The vision of Pierce Plowman, now the second time imprinted by Roberte
Crowlye dwelling in Elye rentes in Holburne Whereunto are added certain notes
and cotations in the mergyne, geuyng light to the Reader. And in the beginning
is set a brefe sum of all the principal matters spoken of in the book. And as
the book is divided into twenty parts called Passus: so is the Summary
divided, for every part his summarie, rehearsynge the matters spoken of in
every part. even in such order as they stand there.

Imprinted at London by Roberte Crowley, dwelling in Elye rentes in Holburne,
The year of our Lord, M.D.L,

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

The printer to the Reader.
Being desyerous to know the name of the Autoure of this most worthy work.
(gentle reader) and the time of the writynge of the same: I did not only
gather together such aunciente co^pies as I could come by, but also consult
such men as I knew to be more exercised in the study of antiquities, then I my
self have been. And by some of them I have learned that the Autour was named
Roberte langelande, a Shropshere man borne in Cleybirie, about viii. miles
from Maluerne hills

For the time when it was written, it chanced me to se an ancient copye, in
the later end whereof was noted, that the same copye was written in the year
of our Lord. M.iiii.C. and nine, which was before this present year, an
hundred and xii, years. And in the second side of the.lxviii. leaf of this
printed copye, I find mention of a dear year, that was in the year of our
Lord M.iii. hundred and.L. John Chichester than being mayre of London. So that
this I may be bold to report, that it was first made and written after the
year of our lord.M.iii.C.L. and before the year.M, iiii.C. and.i^ which mean
space was lix years. We may justly co^^ect therefore. ye it was first written
about two hundred years paste in the time of King Edward the third. In whose
time it pleased God to open the eyes of many to se his truth, giving them
boldenes of heart, to open their mouths and cry out against the works of
darckenes, as did John Wickly^e, who also in those days translated the holy
Bible into the English tongue, and this writer who in reportynge certain
visions and dreams, that he feigned him self to have dreamed, does most
christianlie enstructe the weak, and sharplye rebuke the obstynate blind.
There is no manner of vice, that reygneth in any estate of men, which this
writer has not godly, learnedlye, and wittilye, rebuked, He wrote altogether
in miter* but not after ye manner of our rimers that write now adays (for his
verses end not alike) but the nature of his miter is, to have three words at
the least in every verse which begin with some one letter, As for ensample,
the first two verses of the book run upon.^. as thus.

In a somer season when set was the Sun I shope me into shrobbes, as I a
sheep were The next runeth upon.H. as thus.

The Prologe
Inhabit as an Hermit unholy of werekes. etc This thing noted the meter shall
be very pleasant to read. The English is according to the time it was
written in, and the sense somewhat darcke, but not so hard, but that it may
be understand of such as will not stick to break the shell of the nutte for
the kernelles sake.

As for that is written in the xxxvi, leaf of this book concerning a dearth
the^ to come, is spoken by the knowledge of astronomy as may well be gathered
by that he says, Saturn sent him to tell, And that which follows and gives
it the face of a prophecy, is like to be a thing added by some other man than
the first autour, For diverse copies have it diversely. For where the copy
that I follow has thus.

And when you se the sun amiss, and three monks heads
And a maid have the maistrye, and multiply by eight,
Some other have
Three ships and a shefe, with an eight following
Shall bring bale and battle, on both half the moon
Now for that which is written in the.l, leaf, co^cernyngthe suppresson of
abbayes, the Scripture there alleged, declares it to be gathered of the just
judgment of God, who-wyll not suffer abomination to reign unpunished. Look not
upon this book therefore, to talk of wonders paste or to come but to emend
thine own miss, which thou shall find here most charitably rebuked The
spirit of god give the grace to walk in the way of truth to Gods glory, and
thine own souls health So be it,

A brief su^me of the principal points that be spoken of in this book.
*The vision of Pierce Plowman
THe vision begins the first leaf, and continues to the fourth, declaryng
first the diverse studies that men follow. Some give them selves to tyllage.
Some to be gallant Some to contemplation and straighte life, Some to solitary
life, Some to Marchaundice and all kind of biynge and sellinge, Some to
jesting, Some to beggyng, Some to wandryng, as Pilgryme, Hermets, Friars, and
Pardoners.

Than it declares the great wyckednes of the bishops, that spares not to
hang their seals at every Pardoners proxes, and what shameful Simony reigns
in the church.

Next it declares some what of the power and office of Kings and Princes,
and than secretly in latin verses it rebukes their cruelnes and tyranny. Than
under the parable of Ratto^s and mise, it rebukes the folly of the commune
people that cluster togythers in conspiracies against such as god has called
to office under their Prince, And here in it lamenteth the state of that
realm, wherein the king is childishe, and so every wicked man gets rule
under him.

Finally it rebukes the fautes of men of law, and Bishops, Barons, and
Burgeses, and to conclude of all artificers, And this part is as an argument
to the whole book.

The first part of this book, called Passus primus
THe first part begins in the second side of the fourth leaf, and
ends in the last side of the seventh. And in the person of a woman who^ it
calls holy church: it opens the meaning of the Turret mentioned in the
first leaf, Commands measure in all things. Forbids excess by the
example of Loath, Wylleth all men to pay tribute to their princes, and labor
diligently for their living, Expounds the meaning of the dungeon, Declares
truth to be the best treasure, Prayseth charity, Tells knights office,
Tells of Lucifers fall, Exhorts men to love and do as they would be done by,
Declares that worckes must spring out of our fayeth: and that if we be
liberal to the pore, God will be liberal to us

The second part called Passus secundus.
The second part begins in the first side of the.viii. leaf, and ends
in the last side of the eleue^th, And still under the name of holy church
opens abuses, And first it describes Mede, and declares her progenye.
Tells how she is married unto False, Reherseth the charter granted to that
marriage, Tells how the true preacher rebukith this marriage, Tellith how Mede
worcketh all by brybes, Describes the train that Mede rydeth wythall toward
Westmynster, How Truth ra^ne before secretly, and told the king of all,
How False fleede for fear: and how he was received and entertained of
merchants and many other sorts of men.

The third part called Passus tertius,
The third part begins in the last side of the eleventh leaf, and ends
in the first fyde of the.xvii. leaf. First it declares how all estates do
embrace Mede, What abuse was in Auriculer confession The office of a Mayre,
What harm ill vitelers do, What vengeance shall fall on them that take brybes,
How the king goes about to marye Mede to Conscience, For what cause
Conscience refuses her, How Mede makes answer for her self, and rehearses
what she has done and may do: how neadfull she is, so that no estate can be
without her, How Conscience tells the king of an other Mede, which Conscience
aloweth What mischefe ye wicked mede has wrought, What perfect state the
world shall be in, in the time of renouation, and how scripture must be
read whole.

The fourth part, called Passus quartus,
The fourth part begins in the first side of the xvii. leaf, and ends in
the first side of the twentieth, It declarith how the king wylled Conscience to
kiss Mede, How Conscience would have Reasons advise, How Conscience was sent
in haste to fetch Reason, The manner of Reasons ridyng, What company followed
him, How the king received Reason, How Peace complains upon Wrong, How Wit
and Wisdom went about to brybe the king, How the king committed Wrong to
prison, How Mede stopped Peaces mouth, Reasons advise in punishyng Wrong That
Lawyars should lead a field dunge, How the king cheketh men of law, for
taking brybes, And how reason takes upon him to rule the realm.

The fyfte part, called Passus quintus.
The fyfte part begins in the last side of the twentieth leaf, and ends
in the last side of the.xxx. It declares how Reason proves that Pestilences
come for sin, That due correction must be had, That Abbayes should be
suppressed, What is true Pilgrimage, What satisfaction men were wont to make,
The works of Envy, How Envy repents How Wrath teaches the Friars, That
Gregorye would not suffer women to hear confession, What manner of thing
Couetise is, What restitution Covetous men use, That ill gotten goods, should
be wyckedly spente. That such as be Patteners in the ill gotten gods: shall
also be parteners in making restitution, What true repentance is, What a
Bishops charge is, What manner of men be commune drounckardes What manner a
thing, a droncken man is, And how he repents, What Sloth is, and how he
repents How theft repents, How Repentance conforteth them all, That a
great multitude went to seek Truth, That the plowman is Trueths servant, That
Pierce teaches the way to Truethes house, Who is Truethes portar, and what
maidens Truth has.

The sexte part called Passus sextus.
The syxte part begins the first side of the.xxxi. leaf, and ends in the
first side of the.xxxvi. It declares how women should be occupied, Who
should defend the church of Christ, How knights should behave them selves,
Who is Pierces wife, How Pierce makes his testament. How sturdy beggars
must be answered, How the wastoure fought with Pierce, How Pierce playned
him to a knight, How Pierce prayed hunger to revenge him, What makes loyterers
work, How beggars may be made work Who suffer hunger, How hunger teaches
Pierce plowman a diete, How pore folk feed hunger, And that there should
shortly come an other derth to punish such as were not content with enough.

The seventh part called Passus septimus
The seuenthe part begins in the first side of the.xxxvi. leaf, and
ends in the second side of the xxxix. It declares what pardon is granted
to the plowman and his helpers, What Merchants should do, That men of law
should take no money, how men should give alms, That patiente Poverty
has like pardon with the plowmanne, How Pierce reasoned with a blind
priest, How Daniel expounds the dreams, of Nabugodonosor, How Jacob
expounded Joseph's dream, And that to trust for salvation in works, is but a
vain thing

The eight part, called Passus Octauus.
The eyghte part begins in the last side of the xxxix. leaf, and ends
in the second side of the.xli. It declares how Pierce went to seek Dowel,
How he reproves the Friars for saying that dowel dwelte with them, How the
Friar proves by a similitude, that a just man sins seven times a day, and
says his mind of frewyl, How thought enstructeth him of dowell, dobet, and
dobest, And how wit (who will none excess) met with Pierce, Of whom Pierce
desiered to learn what Dowel, Dobet, and Dobest were.

The nynth part, called Passus nonus
The nynth part begins in the last side of the xli. leaf, and ends in
the first side of the xlv. It declares that dowell dwells in man, whom he
calls a castle. That dowel is keeper thereof, and In wit Constable, That Inwyt
has five sons, What kind is, That Gods might must work with his word,
That the succurles should live upon the tithes. That marriage is an holy life,
and ought to be between the godly, What great plages fell on the world for
that the godly married with the ungodly, What fruits spring of vnmet marriages.
That married folks should keep them selves clean, And that bastards prove
wicked.

The tenth part called Passus decimus.
The tenth part begins in the first side of the xlv. leaf, and ends in
the second side of the.lii. It declares what wife Wit has, That men love
riches better than wisdom, That counterfayte foles and iesters be rewarned,
when true preachers go without reward, That clerks and noble men have God much
in their mouths, but mean men have him in heart, That every man should give
alms according to that he has, That no man ought to search why god has
done or suffered things to be done, How men that be in office do use them
selves, That Study teaches the way to Clergy, and tells what sciences she
has taught, That we should do good whylse we have time, How vain sciences
be, What dowel, dobet, and dobest be, How Clergy rebukes unlearned prestes,
The suppression of Abbaies, That high degree nor riches helps not to heaven
ward, but the biliefe in Christ, That according to the example of them that
builte Noes ship, many of the preachers shall not be saved, That penitente
sinners be soneste saved, And that none do sonet ere, than great clerks

The eleventh part called Passus vndecimus.
The eleventh part begins in the first side of he.liii. leaf, and ends
in the second side of the lix It declares that scripture would all men should
first seek to know them selves, That Fortune with her damsels persuade man to
live licenciouslye, That Age will cause them all to forsake him, That Friars
covet to burye men for their goods, That many be called and few chosen, That
the observation of the commandments of god is of value before god so it
spring of love, How we should feast, That faith joined with charity, is
most sovereign salve, That each man should bear with other, and search his
own fautes, That Pouertye is the best and sureste life, That Priests
neglecte knoweledge, How Nature teaches manne by the natural creatures, That
man ought not to search why god does or suffers things, That all the
Lords Creatures be good, That our own fantisie deceives us, and shame is the
thing that sonest drives a drunckard from his vice.

The twelfe part, called Passus duodecimus.
The twelfe part begins in the last side of the lix. leaf, and ends in
the last side of the, lxiiii. leaf. It declarith that GOD chastisith such as
he loves, That charity is dowell, That many talk well, but do the contrary,
That true Cleargye is merciful, and ought to be loved, that the holy ghost is
the author of books, That learned men may through their knoledge better eschew
sin, than the unlearned men may That god only knows the causes of things,
That rych men be like Pecockis, And that there be three sorts of Baptism.

The thyrtenth part, called Passus decimus tertius.
The thyrtenth part begins on the last side of the.lxiiii. leaf, and
ends in the first side of the.lxxi. leaf. It rehearses much that was
spoken before, declarith the excess of the Clergy. That Clargy has.vii.
sons, That Clergy has neither conscience nor Patience, That Patience
passes a pack of books, That the Plowman finds us bread, What fautes
reign in labourynge men, And what a wordlyng is.

The fourtenth part, called Passus decimus quartus.
The fourtenth part begins in the first side of the lxxi, and ends in
the first side of the leaf.lxxvii. It declarith how the labourynge man,
excuses him self of his sin, That god provides fode for all his creatures,
That Idleness is cause of sin, That satisfaction kills sin, that all men
have joy here or else where, That the merciful rych shall have heaven What a
christen man's patent is, How blessed a life poverty is, And that Patience
fedeth poverty.

The fyftenth part, called Passus decimus quintus.
The.xv. part begins in the first side of the leaf lxxvii. and ends in
the last side of the leaf.lxxxvi. It declares what the soul is, And how of
diverse offices it has diverse names, That we should not search gods secrets,
The preachers duty, What shall become of evil gotten goods, The true
pylgrimage, What compeny charity haunteth, That we should take no gifts of
wicked men, That it is sacrilege to spend the tithes otherwise than upon the
pore. That no course is certain, When and how Makometes law began, That the
Apostles turned all the world to the fayeth, That children differ not from
wild beasts, till they be instructed in Christ, That couetise of the clergy
will destroy the church, That possession poisoned the church, What the bishops
duty is, And that Christ was declared by his miracles to be Messiah.

The syxtenth part called Passus decimus sextus.
The xvi part begins in the last side of the leaf lxxxvi. and ends in
the first side of the leaf.lxxxxi. It describes charity, Declares ye
Christ delivered man out of the thralde me of sin, The manner of the
betraying of Christ, What the Trinity is, and ye fayeth of Abraham.

The seuententh part, called Passus decimus septimus.
The seuententh part begins in the first side of the leaf.lxxxxi. and
ends in the last side of the leaf.lxxxxvi. It declarith the old law to be
abrogate That Christ the Samaritan has delivered us, and given us a new
law, Christ's resurrection, That the Trinity is like an hand, The holy ghost
by similitudes, That a good man is like a torche, And three things that drive a
man out of his house.

The eyghtenthe part, called Passus decimus octauus.
The.xviii. part begins in the last side of the leaf.lxxxxvi. and ends
in the last side of the leaf, Ciii. It declares Christ's coming into
Jerusalem His judgment and death, That god curses usurers That Christ
triumphed ever death and hell, That wealth is known by woe, and like of all
other contraries, How Christ vanquiseth Lucifer, How Christ satisfied the
law, And that god is merciful.

The nyntenthe part called Passus decimus nonus.
The nintenth part begins in the last side of the leaf.Ciii. and ends
in the last side of the leaf Cxi. It declares Christ's victory, The gifts
that the three kings gave him, That Christ is showed to be god by his
miracles, Why Christ appeared first to a woman, What Pierces pardon is, The
gifts of the holy ghost, Pierces office, his oxen and his sede that he
sows, That Justice leaves no sin unpunished The fundation of the church,
That pride enuieth the church, How to withstand pride, Who they be that never
repent, How lucre causes me^ to forsake the truth The answer of a blind
curate, How the plowman follows the example of god, And what Land lords and
kings may take of their tenauntes and subjects

The twentieth part, called Passus visecimus.
The twentieth part begins in the last side of the leaf.Cxi. and ends
in the last leaf of the book It declares what a man may do when need
compels him, That temperaunce is the chief virtue, Who received Antichrist
first, How Antichrist does seduce many good men, The manner of gods visitatio^
The manner of men when plages cease That couetise and simony make prelates, That
Life and Fortune beget Sloth, That Sloth marieth despair, That Age kills
both physician and surgian, That Nature would have us to love, That the.vii.
capital sins besieged Conscience. The answer of an Irysh priest, That
Curates ought to have a co^potent living certain That Friars have no nu^bre,
That such as went to ye Friars to shrift, be like saintuary me^, That Hypocrisy
wou^deth many prechers, The negligence of patrons and bishops. And what penance
gostly fathers were wo^t to enjoy their gostly children

Finis.
IN a somer season, when set was the sun
I shope me into shroubs, as I a sheep were
In habit as an harmet, unholy of works
Went wide in this world, wonders to here
And on a May morning, on Maluerne hills
Me befell a ferly, of fayry me thought,
I was weary of wandering, and went me to rest
Under a broad bank by a bourne side
And as I lay and leanid, and lokid on the water
I slombred into a sleping, it swyzed so merye.
Than began I to meten, a meruelouse swiuen
That I was in a wilderness, I wist never where.
As I beheld into theaste, on high to the sun
I saw a tower on a toft, trychlych ymaked
A deep dale beneth, a dungeon therein
With deep diches and darcke, and dreaful of sight
A fair field full of folk, found I there between
Of all manner men, the mean and the rich
Werking and wandering, as the world asks
Some put hem to the ploughe, pleiden full selde
In setting and sowing, swonken full hard
And wonnen that wasters, with glotony destroyen
And some put hem to pride, appareled thereafter
In countinaunce of clothyng, comme^ly disgisid
In prayers and penance, putten hem many
In hope to have after, heauentich bliss
And for the love of our lord, liuyden full hard
As Ankers and Hermets, that hold hem in her selles
And coueten naught in contrei, to carien about
For no liquerous liuelod, her likam to please
And some chosen chaffer, they cheueden the better
As it semith to our sight, that such do thriuen
And some mirthes to make, as minstrels cunneth
And getten gold with her glee, sinles I leave
As Iapers and Ianglers Judas children
Fayneth hem fantasies, Common Iestas.
and foles hem makes
And han her wit at will, to work if they should
That Paul precheth of hem I nil not preue it here
Qu^ loqiurut turpiloqutum etc. Is Lucifers knave
Bydders and beggars, fast about yede
With her bealies and her bags, of bread full cra^med
Faitenden for her fode, foughten at the ale
In glotony Godwote, gone they to bed
And rise with rebaudry, as Rebertes knaves
Sleep and sorry sloth, sueeth hem ever
Pylgraimes and Palmers, Pilgrims.
plight hem togethers
For to seek. S. James, and saints at Rome
They went forth their way, with many wise tales
And had leave to lie all her life after.
I see some that said, they had sought saints
To each a tale yt they told, her tongue was te^pred to lie
More then to say soth, it seemed by her speech.
Hermets on a heap, Hermes.
with hoked staves
Wenten to Walsingham, and her wenches after.
Great loubies and long, yt loath were to swinke
Clothed hem in copes, to be known from other
And shopen hem hermets, her ease to have,
Friars.
I found there fryres, all the four orders
Preached to the people, for profit of them selves
Glosed the gospel, as hem good lyked
For couetouse of copes, construe it as they would
Many of these master f^iers, might cloth he^ at liking
For her money and her marchau^dise marche^ togithers.
For since cheritie was chap man, and chief to shryue lords
Many ferleis have fallen, in few years,
But holy church and they, hold better together
The most mischief on mould, is mou^tinge well fast
There preached a pardoner, as he a priest were
Brought forth a bull with many bishops seals
And said that him self, Pardonars.
might absoyle hem all
Of falsehod and of fasting, and of vows broken.
Lewd men leued him well: and liked his words
Commen up kneling, to kiss his bulls
He bouched hem with his breuet, and blered her eyes
And raught with his ragma^, both ringes and broches
Thus they give their gold, g^otons to keep
And leneth it to such losels, as lichery haunteth
Were the bishop blessed, and worth both his ears
His seal should not be sent, to deceive the people
And it is naught by the bishop, that ye boy preaches
For the parish priest and the pardoner, part the silver.
That the pouerti of the parish, should have if they ne were
Persons and her priests: pleyned he^ to ye bishop
That her parishes were pore, sithe^ ye pestilence time
To have a license and leave, at London to dwell
To sing there for Simony for silver is sweet,
Bishops and Bachelors, both masters and doctors
That have cure under Christ, and crowning in token
And sign that they should shriue her parishinges
Preach and pray for hem, and the poor feed,
Lie at London, in lenten and else
Some seruen the king and his silver tellen
In chekec and in chauncery, challenge his dettes.
Of wards and warmottes of wayues and st^^ues:
And some seruen as serau^es, to lords and to ladies
And instead of stewerdes, sit and demen.
Her masses and her mattens, and many of her hours
Are done vndeuoutly, dread is at the last
Lest Christ in consistory, accursse full many
I perceived of the power, that Peter had to keep
To binden and vnbinden, as the book tells:
How he left it with love, as our lord hight
Among four vertuis, the best of al virtues
That Cardinals been called, and closing yates
There Christ is in kingdom, to close and to shit
And to open it to hem, and heuens blys show
And of Cardinals at court, that caught of that name
And power presumid, in hem a Pope to make
To have that power that Peter had, impugn Inel
For in love and in lecture, the election belongs
Forthy I can, and cannot, of court speak more.
Then came there a king, knighthode him led:
Might of the commons, made him to raygne
And than came kind wit, and clerks he made
For to council the king, and the commons save
The king and knighthode, and clergy boeth
Casten that the commons, should hem selves find
The commons contrived, of kind wit crafts
And for profit of all the people plowmen ordained
To till and to travel, as true life asks.
The king and the commons, and kind wit the third
Shopen law and leauti, every man to know his own.
Then lokid up a Lunatike, a leave thing with all
And knelyng to the king, clergially he said
Christ keep the sir king, and thy king rich
And leave the led thy loud, so lenty the loves
And for thy rightful rulyng, be rewarded in heaven
And sithen in the air on height, an aungel of heaven
Loud to speak in laten, for lewd men ne could
Iangle ne judge, that justify hem should
But suffren and seruen, forthy said the angel.
Sum Rex, sum Princeps, neutrum fortasse demceps.
O qui Iura regis, Christi specialia regis,
Hoc quo agas melius, Iustus es, esto Pius.
Nudum Ius a te, vestiri vult Pietate.
Qualia vis metere, talia gra^a sere.
Si Ius undatur, undo de Iure metatur
Si seritur Pietas, de Pietate metas.
Than grieved him a Goliardes a gloten of words
And to the angel, on high answered after
Dum Rex a regere, dicatur nomen habere,
Nomen habet sine re, uisistudet Iura tenere.
Than began all the commons cry, in versis of latin
To the kings counsel, construe who so would.
Precepta Regis, sunt nobis vincula Legis,
With that ran there a route, of rattons at once
And small mise with hem, The tal^ of the ra^^tons.
mo than a thousand
And commen to counsel, for the common profit.
For a Catte of a court, came when him lyked
And ouerleapte hem lightly, and cought hem at his will
And played with hem perilously, and possed about
For doubt of diverse dreades, we dare not well look
And if we grutch at his game, he will greuen us all
Scratchynge us and clawyng us, and in his claws hold
That we loath the life, or he let us pass.
Might we with any wit, his will wythstand
We might be lords aloft, and live at ease.
A rotton of renown, most renable of tongue
Said for a sovereign, help to him self,
I have seen segges quod he, in the City of London
Bear byghes full bright, about their necks
And some colers of crafty work, vncoupted they went
Both in waren and in wast, where hem leave lyketh
And other while they are else where, as I here tell
Were there a bell on her bight, by Jesus as me thinks,
Men might wit where they went, and away run
And right so quod that ratton, reason me shows
To bugge a vel of brass, or of bright silver
And knyt on his collar, for our commen profit
And hangen it about the cattes half, then here we.
Whether he rit or rest, or run to pleye
And if him list for to lake, than look we might moune
And pere in his presens, the while him play lyketh
And if he wrath, beware, and his way shonne.
All this rout of rattons, to this reason they assented
And tho the bell was bought and on the byght hanged
There ne was ratte^ in all ye rowte, for all the realm of France
That durst bind the bell about ye ca^s nek
Ne hang it about the cats half, all England to win
And held hem vnhardy, and her cowncell feeble
And let her labor lost, and al her long study.
A mouse that much good coud, as me thought
Stroke forth sternly, and stood before him al
And to the rowte of rattons, rehearsed these words
Though we kill this cat, yet should there come an other
To catch us and al our kind, though we crepe under ^e^ches
And be we never so bold the bell him to show
For I heard my sier say, seven year passed
Where the Cat is a kitling, the court is full clen^e
That witnesses holy writing, who so will it read
Omnium doctisumorum suffragio dicuntur Hec de lassiuis, fatuis, aut ineptis
principibus, non de etate tenellis Quasi dicat, vbi rex puerilis est.
Ve terre, vbi puet rex est.
For may no reuke there rest have, for rattons by night
The whil he catches comes, he couetith not our carien
But fedeth him with veniso^, defame we him never
Eccles. x.
For better is a little loss, than a long sorrow.
The maze among us all, though we mysse a shrewe
For many men's mait, we myse would destroy
And also ye route of cattons, rend men's clothes
Ner the catte of that court, that can us ouerleape
For had you rats your will, you could not rule yourselfe
I say for me, quod the mouse, I se so mekel after
Shall nether ye cat ne ye kitling, by mi counsel be greuid
Ne carpyng of this coler, that costed me never
And though it had cost me catel, be known it I nold
But suffer as him self would, to done as him likes
Coupled and uncoupled, to catch what they may.
Forthy each a wise wight I warn, wit well his own
What this metels by means, ye men that be merye
Divine ye for I dare not, by dear God of heaven.
Yet houed there an hundred, in hownes of sylke
Sergeantes it besemed that seruen at the bar
Pieten for penies, and pounds, the law. Sergia^ts of ye law

And not for the love of our lord, vnclose^ her lips once
Thou might better mete ye mist, on maluerne hills
Tha^ get a mu^me of her mouth, til money be showed
I saw Bishops bold, Bishops
and Bachilers of divine
Become clarckes of accountes, the king for to serve
Arche deakens and deanes, that dignities have
To preach to the people, and pore men to feed
Ben lope to London by leave of her bishop
And ben clerks of the kings benche, the country to shend
Barons and burgesis, and bond men also
I see in this assemble, as ye shall hear after.
Bakesters and bruesters, and bouchers many
Woollen websters, and weuers of lynnen
Taylers and tinkers, and tollers in markets
Masons and minors, and many other crafts
Of all kin lybbing laborers, lopen forth some
As dikers and deluers, that done their deeds ill
And drive forth ye long day with dieu vous save dame Eme
Cokes and her knaves criden hot pyes hot
Good geese and gris, goo we dine goo we
Tauerners until them, told the same
Whyt wine of Osay, and red wine of Gascoyone
Of the run and of the rochel, the roste to defye
This saw I sleping, and seven sythes more.
Passus primus de visione
WHat this mou^tein bemeineth, and ye merk dale
And ye feld full of folk, I shall you fair show
A lovely lady of lere, in linen iclothed
Came down from a castle, and called me fair
And said son slepest thou, see thou this people?
How busy they be, al about the mase
The tour
The most part of this puple, ye passes on this earth
Have they worship in this world, they will no better
Of other heaven then here, hold they no tale
I was afraid of her face, though she fair were
And said mercy madame, what is this to mean?
The toure upon the toft, truth is therein
And would that ye wrought, as his word teaches
For he is father of faith, and former of you al
Both with fell and with face, and gave you five wyttis
For to worship him there with, the while you been here
Of woollen of lynnen, and of liuelode at need
In mesurable manner to make you at ease
And co^ma u^ded of his curtesy, in common three things
Arne none nedful but tho, and nempe^ hem I think
And reken hem by reason, rehearse ye hem after.
That one is vesture, from cheyle to save
And meat at meal, for disease of thy self
And drink wha^ thou driest, and do naught out of reason
That you worth the worse, wha^ thou work should.
For Loath in his days, for liking of drink
Did with his daughters, Loath
that the Devil lyketh
Delited in drink, as the deuell would
And lechery him laughed, and lay by hem both,
And al he wite the wine, that wicked deed
Inebriamus eum vino, dormiamusque cum eo, Genesis xix.
vt seruare possimus de patre nostro semen.
Through wiue and women, there was Loath accombred
And there gat in glotony, girls that were cherels
Forthy, dred delectable drink, and thou shall do the better
Measure is medicine, though you michel yerne
It is not al for the ghost, that the gutte asks
Leave not thy likam, for a liar him teaches
That is the wretched world, would the betray
For the fend and the flesh, follows the togithers
This and that seyth thy soul, and sees it in thine heart.
And for thou should beware, I wish the ye best.
Madame mercy quod I, me lyketh well your words
And ye money of this moulde, that men so fast holds
Tell me to whom madame that treasure appendeth.
Go to the gospel quod she, that god said him self.
Tho ye people him apposed, with a penny in ye temple
Whether they should therwt, worship the king Caesar
And god asks hem, of whom speaks the letter
And the image i like, that therein stands
Cesars they said, we seen here well echone
Read Cessari, quod god, that Cesary belongs
Et que sunt dei deo, or else ye done ill
For rightful reason, Luke. xx.
should rule you all
And kind wit be warden your wealth to keep
And tutor of your treasure, and take you at need
For husbandry and he, holden together.
Than I frayned her fair, for him that me made
Dungion
That dungeon in the dale, that dredeful is of sight
What may it bemeane, madame I you byseche.
That is the castle of care, who so comes therein
May banne that be borne was, to body or to soul,
Therein wonneth a wight, that wrong is I hot
Cayne
Father of falsehead, and founded it him self
Adam and Eve, he egged to ill,
Judas
Councelled Cayne, to kill his brother
Judas he iaped, with Jews silver
And sithen on an elder, hanged him after
He is lettar of love, and lies hem all
That trust in his treasure, betraieth he soneste
Than had I wonder in my wit, what woman it were
That such wise words, of holy write showed
And I asked her on ye height name, or she thence yede
What she were wisely, that wished me so fair.
Holy church I am quod she, you ought me to know
I vnderfenge the first, and the faith taught
Thou broughtest me borowes, my byddings to fulfill
And to love me lelly, yt while the life dureth
Than I courbed on my knees, and cried her of grace
And prayed her pituosly, pray for my sins
And also kenne me kindly, on Christ to believe
That I might work his will, yt wrought me to man
Truth is the best treasure.
Teach me to no treasure, but tell me this ilke
How I may save my soul, that saint art holden,
When all treasures are tried quod she, truth is the best
I do it on Deus Charitas to deem the sothe
It is as dear worth a drury, as dear God him self,
Who is true of his tongue, and tells no other
And does the worckes therwt, and wills no man ill
He is a god by the gospel, a ground and a lofte
And like to our Lord, by saint Lukes words.
The clerks that know this, should kenne it about
For christen and unchristian, claymeth it echone
Kings and knights, should keep it by reason
Ryden and rapen down, Knygtes office.
in realms about
And taken traungressours, and tie hem fast
Till truth termined, her trespate to the end
And yt is ye profession a partly, ye appe^deth to knights
And not to fast one Friday, in five score winter
But hold with him and with her, that wolden all truth
And never leave hem for love, ne for lakyng of silver.
For David in his days, dubbed knights
And did hem swear on her sword, David
to serve truth ever
And who so passed ye point, was apostata in ye order.
But Christ king of kings, made knights ten,
Cherubyn and Seraphyn, such seven and another.
And gave he^ might in his majesty, ye mirier he^ thought
And over his mean meiny, made he^ archa^gels
Taught by the trinity, Truth to know
To be buxume at his bidding, he bade he^ noughtels
Lucifer with legions, learned it in heaven
But for he brake buxumnes, his bliss can he tine
And fell from that fellowship, in a fendes lykenes
Into a deep darcke hell, to dwell there for ever
And moo thousa^des with him, tha^ man could number
Loppen out with Lucifer, in lothlyche form
For these leueden upon him, that lied on this manner
Ponam pedem in aquilone, et similis ero altissimo. Esai. xiiii

And al ye hoped it might be so, no heaven might he^ hold
But fell out in finds likeness, nine days together
Till god of his goodness, began stable and stint
And guard the heaven to stick, and stand in quiet
When the wicked went out, in wonder wise they fell
Some in air some in earth, and some in hell deep.
And Lucifer lowest lies, yet of hem al
For pride that he pult out, his pain had no end
And all that work with wrong, wend they shall
After their death day, and dwell with that shrewe
And tho that work well, as holy write tells
And end as I ere said, in trueh that is the beast
May be siker that their souls, shall wend to heaven
There truth is in trinity, and troweth hem al,
Forthy I say as I said ere, by sight of these textes,
When all treasures are tried, Truth is the greatest treasure,
truth is the best
Learn on this lewd men, for letterd men it knows
That truth is treasure, the triedest on earth.
I have no kind knowing quod I, ye mote me ken better
By what craft in my crops, it comseth and where.
Thou dotest daffe, quod she dull are thy wittis
To tell latin thou learned leode in thy youth.
Heu mihi, qui a ste rilem duxi, vitam iuuenilem.
It is a kind knowing quod he, that knows in thy heart
For to love the lord, lever then thy self.
No deadly sin to do, dye though thou should.
This I trow be truth, who can teach the better,
Look thou suffer him to say, and since learn it after
For truth tells that love, is triacle for sin
May no sin be on him seen, that uses that spice
And al his works he wrought, with love as him list
And learned it Moses, for the leuiest thing of al
And also the plant of peace most precious of virtues
For heaven might not hold it, it was so heavy of him self
Till it had of the earth, yoten it selue
And when it had of this fold, flesh and blood taken
Was never leaf upon linde, lighter thereafter
And portatiue and persante, as the point of a nedle
That might none armor it let, ne none heigh walls
Forthy love is the leader, of the lords love of heaven
And a mean as the maire is, between the king and the commons
Right so is love a leader, and the law shapeth
Upon man for his misdedes, the merceme^t he taxes
And for to know it kindly, it comith by might
And in the heart there is the head, and the hight will
For of kind knowing in heart, there a might begins.
And that falls to the father, that formid you al
He lokid on us with love, and let his sone dye
Mekely for our misdeds, to amend us all:
And yet would he he^ no woo, yt wrought him ye pain
But mekely with mouth, mercy he besought
To have pity on that people, that pained him to death
Here might you se in example, in self one
That he was mightful and meke, ye mercy can grant.
To hem that hanged on height him, and his heart thirled
Forthie I red you Rich, have ruth on the pore
Though ye be mighty to mote, be meke in your works
For the same mesure yt ye mete, amiss other else
Ye shall be weine there with, when ye wenden hence
Eadem mensura qua mensi fueritis, remetietur vobis.
For though ye be true of your tongue, Mar. iiii.
and trulieh worch
And as chaste as a child, that in church wepeth
But if ye love lelie, and leave the pore
Such good as god you sent, godliche part
You have no more merit, in mass nor in hours
Than Malkin of her mayde^head, yt no man desires*
For James the Ientle, Judged in his books
That faith without the feate, is right nothing worth
And as dead as door tree, but if the deeds follow
Jacob. ii.
Fides sine operibus mortna est.
Forthi chastity without charity, worthi cheines in hell:
It is as lewd as a lamp, that no light is in
Many chaplens ar chaste, and charity is away
Ar no me^ auarisiouser tha^ they, when they be auau^ced
Unkind to their kin, and to al christen
Chewen their charity, and chiden after more
Many curatours keep hem, clean of her bodies
They be accu^bred with couetise, they ca^ not do it from the^
So hard has avarice, hasped them togithers
And that is no truth of ye trinity, but tricheri of hell
And lerning to lewd men, the latter for to dele
Forthy these words be written in the gospel
Luke vi.
Date et dabitur vobis. for I dele you all.
That is the lock of love, that lets out my grace
To comforten the careful accombred with sin
Love is leche of life, and nexe our lord self
And also the gate, that goes into heaven
Forthy I say as I said er, by the textes
When all treasures be tried, truth is the best
So have I told you what truth is, yt no tresur is better
I may no lu^ger leng ye with, now look ye our lord
Passus secundus de visione
YEt I corbed on miknes, and tried her of grace
And seid merci mada^, for maris love of heaven
That bare ye blisful barn, yt bought us on ye
Ken me by some craft, to know ye falls. rode
Look upon thy left half, and lo where he stondeth
Both false and fauel, and her feeris many
I looked on my left half, as the lady me taught
And was ware of a woman, worthylich clothed
Purfiled with pelure, the finest upon earth
Crowned with a crown, the king has no better
Fetislych her fingers, were fretted with gold wier
And there on red rubies, as red as any glede
And diamo^ds of derest price, and double manner saphirs
Orientales and Ewages, venemis to destroy
Her robe was full rich, of red scarlet engrayned
With rybandes of red gold, and of rich stones
Her array me ravished, such riches saw I never.
I had wonder what she was. and whose wife she were.
What is this woman quod I, so worthyly attyred?
That is mede ye maid quod she, has noied me full often
And lacked my lemman, that leautie is ihote
And bylow her to lords, that laws have to kepe^
In the popes palaice, she is preuy as my self
But sothenes would not so, for she is a bastard
For false was her father, that has a fickell tongue,
And never soth said, sithen he came to earth
And mede is married after him, right as kind askith.
Qualis pater talis filius, bona arbor bonum fructum facit. Mar. iiii

I ought be hier then she: I came of a better
My father the great God is: and ground of all grace
One God without beginning, and I his good daughter
And has given me mercy, to mary with my self
And what man be merciful, and lelly me loves
Shall be my lord and I his life, in the high heaven
And what man takes mede, my head dare I lay
That he shall lease for her love, a lyppe of Charitatis
How co^strueth David the king, of men ye take mede?
And men on this mould, that mainteneth truth
And how ye should save your self, ye psalter bears:
Psa. xv.
Do mine, quis habitabit in tabernaculo tuo etc.
And now worth this Mede, married unto a mauzed witness
To one Falls fikell tongue, a fendes bezet
Fauel by his fair speech, has this folk enchaunted shrewe
And al is liars ledyng, that she is thus wedded
The morrow was made, the maidens brydale
And there might you wit if thou will, which they be^ all
That longen to that lordshyp, the less and the more
Know hem there if thou can, and keep thou thy tongue.
And lake he^ not but let he^ worch, til leauty be justice.
And have power to punish he^ tha^ put forth thy reason
For I beken the Christ quod she, and his clean mother
And let no conscience acco^bre the, for couetise of mede,
Thus left me that Lady, lyggynge a sleep
And how mede was married, in metals me thought
That all the rich reteinaunce, ye rayneth with the false
Were bounden to the brydale, on boeth two sides
Of all manner of men, the mean and the rich
To mary the maid, was many a man assembled
As of knights and of clarks, and other common people.
As sisours and somoners, shryues and their clerks.
Bedelles and bayliffes, and brokers of chaffer
Forgoers and vitellers, and advocates of tharches
I can not reken the route, that can about Mede.
And Simony and Ciny^e, and Sisours of couries
Were most privy with mede, of any men me thought
And fauel was the first, that fet her out of boure
And as a broker brought her, to be with false enjoined
When Simony and Ciuyl, see her both will
They assented for silver, to say as both would
Than lept Liar forth, Meedes charter.
and said lo here a Charter
That gile with his great oaths, gave hem togyders
And prayed Civil to see, and Simony to read it,
Than Simony and Civil, stonden forth both together
And unfold the feoffement, that False has ymade
And thus begyneth these gomes, to grede^ful heyght
Sciant presents et futuri. Maritagium pranum cum feoffeme^to in malo feodo,
et de peruersa tenu^a.
etc.
Witteth and witnesses, al yt wonneth upon this earth
That Mede is married, more for her goods
Than for any virtue or fayrenes, or any fre kind
Falsenes is feign of her, for he woteth her rich
And Fauell with his ficle speech, feffeth her by this charter
To be princes in pride, and poverty to despise
To backebite and to bosten and, to bear false wytnes.
To scorn and to scoulde, and slander to make
Vnbuxome and bold, to break the ten hestes
And the Erledome of Envy, and wrath togythers
With the Chastilet of Cheest, and chatteringe out of reason
The county of couetise, and all the costs about
That is usury and Auarise, all I hem grant
In bargains and brocages, with al ye borough of theft,
And all the lordshyp of lechery, in length and in bread
As in works and in words, and in waytinges with eyes
And in weddes and wishinges, and with idle thoughts.
There as will would, and the workemanshyp fails.
Glotony he gave hem eke, and great oaths together
And all day to drink, at diverse tabernes.
And there to iangle and to iape, and judge her eue^ christen
And in fasting days to frete, ere full time were
And than to sytte and soupe, till sleep hem assail
And bread forth as borough swyne, and bedde^ he^ easily
Till Slouthe and sleep, slyken her sides
And tha^ Manhope to awaken hem so, with no will to amend
For they liuen by lust, that is her last end
And they to have and to hold, and her heirs after
A dwelling with the devil, and damned be for ever
With all ye appertinau^cis of purgatory, into ye pain of hell
Yeldynge for this thing, at one years end,
Their souls to Satan, to suffer with him pains
And with him to wo^ne in woe, while god is in heaven
In wytnes of which thing, Wrong was the first
And Pierce the pardoner, of Paulinus doctrine
Bette the bedle, of Buckyngham shyre
Raynolde the reave, of Rutlande soken
Munde the mylner, with many mo other
In the date of the devil, this deed I enseale
By sight of sir Simony, and Ciuils leave
The true preacher.
Tha^ tened him Theology, when he this tale heard
And said to Civil, now sorrow might you have
Such weddynges to worch, to wrath with Truth
And ere this weddinge be wrought, woe the betyde
For Mede is mulier, of amends engendered
And God grauntethe, to give Mede to Truth
And you have given her to a gilor, now god give ye sorrow
Thy te^te tells the not so, Truth woote the sothe.
For Dignus est opetatius. Luke x. Who it is that shameth holy church.
his hyre to have
And thou haste fastened her to False, fie on thy law
For all by leasing thou lyuest, and lecherous works
Simonye and thy self, shenden holy church
The notaries and ye, no ye the people
Ye shall abye it both, by God that made me
Well ye wit wernardes, but if your wit fail
That False is faythles, and fykil in his works
And was a bastard borne, of Belsabu us kynne
And Mede is a mulier, a maiden of good
And might kiss the king, for cousin if shewold.
Therefore work by wisdom, and by my wit also
And lead her to London, there it is showed
If any law will look, they liggen together
And though justices judge her, to be joined to False
Yet beware of wedding, for wytty is truth
And conscience is of his counsel, and knows you echone
And if he find you in default, and with false hold
It shall be set your souls, full sore at the last
Here to assented Cyull, and Simony ne would
Til he had silver, for his service, and also the notaries
Than fet Fauell forth, florences inowe
And bade gyle go give, Brybes
gold about
And namely to the Notaries, that hem none fail
And feffe False wytnes with florences inowe
For they may Mede amaistry, and maken at my will.
Tho this gold was given, great was the thankyng
To False and to Fauell, for her great gifts
And come to conforten, fro care the False
And sithen said certes sir, ceasen shall we never
Til mede be weddid thy wife, through wits of us all
For we have Mede amastrid, with our merry speech.
That she granted to gone, with a good will
To London to look, if the law would
Judge you ioyntlye, in joy for ever
Than was Falsenes feign, and Fauell as blyth,
And letten sommon al seges, in shyers about
And bad hem al to be bowne, beggars and other
To we^d with him to westminster, to witness this deed.
What horses they yt ^ed with mede had
And tha^ carried they forth caples, to carry hem thither.
And Fauel setforth then, foles in owe
And set mede upon a Shireue, shode al new
And False sat on a Sisour, that softlych troted
And Fauell on a slatterrer, feetly attired
Tho had Notaries none, anoied they were
For Simony and Civil, should on their fete gange
And than swore Simony, and Ciuyll both
That somners should be sadled, and serve hem echone.
And let apparel these prouisors, in palfreis wise
Sir Simony him self, shall sit on their backs
Deanes, and subdeanes, draw you together
Archedecons and officials, and al your regesters
Let saddle hem with silver, our sin to suffer
As aduoutry and divorces, and derne usury
To bear bishops about, abroad in visiting
Paulinus primus, for pleyntis in consistory
Shall serve my self, that Civil is inempned
And cartsaddle the comisary, our carte shall he lead,
And fetch us vitayles, at fornicatores
And makes of Lier a long cart, to lead al these other
As friars and faytours, that on their fete runnen,
And thus False and Fauel, faren forth together
And Mede in the mides, and al these men after.
I have no time to tell, the tail that here follows
Of many manner men, that on this mould lybbeth
Truth makes haste to ye king.
And gyle was foregoer, and guided hem all
Sothenes sees hem well, and says but little
And pricked his palfrey, and passed hem all:
And came to the kings court, and Consciente it told
And Conscience to the king, carped it after.
Now by Christ quod the king, and I catch might
Falls or Fauell, or any of their feeris
I would be worken of tho wreches, yt worken this ill
And done he^ hang by ye hals, and al yt hem meinteyneth
Shall never man on this mold, mainprise the least
But right as the law wol look, let fall on hem all
And commanded a constable, that can at the first
To attache tho tyrauntes, for any thing I hot
And fetter fast Falsenes, for any kinnes gifts
And girde of Gyles head, and let him go no ferther
And if ye latche Liar, let him not escapte,
Or he be put on the pillery, for any prayers I hot
And bring mede to me, in maugre them all,
Dread at the door stood, and the dome hard
How the king commanded, Dread makes the gilty flee.
Constables and Sergeantes
Falsenes and his feloshyp, to fetter and to binden
Than dread went wightely and warned the False,
And bad him fle for fear, and his fellows al.
Falsenes for fear then, fled to the friars
And Gyle does him to go, aghast for to dye
And marchauntis meten with him, and made him to bide
And shytte him in her shoppes, to shown her ware
Appareled him as a prentise, the people to serve.
Lyghtlye Liar leaped, and away ran
Lurkynge through lanes, tolugged of many.
He was no where welcome, fore his many tales
Over all thonted, False can lack no master
and I hot trusse
Till Pardoners had pety, and pulled him into house.
They wash him and wipe him, and wounde^ him in clouts
And sent him with seals, on sondayes to churches
And gave him pardon for pence, pound meal about
Than loured leches, and letters they sent
That he should won with hem, waters to look
Spicers speken with him, to spy their ware
For he coud of there craft, and knew many gommes
And minstrels and messengers, met with him once
And held him half a year, and a leven days
Fryres with fair spech, fet him thence
And for knowing of co^mers, coped him as a friar
And he has leave to leap out, as often as hem lyketh
And welcome when he will, and wonneth with the^ often
All fledden for fear, and flooen into hernes
Save mede the maid, no mo durst abide
And truly to tell, she trembled for dread
And eke wept and wrong, when she was atached
Passus textius de visione.
The king wi^^ now of Mede whom she loves be^.
Now is mede the maid, and no mo of hem all,
with Bedels and balifs, brough before the king
The king called a clerk, can I not his name.
To take mede the maid, and make her at ease
I shall assaye her my self, and sothelych appose
What man of this mold, that her were leuest
And if she work by wit, and my will follow
I wol forgive her this gylt, so me God help
Curtesy the clerk than, as the king hight
Took mede by the middle, and brought her into chamber,
And there was mirth and minstrelsy, Mede to please
They that wo^ne in westminster, worshipped her al
Gently with Joy, the Justices came
Busked hem to the bower, there the brid dwelled
To comfort her kindlye, by clergies leave
And said morn not Mede, ne make ye no sorrow
For we will wish the king, and thy way shape
To be weddid at thy will, and where the leefe likes.
For all conscience cast and craft, as I trow.
Mildly Mede than, mercied them all
Of her great goodness, and gave hem echone
Copes of clean gold, and Cups of silver
Rings with rubies, and riches many
The lest man of their menie, a moton of gold.
Than laugh they leeue, these lord is at mede.
With that common clerks, to comfort her the same
And bidden her be blithe, for we be thine own
For to work thy will, the while we moune last
Hendliche she than, bihight them the same
To louen hem lellie, and lords to make
To beg hem benefices, pluralities to have
And in consistory at court, do call her names
Shall no lewdnes let, the clearke that I love
That he ne worth first auaunced, for I am beknowe^
There cunning clerks, sholen cloak behind.
Than came there a confessor, copid as a Friar
To mede the maid, he mellud these words
And said full softly, in shrift as it were
Though lewd me^ and learned me^, had lien by the both
And falsenes had yfouled the, all this fifty winter
I shall assoyle the my self, for a seem of whete,
And also be thy bedman, and bear well thy message.
Amongst knights and clerks, conscience to turn
Then Mede for her myssedes, to that man kneled
And shroue her of her shroudnes, shameless I trow
Told him a tale, and took him a noble
For to be her bedman, and her broker also
Than he assoyled her sone and sithen he said
We have a witdow in working, will set us full high.
Would thou glase yt gable, and grave therein thy name
Seker should thy soul be, heaven to have.
Wist I that quod the woman, I would not spare
The fruits of Popish penance.
For to be your friend Friar, and fail you never
While you love Lords, that lechery haunten
And lake not Ladies, that love well the same.
It is fraylenes of the flesh, ye find it in books
And a course of kind, whereof we commen al
Who so may escape the slander, ye scath is sone amended
It is sin of the seven, sonest released
Have mercy quod mede, of men that it haunten
And I shall cover your kyrke, your cloisture do make^
Walls do whyten, and wyndowes do glasen
Do paynten and portraye, and pay for the making
That every segge shall say, I am sister of your house.
And god to all good folk, such grauyng defend
To write in wyndowes, of her well deades
On aue^ter pride be painted there, and pomp of ye world
For Christ knows thy conscience, and thy kind will:
And thy cost and thy couetise, and who thy catel ought
Therefore I learn you lords, leave such worckes
To written in wyndowes, of your well deeds
Or to gredde^ after goddesmen, wha^ ye delen doles
Math. vi.
On aue^ter you have your hire here, and your haue^ also.
Nesciat sinistra tua quid facit dextra
Let not thy left half, late ne rathe
Wit what thou worckeste, with thy right side
For thus bids ye gospel, good me^ done her alms.
The mayors office
Mayres and masters, that means be between
The King and the common, to keep the laws
To punyshe on pylaries, and pynnynge stoles
Brusters and bakesters, bouchers and cokes.
For these ar me^ on this mold, What harm y^ vitiliers do and what abuse is in
regrat^g.
ye most harm works
To the pore people, that percell meal byghe
For they poysen the people, privily and often
They richen through regratry, and ^en^es hem bighen,
With that ye pore people, should put in her wombes
For took they all truly, they timbred not so high
Ne bought no burgages, be ye full certain.
And Mede ye maid, the Mayre has besought
Of all such Sellers, silver to take
Or presents without pence, as pieces of silver
Kings or other riches, the regrators to maintain
For my love quod that Lady, love hem echone
And suffer hem to sell, some deal against reason.
Solomon the sage, a sermon he made
For amend Mayres, and men that keep laws
And told hem this teme, that I tell think.
I guis deuorabit tabernacula cotu^, Job. xv.
qui libe^ter accipiu^t muuera.
Among these lettred leodes this late^ is to mean
That fire shall fall, and brenne all to blo ashes
The houses and homes, of hem that des^^eth
Gifts or years gyfts, because of her offices.
The king from the counsel came, and called after mede,
And sent for her a swyth, with sergeantes many
That brought her to boure, with blys and with joy
Curtesly the king than, comsed to tell
To mede the maid, melleth these words.
Vnwittely woman, wrought have thou often
And wurse wroughtest ^ never, than tho you falls took
But I forgive the that gilt, and grant the my grace
Hence to thy death day do so no more.
I have knight conscience, came late from beyond
If he wills the to wife, will thou him have?
Yea lord quod that lady, God for bydels,
But I be wholly at your hest, hang me sone.
And than was Conscience called, to come and appear
Before the king and his counsel, as clerks and other
Knelinge Conscience, to the king louted
To wit what his will were, and what he do should.
Wilt you wedde this woman quod ye king, if I will asse^t?
For she is feign of thy fellowship, for to be thy make
Conscience forsakes Mede for her evil condition*
Quod conscience to the king, Christ it me for bydde
Or I wed such a wife, woo me betyde
For she is frail of her faith, fykell of her speech
And makes men misdo, many score times
Trust of her treasure, betrayeth full many
Wives and widows, wantones she teaches
And learneth hem lechery, that love her gifts
Your father she felled, through false byhest
And has poysened Popes, and peyred holy church
Is not a better band, by him that me made
Between heaven and hell, in earth though men sought
For she is tykel of her tail, taylewise of her tongue
As co^me^ as a carte way, to each a knave that walks
To monks and to minstrels: to mesels in hedges
Sisours and somnours, such men her prayseth
Shriues of shires, were shent if she were not
For she does men lose her land, and her life both.
She lets pass prisoners, and pays for them often
And gives the Gailors, gold and grotes togethers
To vnfetteren the false, fle where him lyketh
And takes the true by the top, and tyeth hem fast
And hangs hem for hatred, that harm did never
To be cursed in consistory, she counts not a bean
For she copith the co^missarie, and coteth his clerks
She is assoyled as sone, as herself lyketh
And may nigh as much do, in a month one
As may your secret Seal, in sixscore days
For she is preuy with the pope, prouisors it knows
For sir Simonie and her self, seals the bulls
She blesses the bishops, though they be lewd
Prouendreth persons, and priests mainteineth
To have lemmans and lottebies, all her live days
And brings forth barnes, again forbode laws
There she is well with the king, woo is the Realm
For she is favorable to false, and fouleth truth often
By Jesus with her Iwels, your Justices she shendith
And lies again the laws, and lets hem the ga^e
That faith may not be of force, her flore^s fly to thick
She leads the law as her list, and louedaies makes
And does me^ lose through her love, ye law might win The maze of a mean man, though he more her ever
Law is so lordleche, and loath to make end
Withouten prsentes or pence, she pleases full few
By good reso^ ye is great ruth, rehearse me^ what he^ likes
Barons and burgesies, she brings in sorrow
And all the common in care, that couetith lyse in truth
For Clergy and couetis, she coupleth together
This is the life of that lady, now lord give her sorrow
And all that mainteineth her me^, meschau^ce he^ betide
For pore me^ may have no power, to plain he^ when they smarte
Such master is mede, among me^ of good,
Than morned Mede, and mened her to the king
To have space to speak, speed if she might
The king granted her grace: with a good will
Excuse the if thou can: I can no more said
For conscience accuses the: Mede has leave t^ speak
to congayne the for ever
Nay lord quod that lady: leave him the wurse
When ye witteh witterly, where the wrong lies
There that mischief is great, mede may help.
And thou know conscience, I came not to chyde
Ne deprave thy person, with a proud heart
Well thou wotest warnard, but if thou will gabbe
Thou have hanged on me, half a leven times
And also griped my gold, give it where the liked
And why thou wrathest ye now, wonder me thinks
Yet I may as I might, menske the with gifts
And maintain thy manhod, more then thou know
And thou have famed me foul, before the king here
For killed I never no king, ne councelled thereafter
Ne did as thou demest, I do it on the king
Mede reherseth what she has done
In Normandy was he not, noyed for my sake
And thou thy self sothely, shamedst him often
Crope into a Chabane, for cold of thy nails
Wendest that winter, would have lasted ever
And dredest to be dead, for a dym cloud
And hydest upward, for hunger of thy womb.
Without pity pylore, pore men thou robbedst
And bare her bras at thy back, to Calleis to sell
There I last with my lord, his life for to save.
I made his man merry and mourning let
I batred hem on her back, and bolded her hertes
I did hem hoppe for hope, to have me at will
Had I been mershall of his men, by Mary of heaven
I durst have laid my life, and no less wed
He should have be lord of yt land, in length and breadth
And also king of that kyth, his kynne for to help
The lest brol of his blood, a barons pere.
Cowardly thou conscience, councelledst him thens
To leven his lordship, for a little silver
That is the richest realm, that rain over houeth.
It becomes to a king, that keeps a realm
To give mede to men, that mekely him serves
To aliantes and to al me^, Mede tells how neadful she is to all men.
to honerne hem with gifts
Mede makes him beloved, and for a man holden.
Emperors and Earls, and all manner of Lords
For gifts have young men, to go and to ride
The Pope and all the prelates, presents vnderfoggen
And medeth men hem selves, to maintein her laws.
Servants for their service, we se well the sothe
Taken mede for her maistrys, as they may accord.
Beggars for their biddynge, bidden me Mede
Mynstrels for their mirth, Mede they ask.
The king has mede of his me^, to make peace in la^d
Men that teachen children, crauen after mede.
Priests that preachen ye people to good, asken mede
And mass pence and her meat, at the meal time.
All kynne crafts men, craue^ Mede for her prentises
Merchants and mede, must needs go togythers
No wight as I wene, withouten mede may live.
Quod the king to Conscience, by Christ as me thinks
Mede is well worthy, the maistrye to have.
Nay quod Conscience to ye king, and kneled on the earth
There are.ii. manner of Medes, Conscience tells ye king of.ii manner of Medes.
my lord with your leave
That one god of his grace, grants in his bliss
To hem that well worchen, while they liuen here
The prophet precheth thereof, and put it in the psalter.
Domine quis habitabit in tabernaculo tuo. etc. Psalm. xv.

Lord who shall wo^ne in thy wonnes, and with thy holy saints
Or reste^ in thy holy hills? this asks David.
And David assoyleth it him self, as ye psalter tells.
Qui ingreditur sine macula, et operatur iusticiam.
They that entren of one color, and of one will
And have wrought worckes, with right and with reason
And he that uses not, the life of vsurye
And enfourmeth pore men, and preserves truth
Psalm. xv.
Qui pecuniam suam non dedit ad vsuram
Et munera super innocentem non accipit.
And al yt help the innocent, and holden with the rightful
Without Mede does hem good, and the truth helps
Such manner men my Lord, shall have ye first mede
Of god at her great need, when they gone hence
There is an other mede mesureles, yt masters desires
To maintain misdoers, mede they take.
And thereof speaks the psalter, in a psalms end.
In quorum manibus iniquitates sunt
Psa. xxvi
Dextera eorum, repleta est muneribus.
And he that grypeth her gold, so me god help
Shall abye it bitter, or the book lies
Priests and persons, that pleasynges desieren
That taken mede and money, for masses yt they singe
Taken her mede here, as Matthew us teaches
Mat. vi.
Amen amen, recipiebant mercedem suam.
That laborers and pore folk, taken of her masters
It is no manner mede, but a measurable hyre
In marchaundice is no mede, I may it well auowe
It is a permutatio^ apertly, a peniworth for another
And reddest thou never Regum, thou recraed mede
Wha^ the ve^geau^ce fell on Saul, and on his children
God sent to Saul, by Samuel the prophet
That Agag of Amelec, and all his people after
Should dye for a deed, that done had her elders
Therefore said Samuel to Saul, god him self hoteth
The be buxume at his bidding, his will to fulfill
We^d to Amelec with thine host, and what you find there flea it
Burns and Beasts, brenne hem to death
Wydowes and wives, women and children
Mouable and immovable, and all that thou might find
Brenne it bear not away, be it never so rich
For mede nor for money, look thou distroye it
Spyll it and spare it not, thou shall speed the better
And for he coueted her cattle, and the king spared
For bare him and his beasts both, as ye bible witnesses
Otherwise than he was, warned of the prophet
God said to Samuel, that Saul should dye
And his sede for that sin, shamefully end
Such a mischief mede made, Saul ye king to have
That god hated him forever, and all his heirs after
The color of this case, ne keep I not to tell
On adventure it noyed men, no end will I make
For so is this world wont, with hem that have power
That who so says sothe, is sonest iblamed
I Conscience know this, for kind wit, This is no prophecy, but a reasonable
gatheri^g.
me it taught
That reason shall rain, and realms govern
And right as Agag had, hap shall come
Samuel shall slay him, and Saul shall be blamed
And David shall be diademed, and daunten hem all
And one christen king, keep hem echeone
Shall no more mede be maistry, as she is now
And love and lownes, and leauty togythers
Shall be masters on molde, Truth to save
And who so trespaceth against truth, or takes again his will
Leauty shall done him law, and no life else
Shall no sergea^t for his service, wear no silk howne
Ne no Pelure in his cloak, for pleadynge at the bar
Mede of misdoers, makes many Lords,
^^^ouer lords lowes, rules the realms
(...) and love shall come yet, and conscience together
This is no prophecye, but a (...) a^hered of the scriptures.
And make of law a labourer, such love shall arise
And such a peace among the people, and a perfect truth,
That Jews shall wene in their wit, and wax wonders glad
That Moses and Messia, be come into this earth
And have wonder in her hertes, that men be so true.
All that bears bastard, broad sword or lance
Axe, or yet hatchet, or any weapon else
Shall Be demed to death, but if he do it smithy.
Esai. ii.
Into sicle or into sithe, to share or to culter.
Conflabunt gladios suos in vomeres.
Every man to play with a plow, pikeaxe, or spade,
Spynne or spread dong, or spil him self with s^oughe,
Priests or persons, with place bo to hunte
And dynge upon David, every day till even
Hunting or hauking, if any of them use
His boast of benifice, worth by nome him after
Shall neither king ne knight, constable ne mayre
Ouerleade the common, ne to the court so^mone
Ne put hem in panel, to done hem plight her truth
But after ye deed is done, one dome shall reward
Mercy or no mercy, as truth will accord.
Kings court, common court, consistorye and chapter
Al shall be but one court, and one Baron by justice
Than worth true to^g, a tidy man ye tened me never
Battles shall none be, ne no man bear weapon
And what smith that any smithed, be smitte^ therwt to death
Esai. ii.
No^ leuable gens contra gentem gladium, etc.
And or this fortune fall, find men shall the werste
By syx su^nes and a ship, and half a shefe of arowes*
And ye mydle of a moan, shall make ye Jews to turn,
And Sarasines for that sight shall sing
Gloria in excelsis Deo
For Makometh and Mede, mishape shall that time
For Melius est bonum nomen quam diuitie multe
Also wroth as the wind, Pro. xxii.
wax Mede in a while
I can latin quod she, clerks wot the sothe
Se what Solomon says, in Sapience books
That he that gives gifts, the victory wins
And most worship has therwt, as holy write tells.
Honorem acquiret, qui dat munera.
I leave well Lady quod conscience, That scripture should be read whole. i. Tess.
v.
that latin be true
And thou art like a lady: that rad a lesson once
Was Omnia, probate and that pleased her well
For that was no longer, at the leaves end
Had she looked that other half, and the lefe turned
She should have found fell words following thereafter
Quod bonum est tenete. Truth that text made
And so fared ye Madame, ye could no more find
Tho you looked on Sapience, sitting in your study
This text that ye have told, were good for lords
And you failed a cu^ni^g clerk, yt coud ye lefe have turned
And if ye seek Sapie^ce often, find ye shall ye follows.
A full teneful text, to hem that take mede
And that is, Animam autem aufert accipientium. etc.
And yt is the tail of the text: of that that ye showed
That though we win worship, and with mede have victory
The soul that the sond takes, by so much is bound.
Passus quartus de visione
CEase said the king, I suffer you no longer
Ye shall sangtle forsooth, and serve me both
Kiss her quod the king, conscience I hot
Conscience will have reasons advice.
Nay by Christ quod Conscience, congay me rather
But Reason read me thereto, rather will I dye.
And I co^mau^d you quod the king, to Conscience than
Rape the to ride, and Reason thou fetch
Command him that he come, my counsel to hear
For he shall rule the realm, and read me the best
Of Mede and of other, and what man shall her wed
And accou^ten with the Conscience, so me Christ help
How thou lernest ye people, the learned and the lewd.
I am feign of that forward, said the freke than
And ryt right to Reason, and rowndeth in his ear
And said as the king bade, and sithe took his leave.
I shall array me to ride quod Reason, rest the awhile
And called Caton his knave: curtise of speech
And also Thomme true tongue, tell me no tales
Reason rydeth on suffera^ce.
Ne leasyng to laughen of, for I loved hem never
And set my saddle apo^ Sufferau^ce, till I se my time
And let waroken it well, with wytty words girthes
And hang on him the heavy bridle, to hold his head low
For he will make we^e, twice er he come there
Than Conscience upon his caple carried forth fast
And reason with him rit, rownynge togithers
Waren wisdom and wittye followed Reason
Which maistris Mede, makes on this earth
One Waren wisdom, and Wytty his fere
Followed him fast, for they had to done
In ye Escheker and at ye chauncerye, to be discharged of things
And ride^ fast, for Reso^ should read hem ye best
For to save hem for silver, from shame and from harms.
And Conscience knew hem well, they loved couetise
And bade Reason ride fast, and reck of hem nether
There be wiles in her words, and with mede they dwell:
There as wrath and wrangeling is, there get they silver
And where is love and leauty, they will not come there.
Contricio et infelicitas in v^is little. Psa. xiii.
etc,
They ne give not of God, one goose winge.
Non est timor domini ante oculos eorum. Psa. xiii.
etc.
For God wot they will do more, for a doson chikins
Or as many copons, or for a seame of Otes
Than for love of our lord, or al his leave saints.
Therefore reason let hem tide, the rich by hem self
For Conscience knows he^ not, ne Christ as I trow.
And than Reason rode fast, the right hie ga^e
And Conscience him kenned, till they came to ye king,
Curtesly the king than, came against Reason
And between him self and his sone, set him on be^ch
And wordeden well wisely, a great while togythers.
And tha^ came Peace into parlime^t, Peace co^playneth upon wrong
and put forth a byll
How Wrong against his will, had his wife taken:
And how he rauyshed Rose, Rainoldes love
And Margaret of her mayde^hed, maugre her cheeks
Both my geese and my gris, his gadlinges fetches,
I dare not for fear of him, fight ne chide
He borrowed my bayard, and brought him never home
Ne no fertinge therefore, for ought I could plead
He maynteineth his men, to murder mine ewen
For stalleth my fayres, and fyghteth in my chepyng.
And breketh up my berne doors, and steals away my wheat
And takes me but a tail, for.x. quarter oaths
Yet he beats me thereto, and lies by my maid
I am not hardy for him, uneath to look
The king knew he said soth, for Conscience him told
That Wrong was a wicked luske, and wrought much sorrow
Wrong was afraid the^: and wisdom he sought
To make peace with his pence, and proferd him many
And said, had I love of the king: little would I reche
If Wrong might obtain the king is favor, he passes for no more,
Though Peace and his power, playned hem ever
Tho went Wisdom, and sir Warren the wittye
For that Wrong had wrought, so wicked a deed
And warnyd Wrong tho, with such a tale.
Who so works by will, wrath makes often
I say it by my self, you shall it well find
But if Mede it make, thy mischyefe is up
For both thy life and thy land, lies in her grace.
Than wowed Wrong, wisdom full yerne
To make his peace with his pence, handy da^dy paid
Wisdom and Wit than, went both togythers
And took Mede midde hem, mercy to win.
Peace put forth his head, and his pan bloody
Wythouten gylt god wot, gate I this scath
Conscience and the commune, known the sothe
And wisdom and wit weren about fast
To overcome the King, with cattle if they might:
The king swore by Christ, and by his crown both
That wrong for his works, should woe thoroughly
Wrong is committed to prison,
And commanded a constable, to cast him in yrous
And let him not these seven years, se his fete once
God wot quod Wisdom, that were not the best
And he ame^des might make, let main price him have
And be borowe for his bale, and byggen him boot.
And so amend that is misdo, and evermore the better
Wit accorded therewith, and said the same
Better is that bote, bale adowne bring
Than bale be ibeate, and bote never the better
Than began Mede to meuen her, and mercy she besought
And profred Peace a present, all of pure gold
Have this man of me quod she to amend thy scath
For I will wage for Wrong, he will do so no more
Pituouslye Peace than, prayed to the king
To have mercy on ye man, that misdyd him so often
For he has waged me well, Mede stops Peaces mouth
as wisdom him taught
And I forgive him that gylte, with a good will
So that the king assent, I can say no better.
For mede has me ame^ds made, I may no more ask
Nay quod the king tho, so Christ me help
Wrong we^deth not so away, erst I will wit more
For lope he so lightly, laughen he would
And eft be the bolder, to beat mine hewn
But Reason have ruth on him, he shall sit in my stocks
And yt as long as he lives, but lownes him borow
Some men rad Reason tho, have ruth on that shrewe
And to council the king, and conscience after
That mede might be meinperner, Reso^ they bisought
Read me naught quod Reason, no ruthe to have
Till Lords and ladies, love all Truth
And haten all harlotrye, Reasons advice in the punyshynge of Wrong.
to hear or to mouth it
Till Pernels purfill, be put in her hutche
And childerns cherishing, be chastisinge with yardes
And harlotes holiness, be holden for an hynde
Till clerks couetise, be to clothe the pore and feed
And religious Romers, recordars in her cloisters
As saint Benet hem bade, Bernard and Francis
And till preachers preaching, be preued on hem self
Till the kings counsel, be the common profit
Till bishops barnes, be beggars chambers
Her hawks and her hou^des, help to pore religious
And til saint James be sought, there I shall asigne
That no man go to Galice, but if he go for ever
And all Rome runners, for robbers of beyond
Bare no silver over sea, that sign of king shows
Neither graven nor vngrauen: gold neither silver
Upon forfeture of that fee, who so find it at Dover
But if he be mercha^t or his man: or messe^ger with letters
Prouisor or priest: or penant for his sins
And yet quod Reason by the roode: I shall no ruthe have
While Mede has the masterie: in this mouth hal
And I may show examples, as I se other while
I say it by my self quod he: and it so were
That I were a king with crown, to keep a realm
Should never wrong in this world: yt I wit might
Be unpunished in my power: for peril of my soul
Ne get my grace for gifts, so me God save
Ne for no Mede have mercy but if mekenes it made
Mat. xvi,
For Nullum malum the man met with Impunitum
And badde that Nullum bonum be Irremuneratum
Let thy confessor sir king, construe this vnglozed
And if ye worken it in work: I dare wed mine ears
That law shall be a labourer: and lead a field dounge
And love shall lead the land, as the leefe lyketh.
Law shall lead afeld dunge.
Clerks yt were Confessors, coupled hem togithers
Al to construe this clause, for the Kings profit
And not for ye comfort of ye pore common: ne kings soul
For I se Mede in the mouth hal: on men of law wink
And they laughing lope to her: and left reason many
Waren wisdom, winked upon Mede
And said madam I am your man: what so mi mouth iangleth
I fail florens quod the freke, and fail speech often:
Al rightful recorden, that Reason truth told
And wit accordid therewith, and co^me^did his words
And the most people in the hal: and many of the great
And lette^ mekenes a master, and mede a manzed shrew.
Love let of her light: and leautie yet less
And said it so high: that all the hall it herd
Who so wilneth her to wife: for wealth of her goods
But he be known for a cokeolde, cut of my nose.
Mede mourned sore tho, and made heavy chere
For the most common of that court, called her an hoar
And a Sisoure and a somnour. sued her fast
And a shriues clarke, beshrewed all the route
For often have I quod he, helped you at the bar
And yet gave ye me never, the worth of a ryshe.
The king called Conscience, and afterward Reason
And recorded that Reason, had rightfully showed
And Moodlych upon Mede, with might the king looked
And ga^ wax wroth with law, The lawiers keep the king from his right,
for mede had it nere she^t
And said, by your law as I leave, I lose may eschets
Mede oueremastreth law, and much truth lets
And Reason shall reke^ with you, if I reign any while
And deem you by this day, as ye have deserved
Mede shall not maynprise you, by Mary of heaven,
I will have Leauty in law, and let be your ianglyng
And as most folk witnesses, Wrong shall be demed.
Quod Conscience to ye king, but ye common will assent
It is full hard by mine head, here to to bring it
All your liege lords, to leden thus even.
By him yt raught on ye rode, quod Reason to the king
But if I rule this your realm, Reason takes upon him to rule the realm.
rent out my guts
If ye bidden buxumnes, be of mine assente.
And I assent said the king, by, S. Mary my lady
By my counsel commune, of clerks and of earls
And reddily reason, thou shall not ride from me
For as long as I live, leave the I nell
I am ready quod Reason, to rest with you ever
So Conscience be of our counsel, I keep no better
And I grant quod the king, god forbid it fail
As long as our lives lasts, live we together
Passus quintus de visione,
THe King and his knights, to the kirk went
To here matte^s of the day, and ye mass after
Tha^ waked I of my wiking, and woe was with all That I ne had slept sadder, and sighen more
And er I had faren a furlong, Fentise me hente
That I ne might farther a foot, for defaut of slepinge
And sar softly adoune, and said my believe
And so I babled on mi beads, they brought me aslep
And than I saw much more, then I before of told
For I se the field full of folk, that I before of said
And how reason began araie^ him, al ye realm to prech
And with a Cross before ye king, comsed thus to techen
He preued that this pestylences: were for pure sin
And the south westorne wind, Pestylences come for sin,
on satterday at even
Was partly for pure pride, and for no point else.
Piries and plumtres, were puffed to thearth
In ensample tho segges, ye should done the better
Beches and broad oaks, were blown to the ground
Turned vpwardes the tails, in tokening of dred
That dedly sin erdomes day, shall fordone hem al
Of this matter I might, mamelie full long
And I shall say as I saw, so me god help
How partly before the people, reason began to prech
He bad wast or go work, that he best could
And win his was^ing, with some manner craft
He prayed Pernell her putfyles to let
And keep it in her cofer, for cattle at her need
Tomme Stowne he taught, to taken two staves
And fech Felicie home, from the winen ^ine
And he warried Wat his wife was to blame
That hirked was worth half a mark, and his hod not worth a grot
And he had Bet, cut a bow or twain
And beat Beton therewith, One correction must be had
but if she will work
And then he charged chapmen, to chasten her children
Let no winninge hem forwany, while they be young
Ne for no poust of pestilence, please hem not out of reason
My syer said to me, and so did my dame,
That the lever child, the more lore behooves
And Solomon said the same, that Sapience made,
Qui parcit virge, Pro.xiii.
odit filium
The Englysh of this latin, who so will know
Who so spares the spring, spylleth his children
And sithen he prayed prelates, and priests together
That ye preach to the people, preue on your self
And do it in deed, it shall drive you to good,
If ye live as ye learn us, we shall leave you the better.
And sithen he radde religion, her rule to hold
Lest the king and his council, The suppression of Abbayes. Good counsel.
your commons apere
And be stuardes of your stedes, till ye be ruled better.
And sithen he councelled the king, his commons to love
It is thy tresure if treson ne were, and treacle at thy need
And sithe^ he prayed ye Pope, have pity on holy church
And ere he gave any grace, govern first him self.
And ye ye have laws to keep, let truth be your couetyse
More then gold or gifts, if ye will god please
For who so contrarieth truth, he teleth in the gospel,
That god knows hem not, ne no saint in heaven. Mat xxv.

Amen dico vobis, nescio vos.
And ye that seek saint James, True pilgrimage.
and saints at Rome
Seek saint truth, for he may save you all,
Qui cum patre et filio that fair hem befall,
That sueth my sermon, and thus said Reason.
Than ran Repentance, and reherced his ^eme
And gart Will weep, water with his eyes
Pernell proud heart, plate her to the earth
And lay along or she looked, and lord mercy cried
And behyght to him, that us al made
She should vnsow her serke, and set thereon here
Shall never high heart me hent: but hold me low
To affaynten her flesh, yt firrce was to sin,
And suffer me to be missayd, and so did I never
But now will I meke me, and mercy beseech
For all this I have hated in my heart.
Lechour. The old satisfacio^
Than Lechoure said alas, and on our lady he cried,
To make mercy for his misdedes, bitwene god and his soul
With yt he should ye saturday, for seven year after
Drink but myd the day, and dyne but once
Envy.
Envy with heavy heart, asked after shrifte
And carefully Mea culpa, he comsed to show
And was as pale as a pellet, in the palsy he seemed
And clothed in Caurymaury, I can it not disceiue,
In kyrtel and curtepy, and a knife by his side
Of a friars frocke, were the foresleues
And as a leke that has lied long in the sun
So looked he with lean chekes, louring foul
His body was to bole for wrath, yt he bote his lips
And wringi^g with yt first, to wreke him self he thought,
With works or with words, when he se his time
Each word that he warped, was of an edders tongue
Of chyding and of chalenging, was his chief liuelode
With backbiting and bismer, and bearing false wytnes
This was al his curtesy, where yt ever he showed him
I would be shriuen quod this shrew, if I for shame durst.
I would be gladder by god, yt Gyb had mischaunce
Envious worckes.
Than if I had won this weke, a wey of Essexe chese
I have a neighbor nigh me, I have noyed him often,
And lowen on him to lords, to don him lose his silver
And make his friend be his foe, through my false to^g
His grace and his good happes, greueth me fulsore
Between many and many, I make debate often
That both life and lyme, is lost through my spech.
And when I mete him in market, that I most hate
I halse him hendlech, as I his friend were
For he is doughtier then I, I dare do none other,
And had I mastry and might, god wot my will
And when I come to ye kirk, and should knele to the rode
And pray for the people, as the priest teaches
For pilgrims and for palmers, and for all the people after
Than I cry on my knees, you Christ give him sorrow
That bare away my bole, and my broke shete
Away from the altar, then turn I mine eyes
And behold how Elen, has a new coat
I wysh that it were mine, with all the web after
And at men's lesing I laugh, that mine herteaketh
And for there winning I weep, and well the time
And deem that they do ill, though I do well worse
Who so undermines me hereof, I hate him deadly after
I would that each a wight, were my knave
For who so has more then I, ye angreth me sore.
And thus I live loueles, like a lyther dog
That all my body bolneth, for bitter of my gall
I might not eaten many years: as a man ought
For envy and evil will, is evil to defye
May no sugar ne no swetethynge, swage the swelling
Ne no Diapenidion, drive it from my heart
Nether shrift nether shame, but shraping of mi maw
This I read quod repentance, and read him to ye best
Sorrow for sins, salvation is of souls. Se how^ Envy repents.

A am sorry quod that segge, I am but selde other
And ye makes methus megre, for I ne may me veng
Among Burgesis have I be, dwelling at London
And guard backbiti^g be a broker, to blame men's ware
When he sold and I not, than was I ready
To lie and lour on my neighbor, and to lak his chaffer
I will amend this if I may, through might of god almighty
Now awaketh Wrath, Wrath.
with two white eien
And niueling with the nose, and his neck hanginge.
I am Wrath quod he, I was sometime a Friar
And the couentes gardener, for to graften Impes
On Limitours and Legisters, lesynges I imped
Til they bear leaves of smoth speech, lords to please
And sithe^ they blosomed abrod, in bour to hear shrift
And now is fallen thereof a fruit, ye folk han well lever
Show her shrifts to hem, tha^ shriue he^ to her persons
And persons have perceived, ye friars part with hem
These possessours preach, and deprave Friars
And Friars finds he^ in defaut, as folk bear wytnes
And wha^ they prech ye people, in many places about
I Wrath walk with hem, A good scholemaster.
and wish hem of my books
Thus they speke^ of mi spirituality, and despiseech other
Till they be both beggars, and by my spiritualty lib be^
Or else al rich and riden about, I Wrath rest never
That I ne most follow this wicked folk, for such is my grace
I have an aunt to Nun, Nuns.
and an Abbes both
Her had lever swone or swelt, tha^ suffer any pain
I have been coke in her kitchen, and her covent served
Many months with hem, and with Monks both
I was the Priores potager, and other pore ladies
And made he^ Iowts of ia^gling, ye dame I one was a bastard
And dame Clarence a knights daughter,
a cokolde was her sire.
And dame Pernel a prests file, priores was she never
For she had child in chery time, al our chapter it wyste
Of wicked words (I Wrath) her wortes made
Till thou lie and thou lie, lopen out at once
And either hit other, under the cheke
Had they had knives by Christ, either had killed other
Saint Gregory was a good pope, Gregory would not suffer woe men to hear
confession.
and had a good forewit
That no priores were priest, for ye he provided
Lest happily they had had no grace, to hold harlatry in
For they are ^icle of her tongues, and must al secrets tell.
Among monks I might be, and many times ishamen
For they be many fell frekes, my fetis to epsy
Both Prior and subprior, and our Pater abbas
And if I tell any tales, they taken hem togithers
And do me fast frydaies, to bread and to water
I am challenged in Chapter house, as I a child were
And balaced on the bare arse, and no breach between
Therefore have I no likynge, with tho leodes to won
I eat there vnhende fish, and feeble ale drink
Other while when wine comes, and I drinck it at eue^
I have a flux of a foul mouth, well five days after
Al ye wickedness that I wot, by any of our brethren
I knoth it in our cloister, that all our covent wot it
Now repent the quod Repe^tau^ce, and rehearse thou never
Council that you know, by countenance ne by sight.
And drink not over delicately, ne to deep neither
That thy will because thereof, to Wrath might turn
Esto sobrius he said, and assoyled him after
And bade him will to weep, his wickenes to amend.
And than came Couetis, can I him not discriue
So hungerly and hollow: Couetits.
so sternely he looked
He was vittle browed, and baberlypped also
With two blered eyes, as a blind hagge
And as a lethren purse, lolled his chekes
Well syder then his chyn they sheuered for old
And as a bound man of his baco^, his berd was bidrauled
With a hode on his head, The image of couetise.
and a lousy hatte above
And in a tauny teberd, of twelve winter age
Al totorne and baudye, and full of lyce crepinge
But if that a louse, could have lopen the better
She had not walked on ye welte, so was it thredbare
I have been couetice quod this caytife, I beknowe it here
For sometime I served, Symme at style
And was his prentice plight, his profyt to wate
First I learned to lie, a leaf other twain
Wyckedly to wey, was my first lesson
To Wy and to Winchester, I went to the fair
With mani manner mercha^dise, as mi master me hight
Ne had the grace of gyle, igo amongst my chaffer.
It had been unsold this seven year, so me God help
Than drove I me among drapers, my donet to learn
To draw the lyser a long, the longer it seemed
Among the rich rays: I rendered a lesson
To broch hem with a pacnedel, and spiyt hem to gythers,
And put hem in a press, and pynnen them therein
Tylten yardes or twelve, had tolled out. xiii
My wife was a webster, and wolloncloth made
She spoke to spinsters to spynen it out
And the pound yt she paid by, passed a quartern more
Than mine own auncer, who so weyed truth
I bought her berly malte, she brewed it to sell
Penyale and puddingale, she poured togithers
For labourars and low folk, that lay by it self.
The best ale lay in my bour, or else in my chamber
And who so bummed thereof, bought it thereafter.
A gallon for a grote, god wot no less
And yet it came in cupemele, this craft she used.
Rose the Regrater, was her right name
She has holden huksterye, all her life time
And I swear now sothelich, that sin would I let
And never wickedly wey, ne wicked chaffer use
But wend to Walsingham, and my wife also.
And bid the rode of bro^holme, bring me out of debt
Repentest thou ever (quod repentance)
or restitucion made?
Yes once I was he^berd quod he, with an hepe of chapme^. The restitutio^ that
now is used.

I rose when they were at rest, and rifled their males.
That was not restitucio^, quod repe^ta^ce but robers theft
Thou had ben better worthy, to be hanged therefore
Than for all that, thou have here showed.
I took rifli^g for restitucio^ quod he, for I never red book
I ca^ no french in faith, but of the fer end of Norfolk
Used thou ever usury quod repentance, in all thy life time?
Nay sothely he said, save in my youth
I learned among Lumberdes, and Jews a lesson
To wey pence with a pays, and pare the heuyest
And lene it for love of crese, to lay a wed and lesen it,
Such deeds I did write, if he his day broke
I have mo manners by rerages, tha^ through, Miseriatur and co^modat
I have lent lords and ladies, my chaffer
And ben her broker after, and bought it my self
Eschaunges and cheuisauncis, with such chaffer Idle
And lend folk that lose will, a lyp at every noble
And with lumbardes letters, I lade gold to Rome
And took it by tale here, and told hem there less
Le^dest thou ever lords, for love of her maintenance?
Yea I have lent lords, that loved me never after
And has made mani a knight, both mercer and draper
That paid not for his pre^tishod, one pair of glouis
Have thou pit on pore men, yt must needs borowe?
I have as much pity on ye pore, as peddler has of cats
That kylth hem if he ca^ he^ catch, for covet of her skins
Art you ma^lich among thineibours, of thimete and drink?
I am holden quod he as hind, as is hound in kitchen
Amongst my neighbors namely, such a name I have
God leave yt never quod repentance, but you repent yt rather
Grace on this ground, thy good well to byset
Ne thine heirs after yt, have joy of yt thou wynnest
To thine executors well biset, Ill gotten goods muslebe il spent,
ye silver yt thou he^ leuest.
And yt was wo^ne with wrong, with wicked me^ be dispe^did
For were I friar of ye house, there good feith and chariti is
I nold cope us with thy cattle, ne our kirk amend.
Ne have a penny to my pittau^ce, so god my soul help
For ye best book in our house, bright gold if it were
And I wist witterly thou were such as thou tellest.
Or else that I could know it by any kinds wit
Seruuses alterius cu^ fercula pinguia queris.
pane tuo potius vescere liber eris.
Thou art an unkind creature, I can the not assoyle
Till thou make restitucion, and rekening with them all,
And sith that reason roll it, in the regester of heaven
That you have made each man good, I may yt not assoile
Forgette not that ye last date will surely come. Psalm. li
Non dimit tur peccatum nisi restituatur ablatum.
For all that have of thy good, have God my troth
Been holde^ at the heygh dome, to help the to restitute
Who so leueth not this be soth, look in ye psalter clause
In Miserere mei deus whether I mean truth
Ecce enim veritatem dilexisti. and. etc.
Psalm. xvii
Shall never workma^ in this world, thrive with that thou wineste
Cum sancto sanctus eris. Construe me that in english
Tha^ waxt yt shrew in wa^hope, and would ha^g him self
Ne had repe^ta^ce yt rather, True repentance has hope of mercy.
reco^forted him in this manner
Have merci in thy mind, and with mouth beseech it
For Gods mercy is more, than al his other works
And al wikidnes in ye world, ye man may work or think
Is no more, to ye mercy of God, tha^ in ye sea a glied.
O muis iniquitas quantum ad misericordiam dei
Est quasi scintilla, in medio maris.
Therefore have you mercy in mind, and mercha^dice leave it
For thou have no good ground, to get there with wastell
But if it were with thy tongue, or else with thy two hands
For ye good that you have gotten, began all with falshead
And as long as you live with it, you pa^st not but borowst
And if you wit never to which, ne to whom to restore
Bear it to the byshope, and bid him of his grace
Biset it him self, The Bishop shall answer for many
as best is for thy soul
For he shall answer for the, at the heygh dome
For yt and for many mo, that man shall give a rekening
What he learned you in lent, leave you none other
And le^te you of our lords good, to keep you from sin
Now biginneth Gloton, for to go to shrifte
And carries him to the kirkeward, his coppe to show
And Beton the bruster, bade him god morrow
And asked him with that, whetherward he would
To holy kirk said he, for to hear mass
And sithen I would be shryuen, and sin no more
I have goodale goship said he, gloto^ would thou assai
Haste thou ought in thy purse, any hot spices?
I have pepper and pienes quod he, and a pound of garlyke
And a ferding worth of fenel sede, for fasting days
Than goes Glotton in, and great oaths after
Cisse the souteres, sat on the bench
Common dru^kerds
Wat the warner, and his wife boeth
Tymme the tyncker, and tweyne of his prentises
Hycke the Hackeney man, and Hughe the nedler
Clarise of cockelane, and the clarke of the church
Dauie the diker, and a dosen other.
Sir Pierce of Prydy, and Pernell of Flaunders
A Ribiboure, a ratener, a rakier of chepe
A Roper, a redinge king, and Rose the disheresse
Godfray of garlike hyue, and Gryffin the walshe
And vpholders an heap, early by the morrow
Given Gloto^ with glad cheer, good ale to hansell
Clemente the Cobbler, cast of his cloak
And at the new fair, he nempned it to sell
Hycke the hackeney man, hytte his hode after
And bade Beat the butcher, be on his side
There were chapmen ichose, this wa^e to praise
Who so has ye hode, should have ame^ds of ye cloak
Two risen up in ^ape, and rouned togythers
And praised these penyworthes, apart by them self
They could not by their conscience, accorden in truth
Till Roben the roper, arose by the South
And named him for an vmpere, that no debate nere
For to try this chaffer, betwexte hem there
Hycke the Hosteler, had the cloak
In couenaunte that Clement, should the cup fill
And have Hickes hode ye hosteler, and holde^ him served
And who so repented rathest, should arise after
And greten sir Gloton, with a gallon of ale
There was laughyng and louring, and let go the cup
And so sytten they to eue^song, and songen other while
Till Gloton had igalped, a gallon and a gill
His guts began to gothlen, as two gredy sowes
He pissed a pottell in, a Pater noster while
And blew his round rewet, at his rudge bones end
That all that hard that horn, held her nose after
And wished it had been wyped, with a wyspe of firses
He might neither stepe nor stand, or he a staff had
And than began he to go, like a glemans bytch
Sometime a side, The descripsion of a drunken man.
and sometime a rere
As who so lays lines, for to latche fowls
And wha^ he drough to the door, the^ dimned his eyes
He sto^bled on the threshold, and threw to the earth
Clement the cobbler, cought him by the myddle
For to lift him alofte, and laid him on his knees
And Gloton was a great churl, and a grime in lifti^g
And kought up a caudel, in Clementes lap
There is none so hongry hounde, in Herforte shere
Durst lap of tho leuings, so unlovely they smaught^
With all ye woe of this world, his wife and his wench
Bare him home to his bid, and brought him therein
And after all this excess, he had an accidie
That he slept saturday and sunday, till su^ne went to rest
Than waked he of his wynking, and wyped his eyes
The first word yt he warped was, where is ye bole?
His wit ga^ edwite him tho, how wickedly he lived
And Repentance right tho, rebuked him that time.
As with words and works, you wroughtest ill in thy life
Shriue ye and be ashamed thereof, and show it with mougth.
I Gloton quod the gome, giltye me yield
That I have trespaced with tongue, I ca^ not tell how often
Sworn gods soul, so god me help and holidome
There no need was, nine hundred times
And over se me at my soupe, and sometime at nones
That I Gloton gyrte up, ere I had gone a mile.
And I spilt yt might be spared, and spent on some hu^gry
Over delicatli on fasting days, dro^k and eaten both
And sat su^time so long there, yt I slept and eat at once
For love of tales in taberns, to drink ye more I dined
And hied to ye meat er none, wha^ fasting days were.
This shoyng shrift quod repentance, shall be merit to ye
And than began gloten great, and great dole make
For his lewd life, that he lived had
Pretty vows.
And vowed to fast, for honger and for thirst
Shall never fish on friday, diffien in my womb
Till abstinence mine aunt, have given me leave
And yet have I hated her, al my life time
Than came Sloth al beslaberd, with two slimy eyne
I must sit said ye Segge, or else I must needs nap
I may not stond ne stoop, ne with out mi stole knele
Were I brought a bed, but if my talende it made
Should no ringing do me rise, or I were ripe to dine
He began Benedicite with a belke, and his breast knoked
And raskled and rored, and rut at the last.
Awake reuke quod repentance, and rape yt to shrift.
If I should dye by this day, me list not to look
I ca^ not perfitli my Pater nost, as ye priest it singith,
But I ca^ rimes of Robe^hod, and Randall of Chester
But of our lord or our lady, I learn nothing at all.
I have made vows xl. and forgotten the^ on ye morrow
I performed never penance, as ye priest me hight
Ne right sorry for my sinnis, yet was I never
And if I bid any beads, but if it be of wrath
That I tell with my tongue, is two mile from my heart
I am occupied every day, holy day, and other
With Idle tales at ye ale, and other while in churches
Gods pain and his passion, full selde think I thereon
I visited never feblemen, ne fettred folk in pyttes
I have lever here an harlotry, or a summers game
Or leasinges to laughe at, and bilye my neighbors
The^ all yt ever mark made, Math, Iho^, and Lucas.
And vigiles and fasting days, al these let I pass
And lie in bed in lent, and mi lemma^ in mine arms.
Till mattens and mass be done, and than go I to ye friars
Come I to Ite missa est I hold me served,
I am not shryuen sometime, but if sickness it make
Not twyse in two year, and than up guess I shriue me
I have been priest and person, passing thyrty winter
Yet can I nether solfe ne singe, ne saints lives read
But I ca^ find in a field, or in a furlong an have
Better than in Beatus ^ir or in Beati omnes.
Construe one clause, and ken it to my parishens
I can hold love days, and hear a reues rekening
And in Cannon and in decretals, I can not read a line
If I bugge and borow ought, but if it be tayled
I forget it as sone, and if men me it ask
Six sithes or seven, I forsake it with oaths
And thus tene I true men, ten hundred times
And my servants salary, sometimes is behind
Ruth is to hear ye rekning, wha^ we shall make account
So with wicked will and with wrath, my workme^ I pay
If any man do me benifite, or help me at need
I am unkind against his curtesi, and ca^ not understand it
For I have and have had, somdeal hawks manners
I am not lured with love, but if ought be under ye tho^b
That kindness that mine eue^ christen, kid me ferther
Six sythes I Sloth, have forgotten it sith
In spech and in sparing of spence, I spilt many a time
Both flesh and fish and many other vitailes
Both bread and ale, butter, milk and chese.
For slouthed in my service, till it might serve no man
I ran about in youth, and gave me not to learning
And ever since have been a beggar, for my foul sloth
Hon mihi quia steril^m duxi, vitam iuuenilem.
Repentist thou quod Repe^tau^ce, and right with he swoned
Till Vigilate, An admonition to beware of despair in repentance
the veil, fet water at his eyes
And flapte it on his face, and fast on him cried
And said ware the, for wanhope will the batraye
I am sorye for my sins, say to thy self
And beat thy self on the breast, bid god of grace
For is no gilte here so great, but yt his goodness is more
Tha^ sat Sloth up, and seyned him Swyth
And made a vow tofore god, for his foul Sloth
Shall no so^day be this seven year, but sikenes it let
That I ne shall do me or day, to the dear church
And hear matteus and mass, as I a monk were
Shall no ale after meat, hold me thence
Till I have euensong heard, I behote to the rode
And yet woll I yield again, if I so much have
All that I wickedly wanne, sithen I wit had
And though my liuelode lack, letten I nell
That each man ne shall have his, or I hence wend
And with the residue and the remnaunte, by ye rode of Chester
I shall seek Truth erste, or I see Rome
Robert the robber, on Reddite looked
And for there was not whereof, he wept swith sore
And yet the sinful shrewe, said to him self
Christ that on Caluery, upon the cross did
Tho Dismas my brother besought you of grace
And had mercy on that man, for Memento sake
So rue on this robber, that Reddere ne haueth
Ne never wene to win, with craft that I know
But for thy mikle mercy, mitigation I beseech
Ne dampe me not at domisday, for that I did ill
What befell of this fellow, I can not fair show
Well I wot he wept fast, water with his eyes
And knowleged his gilte, to Christ yet eft sons
That Penitentia his pycke, he should polish new
And leap with him over land, all his life time
For he had layne by Latro Lucifers aunte
And than had Repentance ruth, and rad he^ al to knele
For I shall beseech for all sinful, our savior of grace
To amend us of our misdedes, and do mercy to us al
Now god quod he, yt of thy goodness, ga^ ye world make
And of naught made ought, and man most like thy lelf
And sithen suffcedest for sin, a sickness to us al
And al for ye best as I leave, what ever ye book tells
O felir culpa O necessarium peccatum Ade.
For through ye sin thy son, sent was to the earth
And became man of a maid, mankind to save
And make thy self with thy son, and us sinful ilyche. Genes. i. i. Io. iiii.

Faciamus homine^ ad imagine^ et similitudinem nostra^. Et alibi. Qui manet in
charitate, in deo manet, et deus in eo.
And sith with thy self son, in our suit dyedest
On good Friday for ma^s sake, at full time of ye day
There thy self ne thy son, no sorrow in death feled
But in our sect was the sorrow, and thy son it ladde,
Captiuam duxit captiuitatem. Ephe. iiii.

The sun for sorrow thereof, lost light for a time
At midday when most light is, and mealtyme of saints
Feddest with thy fresh blud, our forfathers in darkness
Populus qui ambulat in tenebris, vidit lucem magnam
And by ye light yt leaped out of ye, Lucifer was blent
And blew all thy blessed, into the bliss of Paradise
The third day after, thou yedesie into our suit
A sinful Mary the saw, ere saint Mary thy dame
And all to solace synful, thou suffredest it sooner.
Mat. ix.
Non veni vocare iustos, sed peccatores ad penitentiam
And al ye Mark made, Matthew John and Lucas
Of thy doubty deeds, were done in our arms.
John. i.
Verbum caro factum est, et habitauit in nobis.
And by so much me seems, the sikerer we may
Bydde and beseech, if it be thy will
That art our father and our brother, be merciful to us
And have ruth on these ribaudes, yt repent hem selves sore
That ever they wrathed the, in this world
in word, thought, and deed.
The^ he^t Hope an horn of Deus tu co^uersus viuificabis nos
And blew it with Beati quotu^ remiss su^t iniquitates.
That all Saints in heaven, songen at once
Homines et iume^ta saluabis quemadmodum multiplicasti, misericordiam tuam
deus. Psalm, 36.

A thousand of men tho, throngen togythers
Criden up ward to Christ, and to his clean mother
To have Grace to go with hem, Truth to seken.
And there was none so wise, the way thither could
But blustering forth as beasts, over ba^ckes and hills
Till late was and long, ere they a leode met
Appareled as a paynime, in pylgraimes wise
He bare a burden bounden, with a broad lift
In a with wandes wise, wounden about
A bole and a bag, he bare by his side
An hundred amples, on his hatte set
Signs of Sinai, and shelles of Galice
And mady a crouch on his cloak, and keys of Rome
And the vernicle before, for men should know
And se by his signs, whom he so sought had.
This folk trained him first, from whence he came
From Snai he seid, and from our Lords sepulcher.
In Bethlem and in Babylon, I have been in both,
In Ermonie and Alexander, and many other placis.
Ye may see by my signis, that be set in my hatte
That I have walked full wide, in wette and in dry
And sought many good Seints, for my soulis help
Knoweste thou not a crossent, that men call truth?
Coudst you not wish us ye way, where ye wight wo^nith
Nay so me God help, said that gome than
I saw never Palmer, with poke nor with scrippe
Ask after him ere, till now in this place.
Peter, quod a plowman, and put forth his head
I know him as kyndly, The plowman is Truths servant.
as clerk does his book
Conscience and kind wit, kenned me to his place,
And did me sweren sykerly, to serve him for ever
Both to sow and to set, the while I swinke might.
I have been his follower, al this fifty winter
Boeth so wen his seed and sued his beasts
Within and without, I waited his profit.
I dyke and delue, and do that truth hoteth
Sometime I sow, and sometime I thresh
In Tailars and tinkers craft, what truth can devise
I weue and I wind, and do what truth hoteth
For though I sey it my self, I serve him to pay.
Iche have mine hyre well, and other whiles more.
He is prestiste payar that pore men knows,
Hene with halt none helk his hire, yt he ne has it at even
He is as low as a lamb, and lovely of spech.
And if ye will wytt where he wonnith:
I shall wyshe you witterly, the hye way to his place
Yea leave Piers quod these pilgrims, and proferd him hyre
For to wend with hem, to Truethes dwelling place
Nay by my soul health quod Piers, and began for to swear
I nolde fang a ferthinge, for saint Thomas shryne
Truth would love me ye less, lo^gtime therefore after
And if ye will to wend well, this is the way thither
Ye must go through mekenes, both men and wives
Til ye come into conscience, ye Christ wit the soth
That ye louen our lord God, How Piers teaches the way to truth.
leuest of all things
And that your neighbors next, in no wise appeire
Other wise tha^ thou woldist, he wrought to thy self
And so bowith forth by a broke, beeth buxo^ of speech
Till you finden a forde, your fathers ye honors
Honora patrem et matrem. etc.
Exodus xx.
Wade in that water, and wash you well there
And you shall leap the lighter, all your life after
And so shall thou se swear not, but if it be for need
And namely on idle, the name of god almighty
Tha^ shall you come by a croft, but come thou not therein
That croft hight covet not, men's cattle nor her wines
Ne none of her servants, that noyen hem might
Look ye break no bows there, but if they be your own
Two stocks there standen, and flynte you not there
They hight stele not ne sle not, stricke forth by both
And leave hem on the left hand, and look not thereafter
And hold well thy holy day, heighe till even
Tha^ shall thou ble^sh at a berch, bear no false witness
He is frithed in with Florens, and other foes many
Look thou pluck no plant there, for perals of thy soul
Than shall ye se Saysoth, so it be to done
In no manner else not, for no man's biddynge
Tha^ shall thou come to a court, as clear as the sun
The mote is of mercy, that manner abowte
And all the walls been of wit, to holden will out
And kerneled with christendom, mankind to save
Botrased with believe so, or thou be not saved
And all the houses been hiled, hales and chambres
With no lead but with love, and low spech as brethern
The bridge is of bidewel, the better may thou speed
Every pillar is of pennaunce, of prayers of saints
Of alms deds are ye hokes, that the gates hange^ on
Grace hight the Gatewarde, Truth^ Portar
a good man forsooth
His man hight Amend you, for many me^ him knows
Tells him this token, that truth wit the soth
I performed the penance, that the priest me enioined
And am full sort for my sins, and so shall I ever
When I think thereon, though I were a pope
Beddeth amend you meke^ him, till his master once
To wayne up the wyket, that the woman shute
Tho Adam and Eve, eaten apples vnrosted
Paradisi porta per Euam cutictis clausa est, et per vitginem Mariam patefacta
est.
For he has the key and the clicket, though ye King slept
And if grace grant to the, to come in this wise
Thou shall see in thie self, Truth sit in thine heart
In a cheyre of charity, as thou a child were
To suffer him and sey not, against thy Siers will
And beware than of Wrath, that is a weked shrewe
He has Euuye to him, that in thy heart sits
And paketh forth pride, to praise thy self
The boldness of the benefits, makes ye blind than
And tha^ wast you dryue^ out as dew, and the door closed
Keyed and clyketted, to keep the with out
Happilye an hundred winter, er thou eft enter
Thus might you lesen his love, to let well by the self
And never happily eft enter, but grace if thou have
And there are seven sisterne, that seruen Truth ever
And are porters to the posterus, Truths maidens
yt to the place belong
That one of hem hight Abstine^ce, Humility an other
Chartie and Chastity, been the chief maidens there
Patience and Peace, do much people help
Largenes the Lady, lets in full many
She has helped an hundred out of the devils pinfold
And who is sibbe to these seven, so me god help
He is wondersly welcome, and fair vnderfoggen
And but ye be sibbe, to some of these sisters seven
It is full hard by my head quod Piers, for any of you al
To get in gong at any gate there, but grace be ye more
Now by Christ quod a cutpurse the^, I have no kin there
Nor I quod an apeward, by ought that I can know
Wit God quod a wafrester, wist I this for soth
Should I never further a foot, for any friars preachi^g
Yis quod Piers ye plow man, and poked hem all to good
Mercy is a maiden there, has might over hem all
And she is syb be to al sinful, and her son also
And through ye help of hem two, hope ye none other
Thou might get grace thereby, so thou go bytyme
By. s. Paul quod a pardoner, on aue^ture I be not known there
I will go fetch my boxke, with my breuets al
And also a bull, with a Bishops letters.
By Christ quod a common woman, thy company will I follow
Thou shall say I am thy sister, I ne wotte whether they be gonne.
Passus sextus de visione:
THis were a wicked way, but if we had a gide
That would we^d with us each a foot, and ye way tell
Quod perkin ye plowma^, vi. s. Peter of rome
I have an half acre to erie, by ye high way
Had I eryed this half acre, and sown it after
I would wend with you, How Peers assigns women to work.
and the way teach
This were a long lettynge, quod a lady in a Skleire
What should we women work, in the mean while
Some shall sow ye sack quod Piers, for shedyng of the wheat
And ye se lovely ladies, with your long fingers
That ye have silk and sandell, to sow when time is
Chesibles for chaplaynes, churches to honor
Wives and wyddowes, wole and flax spinneth
Make cloth I counsel you, and ken so your daughters
The nedy and the naked, nimith head how they ligge^
And cast hem clothes, for so commands truth
For I shall lene hem liuelode, but if the land fail
Flesh and bread boeth, to rich and to pore
As long as I live, for the lords love of heaven
And al manner of me^, yt through meat and dringe libbeth
Help him to work wightlye, that wins your fode
By Christ quod a knight tho, he kenneth us the best
And on the teme truly, taught was I never
And ke^ me quod ye knight, and by Christ I will assaye.
By saint Paul quod Perken, ye profer me fair
That I shall swynke and sweet, Pierce prays a knight to help to keep holy
church.
and sow for us boeth
And other labors do for thy love, all my life time
In covenant that thou keep, holy kirk and my self
From wastours and from wicked me^, yt this world destroys
And go hunt hardely, to hares and to Foxes
To doors and to brocks, ye breken adowne my hedges
And go affayte the Fawcons, wild fowls to kill
For such comes to my croft, and cropeth mi whet^
Curtessy the knight then, comsed these words
By my power Pers quod he, I plyght the my troth
To fulfill this forward, though I fight should
As long as I live, I shall the maintain
Pierce cou^celleth ye knight wisely
Yea and yet a point quod Piers, I pray you of more
Look ye tene no tenant, but truth wol assent
And though ye may amarcye hem, let merci be taxour
And mekenes thie master, manger Medes chekes
And though pore me^ proffre you, presents and gyfts
Nym it not on a venture, ye may it not deserve
For ye shall yelden it again, at one yers end
In a full parilous place, Purgatory it high
And misved not thy bond me^, ye better might you speed
Though he be thy underling here, well it may happen
That he were worthelier set, and with more blis in heaven
Than thou, but thou do bet, and live as thou should
Amice asccude superius.
Luke xiiii
For in charnel and in church, cherls be full euel to know
Or a knight from a knave there, know this in thy heart
And yt thou be true of thy tongue, and tales yt thou hate
But if they be of wisdom or wit, thy workme^ to chaste^
Hold with no harlots, ne here not her tales
And namely at thy meat, such meneschew
For it be the devils dyssours, I do the to understood
I assent be saint Iame, the knight said than
For to work by thy words, ye while my life endures
And I shall aparel me quod Parke^, in pilgremes wise
And wend with you I will, till we find truth
And cast on my clothes, clouted and hole
Micokers and mi cuffes, for cold on my nails
And hang mi hoper at mi hals, in slede of a scripe
A bushel of bread corn, bring me therein
For I will sow it my self, and since will I wend
To pilgrimages as palmers do, pardon for to have
And whosoever helps me to erye, and sower I wend
Shall have leave by our lord, to glene here in heruest
And make^ he^ merry thermid, mangre who so grudge it
And all kin crafty men, that can live in truth
I shall find hem fode, that faithfully lybbeth
Save Iake the iudgeler, and Ienet of the stews
And Daniel the displeyer, and Benot the baude
And Friar faytoure, and folk of his order
And Robin the ribauder, for his rustye words
Truth told me it once, and bade me tell it after.
Delea^tur de libro viue^tium. I should not deal with hem
For holy church is hot, Psalm. 69.
of hem no tithes to take
Quia cum tustis non scribantur.
They be escaped good adventure, Pierces wife
God hem amend
Dame werche when time is, Pierce wife hight
His daughtir high do right so, or thy dame shall ye beat
His son hight Suffer thy souerains, to have her will
Deem hem not for if thou do, you shall it dear abye
Let God work withal, for so his word teaches
For now I am old and hoar, and have of mean own
To penance and to pilgrimage, I will pas with these other
Therefore I will er I wend, do write my bequest, How Piers makes his testament,

In dei nomine amen, I make it my self
He shall have my soul, that best has deserved it
And from the fend it defend, for so I believe
Till I come to my countes, as my Creed me tells
To have a release and a remission, on that re^tal I leave
The kyrke shall have my carren, and keep my bones
For of my corn and cattle, she craved my tithes
I paid it him prestly, for the perell of my soul
Therefore is he holde^ I hope, to mind me in his mas
And mengen in his memori, among all christen
My wife shall have of yt I wan, with Truth and no more,
And deal among my daughters, and mi dear children
For though I bye to day, my dettes are quite
I bare home that I borrowed, or I to bed yede
And with the residue and the re^naunt by ye rode of Lukes
I will worship therewith, Truth by my life
And be^ his Pilgraime at ye plowe, for pore men's sake
Mi plow foot shall be mi pikstaf, and pitch ato ye tootes
And help my culter to kerne, and cleanse ye forowes.
Now is Perkin and his pilgraymes, to ye plow faren
To erie this half acre, helpen him many
Dikers and deluers, dygged up the balkes
Therewith was Perkin apaied, and praised hem fast
Other workmen there were, that wrought full yerne
Every man in his manner, made him self to done
And some to please Perkin, picked up the wedes.
At high prime Pierce, let the plow stand.
To over se hem him self, and who so best wroughte
He should be hired thereafter, wha^ heruest time came
And than satin some, and song at the nale,
Iolye workmen
And helped erie his half acre, with hey trolly lolly
Now by ye peril of mi soul quod Pierce, all in pure tene.
But ye arise the rather, and rape you to work
Shall no grain that grows, glad you atende
And though ye dye for dole, ye devil have that retche.
Tho were faytors aferd, and feyned hem blind
Some laid her legs a lyrye, as such losels can
And made her moan to Pierce, and prayed him of grace
For we have no lims to labor with lord, graced be ye
And we pray for you Pierce, and for your plowe both
That god of his grace, your grain multiply
And yield you for your alms, that you give us here
For we ca^ nether swink ne swet, such siknes us ailith
If it be soth quod Pierce yt ye said, Learn to answer counterfaite beggars
I shall it sone espy
Ye be wasters I wot well, and truth wot the sothe
And I am his old hine, and hight him to warn
Which they were in this world, his workme^ apeared
Ye wast ye men winnen, with travail and with tene
And truth shall teach you, his teme to drive
Or ye shall eat barley bread, and of the broke drink.
but if ye be blind or broken leggid, or bolted with iro^s
Ye shall eat wheat bread, and drink with my self
Till God of his goodness, amendment you send,
And ye might travel as truth would, and take meat and hyre
To keep kine in the field, ye corn from the beasts
Dyken or deluen, or dingine upon sheues
Or help make mortar, or bear mucke a field
In licherie and in losengery ye, live and in sloth
And al is through sufferau^ce, that vengeance you ne takes
And Ankers and hermits, ye eat but at nones
And no more or morrow, my alms shall not they have
And catell to keep hem with, yt have cloisters and churches
And Robert runabout, shall not have of mine
Ne apostles but they prech ca^, and have bishopes power
They shall have pane and potage, and make her self at ease
No reasonable religion, has right naught of certain.
And tha^ began a wastoure to wrath him, and would have fought
And to Piers ye ploma^, he proferd his glove
A britoner a bragger, The wastour will fight
and bofeted Pierce also
And bad him go pysse with his plow, forpyned shrewe
Will thou or nilt thou, we will have our will
Of thy flour and of thy flesh, fetch when us lyketh,
And maken us merry there myd, maugre thy chekes
Pierce playneth to the knight.
Than Pierce ye plowman, plained him to the knight
To keep him as covenant was, fro cursed shrewes
And from these wastors wolueskins, yt make ye world dear
For tho wasten and win naught, and that ilke while
Worth never plenty among ye paple, ye while my plowe liggeth
Curtesly the knight tha^, as his kind would
Warned wastour, and wished him the better,
Or you shall abie by the law, by thorder that I bear.
I was not wont to work quod wastour, and now I nill begin
And let light of the law, and less of the knight,
And set Pierce at a pese, and his plow both
And manaced Piers and his men, if they met eft sone
Pierce prcied ho^ger to reue^g him.
Now by ye peril of mi soul quod piers, I shall apeir you al
And whouped after hunger, that heard him at ye first.
A wreke me of these waftours quod he, ye this world shendeth
Hunger in have tho, hent wastour by the maw
And wrong him so by the womb, yt both his eien watered
He buffeted the breton, about the chekes,
That he looked like a lantern, al his life after
He beat hem so both, he brake nere her guts
Ne had Pierce with a pese lof, prayed hunger to cease
They had been doluen, ne deem thou none other
Faytours work for fear of ho^ger
Suffer he^ live he said, and let he^ eat with hogs,
Or else beans and branne, i baken togethers
Or else milk or mean ale, thus prayed Pierce for he^.
Faitours for fear thereof, flowen into barnes
And flapped on with flailes, from morrow till even
That hunger was not so hardy, on hem for to look.
For a pot full of pese, that Pierse had ymaked
An heap of Heremites, henten hem spades
And kit her copes, and courtebies hem made
And wenten as workeme^ with, spades and with shouels
And doluen and diggen, to drive away hunger, What need can do.

Blind and bedridden, were botened a thousand
That sitten to beg silver, sone were they healed
For bred bake^ for baierds, was bote for mani ho^gri
And mani beggars for beans, buxum were to swink
And each pore man well apayed, to have pese^ for his hire
And what Pierce prayed he^ to do, as priest as a hauk
And thereof was Pierce proud, and put hem to work
And gave he^ meat as he migh ford, and reasonable hire
Than had Pierce pity, and prayed hunger to wend,
Home unto his own yarth, and holde^ him there
For I am well a wroke of wasters, by thy might now
And I pray the er thou pass, quod Pierce to honger
Of beggars and bidders, what best to be done?
For I wot well be thou went, they will worch full ill
For mischefe it makes, they be so meke now
And for defaut of her fode, this folk is at my will.
They are mi bloody brether quod pierce, for god bought us al
Truth taught me once, to love hem each one
And helpen hem of all thing, aye as hem needs
And now would I wit of the, what were the best
And how I might mastren hem, and make hem work. How begers may be made to
work.

Hear now quod hunger, and hold it for wisdom,
Bold beggars and bygge, that may her bread swinke
With hou^ds bread and horsebread, hold up her hearts
Abate hem with beans, for bollinge of her womb
And if the gommes grutch then, bid hem go swynke
And he shall soupe sweter, when he has it deserved
And if thou find any freke, ye fortune has apaired
Or any manner falty man, fond thou such to know
Confort hem with thy cattle, for Christ's love of heaven
Love hem, and lene hem, for so the law teaches
Gal vi a.
Alter alterius onera portate
And all manner of men, that thou might espy,
That nedy ben and noughty, help hem of thy goods
Love and lack he^ naught, lest god take the vengeance
Though they do evil, let god worche
Mihi vindictam, er ego distribuam,
Hebr. xii. Romans xii. De. xxxii. Luke xvi.
If you wilt be gracious to go, do as the gospel techeth
And byloue ye among low men, so shalt you latch grace.
Facite vobis amicos de maminone iniquitatis,
I nold grieve god quod Pierce, for all the good on ground
Might I synles do as thou say, said Pierce then
Yea I behote the quod hunger, or else the bible lies.
Go to Genesis the giant, the engendrour of us all.
In Sudore and in swynke, thou shall thy meattilye
And labor for thy lyuelode, for so our lord hight
And Sapience says the same, I saw it in the bible
Piger pre frigore, no fyelde would tilye,
Prou xx. The slothful suffer ho^ger Mat xxv
And therefore he shall beg and bid, and no man bate his hunger
Matthew with ma^s face, mouthed these words
That Seruus nequa^ had a mna^, and for he nold chaffer
He had inaugre of his master, for evermore after
And biname him his Mnam, for he ne would worch
And gafe that Mnam to him, that ten Mnams had
And with that he said, that holy kirk it heard
He that has shall have, and help there it needs
And he you has not shall not have, ne no man him help
And yt he weneth well to have, I will it him bereue
Kind wit would, that each a wight wrought.
Or in digging or in deluing, or travail of prayers
Co^te^platiue life, or active life, Christ would they worught
The psalter says in ye psalms of beati omnes,
The freke yt fedeth him self, with his faithful labor
He is blessed by the book in body and in soul.
Lobores manuum tuarum, Psalm. 128 How^ piers prays hu^ge^ to teach^ him a
(...) craft for him and for his servants
quoniam manducabis
Yet I pray you quod Pierce, pur charity and ye can
Any leefe leche craft, lere it me my dear
For some of my servants, and mi self both
Of al a weke work not, so our womb aketh
I wot well quod hunger, what sikenes the ayleth,
Ye have manged over much, and yt makes you groan
And I hot the quod hunger, as thou thy hele wilneste,
That thou drink no day, ere thou dine some what,
Eat not I hot the, ere hunger, the takes
And send the of his sauce, to savor with thy lyppes,
And keep some till souper time, and sit not to long,
And rise up ere appetite, have eaten his fill:
Let not sir Surfyte, sit at thy board,
Leave him not for he is licherous, and lycorous of tongue
And after many manner of meat, his maw is a hu^gred
And if thou diet the thus, I dare lay my ears
That Phisike shall his furred hode, for his fode sell,
And his cloak of Calabrie, with al ye knaps of gold
And be feign by my faith, his phisike to let
And learn to labor with hond, for lyuelode is sweet
For murderers are many leches, lord hem amend,
They do men dye by their drinks, yer destiny it would
By. S. Paul quod Pierce, these are profetable words
Wend now hunger when thou wylt, ye well be you ever
For this is a lovely lesson, the lord it the foryelde,
By hot god quod honger, hence ne will I wend
Til I have dined by this day, and dronken both
I have no penny quod Pierce, polettes for to bye
Ne neither gose ne grys, but two grene chesis,
A few curdes and cream, and an hauer cake.
And two loves of beans and dran, bake for my folk,
And yet I say by my soul, I have no salt bacon
Ne no cokeny by Christ, colopes for to make
And I have percely and porets, and many cole pla^tes,
And eke a cow and a calfe, and a cart mare
To draw a field my dung, ye while ye draught lasts.
And by this lyuelod, I must live to Lammas time
By that I hope to have, harvest in my crofte
And then I may dight thy dinner, as me dear likes
And all the pore people tho, pescoddes fetten,
Beans and bake^ apples, they brought in her lappis
Pore folk feed hunger.
Chiboles and chernell, and ripe cheries many
And proferd Piers ye present, to please with his hunger
All hunger eat in have, and asked after more
Than pore folk for fear, fed hunger yerne
With grene poret and pesen, to poysen him they thought
By yt it neghed to harvest, new corn came to cheping
Than was folk feign, and fed hunger with the best
With good ale as Gloto^ taught, and gart hunger to sleep
And tho would waster no work, but wandre^ about,
Ne no beggar eat bread, that beans in were
But of Coket and Clermatine, or else of clean wheat
Ne no halpeny ale, in no wise drink
But of best and of yt brownest, that in borough is to sell
Laborers that have no la^d to live on, but her hands
Deyned to dyne a day, with night old wortes
May no penyale hem pay, ne no piece of bacon
But if it be fresh flesh, other fysh fried other bakte
And yt cha^ud, or plus chaud, for chilling of her maw
Prouender pricketh them
And but if he be highly hiered, else will he chyde
And that he was workman wrought, wail ye time
Against Cafons counsel, comseth he to iangle,
Paupertatis onus patienter far memento
He greu^^h him against god, Cato,
and grutcheth again reason
And than curses he the king, and all his counsel after
Such laws to look, laborers to grieve.
While hunger gafe hem hier, not one of he^ would chide.
Ne striuen against his statute, so sternely he looked
And I warn you workmen, win while ye may
For hunger hither ward, hastes him self
He shall awake with water, wastours to chaste.
Ere five year be fulfilled, such famine shall arise
Through floudes and foul weder, This is no prophecy but a pronostication
fruit shall fail
And so said Saturn and sent you to warn.
And when ye se the sun amiss, and two monks heads
And a maid have the maistry, and multiply by hight.
Than shall death withdraw, and derth be justice
And Dauie the dyker, shall dye for hunger
But if God of his goodness grant us a treue
Passus septimus de visione.
TRuth heard tell hereof, and to Pierce sent.
To taken his teme, and tilen the earth
And purchased a pardone A pena et a culpa
For him and for his heirs, Piercis Paxdon.
for evermore after
And bade him hold him at home, and erye his lays
And all that help him to erye, to set, and to sow
Or any other mystery, that might Pierce avail:
Pardon with Pierce plowman, Truth has granted,
Knights and kings, that keeps holy kyrke,
And rightfully in realms, rules the people
Have pardon through purgatory, to pass full lightli
With patriarks and prophets, in Paradise to be fellow
Bishops iblessed, if they been as they should,
Legisters of both laws, the lewd therwt to preach,
And in as much as they may, amend al synful
Are peers with thapostles, such pardon Pierce shows
And at the day of dome, at the high deyse to sit
Merchants in the mergen, had many years
And none Apena et culpa, the Pope will hem grant
For they hold not her holidaies, as holy kirk teaches
And for they swear by her soul, and so god must he^ help
Again clean conscience her cattle to sell
What merchau^tes should do.
And under his secret seal, truth sent hem a letter
That they should bugge boldly, that them best lyked
And sythen sell it again, and save the winning
And amend meso^diux, there mede, and misease folk help
And wicked ways, wightely amend
And do boot to bridges, that to broke were
Marien maidens, or maken hem Nuns.
Pore people and prisonars, finden hem her fode
And set scholars to schole, or to some other crafts
Releue religion, and renten hem better.
And I shall send you my self, s. Mihel mine afcha^hel
That no deuel shall you dear, ne fere you in your doing
And witten you from wanhope, if ye will this work
And send your souls in safety, to my saints in Joy
Than were marchaunts merry, many wept for Joy
And praised pierce the plowma^ that purchased ye bull
Men of law lest pardon had, that pleden for mede
For the psalter saves hem not, such as taken gifts
Psalm. xv. Men of law should take naught but their fee.
And namely of Innocents, that no evil ne ca^neth.
Super innocentem munera non accipies.
Pleders should peine hem to plead, for such in health
Princes and prelates should pay for her travel,
A regibus et principibus erit merces little
And mani a Justice and Iurour would for John do more
Than for Dei pietate, Law^ars should take no money
leave you no other
And he that spends his speech, and speaks for ye pore
That is innocent and nedy, and no man appeyreth
Conforteth him in that case, without couetise of gifts,
And spekith law for our lords love, as he has learned
Shall no devil at his deaths day, dearn him a mite
That he ne worth false and his soul, ye psalter bears witness
Domine quis habitabit in tabernaculo tuo? Psalm. xv.

And to bug water ne wind, ne wit, ne fire the fourth
These four the father of heaven made, to this fold in common
These be Truths treasures, truefolk to help
That never shall wexe ne wane, without God him self.
Wha^ they drawn on to die, and indulge^ce would have
Their pardon is full petit, at their partyng hence
That any mede of mean men, for their mooting take
Ye Legisters and lawyers, hold this for Truth
That if I lie* Mathewe is to blame,
For he bade me tell you this, and this proverb me told
Quod cumque vultis vt faciant vobis homines facite eis.
Al living laborers, Luke. vi.
that libben with her hands
That truly taken, and truly wynnen,
And liuen in love and in law, for their low hertes
Haueth the same absolution that sent was to Pierce
Beggars and bidders, Of giui^g of alms.
ne be not in the bulle
But if the suggestion be south, yt shapeth he^ to beg
For he that beggeth one byt, but if he have need
He is false with the fend, and defraudeth the nedy
And also he begileth the gyuer, against his will
For if he were not nedy, he would give yt to an other,
That were more nedy tha^ he, so ye nedest should be helped
Caton kenneth me thus, and the clerk of Stories
Cui des dideto, is Catons teachinge
And in the stories, he teaches to bestow your alms
Sit elimosina tua in manu tua donec studes cui des
And Gregory was a good man, Gregory
and bade us given all
That asks for his love, that us al leneth
Non eligas cui miserearis, ne forte pretereas illu^ qui meretur accipere. Quia
incertum est pro quo deo magis placeas.
For ye wit not who is worthy, and god wot the nedie.
In him that takes is ye treachery, if any treson walk
For he that gives yeldeth, and yarketh him to rest
And he ye bids boroweth, and brigeth him self in det
For beggars borowe^ ever, and their borow is god almighty
To yield he^ yt gives he^, and yet usury more
Quare non dedisti pecuniam meam ad mensam,
vt ego venie^s meum cum vsuris exigerem? Luke xix

Therefore bid not ye begers, but if ye have great need
For he yt has to bug hi bread, ye bow bears wytnes
He has enough yt has bred, though he have naught else
Satis dives est qui non indiget pane
Let usage be your solace of saints lives reading
The book ba^neth begeri, and blames he^ in this manner
Junior fui et iam senui, et non vidi iustum derelictum
nec semen eius querens panem. Psalm. 37

For ye live in no love, ne no law hold
Mani of you ye wed not, the women yt ye with deal
But as wild beasts with wehe, worthe^ up and worche^
And bringen forth barnes, that bastardes men callen.
Or the back or some bone, he breaks in his youth:
And sith gone faiten with your fau^tes, for ever after
There is more mishappe puple, among these beggars
Than of al manner of me^ that on this molde walks
And they that live thus her life, may loath the time
That ever they were me^ wrought, wha^ they shall hence fare
And old me^ and hoar, that helples be of strength
And women with child, Patiente poverty.
that work ne may
Blind and bedriden, and broke their members
That taken the mischeues mekely, as mesels and other
Have as plain pardon as the plowman him self
For love of her low hertes, our lord has he^ granted
Their penance and their purgatory, here on this earth
Pierce quod a priest tho, thy pardon must I read
For I will construe each a clause, and ken it ye in english
And Pierce at his prayer, his pardon unfolded
And I behinden hem both, beheld all the bulle
All in two lines it lay, and not a leefe more
And was written right thus, in witness of Truth,
Et qui bona egerunt ibunt in vitam etexnam.
Qui vero mala in ignem eternam. Mat. xxv

Peter quoth the priest tho, I can no pardon find
But dowel and have well, and god shall have thy soul
And do Ill and have Ill, hope thou none other
But after thy deaths day, ye devil shall have thy soul
And Pierce for pure tene, pulled it in twain.
And said.
Si ambulauero in medio vmbre mortis
Non timebo malum quoniam, tu mecum es. Psalm. xxiii

I shall cease of my sowyng quod Pierce, and swinke not so hard
Ne about my bealy joy, so busy be no more
Of prayers and of penance, my plowe shall be hereafter
And weep when I should sleep, though whete bread me fail
The prophet his pain ate, in penance, and sorrow
By that the psalter says, so did other many
That loves god lelly, his liuelode is full easy,
Fuerunt mihi sachrime me, panes die ac nocte.
And but if Luke lie, Psalm. lii.
he learneth us by fowls
We should not be busye, about the worlds bliss
Math. vi.
Ne soliciti sitis he says in the gospel
And shows in examples our selves to wish
The fowls in ye field, who finds he^ meat in winter
Have they no garner to go to, but god fedes hem all:
What quod the priest to Parkin, Peter as me thinks
Thou art lettered a little who learned the on book?
Abstine^ce ye Abbes quod Pierce, mine. a.b.c. me taught
And conscience came afterward, and ke^ned me much more.
Were you a priest quod he, A blind. priests taunt
you might preach where yt should
As diuinor in divinity with Dirit insipiens to thy teme.
Lewd Lorel quod Pierce, little lokest thou on the bible
On Salomons sawes, seldom thou beholdest.
Ecce derisiones et iurgia cum eis ne crescant.
The priest and Perkin, Pro. xxii.
apposed either other
And I through her words awoke, and waited about
And saw the sun, in the south sit that time
Meatelesse and moneilesse, on Maluerne hills
Musinge on these metales, and my way ich yede.
Many times these metals, has made me study
Of that I se slepynge, if that so be might
And also for Pierce the plowman, full pensife in heart
And what a pardon Pierce had, al ye people to comfort
And how ye priest impu^gned it, with.ii. propre words
And I have no sauery in so^gwary, for I seit often fail
Caton and canonisters, counsel us to leave
To set sadness in songwary, for Somnia ne cures
And for the bible book bears wytnes
How Daniell demed, How Daniel demed the dreams of Nabuchodonosor.
the dreams of a king
That was Nabugodonosor, named of clerks
Daniel said sir king, thy dreams betoken
That vnkought knights shall come, thy kingdom to claim
Amongst lower Lords, thy land shall be departed
And as Daniel demed, in deed it fell after
The king lost his lordship, and lower men it had
And Joseph met marueilously, Of the dreams of Joseph
how ye moan and the sun
And the. xi stars, halsed him all
Than Jacob judged, Iosephes swyuen
Beau fitz quod his father, for defante we shall
I my self and my sons, seche the for need
It befell as his father said, in Pharaos time
That Joseph was justice, Egypt to loken
It befell as his father told, his friends there him sought
And all this makes me, on this metals to think
And how the priest preued, no pardon to do well
And demed that dowel, in dulgence passed
Biennales and triennales, and bishops letters
And how dowel at ye day of dome, is dignely vnderfo^gen
And passed all the pardon, Note how hescorneth the auctority of Popes Math. vi.
of. s. Peter's church
Now has the pope power, pardon to grant ye people
Without any penance, to pass into heaven
This is our belief, as lettered men do us teach
Quod cu^que ligaueritis super terram, erit ligatum et in celis
And so leave lellye Lords, forbode else
That pardon and penance, and prayers done save
Souls that have sinned, seven sythes deadly
And to trust to these trentals, truly me thinks
Is not so siker for the soul, as to do well
Therefore I red you reukes, that rich be on this earth
Upon trust of treasure, trientales to have
Be ye never the holder, to break the ten hestes
And namely ye masters, mayres and judges
That have the wealth of this world,, and for wise me^ be holde^
To purchase you pardons, and the popes bulls
At the dreadful dome, when the dead shall arise
And commen all tofore Christ, accountes for to yede
How thou leadest thy life here, and his laws kepest
And how thou did day by day, ye dome will rehearse
A poke full of pardon there, ne provincial letters
Though ye be fou^den in ye fraternity, of ye.iiii. orders
And have indulge^ce an.C. fold, but if do well you help
I beset your patentes and your pardons, at a pies hele
Therefore I counsel all christen, to cry god mercy
And make Christ our mean, that has made eme^ds
That and give us grace here, or we go hence
Such wockes to work, while we ben here
That after our deaths day, dowel rehearse
At the day of dome, we did as he hight.
Passus octauus de visione. Et hic incipit inquisitio prima de dowell.
THus robed in russet, I romed about
All a Somer season, for to seek dowell
And freyned full often, of folk that I met
If any wight wiste, where dowel was at inn
And what man he might be, of many man I asked
Was never wight as I went, that me wysh could
Where this ladde lenged, less or more.
Till it befell on a Friday, two Friars I met
Masters of the Minours, men of great wit
I halsed hem hendelye, as I had learned
And prayed hem for charity, or they passed further
If they knew any court, or contrye as they went
Where that do well dwells, do me to wit
For they be me^ on this mould, that most wide walke^
And known contries and courts, and many kinnes places
Both princes palaces, and pore men's cotes
And dowel and do evil, where they dwell both.
Amongst us quod the minours, that man is dwellinge
And ever has as I hope, and ever shall hereafter,
Contra quod I, as a clarke, and cumsed to of sputen
And said him sothly, Septies in die cadit iustus. Prou. 24.

Seven sythes says the book, synneth the rightful.
And who so synneth I say, does euel as me thinks
And do well and doeuyl, may not dwell together,
Ergo he is not always, among you Friars
He is other while else where, to wyshen the people.
I shall say the my son, said the Friar than,
How seven sithes the sad man, on a day synneth.
By a forbisue quod the Friar, I shall the fair show
Let bring a man in a boat, amyd the broad water
The wind and the water, and the boat waggyng
Make a man many time, to fall and to stand
For stand he never so stiff, he stumbleth if he move
And yet is he safe and sound, and so him behooves,
For if he ne arise the rather, and raght to the stere,
The wind would with the water, the boot overthrow
And tha^ were his life lost, through latches of him self
And thus it falls quod ye Friar, by folk here on earth
The water is likned to ye world, yt waneth and wexeth
The goods of this world, ar likned to ye great waves
That was wynds and wethers, walken about.
The boot is likened to our body, ye brytil is of kind
That through the flesh, and the frail world
Synneth the sad man, a day seven times
And deadly sin does he not, for do well him keeps
And yt is charity ye cha^pion, chief help again sin
For he stre^gtheth man to stand, and stirs man's soul
And though thy body bow, as bote does in water,
Aye is thy soul safe, but if thou wylt thy self
Do a deadlye sin, and drenche so thy soul
His opinion of frewyll.
God will suffer well thy sloth, if thy self lyketh
For he gafe the two yeresgifts, to teme well thy self
And yt is Wit and Frewil, to every wight a portion
To flyinge fowls, to fishes, and to beasts
And man has most thereof, and most is to blame
But if he worth well therwt, as dowel him teaches.
I have no kind knoyng quod I, to co^ceyue all your words
And if I may live and look, I shall go learn better
I bikenne the Christ, that on the cross dyed
And I said the same, save you from mischaunce
And give you grace on this ground good me^ to worth
And thus I went wide, where walking mine one
By a wide weldernes, and by a woddes side
Bliss of the birds brought me on sleep,
And under a lynde on a land, lened I a stounde
To lyth the lays, tho lovely fowls made
Myrthe of her mouths, made me there to sleep
The maruelousest metelles, met me than
That ever dremed wight, in world as I wene.
A much man as me thought, and like to my self
Came and called me, by my kind name
What art you quoth I tho, thou yt my name knoweste
That thou wottest well quoth he, and no wight better
Wot I what thou art? Thought said he than,
I have sued the this seven years, se you me no rather?
Art thou Thought quod I tho, thou could me wish
Where ye Dowel dwells, and do me that to know
Dowel, and Dobetter, and Dobest the third, quod he
Are three fair virtues, and be not far to find.
Who so is true of his tongue, and of his two hands
And through his labor or his lo^d, his liuelod wi^neth
And is trusty of his taylyng, takes but his own
And is no drunklewe ne de digious, dowel him follows
Dobet does right thus, and he does much more
He is as low as a lamb, and lovely of speech
And helps all men, after that hem needs
The bags and the bigirdles, he has to brok hem all,
That the Earl Auarous, held and his heirs
And thus with ma^mo^s money, he has made him fre^des
And is run to religion, and has rendered the Bible
And preaches to the people, saint Paul's words
Libenter suffertis insipientis cum siits ipsi sapintes. ii. Cor. xi.

And suffers the unwise, with you for to live
And with glad will does he^ good, for so god you hoteth
Dobest is above boeth, and bears a bishops cross
Is hoked on that one end, to halye men from hell
A pyke is on the potent, to pull down the wicked
That wayten any wyckednes, do well to tene
And dowell and dobet, amongst hem have ordained
To crown one to be king, to rule hem boeth
That if dowell and dobet, arne against dobeste
Than shall the king come, and cast hem in yrons
And but if do best bid for hem, they be there for ever
Thus dowell and dobet, and dobeste the third
Crowned one to be king, to kepen hem all
And to rule the realm, by her three wits
And none other wise, but as they three assented,
I thanked Thought tho, that he me thus taught
And yet sauoreth me not thy suging, I covet to learn
How dowel dobest and do better, done among ye people
But wit can wysh the quod thought, where tho.iii. dwell
Else wot I none that can tell, that now is alive.
Thought and I thus, three days we yeden
Disputynge upon dowell, day after other
And ere we were ware, with wit began we mete
Wit will have none excess.
He was long and lean, like to none other
Was no pride on his apparel, ne poverty nether
Sad of his semblaunce, and of soft chere
I durst not move no matter, to make him to iangle
But as I bade thought tho, be mean between
And pur forth some purpose, to preuen his wyts
What was dowel fro dobet, and dobest from hem both
Than thought in that time, said these words
Whether dowel dobet, and dobest ben in land
Here is will would wit, if Wit could teach him
And whether he be man or woman, this man feign would espy
And worch as they three would, this is his intent
Passus nonus de visione. Et primus de dowell.
HEre dowel dwells quod wit, not a day hence
In a castle yt kind made, of four kins things
Of earth and air is it mad, mi^gled togithers
With wind and with water, witterly enjoined
Kind has closed therein, craftily withal
A Lemman that he loves, like to him self
Anima she hight, and Envy her hates
A proud pricker of France, Princeps huius mundi
Dowel is keeper of ye soul.
And would win her away, with wiles and he might
And kind knows this well, and keeps her the better
And does her with sir dowel, is duke of this marches
Dobet is her damsel, sir dowels daughter
To serve this lady lelly, both late and rathe.
Dobest is above boeth, a bishops pere
That he bid moote be do, he rules hem all
Anima that lady, is led by his lerning.
And ye constable of ye castle, that keeps all ye watch, In wit has five
sons.

Is a wise knight withal, sir In wit he hight
And has five fair sons, by his first wife
Sir Seewell and Saywel, and hearwell the end
Sir worchwel with thy hand, a wight man of strength
And sir Godfray gowell, great lords forsooth
These five been set, to save this lady Anima
Till kind come or send, to save her for ever
What kins thing is kind quod I, can thou me tell?
Kind quod wit is a creator, of all kinnis things
Father and former of all, that ever was makyd
And that is the great god, that gynning had never
Lord of life and of light, of blys and of pain
Angels and all thing, arne at his will,
And man is him most like, of mark and of shape,
For through ye word that he spoke, Ps. xxxiii
wexe^ forth bestes
Dirit et facta sunt.
And made Adam, likest to him self one
And Eve of his ribbe bone, without any mean
For he was singular him self, and said faciamus
As who say more must hereto, Gods might must help his word.
then my word one
My might must help, now with my speech
Eue^ as a lord should make leters, and he lackid perchme^
Though he could write never so well, if he had no pe^
The letters for all his lordship, I leave were never imaked
And so it seems by him, as the bible tellith.
There he said. Dirit et facta sunt,
He must worch with his word, and his wit show
And in this manner was man made, by might of God almighty
With his word and his workma^ship, and with life to last
And thus god gave him a ghost, of ye godhed of heaven
And of his great grace, granted him bliss
And yt is life that aye shall last, to al our lineage after
And yt is the castle ye kind made, Caro it hight
And is as much to mean, as man with a soul
And that he wrought with work, and with word both
Through might of the majesty, man was imaked
In wit and all wyts, closed been therein
For love of the lady Anima that life is nempned
Over all in man's body, she walks and wandreth
And in the heart is her home, and her most rest
And Inwit is in the head, and to the heart looks
What Anima is leef or loath, he leads her at his will
For after the grace of god, the greatest is Inwyt
Much woe worth ye man that misruleth his Inwytte
And yt been glotons glob beris, her god is her womb
Phili. iii.
Quorum deus benter est.
For seruen they Satan, their souls shall he have
They live in sinful life here, her souls is like ye devil
And all that liuen good life, are like to God almighty
i. Io. iiii.
Qui manet in charitate, in deo manet.
Alas that drink shall for do, that god dear boughte
And does god forsake him, yt he shope to his likeness?
Mat. xxv
Amen dico vobis, nescio vos. Et alibi Et dimisi eos secundum desiderata little.
Fools that fauten Inwyt, I find that holy church
Woe be to you yt turn the tithes to private use.
Should finde^ hem that fauten, and fatherles children
And wydowes yt have naught, wherwt to win he^ her food
Hand men and maidens that helples were
All these lack In wit, and lore behooves.
Of this matter I might, make a long tale
And finden fell witnesses, among the four doctors
That I lie not on yt I learn ye, Luke bears witness
Godfathers and godmothers, yt seen her god children
At misease and at mischief, and moune hem amend
Shall have penance in purgatory, but they hem help
For more belongs to ye little barn, or he ye law know
Than nempning of a name, and he never the wyser
Should no christen creature, cry at the gate
Ne fail pain ne potage, Bestow your tithes as you are bound to do.
and prelates did as they should
A Jew wol not see a Jew, go iangling for defaut
For all ye mouables on this mold, and he amend it might
Alas ye a christen creature, shall be unkind to an other
Sythen Jews that we judge, Judas fellows
Each of hem help other of yt that hem needs
Why will not we christian, of Christ's good be as kind
As Jews that be our lores men, shame to us all.
The Common for her unkindness I dread me shall abie
Bishops shall be blamed, for beggars sake
He is worse then Judas, that gives Iapers silver,
And bids the beggar go, for his broken clothes.
Proditor est prelatus cum Judah qui patrimonium Christi minus distribuit. Et
alibi, Perniciosus dispensator est qui res pauperum Christi in utiliter
consumit.
He does not well yt does so, ne dredith God of might
He loves not Salomo^s sawes that sapience taught
Initium Sapientie timor domini. Eccle. i.

That dredeth god he does well, ye dredith him for love
And not for dread of ve^geau^ce, does therefore ye bet
He does best that wtdraweth him, by day and by night
To spyl any speech, or any, space of time.
Qui offendit in vno, Iaco. ii.
in omnibus est reus
Lesyng of time, truth wotes the sothe
Is most hated upon earth, of hem that be in heaven
And sithen to spyll sheach, that enspired is of grace
And gods gleman, and a game of heaven,
Would never ye faithful father, his fydle were vntemperd
Ne his gleman a gadlinge, a goer to tavern,
To all true tidy men, that travel desyren
Our lord loves hem and lent (loud other still)
Grace to go to hem, and agone her lyfelode
Inquirentes autem dominu^, non minuentur omni bono.
Psa. 34. Marriage is praised
True weddid living folk, in this world is do well,
For they moote work and win, and the world sustain
For of her kind they come, that co^fessoures be ne^pned
Kings and knights, Caysers and cherles
Maidens and martires, out of one man come
The wife was made the way, to help to worch
And thus was wedlock iwrought with a mean person
First by the fathers will and the friends counsel,
And sithe^ by the assent of he^ self, as they might accord
And thus was wedlock iwrought, and god him self it made
In earth and in heaven, him self was the wytnes
And false folk faythtles, thieves and liars,
Wastours and wretches, out of wedloke I trow
Conceived ben in ill time, as Cayne was of Eve,
Of such sinful shrewes, the psalter makes mind
Concepit in dolor et peperit iniquitatem,
Psalm. vii.
And all that come of that Cayne: come to evil end
For god sent to Sem, and said by an angel
Learn to chose the a wife.
Thine issue in thine issue, I will that they be joined,
And not thy kind in Caines kind, coupled nor spoused
Yet Sem again the sound, of our savior of heaven
Caines kind and his kind, coupled togithers
Til god wrothed for her works, and such a word said
That I made man, now it me forthynketh,
Penitet me, fecisse hominem,
And came to Noe anon, Gene. v^
and bade him not let
Swythe go shape a ship, of shydes and of bordes
Thy self, and thy sons three, and sithen your wives
Buske you to that bote, and bide you therein,
Till forty days be fulfilled, yt the flood have iwashed
Clean away ye cursed blood, that Cayne has made,
Brastes that now ben, shall banne the time
That ever that cursed Cayne, came on this earth
All shall dye for his deeds, by dales and by downs
And the fowls that flow forth, with other beasts
Except only, of every kind a couple,
That in thy shingled ship, shall be isaued
Here bought the barn, the belsyres gyltes
And all for her forefathers, fareden the worse
The gospel is here again, in one degree I find,
Filiuns non portabit iniquitatem patris, Eze, xviii

Et pater non portabit iniquitatem filii.
And I find if the father, be false and a shrewe
That some deal the son, shall have the syrs tutches
Impe on an elderne, and if thine apple be sweet
Much maruayle me thinks, and more of a shrewe
That brings forth any barn, but if it be the same
And have a savor after ye sire, seld see thou other
Nunquam colligitur de spinis vua, nec de tribulis ficus. Luke. vi.

And thus through cursed Caine, came care apo^ earth
And al for they wrought, wedlock against gods will
Forthy have they inaugre of her mariges, yt mary so her children
For some as I see, now soth for to tell
For couetise of cattle, vnkindlich be wedded
And careful conception, comes of such marriages
As befell of the folk, that I before told
For good should wed good, though they no good had
Ioh. xiiii
I am Via et veritas, says Christ, I may auau^ce all
It is an uncomely couple, by Christ as me thinks
To give a young wenche, to an old feeble
Or wedden any wyddowe for wealth of her goods
That shall never barn hear, but if it be in arms
Many a pair sithe^ ye pestilence, has plight he^ together
The fruit that they bring forth, are foul words
In ielousye ioyeles, The fruits of wicked marriage.
and ianglen a bed
Have they no children but chests, and clapping the^ betwe^
And though they do he^ to do^mow, but if ye devil help
To follow after the fliche, fetch they it never
And but they both be forsworn that, bacon they tyne
Forthy I counsel al christen, cover not to beweddid
For couetis of cattle, ne of kindred rich
And maidens and maidens, match you togythers
Wydowes and wydowes worche the same
For no lands but for love, look ye be wedded
And than get ye ye grace of god, and good enough to live with
And every man seculer, that may not conteyne
Wisely goo wed, and ware him from sin
For lechery in lokyng, is lyme yard of hell
Whiles thou art young, and thy wheapon kene
Wreke the with wyueyng, if thou will be excused
Dum sis vir fortis, ne des tua robora scortis
Scribitur in portis meretrir est Ianua mortis-
When ye have wyued, be ware and werch in time
The married couple must keep themselves clean.
Not as Adam and Eve, when Cayne was Engendered
For in one time truly between, man and woman
Ne should no bourd on bed be, but if they both were clean
Both of life and of soul, and in perfect charytie
That ylke derne deed, do no man ne should
And if they lead thus their life, it likes god almighty
For he made wedlock first, and him self said
Bonum est vt vnusquisque vrorem suam habeat propter fornicationem. i. Cori. vii

And they ye other gates be^ gete^, Bastards.
for gedlings ben hold
As falce folk, fu^dlinges, faytours and liers
Ungracious to get good, or love of the people
Wandren and walien, what they catch may
A gain dowel they do evil, and the devil serve,
And after their deaths day, shall dwell with the same
But god give hem grace here, hem selves to amend.
Do well my friend is to done, as laws teachen
To love thy friend and thy foe, leave me ye is do bet.
To give unto men both, young and old
To healen and to helpen, is do best of all,
And do well is to dread god, and do bette to suffer
And so comes do best of both, and brings adowne the modie
And ye is wicked will, ye many work shendeth
And dryueth away dowell, through deadly sins.
Passus decimus de visione, Et secundus de dowell.
THa^ had Wit a wife, was hot dame study, Wits wife

That leave was of lere, and of liche boeth
She was wo^derli wroght wit me so teched
And al staryng dame study farnely said
Well art you wise quod she to wit, any wysdomes to tell
To Flatterers or to foles, that frentyke be of wits
And blamed him and banned him, and bade him be still
With such wise words, to wyshe any sottes
And said, Noli mittere man Margaryre Pearls,
Among hogs, that have hawes at will.
They do but driuel thereon, drate were him lever,
Tha^ al precious Pearls that in Paradise waxes.
I say it by such quoth she, ye show it by her works
That hem were lever land, By theit works know the^
and lordshyp on earth
Or rychs or rentes, and rest at her will
Than all the soth sawes, that Solomon said ever
Wisdom and wit, now is not worth a kerse
But if it be carded we couetis, as clothers kembe her woule
Who so ca^ co^tryue deceites, and co^spyre wro^gs
And lead forth a love day, to let with truth
He that such crafts can, is often cleped to counsel
They lead Lords with leasing es, and belieth truth
Job the gentle in his gestes, greatly witnesses
That wicked me^ welde^, ye wealth of this world
And ye they be lords of each land, ye out of law lives
Psalm. xxii
Quare impevruunt, be ne est omnibus qui preuaricantur et inique agunt.
The Psalter says the same, by such as done evil.
Ecce ipsi peccatores habu^da^tes in seculo obtinueru^t diuitias
Psalm. xi
Lo says holy lecture, which lords be these shrewes
Thilke that god gives most, lest good they deals
And most unkind be to ye co^me^, yt most catel weldeth.
Psalm. xi
Que perfecisti destrurerunt, iustus au tem. etc.
Harlots for her harlotrye, may have of her goods
And iapers and iudgelers, and iangelers of iestes
And he that has holy write, aye in his mouth
And can tell of Tobie, and of the twelve Apostles
Or preache^ of ye penance, Only divinity has no reward
ye Pilate falsely wrought
To Jesus the gentle, that Jews to draw:
Little is he loved, that such a lesson shows
Or daunten or draw forth, I do it on god him self
But tho that feign hem foles, and with faiting lives
Again the law of our lord, and lien on hem self
Spitten and spuen, and speak foul words
Drynken and driuelen, and do men for to gape
Lyken men, and lie on hem, yt leueth hem no gifts
They can no more minstrelsy, ne musyke men to glad
Than Mundie the milner, of Multa fecit deus
Ne were her vile harlotry, have god my troth
Should never king ne knight, ne canon of Poules
Give hem to her new years gift, gift of a grote,
And mirth and minstrelsy, All men love bandrye,
amongst men is naught
Lechery, losenchery, and losols tales,
Glotony and great oaths, this mirthe they loves,
And if they carpe^ of Christ, these clerks and these lewd.
And they meet in her mirth, when minstrels ben still
Than tells they of the trinity, a tale or twain
And brings forth a blade reason, and taken Bernard to witness
And put forth a presu^ption, to preue yt soth
Thus they dreuell at her dayse, the dretie to scorn
And gnawen god with her gorge, when her guts fallen
And the carfull may cry, and carpen at the gate
Both a fyngerd and a furste, and for chel quake
Is none to nymen hem nere, his noye to amend
But hunten him as a hounde, and hoten him go hence,
Little loves he that Lord, that lent him all ye bliss,
That thus parts, we the pore, apercel wha^ him needs
Ne were mercy in mean men, more than in rich
Mendynauntes meatles, might go to bed.
God is much in the gorge, of these great masters,
And among mean men, his mercy and his worckes
And so says the psalter, Psalm. 3^.
I have seen it often
Ecce audiuimus eum in effrata, inueniemus cum in campis silue.
Clerks and other kinnes men, carpen of god fast
And have him much in ye mouth, and mean men in heart
Friars and saytors, have fouden such questions
To plese with the proud men, since the pestilence time
And preachen at. S. Paul's, for pure enui fo clarks
That folk is not firmed in the faith, ne free of her gooddes
Ne sorry for her sins, so is pride waxen,
In relygion, and in all the teame, amongst rich and pore
That prayers have no power, the pestilence to let
And yet ye wretches of this world, are none ware by other
Ne for dread of ye death, wtdraw not her pride
Ne ben plentuous to the pore, as pure charity would
But in gains and i glotony, forglote^ her goods he^ self
And breketh not to the beggar, as the book teaches.
Frange esurienti panem tuum. Esai. lviii
etc.
And ye more he wynneth, and wexeth welthy in riches
And lordeth in lands, the less good he deals
To bie tells you not so, take heed ye rich
How the bible book, of him bears wytnes
Si tibi sit copia habundanter tribue
Si aute^ eriguum, Tobi. iiii
illud impertiri stude libe^ter
Who so has much spend ma^ly, so means Tobie
And who so little weldeth, rule him thereafter,
For we have no letter of our life, how long it shall endure
Such lessons lords, should love to hear
And how he might most meyny, manlych find
Not to fare as a fideler, or a friar to seek feasts
Homely at other men's houses, and haten her own.
Elenge is the hal, every day in the weke
There the Lord ne the lady, lyketh not to sytte
Now has each rich a rule, to eaten by hem felfe
In a priui parler, for poor men's sake
Or in chamber with a chymney, and leave the chief hal
That was made for meals, men to feate in
And all to spare to spend, that spyll shall an other
I have heard heigh men, eating at the table
Carpe^ as they clerks were, of Christ and of his might
And leide^ saut upon the father, that formed us al
And carpen again clerks, crad bed words
Why would our savior suffer, such a worm in his bliss
That begiled the woman, and the man after
Through which wiles and words, they went to Hell
And al her sede for her sin, the same death suffered
Here lies your lore, these lords begins to dispute
Of ye ye clackes us kenneth, of Christ by the gospel.
Filias non port abit iniquitatem patris. Eze. xviii

Why should we that now be, for the works of Ada^
Roten and torente, reasone would it never
Vuusquispue portabit onus suum
Such motives they move, Galat. by
these masters in her glory
And make men to misbeleue, that muse^ on her words
Imaginatiue here afterward, shall answer to your purpose
Austen to such arguers, tells this teme.
Nou plus sapere, quam oporter
Wylneth never to wit, Romans xii.
why that God would
Suffer Satan, his sede to begyle,
And believe lelly, in the loore of holy kyrke
And pray him of pardon, and penance in thy life
And for his much mercy, to amend you here
For who ye wylneth to wit. ye ways of god almight
I would his eye were in his ars, and his finger after
That ever wylneth to wit, why that god would
Suffer Satan, his sede to begyle
Or Judas to the Jews, Jesus betraye
Al was as thou woudest lord, worship be thou
And al worth as thou would, what so we dispate
And tho ye use these hanylowes, to blidde^ men's wit
What is do well fro dobet, now defe mote he worth
Since he wylneth to wit, which they be both
But it he live in the life, that longs to dowel
For I dare be his bold borow, yt dobet will he never
Though do best draw on him, day after other
And wha^ you wit was ware, what dame study told
He became so confuse, he cu^neth not look
And as dome as death, and drew him arere
And for no carping I cold after, ne kneling to therth
I might get no grain, of his great wyttis
But al laughing he louted, and looked upon study
In sign that I should, The manner of the^ ye be in office.
besechen her of grace
And when I was ware of his will, to his wife I loutid
And said mercy madame, your man shall I worth
As long as I live, both late and rathe
For to worchen your will, the while mi life endures
With ye that ye ken me kindly, to know what is dowel
For thy mekenes man quod she, and for thy mild spech
I shall ken the to my cosen, that clergy is hoten
He has weddyd a wife, wtin these syx months
Is syb to the seued arts, Scripture is her name
They two as I hope, after my teachinge
Shall wishen the dowel, I dare under take
Than was I as feign, as foul of fair morrow
And glader then the gleman, that gold has to gift
And asked her the high way, where that clergi, dwelt
And tell me some token quod I, for time is that I wend
Ask the high way quod she, hence to suffer
Both well and we, if that thou wyllt learn
And ride forth by riches, and rest thou not therein
For if you couplest ye therewith to clergy co^mest you never
And also the lycores land that lechery hight
Leave it on thy left half, a large mile and more,
Till thou come to a court, keep well thy tongue
From leasinges and lyther speech, and licorus drinckes
Tha^ shall thou se so brietie, and simplicity of speech
That each wight be in his will, his wit to show
And thus shall you come to cleargye, yt ca^ mani things
Say him this sign, I set him to schole
And that I great well his wife, Study teaches, al things
for I wrote her many books
And set her to Sapience, and to the psalter gloss
Logike I learned her, and many other laws
And all the unisons in music, I made her to know
Plato the poet, I put him first to book
Aristotle and other more, to argue I taught
Grammar for gyrles, I guard first to write
And beat hem with a bales, but if they would learn
Of all kinnes crafts, I contrived tools
Of carpenters of caruers, and compassed Masons
And learned hem leuel and line, though I look dim
And Theology has tened me, seven score times
The more I muse therein, the mistier it seems
And the deper I deuyne, the darker me it thinks
A full lethye thing it were, if that love nere
And for it leet best by love, I love it the better
For there as love is Leader, ne lacks never grace
Look thou love lellie, if the likes Dowell
For Dobet and Dobest, been of loves kynne
In other science it says, I saw it in Caton
Qui similat verbis, Cato.
nec cord est fidus amicus
tu quoque fac simile, sic ars deluditur art.
Who so gloseth as Gylours done, go me to ye same
And so shall thou false folcke, and faiethles begyle
This is Catons kenning, to clerckes that he lernethe
And Theologye teaches not so, who so takes head
He kenneth the contrary, again Catones words
For he bids us be as brethren, and bid for our enmies
And love he^ yt lie on us, and le^de hem when they need
And do good again evil god him self hoteth
Galat. vi
^um tempus habemur operemus bonum ad omnes,
O arime autem ad domesticos fidoi.
Pauie preached the people, that perfitenes loved
To do good for gods love, and give men that asken
And namely to such, that sueth out believe
And aly us lack or lie, our Lord techeth us to love
And not to grieve he^ ye grieve us, god him self forbade it
Mihi vindictam, et ego distribuam.
Therefore look thou love, as long as thu durest
For is no science under ye su^ne, so souerain for thy soul
And astronomi is a hard thing and evil for to know
Geometry and geomansye, so gylfull of speech
The vaniti of science
Who so thinkith worch with tho two, thriueth but late
For Sorcerie is ye souerainst book, yt to science belo^gith
Ye ar there febichers in forcers, of fell men's making
Experimentes of alkinamie, the people to deceiuen
If thou think to do well, dele therwyth never
Al these sciences I me self, soteled and ordained
And founded him formest, folk to disceyue
Tell Clargy these tokens, and scripture after
To council the kyndlye, to known what is dowel.
I said graund mercy madame, and mekely her grate
And went wightlie away, wtoute more letinge
And til I came to clergy I could never stinte
And grate well the good man as study me taught
And afterward the wife, and worshypped he^ both
And told hem the tekeres, that me taught were
Was never g^m on this ground since god mad ye world
Fayrer vnderfongen, ne frendlier at ease
Than my self sothly, sone so he wyste
That I was of wits house, and with his wife dame Study
I said to he^ sothly, ye sent was I thither
Do well and Dobet, and Dobest to learn
It is common life quod Clergy, on holy church to believe
With all ye articles of ye faith, yt falls to be known
And that is to believe lelly, both learned and leude
On the great God, that gynnynge had never
And on the sothfast Son, that saved mankind
From the deadly death and from the deuyls power
Through ye help of ye holy ghost, yt which ghost is of both
Three persons, and not in plurell number
For all is but one god, and each is god him self
Deus pater, Deus filius, Deus spiritus sanetus
God the father god ye son, god the holy ghost of both
Maker of mankind, and of beasts both
Austen the old, hereof made books
And him self ordained, to save us in believe.
Who was his auctour all the four evangelists
And Christ cleped him self so, ye Eua^gelists bears witness
Al ye clarks under Christ, ne could this assoile
But this belo^gith to believe, to lewed ye would dowell
For had never froke five wits, the faith to dyspute
Ne man had no merit, might it be preued.
Fides non habet meritum, vbi humana ratio prebet experimentum.
Than is do bet to suffer, for thy souls sake
All that the holy book byt, by holy kirkes teachinge
And that is man by thy might, for mercies sake
Look thou work it in work, that thy word shows
Such as thou semest in sight, be in assaye found,
Appare quoe es, vel esto quod appares.
And let no body be, by thy bearinge beglied
But be such in thy soul, as thou semest with out
Than is dobest to be bold, to blame the gylty
Sithen thou see thy self, as in soul clean
And blame thou never body, and yt be blame worthy
Si culpare velis, culpabilis esse cauebis
Dogma tuum sordet, cum te tua culpa remordet.
God in the gospel, greuouslye repreueth
All that lacken any life, and lackes have hem self
Luke. vi.
Quid consider as festucam inoculo fratris tui, trabem in orulo tuo. etc.
Whi meuest yt thy mode, for a more in thy brothers eye
Sithen a beam in thin own, blinds thy self
Elice primo trabem in oculo tuo.
Which lets the to look, less or more
I read each a blind bussarde, do boot to him self
For Abbots and for priers, and for all manner prelates
As persons and parish priests, ye preach should and teach
All manner men, to amend, by her might
This text was told you, to beware ere ye taught
That ye were such as ye said, to salve with other
For gods word would not be lost, for yt worcheth ever
If it auailed not ye common, it might avail your self
And it seems now sothly, to the worlds sight
That gods word works not, on learned ne on lewd
But in such manner, as Matthew meneth in the gospel
Dum cecus ducit cecum, ambo in foueam cadunt.
Math xv. Against lewed oriestes
Lewed men may liken you thus, yt the beam lies in your eye
And the festue is fallen, for your defaut
In all manner of men, through mauzed priests
The bible bears witness, that all the folk of Israel
Vytterly bought the giltes, of two had priests
Offyn and Finces, for her couetyse
Arch adei myshapped, and Eli brake his neck
For thy ye correctors claw here, and correct first your self
And the^ may ye safely sai, as David you made ye psalter.
Existimasti inique quod cro tui similis, arguam te, Psalm. l.
et statuam contra faciem tuam.
The^ shall burel clarks be bashed, you to bla^e or grieve
And carpen not as they carpe now, and call you domme
Canes muti non valentes satrare. Esaie. l^^

And to lack you with a word, your workma^shyp to let bounds
But be prester at your prayer, the^ for a pound of no bills
And all for your holiness, have you this in heart
In schole there is skorke, but if a clarke will learn
And great love and liking, for each of hem loves other
And now is religion a rider, a romer by streate
A leader of love days, Read this
and a loud beggar
A pricker on a palfrey, from Manner to Manner
An heap of hounds at his arse, as he a lord were
And but if his knave knele, that shall his cope bring
He loured on him and asked, who taught him curtesye
Little had lords to done, to give lands from her heirs
To religious yt have no ruth, if it rain on her altares
In many places there they persons be, by he^ self at ease
Of the pore have they no pity, and that is her charity
And they letten hem as lords, her lands lie so brod
And there shall come a king, The suppressio^ of Abbayes.
and confess you religious
And beat you as the bible tells, for breki^g of your rule
And amend moniales, monks, and chanons
And put hem to her penance, Ad pristinum statum ite
And barons with earls, beat hem through, Beatus virs teching
That her barnes claime^, and blame you foul
Hii in curribus, et hii in equis ipsi obligati sunt. etc. Psalm. xxii

And than friars in he fecytor, shall find a key
Of Constantynes cofers, in which is the catel
That Gregory's god children, had Ill dispended
The Abbot of Abington
And tha^ shall ye Abot of Abingto^, and al his issue for ever
Have a knock of a king, and incurable the wound
That this worth soth seek ye, that often over se ye bible
Esa. xiiii.
Quomodo cessauit eractor quieuit tributum co^triuit dominus baculu^ timpi oru^
virga^ domina^tiu^, cede^tiu^ plaga insanabili
And ere that king come, Cayne shall awake
And Dowel shall ding hem down, and distroi his might
The^ is Dowel and dobet quod I, dominus and kinghthod
High degree helps nothing to heauenwarde.
I will not skorne quod scripture, but if seriuiners lie
Kynghode ne knyghthode, by ought I ca^ a wait
Helps not to heaven ward, one here is end
Ne riches right naught ne ryaltie of lords
Paul preuith it impossible, rich men to have heaven
Solomon says also, that silver is worst to love.
Nihil iniquitus quam amare pecuniam.
And Cato^ ke^neth us to couete^ it naught, but as need teaches
Dilige deuarium sed parce dilige formam
And patriarchs and prophets, and poets both
Written to wyshe us, to will no riches
And praise pouerti with pacie^re, thapostils bear witness
That they have heritage in heaven, and by true right
There rich me^ no right may claim, but of ruth and grate
Contra quod I, by Christ that can I repreue
And preuen it by Peter, and by Paul both
That been baptized be saved, be he rich or pore.
That is in extremis quod Scripture, among sarace^s and Jews
They mow be sauyd so, and yt is our believe
That an vnchrysten in that case, may christian an heathen
And for his lely believe, when he the life tyneth
Have the heritage of heaven, as any man christen
And christen men wtoute more, may not come to haven
For ye Christ for christen me^ died, and confirmed the law,
That who so would and wills, with Christ to arilse
Si cum Christo surreristis: etc.
He should love and leave, Col iii.
and the law fulfill
That is love thy lord god, leuest above al thing,
And after all christian creatures, in co^me^ each man other.
And thus him lo^geth to love, that leueth to be saved
And but we do thus in deed, ere the day of dome,
It shall besitten us full sore, the silver that we keep
And our bocks ye moteate^ be^, and se beggars go naked
Or delight us in wine and wild foul, and wot any in defaute
For every christen creature, should be kind to other,
And sithen heathen to help, in hope of amendment
God hoteth boeth hight and low, yt no man hurt other
And says slay not ye se^blable is, to mine own likeness
But if I send the some token and say, Non necaberis
I slay not but suffer, and all for the best
For I shall punyshe hem in purgatory, or in ye pyt of hell
Every man for his misdedes, but if mercy it let,
This is alonge lesson quod I, and little I the wyser
Where do well is or dobet, darkely ye shown,
Many tales ye tell, that Theology lerneth,
And that I man made was, and my name entered
In the legend of life, long ere I were,
Or else written for some wyckednes, as holy write manaceth
Nemo asce^dit ad celu^, nisi qui de celo desce^dit, Ioh. iii

I leave it well by our lord quod I, and no letter better
For Solomon the sage, that Sapience taught
God gave him grace of wit, and al his goods after
He demed well and wisely as, holy writ tells.
Aristotle and he, who wyshed men better?
Masters that of gods mercy, teachen me^ and preachen
Of her words they wish us, for wissest as in her time
And al holy kyrke, holds hem both dampened
And if I should work, by her works, to win me heaven
That for her works and wit, wonneth in pain
Than wrought I unwisely, what so ever ye preach
And of fell wytty in faith, little farly I have
Though her ghost be ungracious, god for to please
For many men on this molde, more setten her hertes,
In good tha^ in god, therefore hem grace fails
At her most mischief, when they shall life let,
As Solemo^ did and such other, ye showed great wyts
And her works as holy write says, were ever ye contrary
Therefore wise witted me^, and well lettred clerks
As they say hem selves, selde done thereafter.
Supra cathedram Moysi. Math. 23.
etc.
And I wene it worthes of many, as was in Noes time
They that made Noe a ship were vnsaued
Tho he shoope that ship, of shides and of bordes
No wight ye wroght thereon was salfe, ne any workma^ else
But birds and beasses, and the blessed Noe,
And his wife with his sons, and also her wives,
Of wights that it wrought, was none of hem saved
God leave it fare not so by folk, that ye faith teaches,
Of holy kirk ye hat borowe is, and gods house to save
And shilden us from shame therein, as Noes ship did beasts
And me^ yt made it, amyd yt stood he drowned
The Culor of this clause, curate is to mean,
That been carpe^ters, holy kirk to make, for Christ's own beasts
Psalm. 36
Homines et iumenta saluabis domine
On good Friday I find, a felon was saved,
That had lived all his life, with leasinge and with theft,
And for he beknew on ye cross, and to Christ shroue him
He was souer saved, The the^ was saved before any of the prophets
than saint John the Baptiste
And or Adam or Isai, or any of the prophetis.
That had lain with Lucifer, many long years,
A robber was raunsomed, rather than they all,
Withoute^ any penance of purgatory, to perpetual bliss
Tha^ Mari Magdele^, what woman did worse?
Or who worse tha^ David, yt Vrias death conspired
Or Paul the Apostle, that no pity had,
Much christen kind, to put to death
And now be these as souereins, and saints in heaven
Tho ye wrought wickedlest, in world tho they were
And tho that wisely worde^, and written many books
Of wit and of wisdom, with dampted souls wo^neth,
That Solomon says I trow be soth, Eccles. ix
and certain of us al
Sunt iusti atque sapientes, et opera eorum in manu dei sunt
There are witty and wellearned, and her works ben hid
In the hands of almighty god, and he wot ye sothe
Wherefore a man worth allowed there, and his lelie works
Or else for his ill will, and for envy of heart,
And be allowed as he lived, for by ill, me^ know god
For how wist me^ what is white, if al thig blak were
And who were a goodma^, but if there were some shrew
Therefore live we forth, with other me^, I leave few ben good
For Qant oportet vient emplace, il nyad que pati.
And he that may all amend, have mercy on us all
For you sothist word yt ever god said, was Nemo bonus
Cleargye tho of christ's mouth, co^me^ded was little,
For he said to saint Peter, and to such as he loved.
Cum steteritis ante reges et precides. etc. Mat. vi

Though ye come before kings, and clarke, of ye law,
Be not abashed, for I shall be in your mouths
And give you wit and will, and cunning to conclude
Hem all that against you, of christendom disputen
David makes mention, he spoke amongst kings
And might no king overcome him, as bicu^ning spech
But wit and wisdom, wan never the maistrye
When man was at mischief, without the more grace
The douties doctor, and diumour of divinity
Was Austen the old, and heighest of the four
Said thus in a sermon, I se it written once.
Ecce ipsi idiote rapiunt celum, vbi nos sapientes in inferno mergimur.
And is to mean to English men, to more and to less
Are none rather ravished, from the right believe
Than are these cunning clerks, that can many books
Ne none souer saved, ne sadder of believe
Than plowmen and pastors, and pore common laborers
Sowters and shepeherds, and such lewed Iuties
Percen with a Pater noster, the palaice of heaven
And passe^ Purgatori penau^celes, at her hence parting
Into the bliss of Paradise, for her pure believe
That vnperfitelye here knew, and eke lived
Yea men know clerks, that cursed the time
That ever they could or knew more the^ Credo in deum
And pri^cipalli her Pater noster. mani a person has wyshed
I se examples my self, and so may many other
That servants ye seruen lords, seldo^ fall in artrages
But tho that keep the lords catell, clerks and reues,
Right so lewd men, and of little knowing,
Selde fall they so foul, and so far in sin,
As clerks of holy church, ye keep Christ's treasure,
The which is ma^s soul to save, as god says in ye go spell
Math. xx
Ite vos in vineam meam.
Passus vndecimus de visione.
THan Scripture scorned me, and askile looked
And lacked me in latin, and light by me she set
And said, Multi multa sciunt, et seipsos nesciu^t,
Tho wept I for woe, and wrath of her speech.
And in a wynkinge wrath, wexed I aslepe.
And marvelous metals, met me than
That I was ravished right there, and fortune me set
And into the land of Longing, alone she me brought
In a mirror hight Middle earth, she made me to look
Sithe^ she said to me, here might thou se wonders
And know that you couetist, and come thereto peradventure
Than had Fortune following her, two fair damsels
Concupiscentia carnis, The d^^^sels of (...) Fortun^
men called the elder maid
And Couetis of eyes, called was the the other
Pride of perfect living, pursued hem both
And bade me for my cou^tenau^ce, account clergy light
Concupiscentia carnis, colled me about the neck
And said thou art young and yemp, and haste years inowe
For to live long, and Ladies to love
And in this myrrour you might se, mirthes full many
That leaden the wily wise, to liking al thy life time
The second said the same, I shall sue thy will
Till thou be a lord and have land, let the I nell
That I ne shall follow thy fellowship, if Fortune it like
He shall find me his friend, quod Fortune thereafter
The freke that follows my will, failed never bliss.
Tha^ was there one yt hight Eld, yt heavy was of chere
Man quod he if I mete with the, by Mary of heaven
Thou shall find Fortune the fail, Age.
at thy most need
And Concupiscentia carnis clean theforsake
Bitterly shall thou banne hem, both day and night
Couetise of eye, that ever thou her knew
And pride of perfect living, to much perell the bring
The counsel of Reebles
Yea rech ye not quod rechles, and stood forth in raged cloths
Follow forth ye Fortune wol, thou have well far til Eld
A man may stoop time enough, wha^ Eld shall tine thy crown
Homo proponit quam a poet, and Plato he hight
And Deus disponit, quoth he, let god do his will
If Truth do witness it is well done, fortune to follow
Concupiscentia carnis, ne Couetis of eyes
Ne shall grieve the greatly, ne but you wilt begyle the.
Yea fare well Phip quam Fanteltie, and forth began me draw
Till Concupiscentia carnis, accorded all my works
Alas Eighe quod Elde, and holiness both
That wit shall turn to wrechednes, for will to have his liking
Couetise of eyes, comforted me anon after
And followed me forty winter, or fifty and more
That of dowell ne do bet, no deinty me thought
I had no liking ne no lust, of he^ ought to know
Couetise of eyes, came after in my mind
Than dowell or dobet, among my deades all
Couetise of eyes, conforted me often
And said have no conscience, how thou come to good
Go confess the to some Friar, and show him thy sins
For while Fortune is thy friend Friars will the love
And fetch the to their fraternity, and for the beseech
To her Prior prouincial, a pardon to have
And pray for the pole by pole, if thou be pecuniosus.
Sed pena pecuniaria non sufficit, pro spiritualibus delictis
By wishing of this we^ch I wrought, her words were so sweet
Til I forgate youth, and yarne into Elde
And than was Fortune my foe, for all her fair behest
And poverty pursued me, and and put me low
And tho found I the Friar aferde, and flytting both
Against our first forward, for I said I nolde
Be buried at her house, but at my paryshe church
For I heard once, how conscience it told
That kind would me^ be buried, there they were christe^id
Or where yt he were parishe^, yt there he should be graven
And for I said thus to Friars, a fool they me helden
And loved me the less, for my lely speech
And yet I cried on my confessor, yt held him self cu^nig
By mi faith, Friars did not seek yt bodi but the money,
friar quod I ye fare^ like these wowers
That wed none wedows, but for to weld her goods
Right so by the rode, rought you never
Where my body were buried, by so ye had my silver
I have much marvel of you, and so has many other
Why your covent coueteth, to confess and burye
Rather then to baptize barnes, that be catechislinges
Baptisynge and buriynge, both be neadfull
And much more meritorie me thi^keth, it is to baptize
For a baptized man may, as these masters tells
Through co^tritio^ come to ye high heaven, sola co^tricione
And barn without baptism, may not be saved
Nisi quis renatus fuer it, look ye lettred me^, John. iii.
where I lie or do not
And leauti looked on me, and I loured after
Wherefore lourest you quod leauty, and looked on me hard
If I durst quod I amongeste me^, these metels auowe
Yes by Peter and by Poule quod he, and took he^ both to wytnes
Non oderis fratres in cord tuo secret. Leuit. xii

sed public argue illos.
They will aledge also quod I, and by the gospel preue^
Nolite iudicare quemquam. Romans ii.

And whereof seruith law quod Leautie, if no life undertook it
Falsenes ne flatterye, for some what thapostle said.
Non odoris fratre^, and in the psalter also, says David the prophet.
Psalm. 115.
Eristimasti inique, quod ero tui similis.
It is lefull for lewd men, to say the sothe
If hem likes and lust, each a law it grau^teth
Except persons and priests, and prelates of holy kirk
It falls not for that folk, no tales to tell
Though the tale were true, and it touched sin
Thing yt al ye world wot, wherefore should you spare
And reden it in Rethorike, to arate deadly sin
And be neuermore first, the defaute to blame
Though you se I^, say it not first, be sorry it nere ame^did
No thing that is pryuie, publishe thou it never
Neither for love laud it not, ne lack it for envy
Parum lauda vitupera percius
He says soth quod scripture tho, and skipte up and preached
And ye matter yt she meaned, if lewd me^ it knew
The less as I leave, louen it they would.
This was her theme, and her text, I took full good head
Math. xx and.xxii
Multi to a mangery, and to the meat were su^pted
Wha^ ye people were plener come, ye orpter vnpend the gate
And plucked in Pauci, privily, and let ye re^nau^t go
And for tene of her text, trembled my heart
And in a were began I wexe, and with my self to dispute
Whether I were chose or not, on holy kirk I thought
That vnderfonged me at ye fo^t, for one of gods chose^
For Christ cleped us al, come if we would
Saracyns and Scismatikes, and so he did the Jews
Esai. lv.
O bos omnes sitientes venite. etc.
And badde hem sonke for sin, safely at his breast
And drink bote for bale, brook it who so might
Tha^ may all christian come quod I, and claim her enter
By ye blood yt he bought us with, and through baptism after
Qui crediderit, Mat xvi.
et baptisatus fuerit
For though a christen man coueted, his christendom to rent
Ryghtfullye to reney, no reason it would,
For may no cherle charter make, ne his catell sell
Without leave of his Lord, no law will it grant
And he may run in arerages, and run so from home
And as a reneyed kayeyfe, recheles runnen about
And reason shall reke^ with him, and cast him in arerage
And put him after in a prison, in purgatory to brenne
For his arerages rewarde^ him there, till domes day
But if contrition will come, and cry by his live
Mercy for his mysdeades, with mouth or with heart
That is so the said scripture, may no sin let
Mercy all amend, and mekenes her fellow
For they be^ as our books tells, above gods werks
Misericordia eius super omnia opera eius. Psalm. 4.

Yea bawe for books quod one, was broken out of hell,
I Troianus a true knight, took wytnes at a pope
How I was dead, and dampened to dwell in pain
For an unchristian creature, clerks witten ye sothe
That al ye clargi under Christ, ne might me cratch from hell
But only love and leauty, and my lawful domes
Gregory wist well that, and wylned to my soul
Salvation for sothnes, that he se in my works
And after that he wept, and wylned me were granted
Grace without any bedebydding, his bone was vnderfoge^
And I saved as ye se, without synging of masses
By love and by leadynge, of my living in truth
Brought me from bitter pain, there no bidding might
Lo ye lords what leuty did, by an emperor of Rome
That was an unchristian creature, as clerks find in
Gregory
Not throught prayer of a pope, but for his pure truth
Was ye sarazin saved, as. s. Gregory bears witness
Well oughte^ lords ye laws keep, yt lesson hold in mind
And on Troianus truth to think, and do truth to ye puple
Law without love quod Troianus, ley there a bean
Or any science under the sun, the seven arts and al
But they be learned for our lords love, lost is thy time
For no cause to catch silver by, or be called a master
But all for love of our lord, and the bet to love ye people
For saint John said it, and soth are his words.
i. Ioh. iii
Qui non diligit, manet in morte.
Who so ever loves me not, lives in death diyng
And that all manner of men, enemies and friends
Love either other, and lene hem as hem self
Who so leneth not he leueth not, god wot the sothe
And cu^mau^deth each creature, to conform him to love
And souerainely the pore people, and her enemies after
For hem that haten us, is our merit to love
And pore people to please, her prayers may us help
Christ was pore
And our joy, and our health, Jesus Christ of heaven
In a pore man's apparayle, pursued us after
And looked on us in her likeness, and that with lovely chere
To know us by our kind heart, and casting of our eien
Whether we love ye lords here, before the lord of bliss
And exciteth us by ye eua^gelie, yt wha^ we make feasts
We should not clepen our kin thereto, ne no kynnes rich
Luke xiiii
Cum facitis co^uiuia, nolite inuitare amicos.
And call the careful thereto, the crooked and the pore.
For your friends will feden you, and found you to quite
Your festi^g and your fair gift, each fre^d quiteth so other
And for the pore I shall pay, and well quite her travail
That give he^ meat or money, and love he^ for mi sake
For the best ben some rych, and some beggars and pore
For we al are Christ's creatures, and of his cofers rich
And brethren as of one blood, as well begers as Earls
For on Calueri of christis blud, christendom ga^ spri^g
And bloody brethren we became thee, of one bodi woo
As Quasi modo geniti, and gentlimen each one
No beggar nor no boy among us, Ioh. viii.
but if sin it make
Qui facit peccatum, seruus est peccati,
In the old law, as holy letter tells
Men's sons, men called us each one
Of Adames issue and Eve, aye till god man dyed
And after his resurreccion, redemptor was his name
And we his brethren by him bought, both rich and pore
Forthy love we as leave brethren, and each man lene other
And of ye each man may forbear, amend there it needs
And every man help other, for hence shall we al
Alter alterius onera portate. Galat, v^

And be we not unkind of our catel, ne of our cunning
For wot no man how nie it is, to be binome from both
Therefore lack no others life, though he more latin know
Ne vndernime not foul, for is no^ without faut
For what ever clerks carpe, of christendom or else
Christ to a common woman said, in common at the feast
That Fides sua should save her, and salue^ her of al sins
Then is believe a lelly help, above logyke or law
Of logyke or law in Legend a sanctorum,
Is little alowaunce made, but if believe hem help
For it is over long or logyke, any lesson assoyle
And law is loath to love, but if he lack silver
Boeth logike and law, that loves not to lie
I counsel all christen, cleave not thereon to sore
For some words I find writ, were of fayths teachi^g
That saved sinful men, saint John bears witness
Mat. vii.
Eadem mensura qua mensi fucritis remetretur vobis.
Therefore learn we ye law of love, as out lord taught
And as saint Gregory said, for man's souls health.
Melius scrutari scelera nostra, qua^ naturas retum.
Why I mean this matter, is most for the pore
For in her likeness our Lord, often has been known,
Wytnes in Paske weke, when he yede to Emaus
Cleophas ne knew him not, that he Christ were
For his pore apparel, and pilgrames wedes
Till he blessed and brake, the bread that they eaten
So by these works, they wist that he was Jesus
And by clothing they knew him not, ne by carping of tongue
And all was in example, to us sinful here
That we should be low, and lovely of speech
And apparel us not proudly, for pilgrims are we al
And in the apparel of a pore man, and pilgrims lykenes
Many times god has been met, among nedy people
There never segge him see, in set of the rych
S. John and other saints, were seen in pore clothing
And as pore pilgrymes, prayden men's goods
Jesus Christ on a Jews daughter light, gentle though she were
Was a pore maid, and on a pore man wedded
Martha on Mary Magdalen, an hudge playnet she made
And to our savior self, said these words
Domine non est tibi cure quod soror mea reliquit me solam ministrare? Luke xi.

And hastily God answered, and eithers will followed
Both Marthaas and Mary's, as Mat. bears witness
And poverty god put before and praised that better
Maria optimam partem elegit que non. etc.
And all the wise that ever were, by ought I ca^ espy
Praysen poverty for best life, if patience follow
And both better and blesseder, by many fold tha^ riches
And though it be sour to suffer, yet after comes swet
As on a walnutte without, is a bitter bark
And after that bitter bark, be the shell away
Is a kernel of conforte, life to restore
So is after pouertye and penance, patiently taken
For it makes a man to have mind in god, and a great will
To weep and to well bid, whereof waxes mercy
Of which Christ is a kernel, to confort the soul
And well siker he slepeth, the man that is pore
And less he dreadeth death, and dark to be robbed
Than he that is right rych, reason bears wytnes
Pauper ego ludo, dum tu dives meditaris.
All though Solomon says, as folk seth n the bible
Diuitias uec paupertates.
Wiser than Solomon was, Prou. xx^
bears wytnes and taught
That perfect pouertye was no possession to have
And lif most liking to god, as Luke bears witness
Si vis perfectus esse, vade et vende. etc.
And is to mean to men, Mat. xix.
that on this moulde liuen
Who so will be pure perfect, must possessions forsake
Or sell it as says the book, and the silver deal
To begers yt gone and beg, and bidde^ good for gods love
For failed never man meat, that mightful god served
As David says in ye psalter, to such as been in will.
To serve god goodlich, ne greth hem in penance
Nihil impossiblie volenti.
Ne lacks never liuelode, linen ne woollen.
Inqui rentes autem dominum no^ minuentur omni bono
If priests were perfect, Psalm. 34.
they would no silver take
For masses ne for mattens, ne her meats of usurers
Ne nether kirtle ne cote, though thy for cold should die
And they her devour did, as David says in ye psalter.
Psa. xliii
Iudica me deus, et decerne causam meam.
Spera in deo speaks of prists, ye have no spe^ding silver
Tha^ if they travel truly, and trusten in god almighty
Hem should lack no liuelode, nether woollen nor liuen
And ye title they took orders by, tells they be adua^ced
Tha^ need not you to take silver, for masses yt ye singe
For he ye tok you your title, should pay you your wage
Or the bishop that blessed you, if that ye be worthy
For made never kig a knight, but he had catel to spend
As befell for a knight, or found him for his strength
It is a careful knight, and of a kaytife kings making
That has no land ne lineage rich, ne good loos of his hands
The same I say forsooth, by all such priests
That have neither cunning ne kin, but a crown one
And a title a tale of naught, to live by at his mischief
Priesting was an occupation. to live by
He has more believe I leave, to latch by his crown
Cure than for ke^ning, or knowing, or for clean bering
I have wonder why, and wherefore the bishop
Makes such priests, that lewed men betrayen
A charter is chalengeable, before achiefe Justice
If false latin be in that letter, the law it impungeth
Or painted pentrelniarie, or percell ouerskipped
The gome ye gloseth so chartes, for a goki is holden
So it is a goky by god, that in his gospel fails
Or in mass or mattens, makes any defaute
Qui offendit in buo, in omnibus est reus
Jacob. ii.
Also in the psalter, says David to ouerskippes
Psalite deo nostro psalite, quoniam rex terre deus Israel, Psa. xlvii
psalite sapienter.
The bishope shall be blamed, before god as I leave
That crowns such gods knights, yt ca^ not sapie^ter
Sing ne psalm read, ne say a mass of the day
And never nether is blamles, the bishop or ye chaplen
For ever either is indicted, and that is ignorantia
Non excusat episcopos, necidiotes priests
This loking on lewe priests, I am leapt from pouerti
Which I praise, her patience is more perfect tha^ riches
And much more in meting thus, with me ga^ one disput
And slepyng I se all this, and sythen came kind
And named me by my name, and bad me nimen head. Nature teaches man

And through the wonders of this world, wit to take
And on a mou^tain ye mydle earth hight, as me though
I was fette forth, by ensamples to know
Through each a creature and kind, my creator to love.
I se the su^ne and the sea, and the sonde after
And where that brydes and beasts by her makes they yede^
Wyld worms in woods, and wonderful fowls
With fleked ferthers, and of fell colors
Man and his make, I might both behold
Pouertye and plenty, both peace and war
Bliss and bale both, I se al at once
And how men took mede, and mercy refused
Reason I see sothlye, sewen all beasts
In eating and drynkyng, and in engendryng of kind
And after course of co^ception, none took keep of other
As wha^ they had ryde^ in rote time, right anon after
Males draw he^ to males, on morninge by hem self
And in eueninges also the males ben from the females
There ne was cow ne cowekinde, ye conceived had
That would a bellow after boles, ne bore after sow
Both horse and hounds, and all other beasts
Meddled not with her makes, that with fool were
Birds I beheld, that in bushes made nestes
Had never wryghte wit, to work the least
I had wonder at whom, and where the Pie learned
To lygge the sticks in which, she lays and breadeth
Nis wryght as I wene, could worch her nest to pay
If any maso^ made a mold thereto, much wonder it were
And yet me marueiled more, how many other birds
Hydden and hylden, her eggs full derne
In maryes and mores, for men should hem not find
And hydden her eggs, when they therfro went,
For fear of other fowls, and for wild beasts
And some treden her marks, and on trees breden
And broughte^ forth her byrds so, all above ye ground
And some byrds at ye byl, through brething conceived
And some cauked I took keep, how pecocks breade^
Much marueyled me, what master they had
And who taught hem, on trees to tymbren so high
That neither barn ne beast, may her birds rechen
And sithe^ I looked on the sea, and so forth apo^ ye stars
Many selkougthes I see, be not to se now
I see flowers, in the frythe, and her fair colors
And how among ye grene grass, growed so many huis
And some sour, and some sweet, selkougth me thought
Of her kinds and of her colors, to carpe^ it were to long
And that most meued me, and my mode changed
That reason rewarded, and ruled al beasts
Save man and his make, many time and often
No reason hem followed, and than I rebuked
Reason and right, till him self I said
I have wonder of the quod I, that wyttye art holde^
Whi you ne suiste man and his make, yt no myffeat he^ follow
And reason arated me, and said retche the never
Why I suffer or not suffer, thy self have not to do
Amend yt it if thou might, for my time is to abide
Suffrau^ce is a suffrain virtue, and a swifte ve^geau^ce
Who suffers more tha^ god quod he, no gome as I leave
He might amend in a minut while, al yt amiss stands
And he suffers for some ma^s good, and so is our better
The wise and the wytty, wrote thus in the bible
De re que te non molestat, noli certare. Eccle. xi.

For be a man fair or foul, it falls not for to lack
The shampe ne the shape, that god shope him self
For all yt he did was well do, as holy write witnesses
Et vidit deus cuncta que fecerat, et crant valde bona.
And bade every creature, Give. i.
in his kind increase
All to myrthe with man, that most worth holy
In foundynge of the flesh, and of the fend both
For man was made of such a matter, he may not well a start
That ne so^time him bited, to folowe^ his kind
Caton accords there with, Nemo sine crimine viuit.
Tho caught I color anon, and co^sed to be, ashamed
And a waked therewyth, woe was me than
That I in metelis ne might, more have known
And than said I to my self, and chyde that time
Now do I ken dowel quod I, by dear god as me think
And as I cast up my eyes, one looked on me and asked
Of me what thing it were I wysh, sir I said.
To se much and suffer more, certes quod I, is dowel
Had thou suffered he said, slepyng tho thou were
The^ had ye ke^de yt Clergy can, and kend more by reason
For reso^ would have rehearsed ye, right as cleargi said
And for thy inter mitting, here art thou forsake.
Philosophus esses, si tacuisses. etc.
Adam while he spoke not, had paradise at will
But wha^ he man blid about meat, and e^termittid to know
The wisdom and ye wit of god, he was put from blis
And right so fared reso^ with the, thou with thy rude spech
Lokedst and losedst, thing that longed not to be done
Tho had he no lyking, for to learn the more
Pride now and presu^ption, peradventure wol me appele
That clergy thy company, ne keeps not to show
Shall never chale^gyng ne chidyng, chaste a man so sone
As shall shame and she^den him, and shape him to amend
Shame is the best remedy for dronkardes.
For let a dronken daffe, in a dyke fall
Let him ligge look not on him, till him list to arise
For though reso^ rebuked him tha^, it were but pure sin
And when need nimeth him up, for doubt lest he sterue
And shame shraketh his clothes, and his skyn washes
Tha^ wot the dro^ken daffe, wherefore he is to blame.
Ye sayen sothe quod I, iche have isene it often.
There smites naught so smarte, ne smells so sour.
As shame there he she with him, for each man him sho^ith
Why ye wish me thus quod I, was for I rebuked reason
Certes quod he that is sothe, and shope him for to walk
And I arose upright with that, and followed him after
And prayed him of his curtesye, to tell me his name
Passus duodecimus de visione.
I Am Imaginatiue quod he, idle was I never
Though I sit by mi self, in sikenes and in health
I have followed ye in faith, this.xlv. winter
And oftimes have meued ye, to think on thine end
And how fell ferniers are faren, and so few to come^
And of thy wild wanto^nes, tho thou young were
To amend it in thy middle age, lest might the failed
In thine old Elde, that evil can suffer
Pouertye or penance, or prayer bydde
Si non in prima vigilia, nec in secunda
Amend the while thou may, thou have ben warnd often
With pousties of pestile^ces, with poverty and with angers
And with these bitter baleises, god beats his dear childrene
Quem diligo castigo. Apoc. iii.

And David in ye psalter says, of such ye loves Jesus
Virga tua et baculus tuus, Psa. xxiii
ipsa ne consolati sunt
Although thou strike with thy staff, with stycke or with yard
It is our mirth as for me, to amend my soul
And you medlist with maki^gs, and might go sai thy psalter
And bid for hem ye give the bread, for there are books inow
To tell me what do well is, and do bet do best both
And prechers to preuen what it is, of many a peir friars
Ise well he said ye soth, and some what me to excuse
I said Caton comforted his son, yt clarke though he were
To solace him some time, as I do wha^ I make
Interpone tuis, interdum gaudia curis
And of holy men I heard quod I, how they other while
Pleyden, the perfitter to be in many places. Holy m^ used recreation.

And if there were any wight, that would me tell
What were do well and do bet, and do best at the last
Would I never do work, but wend to holy kirk
And there bid my beads, but when I eat or sleep
Paul in his pistle quod he, preueth what is dowell
Fides spes charitas, mayor horum. i. Cor. xiii
etc.
Fayeth hope and charity, and all be^ good
And sauen me^ so^dry times, and none so sone as charity
For he does well wtoute^ dout, yt does as leuti techeth
That is if thou be man married, thy make thou love
And live forth as law will, while you lyuen both
Right so if thou be religious, ren thou never further
To Rome ne Roch mad or, but as thy rule teaches
And hold the under obedience, ye high way is to heaven
And if thou be maiden to mary, and might well continue
Seek never no saint further, for thy souls health
For what made Lucifer, to lose the high heaven?
Or Solomon his sapie^ce, or Sampson his strength?
Job the Jew his joy, dear he it bought?
Aristotle and other mo, Hypocrates and Virgil?
Alexander that all wanne, elengelych ended
Catell and kind wit, was combraunce to hem all
Felice her fayrenes, fell hem all to sclaunder
And Rosamonde right so, rufully to believe
The beauty of her body, in badnes she dispended
Of many such I may read, of men and women
That wise words would show, and work the contrary
Sunt homines nequam, been de virtute loquentes.
And rich reukes right so, gaderen and sparen
And tho men yt they most haten, minister it at ye last
And for they suffren and se, so many nedye folks
Luke. vi.
And love not as our lord bid, lesen her souls.
Date et dabitur vobis.
And riches right so, but if the rote be true
And grace is a graffe thereof, tho greuau^ces to abate
And grace ne grows, not, but among low
Patience and poverty, the place is there it grows
And in lelly living men, and in life holy
And through ye gift of ye holy ghost, as ye gospel tells
John. iii.
Spiritus vbi vult spirat.
Clergy and kind wit, comes of sight and teaching
As the book bears wytnes, to barnes ye can read.
Quod scimus loquimur, quod vidimus testamur.
Of quod scimus, comes clergy, and cunnyng of heaven
And of quod vidimus, comes kind wit of sight of diverse people
And grace a gift of god, and of great love springs
Knew never clark how it comth, ne kind wit ye ways
Nescit aliquis vnde venit, Ioh. iii. True clergy is merciful.
aut quo uadit
And yet is clergy tocommend, and kind wit both
And namly clergy for christys love, yt of clergy is rote
For Moses witnesses ye god wrote, ye puple to wish
In thold law as ye letter tells, yt was ye law of Iues
That what woman were taken in auoutri, rich or pore
With stones me^ should strike her, and stone her to death
A woman as we finden, was gilty that death
And Christ of his curtesy, through clergy her saved
And through caracts that Christ wrote, the Jews knew he^ self
Giltier as before god, and greater in sin
Than the woman yt there was, and went away for shame
The clergy that there was, consorted the woman
Holy kyrk knows this, ye christ's writing saved her
So clergy is confort, to creatures that repenten
And to mansede men, mischief at her end
For bread of gods bodi, might not be without clergy
The which bread is, both boot to the rightful
And death and dampnation, to hem that dye evil.
And christis caracts co^fortid, and both culpable shewid
The woman that ye Jews brought, ye Jesus thought to save.
Nolite iudicare, et non iudicabimini.
Right so gods body brethren, Luke. vi.
but it be worthily take
Da^nith us at ye dai of dome, as ye caracis did ye Iuis
Therefore I counsel the for christ's sake, clergy yt thou love
For kind wit is of his kin, and nigh cosins both,
To our Lord leave me, therefore love hem I read
For both ben as myrours, to amend our defautes
And leaders for lewd men, and for lettred both
Therefore lack you never logyke, law ne his customs
Ne counterplede clerks, I counsel the for ever
For as a man may not see, that misseth his eyne
No more ca^ no clark, but if he caught it first by boks
Although men made books, god was the master
The holy ghost is the autour of books
And.s. spirit ye sa^plare, and said what me^ should write
Right so leads letture, lewd men to reason
And as a blind man in battle, bears weapon to fight
And has no hap with his axe, his enemy to hytte
No more can a kind witty man, but clerks him teach
Come for all his kind wit, to christendom and be saved
Which is ye cofer of Christ's tresure, and clarks keep ye kayes
To unlock it at her liking, and to ye lewd puple
Give mercy for her misdeades, if men will it ask
Buxomely and beningly, and bidden it of grace
Archa dei in the old law, Levites it kepten
Had never lewd man leave, to ligge^ hand on that cheste
But he were priest or priests son, patriarch or prophet
For clergy is keeper, under Christ of heaven
Was there never knight, but clergy him made
And kind wit comes, of all kinds syghtes
Of bird and of beasts, of tastes of truth and of deceits
Lyuers aforne us, vseden to make
Seldom that they seen, her sons for to teach
And helden it an high science, her wits to know
And through her science sothli, was never no soul saved
Ne brought by her books, to bliss ne to joy,
For all her kind knowings, come but of diverse sights
Patriarchs and prophets, repreuede^ her science
And said her words ne her counsel, was but folly
As to ye Clergy of Christ, counted it but a trifle.
Sapientia huius mundi, stulticia est apud deum.
For the high holy ghost, heaven shall to cleave,
And love shall lepen out after, into this low earth
And cleannes shall catch it, and clerks shall it find
Pastores loquebantur ad inuicem. Luke. ^^.

He speakith naught there of rich me^, ne of right wytty
Ne of lords yt were lewd me^, but of ye hyeste lettred
Abant Magi ab orient.
If any friar were found there, Math. i^
I give you five shillings
Ne in no beggars cote, was that barn borne
But in burgers place, in Bethleem the best.
Sed no^ erat ci locus in diuersorio, et pauper non habet diuersorium.
To pastors and to poets, Luke. ii.
appeared the angel
And bad hem go to Bethleem, gods birth to honor
And songen a so^g of solace, Gloria in excelsis deo.
Clerks knew it well, and commen with her presents
And did homage honorabli, to him yt was almighty
Why I have told al this, I took full good head
How thou co^triuedest Clergy with crabbed words
How yt lewd me^ light lucker, tha^ lettred were saved
Than clerks or kind witted men, of christen people
And thou saydest soth of some, and se in what manner.
Take two strong men, Two me^^ cast into Lemmes.
and in Temes cast hem
And both naked as a nedle, there non sikerer tha^ other
The one has cunning, and can swymme and dyue
The other is lewd of yt labor, learned never to swym
Which trowest you of those two, in Temese is most in dred
He ye never diuid, ne naught ca^ of swimming
Or the swymer that is safe, be so him self like?
There his fellow flete forth, as the flowd likes
And is in dread to drench, that never did swymme?
That swymme can not I said, it seems to my wyts
Right so quod the reuke, Reason shows
That he that knows clergy, can souer arise
Out of sin and he be safe, though he sin often
If him lyketh and lust, than any lewd lelly
For if the clarke be cunning, he knows what is sin
And how co^tricio^ without confession, comforts the soul
As thou see in ye psalter, in psalms one or twain
How co^tricio^ is commended, for it catches away sin
Psalm. 32.
Beati quoru^ remiss su^t iniquitates, et quoru^ recta sunt. etc.
And this comforts each a clarke, and covers hi from wa^hope
In which floode ye fend, fou^deth a man hardest
There the lewd lies still, and looks after lent
And repents not before shrifte, and tha^ ca^ he little tell
And as his sores man learneth hi, believes and troweth
And that is person and parish pressed, and peradventure he is
Vncu^ning to learn lewd me^, as Luke bears witness
Luke. vi.
Dum cecus ducit cecum. etc.
Woe was him marked, that wade must with the lewd
Well may the barn hem bless, that him to book set
That liueing after letture, saves hi both life and soul
Dominus pars hereditatis me, is a merry verse
That has taken from Tibunre.xx. strong thieves
There lewd thieves be lolled up, look how they be saved
The thef ye had gods grace on good friday, as you spak
Was for he knew Christ on ye cross, and knowleged his sin
And grace asked of god, and he is ever ready
That buxomlych byddeth it, and be^ in will to amend he^
And though ye thief had heaven, he had no hie bliss
As saint John and other saints, yt deserved had better
Right as if a man give me meat, and set me amid ye flore
I have meat more the^ enough, and not so much worship
As they ye sit at side tables, or with sovereigns of ye hal
But sit as a beggar bourdles, by my self on yt ground
So it fares by ye felo^, that on good friday was saved
He sits neither with saint John, Simon ne Jude
Ne with maide^s, ne with martirs, co^fessours ne widows
But by him self as a solayne, and served upon earth
For he that is once a thief, is evermore in danger
And as law lyketh, to live or dye
De peccato propitiato noli osse sine meta.
And forto seruen a saint, and such a thief togythers
It were neither reso^ne right, to reward he^ both ilike
And as Troianus ye true knight, dwelt not so dep in hell
But our lord had hi lightly out, so leave I ye thef be in heaven
For he is in ye lowest heaven, if our bileue be true
And well losellych he lolleth there, by law of holy kyrke
Qui reddit vnicuique iurta opera sua. Mat. xvi.

And why ye one thief on ye cross, creant began him yield
Rather the^ the other thef, though you would appose
All the clerks under Christ, ne could the skill assoyle.
Quare placuit? quia voluit.
And so I say by the, that sekest after the ways
And reasonest reason, a rebukinge as it were
And of the flowers in the frith, and of her fair hewes
Whereof they catch her colors, so fair and so bright
And wollest of birds and beasts, and her breding to know
Why some be allow and some aloft, thy lyking it were
And of ye stons and of the sters, thou studiest as I leave
How every beast and byrd, Only god knows ye causes of things
has so her wits
Clergy nekynde wit, ne knew never the cause
And kind knows the cause him self, no creature else
He is the Pies patron, and put it in her ear
That there the thorns it thickest, to build and bread
And kind keneth the Pecoke, to canken in such a kind
And kenned Adam to know his privy members
And taught him and Eve, to heal hem with leaves
Lewed men mani times, masters they apposen
Why Ada^ ne hilled not first, his mouth yt eat ye apple
Rather tha^ his lika^ allow, lewd axen thus clerks.
Kind knows why he did so, and no clerks else
And of birds and of beasts, men by old time
Ensamples toke^ and terms, as tellen the poets
And that the fairest foul, foulest engenders
And feblst foul of flight is, ye flies or swymmeth
Rych me^ be compared to the Pecocke.
And ye Pecock and the pehe^, proud rich me^ they betoke^
For the Pecok and me^ pursue him, he may not fly high
For the trailynge of his tail, overtake is he sone
And his flesh is foul flesh, and his fete both
And unlovely of leden, and lays for to hear
Right so the rych, if he his riches keep
And deleth it not til his deths day, ye tail of al sorrow
Right as ye pe^se in ye pecock, paineth him in his flight
So is possession pain of pence, and of nobles
To al hem that it holds, till her tail be plucked
And though the rych repent tha^, and birue ye time
That ever he gathered so great, and gave thereof so little
Though he cry to Christ than, with keen will I leave.
His leden be in our lords ear, like a pies chattering
And when his carrion shall come, in cave to be buried
I leave it flowme full foul, the fold all about
And all ye other there it lies, enuenimed through his
By ye posere is understand, as I have learned in Auenet
Executors, false friends, that fulfill not his will
That was written and they witness, to werk al ye it would
And thus the poet preueth, ye the pecock for feathers is reuere^ced
Right so the rych, by reso^ of his goods
The lark yt is a less foul, is more lovely of leadene
And will away of wyng, swyfter than the pecocke
And of flesh by fell fold, fatter and sweter
To low lyueinge men, is resembled the lark
Aristotle the great clarke, such tales he tells
Thus he likeneth in his logyke, the lest foul out
And whether he be safe or not, the soth wot no clergy
Ne of Sorts ne of Solomon, no Scripture can tell
And god is so good I hope, that since he gave he^ wits
To wishe^ us ways there with yt wishen us to be saved
And the better for her books, to bidden we be holden
That god of his grace, give her souls rest
For lettred men were lewd yet, ne were lore of her books
And these clerks quod I tho, yt on Christ leven
Seithe^ in her sermons, ye nether Sarasins ne Jews
Ne creature of christ's liknes, worth safe vnchriste^id
Co^tra quod Imaginatiue tho, and comsed for to loure
And said Saluabitur vir iustus in die iudicii. i. Pet. iiii

Ergo saluabitur quod he, and said no more latin
Troianus was a true kinght, Troianus
and took never christe^do^e
And he is safe says the book, and his soul in heaven
For there is fulling in font, and falling in blud shedinge
And through fire is fullynge, that is firm believe
Aduenit ignis diuinus non combutens sed illuminans. etc.
And truth yt trespaced never, ne tra^suersed against his law
But liuith as ye teaches, and leueth there be no beter
And if there were, he would amend, and in such will dye
Ne would never true god, but truth were allowed
And were it worth or worth not, ye belefe of it is great
And an hope ha^gi^g therein, Psa. xxiii
to have mede for his truth
For Deus dicitur, quasi da^s vita^ eternal sais, hoc est fidelibus
Et alibi, si ambulauero in medio vmbre mortis:
The gloss grau^teth apo^ ye verse, a great mede to truth
And wit and wisdom quod ye wight, was so^time treasure
To kep with a commune, no cattle was hold better
And much mirthe and ma^hode, and right with that he vanyshed
Passus.xiii. de visioue:
ANd I awaked there with, wities nere hand
And as a freke yt tree were, forth ga^ I walk
In manner of a me^dinaunt, many a year after
And of this meting mani time, much thought I had
First how Fortune me failed, at my most ned
And how yt Elde manaced me, might we ever meten
And how the Friars followed, folk that was rich
And folk that was pore, at little price they set
And no cors in her kyrkeyard, nor kirk was buried
But quik he bequeth he^ oght, or quit part of her dets
And how that couetise euercame, clerks and priests
And how yt lewd men be ladde, but our lord he^ help
Through vucunning creatures, to incurable pains
And how that imaginatiue, in dreams me told
Of kind and of his cunning, and how curtise he is to beasts
And how loving he is to beasts, on land and on water
Leaves he no life, less ne more.
The creatures that crepen, of kind they be engendered
And sithe^ how imaginatiue said, Vix saluabitur iustus.
And when he had said so, how suddenly he passed
I lay long in this thought, and at the last I slepte
And as Christ would conscience came, to comfort me yt time
And bade me come to his curt, with clargy should I dine
And for conscience of clergy spoke, I came well ye rather
And there I se a master, what man he was I nist
That low he lowted, and louelye to scripture
Conscience knew him well, and welcomed him fair
They washen and wypen, and went to the dinner
And patience in the palaice, stood in pilgrims clothes
And prayed meat for charity, for a pore hermit
Conscience called him in, and curteslie said
Welcome wight go and wash, thou shall sit sone
This master was made sit, as for the most worthy
And tha^ Clergy and Conscience, and Patience came after
Patience and I, were put to be matches
And sitten by our selves, at the side bourde
Conscience called after meat, and than came scripture
And served hem thus sone, of sundry meats many
Of Auste^ of Ambrose, and of the four Evangelists.
Edentes et bibentes: que apud illos sunt. Luke. x,

And this master and his man, no manner flesh eaten
And they ate meat of more cost, mortreulx and potage
Of that men miswonne, they made hem well at ease
And their sauce was over sour, and vnsauerly ground
In a mortar Post mortem, of many bitter pains
But if they singe for tho souls, and weep salt tears
Vos qui peccata hominum commeditis, nisi pro eis lachrimas et orationes
effunderitis, ea que in delitus comeditis, in tormentis euometis.
Conscience full curteslye tho, commanded scripture
Before patience bread to bring, and me yt was his match
He set a sour lofe before us and said, Agite penitentia^,
And sith he brought us drink, diaperseueraunce
As long quod I as I live, and likam man endure.
Here is preti service quod Patience, no price ca^ fare better
The^ brought he forth a mes of meat, of Miserere mei
And he brought us of Beati quoru^, of Beatus virs making
Et quorum tectasunt peccata in a dyshe
Of dernes shrifte Dixi, and Confitebor tibi, Psalm, 23,

Bring Patience some pitaunce privily quod Conscience
Psa. 32
And tha^ had Patience a pittau^ce, Pro hac orabit ad te. etc
And Conscience comforted us, and carped us merry tales
Psalm. li.
Cor contritum et humiliatum deus non despicies
Patience was proud, of that propre service
And made hi merye with his meat, and I mourned ever
For this doctor on ye hie deise, drancke wine so fast.
Esai. v.
Ve vobis qui potentes estis, ad bibendum vinum.
He eat many sondrye meats, mortrix and puddinges
Womb be clouts and wild drawn, and eggs fried with grese
Than said I to my self, so Patience it hard
It is not four days that this freke, before ye deane of poules
Preched of penance, yt Poul thapostle suffered
In fame et frigore, and flappes of scourges
ii. Cor. xi.
Ter Cesus sum et a Iudeis quinquies quadragintes.
And one word they ouerhipped, at each time that they preach
That Poule in his pistle, to all the puple told
Periculum est, in falsis fratribus.
Holy write bid men beware, I will not write it here
In English on adventure, it should be rehearsed to often
And grieve there with good me^, and gramaria^s should read
Vnusquisque a fratre se custodiat, quia vt dicitur periculum est in falsis
fratribus. ii. Th. iii

And I wist never freke, yt as a friar yead before me^ in english
Take it for her theme, and tell it without leasyngs
They preach that penance, is profitable to the soul
And what mischefe and male ease, Christ for man tholed
And this gods glotton quod I, with his great chekes
Has no pitye on us pore, he perfourmeth evil
That he preaches he preueth not, to Patience I told
And wyshed full wytterlye, with will full eger
That dyshes and doublers, before this ilke doctoure
Were molten lead in his mawe, and Mahound amidst
I shall iangle to this Iurdan, with his just womb
To tell me what penance is, of which he preched rath
Patience perceived what I thought, and winked on me
And said thou shall se this sone, A good divine.
when he may no more
He shall have a penance in his pau^ch, and pufatech word
And then shall his guts gottilen, and he shall gulpe^ after
For now he has droncke so deep, he woll divine sone
And preue^ it by her pocalips, and passion of. S. Avarice
That nether baco^ ne brawne, black manger ne mortreulx
Is neither fysh ne flesh, but fode for a penau^t
And the^ shall he testify of ye trinity, and take his fellow to witness
What he found in a frail, after a friars living
And but he first live by leasinges, leave me never after
And than is time to take, and to appose this doctor
Of dowel and of dobet, and if dobest be any penance
And I sat still as Patience said, and thus sone this doctoure
As ruddye as a rose, rubbed his chekes
Coughed and carped, and Conscience him heard
And told hem of ye Trinity, and toward us he looked
What is dowel sir doctor quod I, is dowel any penance
Dowel quod this doctor, and took the cup and drancke
Is do no evil to thine euenchristen, not to thy power
By this day sir doctor quod I then, ye be not in dowel
For ye have harmed us two, in yt ye have eaten the puddyng
Mortreulx and other meat, and we no morsel had
And if ye fare so in your farmarye, ferly me thinks
But chest be there chariti should be, and children durst plein
I would permute mi penance with you, for I am in poit to do well
The^ ^o^scie^ce curtesly a cou^tenau^ce made
And preynt upon Patience, to pray me to be still
And said him self sir doctoure, and it be your will
What is dowell and dobet, ye diuinours know
Dowell quod this doctoure, is do as clerks teach
And dobet is he ye teaches, and traueleth to teath other
And do best does him self so, as he says and precheth
Math. v. Cleargye has seven sons, yt is the. vii sciences.
Qui facit et docuerit, magnus vocabitur in regno celoru^
Now ye Conscience quod Clergy, carpest what is dowel
I have seven sons he said, seruen in a castle
There the lord of life wo^neth, to learn what is dowel
Till I see the seven, and my self accorden
I am vnhardy quod he, to any wight to preue it
For one Pierce the Ploughma^, has impu^gned us al
And set al sciences at a Soupe, save love only
And no text ne takes, to maintain his cause
But Dilige deum, And Domine quis habitabit
Psa. xv.
And says that dowell and dobet, are two infinites
Which infinites with fayeth, find out dobest
Which shall save ma^s soul, thus says Pierce plowma^
I ca^ not here one quod Conscience, and I know well Pierce
He will not gainsaie holy writ, I dare well undertake
Tha^ pass we over til Pierce come, and preue it in deed
Patience has been in mani places, and peradventure mouthed
That no clark ne can, as Christ bears witness
Patientes vincunt.
And your prayer quod Patience tho, so no man displese him
Disce quod he, Doce and Dilige inimicos.
Disce and dowell, Doce and dobet, Dilige and do best
thus taught me once.
Alemman that I loved, love was her name
With words and with works quod she, and will of thy heart
Thou love lelly thy soul, al thy life time
And so you learn the to love, for the lords love of heaven
Thine enemies in all wise, eue^ forth with thy self
Cast coals on his head, and all kind of speech
Both with works and with words, found his love to win
And lay on him thus with love, till he laughe on the
And but he bow for this bearing, blind might he be
And for to fare thus with thy frynde, folly it were
For he that loves the lellye, little of thine coueteth
Kind love coueteth not no cattle, but speech
With half a lampeline in latin Ex vi transitionis.
I bare therein about, fast bound Dowell
In a sign of the saturday, that set first the Calendar
And all the wit of the wenisday, of ye next weke after
The middle of the moon, is the might of both
And there with I am welcome, there I have it with me
Under it let this doctor deem, if dowel be there i
For by him that me made, might never poverty
Mysease ne michiefe, ne man with his tongue
Cold ne care, ne company of thieves
Ne nether heat ne hayle, ne none hell Powke
Ne neither fire ne floude, ne fear of thine enemy
Tene the any time, and thou take it with the
Charitas nihil timet. i. Cor. xi

It is but a Dido quod this doctor, a disertes tale
All the wit of this world, and wight men's strenght
Ca^ not confirm a peace, between ye pope and his enimes
Ne between.ii. christian kings, ca^ no wight peace make
Profitable to either people, and put the table from him
And took clergy and conscience, to counsel as it were
That patience tho must pass, for pilgrims ca^ well lie
And Conscience carped loud, and curteslye said
Friends fare well, and fair spoke to Clergy
For I will go with this go^me, Cleargye is loath ye Conscience should go with
patience
if god will give me grace
And be pilgraime with Patience til I have preued more
What quod clergy to conscience, are ye couetouse no we?
After yeresegyft or gifts, or yernen to read riddels?
I shall bring you a bible, a book of the old law
And learn you if you like, the least point to know
That Patience the pilgrim, perfitlye knew never
Nay by Christ quod Conscience to Clergy, god ye for yield
For all that Patience me profereth, proud am I little
And the will of the wye, and the will of folk here
Has meued my mode, to mourn for my sins
The good will of a wight, was never bought to the full
For there is no treasure thereto, to a true will
Luke. xix.
Had not Magdalen more, for a box of salve
Tha^ zecheus for he said, Dimidium bonoru^ meorsi do pau peribus.
And the pore wydowe, for a payr of mites
Luke. xxi.
Than all tho that offered into Gaz ophilacium?
Thus curteslye Conscience, congied first the friar
And sythen softlye he said, in Cleargies ear
Me were lever by our lord, and I live should
Have Patience perfecli, then half thy pack of books
Patience passes a pack of books
Clergy of Conscience, no congy would take
But said full soberlye, thou shall se the time
When thou art werye for walking, will me to counsel
That is sothe said Conscience, so me god help
If Patience be our parting fellow, and preuie with us both
There nis woe in this world, that we ne should amend
And confirmen kings to peace, and al kinnes lands
Sarazens and Surrey, and so forth all the Jews
Turn into the true faith, and into one believe
That is soth quod Cleargye, I se what thou meaneste
I shall dwell as I do, my devour to shown
And co^fyrmen fauntekyns, and other folk learned
Till Patience have preued the, and perfect the maked
Conscience tho with patience, passed pilgrims as it were
Tha^ had patience as pilgrims have, in his poke vital
Sobriety and simple speech, and sothfast believe.
To confort him and Conscience, if they come in place
There unkindness and couetise is, hu^gry contryes both
And as they went by the way, of dowell they carped
They met with a minstrell, A loiterers life
as me tho thought
Patience posed him first, and prayed he should tell
To conscience what craft he could, and whether he would
I am a minstrel quod that man, mi name is Actiua vita
All idle I hate, for of actyue is my name
A waferer will ye wit, and serve many Lords
And few robes I fonge, or furred gowns
Could I lie to do men laugh, than lachen I ne should
Other mantill or money, among Lords minstrels
And for I can neither taber ne tru^pe, ne tell no gestes
Farten ne fisten at feasts, ne harpen
Iape ne iuggele, ne gentyllye pype
Ne neither saylen ne saute, ne sing to the gytterne
I have no good gifts, of these great Lords
For no bred yt I bring forth, save a beniso^ on ye su^day
Wha^ ye priest prays ye people, ye Pater no. to say
For Pierce the plowma^, and that him profit waiten
And that am I active, that idleness hate
For all true traueilers, and tyllers of the earth
From Mighelmas to Mighelmas, I find hem with my wafers
Beggars and bidders, of my bread crauen
Faytours and Friars and folk with broad crowns
I find pane for the Pope, and prouender for his palfrey
And I had never of him, have god my truth
Nether prouender ne parsonage, yet of ye Popes gift
Save a pardon with a piece of lead, and two poles amids
Had I a clarke yt could write, I would cast him a bil
That he se^te me under his seal, a salve for ye pestilence
And yt his blessing and his bulls, botches might destroy
Mar. xvi.
In nomine meo demonia eiicient, et super egros manus imponent, et been habebunt
And tha^ would I be pressed, to ye puple paast to make
And buxome and busy, about bread and drink
For him and for all his, found I that his pardon
Might lechen a man, as I believe it should
For since he has the power, that Peter had him self.
He has the pot with the salve, truly as me thinks.
Argentum et auru^ non est mihi, quod habeo tibi do.
In nomine domini surge et ambula.
Act. iii.
And if might of miracle him fail, it is for men be not worth
To have grace of god, and no gilt of the Pope
For may no blessi^g done us bote, but if we will amend
There may no man make peace, among christian people
Til pride be purely fordo, and through pain de fault
For ere I have bread, a meal of mote I sweet
And ere ye co^me^ have corn enough, mani cold morni^g
So ere my wafars ben wrought, much woe I tholy
All London I leave, likes well my wafers
And loure when they lack hem, it is not long passed
There was a careful common, when no cart came to town
With bread from Stratford, tho began beggars weep
And workme^ were aghast a little, this wol be thought long
A dear year,
In date of our dryght, in a dry Apriell
A thousand and three hundred, twyse twenty and ten
My wafers there were geise^, wha^ Chicester was Mair
I took good keep by Christ, and Conscience both
Of Hankyn the actyue man, and how he was clothed
He had a cote of christendom, as holy kirk believes
And it was moled in mani places with mani so^dri plots
Of pride here a plotte, and there a plot of vnbuxome spech
Of scorning and of scoffinge, and of unskillful bearinge.
As in apparel and in port, proud among the puple
Other wise then he has with heart, Hypocrisye.
or sight shewinge
Him willing yt al men we^d, he were that he is not
For why, he bosteth and braggeth, with many bold oaths
And is vnobedie^t to be vndernome, of any life living
And none so singular by him self, nor so pope holy
In habit as an hermet, an order by him self
Religion sans rule, and unreasonable obedience
Lacked lettred men, and lewd men both
In lykinge of lely life, and a liar in Soul
With inwyt and outwyt, imaginen and study
As best for his body be, to have a bad name
And entermeten him over all, there he has not to do
Wylnynge that men wend, his wit were the best
And if he give ought to pore goms, tell what he delith
Pore of possession in purse, and in cofer both
And as a Lion on to look, and Lordly of speech
Boldest of beggars, a boster that naught has
In town and in tauernes, tales to tell
And say thing yt he never se, and forsooth swear it
Of deeds that he never did, domen and bosten
And of warkes that he well did, wytnes and siggen
Lo if ye leave me not, or that I lie wenen
Ask at him or at him, and he the can tell
What I suffered and see, and sometimes had
And what I could and knew, and what kin I came of
Al he would yt men wyste of works and of words
Which might please the people, Gala, i.
and praise himself
Si hominibus placerem Christi seruus non essem,
Et alibi. Nemo potest duobus dominis scruire.
By Christ quod Conscience tho, thy best cote Hankyn
Has many moles and spots, it must be washed
Yea, who so took head quod Hankyn, bihinde and before
What on back and what on body half, and by ye two sides
Hankins garmente is foul.
Me^ should find many frownces, and many foul plots
And he turned him as Tit, and than took I head
It was fowler by fell fold, then it first seemed
It was bydropped with wrath, and wicked will
With Envy and evil speech, entysynge to fight
Lyinge and laughing, and lefe tongue to chyde
All that he wyste wicked by any wight, tellen it
And blame me^ behind her back, and bidde^ he^ mischau^ce
And that he wist by Will, tellen it to Watte
And that Watte wist, Will wyste it after
And made of friends foes, through a false tongue
Or with might of mouth, or through ma^s strength
Avenge me fell times, other feet my self
Psalm. x.
Within as a shepsters shere, I shrewed men and cursed
Cuius maledictione os plenum est, et amaritudine, sublingua eius labor et
dolor. et alibi. Filii hominu^ de^tes eoru^ arma et sagitte, et lingua eoru^
gladius acutus.
There is no life that me loves, lasting any while
For tales that I tell, no man trusts to me
And wha^ I may not have ye maistry, such mela^cholie I take
That I catch ye cra^pe, ye cardiacle sometime
Or an ague in such an anger, and sometime a fever
That takes me al a twelve month, til ye I despice
Lechcrafte of our lord, and leave of a witch
And say that no clarke ne can, ne Christ as I leave
To ye sortry of Southwarke, or of short dies dame Eme
And seg yt no gods word gave me never bote
But through a charm had I chance, and mani chief heal
I waited wisloker, and than was it soyled
With lykyng of lechery, as by lokinge of his eight
For each amaid that he met, he made her to sign
Semyng to synnewarde, and sometime he began taste
About the mouth or beneth, begins to groppe
Till eythers will waxes kene, and to the work yeden
As well in fasti^gdaies and frydayes, Young lechour old baude.
and for bode^ nights
And as well in lent as out of lent, all times ylyke
Such works with hem, were never out of season
Till they might no more, and then merye tales
And how that lechours loves, laughen and iapen
And of her harlotrye and horedome, The spots of Haukins cote.
in her age tellen
Than Patience perceived, of points of this cote
Was culmy through couetise, and unkind desierynge
More to good than to god, the gomme his love cast
And imagined how he it might have,
With false mesures and mete, and with false weightes
Leued for love of the wedde, and loath to do troth
And awayte by which way, he might begyle
And menged his machandise, and made a good mastry
The worst within was, a great wit I leete it
And if my neighbor had any hynde, or any beast else
More profitable then mine, many sleyghtes I made
How I might have it, all my wit I cast
And but if I had by other way, at last I stole it
Or priuilye his purse shoke, vnpiked his locks
Or by night or by day, about was iche ever
Through gyle to gadren, the goods that ich have
If I yede to the ploughe, I pynched so narrow
That a foot land or a surrowe, fetchen I would
Of my next neighbor, nimen of his earth
And if I reap over reachen, or gave he^ read ye repen
And cese to me with her sycle, that I fowed never
And who so borrowed of me, about the time
With presents priuelye, or pay some certain
So would he or would he not, wynnen I would
And both to kith and to kynne, unkind of that ich had
The Image of a worldli^g
And who so cheped my chaffer, chiden I would
But he proffered to pay, a penny or twain
More than it was worth, and yet would I swear
That it cost me much more, swear many oaths
In holy days at holy kirk, when ich hard mass
Had I never will wot god, witterly to beseech
Mercy of my misdeades, that I ne mourned sore
For loss of good leave me, than for my lykam giltes
And if I had deadly sin done, I dred not yt so sore
As when I le^ded and leued it lost, or long ere it were paid
So if I kidde any kindness, mine eue^christe^ to help
Upon a cruel couetise, mine heart began hang
And if I sent over sea, my servants to Bryges
Or into Prucelande my prentice, my profit to waite^
To marchau^den with money, and make her exchau^ges
Might never me conforten, in the mean while
Neither mass ne mattens, ne no manner syghtes
Ne neither penance performed, ne Pater nost. said
That my mind ne was more, on mi good in a doubt
Than in the grace of god, and in his great help
Math. vi
Vbi the saurus tuus, ibi et cor tuum.
Which ben the branches, that bring a man to sloth
He ye mournith not for his miss, ne makes no sorrow
And penance that the pressed inioyneth, perfourmeth ill
Does no almesdedes, dread him of no sin
Lives again the believe, and no law holds
Each day is holy day with him, or an high fery
And if he ought will hear, it is an harlots tongue
When men carpen of Christ, or of clennes of souls
He waxes wroth and will not here, but words of mirth
Penance and pore men, and the passion of saints
He hates to hear thereof, and all that he tells
These be^ branches beware, yt brings a man to wa^. hope
The lords and you ladies, and legates of holy kirk
That feden foles sages, flatterers and liars
And have liking to lithen hem, to do you to laugh.
Ve vobis qui ridetis. etc. Luke. vi.

And give hem meat and mede, and pore men to refuse
In your death diynge, I fear me full sore
Lest tho three manner of me^, to much sorrow you bring
Consentientes et agentes pari pena punientur.
Patriarchs and prophets, and prechers of gods word
Sauen through her sermons, man's soul from hell
Right so flatterers and foles, arne the fendes disciples
To entise men through her tales, to sin and harlotrye
And clerks that known holy write, should ken lords
What David said of such men, as the psalter tells
Non habitabit in medio domus me, Psalm. C^
qui facit superbiam et qui loquitur iniqua.
Should no harlot have audience, in hall ne in chamber
There wysemen were, witnessen gods words
Ne no misproud man, among lords be allowed
And flatterers and foles, through her lewd words
Leden tho that love hem, to Lucifers feast
With Turpiloquio. a lay of sorrow, and Lucifers fidle
Thus Hankyn the active man, had soyled his cote
Til Conscience acouped him thereof, in a curteis manner
Why he had ne washed it, or wyped it with a brushe
Passus.xiiii. de visione.
I Have but one hole hattir quod Ha^kin, I am
the less to blame
Though it be soyled and field clean, I sleep
therein on nights,
And also I have an huswife, hewn and children
Luke xiiii
Vxoxem duxi et ideo non possum venire.
That woollen bymollen it many times, maugry my chekes,
Hankins cote will not be clean.
It has been laued in lent, and out of lent both
With ye soupe of sickness, that seeks wonders deep.
And with the loss of cattle, loathe for to agyle
God or any good man, by ought that I wyste
And was shryuen of a priest, that gafe me for my sins
To penance Patience, and pore men to feed
Al for couetise of mi christendom, in clennes to keep it
And could I never by Christ, keep it clean an hour
That I ne soyled it with sight, or with some idle speech
Or through work or word, or will of my heart
That I ne slober it foul, from morrow till even
And I shall ken the quod Conscience, of contricion to make
That shall claw thy cote, of al kinds of filth
Cordis contricio. etc.
Dowel shall wash it and wringe it, through a wise confessoure.
Oris confessio.
Dobet shall beat it and bo^ke it, as bright as any scarlet
And engraue^ it with good will, and gods grace to amend ye
And sithen se^d the to satisfaction, for to sown it after
Satisfactio dobesse.
Shall never chest bymollen it, ne might after bite it
Ne fend ne false man, defoulen it in thy life
Shall no heraulde ne harper, have a fayrer garment
Than Ha^kin the active man, and thou do by my teaching
Ne no minstrell be more worth, among pore and rich
Tha^ Hankins wife show ^^ere^, with his actiua vita
And I shall puruey ye paast and patience though no plow
And flower to feed folk withal, as best be for ye soul
Though never grieve growed, ne grape upon vine
All that lived and looked, liuelode would I find
And that enough shall none fail, of thing yt hem needs
We should not be to busye, about our liuelode
Ne soliciti sitis. etc. Volucres celi deus pascit. Mat. vi.
etc. patientes vincunt.
Than laughed Hankin a little, and lightly began swear
Who so leueth you by our lord, I leave not he be bleste
No quod Conscience patiently, God gives not life, but he provides fode,
and out of his poke hent
Vytayles of great virtues, for all manner beasts
And said lo here liuelode enough, if our belief be true
For lent never was life, but lyuelode were shapen
Whereof or wherefore, or whereby to live
First the wild worm, under wete earth
Fish to live in the floude, and in the fire the creket
The kurlew by kind of hem, are clenest flesh of birds
And beasts by grase and by grene, and by grene rotes
In meaning that all men, might the same do
Live through lelly believe, and love as god witnesses
Quodcu^que petieritis a patre in nomine meo. etc:
Et alibi Non solo pane viuit homo, sed in omni verbo
quod procedit de ore dei.
And I looked what liuelod it was, yt patience so praised
And it was a piece of ye Pater nost. Fiat voluntas tua.
Have Ha^kin quod Patience, and eat this wha^ thou hu^grest
Or when thou clumsest for cold, or clyngest for dry
Shall never gives the grieve, ne great lords wrath
Prison ne pain, for Patientes vincunt,
By so that thou be sober, of sight and of tongue
In eating and in handelyng, and in all thy five wyts
Dare thou never care for corn, neline^ cloth ne wole^
Ne for drink ne deaths dread, but dye as god likes
Or through honger or through heat, at his will be it
For if thou live after his lore, the shorter life ye better
Si quis amat Christum, mundum non diligit istum.
For through his breath beasts waxed, and abroad yede^
Dixit et facta sunt.
Ergo through his breath, may men and beasts liuen.
As holy write witnesses, when men se in her graces
Aperis tu manum tuam et imples omne animal benedictione
It is found that forti winter, folk lived without tilling
Forty years without tyllage.
And out of ye flint spro^ge the flood, yt folk and beasts drunk
And in Helies time, heaven was closed
That no rain ne run, thus read men in books
That many winter men lived, and no meat ne tiliden
Seven slept as says the book, seven hundred winter
And lived without lyuelode, and at the last they woken
If me^ liuid as mesure would, should no more be defaut
Lack of measure is cause of scarcity.
Among christen creatures, if christ's words be true
And unkindness Caristia^. makes among christian puple
And over plenty makes pride, among pore and rych
Therefore mesure is so mich worth, it ca^ not be to dear
For the mischife and the mischau^ce amo^gs me^ of Sodo^
Wext through plenty of pane, and of pure Sloth.
O ciositas et habundantia panis, peccatum turpissimum nutriuit.
For they measured not he^ self, of yt they ate and drank
They did deadlye sin, that the devil liked.
So vengeance fell upon hem, for her vile sins
They sonken into hell, the cities each one
Therefore mesure we us well, and make faith our feltron
And through faith comes co^tricion, conscience wot well
Which drives away deadly syn, and does it to venial
And though a man might not speak, co^tritio^ might save
And bring his soul to blish, by so ye faith were witness
That while he lived he believed, in ye law of holy kirk
Ergo co^trition, faith and conscience, is kindly dowel
And surgeo^s for dedli sin, when shrift of mouth fails
And shrift of mouth more worthy is, if man be co^trite
For shrift of mouth sleeth sin, be it never so deadlye
Per confessionem to a priest, peccata occiduntur,
There contricion does drive down, into venial sin
And David says in ye psalter, Psalm. 32. Satisfaction kylleth sin
Et quoru^ recta su^t peccata
And satisfaction seeks out the rote, and both sleeth and voydeth.
And as it never had be^, to naught brings dedly syn
That eft it is not seen no sore, but semith a wou^d helid
Where wo^nith chariti quod Ha^kin, I wist never in mi life
Man that with him spoke, as wide as I have passed
That perfect troth and pore heart is, and Patient of tongue
There is charity yt chief cha^berer, for god him self
Where patie^t porti quod Ha^ki^, be mor plesa^t to our dright
Tha^ riches rightfully wo^ne, and resonably dispended?
Yea Quis est ille quod Patience, quick laudabimus eum
Though men read of riches, right to the worlds end
I wist never reuke ye rych was, ye wha^ he reke^ should
When he drough to his dethes day, yt hene dred hi^ sore
And yt at the rekening in arerage fell, rather the^ out of debt
There ye pore dare pleate, and preue by pure reason
To have alowau^ce of his lord, by ye law he it claims
Joy that never joy had, of ryghtful judge he asks
And sees so birds and beasts, yt no blis ne knows
And wild worms in wods, by winters hem greueth
And makes hem welnigh meke, and mylde for defaut
And after you se^dest he^ somer, that is her sovereign joy
And blyshe to hem that been, both wild and tame
Then may beggars as beasts, after bote waiten
Never treature was with out joy here and hence to.
That al her life have lived, in langour and in defaut
But god sent hem sometime, some manner joy
Or here or else where, kind would it never
For to overmuch woe was he wrought, yt never was joy shape^
Angels yt in hell now be^, had joy sometime
And Dives in deyntis lived, and in Douce vie
Right so reason shows, that the men that were rich
And her makes also, lived her lives in myrthe
And god is of a wo^derous will, by yt kind wit shows
To give mani man mercimony, ere he it has deserved
Right so fares god by some rich, ruth me it thinks
For they have her hire here, and heaven as it were
And great liking to live, without labor of the body
And when he dies is disalowed, as David said in the psalter
Psalm. 76.
Dormierunt, et nihil inuenerunt.
And in an other stead also, Velunt sompnum surgentium. domine.
In ciuitate tua, et ad nichillum rediges.
Alas that riches shall reave, and rob man's soul
From the love of our Lord at his last end
Newen that have her hire before, are evermore nedye
And selde dies he out of det, yt dineth or he deserve it
And till he have done his devour, and his days journey
For wha^ a workma^ has wrought, the^ me^ say ye soth
What he were worthy for his work, and what he has deserved
And not to fig before for dred of disanulli^g
So I say by you rich, it seems not that ye should
Have heaven in your here being, and heaven hereafter
Right as a servant takes his salari before, and since would claim more
As he yt none had, and has hire at ye last
It may not be ye rych men, or Matthew on god lies.
Mat. xix.
De delictis ad delicias, difficile est transite.
And if ye rich have ruthe, and reward well the pore
And like as law teaches, done leauty to hem al
Christ of his curtesy, shall confort you at the last
And reward you al double riches, The rych that be merciful shall have heaven.
ye ruful heart have
And as an hyne that had his hyre, ere he begane
When he has do^e his devour well me^ do him ouirbou^t
Give him a tote above his covenant, right so Christ gives heaven
Both to rich and not rich, yt rufully lives
And al yt done her devour well, han double hire for her travel
Here forgiveness for her sins, and heaven blis after
And it is but seld seen, as by saints books
That god rewarded double rest, to any rych man
For much mirth is among rych, as in meat and clothes
And much mirth in May, is amongst wyld beasts
And so forth ye while somer lasts, her solace dureth
And beggars about midsomer, breadles they soupe
And yet is winter for he^ worse, for wetshod they ga^g
A furst sore, and a fyngred, and foul rebuked
And rated of rich men, that ruth is to hear
Now Lord send hem somer, and some manner joy
Heaven after her hence going, yt here have such defaute
For all might you have made, none meaner tha^ other
And like wytty and wise, if the well had lyked
And save ruth of these rich me^, yt reward not thy prisoners
Of the good that you hem give, ingrati be^ mani
And god of thy goodness, give hem grace to amend
For may no derth he^ dear, drough ne were he gieue
Ne nether heat ne hail, have they her health
Of that they will and would, wants hem not here
And pore puple thy prisoners lord, in ye pit of mischef
Confort the creaturs, that much care sufferen
Through derth and through drough, al her days here
Woe in winter times, for wantynge of clothes
And in somer time selde, soupen to the full
Conforte thy careful, Christ in thy riches
For how you co^fortest al creatures, clerks bears witness
Esai. xlv.
Conuertimini ad me, et salui eritis
Thus in general of gentryes Jesus Christ said
To robbers and to reuers, to rich and to pore
Thou taughtest hem in the trinity, to take baptism
And be clean through ye christening, of al kins sins
And if us fell through folly, to fall in sin after
Confession and knowledging, and craving thy mercy
Should amend us as many sithes, as man would desire
And if the Pope would plede here again, and punish us in conscience
He should take the acquitaunce as quycke and to the
A christen man's patente.
queed show it, Pateat. etc. per passione^ domini
And put of so the pouke, and preuen us under borow
And the parchmin of the Patente, of poverty be must
And of pure patience, and perfect believe
Of pomp and of pride, the parcemyn declares
And principality of al people, but they be pore of heart
Else is al idle, and all that ever we written
Pater noster and penance, and pylgrimages to Rome
But our spenses and spending, spring of true will
Else is all our labor lost, lo how men writes
In fenestres at the Friars, if false be the fundament
Therefore christen should be in co^me^ rych, none couetise for him self
For seven sins yt there be, assaile^ us ever
The fend follows hem al, and foundeth hem to help
And with riches that rybaunde, he rathest men begileth
For there that riches raygneth, reverence follows
And that is pleasant to pride, in pore and in rich
And the rych is reverenced, by reason of his riches
And the pore is put behynd, and peradventure ca^ more
Of wit and of wisdom, that far away is better
Than riches or rialtye, and rather hard in heaven
For ye rich has much to reke^, and right often him ye walks
The hye way to heuenward, riches him lets
It a possibile diuiti. etc.
There the pore preiseth before ye rich, Apo. xiiii
with a pake at his rygge
Opera enim illorum sequntur illos,
Batau^tly, as beggars done, and boldly he craves
For his poverty and his patience, a pertual bliss.
Beati pauperis, Luke. v^
quoniam ipsorum est regnum celorum
And pride in riches reigns, rather than in pouertye
Erst in the master or in ye man, some mantio^ he haueth
And in poverty there patience is, pride has no might
Ne none of the seven sins, sit ne may there long
For the pore is aye priest, to please the rich
And buxome at his bidding, for his broke loves
And buxomnes and bost, are evermore at war
And either hates other, in all manner works
If wrath wrestle with the pore, he has the worse end
And if they both pleyne, the pore is but feeble
And if he chyde or chatter, him cheueth the worse
And if couetise catch ye pore, they may not come togithers
And by the neke nameli, there no^ may he^t other
For men known well that couetouse is of kene will
And has hands and arms, of a long length
Pouerttis but a petit thing, apperith not to his nauel
And louelike was yet never bitwen, ye long and ye short
Though avarice wole angry ye pore, he has but little might
For poreti has but pokis, to put in his good
There avarice has almaries, and iron bound cofers
And whether be lighter to break, and less bost makes
A beggars bag, than an iron bound cofer
Lecherye and glotony reign not much in pouertye.
Lechery loves him not, for he gives but little silver
Ne does him not dine delecatlye, ne drink wine often
A straw for the Stews, it stood not I trow
Had they nothing but of poreme^, her house stood untilled
And though swuth sue pouerti, and serve not god to pay
Myschiefe is his master, and makes him to thyncke
That god is his greatest help, and no gome else
And he his saruaunt as he says, and of his fute both
And whether he be or not, he bears ye sign of poverty
And in ye sect our sauyoure, saved al mankind
Therefore al poverty that patient is, may claim and asken
After her endyng here, heuenlyche bliss.
Much hardier may he ask, yt here might have his will
Wylfull pouertye.
In land and in lorshyp, and in lyking of body
And for gods love leueth al, and lives as a beggar
And as a maid for man's love, her mother forsakes
Her father and all her friends, and follows her make
Much more is the love of him, that such one takes
Than a maiden is, that is married through brocage
As by assent of sundry parties, and silver to beat
More for covetous of good, than kind love of both
So it fares by each parson, that possession for saketh
And put him to be patiente, and poverty weddeth
Such is sybbe to god him self, and so ^^^chis saints
Have god mitrougth quod Ha^kin, ye praise f^st poverty
What is poverty with Patience, quod he properly to mene^
Paupertas quod Patience, est odibile bonum
Remotio curarum, possessio sieve calumpnia, Ponum dei, Sanitatis matter, Absque
solicitudine semita, Sapientie te^peratrir, negotium sine dalimo, incerta
fortuna, absque solicitudine felicitas.
I can not co^stine all this quod Ha^kin, ye must ken this in english
In engish quod patience, it is well hard to expound
And some deal I shall say it, by so thou understand
Poverty is the first point, that pride most hates
Than it is good by good skyll, all that agasteth pride
Right and co^tticion is a comfortable thing, Conscience wot it well
And sorrow of him self, and solace to the soul
So pouertye properlye, The p^^^se of p^uerty
penance and joy
Is the bodies pure, spiritual leche.
Ergo Paupertas est odibile bonum.
And co^tritio^ comforts, and Cura anima animaru^, ye second
Selde sits pouertye, the sothe to declare
Or as justice to judge men, enjoined is no pore
Ne to be mayre above me^, ne minister under kings
Selde is any pore put, to punish any people.
Remotio curarum,
Ergo poverty and pore me^, perfourmen the commandments
Nolite iudicate quemquam, the third
Selde is any poor man rich, of vnrightful heritage
Wineth he not with false weight ne with vnseled mesures
Ne boroweth of his neighbors, but yt he may well pai
Possessio sine calampnia.
The fourth is a fortune, that florisheth the soul
With sobriety from all sin, and also yet more
It afayteth the flesh, from soles full many
A collateral conforte, Christ's own gyfe,
Donum dei.
The fifth is mother of health, a friend in all fondynges
And for the la^^de (...) lech, alemman of al clennes.
Sanitatis (...)
The sixth is a path of peace, ye through ye paas of Alton
Poverty myghe pass, wont peril of robbing
For there that poverty passes, peace follows after
And ever ye less that he bears, ye hardier he is of heart
Therefore says Seneca, Paupertas e^ absque solicitudine
And an hardi man of heart, among an heap of of thieves
Cantabat paupertas, coram latrone biatore.
The.vii. is well of wisdom, and few words shows
Therefore Lords allow him little, or liste^ to his reason
For he te^pereth his tongue to truthward, and no treasure coueteth
Sapiencie temperatrix.
The eight is a lellye labourer, and loath to take more
Than he well deserves, in somer or in winter
And if he chaffreth he charge no loss, may he charity win
Negocium sine damno.
Patience fedeth pouertye.
The nynth is sweet to the soul, no sugar is sweter
For Patience is pane, for pouertye him self
And sobrity sweet drink, and good lethe in sycknes
Thus learned me a lettered man, for our lords love of heaven
S. Austen a blessed life, without business led
For body and for soul, Absque solicitudine felicitas.
Now god that al good gives, grant his soul rest
That this first wrote to wisse^ me^ what pouerti was
Alas quod Ha^kin yt active man tho, ye after mi christe^dom
I ne had be dead and doluel, for dowels sake
So hard it is for Hankin to live, and to do no sin
Sin sueth us ever quod he, and sorry began weep
And wept water with his eyes, and wayled the time
That ever he did deed, that dear God dispeased
Sworned and sobbed, and syghed full often
That ever he had land, lord shynne less or more
Or maistrye over any man, more then of him self
I were not worthy wot god quod Ha^kin, to wear any clothes
He nether shyrt ne shoo, save for shame oneli
To cover my caroen quod he, and cried mercy fast
And wept and wayled, and therwyth I waked.
Passus.xv. de dowel, et incipit dobet.
ANd after my waking, it was wonders long
Ere I could kindly know, what was dowel
And so my wit wexe and wained, til I a folewer
And some lacked mi self, allowed it few
And letten me for a lorell, and loath to reuerencen
Lords or ladies, or any life else
As persons in pelure, with pendantes of silver
To sergeauntes ne to such, said I not once
God look you lords, ne louted fair
That folk helden me a f^le, and in that folly I reigned
Till reason had ruth on me, and rocked me a sleep
Till I se as it sorcerye were a sotle thing wythall
One wythoute^ tongue or teth, told me whither I should
And whereof he came and of what kynne, I coniured
him at the last
If he were Christ's creature, anon me to tellen
I am christ's creature quod he, and christian in many a place
In christ's court I know well, and of his kin a party
Is neither Peter ye porter, ne Poule with his faucheon
That will defend me the door, ding I never so late
At midnight, at middaye, my voice is so know
That each a creature of his court, welcometh me fair.
What ar ye called quod I in yt court, among christ's puple
The whils I quicke^ ye course quod he, Diuers^ offices of the soul,
callid am I Anima
And when I will and would, Animus iche hight
And for that I can and know, called am I Men's
And when I make moan to god, Memoria is mi name
And when I deem domes, and do as truth teaches
Than is Rasio my right name, reason in English
And when I feel yt folk tellith, mi first name is se^sus
And that is wit and wisdom, the well of all crafts
And when I challenge or challenge not, chepe or refuse
Than am I conscience called, gods clerk and his notary
And when I love lelly, our lord and al other:
Than is Leli love my name, and in latin Amor
And when I flee from ye flesh, and forsake the carrion
Than am I spirit specheles, spiritus than iche hyte
Austin and Isodorus, either of them both
Named me thus to name, now thou might chese
How you couetist to call me, now you know al mi names
Anima pro diuersis actionibus, diuersa nomina sortitur, dum viuificat corpus,
anima est, dum vult animus est, du^ scit men's est, dum recolit me noria est,
dum iudicat ratio est, dum sentit sensus est, dum amat amor est, dum negat, vel
consentit, co^scientia est, dum spirat spiritus est.
Ye been as a bishop quod I, all bourding that time
For bishops iblessed, Bishops have many names
they bear many names
Presal and Pontifex, and metro politanus
And other names an hepe, Episcopus and Pastor.
That is soth said he, now I sethy will
Thou would know and ken, ye cause of al their names
And of mine if thou might, me think by thy speech
Yea sir I said, by so no man were grieved
All the sciences under sun, and all the suttel craft
I would I knew and coud, kindly in mine heart
Than art you imperfit quod he, and one of prids knights
For such a lust and liking, Lucyfer fell from heaven
^sal. xiiii
Pona^ pedem in aquilone, et similis ero altissimo.
It were against kind quod he, and kinnes reason
That any creature should kenne all, except Christ one
Again such Solomon speaks, and dispiseth her wis
And says Sicut qui mel comedet multum, no^ est ei bonum. Pro. xxv.

Sic qui scrutator est maiestatis opprimitur a gloria
That is to mean to english me^, yt mowe^ speak and hear
The man yt much honey eats, his maw is englemed
And the more that a man, of good matter hears
But he do therefore, it does him double scathe
Beatus est says saint Barnarde, qui scripturam legit.
Et verba vertit in opera, fully to his power
Couetise to kenne, and to know science
Put out of Paradise, Adam and Eve.
Scientie appetitus homine^ immortalitatis gloria spoliauit.
And right as honi is euel to defy, and englimeth ye maw
Right so he yt through reason, would yt rote know
Of God and of his great mights, his graces it lets
For in the liking lies a pride, and likames couetyse
Against Christ's counsel, and al clerks teaching
That is. Non plus sapere quam oportet, Romans xii.

Friars and fell other masters, yt to ye lewd men preachen
Mouen matters inmesurable, to tell of the Trynytie
That oftimes ye lewd people, of their belief douten
Better to leave were many docters, Prechers duty.
such teching
And tell me^ of x. co^mau^deme^ts, and touche^ ye seven synis
And of ye branches yt budde of the^, and bringe^ me^ to Hell
And how that folk in folies, mispend their five wits
As well friars as other folk, folish spenen
In housing in hatering, and in to high clergy showing
More for pomp the^ for pure charity, ye people wot ye soth
That I lie not so, for lords they pleasen
And reuerencen the rich, the rather for their silver.
Confundantur omnes qui adorant sculptilia. Et alibi, Psalm. 117.
vt
quid diligitis vanitatem et queritis mendatium?
Go to the gloss of the verse, ye great Clerks
If I lie on you to mi lewed wit, lead me to bre^ning
For as it seems ye forsake, no man's alms
Of usurers of whores, of auarous chapmen
And loute^ to these lords, that may lene you nobles,
Again your rule and religion, I take record at Jesus
Mat. xx.
That said to his disciples Ne sitis personatu^ acceptores
Of this matter I might, make a long bible
And of curats of christian people, as clerks bear witness
I shall telle^ it for truths sake, take heed who so lykith
As holiness and honesty, out of holy church spredith,
Through lelly leuing men, that Gods law teachen
Right so out of holy church, al euels spredith
There imperfit presthode is, Prechers must do as they preach
prechers and techers
I se it by ensample, in summer time on trees
There some bows been leaued, and some beat none
There is a mischefe in ye more, of such manner bows
Right so of parso^s and priests, and prechers of holy kyrke
That are root of the right faith, to rule the people
And there the rote is rotten, reason wot the soth
Sall never flower ne fruit, ne fair lefe be grene
Therefore would ye letred me^, leave yt lechert of clothi^g
And be kind as befell for clerks, and curteis of Christ's goods
True of your tongue, and of your tail both
And hate to hear harlotrye, and not to vnderfonge
Tithes but of true thing, tilied or chaffered
Loathe were lewd men, but they your lore followed
And amende^ hem yt misdone, more for your ensa^ples
Then to preach and prove it not, hypocrisy it seems
For hypocrisy in latin, is likened to a dunghyll
That were beshewed with snow, and snakes wtin
Or to a wall yt were whitlimed without, and foul wtin
Right so m^nye priests, preachers and prelates
Are enblaunched with Belperopis, and with clothes also
And your works and your words, theru^der are full unlovely
John Chrysostom of clarks spekth and priests
Sicat de te^plo omne bonum progreditur sic de te^plo omne masum procedit. Si
sacerdotium incorruptu^ fuerit: Chrysostomus
tota sloret ecclesia. Si autem corruptum fuerit: omnium fides marci dae^. Si
sacerdotru^ fuerit in peccatis: tot^s populus conuertetat a^ peccatum. Sicat
cum videris arborem pa^dam et marridam intelliges quod vicium hader, in radice:
Ita cum videris populum in disciplinatu^ et irreligiosum, sine dubio
sacerdotium eius non est samum.
If lewd men wist, what this laten means
And who was mine auctour, much wonder me think
But if mani prists bear for her bastards and her brochis
A pair of bedes in their hands, and a book under their arm
Sir John and sir Ieffery, has a girdle of silver
A baselard or a ballocke knife, with bottons ouergilt
And a portus yt should be his plow, Place vo to sing
Had he never service to save silver thereto, seith it with idle will
Alas ye lewd men, much lose ye on priests
And a thing that wickedly is won, Evil gotten evil spent
and with false sleights
Would never wit of witty God, but wickid me^ it had
The which are priests imperfit, and prechers after silver
That with gile is gotten, ungraciously is spended
Executors and sodemes, samoners and their lemmans,
So harlots and hoores, are helped with such goods
And Gods folks for defaute thereof, for fare^ and spill
Curatours of holy kyrke, as clerks yt ben auarous
Lightly that they leaven, losels it habbeth
Or dies intestat, and the bishop enters
And makith mirth thermidde, and his men both
And sigge^ he was an nigard, yt no good might spare
To friend ne to fremid, the fend have his soul
For a wretched house he hyled, all his life time
And yt he sparid and bisperid, spend we in mirth
By learned and by lewd, that loath is to spend
Thus gone their goods, be the ghost faren
And for good men God wot, great dole men maken
And be means good meatgeuers, and in mind haueth
In prayers, and in penance, and in perfect charity.
What is charity quod I tho? A childish thing he said.
Mata. 18,
Nisi efficiamini sicut paruuli no^ intrabitis regnu^ celoru^
Without fauteltie or tolie, fre liberal will,
Where should men find such a frind, with so fre a heart?
I have lived in land quod I, my name is long Will
And found I never full charity, before ne behind
Men be merciable to me^dinauntes, and to pore
And woollen lene there they leave, lelly to be paid
Chariti yt Poul praisith best, Romans xiii
most plesi^g to our God
Is No^ inflatur, non est ambitiosa, non querit que sua sunt.
I se never such a man, so god me help
That he ne would ask after his, and other while covet
Thing that neded him not, and nyme it if he might,
Clerks kenne me that Christ, is in all places
And I se hi never sothly, but as mi self in a myrror
In enigmate, i. Cor. xiii
tunc farie ad faciem.
And so I trow truly, by that men sell of charity
It is not champions sight, ne chaffer as I trow
Charity quod he chaffreth not, ne chale^geth ne craves
As proud of a penny, as of a pound of gold
And is as glade, of a gown of graye russet
As of a tunicle of tars, or of tried scarlet
He is glad with all glade, and good to all wicked
And leueth and loves, all that our lord made
Curses no creature, ne he can bear no wrath
Ne no likynge has to lie, ne laughe men to skorne
All that men same he let it soth, and in solace takes
And all manner mischief, in mildnes he suffeeth
Coueteth he no earthly good, but heaven lich bliss
Has he any rentes or riches, ne retcheth he never
For a friend yt finds him, fails him never at need
Fiat voluntas tua, fyndeth him evermore
And if he soupe, he eats but a soupe of Spera in deo,
He ca^ portrey well ye Pater noster, Goyn^^ on pilgrimage
and paint it with pytye
And other while he is won, to wead on pilgimage
There pore me^ and prisoners liggen, her pardon to have
Though he bear he^ no bread, he bears sweter fode
Loves he^ as our Lord bade, and looks how they fare
And when he is weary of ye work, tha^ woll he sometime
Labor in lauendrye, well the length of a mile
And yarne into youth, and yepely speak
Pride with all thappertenau^ces, pake hem togithers
And boken hem at his breast, and beat hem clean
And liggen on long, with Laboraui in gemitu meo,
And with warn water at his eyes, washen hem after
And than he syngeth, when he does so
And sometime says weeping
Cor contritum et humiliatum deus non despicies
By Christ I would I knew him quod I, Psalm. ii
no creature lever
Without the help of Pierce plow man quod he, his person see thou never.
Where clerks know him quod I, yt kepen holy kyrke?
Clarks have no knowi^g quod he, but vi works and word
And Pierce the plowman, perceives more depely
What is the will and wherefore yt many wight suffers
Et vidit cogitationes eorum. Luke. ^^

For there are full proud herted men, patient of tongue
And buxome as of beringe, to burgesis and to lords
And to pore people, have pepper in the nose
And as a Lion he looks, there men lack his works
Former are veggers and bidders, bedemen as it were
Loken as lambren, and semen live holy,
And it is more to have her meat, with such a easi manner
The^ for penance or perfitnes, yt pouert yt such takes
Therefore by color ne by clergy, know shall you never
Nether through works or words, but through will one
And yt knows no clarke, ne creature on earth
But Pierce the plowman Petrus id est Christus
For he is not with lesels, ne with landlippers hermets
Ne with ancres there a box hangs, al such they faite^
Fie on Faytors, and Infautores suos,
For charity is gods cha^pion, Of charity.
and as a good child hende
And the meriest of mouth, at meat where he sets
The love yt lies in his heart, makes him light of spech
And is compaignable and co^fortatiue, as Christ bid him self
Nolite fieri sicut hypocrite tristes.
For I have seen him in sylke, Mat. vi.
and sometime in russet
Both in graye and in gryse, and in a gylt harneys
And as gladly he it gave, to gommes that it neded
Edmunde and Edward, either were kings
And famies set, for charity hem followed
I have seen charity also syngyng and reding
Ryding and runnyng, in ragged weeds
And bydden as beggars, beheld I him never
And in rich robes, rachest he walks
Called and Crimised, and his crown shaue^
And in a Friars froke, he was found once
And it is fern ago, in saint Frances time
In that seet sith, to selde has he be known
Rich men he recommendeth, and of their robes takes
That withouten wiles, ledeth her lives
Beatus est dives qui. etc.
In kings court he comes often, there the counsel is true
And if couetis be of counsel, What company charity hau^teth,
he will not come therein
In court among tapers, he comes not but selde
For brauling and backbiting, and bearing false wytnes
In ye co^sistori before ye comissari, he comes not full often
For their law dureth ouerlong, but if they lache^ silver
And matrimony for money, maken and vnmaken
And that conscience and Christ, has knite fast
They undone it unworthily, the docters of law
And I ne lack no live, but lord amend us all
And give us grace good God, charity to follow
For who so might mete with him such manners hi^ aileth
Neither he blames ne banneth, bosteth ne prayseth
Lacks he ne loses, ne looks up stern
Craves ne couetith, ne cries after more
In pace in idipsum dormiam et requiescam.
The most liuelode he liuith by, Psalm. xii^,
is love in gods passion
Nether he bids ne beggeth, ne boroweth to yield,
Misdoth he no man, ne with his mouth greueth
Amongst christen men, this mildnes should last
In all manner angers, have this in heart
That though he suffered all this, God sufferid for us more
In example we should do so, and taken no ve^geau^ce
Of our foes yt done us falsenes, yt is our fathers will
For well may eueri man wit, if god had would him self
Should never Judas ne Jew, have Jesus do^e on rode
Ne have martrid Peter ne Paul, ne in prison holden
And he suffered in example, that we should suffer also
And said to such yt suffer would, that Patientes vincunt
Verbi gracia, quod he, and very examples many
The Lege^d of say rites, believe it if ye lust.
In Legenda sanctorum, the life of holy saints
What penance and pouertye, and passion they suffered
In honger in heat, in all manner angers
Antonye and Egedye, and other holy fathers
Wendynge in wyldernes, among wyld beasts
Monks and mendinauntes, men by hem self
In spekes and spelunkes, seldom speken togyders
And neither Antony nor Egedi, ne hermit that time
Of Lions ne of Leopardes, no lyuelode to take
But of fowls that flies, this finden men in books
Except that Egedi, after an hynde cried
And through the milk of that mylde beast, the man was sustained.
And day by day had never naught, his ho^ger to slake
But selde and sundry times, as says ye book and teaches
Antonye each a day, about none time
Had a byrd that brought him bread, that he by lived
And though the gome had a gest, God found hem both
Poule primus heremita, had proroked him self
That no man might him se, for moss and for leaves
Fowls hem fed, fell wynters wythall
Till he founded Friars, of Austens order
Poule after his preachinge, paniers he made
And won with his hands, that his womb neded
Peter fyshed for his fode, and his fellow Andrewe
Some they sold and some they soth, and so they lived both
And also Mary magdalen, by moors lived and dewes
And most through devotion, and mind of god almighty
I should not these seven days, seggen hem all
That lived thus for our lords love, many long years
And there ne was Lion ne Leopard, yt on lands went
Neither bear ne bore, ne other beasts wild
That ne fell to their fete, and fawned with their tales
And if they could have carped, by Christ as I trow
They would have fed that folk, before wyld fowls
And God sent the^ food by fowls, and by no fierce bestes
In meaning that meke thing, mild thing should feed
As who say religious, A leso^ for them that take be^^tices at wicked me^ hand.
ryghtfull men should find
And lawful men to life holy men, lyuelode bring
And than would Lords and ladies, be loath to a gilte
And to take of her tenauntes, more than truth would
Found they that Friars would, forsake her alms
And bidden hem bear it, there it was borrowed
For we been gods foles, and abiden always
Till birds bring us, that we should live by
For had ye potage and pane enough, and peniale to drink
And a mes there a mid, of one manner kind
Ye had right enough ye religious, so your rule me told
Nunquid (dicit Job) rugit Onager cum herba^ habuerit. Aut mugiet bos, cu^ ante
plenu^ presepe steterit. Job. v^.
Brutoru^ animaliu^ natura te co^de^pnat, quia cu^ eis pabulum commune
sufficit, ex adipe prodiit iniquitas tua.
If lewd me^ knew this late^, they would look who^ they give
And advice hem before, a five days or six
Ere they amortised to monks, or chanons her rents
Alas Lords and Ladies, lewd counsel have ye
To give from your heirs, that your elders you left
And give it to bydde for you, to such as ben rich
And ben founden and fed eke, to bydde for other
Who perfourmeth this prophecy, of ye people yt now lives?
Dispersit dedit pauperibus. Psalm. iii

If any people perform ye text, it are these pore friars
For that they beg about, in building they spend it
And on hem self some, and such as be^ her laborers
And of he^ that have not they take, and gives he^ yt has
And clerks and knights, and co^muners that been rych
Fell of you fares, as if I a foreste had
That were full of fair trees, and I found a cast
How I might mo therein, among hem set
Right so ye rich, ye rob that been rich
And helps he^ yt help you, and gives there no need is
As who so fylleth a tun, of a fresh river
Cast water into temes.
And went forth with that water, to woke with Camise
Right so ye rich, ye rob and feed
Hem that have as ye have, hem ye make at ease
And religious that rych ben, should rather fest begers
Then Burgesis that rych been, as the book tells.
Quia sacrilegium est tes pauperum non pauperibus dare
Item peccatoribus dare est demonibus immolare
Item Monache, si indiges et accipis potius das qua^ accipis
Si autem non indiges et accipis, rapis. Porro non
Indiget Monachus, si habeat quod nature sufficit.
Therefore I counsel al christian, to confirm he^ to charity
For charity without chalengyng, vnchargeth the soul
And mani prisoners by his prayer, he pulls from pain
And there is a defaut in ye folk, that the faith keeps
Wherefore folk is the febler, and not firm of believe
As in Lushburth is a luther alay, yet looks like sterling
The mark of ye money is good, and ye metel feeble
So fares it by some folk now, they have a fair spech
Crown and christendom, the kings mark of heaven
And the metel yt is man's soul, with sin is foul alaied
Both lettred and lewd, ben arrayed now with sin
That no life loves other, ne our Lord as it seems
For by war and wicked works, and weders unseasonable
Wether wyshyppers, and wyttye clerks also
Have no believe to ye list, ne to ye lore of Philosophers
Astronomers all day, in her art faylen
That whilome warned before, what should fall after
Shipme^ and shepeheardes, yt with ship and sheep we^ten
Wyshen by the welken, what should betide
As of weders and wyndes, Al is our of frame
they warned men often
Tyllers that tylled the earth, told her masters
By the seed that they sewe, what they sell might
And what to leave and what to live by, ye land was so true
Now fails ye folk of ye flood, and of ye land both
Sepeheardes and shypmen, and so do these tyllers
Nether they ca^neth ne knows, one course before another
Astronomers also, are at her wits end
Of yt was calculed of theleme^t, the contrary they find
Grammar the ground of al, begileth now the children
For it is non of these new clarks, who so nimeth head
Not one among an hundred, that an auter ca^ construe
Ne read a letter in any la^gage, but in latin or english
Go now to any degree, and but if gyle be master
And flatterer his fellow, under him to fourmen
Mache wonder me thinks, among us all
Doctors of degrees, and of divinity masters
That should kenne and know, all kynnes cleargye
And answer to arguments, and also to a Quod libet.
I dare not say it for shame, if such were apposed
They should fail of her philosophy, and phisike both
Therefore I am afraid, of folk of holy kyrke
Lest they ouerhipe^ as other done, in officis and in hours
And if they ouerhip as I hope not, our belefe suffers
As clerks in Corpus Christi feast, singen and readen
That Sola fides sufficit, to save with lewd people
And so may Saracines be saved, scribes and Jews
Alas than but our lores men, lived as they serve us
And for her living ye lewd me^ be, ye lother god agylt
For Saracines have somewhat, seming to our believe
For they love and believe, one god almyghtye
And we learned and lewed, in one god believe.
The beginning of Mahomets law
And one Mahomet a man, in misbeleue brought
Saracines of Surrey, and se in what manner.
At the first he was christian, and for he might not be pope
Into Surrey he sought, and through his sottle wyts
Daunted a dove, and day and night her fed
The corn that she cropped, he cast in his ear
And if he among the puple preched, or in places come
Than would the Culuer come, to the clerks ear
Meni^g as after meat, thus Mahomet her enchau^ted
Tha^ did folk fall on knees, for he swore in his prechi^g
That the Culuer that came so, came from god of heaven
As messenger to Mahomet, men for to teach
And thus through wyles of his wit, and a whit dove
Mahomet in misbeleue, men and women brought
That lived tho there and lyue^ yet, leuing on his laws
And since our savior suffered, ye Saracenes so begiled
Through a christen clarke, accursed in his soul
For dread of death, I dare not tell truth
How english clerks a Culuer feed, ye couetise hyte
And ben manered of Mahomet, yt no man uses truth
Ancres and hermets, monks and friars
Peren to Apostles, through her perfect living
Would never the faithful father, yt his ministers should
Of tyrants that teneth true men, take any alms
But done as Anthony did, Dominike and Frauncis
Benet and Barnarde, the which hem first taught
To live by little and in low houses, by lelly men's alms
Grass should grow and be grene, through her good living
And folks should find yt ben in diverse sikenes
The better for her byddynges, in body and in soul
Their prayers and their penau^ces, to peace should bring
All that been at debate, and bedmen were true.
Petite et accipietis. etc. Luke. ^^.

Salt saves cattle, says these wives.
Vos estis sal terre. Math. ^^.

The heads of holy church, and they holy were
Christ calls hem salt, for Christen souls.
Et si sal euanuerit in quo salietur.
For fresh flesh other fyshe, when it salt fails
It is unsavory forsothe, sodde or baked
So is man's soul sothly, that sees no good exemple
Of hem of holy kyrke, yt the high way should teach
And be gyde and go before, as a good rauenour
And harde^ hem yt behind ben, and give he^ good evidence
A leven holy men, all the world turned
Into lellye believe, The Apostles turned all the world to the faith,
the lyghtloker me thyncketh
Should al manner of men, we have so many masters
Priests and preachers, and a Pope above
That Gods salt should be, to save man's soul
All was Heathennes sometime, England and Wales
Till Gregory guard clerks, to go here and preach
Austen at Canturburye, christened the king
And by miracles as me^ may read, al ye marsh he turnid
To Christ and to christendom, and cross to honor
And fulled folk fast, and the fayeth taught
More through miracles, tha^ through much prechi^g
As well through works, as through his holy words
And said hem what fullinge, and faith was to mean
Cloth that comes from the weuyng, is not comely to wear
Til it be fulled under foot, or in fulling stocks
Washen well with water, and with tasels cratched
Touked and teynted, and under tailors hand
And so it fares by a barn, that borne is of a womb
Till the child be instructed in Christ it is but as a wild beast
Til it be christened in christ's name, confirmed of bishop
It is hethe^ as to heue^ward, and helples to the soul
Hethen is to mean, after heath and untilled earth
As in wild wilderness, waxes wild beasts
Rude and unreasonable, runnyng without cropers
Ye menen well how Matthew says, how a man made a feast
He fed he^ with no venison, ne fesau^tes baked
But with fowls yt from him nold, but followed his whistlynge
Math. xx
Ecce altilia mea, et omnia parata sunt.
And with calves flesh he fed, ye folk that he loved
The calfe betokens cle^nes, in he^ that keeps laws
For as ye cow through kind milk, ye calfe nourishes til an ox
So love and leauty, lelly men susteyneth
And maidens and mylde men, mercy desieren.
Right as the cow calfe, coueteth sweet milk
So done rightful men, mercy and truth
And who so yt excuses hem, that are persons and priests
That heneds of holy kyrke be^, that have her will here
Without travel ye tith deal, that true men biswinke^
They would wroth for I write this, and to witness take
Both Matthew and Mark, and Memento domine david
What pope or prelat now, performs ye christ hight
Ire in vniuersum mundu^, et predicate euangelium.
Mat. xvi
Alas that me^ so long, on Makometh should believe
So many prelates to preach, as the Pope makes
Of Nazareth of Niniue, of Nepthalim and Damasco
That they ne went as Christ wysheth, sithe^ they will have name
To be pastor and preach, the passion of Jesus
And as hem self said, so to live and dye.
Bonus pastor animam suam ponit. etc. John. x.

And said it in salvation, to Saracines and other
For christen and unchristian, Christ said to preachers
Ite vos in vineam meam. Math. xx

And sith that these Saracines, scribes and Jews
Have a lyppe of our believe, the lyghlier me thinks
They should turn who so traueiled, to teach hem of the trinitye
Querite et inuenietis. Mat. vii
etc.
It is ruth to read, how ryghtwyse men lived
How they defowled her flesh, forsook her own will
Far fro kyth and from kynne ill clothed yeden
Badlye bedded, no book but Conscience.
Ne no riches but the rode, to rejoice hem therein
Absit vos gloriari nisi in cruce domini nostri. etc. Galat. vi

And tho was plenty and peace, among pore and rych
And now is ruth to read, how the red noble
Is reuere^ced ere the rode, How couetise of the clergy will destroy ye church.
and received for the worthier
Then Christ's cross, yt overcame death and deadly syn
And now is war and woe, and who so why asks
For couetise after cross, the crown stands in gold
Boeth rich and religious, that rode they honor
That in grotes is graven, and in nobles
For covetous of that cross, men of holy kyrke
Shall turn as te^plars did, the time approaches nere
Wit ye not ye wise men, how tho men honored
More treasure then troth, I dare not tell the soth
Reason and ryghtfull dome, the religious demed
Right so you clerks, for your couetise ere long
Shall they deem Dos ecclesie, and your pride depose.
De posuit potentes de sede. Luke. ^.
etc.
If knyghthode and kyndwyt, An admonicion to ye clergy
and commune by conscience
To gyther love lelly, leueth it well ye bishops
The lordshyps of lands, for ever shall ye lose
And live as Louitiei, as our Lord you teaches
Per primitias et decimas. etc.
When Constantyne of curtesy, Deuteronomy. 18. Nume. v.
holy kyrke dowed
With lands, and leads, lordshyps and rentes
An angel men harden on high at Rome cry
Dos ecclesie, this day has drunk venyme
And they that have Peter's power, are poisoned al
A medicine must thereto, that may amend prelates
That should pray for peace, possession hem lets
Take her lands ye lords, A medicyne for ye Cleargye
and let hem live by decimus
If possession be poison, and imperfit hem make
Good were it to discharge hem, for holy kyrke sake
And purge hem of poison, ere more peril fall.
If priesthode were perfect, the people should amend
That co^trarien Christ's law, and christendom despise
For all Paynymes prays, and perfectly believes
In the holy great god, and his grace they asken
And make her moan to Makomet, her message to she we
Thus in faith live that folk, and in a false mean
And yt is ruth of ryghtfull men, yt in realm wonneth
And a peril of the Pope, and prelates that he makes
That bear bishops names, of Bethlem, and of Babilo^
That hip about in England, to hallow men's aulters
And crepen among curatours, co^fessen again the law
Nolite mittere falcem, in messem alienam.
Mani a man for christ's love, Bishops. duty.
was martyred in Rome
Ere any christendom was known there, or any cross honored
Eueri bishop yt bears cross, by ye he is holde^
Through his proui^ce to pass, and to his puple to show
Tellen hem and teachen hem, on the trinity to believe
And fede^ hem we gostly fode, and give there it neadeth.
In domo mea non est panis neque vestimentum. Esai. iii.

Et ideo nolite, constituere me regem.
Malachias says for such, as sick be and feeble.
Inferte omnes decimas in horreum meum, Mal. iii.
vt sit cibus in domo mea.
And we christian creatures, that on the cross beleuen
Are fyrme in the fayeth, god forbode else
And have clerks to keep us therein, and he^ ye come after
And Iues liue^ in lelly love, our lord wrote it him self
In stone for it steadfast was, and stand shall ever
Dilige deum et prorimum, is perfect Jews law
And took it to Moses to teach me^, til Messiah came
And on that law they leave yet, and leten it the best
And yet knew they Christ, that christendom taught
For a perfect prophet, that much people saved
Of selkougth sores, they saw it often
Both of miracles and meruels, and how he men feasted
With two fishes and five loves, five thousand people
And by ye ma^gerye men might se, ye Messiah he seemed
And when he lift up Lazar, that laid was in grave
And under stone and stanke, with styfe voice him called.
Lazare veni for as. John. xi.

Did him rise and room, right before the Jews
And they said and swore, we sorcery he wrought
And studied to destroy him, and stroyed hem selves
And through his patience, her power to naught he brought.
Vincunt patientes.
Daniell of her doing, diuined and said.
Cum sanctus sanctorum veniat, cessabit vnctio bestra.
And wene^ tho wretches, ye he were pseudo propheta
And that his lore be leasynges, and lacken it all
And hopen that he be to come, that shall hem releue
Moses eft or Messie, her masters yet diuineth
And Phariseis and Sarasins, Scribes and Greeks
Are folk of one faith, the father god they honouren
And sithen that the Sarasines, and also the Jews
Konne the first clause of our believe Credo in deum
Prelates of christian proui^cis, should preue if they might
To learn hem little and little, Et in Iesum christum filium,
Till they could speak and spel, Et in spiritum sanctum
And read it and record it with remissionem peccatorum.
Carnis resurrectionem et vitam eternam amen.
Passus.xvi. et primus de dobet.
Now fair fall you quod I tho, for your fair showing:
For Hankins love the actyue manne, ever I shall you love.
And yet I am in a were, what charity is to mean
It is a full tried tree quod he, truly to tell
Mercy is the moore thereof, the middle stock is ruth
The leaves ben lelly words, A discriptio^ of charity.
the law of holy kirk
The blossoms ben buxome speech, and vening loking
Patience hight the pure tree, and pure simple of heart
And so through god and good me^, grows ye fruit charity
I would travel quod I this tree to se.xx. C. mile
And to have my fyl of ye fruit, forsake all other salve
Lord quod I if any wight wit, whither out it grows
It grows in a garden quod he, ye god made him self.
Amids man's body, the moore is of that stock
Heart hight the herboure, that it in grows
And Liberum arbitrium, has the land to farm
Under Piers the plowman, to pick it and to wede it
Pierce the Plowman quod I tho, and al for pure joy
That I hard nempe his name, an on I swoned after
And lay long in a love dream, and at last me thought
That Pierce the Plowman, all the place me showed
And vade me to totre on ye tree, on top and on rote
With.iii. piles was it vnderpight, I perceived it sone
Pierce quod I, I pray the, why stond these piles here?
For wyndes, wylt you wit quod he, to wyten it from falling
Cum reciderit iustus, no^ collidetur, quia dominus supponit manum suam. Psalm.
37.

In blowing rune bite ye flours, but if these piles help
The world is a wicked wind, to hem that will troth
Couetise comith of ye wind, and crepith among the leaves
And forfretith nigh ye fruit, through mani fair sights
Tha^ with ye first pile, I pale him down, ye is Pote^tia Dei Patris
The flesh is a fell wind and in flouryng time
Through liking and lusts, so loud ginneth to blow
That it nourishes nigh sightes, and sometime words
And wicked works thereof, worms of sin
And forbyteth the blosomes, even to the bare leaves
Than set I to the second pyle, Sapientia dei patris.
That is the passion and the power, of our prince Jesus
Through prayers and through penance, gods passion in mind
I save it til I se it ripe^, and some dele fruted
And than fondeth the fend, my fruit to destroy
With all the wyles that he can, and waggeth the rote
And casts up the crompe, unkind neighbors
Backbyters break the chest, brawlers and chiders
And leyth a ladder thereto, of lesynges are ye roundes
And fetch away my flours, so^time before both mine eyes
And Liberum arbitrium, lets hem sometime,
That is leuetenaunt to loke^ it well, bileaue of my self
Vidiatis qui peccat in spiritum sanctum nu^qua^ remitterur.
Hoc est idem qui peccat per liberum arbitriu^ non repurgatur
And wha^ the fend and the flesh, Mat. xii.
forth with the world
Manacen behind me, Pierces ^efence
my fruit for to fetch
Than liberum arbitriu^, latcheth the first plant
And palleth adoune the pouke, purely through grace
And help of the holy ghost, and thus have I ye mastrie
Now fair fall you Piers quod I, so fair ye descriuen
The power of these posts, and their propre might
And I have thought a threw, of these three poles
In what wood they wope^, and where that they growed
For all are they a like long, none less than other
And to mimid as me thi^keth, on a more they growed
And of one greatness, and grene of greyne they semen
That is so the quod Pierce, so it may befall
I shall tell the as tyte, what this tree hight
The ground there it grows, goodness it hight
And I have told ye what hight ye tree, The tree and the fruits thereof.
ye trinity it means
And egerly he looked on me, and therefore I spared
To ask him any more therefore, and bade him full fair
To descriue the fruit, that so fair hangs
Here now beneth quod he tho, if I need had
Matrimonye I may name, a moist fruit wythall
Then co^tinence is here the crop, as caile way bastard
Then bears the crop kind fruit, and clennest of all
Maydenhode angels pere, and rathest will be ripe
And sweet without swellynge, sour worth it never
I prayed Pierce to pull down, an apple if he would
And suffer me to assaye, what savor it had
And Piers cast to the crop, and than comsed it to cry
And wagged widowhead, and it wept after
And when it meued Matrimony, it made a full noise
I had ruth when Piers ragged, it grad of ruthfullye
For ever as they dropped down, ye deuel was ready
And gathered them altogyther, both great and small
Adam and Abraham, and Esai the prophet
Sampson Samuel, and saint John Baptist
Bare hem forth boldlye, no body him let
And made of holy men his hoorde, In limbo inferm.
There is darckenes and dread, and the devil master
And Pierce of pure tene, of that apple caught
He hytte often at him, hytte if he might
Filius, by the fathers will, and frenes of Spiritus sancti,
To go rob that ragma^, and reave the fruit from him
And speak Spiritus sanctus, in Gabriels mouth
To a maid that hight Mary, a meke thing wythall
That one Jesus a justice son, must to^ken in her womb
Till Plenitudo temporis, full ye commen were
That Pierces fruit floured, and fill to ripe
And Jesus should just therefore, by judgment of arms
Whether should fonge the fruit, the fend or him self
The maid myldelye tho, the messenger greted
Add said hendelye to him, lo me his handmayden
For to work his will, without any sin.
Ecce ancilla domini, fiat mihi. Luke. ^.
etc.
And in the womb of ye wench, was he fortye wekes
Till he wext a faunt through her flesh, and of fyghtyng could
To have fought we the fend, ere full time came
And Pierce the Plowman, perceived plener time
And learned him lechcrafte, his life for to save
That wou^did with his enmy, he might warish him self
And did him assay his surgery, on hem that sick were
Till he was perfect practiser, if any danger fell
And sought out the sick and sinful boeth
And salued sick and sinful, does blind and crooked
And commen women converted, and to good turned
Non est sanis opus medico. etc.
Both mesels and mute, and in the menison bloudye
Often he healed such, he ne held it for no maistrye
Save tho he healed Lazar, that had lay in grave
John. xi.
Quatriduanas, Quelte quycke did him wake
And as he made the mastrye, Messus cepit esse.
And wept water with his eyes, there seighen it many
Some that the sight syghen, said that time
That he was leche of life, and lord of high heaven
Jews iangled there again, and judged laws
And said he wrought through witchcraft, and with the devils might
Ioh. viii
Demonium habes.
Then are ye cherls quod I, and your children both
And Satan your savior, your self now ye wytnes
For I have saved your self says Christ, and your sons after
Your bodies, your beasts, and blind me^ helped
And fed you with two fyshes, and with five loves
And left baskets full of broken meat, bear away yt would
And missayd the Jews manly, and manaced he^ to beat
And knocked on hem with a cord, and cast down her stals
That in church chafferden, or change den any money
And said it in sight of hem all, so that all hearden
I shall ouerturne this temple, and down throw
And in three days after, edifye it new
And make it as much or more, in all manner points
As ever it was and as wide, and therefore I hot you
Of prayers and of perfitnes, this place that ye call.
Mat. xxi.
Domus mea domus orationis vocabitur.
Envy and evil will, was in the Jews
They caste^ and contriueden, to kill him when they might
Each day after other, her time they awayted
Till it befell on a Fridaye, a little before paske
The thursedaye before, there he made his maundye
Sitting at the supper, he said these words
I am sold through one of you, he shall the time rue
That ever he his savior sold, for silver or else.
Judas iangled theragaynst, and Jesus him told
It was him self sothlye, and said Iudicis,
Tha^ went forth that wicked man, The manner of Judas ^^trayng (...) used
and with ye Jews met
And told them a token, how to know Jesus
And which token to this day, to much is used
That is kissing and fair countenance, and unkind will
And so was with Judas tho, that Jesus betrayed
Aue rav by quod that ribaude, and right to him he yede
And kyst him to be caught thereby, killed of ye Jews
Then Jesus to Judas, and to the Jews said
Falsenes I find, in thy fair speech
And gile in thy glad chere, and gall in thy laughing
Thou shalt be mirroure to many, men to deceive
And thy work and wickedness, shall worth upon thy self.
Necesse est vt veniant sca^dala, Mat. ^^.
ve tamen homini illi per quem scandalum venit.
Though I by treason, be at your own will
Suffer mine apostles, in peace and in paise gauge
On a thursedaye in the sterns, thus was he take
Through Judas and Jews, Jesus was his name
That on the Friday following, for mankindes sake
Iusted in Jerusalem, a joy to us all
On cross upon caluerye, Christ took the battle
Against death and the devil, destroyed both her mights
Dyed and death fordyd, and day of night made
And I awaked therwyth, and wyped mine eyes
And after Pierce the plowman, pried and stared
Eastwarde and westwarde, I waited after fast
And yede forth as an Idiote, in country to espy
After Pierce the Ploweman, many a place I sought
And than met I with a man, on Mydlenten sunday
As hoar as an Hauthorne, and Abraham he hight
I frayned him first, from whence he came
And from whence he were, and whither that he thought
I am Faith quod that freke, it falls not to lie
And of Abraham's house, an heraude of arms
I seek after a segge, that I see once
A full bold bachiler, I know him by his blasen
What bears that burn quod I tho, so blishe the betide
A description of the trinitiei.
Three leodes on a lyth, none longer then other
Of one mikell and one might, in measure and in length
That one does all does, and each does by his own
The first has might and majesty, maker of al things
Pater is his propre name, a person by him self
The second of that sire is, sothfastnes Filius
Warden of that wit has, was ever without gynninge.
The third hight the holy ghost, a person by him self
The light of all that life has, on land and on water
Confortour of creatures, of him comes all blyshe
So three belongs for a lord, that lordshyp claymeth
Might, and a mean, to know his might
Of him and of his servant, and what they suffer boeth
So God that gynnynge had never, but tho him good thought
Sent forth his son, as for servant ye time
To occupye him here, till issue were spronge
That is children of charity, and holy kyrke the mother
Patriarchs and prophets, and apostles were the children
And Christ and christendom, and christen holy kyrke
In meaning that man must, in one God believe
And there him liked and loved, in.iii. persons him showed
Wedlock and widowhead, with virginity nempned
In to kenninge of the trinity, was out of man taken
Adam our old father, Eve was of him self
And the issue that they had, it was of hem both
And either is others joy, in three sondrye parsones
And in heaven and in earth, one singular name
And thus is ma^kynd or ma^hode, of matrimony spro^g
And betokens the trinity, and true believe.
Mighty is matrymonye, and multyplieth the earth
And betokens truly, tell if I durst
Him that first formed al, father of heaven
The son if I durst say, rese^bleth well the wydowe
Deus meus deus meus, vt quid dereliquisti me. Psalm. xxii

That is creator was creature, to know what was both
As wydow without wedlock, was never yet se
No more might god be man, but if he mother had
So widow without wedlock, may not well stand
Ne matrimony without moylerie, is not much to praise
Maledictus homo qui non reliquit semen in Israel.
Thus in three persons, is parfitly manhood
That is man and his make, and moiler children
And is not but ge^der of generation, before Jesus Christ
So is the father forth with the son, and fre will of he^ both
Spiritus procedens a patre et filio.
Which is the holy ghost of all, and al is but one god
Thus in a somer I him se, as I sat in my porche
I rose up and reverenced him, and right fair him great
Three men to my sight, I made well at ease
Washed her fete and wyped hem, and afterward they eaten
Calves flesh and cake bread, and knew what I thought
Full true tokens between us be^, to tell wha^ me likes
First he fonded me, whether I loved better
Him or Isaac mine heir, which he hight me to kill
He wist my will by him, he woll me it allow
I am full syker in soul thereof, and my son boeth
Abraham is circumcised.
I circumcised my son, sithen for his sake
My self and my meyny, and all that male were
Bled blood for ye lords love, and hope to bliss ye time
Mine affiau^ce and my faith, is ferme in this believe
For him self behyght to me, and to mine issue both
Land and lordeshyppe, and life without end
To me and to mine issue, more yet he me granted
Mercy of our misdeeds, many times as we ask,
Quam olim Abrahe promisisti, et semini eius.
And sith he sent me to sey, I should do sacrifice
And done him worship with bread, and with wine boeth
And called me foot of his faith, his folk for to save
And defend hem from the fend, folk that on me leued
Thus have I ben his Heraude, here and in hell
And comforted many a careful, yt after his coming waiten
And thus I seek him he said, for I hear say late
Of a barn yt bapsid him, I. Baptyst was his name
That to patriarchs and to prophets, and to other people in darkness
Said that he se here, yt should save us al.
John. i.
Ecce agnus dei. etc.
I had wonder of his words, and of his wide clothes
For in his bosom he bare a thing, yt he blessed ever
And I looked in his lap, a Lazare lay therein
Among patriarchs and prophets, pleyinge togiders
What awaitest thou quod he, and what would you have
I would wit quod I tho, what is in your lap
Lo quod he and let me se, lord mercy I said
This is a present of mich price, what price shall it have
It is a precious present quod he, and ye pouk has it atachid
And me thermid quod yt man, there may no wed me quite
Ne no barn be our borow, ne bring us from his danger
Out of ye powkes pinfold, no mainprice may us fetch
Till he come that I carpe of, Christ is his name
That shall deliver us some day, out of ye deuyls power
And better wed for us ligge, tha^ we be all worthy
That is life for life, or lygge thus ever
Lollinge in my lap, til such a lord us fetch
Alas I said that sin, so long shall let
The might of gods mercy, that might us well amend
I wept for his words, with that I saw an other
Rapelich run forth, the right way he went
I frained him first, from whence he came
And what he hight, and whether he would, and wightly he told
Passus. xvii. de visione.
I Am Spes quod he, and spy after a knight
That took me a ma^deme^t, upon yt most Synai
To rule al realms with, I bear ye write here
It is ensealed I said, may me^ se the letters?
Nay he said I seek him that has the seal to keep
And yt is cross and christendom, and Christ thereon to ha^g
And when it is ensealed so, I wot well the soth
Than Lucifers Lordeshyp, shall last no longer
Let us se the letters quod I, we might the law know
Than pulled he forth, a pyece of a hard roche
Wherein were written these words, on this wise iglosed
Dilige deum, et proximum. etc. Mat. xxii

This the text truly, I took full good yeme
The gloss was glorious, written with a gylt pen.
In hiis duobus mandatis, tota lex peudet et prophet.
Be here all the Lords laws quod I, yea leave me he said
And who so worcheth after this write, I will undertake
Shall never devil him dear, ne death in soul grieve
For though I say it my self, I have saved with this charm
Of men and women, mani score thousands
He says sothe said this heraude, I have it found often
Lo here in my lap, that leued on that charm
Iosue and Judith, and Judas Machabeus
Yea and.vi. thousand beside forth, yt ben not seen here
Your words are wonderful quod I tho, which of you is truest?
And lelest to leave on, for life and for soul
Abraham says, that he se wholly the trinity
Abraham saw three distinct persons in trinity
Three persons in percels, each departable from other
And all three but one god, thus Abraham me taught
And has saved that believed so, and sorry for her sins.
I can not suggest, ^^nme, and some are in mi lap
What neded it than, a new law to begin?
Since the first suffices, to a saluasion and bliss
And now comes Spes, and speaks yt has espied the law
And tells not of ye triniti, yt took him his letters
To believe and love, in our Lord almighty.
And since right as my self, so love all the people
The gome ye goth with a staff, he seems in greater heal
Than he that goth with two slaves, to sight of us al
And right so by the rode, reason me shows
It is lighter to lewd men, one lesson to know
Than for to teach he^ two, and to hard to learn the least
It is full hard for any man, on Abraham believe
And well away worse yet, for to love a shrewe
It is lighter to leave, in three lovely persons
Than for to love and leave, as well lorels as lelly
Go thy gate quod I to Spes, for so me god help
Tho that learn thy law well, little while vsen it
And as we we^ten in ye way, thus wording togithers
Than sewe a Samaritan, sitting on a mule
Riding well rapelye, the right way we yeden
Cumming from a contrye, men call Jericho
To a Justice at Jerusalem, he chaseth away fast
Both the heraude and hope, The man wounded of thieves
and he met at once
Where a man was wounded, and with thieves taken
He might neither step ne stand, ne stir foot ne hand
Ne help him self sothly, for Semiuife he seemed
And as naked as a nedle, and no help about him
Faith had first sight of him, and he fle a side
And would not nyghen him, by nine lands length
Hope came hipping after, that had so bosted
How he with Moses mau^dement, had many me^ helped
And wha^ he had sight of ye segge, a side he began him draw
Dredfully by this day, as duck does from fauco^
And so sone this Samaritan, had sight of this leode
He light down of liard, ladde him in his hand
And to the wye he went, his wounds to behold
And perceived by his pulse, he was in peril to dye
And but he had recover the rather, that rise should he never
With wine and with oil, his wou^des he washed
Enbaumid him and bound his head, and in his lap him laid
And lad him so forth on liard, to Ler Christi, a grau^ge
Well six miles or seven, beside the new market
Herberde him at an hostrye, and to the hostler called
And said have keep this man, til I come from the justice
And lo here silver he said, for salve for his wounds
And he took him two pence, for liuelode as it were
And said who so spend more, I make it good heraftir
For I may not let quod that leode, and liarde he bestrideth
And raped him to Jerusalem, the right way to ride
Faith followed after fast, and fonded to meten him
And Spes spaklich him sped, speed if he might
To overtake him and talk to him, er he to town come
And wha^ I se this I soiorned not, but shope me to re^
And sewed that Samaritan, that was so full of pity
And granted him to be his grome, gramercy he said
And thy friend and thy fellow, thou fyndest me at need
Pierce profereth Christ to be come his servant
And I thanked him tho, and sithe. I him told
How that faith fle away, and Spes his fellow both
For sight of ye sorrowful man, ye robbed was with thieves
Have hem excused quod he, her help may little avail
Ma^^^ medicine on molde, the man to heal bring
Neither faith ne fine hope, so festred be his wounds
Without the blood of a barn, bore of a maiden
And he bathed in that blood, baptized as it were
Than plastered with penance, and passion of that baby
He should stand and step, and stalworth he never
Till he have eaten all the barn, and his blood dronken
For went never wye in this world through ye wyldernes
That he ne was robbed or rifled, rode he or yede
Save Faith and his fellow Spes, and my self
And thy self now, and stich as suen our worckes
For an outlaw in the wood, and under bancke louteth
And may each man se, and good mark take
Who is behind and who before, and who so be^ on horse
For he halt him hardier on horse, the^ him yt is on foot
For he sees me yt am Samarita^, sue faith and his fellow
On my caple that hight Caro, of mankind I took it
He was vnhardy that harlot, and hyd him in inferno
And ere this day three days, I dare undertaken
That he worth fettred that felon, fast with chains
And never eft grieve gome, that goes this ilke gate
And the^ shall faith be foster here, and in this frith walk
And kennen out common me^, that known not the co^try
Which is the way yt I went, and where forth to Jerusalem
And Hope ye hostylers man, shall be there ye ma^lyeth in heali^g
And al ye feeble and faint be, ye faith may not tech
Hope shall lead hem forth with love, as his lore teach
And hostell hem and heal, through holy kirkes believe
Till I have salve for all sick, Of Christ's resurrection.
and tha^ shall I return
And come again by this contrye, and co^forte^ all sick
That craves it or coueteth it, and cries thereafter
For ye barn was borne in Bethle^, yt with his blood shall save
Al ye liue^ in faith, and folowe^ his fewlowes techi^g
A sweet sir said I tho, whether shall I believe
As Faith and his fellow, enfourmed me both
In three persons departable, that perpetual were ever
And all three but one god, thus Abraham me taught
And hope afterward, he bade me to love
One god with all my good, and al gomes after
Love hem like my self, and our lord above al.
After Abraham quod he, that heraud of arms
Set fast thy faith, and fyrme believe
And as hope high the, I bote the that thou love
Thine even christen evermore, even forth with thy self
And if conscience carpe there again, or kind wit other
Or heritikes with arguments, thine hand you him show
For god is after an hand, The triniti like an hand
here now and know it
The father was first as a fyst, with one finger foldyng
Till him loved and lust, to vnlosen his finger
And put it forth as with a paum, to what place it should
The paume is pureli ye hand, and proferith forth ye figers
To minister and to make, ye might of hand known
And betokens truly, tell who so lyketh
The holy ghost of heaven, he is as the pawme
The fyngers that free be, to fold, and to serve
Betokens sothly the son, ye sent was to the earth
That touched and tasted, at teaching of the pawn
Saint Marye a maid, and mankind laughed.
Qui conceptus est de spiritu sancto.
The father is then as a fyst, with fyngers to touch
Quia omnia traham ad me ipsum.
(...). ^ii.
All that the pawme perceyueth, profitable to feel
Than are they all but one, as it a hand were
And three sundry syghtes, in one showing
The pawme, for he puts out fingers and fist both
Right so reddilye, reason it shows
How he that is holy ghost, sire and son preueth
And as the hand holds hard, and all things fast
Through four figers and a thombe, forth with ye pawme
Right so the father and the son, and. s. spirit the third
Within hem three, the wide world holden
Boeth the welken and the wind, water and earth
Heaven and hell, and all that therein is
Thus it is, needs no man trow none other
That three things belongs, in our lord of heaven
And ar Serples by he^ self, a sunder were they never
No more than my hand, may move without my fyngers
And as my fyst is full hand, folden togythers
So is the father a full God, former and maker.
Tu fabricator omnium. etc.
The Trinitye like an hand.
And all the might myd him is, in making of al things
The fyngers frame^ a full hand, to purtrey and to paynte^
Caruynge and compassinge, is craft of the fingers
Right so is the son, the science of the father
And full god as is the father, no febler nor no better
The paume yt is puteli ye hand, has power by him self
Other wise than ye wrethe^ fist, or workma^shyp of fingers
For the pawme has power, to put out all ye joints
And to unfold the folden fist, at the fingers will
So is the holy ghost god, neither greater ne less
Than is the sire and the son, and in the same might
And al three but one god, as is mi hand and mi fingers
Vnfolden or folden, my fest and my pawme
Al is but one hand, how so ever I turn it
And who so is hurt on the hand, even in the mids
He may receive right naught, reason it shows
For the fingers that fold should, and the fist make
For pain of the pawme, power hem fails
To cratche or to claw, to clype or to hold
Were the middle of my hand, maimed or pershed
I should receive right naught, of that I reach might
And though my thombe and my fingers, boeth were to swolen
And ye middle of my hand, without malease
In many kinnes manners, I might my self help
Both move and amend, though al my fingers oak
By this skyll me thinks, I se an evidence
That who so sins in the.s. Spirit, assoyled worth he never
Nether here ne else where, as I hear tell.
Qui peccat in spiritum sanctum. etc.
For he ye pricketh god as in ye pawme, Mat. xii.
Qui peccat in spi
For god the father is as a fist, the son is as a finger
The holy ghost of heaven, is as it were the pawme
And who so sineth in.s. spirit, it seems yt he greueth
God that he grypeth with, and would his grace quentch
And to a torche or a tapoure, the trinity is lykened
As wax and a week, were twined together
And than a fire flaming, forth out of both
And as wax and week, and hot fire together
Fostren forth a flame, and a fair lay.
So done the sire and the son, and also Spiritus sanctus,
The holy ghost show to by similituds
Fostren forth among folk, love and believe
And all kynne christen, cleanses of sins
And as thou feast sometime, suddenly a torche
The blasse thereof blown out, yet burns the weke
Without ley or light, that the match burns
So is the holy ghost god, and grace without mercy
To all unkind creatures, that covet to destroy
Lellye love or life, that our Lord shapte
And as glowing gleden, gladeth not these workmen
That waken and worken, in winter nyghtes
As does a kex or a ca^del, yt caught has fire and blaseth
No more does sirene son, ne saint spirit togythers
Grant no grace, ne forgeuenes of sins
Till the holy ghost gynne, to glowe and to blase
So that the holy ghost gloweth, but as a glede
Till that lellye love, lygge on him and blow
And than flameth he as fire, on father and on Filius
And melts her might into mercy, as men may se in winter
Isicles and eues, through heat of the sun
Melt in a minute while, to mist and to water
So grace of the holy ghost, the great might of the trinitye
Melts mercy to merciable, and to no other
And as wax without more, and a warm glede
Will brennen and blasen, all togythers
And solacen hem that may see, that sytre in darcknes
So the father forgeueth folk, that have mild hertes
That rufullye repenten, and restitution make
In as much as they may, amend and pay
And if it suffice not for a seth, that in such will dies
Mercy for his mekenes, woll make good ye remnau^t
And as the weke and fire, will make a warm flame
For to myrthe men with, that in merke sytten
So will Christ of his curtesy, and me^ cry him mercy
Boeth forgive and forgette, and yet bydde for us
To the father of heaven, forgyuenes to have
And new fire at the flynte, four hundred winter
But thou have to we to take it with, tinder or broches
All thy labor is lost, and thy long travel
For may no fire flambe make, fail it his kind
So is the holy ghost god, and grace without mercy.
To all unkind creatures, Christ him self witnesses.
Amen dico vobis, nescio vos. Mat. xxv

Be unkind to thine eue^christen, and all that ye can bydde
Deal and do penance, day and night ever
And purchase all the pardon, of Pampilon and Rome
Add indulgences inowe, and be ungrateful to thy kynne
The holy ghost hears the not, ne help may ye by reason
For unkindness quenches him, that he can not shine
Ne brenne ne blasse clear, for blowing of unkindness
Poule the Apostle, proves, i. Cor. xiii
whether I lie
Si linguis hominum loquar. etc.
Forthy beware ye wise men, that with the world dele
That rych ben and reason knows, rule well your selves
Be not unkind I counsel you, to your even christen
For many of you rych men, by my soul men tells
Ye brenne but ye blase not, that is a blind beacon
Non omnis qui dicit domine domine, intrabit. etc. Mat. vii.

Dives died dampened, for his unkindness
Of his meat and of his money to men, that it neded
Each a rich I read, regard at him take
And give your good to that god, yt grace of ryseth
For they that be unkind to his, hope I none other
But they dwell there Dives is, day without end
Thus is unkindness ye contrary, yt que^cheth as it were
The grace of the holy ghost, gods own kind
For that kind does, unkind fordoth, as done these cursed thieves
Unkind christian me^, for couetise and envy
Sleeth a man for his mouables, with mouth or with hands
For yt the holy ghost has to keep, tho harlots destroys
The which is life and love, ye leye of man's body
A good man is like a torche or a tapoure.
For every manner good man, may be likened to a torch
Or else to a tapour, to reverence the trinity
And who ye murdreth a good man, me thinks by my in wit
He fordoth the leuest light, yt our lord loves
And yet in many more manners, me^ offend the holy ghost
And this is the worst wise, that any wight might
Sin against.s. Spirit, assenten to destroyen
For couetise any kynnes thing, ye Christ dear bought
How might he ask mercy, or any mercy him help
That wicked and wylfullye, would mercy amentyce
Innocence is next god, and night and day cries
Vengeance vengeance, forgyuen be it never
That she^t us and shed our blood, forshapt us as it were
Apoca. vi
Vindica domine sanguinem nostrum.
Thus vengeance vengeance, very charity asks
And since holy kyrke and charity, charge this so sore
Leave I never yt our lord will love, yt charity lacks
Ne have pitye for any prayer, there that he pleynyth
I pose I had sinned so, and should now dye
And am sorry that I did so, the saint spirit agylt
Confesseme and cry his grace, god that all made
And mildly his mercy ask, might I not be saved?
Yes said the Samaritan, so well thou might repent
That right witness by repentance, to ruth might turn
And it is but seldom seen, the sothnes bears witness
Any creature that is culpable, before a kings justice
Be rau^somed before his repentance, there al reason him da^neth
For there ye party pursues, ye plee is so hudge
That the king may do no mercy, til both men accord
And either have equity, as holy write tells
Nunquam dimittitur peccatum. etc.
Thus it fares by such folk, yt falsely al her lives
Evil live and letten not, till life hem forsake
Good hope that help should, to wanhope turns
Not of the no unpower of god, that he ne is mightful
To amend all that amise is, and his mercy greater
Than all our wicked works, as holy write tells.
Misericordia eius super omnia opera eius.
And er rightousnes to ruth turn, Psalm. ^^^.
some restitutio^ behooves
His sorrow is satisfaction, for him yt may not pay
Three things there be, Three things drive a man out of his house.
that done a man by strength.
For to fly his own house, as holy write shows
That one is a wicked wife, that will not be chastised
Her fere flies from her, for fear of her tongue
And if his house be vnhiled, and rain on his head
He seeks all about, till he sleep dry
And when smolke and smoulder, smight in his sight
It does him worse than his wife, or wete to sleep
For smolke and smoulder, smyteth in his eyes
Till he be bleard or blind, or hoorse in the throat
Cougheth and curses, that Christ give hem sorrow
That should bring in better wood, or blow it til it bren
These three that I tell of, ben thus to understand
The wife is our wicked flesh, that will not be chasted
For kind cleueth on him ever, to contrary the soul
And though it fall it fynt skiles, that freilty is made
And that is lightly forgeuen, and forgetten both
To man that mercy asks, and amend thinks
The rain that reigns, there we rest should
By sykenes and sorrows, that we suffren often
As Poule the apostle, to the people taught
ii. Cor. xii
Virtus infirmitate perficitur.
And though that men make, much dole in her anger
And be^ impacie^t in her penance, pure reason knows
That they have cause to contrary, by kind of her siknes
And lightly our Lord, at her lives end
Has merci on such men, that so evil may suffer
And the smolke and the smolder, that smite in our eien
That is couetise and unkindness yt que^cheth gods mercy
For unkindness is the contrary, of al kinnes reason
For there nis sick ne sorye, ne none so much wretch
That he ne may love if him like, and leave of his heart
Good will and good word, boeth wishen and willen
Al manner of mercy, and of forgiveness
And love hem like him self, and his life amend
I may no longer let quod he, and lyard he pricked
And went away as wynd, and therwyth I waked.
Passus. xviii. de visione.
WOlward and wetshode, went I forth after
As a rechles reuke, that of no woe retcheth
And yede forth like a lorel, al my life time
Til I waxt weary of ye world, and willed efte to sleep
And lened me to a lenten, and long time I slepte
And of christ's passion and penance, ye people of taught
Rest me there and rut fast, till Ramis palmarum,
Of gerles and of Gloria laus, grealye me dreamed
And how Osanna by Organye, old folk songen
One se^blable to ye Samaritan, and so^deale to Piers the plowman
Barefote on an ass back, boteles came prickynge
Without spore or spear, spackly he looked
As is the kind of a knight, that comes to be dubbed
To get him gilt spores, and galoches couped
Than was faith in a fenester, and cried O fili David,
As does an heraud of arms, wha^ aue^trous comes to justice
Old Jews of Jerusalem, for joy they so^ge^
Benedictus qui venit in nomine demini. Mat. xxi.

Than I frained at faith, what all that fare bymente
Who should just in Jerusalem, Jesus he said
And fetch yt the fe^d claims, Pyerce fruit ye plowma^
Is Piers in this place quod I, and he preint on me
This Jesus of his gentry, will just in Pierces arms
In his helm and in his herbergeon, Humana natura.
That Christ be not known here, for consu^matus deus
In Pyerce paltock the plowma^, this pryker shall ride
For no dinte shall him dear, as in Deitate patris,
Who shall just with Jesus quod I, Jews or scribes?
Nay quod he the fould fend, and false dome and death.
Death says he shall for do, and adowne bring
All that lives or looks, in land or in water
Life says that he lives, and lays his life to wed
That for all that death can do, within three days
To walk and fetch from the fend, Pierce fruit ye plowma^
And lay it there him likes, and Lucifer bind
And for to beat and down bring, bale death for ever
O Mors, ero mors tua.
Tha^ came Pilate with mich puple, Sedens pro tribunali. Ozce. xiii

To se how douty death should do, and deem her brothers right
The Jews and justices, again Jesus they were
And all the court on him cried, Crucifige sharp
Tho put him forth a pylour, before Pylate and said
This Jesus upon Jews temple, iaped and despised
To for do it on one day, and in three days after
Edify it eft new, here he stands that said it
And yet make it as much, in all manner of points
Both as long and as large, by loft and by ground
Crucifige quod a catch pole, I warrant him a witch
John. xix
Toll Toll quod another, and took of kent thorns
And began of kene thorns, a garlande to make
And set it sore on his head; and said in envy
Aue Rabbi said that rybaude, and threw redes at him
Nailed him with three nails, naked on the rode
And poison on a pole, they put up to his lyppes
And bydde him drink his dethes evil, his days were done
And if that thou sotle be, help now they self
If you be Christ and kings son, come down of ye rode
Tha^ should we leave yt life ye loves, and wol not let ye dye
Consu^matu^ est, quod Christ, and comseth for to swonne
Pitiously and pale, as a prisoner does that dies
The Lord of life and of light tho, laid his eyes together
The day for dread wythdrew, and darck became ye son
The wall wagged and clefte, and all the world quaued
Dead men for that dine, came out of deep graves
And told why that tempest, so long time endured
For a bitter battle, the dead body said
Life and death in this darkness, here one fordoth ye other
Shall no wight wit witterly, who shall have maistry
Ereso^ day about su^ne rising, and sanke with that till earth
Some said that he was gods son, ye so fair dyed
Mar. xv
Vere filius dei erat iste
And some said he was a witch, good is that we assaie
Whether he be dead or not dead, down er he be taken
Two thieves also, tholed death that time
Besides Christ upon a cross, so was the common law
A catchpole came forth, and cragged both the legs
And the arms after, of either of tho thieves
And was no boy so bold, gods body to touch
For he was knight and kings son, kind forgave yt time
That no harlot were so hardy, to lay hand upon him
And there came forth a knight, with a kene spear ground
Hight Lo^gis as ye letter telth, He cites a lie out of the Legendauri*
and long had lost his sight
Before Pilate and other puple, in the place he houed
Maugre his many teath, he was made that time
To take his spear in his hand, and iusten with Jesus
For all they were vnhardy, that houed on horse or stood
To touch or to taste him, or taken down of rode
But this blind bachyler, bare him through the heart
The blud spra^g down by ye spear, and vnspared his eyes
Then fell the knight upon his knees, and cried him mercy
Against my will it was Lord, to wound you so sore
He syghed and said, fore it me for thinks
For ye deed that I have done, I do me in your grace
Have on me ruth rightful Jesus, and right with yt he wept
Than began Fayeth fellye, the false Jews despise
Called hem caytifes, accursed for ever
For this foul villanye, vengeance to you all
To do ye blind beat him bound, it was a boys counsel
Cursed Caytifes, knyghthode was it never
To misdo a dead body, by day nor by night
The gre yet has he gotten^ for all his great wound
For your champion c^^ualer, chief knight of you all
Yield him recreant, renning right at Jesus will
For be this darcknes ido, his death worth avenged
And ye lurdens have lost, for life shall have the mastry
And your fra^ches that fre was, fallen is in thraldom
And ye Cherles and your children, chiuen shall you never
Ne have Lordeshyppe in land, ne no land till
The lord accurseth usurers
But all bareyne be, and vsurye vsen
Which is life that our Lord, in all laws accurseth
Now your good days ar done, as Dani. prophesied
Wha^ Christ come, her ki^gdome and croune should cease
Dani. ix.
Cum venerit sanctus sanctorum, tunc cessabit vnctio vestra.
What for fear of the farlye, and of the false Jews
I drowe me in that darkness, to Descendit ad inferna.
And there I saw sothlye, Secundum scripturas,
Out of the west cost, a wenche as me thought
Came walking in the way, to helward she looked
Mercy hight that maid, a meke thing wythall
A full benyngne bird, and boxome of speech
Her sister as it seemed, came worthelye walking
Even out of the east, and westwarde she looked
A full comelye creature, Truth she hight.
For the virtue that her followed, afered was she never
When these maidens met, mercy and truth
Either asked other, of this great marvel
Of the din and of the darcknes, and how the day renned
And what a sight and a leme, lay before hell
I have farly of this fare, in faith said truth
And am wendinge to wit, what this wonder means
Have no marvel quod mercy, myrthe it betokens
A maid that hight Marye, and mother without feling
Of any kynnes creature, conceived through speech
And grace of the holy ghost, went great with child
Without wembe into this world, she brought him
And that my tale be true, I take God to wytnes
Sith this barn was borne, be thyrty winter paste
Which died and death tholed, this day about myddaye
And that is cause of this clipse, ye closed now the su^ne
In meaning that man shall, from merkenes be drawn
The which this light and this leem, shall Lucifer ablind
For Patriarks and Prophets, have preached it often
That man shall man save, through a maidens help
And that was tyne through tree, tree shall it win
And that death down brought, death shall releue
That thou tellest quod truth, is but a tale of waltrot
For Adam and Eve, Abraham and other
Patriarchs and Prophets, that in pain lyggen
Leave thou never that yon light, hem may aloft bring
Ne have hem out of hell, hold thy tongue mercy
It is but a trifle that you tellest, I truth wot the soth
For that is once in hell, out comes he never
Job the prophet patriarch, repungneth thy sawes.
Quia in inferno nulla est redemptio. Job. vii.

Than mercy full mekelye, mouthed these words
Through experience quod she, I hope I shall be saved
For venine for does venine, and that I prove by reason
For of all venimes, foulest is the Scorpion
May no medicine help the place, there he styngeth
Till he be dead and do thereto, the evil he destroys
The first venime moist, Poison expels poison,
through venime of him self
So shall this death for do, I dare my life lygge
All that death did first, through the devils entisynge
And as through gyle, man was begiled
So shall grace that began, make a good sleyght.
Ars vt artem falleret.
Now suffer we said truth, I se as me thinks
Out of the nyppe of the north, not full far hence
Ryghtwisenes come rennynge, rest we the while
For he wotteth more then we, he was ere we both
That is soth said mercy, and I se here by south
Where peace comes playinge, in patience clothed
Love has coueted her long, leave I none other
But he sent her some letter, what this light bemeneth
That ouerhoueth hell thus, she us shall tell
Wha^ peace in patience clothed, thus aproched nygh he^ twain
Rightfulnes her reuere^ced, for her rich clothi^g
And prayed peace to tell her, to what place she would
And in her gaye garment, whom she great thought
The talk between Justice etc Peace.
My will is to wend quod she, and to welcome hem all
That many a day might not se, for merknes of sin
Adam and Eve, and other more in hell
Moses and many more, mercy shall have
And I shall dance the reto, do thou so sister
For Jesus iusteth well, joy begins to dawe.
Psalm. xxx.
Ad vesperum demorabitur fletus, et ad matutinu^ leticia.
Love that is my lemman, such letters me sent
That mercy my sister and I, mankind should save
And yt god has forgiven, and granted me peace and mercy
To be man's meinpernour, for evermore after
Lo here the patent quod Peace, In pace in idipsum,
And that this deed shall dure, Dormiam et requiescam.
What rauest you quod rightwisenes, or ye art right drunk
Leuest thou that yon light, unlock might hell
And save man's soul? sister wene it never
At the beginning God gave the dome him self
That Adam and Eve, and all that hem sewed
Should dye down right, and dwell in pain after
If that they touched a tree, and the fruit eaten
Adam afterward, against his defense
Frete of that fruit, and forsook as it were
The love of our Lord, and his lore boeth
And followed yt the fend taught, and his fellows will
Against reason and rightwis^es, record thus with truth
That their pain be perpetual, and no prayer the^ help
Therefore let them cheue as they chose, and chide we not sisters
For it is boteles bale, the byt yt they eaten.
And I shall prove quod peace, their pain must have end
And we into weal, must wend at last
For had they wist of no woe, weal had they not know
For no wight wotes what weal is, Co^trar^es are known by t^^ contrary
that never woe suffered
Ne what is whote hu^gre, that never had defaut
If no night nere, no man as I leave
Should wit witerly, what day is to mean
Should never right rychman, ye lives in rest and ease
Wit what woe is, ne were the death of kind
So God that began all, of his good will
Became man of a maid, mankind to save
And suffer to be sold, to se the sorrow of dyinge
The which vnknytteth all care, and comsing is of rest
For till modicum met with him, I may it well avowe
Wot no wight as I wene, what is enough to mean
Therefore God of his goodness, ye first gome Adam
Set him in solace and in souereine mirth,
And sith he suffered him sin, sorrow to feel
To wit what weal was, kyndly to know it
And after God aue^tred him self, and took Adams kind
To wit what he had suffered, in three sundry places
Both in heaven and in earth, and to hell he thinks
To wit what al woe is, that wot of all joy
So it shall fare by this folk, their folly and their sin
Shall learn hem what langor is, and life without end
Wot no wight what war is, there ye peace reineth
Ne what is witerly weal, till welaweye him teach
Books be bold.
Than was there a wight, with two broad eyes
Book hight that beaupier, a bold man of speech
By gods body, quod this book, I will bear witness
That tho this barn was borne, there blased a star
That all the wiseme^ of this world, in one wit accorde^
That such a barn was borne, in Bethlems city
That man's soul should save, and sin destroy
And al ye eleme^tes says the book, hereof bears witness
That he was god ye al wroght, ye welke^ first showed
Tho that were in heaven, tooken Stella cometa,
And tinde den her as a torche, to reverence his birth
The light followed the lord, into the low earth
The water witnessed he was god, for yt he went on it
Peter the apostle perceived his gate
And as he went on the water, well him knew and said
Mat. xiiii
Iube me venire ad te super aquas.
And lo how the sun began lack, her light in her self
When she see him suffer, that sun and sea made
The earth for heeuines, that he would suffer
Quaked as quycke thing, and al to quassed the roch
Lo hell might not hold, but opened tho God tholed
And let out Simons sons, to se him hang on rode
And now shall Lucifer leave it, though him loath think
For Gygas the giant, with a gynne engined
To brake and to beat down, yt been again Jesus
And I book wolbe burnt, but Jesus rise to live
In all mightes of man, and his mother glad
And conforten al his kynne, and out of care bring
And all the Jews joy, vnioyne and vnloken
And but if they reverence his rode, and his resurrection
And bileue on a new law, be lost life and soul.
Suffer we said Truth, I hear and I se both
How a spirit speaked to hell, and bid vnspar ye gates
Attollite porta. etc. Ps. xxiiii.

A voice loud in that light, to Lucifer said
Princes in this place, vnpinneth and vnlocketh
For here comes with crown, that king is of glory
Than sighed Satan, and said to hem all
Such a light against our leave, Lazar out fette
Care and combraunce, is commen to us all
If this king come in, mankind will he fetch
And lead it there him likes, and lightly me bind
Patriarchs and prophets, have parled hereof long
That such a Lord and a light, should lead he^ al hence
Listeneth quod Lucifer, for I this lord know
Both this Lord and this light, is long ago I knew it
May no death him dear, ne no deuiles quentise
And where he will is his wai, and warn him of ye perels
If he reave me of my right, he robs me by mastrye
For by right and by reason, the reukes that been here
Body and soul be mine, both good and evil
For him self said, Lucifer reasone^^ the mate^^
that sire is of heaven
If Adam eat the appel, all should dye
And dwell with us deuels, this threatenyng he made
And he that sothnes is, said these words
And sithen he seized, seven hundred winter
I leave that law nill not, leave him the least.
That is sothe quod Satan, but I me sore dread
For thou gate hem with gile, and his garden brake
And in semblaunce of a serpent, sat apo^ the apple tree
And eggedest hem to eat, Eve by her name
And toldst her a tale, of treason were thy words
And so thou had hem out, and hider at the last
It is not graithlye gayten, there gyle is the rote
For God will not be begiled quod Gobelyn, ne iaped
We have no true title to he^, for by treso^ were they damned
Certes I dread quod this devil, lest truth will he^ fetch
Out of our postye, and leaden hem hence
These.xxx. winter as I wene, he has gone and preched
I have assailed him with sin, and sometime asked
Where he were god or gods son, he gave me short answer
And thus he has trolid forth, this.xxxii. witer
And when I see it was so, sleapynge I went
To warn Pilatus wife, what done man was Jesus
For Jews hated him, and have done him to death
Pilates wife.
I would have lengthed his life, for I leued if he died
That his soul should suffer, no sin in his sight
For ye body while it on bones yede, about was ever
To save man from sin, if him self would
And now I se where a soul comes hitherward sailig
With glory and with great light, god it is I wot well
I red we flee quod he, fast all hence
For us were better not be, than abide his sight
For thy leasynges Lucifer, lost is all our pray
First through the we fell, from heaven so hye
For we believed on thy lesings, ilorne we have Adam
And all our Lordshyp I leave, on land and on water
Luke. xii.
Nunc princeps huius mundi, eiicietur for as.
Eft the light bade unlock, and Lucifer answered
What lord art thou quod Lucifer, Quis est iste?
Ker glory, the light soon said,
And lord of might and of main, and al manner virtues
Dominus virtutum.
Dukes of this dim place, anon undo these gates
That Christ may come in, the kings son of heaven
And with that breath hell brake, with belials bars
For any wye or ward, wide open the gates
Patriarchs and prophets, Populus in tenebris
Songen saint John's song, Ecce agnus dei
Lucifer look ne might, so light him ablent
And tho that our lord loved, into his light he laughed
And said to Satan, lo here my soul to amends
For all sinful souls, to save tho that been worthy
Mine they be and of me, I may the better hem claim
Although reason record, and might of my self
That if they ate the apple, all should dye
I behyght them not here, hell for ever
For the deed that they did, thy disceyte it made
With gyle thou hem got, against all reason
For in my palace Paradise, in parson of an addre
Falsely thou fettest there, thing that I loved
Thus like a lysard, with a Ladies visage
Thefely thou me robbeste, the old law grants
That gilers be begyled, and that is good reason
Dentem pro dente, et oculum pro oculo. Deuteronomy. ^ Soul for soul*

Ergo soul shall soul quite, and sin to sin wend
And all that man has misdo, I may well amend
Membre for membre, in the old law was amends
And life for life also, and by that law I claim it
Adam and al his issue, at my will hereafter
And that death in hem fordid, my death shall releue
And both quicke^ and quite, yt queint was through sin
And that grace gile destroys, good faith it asks
So leave I not Lucifer, again the law I fetch hem
But by right and by reason, ransom here my liges
Non beni soluere legem, sed adimplere. Mat. ^^

Thou fettedste mine in my place, against all reason
Falsely and felonly, good faith me it taught
To recover hem by ransom, and by no reason else.
So that through gile thou gate, through grace it is won
Thou Lucifer in lykenes of a luther edder
Gatiste by gyle, tho that God loved
And in lykenes of a leode, that Lord am of heaven
Graciously thy gyle have quite, go gile against gyle
And as Adam and all, through a tree dyed
Adam and althrough a tree, should turn again to life
And gile is gyled, and in his gyle fallen.
Psalm. vii.
Et cecidit in foueam quam fecit.
Now begins thy gile, again the to turn
And my grace to grow aye, greater and wyder
The bitterness that you have brued, broke it thy self
Thou art doctor of death, drink that thou madeste
For I that am Lord of life, love is my drink
And for that drink to day, I dyed upon earth
If ought so me thristeth, yet for man's souls sake
May no drink me moist, ne my thryste stake
Till the vendage fall, in the vale of Iosaphat
That I drink right ripe must, Resurrectio mortuoruns
And then shall I come as a king, crowned with angels
And have out of hell, all men's souls
Fendes and fend kynnes, before me shall stand
And been at my biddynge, whersoeuer me lyketh
And to be merciable to man, that my kind it asks
For we ben brethren of blood, but not of baptism al
And all that be^ my hole brethren, in blood and baptism
Shall not be damned to death, that is without end.
Psai. li.
Tibi soli peccaui. etc.
It is not used in earth, to hangen a felon
Ofter than once, though he were a traytoure
And if the king of that kingdom, come in that time
There the felon thole should, death other else
The law would have give him life, if he looked on him
And I that am king of kings, shall on such a time come
There dome to the death, da^neth all wicked
And if law will I look on hem, it lies in my grace
Whether they dye or dye not, for that they did ill
Be it any thing, about the boldness of their sins
I do mercy through rightwi^nes, and al mi words true
And though holy write will, yt I be wroke of he^ thai did evil
Nullum malum impunitum. etc.
They should be cleansed clearly, and washen of her sins
In my prison Purgatory, till Parce it hot
And mi mercy shall be showed, to many of my brethren
For blood may suffer blood, both honger and cold
And blood may not se blood blede, but him rewe.
Audiui arcana verba, qui non licet homini loqui. ii. Cor. ^^^

And my righteousness and right, shall rule al hell
And mercy all mankind, before me in heaven
For I were an unkind king, but I my kind help
And namely at such a need, there needs help behooves
Non intres in iudicium cum seruo tuo. Psalm. ^^^

Thus by law quod this Lord, lead I will from hence
Tho that me loved, and leued in my coming
And for thy leasing Lucifer, that thou liedst to Eve
Thou shall a bye it better, and bound him with chains
Astaroth and all the route, hid hem in hernes
They durst not loken on our lord, the boldest of he^ al
But lette^ him lead forth what hi^ liked, and let what him list
Many hundred of angels, harpen and sange.
Culpat caro, purgat caro, regnat deus dei caro.
Than pyped Peace, of poesye a note.
Clarior est solito post marima nebula phoebus, post inimicitlas
After sharp shoures quod peace, most sheene is ye sun
Is no weader warmer, than after watery clouds
Ne no love lever, no better friends
Tha^ after war and woe, wha^ love and peace be masters
Was never war in this world, ne wickedness so kene
That ne love and him lust, to laughyng ne brought
And Peace through patience, all peril stopped.
Truse quod Truth, thou tellest us soth by Jesus
Clype we in covenant, and each of us kiss other
And let no people quod Peace, perceive that we chid
For impossible is nothing, to him that is almighty
Thou say soth quod righteousness, and reuere^tly hi^ kissed
Peace and peace here, Per omnia secula seculorum.
Psai. 85.
Misericordia et veritas obuiauerunt sibi.
Iusticia et par osculate sunt.
Truth trumped tho, and song Te deum laudamus.
And than luted Love, in a loud note.
Psalm. 133.
Ecce quam bonum, et quam iocundum. etc.
Till the day dawed, these damsels daunced
That me^ ra^g to ye resurrection, and right with ye I waked
And called Kit my wife, and Colet my daughter
Arise and reverence, Gods resurrection
And crepe to ye cross on knees, and kiss it for a Jewel
For Gods blessed body, it bare for our bote
And it afereth the fend, for such is the might
May no gryslye ghost glyde, there it shadoweth
Passus.xix. de visione.
THus I waked, and wrote what I had dremed
And dight me dearly, and did me to kyrke
To here holy ye mass, and to be housled after
In mids of the mass, men went to offeringe
I fell efte sons a sleep, and sodaynely me met
That Pierce the plowman, was painted all bloudye
And came in with a cross, before the commen people
And right like in all lymmes, to our lord Jesus
Than called I Conscience, to kenne me the soth
Is this Jesus the iuster quod I, that Jews did to death
Or is it Pierce Plowma^, who painted him so red?
Quod Conscience and kneled tho, Pier^^ cote armor.
these are Piers arms
His color and cote armor, and he yt comes so blouddye
Is Christ with his cross, conqueroure of christendom
Why call ye him Christ quod I, since Jews call hi^ Jesus
Patriarchs and prophets, prophesied before
That all kinnes creatures, should knele and bow
Anon as men named, this high name of Jesus
Ergo is no name, to the name of Jesus
Ne none so nedeful to name, by night nor by day
For all the darcke devils, are a dread to hear it
And sinful are solaced, and saved by that name
And ye call him Christ, for what cause tell me
Is Christ more of might, and more worthy name
Than Jesus or Jesus, that all our joy came of?
Thou know well quod conscience, and you can reason
That knight, king, conqueror, may be one person
To be called a knight is fair, for me^ shall knele to him
To be called king is fayrer, for he may knights make
And to be conqueror called, yt comes of special grace
And of hardines of heart, and of hendines both
To make Lords or ladies, of land that he wynneth
And fre men foul thrales, that follow not his laws
The Jews that were ge^tilmen, Jesus they despised
Both his lore and his law, now are they low cherles
As wide as the world is, wonneth none therein
But under tribute or tallage, as tikes and cherles
And tho yt became christen, by counsel of the baptism
Christ crowned king.
Are frankelens fremen, through fullynge yt they took
And gentilmen with Jesus, for Jesus was ifulled
And apo^ Caluery on cross, crowned king of Jews
It becomes to a king, to keep and to defend
As conqueroure of conqueste, his laws and his large
And so did Jesus ye Jews, he justified and taught he^
The law of life, that last shall ever
And defend from foul euiles, fevers and fluxes
And from fendes that in them were, and false believe
Tho was he Jesus of Jews, called gentle prophet
And king of her kingdom, and crown bare of thorns
And tho conquered he on cross, as co^querour noble
Might no death him fordo, ne adowne bring
That he naroos and raygned and ravished hell,
And tho was he conqueror called, of quick and of dead
For he gave Adam and Eve, and othermoe blyssed
That long had layne before, as Lucifers cherles
And sythen he gave largelye, all his lelly lieges
Places in paradise, at her partinge hence
He may well be called co^queror, and yt is Christ to mean
And the cause yt he comes thus, with cross of passion
Is to wishen us therwt, that when that we be tempted
Therwt to fight and fend us, from falling into sin
And se by his sorrow, that who so loves joy
To penance and to poverty, he must put him self
And much woe in this world, willen and suffren
And for to carpe more of Christ, and how he came to ye name
Faithly to speak, his first name was Jesus
Tho he was borne in Bethlem, as the book tells
And came to take mankind, kings and angels
Reverenced him fair, with riches of this earth
Angels out of heaven came, knelinge and song
Gloria in excelsis deo. The gifts that ye iii. kyng^ offered.

Kings commen after, knelinge and offered,
Myrre and much gold, without mede askinge
Or any kins catel, but knowledging him sovereign
Both of sonde, sun, and sea, and sithen they wenten
Into their kingdom kyth, by counsel of angels
And there was ye word fulfilled, ye which you of spoke.
Omnia celestia terrestria flecta^tur, in hec nomine Jesus. Phili. ii

For all the angels of heaven, at his birth kneled
And all the wit of ye world, was in tho three kings
Reason and righteousness, and ^uthe they offered
Wherefore and why, wise men that time
Masters and lettred men, Magi hem called.
That one king came with reason, covered vndersence
The second king sothly, since he offered
Ryghtuousnes under read gold, reasons fellow
Gold is likened to leauty, that last shall ever
And reason to rich gold, to right and to truth.
The third king tho, came knelyng to Jesus
And presented him with pitye, apperynge to mirre
For myrre is mercy to mean, and mild speech of tongue
Three in like honest things, were offered thus at once
Through three kin kings, knelinge to Jesus
And for all these precious prese^ts, our lord prince Jesus
Was nether king ne co^queror, til he ga^ to w^xe
In the manner of a man, and that by much sleght
As becomes a conqueror, to konne many slightes
And many wills and wit, that woll be a leader
And so did Jesus in those days, who so had time to tell it
Sometime he suffered, and sometime he hid him
And sometime he fought fast, and fle other while
And sometime he gave good, and granted heal both
Life and lyme, as he list he wrought
As kind is of a conqueror, so comsed Jesus
Till he had all them, that he for bledde
In his inuente, this Jesus at the Iewen feast
Christ works miracles
Water into wine turned, as holy write tells
And there began God of his grace to dowel
For wine is likened to law, and life of holiness
And law lacked tho, for me^ loved not her enmies
And Christ cou^celeth thus, and commands also
Both to learned and to lewd, to love our enemies
So at the feast fi^ste, as I before said
Began god of his grace, and of his goodness to dowell
And tho was he cleped and called not only Christ but Jesus
A faunt fine full of wit, Filius Marie,
Before his mother Mary, made he that wonder
That she first and formoste, ferme should believe
That he through grace was get, and no gome else
He wrought that by no wit, but by word only
After the kind yt he came of, there co^sed he to dowell
And when he was wexe^ more, in his mothers absence
He made lame to leap, and gave light to blind
And fed with two fyshes, and with five loves
Sore afingered folk, mo than five thousand
Thus he comforted the careful, and caught a great name
The which was dober, where that we went
For defe through his doi^gs to hear, and do^b to speak he made
And al he heled and helped, yt hi^ of grace asked
And tho was he called in co^try, of the common people
For the deeds that he did. Fili David Jesus.
For David was doutiest of deeds in his time
The birds tho so^g Saul interfecit mill. ^. Ke^. 1^
and David. x. mi.
Therefore ye co^try there Jesus came, called hi^ fili David
And named him of Nazareth, and no man so worthy
To be Cayser or king, of the kingdom of Judah
Ne over Jews justice, as Jesus was hem thought
Whereof Cayphas had envy, and other of the Jews
And for to do him to death, day and night they casten
Killed him on crossewyse, at caluery on a Frydaye
And sithen buried his body, and beden that me^ should
Keep it from night comers, with knight armed
For no friends should him fetch, for prophets he^ told
That, that blessed body, of buriels should arise
And gone into Galile, and gladden his apostles
And his mother marye, thus men before demed
The knights that kept it, beknewe it hem selves
That angels and archangels, ere the day spronge
Came kneling to the corpse and song, Christus resurgens,
Very man before hem all, and forth with hem he yede
The Jews prayde^ peace, and besoughte the knights
Tell ye common, yt there came a company of his apostles
And bewiched hem as they woke^, and away stolle^ him
And Marye Magdalen, met him by the way
Going toward Galile, in godhead and manhead
A live and lokynge, and she a loud cried
In each a company there she came, Christus resurgens,
Thus came it out ye Christ overcame, recovered, and lived
Sic oportet Christum pati et intrare. Luke. 24 Why Christ appeared first to a
woman.

For that women wytteth, may not well be counsel
Peter perceived this, and pursued after
Both James and John, Jesus for to seek
Thade and ten more, with Thomas of Inde
And as these wise wyes, weren togythers
In an house al be shette, and the doors barred
Christ came in and all closed, both doors and gates
To Peter and to his apostles, said Pax vobis,
And took Thomas by ye hand, and taught him to grope
And feel with his fingers, his fleshye heart
Thomas Didimus John. xx
Thomas touched it, and with his tongue said.
Dominus m^us, et deus meus.
Thou art my Lord I believe, god lord Jesus
Thou diedst and death tholedst, and deem shall us all
And now art living and lokynge, and last shall ever
Christ carped than, and curteslye said
Thomas for thou trowest it, and truly beleuest it
Blessed might thou be, and be shall for ever
And blessed might they all be, in body and in soul
That never shall se me, in sight as thou do now
And lelly believe all this, I love hem and bless hem.
John. xx
Beati qui non viderunt. etc.
And when this deed was done, Dobest he taught
And gave Pierce power, and pardon he granted
To all manner of men, mercy and forgiveness
Him might to assoyle men, of all manner of sins
In covenant yt they come, and knowledge to pay
Pierces pardon is pay that you ^weste.
To Pierces pardon the plowman, Read quod debes,
Thus has Pierce power, be his pardon paid
To bind and unbind, both here and else where
And assoylen men of all sins, save of debt only
Anon after, an high into heaven
He went and wonneth there, and will come at last
And reward him right well, that Reddit quod debet.
And pays perfitelye, as pure truth would
And what person pays it not, punyshe he thinks
And demen hem at domes day, both quick and dead
The good to the Godheade, and to great joy
The wicked to won, in woe without end.
Thus Conscience of Christ, and of the cross carped
And cou^celed me to knele, and tha^ came as me thought
One Spiritus paracletus, The holy Ghost.
to Pierce and to his fellows
In lykenes of a lyghteninge, he light upon hem all
And made hem kon and know, all kynne languages
I wo^dered what that was, and wagged Conscience
And was aferde of the light, for in fyers lykenes
Spiritus paracletus, over sprede hem all
Quod Conscience and kneled, this is Christ's messenger
And comes from the great god, and grace is his name
Knele now quod Conscience, and if thou can sing
Welcome him and worship him, with Veni creator spiri.
Than sange I that song, and so did many hundred
And cried with Conscience, help us god of grace
Than began grace, to go with Pierce plowman
And cou^seled him and Conscience, the common to su^mon
For I will deal to day, and divide grace
To all kin creatures, that han her fine wits
Treasure to live by, to her lives end
And weapen to fight with, that shall never fail
For Antichriste and his, all the world shall grieve
And accumbre the conscience, but if Christ help
And false prophets, fell flatterers and glosers
Shall come and be curatours, over kings and Earls
And pride shall be Pope, and prince of holy kyrke
Couetise and unkindness, cardinals hem to lead
Therefore quod grace ere I go, I will give you treasure
And wepo^ to fight with, wha^ Antichrist you assayleth
And give each man grace, to guide with him self
That idleness encumbre him not, envy nor pride.
Diuisiones graciarum sunt.
To some he gave wit, with words to show
The gifts of the holy ghost.
Wit to win her liuelode with, as ye world asks
As preachers and priests, and prentises of law
They lellye to live, by labor of tongue
And by wit to wishen other, as grace hem would teach
And some he kenned crafty, and cunning of sight
With selling and bigging, their liuelodes to win
And learned some to labor, a lelly life and a true
And some he taught to tilly, dytch and to hedge
To win with their live lode, by lore of his teachinge
Some to divine and divide, numbres to kenne
And some to se and to say, what should befall
Astronomers.
Boeth of well and of woe, till it or it fell
As astronomers by astronomy, and philosophers wise
And some to ride and recover, ye unrightfully was w^n
He wished he^ wi^ it again, through wightnes of hand
And fetch it from false men, with soul evil laws
And some he learned to live, in longing to be hence
In poverty and in penance, to pray for all christen
And al he learned to be ^elly, and each a craft love other
And forbade hem al debate, yt none were among hem
Though some be cleaner then some, ye se well quod grace
That me^ of ye fairest craft, to ye foulist I could have put
Think al quod grace, yt grace comes of my gift
Look that none lack other, but love all as brethren
And who ye most masteries can, the mildest of beryng
And crown conscience king, and make craft your steward
And after crafts counsel, cloth you and feed
Pierces offices.
For I make Pierce plowman, my procuratour and my reave
And register to receive, Read quod debes,
My prouisor and my plowman, Pierce shall be on earth
And for to tell truth, a teme shall he have
Grace gave Pierce a t^me, four great oxen,
That one was Luke, Pierce Plowemannes ore. 1.
a large beast and a low chered
And Mark and Matthew ye third, mighty blasts both
And joined to hem one John, most gentle of all The price net of Pierces plow, and passing al other
And grace gave pierce, of his goodness four stottes
All that his oxen cried, they to harrowe it after
One hight Austen, and Ambrose an other
Gregory the great clarke, and Jerome the good
These four ye faith to teach, follows Pierces teme
And harowed in an hand while, all holy scripture
With two harowes that they had, an old and a new.
Id est vetus testamentum et nouum.
And Grace gave grains, the cardinal virtues
And sew it in man's soul, and sithe^ told her names
Spiritus prudencie, the first sede hight
And who so eats that, The sede ye Pierce sows.
ymagen he should
Ere he did any deed, devise well the end
And learned men a lady bugge, with a long stele,
That cast for to keep a croke, to save the fat above
The second sede hight, Spiritus temperantie
He that eat of that sede, had such a kind
Should never meat ne much drink, make him to swell
Ne should no scorner ne skolde, out of skyll him bring
Ne wynning ne wealth, of worldly riches
Waste word of ydlenes, ne wicked speech move
Should no curious cloth, come on his rygge
Ne no meat in his mouth, ye master John spiced.
The third sede ye piers sew was, Spiritus fortitudinis
And who so eat of that sede, hardye was ever
To suffer all that God sent, sickness or angers
Might no leasinges ne lier, ne loss of worldly cattle
Make him for any mourning, yt he has merry in soul
And bold and abidinge bismeres to suffer
And plays al with patience, and Parce mihi domine
And covers him under counsel, of Caton the wise
Esto forti animo, cum sis damnatus inique.
The fourth sede ye Pierce s^w, was spiritus iusticie
And he that eats of that sede, shall be ever true
With god and not agaiste, but of gile one
For Gile goth so priuelie, ye good faith other while
May not be espied, fro spiritus iusticie.
Spiritus iusticie, spares not to spil,
Justice leaves no sin unpunished.
Them that be^ gyltye, and for to correct
The king if he fall in gylte or in trespace
For cou^teth he no kings wrath, when he court sits
To demen as a demes man, adrad was he never
Neither of Duke ne of death, that he ne did law
For presents ne for prayers, or any princes letters
He did equity to all, even forth to his power
These four seeds piers sewe, and since he did he^ hard we
With thelde law and new, that love might wexe
Among the four virtues, and vices to destroy
For communely in contries, cammokes and wedes
Fouleth ye fruit in the feld, there they grow togiders
And so done vices, virtues worthy
And Piers harroweth al, ye konneth kind wit
By counsel of thief doctors
And tilleth after her teachinge, ye cardinal virtues
Again these grains quod grace, groneth for to ripe
Ordeine the an house Piets, to hather in ye corn
By god Grace quod Piets, ye moote give timbre
And ordain that house, or ye hence wind
And Grace gave him ye cross, with ye crown of thorns
That Christ upon caluery, for mankind on pined
And of his baptism and blood, The foundation of ye church.
that he bled on rode
He made a manner mortare, and mercy it hight
And therwyth grace began, to make a good fundame^t
And walled it and watled it, with his pains and his passion
And of al holy write, he made a roufe after
And called that house unity, holy church in englysh
And when this deed was done, grace devised
A carte hight christendom, to carry Pierces sheues
And gave him caples to his carte, co^trition and confession
And made pryesthode hayward, while him self went
As wide as the world is, with Pierce to tilly truth.
Now is Pierce to the plowe, Pride enuieth the church.
and pride it spied
And gadered him a great host, to grieve him he thinks
Conscience and all christen, and cardinal virtues
Blow he^ down and break hem, and bite at woe ye mores
And sent forth Surquidous, his sargeant of arms
And his spy spyll love, one speak evil behynd
These two comen to conscience, and to christen people
And told hem tidinges, that tine they should the seeds
That Pierce there had sown, the cardinal virtues
And Pierce barn were broken, and they yt be in unity
Should come out, and conscience and your two caples
Confession and contrition, and your cart the believe
Shall be colored so queintly, and covered under our sophistry
That conscience shall not know, by contrition
Ne by confession, who is christen ne heathen
Ne no manner merchant, that with money deals
Whether he wyn with right, or with wrong, or with vsery
With such color and queintise, comes pride armed
With the lord that lives, after the lust of his body
To wasten on welfare, and on wicked keeping
All the world in a while, through our wit quod Pride
Quod conscience to al christian tho, my counsel is to we^d
The way to wtstand pride.
Hastily into unity, and hold we us there
And pray we ye a peace were, in Pierces barn ye plow man
For witterly I wot well, yt we be not of strength
To gone again pride, but grace were with us
And than came kind wit, conscience to teach
And cried and commanded, to al christen people
For to deluen and dig, deep about unity
That holy kyrke stood in unity, as it a pyle were
Conscience commanded tho, all christen to dolue^
And maken a much mote, that might be a strength
To help holy kyrke, and hem that it keeps
Than al kynne christen, save commen women
Who they be that never repent.
Repented and refused sin, save they only
And false men flatterers, usurers and thieves
Liars and questmongers, that were forsworn often
Wyttingly and wilfully, with the false holden
And for silver were forsworn, sothly they wist it
There nas no christen creature, that kind wit had
Save shrewes only, such as I speak of
That he ne help a quantity, holiness to wax
Some by bedes bidinge, and some by pilgrimage.
And other priui pains, and some through pens delinge
And than welled water, for wicked works
Egrely renynge, out of men's eyes
Clennes of the commune, and clerks clean living
Made unity holy kirk, in holiness to stand
I care not quod Conscience, though pride come now
The lord of lust shall be let, all this lent I hope
Come quod Conscience, ye christen and dyne
That have labored lelly, all this lent time
Here is bread blessed, and gods body therunder
Grace through Gods word, gave Pierce power
And might to make it, and men to eat it after
In help of their heal, once in a month
Or as often as they had need, tho that had paid
To Pierces pardon the plowman, Read quod debts,
How quod all the common, you councelest us to yield
All that we owe any wight, ere we go to housell
That is my counsel quod conscience, and cardinal virtues
That each man forgive other, and that will the Pa. no.
Et dimitte nobis debita nostra. Math. vi
etc.
And so to be assoyled, and sithen houseled
Yea bawe quod a bruer, What lucre may do.
I will not be ruled
By Jesus for your jangling, with Spiritus iusticie
Ne after Conscience by Christ, while I can sell
Both dragges and draffe, and draw it at one hole
Thycke ale and thine ale, for that is my kind
And not hacke after holiness, hold thy tongue Conscience
Of Spiritus iusticie, thou speak much on idle
Caytife quod Conscience, cursed wretch
Unblessed art thou bruer, but if the God help
But if thou live by lore, of Spiritus iusticie,
The chief sede that Pierce sewe, saved worth never
But Conscience the commune feed, and cardinal virtues
Leave well they be lost, both life and soul
Than is many a man lost, quod a lewd vicory
I am a curator of holy kirk, A blind curate.
and came never in my time
Men to me that could tell, of cardinal virtues
Or that counted Conscience, at a cocks fether or an hens
I ne knew never cardinal, yt he ne come fro the Pope
And we clarks when they come, for her co^mens payen
For her pelures and palfreis meat, and pilors ye hem follow
The common Clamat quotidie, each a man to other
The praise of cardinals.
The country is the curseder, that Cardinals common in
And there they lyg and leng, most lechery there reigns
Therefore quod this vicory, by very god I would
That no cardinal ne come, among the comme^ people
But in her holiness, helden hem still
At Auion among the Jews, Cum sancto sanctus eris.
Or in Rome as their rule will, the relikes to keep
And thou Conscience in kings court, and should never come thense.
And Grace that thou gredest so of, gider of al clerks
And Pierce with his new plow, and eke with his old
Emperor of all the world, that al men were christen
Imperfite is the Pope, that all the world should help
Pierce follows ye example of God Math. v.
And sends hem that sleeth, such as he should have
And well worth Pierce plowman, yt pursues god in doing
Qui pluit super iustos et iniustos attonce
And sent the son to save, a cursed man's tylth
As bright as to the best man, or the best woman
Right so Pierce the plowman, peyneth him to till
As well for a wastor, and wenches of the stews
As for him self and his seruau^ts, save he is first served
And traueileth and tilleth, for a traitor also sore
As for the true tidye men, all times ylyke
And worshipped be he ye wrought al, both good and ill
And suffers ye sinful be, till sometime yt they repent
Of the Pope
And God amend the pope, that pylleth holy kyrke
And claymeth before the king, to be kept of christen
And cou^teth not though christen, be killed and robbed
And find folk to fight, and christen folk to spill
Again thold law and new law, as Paul thereof witnesses.
Hebru. x.
Non occides mihi vindictam. etc.
It seems by so him self had his will
That he ne retcheth right naught, of all the re^naunte
And Christ of his curtesy, mend the cardinals frame
And turn her wit to wisdom, and weal of her soul
For the common quod this curatour, counten full little
The counsel of Conscience, or cardinal virtues
But if they se as by sight, somewhat to wynning
Of gyle ne of gabynge, give thou never tale
For Spiritus prudentie, among the puple is gyle
And all the foul vices, as virtues they semen
Each man sutteleth a slyght, sin for to hyde
And colereth it with cunning, and a clean living
Then laughed there a Lord, Of land-lorde^.
and by the light said
I hold it right and reason, of my reeue to take
All that mine auditors, or else my steward
Cou^celeth me by their account, and by clerks writing
With Spiritus intellectus, they seek the reues roles
And with Spiritus fortitudinis, fetchen it I will
And than came there a king, and by his crown said
I am a king with crown, Of kings
the commune to rule
And holy kyrke and clergy, from cursed men to defend
And if me lacks to live, by the law will I take it
There I may most hastly it have, for I am head of law
For ye be but members, and I above all
And since I am your allerhed, I am your allerhele
And holy kyrkes chief help, and chefest am of ye common
And what I take of you two, I take it of ye techinge
Of Spiritus iusticie, for I judge you all
So may I boldly be houseled, for I borow never
Ne crave of my commune, but as my kind asks
In condition quod conscience, that thou can defend
And rule thy realm by reason, as right will and truth
Take thou might in reason, as the law asks
Omnia tua sunt ad defendendum sed non ad depredandum.
The vycar had far home, and fair took his leave
And I awaked therewith, and wrought as me met.
Passus. xx. et primus de dobest.
THa^ I went by ye way, wha^ I was thus awaked
Heavy chered I yede, and eleng in heart
I ne wist where to eat, ne at what place
And it nighed nie the none, and with need I me
That afrowned me foul, and faytour me called
Can thou not excuse the, as did the king and other
That you took to thy believe, to clothes and to sustinau^ce
As by teaching and by telling, of spiritus temperancie,
And thou nome no more, then need the taught
And need has no law, ne never shall fall in debt
For three things he takes, his life for to save
That is meat when me^ hi^ warn, and he no moni weldeth
Ne wight yt will be his borow, and has no wed to ligg
What liberti need gives.
And he caught in that case, and came thereto by sleights
He synneth not sothlye, that so wins his fode
And though he ca^ so to a cloth, and ca^ no beter cheuisa^ce
Need anon right, wins him under maynprice
And if him list for to lape, the law of kind would
That he drunk at each ditche, ere he for thyrst died
So need at great need, may nimen as for his own
Without counsel of Conscience, or cardinal virtues
So that he sewe and serve, Spiritus temperancie,
For is no virtue by fer, to Spiritus temperancie,
Neither spiritus iusticie, ne spiritus fortitudinis
Temperaunce is the chief virtue.
For spiritus fortitudinis, forfeteth full often
He shall do more then measure, many a time and often
And beat men over bitter, and some of hem to little
And grieve men greater, then good faith it would
And Spiritus iusticie shall judge, will he nyll he
After the kings counsel, and the commen like
And spiritus prudencie, in many points shall fail
Of that he weneth would fail, if his wit ne were
Wening is no wisdom, ne wise ymaginacyon
Homo proponit, deus disponet and governs al good virtues
And need is next him, for anon he makes him
And as low as a lamb, for lacking of yt him ends
Wise men forsook weal, for they would be nedye
And weneden in wyldernes, and would not be rich
And God al his great joy, gostly he left
And came and took mankind, and became nedy
So nedy he was as says the book, in many sundry places
That he said in his sorrow, on the self rode
Both fox and foul may, and to hole crepe
And the fyshe has fyn, to flete with to rest
There need has innomed me, ye I must needs abide
And suffer sorrows full sour, that shall to joy turn
Therefore be naught a bashed, to bide and to be nedy
Sith he ye wrought all the world, was wilfully nedy
Ne never none so nedy, ne pore died
When need had undone me, thus anon I fell a sleep
And met full maruelously, in a man's form
Antichrist came than, and all the croppe of truth
Turned vpsidoune, and over tilt the rote
And false sprange and spread, and sped men's needs
In each a country there he came, he cut away truth
And gart gile grow there, as he a God were
Friars followed that fend, Who received Antichriste first*
for he gave hem copes
And religious reverenced him, and range their belles
And all the covent forth came, to welcome that tyrant
And all his as well as him, save only fools
Which foles were well lever, to dye than to live
Longer then Leten, to be so rebuked
And a false fend Antechriste, over all folk raygned
How Antichriste does seduce many good men
And yt were myld me^ and holy me^, yt no myschyefe dred
Defieden all falsenes, and folcke that it used
And what king yt he^ comforted, knowing he^ any while
They cursed and her counsel, were it clerks or lewd
Antichrist had thus sone, hundredes at his banner
And pride it bare boldly, about where he yede
With a Lord that lives, after the likinge of his body
That came again Conscience, ye keeper was and gydour
Over kind christen, and cardinal virtues
I counsel quod Conscience, come with mefoles
Into unity holy church, and hold we us there
And cry we to kind, that he come and defend us
Foles from these fe^des lims, for Piers love ye plowma^
And cry we to all the commune, yt they come to unity
And there abide and biker, against Belials children
Kind Conscience tho heard, and came out of the planets
And sent forth his forriours, fevers and fluxes
Coughes and cardiacles, crampes and toth aches
Reumes and radgondes, and raynous scalles
Byles and botches, and burning agues
Freneses and foul evil, foragers of kind
Hadden pricked and prayed, polles of the people
That largely a legion, losten their lives sone
There was harow and help, here comes kind
A great sign of infidelity
With death that is dreadeful, to undone us all
The lord that lives after lust, tho aloude cried
After confort a knight, to come and bear his banner
A larme a larme quod ye Lord, each life keep his own
And than met these men, their minstrels might pype
And their heraudes of arms, had descriued Lords
Age the hoore, he was in the vawwarde
And bare ye ba^ner before death, by right he it claimed
Kind came after, with many kene sores
As pockes and pestilences, and much puple shent
So kind through corruptions, The manner of gods visitation.
killed full many
Death came driuynge after, and all to dust pashed
Kings and Kaysers, knights and Popes
Learned ne lewed, he ne let no man stand
That he hitte even, he never stood after
Many a louelye Lady, and lemmans of knights
Swoned and swelted, for sorrow of deaths dintes
Conscience of his curtesye, to kind he besought
To cease and suffer, and se where they would
Leave pride priuelye, and be perfect christen
And kind ceased tho, to se the people amend
Fortune began flatteren then, The manner of me^ when plages cease
tho few that were a live
And hight hem long life, and lechery she sent
Among all manner of men, wedded and unwedded
And gathered a great host, all against Conscience
This Lecherye laid on, with a laughing chere
And with a priuye speech, and painted words
And armed him in idleness, and in high bearing
He bare a bow in his hand, and many blouddy arrows
Were fethered with fair behest, and many a false truth
With his vntidye tales, he tened full often
Conscience and his company, of holy kyrke the teachers
Than came Couetise, and cast how he might
Overcome Conscience, and cardinal virtues
And armed him in auaryce, and hongrichly lived
His wepen was all wiles, to winnen and to hiden
With glosinges and with gabbinges, he gyled the people
Couetise and Simony make prelates.
Simony him seem, to assail Conscience
And preached to the people, and prelates they maden
To hold with antichriste, their temporalties to save
And came to kings counsel, as a kene baren
And kneled to Conscience, in court before hem all
And guard good faith flee, and false to abide
And boldly bare adowne, with many a bright noble
Much of the wit and wisdom, of Westminster hall
He iusteled to a Justice, and iusted in his ear
And ouertilt al his truth, well take this on ame^dme^te
And to the arches, he yede anon after
And turned civil into simony, and since he took thofficial
For a mantil of miniuer, he made lelly matrimonye
Departed ere death came, and deuorse shaped
Alas quod Conscience tho, would Christ of his grace
That couetise were a christian, that is so kene a fyghter
And bold and abidinge, while his bag lasts
And then laughed life, and let dagge his clothes
And armed him in haste, in harlottes words
And held holiness a iape, and hendnes a waster
And let leautye a cherle, and liar a freman
Conscience and counsel, he counted it folly
Thus rayled life, for a little fortune
And pricked forth with pride, praised he no virtue
He cares not how kind slow, and shall come at last
And kyl al earthely creatures, save conscience only
Life lept aside, and laughed him a lemman
Health and I quod he, and heauynes of heart
Shall do the no dread, neither death ne Elde
Life and Fortune beget Sloth.
And to forget sorrow, and give naught of sin
This liked life, and his lemman fortune
And gat in their glory, a gadlinge at the last
One that much woe wrought, sloth was his name
Sloth wexe wonder yerne, and sone was of age
And wedded one wanhope, Slouthe marieth despair
a wench of the stews
Her sire was a sysor, that never swore truth
One Tomme two tongue, atteint of each a quest
This Sloth was ware of war, and a flyng made
And threw dread of despair, adoze^ miles about
For care conscience tho, cried upon age
And bad him fond to fight, and afere wanhope
And age hent good hope, and hastily he shyfte him
And wamed away wanhop, and with life he fights
And life flees for fear, to phisike after help
And besought him of his succor, and of his salve had
And gave him gold good won, ye gladded his heart
And they gave him again, a glasen howne
Life leued that lechecraft, let should Elde
And drive away death, with dias and dragges
And Elde auentred him on life, and at last he hit
A phisician with a furred hode, Age kills boeth Phisicia^ and Surgi^
that he fell in the palsy
And there died that docter, er three days after
Now I see said life, that surgery ne phisike
May not a myte avail, to meddle again Elde
And in hope of his heal, good heart he hente
And rode so to revel, a rych place and a merry
The company of court, m^n cleped it sometime
And Elde anon after, and over my head he yede
And made me bald before, and bare on my crown
So hard he yede over my head, yt it will be seen ever
Sir euel taught Elde quod I, vnheende go with she
Since when was the way, over men's heads?
Had you been hend quod I, thou would have asked leave
Yea leave lurden quod he, and laid on me with age
And hit me under the ear, uneath may ich hear
He buffeted me about the mouth, and bet out mi teth
And gyued me in goutes, I may not go at large
And of the woe that I was in, my wife had ruth
And wished full witterly, that I were in heaven
For the lyme that she loved me for, and leef was to feel
On nights namely, when we naked were
I ne might in no manner, make it at her will
So Elde and she sothely, had forbeaten it
And as I satte in this sorrow, I se kind passed
And death drew nere me, for dread began I quake
And cried to kind, out of care me bring
Lo Elde the hoar, has me besette
A wreke me if your will be, for I would be hence
If thou would be wroken, wend into unity
And hold the there ever, till I send for the
And look thou konne some craft, ere thou come thence
Nature would we should learn to love.
Counsel me kind quod I, what craft is best to learn
Learn to love quod kind, and leave of al other
How shall I come to cattle so, to cloth me and to fode?
And thou love lelly quod he, lack shall thou never
Meat ne worldly wede, while thy life lasts.
And there by counsel of kind, I comsed to run
Through contricyon and cofessio^, till I came to unity
And there was conscience constable, christen to save
The seven capital sins besieged conscience.
And beseged sothelie, with seven great Gyantes
That with antichrist holden, hard again conscience
Sloth was his slyng, and hard assawte made
Proud priests come with him, mo then a thousand
In paltokes and piked shoes, and pissers long knives
Comen again conscience, with coueryse they helden
By Mary quod a mansed priest, of the march of Ireland
I count no more conscience, Would god there were no such priests in england.
by so I catch silver
Than I do to drink, a draught of good ale
And so said sixty, of the same country
And shotten again with shote, many a shefe of oaths
And broad hoked arowes, Gods heart and his nails
And had almost unity, and holiness adowne
Conscience cried help cleargye, or else I fall
Through imperfite priests, and prelates of holy church
Fryes heard him cry, and came him to help
And for they could not well her craft, conscience hem for soke
Need neighed tho nere, and conscience he told
That they came for couetise, Curates ought to have a co^petent living certain
to have cure of soul
And for they are pore peraue^ter, for patrimony he^ failith
They flatter to fare well, folk that been rich,
And sith they chosen chele, and cheitif poverty
Let the^ chewe as they chose^, and charge the^ with no cure
For Lomer he lies, that live lode must beg
Then he that labors for liuelod, and leueth it begers
And since friars forsook, the filicitie of the earth
Let them be as beggars, or live by Angels food
Conscience of this counsel tho, comsed to laugh
And curtesly comforted him, and called in all friars
And said syrs sothely, welcome be you al
To unity and holy church, one thing I you pray
Hold you in unity, and have no envy
To learned men to leude, but live after your rule
And I will be your borow, ye shall have bred and cloth
And other necessaryes ynow, ye shall nothing fail
With that ye leave lodgike, and learn to love
For love lost the lordshyp, both land and schole
Friar Fraunces and dominyke, for love to be holy
And if ye covet cure, kind will you teach.
That in measure God made, al manner things
And set hem at a certain, and a seker nombre
And nempned names new, and numbered the sterrs
Psalm. 147
Qui numerat multitudinem stellarum and omnibus. etc.
Kings and knights, that kepen and defenden
Have officers under hem, and each of hem certain
And if they wage me^ to war, they write hem in no^bre
Or they will no treasure hem pay, travail they never so sore
For all other in battle, been holden brybors
Pylors and pikeharneis, in each a place accursed
Monks and moniales, and al men of relygion
Their order and their rule would, to have a certain nombre
Of learned and of lewd, the law will and asked
A certain for a certain, save only of Friars
The Friars are without nu^bre
Therefore quod conscience by Christ, kind wit me tells
It is wickid to wage you, ye wexe without nombre
Heaven has even nombre, and hell is without number
Therefore I would witterly, ye ye were in ye registers
And your no^bre under notaries sign, and neither mo ne less
Envy hard this, and bad friars go to schole
And learn logike and law, and eke contemplacion
And preach men of Plato, and prive it by Seneca
That all things under heaven, ought to be in common
And yet he lies as I leave, yt to the lewd so precheth
For God made men a law, and Moses it taught
Exodus xx.
Non concuptsces rem prorimi tu^.
And euel is this hold, in parishes of England
For persons and paryshe priests, yt should ye people shriue
Been Curatours called, to know and to heal
All that been their parishers, penance to enjoin
And should be ashamd in their shryft, yt he^ we^d makes
And flee to ye Friars, as false folk to Westmynster
That boroweth and bears thither, They that went to ye Friars is shri^t were
like santuary men.
and the^ bids friends
Yerne of forgiveness, or longer years love
And while he is in Westminster, he will be before
And make him merry, with other men's goods
And so it fares with much folk, yt to friars shriueth
As sisours and executours, they will give the friars
A percel to pray for hem, and make hem self merry
With ye residue and ye remnau^t, ye other men beswonken
And suffer the dead in det, to the day of dome
Envy therefore hated Conscience,
And Friars to philosophy, he found hem to schole
The while couetise and unkindness, Conscience assailed
In unity holy kyrke, Conscience held him
And made peace porter, to pynne the gates
To all tale tellers, and tutelers idle
Hypocrisye and he, and hard assault they made
Hypocrisye at the gate, hard began to fight
And wounded well wickedly, many wise teachers
That with Conscience accorded, Hipocris^ wou^deth preachers
and cardinal virtues
Conscience called a leche, that could well shryue
Go salve tho ye syck ben, and through sin wounded
Shrift shope sharp salve, and made hem do penance
For her misdedes, that they wrought had
And that Pierce were paid, Read quod debes.
Some liked not this leche, and letters they sent
If any surgeo^ were in the sege, yt softer could plaster
Sir life to live in lecherye, lay there and groned
For fasting of a Friday, he fared as he would dye
There is a surgeon in this sege, that soft can handle
And more of phisike he can, and fayrer he plastereth
One Friar flatterer, is phisician and surgeon
Quod contricion to conscience, do him come to unity
For here is many a man hurt through Hypocrisse,
We have no need quod Conscience, I wot no better lech
Than Person or parish priest, penitau^cer or bishop
Save Pyerce the plowma^, yt has power over he^ al
And indulgence may do, but if that debt let it
I may well suffer quod conscience, seeing ye desieren
That Friar flatterer be fet, and phisike you seek
The Friar here of hard, and hied full fast
Another patro^ nor bishop, regards his duty
To a lord for a letter, leave to have curen
As a curatour he were, and came with his letters
Boldly to the bishop, and his brief had
In contryes there he came in, confession to here
And came there Conscience was, and knocked at the gate
Peace vnpinnen it, was porter of unity
And in haste asked, what his will were
In faith quod this Friar, for profit and for health
Carpe I would with co^trytion, and therefore I came hither
He is sick said Peace, and so is many an other
Hypocrisy has hurt him, full hard is he to cover
I am a surgion said the segge, and salues can make
Conscience knows me well, and what I ca^ do both
I pray the quod Peace tho, ere thou pass further
What hightest thou I pray the, heyle not thy name
Certes said this fellow, sir Penetrans domos.
Go thy gates quod Peace, by god for all thy physic
But thou kenne some craft, thou co^mest not herein
I knew such one once, not eight winters passed
Came in thus coped, at a court where I dwelled
And was my lords leche, and my ladies both
And at last this limitour, tho my lord was out
He salued so out women, till some were with child.
Heende speech haete Peace, to open the gats
Let in the friar and his fellow, and make him fair there
He may se and here, so it may befall
That life throught his lore, shall leave couetise
And be a drade of death, and with draw him from pride
And accord with conscience, and kiss either other
Thus through hende speech, entered the friar
And came to Conscience, and curtesly him great
Thou art welcome quod Conscience, can you hele ye sick?
Here is contricion quod conscience, my cousin wounded
Confort him quod conscience, and take keep to his sores
The plasters of ye person, and pouders beaten to sore
He lets hem lygge over long, and ioth is to chau^g hem
From lenten to lenten, his plasters byten.
That is ouerlo^g quod this Limitor, I leave I shall amend it
And goth and geopeth co^tricio^, and gave him a plaster
Of a pryuy payment, and I shall pray for you
And for all that ye been holden to all my life long
And make you my Lady, The old manner of cares shr^fre made sinners negligent
in masses and in mattens
As Friars of our fraternity, for a little silver
Thus he goth and gadereth, and gloseth there he shriueth
Til contricion had clean forgoten, to cry and to weep
And wake for his works, as he was wont to do
For confort of his confessor, Contricion he lost
That is the souereynest salve, for all kinnes sins
Slouthe see that, and so did pride
And commen with a kene will, conscience to assail
Conscience cried out, and bade clergy help him
And also contricion, for to keep the gate
Helleth and dreameth said Peace, and so does mani other
The friar with his phisike, this folk has enchau^ted
And plastred hem so easily, they dread no sin
By Christ quod Conscience tho, I wol become a pylgrime
And walken as wide, as the world lasts
To seek Pierce the plowman, that pride may destroy
And that Friars had a findinge ye for no need flatteren
And co^trepledeth me Conscience, now kind me aueng
And send me hap and heal, til I have Pyers ye plowma^
And sith he grad after grace, til I began awake.
Finis.
Imprynted at London by Roberte Crowley, dwelling in Elye rentes in Holburne.
The year of our Lord. M. O. L.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum


