A godly dyalogue and dysputacyon between Pyers plowman, and a popysh priest
concerning the supper of the lord / no less fruitful then necessary to be,
noted of al christen men specially considering the great controuer ses and
varyaunces had therein now in your time
.i. Corinth. i God has chosen the weak things of the world to confound
things which are mighty. yea things of no reputacyou for to bring to naught
things of reputacion, that no flesh should presume i^ his sight


IT chanced that this simple Pyers plowma^ com to a certain house where as
was a daner, prepared for the neighbors dwelling there about, At ye which
dynner were, iiii. Prests amongst whom, was much resoning concerning the
Sacrament of the Aultre, to be short one amongst these. iiii (to make the
simple people believe that he was better learned then all his fellows) said
and declared there that the sacrament was the very body and blood of Christ
Alleagynge further that great danger yt was to receive yet unworthily. etc.
where upon Pycets. plowman, encouraged him self, yea was rathere boldened and
encouraged by the secret motyon of the holy ghost (having this sentence of
Christ before his eyes, that he that for saketh me before the world him will I
forsake before mi farther which is in heaven* begins with the said priest)
after this manner followynge.

Master parso^, by your patience I would ask you a question, in the way of
communycacion

Pressed Ask what ye will


Pyers I pray the sir whether shall when receive the very self same body,
which the blessed vergyn Marye conceived in her whom^ ^e by the inspyracyon of
the holy ghost at this holy time of Easter, or no?


Priest We shall receive ye same body


Pyers I deny that


pressed Then shall we receyne some other body


pers That I deny also


pressed Now I parceyue that thou art a rank heretyke


Pyers If I am and heretic then is S. Austyne and heretyke. also


pressed S. Austen says no such thing I trow how be it to say truth I have not
greatly occupied mi self in redyng of his works


Pyers Swear not master parson for I believe you well enough. I thyncke you
comber but little your brains either with S Austens wryntinges, or yet with the
holy and sacred Bible. But I told you before, if I am an heretyke. S. Austen
is anheretyke also


Pressed In what place. I pray the does. S. Austyne speak these words?


Pyers Learn to understand these few words, which, S. Austen writes in a
book entitled.

Magistra sent enciarum Iesum et non ipsum quod videbatur in cruce manducatur
in altari Hoc est ipsum scz, corpus quod videbatur in cruce manducabatur and no
ma^ducabatur Man ducabatur aute^ spiritualiter, it non carnaliter, that is that
and not that body which was seen on the cross was eaten at ye altar that is
to say it is eaten and it is not eaten. After this man, nor is it eaten when
it is minstred according to the institucyon of Christ spiritually that is sted
fastlye to believe that we are redeemed and saved by the metites of Christ's
passyo^ where of this sacrament is only a remembrance and is not eaten carnalle
or fleshlye as ye papists do roate and cry


Pressed But for all that he is at the alter in the form of bread


Pyers I deny that for if he where there under the form of bread ye bread /
should, lose his taste? wayght and color. Where by may easelye be parecyued
that your saying is false. But his power when it is mynystred and receyueyd
according to ye institucion of Christ, is there invisible so us Here to also
apparteyneth an other saying of. S. Austen, Creed et manducasti. That is believe
and thou have eaten. And thus I believe that the supper of the lords body, can
be made no better by a good priest, nor worsse by abad pressed


Pressed That I grant also


pyers Syris not he both. God and man.


Pressed Yea forsooth.


paers But now master parson tell me (I pray the, in how many places can he be
as one time, concerning his godheade


Pressed God occupyeth no place


Pyers That is truth for he is a spirit, and a spy^yte is where he will, And I
pray t^^ ^maye not, God be in every place although he occupyeth noplace:


Pressed yea forsooth.


Pyers So I believe that God, is al in all things, as Pau^e witnesses. And so
he may be in all places where the. Sacrament is consecrated, according to the
instrucion of Christ.


Pressed All that is no less then truth


Pyers, Gentell master parson: tell me

I pray yt, whether occupied that body which the bledssed vyrgyn mary bare any
place or no*


Priest Ye marye did it good man pyers.


Pyers How many places occupied the same body at oone time


Priest But one place at ones


Pyers Did not the self same body suffer under ponce pilate and was it not
also crucyfyed, dead and buried for our offenses.


Pressed Yea forsooth did he


Pyers Did not that same body reman in the grave or sepulcher, whiles the
spirit descended. in to hell? And was not the god head with the spyrite in
hell and remained not y^ godhead neue^ the less with the body / in the
sepulcher or grave.


Priest Yea forsooth it was even so


Pyers Sir did not that self sam body arise again, on the third day. And
after his resurrectiou did not he eat of a broyled fysh and of a Honycombe in
a token that he was very man:


Pressed It was even so


Pyers Did not ye body ascend in to heaven and sytteth he not at the right
hand of ye majesty of god,


Pressed yea mary


Pyers Now master parson, where is that body now?


pressed It is in heaven


pyers Now tell me, I pray the did that body ever come down from heaven*
sense it ascended, up into heaven /


pressed No verily it never descended or came down sense,


pyers Ergo to you master parson. then is not the same body that our lady bare
mynystred at the Aultet but only a rememb. ance of the same.as it appears:
not onelte by my layingout also by poutes


pressed For soth, it were a strange matter to reason upon before the lay
people.


pyers No sir not so, It were a very godly and necessary matter to be resoned
and co^nuned of for by this means might the simple people learn to be ware of
the leaven of such pharyses I will not say as you are for now thanks be to
god ye are, come to the right way, but as a great forte, the more pytie be

The other.iii. prestes said

If these hobbes and rusticals be suffered to be thus busy, in reading of
Englysh heresy and to dyspute after this manner with us, which are sperytual men
we shall be feign, to learn some other occupacion or else we are like to have but
a cold broth.


Pyers. AMEN.



