The examinacion of the constaunt Martyr of Christ, John^ Philpot Archediacon
of Winchestre at sundry seasons in the time of his sore emprisonment, conuented
and bayted, as in these particular tragedies following, it may (not only to the
christen instruction, but also to the merry recreacion of the indifferent
reader) most manifestly appear.

Read first and than judge.

When the waters arose, the floode bette upon this house, and could not move
it: for it was builded upon a rock.

Luc. 6. And the rock was Christ.

1. Corint. 10. The examinacion of John^ Philpot before the Queen's
commisioners master Cholmley, master Roper, and D. Story, and one of the
Scribes of the Arches, at newgate sessions hall. 2. October. 1555.
DOctor story (before I was called into an inner parler where they satte) came
out into the hal where I was, to vewe me among other, that there were. And
passing by me, said: Ha master Philpot. And in returning immediately again
stayed against me, beholding me, and saying that I was well fedd in deed.

I, Phil. If I be fat and in good lykyng (master doctor) it is no maruayle,
since I have been staulled up in prison this twelve month and an half in a
close corner. I am come to know your pleasure, wherefore you have sent for me.


Story. We hear that thou art a suspecte person, and of heretical opinions:
and therefore we have sent for thee.


Phil. I have been in prison thus long, only upon the occasion of the
disputacio^ made in the convocation house: and upon suspect of setting furthe
the report thereof.


Story. If thou will revoke the same, and become an honest man, thou shall be
set at liberty, and do right well: or else thou shalt be committed to the B.
of London. How say thou? will thou revoke it or no?


Phil. I have already answered in this behalf to mine Ordinary.


Story. If thou answerest thus, when thou come before us anon, thou shall
hear more of our minds. And with this he went into the parler, and I (within
a little while after) was called in.


The Scribe. Sir, what is your name?


Phil. My name is John^ Philpot. And so he intytuled my name.


Story. This man was Archdeacon of wynchester, of doctor Ponets presentement.


Phil. I was Archdeacon indede, but none of his presentment, but by the virtue
of a former vowson, given by my lord Chauncelour that now is.


Story. Ye may be suer, that my lord Chau^celour would not make any such as
he is, Archdeacon.


Roper. Come hither to me M. Philpot. we hear say, that you are out of the
catholyke church, and have been a disturber of the same: out of the which who
so is, he can not be the child of salvation. Wherefore if you will come into the
same, you shall be received and find favor.


Phil. I am come before your worshipful maisterships at your appointment,
understanding that you are magistrates, authorized by the Queen's majesty, to
whom I owe and will do my due obedience to the uttermost. Wherefore I desire to
know, what cause I have offended in, wherefore I am now called before you. And
if I ca^ not be charged with any particular matter done contrary to the laws
of this realm, I desire your masterships, that I may have the benefit of a
subject, and to be delivered out of my long wrongful imprisonment, where I
have lain this twelve month and this half, without any calling to answer
before now: And my living taken from me, without all law.


Roper. Though we have no particular matter to charge you with all, yet we may
both by our commission, and by the law drive you to answer to the suspicion
of a slander, going on you: And besides this, we have statutes to charge you
herin withal.


Phil. If I have offended any statute, charge me therwithal: and if I have
incurred the penalty thereof, punyshe me accordingly. And because you are
magistrates and executours of the Queen's majesty's laws, by force whereof you
do now sit: I desire, that if I be found no notorious tra^sgressour of any of
the^, that I may not be burdened with more than I have done.


Cholm. If the Justice do suspect a felon, he may examine him upon suspicion
thereof, and commit him to prison, though there be no fact done.


Story. I perceive wherabout this man goes he is plain in Cardmakers case,
for he made the self same allegations. but they will not serve thee.

For thou art an heretic, and hold against the blessed mass, how say
thou to that?


Phil. I am no heretyke.


Story. I will prove thee an heretyke. Whosouer has holden against the
blessed mass, is an heretyke: but thou have holden against the same, therefore
thou art an heretyke.


Phil. That which I spoke, that you are hable to charge me withal, was in the
conuocacion, where (by the Queen's majesty's will, and her hole council)
liberty was given to every man of the house, to utter his conscience, and to
say his mind freely, of such questions in religion, as there were propounded
by ye Prolocutor, for the which now I ought not to be molested and imprisoned,
as I have been, neither now be compelled of you, to answer to the same.


Story. Thou shall go to the Lollardes tower, and be handled there like an
heretyke, as thou art: and answer to the same, yt thou there did speak,
and be judged by the B. of London.


Phil. I have already ben conuented of this matter, before my lord chau^celor
mine ordinary: who this long time has kept me in prison, therefore and if his
lordshyp will take away my life, as he has done my liberty and living, he
may: the which I think he ca^ not do of his conscience, and therefore has
let me lie this long in prison: wherefore I am content to abide the end of him
herin that is mine ordinary, and do refuse the auditory of the bishop of
London: because he is an vnconpetent Judge for me, and not mine ordinary.


Story. But sir, thou spakest the words in the convocation house, which is of
the bishop of londo^s diocese: and therefore thou shall be carried to ye
lollardes tower, to be Judged by him, for the words thou spakest in his
diocese, against the blessed mass.


Phil. Sir you know by the law, that I may have exceptionem fori. And it is
against al equity, yt I should be twyse vexed for one cause, and that by such,
as (by ye law) have nothing to do with me.


Roper. You ca^ not deny, but that you spoke against the mass in the
convocation house.


Story. Do thou now deny ye which thou spakest there, or no?


Phil. I can not deny that I have spoken there. And if by the law you may put
me to death therefore, I am here ready to suffer whatsoever I shall be adjudged
unto.


The scribe. This man is led of vain glory.


Cholm. Play the wise gentilma^, and be comfortable and be not stubborn in
your own opinions, neither cast your self away. I would be glad to do you
good.


Phil. I desire you (sir) with the rest here, that I be not charged farther at
your hands, than the law charge me, for that I have done: since there was
tha^ no law against that directly, where with I am now charged. And you
master Doctor (of old acquayntaunce in Oxford) I trust, will show me some
frendshype, and not extremity.


Story. I tell the, if thou would be a good Catholic man, I would be thy
friend, and spend my gown to do the good. Now comes in the bochers axe.
But I wylbe no fre^d to an heretyke, as thou art: but will spend both my gown
and my cote, but I will burn the. How say thou to the sacrament of the altar?


Phil. Sir I am not comme now to dispute with your maistership. And the time
now serves not thereto. But to answer to that I may be lawfully charged
withal.


Story. Well, since thou wilt not revoke that thou have done, thou shall be
had into the lollardes tower.


phil. Sir, sense you will needs show me this extremity, and charge me with
my conscience, I do desire to see your commission, whether you have this
authority so to do. And after the vewe thereof, I shall (according to my duty)
make you further answer, if you may by the virtue thereof, burden me with my
conscience.


Roper. Let him se the commission, is it here?


Story. Shall we let every vile person see our commission?


Cholm. Let him go from whence he came, and on thursdaye he shall se our
commission.


Story. No let him lie in the mean while in the lollardes tower: For I will
swepe the kings Benche, and al other prisons also, of these heretics, they
shall not have that resort as they have had, to skatter their heresies.


Phil. You have power to transfer my body, from place to place, at your
pleasure: but you have no power over my soul. And I pass not whither you
commit me. For I ca^ not be worse entreated then I am, kept al day in a close
chamber. wherefore it is no marvel, that my flesh is puffed up, wherwithal M.
doctor is offended.


Story. Marshal take him home with you again. And se that you bring him
again a thursdaye, and then we shall rid your fyngers of him, and afterward
of your heretics.


Phil. God has appointed a day shortly to come, in the which he will judge us
with ryghteousnes, how so ever you judge of us now.


Roper. Be content to be ruled by master doctor, and show your self a
catholyke man.


Phil. Sir. if I should speak otherwise then my conscience is, I should but
dissemble with you. And why be you so earnest to have me show my self a
dissembler both to God and you, which I can not do.


Roper. We do not require you to dissemble with us, but to be a catholyke man.


Phil. If I do stand in any thing, against that which any man is hable to
burden me, with one jot of the scripture, I shall be content to be counted no
catholyke man, or an heretyke, as you please.


Story. Have we scripture, scripture? and with that he rose up, saying: who
shall be judge, I pray you?


Scribe. This man is like his fellow Woodma^, which the other day would have
nothing else but scripture.

And this is the beginning of this tragedy.


The confuse manner of John Philpots examinacio^ had before the Queen's
commisioners, master Cholm. Roper, D. story, D. Cook, and the Scribe: the.24.
of Octobre.1555. At Newgate sessions hall..
AT my coming, a man of Algate of mine acquayntaunce said unto me: God have
mercy on you. For you ar already condemned in this world: for S. story said,
yt my lord Chau^celour has commanded to do you away. After a little
consultacion had between them, master Cholmeley called me unto him, saying.

Cholm. Master Phylpot, show your self a wise man. And be not stubburne in your
own opinion, but be conformable to the Queen's procedinges, and live, and you
shall be well assured of great favor and reputacion.


Phil. I shall do, as yt becomes a Christian man to do.


Story. This man is the rankest heretic: yt has been in all my Lord
chau^celers diocese, and has done more hurt, than any man else there.
Therefore his pleasure is, that he should have the law to proceed against him.
And I have spoken with my lord herein. And he wylleth him to be committed to
the bishop of London. And he there to recant, or else burn. He howled and
wept in the conuocacion house, and made such a do, as never man did. As all the
heretics do, when they lack learning to answer. He shall go after his fellows.
How say thou? will thou recant.


Phil. I know nothing I have done, that I owght to recant.


Story. Well than I pray you, let us commit him, to the lollardes tower, and
there remain, until he be further examined before the bishop of London. For
he is to fine fed in the kings Benche, and he has to much favor there. For
his keeper said at ye door yesterdaye, that he was ye fynest fellow, and one of
the best learned in England. And with this he rose up, and went his way.


Cook. This man has most stoutly mayntayned heresies, since the Queen's
coming in, as any that I have heard of. Therefore it is most mete, he should be
adjudged by the bishop of London, for the heresies he has mayntayned.


Phil. I have mayntayned no heresies.


Cook. No have? Did ye not openly speak against the sacrament of the altar,
in the co^uocacion house? call you that no heresy? will thou recant that or
not?


Phil. It was the Queen's Majesty's pleasure, that we should reason thereof, not
by my sekyng, but by other men's procuryng, in the hearing of the counsel.


Cook. Did the Queen give you leave to be an heretyke? you may be sure, No
Cook. But ye take leave to be a trayter.
her grace will not so do. Well, we will not dispute the matter with you. My lord
of London shall proceed, by inquisicion upon thee, and if thou will not recant,
thou shall be burned.


Phil. My lord of London is not mine ordinary in this behalf: and I have
already answered unto mine ordinary in this matter. And therefore as I have
said before, you shall do me great wrong, to vex me twyse for one matter:
since I have sustained this long inprisonment, besides the loss of my living.


Roper. You were a very unmeet man to be an Archdeacon.


Phil. I know I was as mete a man, as he that has it now.


Cook. A mete man quod a? he troubled master Roper, and the hole country.


Phil. There was never poor Archdeacon so handled at your hands, as I am: and
that without any just cause ye be hable to lay unto me.


Cook. Thou art no Archedeacon.


Phil. I am Archedeacon still, although an other be in possession of my living:
for I was never deprived by any law.


Cook. No sir, that needs not: for a notorious heretyke should have no
ordinary proceeding about his depriuacion: but the Bishop may at knowledge
thereof, proceed to depriuacion.


Phil. Master doctor, you know, that the common law is otherwise. And
besides this, the statutes of this realm be otherwise, which gives this
benefyte to every person, though he be an heretyke, to enjoy his living,
until he be put to death for the same.


Cook. No, there thou art deceived.


Phil. Upon the living I pass not.

But ye unjust dealyng greueth me, that I should be thus troubled for my
conscience, contrary to al law.


Cholm. Why, will you not agree, that the Queen's majesty may cause you to be
examined of your faith?


Phil. Ask you of master D. Cook, and he will tell you, that the temporal
magistrates have nothing to do with matters of faith, for determinacion thereof.
And S. Ambrose says, Diuina imperatoriae maiestati non sunt subiecta. That the
things of God are not subject to ye power and authority of princes.


Cook. No? may not the temporal power commit you to be examined of your faith
to the bishop? That is an other matter.



Phil. Yea sir I deny not that, but you will not grant, that the same may
examine any of their own authority.


Cook. A sure solucion.
Let him be had away.


Phil. Your mastership promised me, ye last time I was before you, I should see
your commission, by what authority you do call me, and whether I (by the same)
be bound to answer to so much as you demand.


Roper. Let him see the commission,


The scribe. What? tha^ he exhybited it to master Roper, and was about to open
the same.


Cook. No, what will you do? he shall not see yt.


Phil. Than do you me wrong, to call me and vex me, not showing your authority
in this behalf.


Cook. If we do you wrong, compain on us: and in the mean while thou shall
lie in the lollardes tower.


Phil. Sir, I am a poor ge^telma^: therefore I trust of your gentleness you will
not commit me to so vile and strayte a place, being found no heinous
trespacer.


Cook. Thou art no gentilman.


Phil. Yeas that I am.


Cook. An heretyke is no gentilman, for he is a gentelma^, that has gentil
conditions.


Phil. The offense can not take away the state of a gentilman, as long as he
lives, although he were a traitor, But I mean not to boast of my
ge^tlemanship, but will put it under my foot, since you do no more esteem it.


Story. What? will you suffer this heretyke to prate with you all this day.


Cook. He says he is a gentilman.


Story. A gentilman quod A? he is a vile heretic knave. Nay, he will not take
your name from you.
For an heretyke is no gentilman: Let the Keeper of lollardes tower comme in,
and have him away.


The Keeper. Here sir.


Story. Take this man with you to the lollardes tower, or else to the bishops
Cole house.


Phil. Sir, if I were a dog, you could not appoint me a worse and more vile
place. But I must be content with what so ever injury you do offer me, God
give you a more merciful heart, you are very cruel upon one, that has never
offended you. I pray you (master cholmeley) show me some friendship, that I be
not carried to so vile a place. And he called me aside, and said.


Cholm, I am not skylfull of their doing, neither of their laws: I ca^ not tell
what they mean, I would I could do you good.


Phil. I am content to go whither you will have me. There was never man more
cruelly handled, than I am at your hands that without any just cause known,
should thus be entreated.


Story. Shall we suffer this heretyke, thus to reprove us? have him hence.


Phil. God forgive you, and give you more merciful hearts, and show you more
mercy in the time of need. Et quod facis, fac citius. So quickly that you have
in hand.


Story. Do you not hear, how he makes us Iudases?


Phil. That is after your own understanding.

After this I with.iiij. other moo, were brought to the kepers house, where we
supped in pater noster row, and after supper I was called up to a chamber by
the archdeacon of Londons servant, and that in his masters name he offered me a
bed for that night.

To whom I gave thanks, saye^g: that yt should be a greffe to me to lie well
one night, and ye next worse. Wherefore I would begin, as I am like to
continue, to take such part, as my fellows do. And with that, we were brought
through paternoster row, to my lord of Londons colehowse. Unto the which is
joined a little blind house, with a great pair of stocks, appointed both for
hand and foot. But thanks be to God, we have not played of those orgaynes
yet, although some before us had tried them. And there we found a Minister of
Estsex, a married priest, a man of godly zeal, with one other poor man. And
this minister (at my coming) desired to speak with me, and did greatly lament
his own infirmity for that through extremity of imprisonment, he was
constrained by writing to yield to the bishop of London. Whereupon he was once
set at liberty: And afterward felt such a hell in his conscience, yt he could
scarce refrain from destroyeng himself, and never could be at quiet, until he
had gone to the bishopes regester, desyring to see his byl again, the which as soon as he had received, he tare yt in peaces. And afterward he was as Joyful
as any man might be. Of the which when my lord of London had understanding, he
sent for him, and fell upon him like a lion, and like a manly bishop buffeted
him well, and plucte away a great piece of his beard. But now thanks be to God,
he is as Joyful under the cross, as any of us, and very sorye of his former
infirmity. I write this, because I would all men to take heed, how they do
contrary to their conscience: which is to fall into the pains of hell.


Here an end.
The manner of my calling first before the bishop of London the second night of
my imprisonment, in his cole house.
THe Bishop sent unto me master Iohn^son his Regester, with a mess of meat,
and a good pott of drink and bread, saying that my lord had no knowladge
erst of my being here, for yt which he was sorye. Therefore he had sent me and
my fellows that meat, knowing whether I would receive the same.

I thank god for my lords charity, that it pleased him to remember pore
prisoners, desyring almighty God to encreace the same in him and in all others.
And therefore I would not refuse his beneficence: and therewith took the same
unto my brethern, praising God for his providence toward his afflicted flock,
that he stereth our adversaries up, to help the same in their necessity.

Iohn^son. My lord would know the cause of your sendyng hither, for he knows
nothing thereof: and wondreth, that he should be troubled with prisoners of
other dioceses, then his own. And I declared unto him the hole cause. After
the which he said, my lords will was, that I should have any fre^dshyp that I
would desire, and so departed.

Within a little after one of my lords gentlemen comes for me. And I was
brought into his presence, wheare he sat at a table alone, with three or four
of his chaplaynes waiting upon him: and his regester.


London. Master Phylpot you are welcome, give me your hand.


phil. With that, because he so gentlye put forth his hand, I to render
curtesye for curtesye, kyssed my hand, and gave him the same.


London. I am right sorye for your trouble. And I promise you, before yt was
within these two hours, I knew not of your being here. I pray you tell me
what was ye cause of your sending hither: for I promise you, I know nothing
thereof as yet: neither I would you should not think, that I was the cause
thereof. And I maruayl that other men will trouble me with their matters. But I
must be obedient to my betters. And ywis, men speak otherwise of me than I
deserve.


phil. I showed him the sum of the matter: that yt was for the disputacion in
the conuocasion house: for the which I was against alryght molested.


London. I maruayl that you should be troubled therefore, if there were none other
cause but this. But parauenture you have mayntayned the same since. And some of
your fre^des of late have asked, whether you do stand to the same, and you have
said yea, and for this you might be committed to prison.


phil. And yt shall please your lordship, I am burdened non otherwise, than I
have told you, by the commissioners, who have sent me hither, because I will not
recant the same.


London. A man may speak in the parliament house (though yt be a place of fre
speech) as he may be imprisoned for. As in case he speak words of high
treason, against the King or Queen. And so it might be, that you spoke
otherwise then it became you, of the church of Christ.


Phil. I spoke nothing, which were out of the articles, which were called in
question, and agreed upon to be disputed by the holl house, and by the Queen's
permission and her counsel.


London. Why, may we dispute of our faith?


Phil. Yea that we may.


London. Nay I trow not, by ye law.


Phil. In deed by the cyuile law I know it is not lawful, but by Gods law
we may reason thereof: for S. Peter says, be ye ready to render account unto
all men of that hope which is in you, that demand you of the same.


London. In deed S. Peter says so.

Why then I ask of you, what your judgment is of the sacrament of the altar?


Phil. My lord, S. Ambrose says, that the disputacion of faith ought to be
in the congregation, in the hearing of the people. And that I am not bound to
render account thereof to every man privately, onles it be to edify. But now I
can not show you my mind, but I must run upon the pikes in danger of my
life therefore. Wherefore as ye said doctor said unto Valentiniane them perour,
so say I to your lordship. Toll legem and fet certamen. Take away the law,
and I shall reason with you. And yet if I come in open judgment, where I am
bound by the law to answer, I trust I shall utter my conscience as freely, as
any that has come before you.


London. I perceive you are learned. I would have such as you are about me,
but you must come and be of the church, for there is but one Church.


Phil. God forbid I should be out of the church. I am sure, I am within the
same: for I know as I am taught by the scripture, that there is but one
catholyke church, Vna columba, vna sponsa, vna dilecta. One dove, one spouse,
one beloved congregation: out of the which there is no salvation.


London. How chances it then that you go out of the same, and walk not with
us?


Phil. My lord, I am sure, I am with in the bounds of the church, whereupon
she is builded, which is the word of God.


London. What age are you of?


Phil. I am four and forty.


London. You are not now of the same faith your Godfathers and Godmothers
promised for you, in the which you were baptized.


Phil. Yes that I thank God I am.

For I was baptized into the faith of Christ, which I now hold.


London. How can that be? there is but one faith.


Phil. I am assured of that, by S. Paul, saying: that there is but one God, one
faith, and one baptism of the which I am.


London. You were.xx. year ago of an other faith, then you be now.


Phil. In deed (my lord) to tell you plain, I was then nullu fidei, of no
faith, a neuter, a wicked liver, neither hot nor cold.


London: Why, do you not think, that we have now the true faith?


Phil. I desire your lordship to hold me excused, for answering at this time.
I am sure that Gods word thoroughly with the primative church, and all the
ancient writers do agree with this faith I am of.


London. Well, I promise you, I mean you no more hurt, tha^ to mine own
person. I will not therefore burden you with your conscience as now. I maruayle
that you are so merry in prison, as you be synging, and rejoicing (as the
Prophet says) Exultanies in rebus pessimis, rejoicing in your naughtines. Me
think you do not well herin, you should rather lament and be sorry.


Phil. My lord, the mirth that we make is but in singing certain Psalms,
according as we are commanded by S. Paul, wyllyng us to be merry in the Lord,
synging together in Hymns and Psalms: and I trust your lordship can not be
displeased with that.


London. We may say unto you, My lord is we louersene in the gospel.
as Christ said in the gospel. Tibijs cecinimus vobis, and non planxistis. And
there my lord stumbled, and could not bring forth the text, and required his
chaplaynes to help, and put him in remembrance of ye text better: but they
were mu^me.


phil. And I recited out the text unto him, which made nothing to his purpose,
unless he would have us to mourn, because they if they laugh, sing still
sorrowful things unto us, threatening fagottes and fire.

We are (my lord) in a dark co^fortles place: and therefore it behooves us to
be merry, lest (as Solomon says) sorowfulnes eat up our heart. Therefore I
trust your lordship will not be a^gry for our singing of Psalms: sense S. Paul
says, if any man be of an vpryght mind, let him sing. And we therefore to
testify that we are of an upright mind to God (though we be in misery) do
sing.


London. I will trouble you no further as now. If I can do you any good, I will
be glad to do it for you. God be with you, good master Philpot, and give you
good night. Have him to the cellar, and let him drink a cup of wine. Thus I
departed, and by my lords regester I was brought to his cellar door, where I
drank a good cup of wine, and my lords chaplain master Cosyn followed me,
taking acquaintau^ce, saying, that I was welcome, and wished that I would not
be singular.


Phil. I am well taught the contrary by Salomo^, saying: Vae soli. Woe be unto
him that is alone. After that I was carried to my lords cole house again,
where I with my six fellows do rowse together in the straw, as cheerfully (we
thank God) as other do in their beds of down.

Thus for the third fit.


The examinacio^ of master John Phylpot had in the archdeacons house of London
the (...) day of October before the bishops of London, Bathe, worcester and
Gloucester.
MAster Phylpot, yt has pleased my lords to take pains hereto day, to dyne
with my pore archdeacon, Nay your cousyn Archediaco^, and you both bastardes,
and.ij. priests sons.
and in the dinner time it chanced us to have communication of you. And you
were pitied here of many, yt knew you, in ye new college in Oxford. And I also
do pytie your case, because you seem unto me (by the talk I had with you the
other night) to be learned. And therefore now I have sent for you, to com
before them, that yt might not be said herafter, that I had so many learned
byshopes at my house, and yet would not vouchesafe them to talk with you. And
at my request (I thank the^) they are contented so to do. Now therefore utter
your mind freely, and you shall with all favor be satisfied. I am sorye to see
you lie in so euel a case, as you do, and would feign you should do better, as
you may if you lust.

Bath. My lords here, have not sent for you to fawn upon you, but for
charities sake, to exhort you to come in to the right catholic way of ye
church.


worcest. Before he begins to speak, yt is best that he calls to God for
grace, and to pray: yt yt might please God, to open his heart, that he may
conceive the truth.


phil. With that I fell down upon my knees before them, and made my prayer on
this manner: Almyghtie God, which art the geuer of al wisdom and understanding,
I beseech the of thine infinite goodness and mercy, in Jesus Christ, to give me
(most vile sinner in thy sight) ye spirit of wisdom, to speak and make
answer in thy cause that it may be to the contentacion of the hearers, before
whom I stand: And also to my better understanding, if I be deceived in any
thing.


London. Nay (my lord of Worcester) you did not well to exhort him to make
any prayer. For this is ye thing they have a singular pride in: that they can
often make their vain prayers, in the which they glory much. For in this
point, they are much like to certain arra^t heretics, of whom Pliny makes
mention, that did daily sing ^n e^u^ano^ hymnos, praise unto God before the
dawnyng of the day.


phil. My lord, God make me and all you here present, such heretykes, as those
were, that so^g those morning hymns: for they were right Christians, with whom
the tyra^nes of the world wear offended for their well doing.


Bath. Proceed to that he has to say, he has prayed I ca^ not tell for what.


London. Say on master Phylpot, my lords will gladly hear you.


Phil. I have (my lords) be^ this twelve month and an half in prison without
any just cause, that I know: and my living taken from me, without any law full
order: And now brought (contrary to right) from mine own territory and
ordinary into an other man's jurisdiction, I know not why. Wherefore if your
lordships can burden me with any evil done, I stand here before you, to purge
me of the same. And if none such thing may be iustlye laid to my charge, I
desire to be released of this wrongful trouble.


London. There is none here goes about to trouble you, but to do you good, if
we can. For I promise you, ye wear sent hither to me, without my knowledge.
Therefore speak your conscience, without any fear.


Phil. My lord, I have learned to answer in matters of religion in Ecclesia
legittime vocatus, In the congregation being there to lawfully called: but now
I am not lawfully called, neither is here a just congregation, where I owght to
answer.


London. In deed this man told me, the last time I spoke with him yt he was a
lawer: And would not utter his conscience in matters of faith, unless yt were
in ye heari^g of ye people, where he might speak to vain glory.


Phil. My Lord, I said not I was a lawer, neither do I arrogate to my self
that name, although I was once a nouice in the same, where I learned some thing
for mine own defense, when I am called in Judgment, to answer to any cause,
and whereby I have been taught, not to put my self further indaunger, then I
need, and so far am I a lawer, and no farther.


Bath. If you will not answer to my lords request, you seem to be a wilful
man in your opinion.


Phil. My lord of London is not mine ordinary, before whom I am bound to
answer, in this behalf: as master D. Cole (which is a lawier) can well tell you
by the law. And I have not offended my lord of London, wherefore he should call
me.


London. Yes, I have to lay to your charge, that you have offended in my
diocese by speaking against the blessed sacrament of the altar: and therefore I
may call you, and proceed against you, to punish you by the law.


Phil. I have not offended in your diocese, for that which I spoke of the
sacrament, was in Paul's church in the co^uocation house, which (as I
understand) is a peculiar Jurisdiction, belonging to the deane of Paul's, and
therefore is counted of your lordshipes diocese, but not in your diocese.


London. Is not paul's church in my diocese? Well I wot, it cost me a good
deal of money by the year, the leading thereof.


Phil. That may be, and yet be exempted from your lordships iurisdiccion. And
albeit I had so offended in the place of your diocese, yet I ought (by the
law) to be sent to mine Ordinary, if I require it, and not to be punished by
you, that are not mine ordinary. And already (as I have told you) I have been
conuented of mine Ordinary for this cause, which you go about to enquire of me


London. How say you M. doctor Colle? may not I proceed against him by the
law for that he has done in my diocese?


Colle. Yea further him to the fire
Me thinks, M. Philpot needs not to stand so much with your lordship in
that point, as he does, sythen you seek not to hinder him, but to further him.
Therefore I think it best, that he go to the matter, that is laid against him
of the conuocacion, and make no longer delay.


Phil. I would willynglye show my mind of that matter, but I am sure it wylbe
laid against me to my prejudice, when I come to judgment.


Colle. Why, then you may speak by protestacion.


phil. But what shall my protestacion avail, in a cause of heresy (as you call
it) if I speak otherwise the^ you will have me: since that which I spoke in the
conuocacion house (being a place privileged) can not now help me?


London. But M. D. Colle, may I not proceed against him, for that offense he
has done in my diocese?


Colle. You may call him before you (my lord) if he be found in your diocese.


Phil. But I have by force ben brought out of mine own diocese, to my lords:
and require to be judged of mine own ordinary. And therefore I know, M. D.
will not say of his knowledge, that your lordship ought to proceed against me.
And here M.D. would say nothing.


worcest. Do you not think to find, before my lord here, as good equity in
your cause, as before your own ordinary?


Phil. I can not blame my lord of Londons equity, with whom (I thank his
lordship) I have found more gentleness, since I came, then of mine own
ordinary (I speak it for no flattery) this twelve month, and this half
before, who never would call me to answer, as his lordship has done now
twyse. Sed nemo prohibetur vti iure suo. But I ought not to be forstalled of my
right. And therefore I challenge the same, for diverse other consideracions.


London. Now you can not say herafter, but that ye have been gently co^muned
withal, of my lords here. And yet you wylfull and obstinate in your error,
and your own opinions: and will not show any cause, why you will not come,
into the unity of the church with us.


Phil. My lords, that I do not declare my mind, according to your
expectacion, is as I have said, because I can not speak without present
danger of my life: but rather then you should report me by this, either
obstinate or self willed, without any just ground, whereupon I stand, I will
open unto you somewhat of my mind, or rather the hole: desyring your
lordshippes, which seem to be the pillars of the church of England, to
satisfye me in the same And I will refer al other causes, in the which I
dissent from you, into one or two articles, or rather to one, which includes
them both, in the which, if I can (by the scriptures) be satisfied at your
mouths, I shall as willyngly agree to you, as any other, in all points.


London These heretics com always with their yffs, as this man does now.
sayng: if he ca^ be satisfied by the scriptures, so that he will always have
this exception, I am not satisfied, although the matter be never so plainly
proved against him. No proof, but prailyng.
But will you promise to be satisfied, if my lords take sum pains about you?


Phil. I say (my lord I will be satisfied by the scriptures, in that I stand.
And I process here before God, and his eternal son Jesus Christ my saueour,
and the holy ghost, his angels, and you here present, that be Judges of that I
speak: that I do not stand in any opinion, of wilfulnes, or singularity, but
only upon my conscience, certainly informed by Gods word: from the which I
dare not goo, for fear of damnacion. And this is the cause of mine earnestnes
in this behalf.


London. I will trouble my lords no longer, seeing that you will not declare
your mind.


Phil. I am about so to do, if yt please your lordship to hear me speak.


Bath. Give him leave (my lord) to speak that he has to say.


Phil. My lords, it is not unknown to you, that the chyef cause why you do
count me, and such as I am, for heretics, because we be not at unity with
your church. You say you are of the true church. And we say we, are of the
true church. You say, that who is out of your church, is dampened. And we
think verily on the other side, that if we depart from the true church,
whereon we are graffed in Gods word, we should stand in the state of
dampnacion. Wherefore if your lordships can bring any better auctorities for
your church, than we can do for ours: and prove by the scriptures, that the
church of Rome now (of the which you are) is the true catholic church, as in
all your sermons, writings, and arguments you do uphold: And that all
christian persons owght to be ruled by the same under pain of da^pnation (as
you say) and that the same church (as you pretend) have authority to
entreprete the scriptures, as it seems her good: and that all men are bound
to follow such interpretacions only: I shall be as conformable to the same
church as you may desire me, the which otherwise I dare not. Therefore I
require you for Gods sake to satisfy me in this.


Cole. If you stand upon this point only, you may sone be satisfied and you
list.


Phil. It is the thing that I require. And to this I have said, I will stand,
and refer al other controversies, I stand now against you, and will put my
hand thereto, if you mistrust my word.


London. I pray you master Philpot, what faith were you of.xx. years ago?
this man will have every year a new faith.


Phil. My lord to tell you plain, I think I was of no faith, for I was tha^ a
wicked liver, and knew not God, tha^ as I owght to do: God forgive me.


London. No were? that is not so, I am sure, you were of some faith.


Phil. My lord I have declared you on my conscience, what I than was, and judge
of my self. And what is that to the purpose, of the thing I desire to be
satisfied of you.


London. Master Archdeacon Colle I pray you, say your mind to him.


Cole. What will you say, if I can prove, that it was decreed by a universal
counsel, in Athanasius time: that all the christian church should follow the
determinacion of the church of Rome? but I do not now remember where.


phil. If you (master doctor) can show me the same granted to the sea of Rome
by the authority of the scripture, I will gladlye harken thereto. But I think,
you be not hable to show any such thing: for Athanasius was precident of
Nicene counsel, and there was no such thing decreed, I am sure.


Cole. Though it were not than, yt might be at an other time.


Phil. I desire to see ye proof thereof. And upon this, master Harpesfyld
Chau^celer to the bishop of London, brought in a book of Ireneus, wc certain
leaves turned in, and laid it before ye bishops, to help them in their
perplexity, if it might be: the which after ye bishops of Bath and Gloucester
had read together, the bishop of Gloucester gave me the book.


Glocest. Take the book (master Philpot) and look upon that place, and there
may you see, how the church of Rome is to be followed of all men.


Phil. I took the book, and read the place. The which after I had read, I
said, it made nothing against me, but against the Arria^s and other heretics,
against whom Ireneus wrote, proui^g that they wear not to be credityd because
they did teach, and follow after strange doctrine in Europa: and that the
chief church of the same was founded by Peter and Paul, and had to his time
continued by faithful succession of the faithful Bishops, in preaching the
true Gospel as they had received it of the Apostles, and nothing life to the
late sprung heretics. etc. Whereby he concludes against the^, that they were
not to be heard, neither to be credited. The which thing, if you (my lords) be
able to prove now, of the church of Rome: then had you as good authority
against me, in my cause now, as Ireneus had against those heretics. But the
church of Rome has swarued from that truth, and simplicity of the Gospel,
which it maintained in Ireneus time: and was uncorrupted from that, which it is
now. Wherefore your lordships can not justly apply the authority of Ireneus,
to the church of Rome now, which is so manifestlye corrupted from the
primative Church.


London. So will you say still, it makes nothing for the purpose, what so ever
authority we bring, and will never be satisfied.


Phil. My lord when I do by just reason) prove, that the autorities which be
brought against me, do not make to the purpose, as I have already proved: I
trust you will receive mine answer.


worcest. It is to be proved most manifestly by all ancient writers, that the
sea of Rome has always followed ye truth, and never was deceived, until of
late certain heretics had defaced the same.


Phil. Let that be proved and I have done.


worcest. Nay, you are of such arroga^cie, singularity, and vain glory, yt
you will not se it, be it never so well proved.


Phil. Ha my lords, is it now time (think you) for me, to follow
singularity or vaynglorie, since it is now, upon danger of my life and
death: not only presently, but also before God to come? and I know, if I dye
not in the true faith, I shall dye everlastingly, and again I know, if I do
not as you would have me, you will kill me, and many thousands moo. Yet had I
lever perish at your hands, than to perish eternally. And at this time, I
have lost al my commodities of this world, and now lie in a colhouse, where a
man would not lay a dog, with the which I am well contented.


Cole. Where are you hable to prove, that the church of Rome has erred at any
time? and by what history? certain it is by Eusebius, that the church was
stablyshed at Rome by Peter and Paul: and that Peter was Bishop.xxv. years at
Rome.


Phil. I know well, that Eusebius so writes, but if we compare that which S.
Paul writes to the Galathia^s the first: it will manifestly appear the
contrary, that he was not half so long there. He lived not past.xxxv. years,
after he was called to be an Apostle. And Paul makes mention of his abidyng,
after Christ's death more then.xviij. years.


Colle. What did Peter write unto the Galathians?


Phil. No, I say Paul makes mention of Peter, writing to the Galathians, and
of his abiding. And further I am hable to prove, both by Eusebius and other
historiographers, that the church of Rome has manifestly erred, and at this
present does err, because she agrees not with that, which they wrote. The
primative church did use according to the Gospel. And there needs none other
proof, but compare the one with the other.


London. Hark my lords wise parabable.
I may compare this man, to a certain man I read of, which fell into a
disperation, and went into a wood to hang him self. And when he came there, he
went vewyng of every tree, and could find none, on the which he might
vouchesaffe to hang himself. But I will not apply it, as I might. I pray you
(master doctor) go forth with him. Another you nor they are hable in this case.



Colle. My lord, there be on every side on me, that be better hable to answer
him. And I love not to fall in disputacion, for that now a days, a man shall
but sustain shame and obloquy thereby of ye people. I had lever show my mind
in writing.


Phil. And I had lever that you should so do, then otherwise. For the^ a man
may better judge of your words, then by argument. And I beseech you, so do.
But if I were a rich man, I durst wager an hundredth pounds, that you shall not
be hable to show, that you have said, to be decreed by a general counsel in
Athanasius time. For this I am sure of, yt it was concluded by a general
counsel in Africa, many years after, yt none of Africa (under pain of
excommunication) should apeale to Rome, the which decre I am suer they would
not have made, if by the scriptures it had been (and by an universal counsel)
that all men should abide, and follow the determinacion of the church of Rome.


Colle. But I can show that they revoked that error again.


Phil. So you say master doctor. But I pray you show me where. I have
hitherto heard nothing of you, for my contentation, but bare words, without
any authority.


London. What (I pray you) ought we to dispute with you, of our faith?
Justinian in the law has a title, De fide catholica, to the contrary.


Phil. I am certain the civil law has such a constitucion: but our faith
must not depend upon the civil law. For as S. Ambrose says, Non lex sed
fides congregauit Ecclesiam. Not the law but the gospel (says he) has
gathered the church together.


worcest. Master Philpot, you have the spirit of pride, wherewith ye be led,
which will not let you yield to ye truth. Leave it for shame.


Phil. Sir, I am suer I have the spirit of faith: by the which I speak at
this present. Neither am I ashamed to stand in my faith.


Glocest. What? do you think yourselfe better learned, then so many notable
learned men as be here.


Phil. Elyas alone had the truth, when there were four hundredth priests
against him.


worcest. Oh, you would be counted now for Helyas. And yet I tell thee, he was
deceived. For he thought, there had been none good, but him self, and yet he was
deceived, for there was.vii. hundredth besides him.


Phil. Yea, but he was not deceived in doctrine, as the other.vii. hundredth
were.


worc. By my faith you are greatly to blame, yt you can not be content to be of
the church, which ever has been of that faithful antiquity.


Phil. My lord I know Rome, and have been there, where I saw your lordship.


worc. In deed I did fly from hence thither. And I remember not, that I saw
you there. But I am sorye, that you have been there, for the wyckednes, which
you have seen there, peradventure causes you to do, as you do.


Phil. No my lord, I do not as I do, for that cause. For I am taught otherwise
by the Gospel, not altogether to refuse the minister for his evil living: so
that he bring sound doctrine out of Gods book.


worce. Do you think, that the universal church may be deceived?


Phil. S. Paul to ye Thessalonians prophesied that there should come an
universal departing from the faith, in the latter days, before the coming of
Christ, saying: Non veniet Christus nisi venerit defectio prius. That is,
Christ shall not come, till there come a departing first.


Cole. Yea, I pray you, how take you the departing there, in S. Paul? It is
not meant of faith, but of ye departing from the empire. For it is in Greek
Apostasia.


Phil. Mary in deed you (M. Doctor) put me in good remembrance of the meaning
of saint Paul in that place. For Apostasia, is properlye a departing from the
faith, and thereof comes Apostata which properlye sygnyfyeth one that
departs from his faith. And saint Paul in the same place after speaks of
the decay of the Empire.


Cole. Apostasia. does not only signify a departing from the faith, but also
from the Empire, as I am hable to show.


phil. I never red it so taken, and when you shall be hable to show it, as you
say in words, I will believe it, and not before.


morc. I am sorye, that you should be against the christen world.


phil. The world commonly and such as be called christians (for the multitude)
has hated the truth, and ben enemies to the same.


Glove. Why master Philpot, do you think, that the universal church has
erred, and you only to be in the truth?


phil. The church, that you are of, was never universal. For two parts of the
world (which is Asia and Africa) never consented to the supremacy of the
bishop of Rome, as at this day they do not, neither do follow his decrees.


Gloce. Yes, in Florentines counsel they did agree.


phil. It was said so by false report, after they of Asia and Africa were
gone home. But it was not so in deed, as the sequel of them al hitherto does
prove the contrary.


Gloce. I pray you, by whom will you be judged in matters of controversy,
which happen daily?


phil. By the word of God. For Christ says, in S: John^, the word that he
spoke, shall be judge in the later day.


Gloc. What if you take the word one way, and I an other way: who shall be
judge then?


phil. The primative Church.


Gloc. I know you mean ye doctors that wrote thereof.


Phil. I mean verily so.


Gloc. What if you take the doctors in one sense, and I in an other: who
shall be judge then?


Phil. Then let that be taken, which is most agreeable to Gods word.


Cole. My lords, why do you trouble your selves, to answer him in this matter?
it is not the thing, which is laid to his charge, but his error of the
sacrament: and he to shyfte him self of that, brought in an other matter.


Phil. This is the matter, master Cole, to the which I have referred al other
questions, and desire to be satisfied.


worce. It is wonder to se, how he stands with a few, against a great
multitude.


Phil. We have almost as many as you. For we have Asya, Affryca, Germany,
Denmark, and a great part of France, and daily the nombre of the Gospel
does increase: so that I am credibly informed, that for this religion, in the
which I stand, and for that which I am like to die^: a great multitude does
daily com out of France through persecucion, that the cities of Germany be
scarce hable to receive them. And therefore your lordship may be sure, the word
of God will (one day) take place: So what you can to the contrary.


worcest. They were well occupied, to bring you such news, and you have been
well kept, to have such resort unto you. thou art the arrogauntest and
stoutest fond fellow, that ever I knew.


Phil. I pray your lordshipe, to bear with my hastye speech: for it is part
of my corrupt nature, to speak somewhat hastly. But for all that, I mean with
humility, to do my dewty to your lordships.


London. Master Philpot, my lords will troble you no further at this time But
you shall goo from whence you came, and have such favor, as in the mean
while, I can show you, and upon wednesdaye next, you shall be called again, to
be heard, what you ca^ say, for the mayntenaunce of your error.


Phil. My lord, my desire is to be satisfied of you, in that I have required:
and your lordship shall find me, as I have said.


worcest. We wyshe you as well as our selves.


Phil. I think the same (my lords) but I fear you are deaceuyd: and have a
zeal of your selves, not according to knowledge.


worcest. God send you more grace.


Phil. And also God increase the same in you, and open your eyes, Nay God ryd
his sheep from such wolves.
that you may se to maintain his truth, and his true church.

Than the bishopes rose up, and co^sulted together, and caused a writing to be
made, In the which, I think my blood by them was bought and sold, and thereto
they put to their hands, and after this I was carried to my cole house again.


Thus ends the fourth part of this tragedye. God hasten the end thereof to
his glory. Amen.
BEcause I have begone to write unto you, of mine examinacions before the B.
and other, more to satisfy your desire, than it is any thing worthy to be
written: I have thought yt good, to write unto you also, that which has been of
late, that the same might come to light, which they do in darkness and privy
corners, and that the world now and the posterity herafter might know, how
vnorderlye, unjustly, and vnlearnedlye, these ravening wolves do proceed
against the selye and faithful flock of Christ: and conde^pne and persecute
the sincere doctrine of Christ in us, which they are not hable (by honest
means) to resyst, but only by tyranny, and violence.

The examinacion of John Philpot had before the bishops of London, Rochester,
Coue^tre, S. Asses I trow, and one other, whose seas I know not: Doctor story,
Curtop. D. Sauerson, D. Pendleto^, with diverse other chaplaynes and ge^tlemen
of the Queen's chamber, with diverse other gentilmen, in a galerye of my lord of
Londons palace.
MAster Philpot come you hither, London.
I have desired my lords here, and other learned men to take some pains once
again, and to do you good: and because I do mind to sit in judgment on you to
morrow (as I am commanded) yet I would you should have as much favor, as I
can show you, if you will be any thing conformable. Therefore play the wise man,
and be not singular in your opinion, but be ruled by these learned men.

phil. My lord that you say, you will sit on me in judgment to morrow, I am
glad thereof. For I was promised by them, which sent me unto you, that I should
have been Judged the next day after: but promise has not ben kept with me, to my
farther grefe. I look for none other, but death, at your hands. And I am as
ready to yield my life in Christ's cause, as you be to require yt.


London. Loo, what a wilful man this is. By my faith it is but folly to reason
with him, neither with any of these heretics. I am sorye, that you wylbe no
more tractable, and that I am compelled to show extremity against you.


Phil. My lord, you need not to show extremity against me, onles you list.
Neither by the law (as I have said) you have any thing to do with me: For that
you are not mine ordinary. Albeyt I am (contrary to al right) in your prison.


London. Why, the Queen's commissioners sent you hither unto me, upon your
examinacion had before them, I know not well the cause. But I am sure, they
would not have sent you hither to me, onles you had made some talk to them
otherwise, then it becomes a christian man.


Phil. My lord, in deed they sent me hither with our any occasion than
ministered by me. Only they laid unto me the disputacion I made in the
conuocacion house: requiring me to answer to the same, and to recant it, the
which by cause I would not do, they sent me hither to your lordship.


London. Why did you not answers them thereto?


Phil. For that they were temporal me^, and owght not to be Judges in
spiritual causes, whereof they demanded me without showing any authority,
whereby I was bound to answer the^: and hervpon they committed me to your
prison.


London. In deed I remember now, you mayntayned open heresy in my diocese,
wherefore the commissioners sent you unto me, that I should proceed against you,
for that you have spoken in my diocese.


Phil. My lord I stand still upon my lawful plea in this behalf, yt though it
were as great heresy, as you suppose it, yet I owght not to troubled therefore,
in respect of the preuilege of the parliament house, whereof the conuocacion
house is a membre, where all men in matters propounded may fraunklye speak
their minds: and here is present a gentlemen of the Queen's majesty's, that was
present at the disputacio^, and can testify, yt the questions which were there
in controversy, were not set forth by me, but by ye prolocutor, who required in
the Queen's majesty's name, all men to dispute their minds frelye in the same,
that were of the house.

Though the parliament house, The Queen's gentilman.
be a place of privilege for men of the house to speak, yet may non speak
any treason, against the Queen, nor maintain treason against ye crown.


Phil. But if any matter (which otherwise were treason to speak of yt) were it
treason for any person to speak therein, specially the thing being proposed by
ye speaker? I think not.

The Queen's gentilman.
You may make the matter easy enough to you yet, as I perceive, if you will
revoke the same, which you did there so stubburnly maintain.


S. ass. This man did not speak under reformacion, as many there did, but
agonicos and catagoricos, which is earnestly and persuasiblye, as ever I heard
any.


Phil. My lords, sense you will not cease to trouble me, for yt I have
lawfully done, neither will admit my Just defense, for that was spoken in the
parliament house by me, contrary to the laws and custom of the realm, I
appeal to the hole parliament house, to be judged by ye same, whether I owght
thus to be molested, for yt I have there spoken,


Rochest. But have you not spoken and mayntayned the same, sense ye time or no?


Phil. If any man can charge me justly therwt, here I stand to make answer.


Rochest. How say you to it now? will you stand to that you have spoken in
the conuocacion house? and do you think, you said then well or no?


phi. My lord you are not mine ordinary to proceed ex officio against me: and
therefore I am not bound to tell you my conscience of your demaundes.


S. Ass. What say you now? is not there in the blessed sacrament of the
altar (And with that they put of al their cappes for reverence of that ydol)
the presence of our saueour Christ, reallye, and substa^cyally, after de words
of consecracio^?


Phil. I do believe in the sacrament of Christ's body duly ministered to be such
manner of presence, as the word teaches me to believe.


S. Ass. I pray you how is that?


Phil. As for that I will declare an other time, wha^ I shall be laufully called
to dispute my mind of this matter, but I am not yet driven to that point. And
the scripture says: al things owght to be done after an order.


An other. b. This is a froward and a vain glorious man.


London. It is not lawful for a man (by the civil law) to dispute his faith
openly, as it appears in the title, de su^ma trinitate and fiide catholica.


phil. My lord, I have answered you to this question before.


London. Why? I never asked the of this before now.


Phil. Yes, that you did, at my last examinacion, by that token, I answered
your lordship by S. Ambrose, that the church is congregated by the word, Note
well.
and not by ma^s law, wherefore I add now further of this sayng, quod qui
fidem repudiat, and legem obijcit, iniustus est, quia Iustus ex fide viuit.
That he which refuses the word, and obiecteth the law, is an unjust man:
because the Just shall live by faith. And more over (my lord) the title which
your lordship alleges out of the law, makes it not unlawful, to dispute of
all the articles of the faith, but of the Trinity.


London. Thou lie, it is not so. And I will show you by the book, how
ignorant he is.

And with that, he went with all have to his study, and fett his book, and
openly red the text and the title of the law, and charged me with such
words, as seemed to make for his purpose, saying: how say thou to this?


Phil. My lord, I say as I did before, that the law means of the catholic
faith, determined in the counsel of Calcedonia, where the articles of the Creed
were only concluded upon.


London. Thou art ye veriest beast, Nay thou art a beast.
that ever I heard. I must needs speak it, thou compellest me thereunto.


phil. Your lordship may speak your pleasure of me. But what is this to the
purpose, which your lordship is so earnest in? You know that our faith is not
grounded upon ye civil law. Therefore it is not material to me, what soever
the law says.


London. By what law wylt thou be judged? wylt thou be Judged by the common
law?


Phil. No my lord, our faith depends not upon the laws of man.


S. Ass. He will be Judged by no law, but as he list him self.


worcest The common laws are but abstractes of the scriptures and doctors


Phil. What so ever you do make them, they are no ground of my faith, by the
which I ought to be Judged.


London. I must needs proceed against the to morrow.


Phil. If your lordship so do, I will have Excepcionem fori, for you are not my
competent judge.


London By what law can thou refuse me, to be thy judge?


Phil. By the Civil law De co^petente Iudice.


London. There is no such title in the law. In what book is it as connyng a
lawer as you be?


Phil. My lord, I take upon me no great connyng in the law, but you drive me
to my shyftes for my defense. And I am sure, if I had the books of the law, I
were able to show, what I say.


London. What? De competente Iudice? I will go fet thee my books. There is a
title in deed De officijs Iudicis ordinarij.


phil. Verily that is the same Competente Iudice which I have alleged. With
that he ran to his study, end brought the hole course of the law between
his hands, which (as it might appear) he had well occupied, by the dust they
were enbrued withal.


London. There be the books, find it out (if thou can) and I will promise
thee, to release thee out of prison.


phil. My lord, I stand not here to reason matters of ye Civil law
(although I am not altogher ignorant of the same) for that I have been a
student in the same six or seven years: but to answer to the articles of
faith, with the which you may lawfully burden me. And where as you go about
unlawfully to proceed, I challenge according to my knowledge, the benefyte of the
law, in my defense.


London. Why, thou will answer directly to nothing thou art charged with all.
Therefore say not herafter, but you might have been satisfied here by learned
men, if you would have declared your mind.


phil. My lord, I have declared my mind unto you, and to other of the
bishops, at my last being before you, desyring you to be satisfied but of one
thing whereunto I have referred al other controversies, the which if your
lordships now or other learned men can symply resolve me of, I am as contented
to be reformable in all things as you shall require, the which is to prove yt
the church of Rome (whereof you are) is the catholyke church.


Couentrie. Why? do you not believe your Creed, Credo ecclesiam catholicam.


phil. Yes, that I do, but I can not understand Rome (wherewith al you now
burden us) to be the same, neither like to it.


S. Ass. It is most evident, that S. Peter did build the catholyke church at
Rome And Christ said, Tites Petrus, and super hanc petrant edificabo ecclesiam
meam. Moreover the succession of bishops in the sea of Rome can be proved, from
time to time, as it ca^ be of none other place so well, which is a manifest
probacion of the catholic church, as diverse doctors do write.


Phil. That you would have to be undoubted, is most uncertain: and that by
the authority, which you allege of Christ, saying unto Peter, Thou art Peter,
and upon this rock I will build my church: Marcke well.
onles you ca^ prove the rock to signifye Rome, as you would make me falsely
believe. And although you can prove the succession of bishops from Peter, yet
this is not sufficient, to prove Rome to be the catholic church: onles you can
prove the succession of Peter's faith, whereupon the catholyke church is builded,
to have continued in his successors at Rome, and at this present to remain.


London. Is there any mo churches the^ one catholic church? and I pray you tell
me, into what faith were you baptized?


Phil. I acknowledge one holy catholyke and Apostolyck church, whereof I am a
membre (I praise God) and I am of that catholic faith of Christ, wherinto I
was baptized.


Couentre I pray you, can you tell what this word catholyke does signify?
show if you can.


Phil. Yes that I can, I thank God.

The catholyke faith or the catholyke church is not as now a days the
people be taught, to be that which is most universal, or of most part of men
received, whereby you do infer our faith to hang upon the multitude, which is
not so. But I esteem the catholyke faith and the catholic church to be as S.
Austen defines the same. Estimamus fidem catholicam a rebus praeteritis,
praesentibus and futuris.

We judge (says he) the catholic faith, of that which has been, is, and
shall be.

So yt if you can be hable to prove, that your faith and church has been from
the beginning taught, and is, and shall be: then may you count your selves
catholics, otherwise not. And catholic is a Greek word, compounded of cata
which signifies after, or according, and holon: a sum^, or principle, or hole.
So that catholic church or catholic faith, is as much to say, the first,
hole, sou^de, or chiefest faith.


London. Does S. Austen say so, as he alleges it? or does he mean thus, as
he takes the same? how say you master Curtoppe?


Curtop. In deed (my lord) S. Austen has such a saying, speaking against the
Donatistes: that ye catholic faith ought to be esteemed of things in times
past, and as they are practiced according to the same. And ought to be through
al ages and not after a new manner, as the Donatistes began to profess.


phil. You have said well ( M. Currop) and after the meaning of S. Austen. And
do confirm that, which I have said, for the significacion of catholic.


Couentre. Let the book be seen my lord.


London. I pray you my lord be content, or in good faith I will break even
of, and let all alone. Do you think ye catholyke church (until it was with in
these few years, in the which a few upon singularity have swarued from the
same) has erred?


phil. I do not think that the catholic church can err in doctrine, but I
require to prove the church of Rome to be this catholic church.


Curtop. I can prove yt Ireneus, (which was within an hundredth years after
Christ) came to Victor then bishop of Rome, wisely Curtop.
to ask his advise about the excommunication of certain heretics, the which
he would not have done (by all lykelyhode) if he had not taken him to be supreme
head.


Couentre. Mark well this argument.

How are you able to answer to the same? Answer if you can.


phil. It is sone answered, my lord: for that it is of no force, neither this
fact of Ireneus proves no more for the supremacy of the bishop of Rome, the^
mine has done, which have been at Rome as well as he, and might have spoken with
the Pope if I had list: and yet I would none in England did favor his
supremacy more then I.


S. Ass. You are the more to blame (by my faith of my body) for that you
favor the same no better: Your oath is as great, as if a dog swear by his
christendom.
sense all the catholyke church (until these few years) have taken him to be
supreme head of the church, besides this good man Ireneus.


Phil. That is not lykely that Ireneus so took him, or the primative church.
For I am hable to show seven general counsels after Ireneus time, wherein he
was never so taken, which may be a sufficient proof that the catholic
primative church never took him for supreme head.


The other Bis. This man will never be satisfied, say what we can. It is but
folly to reason any more with him.


Phil. Oh my lords, would you have me satisfied with nothing? Judge (I pray
you) who of us has better authority: he which brings the example of one man
going to Rome, or I that by these many general councelles, am hable to prove,
that he was never so taken in many hundredth years after Christ, as by Nicene,
Ephesyne the first and the second, Calcedonen^, Constantinopolitane,
Carthaginen^, Auilien^.


Couentre. Why will ye not admit the church of Rome, to be the Catholyke
church?


phil. Because it follows not the primative catholyke church, neither agrees
with the same, no more then an apple is like a nutte.


Couentre. Wherein does it descent?


Phil. Yt were to long to recite all, but two thing I will name: the
supremacy, and transubsta^ciation.


Curtop. As for transubstantiation, albeyt yt was set forth and decreed for an
article of faith, not much above three hundredth years, yet yt was always
believed in the church.


London. Yea that it was, very well said of you master Curtoppe.


phil. Ye have said right, that transubstanciation is but a late plantacion of
the bishop of Rome, and you are not hable to show any ancient writer, that the
primative church did believe any such things. And with this Curtop shranke
away. And immediately after, the ambassadoure of spain came in, To whom my lord
of London went, leaving ye other with me. To who^ I said: my lords, if you can
show me, that this church of Rome (whereof you are members) is the true
chatolik church. I shall be content to be one thereof. And as conformable to the
same, as you can require me, in all things. For I know there is no salvation
but within the church.


Couentre. Can you disprove that the church of Rome is not the catholic
church?


phil. Yea that I am hable, but I desire rather to hear of you for the proof
thereof. And seeing I can not have my request at your hands, neither be
satisfied with any probable authority, I will show you good proof, why it is
not the catholic church (as it was in dead) and owght to be the form, and
scolemaistres of the church to the worlds end: than is not the church of
Rome now the catholic church, which dissenteth so far from the same both
in doctrine and use of the sacraments.


Couentre. How prove you, that the church of Rome now dissenteth in doctrine
and use of the sacraments, from the primative church?


Phil. Compare the one with the other, and yt will sone appear as you may see
both in Eusebius, and in other Ecclesiastical and ancient writers.


Couentre. What have you to say more, why it is not the catholic church.


Phil. Because it is not (by your own interpretacion of the catholic)
universal, neither never was, albeyt you falsely persuade the people, that it
is so. For the world being divided in three parts, Asia, Africa and Europa:
two parts thereof, Asia and Africa (professi^g Christ as well as we) did never
consent to the church of Rome, which is of Europa which is a sufficient
testimony, that your faith was never universal.


Couentre. How prove you that?


Phil. All the historiographers which write of ye procedinges of ye church, do
testify the same. Besides that this present time does declare that to be true,
which I say. For at this present the church of Asia, and Africa do not
consent to the church of Rome. Yea and besides all this, the most part of
Europa does not agree neither allow the church of Rome. As Germany, the
kingdom of Denmarcke, the kingdom of Poole, a great part of France, England,
and Zealande: which is a manifest probacion, that your church is not
universal. And after this, the bishop of London called away the other
bishops, and left with me diverse gentlemen, with certain of his chaplaynes as
doctor Sauerson an englisheman, which had proceeded doctor in Bonnony, who after
began with me in this manner.


D. sauer. Master Philpot, I remember you beyond the sea since ye time you
reasoned with a friar, (a notable learned man) coming from Venece to Padua in
a barge.


Phil. I can not forgett that, for the friar thretned me to accuse me of
heresye, as soon as he came to Padua, for that I talked with him so boldly of
the truth.

He was no such learned man as you name him to be, but only in his scoole
points, a good purgatory friar.


D. sauer. Well, he was a learned man for all that. And I am sorye to hear,
that you this day, having communed with so many notable learned men, are no
more conformable to them, than you be.


Phil. I will be conformable to all them, that be conformable to Christ in his
word. And I pray you (good master Doctor) be not so comfortable to please
men more than God, contrary to your learni^g, for worldly estimacio^s sake.


D. sauer. No that I am not, upon what occasion should you think thus of me?


Phil. Upon no evil yt I do know of you, master doctor, but I speak as one
wishing yt you should not be led away from ye truth for promocions sake, as
many doctors do now a days.


D. sauer. I have heard your argume^tacions hitherto, and me thinks yt a
great many of ye old ancient writers be against you, in yt you do not allow
ye church of Rome, neither the supremacy. For S. Cipriane (which is an old
ancient writer) does allow ye bishop of Rome, to be ye supreme head of the
church.


Phil. That I am sure of, he does not.

For he writing unto Cornelius then bishop of Rome, calls him but his
co^panyon and fellow bishop: neither attributed to him the name either of Pope
or else of any other usurped terms, which now be ascribed to the bishop of
Rome to ye setting forth of his dignity.


Sauer, You can not be hable to show, that S. Ciprian calls Cornelius his
fellow bishop.


Phil. I will wager with you that I am hable to make, that I can show it you in
Ciprian, as I have said.


Sauer. I will lay non other wager with you, but book for book, it is not so.


Phil. I agree thereto, and I pray you one of my lords chaplaynes, to set us
Cipriane hither, for the trial hereof. And with that one of the^ went to my
lords study, and brought forth Cipria^. And by and by he turned to the first
book of his epistles, the.4. epistle, and there would have seemed to have
gathered a strong argument for the supremacy of the bishop of Rome: because
he says, it goes not well with the church when the high priest is not obeyed
which supplieth the ^^ede of Christ, after Gods word, and the consent of his
fellow bishops, and the agreement of the people.


Sauer How can you avoid this place which makes so plainly for the B. of Rome
his supremacy?


phil. It makes not so plain (M. doctor) on your sede, as you gather: as by
and by I will give you to understand. But first I challenge the wager which we
made, that your book is mine. For here you may see, that he calls Cornelius
his felowbishop, as he does also in other places. And now for the
understanding of that place, you do misconstrue it, to make the high priest
only for the B. of Rome, and otherwise then it was in his time. For there were
by Nicene counsel four Patriarchs appointed. The Patriarch of Jerusalem, the
Patriarch of Constantinopole, the Patriarch of Alexandria, and the Patriarch of
Rome: of which four the Patriarch of Rome was placed lowest in the counsel,
and so continued many hundredth years, for yt time of.vij. or.viij. general
councelles: as I am hable to show. Therefore s. Cipria^ writing to Cornelius
Patriarch of Rome, (whom he calls his fellow bishop) fyndeth him self
offended, that certain heretics being justly excommunicated (as the Nouacia^s
were) by him, did flee from his diocese (which was their chief bishop) refusing
to be obedient unto him, and to be reformed, as to the bishop of Rome, or to
the Patriarch of Constantinopole. And there were received in communion of
congregation, in derogacion of good order and discipline in the church, and to
the maintayning of heresies and scismes. And that heresies did spring up and
scismes daily arise hereof, that obedience is not given to the priest of God,
nor once considered to be in the church, for the time the priest, and for the
time, the Judge, in Christ's stead (as in the decre of Nicene counsel was
appointed) not meaning the B. of Rome only, but every Patriarch in his precinct.
Who had every one of them a college or cathedral church of learned priests,
in hearing of whom by a conuocacion of all his fellows bisshoppes, with the
consent of the people, al heresies were determined, by ye word of God. And this
is the meaning of s. Cyprian.


Sauer. You take it so, but it seems to me otherwise.


phil. Upon what ground it should seem otherwise unto you, I know not: but
this meaning, which I have declared, the general counsels.vij. or.viij. (one
after an other) confirmed it so to be, which did not allow one supreme head
only.


pen. There were not so many general councelles, but four only allowed.


phil. That is not so, M. Pendleton. Although there be four specially allowed,
for the confirmacion of the Trinity, but beside these four, there were many
other general councelles, as you may learn by many writers.


Achaplayn. Did not Christ build his church upon Peter? S. Cyprian says so.


phil. S. Cyprian De simplicitate prelatorum, declares, in what respect he so
said. In persona vnius, he is. Dedit Dominus omnibus claues, vt omnium vnitatem
denunciaret. God gave in person of one man, to all the keys, that he might
signifye the unity of all men. And also S. Austen says in the.10. homely of
saint John^.

Si in Petro non esset ecclesiae misterium, no^ ci diceret Dominus, tibi dabo
claues, si autem hoc Petro dictum est, non habet ecclesia, si autem ecclesia
habet, quando claues accepit, ecclesiam totam designauit.

If in Peter had not ben the mystery of the church, ye lord had not said
unto him: I will give unto thee the keys. Fo: if that were said unto Peter:
the church has them not, if the church have them when Peter received them,
he signifies the hole church. As also s. Hierome a priest of Rome, writing to
Nepotian, says, that al churches do lean to their own pastors, where he
speaks of the Ecclesiastical hierarchy or regiment, where he makes no
mention of the bishop of Rome. And ad Euagium, he says that where so ever a
bishop be, whether it be at Rome, or at Euagie, or at Regiu^ he is of one
power, and of one iurisdiccion.


Sauer. S. Hierom De celesti hierarchia? It was Dionisius you mean.


Phil. I say not, that Hierom wrote any book so entytled, but I say that in
the epistle by me alleged, he makes mention of the ecclesiastical regiment.


Sauer. I wonder you will stand so steadfast in your error to your own
destruction.


phil. I am sure, we are in no error, by the promise of Christ made to the
faithful ons, which is, that he will give to his true church such a spirit of
wisdom, that the adversaries thereof should never be hable to resist. And by
this I know, we are of the truth, for that neither by reasonyng, neither by
writing your synagog of Rome is hable to answer Where is there one of you all,
that ever has been able to answer any of ye godly learned ministers of
Germany, who have disclosed your cou^terfaict religion? Which of you all (at
this day) is hable to answer Caluynes institucion, which is minister of
Geneua?


Sauer. A goodlye minister in dead, of receyt of cuspurses and ru^nagates
traitors. And of late I can tell you, there is such contention fallen between
him and his own sects, that he was feign to flee the town, about
predestinacion. I tell you truth, for I came by Geneua hither.


Phil. I am sure you blaspheme that godly man, and that godly church where he
is minister, as it is your churches condition, when you can not answer me^ by
learning, to oppress the^ with blasphemies and false reports. For in the matter
of predestinacion, he is in non other opinion the^ all the doctors of the
church be, agreyng to the scriptures.


Sauer. Men be hable to answer him, if they lust. And I pray you, which of you
have answered bishope Fysshers book?


phil. Yes (master Doctor) that book is answered and answered again, if you
list to seek, what has been written against him. And after this Doctor story
came in: to whom I said, master doctor, you have done me great injury, and
without law have straytlye imprisoned me, more like a dog then a man. And
besides this you have not kept promise with me. For you promised, that I should
be Judged the next day after.


Story. I am come now to keep promise with yt. Was there ever such a
fa^tasticall man as this is? Nay he is no man, he is a beast. Yea those
heretics be worse then brute beasts: for they will (upon a vain
singularity) take upon them to be wyser the^ all men being in deed very
fools and asseheades, not hable to maintain that which of an arrogaunt
obstinacy they do stand in.


Phil. Master Doctor, I am content to abide your railing Judgment of me now:
say what you will I am content. For I am under your feet, to be trodden on, as
you list, God forgive it you, yet am I no heretic, neither you nor any other
shall be able to prove yt I hold any jot against the word of God, otherwise
then a christian man ought.


Story. The word of God? forsooth the word of God. Yt is but a follye to
reason with these heretics, for they are incurable and desperate. But as I may
reason with the, not that I have any hope to win thee, whom will thou apoynt
to be judge of ye word, whereto thou stand?


phil. Verily the word it self.


Story. Do you not see the ignorauncie of this beastly heretic? he wills
the word to be Judge of the word, ca^ the word speak.


Phil. If I can not prove that which I have said by good authority, I will be
content to be counted an heretic, and an ygnora^t person, and further what you
please.


Story. Let us hear, what wise authority thou can bring in.


phil. It is ye sayng of Christ in S. John verbu^ quod locutus sum iudicabit in
nouissimo dic. The word which I have spoken (says Christ) shall Judge in the
last day. If the word shall judge in the last day, much more it ought to
Judge our doings now. And I am sure, I have my Judge on my side, who shall
absolve and justify me in an other world, howsoever now it shall please you,
by authority, vnrighteouslye to Judge of me and others: sure I am in an other
world to Judge you.


Story. What? you purpose to be a stinking martyr, and to sit in Judgment
with Christ at the last day to Judge the twelve trybes of Israel.


Phil. Yea sir. I doubt not thereof, having the promise of Christ, if I die for
righteousness sake which you have begone to persecute in me.


Story, I told you it is but vain to argue with this heretic, he is drowned
in his heresies, without al learning.


Phil. Sir I have brought you for that I have said, good authority out of
Gods book, to the which you answer nothing: but goo about still to give
rayli^g judgment against, me without any cause.


Story. I will com to you by and by when ye judge in westminster halle gives
sentence, does ye word give sentence or the judge, tell me?


phil. Civil matters be subject to civil me^, and they have authority by the
word, to be judge of them. But the word of God is not subject to man's
judgment, but ought to judge al ye wisdom, thoughts, and doings of men.
And therefore your comparison disproueth nothing that I have said, neither
answers any whyt thereto.


Story. Wilt you not allow the interpretacion of the church, upon the
scripture?


Phil. Yes, if it be according to the word of the true church, and this I say
to you, as I have said heretofore, that if ye can prove the church of Rome
(whereof ye are) to be the true catholyke church, which I ought to follow, I
wylbe as ready to yield thereto (as long as it can be so proved) as you may
desire me.


Story. What a fellow is this? he will believe nothing, but he list him self.
Are we not in possession of the church? have not your forfathers, these many
hundredth years taken this church for the catholyke church, whereof we are now?
And if we had none other proof but this, it were sufficient. For prescription
of time makes a good title in the law


Phil. You do well (M. doctor) to allege prescription of many years, That al
is nothing but a lie.
for it is all that you have, to show for your selves.

But you must understand Ex diuinis nulla occurrit praescriptio, that
prescriptio^ has no place in matters belonging to God, as I am hable to show
by ye testimonye of many doctors.


Story. Well sir, you are like to go after your fathers, Latimer the Sophister,
Now Story ye show your self in your Colors
and Rydley, who had nothing to allege for him self, but that he had learned
his heresy of Cranmer: where I came to him with a poor bacheler of art, he
tre^bled as though he had had the palsy, as these heretics have always some
token of fear, whereby a man may know them, as you may se this man's eyes do
tremble in his head.

But I despatched them. And I tell thee that there has been yet never a one
burnt, but I have spoken with him, and have been a cause of his despatche.


Phil. You have the more to answer for M. doctor, as you shall feel it in an
other world, how much so ever you do now triumph of your procedinges.


Story. I tell thee I will never be confessed thereof. And because I cannot now
tarry to speak with my lord, I pray you one of you tell my lord, that my
coming was to signifye to his lordship, that he must out of hand ryd this
heretic away. And going away he said unto me. I certifye the, that thou may
thank none other man for it, but me.


Phil. I thank you therefore with all mine heart: and God forgive it you.


Story. What, do thou thank me? if I had thee in my study half an hour, I
think I should make you sing an other song.


Phil. No master doctor, I stand up on to sure a ground, to be overthrown
by you now. And thus they departed al away from me, one after an other, until
I was left al alone. And afterward with my keeper going to my colehouse (as I
went) I met with my lord of London, who spoke unto me gently, as he has
hitherto in words, saying.


London. Philpot, if there be any pleasure, I may show you, in my house: I
pray you require it, and you shall have it.


phil. My lord, the pleasure that I will require of your lordship, is to
hasten my judgment, which is committed unto you, and so dispatsche me forth of
this miserable world, unto my eternal rest.

And for all his fair speech, I can not attain hitherto this forthnight
space, neither fire nor candle, neither yet good lodgyng. But it is good for a
man to be brought low in this world, and to be counted amongst the vylest,
that he may in time of reward receive exaltacion and glory. Therefore praised
be God, that has humbled me, and given me grace, with gladness to be content
therewith all.


Let all that love the truth say Amen.
The fyfth tragedye.
The sixth examinacion of John Phylpot had before the right honorable lords,
lord Chamberleyne to the kings majesty, the Vicount Hereforde commonly called
lord Ferrers, my lord Rich, my lord saint John's, the lord wyndsore, the lord
Shandoys, Sir John of brydges Lieutenaunt of the tower: and two other mo, whose
names I know not with the bishop of London, and D. Chedsey the syxt day of
Noue^bre Anno Dn^i. 1555.

phil. BEfore that I was called before the lords, and whiles they were in
sitting down: the bishop of London came aside to me, and whystred in mine
care, willi^g me to use my self before the lords of the Queen's majesty's
council prudentlye, and to take heed what I said. And thus he pretended to
give me counsel, because he wysshed me to do well, as I might now do, if I
list. And after the lords and other worshypfull gentelmen of the Queen's
majesty's servants were seit, my lord of London placed himself at thend of
the table, and called me to him. And by the lords I was placed at the vpperend
against him, where I kneling down, the lords commanded me to stand up, and
after in this manner the bishop began to speak.


London. Master Phylpot, I have hertofore both priuatlye my self and openly
before my lords of the cleargye (mo times then once) cauled you to be talked
withal, to reform you of your errors, but I have not found you yet so
tractable as I would wysshe. Wherefore now I have desired these honorable lords
of ye te^poraltie and of ye Queen's Majesty's counsel, who have taken pains with
me this day (I thank the^ therefore) to hear you what you ca^ say, yt they
may be Judges, whether I have sought all means to do you good, or no. And I
dare be bold to say in their behalf, that if you show your self comfortable
to ye Queen's majesty's proceadinges, you shall find as much favor for your
deliuerau^ce, as you ca^ wisshe. I speak not this to fawn upon you, but to
bring you home into the church. Now let them hear what you have to say.


phil. My lord I thank God of this day, yt I have such an honorable
audience, to declare my mind before. And I can not but commend your lordships
equity in this behalf, which agrees with ye order of ye primative church:
which was, if any body had be^ suspected of heresy (as I am now) he should be
called before the Archbishop or bishop of ye diocese where he was suspected, in
the prese^s of others his felowships and learned elders, and in ye hearing of
ye laytie: where after ye judgment of Gods word declared, and with ye asse^t
of other bishops and consent of ye people he was co^de^pned for an heretic, or
absolved. And ye second point of ye good order, I have found at your lordships
hands already, and now have ye third fort of men, at whose hands I trust to
find more righteousness in my cause, then I have found with my lords of ye
clergy, God grant I may have at last the judgment of Gods word concerning
the same.


London. Master Philpot, I pray you, er you go any further, tell my lords
here plai^ly, whether you were by me, or by my procureme^t committed to prison
or not. And whether I have showed you any cruelty, sythe^ you have been
committed to my prison.


phil If yt shall please your lordship to give me leave, to declare forth my
matter, I will touch that afterward.


Rich. Answer first of all to my lords two questions, and the^ forth proceed
to ye matter. How say you, were you imprisoned by my lord or no, ca^ you
find any fault since, with his cruel using of you?


phil. I ca^ not lay to my lords charge ye cause of my imprisonment, neither
I may say yt he has used me cruellye. But rather for my part I might say,
yt I have found more gentleness at his lordships hands then I did at mine own
ordinaries for ye time I have be^ within his prison: for that he has called me
three or four times to mine answer, the which I was not twelve monethe and a
half before.


Kyche. Well now, go forth to your matter


Phil. The materis, that I am imprisoned for the disputacion had by me in ye
conuocacio^ house, again the sacrament of the altar, which matter was not moved
principally by me, but by the prolocutor with the consent of the Queen's
majesty, and of the holl house. And ye house (being a membre of the parliament
house) ought to be a place of fre speech for all me^ of the house, by the
ancient and laudable custom of this realm. Wherefore I think my self to
have sustained hitherto great injury, for speaking my conscience freely in
such place as I might laufully do it. And I desire your honorable lordships
judgments which be of ye pliame^t house, whether of right I ought to be
empeched therefore and sustain ye loss of my liui^g (as I have done) and
morouer of my life, as it is sought.


Rich. You are deceived herin, for the conuocacion house is no part of the
parliament house.


Phil. My lord I have always understood the contrary, by such as are more
expert men in things of this real me then I. And again the title of every
act leads me to think otherwise, which alleges the agreement of the
spirituality and te^poraltie assembled together.


Rich. Yea that is me^t of the spiritual lords of the upper house.


wynsor. In deed the convocation house is called together by one wryt of the
so^mons of the parliament of an old custom: notwithstanding that house is no
part of the parliament house.


phil. My lords, I must be contented to abide your judgments in this
behalf.


Rich. We have told you the truth. Mary yet we would not, yt you should be
troubled for any thing, that there was spoken, so that you having spoken
amiss, do declare now, that you are sorye therefore.


London. My lords, he has spoken there manifest heresy, yea and there
stoutly mayntayned the same, against ye blessed sacrament of the alter (and
with that he put of his cap that all the lords might reverence and veil their
bonets at that ydol as they did) And would not allow the real presence of the
body an blood of Christ in the same. Yet my lords, God forbid that I should
go about to show him extremity. For so doing, in case he will repent and
revoke his wicked sayenges. And in faith if he will so do, with your lordships
consent, he shall be released by and by. Mary if he will not, he shall look for the
extremity of the law, and that shortly.


Chamber. My lord of London speaks reasonably unto you, take it whiles it is
offered you.


Rich. How say you? will you acknowlage the real present of the blood and
body of Christ, as all the learned men of this realm do in the mass, and as I
do, and will believe as long as I live, I do protest it.


Phil. My lord, I do acknowledge in the sacrament of the body and blood of
Christ such a presence, as the word of God does allow and reach me.


Rich. That shall be none otherwise, then you list.


Land. A sacrament is the sign of a holy thing. So that there is both the
sign which is the accidens (as the whitnes, roundnes, and shape of bread) and
theris also the thing it self, as very Christ both God and man. But these
heretics will have the sacraments to be but bare signs. How say you? declare
unto my lords here, whether you do allow the thing it self in the sacrament
or no?


Phil. I do confess the sacrament both to be a sign, and the thing it self,
when it is duly ministered after the institution of Christ.


London. You may se, how he goes about the bushe (as he has done before)
with my lords of the clergy, and dare not utter his mind plainly.


Rich. Show us what manner of presence you allow in the sacrament?


Phil. If it shall please you my lord of London, to give my leave, to proceed
orderly thereunto: and to let me declare my mind without interruption, I will
thoroughly open my mind therein.


L. Shand. I pray you my lord, let him speak his mind.


Phil. My lords, that at the first I have not plainly declared my judgment
unto you, is this: because I can not speak hereof, without the danger of my
life.


Rich. There is none of us here, that seeks thy life, or mean to take any
advantage of that thou shall speak.


Phil. Although I mistrust not your honorable lordshippes, that be here of ye
temporaltie, yet here is one that fytteth against me (appointing to my lord of
London) that will lay it to my charge, even to the death. Notwithstanding seeing
your honors do require me to declare my mind of the presence of Christ in the
sacrament, that ye may perceive, that I am not ashamed of the Gospel of
Christ, neither do maintain any opinion without probable and sufficient
authority of the scripture, I will show frankly my mind without al color,
what so ever shall ensewe unto me therefore, so that my lord of London will not
let me to utter my mind.


Rich. My lord, permit him to say what he can, seeing he is willing to show
his mind.


London. I am content my lords, let him say what he can, I will hear him.


Phil. That which I do entend to speak unto you (right honorable lords) I do
protest here, first before God and his Angels, yt I speak it not, neither of
vain-glorie, neither of singularity, neither of wilful stubburnes, but truly
upon a good conscience, grounded on gods word, against yt which I dare not
do, for fear of dampnacio^, which will follow that is done contrary to
knowledge. Neither do I disagre to the procedinges of this realm in religion,
for that I love not the Queen (who^ I love from the botto^ of my heart) but
because I ought to love and fear God in his word, more then man in his laws.
Though I stand (as I seem to do) in this consideration, and for none other, By
what things the clergy deceaueth the hole realm.
as God I call to witness. There be two things principally, by the which the
clergy at this day does deceive the hole realm. That is, the sacrament of
the body and blood of Christ, and the name of the catholic church: the which
both they do usurp, having in deed none of them both. And as touching their
sacrament, which they term of the Altar, I say now as I said in the
conuocacion house, that it is not the sacrament of Christ, neither in ye same
is there any manner of Christ's presence. Wherefore they deceive the Queen's
majesty, and you of the nobility of this realm, in making you to believe that
to be a sacrament, which is none, and cause you to commit manifest idolatry,
inworshippyng that for God, which is no God. And in testimony of this to be
true, besides manifest proof which I am hable to make to the Queen's majesty,
and to al you of her nobility, I will yield my life. The which to do, if yt
were not upon a sure ground, yt were to my utter da^pnacion. Note.
And where they take on them the name of the catholic church, whereby they
blind many folks eyes, they are nothing so: calling you from ye true religion,
which was reveled and taught in king Edwardes time, unto vain supersticio^.
And this I will say for the trial hereof, that if they can prove them selves to
be the catholyke church (as they shall never be hable to do) I will never be
against their doings, but revoke all that I have said. And I shall desire you
(my lords) to be mean for me to ye Queen's majesty, that I may be brought to
the just trial hereof. Yea I will not refuse to stand against ten of the best
of them in this realm. And if they be hable to prove that otherwise then I
have said, either by writing or by reasonyng with good and lawful authority, I
will here promise to recant what so ever I have said, and to consent to them in all points. And in the declaration of these things more at large, which now I
write in sum, the bishop of London eftsoon would have interrupt me, but the
lords procured me liberty to make out my tale, to the great grefe of my lord
bishop of London, as it appeared by his dumpes he was in.


London. It has been told me before, that you love to make a long tale.


Rich. All heretics do boast of the spirit of God. And every one would have
a church by him self, as John of Kent and the Anabaptists. I had my self
John of Kent a seven night in my house, after the writ was out for her to be
burnt, where my lord of Cantorburye and bishop Rydley resorted almost daily
unto her, but she was so high in the spirit that they could do nothing with
her for all their lernyng. But she went wilfullye unto the fire was burnt, and
so do you now.


Phil. As for John of Kent, she was a vain woman, I knew her well and an
heretic in deed, well worthy to be burnt, because she stood against one of the
manifest artikles of our faith, contrary to the scripture. And such vain
spirits be sone known from the true spirit of God and his church, for that
the same abides within the lymittes of Gods word, and will not go out of
the same, neither stubburnly maintain any thing, contrary to the word, as I
have Gods word thoroughly on my side, to show for that I stand in.


London. I pray you, how will you join me these two scriptures together,
Pater mayor me est. Et pater and ego vnum sumus. I must interpret the same,
because my lords here understand no latyne: that is to say: the father is
greater the^ I: and I and the father are one.

But I cry you mercy my lords, I have mispoken in sayng you understand no
latyne: for the most part of you understand latyne as well as I.

But I spoke in co^sideracio^ of my lord Shandois and master Brydges his
brother, whom I take to be no great latin men. Now show you your connyng, and
join these twain scriptures by the word if you can.


Phil. Yes that I can right well. For we must understand that in Christ there
be two natures, the divinity and humanity. And in respect of his humanity,
it is spoken of Christ, the father is greater then I. But in respect of his
deity, he said again, the father and I be one.


London. But what scripture have you.


Phil. Yes I have sufficient scripture for the proof of that I have said. For
the first it is written of Christ in ye psalms. Diminuisti cum Paulominus ab
angelis. Thou have made him a litel lesser then angels. It is ye fyfte^
spalme, beginning: Celi enarrant. And there I misrekened, wherwithall my lord
took me.


London. It is in Domine Dominus noster. Ye may see my lords, how well this
man is used to say his matyns.


Phil. Though I say not matyns in such order as your lordship means, yet I
remember of old that Domine Dominus noster, and Celi enarrant, be not far a
su^dre. And albeit I misnamed the spalme, it is no proiudice to ye truth of yt
I have proved.


London. What say you then to the second scripture? how couple you that by
the word to the other?


Phil. The text it self declares, that not withstanding Christ did abase him
self in our humain nature, yet is he still one in deity with the father. And
this S. Paul to the Hebrews does more at large set furthe. And as I have by ye
scriptures joined these two scriptures together, so am I hable to do in all
other articles of faith, which we ought to believe by the manifest word of God
to expound them.


London. How can that be, seeing S. Paul says, that the letter kylleth, but it
is the spirit that gives life.


Phil. S Paul means not, that the word of God written in it self kylleth,
which is the word of life, and the faithful testimony of the Lord. But that
the word is unprofitable, and kylleth him that is void of the spirit of God,
although he be the wysest man of the world. And therefore S. Paul said that
ye gospel to some was a favor of life unto life, and to some other a savor of
death unto death. Also an example hereof we have in the syxt of John, who
hearing the word of God without the spirit were offended thereby. Wherefore
Christ said, the flesh profits nothing, it is the spirit that quickneth.


London. What? do you understand that of S. Paul and of S. John so?


Phil. Yt is not mine own interpretacion, it is agreeable to the word in other
places. And I have learned the same of ancient fathers interpreting it
likewise. And to the Corinthians it is written. Animalis homo non percipit ea
que sunt spiritus Dei: Spiritualis dijudica^ omnia. The natural man perceyueth
not the things yt be of the spirit of God: But ye spiritual man which is
endued with the spirit, judges al things.


London, You se my lords, that this man will have but his own mind, and will
wilfully cast away him self. I am sorry for him.


Phil. The words that I have spoken be not of mine but of the gospel, whereon I
ought to stand. And if you (my lord of London) can bring better authority for
the faith you would draw me unto, then, that which I stand upon, I will
gladlye hear ye same by you, or by any other in this realm.

Wherefore I kneling down, besought the lords, to be good unto me a poor
gentleman, that would feign live in the world if I might: and to testify as
you have heard me to say this day, that if any man can approve that I ought
to be of any other manner of faith, then that which I now am, and can prove the
same sufficientlye, I will be neither wilful, neither desperate, as my lord of
london would make you believe me to be.


Rich. What contreiman be you? are you of me Phylpots of Hampshere?


Phil. Yea my lord, I was sir Peter Philpots son of Hampshere?


Rich. He is my nere kinseman, wherefore I am the more sorry for him.


phil. I thank your lordship, that it pleased you to challenge kindred of a pore
prisoner.


Rich. In faith I would go a hundredth miles on my bare fete, to do you good


Chamber. He may do well enough if he list.


S. John. Master Philpot you are my contreiman and I would be glad you should
do well.


Rich. You said even now, that you would desire to maintain your belef,
before ten of ye best of this realm. You did not well to compare with the
nobility of the realm. But what if you have ten of the best of the realm to
hear you, will you be tried by the^?


Phil. My lord, your lordship mistaketh me, to think that I challenge ten of
the best of the nobility in this realm, it was no part of my mind. But I meant
of the best learned on the contrary side


Rich. Well I take your meani^g. What if means be made to the Queen's majesty,
that you shall have your request? Will you be judged by them?


Phil. My lord, it is not mete that a man should be judged by his adversaries.


Rich. By whom then would you be judged?


phil. I will make your honors judges, that shall be hearers of us.


Rich. I dare be bold to procure for you of the Queen's majesty, that you
shall have ten learned men to reason with you, and twentye, or forty of the
nobility to hear, so you will promise to abide their judgment? How say you,
will you promise here before my lords so to do?


Phil. I will be contented to be judged by them.


Rich. Yea, but you will not promise to agree to their judgment.


Phil. There be causes, why I may not so do, onles I were sure they would
judge according to the word of God.


Rich. O, I perceive you will have no man judge but your self, and think your
self wyser then all the learned men of this realm.


phil. My lord, I seek not to be mine own judge: but am content to be judged
by other, so that the order of judgment in matters of religion be kept, yt was
in the primative church, which is, first that Gods will by his word was
sought, and thereunto both ye spirituality and temporaltye gathered together
gave their consents and judgment. And such kind of judgment I will stand to.


London. My lords, he would make you believe, that he were profoundly seen in
ancient writers, of the judgments of the primative church, and there was
never no such manner of judgment used as he now talks of.


Phil. In the epistles of S. Ciprian I am hable to show it you.


London. A, I tell you, there is no such thing, fet me Cyprian hither.


Phil. You shall find it otherwise, when the book comes. And doctor Chadsey
his chapleyne (whom he appointed to fet his book) whistered the bishop in his
ear, and fet not the book, by lyklyhode that he should have sustained the
reproach thereof, if the book had been fette. Well my lord (quod I) master
doctor knows it is so, or else he would have fet the book ere this.


Rich. You would have non other judge (I see) but the word.


Phil. Yeas my lord, I will be tried by the word, and by such as will judge
according to the word. As for an example, if there were a controversy betwyxt
your lordship and an other upon the words of a statute, must not the words of
the statute judge and determine the controuersye?


Rich. No mary the judges of the law may determine the meaning thereof.


London. He has brought as good example against him self, as ca^ be. And here
ye bishop thought he had good hand fast against me: and therefore enlarged it
with many words to the judgment of the church.


The lords. He has overthrown him self by his own argument.


Phil. My lords, it seems to your honores, that you have great advantage of
me, by the example I brought in, to express my cause, but if it be pondered
thoroughly, it makes holly with me, and nothing against me: as my lord of
London has pretended. For I will ask of my lord Rich here, whom I know to
have good knowledge in the laws and statutes of this realm. Albeit a judge
may decerne the meaning of a statute agreeable to the words, whether the same
may judge a meaning contrary to the express words or no?


Ryce. He can not so do.


phil. Even so say I that no man ought to judge ye word of God to have a
meaning contrary to the express words thereof, as this false church of Rome
does in many things. And with this the lords seemed to be satisfied and made
no further replicacion herin.


Rich. I marvel the^ why you do deny the express words of Christ in the
sacrament, saying this is my body, and yet you will not stick to say it is not
his body. Is not God omnipotent? And is not he hable as well by his omnipote^cy
to make it his body, as he was to make man flesh of a piece of claye? did not
he say this is my body, which shall be betrayed for you? and was not his very
body betrayed for us? therefore it must needs be his body.


London. My lord Rich you have said wonderful well and lernedly. But you might
have begone with him before also in the sixth of John^, where Christ promised to
give his body in the sacrament of the altar: saying, panis quem ^go dabo caro
mea est? The bread which I will give is my flesh. How can you answer to
that?


Phil. If it please you to give me leave, to answer first my lord Rich, I
will also answer the objection.


Rich. Answer my lord of London first, and after come to me.


phil. My lord of London may be sone answered, that the saying of S. John^ is
that the humanity of Christ which he took on him for the redemption of man is
the bread of life, whereby our bodies and souls be sustained to eternal life,
of the which the sacramental bread is a lively representacion and an
effectual cohabitatio^, to al such as believe on his passion, and as Christ
says in the same syxte of John^. I am the bread that came from heaven: but
yet he is not material neither natural bread. Likewise the bread is his
flesh, not natural or substanciall, but by signification, and by grace in a
sacrament. And now to my lord Riches argument. I do not deny the express
words of Christ in the sacrament, this is my body. But I deny that they are
naturally and corporally to be taken, but sacramentally and spiritually,
according to the express declaracion of Christ, saying, that the words of the
sacrament, which the Capernaites took carnally (as the Papists now do) ought
to be taken spiritually, and not carnally, as they falsely ymagine, not wayeng
what interpretacion Christ has made in this behalf. Neither follow the
institution of Christ, nether the use of the Apostles and of the primative
church, who never taught neither declared no such carnal manner of presence, as
is now exacted of us violently, with out any ground of scripture or
antiquity, who used to put out of the church, al such as did not receive the
sacrament with the rest: and also to burn that which was left after the
receyuyng, as by the Canon of the Apostles, and by the decre of the counsel of
Antioche.


London. No that is not so, they were only Cathecumeni, which went out of the
church at the celebration of the communion, and none other.


Phil. It was not only of such as were Nouices in faith, but al others, that
did not receive.


London. What say you to the omnipotency of God? is not he hable to perform
that which he spoke, as my lord Rich has very well said. I tell thee, that God
by his omnipotency may make him self to be this carpet, if he will.


Phil. As concerning the omnipotency of God, I say that God is hable to do (as
the prophet David fayeth) what so ever he wills. But he wills nothing that
is not agreeable to his word, as that is blasphemy, which my lord of London
has spoken, that God may become a carpet. For as I have learned of ancient
writers: Non potest Deus facere quae su^t naturae suae contraria. That is, God
can not do that which is contrary to his nature, as it is contrary to the
nature of God, to be a carpet. A carpet is a creature, and God is the creator:
and the creator can not be the creature, wherefore onles you can declare by the
word, that Christ is otherwise present with us, then spiritually, and
sacramentally by grace, as he has taught us: you pretend the omnipotency of
God in vain.


London. Why, will you not say that Christ is really present in the sacrament?
or do you deny it?


Phil. I deny not that Christ is really in the sacrament, to the receauer
thereof, according to Christ's institution.


London. What mean you by really present?


Phil. I mean by really present, present in deed.


London. Is God really present euerywhere?


phil. He is so.


London. How prove you that?


phil. The prophet Esaias says, that God fills all places, and where so ever
be two or three gathered together in Christ's name, there is he in the midst
of them.


London. What? his humanity?


Phil. No my Lord, I mean the Deity according to that you demanded.


Rich. My lord of London, I pray you, let master doctor Chedsey reason with
him: and let us see, how he can answer him, for I tell thee he is a learned man
in deed, and one that I do credit before a great many of you, whose doctrine
the Queen's majesty and the hole realm does well allow: therefore hear him.


London. My lords, I pray you, will it please you to drink. You have talked a
great while, and much talk is thrustye. I will leave master doctor and him
reasoning together a while, with your leave, and will come to you by and by
again, They went (as I suppose) to make rowme for more drink, after the
lords had drunk.


Rich. My lord Rich said to the lords, I pray you let the poor man
drink: for he is thristy. And with that, he called for a cup of drink, and
gave it me, and I drank before them all: God requite it him, for I was athirst
in deed Afterward doctor Chadsey began in this wise, making a great process,
of the which, this is the effect.


D. Chapter d. Master Philpot fyndeth fault with ye convocation house, Note
Chadseys shameful lie.
before your lordshippes, that he has layen this long in prison, and that he
had there a dolyn arguments, whereof he could not be suffered to prosecute one
thoroughly, which is not so. For he had leave to say what he could, and was
answered to as much as he was hable to bring, and when he had nothing else to
say, he fell to weping. I was there present, and can testifye thereof, albeit
there is a book abroad of the report of the disputacion to the contrary, in
the which there is never a true word.

And where as you require to be satisfied of the sacrament, I will show you the
truth thereof, both by the scriptures, and by the doctors.


phil. It is a shrewed lykely, that you will conclude with any truth, since
you have bego^ne with so manifest untruths, as to say, that I was answered
whiles I had any thing to say: and that I wept for lack of matter to say. And
that the book of ye report of ye disputacio^ is nothing true. God be praised,
there were a good meany of noble men, gentleman, and worshipful men, that
heard and saw the doings thereof, which can testify, that you here have made
an unjust report, before these honorable lords. And that I wept, was not for
lack of matter, as you slander me: for I thank God, I have more matter, then
the best of you all shall ever be hable to answer, as little lerning as I have:
but my weping was, as Christ's was upon Jerusalem, seeing the destruction that
should fall upon her. And I forseing the^ the destruction which you (through
violence and unrighteousness, which you there declared) would work against the
true church of Christ and his faithful members, as this day bears witness, I
was compelled to weep in remembrance of that, which I with infinite mo have
fealt and shall feel. All these words I did nor then speak out, being
interrupted by my lord Rich, saying that I should suffer him to proceed out in
his matter, and afterward I should have leisure to answer him in every
article. But he promised more than he could perform as ye end did well
declare. For he had not the consent of the spiritualty to his promise, which
now rule the roste. God shorten their cruel days, for his elects sake. And
therefore I add this, I had purposed to have spoken if then I might have been
suffered, lest any that perfectly know not ye things done in ye conuocacion
house, and now laid to my charge, unanswered by me, might reken doctor
Chadsyes sayenges to be true, and as concerning the book of the report of the
disputacions, I wrote the same. And it is true in every argument, as master
Sean of Rochester, and master Cheynye archdeacon of Harforde (yet being a live
and within this realm) can testyfie.


Chad. You have of scriptures the four eua^gelistes for the probacio^ of
Christ's real presence to be in the sacrament after ye words of consecracio^,
with S. Paul to the Corinthians. Which all say, Hoc esi corpus meu^. this is
my body, they do not as you would have me to believe, this is not the body. But
specially yt.6. of S. John proves ye same most manyfestlye, where Christ,
promised to give his body which he performs in his last supper, as it
appears by these words Panis quem ego dabo, caro mea est, quam ego dabo pro
mu^di vita. The bread which I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the
life of the world.


Phil. My lord Rich, with your leave, I must needs interrupt him a little,
because he speaks open blasphemye, against the death of Christ, for if that
promise brought in by S. Paul was performed by Christ in his last supper then
neded he not to have died after he had given the sacrament.


Rych. Let master Doctor make an end of his arguments, and afterward object to
him what you can.


Chadsy. You must note that there is twyse dabo in this saying of S. John, and
the first is referred to the sacrament of the altar, and the second to the
sacrifice upon the cross, and besides these manifest scriptures, there be many
ancient doctors proving the same, as Ignatius, Ireneus and S. Ciprian whose
auctorities he recyted at large which I do omit, because I was not permitted to
answer ye same.


Rich. Now answer, and obiecte to him what you can, and you shall be heard.


Phil. My lord the chefest ground where he with the rest of his side do
ground themselves against us, be these words. This is my body, with a false
pretense of the omnipotency of God. And before I will com to the partycular
answers of all that he has alleged, for that your lordships may the better
understand me, what I mean, and whereupon I stand, I will require master
doctor to answer me one question. But first of all, I do protest to your honors
that I think as reverently of the sacrament, as a christian man ought to do,
and that I acknowledge the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ,
mynystred after Christ's institucio^, to be one of the greatest treasures and
conforts, yt he left us on the earth. And contrary wise it is most discomfort
and abominable, not being ministered as it ought to be, as it is used now
adays. And now to my question, which is this. whether these words only, Hoc
est corpus meum, This is my body, spoken by a priest over the bread and wine,
may make the body and blood of Christ, as you suppose or no?


Chadsey. Staggering what he might say, at last said, that these words alon
(pronounced by the priest) be sufficient to make the bread and the wine, the
very body and blood of Christ really


Phil That is blasphemy to say, and against all the scriptures and doctors, who
affirm that the form and substance in consecracion must be observed, which
Christ used and did institute, as S. Ciprian says. In sacrificio quod Christus
est, non nisi Christus sequendus. In the sacrifice which is Christ, only is
Christ to be followed. And by ye law it is forbidden, to add or take away from
Gods word. And S. Peter says, if any man speak, let him speak as ye word
of God. Wherefore whosoever says, that these words only, this is my body, do
make a real presence of Christ, without bliss, take, and eat, whereby be
three as substanciall points of the sacrament, as this is my body, is: he is
hyghly disceaued. Therefore S. Austyne says, Accedat verbum ad elementum, et
fit sacramentum. Let the word be joined to the element, and it becomes a
sacrament: so that if the entier word of Christ's institucion be not observed
in the ministracion of a sacrament, it is no sacrament, as the sacryfices which
ye ten tribes did offer at Bethel to God, were not acceptable, because they
were not in all poi^ts done according to Gods word. Wherefore except blessing
be made after the word, which is a dew thanks geuyng for our redemption in
Christ, and showing forth of the Lords death in such wise as the congregation
may be edified, and also a taking and eating after Christ's commandment, as
it is not in the mass. This is my body, which is the latter part of the
sacrament, has never no place, neither can be verefied. For Christ commanded
as well take ye, and eat ye, as this is my body.


Chadsey. Christ said, take, eat, this is my body, and not take ye, eat ye.


phil. No did master doctor? be not these ye words of Christ accipite
manducate,: and do not these words in ye plural number, singnifie, take ye, eat
ye: and not take thou, eat thou, as you would suppose?


Chadsey. I grant it is as you say.


phil. Likewise of consequency, you (master doctor) must needs deny, which you
have said, that these words this is my body, being only spoken, be sufficyent
to make the body and blood of Christ in the sacrament, as you have untruly
said.


London. Then came in ye bishop again, and said, what is that you would have
master doctor deny.


phil. My lord, master doctor has affirmed yt these words this is my body
spoken by ye priest, only do make the sacrament.


London. In deed if master bryges should speak these words over the bread and
wine, they would be of none effect, but if a priest speak them after a due
manner, they are effectual, and make a real body.


Phil. Master S. has said otherwise.


London. I think you mystake him, for he means of the words duly
pronounced.


Phil. Let him revoke that he has said, and the^ must it needs follow, yt this
is my body has no place, except bliss, take, and eat, duly go before. And
because the same do go before this is my body, in your sacrament of the mass,
it is not the sacrament of Christ, neither has Christ present.


Chadsey. If this is my body only do not make the sacrament, no more do
bliss, take, and eat.


Phil. I grant that the one without tho there can not make the sacrament. And
it can be no sacrament, onles the hole action of Christ does concur together,
according to the first institucion.


Chadley. Why, then you will not have it to be the body of Christ, onles it be
received.


phil, No verily, it is not the very body of Christ, to none other, but to
such as condignely receive the same, after his institucion.


London. Is not a loaf a loaf, being set on ye table, though no body eat
thereof?


phil. It is not like my lord. For a lofe is a lofe before he be set at the
table. But so is not the sacrament a perfect sacrament, before it be dewly
ministered at the table of the lord.


London. I pray you, what is it in the mean while, before it is received after
the words of consecracio^ spoken? answer me.


phil. It is (my lord) the sign begone of a holy thing, and yet no perfect
sacrament, until it be received. For in the sacrament there be two things to
be considered, the sign and the thing it self, which is Christ and his hole
passion: and it is that to none, but to such as worthily receive the holy
signs of bread and wine, according to Christ's institucio^.


wynsor. There were never none yt denied the words of Christ as you do, did not
he say this is my body?


phil. My lord I pray you be not disceyued. we do not deny ye words of Christ.
but we say, these words be of none effect, being spoken otherwise than Christ
did instuute them in his last supper, for an example, Christ bydde the church
to baptyze, in the name of the father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, if a
priest say those words over the water, and there be no child to be baptized,
those words only pronounced do not make baptysme. And again, baptysme is only
baptysme to such as be baptized, and to none other standing by.


L. Chamber. I pray you my lord, let me ask him one question. what kind of
presence in the sacrament (duly ministered according to Christ's ordinance) do
you allow?


Phil. Than do I confess the presence of Christ holly to be with all the
fruits of his passion, unto the worthy receyuer, by the spirit of God: and that
Christ is thereby joined to him, and he to Christ.


L. chamber. I am answered.


London. My lords take no head of him. For he goes about to disceyue you. His
similitude yt he brings in of baptism, is nothing like to the sacrament of
the altar. For if I should say to sir John Bryges being with me at supper, My
lord is better skilled in belly cheer, than in Christ's sacraments.
and having a fatt capo^, take, eat, this is a fat capon. Although he eat not
thereof, is it not a capon still? and like wise of a piece of beef or of a cup
of wine, if I say: drink, this is a good cup of wine, is it not so, because
he drinks not thereof?


Phil. My lord your similitudes be to gross for so high mysteries, as we have
in hand, as if I were your equal I could more plainly declare: and there is
much more dissimilitude between common meats and drinks, than there is
between baptysme and the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. Like must
be compared to like, and spiritual things with spiritual, and not spiritual
things with corporal things. And meats and drinks be of their own natures
good or evil, and your words comme^ding or disco^me^ding, do but declare what
they are. But the sacraments be to be considered according to the word, which
Christ spoke of the^, of the which, take ye, and eat ye, be some of the chief
concurrent to the making of the same, without the which there can be no
sacraments. And therefore in Greek, the sacrament of the body and blood of
Christ is called Coenonia, a communion. And likewise in the gospel Christ
commanded saying, Diuidite inter vos, divide it among you.


Chadsey. S Paul calls it a communicacion:


Phil. That does more expressly show that there must be a participaon of the
sacrament together.


London. My lords, I am sorry I have troubled you so long with this obstinate
man, with whom we can do no good. I will troble you no le^ger now.

And with that the lords rose up, non of them saying any evil word unto me,
half amassed in my judgment, God work it to good.


Thus ends the syxt part of this tragedy: the seventh look for with Joy.
The vij. examinacio^ of John Philpot, had the.xix. of Nouembre, before the
bishops of London and Rochester, the chaunceler of Lychefeld, D. Chadsey,
master Dee, bacheler of divinity.
SYrra come hither. How chance you come no sooner? is it well done of you to
make master chaunceler and me, to tarry for you this hour, well sworn my lord.
by the faith of my body, half an hour before mass, and half an hour even
at mass, lokyng for your coming?

Phil. My lord, it is not unknown unto you, that I am a prisoner, and that
the doors be shut upon me, and I can not come when I list. But as soon as the
doors of my prison were open, I came immediately.


London. We sent for thee, to the intent thou should have come to mass.

How say you, would you have come to mass or no, if the doors had sooner ben
opened.


Phil. My lord that is an other manner of question.


London. Lo master chaunceler I told you, we should have a froward fellow of
him, he will answer directly to nothing. I have had him before both the
spiritual lords and the temporal, and thus he fares still, yet he rekeneth him
self better learned then all the realm. Yea before the temporal lords the
other day, he was so folyshe to challenge the best. He would make himself
learned, You said before he was learened.
and is a very ignorant fool in deed.


Phil. I reken, I answered your lordship before the lords plain enough.


London. Why answerest thou not directly, whether thou would have gone to
mass with us or no, if thou had come in time?


Phil. Mine answer shall be thus, that if your lordship can prove your mass
whereunto you would have me to come, to be the true service of God, whereunto a
Christian ought to come: I will afterward come with a good will.


London. Look I pray you: the King and the Queen, and all the nobility of the
realm do come to mass, and yet he will not. By my faith thou art to well
handled: thou shall be worse handled herafter, I warrant thee.


Phil. If to lie in a blind colehouse, may be counted good handlyng, both
without fire and candle: then it may be said, I am well handled. Your lordship
has power to entreat my body, as you lift.


London. Thou art a fool, and a very ignorant fool. Master chaunceler, in
good faith I have handled him and his fellows with as much gentleness as they
can desire. I let their friends come unto them to releue them. And wot you
what? the other day they had gotten them selves up into the top of the
leads, with a meany of prentiles, gasyng abroad, as though they had been at
liberty: but I shall cut of your resort. And as for the prentises, they were
as good not to come to you, if I take them.


Phil. My lord, we have no such resort to us, as your lordship ymagyneth, and
there comes very few unto us. And of prentises I know not one, neither have
we any leads to walk on over our colehouse, that I wot of, wherefore your
lordship has mistaken your mark.


London. Nay now you think (because my lord Chaunceler is gone) that we will
burn no moo, yes I warrant thee. I will dispatche you shortly, onles you do
recant.


Phil. My lord, I had not thought that I should have been alive now, neither
so raw as I am, but well roasted unto ashes.


Chance. Cast not your self wilfully a way, master Philpot. Be content to
be ruled by my lord here, and by other learned men of this realm, and you may
do well enough.


phil. My conscience bears me record, that I seek to please God, and that the
love and fear of God causes me to do as I do, that I were of all other
creatures most miserable, if for mine own will only, I did lose all the
commodities I might have in this life, and afterward to be cast to dampnatio^.
But I am sure, it is not my will, whereon I stand, but Gods will, which will
not suffer me to be cast away, I am sure.


Chaun. You are not so sure, but you may be deceived.


London. Well, since thou will not be comfortable by no fair means, I will
proceed against thee, Ex officio. And therefore herke^ here to such articles,
as I have here written. And I charge the to make answer to them. And with that
he red a lybel which he had in his hand of diverse articles. And when he had
done, he had me answer.


phil. Your lybel (my lord) contains in su^me, two special points: The
first prete^deth, that I should be of your diocese, and therefore your lordship
upon diverse suspectes and infamies of heresy, going upon me, is moved to
proceed against me by your ordinary office. The which first is not true, for
that I am not of your lordships dioces, as ye lybel does pretend. And the
second is, that I being baptized in the catholic church, and in the catholic
faith, am gone from them, the which is not so. For I am of that catholic faith
and church, as I was baptized unto.


London. What, art thou not of my dioces? where are ye now, I pray you?


Phil. My lord, I can not deny, but I am in your colehouse, which is in your
dioces, yet am I not of your dioces.


London. You were sent hither unto me by ye Queen's majesty's commisioners, and
thou art now in my dioces, wherefore I will proceed against thee as thine
ordinary.


phil. I was brought hither through violence, and therefore my present being
now in your dioces, is not enough tabrydge me of mine own ordinary
jurisdiction, neither makes it me unwillingly subject to your jurisdiction,
sense it comes by force, and by such men as had no just authority so to do,
no more then a sanctuary man being by force, brought forth of his place of
privilege, does thereby lose his privilege, but always may challenge the same,
where so ever he be brought.


Chadsey. Has not the Queen's majesty authority by her commissioners, to
remove your body whither she will? And ought you not to obey herin?


phil. I grant that the Queen's majesty (of her just power) may transpose my
body, whither it shall please her grace to command the same. But yet by your
laws, Spiritualia non sunt subiecta Imperatoris potestati. Spiritual causes be
not subject to the temporal power. As for example, you master doctor, if the
Queen's majesty would appoint two temporal men to be judge over you in certain
spiritual matters: might not you allege the privilege of a clearke, and
demand competent spiritual judges in your causes?


London. Does not a man (I pray you) Sortiri forum ratione delicti?


Phil. My lord your rule is true in temporal matters. But in spiritual causes
it is not so: which be otherwise priuileged


London. What say thou then to the second article, and to the other?


Phil. My lord, I said that I am not bound to answer the second neither the
rest, unless the first be proved.


London. Well, suppose the first may be proved (as it will be) what will you say
then to the second, that you are not of the same catholic faith neither of
the same church now, as you were baptized in?


Phil. I am of the same catholic faith, and of the same catholic church
which is of Christ, the pillar and stablisheme^t of truth.


London. Nay that you are not.


phil. Ye as that I am.


London. Your godfathers and godmothers were of an other faith, then you be
now.


Phil. I was not baptized neither into my godfathers faith nor my godmothers,
but into the faith and into the church of Christ.


London. How know you that?


Phil. By the word of God, which is the touch stone of faith, and the
lymites of the church.


London. How long has your church stand, I pray you?


Phil. Even from the beginning, from Christ and from his Apostles, and from
their immediate successors.


Chanc. He will prove his church to be before Christ.


phil. If I did so, I go not amiss. For there was a church before the coming
of Christ, which makes one catholic church.


Chance. It is so in deed.


phil. I will desire no better rule, the^ that which is often times brought in
of your side, to prove both my faith and church, catholic: that is,
antiquity, universality, and unity.


Land. Do you not se, what a bragging folyshe fellow this is? He would seem to
be very well seen in ye doctors, and he is but a fool. By what D. art you able to
prove thy church? name hi^, and you shall have him


phil. My lord let me have al your ancient writers with pen, and ynke and
paper, and I will prove both my faith and my church out of every one of them.


Lon. No yt thou shall not have* you shall see how he lies. S. Cipria^ says,
Ye lie my lord.
there must be one high priest, to ye which ye residue must obey. And they will
allow no head, neither vicar general.


phil. S. Ciprian says not, yt there should be a vicar general over al. For in
his book De simplicitate praelatorum, I am sure he says the contrary, Vnus
episcopatus est, cuius pars in solidum a singulis tenetur. There is but one
bishoprike, which is holly possessed of every bishop in part.


London. Fet hither the book, thou shall se the manifest place against the. S.
Chedsey brought ye book, and turned to the place in an Epistle written unto
Cornelius then B. of Rome, and recited these worlds in su^me, that it went not
well with the church, where the high priest was not obeyed. And so would have
concluded for the confirmacion of the bishops saying.


Phil. M. doct. you misconstrue the place of S. Cipria^, for he means not
there (by the high priest) the B. of Rome: but every patriark in his precinct,
of whom there were four appointed in his time.

And in writing unto Cornelius, he means by the high priest him self, which
was then chief B. of Africa, whose authority the heretics began to despice.

Whereof he complayneth to Cornelius, and says, the church can not be well
ordered, where the chief minister by order, after the judgment of the
scriptures, after the agreement of the people, and the consent of his fellow
bishops he is not obeyed.


London. Has not the bishop of Rome always ben supreme head of the church,
and Christ's vicar in earth even from Peter?


Phil. No that he was not. For by ye word of God he has no more authority,
then the bishop of London has.


Lon. Was not Peter head of ye church? and has not the bishop of Rome which is
his successor, ye same authority?


Phil. I grant that the bishop of Rome, as he is the successor of Peter has
the same authority as Peter had. But Peter had no more authority, then every
one of the apostles had.


Chance. Yes that S. Peter had, for Christ said specially unto him, Tibi dabo
claues regni Coelorum, I will give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven:
the which he spoke to none other of his disciples syngularly but to him.


phil. S. Austyne answers otherwise to the objection, and says, that if in
Peter, there had not been the figure of the church, the Lord had not said unto
him, to the I will give the keys of the kingdom of heaven. The which if Peter
received them not, the church has them not. If the church has them, the^
Peter has them not.


London. What if I can prove and show you out of the civil law, that all
Christendom ought to follow the holy catholic church of Rome, as there is a
special title thereof De catholica fide and Sancta Romana ecclesia.


phil. That is nothing material, seeing the things of God be not subject to
ma^s laws. And divine matters must be ordered by the word of God, and not of
man.


M. Dee. What will you say, if I can prove, that Christ builded his church
upon Peter: and that out of S. Ciprian? will you then believe, that the bishop
of Rome ought to be supreme head of the church?


Phil. I know what S. Ciprian writes in that behalf. But he means nothing
so as you take it.


M. Dee. S. Ciprian has these words: quod super Petrum fundata suit ecclesia
tanquam super originem vnitatis. That upon Peter was builded the church, as
upon the first beginning of unity.


Phil. Be declares that in an example: ye unity must be in the church, he
grounded on Peter his church alone, and not upon men: The which he does more
manifestly declare in the book De simplicitate praelatorum saying, in persona
vnius Christus dedit Dominus omnibus claues, vt omnium vtatate^ denotaret. In
ye person of one man, God gave the keys to al, that he in significacio^ thereby
declares the unity of all men.


M. Dee. How will you understand S. Ciprian? So? yt were good in deed.


Phil. I think you can not understand S. Ciprian better, then he does
declare him self.


London. I will desire you (master chau^celer) to take some pains, wc master
doctor Chadsey and master Dee, about his examinacion. For I must god to the
parliament house: And I will desire you to tarry diner with me.


phil. Then master Dee took again his former authority in hand, for want of
an other. And would have made a farther circumstaunce, dysgressing from his
purpose. To whom I said he knew not wherabout he went, and here withal he
laughed. And I said, his divinity was nothing but scoffing.


M. Dee. Yea? then I have done with you. And so went away.


phil. master Dee, you are to young in dyuynytie to reach me in the matters of
my faith: though you be learned in other things more then I, yet in divinity
I have been longer pracrysed then you, for any thing I can hear of you:
therefore be not to hasty, to judge that you do not perfectly know.


Chaun. Peter and his successors (from the beginning) have been allowed for the
supreme head of the church: and yt by ye scriptures. For that cause Christ
said unto him, in S. John thryse, feade my sheep, pasce oues meas.


Phil. That is none otherwise to be taken, the^ Ite, predicate, goo ye and
preach: which was spoken to al ye Apostels, as well as unto Peter. And ye
Christ said thrice, pasce oues meas, feade my sheep, it signifies nothing
else, but the earnest study, that the ministers of God ought to have in
preaching the word. God grant that you of the clergy would way your duty
in this behalf, more then you do. Is this a just interpretacio^ of the
scripture, to take pasce oues meas, for to be lord of the hole world? In this
mean while came in an other bacheler of divinity, which is a reader of Greek
in Oxforde belonging to the bishop. And he took upon him to help master
chaunceler.


Scoler. What will you say, if I can show you a Greek Author (called
Theophilacte) to interpret it so? Will you believe his interpretacion?


Phil. Theophilacte is a late writer, and one that was a favorer of the bishop
of Rome: and therefore not to be credited, since his interpretacion is contrary
to the manifest words of the scriptures, and contrary to the determinacion of
many general councels.


Scolar. In what general counsel was it otherwise, that the bishop of Rome was
not supreme head over al.


Phil. In Nyce counsel I am sure it was otherwise. For Athanasius was there the
chief B. and president of the council, and not the bishop of Rome.


Scolar. Nay that is not so.


phil. Then I perceive you are better seen in words, then in knowledge of
things. For I will gage with you what you will, it is so. As you may see in
the Epitome of the council.


Scoler. I will set Eusebius, and show ye contrary, and the book of general
councils. He went into my lords closet, and brought Eusebius, but the general
councels he brought not, saying (for saving of his honesty) that he could not
come by them. And there would have defended that it was otherwise in Eusebius,
but was not hable to show the same. And so shranke away confounded.


Chan. The church of Rome has been always taken for the hole catholic
church: therefore I would advise you, to come into the same with us. You se all the men of this realm do condemn you. And why will you be so singular?


Phil. I have said, and still do say, that if you can be hable to prove it unto
me, that I will be of the some. But I am sure that the church which you make so
much of, Note.
is a false church, and a Synagoge of Satan. And you with the learned me^ of
this realm do persecute ye true church, and condemn such as be ryghteouser
then you.


Chaun. Nay the Deuylles daughter.
Do you hear (master doctor) what he says? that the church of Rome is the
devil.


Chadsey. I wish you did think more reverently, of the church of Rome* What
will you say, if I can show you out of S. Austyne in his epistle written to
Pope. Innocentius, that the hole general counsel of Cartage did allow the
church of Rome to be chefest over al other?


Phil. I am sure you may show no such thing. And with there he set the book of
S. Austyne, and turned to the epistle: but he could not prove his allegacion
manyfestly, Thou falsifiest S. Austyne Chadsey.
but by conjectures in this wise.


Chadsey. Here you may see, that the counsel of Cartage writing to
Innocentius the Bishop, calls the sea of Rome the Apostolic sea. And besides
this, they write unto him, certifyeng him of things done in the council, for
the condemnacion of the Donatistes: requiring his approbations in the same.
Which they would not have done, if they had not taken the church of Rome for
the supreme head of others. And moreover you may see, how S. Austyne does
prove the church of Rome to be ye chatholike church, The succession of false
bishops, and not of Christ's faith.
by continual succession of the bishop until his time, which succession we can
prove until our days. Therefore by ye same reason of S. Austine, we say now,
that the church of Rome is the catholic church.


Phil. Master doctor, I have considered how you do way S. Austyne And
contrary to his meaning and words you would infer your false conclusion. A
false conclusion indede.
As concerning that it was called by him the Apostolical sea, that is not
material to prove the church of Rome now to be the catholic church. I will
grant it now that it is the apostolic sea in respect that Paul and Peter did
once there preach the Gospel, and abode for a certain season. I would you
could prove it to be the Apostolical sea of that true religion and synceritie,
as the Apostle left it, and did teach the same: The which if ye can do, you
might boast of Rome, as of the Apostolical sea, Otherwise it is now of no more
force, then if the Turk at Antioche, and at Jerusalem should boast of the
Apostolic seas, because the Apostles once did there abide, and founded ye
church of Christ. And where as by yt ye hole counsel of Carthage did write
unto Pope Innoce^tius, certifieng him of that was done in the general
counsel, and willing him to set his helping hand to ye suppressing of the
Donatistes, as they had done. That fact of the council proves nothing the
supremacy of the bishop of Rome, no more then if the hole conuocacion house
now gathered together, and agreyng upon certain articles, might send the
same to some Bishop, that upon certain impedimentes, is not present, willing
him to agree thereto, and to set them forth in his dioces. The which fact does
not make any such bishop of greater authority then the rest, because his
consent is brotherly required. And touching the succession of the bishops of
Rome brought in by saint Austine, makes nothing now thereby, to prove the same
the catholic church, onles you can conclude with the same reason as S.
Austyne does. And ye rehersall of ye succession of the bishops does tend to
this only, to prove ye donatistes to be heretykes, because they began, as well
at Rome as in Africa, to found an other church, then was grounded by Peter
and Paul, and by their successors. whom he recites until his time, which all
taught no such doctrine, neither no such church, as the Donatistes. And if
presently you be hable to prove by the succession of bishops of Rome (whereof
you do glory) that no such doctrine has been taught by any of the successors
of Peter's sea as is now taught and believed of us, you have good reason Against
us. Otherwise it is of no force, as I am hable to declare.


Chaun. Well master doctor, you se we can do no good, in persuadi^g of him, let
us mynyster the articles, which my lord has left us, unto him. How faye you
master Philpot to these articles? M. Johnson I pray you write his answers.


phil. Master chaunceler, you have no autorytye to enquire of me my belefe in
such articles, as you go about, for yt I am not of my lord of Londo^s diocese,
and to be brefe with you, I will make no further answer herin, then I have
already to the bishop.


Chaun. Why then, let us go our ways, and let his keeper take him away.


Thus ends the.vij. part of this tragedy.
The next day in the morning bytyme the bishop sent one of his men unto me, to
call me up unto his chapel to hear mass.
The bishops man
Master Philpot, where be you?

Phil. Who is that calls me?


B. man. My lords will is, you should rise, and come to hear mass. Will you
come o no*


phil. My stomach is not very good this morning: you may tell my lord I am
sick After this the keeper was sent to bring me to my lord.


The keeper. Master Philpot, you must rise, and come to my lord.


Phil. I am at your commandment (master keeper) as soon as I can: and going
out of the prisone he asked me, saying.


The keeper Will you go to mass?


phil. My stomach is to raw to digest such raw meats of flesh, blood, and
bone this morning. After this my keeper presented me to the bishop in his hall.


London. Master Philpot, I charge you to answer to such articles, as my
chaplayne master Dee, and my regester have from me, to obiecte against you: go
and answer them.


phil. My lord. Omnia iudicia debent esse publica. Aliudgementes ought to be
public Therefore if your lordship has any thing to charge me lawfully withal,
let me be in judgment lawfully and openly called, and I will answer according
to my dewtie, otherwise in corners I will not.


London. Thou art a folishe knave, I see well Enough. Thou shall answer whether
thou will or no, go thy ways with them I say.


Phil. I may well goo with them at your lordships pleasure, but I will make the^
no further answer then I have said already.


London. No will thou knave? Have him away, and set him in the stocks. what
folishe knave?


Phil. In deed (my lord) you handle me with others, like foles: and we must be
content to be made foles at your hands: stocks and violence is your
byshoplyke almose. You go about by force in corners to oppress, and be
ashamed, that your doings should cum to light. God shorte^ your cruel
kingdom, for his mercyes sake. And I was put by and by into ye stocks, in an
house alone separate from my fellows. God be praised, that he has thought me
worthy to suffer any thing for his names sake: better it is to sit in the
stocks of this world, then to sytt in the stocks of a damnable conscience.


Mark here the proceeding, Ex officio. The next day after, an hour before day
the bishop sent for me again by the keeper.
Keeper. MAster Philpot arise: you must come to my lord.


phil. I wonder what my lord means, that he sends for me thus early. I
fear he will use some vyole^ce toward me, wherefore I pray you make him this
answer, that if he send for me, by an order of law, I will come and answer:
otherwise since I am not of his diocese, neither he is mine ordinary, I will
not (without I be vyolently constrained) come unto him,


Keeper. I will goo tell my lord what answer you make, and so he went away to
the bishop, and immediately returned with two of the bishops men, saying that I
must come, whether I would or no.


Phil. If (by violence) any of you will enforce me to goo, then must I goo:
other wise I will not. and therewith one of the^ took me with force by the arm,
and led me up unto the bishops galerye.


Land. What? thou art afolyshe knave in deed, thou will not come, without thou
be fett.


Phil. I am brought in deed (my lord) by violence unto you, and your crueltye
is such, yt I am afraid to come before you. I would your lordship would ge^tlie
proceed against me, by the law.


London. I am blamed of the lords the bishopes, for that I have not dispatched
thee er this. And in faith I made suit to my lord cardinal and to al ye
conuocacion house, yt they would hear ye. And my lord of Lincoln stood up,
and said that you were a frantike fellow, and a man that would have the last
word. And they all have blamed me, because I have brought the so often before
the lords openly, and they say it is meat and drink to you, to speak in an
audience, you glory so of your self.

Wherefore I am commanded to take a farther order with thee. And in good faith
if thou will not relent, I will make no farther delay Mary, if thou will be
conformable, I will yet forgive thee all that is paste: And shall have no hurt
for any thing that is already said or done.


Phil. My lord, I have answered you al ready in this behalf, what I will do.

And as for the report of master white, bishop of Lincoln^, I pass not: who
is known to be mine enemy, for yt I being archdeacon did excommunicate him,
for preaching naughty doctrine. If Christ my master were called a mad man, it
is no marvel, though you count me fra^tyke.


London. Had not you a pygge brought thee the other day, with a knyfe in it?

Wherefore was it (I pray thee) but to kyl thy self? Or as it is told me
(mary, and I am cou^celled to take heed of the) to kyl me? but I fear the not.
I trow I am able to tread the under my foot: do the best thou can.


Phil. My lord, I can not deny, that there was a knyfe in the prgges belie,
that was brought me. But who put him in, or for what purpose, I know not,
onles it were, because he that sent the meat, thought I was without a knyfe,
and so put him in. But other things your lordship needs not to fear: for I
was never without a knyfe, since I came into prison. And touching your own
person, you should live long, if you should live until I would go about to kyl
you. And I confess, by violence your lordship is hable to ouerco^me me.


London. I charge the answer to mine articles. Hold him a book. Thou shall
swear to answer truly, to al such articles, as I shall demand thee of.


Phil. I will first know your lordship to be mine ordinary, before I swear
herin.


London, What? we shall have an Anabaptist of thee, which thinks it not
lawful to swear before a Judge.


Phil. My lord I am no Anabaptist. I think it lawful to swear before a
co^petent Judge, being lawfully required,

But I refuse to swear in these causes before your lordship, because you are
not mine ordinary.


London. I am thine ordinary, and here do pronounce by sentence interrogatory,
that I am thine ordinary, and that thou art of my dioces: and here he bad call
in mo to bear witness. And I make thee (taking one of his servants by ye
arm) to be my notary. And now harke^ to my articles, to ye which (when he had
red them) he monished me to make answer. And said to ye keeper, fet me his
fellows, and I will make the^ to be witness against him. In the mean while came
in one of ye sherifs of London, who^ the B. (calling for.ij. chaires) placed by
him saying: M. sherif I would you should understand, how I do proceed against
this man. M. sherif you shall hear, what articles this man does mai^taine. And
so he red a rableme^t of feigned articles, yt I should deny baptism to be
necessary to them ye were borne of christian persons. That I denied fasting
and prayer, and al other good deeds. And yt I maintained only bare faith to be
sufficient to salvation, what so ever a man did besides. And I maintained God
to be the author of al sin and wyckednes, be feign to imagine these
blasphemous lies against me? you might as well have said I had killed your
father: the scriptures say, that God will destroy all them yt speak lies. And
is not your lordship ashamed, to say before this worshipful gentle man (who
is unknown unto me) that I maintain these abominable blasphemies, which you
have rehearsed. which if I did maintain, I were well worthy to be counted an
heretic, and to be burned an hundred times, if it were possible.


London I do object them unto thee, to hear what thou will say in them, and
how thou can purge thy self of them.


phil. Then it was not justly said in the beginning of your lordship, that I
did maintain them, since almost I hold none of al those articles you have red,
in form as they are written.


London. How say thou? will thou answer to them or no?


Phil. I will first know you to be mine ordinary, and that you may lawfully
charge me with such things, and than afterward being lawfully called in
judgment, I will show my mind fully thereof, and not otherwise.


London. well then, I will make thy fellows to be wytnes against the^: where
are they? come.


Keeper. They be here my lord.


London. Com hither syrs, hold them a book, you shall swear by ye co^tentes of
that book, that you shall (al manner of affections laid aparte) say ye truth of
al such articles, as you shall be demanded of, concerning this man here present
which is a very naughty man, and take you head of him, that he does not deceive
you, as I am afraid he does you much hurt, and strength you in your errors.

Prisoners.
My lord, we will not swear, except we know whereto, we can not accuse him of no
evil, we have been but a whil acquaynted with him.


phil. I wonder your lordship knowing the law, will go about, (contrary to the
same) to have infamous persons to be witnesses: for your lordship does take
them to be heretics, and by the law an heretic can not be a witness.


London. Yes one heretic against an other may be witness well enough. And
master sheriff, I will make one of them, to be witness against an other.


Phil. You have the law in your own hand, and you will do what you list.


My prison fellows. No my lord.


London. No will? I will make you swear, whither you will or no. I wene they be
Anabaptists (master sheriff) they think it not lawful to swear before a
judge.


phil. We think it lawful to swear for a man iudicially called, as we are not
now, but in a blind comer.


London. Why then, seeing you will not swear against your fellow, you shall
swear for your selfs, and I do here in the presence of M. sheryf, object the
same articles unto you, as I have don unto him, and do require you under the
pain of excommunication, to answer particulerly unto every one of the^, when
you shall be examined, as you shall be, by and by examined after, by my regester
and some of my chaplains.

My lord, Prisoners.
we will not accuse our selves. If any man can lay any thing against us, we are
here ready to make answer thereto: otherwise we pray your lordship not to burden
us, for some of us are here, before you we know no just cause why.


London. M. sherif, I will trouble you no longer with these froward men.

And so he rose up, and was going away, talkyng with master sheryf.


Phil. Master sheryf, I pray you record, how my lord proceeds against us in
corners without al order of law, having no just cause to lay against us And
after this were all commanded to be had away. And I was commanded to be put
in the stocks, where I sat from morning until night, and the keeper at night
upon favor let me out.


The sunday after, the Bishop came into the colehouse at night, with the
keeper, and viewed the house saye^g that he was never here before. whereby a man
may guess, how he has kept Gods commandment in visiting the prisoners,
seeing he was never with them that have been so nigh his nose. And he ca^ not
then for any good zeal, but to view the place, and thought it to good for me,
and therefore after supper between eight and nine he sent for me, saying:

London.
Sir, I have great displeasure of the Queen and the counsel, for keeping you so
long, and for lettyng you have so much liberty. And besides that, you be
yonder, and strengthen the other prisoners in their errors, as I have laid
wayt for your doings, and am certifyed of you well enough. I will sequester you
therefore from them, and you shall hurt no mo as you have done.

And I will out of hand dispatche you, as I am commanded, onles you will be a
conformable man.

Phil. My lord you have my body in your custody, you may transporte it whither
it please you, I am content. And I would you would make as quick expedition in
my judgment, as you say. I long therefore, and as for conformity I am ready
to yield to al truth, if any can bring better then I.


London. Why? you will believe no man but your self, what so ever they say.


phil, My belefe must notheng upon men's sayenges, without sure authority of
Gods word, ye which if any body ca^ show me, I will be plia^t to yt. Otherwise
I ca^ not go from my certain faith to an uncertain.


Lon. Have you the^ ye truth only?


Phil. My lord I will speak my mind fully unto you, and upon no malice I bear
you, before God. You have not ye truth, neither are you of the church of God.
But you persecute both ye truth and ye true church of God, for yt which cause
you ca^ not prosper long. You see God does not prosper your doings according
to your exspectation, he has of late showed his just judgment against one of
your greatest doers who by report dyed myserably. Gardener.
I envy not your authority you are in. You yt have learning should know
best, how to rule. And seeing God has restored you to your dignity and living
again, use ye same to gods glory, and to ye setting forth of his true
religion: other wise it will not continue, do what you ca^.


London. With this saye^g, he was apaused, and said at lenght: that good man
was punished for such as thou art.

Where is the keeper, come let him have him to ye place yt is provided for him.
Go your way before. And he followed me, calling yt keeper aside, co^mau^ding to
keep al men from me, and narowly to search me, as the sequel did declare, and
brought me to his privy door, that goes into the church, and commanded two
of his men to accompany the keeper, and to see me placed. And afterward I
passed through Paul's up to the lollards tower, and afterward turned along all the west side of Paul's through the wall, and passing through six or seven
doors, came to my lodging through many straites: where I call to remembrance,
that strait is the way to heaven. And it is in a tower right on the other
side of lollardes tower, as high almost, as the battlements of Paul's, eight
foot breadth and thyrten of length, And all most over the prison where I was,
before, having a wyndo opening toward the East, by the which I may look over
the tops of a great many of houses, but se no man passing into the^. And who
so walks in ye bishops utter galery, going to his chapel, may see my windo
and me standing in the same, and as I was come to my place the keeper plucked of
my gown and searched me very narowly, and took away pe^nar, inkhorne, gyrdel,
knyffe, but (as God would) I had an ynkeling a little before I was called of my
removing, and thereupon made an errant to the stole, where full sore against my
will I cast away many a sweet letter, and friendly, but that I had written of my
last examinacion before, I thrust into my hose, thinking the next day to have
made and end thereof, and with going it was fallen down to my leg, the which
he by feling did sone espy, and asked what that was, I said, they were
certain letters. And with that he was very busy to have the^ out. Let me
alone, said I, I will pluck them out. And with that I put in my hand, having
two other letters therein, and brought up the same writing to my codpece, and
there left it, giving him the other two letters that were not of any great
importau^ce. The which for to make a show, that they had been wayghtie, I
began to tear as well as I could, till they snatched the^ from me, and so
deluded him (I thank God) of his purpose. After this he went his way, and as
he was going, one of the^ that came with him said, yt I did not deliver yt
writings I had in my hose, but two other letters I had in my hand before. No
did quod he? I will go search him better, yt which I hearing, co^uaied mine
examinacio^ I had written, into an other place, besides my bed, and took all the
letters I had in my purse, and was tearing of them when he came again, and as
he came, I threw the same out of the windo, saying that I heard what he said.
Wherefore I did prevent his searching again, whereof I was right glad, God be
praised that gave me that present shyft to blind their eyes, from the knowledge
of my writings the which if they had known, it would have been a great
occasion of more straiter keeping and loking unto, although they look as
narrowly as they may.


The next day after, my keeper came before day in the morning, to call me down,
and so was brought down into his wardrobe, where with a keeper I was left, and
there continued all the day. But after dinner, I was called down into the
chapel before the bishop of London, The bishop of S. David, M. Mordau^t, one
of the Queen's council, master archdeacon of London: and before a great meany
mo Balamits, and the bishop spoke unto me in this wise,

Sir, here I object and lay unto you in the presence of my lord of S. David's,
and of master Mordau^t, and of these worship full men^ these artycles here in
this Libel contained: and openly red them, to whom when I would partycularly
have answered to some of his blasphemies, he would not permit me: but said I
should have leisure enough to say what I would, when he had said, and to these
here I add an other shedel. Also I require the to answer to the cathechisme
set forth in the scysmaticall time of king Edward. Also I will the to answer to
certain co^clusions, agreed upon both in Oxforde and Cambryge. And I here do
bring furthe these witnesses against thee, in thy own presence: namely my
lord of S. David's, master Mordau^t, and master Harpesfeld, with as many of you
as were present in the disputacion he made in the conuocacion house, willing
you to testify (of your oaths taken upon a book) his stubburne and vnreuere^t
behaueour he did there use, against the blessed sacrament of the altar, give
me a book, and receiving one, he opened the same, saying: I will teach him
here one trick in our law, which he knows not, yt is, My lord of S. David's
because you are a B, you have this privilege, that you may swear Inspectis
euangelijs and non tactis, by loking on the gospel book without touching the
same. And so he opened the book in his sight, and shut it again, and caused
the other to put their hands on the book and took their oath. And wylled them
to resort to his regester to make their deposicions, when they might be best at
leisure. And afterward he turned to me, and said: Now sir, shall you answer,
but in two words, whether you will answer to these articles, which I have laid
unto you directly, yea, or nay.

phil. My lord you have told a long tale against me, containing many lieng
blasphemies, which can not be answered in two words: besides this, you
promised me at ye beginning that I should say what I could for my defense. And
now will you not give me leave, to speak. What law is this?


London. Speak yea, or nay. For you shall say no more at this time the cause
was (as I guess) that he saw so many there gathered to hear.


Phil. Then my two words you would have me speak shall be that I have appealed
from you, and take you not for my sufficient judge.


London. In deed (master Mordau^t) he has appealed to the king and to the
Queen, but I will be so bold with her majesty, to stay that appeal in mine
own hands.


phil. You will do what you list, my lord you have the law in your hands.


London. Will thou aswere or no?


Phil. I will not answer otherwise, the^ I have said.


London Regester, note his answer that he makes.


Land Knock him in the head with an hatchet, or set up a stake and burn me
out of hand, without farther law, as well you may do so, as do that you do, for all is without order of law. Such tyranny was never seen as you use now a
days. God of his mercy destroy your cruel kingdom. And whiles I spoke this,
the bishop went away in haste.


S. David. Master Philpot, I pray you be quiet, and have pacyence with you.


Phil. My lord I thank God I have patience to bear and abide all your cruel
intentes against me, not withstanding I speak this earnestly being moved there
unto justly, to notify your unjust and cruel dealinges of me^ in corners
without all due order of law.


At night I was conducted by three or four to my collehouse, and in the
morning the next day called down by time by my keeper, and brought again in to
the wardrobe, where I remained until the bishop had heard his mass, and
afterward sent up for me unto his inward parler, and there he called for a
chair to sit down and braught his infamous Libell of his forged articles in
his hand, and set down, willing me to draw nere unto him, and said.

I Am this day appointed to tarry at home from the parliament house, to examine
you and your fellows, upon these articles, and you stand dalieng with me and
will neither answer to nor fro. I wys al your exceptions will not serve you.
will it not be a fayer ho^nestie for you (think you) that when thou come
before my lord Mayer and the shriffes, and other worshipful audience, when I
shall say before them al, that I have had the these many times before me, and
before so many learned men, and then thou could say nothing, for that you
stand in, for all thy bragges of learning, nether would answer directly to
any thing.

phil. My lord, I have told you my mind plain enough, but yet I do not inte^d
to lose that privilege the law gyuethe me, the which is free choice to answer,
where I am not bound, and to this privilege will I cleave unto until I be
compelled otherwise.


London. Well, I perceive you will play the obstynate fool. Lay thyn
appellation, when thou come in judgment, and answer in the mean while to
these articles.


phil. No my lord by your leave, I will not answer to them, until my lawful
appeal be tried.


London. Well thou shall hear the^, and with that he began to read them.


Phil. I shranke back into the windo, and looked on a book, and after he had
read them over, he said unto me.


London. I have read them over, although it has not pleased you to hear me. I
marvel (in good faith) what thou meanest, to be so willful and so stubburne,
seeing thou may do well enough if thou list. It is but of sigularitie, do
you not see all the realm against thee?


phil. My lord, I speak unto you in the witness of God, before who^ I stand,
ye I am nether wedded, unto mine own will, nether stand upon mine own
stubbernes or singularity, but upon my conscience instructed by Gods word.
And if your lordship can show better evidence than I have for a good faith, I
will follow the same.


London. What? thou will not (lo) for all yt. well all that is past shall be
forgotten: and be conformable unto us? I wis thou myghtest find as much favor
as thou would desire.


Phil Then I perceauing that he fawned so much on me, thought it good to give
him some comfort of rele^ting to the end I might openly give him and his
hipocritical generacio^ openly a further foil, perceiving that they dare
reason openly with none, but with such as be unlearned, and forlacke of
knowledge not hable to answer, or else with such as they have a hope, that
(for fear or love of the world) will recant. I said my lord it is not
unknown to you, that I have openly in the audience of a great nombre stand to
the maintenance of these opinions I am in, and by learning did offer to
defend them. Therefore (my Lord) I would it might openly appear to the world,
that I am won by learning, or else what will they say, but that either for
fear or love of the world, I am without any just ground, turned from the
truth? And if I have any find of learning openly showed, I shall be as
comfortable as you may require me.


London. Yea mary, now ye speak so^what like a reasonable man. I wis you
might have had a great deal more favor in my house and liberty the^ you have
had. And you shall lack nothing that is within my house, call for it and you
shall have it. And what is it that you would openly by learning somewhat be
satisfied? tell me.


phil My lord I have openly said, and do believe it also, that your sacrifice
of ye mass is no sacrament.


London. What? do you deny the presence of Christ in the sacrament?


Phil. No my lord, I deny not the presence of Christ in ye sacrament, but I
have denied ye sacrament of the altar, as it is used in your mass, to be the
true sacrament of Christ's institution. And first it must be proved a
sacrament, or there can be any find of presence granted.


London. Why, do you deny the mass to be a sacrament? I pray you what is a
sacrament? is it not a sign of a holy thing, as. Austine does defyne it?


phil. Yes verily, that it is.


London. Then I make this argument, unto you. A sacrament is the sign of a
holy thing: but the mass is the sign of a holy thing, ergo it is a sacrament.


Phil. You must add this to your mayor, or first proposition, as S. Austine
does mean: that a sacrament is the sign of a holy thing instituted of God and
commanded: for otherwise it can be no sacrament, for all men can not make a
sacrament.


London. I grant that, and such a sign of a holy thing is ye mass of
Christ's institution.


Phil. I deny that, my lord?


London. I will prove this by S. Austine by and by. I will go show you the
book, and you shall have any book I have, that you will demand. Hoo? who is
without there? call me master doctor Chadsey, master Archdiacon, master
Cosins, and other chaplaynes hither. M. Cousin and his morrow mass chaplayne.


Here my lord. M. doctor Chadsey is gone to westminster: and master
Archdeacon was here even now.


London. Master Cosyns, I pray you examine him upon these articles, and wryt
his answer he makes to every one of them. I will go examine his fellows, and
send you S. Austyne by and by. I find this man more conformable then he was
before.


Cosyns. I trust my lord you shall find him at lenght a good Catholic man.
Mary here be a sight of heresies, I dare say, you will hold none of them,
neither stand in any of them. How say you to the first?


phil. M. Cosyns, I have told my lord already, that I will answer to none of
these articles, he has objected against me. But if you will with learni^g answer
to that which is in question between my lord and me, I will gladly hear and
common with you.


Cosins. No will you? Why, what is that then, which is in question between my
lord and you?


Phil. Whether your mass be a sacrament or no.


Cosins. What? the mass to be a sacrament? who ever douted thereof?


Phil. If it be an undoubted truth, you may the sooner prove it: for I doubt
much thereof.


Cosins. Why I will prove it. It is the sign of a holy thing: Ergo it is a
sacrament.


Phil. I deny your antecedent.


Cosins. What will you so? then there is no reasoning with you. Thus master
Cosins gave over in ye plain fylde, for want of farther proof. And tha^ ye
morrow mass chaplai^ began to speak for his occupacio^ and with ye M. harpesfild
came out from my lord with S. Austi^s epistles, saie^g.


Harpesfild. My lord has sent you here S. Austin to look upon. And I pray you
look what he says in a certain epistle, which he writes, I will read over the
hole. Here may you hear the celebracion of the mass, and how he reproves
them that went a hawki^g and hunting before the celebracion of the same, and yt
on ye sabbat and holy days.


phil. I perceive the contents of this epistle. And I see nothing herein
against me, nether nothing that makes for the proof of your sacrament of the
Mass.


Harpsfild. No? does he not make me^tio^ of the mass, and the celebracio^
thereof. What can be spoken more plain?


Phil. S. Austin means of the celebracion of the communion, and of the true
yse of the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, and not of your private
mass, which you of late years have erected in the stead thereof. For this
word Mass has been an old term attributed to the communion, even from the
primative church. And I pray you tell me what Missa does signify, I think not
many that say mass, can well tell.


Cosins. No can? that is marueil.


Phil. Then tell if you can. But master Cosins and my morrow mass chaplayn were
du^me loking upon master Harpesfeld for help, and at lenght he spoke.


Harpesfild. You think it comes of the Hebrew word Massahe, as though none
were seen in Hebrew but you.


Phil. I have not gone so long to scole, to derive the significacio^ of missa,
which is a latin word out of Hebreu. But I have learned to interpret Greek
words by Greek, and Latin by Latin, and Hebreu by Hebreu. I take the communion
to be called missa, a Mittendo, of such things as (at the celebracion of the
communion was sent by such as were of ability, to the relefe of the poor
where the rich brought after their devotion and ability, and required the
minister in the celebracio^ of the communion, to pray unto God for them, and to
accept their common alms, which they at such times did send for the help
of their poor brethern and systers. And for this cause was it called Missa as
learned men do withes. At the which celebracion of the mass all that were
present did communicate under both kinds, according to Christ's institucion,
as they did in S. Austines time. But onles you can show that your mass is
used as that was, you shall never by the name of mass (which S. Austine
attributed to ye true use of ye communion) prove your private mass to be a
sacrament, onles you can prove the same use now to be in your mass, as was
then: which is clean contrary.


Harpsfild. What? deny you the Mass to be a sacrament? for shame speak it
not.


Phil. I will not be ashamed to deny it, if you can not prove it.


Harpsfild. Why, it is a sacrifice, which is more then a sacrament.


Phil. You may make of it, as much as you list, but yet shall you never make it
a sacrifice, as you ymagine thereof. But first it must be a sacrament, for of
the sacrament, you deduce your sacrifice.


Harps. Why, does not Christ say, this is my body, and does not the priest
pronounce the same, that Christ did?


phil. The pronunciatyon is not only enough, onles the words be therewith all
applied to the use, as Christ spoke the^ to. For though you speak the words
of baptism over water never so many times yet there is no baptism, onles there
be a christian person to be baptized.


Harpsfeld. Nay that is not like: for Hoc est corpus meum, is an indicative
proposicion, showing a working of God in the substance of orcad and wine.


Phil. It is not only an indicatyue proposition, but also imperative or
co^mau^ding For he that said. Hoc est corpus meum, said also, accipite,
ma^ducate, take ye, eat ye. And except the former part of the institucio^ of
Christ's sacrament be accomplished according to the commandment, the later
part this is my body, can have no veryficacion: take it which way you will,
and how you will.

Morrow Mass chaplain.
Why than, you will make the sacrament to stand in the receiving, and that
receiving makes it a sacrament.


Phil. I do not say, that ye receiving makes it the sacrament only, but I
say, that a common receiving must needs be concurrent with the true sacrament
as a necessary member, without the which it cannot be a sacrament, because
Christ has made this a principal part of the sacrament, take ye, eat ye,
which you do not in your mass, according to Christ's institution. Wherefore it
can be no sacrament, for that it wants of Christ's institucion.


Cosins. We do not forbid none to come to it. But as many as list, may be
partakers with us at the mass, if they require it.


Phil, Nay that they shall not, though they require it. You will minister but
one kind unto them, which is not after Christ's institucio^. Besides that you
ought before you goo to mass, to exhort all that be present, to make a
sacrifice of thanks giving for Christ's passion with you, and to exhort them
to be partakers with you, according to Christ's commandment, saying unto all
that be present, take ye, eat ye. And likewise by preaching show forth the
Lords death, which you do not.


Cosins. What and if all things be done even as you would have it. And whiles
the minister is about to ministre the sacrament before any have received it,
there rise a soden hurly burly that the co^municantes be compelled to go away:
is it not a sacrament, for all that none has communicated beside the priest.


phil. In this case where al things are appointed to be done according to
Gods word, if incyde^t necessity had not let, I can not say, but it is a
sacrament, and that he which has received, has received the true sacrament.
After this the morrow Mass priest made this apishe reason.

Morrow mass Priest.
If the sacrament of the mass be no sacrament, onles all do receive it,
because Christ said, take ye, eat ye: the^ the sacrament of baptism is no
sacrament, where there is but one baptized. Because Christ said to his Apostles,
go preach the Gospel to all creatures, baptisyng al nations in the name of the
father. etc.


phil. Baptising al nations, in that saying of Christ is a commandment to the
Apostles, to baptize al sorts of me^, and to exclude none that do believe, be
he ge^til or Jew, not meaning al at once, for that were impossible. And there
is many examples that baptism may be singularly ministered to one person, as we
have example in Christ baptized of John^, and in ye Eunuche baptized of Philip,
with many mo such like. But so have you not of the sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ, but contrary wise by the express words of S. Paul, you are
commanded to use it in a communion and participation of many together: the xi.
to the Corin. Quoties conuenitis ad mandu candum, alius alium expectate. As
often as you come together, to eat (meaning the Lords supper) tarry one for an
other.

And also the minister in the celebration of the sacrament, speaks unto all that be present in Christ's behalf, to communicate with him, saying: take ye,
and eat ye. Wherefore as many as be present, and not communicate, do break
gods commandment in not receauyng the same, and ye minister is no just
minister, that does not distribute the sacrament, as Christ did, to all that
are present, and where Gods word is transgressed, there is not Christ
present, and consequently is no sacrament.


Harpsfelde. What would you have it no sacrament without it be a communion?


phil. I make it not so, but Gods express word teaches me so, yea also all
the ancient writers. As S. Chrisosto^e writing upon the epistle to the
Ephesians, says, that ye oblatio^, is in vain, where as none does communicate
with the priest. If by his judgment the action of the priest alone is in
vain, where is no communion, how can that be a sacrament, which he calls a
vain oblatio^, and a vain standing at the altar?


Cosins. You are such an other fellow, as I have not heard, yt will not have the
mass to be a sacrament: you are no man for me to reason with all. Come, let us
goo, poyntyng to the morrow mass chaplayn, we will leave you (master archdiacon)
and him together. And so they went away. Afterward the archdiacon fell into
earnest persuasions with me, saying:


harpsfild. Master Philpot, you and I have been of old acquayntance a long time,
we were scolefelowes, both in wynchester and in Oxforde many years, wherefore I
must wyshe you as well to do as my self: and I pray you so think of me.


Phil. I thank you for your good will toward me, but if you be deceived, (as
I am sure you are) I shall desire you, not to wyshe me deceived with you, For
before God I tell you plainly, you are highly deceived, and maintain false
religion, and be not those men you take your selfs for. And if you do not
repent, and leave of your persecuting of christ's truth, you will go to the
dyuell for it. Therefore consider it in time, I give you warnyng, for in the day
of judgment else I shall be a wytnes against you, that I told you this here
talkyng together.


Harpesfild. Fie, that is but your own vain syngular opinion. I perceive you
are still now, that man you were in Oxforde.


Phil. I trust you can report no notorius evil, that ever you knew by me
there.


Harpsfeld. I can say no evil of your conversation, but I knew you to be a
studious man. Mary if you remember, when we met in disputacion in paruis, you
would not lightly give over, and for that cause I speak that I have said.


Phil. Master Harpesfeld, you know in the scoles at Oxforde, when we were young
men, we did strive much upon vayn glory, and upon contention, more than for
the truth. But now our years and our ryper learning teach us, to fall to a
truth, which must be our portion for ever. And if I was then (in my time of
ignorance) earnest in mine own cause, I ought now to be earnest in my master
Christ's cause, and in his truth. I know now, that nothing done upon vain
glory and singularity, can please God, have it never so goodly a show.
Wherefore I pray you, judge not so of me now.


Harpfi. What? will you think your self better learned, then all the learned
men in this realm?


Phil. My faith hengeth not upon the learned of the world, but upon the
learned after Gods word.


Harpf. Well, I will talk with you no more as now, but pray to god to open your
heart.


Phil. I pray God open both our hearts, to do more his will, then we have done
in times past.


Harpf. Ho keeper take him away with you


Phil. I pray you M. Harpsfeld, tell me what this pronowne Hoc does demonstrate
and show in this indicative proposition as you call it, Hoc est corpus meum,
This is my body.


Harpf. It does demonstrate the substance of bread, which by the words
spoken by the priest, and by the omnipotency of God, is turned into the
substance of Christ's very body.


Phil. Is the substance of the bread (as you say) turned into Christ's body?


Harpf. Yea that it is.


phil. Why then, Christ's body receaueth daily a great increase of many
thousand pieces of bread into his body. And that is his body become now, which
was not before, and by this you would seem to make, that there is an alteracion
in Christ's glorified body: which is a wicked thing to think.


Harpf. Then he fet about again, and remembering better him self, and seeing
the inconvenience of his first assertion, of the transubstantiacion of the
bread into Christ's body, he said, that the substance of bread after the
words spoken by the priest, was euacuated or vanished away, by the omnipotency
of God.


Phil. This is an other song, the^ you said first. And here you may see, how
contrary you ar to your selves. For in deed your scole me^ do hold, yt the
very substance of bread is really turned into ye substance of Christ's body.
And now you perceauing of late ye inconvenience which is objected against you
in ye opinion of late you ar dryue^ to imagine a new shyfte, and say, the
substance of bread is euacuated contrary to yt your church has first believed
and taught. O what contrariety is there among you, and all to deface the
sincere truth?


Harpesfild. Is not God omnipotent? and cannot he do, as he has said?


Phil. But his omnipotency will not do as you say, contrary to his word and to
his honor: it is not Gods honor to include bodily in a piece of bread, and
of necessity to tie him thereto. It is not Gods honor, for you to make a
piece of bread, God and man: which you se before your face does putrify after a
certain time. Is not Gods omnipotency as hable to give his body with the
sacramental bread, as to make so many turninges away of the bread as you do?
And that directly against the scripture which calls it bread many times after
the co^secracio^. Are you not ashamed to make so many alteracions of the lords
holy institucion, as you do? And to take away the substanticall parts of the
sacrament, as, take ye, eat ye,: drink ye all of this. So ye this in
remembrance of me: and to place in their steades, hear ye, gase ye, knock
ye, worship ye, offer ye, sacrifice ye for the quick and the dead. If this be
not blasphemy to God and his sacrament, to add and to pluck away in this
sort, and that contrary to the mind of all ancient writers, and contrary to
the example of Christ and his Apostles, tell me.


Harpesfild. I know you have gathered the saienges of the doctors together,
which make for your purpose. I will talk no longer with you. And so to the end
as is written before.


The next day after dinner I was brought into my lords vpperhalle, and there
he called me before him, and his Regester, and before Doctor Chadsey, in the
presence of two homely ge^tilmen, and a priest, which I knew not saying.

I Do here lay unto this man in your presence, requiring you to be witness
against him, as much as you know in any of the^, these artycles, this book of
the cathethisme made in king Edwards days. Also these conclusyons agreed upon,
both in Oxforth and Cambryge: also I lay unto him, that he has despised the
censures of the church, and has stande^ accursed more then this twelf-moneth,
and never required absolution thereof. How say you? wast thou not accursed by
my lord Chaunceler?

Phil. I was excommunicated by him wrongfully, and without any just cause, and
without order of law, being never personally cyted.


London. Dyddest thou not tell me the other day, when I required thee to come
to the mass, that thou wast excommunicated, and therefore by the law could
not hear mass? How long have thou ben thus exco^municat?


Phil. More than this twelfe month and this half.


London. Lo, you may hear what he says, write it.


Phil. But as you would have written that I have said, I have been thus long
excommunicated, so also let him write, that I did require of my lord chau^celer
that did excommunicat me, my absolutio^, but he would not give it me, saye^g,
yt I was exco^municatus ipso iure, because I was an heretic, as it plesed him
to call me, therefore accursed by your law, and so commanded me to prison,
where I remain.

Why do you not require absolutio^ at my lords hands here now? A gentilman.



Phil. Because he is not mine ordinary, neither has by the law any thing to
do with me of right.


Land. What an obstinate fool is this? I tell thee, I will be thine Ordinary,
whether thou will or no.


Phil. And because of this your unrighteous force toward me, I have appealed
from you, and require you (master Regester) that my appeal may be entered in
writing.


London. Have you heard such a froward fellow as this? he seemed yesterdaye to
be very tractable, and I had a good hope in him. I tell thee, thou art of my
diocese.


Phil. I am of Wynchester dioces, and not of London dioces.


London. I pray you, may not a man be of two dioceses at once?


Phil. No that he can not.


London. Lo, will you see what an ignorant fool this is in ye law, in yt which
he would seem to be seen. I tell ye a man may be of three dioceses at once: as if
you were borne in London, by reason thereof thou should be of my dioces, or
else if thou were not borne but had a dignity here, also thou art to be
counted of my dioces, or else by reason of thy habitacion in my dioces.


Phil. In none of these respects I am of your lordships dioces. But for all
that this will not follow, that I dwelling at Winchester am (at that present) of
London diocese.


Land. What will you lay thereof: will thou recant, if I prove it?


Phil. But what shall I win, if you do not?


London. I will give the my byshoprik, if I prove it not.


phil. Yea but who shall deliver it me, if I win?


London. Thou art an arrogau^t fool. Enter their oaths, and take these
witnesses depositions. I must be gone to the parliament house.

A strange kynsman of mine.
After this spoke unto me a priest, standing by, askyng me whether I was kyn to
my lord Rich or no?


Phil. I said, he said so himself unto me the other day: but how I know not.


Chadsey. I heard him say, that he was his very nigh kynsman.

Balaeamit kynsman.
Why then you and I must be of kyne, for he is my very nygh kynsma^. How
chance it that you and I be of contrary judgments?


Phil. It is no marvel that, for Christ prophesied, yt the father shall be
divided against the son, and the son against the father, for his truths
sake.


The Bala. You do hold (as I understand) against the blessed sacrament of the
altar, and against the holy mass.


phil. If you can prove it a sacrament, I will not hold against you.


The Bala. What? prove it a sacrament, quod a? Does not S. Paul say: Quae
oculus non vidit, and auris non audiuit, quae preparauit Deus diligentibus,
that such things as the eye has not seen, neither ear heard, God has
prepared for them that love him?


Phil. That saying of S. Paul concerns nothing your sacrament, but is meant
of the heavenly joys, that be prepared for all faithful beleuers.


The Bala. Why the^ I perceive you understand not S. Paul: by God you are
deceived.


phil. You ought not to swear kynsman (if you will I shall so call you) and
without disworship of our kynred, I understand S. Paul as well as you, and
know what I say. And with that showed him a Greek testament, with Erasmus
tra^slacion, and with the old also, demanding him which text he was best
acquaynted withal.


Balaamit. I knew Greek to once, as well as you: I care not, which you read.


Phil. You know them then all alyke, you understand the one as well as the
other. with this my Balaamit kinsman departed in a furye.


The next day after, I was brought down again after dinner, to the chapel: and
there my Balaamit kinsman (to verify the scriptures, that a man's own kinsfolks
shall be his ennemis) came in with the bishop, as a witness against me. And there
the bishop caused an other that came to him about other matters, to swear also
to be a witness against me, which was a priest also, saying.

YOu shall swear to depose all the truth of certain articles you shall be
enquired of, concerning this man. And here I (according to the law) do bring
them forth in thy presence.

Phil. My lord, I do not agree to the production of them, but do appeal from al
these and others your procedinges against me. And require you master regester,
yt my appeal may be entered, and I will give you for your labor.


Regester. Your appeal shall be entered at leisure, whom do you appeal unto?
tell me.

I appeal to a higher judge, Phil.
as to the lieutenaunt of the archebishopryke of Cantorbury: for I know not who
is bishop thereof at this present. With that the bishop went away, and my
balaamit kinsman looked byg upon me, but said never a word.

This I have in have scribled out all mine examinacio^ hitherto, that the same
which has been done unto me in dark, might come to light, and that the
papists unjust procedinges and nakedness in their false religion might be
known to their confusion. AMEM.


Jesus is God with us Amen. 1555. The examination of John^ Philpot had on S.
Andrews day last, before the bishop of Duresme, the B. of Chichester, the
bishop of Bathe, the bishop of London, the Prolocutor, master Christoforson,
and Doctor Chadsey, D. Morgan of Oxforde, master Hussy of the Arches, D.
weston, D. Harpsfild Archdeacon, master Cosins, and master Iohn^son regester to
the bishop of London, in his palace.
I Was coming being sent for with my keeper, and the bishop of London met me at
his hal door, and full manerly he played ye ge^tilma^ (...), to bring me before
ye lords, saye^g.

London. My lords, I shall desire you to take some pains with this man, he is
a gentilman, and I would be should do well, but he will wilfully cast away him
self.


Duresme. Come hither sir, what is your name?


phil. My name is Philpot.


Duresme. I have heard of that name to be a worshipful stock, and since you
be a gentilman, do as you may live worshipfully among other gentilme^. what is
the cause of your troble now?


phil. I told him the cause as in my former examinacions is expressed.


Duresme. Well, al causes set apart, will you now be a conformable man to the
catholic faith, and leave al new fangled opinions and heresies? I wis I was in
Germany with Luter, at the beginning of this, and can tell, how they began.
Leave them, and follow the catholic church through out the world, as the hole
realm now does.


Phil. My lord I am of ye catholic faith and desire to live and die in the
same. But it is not unknown to your lordship, that I with others these twenty
years have been taught an other manner of faith, than you now go about to
compel us unto. Wherefore it is requisite that we have a time to weigh ye same,
and to hear, how it agrees with Gods word. For faith is not at a soden,
nether won nether removed, but as S. Paul says, faith comes by hearing, and
heari^g by ye word. Fides ex au^iu^, auditus per verbum.


Chiche. And if you will give m leave my lord, I will show him, how he takes
the saying of S Paul amiss, as many other now of days allegeing the same do,
that they ought not be compelled to believe: where as S. Paul means of
infideles, and not of the faithful. And so S. Austin writing against ye
Donatistes, says, that the faithful may be compelled to believe


phil. S. Barnard (and it please your lordship) does take that sense of S. Paul
as I do, saying that Fides est suadenda and non imponenda, faith must be
persuaded to a man and not enjoined. And S. Austin speaks of such as were
first thoroughly persuaded by manifest scriptures, and yet would resyst of
stubburn wilfulnes.


Chichest. So Bernard means of infidels also.


phil. No my lord that he does not: for he writes not of ye infideles, for he
writes of such as were deceived by errors.


Chichest. My lord of Duresme, I have been so bold to interrupt your lordship of
your tale, I pray you now proceed on.


Duresme. M. Philpot, will you be of the same catholic faith and church with us,
you were baptized in, and your godfathers promised for you, and hold as we do?
and then may you be rydd out of trouble. I perceive you are learned, and it is
pity, but you should do well.


phil. I am of the same catholic faith and catholic church I was baptized
unto, and in that will I live and dye.


Duresme. That is well said, if you hold there, you can not do but well.


Chichest. Yea my lord, but he means otherwise than you do. Are you of the
same faith, your godfathers and godmothers were or no?


Phil. I can not tell what faith they were of certainly, but I am of ye faith I
was baptized unto, which is in ye faith of Christ: for I was not baptized in ye
faith of my godfathers, but in ye faith of christ


Christo. S. Austin says, that infantes are baptized in fide susceptorum, In
the faith of their godfathers.


Phil. S. Austin yet in so saying means of ye faith of Christ, which ye
godfathers, do or ought to believe, and not otherwise.


Dures. How say you, will you believe as we do, and all the learned of ye realm,
or no? and be of one church with us? My lords it is not unknown unto you,
Phil.
yt there has been always two churches.


Chichest. Nay, that is not so, there is but one catholic church.


phil. I shall desire your lordships to hear out my tale, and to take my
meani^g, for I know there is but one true church, but always from the
beginning there has been joined to the same true church a false church,
aduersarye to the true, and that was declared at the first in Abel and Cayn,
who persecuted and slew his brother, in whom (as S. Austine witnesses) is
represented the false and true church. And after that as soon as God had chosen
his peculiar people, and showed unto them his sanctuary, holy statutes, and
will, anon after arose the false church, and ten of ye.xij. tribes of Israel
divided the^ selves from the true church of Judah and Benjamin, and made to
the^ selves at Bethel, and set up golden calves, and yet pretended therewith to
serve God, and so abused his word. No withstanding God was displeased with
them, and ceased not his wrath, until he had utterly destroyed them.


Chichest. I will grant you, before the coming of Christ there were two
churches in the old law, but in the new law, sense Christ's coming, you
can not show it to be so, by the scripture.


phil. Yes my lord that I can, if you will give me leave. After Christ had
chosen his twelve Apostles, was there not a Judas in the new law, and a Simon
Magus? And were not they of ye false church?


Chichest. Yea but I mean after ye Gospel was written, where can you find me
two churches, after Christ had ascended, and sent the holy Ghost?


phil. The Gospel was within eight years after the Ascensio^ written by S.
Mathieu, and the writing thereof is not material to the declaration of these two
churches, to have been always from time to time, as by examples it may be
showed. And yet as evil as my memory is, I remember in the new testament, is
mention made of two churches, as it appears in the Apocalips, and also S.
Paul to the Thessalonians makes mention, that Antichrist with his false
generacio^ shall sit in the temple of God, to the which Chichester replied not.


Duresme. The church in the scripture is likned to a great fishers net, which
contains in it both good fishes and bad fyshes, I trust you will be of the
better sort and lean to the truth.


phil. My lord, it is my hole desire now to follow yt which is good, what
soever I have don in times past, and to cleave to Gods truth.


Duresme. Do you so, and then shall you do well. It is almost night my lord of
London, I must needs be gone.


London. Nay my lord of Duresme I must desire your lordship, and my lord of
Chichester, to tarry a little while. And before he had so said, the bishop of
Bathe went his way, without saye^g any word. What my lord of Bathe, will you be
gone? I pray you tarry. My lords I have earnest matters to charge this man
withal, whereof I would your lordships to be made privy. And I have them here
written in a lybel. I pray you sit down again, or else I will. First I lay to
him here, that he has written in a Bible which I took from him, this erroneous
saying, quod spiritus est vicarius Christi in terra, will thou abide by this
saying of thine, that ye spirit is Christ's vicar on earth?


Phil. My lord, it is not my saying, it is a better learned man's then mine.
For I use not to wryt mine own sayenges, but the notable sayenges of other
ancient writers, as all the other be, where ye find the same written.

And as I remember, it is in the saying of S. Bernarde, and a saying that I
need not to be ashamed of, nether you to be offended, as my lord of Duresine
and my lord of Chichester by their learning can discern, and will not reckon
it evil said.


London. No will? why? take away the first syllable, and it sounds Arius.


phil. That is far fetched in deed: if your lordship will scan men's sayengs in
such wise, you may find out what you list.


London. But to help this, I find moreover written with his own hand in an
other book: In me Ioanne Philpotto, vbi abundauit peccatum, superabundauit and
gratia. That is: in me John^ Philpot where sin did abound, grace has
superabou^ded. I pray you what superabou^daunt grace have you more the^ other
men? So said Arius, that he had the abundance of grace above al other.


phil. My lord you need not to be offended with that saying, more the^ ye
other, for it is the saying of S. Paul of him self, and I did apply it to my
self for my comfort, knowing that though my sins be huge and great in the
sight of God, yet is his mercy and grace above them all. And concerning Arius
and his adherentes, I defye them, as it is well known, I have written against
them.


London. Also I lay to thy charge, that thou killedst thy father, and wast
accursed of thy mother in her deathbed, as I can bring witness hereof.


phil. O lord, what blasphemy is this? has your lordship nothing of truth to
charge me wtal, but (as I may speak it with your honors) such forged
blasphemous lies? If any of these ca^ be proved, I will promis here to recant at
Paul's cross, what you will have me. I am so sure they are as great
blasphemies, as may be objected against any man: Ha my lords, I pray you
considre how my lord of London has hitherto proceeded against me. For in deed
he has none other but such pretensed slau^derous lies.


Chichest. They be parorga: That is matters beside the purpose.


Dures. My lord, I must needs bid you fare well.


London. Nay my lord, here is a letter which your lordship I shall desire to
hear or you goo. This man (being in my keeping) has taken upon him to write
letters out of prison, and to peruerte a young gentilman, called Master Grene in
my house (call him hither) and has made a false report of his examinacion, as
you shall hear, not being content to be evil him self, but to make others as
bad as him self, he all to tare the letter, when he saw my man went about to
search him. But yet I have pieced it again together, and caused a copy to be
written thereof, and he read the torn letter bidding master Christo for so^, and
doctor Morgan to mark the copy thereof.

The contents of the letter was the examinacion of master Grene before the
bishop of London, in the presence of master Feknam Deane of Paul's, and of
diverse others whose ready answers in the scriptures and in the doctors was
wo^dered at, of the deane him self, and of many others, as master Feknam did
report. And that he was first committed to doctor Chadsey, and after to doctor
Dee the great coniurer, and to have his meat from the bishops own table. How
say you my lords? was this well done of him, being my prisoner to write this?
And yet he has written as shamfully, that he was in doctors Chadseys keeping.
how say you master doctor Chadsey? is it not a shamfull lie?


Chad. Yes my lord, he was never in my keeping.


Land. Art thou not ashamed to write such shamfullyes? come hither master
Grene, did not I show you this letter?


Grene. yea forsooth my lord, you showed it me.


London. How think you my lords? Is not this an honest man to belie me, and
to call my chaplayne a great co^iurer? my lord of Duresme smyled thereat.


phil. Your lordship does mystake all things: this letter (as your lordship
may perceive and al other yt have herd ye same) was not written by me, but by a
fre^d of mine certyfye^g me at my request, how master Grene sped at my lord of
Lo^do^s hands: and there is nothing in yt letter ye other I or he ye wrote it,
need to fear, but that might be written, as my report.


London. Then tell me, who wrote it, if you dare.


phil. No my lord, it is not my deuty to accuse my friend: specially seeing you
will take all things to ye worst. Nether you shall never know of me, who wrote
it. Your lordship may se in ye end of ye letter, yt my fre^d did write unto me
upon the occasion of my appeal, which I have made to ye hole parlyament house,
about such matters as I am wrongfully troubled for.


London. I would see any so hardy, to put up thine appeal.


Phil. My lord I cannot tell, what God will work: I have written it, speed as it
may.


London. My lord, I have used him with much gentilnes, since he came to me, how
say thou? have I not?


phil. If to lie in the vilest prison in this town (being a gentilman and an
archdiacon) and in a cole house by the space of v. or. vi. wekes already,
without fire or candel, be to be counted gentilnes at your hands, I must needs
say I have found ge^tilnes. But there were never me^ so cruelly handled as we
are at these days.


London Lo, what a varlet is this? besides this (my lords) even yesterday he
procured his man to bring him a bladder of black powder, I cannot tell for what
purpose I.


phil. Your lordship needs not to mistrust ye matter, it is nothing but to make
ynke withal, for lack of ynke, as I had it before in the kings benche, when
my keeper took away my inthorne.


London. And why should thou goo about any such thing unknowing unto me
being thy keeper? for I am thy keeper in this house, I tell the.


phil. My lord, because you have caused my pennar and ynkhorne to be taken from
me, I would yet feign, yt my fre^des might understand what I lack, not that I
intended to write any thing, that I would be afearde should come to your sight.


London. More then this my lords, he caused a pigg to be roasted, and made a
knyfe to be put between the skyn and ye flesh, A great heresy,
for what purpose judge you, how say thou? dydest thou not so?


Phil. I can not deny but there was half a pig sent me, and under the same a
knyfe lyeng in the sawse, but for no ill purpose ye I know: your lordship may
judge what you will. It was not to kill my self, nor none other as you would
have men to believe, for I was never yet without a knife, since I came to prison
therefore all these be but false surmises, and not worth rehearsal.


London. I have here to lay to his charge (chefest of al) his book of ye report
of ye disputacio^ had in ye co^uocacio^ house, which is ye rankest heresy yt
may be, against the blessed sacrament of the altar. How say you M. doctor
weston? did he maintain the same there stubbornly or no?


weston. Yea my lord, that he did, and would never be answered. And it is
pytie, that the same worshipful congregation should be slaundered with such
untrue reports.


phil. You answered me in deed M.S. (being then prolocutor) goodly, with hold
thy peace, and have him to prison and put him out of the house. I have red the
book, and I find the report of every man's argument to be true in all points.
And if there be any fault, it is because it sets forth your doings to
favorably, and nothing like to that you did use me, being an archdiacon, and
not of the worst of the house.


weston. Thou art no Archdeacon.


phil. In deed M. S. ye have among you vnarchediaconed me as now (I thank God
of it) and that without all order of law.


London. I pray you my lords harken what he writes of him self, I red it
over this morning, and made a note of it. He says that D. Weston called him
frantike and mad man, and said he should go to Bethlehem.


phil. In deed my lord, so it pleased M. weston to taunt at me, and say his
shameful pleasure: but yet I was no whyt the more so, for all his sayenges, then
Christ was, when the Scribes and the Pharisees said likewise, he was mad, and
that he was possessed of a deuell, most blasphemously.


Duresme. My lord of London, I can tarry no longer. I must needs bid you
farewell M. Philpot me thinks you have said well, that you will abide in the
catholic faith and in the catholic church: I pray you so do, and you shall
do right well. And so he departed with M. weston and M. Hussy.


Phil. I have purposed so to do (how so ever I speed) by Gods grace.


Land. I pray you my lord of Chichester, and M. prolocutor, and M. doctor
Morgane to common with him, whiles I bring my lord of Duresme going


Christoforson. M. Philpot, I was acquaynted with you at Rome, if you be
remembered, but you have forgotten me, and talked somewhat with you of these
matters, and I find you now the same man as you were then, I wyshe it were
otherwise. For gods sake be conformable to men that be better learned then
you, and stand not in your own conceat.


phil. Where as you call me to remembrance of acquayntau^ce had at Rome, in
deed it was so, though it were but very strange on your part to me ward
being driven to necessity.


Christo. You know the world was dangerous at that time.


Phil. Nothing so dangerous as it is now, but let that pass: where as you
say you find me the same man I was then, I praise God for that you se not me
like a read wanderyng with every wind. And where as you would have me follow
better learned men then my self: in deed I do acknowlage that you with a great
meany other ar far better learned then I, whose books in respect of learning
I am not worthy to carry after you, but faith and the wisdom of God consysteth
not in learning only, and therefore S. Paul wills that our faith be not
grounded upon the wisdom of man. If you can show by learning out of Gods
book that I ought to be of an other faith then I am, I will hear you and any
other man what so ever he be.


Christo. I marvel why you should dissent from the catholic church since it
has thus long universally ben received, except within this five or syx years
here in England.


Phil. I do not dissent from the true catholic church, I do only dissent from
the church of Rome, which if you can prove to be ye catholic church of
Christ, I will be of the same also with you.


Christo. Will you believe S. Cyprian, if I can show you out of him, quod
Ecclesia Romana est talis ad quam perfidia accedere non potest. That the church
of Rome is such a one, unto the which mysbeleue can not approach.


phil. I am sure you can not show any such saying out of S. Cyprian?


Christo. What will you lay thereon.


phil. I will lay as much as I am able to make.


D. Morgan. Will you promise to recant if he show his saying to be true?


phil. My faith shall not heng upon no doctors saying, further then he shall be
hable to prove ye same by gods word


Christo. I will go fet the book and show it him by and by, and there withal he
went into the bishops study and fet Cypria^, and appointed out these words in
one of his epistles, Ad Romanos autem quorum fides Apostolo praedicante laudata
est no^ potest accedere perfidia. Cipri. ad Corn. vel ad Ste^pha.
But unto the Romans whose faith by the testimony of the Apostle is praised:
misbelefe ca^ have no access.


phil. These words of Cyprian do nothing prove your pretensed assertion, which
is, that to the church of Rome there could come no mysbelefe.


Christo. Good Lord, no does? what can be said more plainly?


Phil. He speaks not of the church of Rome absolutely.


Christo. By God, a child that can but his grammar, will not deny that you do,
the words be so plain.


Phil. Swear not M. D. but way Cyprianes words with me, and I shall make you
to say as I have said.


Chresto. I am no D. but I perceive it is but labor lost to reason with you.


London. And with that the B. of London came in blowyng again, and said: what?
is my lord of Chichester gone away also? (for he even a little before departed
also without any other word saying, but he must needs be gone) what is the
matter you now stand upon?


Morgan. M. Christoforson has showed M. Philpot a notable place for the
authority of the church of Rome, and he makes nothing of it.


London. Where is ye place, let me se: by my faith here is a place alone. Come
hither sir, what say you to this? Nay tarry a little, I will help this place, with
S. Paul's own testimony the first to the Romans, where he says, that their
faith is preached through out the world, how can you be hable to answer to
this?


Phil. Yes my lord, it is sone answered if you well consider all the words of
Ciprian: for he speaks of such as in his time were faithful at Rome, that
followed the doctrine of S Paul, as he had taught them, and as it was notyfied
throughout ye world by an epistle, which he had written in the comme^dation of
their faith. With such as are praised of S. Paull at Rome, for foloing the true
faith, mysbelefe can have no place. And now if you can show, that the faith
which the church of Rome holds, is that faith, which the Apostle praised and
allowed in the Romans in his time, then will I say with S. Cyprian, and with
you, that infidelity can have no place there, but otherwise it makes not
absolutely for ye authority, of the church of R. as you do mistake it.


Christo. You understand Cyprian well in deed, I think you never red him in
your life.


Phil. Yes M. S. that I have. I can show you a book noted with mine own hand:
though I have nor red so much as you, yet I have red somewhat. It is shame for
you to wrast and wryth ye doctors as you do, to mayntaine a false religion,
which be altogether against you, if you take them aright, and if your false
packing of the doctors together has given me and others occasion to look upon
them, whereby we find you shamfull liars and mysreporters of the ancient
doctors.


Morgan. What, will you be in hand to allow doctors now? they of your sect do
not so, I marvel therefore you will allow them.


Phil. I do allow them, in as much as they do agree with the scriptures: and so do
al they which be of ye truth, how so ever you term us: and I praise God for
ye good understanding I have received by the^.


Christo. What? you understand not ye doctors: you may be ashamed to say it.


Phil. I thank God, I understand the^ better the^ you. For you have
excoecationem cordis, the blindness of heart, so yt you understand not truly,
what you read, no more the^ the wall here, as the taking of Cipria^ does well
declare. And before god you are but deceauers of ye people, for all your brag you
make of learning: neither have ye scripture or ancient doctor on your side
being truly taken.


Chriho. Why, all the doctors be on our side, and against you altogether.


Phil. Yea, so you say, when ye be in your pulpits alone, and none to answer
you. But if you will come to cast acco^ptes with me thereof, I will ventre with you a
recanracio^, yt I (as little sight as I have in ye doctors) will bring more
authorities of ancient doctors on my side, the^ you shall be able for yours,
and he yt ca^ bring most, to him let the other side yield. Are you content here
with?


Christo. It is but folly to reason with you: you will believe no man but your
self.


phil. I will believe you or any other learned man, if you ca^ bring any thing
worthy to be believed. You ca^ not win me with vain words from my faith.
Before God there is no truth in you.


Mor. what no truth, no truth? ha, ha, he


Phil. Except the articles of the Trinity you are corrupt in all other things,
and are sound in nothing.


Morg. What say you? do we not believe well on ye sacrament?


Phil, It is the thing, which (among all other) you do most abuse.


Mor. Wherein I pray you tell us?


Phil. I have told you before this (M. S.) in ye co^uocacio^ house.


Mor. Yea mary in deed you told us there very well, for there you fell down
upon your knees and fell to weping: ha, ha, ha.


phil. I did weep in deed, and so did Christ upon Jerusalem, and am not to be
blamed therefore, if you consider ye cause of my weping.


Mor. What make you your self Christ? ha, ha, ha.


Phil. No sir, I make not my self Christ: but I am not ashamed to do as my M.
and saueour did to bewail and lament your infydelytie and idolatry, which I
there forsawe through tyranny you would bring again to this realm, as this
day does declare.


Morgan. That is your argument.


Christo. Wherein do we abuse the sacrament, tell us?


Pihl. As I may touch but one of the least abuses: you minister it not in both
kinds, as you ought to do, but keep the one half from the people contrary to
Christ's institution.


Chri. why, is there not as much contained in one kind as in both and what need
is it then to minister it in both kinds?


phil. I believe not so, for if it had, Christ would have given but the one
kind only: for he instituted nothing superfluous and therefore you cannot say
that the hole effect of the sacrament is as well in one find as in both, since
the scripture reaches otherwise.


Christofor. What if I can prove it by scripture, that we may minister it in
one kind? the Apostles did so, as it may appear in the Acts of the Apostles
in one or two places, where it is written that the Apostles continued, in
orationibus and fractione panis, in prayers and in breaking of bread, which is
meant of the sacrament.


Phil. Why master doctor, do you not know, that S. Luke by making mention of
the breaking of bread means the hole use of the sacrament according to
Christ's institution? by a figure which you have learned in gramer metinomia,
where part is mentioned, and the hole understood to be done as Christ
commanded it.


Christofor. Nay that is not so. For I can show out of Eusebius in Ecclesi.
historia, that there was a man of God whom he named, that sent the sacrament in
one kind by a boy to one that was sick.


Phil. I have red in deed, that they did use to give that was left of the
communion bread, to children, to maryners, and to women, and so perauenture the
boy might carry a piece of that was left to ye sick man.


Christofor. Nay as a sacrament it was purposely sent unto him.


Phil. If it were so, yet can you not precysely say, that he had not the cup
ministered unto him also by some other sent unto him: but what though one man
did use it thus, does it follow, that al men may do the like? S. Ciprian notes
many abuses of the sacrament in his time, which rose upon singular men's
examples: as using of water instead of wine, therefore he says Non
respiciendum quid aliquis ante nos fecerit sed quid Christus qui omnium est
primus antea fecit and mandauit. That is, we must not look what any man has
done before us, but what Christ first of all men did and commanded.


Christof. Has not the church taught us so to use the sacrament? and how do
we know that Christ is, Homousios, that is of one substance with the father,
but by the determinacion of the church? how ca^ you prove that otherwise by
express words of scripture, and where find you Homoufios in all scripture?


Phil. Yes that I do, in the first to the Hebreus, where it is written, ye
Christ is the express image of Gods own substance, eiusdem substantiae.


Christo. Nay that is not so, it is there no more, but expressa imago
substantiae the express image of Gods substance, and image is accidence.


phil. It is in the text, of his substance, substantiae illius, or of his own
substance, as it may be right well interpreted. Besides this yt which Christ
spoke of him self, in S. John^ manifests the same saying, I and the father
be one thing, Ego and pater vnum sumus. And where as you say Imago here is
accidence, the ancient fathers use this for a strong argument to prove Christ
to be God, because he is the very image of God,


Christofor. Yea do? is this a good argument, because we are the image of God,
ergo we are God?


phil. We are not called the express image of God, as it is written of Christ,
and we are but the image of God by participation, and as it written in the
Genesis, we are made to the lykenes and similitude of God. But you ought to
know (M. Christoforson) that there is no accede^ce in God, and therefore
Christ can not be the image of God, but he must be of the same substance with
God.


Christofor. Tushe.


Morgan. How say you to the presence of the sacrament? will you stand to the
judgment here of your book or no, or will you recant.


philpot. I know you go but about to catch me in words, if you can prove ye
book to be of my setting forth: lay it to my charge, when I come in judgment.


Morgan. Speak, be you of the same mind as this book is of or no? sure I am
you were once, oneles you become an other manner of man tha^ you were.


phil. What I was you know, what I am, I will not tell you now: but this I will
say to you by the way, that if you ca^ prove your sacrament of the mass (as
you now use it) to be a sacrament, I will than grant you a presence: but
first you must prove the same a sacrament, and afterward entreat of the
presence.


Margan. Hoo, do you doubt that it is a sacrament?


phi. I am past doubting, for I believe you can never be hable to prove it a
sacrament.


Christofor. Yea do? good Lord, does not S Austine call it the sacrament of the
altar, how say you to that.


phil. That makes nothing for the probacion of your sacrament, Note.
for so he with other ancient writers do call the holy communion or the supper
of the Lord, in respect that it is the sacrament of the sacrifice, which Christ
offered upon the altar of the cross, the which sacrifice al ye altars and
sacrifices done upon ye altars in the old law did prifigure and shadow, the
which partayneth nothing to your sacrament, hanging upon your altars made of
lyme and stone.


Christofor. No does? I pray you, what signifies altar?


phil. Not as you flalslye take it materially, but for the sacrifice of the
altar of the cross.


Christo. Where find you it ever so taken.


Phil. Yes that I do, in S. Paul to the hebrews. 13 where he says Habemus
altar de quo no^ est fas edere his qui tabernaculo deseruiu^t, we have an
altar, of the which it is not lawful for the^ to eat, that serve the
tabernacle. Is not altar, there taken for the sacrifice of the altar, and not
for the altar of lyme and stone?


Christo. Well, god bliss me out of your company. You are such an obstinat
heretic, as I have not heard the like.


phil. I pray God keep me from such blind doctors, which when they are not
hable to prove what they say, than they fall to blaspheming (as you now do) for
lack of better proof.

In the mean while the bishop of London was talking with some other by, and at
lenght came in to supply his part and said.


London. I pray you masters harken what I shall sail to this man: come hither
master Grene. And now sir (poynting to me) you can not think it sufficyent to
be nawght your self, but must go about to procure this young gentilman by your
letters to do the like.


Phil. My lord he can not say that I ever hitherto wrote unto him, concerning
any such matter, as he here can testify.


Grene. No, you never wrote unto me.


London. Why, is not this your lesser which you did write concerning him?


Phil. I have showed your lordship my mind concerning that letter already: It
was not written to master Grene, nether he was priui of the writing thereof.


London. How say you then, if a man be in an error and you know thereof, what
are you bound to do in such case?


Phil. I am bound to do the best I ca^ to bring him out of it.


London. If master Grene here, be in the like, are you not bound to reform him
thereof if you can?


Phil. Yes that I am, and will do the uttermost to my power therein.

The bishop remembering him self thinking that he should but shrewdly after his
expectacion be helped at my mouth but rather confirmed in that which he called
an error, cessed to proceed any further in his demand, and called master
Grene a side, and before his regester red him a letter, I knew not the
contents thereof: and therewith all gave master Grene the book of my disputacion
in the conuocacion house. And afterward went a side co^moning with master
Christoforso^, leaving doctor Morgan, master Harpesfild, and master Cosins, to
reason with me, in the hearing of master Grene.


Morgan. Master Philpot I would ask you, how old your religion is.


Phil. It is older than yours, by a thousand years and mo.


Morgan I pray you, where was it fyfty or fourthy years ago?


Phil. It was in Germany appare^t by ye testimonies of Husse, Jerome of Prage,
and Wyciene, who^ your generacio^ a hundred years ago and more did burn for
preaching the truth unto you: and before their time and since has been,
although under persecution it has been put to silence.


Morgan. That is a maruelus strange relygion, which no man can tell certainly
where to find it.


Phil. It ought to be no marvel unto you, to see gods truth through viole^s
oppressed: for so it has been from the beginning, from time to time, as yt
appears by stories, and as Christ's true relygion is now to be found here
in England, although hypocrysy has by vyolens the upper hand, And in ye
Apocalypse you may se, it was prophesied, that the true church should be driven
into corners, and into wyldernes, and suffer great persecution.


Morgan. A, are you seen in the Apocalypse? there is many strange things.


phil. If I tell you the truth, which you are not hable to refel, believe it,
and daly not out so earnest matters. Me think you are liker a scoffer in a
play, Morgan ryghtly painted out.
than a reasonable doctor to instruct a man: you are bare arced and daunse
naked in a net, and yet you se not your own nakedness.


Morgan. What (I pray you) be not so quick with me. Let us talk a little more
coldly together.


phil. I will talk with you as myldly as you can desire, if you will speak
learnedly and charitably. But if you goo about with tauntes to delude the
truth, I will not hyde it from you.


Morgan. Why will you not submit your judgment to the learned men of this
realm?


phil. Because I see they can bring no good ground, where upon I may with a good
conscience settle my faith more suerly, then on that which I am now grounded
by Gods manifest word.


Morgan. No do? that is marvel that so many learned men should be deceived.


phil. It is no marvel by S. Paul: for he says, that not many wise, neither
many learned after the world, be called to the knowlage of the gospel.


Morgan. Have you the^ alone the spirit of God and not we?


phil. I say not, that I alone have the spirit of God, but as many as abide in
the true faith of Christ, have the spirit of God as well as I.


Morgan. How know you, that you have the spirit of God?


Phil. By the faith of Christ which is in me.


Morgan. A, by faith, do you so? I wene it be the spirit of the butterye, which
your fellows have had, that have been burned before you, who were drunk the
night before they went to their death, and I wene went dronken unto it.


Phil. It appears by your communicacion, that you are better acquainted with
the spirit of the buttrye, then with the spirit of God, wherefore I must now,
tell the (thou painted wall and hypocryte) in the name of the living Lord,
whose truth I have told the, that God shall rain fire and brymstone upon such
scorners of his word and blasphemers of his people, as thou art.


Morgan. What, you rage now.


Phil. Thy folishe blasphemies have compelled the spirit of God which is in
me, to speak that which I have said unto the, thou enemy of all righteousness.


Morgan. Why do you judge me so?


phil. By thine own wicked words I judge of the, thou blind and blasphemous
doctor: for as it is written, by thy words you shall be justified, and by thy
words thou shall be condemned. I have spoken on Gods behalf, and now have
I done with the.


Morgan. Why then I tell the Philpot, that thou art an heretyke, and shall be
burnt for thy heresy, and afterward goo to hell fire.


phil. I tell the, thou hypocryte, that I pass not this, for thy fire and
fagots, nether (I thank God my lord) stand in fear of the same: my faith in
christ shall ouercom them. But the hell fire which thou thretnest to me, is thy
porcyon, and is prepared for thee, (oneles thou spedely repent) and for such
hypocrites as thou art.


Morgan. What you speak upon wine: thou have typled well to day by lykelyhode.


phil. So fayd the cursed generation to the Apostles being replenished with the
holy ghost, and speaking the wondrous works of God: they said they were drunk
when they had nothing else to say as thou do now.


Morgan. Why I am hable to answer the ywis, I trow.


phil. So it seems, with blasphemies and lies


Morgan. Nay even with learning, say what thou can.


philpot. That appeared well at my disputacion in the convocation house, where
thou tokest upon thee, to answer those few arguments I was permitted to make,
and yet wast not hable to answer one, but in thine answers dyddest fomble and
wonder, that the hole house was ashamed of thee. And thy fynall conclusion of
all thine answers was, that thou could answer me, if I were in the scoles
at Oxforde.


Morgan. What did I so? thou belyest me.


Phil. I do not belie the, the book of the report of the disputation bears
record thereto, and all that were present can tell (if they list) thou saydest
so. And I tell thee plain, thou art not hable to answer ye spirit of truth,
which speaks in me, for the defense of Christ's true religion. I am hable (by
the might there of) to drive thee round about this galarie before me. And if it
would please the Queen's majesty and her counsel to hear thee and me, I would
make thee for shame shrynke behind the door.


Morgan. Yea, would you so lo?


phil. Thou have the spirit of illusion and sophisirie, which is not hable to
counteruayle the spirit of truth. Thou art but an Ass in the true
understanding of things pertaynyng unto God: I call the ass, not in respect
of malice, but in that thou kickest against the truth, and art void of all
godly understanding, not hable to answer to that thou bragest in.


Morgan. Why, have I not answered thee in all things thou have said unto me? I
take them to record.


Phil. Ask of my fellow whether I be a these.


Cosins. Hark, he makes us al thieves.


phil. You know the phrase of that Proverb, that like will hold with like.
And I am sure, you will not judge with me against him, speak I never so true.
And in this sense I speak it, the strongest answer that he has made against
me, is, that you will burn me.


Morgan. Why, we do not burn you, it is the temporal me^ that burn you and
not we.


phil. Thus you would (as Pylate did) wash your hands of al your wicked
doings. But I pray you invoke seculare brachium. Call upon the secular power
to be executioners of your unrighteous judgments. And have you not a rytle in
your law, De haeruicis comburendis, for to burn heretics?


Harpes. I have heard you both a good while reason together, and I never heard
so stout an heretic as you are, master Philpot.


Cosins. Neither I in all my life.


Phil. You are not hable to prove me an heretic, by one jot of Gods word.


Harpes. You have the spirit of arroga^cye, I will reason with you no more. And
so he was departing, and M. Cosins also. And with that the bishop and
Christoforson came in again, and said.


London. M. D. how does this man and your agree?


Morg. My lord, I do ask him where his church was fyfty years ago.


London. Are you not half agreed, as one man said ones to tway parts, of whom
the one was equally disagreyng from the other.


Crhisto. My lord, it is but folly to reason with him any further: your
lordeship shall but lose time, for he is incurable.


London. Well then, let his keeper have him away. And with that D. Chadsey led me
a way by the which we could not pass, and therefore came back again through
the bishops chamber, where al these doctors were clustred together. And as I
was passing, the bishop took me by the gown, and said, Wot you what M.
Christoforson tells me? I pray you (M. Christoforso^) rehearse the sentence
in latin. And so he did. The co^tentes whereof was, that an heretic would not
be won.


Christo. S. Paul says. Haereticum homis nem post vnam atque altera^
admonitione^ deuita. Flee an heretic after once or twyse warning.


All the Doc. Yea my lord, it is best you so do, and trouble your lordship no
more with him.


Phil. You must first prove me iustlye to be an heretic, before you use the
judgment of S. Paul against me: for he speaks of such as hold opinion
against the manifest word, the which you can not prove by me. And because you
want in your proof, and be hable to prove nothing against me, therefore you go
about falsely to suppose me to be an heretic, for the safegarde of your own
cou^terfait honesties. But before God you ar the heretics, which so stoutly and
stubburnly maintain so many things directly against gods word, as God in
his time shall reuele. As I went out of his chamber, the B. called me aside,
and said.


London. I pray the in good sadness, what meanest thou by writing in the
beginning of thy Bible: Spiritus est vicarius Christi in terris, the spirit is
the vicar of Christ on the earth. I wis you have some special meaning thereof.


Phil. My lord, I have none other meaning but as I have told you already,
that Christ sense his Asce^fion works works al things in us by his
spirit, and by his spirit does dwell in us. I pray you my lord, let me have my
Bible with other lawful books and writings, which you have of mine: whereof many
of the^ be none of mine, but lent to me by my friends.


London. Your Bible you shall not have, but I will perhaps let you have an other:
and after I have perused the rest, you shall have such as I think good.


Phil. I pray your lordship the^, that you would let me have candel light.


London. To what purpose, I pray you?


Phil. The nyghtes be long, and I would feign occupy my self about somewhat,
and not spend my time ydlely.


London. You may then pray.


phil. I can not well say many prayers without light.


London. Can you not say your pater noster without a ca^dle? I tell you sir,
you shall have some meat and drink of me, but candel you get none.


Phil. I had lever have a candel then your meat or drink: but seeing I shall
not have my request, the lord shall be my light.


London. Have him down.


Chadsey. I will bring him to his keeper my lord. Master Philpot I wonder, that
all these learned men whom you have talked withal this day, can nothing
persuade you.


phil. Why M. doctor, would you have me to be persuaded with nothing? Or would
you have me build my faith upon sand? what do you al bring, whereby I ought by a
sufficient authority to be persuaded unto you.


Chadsey. I am sorry you will so wilfully cast away your self, where as you
might live worshipfully: do you not think other have sowles to save as well as
you have?


Phil. Every man shall receive according to his own doings, sure I am you are
disceaued, and maintain a false religion: and as for my casting away, I would
my burning day were to morrow, for this delay is every day to dye and yet not
to be dead.


Chadsey. you are not like to dye yet, I can tell you.


phil. I am the more sorry therefore. But the will of God be done on me, to his
glory AMEN.


The examinacion of John^ Philpot on wednesdaye the.4. day of Decembre before
the B. of London, the B. of worcester, and the B. of Bangor.
IN the morning I was fet down to the wardrobe adioynyng to the chapel, and
within a while after, came three of the B. chaplaynes unto me, saying.

B. Chap. Master Philpot, my lord has sent us unto you, to desire you to
come to mass, certifyeng you, that there is a doctor of divinity, a chaplayne
of my lords, a notable learned man, called doctor Chadsey, going to mass.
Therefore we also pray you (good M, Philpot) be content to come: it is even
hard hereby.


phil. I wonder my lord would trouble you, in sendyng you about this matter,
seeing he knows I am a man (by your law) that can not hear mass, be cause I
stand excommunicate.


B. Chap. Your excommunication is upon but a contumacie, and my lord will
dispense with you, if you will come.


phil. My lord can not, for he is not mine ordinary, and I will not seek any
such thing at his hands. With this answer they went their way. And after
mass the B. called me before him into his Chapel, and there in the presence of
his register (after he had said his mind, because I would not come to mass)
recyted the articles, which he often times before had done in that behalf, with
the depositio^s of the witnesses, of who^ some were not examined.


London. Sir, what can you now say, why I should not proceed to give sentence
against thee, as an heretyke?


Phil. Why my lord, will you proceed to give sentence against me, before your
witnesses be examined: that is plain against your own law, as al your
doings have been hitherto.


London. See what a fool thou art in the law. I need not recite the
depositions of the witness, but if I list. For I know them well enough already.


Phil. It appears in deed, you may do what you list.


London. Tell me I say, whether thou will answer or no: and whether if thou
were absolved of thine exco^municatio^, thou would come to mass or no?


phil. I have answered as much as I entende to do, until I be called to
lawful judgment: and as concerning my conscience, I will not make you God, to
sit there as yet: it is Gods part only to be searcher of the heart.


London. Look how foolishly he speaks. Art thou God? and yet do thou not
sit in thine own conscience?


phil. I sit not in mine own conscience: but I know it, and God there only
ought to sit and no man else.


London. Thou art a naughtye fellow and have done much hurt, and have seduced
other poor fellows here in prison with the, by thy co^forting of them in their
errors, and have made them rejoice and sing with thee.


phil. Yea my lord, we shall sing, when you and such as you are, shall cry,
vae, vae, woe, woe, except you repent.


London. What an arrogaunt fool this is? I will handle the like an heretyke, and
that shortly.


phil. I fear nothing (I thank God) you can do unto me. But God shall destroy
such as thou art, and that shortly, as I trust.


Land. Have him away, this is a knave in deed.


phil. And I was had into ye wardrobe again, by my keeper: and within an hour
after was sent for to come before him, and the bishops of Worcester, and Bangor.


Land. Sir, I have talked with you many times, and have caused you to be talked
with all of many learned men, yea and honorable both temporal and
spiritual, and yet it avails nothing with you. I am blamed, that I have
brought thee before so many, for they say thou gloryest to have many to talk
withal. Well, now it lies the upon to look to thy self, for thy time drawith
nere to an end, if thou be not become conformable. And at this present we are
sent from the synod, to offer you this grace, that if you will come to the
unity of the church of Rome with us, and acknowledged the real presence of
Christ in the sacrament of the altar, with us: all that is past shall be
forgeuen, and you received to favor.


worcest. M. Philpot, we are sent (as you here have heard by my lord of London)
from the synod, to offer you mercy, if you will receive it. And of good will I
bear you, I wish you to take it whiles it is offered: and be not a singular
man against a hole multitude of learned men, which now in fasting and prayer
are gathered together, to ymagyne things to do you good. There have many
learned men talked with you: why should you think your self better learned
tha^ them all? be not of such arrogauncy, but have humility and remember there
is no salvation, but in the church.


Bangor Me thinks my lord has said wonderfully well unto you, that you
should not think your self so well learned, but other men are as well learned
as you, neither of so good wit, but other be as wise as you: neither of so good
memory, but other have as good memory as you. Therefore mystrust your own
judgment, and come home to us again. Iwis I never lyked your religion,
because it was set further by violence and tyranny, The same token proves your
religion false.
and that is no token of true religion. And I was that same manner of man then
that I am now, and a great meany mo. Mary, for fear we held our peace, and
bare with ye time: wherefore M. Philpot, I would you did well, for I love you and
therefore be content to come home with us again, into the catholyke church of
Rome.


Phil. Where my lord as I may begin first to answer you, that you say that
religion is to be misliked, which is set forth by tyranny. I pray God you give
not men occasion to think the same by yours at this day, which has none
other argument to stand by, but violence. If you can show me by any good
sufficient ground, whereby to ground my conscience, that the church of Rome
is the true catholic church, whereunto you call me, I will gladly be of the
same; otherwise I can not sone change the religion I have learned these many
years.


Bangor. Where was your religion (I pray you) a hundred years ago, that any man
knew of it.


Phil. It was in Germany and in diverse other places apparent.


worcest. Jesus, will you be still so singular a man, what is Germany to the hole
world?


London. My lords, I pray you give me leave to tell you, that I sent for him
to hear mass this morning, and wot you what excuse be made unto me? for soth
that he was accursed cursed, allegyng his own shame? He plays as that varlet
Latimer did at Cambrige, Hark how fine my lord is in dogs eloquence. If he
had come to mass he had been cursed in deed.
when the vice Chaunceler sent for him (who intended to have excommunicated him
for some of his he resies) and the chaunceler was coming to his chamber, which
as soon as he herd that the chaunceler was come, made answer that he was sick
of the plague, and so deluded the chau^celer: even so this man says, he is
accursed, because he will not come to mass.


worcest. My Lord (I am sure) here does behave him self like a father unto
you, therefore be admonished by him, and by us that come now friendly unto you,
and follow your fathers before you.


phil. It is forbidden us of God, by the prophet Ezechiel to follow our fathers*
neither to walk in their co^mau^deme^ts.


worcest. It is written also in an other place, interroga patres, ask of your
fathers.


phil. We ought to ask in deed our fathers that have more experience and
knowlage then we of Gods will, but no more to allow them, then we perceive
they agree with the scriptures.


worcest. You will be a contentious man, I see well: and S. Paul says that we
neither the church of God have no such custom.


Phil. I am not contentious, but for ye verity of my faith in ye which I ought
to contend with all such as do impugn the same without any just objection.


worces. Let us rise my lord, for I see we shall do no good.


London. Nay I pray you tarry, and hear the articles I lay to his charge: and
after he had recited them, they arose; and afterward standing they reasoned
with me a while.


worces. M. Philpot, I am very sorye, that you will be so singular. I never
talked with non yet of my diocese, but after once co^municatio^ had with me,
they have been co^te^ted to revoke their errors, and to teach the people, how
they were deceived, and so do much good, as you may if you list. For as I
understand, you were archdiacon of winchester (which is the eye of the B.) and
you may do much good in ye country, if you would forsake your errors, and
come to the catholyke church.


phil. Where withal you so sone persuaded them to your will, I see not. Error
that I know I hold none, and of the catholic church I am sure I am.


worces. The Catholic church does acknowledge a real presence of Christ in the
sacrament; and so will not you.


phil. That is not so. For I acknowlage a very essensial presence in the
sacrament duly used.


worces. What a real presence?


Phil. Yea a real presens by the spirit of God, in the right administracion.


worces. That is well said, and do you agree, with the catholic church also?


Phil. I do agree with the true catholic church.


worcest. My lord of London, this man speaks reasonably now.


London. You do agree in generalties. But when it shall come to the
particularities, you will far disagree.


worces. Well, keep your self here, and you shall have other learned bishops to
common farther with you, as my lord of Duresme, and my lord of Chichester
(whom I hear say) you do like well.


Phil. I do like them as I do all other that speaks the truth. I have once
already spoken with them, and they found no fault with me.


worcest. Pray in the mean season for grace to God.


Phil. Prayer is the comfortablest exercise I feale in my trouble, and my
conscience is quiet, and I have the peace of mind, which can not be the fruits
of heresye.


worces. We will bid you fare well, for this time.


phil. After dinner, they called for me again, and demanded of me, whether I
meant, as I spoke before dinner, and not go from it: to whom I answered, that I
would not go from that I had said.


worces. You said at my departing from you before dinner, yt if we did burn
you, we should burn a catholic man. Will you be a catholic man, and stand to
the catholic church?


Phil. I will stand to the true catholic church.


worces. Will you stand to the catholic church of Rome?


phil. If you can prove the same to be ye catholic church, I will be one
thereof.


worces. Did not Christ say unto Peter and to all his successors of Rome,
Pasce oues meas, pasce agnos meos, Feed my sheep, feed my lambs, which does
signifye, that he gave him more authority than the rest.


phil. That saying pertayneth nothing to the authority of Petre above others,
but declares what Christ requires of his beloved Apostles, that they should
with all diligence preach to the flock of Christ, the way of salvation, and
that does the iterracion of feding spoken to Petre only signify. But the
bishop of Rome little regards this spiritual feding, and therefore he has
ymagined an easyer way, to make him self lord of the hole world, yea and of
Gods word to, and does not feed Christ's flock, as Petre did,


worces. How can you tell that?


phil. Yes I have been there, and I could not learn of al his country men, that
ever he preaches.


worces. Though he preached not one way, he preaches an other, by procuring
good order for the church to be kept in.


phil. I am sure that it will be his damnacion before God, that he leaves that
he is commanded of Christ, and sets furthe his own decrees to deface the
gospel.


worces. It is the evil living that you have seen at Rome, that causes you to
have this ill judgment of the church of Rome. I can not tarry now with you to
reason further of this matter. How say you to the real presence of the
sacrament? will you stand to that?


Phil. I do acknowledge (as I have said) a real presence of the sacrament in
the dew administracion thereof, to the worthy receauers by the spirit of God.


worcester. You add now a great meany mo words the^ you did before, yet you say
more of the sacrament then a great meany will do. Thus they departed.


After them came in to me, D. Chadsey and D. wright Archdeacon of Oxforde, with
a great meany mo.
Master Philpot here is master Archdeacon of Oxforde come to you, Chadsey.
to give you good council, I pray you hear him.

Phil. I will refuse to hear none that will council me any good, and if any
can bring any matter better tha^ I have, I will stick thereunto.


wright. I would wyshe you (master Philpot) to agree with the catholic church,
and not to stand in your own co^ceyt, you see a great me any of learned men
against you.


phil. I am (master doctor) of the unfeigned catholic church, and will live
and dye therein: and if you can prove your church to be the true catholic
church, I will be one of the same.


wright. I came not to dispute with you but to exhort you, here be better
learned than I, that ca^ inform you better than I


Chadsey. Thy heart knows that thy mouth lies Chad.
What proof would you have? I will prove unto you our church to have his being
and fou^datio^ by ye scriptures, by ye Apostles and by the primative church
confirmed with ye blood of martirs and the testymony of al confessors.


phil. Give me your hand, master doctor: prove that, and have with you.


Chadsey. If I had my books here, I could sone prove it. I will go fette some.
and with that he went, and fette his book of annotacio^s, saying, I cannot
bring my books well. Therefore I have brought my book of annotacio^s. And turned
there to a common place of the sacrament, asking me whether ye catholic church
did not allow ye prese^s of Christ's body in the sacrament or no? I hear say
you do confess a real presence, hangyng is to good for thee.
but I will be hanged if you will abide by it, you will deny it by and by.


Phil. That I have said I cannot deny, neither intend not what soever you say.


Chadsey. If there be a real presence in the sacrament, than evil me^ receive
Christ: which thing you will not grant, I am suer.


Phil, I deny the argument. For I do not grant in the sacrament, by
transubsta^ciacion any real presence, as you falsely ymagyne. But in the dew
administration to the worthy receyuers.


Chadsey. I will prove yt ye euel and wicked men eat the body of Christ, as well
as the good men, by S. Austine here.


phil. And in the beginning of his text, S Austine seemed to approve his
assertion, but I bad him read out to the end, and there S Austine declares
that it was quodam modo, after a certain manner, the evil men received the body
of Christ, which is sacrame^tally only, in ye utter signs and not really, or
in deed, as the good does. And thus al ye doctors, that you seem to bring in
for your purpose, be quite against you, if you did up rightly way them.


Chad. By God you ar a subtle fellow, se how he would wrythe S. Austines
words.


phil. See who of us wryeth S. Austine more, you or I which take his meani^g by
his own express words. And seeing you charge me of subtlety, what subtilty
is this of you to say that you will prove your matter of the church, even from
the beginning, promysyng to show your books therein, and when it comes to the
showing, you are hable to show none, and for want of proof slip into a bye
matter, and yet faint in the proof thereof. Before God you ar bare arst, in all
your religion.


Chadsey. You shall be constrained to come to us at lenght, whether you will or
no.


phil. Hold that argument fast, for that is ye best you have, for you have
nothing but violence.


The thursdaye after I was called in the morning before the Archbishop of
York, the B. of Chichster, the B. of Bathe, and the B. of London, the B. of
Chichester being first come, began to talk with me.

I Am come of good will, to talk with you, to instruct you what I can, to
come to the catholyke church, and to will you to mistrust your own judgment,
and to learn first to have humilite, and by the same to learn of others,
that be better learned the^ you, as they did learn of such as were their
betters before them.

phil. We must be all taught of God, and I will with all humility learn of
them that will inform me by Gods word, what I have to do. I confess I have,
but little learning in respect of you, that both for your years, and great
exercise, do excel therein: but faith co^systeth not only in learning, but in
simplicytie of believing that which Gods word teaches, therefore I will be glad
to hear both of your lordship, or of any other (that god has revealed unto
by his word) ye true doctrine thereof, and thank you, that it does please you
to take pains herein.


Chiche. You take ye first alleged amiss, as though al me^ should be taught by
inspiration, and not by learning. How do we believe the Gospel, but by the
authority of the church, and because the same has allowed it?


Phil. S. Paul says, he learned not the Gospel by men, neither of men, but
by the revelation of Jesus Christ: which is a sufficient proof, yt ye gospel
takes not his authority of man, but of God only.


Chichest. S. Paul speaks but of his own knowlage how he came thereto.


Phil. Nay he speaks of the Gospel generally, which comes not from man,
but from God, and that the church must only teach that which comes from God
and not man's precepts.


Chiches. Does not S. Austine say, I would not believe the Gospel, if ye
authority of the church did not move me thereto?


phil. I grant that the authority of the church does move the unbelievers to
believe, but yet the church gives not the word his authority: for the word
has his authority only from God, and not of man. Men be but disposers thereof,
for first ye word has his being before the church, and the word is the
foundation of the church, and first is the foundation sure, before the
buyldyng thereon can be steadfast.


Chiches. I perceive you mistake me, I speak of the knowlage of the Gospel,
and not of the authority: for by the church we have all knowlage of the
Gospel.


phil. I confess that: For faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word:
and I acknowlage, that God appoints an ordinary means for me^ to come unto
knowlage now, and not miraculously, as he has done in times paste, yet we
that be taught by men must take heed, that we learn nothing else but yt which
was taught in ye primative church by revelation. Here came in the B. of York,
and the bishop of Bathe, and after they had saluted one an other, and commoned
a while together, the Archbishop of York called me unto them, saying.


York. Sir, we hearing that you are out of the way, are come of charity to
inform you, and to bring you into the true faith, and to the catholic church
again, willing you first to have humility, and to be humble, and willing to
learn of your betters, for else we can do no good with you: and God says by
the Prophet. On whom shall I rest but on the humble and meke, and such as
tremble at my word. Now if you will so be, we will be glad to trauail with
you.


phil. I know that humility is the door whereby we enter unto Christ, and I
thank his goodness, I have entered in at the same unto him, and will with all
humility hear whatsoever truth you shall speak unto me.


York. What be the matters you stand on, and require to be satisfied?


Phil. My lord and it please your grace, we were entered in a good matter before
you came, of the church, and how we should know the truth, but by the
church.


York. In deed that is the head, we need to begin at: for the church being
truly known, we shall sooner agree in the particular things.


phil. If your lordships, can prove the church of Rome to be the true
catholic church, it shall do much to persuade me toward that you would have
me inclyne unto.


York. Why, let us go to the definition of the church, what is it?


phil. It is a congregation of people, dispersed through the world, agreyng
together in the word of God, vsyng the sacraments and al other things
according to the same.


York. This diffinitio^ is of many words, to no purpose.


Phil. I do not precisely diffyne the church, but declare unto you what I
think the church is.


York. Is the church visible or invisible?


Phil. It is both visible and invisible: the invisible church is of all the
electes of God only, the visible consists of both good and bad, using all
things in faith according to Gods word.


York. The church is an universal co^gregacio^ of faithful people in Christ
through the world, which this word catholic does well express: for what is
catholic else, does it not signify universal?


Phil. The church is diffined by S. Austen to be called catholic in this
wise. Ecclesia ideo dicitur catholica, quia vniuersaliter perfecta est and in
nullo claudicat. The church is called therefore catholic, because it is
thoroughly perfyt, and halteth in nothing.


York. Nay it is called catholyke, because it is universally received of all
Chrystian nations, for the most part.


Phil. The church was catholic in the Apostles time, yet was it not
universally received of the world: but because their doctrine which they had
received of Christ, was perfect and appointed to be preached and received of
the hole world, therefore it is caled the catholic faith, and all persons
receiving the same, be to be counted the catholic church. And S. Austine in
an other place writes ad Neophitos, yt ye catholic church is ye, which
believes a right.


York. If you will learn, I will show you by S. Austine, writing against the
Donatistes, that he proves the catholic church by two principal points,
which is universality, and succession of bishops in one apostolycal sea from
time to time. Now thus will I make mine argument. The church of Rome is
universal, and has had his succession of bishops from time time, Ergo it is ye
catholic church. how answer you to this argument?


phil. I deny the antecedent. That the catholic church is only known by
universality, and by succession of bishops.


York. I will prove it. And with yt he brought furthe a book, which he had
noted out of the doctors, and turned to his common places therein of ye church
and recyted one or two out of S Austen, and specially out of his epistle
written against ye Donatistes. Here S. Austen manifestly proves, yt ye
Donatistes were not the catholic church, because they had no succession of
bishops in their opinion, neither universality, and the same force has S.
Austins argument against you.


phil. My lord I have wayed the force of that argument before now. And I
perceive it makes nothing against me, nether it comes to your purpose, for I
will stand to the trial of S. Austen, for the approbacion of the catholic
church, where of I am. For S. Austine speaks of universality, joined with
verity, and of faithful successors of Peter, before corruption came into the
church, and so if you can deduce your argument for the sea of Rome now as S.
Austen might do in his time, I would say it might be of some force, otherwise
not.


York S. Austine proves the catholic church, principally by succession of
bishops, and therefore you understand not S. Austine: for what I pray you was
the opinion of the Donatistes against whom he wrote, can you tell? what country
were they of?


phil. They were a certain sect of men affirming among other heresies, that the
dignity of the sacraments, depended upon the worthynes of the minister: so
that if the minister were good, the sacrament which he ministered were
auayliable, or else not.


Chiches. That was their error and they had none other, but that. And he red
an other authority of S. Austins out of a book, which he brought even to the
same purpose, that the other was.


Phil. I challenge S. Austine to be with me thoroughly in this point, and will
stand to his judgment, taking one place with an other.


Chiches. If you will not have the church to be certain, I pray you by whom will
you be judged in matters of controversy.


Phil. I do not deny the church to be certain: but I deny that it is
necessarily tied to any place, longer then it abides in the word, and for all
manner of controversies the word ought to be judge.


Chichest. But what if I take it one way, and you an other, how than?


Phil. S. Austen shows a remedy for that, and wills quod vnius locus per
plura intelligi debeat, that one place of the scripture ought to be
understood by the mo.


York. How answer you to this argument: Rome has a known succession of
bishops, which your church has not: Ergo that is the catholic church and
yours is not, because there is no such succession can be proved for your
church.


phil. I deny (my lord) that succession of bishops is an infallible point to
know the church by: for there may be a succession of bishops known in a
place, and yet there be no church, as at Antioche and at Jerusalem, and in
other places, where the Apostles abode as well as at Rome. But if you put to the
succession of bishops, succession of doctrine with all (as S. Austine does) I
will grant it to be a good proof for the catholic church, but a local
succession only is nothing vayleable.


York. You will have no church then I se well.


phil. Yes my lord, I acknowledge the catholic church, as I am bound by my
Creed, but I can not acknowledge a false church for the true.


Chichest, Why is there two catholic churches then?


philpot. No I know there is but one catholic church, but there have been and
be at this present, that take upon the^ the name of Christ and of his church,
which be not so in deed, as it is written, that there be that call them selves
APostles and be not so in deed, but the sinagoge of Satan, and liars. And now
it is with us, as it was with the two women in Salomo^s time, which lay to
gether, and the one suppressed her child, and after went about to challenge the
true mothers child.


Chiches. What a babbling here is with you now? I se you lack humility. you
will go about to teach, and not to learn.


philpot. My lords, I must desire you to bear with my hasty speech, it is my
infirmity of nature, all that I speak is to learn by, I would you did
understand all my mind, that I might be satisfied by you, through better
authority.


Chichest. My lord, and it please your grace, turn the argument upon him which
you have made, and let him show the succession of bishops of his church, as we
can do. How say you? can you show the succession of bishops in your church
from time to time? I tell you, this argument troubled doctor Ridley, so sore
that he could never answer it. Yet he was a man well learned, I dar say, you
will say.


phil. He was a man so learned, that I was not worthy to carry his books for
learning.


Chichest. I promise you he was never hable to answer that, he was a man that
I loved well and he me. For he came unto me diverse times being in prison, and
conferred with me.


philpot. I wonder my lord, you should make this argument, which you would
turn upon me, for the trial of my church, whereof I am, or that you would make
bishop Rydley so ignorant that he was not hable to answer it, since it is of
no force. For behold, first I denied you that local succession of bishops in
one place is no necessary point alone to prove the catholic church by, and
that which I have denied, you can not prove, and is it then reason that you
should put me to the trial of that, which by you is unproven and of no force
to conclude against me?


Chichest. I se my lords we do but lose our labors, to reason with him, he
takes him self better learned than we.


phil. I take upon me the name of no learning, I bost of no knowledge, but of
faith and of Christ, and that I am bound undoubtedly to know, as I am sure I
do.


Chichest. These heretics take upon the^ to be sure of all things they stand
in. you should say rather with humility, I trust I know Christ, than that you
be sure thereof.


phil. Let him doubt of his faith, that lysteth: God give me always grace to
believe that I am sure of his faith and favor in Christ.


Bathe. How will you be hable to answer heretics, but by ye determination of
the known catholic church?


Phil. I am hable to answer al heretics, by the word of God, and convince
them by the same.


Chichest. How arrogantly that is spoken? I dare not say so.


Phil. My lord I pray you bear with me, for I am bold in the truth side, and I
speak some what by experience, that I have had with heretykes, and I know the
Arrians be the subtilest that ever were, and yet have I manifest scriptures to
beat them down with all.


Chiches. I perceive now you are the same manner of man, I have heard of, which
will not be satisfied by learning.


Phil. Alas my lord, why do you say so? I do desire most humbly to be taught,
if there be any better way, that I should learn, and hitherto you have showed
me no better. Therefore I pray your lord ship, not to misiudge without a cause.


Ba^he. If you be the true catholic church, than will you hold with the real
presence of Christ in the sacrament, which the true church has ever
mayntayned.


phil. And I (my lord) with the true church do hold the same in the dew
ministracion of the sacrament, but I desire you my lord, there may be made a
better conclusion in our first matter, before we enter in to any other, for if
the church be proved, we shall sone agree in the rest. In this mean while my
lord of York was turning his book for mo places, to help forth his cause.


York. I have found at lenthe, a very notable place which I have looked for all
this while of S. Austine, de simpliciate credendi.


Chichest. It is but folly (my lord) that your grace do read him any mo places
for he estemeth them not.


Phil. I esteem the^ in as much as they be of force, as your lordship does
hear me deny no doctors you bring, but require the true applicacion of them,
according to the writers meaning, as by his own words I do prove.


York. I will read him the place, and so make an end. After he had red the
sentence he said, that by four special points here S. Austine proves the
catholic church. The first is by ye consent of al nations, ye second by the
Apostolic sea, the thryd by universality, and the fourth by this word
catholic.


Chichest, That is a notable place in deed, and please your grace.


philpot. I pray you my lord of what church does S. Austine write the same? of
Rome or not*


York. Yea he writes it, of the church of Rome.


philpot. I will lay with your lordship as much as I can make, it is not so.
And let the book be seen,


Bathe. What art thou hable to lay, that have nothing?


York. Does he not make mention here of the Apostolic sea, whereby he means
Rome.


Phil. That is very straytly interpreted my lord, as though the Apostolic
sea, had been no where else but at Rome. But let it be Rome, and yet shall you
never verifye ye same, onles all ye other co^dicions do go there with, as S.
Austine does proceed withal, whereof none except the Apostolic sea, can now
be verifyed of the church of Rome. For the faith which that sea now
maintayneth, has not the consent of all nations nether ever had, besides that
it can not have the name of catholyke, because it diffreth from the catholic
churches, which the Apostles planted almost in all things.


York. Nay he goes about here to prove the catholic church by
universality. And how can you show your church to be universal fyftye or
an hundred years ago?


phil. That is not material, neither any thing against S. Austyne. For my
church (whereof I am) were to be counted universal, though it were but in.x.
persons, because it agrees with the same that the Apostles universally did
pla^te.


York. I perceive you are an obstinate man in your opinion, and will not be
taught. Wherefore it is but lost labor to talk with you any longer, you are a
member to be cut of.


Chichest. I have heard of you before, how you troubled the good bishop of
Winchester before, and now I see in you, that I have heard.


Phil. I trust you see no evil in me by this, I desire of you a sure ground to
build my faith on, and if you show me none, I pray you speak not ill of him,
that means well.


Chichest. Thou art an impudent fellow, as I have commoned with all.


Phil. That is spoken vncharytably (my lord) to blaspheme him whom you can not
justly reprove.


Chichest. Why you are not God, blasphemy is counted a rebuke, to Godward and
not to man.


phil. Yes it may be as well verified of an infamy laid to man, speaking in
Gods cause, as you now do lay unto me for speaking freely the truth before
God, to maintain your vain religion, you are void of all good ground. I
perceive you are blind guydes and leaders of the blind, and therefore (as I am
bound to tell you) very hypocrites, tyra^nously persecuting the truth, which
otherwise by just order you are hable to do by no means. Your own doctors and
testimonies which you bring, be euidentlye against you, and yet you will not see
the truth.


Chichest. Have we this thank for our good will, coming to instruct thee?


phil. My lords, you must bear with me, since I speak in Christ's cause, and
because his glory is defaced and his people cruelly and wrongfully slain by
you, because they will not consent to the dishonor of God, to hypocrisy with
you. If I told you not your fault, it should be required at my hands in the
day of judgment, therefore know you (ye hipocrites in deed) that it is the
spirit of God that tells you your sin, and not I. I pass not (I thank
God) of al your cruelty, God forgive it you, and give you grace to repent. And
so they departed,


The same day at night before supper, the bishop sent for me into his chapel
in the presence of Archdeacon Harpesfild and doctor Chadsey, in the presence of
other his Chaplayns, and his servants.

MAster Philpot, I have (by sundry means) gone about to do you good, and I
maruail, you do so little considre it. By my truth I can not tell what to say
to you. Tell me directly, whether you will be a conformable man or no, and where
upon you chifly stand.

Phil. I have told your lordship often times plain enough, where on I stand
chiefly, requiring a sure probatio^ of the church whereunto you call me.


Harpel. S. Austine writing against the Donatistes declares four special
notes to know the church by, the consent of many nations, the faith of the
sacraments confirmed by antiquity. succession of bishops, and universality.


London. I pray you master Archdeaco^ fett the book hither, it is a notable
place, let him se it. And the book was brought, and the bishop red it,
demanding how I could answer the same.


Phil. My lord I like S. Austins four points for the trial of the catholic
church, whereof I am. For it can abide every point thereof together, which yours
can not do.


Harpes. Have not we succession of bishops, in the sea and church of Rome?
wherefore then do you deny our church to be the catholic church?


Phil. S Austine does not put succession of bishops only to be sufficient, but
he adds the use of the sacraments, according to antiquity, and doctrine
universally taught and received of most nations from the beginning of the
primative church, the which your church is far from. But my church can
auouche all these better then yours: therefore (by S. Austins judgment which
you here bring) mine is the catholic church, and not yours.


Harpes. Chad. It is but folly (my lord) for you to reason with him, for he is
irrecuperable.


Phil. That is a good shift for you to run unto, when you be confounded in
your own sayenges, and have nothing else to say, you are evidently deceived,
and yet will not see it, when it is laid to your face.


Here end as many of John^ Philpots examinacions, as came to the printors
hands, and as soon as the rest may be come by, thou shall have it, good reader,
by the will of God. In the mean time refreshe thy self with this, praising
God for the perseueraunce of this co^stau^t learned martyr, and pray hartly
for the rest of Christ's poor afflicted church. Give God the glory.
Jesus is God with us. An Apology of Johan Philpot written for spitting upon
an Arrian, with an inuectiue against the Arrians (the very natural children of
Antichrist) with an admonition to all that be faithful in Christ, to beware of
them, and of other late sprung heresies, as of the most enemies of the Gospel.
I Am amassed and do tremble both in body and soul, to hear (at this day)
certain men, or rather not men, but covered with man's shape, persons of a
beastly under standing, who after so many and manyfolde benefits and graces of
our Lord God and saueour Jesus Christ, manyfested to the hole world, and
confirmed with so evident testimonies of the Patriarchs, Prophets and
Apostles, approved by wo^derous signs and undoubted tokens, Romans 1. Hebr. 1.
declared to be both God and Man, by the spirit of sanctification, the
eternal son of God with power, the very express image of the substance of
the father, and revealed unto us in these later times, in the flesh borne of
the sede of David, in ye which he has taught us truly, and maruelously
finished the mystery of our salvation: and is ascended in body into heaven,
from whence his divinity abased him self for our glory, and sits in
equal power at the right hand of the father in his everlasting kingdom:
notwithstanding are not ashamed to rob this eternal son of God, and our
most merciful saueour of his infinite majesty, and to pluck him out of the
glorious throne of his unspeakable deity.

O impiety of all others most detestable, O infidelity more terrible then the
palpaple darkness of Egypt. O flaming fyrebrandes of hell, as I may use the
terms of the Prophet Esaias, Esa. 7.
against such apostatas, was it not enough for you to be grievous unto men by
so manifold sects and heresies, The Arrians have many heresies.
dividing your selves from Christ's true catholic church, as never hitherto
has been heard of any heretical segregacion, but will also be molest unto my
God the eternal son of God? What heart may bear such blasphemye? what eye
may quietly behold such an enemy of God? What membre of Christ may allow
in any wise, such a membre of the devil? What Christian may have fellowship
with such rank Antichrists?

Who having the zeal of the glory of God in his heart, can not burst out in
tears and lamentacions to hear the immortal glory of the son of God trod
under ye fete, by the vile sede of the serpent? whose head by his eternal
Godhead he has beaten down, Gene. 3,
and therefore now lies biting at his hele, lurking in corners, but he shall be
crushed in pieces unto eternal woo, after he has spewed out al his venom, for
brighter is the glory of our God and Christ, than it may be darkened by all
the rowte of the prince of darkness, who dwells in the light which is
vnaprocheable, although these dead dogs do take upon them with their corrupt
sight to pearce, and vlemishe the same to their own blinding for ever.

If the good king Ezechias after he had heard the blasphemies that Rabsaces
vttred against the living Lord, tare his royal garments in pieces, in testimony
of the sorrow he had conceived for the same, shall we be still at the
blasphemous barkinges against our Lord, and show no token of indignacion for
ye zeal of his glory? If Paul and Barnabas perceiving the people of Listris,
Act. 14.
to take the honor of God and attributing the same to creatures rent their
garments, in signification that we all should declare (by some outward
means) the like sorrow, when we hear or see the like blasphemy, how may we
with patience abide to hear the robbery of the majesty of our Christ's
equality with God, Phil. 2.
who (as saint Paul witnesses) thought it no robbery to be equal with God?
what faithful servant can be content to hear his master blasphemed. And if
perchance he show any just anger therefore, al honest men do bear with his
doing in that behalf: and can not you good (christian brethren and systerne)
bear with me, who for the just zeal of the glory of my God and Christ
(being blasphemed by an arrogaunt, ignorant and obstinatlye blinded Arrian,
making him self equal with Christ, saying ye God was none otherwise in Christ,
tha^ God was with him, making him but a creature as he was him self, vaunting
to be without sin as well as Christ) did spit on him? The cause why I did spit.
Partly in declaracion of that sorrow which I had to hear such a proud
blasphemour of our saueour, as also to signify unto other there present whom
he went about to pervert, that he was a person to be abhorred of al christians,
and not to be companied with all. If this my fact seem to some, that judge not
al things according to the spirit of God, vncharitablye: Yet let them know,
that God (who is charity) allowed the same. Luke. 12.
For it is written in the Gospel, that Christ came not to set us at peace with
men in the earth, but at division, and that is for his cause and truth. And
who so ever will not abide with Christ's church in the truth, we ought not to
show the points of charity unto any such, Math. 12.18.
but to take him as an heathen and a publicane. If any man (says S. John^)
bring not unto you this doctrine which I have taught you, say not God speed,
2. Ioh. 1.
unto him, for who so says God speed unto such a one, is partaker of his
euel doings. Consider you therefore, that have love and fellowship wit such,
that the same dampnacion shall fall upon you therefore, as is dew to wicked
heretics. God will have us to put a difference betwixt the clean and unclean,
2. Cor. 6.
and to touch no unclean persons: but to go out from them.

And what is more unclean than infidelity? who is a greater infidele tha^ the
Arrian, who spoyleth his redemer of his honor, and makes him but a creature?
What fellowship is there between light and darkness: what concord can there be
between Christ and Belial? Never was there more abominable Belials than this
Arrians be. The ignorant Belials worshipped the creatures for the creator.
But these perverse Arrians do worship Christ (who is the creator of al
things, Gal. 1. Romans 9. 1. Ioh. 5.
by whom as S. Paul testifies, both in heaven and in earth al things visible
and invisible were made, who is God blessed for ever, and as S. John^
witnesses, very God and life everlasting) but as a creature like unto
themselves? what christian tongue may call him to be a good man, that denies
Christ to be ye author and worker of al goodness, as the Arrian does? Woe be
unto them (says the prophet) that call evil good and good euel. Judge
therefore uprightly (ye children of men) and condemn not the just for the
unrighteous sake, neither by any means seem to allow either in word or deed
the wicked, who say there is no God: Johan. 5.
for they that honor not ye son honor not the father: and he yt has not
the son, has not the father. Johan. 14
And if we believe in God, we must also believe in Christ: for ye father and he
be one. And none in the spirit of God can divide Christ, from the substance
of God the father, onles a natural son may be of an other substance, than
his father, which nature does abhor.

Who can abide the eternal generation of the son of God to be denied, since
it is written of him, his generation who shall be able to declare? Esa. 53.


Is there any true christian heart that grudged not at such faythles
blasphemours? Can the eye, ear, tongue, or the other senses of the body, be
content to hear their creator blasphemed, and not repyned? should not the
mouth declare the zeal of his maker, by spittyng on him, that depraueth his
divine majesty, which was, is, and shall be God for ever? Apoc. 3.
If God (as it is mentioned in the Apocalipse) will spew ypocrites out of his
mouth, such as he neither hot nor cold in his word, why may not than a
man of God, spitte on him that is worsse than an hipocrite, enemy to the
godhead manifested in the blessed Trinity, which will in no wise be persuaded
to the contrary? Johan. 2.
If Christ with a whippe drove out ye of temple such as were prophaners
thereof, ought not the servant of God (by some like outward significacion)
reprove the villainy of those as go about to take away the glory of him, that
was the buylder of the temple? If there were as much zeal in men of the
truth, as there is talkatiue knowledge, they would never be offended with that,
which is done in the reproach and co^demnacion of froward ungodly men, whom
nothing can please but singularities and divisions from the church of Christ,
which ought to be the mother and mystres of us al to lead us, Gala. 4.
into al true knowledge of the word of God, and not ymagine by ignorance,
taking ye word of God, daily an other Gospel and an other Christ, as every sect
does, separating the^ selves from Christ's spouse, which is the same that is
the acco^plishement of truth, Ephe. 1.
hitherto never knew. O insatiable curiosity: O arrogaunt self love, the
original of al these heresies: O pestilent canker of thine own salvation: O
Arrian, the right inheritour to Lucifer, Esaias. 14.
yt would exalte his seat and be like to the highest, whose fall shall be like,
where the sin is equal. If God did hyghly allow the minister of Ephesus,
Apoca. 2.
for that he could in no wise abide such as said they were Apostles and were
not indede, how may any lay uncharitableness unto me, which for the love of
my sweet Christ, do abhor al fantastical Arrians in such sort, as al men
ought to do, that love the son of God unfeignedly? If Moses be commended by
the scriptures, Act. 8.
for strykyng an Egiptian, that did injury to one of the people of God, how
may he justly be blamed, which did spit at him that does such injury and
sacrilege to the son of God, as to pluck him from his eternal and propre
godhead? was there ever creature so unkind? was there ever man so temerarious,
to strive against the glory of his glorifier? was there ever heretic so bold
and impudent, as the Arrian is, yt durst take from the son of God, ye glory
which he had with the father from the beginning? If Christ be the beginning,
Apoca. 1.
and ending of all thing (as he testifyeth him self to S. John) how may he be
but a creature like unto others? who may dissemble such blasphemy, yt has any
spark of ye spirit of God? who may hear with patience ye right ways of the
Lord perverted by these deuilishe holy Arria^s, and hold his peace? A lively
faith is not do^me, but is always ready to resist the gainesayers as David
says. I have believed and therefore I have spoken. Speak than you that have
tongues, to praise and confess against these Arria^s: exalte your voice like a
trompet, that the simple people may beware of their Pharisaical venom, and be
not deceived as now many are unawares of simplicity. Suffer them not to pass
by you vnpointed at, yea if they be so stonte, that they will not cease to
speak against God our saueour and Christ (as they are al new baptized enemies
thereto) refrain not to spit at such inordidate swyne, as are not ashamed to
tread under their fete the precious godhead of our saueour Jesus Christ. Our
God is a gelous God, and requires us to be zealous in his cause. If we can not
abide our own name to be euel spoken of, without great indignacion, shall we
be quiet to hear the name of our God defaced, and not declare any sign of
wrath against the^? It is written, be angry and sin not. A man than may
show tokens, of anger in a cause, which he ought to defend, without breach
of charity.

The prophet David says, shall I not hate them (O Lord) that hate thee? Psalm.
138.
and upon thine enemies shall I not be wrathful? I will hate them with a
perfect hatred, they are become mine enemies. Aaron (because he was not more
zealous in gods cause, when he perceived the people bent to ydolatry) entered
not into the land of promise. God loves not luke warm souidiars, in ye batel
of faith, but such as be earnest and violent, shall inherit his kingdom.
Therefore S. Paul bids us to be fervent in spirit, and you yt are to cold
in these days of ye co^ntet of the gospel, as well against these arch heretics,
as others whereof there be at these days, stered up by the Devil an infinite
swarm to the overthrow of the gospel, if it were possible. I exhort you, not
to judge that evil, which God highly commedeth: But rather to pray, that God
will give you the like zeal, to withstand the enemies of the gospel, neither
to have any manner of fellowship with these Antichrists, whom the devil has
shitten out in these days, to defyle the Gospel, which go about to teach you
any other doctrine, The gospel pure in K. Edw. days.
than you have received in king Edwardes days, in the which (praised be God)
all the synceritie of the gospel was revealed according to the pure use of ye
primative church, and as it is at this present of the true catholic church
allowed through the world. The spirit of God the holy Ghost, the third
person in Trinity, whom these wicked Arrians do elude and mock, has taught
the church (according, to Christ's promise) al truth, and shall we now receive
an other vain spirit, whom the holy fathers never knew? Try the spirits
of me^ by gods word, and by the interpretacion of the primative church, who
had promise of Christ, to receive by the coming of the holy ghost, the true
understanding of all that he had spoken and taught, after the which we have been
truly taught to believe three persons in one deity, God the father from whom,
and God the son by whom, and God the holy Ghost in who^ al things visible
and invisible do consist, and have their being and life. In the which believe we
were baptized by the institution of Christ, in to the name of the father, the
son, and the holy Ghost. Mat. 28.
And shall we now begin to stand in doubt of this most firm faith, ye which
from ye beginning has been confirmed, besides the undoubted testimonies of the
scriptures, with the precious blood of an infinite number of martirs and
co^fessours? It is no marvel though these Arrians deny the holy ghost to be
God, who refuse ye testimony that he made of him self in fiery tongues to the
primative church, Act. 1. Math. 3.
and before that in the likeness of a Dove at the baptism of Christ. They must
needs deny the spirit of truth, who be led by the spirit of error, under
the color of Godlynes, denyeng their true sanctifier and instructour, whom
Christ evidently taught to be an other comfortor besides him. The holy ghost is
an other comforter besides Christ.
And therefore to the end he should so be believed, appeared visibly as Christ
did, but as their corrupt faces bashe not to deny the eternal son of God,
so are they not ashamed to deny the holy Ghost to be God, The Arrians are
past shame.
their forehead is like the forehead of an hoar, hardened with counterfaited
hypocrisy, styffnecked wretches they are, yt will not yield to the truth,
though it be never so manyfestly laid before their face: they have sworn to
run after their master the devil, without stay, and to draw with the^ as many,
as they can, in ye which they are very diligent: The Lord confound them, the
Lord conserve his elect from their dampnable poison, the Lord open al
christian eyes, to beware of them, The Lord give al his church an uniform
zeal and mind to abhor them, and to cast faith from them. You that be of ye
truth, and have any zeal of God in you, stere it up and bind it against these
enemies of our living God, which is the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost,
to whom be al honor praise, and glory for ever. Can thou be angered with
thy brother, being lawfully called to be a mynister in Christ's church, and to
be a teacher in ye same, for spitting at an obstinate adversary of Christ,
refusyng to obey the truth, and declare no manner of indignacion against the
Arrian, the thief that robs thy God of his honor? Does the injury of the
Arrian more offend thee, than the defense of thy redemer please the? Art you
not ashamed rather to take part with an Arrian, than with a true christian?
Thou would seem to have charity, by bearing with the wicked, and contrary
to al charity you backbitest thy brother, for doing yt which thou should
rather do, than to have any familiarity with thee? If thou dwell within the
church of Christ, what have thou to do with them that be without? Which go
about nothing else, but to buyld a new Babylon, and to destroy all the Godly
order of the Gospel? I tell thee plain, that I am nothing of that face, but
give God thanks, that I hear evil, for well doing. If I should please me^, I
could not please God. I marvel, yt there should be so little zeal in a true
christian heart, that it can seem to take the part of an Arria^? We can not
scrue Christ and Baal, how long will me^ halt on both sides? let your halting be
healed. If ye be unfeignedly of ye truth, abide in ye truth, and let al your
will be toward the professors of the truth, in ye unity of Christ's church,
least you might appear to be scatterers with heretics, rather tha^ gatherers
together with Christ. Do ye not se, what a rabble of new found scaterers there
be? such a sort as never at ones has be^ heard of in one realm, the one
contrary to the other: The devil has shaken out his bag of heresies against
the gospel
So that the deuel might seem to have powered out al his poisons at ones against
the gospel. And will you (that glory of the truth) go about by word, deed, and
help, to maintain any such in their headdy errors? he that touches pitche,
can not chose but defyle his fyngers therewith. Be not deceived says S. Paul,
for wicked talk corrupts good manners. 1. Cor. 14
Therefore watch ye righteously, and sin not: for many therbe that have not
ye knowlage of God, I speak it to your shame. 2. Tim. 2.
Saint Paul wills us to be more circu^spect in talking or acquainting our
selves with such, then men at this day be, to their incorrageme^t and
strenghtnyng in their error. The words of an heretic (as he says in an
other place) eats like a canker. 2. Tim. 2
And therefore writing unto Tyte, Tit. 3.
he commands al Christian persons to avoid an heretic, after once or
twyse warnyng, knowing that such a one is perverted, and synneth and is dampened
by his own judgment.

And to the Thessalonians he also says: 2. These. 3.
we command you in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you wythdrawe
your selfs from every brother that walks inordinatly, and not according to
the institution which they have received of us. There can be no fellowship
betwixt faith and infidelity: he that is not with Christ is his enemy, Luke.
11.
he that is an enemy to the unity and peace of Christ's church, he may not
be coupled with us. And Solomon renders a cause why. Prou. 16.
A perverse man in his mouth does carye perdicion, and in his lips hydeth
fire. Again he says: an evil man, obeys the tongue of the unrighteous,
Prou. 17,
but the Just harketh not to lyeng lips. Also Ecclesiasticus warns saying:
Eccle, 28.
Hedge thine cares with thorns, and do not hear a wicked tongue. This have I
touched to give you warning, how to behave your selves with the Arrians and
other sismatikes and heretics, whom al godly order and good learning
displeases, the which if our Christian brethren and systerne did well way and
follow, there would not be so many stout heretics as there be. I doubt that
the heretics be better provided for, than the poor faithful afflicted flock
of Christ. If you hear that there is conte^tion between us and the^ that be in
prison, marvel not therefore, neither let your minds be alienated from the
truth any thing thereby: for as it is written, it is necessary ye heresies
should be, 1. Cor. 11.
that the elect might be tried. Christ and Antichrist can never agree. 1. Ioh.
2.
And as S. John says, Antichrist is come, and there is now many Antichrists,
they are gone out from us, such as were non of us: for if they had. they would
have continued with us: by this saying of S. John, we may well try and know
all the rowte of Antichrists generation, such they be as break the unity of
Christ's church, neither abide in ye same, neither submit their judgment to be
tried in the causes which they brable for by the Godly learned pastors thereof:
but arrogauntlie deprave them, and take upon them self to be teachers before
they have learned, affirming they can not tell what, and speaking evil of that
which they know not, proud they are and puffed up, in the imaginacions of
their own hearts and blind senses, and judge them selves best of all other,
because they can make a pale face of ypocrysye to the world, and cast a glass
of desembling water before the eyes of the simple people, as these Arrians do
But praised be God, his word is lyuelie and mighty, and beats the^ al down,
like an iron rod an earthen pot in peaces, and yet they are so hard hearted, and
far from grace, yt they will not yield to ye manifest truth, when they have
naught justly to reply besides cou^terfaited words. There is no pyth in
the^, full of co^te^tion and backbiting these brauli^g heretics ar under a
pretense of feigned holiness, who^ our saueour Christ aptly compared to painted
sepulchers, which be nothing else wtin, Math. 23.
but full of rotten bones. For whereas true faith is not in ye unity of Christ's
church, there is nothing but abominable in ye sight of God: for God Psalm. 67.
(as the Prophet says) makes his people to dwell after one manner in one
house. But with all manner of sects can these perverse generation away with all,
more tha^ with ye unity of Christ's pure catholic church, to the which in no
wise they will agree, albeit the same is the pillar and stablishment of truth,
as S. Paul writes to Timothe. 1. Tim. 3.
I never saw neither heard before of such a sight of gydie and fantastical
heads, who delight only in singularity, whom I do much pity, because they
take so much pains, to go to the devil. Arrogaunt singularity and envious
contention be ready paths, leading to the same, in the which they walk
manfully. Still they have ye scriptures in their mouth, and cry the scripture,
the scripture, but it comes like a beggars clooke, out of their mouths full
of patches, and al out of facion: and when they be (by the word ryghtly
alleged) overthrown, that they have not with reason, what to replye, yet will
they never be confounded. But either depart in fury, or else stop their
ears, at ye saying of the wise charmers, like deaf serpents: or else fall to
scolding, which is their surest divinity they fight with all. And if perchance
any of them be soberer than other, their answer is, I pray you let us alone,
our conscie^s is satisfied, you labor but in vain to go about to turn us.
Thus in self love, blyndnes, and vain hypocrisy, these heretics continue,
be they never so charitably or learnedly informed. And where they have nothing
to lay against their loving informers, than they ymagine most spitfully and
falsely to declare, whose children they are, blasphemies spreadyng the same
abroad, both by them selves, and by their adherentes, against the sincere
professors of ye Gospel: that we make God the author of sin, and that we
say let men do what they will, it is not material, if they be predestinate: and
that we maintain al carnal liberty, dyse, cards, drunkenness and other
inordinate things and gain: and with this I (among other) am most
slau^derously charged and defamed by these outrageous heretics, to whom I
have gone about (to my power) to do good, as God is my witness, but I have
received the reward of a Prophet at their hands, although I am not worthy to
be counted under that glorious name, which is shame, rebuke, slander, and
sleyng of my good fame. They are like Satan their graund syer in this poinct,
Ioh. 8.
who was a liar and a man queller from the beginning. These presciptuous
heretics do daily declare their cold charity, which proceeds out of their
cold faith: God forgive it them, and inflame them with a better spirit. I
protest before God and his angels, that I never meant neither said any of
these infamies, whereof I am besyed of them with many other good me^. Only
because I hold and affirm (being manifestly instructed by gods word) that ye
elect of God, cannot finally perish, therefore they have pyked out of their
own malicious nails, the former part of these blasphemies: and because at an
other time, I did reprove them of their temerarious and rash judgment, for
condempning of men, vsyng things indifferent, as shoting, boulyng, hawking
with such like, prouyng by the scripture, that al men in a temperancy, might
use them in their dew times, and showing that honest pastyme was no sin,
which these contencious sysmatikes do improve, whereupon they do maliciously
desca^t, as is before me^cioned. And whether I have deserved to have this
reproach for tellyng them the truth, which they can not abide, let al men
judge that be of an upright judgment. Might not these hipocrites be ashamed of
their bridleles blasphemous tounges, if the devil had not rubbed away all
shame from their fore heads? S. James says, James. ^.
that if any person which would seem to be a gospeller, refrain not his
tongue, his religion is in vain. O what a meany of vain caterpillars be
there, which corrupt the sweet and holsom flowers of the Gospel to the shame
thereof, as much as it lies in them. It had been better for them, never to have
known the Gospel, than by their proud freewill knowlage, to go about to
subvert the same. I would they would be taught by the church of Christ, where
they ought to be, and become sincere confessors, or else leave bogging of
heresies to their own damnacio^ and deceauing of many, The heretics clout up
the scriptures without understanding.
and fall to their own occupacion every man according to his own calling, and
learn to eat (with the swet of their own brows) their bread to help
others, as gods word commands the^, and not to lie in corners, like
hu^bledories, eating up the honey of the bees, and do nothing else but murmr
and sting at the verity, and at all faithful laborers in ye lords vynyarde.
Thus by the way, I thought it good to admonish you of other heretics,
besides the Arria^s, who be hand maidens unto them, and do daily make an
entrance for the^ to increase, who belong to one kingdom of darkness,
although, the one be not so high in degree as the other. Blind guydes they
are, Mat. 15.
and leaders of the blind, and as many as follow them do fall into the ditch:
for as it is said of Salomo^, there is a way that seems to a man right, Prou.
14.
and yet the end thereof tends to destruction. Direct therefore your steps
with the church of Christ in ye ways of the gospel, and in brotherly unity,
and account it as the sin of witchcraft to make division from the same. And
God of his mercy either turn their hearts shortly, or else confound them, that
they be not a shameful slander to the gospel, as already they have begone to
be, to ye great grief of al faithful hearts. Now will I turn to the Arrian
again, who transfygureth himself into an Angel of light, as Satan oftentimes
does, that he might under ye cloak of holiness more myghtely deceive the simple
folk. The Arrians comer fait holiness.
And verily he is a devil incarnate, he has a name that he lives, and in deed
is dead Judge them not by their outward show, wherein they extol them selves
wonderfully, Apoc. 3. Johan. 7.
and dare simple men's eyes like larkes. For our master Christ prophesied of
such false hypocrites to come, gyuyng us warning to beware of such as
prete^de the simplicity of a sheep outwardly, Mat. 7.
and yet inwardly are rauenyng wolves, deuouryng the souls and bodies of me^,
unto perdition. Act. 20.
S. Paul departing from Ephesus, said there should rise up men speaking
perverse things, that they might make scolars to ru^ne after them. S. Peter
sets me fourth these Arrians lively in their colors, 2. Pet. 2.
and in manner points at the^ with his fingre: there has be^ (says he)
false prophets among the people, as there shall be among you false teachers,
which privily shall bring in pernicious sects, yea denyers of ye Lord, who has
bought them, procuryng to them selves swift destruction, and many will follow
their poisons, by who^ the way of truth shall be evil spoken of etc. who be
such Iudases unto Christ, as these Arrians, which cease not to betraye him of
his eternal deity? who slander more the truth than these, denyeng Jesus to
be ye God of truth? These be they, of whom the Apostle Jude speaks, which
transpose the grace of our God into wanton ymaginacio^s of their own brains,
and deny God, who is the only Lord, and our Lord Jesus Christ. My mind
therefore (says he) is to put you in remembrance, for as much as ye ones
know this, that the Lord (after that he had delivered the people out of
Egypt) destroyed the^ which believed not, The Angels also which kept not their
first estate, but left their own habitacion, he has reserved in everlasting
chains under darkness unto yt judgment of the great day. etc. Eue^ so shall
the Lord destroy these unbelieving Arrians whom he did ones (through baptism)
deliver from the bondage of syn, because they have forsaken the deity of
Christ their original justice, and compared him irreverently and ungodly to
them selves, to whom eternal fire belongs, which is prepared for the devil
and for these Arria^s his chief angels. Worse they are tha^ the devils, which
in the.8. chap. of S. Matthew did acknowlage him to be the eternal son of God,
and in the acts of the Apostles they confessed Paul and Barnabas, Act. 16.
which were yt servants and disciples of Christ, to be the servants of god
most high. The devils in S. James do believe and tremble at the majesty of
Christ. James. ^.
The Centurion in the.28. of S. Ma. acknowledged him verily to be the son of
God. But these helhoundes are offended at his eternal majesty, and would have
him no better than them selves by creation. Is this your profession of Christ,
O you Antichrists? does your feigned holiness tend to this end, to dishonor
him that is most holiest, and one God with the father and the holy Ghost of al
holiness? O you painted hipocrites, does your counterfaited love, and
dissemblyng patiens go about to abase the eternal love of God, his beloved
son? O you haters of God, put of your shameless visardes o you unbelieving
Arrians, put of your Angelical infidelity, and walk as you be. O you
deceauers of the people, you say ye se, and yet be altogether blinded, for he
that sees not Christ to be the everlasting son of God, sees no light, for
he is the very light, Johan. 1
by whom al men be illyghtened: Seek therefore of him your eye salve, lest in
your blyndnes ye stomble shortly to eternal darkness. 1. Johan. 1
O what huge blyndnes are they in, which say they have no sin in the^, as S.
John^ plainly affirms, that who so ever says he has no sin is a liar?
And David says that al men be liars.

Psalm. 116. Esaias. 67.
The prophet Esaias says, that our ryghteousnes is like the clothe of a
monstrous woman. Shall we believe liars before the faithful servants of God?
If they know not them selves, is it any maruail, though they know not God? He
that is unfaithful in a little, will be also unfaithful in much: he that is not
ashamed to belie himself, it is no wonder, though he be so bold to belie an
other better than him self. How may a purblinded man behold the brightness of
the sun? who is so sore diseased, as he that being very sick, believes that
he is hole? Who knows not our flesh (as long as it is in this corruptible
life) to be a lo^pe of sin? Yea and who fealeth not the law of sin, which
is in our members still to strive against the law of our mind? Romans 7. 2.
Cor. 12.
S. Paul who was taken up into the third heaven, and saw such things as is
not lawful for man to speak of, whose godly life, surmou^teth the rabble of
these Arria^s, and yet he durst not be so bold as to compare in purity with
Christ, neither to affirm that he was without sin: but acknowlaged sin to
be in his body, and desired that it might be taken from him: to whom it was
not granted, but that it should remain with him for his spiritual exercise,
and by grace to overcome ye same, that where sin haboundeth, there grace
should super abound. Why do ye cleanse the outward sides of your stynkyng
vessels (O you impure glorifiers of your selves) and se not the inward
abominacion which is in you? Ye say ye be sweet before the Lord, and behold
you stynke before the face of the hole world, but specially before God and al
his saints: for how can God but abhor al such as do take away the sweet
savor of his divine nature from his son, and to attribute that excellency to
them selves which is not in them? Genesis 6.
Has not God himself witnessed of man's impuritie, saying that all the
thoughts of man be only prone unto evil? Is not this inclination to evil which
lurketh in our flesh, sin and the natural corruption which we sucked from
our first pare^tes? learn to know thy self better, and than shall thou judge
more uprightly of the son of God: cleanse thine inward filthynesse and sin
by an humble and repentau^t confession of thine own unworthiness and
wickedness toward thy redemer, and than thine outward show of holiness, might
be somewhat worth, which now is double deuilishnes, for want of true knowledge
both of thy self and of faith to God. Know thine own poverty and misery,
and come to thy saueour, which is rich with God, and hable of himself to
enriche thee with all felicity. Thou art like them that be of the congregation
of Laoditia mentioned in the Apocalips, which says with them that I am rich
and enryched, and want nothing, Apoca. 3.
and know not in deed, yt thou art wretched and miserable, both poor, blind
and bare, I counsel thee therefore to bye fyrye gold of the deity of our
Christ, that thou myghtest thorough true belefe wexe rich, and be clothed with
his whit garments, that the shame of thy nakedness might not appear as it does
now to thy great confusion. If thou se not this, thou art one of them whom
Christ for thine infidelity toward him made blind unto everlasting
dampnacion. These Arrianes would not be counted miserable, and they can not
away with this godly prayer, which the church uses saying, Lord have mercy
upon us miserable sinners. Romans 7.
But S. Paul was not ashamed to say, miserable person that I am, who shall
deliver me from this body subject to death? He confesses as well our miserable
as sinful state in this life, and they that perceive the impuritie of our
nature which it has through the fall of Adam, and the want of original
justice which we lost by him, can not but cry we are miserable, and say with
David. I am miserable and made crooked. I went al day long sorowfully: and
pray with the blind man of the gospel, Luke. 18.
Jesus ye son of David have mercy upon us. What vain religion is this of
theirs? What pharisaical leven does they scatter abroad? what lyeng hypocrisy
do they maintain? But is this al? no verily. It were to long for me to touch
their infinite errors, they are infected withal, they deny the old testament,
to be of any authority, David psalms be not to be used as prayers and praises
to God, and they are almost as bold with the new. For they find fault with
the Lords prayer, and affirm that they need not say, for the^ selves, let
thy kingdom come, for it is already come upon them. And what need we pray
(say they) for that we have alreadi. And we have no sin, wherefore than should
we say, forgive us our trespasses? O impude^cy of al impudencyes the greatest.
O infidelity more than ever was among the brutishe heathen. Was there ever any
that went about to set God to scole, before he has taught us how to pray:
and they say, we need not so to pray. The godly men (says S. Peter) 2. Pet.
1.
which did write the scriptures, spoke not of themselves, but by the
instruction of the holy Ghost. And these frantike heretics and Antichrists
will both correct and teach the holy Ghost to speak. Who having any spitte
in his body, may not think it well bestowed upon such wicked blasphemours of
God and his word? I would I had a fou^tayne of spitle to spatle on them, I
would my spittle might be of so great virtue against them, as the words of S.
Paul was against Bariesu, whom resysting the belefe of Christ, Act. 13.
he called the son of the devil: and therewith stroke him blind. Better it
were for a man to lose his outward sight, whereby corruptible things be only
seen, than to want the inward whereby God is perceived. And more precious is
the glory of my Christ in my sight, than all the men of ye world. The blind
Pharisees I know will be offended at this my saying, and think it is
uncharitably spoken, but I pass not upon their offense, answering the^ with
Christ, let them alone they are blind and the leaders of blind, he that is
ignorant let him be ignorant still, and he that is fylthie let him be more
filthye, but he that is holy let him become more holy, Apoc. 22.
and beware of these pestiferous Arrians leaven, who besides all this deny the
benefit of repentance to any person that synneth after baptism, contrary to
the manifest word of God, Ezech. 13.
saying that in what so ever hour a sinner does repent him of his sins they
shall be forgiven him. Do ye not think that these beasts are to be borne
withal? Say what ye will, they will not hear, they are like unto those of whom
it is written in ye psalms, Psalm. 115.
eyes they have and see not, ears they have and hear not, they have noses and
smell not, yea they have a froward heart and understand not, when the
scriptures be so clearly alleged against them, that they have not what to
say, these be their folishe answers they can make you understand it so, you
will needs have it so. If ye were of us, ye should perceive more tha^ ye do.
Thus under the pretense of a hydde^ secret, which they say is reveled unto
them above al other, they would thorough curiosity, have me^ to call their
faith in doubt, and so to deny the same. But say to them, depart from me you
Satan's whelps. Take heed lest by any means it come to pass, that like as
the serpent deceived Eve so by his sutteltie, 2. Cor. 11.
your senses be corrupted from the simplicity of faith which ye have toward
Christ. And if any man preach unto you an other Jesus, whom the church of
Christ hitherto has not taught, or an other spirit which the church has not
received, Math. 24
hear him not, believe him not, for such Christ prophesied of to come in the
latter days that should go about to show us other Christ's than he taught us,
whom he charge us not to credit, Hebr. 13.
for Jesus Christ (as it is written) is always one yesterdaye and to day, and
shall be to the worlds end and for ever.

Therefore do as saint Paul exhorts you. Gala. 1.
If an Angel from heaven should preach unto you any other Gospel besides that
which has been preached unto you, let it be accursed: or if any man preach any
other, hold him accursed. These be sufficient warninges for all true christians
to beware of these late spro^g heresies, and specially of these new baptized
Arrians, who be more craftyer than the others and more dampnable, and for that
the dilige^ter to be avoided. If they will goo about to pervert you from the
true faith, in corners and dens, as they do very diligently (as I hear say)
the more pity it is they be so suffered, tell such that ye truth seeks no
corners as the proverb teaches us. And therefore if they were of the truth,
they would not lurk in corners this long as they have don, Thapostles whose
counterfaicted successors, they would be counted to be, after the truth of the
gospel was reveled unto them, went forth and preached the same boldly,
notwithstanding they were straightly forbidden, and persecuted for the same.
Every one (says our saueour Christ) yt does well, comes to the light, that
his works may be seen, that they be done according to Gods will, Ioh. 3.
but he which does naughtely, hates the light, and comes not to the light,
The Arrians lurk in corners and be coy to show there faith.
lest his doings should be reproved. By this ye may know that these Arrians
with other heretics, are borne of that prince of darkness, who walk
continually under clouds, and with great difficulty will show them selves,
onles it be to some simple persons, whom they think apt to be deceived.
Therefore turn your ears from them, al ye that be unlearned when they endeavor
to deprave your faith with an other Christ and means of salvation tha^ you have
heard before of. And bid them first show their new found says to the elders
and ministers of Christ's true church, and afterward if they allow the same,
as sound and pure, you will gladly harken unto them, otherwise not, for no
person ought to take upon him the office of a doctor, except he be called
thereunto, by the ordinary alowau^ce of the church of God, Romans 10.
as S. Paul testifies, how shall they preach except they be sent. Marc. 4.
Therefore Christ in S Mark bids al perso^nes take heed what they hear.
There are innumerable sorts of heresies, entered into the world, so that we may
justly gather these to be the evil days that Christ spoke of before, Math. 24
in the which if it were possible the very electes should be deceived, be ye
therefore strong in your faith grounded upon the rock immovable what soever
storm come upon you or mystie wind blow against you. Many inordinat
persons of this time do run, Iere. 23.
whom the Lord has not sent, as hieremie says, and say the Lord says
thus and thus, where as ye Lord never spoke any such thing, as they of their
fantastical brain do ymagine and thorough ignorau^cy do misconstre to deceive
others and themselves also. Therefore the Lord bids us not to harken to
their words.

Prove these wandering and glittering spirits, by this rule which I have told
you: and than be you assured, ye can not be deceived, though there arise ten
thousand more heresies tha^ there be. It may trouble an inconstaunt mind, to
se so many at once, but he yt knows the devils diligence to deface Christ's
Gospel, may not wonder thereat, for he knows his time is but short, and sees
the gospel so triumph thorough the death of faithful martirs that he is wood
thereat, and therefore works his uttermost, and trusts to make some stout
arrogaunt martirs for ye stabishement and increase of his kingdom, and that
under ye name of christ, as he has had in times past, that ye simple people
might be brought in a mamering of their faith, and stand in doubt whom they
might believe, that thereby he might more lightly seduce them into his snares.
Behold I have given you warnyng, that ye be not deceived by these wanderyng
stars, and empty clouds, which now a days are carried about, with so
uncertain wyndes, that a man can not tell where to find them, neither they
themselves know from whence they came, neither whither they would.

They will enter into heaven by ye wyndow, and not by the door, and therefore
like erraunt thieves shall be cast out. Beware of curiosite my dear brethren and
systerne, for she is an insatiable beast, and the cause of much infidelity
and wyckednes, she is always desirous of alteration and to hear news, and
can not be permanent on one sure ground. Dyna as it is written in the Genesis,
being full of curiosity, Gene. 34.
and desirous to see the women of a strange country, was ravished and lost
her virginity, and was the destruction of Sichem. David was curious to behold
the beauty of Bethzabe, 2. Reg. 11.
and became thereby an adulterer and a murderer, and was the cause of many
thousands destruction, 2. Reg. 24.
by the curiouse nombring of his people.

Therefore of experience he gives good counsel saying in the psalms, turn
away thine eyes that they se not vanity. Turn I say away from these
heretics, show not them a cheareful countenance, lest they receive an
encouragement thereby to win ye unto them, and thou by curiosity be entangled
thorough their hypocrisy and perverse talk. As many as abode in the Ark of Noah, were not drowned by the flood of Noe. Even so as many as abide in the true
church of Christ, shall receive no hurt by all the blustering and corrupt
waters which the dragon that persecuteth the church into wilderness does in
thapocalips cast out after her to the end to drown her therewith. Apoca. 12
You that stand in doubt of any thing by the suggestion, of these new found
heretics, run to the pure catholic church of Christ for your sure
instruction, which (praised be God) at this day does gloriouslye appear and
shine spyte of the gates of hell, in all Germany, and in the borders of France
at Geneue, and in the kingdoms of Denmark and Pole, besides that which of
late ye have seen in your own country, in England, now by the will of God,
under affliction and persecution, as well for our sins, as for the trial of the
people of God: for as an ancient father S. Ciprian says. He that has not
the church for his mother, has not God for his father, we have but one
mother says Solomon in his Ballets, Cant. 6.
and she coueteth to gather us under her wings like a loving he^ne her
chekins, and if we abide there, we are assured from all the ravening vermyne of
heretics, and though there shall fall on every side of thee, millia^s yet shall
they not aproche nere unto thee. But if after curiosity thou go out astraye,
some Kyte or other will snatche thee up to the prince of the air, from where
thy fall will be great. If thou will be assured of the eternal kingdom of God, be
stable in thy faith, flee from sects and heresies, and abide in the unity of
Christ's spouse his true church. Remember that in old time, it was forbidden
the people of God, to mary with any foreyn nacio^ that was not of the house of
Israel, in significacio^ that the church of God, should never join them selves
with such as be of a strange religion and of heretical opinions contrary the
catholic faith, cursed is he (says Hieremie) that does the work of the
lord negligentlie and with drawith his swerd from blood. Iere. 48.
In the law he is commanded to be stoned that goes about to turn us from
the living Lord, Gent. 13,
and to move us to worship creatures for the creator, and that the same should
cast the first stone at him whom he went about to pervert. And what do these
Arrians else go about, but to will us to worship their new found Christ, whom
they affirm to be but a creature in place of our true Christ the eternal
son of God our creator, redemer and governor, who is God to be praised and
honored, with the father and ye holy ghost world without end. The Prophet
says in the psalms, there must be no new God, among Gods people: but if
Christ should be as they say but a made and appoincted God of the father as
princes of the earth be called Gods, the^ should he be a new God. and so by
the word of God, not to be taken of us for God, neither to be worshipped or
called upon, Iere. 17.
for as the Prophet Jeremy testifies, cursed is ye person which puts his
confidens in man, and sets flesh to be his strenght. These wicked Arrians
are worse than the Jews, for they were offended with Christ, whom they took
but for a creature, for saying he was the son of God. But the Arrians,
blinder than the Jews, taking him for God would have him to be only a
creature like to them selfs in all poinctes and not very God of Gods
substance. They make the Jews more ryghteous than Christ, and do justify them
for crucifieng of him, for the chieffe cause why they crucified him was, as it
does appear by S. John, because he made him self equal with God, being but a
man as they took him to be only What Christians ears do not glome at this
great impiety? who having any zeal of God, will not cry out, ah devil, ah
Lucefers brood, ah Marathans cursed of God, until his commi^g. woe be to ye
Arius ye father of this wicked progeny, woo be unto you vile childerne, and
folowers of his horrible impiety. God of his mercy turn from you, such as of
ignorauncy and simplicity be deceived, but you yt be arrogant and incurable in
your blasphemy:

The lord for his glory sake, and for example to others to beware of such
detestable impiety consume you, with fire from heaven, as he did Chore, Dathan
and Abiron, let the ground (oh lord) open, and let hem go down alive unto
hell, let them be put out of the book of life, and let them not be reckoned
among the righteous, let the^ have thy traitor Judas reward, let the^ break
a sonder in the midst and let their bowelles gushe out to their shame for
ever, let their guts issue out behind as Arrius guts did, and let them die
in their own dong with their father, and be abhorred of all the world for ever,
let their portion be with Zodome and Gomor, let their stinking smoke be done
out never, let the just rejoice when they shall see the reuengaunce of the
glory of Christ, let them praise him one God with the father and the holy ghost
for ever and ever AMEN.

FINIS.
Vincit qui patitur.

