AN HOVREGLASSE Containing I A Computation from the Beginning of Time to Christ
by X. Articles.

II A Confirmation of the same for the times controuersed before Christ: as
also that there wants a year after Christ, in the usual Computation.

With other matters, offered to the judgment of the learned, and use of the
studious in Chronology and History.

By Thomas Pie Doctor of Divinity.

LONDON, Printed by John Wolf. 1597.

To the most Gracious and Reverend Father in Christ, JOHN by the providence of
God Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all England and Metropolitan,
and one of her Majesty's most Honorable privy Council.
HOW necessary and requisite Chronology is in the study of all History,
Divine or Humane, it being the right eye thereof, as Geographie is the left:
there is no man, unless he be blind of both eyes, but may easily discern and
will freely confess. Without which we cannot but wander in the estate and
affairs of the world as Polyphemus in his cave, and be tossed in the vast
Ocean of History, as a Pilot without the Northstarre, discerning nothing in
the main course thereof, but an huge heap of diffused matter. For which cause
Athenaeus is so sharp in reprehending both Plato and Xenophon, for misnoting
the times of some stories; and Thucidides finds the same fault with
Hellanicus, Dionysius with Fabius Pictor, Plutarch with Thucidides, for
misdating the Ostracisme of Themistocles, and the Reign of Artaxerxes; and
Tullie with certain before him, which made Numa to be the scholar of
Pythagoras, who was borne not a few years, but whole ages after Numa. And
therefore it is the more strange that Ovid after him should fall into the same
error. Hieron. ad Nepot. de vica clericali.
Hierome writing to Nepotian of unlearned preachers in his time, alleges this
example out of an Oration of Tully for Quintus Gallus (which now is not
extant:) Quidam Poeta nominatus, homo perliteratus, cujus suntilla Colloquia
Poetarum and Philosophorum, cum facit Euripidem and Menandrum intersese, and
alio loco Socratem and Epicurum disserentes, quoru^ aetates non annis, sed
saeculis scimus esse disiunctas; quantos is plausus and clamores mouet? multos
enim condiscipulos habet in Theatro, qui simul literas non didicerunt.
Doubtless, had Tullie himself been there, or at the sermons of Hieroms
unlearned preachers, (I would God our age were void of the like,) he would
have exclamed, Ad Atticum. li. 6.
as he did of one Metellus, (...) turpem! Oh foul ignorance of History! It is
a wonder to see the Beauperes of the Law, Bartolus and Paulus Castrensis,
rouing at Randon about the time and age of Papinian and Diocletian, and that
when they handle the same of purpose for the reconciliation of certain laws:
and a very world to behold the great Antiquaries of the Saxons, Specul. Saxon.
li. 3. ca. 43. Alb. Stadenfis ad annu^ 917. Epiph cont. haer. l. 7. tom. 3.
Socrates li. 5. ca. 21. Lact. divine. instit. li. 4. ca. 5. Aug. de doctr. Chapter
li. 2. Retract li. 2. De ciuit. Dei li. 18.
auerring that their first ancestors were Alexanders Macedonian companies,
which as soon as Alexander was dead, arrived in Germany, even iump at that
time, when Theodorik king of Frankes had war with Ermifrid king of
Thuringians; which was little less than a thousand years after Alexander: and
the great Historicians of the Danes, Johannes Magnus Archbishop of Vpsala,
Pantaleon and Heminges, making Dan the Archege and Grandsire of the Danes, to
be equal in antiquity to Gedeon, who was at the least a thousand years after
Gedeon. And therefore the less marvel, that the great Fathers in Divinity
are sometime out of their numbers too; as Epiphanius, mistaking the death of
Justin Martyr to be under Adrian: Socrates, misplacing the martyrdom of
Polycarpus to be under Gordian: Lactantius affirming that Moses was 900 year
before the Trojan war: and Augustine himself likewise, auouching that Plato
went into Egypt in the time of Jeremy the prophet; and producing Ambrose for
a witness thereof, though afterward he both confess the misciting of Ambrose,
and also acknowledge that Plato was borne after Ezra his time.

But it is not my purpose here to imitate Castor Rhodius; who as Suidas
records, has written in large volumes (...), Errors of time and Ignorances
of History.

In ancient time, the Pagans so out faced and ouerbore the Christians with such
mistaken Histories, antedated and forged authorities, worn and worme-eaten
antiquities, that the Christians were constrained to bestow more time and
diligence in that study: as among other Eusebius, and before him Clemens
Alexandrinus have performed that part most painfully and profitably; whose
tract other since have diligently traced.

And albeit many in our time have labored in this argument, with great pains
and no less praise, whose candle my self (...) scarce worthy to hold; yet
finding none of them all, fully to content me in the main Computation of the
years of the world, or thoroughly to clear that principal account, being the
ground of Chronology, and as it were the maine body, whereout all other
Computations as branches do spring: no man, I hope, will blame my endeavors,
either for wading further in the broken ice to find out the truth, or for
diuulging my opinion and reasons in this naked shadow and short delineation:
since it is done to this end, that the judgment of the learned may be had
thereof, not that the conjectures of other should be prejudiced thereby, as I
would not have the conceits or authority of any to prejudice or forestall the
truth. It was truly said of Seneca to Lucilius, of all parts of learning
generally, and it is verified of this specially, Epist. l. 8. ep. 7.
Multum egerunt qui fuerunt ante nos, sed non peregerunt.

Besides this, great men employed in great matters, busied with weighty
affairs, and bestowing their study in the greater parts of learning, have
not that liberty and quiet leisure, which these (...) and lesser studies do
require. Which since the Almighty has vouchsafed me, as I take it for no
small benefit of his goodness, especially in these evil times, and very
dogdaies of the Church and Religion, which now lie together in a desperate
paroxisme and most dangerous fit, jointly shaken and assaulted by Popery and
Atheism, and daily weakened, yea hazarded by both, but that the zealous care of
her sacred Majesty, and the careful foresight of her Honorable counsel
holds in life: so I thought it my duty to employ some part thereof in these
smaller and lower arguments, which greater matters will not suffer other men
to stand about and thoroughly to look into. Which labors of mine (if the
lowness thereof in regard of your Highness breed not too great a disparage) I
hight as wholly due to your Grace, in respect not only of the common right, in
that you are the highest person and chiefest patron of my profession; or of
that special interest, in that you are the Visitor and Ouerseer of Merton
College my tender parent, but also even of a certain property, which your
Grace in regard of many benefits above other has in me, now that I am bereft
of that Reverend Father D. Bickleie late L. Bishop of Chichester, Qui nobis
haec otia fecit. Wherefore craving pardon for my boldness herein, I humbly
submit this short treatise to your Graces censure and favor, and with daily
prayers commit your Grace to all the blessings of the Almighty. September.
1597.

Your Graces most bounden: THOMAS PIE.

The first Article.
From Adam to Seth Years. 130 Seth to Enosh Years. 105 Enosh to Kenan Years.
90 Kenan to Mahalaleel Years. 70 Mahalaleel to Iered Years. 65 Iered to
Henoch Years. 162 Henoch to Mathushelah Years. 65 Mathushelah to Lamech
Years. 187 Lamech to Noach Years. 182 Noach to the beginning of the Deluge
Years. 599 Beginning of the Deluge to the end. Years. 1


The Sum from the Creation to the Beginning of the Deluge, 1655. years, 1.
month 16 days. End of the Deluge, 1656. years, 1. month and 26. days.
Beginning of the Deluge to the end of it, 12. months containing 354. days for
the common year, and one day, for the Bassextil year; and 10. days over:
which with the foresaid odd day make up the Epacts; so that Noach was in the
Arc precisely a just Solar year: unless the year 1656. had the month Veadar
intercalated, as Wolphius seems to prove: and then he was a year and a month
full.


The second Article.
From End of the Deluge to Arphaxad Years. 2 Arphaxad to Shelah Years. 35
Shelah to Heber Years. 30 Heber to Peleg Years. 34 Peleg to Rehu Years. 30
Rehu to Serug Years. 32 Serug to Nahor Years. 30 Nahor to Terah Years. 29
Terah to Abraham Years. 130


The sum from the Deluge to Abraham Years. 352 Creation to Abraham Years.
2008


Abraham was borne in the year of the world 2009. which is accounted for his
first year.

The third Article.
Abraham's age before the beginning of the Peregrination or Soiourning, that is
before he went from Vr of the Chaldees Years. 70
Abraham departed from Vr, in the year, 2079. which is the first of his
Peregrination.

The fourth Article.
The Peregrination or soiourning of the Hebrews from Abraham's departing from
Vr, to the Israelites departing out of Egypt Years. 430
The Israelites departed out of Egypt in the year, 2509. which is the first
year of their departing.

The fifth Article.
From the departing of the Israelites out of Egypt, to the Foundation of the
Temple, that is, to the end of Solomon's fourth year, in the second month
whereof the Temple was sounded. years. 480
The Temple was founded in the second month of the year of the world, 2988.

The sixth Article.
From the beginning of Solomon's fifth year, to the end of Rehoboams first
year years. 37
The first year of Rehoboam and Ieroboham was the year of the world, 3025.

The seventh Article.
(...), or Bearing of the burden of the iniquity of Israel, from the sin of
Jeroboam, and the Apostasy of the ten Tribes in the first year of Jeroboam,
to the end of the siege and taking of Jerusalem, in the eleventh and last year
of Zedechias. years. 390
The siege ended, and Jerusalem was taken the ninth day and fourth month of the
year 3416. in the very end both of Zedechias 11. year, and Nabuchodonosors
18. which year 3416, falling some small part in Nabuchodonosors 18. but the
greater part in his 19. is the first year of the Captivity.

The eight Article.
The punishment of the iniquity, viz. the Captivity of the people from the
taking of Jerusalem by Nabuchodonosor to the taking of Babylon by Cyrus.
years. 70
The Captivity ended in the beginning of the year of the world 3486. which
was the first year of the deliverance, and likewise the first year of Cyrus.

The ninth Article.
From the taking of Babylon to the Edict of Artaxerxes Longimane for the
Return of the people and building of the City by Ezra, that is to Artaxerxes
7. year, exclusive Years. 78
Artaxerxes seventh year, in the very beginning whereof the Edict proceeded
forth, was the year, 3568.

The tenth Article.
Daniels 70. weeks from Artaxerxes Edict to the death of Christ, in the 34.
year of his life. Years. 490
Conclusion.
At the death of Christ there were complete and ended 4053. years of the
world, out of which substract 34. backward to his Conception or Incarnation,
and there will be 4019. complete before his incarnation: which was on the day
of the Vernal Aequinoctiall beginning the year of the world, 4020. and he was
borne, as learned Astronomers have calculated it, agreeably to this
Computation, the day of the winter Solstice being friday in the year of the
world 4020. the 29. day of Cisleu of the Hebrews. Olympiad, 194. Y. 3. the 28.
day of Anthestion of the Athenians. Andyneus of the Macedonians.
Rome, 751. the 8. Calends of January, of the Romans. 25. day of December.
of the Romans.
Nabonassar 747. the 4. day of Tibi of the Egyptians. Augustus Empire 42. or
his xiii. Consulship. Indichon 4. having the Golden number, 19. Circle of the
sun, 8. Dominical letter E. because of the erroneous intercaling: else it
should have been D. The next year was the last omitted leap year. And so
since Christ the year of Julius Caesar remained unviolated till Gregory,
xxij. 1582. years. See Page,



The Computation after Christ.
THe year of the world 4020. and the Incarnation of Christ began just
together. But the vulgar and usual Computation from the Incarnation of Christ,
used in this Realm and other places, does not reach to Christ's true
Incarnation, and the beginning of the year, 4020. by one whole year: but
begins the first day of the year of the world, 4021. Wherefore in reducing
that vulgar computation to the true computation of Christ's Incarnation, and
then consequently by it to the years of the world, you must ever first add
one to the year of that vulgar computation, which also must be done to the
computations of the church of Rome from the Nativity or 25. of December, and
of the City of Rome and Astronomers from the Circumcision or first of
January: between the Incarnation or twenty five of March, and the said days
of Nativity and Circumcision following. But the first quarter of their said
computation runs iumpe with the last quarter of the same year of his true
incarnation. As thus, February second, one thousand five hundred ninety five,
according to the computation of Rome and the Astronomers, is also February
second, one thousand five hundred ninety five, according to the true
computation of his Incarnation. But the first day of April, one thousand five
hundred ninety five, according to the computation of Rome, is the first of
April, one thousand five hundred ninety six, after the true computation of
Christ's Incarnation. See more of this in the discourse following.

An Houreglasse. The Confirmation of the Computation.
THE first Article, from the Creation to Noah, is proved in Gen, 5. where the
ages of the Fathers are recorded. From Noah to the beginning of the Deluge is
proved, Genesis 7.11.12. The continuance of the Deluge to the end, Gen, 8.14. This
year of the Deluge, being a just solare year of 365. days (as I noted
before) is omitted by many in their Computations, and clean left out: but Io.
Funccius sets it a year latter than it should be, and so ouerreckoneth the
time by a whole year. For although in his first edition he begin the Deluge,
as all ancient Chronologers do, at the 7. day of the second month of Noachs
600 year: yet in his second Edition, upon better aduisement (as he says) he
begins it the same day in Noachs 601 year, wherein other notable
Chronologers since do follow him. But surely their reasons are lame, and not
concludent: yea plain flatt against Moses, who says the beginning was, (...)
In the six hundredth year of Noah: not (...) After the end of the six hundredth
year, as he speaks, Genesis 16.3. where he intends full and complete years.
For questionles ever imports the day, month, or year current, not complete.
His infallible rule (as he calls it) is most fallible and false. His rule
is, that whersoeuer a number of years is set down, and months, and days be
added to the same, that must needs be understood of years complete. By which
rule it must be understood, Deuteronomy. 1.3. that Moses delivered Deuteronomie in the
11. month of the 41. year after the departing out of Egypt: whereas Funccius
himself makes Joshua to begin presently after the end of the 40. years: yea,
and Aaron too, must be understood, Number. 33.38. to die in the first day of the
5. month of the 41. year of the Israelites departing out of Egypt, which
himself does not think. As for that Genesis 7.6. And Noah was six hundred year
old, when the flood of waters was upon the earth (whereupon they stand so
much,) it is not spoken of the Beginning, but of the Being of the flood upon
the earth. The very instant of the beginning thereof is evidently and purposely
expressed. v. 11.

The second Article is confirmed. Gen, 11. from the 10. verse to the 25. where
the age of the Fathers after the flood unto Terah are recorded. But about the
nativity of Arphaxad there is some odding. For some account from the end of
the Deluge to his birth, but one year, and other scarce that, whereas we
account two years. For in the 1657 year, the 2 month, and 27 day the Deluge
ended, Genesis 8.13. The same day and month of the year, 1659 end (...) two
years after the flood, Ge. 11.10. And these two years are to be taken for
complete, as both the nature of the Duall number imports, and also the use of
the same word in scripture, 2. Sam. 13. and 14. Ierem. 28. For when the holy
Ghost means the second year Current, he says, (...) as 1. Reg. 15.2. Reg.
1. and 14. and 15. and 19. And if it had been expressly said, that Arphaxad
was borne in the 2. year Current, yet that might be in the first or second
month of this year, 1659. and therefore I make the year of the world 1659.
and the third year after the end of the flood, to be the first year of his
age* Eusebius between Adam and Terahs 71 year (which he makes Abraham's first)
ouerreckoneth the time by 1236 years. For from Adam to the end of the Deluge
he says there are 2242, which is too much by 586. For himself says, that
after the account of the Hebrews, it is but 1656. and so the several years of
the fathers which himself a little before did set down, do amount to the same
total sum of 1656. though he miss in some particulars, adding to Adam 20.
years which he takes from Iered: and to Seth 25. which he takes from
Mahaleel. Yet the Lxx. Greek Interpreters are wider off than he. For they
reckon to the end of the Deluge, 2362. which is more than Eusebius by 120. but
that total of 2242. which Eusebius has, agrees with the Latin Translation
of the lxx. Interpreters, which gives Adam 100. years less, and Mathushelah
20. years less than the Greek does. Again between the Deluge and Terahs
seventy one year; (which he after the common opinion, supposes to be the
first year of Abraham) he says, there are 720. years: which sum is surely
corrupted and falsefied. For in the body of his Chronicle, he makes Abraham's
first to be the year of the world 3185. and upon that ground proceeds in all
his Chronicle, whereby it is evident that he makes between the Deluge and
Abraham's birth 942. yet the several sums of the fathers ages, which he
sets down before, amount to 1082. which sum the lxx. make between the
Deluge and Terahs seventy one year, wanting but 10. years, which Eusebius
puts to Nahor more than the lxx. did, and those 10. years he stroke out in
the sum, whereby he proceeds in his Chronicle: as also 130. which both he and
they give to one Cainan: because in the Hebrew there is no such man as Cainan.
And then there remain the foresaid 942. which is too much by 650. as himself
intimates in the 51. year of Abraham, affirming that unto that year the
Hebrews account but 2000 years. The cause of this Surplussage is in the lxx.
Interpreters whom herein he follows who to make the years of the Fathers
after the Deluge somewhat proportionable to those before the Deluge, give to
all the Fathers between Sem and Nahor 100. years a piece, and to Nahor 50.
more than the Hebrew has, and so likewise before the Deluge the lxx. gave to
Adam 200. to Lemech 6. and to all the rest, that were not in their hundredths
100. a piece.

This Computatiton of Eusebius, coupling Abraham's first with the 3185. of the
world, is used by many, as Origin, Epiphanius, Cedrenus, Nicephorus etc. and by
the Greek church, and East Empire even at the counsel of Basil.

The time of Terahs age, when he begatte Abraham, is also controuersed. For
the Hebrews say, that Terah begat Abraham, when he was 70. year old, and so
begin Abraham's first with Terahs 71. whom all Greeks and almost Latins
follow. For which opinion these reasons may be given. First Moses Genesis 11.26.
expresses the 70. year of Terah, and joins next to it the name of Abraham,
by whom the Computation was to be continued: and Terah lived 70. years and
begat Abraham, Nahor and Haran. Secondly, because that year 130. (at which age
by this account Terah should beget Abraham) is no where expressed by Moses: So
that whereas all the Patriarchs have their ages recorded, only Abraham, the
father of all the faithful, even the Archpatriarke, has his omitted: and his
age in other years is five times set down: which were all great absurdities.
Thirdly, ab Analogia: because after the Deluge most of the Fathers begat about
the age of 30. only Terah at 130. Fourthly, because Abraham himself wondreth
that he should have a son at 100, year old: which were no wonder if he
were begotten when his father was 130. year old.

All this is counterpesed by the only authority of Saint Stephen, Act. 7.4.
who plainly affirms, that Abraham abode at Haran till his Father Terah was
dead: and Moses records Genesis 11.32. that Terah died, when he was 205. year
old, and that Abraham then presently departing from Haran was 75. year old Genesis
12.1.4. which being subducted out of 205. there remain 130. which was Terahs
age when he begat Abram. And this is plain by the very text of Moses, if by
the dividing of the chapter, the sense and matter were not somewhat broken in
sight and disioynted. For thus it hangs together: And the days of Terah were
205. years, and Terah died in Haran. For God had said to Abraham: Get thee out
of thy country, and from thy native soil, and from thy fathers house, unto the
land that I will show thee: and I will make of thee a great Nation, and will
bless thee, and make thy name great: and thou shall be a blessing. I will also
bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee: and in thee shall
all the families of the earth be blessed. And Abram departed, even as the Lord
spoke unto him; and Lot went with him, and Abram was 75. year old when he
departed out of Haran. What can be spoken more plainly, to show that Abram
was 75. year old, when his Father was 205. year old: and therefore his father
130. years elder than he? Does not Moses say expressly; that Terah died when
he was 205. year old: and then God said to Abram, Go out of thy Country: and
Abram anon as God had spoken, departed, being then 75. year old; and this is
the very first time that Abraham's age is spoken of by Moses, serving only to
show at what year of Terahs age he was borne.

Of the objections alleged, the first is infringed by Genesis 5.33. And Noah
was five hundred years old, and Noah begat Sem, Cham, and Iaphet. Where in the
very same sort, Noah's 500. year is expressed, and the name of Sem, by whom the
Computation was to be continued, joined next with it: and yet it is plain by
Genesis 11.10. that Sem was begotten two years after, as Funccius himself
proves. And also by 1. Paral. 1. 28. where it is said, The sons of Abraham
were Isaak and Ismael, and yet no man will say, that Isaak was the elder. The
reason of the (...) in those places may be the excellency of the Persons, in
regard that the Messiah should descend of them. Secondly the absurdities are
all avoided: because by the coupling of Terahs 205. year, with Abrams 75.
year, Abraham's nativity is most certain. Thirdly, the proportion which is
pretended, was in the firstborn. For doubtless the other Fathers had their
last children at a far greater age; and perhaps Haran was borne, when Terah
was 70. year old, for that he was far elder than Nahor, appears verse 29.
in that he had a daughter mariageable for Nahor; and also elder than Abram the
Jews do infer, holding that his daughter Ischa, was Sara Abrams wife being
but ten year younger than Abram as Moses shows. Howsoever it be, that
argument is of no force: for there was a greater disproportion and odds
between Noach and the other Fathers before him, and every man sees that the
mistaking of that ground caused the lxx. and Eusebius to miss their footing so
much in the years of the other Fathers. Fourthly the cause of Abraham's
admiration was (...), as the Apostle speaks Romans 4.19. that is, that himself
haueing a dead body, and Sara his wife a dead womb, being both by nature
(...) barren and unfruitful, Heb. 11.11.5. (...)
(as Abraham complains for himself Genesis 15.2.3. and Moses affirms
apparently for Sara, Genesis 11.30.) should now after they had been married
above 40. years together, at that age, he being 100. Compl. Bibl.
and she 90. year old, become fruitful, and begin to have children. Otherwise
the impediments and barrennes by Gods blessing being taken away, Abraham
doubts not after the death of Sara, Genesis 25.1.2
when he was 138. year old, for all his age dare operam liberis, and to take a
new wife, by who^ he had 6. sons, and no matter of wonder at all. He that
obiecteth that saint Steven erred also in other numbers in the same speech:
though he bite at S. Steven, yet he bettereth not himself. For if in those
numbers there be an error (which I dare not say or think:) yet the cause
thereof may be not in Saint Steven, but in the carelesnes or needless
curiosity of Scribes and Writers many years after: But this is such, as must
needs have proceeded from saint Steuens mouth, and saint Lukes pen.

The third Article is plainly confirmed Genesis 12.4. And Abram was 75. year
old, when he departed from Haran.

The fourth Article is clear. Exo. 12.40. and the soiourning of the children
of Israel, which soiourned in Egypt, was 430. year. Yet about the beginning of
that (...) Soiourning or Peregrination there is some controversy. For it
seems, it ought to begin at the descending of Jacob into Egypt: Because Moses
calls it the soiorning of the Israelites and to be in Egypt: which reasons
are very pregnant, were it not evident in Scripture to be otherwise. For first
Cohath being one of the Descenders, lived but 133. years. Exodus 6.17. Amram
his son lived but 137. years verse 19. and Moses his son, when they came
out, was but 80. year old. Exodus 7.9. all which added together come short of
430. If Cohath descended when he was but a year old, and Amram and Moses were
borne in the year that their fathers died in. But indeed, from Jacobs and the
Israelites descending into Egypt unto their departing thence is but 215 years,
as these ancient Writers avouch. Joseph. Antiqu. lib. 2. cap. 13. Eusebius out
of Alexander Polihister praep. Euang. lib. 9. cap. 4. Cedrenus, Zoneras, and
Sulpitius Seuerus: which is just half the time of the Pilgrimage or
soiourning, as Epiphanius notes in Anccrato. Again saint Paull, Gal. 3.17.
evidently shows, that those 430. years are the space between the promise
made to Abraham, and the law given to Moses. And therefore in Exodus 12.40. the
name Israelite must be taken (...), which the lxx. do clear, adding (...)
these words: (...): they and their fathers and Egypt is taken (...), a part
for all, as the lxx. do likewise express it, adding (...), and in the land of
Canaan, and Genesis 15. it is not said they shall be strangers in Egypt, but (...)
in a land that is not their own: neither do the words Exodus 12.40. importe
that they were so long in Egypt: for thus they sound: The soiourning of the
children of Israel which soiourned in Egypt, was 430 years. So that the
words, which soiourned in Egypt, serve for the (...), to describe the persons,
not for a (...) to define the time. So that it is clear that the peregrination
began in Abrams time, but at what year of his age, is a greater question: for
many great Chronologers begin it at the taking of Abraham's journey from Haran,
when he was 75. year old: but I am of the opinion, that it began at the taking
of his journey from Vr to Haran when he was just 70. year old: Whereunto I am
induced by four credible and sufficient witnesses.

1 Moses, or rather God himself in Moses, Genesis 15.13. plainly pronounces,
that Abrams seed should be soiourners and subjects or servants in a foreign
Land 400. years. The seed which he meant, was Isaak; and the term which he
mentions, began at Isaaks birth, as S. Steven shows evidently, Act. 7.8.
And so Abraham begat Isaak, and circumcised him, having relation as well to the
soiourning, as to the circumcising of Isaak. Isaak was borne, when Abraham was
100. year old, Genesis 21.5. whereout we must take 30. and there remain 70. for
Abraham's age before the soiourning, and then he took his journey from Vr, to
go to Canaan, Genesis 11 31. and soiourned 30. years without seed, and then his
seed soiourned 400. which make up the 430. recorded, Exodus 12.4.

They which begin the soiourning at Abraham's journey from Haran, are forced
to make 405. years between Isaaks birth and the departing out of Egypt: and
therefore some of them say, that the term of 400, years, began at Ismaels
deriding of Isaak, when he was (as they imagine) 5. years old. But first it is
uncertain when that was done. Secondly God says that his seed shall not
only be afflicted; but also be both Soiourners and Subjects too. Thirdly
that he will judge the Nation, which shall afflict them: which was never
verified in Ismael, or the Ismaelites: but on the Nation of Egypt. Again other
of them say, that God spoke indefinitly and summa solida, without respect of
the small odds of 5. which is an indefinite answer, and will serve for any
thing, and therefore not to be admitted, but where the true and definite
number is otherwise manifest. As Iud. 20.46. there are mentioned but only
20000: though there were 20100. because that odd hundred was evidently set
down before in the definite number, verse 35.

2, Achior in the book of Judith, (who protests that there shall not a lie
come out of his mouth) most euidentlye begins the (...) and Soiourning of
the Israelites, Judith. 5.5
Abraham's journey from Chaldaea into Mesopotamia, and makes three parts of the
whole Peregrination, or three several soiourninges: one at Haran, another in
Canaan, the third in Egypt. Hear him speak: 6. This people came of the stock
of the Chaldaeans, 7. and they soiourned before in Mesopotamia, because they
would not follow the Gods of their fathers, which were in the land of Chaldaea,
8. but they went out of the way of their auncesters, and worshipped the God of
heaven, the God whom they knew; so they cast them out from the face of their
Gods, and they fled into Mesopotamia and (...). as Moses says (...) Genesis 11.31.
Soiourned there many days. 9. Then their God commanded them to depart from
their (...)
Soiourning and to go into the land of Chanaa^, and they dwelt there, and were
increased with gold and silver and with very much cattle. 10. But when a
famine covered all the land of Chanaan, they went into Egypt and soiourned
there, until they returned. And so Moses makes plainly their being at Haran
a soiourning Genesis 11.31. using the self same word which he does Exodus 12.40.
and therefore when Moses accounts from either of the latter soiournings, he
does specify it, as Genesis 16.3. Then after 10 years of the soiourning of
Abraham in Chanaan. Not of the whole soiourning, but of that particular part of
it.

3. Saint Steven Act. 7. peremptorily affirms, that that famous (...)
recorded Genesis 12.1. Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, into
the land that I will show thee etc. was spoken to Abraham, before he came to
Haran, and Moses insinuates the same sufficiently Cha. 11, 31. affirming that
Abraham with Terah came from Vr, to go into Chanaan. Moreover saint Steven
avouches, that Abraham did obey, follow, and execute or put in practice the
same calling, when he came from Vr. Act. 7.
Hear Saint Steven himself speak. 2 The God of glory appeared unto our
Father Abraham, while he was in Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in Haran. 3. and
said unto him. Come out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and come into
the land that I will show thee. 4. THEN came he out of the land of the
Chaldaeans and dwelt at Haran: (...).
and thence when his Father was dead, he made him flit into the land, wherein
you now dwell.

4 Saint Paul, Gal. 3.8.14.17. joins with S. Steven and makes all plain,
auouching that the law was given 430. years after the promise. What promise
he urges, appears ver. 8. and 14. namely this: and in thee shall all the
Nations of the earth be blessed. Which was spoken in respect of Christ, as
Paul proves: and it was spoken to Abraham, when he was bidden go out of his
country etc. as Moses shows Genesis 12.3. and that was before Abraham dwelt at
Haran: as saint Steven says. Join Paul to Steven, and them both to Moses:
and take old Achior to them; and I think the proof of this Article will be
clearer than the sun in his morning brightness, and stronger than the
authority and arguments of men can infringe.

The reasons which the other opinion stands upon are very slender, as 1.
that God so precisely dateth the departing of Abraham from Haran, namely when
he was 75. year old, which they say could be done for no other cause, than to
limite the beginning of the Peregrination. But it appears in the former
Article, Page that the 75. year of Abraham, being the first year of his age
mentioned by Moses, was there so precisely set down with Terahs death, and age
at his death, to show the distance from the birth of Terah, to the birth of
Abraham: which could not otherwise be known. 2. They urge that Abraham was bid
to go out of his fathers house. I would know of them whether Vr were not his
fathers house, when GOD spoke to him before he came to Haran, and before they
went from Vr for Canaan. Genesis 11.31. he was not bid go from his father, and
therefore his father and he both together left their ancient mansion, and
house of their auncetrie. Again Abraham was bid go from his native soil, or
land of his nativity, and that was not Haran but Chaldaea, and there Abraham
begins his Peregrination, even from the land wherein he was borne, Genesis
24.7. Thirdly they press the order of the text. Genesis 12.1. as though that
calling of Abraham, were after the death of Terah: because it is placed after.
Whereas indeed it is an (...) and reason of the journey of Abraham from Vr
toward Canaan, which Moses had specially set down, Chap. 11. 31. without
insinuating any cause of it, and the 32. verse is inserted between, by way of
a Parenthesis. The order and sense of the Story is this. Then Terah took
Abraham his son, and Lot the son of Haran, his sons son, Genesis 11.31
and Sara his daughter in law his son Abraham's wife, and they departed
together from Vr of the Chaldees, to go unto the land of Chanaan, and they
came to Haran, and they soiourned there (at which Haran Terah died, Because
Terah died here, this is interlaced. 32. 12.1. 2. 3. 4.
being 205. year old,) For the Lord had said unto Abraham, while he was at Vr.
Get thee out of thy country, and from thy native soil, and from thy fathers
house, unto the land which I will show thee etc. And Abram, leaving Haran too,
now that his father was dead, went as the Lord had said unto him at Vr,
continuing his journey toward Chanaan, and Lot went with him, and Abram was 75.
year old, when he went from Haran.

The fifth Article is clear, 1. Reg. 6.1. In the 480. year of the departing of
the children of Israel, out of the land of Egypt: in the fourth year in the
month Ziu, (which is the second month) of the reign of Solomon over Israel, he
built the house of the Lord. The particulers of this space are counted thus:
under Moses 40: under Joshua 17: under the Judges 199: Eli 40. Saul and Samuel
40: David 40: Solomon 4. For Solomon's fourth, and that 480. year run
together, though the Temple were founded the second month of both those years,
as appears. 1. Reg. 6.1.2. Chron. 3.2.

The number of 450. years from the division of Canaan to Samuel Act: 13.20. is
not (...) (as most do take it) or an oversight in writing (...) for (...)
(which indeed is pronus lapsus and soon done: De Ciuit. Dei. lib. 15. cap. 13.
) but this non casum redolet, sedindustriam, as Aug. says of the like. For it
was the temeritie and ouerboldnes of an ignorant Corrector, who to the sum of
339. years, which is the time of the Judges and Eli, added the 111, years of
servitude under forreners, which amounts to the just sum of 450: not
considering that the same years of servitude, were included in the years of
the Judges: as not only the Jews, but also Eusebius, Lyra, and Hugo do
affirm: See Mercator Demonst. Temp. Chap, 1. T.

In the same Chapter of the Acts Verse. 18. it is said (...): and about the time
of 40. years he suffered their manners in the wilderness: where (...) is well
added, to show that forty years were not fully complete: for there wanted about
a month and fifteen days: which were spent before their entrance into the
Desert, and before the uttering of their evil manners, and murmuring against
God because of the Desert Exodus 16.2. Wherefore H. Wolphius over reaches too
much, who makes the abode of the Israelits in the wilderness to be full 42.
years, that is (as he says) one year, on month, and twenty days from their
departing out of Egygt to their departing from Sinay, Numb. 10.11. and thence
to the return of the spies, ten or eleven months to make up full two years:
because the spies returned when grapes were ripe. But there first he puts
six months too much. For with Moses the first month is Abib, the 14 day,
whereof they celebrated the Passover. Cap. 9.3. and the 20 day of the next
month they departed from Sina Cap. 10.11. and within four or five months
after they might have ripe grapes: which he makes above 10. months after. And
then he begins the 40. years, which after their turning back into the
wilderness, they wandered in it, till all were dead. the first of which 40, he
begins with the third year of their departing out of Egypt: De tempore Lib.
1. Cap. 6.

For the defense of Wolphius account this may be said. God threatens the
wandering of 40 years in the wilderness after the return of the Spies: and that
as a punishment to some of the Spies for discrediting and discommending the
land; to the people, for not believing Joshua and Caleb: and that also to be
inflicted, according to the number of the days, wherein the spies searched the
land, which were 40. Numb. 14.33.34. and therefore they must not begin before
the offense was committed; but at the next morrow when they were turned back
into the wilderness as a punishment Verse. 25. which was about one year and
half (he says two years) after their departure out of Egypt. This reason
were great, were it not that Moses counters do control the same. For Moses
affirms that Aaron died in the first day of the first month of the fourtieth
year of their departing out of Egypt. Number. 33.38. and in the next six months
they had diverse victories, specially against Sehon and Og, Number. 21. and did and
endured those things which after are recorded in the book of Numbers. then in
the first day of the 11. month of the same year Moses delivered the repetition
and declaration of the law in Deuteronomie: Deu. 1. 3.4, and anon after died:
and Joshua presently as the month of mourning was out, led the people over
Jordan. That Moses died immediately after the reading of the law appears by
his age. for Deuteronomy. 31.1. it is said, that he was at the reading of the law
120. year old: This day am I 120. year old: and Cap. 34.7. when he died, he
was but 120. year old. Which was not full forty years after their departing
out of Egypt. For a little before their departing, when they went to Pharao,
Moses was 80. and Aaron 83. year old Exo. 7.10. That Joshua led the people over
Jordan presently after Moses death, appears by the ceassing of Manna. The
Israelites did eat Manna 40 years Exodus, 16.36. Manna began the 16. day of the
second month of the first year Exodus 16.2. it ended and ceased the 16. day of
the first month of Iosuas first year Ios. 5, 11. which is 40 years wanting one
month. Wherefore the punishment of 40 years wandering in the wilderness,
according to the 40 days of searching the land must be understood of the
continuance of their abode and wandering in the wilderness till 40 years from
their first entering into it were made up and fully expired. For although the
years were proportionated to the number of the days that they searched the
land: yet it was the punishment not only of the rejecting the report of Joshua
and Caleb and despising the land; but also of nine temptations more, which they
committed before that. Number. 14. 22.

The sixth article is plain 1. Reg. 11.42. and 2. Chron. 9.30. The time that
Solomon reigned was 40. years. out of which 40 we must take 4. which were
reckoned before in the 480. (for the 480 and Solomon's fourth ended together.)
and then there remain 36. and Reboams first makes up 37. Other reckon from
the temple to Solomon's death 37. which is true, wanting but a month. But then
they must not reckon from the departing out of Egypt to the Temple 480 (as they
do:) but only 479. years and one month. For in the second month of the 480
year, and of Solomon's fourth year, the Temple was founded: so that Solomon's
fourth year is the four hundredth and fourscore year. The want of marking
that, has caused many to put a year too much in the whole Computation after.

The seventh article is evident Ezech. 4.1, Son of man take the a brick, and
lay it before thee, and purtray upon it the city Jerusalem.

2 And lay seige against it, and, build a fort against it, and cast a mount
against it: set the camp also against it, and lay engines of war against it
round about.

3 Moreover take an iron pan, and set it for a wall of Iron between thee and
the city, and direct thy face toward it: and it shall be beseiged and thou
shall lay seige against it: this shall be a sign unto the house of Israel.

4 Sleep thou also upon thy left side, and lay the iniquity of the house of
Israel upon it: according to the number of the days that thou shall sleep
upon it, thou shall bear their iniquity.

5 For I have laid upon thee the years of their Iniquity, according to the
number of the days, even 390 days: so shall thou bear the iniquity of the
house of Israel.

6 And when thou have accomplished them, sleep again upon thy right side, and
thou shall bear the iniquity of the house of Judah forty days. I have
appointed the a day for a year, a day for a year.

7 Therefore thou shall direct thy face toward the seige of Jerusalem, and thy
arm shall be uncovered, and thou shall prophecy against it.

8 And behold I will lay bands upon thee that thou turn not from one side to
another, till thou have ended the days of thy seige etc.

About the beginning and ending of these 390. years, quot capita, tot
sententiae: as one says of the same out of the Comic. Yet Ezechiel is plain
enough in both, for he makes it the time of bearing a burden. And the burden
is the iniquity of Israel. (Paul calls the like (...) Act. 13.18.) The
beginning of that iniquity is that notable Apostacy and Schism ot the ten
Tribes, from the whole Religion and service of God; and their notorious
Idolatry in worshipping Ieroboams Calves; as it is for perpetual memory
recorded. 1. Reg. 12. And Jeroboam thought in his heart: now shall the kingdom
return to the house of David, if this people go up and do sacrifice in the
house of the Lord at Jerusalem. Whereupon he took counsel and made two Calves
of Gold, and said unto them, it is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem:
Behold O Israel thy Gods, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt. And
he set the one in Bethel, and the other set he in Dan: and this thing turned to
SIN. And Jeroboam made a feast the fifteenth day of the eight month, like
unto the feast that is in Judah, and offered on the altar. So did he at Bethel
and offered to the Calves which he had made, etc.

And this the holy Ghost oftentimes terms (...) the sin of Israel, Because
of the sin of Jeroboam which he sinned, and which he made Israel to sin.
1. Reg. 15.30; and the way of Jeroboam, walking in the way of Jeroboam; and in
his sin which he made Israel to sin. verse. 34. and the sin of the house
of Jeroboam they departed not from the sin of the house of Jeroboam, which
made Israel to sin. 2. Reg. 13.6. and in many other places. And here the
holy Ghost begins expressly the sin of Israel by themselves, which was the
cause of their utter ruin: For Jeroboam drew Israel away from following the
Lord, and made them sin a great sin. And the children of Israel walked in
all the sins of Jeroboam, and departed not therefrom, until the Lord put
Israel out of his sight. 2. Reg. 17.21.22.23. And this year of the Schism
and Apostacy of the house of Israel from the house of Judah is made the Epoche
and mark of a special computation. 2. Chro. 15.19. and 16.1.

Indeed (as Tremellius says) Solomon in his old age by the allurement of his
heathenish wives, sell into heathenish Idolatry. 1. Reg. 11.4.5. and
doubtless drew some of the people into the same, as the holy Ghost seems to
say, verse. 33. But Ezechiels account cannot possibly begin there (as
Tremellius begins it:) first because God threatens there a punishment for
those sins, not to the whole people, but to the princes of the line of David.
Secondly and principally because Ezechiell here speaks of the iniquity of
the Israelites particularly and severally; that is, as they are divided and
distinguished from the house of Judah: as in the other account of 40. years,
verse. 6. he speaks of the iniquity of the house of Judah by themselves; as
being separated from the house of Israel. And therefore neither of those
accountes can possibly begin, before that division and separation was made in
the beginning of Rehoboams first year. And surely though God were greatly and
grievously offended with the former sins of all the 12. Tribes, and specially
with the offenses and enormities of their Heads and Princes, David and
Solomon: Yet herein he shows his truth and mercy, that he concealeth them
all, as being put away, for his former covenants sake, made with David; and not
so much as once mentions them, but only speaks of that iniquity and those
sins, which were committed after a new covenant and the last covenant made
with the^ specially. Which new and last covenant could not be made by any means
at the dedicating of the temple by Solomon, (as Tremellius takes it) because
if there were any reiterating of the covenant there, yet it was with all the
tribes together before the division: but the new and last covenant made for the
Israelites specially and severally, was that which was made with Ieroboa^ by
the ministry of Ahia, as it stands upon record. 1. Reg. 11. wherein as God
binds himself, to be with Jeroboam; to build him a sure house, as he did to
David; and to make him king over the ten tribes after Solomon's death: So
likewise he binds Jeroboam, to harken to all that God commanded him, to walk
in his ways, and to keep all his statutes and precepts, as David his servant
had done. Which covenant God for his part most faithfully observed, defending
Jeroboam from Solomon that sought his death; preserving him in Egypt; renting
the ten Tribes from Solomon's son; and making him king over them. But Jeroboam
was no sooner in his kingdom but the covenant was for his part clean forgot
and fordone, and thence Ezechiel takes the beginning of bearing the burden of
the iniquity of the house of Israel.

The end of the bearing of this burden and the forbearing of the iniquity, is
both plainly expressed, and also typically represented to be the besieging of
the City Jerusalem: yet not the besieging simply (for at the beginning of the
siege they were in case good enough, feeling no punishment at all:) but that
necessity, when as by reason of the siege the City grew to be in hard
terms, and extreme famine, and began to consume in their iniquity. Then
indeed Gods (...) and forbearing of them was at an end, his burden was laid
down, his rod taken up, and the punishment begun, as God most plainly
expounds the type himself, verse. 16.17. Son of man, behold I will break
the staff of bread in Jerusalem, and they shall eat bread by weight and with
care, and they shall drink water by measure and with astonishment: because the
bread and water shall fail; they shall be astonished one with another, and
shall consume in their iniquity. When and how truly this was performed,
appears manifestly, Ier. 52.6. Now in the fourth month, the ninth day, the
famine being sore in the City, so that there was no bread for the people of
the land, the City was broken up. etc. And with this famine Ezechiel in the
next Chapter begins evidently the laying down of the burden and the
punishment of the iniquity under an other type: 1 Son of man take thee a
sharp knife, and make it pass upon thy head and upon thy beard: then take
thee balances to wey and divide the hear. 2 Thou shall burn with fire the
third part in the mids of the City, when the days of the siege are
fulfilled, and thou shall take the other third part and smite about it with a
knife, and the last third part thou shall scatter in the wind, and I will draw
out a sword after them. 3 Thou shall take of them a few in number and bind them
in thy lap. 4 Then take of them again, and cast them into the mids of the
fire: thereof shall a fire come into all the house of Israel. 5. Thus says
the Lord: this is Jerusalem. The rest of the exposition follows after: 9
Behold I will do in thee, that which I never did before, neither will I do
any more the like, because of all thy abominations. 12 The third part of thee
shall die with the pestilence, and with famine shall they be consumed in the
midst of thee. (This was performed before the taking of the City as I showed
before. 2. Reg 25.6.) an other third part of thee shall fall by the sword round
about thee, (which was in breaking of the wall and taking of the City. 2. Reg.
25.7.) and the last third part I will scatter into all winds, and will draw
out a sword after them, (this was done, verse. 8. and the armies of the
Chaldaeans pursued the king, and all his army was scattered from him.) Here
you see, the first beginning of the punishment is the famine in the City,
wherewith no doubt they had been grievously consumed before the City was
taken. The City was taken in the ninth day of the fourth month of the year
3416. which is from the 15. day of the eight month of the year 3025. being
Ieroboams first year, 390 years complete; beside the three months and
fifteen days of 3025. which must go to make up Ieroboams first year, which
was wholly numbered in the article before; and also beside the three months and
nine days of 3416. which must go likewise to make up the first year of the
captivity; and follows to be reckoned in the next article. Heerewith also
lump the 40. years of Iudaes iniquity spoken of by Ezechiell. Cap. 4. verse.
6. which begin with the 13. year of Josias; as God himself shows their
beginning. Ier. 25.3. From the 13. year of Josias the son of Amon king of
Judah, even unto this day (that is, the 23. year) the word of the Lord has
come unto me, and I have spoken early unto you, rising early and speaking:
but ye would not hear. This day that he speaks of, was (as appears, verse.
1.) the fourth year of Iehoiakim and the first year of Nabuchodonosor: which
was as he says, the 23. year of that computation. For Josias 19. last, and
Iehoiakims four make just 23. add thereto 17. to make up Nabuchodonosors 18.
(for Iehoiakims 4. was his first) and there amount just 40. And heerewith also
agrees notably the tradition of the Jews for the standing of the Temple:
which R. Abraham, the Cabalist records: namely, that the temple stood 427.
years. By our account the temple was founded in the second month of the year
2988. and it was desolated in the 5 monthe of 3416. The space between is just
427. years full and complete, beside the piece of the first year wherein it
was founded, and the piece of the last year wherein it was destroyed. Beda.
li. de not. rerum. Cap. 66. says that it was burnt the 430 year after it was
begun to be founded; which differs but one year: which perhaps Beda added
to make the numberfull and round. Both these accounts, as well of the 40. years
of Iudaes iniquity and of the 390. of Isreal's iniquity are confirmed to the
eye in the chronological table of the kings of Iudae and Israel.

The eight article is recorded. Ier. 25.11. And this whole land shall be
desolate and an astonishment, and these nations shall serve the king of Babell
70. years. And also 2. Chro. 36.2. And they were servants to the King of Babel
and his sons till the kingdom of the Persians had rule to fulfill the word
of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremy: until the land had her fill of her
Sabbothes. For all the days that she lay desolate, she kept her Sabbothes to
fulfill 70. years. This is the punishment of the iniquity, set down by
Ezechiel. Cap. 5. as before is showed; and the 70. years of Captivity
prophesied by Jeremy; which begin at the taking of Jerusalem; and end at the
taking of Babylon. For at the taking of Jerusalem they became absolutely the
king of Babels servants, and so continued without interruption 70. years, as
Jeremy foreshewed. Cap. 25.11. where he says also, that the land shall be
desolate 70. years. At that time and before the land became desolate, and
therefore Philo distinguishes the Desolatio^ from the Transmigration:
affirming that the Captivity ended 70. years after the Desolation and 81.
after the Transmigration. Also Ezechiel. Cap. 40.1. makes the SMITING of the
City the (...) and beginning of his general era and computation. As in the
same place he makes the second Captivity the (...) of a special computation,
because then himself and his own king were carried away, and therefore he
calls it our Captivity. And Daniell in like sort, Cap. 9.2. makes Ieremies
70. years to be the term and time of the destruction or desolation of
Jerusalem. And right so the holy Ghost, 2 Chr. 36.17. begins the same with
the taking and sacking of the City, and massacring of the Jews at the same.
The end of these 70. years, is the beginning of the Persian Monarchy, at the
taking of Babylon by Cyrus; as the holy Ghost shows evidently. And they were
servants to the King of Babel and his sons, till the kingdom of the Persians
had rule, to fulfill the word of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremy, etc. 2. Chro.
36.20.21.22.23. And Jeremy himself does end them at or immediately before the
visiting of Babel. Cap. 25.11.12. And this land shall be desolate, and these
nations shall serve the King of Babel 70. years, and as soon as the 70.
years are ended I will visit the King of Babel. What time of the year Babylon
was taken, is not any where expressed. Only Herodotus says, thy Cyrus began
the siege in the Spring; and prevailing nothing a good space, he devised to
turn the current of Euphrates aside; that they might suddenly enter the City
through it: and so set his soldiars to work about it, which required some time,
since the cutting of Gyndes cost the^ a summers work. And therefore the next
Spring must be well spent before it could be finished. But Jeremy is plain;
that the 70. years must be ended before the king of Babell be visited. And
they ended in the ninth day and fourth month of 3486. and immediately after it
seems that Babylon was taken, and the king slain, as Daniel and Xenophon
report. Hierome in his exposition upon Daniell reports that the Jews had a
tale among them that Baltassar, seeing the 70. years expired, thought the
promise false, and all cock sure; and therefore upon a iollitie, and vaunting
over the Jews, made his great banquet, and sent for all the vessels of the
temple: as Daniel shows. But the same night he was slain and the promise
fulfilled. Heerewith agrees the supputation of Metasthenes, attributing to
Nabuchodonosor 45. years: Evil Merodach 30. Reg. Assar. 3. Labassar. 6. Balt
Assar. 5. which make 89. thence take Nabuchodonosors 19. which were before the
Captivity, and there remain 70. For Metasthenes follows the computation of
the Chaldaeans, as does Daniel and Ptolomie, who begin Nabuchodonosors reign
in Iehoiakims third year, that is, a year before Jeremy begins it: so
that his 19. year by them, is but his 18. year by Jeremy. Josephus also
agrees with this account. For Ant. Iud. li. 10. ca. 12. he says that
Nahuchonosor reigned 43. that is, so many years complete beside the odd
months, which were almost another year. And therefore those odd months he
joins to the odd months of Regassar (whom he calls Neregal Assar) and so
makes him four years, which with the other kings make just 70. Joseph cont.
Appion. And Julius Aphricanus, who makes the second year of Syrus to be the
72. year of the desolation of the Temple. Beda de not. rerum. 66.

The ninth article cannot be confirmed out of the holy Scripture. For although
some of the heathen Monarkes of that space be there mentioned, yet not all:
neither have they, that are, any term of their raygnes, or distinction of
years set down. Again Metasthenes though he have a computation of years, yet
he has great obscurity, and great diversity from the Grecians. Insomuch that
some conjecture that the kings named by Metasthenes and Philo unto Longiman,
are not the same persons, nor of the same line and house, as those be which the
Graecians speak of. The principal odds and differences I will briefly set
down, before I come to the proof of this article. The holy scripture thus
far mentions the kings both of Assyria and Babylon.

1 Pull king of Assyria, whom the Historicians call Phul Belochus, made Menahem
king of Israel tributary 2. Reg. 15. about the year of the world, 3240.

2 Tiglath Pileser, king of Assyria, in the time of Pekahiah carried the tribe
of Nepthalim captive into Assyria about the year 3250. and after he diliuered
Achaz from the kings of Syria and Israel. Cap. 16.7.9.10. about the year,
3270.

3 Salmaneser king of Assyria subduing Hoseas king of Israel made him his
vassal and tributarie in Achaz 12. year, A. M. 3274. 2. Reg. 17.1.3. But
anon after Hoseas rebelled, and Salmaneser taking him, committed him to
prison, and carried his people the ten Tribes away captive. verse. 4.5.6.

4 Sennacherib king of Assyria invaded Iudaea, took many towns, besieged
Lachis, made Ezechias to become tributarie again, (who had rebelled against
Salmaneser before:) and not content heerewith, after he had received the
Tribute, sent his army against Jerusalem; where having a wonderful overthrow,
he fled home to Niniue, and there was slain by two of his own sons. Cap.
18.13. and 19.35.36.37. This was in Ezechias 14. year, A. M. 3290.

5 Assaraddon king of Assyria, son of Sennacherab succeeded his Father; his
two brethren, the parricides being fled for fear into the land of Ararat. Cap.
18.37. He was also called of the Jews Osnapar. Ezr. 4. 10. and this king
carried people and planted Colonies in the Cities of Samaria, in stead of the
Israelites. 2. Reg. 17.14. Erz. 4.2. Here ceased that race and progeny.

The kings of Babylon are thus far recorded.

1 Berodach Baladan (or as Esaias calls him, Merodac Baladan) the son of
Baladan king of Babylon, sent letters with a present to Ezechias, 2. Reg,
20.12. That was about Ezechias 14. year, Sennacherib being then king of
Assyria, and having the seat of his chief resiance at Niniue. But when Merodac
began his reign the scripture does not show but he is the first, that is
called king of Babylon.

2 Mention is made of another, whose Captains took Menasses king of Judah
captive, and carried him to Babylon. 2. Chro. 33.11. his name is no where
recorded; but only his title, King of Assyria: whereby it is to be gathered
that after Assaraddon, the kings of Babylon had Niniue and the whole kingdom
of the Assyrians. For it is manifest that this king was of the race of Merodac,
because they brought Menasses captive to Babylon, which the old kings of
Assyria had lost before Sennacheribs time.

3 Mention is likewise made of a king of Assyria against whom Pharao Neco king
of Egypt warred, in the end of Josias reign: wherein Josias was slain. 2.
Reg. 23.29. His name is not recorded: but he might well be Nabuchodonosors
father, whom Berosus in Josephus calls Nabulassar, but Josephus himself
calls him Nabuchodonosor too. In the end of his reign Niniue was destroyed
and utterly razed by him and Assuerus. Tob. 14.17. whereupon afterward the
kings keeping their Court and resiance at Babylon, were called again the
kings of Babylon. See my Bibliotheca historica in Monarchiarum Perioche.

4 Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon, began his reign in Iehioakims fourth year,
Ier. 25.1. took from the king of Egypt all that he had between Euphrates and
Nilus, 2. Reg. 24.9. whereby it is clear, that the king of Assyria, against
whom Neco warred, and this king of Babylon, weere both of one state and
kingdom, though their titles differ. In his seventh year he took Iehoiakim:
in his eight Iehoiacin: in his 18 Zedechias: in his 19. he burnt the Temple and
City. He reigned 44. years. 2. Reg. 24. and 25. Ier. 52.

5 Evil Merodac king of Babylon began his reign in the 37. year of Iehoiacins
captivity. Iehoiacin was carried away in the very beginning of Nabuchodonosors
eight year. To his seven, add the other 37, and there will be 44. and they
were not fully complete neither. So that whereas Josephus de Ant. li. 10. cap.
12 says, that Nabuchodonosor reigned 43. years, he means fully complete,
beside the odd months which were almost another year. But Metasthenes giving
35. years to Nabuchodonosor, begins his reign at Iehoiakims third year,
when he was made General of his fathers wars, his father being sick. See
Page

6 Baltassar king of Assyria, and the very last of that line, of whom
Baltassar alias Daniel speaks, mentioning his first year. Cap. 7.1. and his
third, Cap. 8.1. and the last year and very last night, wherein at his solemn
feast and great banquet he was slain, Cap. 5.30. but in what year of his
reign that was done, Daniel does not specify. And this is all that there is
spoken of that Monarchy. Baltassar being destroyed, the Monarchy came and was
translated to two states jointly together, the Medes and the Persians: as the
Scripture shows. First Daniel prophesied to Baltassar that very night that
his kingdom was divided, and given to the Medes and Persians. Cap. 5.28. again
he says that Darius Medus, or Darius of the seed of the Medes, being 62 year
old, succeeded Baltassar, Cap. 5.31. and that in the kingdom of the
Chaldeans, Cap. 9.1. who in the beginning of his reign highly promoted Daniel.
Cap. 6.4. Likewise that Cyrus the Persian then reigned with him, appears,
Cap. 1.21. where Daniel says, that he remained in the service of the kings of
Babell, to the first year of Cyrus (or of Cyrus the Persian Cap. 6.29. or
Cyrus king of Persians, Cap. 10.1.) which were not true, if Cyrus reign began
not with the reign of Darius: because Daniels estate was altered by Darius.
Therefore he coupleth them together. Cap. 6.29. And Daniell prospered in the
reign of Darius, and the reign of Cyrus the Persian. And he shows that
their laws were made by both states, and had their force and authority from
both states, even in the beginning of Darius Medus: Cap. 6.9.12.15. according
to the law of the Medes and Persians. And both of them had equal soueraintie,
and administered the affairs of the Monarchy jointly: as the Romans had often
times two Augusti; in which state Annius Verus and Marcus Antoninus were the
first, as Spartian notes in his Adrian: Hi sunt, qui postea duo pariter
Augusti, primi rempublicam gubernauerunt. For Darius is said by Daniel to have
120. provinces. Cap. 6.2. and Cyrus says of himself, that God had given him
all the kingdoms of the earth, 2. Chro. 36. Esd. 1.1. Of Darius Daniel
mentions no more than his first year, Cap. 9.1. and 11.1. who dying in the
second year of his reign, the Monarchy came wholly and soly to Cyrus the
Persian. And therefore Daniel alters his style, and calls the third year
the third year of Cyrus king of Persians, Ca. 10.1 with out any mention of
Darius.

With this history of the holy scripture Xenophon agrees notably. For first
he makes two distinct kingdoms, one of the Persians, whereof Cambises was
king; another of the Medes, whereof Astyages was king. Which two nations were
co^bined togetherin league: which they confirmed by making of marriages one with
another: as Cambises married Astyages daughter, by whom he had Cyrus: which was
the chiefest grieuance, and cause of the complaint, that the king of Assyria
alleged by his Ambassadors to Craesus, and other confederates: (...). Saying
that the Medes and Persians were great and mighty nations; combined together;
made marriages one with another; and were so linked in one, that unless they
were prevented and weakened, it were danger, they would set upon other nations
severally, and supplant them. By which induceme^ts, and rewards withal, many
other nations being drawn to his side, old Astyages being dead, and Cyaxares
(that is Darius Medus) reigning in his fathers steed; the Assyrian made war
against the Medes and Persians, and invaded the land of the Medes, being next
to him. Whereupon there was levied an army in Persia of 30 thousand old
trained and beaten soldiers, beside 1000. (...), and worthy leaders, to pass
into Media for Cyaxares aid: whereof Cyrus was General: (...): the ancient
counselors of Persia made him Emperor or General of the army that went into
Media. And thereupon no doubt foreners, and those especially that were far
of, called him king of Persians and of Persia. When he came into Media,
Cyaxares and he so joined together, l. 2.
that the chief state was in Cyaxares, who bare the charges of the army, but
the ordering of the battle, and all matters of war were chiefly menaged by
Cyrus: who first had a great victory against the Assyrians wherein their king
was slain, (perhaps it was Evil Merodach: for Gobryas commends him for a
good man.) The like suceesse he had against Craesus and the rest of the
confederates, whom he chased, having drawn the Hyrcanians to his side.
Afterward at the instance of Gobryas, a vassal of the king of Assyria (whose
son this new king of Assyria, son of him that was slain in the former
battle, l. 3.
had slain) Cyrus marched on toward Babylon: chalengeth the king to fight hand
to hand. Which being refused, 5.
he removed thence to rescue the country of Gadata, another vassal of the
Assyrian, that newly was revolted to Cyrus: and after passed by the walls of
Babylon again: and returned to the confines of Media: whither he sent for
Cyaxares, to view the armies and to deliberate, (...): what he thought best to
have done after this. When Cyaxares came, he had the best of the spoils and
pillages for his share; and the Pauilion of the king of Assyria gorgeously
provided for him: when they were in council, 6,
Cyaxares was in greatest state, and Cyrus repaired to him, in regard of his
age, and that he was his uncle. At the consultation Cyaxares makes this
Exordiu^: (...). Fellow soldiars, since my self am present, Page 118.
that am elder than Cyrus, it is meet, I speak first. In this council it is
concluded, that the war should proceed, that provision be made of engines for
battry: and Cyrus is made General, as he was before. The mean season the
Assyrian likewise provides for war; confederateth unto him many other kings,
especially Craesus, who is made General of all the confederate forces. But he
was soon overthrown by Cyrus in maine battle, pursued to Sardis, and there
taken with the City, and all his treasure. After this Cyrus conquered great
Phrygia, Cappadocia, Arabia: and made the Greeks Tributaries: and after all
that marched toward Babylon the third time, which in the end he took in a
night, wherein all the Babilonians had a great feast (...): Drank and reuelled
all night. And the king of Assyria was slain in his court the same night by
the soldiars of Gobryas and Gadata, Page 128.
that got in as reuelers among the rest. And so Cyrus to the use of his uncle
Cyaxares and himself is possessed of the Monarchy of the Assyrians. For to
his uncles use, Page 179.
that was absent, (...): There was chosen in Babylon a house and palaces, that
when he would come thither he might have his own to go unto. As for himself
what state he took upon him, by the persuasion of Chrysantas, Page 155.
Xenophon shows in the 7. book at large: how he took possession of the
Court, and first of all sacrificed to Vesta and to Jupiter, (...): and to
whatsoever God else the Magi thought meet. At which time no doubt he set forth
the Proclamation mentioned, 2. Chron 36.22. Esd. 1.1. That the Jews should go
build the Temple of the God of heaven at Jerusalem. Of this devotion and
religious piety in Cyrus at his first coming to the Empire, Page 161.
Xenophon speaks also in the eight book. (...): First of all at this time he
showed himself more religious toward the Gods, forasmuch as he was in more
happy estate: and then first were appointed priests (magi) both to sing hymns
to the Gods as soon as the day dawned, and also to offer sacrifice every day,
etc. And for his special devotion to the Jews, and the God of the Jews, these
two places of Xenophon seem to make: First, that as soon as he was entered
Babylon, he caused proclamation to be made in all the streets (...) in the
Assyrian tongue, that they should abide in their houses: or, Page 125.
that the which could speak the Assyrian tongue, should abide in their houses.
Which he did without doubt, because he tendered the safeguard of the Jews, being
Syrians. Otherwise he would have done it in the Babilonian tongue. For the
Babilonians, Assyrians, and Syrians are with Xenophon three distinct nations,
having their diverse languages. The second, that he made a special sacrifice,
(...), Page 2. lin. 17.1^ Page 171.
To the Gods that dwelt in Syria, As Xenophon sets it down in the
heathenish speech: Cyrus intending doubtless the God, whose house was at
Jerusalem in Iudaea, as Ezra sets it down rightly, which was a part of
Syria. This narration of Xenophon suiteth well with the holy scripture, 2.
Chron. 36.22. Ezr. 1.1.2. Ezr. 1.2. Ptol. l. 5.
For there the Proclamation is said to be in Cyrus first year; and to be his
Proclamation only. For he alone was at Babylon, and delivered the vessels of
the Temple to the Jews. Cyaxares was not at Babylon to do any thing, nor came
not thither of a year after: and it is most probable that he was never there
in person. Surely neither the holy scripture, nor Xenophon does any where
mention his being there at all. Only Daniel makes his computation by his
reign, so long as Darius lived: by whom himself, was highly promoted. But
after he computeth by Cyrus, who was sole Monarke. For Xenophon says, that
Cyaxares gave him his only daughter to wife, Page 179.
(as thy father:, says he, married the daughter of my father) and gave him all
Media for her dowry: (...): For I have no male child LEGITIMATE. The marriage
being celebrated, Cyrus ordains (...), lieuetenants over all his realm:
(...): It seemed good to him to send Lieuetenantes into the nations, that he
had subdued. Right as Daniel speaks in the same phrase, as though Xenophon
had translated this out of him: it seemed good to Darius to set 120.
Lieuetenantes over all his kingdom. Which doubtless was done by their joint
authority, and was the act of them both: but Xenophon does attribute it to
Cyrus because his purpose is to write of Cyrus; and Daniel attributes it to
Darius, because axioma imperij, the state of the Monarchy was principally in
him while he lived. Try Xenophon by the touch of holy scripture, and you shall
find a pleasant harmony between them; and nothing in him to cross or
contradict it. It may be some digressions of communications, stratagemes, and
other exploits are not written so much ad historiae fidem, as Tully said, as
(...), as Herodotus says: yet the main course and tenor of the story may be
found and right.

Herodotus confesses that the history of Cyrus beside the way that he tells
it (...), Is told three other manner of ways, and that he took his way for
the likeliest. But try it by the touch and it will not prove so. For first he
makes the Persians no kingdom of it self; nor to be in league with the
Medes, but mere slaves to the Medes and drudges: and Cambyses, who married
Astyages daughter, no king, but a pesant and underling to all: (...): bearing
himself far under the estate of a mean person of Media. The reason of this
disparage, was because he dreamed, that his daughter had pissed such a floode,
as filled his whole City, and ouerflowed all Asia. When Cyrus was borne, he
commanded Harpagus to take and destroy him. Yet he was saved alive, and
afterward by Harpagus procurement and aid he deposed Astyages his grandfather,
and became king himself, Page 28.
Page 43.
making the Medes subject to the Persians: yet Tomyris calls him king of
Medes. Anon after he subdued Croesus, and took Babylon, upon a great
festival day, the Babilonians being so busy at their daunces and pastimes,
that they perceived nothing, till the Persians were in, and took them at
unawares. Lastly that Cyrus went against Tomyris Queen of Massagetes and as he
entered upon her territories, sent his son Cambyses back into Persia: and
after in fight was slain himself. This is the sum of Herodotus, wherein the
league between the Medes and Persians, as two nations linked and confederate
in one, is clean dashed: and also Darius Medus (or Cyaxares) is quite wipt
out: beside the taking of Babylon in the day time, and other diversities.

Metasthenes differs from both these: for first having reckoned up the kings
of Medes from Arbaces to Apanda (in the same sort as Ctesias Guidius does in
Diodorus sixth book, who also adds that Apanda was called Astyages of the
Grecians:) he says that Cyrus and Darius subdued him: and reigned in Persia
six years: and after (resigning the kingdom of Persia to Cambyses his son)
they made war against Tamaris six years. In the sixth year, being called
out by the Babilonians, they slew Baltassar reunited the Monarchy, and
translated it to the Persians: where they reigned jointly two years: and then
Cyrus 22 alone: whom succeeded Priscus Artaxerxes Assuerus 20 years; being
Darius son: who revenged the Tamarical faction, Patruum
which by deceit slew his fathers brother Cyrus. After him followed his
son, Darius Longiman. Here you see, Metasthenes makes Cyrus and Darius
brethren, and both Persians: because after the subduing of the king of Medes
they reigned in Persia: and after the killing of Baltassar they reduced the
Monarchy to the Persians: as Diodorus makes Cyrus (for of Darius he makes no
mention) king of Persians, when he took Apanda. Secondly he prefers Cyrus,
as the elder and better, in that his son Cambyses was made king of Persia,
before they had Babylon. 3 He makes them to have six years war with
Tamaris, before they slew Baltassar: though Cyrus were not slain there. 4 That
the kingdom of Persia was resigned to Cambyses six years before the taking of
Babylon: of whose issue and succession he speaks nothing, but affirms that
Priscus the son of Darius succeeded Cyrus in Babylon. 5 that the Babilonians
rebelled against their king, and sent for Cyrus and Darius to aid them. 6
Between Cyrus and Longiman he makes but one king, Priscus: whereas the
Greeks reckon three, and that agreeably to Daniel, to whom Chap. 10.1.2. the
Angel shows that between Darius Medus, and the rich king, that should raise
all against the Graecians, (that is Xerxes) there should be three kings of
Persia and he should be the fourth. Those were Cyrus, Cambyses, Darius
Histaspis, and Xerxes, of which three last Herodotus writes of certainty,
without intimation of any other reports.

Philo in Breuiar. li. 2. agrees with Metasthenes: but that he gives an
Epithet to Darius, that died in Cyrus second year, naming him Darius
Histaspis: and further adds, that the principal fautor of the Tamaricall
faction, was Artaxat: who compelled the Assyrians, Medes, and Persians to
revolt from Priscus, in so much that Priscus kept himself at Babylon: but in
the end be sudued Artaxat.

Thus you see the great odds among writers in this article: all which Clemens
Schubertus labors and toyleth to reconcile together. But I doubt, he has
lost both oil and toil. Yet that which he has done perhaps may give light to
some other grounded Historician, to effect some further matter. The mean
season for the order of the kings or Emperors in the Persian Morarchie, we
are to follow Xenophon for Darius and Cyrus, and Herodotus for the rest; as
most agreeable to holy Scripture. And for the Confirmation of these two last
articles, and the just Chronology thereof, I will take a course more certain,
Virg. Georg. 1.
even the course of the Sun with the Moon, (Solemn quisdi cere falsum,
Audeat?) observed by Ptolomie and other of the most autentique humane writers.
And to tie their Chronology to the Computation of the Scripture, which cease
with the end of the Captivity, Jeremy the Prophet helps us to a string or
sinewe, Cap. 25.1. where he coupleth the fourth year of Iehoiakim (that is the
3398. year of the world) with the first year of Nabuchodonosor king of
Babylon.

This verse of Jeremy is the very kay of Chronology: wherefore I will first
show how the Divine and Humane Chronology is locked together: and after
unlock and open it with this kay. And first as we reckon the years of the
kings of Judah after Ezechias for full and complete, so we begin their raigns
alike as we did his: that is at the beginning of the usual year: as shall
appear in the Table. Wherefore Iehoiakims fourth began even with the beginning
of 3398. Again Nabuchodonosors first year did not begin even with the first
day of Iehoiakims fourth year, but at the first day of the month Phamenoth
being the seventh month of the Chaldaeans, which Phamenoth in that age began
about or rather anon after the middle of Thamus which was the fourth month of
the Hebrews, so that about three months and an half of Nabuchodonosors first
concurred with Iehoiakims fifth, as appears, Ier. 52.29. where one captivity
or carrying away of the Jews is attributed to Nabuchodonosors seventh year:
which could not be before Iehoijakims 11 year: when Iehoiakim and the Nobles
were carried away. And so by this means Iehoiakim reigned not above two months
of his 11. year: not full so much (I mean) as was in Nabuchodonosors seventh:
and then Iehoakim reigned three months, who was taken in Nabuchodonosors eight
year: the beginning of which three months was in Nabuchodonosors seventh, and
the end in his eight: so that Zedechias began in the beginning of the sixth
month of the year of the world 3405. that is about the middle of the second
month of Nabuchodonosors eight year, and consequently the fourth month of the
year 3416. (the ninth day whereof the City was taken) was the very latter
end of Nabuchodonosors 18. year. Wherefore Jeremy, verse. 29. refers that
Captivity to Nabuchodonosors 18 year: with which 18 year he coupleth
Zedechias 10. too, Cap. 23.1. For they concurred a month and an half together.
Again, Cap. 25. verse. 12. he places the burning and Desolation of the Temple
and City in the fifth month, the seventh day of the month, that is
Nabuchodonosors 19 year. For his 19 year began about the midde of the fourth
month, about a fortnight after the taking of the City. And that fifth month was
the ending and expiring of Zedechias 11 year; as Jeremy affirms plainly,
cap. 1.3. unto the ending of the eleue^th year of Zedekiah, even to the
carrying away of Jerusalem captive in the fifth month.

And thus it is evident and manifest, how the years of Nabuchodonosor king of
Babylon, and king of the Chaldaeans, as he is called, 2. Chron. 36.6. are
locked and linked to the years of the kings of Judah: according to the
Computation of the reign of Nabuchodonosor, which is used in the books of
Kings, and Chronicles, and in Jeremy the Prophet.

Now for the use hereof, and opening of the Chronology by this kay: you must
know, that Ptolomie takes the (...) or mark of his era or Computation from
the beginning of a king of Babylon, and of the Chaldaeans whom he names
Nabonassar. Ptol. l. 4. ca. 6. and 8.
From whence he makes the second of Mardocempad to be the 28. year: and the
fifth of Nabopolassar to be the 127. etc. Who and when Nabonassar, l. 5. c. 14.
Mardocempad, and Nabopolassar were, will appear, if we take some king that is
certainly known and agreed upon, and thence proceeding backward find out the
other. The next king that is known and agreed upon, Ptol. l. 5. ca. 14.
is Cambyses the son of Cyrus, whose seventh year is Cambyses 225. then
consequently Cambyses seventh is the 99. year from Nabopolassars 5. To
Cambyses 7 add Cyrus 7. and the 70. years of captivity (the first whereof
was Nabuchodonosors 19.) then 14 backward to Nabuchodonosors fifth, and all make
98. which is one too short. Wherefore the Computation of Nabuchodonosors reign
in Jeremy and the books of Kings begins later by a year than the era
and account of Ptolomies Nabopolassar. Now if it can be showed, that
Nabuchodonosors reign began a year before that computation of Jeremy, we may
undoubtedly affirm, that Ptolomies Nabopolassar is Ieremies Nabuchodonosor.
And this will easily and evidently appear, by two sufficient witnesses,
Berosus the priest of the Chaldaeans; and Daniel the Prophet brought up in
Chaldaea to the learning of the Chaldaeans. First Berosus. lib. 3. rerum
Chaldaicharum has these words recorded by Josephus de antiqu. Iud. lib. 10.
Cap. 11. Nabuchodonosor the father, hearing that his Lieuetenant, whom he had
set over Egypt, Syria, and Phoenicia, had revolted from him: and being unable
for sickness to go against him in his own person, made his son
Nabuchodonosor Emperor or General of his army, and sent him against the
Rebel, who joining battle with him, conquered him, and recovered his country
again. The mean season Nabuchodonosor the father died of his sickness in
Babylon, having reigned 21 years. Nabuchodonosor hearing of his fathers death,
straight ways left some of his friends to bring the captive Jews, Syrians
and Phoenicians together with the army and carriage to Babilonia; and himself
accompanied with a few, sped him in all have to Babylon through the
wilderness. Where taking upon him the government of the kingdom, which the
Chaldaeans kept for him till he came, he was made Lord of all his fathers
Empire. And first of all he disposed the captives in convenient places in
Babilonia: and with the spoils which he had got, furnished and beautifyed the
Temple of Belus. Among this company of captives, Daniel was one: Dan. 1. ver
1.2.3.4.5.6.
and therefore none can tell the time better then he: hear, what he says. In
the third year of Iehoiakim King of Judah came Nabuchodonosor King of Babylon
unto Jerusalem and besieged it. And the Lord gave Iehoiakim King of Judah into
his hand, with part of the vesse s of the house of God, which he carried into
the land of Shinar to the house of his God. And the king spoke to Ashphenaz the
master of his Eunuchs, to bring certain of the children of Israel, of the
Kings seed, whom they might teach the learning and tongue of the Chaldaeans:
among these were Daniel, etc. Join to these, 2. Reg. 25.2 2. Chr. 35.
the books of Kings and Chronicles and see the concent. Two or three years
before this, Pharao Neco King of Egypt, went up against the king of Assyria to
the river Euphrates, and besieged Carshemish whom Josias as feodarie or
confederate to the king of Assyria, seeking to resist, was slain: and the
people of the land made Iehoahaz his son king of Judah, whom Neco taking
imprisoned a while at Riblah, and after carried him into Egypt: making Eliakim
his brother (whose name he turned into Iehoiakim) king in his steed. Yet the
Jews would not vouchsafe him the name of King, while his brother Iehoahaz
lived, but only the title of high Priest, as he is called in the book of
Judith. For they still hoped for and earnestly expected the return of Iehoahaz
out of Egypt, as Jeremy shows plainly, Cap. 22.11.12. and about this time
(as it is most probable) Nabuchodonosors Lieuetenant, seeing Neco prevail so
mightily, revolted from his master to him, and betrayed all those countries
into his hands, which Berosus speaks of. Wherefore Nabuchodonosor sent his
Captain Holophernes against those Rebels with a great power; but what bad
success he had, the book of Judith shows. This voyage of Holophernes
happened, while Iehoahaz king of Judah, was captive in Egypt; and his brother
Iehoiakim reigned at home, though the people did not vouchsafe the name of
King, his brother being alive. Holophernes being overthrown, ^eros.
Nabuchodonosor in the third year of Iehoiakim (his brother being then dead in
Egypt) being sick himself, made his son Viceroy, and sent him to reduce
those countries into subjection again, and to revenge the overthrow of
Holophernes: who in the same third year of Iehoiakim, Dan. 1.
besieged Jerusalem, and in the beginning of the next year, made Iehoiakim to
yield, 2. Reg. 24.3.
and become his vassal and Tributarie. And so pursuing the victory passed
through Syria and recovered Carchemish, Ier. 46.2.
giving the army of the king of Egypt a great overthrow there. Then hearing
of the death of his father, he sped him into Babylon, and became sole Monarch,
as Berosus says. Afterward Iehoiakim rebelling against him, he made his second
voyage into those countries, wherein he took Jerusalem in his 7 year, and
recovered from the king of Egypt, whatsoever he held from Euphrates to Nilus.
2. Chro. 36 6. 2. Reg. 24.9
Thus the story recorded by diverse, in sundry parcels hangs together. Here
is all the odds, that Daniel begins Nabuchodonosors reign, in Iehoiakims
third year, when he was made General in his fathers sickness, as Berosus
says, with the title of King of Babylon: Beda de rat. temp. and not. retu^
cap. 66.
and Jeremy with the books of Kings and Chronicles, begin it in Iehoiakims
fourth year, when his father being dead, he began his sole Monarchy over
the whole Empire, Iudaea and all: which he had then newly subdued again. But
doubtless Daniel, being brought up in Babylon, in the learning and language of
the Chaldaeans, used the right computatio^ of the Chaldaeans: which Metasthenes
follows also, attributing to Nabuchodonosors reign 35 years, and Ptolomie
likewise, following the observations, and calculations of the Chaldaeans uses
the same. And Nabuchodonosors 5 by all their accountes is but his 4. by
Ieremies computation: which is just 99. years from Cambyses 7. as Ptolomie
says. And therefore we conclude that Ptolomies Nabopolassar is that
Nabuchodonosor, which destroyed Jerusalem. So likewise by Ptolomie this 5 of
Nabopolassar is the 100. year from the second of Mardocempad: draw these 100
years back, and the holy Scripture will lead you to the 25 year of Ezechias,
and 3302 of the world: So that Mardocempads first was Ezechias 24. year, and
the 3301. year of the world. This Mardocempad certainly was the next king,
that succeeded Merodath Baladan in Babylon: whose name is not recorded in the
holy Scripture: but he seems by all probabilities to be that king, which
carried Ezechias son Menasses captive to Babylon. 2. Chron. 33.11. In like
sort this second of Mardocempad, was Nabonassars 28 year, as Ptolomie says,
draw these 28 years back with the odd days, you shall find that Nabonassar
began in the end of the year of the world, 3275. that is in Achaz 13 year:
and the beginning of the first year of Hoseas Tributarie reign under
Salmaneser. Now if we can find who was then king of Babylon, we may
undoubtedly say, that he was Nabonassar. It is generally taken by the learned
Chronologers, Funccius, Mercator, Erasmus, Rainoldus, Eucelcerus and other,
that this Nabonassar was Salmaneser which carried away the ten Tribes in
Ezechias sixth year. But under correction, I take him to be Merodac Baladan as
Esaias calls him (who in the book of Kings is termed Beroodoh Baladan) the
first king of the Chaldaeans or Babilonians, Esaias. 39.1. 2. Reg. 20.12.
and the very founder of that kingdom and house. I will show my reasons
briefly, and leave the judgment to the learned. 1 This Nabonassar reigned as
appeared before out of Ptolomie to the 23 year of Ezechias, whereas Salmaneser
died before the 14 year of Ezechias. For then Senacharib was king of Assyria.
2 Albeit the same year of the world 3275, being the 12. and 13. of Achaz
Salmanesar was king of the Assyrians, and the same year made a great voyage
into Palestina against Hoseas king of Israel: and subduing him, made him his
vassal, Teodarie, and Tributarie, 2. Reg. 17.3. yet it is most certain that
before the 14. year of Ezechias, the kings of Assyria had lost Babylon and
Chaldaea, there being then a new king, Merodac Baladan; and it become another
distinct kingdom, from the kingdom of the Assyrians, whose seat was at
Niniue, as the holy Scripture evidently shows, 2. Reg. 17.12. Ierem. 50.17.
2. Reg. 19.36. This Merodac is the first that in scripture has the Title of
King of Babylon: and Jeremy makes him the very author, father, and founder of
that kingdom, race, and family, Ier. 50.2. As it is apparent, that he reigned
in Babylon when Ezechias was sick, so there can be no reason showed to the
contrary, but he began his reign there 14 years before: nay it is most
probable and likely, that Salmanassar being that year 3275. a far of, and
occupied in his wars in Syria and Israel; Merodac Baladan took that
opportunity to revolt from him and erect that new kingdom. By occasion
whereof Ezechias king of Judah anon after rebelled against Salmaneser too, 2.
Reg. 18.7. entering into league with the new king of Babylon. For it appears
that they were combined and confederate against the king of Assyria: because
Merodac sends so friendly to Ezechias to congratulate his recovery: and
because Ezechias shows his Ambassadors so readily all his treasure and power,
to this end, that the other of the league might see, what forces he was able
to make against the common enemy, the king of Assyria. And about the same time
Hoseas king of Israel, induced by these examples, revolted from Salmaneser, and
entered into league with So king of Egypt. 2. Reg. 17.4. But shortly after
Salmaneser subdued him again: which Senacherib his son attempting to do to
Ezechias, had that miraculous overthrow, 2. Reg. 19.35. which Merodac hering,
together with Ezechias recovery, sent that solemn congratulatio^, Cap. 20.12.
3 I see no reason why Ptolomie or the Chaldaeans, should take aeram Chaldaeorum
the Computatio^ of the Chaldees from Salmaneser king of Assyria more tha^ from
any other king before him, as Pull, or Tiglath Pileser. But every man may see
reason enough, why he should take it from Merodac, because he was the founder
of that kingdom of the Chaldaeans, their first king of Babylon, and first
raiser of that house and family; as Jeremy makes him: and Daniel makes that
kingdom of Merodac, and his successors, the race of the Nabuchodonosors, the
first of his four Monarchies, Dan. 1. and 7. Surely new aeraes, computations,
and dates, are taken from new and great events and actions: as deliverance from
servitude, and restoring of liberty. 1. Mac. 13.42. And such a one as that,
was this action of Merodac delivering the Chaldaeans from the bondage of the
Assyrians. As for the difference of the name, it is most usual, that
forrenners and they which are far of, having a diverse language, call the
same king by another name, than he is called at home. As whom the Chaldaeans
themselves call Nabopolassar, the Jews called Nebucadnetzar; and whom Daniel
calls Baltassar, which doubtless was his right Chaldaean name, Herodotus
calls Labynetus; Josephus, Naboandel; Alphaeus, Naboniddochus. Eus. praep.
Eu. l. 9. and our Merodac himself, is called Berodach. 2. Reg 20.12. and
Esar-chaddon is called also Osnapar. Ezr. 4. But to leave this to the judgment
of the learned, it is agreed and certain that Nabonassar was that king, which
reigned then in Babylon. Wherefore, to come to the ninth Article, Censor. l. de
die natali.
it may be proved either by proceeding in Ptolomies Computation: or by the
account of the Olympiades. For Censorinus coupleth the 986. year of Nabonassar
with the 2. year of Olymp. 254. that is (as he expounds himself) the 1014.
year from the first Olympiad: and indeed the year of Nabonassar began then
much about the beginning of the Olympical year, Substract 986. out of 1014. and
there remain 28. by how many years the first Olymp. began before Nabonassar;
beside the days which Nabonassars era has lost in that space by wanting the
leap year. And therefore the Olympiades began in the year of the world 3247:
being Vzziahs 52. year. By this account the first year of Cyrus Monarchy,
being the 23. year of his Regiment or raygne, is the third year of the 60.
Olympiad: which agrees with Euschius, l. 10. Praep. Euang. cap. 13. where out
of Thallus, Castor, Diodorus, Polybius and Phlegon he places the first year
of Cyrus Regiment or reign in the first year of the 55. Olympiad. The
distance of 78. years from Cyrus first to the beginning of Artaxerxes
Longimans seventh, is proved thus: Diodorus Siculus Page 260. places Xerxes
death in the 4. year of the 78. Olympad, and Artaxerxes beginning about 4 or 5
months before the end of the same year; which by resolution are 312.
years. Add thereto 5 more, to make up Artaxerxes sixth, and there will be 317.
in the end whereof Artaxerxes 6 began; and ended within three or four months
of the end of 318. abstract thence 238. accrewing of 59 full Olympiades, and
two years of the 60. Olympiad, which were before Cyrus first, and there
remain 78. and about three quarters: which three quarters were passed of the
year 3. Olymp. 60. before the beginning of Cyrus first. The same may be proved
by Julius Aphricanus, who (as Eusebius shows Demonst. Euang. l. 8. ca. 2. and
Hierome in Dan. 9.) places Artaxerxes 20. in the year 4. Olymp. 83. and also
by the raygnes of the Kings of Persia: for Cyrus 7. Cambyses 8. with the Magi:
Darius Histaspes 36. Xerxes 21. and Longimans 6. make just 78. To Cyrus I
attribute 7 years after the taking of Babylon; l. 8. pa. 183.
as Xenophon does. For he says, that Cyrus lived seven months of winter in
Babylon, three months of spring at Susis in Persia, and two months of the
heat of Summer at Ectabana in Media. And it is clear if we consider the time,
wherein by all probability the City was taken, and the term requisite to
establish the kingdom, and to set all things in order at Babylon, whereof
Xenophon speaks, (...): Page 184.
that he stayed about a year at Babylon before he went toward Persia. Now
Xenophon further says, that he came seven times in that order to Persia,
(...). At which seventh coming, his father and mother being dead, and himself
very aged, giving solemn and condign thanks to the Gods, for giving him
both good directions in all his great actions, and also grace to embrace and
follow their directions, he ended his life. The first journey of Cyrus into
Persia was in the end of his first year: and the seventh journey was in the
end of his seventh year. Wherefore we cannot give less than seven years to
Cyrus (...), Kingdom or Monarchy: and 30. years to his (...) or Regiment, as
Cicero, Eusebius, and Justin do. Which 30. years are to be reckoned from that
(...) and instant of time, wherein (...): the ancient counselors of Persia
chose him Emperor or General of the Army, that went into Media.

The tenth article is set down. Dan. 9.24. Seventy weeks are determined upon
thy people, and upon thy holy City: These (...) seuenthes or seven nights,
sennightes (as we say) or weeks, are not to be accounted by days, but by
years as all do agree. And seventy seuenties of years, are 490. years. The
beginning of these 490. years the Angel fixes most certainly, and shows
plainly to Daniel in the next verse: Therefore understand and mark; From the
proceeding forth of the word (or Edict) to bring again the people, and to
build Jerusalem, unto Christ shall be, etc.

This Edict proceeded forth in Artaxerxes seventh year: as it is recorded,
Esz. 7. from the 12 verse to the 26. Artashasht King of Kings to Ezra the
Priest, and perfect Scribe in the Law of the God of Heaven. 13. I have given
commandment, that every one that is willing in my kingdom, of the people of
Israel, and of the Priests and Levites, to go to Jerusalem with thee, shall
go. 14 Therefore art thou sent by the King and his seven counselors, to make
inquisition in Judah and Jerusalem, of the law of thy God, which is in thy
hand. This branch is for the bringing again of the people: after which
follows the second branch for the presents, which the King and the Princes,
and the people sent to be offered to the God of Heaven, in his house at
Jerusalem: and then the third branch for the immunities and liberties of the
Priests, Levites, and all other ministers of the house of God, verse. 24. and
lastly insueth verse. 25. the fourth branch, for restoring the Policy and
Government, (...)
ordayning of Magistrates, establishing and executing of laws: And thou Ezra
after the wisdom of thy God, that is in thy hand, appointe Judges, and
Justices of Oyer and Terminer, to all the people that is beyond the river: of
all that know the law of thy God, and them which know it not, teach. 26. And
whosoever will not do the Law of the Lord thy God, and the Law of the King,
let him have judgment without delay, either of death, or of banishment, or of
confiscation of goods, or of imprisonment. Here you see commission is given to
Esdras: to restore a common wealth in Judah and Jerusalem: to ordain
Magistrates and Officers of their own: to execute laws: to punish all manner
of offenders; and to exercise all sorts of punishment: which be the principal
and essential parts of a City; as Cicero said: Ciuitas est, in qua est
Consul, est Senatus, est iuris and aequitatis, quae vincula sunt ciuitatis,
repetita memoria. And these were at this time and by this Edict, granted to
the Jews, and never before: being much more of the essence of a City, than
the repayring of walls, which Nehemias came about. To Daniel the Angel
speaks of a word or Edict, that has two branches: the first to bring again
the people: the other to build the City of Jerusalem; both which Esdras had;
but Nehemias wanted the one, and Zorobabel wanted the other. Wherefore
considering the euidencie of Daniels prophecy and the Angels speech, and
waighing withal the wonderful concent and harmony of the best approved
humane writers with this Computation (which after will appear) it cannot be
but clear and manifest to all men, that Daniels weeks begin neither at the
one, nor at the other of them: though many learned men have made the beginning
thereof at each of them. As: at Nehemias coming in Longimans 20 year the
common exposition begins Daniels 70 weeks: whom very many great Clerks
follow, as Beda, Petrus Galatinus: and of late Lucidus Samotheus, and Clemens
Schubertus etc. But as that is taken, it differs not in time from our
account. For they make it the 20 year, not of his sole reign after his
father, but from the beginning of his reign, while his father lived: the 20
year whereof was but the 7 of his sole reign, which I reckon of. So they iump
with us. Yet that is not the commission, which the Angel prophesied of: 1
Because Nehemias did bring none from Babylon with him, The Latin vulgar
Translation omitteth (...) de reducendo etc which deceived them, and caused
the^ to begin there.
but came only to repair the building. 2 He repaired not so much the City as
the walls, Cap. 2.17.4.1. and as the whole survey of the work shows in all
the third Chapter. 3 That commission was out before, though the work were
neglected, which appears in that he makes mention of Overseers of the work
before he acquainted any man with his commission or purpose, Cap. 7.16. At
Cyrus first year and at the going out of the word at Daniels prayer, R. Aben
Ezra begins Daniels weeks: whom of late Tremellius and Henricus Wolphius
follow. But that cannot be the word, which the Angel meant: because the Angel
poynteth out, describes, and from all other words distinguishes the word that
he meant, by two notable and evident marks and signs: namely that it should be
the going forth of a word to bring again the people, and to build Jerusalem.
Whereas the commission which Zorobabel received at that time, and was proclaimed
in all Cyrus kingdom, had not a word of building Jerusalem, or of ordayning any
state and common wealth there: Ezr. 1.2.
but only to build the house of the Lord God of Israel, which is at Jerusalem.
For that was the thing that Cyrus respected, even the serving of God, 3
and sacrificing to God in that house: and therefore permits them of the
people of Israel that will build it, to go to Jerusalem and to build the
house: 4
and the residue, in what country soever they abide, to help them that go,
with their contribution toward the building up of that house of God in
Jerusalem: whereof the Angel speaks not one word. It may be, that most
spiteful Jew, Aben Ezra, wanting not wit but grace (as one speaks of him)
sought by this slight to bring the Gospel into discredit and disgrace among
other nations and to alienate them from it: when they should see Christians, to
prove that Christ was incarnate and suffered in his due time, corsse and
contradict the History and Chronology of all other nations and times; and the
records of all states and Empyres. As to the like end, that is, to obscure and
ouershadow the time and truth of Chrrst, his fellow Rabbi Solomon, begins
Daniels weeks at the destruction of Jerusalem by Nabuchodonosor, and ends
them at the destruction of the same by Vespasian. It is a very hell to them, to
see the records of the Monarchies bear reccord to Christ; or the annals,
acts, and histories of other kingdoms and people appear as witnesses, that
Christ was given and exhibited in the fullness of time, that God so long before
had set and showed by his Prophets. And this use we are to make of humane
writers and Chroniclers, though heathenish; even to make them serve unto
Christ, toward the leading of us into an understanding of the truth of times
and seasons: since the holy Ghost does not refuse the same neither in the old,
nor new Testament: leading us to the better and readier knowledge of the old
times by the years and account of Nabuchodonosor: and of the new times of our
Savior himself, by the time of Augustus, Tiberius, Cyrenius, Pilat, etc.
Whereof we shall make small use, if we be barred from humane writings and
records. The end of these 70 weeks is the Passion of Christ, as is evident,
verse. 24. and 26. Yet the authors of the former opinion, which begin them at
Longimans 20. year, and Tremellius for the other, end the 70 weeks three
years and a half after Christ; beginning the last week, wherein the
Testament should be confirmed to many, at Christ's baptism, and ending half
of it at his passion, reserving the other half to his Apostles for the
accomplishment of the work: or as though the Angel had used numero rotundo
pro corrupto, the full and round number for the broken, not respecting the odd
three years and half, that were wanting of the full sum. Which negligence
doubtless the Angel would not commit in a matter of such importance. Again it
is evident, that the Angel respects for the mark and scope of all those
works, the person and office of Christ only; and not of his Apostles. Neither
can those actions which he speaks of, be attributed to the Apostles, as to
restrain the falling away; to seal up sins; to expiat Iniquity, to bring
in Everlasting righteousness, etc. The order of the Angels speech, I will
briefly set down. First verse. 24. delivers the prophecy in general,
setting down the whole term in one gross sum of 70 weeks: and withal
reciting up the benefits in ample sort, which that time shall bring forth.
Secondly, verse. 25. by a special (...) he handles all again: First setting
down and fixing the very instant, where the Computation shall begin: Viz. at
the proceeding forth of the Edict to bring again the people, and to build
Jerusalem. Secondly he deuideth the whole term into three parts: two whereof
he reckons in the same verse: First seven weeks, and after threescore and
two weeks, unto Christ, wherein the people shall be returned, and the streets
and wall built: and those two parts shall be in straites of time and much
destresse. But then come the happy and halcyon days wherein the benefits
before promised shall be performed. Which is the last time, and therefore,
verse. 26. he sets down the end of the last week, and consequently of the
whole term: namely the passion and death of Christ: and after the threescore
and two weeks CHRIST shall be slain. Intimating withal the events that shall
ensue the same, even the utter desolation of the City, as a punishment for
their ingratitude in contemning Christ and the benefits brought and wrought by
him, and for their slaying of him. This last part, or last week, which he
reserved for Christ, he handles more particularly. verse. 27. For first least
he should take it, that Christ should be slain presently after the end of
the 62 weeks: he shows, that he shall continue first a whole week: and he
shall confirm the Testament unto many one week: meaning the better Testament,
Heb. 7.22. even the new Testament, Heb. 8.8. And least he should be mistaken,
as though he should spend a whole week in confirming that testament; and
bestow seven years in his Public Ministry, he uses a special (...), and
by an (...) or correction expounds his own meaning: even in half of that
week he shall cease and abolish the sacrifice and the oblation. Which was the
last half of that last week; even from his baptism to his Passion; the whole
time of his Ministry, that is three years and half: whereby he abrogated
and abolished the Leuiticall Priesthood, and changed it. Heb. 7.11 having
himself an everlasting Priesthood, verse. 24. whereunto he was called and
invested at his baptism, when it was said unto him: thou art my son. Heb. 5.5.
exercising and executing the same in the days of his flesh: wherein he offered
up prayers and supplications with strong crying, Heb. 5.7. and finishing it at
his passion, by which he did at once put away sin, by the sacrifice of
himself, once offered. Heb. 9.29.28. which being done, this man after he had
offered one sacrifice for sins, sits for ever at the rightha^d of God.
Heb. 10.12. and therefore justly and rightly he cried upon his cross
CONSVMMATVM EST is it finished. For there was an end of all sacrifices,
oblations, and the whole Leuiticall Priesthood, and of the 70 weeks too. The
distance of 490. years from Artaxerxes 7. to the passion of Christ, is proved
thus. Esdras with the heads and all the multitude of people, and his
commission to restore the commonwealth of Jerusalem and Judah, departed from
the river of Ahaua to go unto Jerusalem the 12 day of the first month: that is
two days before the Passover in Artaxerxes 7: year, Esd. 8.31. that is a
little above 100. days before the end of the second year of the 80 Olympiad.
as is showed before. And Christ Jesus with his Apostles and Disciples took his
journey, to go to Jerusalem to his passion, whereby he restored the kingdom
of Heaven to us, and made us Citizens of Jerusalem which is above the 12 day of
the first month, that is two days before the Passover, Math. 26.1. a little
above 100 days before the end of the 4. year of the 202. Olympiad. as
Eusebius proves out of Phlegon. The distance between these two iourneyes is
precisely 490. years. For 202. Olympiades multiplied by 4 make 808. years:
and 79. Olympiades and 2 years, make 318. years: which being subducted out of
the other, there remains 490. Also it may be proved out of the most excellent
Chronologer Julius Aphricanus, whose words Eusebius cites Demonst. Euang. l.
8. ca. 2. Anno imperij Persarum 115. Artexerxes 20. and Olymp. 83. anno. 4.
Nehemias missus est Hierosolymam ab Artaxerxe, inde ad Olymp. 202. annum 2
Tiberij Caesaris 16: anni numerantur. 475. In the 115, year of the Empire of
the Persians, being Artaxerxes 20, and the 4 year of the Olymp. 83. Nehemias
was sent to Jerusalem by Artaxerxes. From thence to the 2 year of the Olymp.
202. and Tiberius 16, are reconed 475. years. Where first I would have noted,
that he coupleth Artaxerxes 20, with the 115. year of the Persians; for the
confirmation of that, which before I set down. For in that sum are contained
first 23 years of Cyrus (...) or raygne, before his Monarchy: Secondly, the
78 years, assigned before from the beginning of Cyrus Monarchy to the end of
Artaxerxes 6 year: Thirdly 14 that remain to make up Artaxerxes 20. This 20
year of Artaxerxes (as may be gathered by that which before is spoken of his
first, 6 and 7 year) began about a quarter of a year before the 4 year of
the Olymp. 83. so that from the beginning of his 7 year to the beginning of
the year 4 Olymp. 83 are 13 years and a quarter: Which being added to
Aphricans 475, make 488 and a quarter: then add the third years of the said
Olympiad, and three quarters of the fourth (for Christ suffered about a quarter
of a year before the end of the 4 year of the Olymp. 202) and there will be
just 490.

Likewise the same will fall out by Tiberius reign. Aphrican says, that from
Artaxerxes 20. to Tiberius 16 are 475 years: but there wants above half a
year of it. For Tiberius 16 ended the 19 day of August, which was but 50 days
after the beginning of the year 2 Olymp. 202. Add thereto 13 years from
Artaxerxes 7, to his 20: and there will be 487 years and about 5 months. The 16
year of Tiberius was Christ's 31: wherefore we must add further Christ's 32
and 33, and about 7 months more, that is from the 19 of August to his passion;
and there will be just 490.

The same may be proved also by Ptolomies calculatio^ For he li. 4. c. 6.
shows that Adrians 19 year was the 854 year from the second of Mardocempad,
and li. 4. c. 9. he makes the 20 year of Darius Histaspis, to be the 219 from
the same 2 year of Mardocempad: to which 219 ad 16 for the rest of Darius, 21
for Xerxes, and Ataxerxes 6 and there will be 262. which being subtracted from
the 854, leave 592 from Artaxerxes 7 to Adrians 19 inclusiue.

The 19 of Adrian is joined by Historiographers with the year of Christ 136,
as his first is joined with 118: out of 136 take 34 (that is, the space from
Christ's incarnation to his passion) and there remain 102: which being taken
out of 592 there remain 490 from Artaxerxes 7 to the passion of Christ. Or
thus, Ptol. li. 3. ca. 82. reckons from Nabonassar to Alexanders death, 424
years: then consequently Alexanders last, is the 200 year from Cambyses 7
inclusiue. For I showed before, that Cambyses 7 is Nabonassars 225: add
Cambyses first 6, and Cyrus his 7, and they make 213 from Cyrus first of his
Monarchy to Alexanders death. And from Alexanders death to the Conquest of
Egypt, when Augustus reduced it to a Province, Ptolomie reckons 294 years:
which was done in Augustus his III. Consulship, and the year of Antonies
death; as Clemens Alexandrinus shows, who also reckons thence to the
Nativity of Christ 28 years, and thence to his Passion are 33: all which make
568. Out of which substract 78 from Cyrus first to Artaxerxes 7, and there
remain 490 from Artaxerxes 7 to the Passion of Christ.

Eusebius in like sort agrees exactly with this account for the Persians. For
Demonst. Euang. l. 8. c. 2. from the first of Cyrus his Regiment, to the end of
the old Testament, that is to the death of Simon the high Priest (which was in
the year of the Greeks 177.1. Maccab. 16.) he reckons 425. years. Take 23
years of Cyrus Regiment before his Monarchy: then 213 (as before was showed)
from Cyrus Monarchy to Alexanders death: then 12 from his death to the
Coronation of Seleucus Nicanor, where the Computation of the Greeks begins:
and lastly their 177. years, and there will be in all 425.

Likewise the Computation of the Sabbath years and Iubilies agrees notably
with our account. For Moses ordayneth that the Israelites should begin their
Computation of them, as soon as they were entered into the land, so that the
Manna ceasing, their tillage and husbandry began in Iosuahs first year: and
the first Sabbath year was in his 7 year, that is the year of the world
2555. wherein the Land was at rest from wars too: Ios. 10.43. and then they
began the division of the land, as is evident by Calebs age, Ios. 14.7.10. and
the 7 month and 10 day, the people being assembled at Gilgall, the law was
red, as it had been red by Moses 7 years before Deuteronomy. 31.10. which day they
began to rest, and rested till that day tweluemonth: intermitting their earing
and tillage of 2555. and the harvest of 2556: so that the fruits of one year
served three years, as God promises, Leuit. 23: that is the old fruits of
the labors, toil, and tillage of the 6 year, 2554. served the 7 year 2555.
wherein they were gathered; and the eight, 2556 wherein they gathered none; and
the ninth, 2557 till harvest that they might gather new. And so afterward for
the Sabbath years. Every seventh Sabbath year was the Jubilee, that is the
49 year from the former Jubilee exclusive, or the 50 year inclusiue, so that
the year 2597 was the first Jubilee, and 2646 the second etc. Now with this
Computation all the sabbath years and Iubilies, that we find recorded do justly
agree, as the 18 year of Josias, that is, 3381 was the 17 Jubilee as Ezechiell
makes it, taking thence his Computation and account Cap. 1.1.2. It came to
pass in the 30 year in the fourth month, (which was the fifth year of king
Iehoiacins captivity. To the last 14 of Josias, add 11 for the reigns of
Iehoiakim and Iehoiacin, and 5 of his captivity, and there are just 30. So
likewise the Jews besieged in Bethzura, in the 50 year of the Greeks were
driven to yield the town for want of vittailes, by reason of the Sabbath
year, 1. Maccab. 6.49. For the 49 year of the Greeks, that is 3759 was a
sabbath year, whereby they intermitted the tillage of that year, and the
harvest of the 50 year; and their old store of the harvest of 49, which
should have served them till they might have new fruits of the year 51, was
spent by them which had escaped from the Gentiles, and were come into Iudaea,
verse. 53. Again Herod's oppugning of Jerusalem was in a Sabbath year, which
caused great famine in the City, Joseph. li. 14. ca. 28. meaning not that the
Sabbath year continued all the time of the siege (which could have been no
great cause of famine, because they ought to have had store enough of all the
former year for all the Sabbath year, and the year after too, though they
had had no wars at all) but because the oppugning began in the end of the
Sabbath year, wherein no supply might be made, which in the winter following
caused great dearth indeed. The City was taken, as Josephus says, the 185
Olymp. Vipsanius and Gallus being Consuls, the third month, and it was the
third year of that Olympiad, because their consulship began at January in that
third year, and in October before the Sabbath year ended: and a little before
that the City was oppugned and besieged by Herod and Silo Joseph. li. 14. ca.
27. where grew a mutiny among the Roman soldiars, not liking to winter there
for want of provision: which want grew by reason of omitting the harvest
before in regard of the Sabbath year, Joseph. li. 14. ca. 27.

Moreover the son of God was Incarnate of the virgin Marie, to whom the
great and glad news was brought by an Angel from heaven, the very first year
of the 30 Jubilee: and the same Savior of the world, having accomplished the
work of our redemption, rested in his sepulcher, not only the sabbath day,
but also the Sabbath year. For in the 10 day of the 7 month of the year 4053
next before the passion of Christ, began the 215 Sabbath year, wherein
Christ Jesus by his Passion purchased for us true manumission, eternal
remission, perfect liberty and everlasting rest, even Sabbath upon Sabbath, as
the Prophet speaks. To which Sabbath year, and acceptable year of the Lord,
he prepared his countrymen of Nazaret in his sermon there not long before.
Luke. 5.

Now that the 10 Articles of the Computation from the creation to Christ be
clearly confirmed; and that the Olympiades be tied to the Era of Nabonassar;
and they both be applied to the years of the world, which are most certainly
continued in holy scripture till the Captivity of Babylon: it shall not be
amiss to do the like with the years of Rome, which depend of the Olympiades,
because that Computation is much used in the Roman Historiographers. And for
the beginning of the Computation, Era, or style of Rome, which the
Chronologers briefly note with these two letters V. C. that is vrbis conditae,
of the building of the City: there is great difference among the ancient
writers, as is well observed by Solinus, and more particularly by Sigonius. Of
the three principal opinions, the first begins it in the year 3 Olymp. 6
or 23 year of Iphitus: the second in 4 Olymp. 6. or 24 year of Iphitus: the
third in 1 Olymp. 7. or the 25 year of Iphitus. The reason of which
differences I will endeavor briefly to show; and to reconcile these
Computations, for the better light to the studious in History. And heereto the
distinction used by Liuie in his very beginning will help us a little: where
he says, Ante conditam condendamue vrbem: before the building of the City was
finished: or before the building of the City was begun. First therefore it
is held as certain of the Roman Historiographers, that Romulus having
revenged the injuries of Amulius, and leaving the rule and government of Alba
to Numitor, incontinently and with all speed began the building of a new
City: the plot whereof was drawn out with a plough, and the foundation laid
on the day of the shepherds feast called Palilia, which after was called
Natalis vrbis, the birth day of the City: which was (as Pliny says, li. 18.
c. 16.) the 11. Calendes of May, that is, the 21 day of April, in the third
year of the sixth Olympiad, as Plutarch records in his Romulus, (that is, the
year of the world 3270) and within 46 days of the end of that third year
and beginning of the fourth. Which space of 46 days is accounted for a year,
and at that instant Plutarch begins, where he says that Numa Pompilius was
borne when Romulus built the City: and that he began his reign in the 40
year of his age. And Paterculus: In the 6 Olympiad, 22 years after the first
beginning of them, Romulus having revenged the injuries of his grandfather,
built (that is, began to build) the City of Rome in the feast Palilia in the
Palatine. But in his Computation he uses the common account ab vrbe condita:
from the time after the City was built; as straight follows: from which time
(that is, post vrbem conditam, as he speaks Page 40.) to thy Consulship, M.
Vinicius, are 781 years, and that was done after the taking of Troy 430
years, as the place is corrected: And Liuie when he says, that Romulus had
peace 40 years: And Pomponius Atticus, and M. Tullius, as Solinus sets
down their opinions, Cap. 2.

The City was in building and accomplishing a whole year, being finished at
the same feast in the 4 year of the 6 Olympiad, that is, the 21 of April 3271.
where began the account, V. C. that is, ab vrbe condita, and Romulus reign of
37 years. And from thence Varro takes his Era and Computation, which is
followed by Eutropius, Orosius, and Censorinus, where he says: This year, the
style whereof is the Consulship of Vlpius and Pontianus, is the year 1014 from
the first Olympias, beginning it but only from the Summer Solstice, about which
time the Olympique plays and games were showed; and the 991 year after Rome
was built, beginning it at the Palilia, whence the years of Rome are
accounted. Now Dionysius a Greek, and writing in Greek, to make the
Computation of Rome agreeable and proportionable to the year and Computation
of the Greeks, did cast away those few days of the last year of the 6
Olympiad, and did begin it with the beginning of the new Olympiad, and makes
from the destruction of Troy, to that time 432 years: agreeing just with
Diodorus Siculus, who makes it 408 years from the destruction of Troy to the
first Olympiad. Julius Solinus follows Dionysius, as you may see, Cap. 2.
Comparing and proportioning our times and the Greeks together, we find that
Rome was built at the beginning of the 7 Olympiad, in the 433 year after Troy
was taken. And in the same place he shows, that in the year V. C. after Rome
was built, 801 there was written in the public acts the 207 Olympiad, which
exceeds the other by 24 years. And so Clemens Alexand. Strom. li. 1.
reckons from the first Olympiad to the time that Rome was built 24 years.
This Computation of Dionysius and Solinus is most usual. And although there be
but small odds between the (...) or marks of these two last accountes of
Varro and Dionysius: viz. as much as from the 21 of May to the first day of
Hecatombaeam about the summer Solstice, yet it breeds in account the odds of
a whole year: because Varro ends his first year of Rome with the 4 year of
the 6 Olympiad; and begins his second year where Dionysius begins his
first: and so he accounts those few days between the Palilia, and the
Olympiades for one year. The same odds must be observed, if you suite the
Computation of V. C. to the usual year of Rome which began at January, that
Varroes first year end at January next ensuing the building, and Dionysius
first begin but at the same January. Whereupon Eutropius and Orosius place
Augustus death in the year of Rome 767: which after Dionisius account was but
766. In the same sort Orosius ends Augustus first year at January, where
the Civil and Common year ended; accounting the short time between the 10
Call. of October and the Calends of January for one year, and then at January
in his first year, begins his second year. Whereupon he says, that Christ
was borne, anno quadragesimo secundo Augusti propemodum emenso.

Of the years of Rome depend the years and catalogue of the Consuls; Dionys.
l. 1. pa. 46.
which began in the year of Rome after Dionysius 245. and of both them, that
is, of the years of Rome and of the Consuls, depend the years of the
Emperors; and of the years of the Emperors depend the years of Christ. For
S. Luke coupleth the 30 year of Christ with the 15 of Tiberius: so that the 15
year before Tiberius, is the first of Christ's Nativity: and that was the 42
year of Augustus. For out of the 56 years of his Empire take 14 and there
remain 42: which 42 year is the 15 year before Tiberius, in which Christ was
borne, as all the ancient writers agree, Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. li. 1. ca. 5.
Epiph. cont. Haer. li. 1. tom. 1. Tertul. cont. Iudaeos, Page 128. Oros. l. 7.
ca. 2.

And for the further confirmation of this Computation, it does hereby appear
most clearly, that the birth of Christ is rightly and justly placed in the 751
year of Rome after Dionysius account; and also in the 4020 year of the world.
For Paterculus affirms, vol. 2. p. 40. that Augustus Caesar was created
Consul (where Suetonius, Eusebius, Eutropius, and the most part begin his
Empire and Monarchy; though Tacitus begin it at Julius Caesar's death, but then
he attributes 58 years to his Empire) the 10 Calendes of October 709 years
post conditam Romam, after Rome was built: which years are fully complete, and
as much, as from the summer Solstice unto the 22 of September: add thereto 42,
and there will be 751, in which year Christ was borne. Now for the year of
the world, it appeared before that Dionysius began the Computation of the
years of Rome with the 7. Olympiad, which was about the summer solstice of the
year of the world 3270, which takes up the first year of Rome, and of the 7
Olympiad all save one quarter. Wherefore to 3269 and a quarter add 709, and a
quarter (that is from the summer solstice to the 22 of September:) and then 41
of Augustus, and a quarter (from the 22 of September to the 25 of December:)
and there will amount 4019 years and three quarters to the Nativity of
Christ. And here it shall not be amiss to note the harmony, and agreement
between Paterculus and other ancient and autentique writers in this point.
Paterculus gives for a note worth the remembrance, that the said 10 Calendes
of October, or the 22 day of September, was a day before Augustus was full 20
year old, pridie quam viginti annos impleret. And first for the day Suetonius
agrees, affirming Cap. 5. that Augustus was borne 9 Call. Octobris, or 23 day
of September. Secondly for the year, it may be gathered thus: Florus and
Eutropius affirm, that when Julius Caesar was slain, Augustus was 18 year
old: whereto we must add as much as from the 23 of September to the Ides or
15 day of March, on which day Julius Caesar was slain. After his death
Antonius and Dolobella being Consuls took the authority upon them til
January following, wherein Hirtius and Pansa were created Consuls: who
afterward were slain at Mutina: and the 10 Call. of October next after their
death Augustus was made Consul; and the morrow after (as you see) was just 20
year old. So that from Julius Caesar's death to Augustus Consulship was about a
year and half. Which agrees likewise with the account of Paterculus. For
Eutropius says, that Julius Caesar was slain anno ab vrbe condita
septingentesimo fere ac nono: In the year after the building of Rome seven
hundred and almost nine. He adds almost, because the seven hundredth and ninth
year was not fully complet by his account and Varroes (indeed not begun by
Dionysius account:) and the 22 of September tweluemonth after Augustus
Consulship began: so that as Paterculus says, 709 years after the building of
Rome, were fully complet before Augustus Consulship, and as much as from the
summer solstice to the 22 of September. And whereas Solinus, Cap. 2. says that
Hirtius and Pansa were Consuls in the 710 year of Rome, he must not be taken,
as though their creation were in the year 710; but that the 710 began about
the middle of the year of their Consulship: or else that therein he follows
the Computation of Varro, and not of Dionysius. But he is greatly ouerseene in
the same place, auouching that Augustus was created Consul, decimum octauum
annum agens, being in his 18 year. Contrary to Paterculus, as you heard
before; and to Suetonius likewise, who says Consulatum vigesimo aetatis anno
inuasit: He forcibly took the Consulship, in the twentieth year of his age.

Of the Computation by the years of Christ.
AT this day all Christendom uses to make their accountes and Computations by
the years of Christ. And yet notwithstanding presently after Christ that
Computation was not used: but the common order of accounting and dating was by
the Consuls of Rome: saving that the Church had a particular Era or
Computation of their own, which began 38 years before Christ: and some
kingdoms accounted by the reigns of their own kings; all which are seen by
the dates in the Tomes of Councels. But the Church of Rome used a Computation
from the passion of Christ, as Beda shows, li. de not. rerum. Cap. 46. which
also you may see in Hierome and Isidore: and some used the Computation of
Antioch, as Eusebius, Euagrius, Cedrenus, Nicesorus, which began 48 years
before Christ, as Marianus Scotus shows. Yea both Heathen and Christian used
the Era or account of Diocletian, as you may see in Ambrose, etc. which began
in the year of Christ 285, and also in former times the Computation of the
Chaldaeans was much used, as you may see in Ptolomie, which began the 13 year
after Alexanders death, even with the second year of the 117 Olympiad: and at
the next Vernal Aequinoctiall began the Computation of the Greeks used in the
books of Maccabees and in Josephus, viz. at the crowning of Saleucus Nicanor:
and at the coronation of Ptolomaeus Philadelphus in the 26 year of the Greeks
began the Era of Dionysius much used by Ptolomie: yet the Church and Emperors
of the East used to Date by the years of the world according to Eusebius
account, as you may see in the council of Basil, where the Emperors Crisobol
or letter patent, is dated anno a mundi creatione 6944: and the Patriarch of
Constantinople his letters are dated anno ab Adam seu mundi constitutione 6944:
which was the year from the Nativity of Christ 1435: as both the said letters
do testify: for they are both dated by the years of Christ's Nativity
likewise. Marry now the Turks use their Computation which they call Alhigera,
beginning in the year of Christ 622: and the Persians use their Iesdagert,
which began in the year of Christ 632. But in the year of Christ 532
Dionysius Exiguus instituting the Paschal Cicle, and Golden number, would not
number and calculate the same by the Era or Computation of wicked Diocletian
the 10. persecutor of the Church, which then was used through the whole Empire,
but would cast and account it by the years of Christ, beginning at his
Incarnation, as Beda shows Tom. 2 li. de not. rerum. cap. 46. Which Era or
Computation was not used by the Emperors or Popes till long after. For the
first Emperor that used it in dating of his Acts, proceedings, and Epistles,
was Carolus Crassus. And afterward Eugenius IIII. at the advice and instance of
Blondus his Register received it into the Popes Bulls and writtes: as Paulus
Forosemproniensis affirms in his Paulina part 2. li. 13. Praeside Eugenio
IIII adhortante Blondo Forliuiensi Pontificij collegij a secretis Notario, in
bullis atque rescriptis Pontificalibus annorum haec a Christi Incarnatione
supputatio scribi primum coepit: when Eugenius IIII was Pope, at the instance
of Blondus of Forli, Clarke of the Popes counsel, this Computation of years
from the Incarnation of Christ began first to be written in the Popes Bulls
and Mandates. Which I do not take, as though the Computation by the years of
the Lord was then first brought into the Church (as Gerardus, Mercator and
other take it,) or as though it were not used in the acts of the Church, and
in ecclesiastical courts and proceedings before that time; but that then and
by that means it began first to be used in the Bulls, Mandates, and writtes,
that were mere Papal, and passed only from the Pope. For in writtes of that
nature, the year of the Lord was not mentioned at al before that time, but
only the years of their own coronation, anno Pontificatus nostri, etc. For
anon after Paulus Forosemproniensis adds: Sed notarij annos a natiuitate
computare consueuerunt. But all other notaries used to account the years from
the Nativity. And that is evident by the dates of all the Sessions of the
council of Constance, which was before Eugenius: which are all dated anno a
Natiuitate Domini: but the Popes Mandates and letters are only dated, anno
Pontificatus nostri. So that the Computation of Dionysius was both used, and
also corrected, before Eugenius IIII. The order whereof I will briefly set
down. The computation from the Incarnation of Christ, ordained by Dionysius
was used till December. 25. 1351. At which time for special cause, which is
showed, page (...) it was decreed, that the computatio^ by the year of the
Lord, should begin, not at the Incarnation or 25 of March (as before it did,)
but at the Nativity or 25 of December: and yet the same number should be kept
and observed without alteration all the year through, save the first quarter.
For So Much they prevented the change and beginning of the new year, writing
1352. after the said 25. of December, which otherwise they should not have done
till the Incarnation or 25. day of March following. The Act or Decree is
recorded by Ierapha: His quoque temporibus apud Perpinianum oppidum in curia
generali 25 Decembris 1351 fuit determinatum in Catalonia, ne Calendae a
notarijs in chartis scriberentur, nec ab Incarnatione annus Domini, sed a
Natiuitate inchoaretur. And also at that time, at Parpinnan in a general
Court, December. 25. 1351. it was decreed in Catalonia, that the Calendes should
not be used by Notaries in Chartes, and that the year of the Lord should not
begin at the incarnation, but at the Nativity. The practice hereof appears
in the council of Constance about 53 years after: where all the Sessions and
Acts are dated, not by Calendes, but by the days of the month, and by the
years from the Nativity of the Lord, and not from his incarnation. Which
year did alter and change not at the incarnation: for the second session
holden the second of March, and the third holden the 25. of March, that is the
day of Christ's Incarnation; and the fourth holden the 30. of March; and the
fifth, holden the 6. of April, are all recorded in one and the same year 1415.
But the year altered and changed upon the very day of the Nativity. For the
coronation of Martin V. is recorded to be upon sunday the 21. day of November
anno a Natiuitate Domini 1417. Indictione 10. and upon tuesday the 28 of
December following was holden the 42 Session, and there the year is altered
both of the year of the Lord and also of the Indiction. For it is dated anno a
Natiuitate Domini 1418. indictione 11. Indeed printed copies have there also
1417. but an ancient copy written by a Notarie at the very council (which
Lucidus Samotheus affirms that he has seen) has 1418. And it must needs
be so: first because the year of the Lord is there expressed, which would not
have been done unless the year were changed. For otherwise he would have
said, anno and indictione quibus supra. Secondly because the 22. and 29. of
April following, are there recorded, anno and indictione quibus supra. And the
next before mentioned is that: whereas in April 1417 the 32 Session was held,
as before there was mentioned. Thirdly because the Indiction is changed: which
the Church of Rome alters with their year.

But in all that Council the writtes and processes of the Popes themselves,
Martin v. Gregory xij or John xxiiij. are dated neither by the days of the
month nor by the year of the Lord, but by the Calendes and the year of their
own Papacy or Coronation. And I have a pardon granted by Martin V. to
Issabell Wootton of London dated thus: vi. Idus Martij, Pontificatus nostri
anno nono, without any mention of the year of the Lord. Wherefore Blondus
persuading Eugenius IIII. about thirty years after that council, to date his
Bulls Pardons and writtes by the year of the Lord, would have him to follow
Dionysius style, and to write from the Incarnation, keeping the same number,
but altering the (...) or mark: though all other courts and notaries did
keep their new style from the Nativity; as Forocemproniensis affirmed
before. The practice hereof is evident in the council of Basil, held under
the same Eugenius, wherein all his Bulls and Mandates, as also the Bull of
Nicholaus V. are dated, anno Incarnationis Dominicae, etc. and by the Calendes.
And the reuocation of three of his Bulls is dated by himself Calendis Ianuarij,
anno Incarnationis Dominicae 1433: but the Bishop and two Cardinals which
subscribed to the same Reuocation, the fifth day of February following, date
their subscription anno a Natiuitate Domini 1434. where the year, you see, is
changed. And so all the Sessions and Acts of the same council are dated by
the year a Natiuitate Domini. or anno Domini, which is all one: for they mean
a Natiuitate. The like practice we have in the Bull of Clement VII. for the
Jubilee 1525. For the Bull, as it came from the Pope himself, is dated thus:
Datum Romae apud sanctum Petrum, anno Incarnationis Dominicae 1524. Call. Maij.
But out of the court of Audience by the Bishop of Worcester, Auditor General
of the Apostolic Chamber, it is dated thus: Datum Romae in aedibus nostrae
solitae residentiae, anno a Natiuitate Domini 1524. die decimo mensis Iunij.
And these are the two usual datings and computations in Christendom at this
day: the occasion of the difference whereof I will briefly show. The principal
cause of the odds and error was in Dionysius Exiguus; who both erred
himself, and caused other to err, as one said truly of him; though the same
man could not find out the error: as in like sort, Reinerius, Sigebertus
Gemblacensis, Stofflerinus, Paulus Forosemproniensis, etc. have found by their
Calculations, that Dionysius was out and in an error: Marry wherein the error
consists, and what was the true cause thereof, which being taken away, it
might be amended and made right, they could not perceive: and therefore
mistaking the cause, they plunge themselves into further errors. The truth is
briefly this: Dionysius intending principally the time and account to come, and
(...) only the time and Computation past, came too short of the Conception or
Incarnation of Christ by one whole year, in his account backward; because he
accounted from the Incarnation of Christ to his Passion but only 33 years and
so made the whole life of Christ but only 32 years; beside the odd time from
the 25 of December to his Passion. In which error were (as Forosemproniensis
reckons them up part 2. li. 4.) Apollinarus Laodicensis, Augustine,
Victorinus Lemonicensis, Magister Historiarum, Nicholaus de Lyra, and Marianus
Scotus; to whom we may add Bartholomeus Scultetus, and many other excellent
Astronomers. And because that would not fit well with Histories and the
astronomicall calculations, it has driven other into grosser absurdities,
namely to avouch, that Christ lived but 31 full years, as Johannes de Muris,
and Rogerus Bacon in his Epistle to Clement V: or that he lived 34 years full,
as Chrysostom, Albertus Magnus, and of late Gerardus Mercator: all contrary
to the faith of the Church; as Beda shows li. de not. rerum. Cap. 46. Habet
ecclesiae fides, Dominum in carne paulo plus quam 33 annis vsque ad suae
tempora passionis vixisse: The faith of the Church holds that the Lord lived
in the flesh a little more than 33 years to the time of his Passion: And
contrary to Ignatius, who attributes to Christ 33 years and somewhat more in
his Epistle to the Trallians: (...): Christ having conuersed three Decades of
years was baptized, and having preached three years was crucified: where he
reckons 33 full years, beside the time from his baptism, to the beginning
of his preaching: and contrary to Eusebius, who places Christ's Nativity in
the 3 year of the 194 Olymp. and his death in the year 4 of the Olymp. 202.
which is the distance of 33 years and as much as from the 25 day of December
to the day of his Passion: and contrary to the age of Christ by the years of
the Emperors. For Saint Luke says that John the Baptist began his office in
Tiberius 15 year: which ended the 19 day of August, if we begin his Empire at
Augustus death. Yet Tacitus and Suetonius, Cap. 14. show, that Tiberius stood a
while after Augustus death, in great suspense, whether he might take the Empire
upon him, or not; insomuch that some brak patience, and one in a tumult cried
out, aut agat, aut desistat, etc. And therefore it may be, that his Empire
began to be accounted two or three months after. Howsoever it be (for it
mattreth not much) it is evident by Daniel, that Christ was baptized about
October, accounting from his Passion backward to his baptism half a week:
and it is probable by the Analogy between the Baptism of Christ and the
feast, of Expiation that he was baptized at that feast, which was that year
the 7 day of October. Now Christ at his Baptism was almost full 30 year old,
as appears by Saint Luke, Cap. 3. (...), and Jesus himself was beginning
almost to be of 30 years of age, that is, beginning to be full 30 year old:
as Epiphanius (...), and twice (...) does place the words, (...) etc. and
Jesus was beginning to be almost of thirty years, being the son, etc. And
so (...) is taken Act. 13.18. (...), and almost forty years he bare their
manners in the wilderness: meaning not full 40: for there wanted above a month of
it, as before is showed. And so fere is used by Eutropius: Caesar was slain in
they year seven hundred and almost nine, septingentessimo ac fere nono:
because there wanted above a month of the full of that year. So Christ was
(...) or (...), fere triginta annorum, almost 30 year old: for he wanted
above two months. And so Epiphanius takes it, cont. Haer. tom. 2. li. 1. He
was indeed 29 year old and 1^ months: 30 year old, but not full. In which
sense Ignatius said, (...). For he was not full 30 till the 25 of December
following in Tiberius 16 year. To which day, from the 25 of December in
Augustus 42 are just 30 years. For it is evident before that Aug. was 20 year
old wanting one day, the 10 Calendes of October, when he was created Consul
(where his Empire or reign began) and he died, as Suetonius records, Cap.
100. the 14 Calendes of September, or 19 day of August, when he was threescore
and 16 year old wanting but 35 days. So that he reigned 56 years wanting 36
days. Whereto agree Eutropius and Orosius, who say he died in the year of
Rome 767, after Vurroes account that is 766 after Dionysius account. Now Christ
was born the 25 of Dece^ber in his 42 year (as before is showed) so that
Augustus reigned after the Nativity of Christ 14 years and 8 months wanting
but 5 days: add to them 15 years of Tiberius, and there will be 29 years and
the 8 months: which 15 of Tiberius ended the 19 day of August: and Christ was
baptized about October following; and the 25 of Dece^ber following, he was just
30 year old: which was in Tiberius 16 year. Now that Christ lived 3. years
and 3. months after that, which was three years and an half after his
Baptism, is plain both by Daniel, who attributes to his ministry 3 years
and half, that is half a week: and also by the history of the Evangelists,
who make express mention of 4 Passouers after his baptism, at the last
whereof he suffered his Passion: The first John. 2. when he cast the buiers and
sellers out of the Temple: the second Math. 12. Mark. 2. Luke. 6. when the
Disciples plucked the ears, in the (...) second principal Sabbath: the third
Math. 14. Mark. 6. Luke. 9. John. 6. when he fed 5000 with five loaves. The
fourth and last Math. 26. Mark. 14. Luke. 22. John. 13. when he instituted the
new Sacrament of his body and blood, and accomplished the work of our
Redemption. And this the fathers received by tradition: It is left unto us,
that all the time of the doctrine of Christ was three years and a half, which
is half one week. Eusebius. Demonst. Euang. li. 8. ca. 2. And Ignatius in Epist.
ad Trall. (...), and having preached the Gospel three years he was crucified:
he says not two years, or four years. As for the odd days he stands not
upon. For it was not his purpose to make so exact a computation, and yet he is
near the mark. For if Christ began not to preach till the beginning of the
spring, as Clemens Romanus Recog. 1. Pa. 2. affirms, then he preached not
much above three years. But how long it was after his Baptism before he
began to preach, the Evangelists do not show, neither says Ignatius any
thing of that space: but that he preached full three years. Wherefore to
conclude, the time of the life, of Christ from his Nativity to his Passion,
was 33 years and a quarter: and from his Conception or Incarnation to his
Passion, was full 34 years.

That Dionysius between the Incarnation of Christ and his Passion reckoned but
33 is manifest by Beda de not. rerum Cap. 46. Sancta siquidem Romana and
Apostolica Ecclesia hanc se fidem tenere, and ipsis testatur indiculis, quae
suis in cereis annuatim scribere solet, vbi tempus dominicae Passionis in
memoriam populis reuocans, numerum annorum triginta semper and tribus annis
minorem quam ab eius Incarnatione Dionysius ponat, adnotat. Denique anno ab
eius Incarnatione iuxta Dionysium 701 Indictione 14 fratres nostri, qui tunc
fuere Romae hoc modo se in natali Domini in cereis sanctae Mariae scriptum
vidisse, and inde descripsisse referebant: A passione Domini nostri Jesus
Christi anni sunt 668. The holy Roman and Apostolic Church testifies that
she holds this faith, even by the very Indices or Tablets, which she uses to
write yearly in the Tapers, when as putting the people in mind of the time of
the Lords Passion, she sets always a less number by 33 years, than
Dionysius does set from his Incarnation. And in the year from his Incarnation
701 after Dionysius, the 14 Indictio^, our brethren which then were at Rome,
did report that at Christmas in the Tapers of Saint Marie they saw written, and
also wrote out, in this sort: From the Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ there
are 668 years. Subduct 668 out of 701, and there remain but 33 from his
Incarnation to his Passion. Likewise if you go by the Indictions backward,
from this year 701 being the 14 Indiction, to the Nativity of Christ, which
Beda de not, rerum. ca. 48. says was the fourth Indiction, and then his
incarnation was the third, you shall find the same odds and distance. More
arguments and testimonies might be alleged for proof hereof, were it not
confessed by Dionysius his followers, that they all make but 33 years from
Christ's Incarnation to his Passion. Which afterward being perceived, caused
those alterations of the year of the Lord, which I noted page (...), and the
variety of Computation which is used in Christendom. For they which made the
first alteration Anno Domini 1351, being loath to alter the number, and to add
one year more to their vulgar and usual Computation, (which would breed by
all likelyhoode too much inconvenience) they thought it better to keep the
same number, and first to alter the Epoche or mark, setting it shorter back
by three quarters of a year, and therefore decreed that it should be accounted
but from his Nativity: Secondly to anticipate the change of the next new
year, beginning it sooner by one quarter of a year. And by this means they
both regained the whole last year, and also made the Computation of the year
of the Lord to come within eight days of the usual Computation of the
Romans, which began at the Calends of January. But Blondus about 80 years
after that, persuading Eugenius IIII. that the Popes own rescriptes, Bulls,
Acts, and processes might also be dated by the year of the Lord, whether it
were, for that he would of singularity make the Pope differ even in his Dates
from the common course, or (which I think rather) for that he saw the new
style and account did not well concur and agree, neither with the natural
course of the year, which begins with the Spring, when the sun enters
into Aries, nor with the ordinance of God, which appointed the month Abib for
the first, nor with the ancient Computation of the Church, which began both the
years of the world, and the year of the Lord at one time, viz. about the
Vernall Aequinocticall,) refused the new style and Computation from the
Nativity, and took the old from the Incarnation. Yet beginning the change of
the new year after the new year of the other Computation from the Nativity
(as evidently appears by the two dates of the Popes Reuocation in the
council of Basil,) he intimates not obscurelie, that this his Computation
reached not to the true Incarnation of Christ by one whole year, but that it
begins at the feast of his Incarnation, which was in the first year of his
Nativity, and so left out the whole last year before the beginning of his
Computation.

This Computation of Blondus is used by the church of England: and not only
here, but also in Italy by the states of Florence, and Sienes; all which use
the Computation from the Incarnation, and begin the year the 25 day of March,
after that the Church of Rome has begun their Computation from the Nativity
the 25 of Dece^ber before. As Anno Reginae 37, the 25 day of December, the
Church of Rome began the year 1595 from the Nativity: and the City of Rome
together with the Astronomers (for they have a peculiar Computatio^,
proportioned to the ancient and usual year of the Romans, without any regard
of the first 8 days of Christ's Nativity) begin the same year 1595 the first
day of January, or the feast of Circumcision, which therefore is called
New-yeares day, as our yearly Almanacks show: and at the 25 of March following,
we of England, Florence, and Senes begin the same year 1595 from the
Incarnation or Conception of Christ. Which is as much, as if Christ had been
borne and Circumcised too, a quarter of a year before he was conceived: were
it not that they by this their Computation would give us to understand, that
there is lost a whole year of the Lord, which they would regaine and restore
by beginning their Computation from his Incarnation a just year after his true
Incarnation: that is at the feast of his Incarnation or Annunciation next after
his Nativity. But the states of Pisa have the right and perfect computation
from the Incarnation, which runs always a just year before this of
England, Florence, and Senes. For the same 25 of March Elizabethae 37 they
begin the year 1596 from the Incarnation; and so date all their records,
writtes, processes, Epistles, evidences, etc. Indeed in those places, where
any of the other Computations are used, perhaps it will seem good and
convenient, as not unlikely it did to Blondus, not to alter their account and
style ancient though erroneus, but rather to keep and retain the vulgar and
usual Computation, both in their public and private Acts, because the
alteration thereof would breed some confusion in their records and evidences.
But yet it is necessary for the studious in History to be acquainted
heerewith, and to understand the differences of Computations in the world.

Of this point I have been the larger, partly because the author of our last
great Chronicle, in his description of England. li. 3. ca. 14. makes this a
great scruple (to use his own term) and so leaves it, concluding that with
us Christ is borne before he is conceived: and partly because I remember this
doubt was moved to a man of manifold learning, and of great reading and
judgment, as any in this land, who did answer it by a distinction of Annus
Natiuitatis, and annus Actatis. Which distinction I have read in Iacobus
Phillippus Bergomensis Chronic. li. 8. where he labors by that mean to take
away all doubt about the year of the Baptism and Passion of Christ. And first
he puts a difference between the usual year, and the Emergent year: which
Emergent year, a quouis rei euentu quouis tempore anni vsualis emergit and
incipit, and reuolutis duodecim mensibus solaribus finem habet, atque iterum in
sua vestigia redit, and iterum atque iterum circumuoluitur, donec ea res
numerari desinit, a cuius euentu coeptum est numerari; vt solet fieri in
primordijs regum and imperatorum. And after he adds: ad hoc tempus anni
emergentis annos Domini dupliciter numeramus, aut secundum Natiuitatem, aut
secundu^ aetatem etc. By this Emergent year we account the year of the Lord
two ways: either by his Nativity, or by his age. Whereupon Christ being borne
in the end of the usual year, (he means of the Romans) he had of the last
year of his Nativity but only 7 days: but the first year of his age, from
the 25 day of December, wherein he was borne, to that day tweluemonth, is ended
in the second year of his Nativity. And so he accomplished two years of his
Nativity, after the usual year almost in the first year of his age: and the
second year of his Nativity and the first of his age is all one. Whereby it
comes to pass that the years of Christ's Nativity are 34 and a half
almost, etc. Anon after, and in the 33 year of his age and 34 of his
Nativity Christ suffered. Again, therefore Julius Caesar being slain in
March, whence Augustus Empire is accounted, Christ began the first year of his
Nativity in the end of Augustus 42 year. etc. This difference I thought good
to allege, because it may serve the Historician to many good purposes; as
namely it opens and declares the meaning of Oroseus, where he says, anno
Augusti 42 prope emenso Christus natus est, as before I expounded it. As for
the scruple before mentioned and moved, it does somewhat ouershadowe it, but
not clean take it away: shifting it off prettily, but not satisfying it fully.
For if we take the common and vulgar Computation of Christ to be secundum
Natiuitatem after his Nativity, then indeed the second year of Christ
secundum Natiuitatem must begin before the second year of Christ's true
Incarnation; and so onward the Computation secundum Natiuitatem will begin a
quarter of a year before the Computation from his Incarnation: Although the
first year of Christ secundum Natiuitatem, which contained but 7 days began
three quarters after the beginning of the first year of his Incarnation. But
here first I say, that in the common and vulgar Computation of Christendom,
the year of the Lord is not taken secundum Natiuitatem, but secundum aetatem,
and begins not at the first day of January, but at the 25 day of December
which was the day of his Nativity, as appears by the council of Constance,
which puts the 28 of December, and the 11 of March both in one year. And
although the Astronomers, and some other have reduced the year of Christ to
the usual year of the Romans and begin it with the beginning thereof, that
is at the first day of January, being the day of Christ's Circumcision, yet
they do not account those 7 days before for a year, but clean cast them
away, and reckon them not at all: as Forosemproniensis shows page 2. li. 4.
and as the yearly Almanackes testify, which after the Circumcision keep ever
the same year of the Lord, that the Church of Rome does, whereas otherwise
they would have a year more. Thirdly if it were so, that the common and
usual Computation of Christendom, did take the year of the Lord, secundum
Natiuitatem, yet that will not help the matter and cause in hand: because
Bergomas makes but 33 years between Christ's Incarnation and Passion, and
then we are in as bad case as we were before. For a whole year of the life of
Christ is still lost: so that the Computation will not reach to the true (...)
of Christ's Incarnation by a whole year.

By this also you may see, that the dream of Paulus Forosemproniensis, was
nothing but a dream. He writes, that he had showed him in a vision or
revelation, that all Chroniclers and Historiographers did anticipate the year
of the Lord, and put the Nativity of Christ two years sooner than they
should: and this vision, or dream rather, he labors tooth and nail to
confirm; whereas indeed in the usual Computation the Nativity of Christ is
set back by one year.

If you desire to know, to what year of the world the year of any other
Computation is to be referred, add to your year of the Olympiades 3246. Rome
3270. after Dionysius. 3269. after Varro.
Nabonassar 3275. The Chaldaeans 3710. The Greeks 3711. Dionysius 3735.
Antioch 3971. The Council 3981. Christ's Incarnation 4019. after the
Computation of Pisa. 4020. after any other Computation, as England, Florence,
etc.
Passion 4053.
Diocletian 4313. The Turks 4640 The Persians 4650.


As thus. The Council of Nice was holde^ Era 363: add thereto 3986 and we shall
find the year of the world 4349. Again from 363 substract 38: and you have the
year of Christ 325; add thereto 4024; and you find that way too the same
year of the world 4349. Yet it is hard to give a rule to reconcile the
Computation of Eusebius and the Greeks, with this Computation, because he
makes new odds almost in every article. But after Christ there is one
uniform order. For he places the birth of Christ in the year of the world
5199, which is too much by 1174: and that must be subducted out of this
Computation. But the Computation of the Emperor and Patriark in the Council of
Basil, which couple the 6944 of the world, with the year of Christ 1435, is
too much by 1484 years.

By the like respect having a year of any one Era or Computation, by this
table ye may easily reduce it to any of the other.

But in these concurrences due regard must be had what time of the year every
Computation begins: otherwise (as Dionysius Halycarnassaeus complains of
Thucidides manner of Computation) it will be hard to couple them together but
that there will be an odds of one year. And therefore it shall not be amiss
to set down the several forms and beginnings of these years by the which
the principal Computations are reckoned.

First the year of the Hebrews consists of 12 months, the odd having 30
days, and the even 29 whose names be 1 Abib or Nisan: 2 Iiar or Ziu: 3 Siuan:
4 Thamus: 5 Ab: 6 Elul: 7 Thisri or Ethanim: 8 Marchesuan or Bull: 9 Cisleu: 10
Tebeth: 11 Schebath: 12 Adar. And because all this amounts but to 354 days
in the common year: therefore to meet and match the course of the Sun, they
insert in certain years a thirteenth month of 30 days which they call
Veadar, according to their cicle and rule of 19 years, wherein the 3. 6. 8.
11. 14. 17. and 19. have the said thirteenth month. And further to make up the
odd minutes, in every fourth year they intercalate one day, as we do in our
leap year. This year began (as some are of opinion) before the departure out
of Egypt at the Autumnal Aequinoctiall: as the Arabians, Persians, and latter
Jews begin their year: and as the Computation of the year for the Iubilies
began. But out of doubt it is, that after the departure out of Egypt Nisan was
made the first month and beginning of the year, Exodus 12.2. This month shall be
unto you the beginning of months: even the first month of the year. Which
began at the new moon next to the vernal Aequinoctial. At which Aequinoctial
the old Astronomers began their year: and the Church begins the year of
the world. And therefore Dionysius Exiguus to make the year of Christ
proportionable to the year of the world, began it at the Incarnation or
Conceptio^ which was on the vernal Aequinoctial. But in the year of the Lord
1351 for a special cause before spoken of, it was reduced to the Nativity of
Christ. And so there is but a week odds between the Ecclesiastical or Church
Computation of Rome, and the civil or imperial Computation. For the Church of
Rome begin their new year at the day of Christ's Nativity, that is the 25 of
December: and the Empire begins their new year the first day of January:
which we in this realm and other countries too commonly call new years day;
because the late Astronomers begin their new year there: as our yearly
Almanackes do witness; and Paulus Forosemproniensis shows part 2. l. 4.
The Astronomers of our time, which after the manner of the Romans have reduced
the Computation of years to January, and the radices motuu^ to the beginning
of January in the first year of Christ's Nativity, begin the first year of
his Nativity at the 8 day of his Nativity, not accounting the days between
his Nativity and January. Which may evidently appear by this, for they which
seek the place of the Planets at the hour of Christ's Nativity go back 7
days from the radices of the Planets noted in the tables. And this manner of
Computation observe not only Astronomers, but also Divines allowed in
Christian Religion, as Petrus de Aliaco, Nicholaus Cusanus, Rogerus Bachon, and
generally all that have sought out the places of the planets at the hour of
Christ's Nativity. The like or greater dissonancie there is, between the
beginning of the Indictions of the Empire, and the Indictions of the Pope. The
Indictions of the Empire begin the 8 Calendes of October; but the Pope
begins his Indictions three months after the 8 Calendes of December; that
is, at the day of Christ's Nativity.

The Egyptians are made by Herodotus, li. 2. and by Diodorus Siculus, li. 1.
to be the inuentors and first autors of the year. But indeed as they had it
from the Hebrews, among whom Noach himself the first of the renewed world did
ordain the year, and months, as Joseph. Antiqu. Iud. li. 1. and Berosus l.
3. affirm, distinguishing the year by the course of the Sun, and the 12
months by the course of the Moon; so they did corrupt and deprave the same.
For their year (after the which Nabonassars Era is accounted) has indeed 12
months, namely, Thoth, Phaothe, Athyr, Chiac, Tybi, Mechir, Phamenoth,
Pharmuthi, Pachon, Paune, Epephi, and Mesori: all which have 30 days a piece,
and the last 35: which make in all 365 days for their year. But because they
omit the intercalation of a day in the leap year, it falls out that the
first day of their month Thoth and consequently of their year, wandreth through
all the days of our year in 1460 years. Which space of 1460 years is called
of them (...), the great canicular year, because they begin it, when the first
day of their month Thoth and the rising of the dog star meet together. In
the first year of Nabonassars reign, the first day of Thoth was the 26 day of
February, accounting the year of Julius Caesar backward. And the first year
of Christ it was the 24 day of August. The same wandering course has the year
of the Sarazins and Turks, but it differs in the form much. For their year
has but 354 days, as the common year of the Hebrews, and in 30 years they
have 11 leap years, that have a day more a piece: so that the beginning of
their year wandreth through all our year once in 30 years.

The year of the Greeks agrees in form with the year of the Hebrews. For
first the common year has 12 months with the same number of days, which are
named of the Athenians thus: Hecatombaeon, Metagitnion, Boedromion,
Maemachterion, Pyanephon, Anthesterion, Posideon, Gamelion, Elaphebolion,
Munychion, Thargelion, Scirophorion: of the Macedonians thus, Lous, Gorpiaeus,
Hyperberetaeus, Dius, Apillaeus, Audinaeus, Peritius, Dystrus, Xanthichus,
Artemisius, Deutius or Destius, Panemos. Again they have a thirteenth month
called (...), and the year (...), according to the same rule, as the Hebrews
had: and lastly every fourth year a day intercalated for the leap year, but
it differs in beginning. For the first day of Hecatombaeon and Lous is the
next new moon to the Summer Solstice. And when that moon is at herful, they
celebrate and keep the solemn games at Olympus, every fourth year. By which
the Graecians account and compute, dating by the first, second, third, or
fourth year of such an Olympiad. At the same time began the Era Chaldaeorum
in Ptolomie: but the year of the Greeks or Saleucians began at the vernal
Aequinoctiall as may be gathered by 2 Maccab. 15.

The style V. C. that is, Vrbis conditae, of Rome built, began according to
Dionysius, just with the year of the Olympiades. But according to Varro,
Plutarch, Orosius, Eutropius, etc. It began the 11 Calendes of May or 21 of
April, for the first year: but for the second and so onward, either at the
beginning of the Olympiades, or at the usual year of the Romans. For the
common and usual year of the Romans had another course. For before Romulus,
they began the year at the summer Solstice, as it is likely, because they
learned their year of the Graecians. Yet it may be, they had both their year
and the beginning of it from Noach or his children, and afterward corrupted the
same. Howsoever it be, Romulus (as Macrobius shows Saturnal. li. 1.) ordained
a year of 304 days, and divided it into 10 months, called the first March in
honor of his father Mars, and therewith began the year coupling the first of
March with the vernal Aequinoctiall without respect of any leap year. But
Numa Pompilius seeing this year go too fast for the course of the Sun, added
50 days more, and after upon better aduisement he put to one day more and so
brought them to 355, and withal added two months, January and February, and
began the year with January, as the City and Empire of Rome has done ever
since. And because all this would not serve, he devised an intercalar month, as
the Greeks had; but he clean left out the leap year. Yet before Julius
Caesar's time they had gotten a quarter of every leap year, by their new
Intercalation and adding to the three last years of every Octo (...) (or
eight days space) a thirtieth month. But Julius Caesar in his IIII Consulship
and year of Rome 708, with the advice of Sosigenes an Astronomer of
Alexandria, and aid of M. Flauius a notarie in Rome, took away those
intercalated months, ordained the quantity of the common year to be 365
days: and that every fourth year should in February have a day more called
Bissextus (because they wrote twice or two days together sexto Call. Martij,
the sixth Calendes of March:) We call that year the leap year: because there
we leap back to another Dominical letter. Moreover those days he divided
among the 12 months in such sort, that all the odd months beginning with
January had 31 days: and all the even months, as the second, fourth, etc.
had in a full or leap year 30 days: but in the common years February had
but 29. Colum^lla de re ^ rust. l. 12. ca. 2. Plin. l. 8.1.26.
and he placed the winter Solstice 8 Calendes of January, and the vernall
Aequinoctiall 8 Call. of April, continuing the beginning of the year, as it was
before, at the Calendes of January. But the priests mistaking Caesar's mind
made every third year Bissextill or leap: and so in 36 years made too many
leap years by three. Wherefore Augustus Caesar commanded the three next leap
years to be omitted, and so brought it into order again. But Augustus calling
the month Sextilis after his own name August, because it should not be
inferior to July, that bare his predecessors name, took one day from
February to August; and then because three months together had 31 days a
piece, he put one from September to October, and one from November to December.
And this form and fashion of the year remains at this day: saving that the
points of the Aequinoctials and Solstices are varied since Julius Caesar 15
days backward, so that the vernall Aequinoctiall is now the 11 and 10 day of
March.

Which variation Gregory xiij. pretending to amend, in the year 1582 made an
alteration of the year, and brake the course, which it has ever kept since
Julius Caesar's time, reducing the Aequinoctials and Solstices to the points,
which they possessed at the Council of Nice. And this he effected, by taking 10
days out of October 1582: ordayning for hereafter, that every 400 years 3
bissextil or leap years should be omitted: making the quantity of the year
less than Julius Caesar did by one hundredth thirty third part of a day, and
one third of such a part. And so he says, that Calender will last and serve
till the year of Christ 5000. This is the sum of Gregory's correction of the
year and Calendar.

How well he has done, to make this correction, and how well he has done it,
may in few words appear unto us, if we consider these few points.

First in removing the Aequinoctial he condemns the council of Nice, who
thought it not meet to remove it at all, but fixed it, where they found it,
viz. at March, 21. as Julius Caesar left it at March. 25: and so Petrus
Cameracensis urged in the council of Constance, and had persuaded John xxiij.
if he had continued in the popedom, and of the same opinion was Paulus
Forosemproniensis, in his Paulina part, 1.

Secondly he takes not the right (...) mark or point. For if he would needs
remove it, why did he not reduce it to the original and first beginning of the
Julian year, that is to the 25 of March, which place it had at the Nativity
of Christ, a thing more memorable than the council of Nice? But they must
needs show their minds even in this, how they more affect and prefer the
actions of the Church than of Christ Jesus. If the Aequinoctials must needs be
fixed, and kept from varying, fix them where they ought to be fixed, that is
where they were at their Creation: or at the least where they were at Christ's
Passion and Resurrection. For the right celebrating thereof they pretend to be
the cause of their alteration. But rather, why are they not suffered to run
their race and hold on their course, which they ever have kept since the
beginning? For what authority has he, more than all the world before him, to
set the heavens their bounds, and prescribe laws to the stars, yea to
bridle the Sun it self, as though he held the world in his hand? Cannot he
be content, that the Sun Moon and Stars shall keep their course, and the
festival days be solemnised in their appointed times, as well as God himself
was? Why does he take upon more than God himself did in the Leuiticall
Passover and other solemnities; which being once by him appointed, continued a
longer time than from the council of Nice to Gregory xiij. without any
alteration of the year? He may assure himself that if it had been necessary
or meet to be done, or any inconvenience had grown by the not doing of it,
God himself would have altered it in that strickt pedagogie of his people, who
were so precisely tied to the observation of days and times.

Thirdly the manner of removing it, was cause of great confusion and trouble,
by taking of 10 days out of one month at one push; as they did: contrary to
the wisdom of Augustus Caesar, who to amend the surplussage of three days,
caused the three next leap years to be omitted. And contrary to the
judgment of his own predicant Friar Johannes Maria, who affirms that that
way would be difficilis and gignens perturbationem magnam, Epit. de eme^d.
Calend. ca. 3.
and dissidium in Ecclesia Dei per orbem diffusa: and of Johannes Lucidus
Samotheus, who intimates that the same way would be troublesome, and that the
safest and best way were to fix it where they found it, as the Nicene fathers
had done. The whole council of Basil refused this way of Gregory xiij. though
greatly and vehemently urged unto them by Cardinal Cusan, and Hermannus
Zoestius.

Fourthly for the remedy provided for hereafter, the means of omitting three
leap years in every 400 years, will not keep the Aequinoctial at the 21 of
March. For the variation of it from Julius Caesar to Gregory xiij. is not
agreeable to that proportion. For by his reckoning, in 133 years, and one
third part, it goes back one day. Now from Julius Caesar's instituting of
the Calendar to the year 1582, are 1627 years. In which sum you have 133,
but 12 times beside the remainder of almost. So that by this reckoning, at that
year 1582 the Aequinoctiall is removed from the 25 and 26 of March not full 12
days and a quarter: whereas all Astronomers hold, that it is removed 15 days.
So likewise from the council of Nice, which was in the year of Christ 325 to
that year 1582, there are 1257 years: in which sum we have 133 but nine
times, beside the remainder of and a little more. So that by this account the
Aequinoctiall is removed from the 21 day of March, not much more than nine
days and a quarter: and Pope Gregory has stricken out of the Calendar full
10 days. Wherefore his Calendar must needs be false, either in the place of the
Aequinoctiall, which is reduced to the 21 of March; or in the new quantity of
the year, and remedy provided for the perpetuity of it. And surely this is a
notable argument of man's dullness of wit, and dimnesse of sight even of his
owlish eyes (as Aristotle calls them) in the great works of God. For indeed,
the exact course of the Sun, and the just quantity of the year, is
incomprehensible of man's wit. Which has bred among the best Astronomers at the
least 20 diverse opinions of the quantity of the year, all differing from
this of Gregory's, as you may see in Censorine de die Natali, Cap. de anno
vertente, and in Picus Mirandula aduers. Astrologos. li. 9. ca. 9. where he
notes and observes that Azerchel, Baten, Isaac, Israelita and some junior
Astronomers do hold, that as the days do lengthen and shorten, so the
years do likewise, and that in the year of Christ 1310 the year was at the
shortest, and within a while after would begin to lengthen again.

Lastly for the term that this Calendar will serve, I take it one of the
wisest acts of his Holiness, when as he avouches that his Calendar will serve
and last without alteration till the year of Christ 5000. For unless the
term be long the labor is needless: because in a hundred years the
variation is not sensible, and therefore causes no inconvenience at all: in
that (as himself says) 133 years and a third part make but one days odds.
And therefore since the Creation the Aequinoctiall has odded but 42 days: and
now it would be 1463 years before it could get out of March, where now it is.
And whether the world shall last so long, God knows. Sure we are, that it
shall not last so long after Christ as it had lasted before Christ. For the
holy Ghost well nigh 1600 years ago says, It was the ends of the world 1.
Cor. 10.11. the last days, Heb. 1.1. yea the last hour, 1. Ioh. 2.18. and
therefore we must needs be now in the last minute of the last hour, our
hourglasse being almost out. Wherefore let them that be wise consider, whether
the Pope in setting that term of 5000 years of Christ, show not himself and
his to be of the number of those (...), mockers, 2 Pet. 3.
which Peter prophesied should come in the last days, and say, where is the
promise of his coming etc. But let us, comparing the words and warninges of
our Savior Christ and his Apostles, with the term of times here set down,
perceiving the houreglasse to be almost run out, and seeing all these
things, know that he is near, even at the doors: Math. 24.23. and because
we know not when the time will be; Let us take heed, watch, and pray, Mark.
13.33. making our selves ready, and ever waiting with all attendance to be
caught up in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air, 1 Thessalonians. 3.17. who
has said, Revel. 22.20. Surely I will come quickly. Yea come Lord Jesus. Amen.

A Table coupling the years of the Kings of Judah with the Kings of Israel,
and them both with the years of the world: taken out of the books of Kings
and Chronicles, wherein the beginninges of their reigns are certainly
recorded, and also some middle years compared together, as here is represented
to the eye.
Juda. World. Israel. REhoboam the son of Solomon succeeded his father: but
at his Caronation, the 10 Tribes revolted from him, and so he reigned over the
tribe of Judah only, 1. Reg. 12.16.17.20. the space of 17 years. 1. reg. 14.21.
Rehoboam 3025 1 Jeroboam Jeroboam the son of Nebat was proclaimed king of
Israel by the 10 tribes: he reigned 22. years. 1. Reg. 12. and 14.20.

The 15. day of this eight month Jeroboam ordained the solemn feast of his
Golden Calves, ca. 12.32. which was as solemnly kept and celebrated by the
Israelites verse. 30. Here began the Iniquity of Israel, Ibidem: and Ezech.
4.


a 2 2 3026 17 17 3041 18 19 Abijam the son of Rehoboam began his reign in
Ieroboams 18. year: and reigned three years, 1. Reg. 15.1.2.
Abijam 1 3042 20 2 3043 21 3 3044 1 Nadab Nadab the son of Jeroboam began his
reign (his father being alive) in the second year of Asa. and reigned two
years, 1. Reg. 15.25.
Asa the son of Abijam began in Ieroboams 20. year: and reigned 41 years 1.
Reg. 15.9.10.
Asa 1 22 2 2 3045 Baasha Baasha the son of Ahijah of the house of Issachar
conspired against Nadab, and killing him, obtained the kingdom. He began in
the third year of Asa and reigned 24. year. 1. Reg. 15.27.28.33.
3 3046 2 4 3047 24 20 3069 1 Ela Elah the son of Baasha began in the 26 of
Asa, and reigned two years. 1. Reg. 16.8.
3070 Iehosaphat the son of Asa began in Achabs 4 year: and reigned 25 years
1. Reg. 22.41.
27 2 3081 1 Zimri: Omri: and Tibni Zimri Captain of half Elahs Chariots, slew
Elah in the 27 year of Asa. He reigned but 7 days. For Omri, General of the
host, being the same day proclaimed king in the Camp, subdued him in 7 days.
Tibni was proclaimed king by another side against Omri. But he died in the 31
year of Asa: and so Omri reigned alone. Jn the third year of his sole reign
he finished Samaria and removed the Court thither, so he reigned 6 years at
Tirza, and 6 at Samaria, in all 12. 1. Reg. 16.

Achab the son of Omri began in the 38 year of Asa, and reigned 22 years 1.
Reg. 16.29.

Achab going the war against the king of Assyria, left his son Ahazia
viceroy at home: who began in Iehosaphats 17 year, and reigned 2 years. 1.
reg. 22.51. Ahaziah died in the beginning of his 2 year. whom his brother
Iehoram succeeded in Iehosaphats 18 year 2. Reg. 3.1. that is the second year
of Iehoram of Judah, 2. Reg. 1.17. He reigned 12 years. For his father was
slain in that war.


38 3082 12 Jn his 17 year he with Achab went to war against the King of
Assyria, leaving his son Iehoram as Viceroy in his stead at home. But
returning safe out of the war, he received the kingdom again, till the
third year of Iehoram king of Israel: wherein Iehosaphat at the request of
Iehoram going to war against Moab, placed his son Iehoram as viceroy
again: and never after displaced him. Here began Iehorams reign of 8 years:
viz. 4 with his father, and 4 alone. 2. Reg. 8.16.
39 1 Achab 3083 2 40 3 3084 41 4 Iehosaphat 1 3099 19 3100 16 20 1 17 1 Ahaziah
1 Iehora^ 3101 21 2 18 2 3102 1 Iehoram Iehora^ 1 3106 5 7 3112 11 Ahaziah was
made viceroy by reason of his fathers disease in his bowels. 2. Reg. 9.20. His
Father died in the beginning of his 8 year: and so Ahaziah was proclaimed
absolute king in the 12 year of Iehoram of Israel, 2. Reg. 8.25. and anon
after was slain by Iehu.
Ahaziah viceroy. 3113 12 8 Iehu Iehu the son of Iehosaphat the son of
Nimsi, being anointed king of Israel, slew Iehoram king of Jsrael and Ahaziah
king of Judah: 2. Reg. 9.6.24.27. He reigned 28 years. Cap. 10.36.
Ahaziah Athaliah destroying all the rest of the blood royal (save Ioash, that
was hid from he^) reigned after her son 6 years. 2. Reg. 11.3.
Athalia 1 3118 6 6 Ioash the son of Ahaziah began at the solemn feast Easter a
little before Iehues 7 began: for his 23 was begun, before Iehues 28 was
ended. He reigned 40 years, Cap. 12.2.
Ioash 1 3119 7 2 3120 8 22 3140 28 23 3141 1 Iehoachaz Iehoachaz the son of
Iehu began in the 23 year of Ioash: and reigned 17 years, 2. Reg. 13.1.2.

Ioash the son of Iehoachaz was made viceroy of Israel because of the war,
which the king of Syria made against them. 2. Reg. 13.10. whereof he was the
deliverer, verse. 5. and 25. he began in the 37 year of Ioash king of Judah: and
reigned viceroy and absolute king 16. years.


37 3155 15.1 Ioash 1 38 3156 Amaziah the son of Ioash, was made viceroy of
Judah, because of the war, which Chazael king of Syria made against Judah.

2. Reg. 12.17. and 14.1. He began in the 2 year of Ioash of Israel, and
reigned viceroy and absolute king 29 years.


Amaziah 16.2 15 3170 16 1 Jeroboam Jeroboam the son of Ioash began in the 15
year of Amaziah: and reigned 41 years. 2. Reg. 14.23.
19 3171 29 3184 15 Here is a vacancie or Interregnum of 11. years in Judah.
3185 16 3196 27 Vzziah, al^as Azariah the son of Amaziah, began in Ieroboams
27 year, and reigned 52 years. 2. Reg. 15.1.
Vzziah 1 3210 41 15 3211 51 Here is a vacancie or Interregnum almost of 23
years in Israel.
16 3233 38 3234 1 Zacharias Zacharias the son of Jeroboam began in the end
of the 38. year of Vzziah, and reigned 6. months.
39 Sallum Sallum killed Zacharias and reigned one month in Vzziahs 39. year.
2. Reg. 15.8.13.
3235 1 Menahem. Menahem killed Sallum in the very end of Vzziahs 39. year:
and reigned 10. years. verse. 17.
40 3245 50 1 Pekahiah Pekahiah the son of Menahem began in the 50 year of
Vzziah, and reigned 2. years. 2. Reg. 15.23.
3246 51 2 3247 52 The first Olympiad Game was kept and celebrated by Iphitus,
at the full moon of Hecato^baeon, that is the first month of the Athenians,
about the summer Solstice, and hence the Computation of Iphitus and of the
Olympiades are to be reckoned.
1 Pekah Pekah the son of Remaliah kill ng Pekahiah began in the 52. year of
Vzziah, and reigned 20 years. 2. Reg. 15.27.

In his days Tiglath Pileser king of Assyria, took from him diverse towns
and carried away the tribes of Ruben, Gad, half the tribe of Menasses, all
Galilie, and the whole tribe of Naphthalie captive into Assyria. 2. Reg. 15.29.
1. Chron. 5.26.


Iotham the son of Vzziah began a little before the beginning of Pekahs
second year: for Iothams 20 was begun before Pekahs 20 were ended; but Pekahs
second was Iothams first: he reigned 16 years. 2. Reg. 15.32.
Iotha^ 1 3248 2 16 3263 17 Achaz the son of Iotham began in the 17. year of
Pekah, and reigned 16. years. 2. Reg. 16.1.
Achaz 1 3264 18 2 18 3265 16 3 19 3266 20 4 20 3267 1 Hoseas Hoseas the son
of Elah, killing Pekah, began in Iothams 20. year, 2. Reg. 15.30. He means
Achaz 4. year, which would have been Iothams 20, had he lived so long: yet
he uses his Computation being dead because he had made no mention of Achaz
before.
5 3274 12 8 Salmaneser king of Assyria took a voyage against Hoseas, made him
his vassal to hold that kingdom of him in Fee and for tribute: in the 12 year
of Achaz. Here began a new style and Computation of Hoseas, which afterward is
used. 2. Reg. ^7.1.
3275 1 Hoseas 13 Merodac Baladan the son of Baladan taking the oppotunitie
of Salmanesers absence and business in the great wars of Syria and Samaria,
revolted from him, and proclaimed himself king of Babylon. From this first
king and first beginning of the kingdom of Babylon, Ptolomie takes the Epoche
and mark of his era and Computation, naming him Nabonassar.
3276 2 14 3277 15 3 Ezechias began in the third year of Hoseas tributarie
reign a little before the feast of Easter: and reigned 29 years. 2. Reg. 18
1.2. He rebelled against the king of Assyria, denying the tribute which Achaz
undertook, 2. Reg. 16.7. entering into league with the new king of Babylon,
as it seems by the great kindness between them afterward, Merodac sending
ambassadors with presents to him, and Ezechias showing them all his treasure,
that they might see what forces he could make against the common enemy, the
king of Assyria.
Ezechias 3278 4 16 2 3279 5 Hoseas encouraged by the example and good success
of Merodac king of Babylon, and Ezechias king of Judah, revolted from Salmaneser
and entered into league with So king of Egypt, 2. Reg. 17.4.
3 3280 4 3281 6 Salmaneser makes his second voyage against Hoseas
7 Samaria besieged three years. 2. Reg. 18.9.
5 3282 8 6 3283 9 Samaria taken and Israel carried captive into Assyria in the
6 year of Ezechias, and the 9 of Hoseas. verse. 10.


Here ended the kingdom of Israel, which had continued 259 years, to this
year of the world 3283: add 23 more of Ezechias, 55 of Manasses, 2 of Amon,
31 of Josias, and you come to the year of the world 3394: the next year is
Iehoiakims first, as here follows.

Iehoiakim was made king of Judah by Pharao Neco king of Egypt: to hold it of
him for tribute: he reigned 11 years. 2. Reg. 24.1. in the beginning of his 11
year he was taken by Nabuchodonosor.
1 Iehoiakim 3395 2 3396 3 3397 Nabuchodonosor the father being sick,
Nabuchodonosor the great was made viceroy of Babylon, and went with great
forces against the king of Egypt and other rebels, which had revolted from
him: in which voyage he besieged Jerusalem and made Iehoiakim to yield, and
become his vassal and tributarie, 2. Reg. 24.3. Dan. 1.2.3. and gave the army
of the king of Egypt a great overthrow at Carshemish Jer. 46.2. at this
making of Nabuchodonosor viceroy in his fathers life time, Daniel, Ptolomie,
and Metasthenes begin his reign: that is in Iehoiakims third year, by which
Computation he reigned 45 years.
4 3398 1 Nabuchodonosor Nabuchodonosor the father being dead, Nabuchodonosor
the great was made absolute King and Monarke of the whole Empire Beros. in
Joseph. li. 10. ca. 10. where Jeremy, the books of Kings and Chronicles, and
Josephus begin his reign of 43 years complete, besides the odd months. He
began in Iehoiakims 4 year, Ier. 25.1 with the beginning of the 7 month of
the Chaldaeans called Phamenoth: which began about the middle of Thamus the 4
month of the Hebrews.
5 3399 2 10 3404 7 11 3405 Iehoiacin reigned three months and 10 days: which
began in Nabuchodonosors 7, and ended in his 8.2. Reg. 24.10.11.12. 2. Chro.
26.10. Ier. 52.28.
Iehoiacin 8 Zedekiah began his reign in Nabuchodonosors 8 year: in the 6 month
of the usual year of the Hebrews 2. Reg. 24.18. 2. Chron. 36.11. Ier. 52.1.
Zedekiah 1 3406 2 9 3407 3 10 3413 9 16 Jerusalem was besieged by
Nabuchodonosor in the 10. day of the 10. month in Zedechiahs 9. year, 2 Reg.
25.1.
a 3414 17 The famine began to be extreme in the City.
10 3415 11 18 3416 The 9. day of the fourth month in Zedechiahs 11. year,
Jerusalem was taken ver. 6. and Ier. 52.6. which was in Nabuchodonosors 18.
year. Ier. 52.29.
19 The 7. day of the fifth month the temple and City was burnt: which was in
Nabuchodonosors 19. year, 2. Reg. 25.11. and the very end and expiring of
Zedechias 11. year. Ier. 1.3.


(...).

