A comfortable treatise upon the latter part of the fourth chapter of the
first Epistle of Saint PETER, from the twelfe verse to the end. By O. PIGGE.

1. Cor. 49. I think that God has set forth us the last Apostles, as men
appointed to death: for we are made a gasing stock unto the world and to
Angels, and to men. 1. Peter. 4. 15. Let none of you suffer as a murderer, or
as a thief, or an evil doer, or as a busibodie in other men's matters. Seen
and allowed.

AT LONDON. Printed by Robert Walde-graue, fot John Harison the younger, and
Thomas Man. 1582.

TO THE RELIGIOUS AND VERY worshipful knights, Sir ROBERT IERMYN of
Rushbrooke, and Sir JOHN HEIGHAM of Baroe, in the county of Suffolk: Grace
and peace be multiplied from God our heavenly Father, and from our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ.
YOUR worships remember, that at the beginning of the last new year, I
presented to you in wrighting, that which the Lord a little before, had given
me to speak, in two short Sermons at BURI^, adding not much to that which was
then uttered, as the diligent hearer of me can testify. The reason of my so
doing I alleged (as the truth was:) that I might have somevvhat (according to
the manner of that time) wherewith to testify the good affection which of
duty I owe unto you both: as well for the manifold blessings, which the church
of God and the common wealth in these parts of Suffolk, enjoys by your
means: as for your care for my particular safety, and for the great comfort
which by you, from time to time, I have had sithence my coming into this
country. The Lord register them in his book, that they may come into your
good accounts in the day of his son. And because it pleased you then, to give
such liking of the treatise, that both of you desired to retain the coppie,
and requested the same at my hands, vvherof also I made promise: the best way
for the performance of this, I supposed was the putting of it in print: which
I was the rather contented to do, because the matter delivered in it, being
neces^arie to be taught and believed, I hoped might be profitable and
comfortable to others: which also was the judgment of some godly and
learned men that read it over. My purpose when I preached of the text, was to
stir up my self and the hearers, to bear patiently, comfortablie, and
profitablie al afflictions that might fall out for a good conscience sake: my
purpose in sending it a broad, and in making it more common to the church of
God, is the same. The doctrine is necessary to prepare us for those times of
trouble, which the abusing of our peace, the contempt of the gospel, the evil
handling of the ministers, and the infinite abominations of the land, have
most justly deserved. according also as we have these many years been
warned and threatened, not only by our prophets and teachers, but also by
fearefnll signs in heaven and earth, that fortesl unto us further evils,
unless in time from the highest to the lowest we repent, take a better
course, and turn from our disobedience. Yea, in respect of the time present,
this argument is not altogether unnecessary: for although we have just cause
daily upon our knees, to praise God for her majesty, the most honorable of her
counsel, and the rest of the gouerners in the Church and common wealth: by
whose gracious means we have good laws established and executed, for the
liberty of true religion, and for the comfort and encouragement of such as
mean well: yet we see how in every place where the word is taught: cold
protestants, earthly minded men, papists and Athiests, seek and devise all
possible means they can, to hinder the course of the gospel, and to disquiet
the preachers and professors, which oppose them selves against their
corruptions, and refuse to join with them in their disorders. A matter too to
usual in these evil days, as the faithful servants of God know, and in many
places find true by miserable experience If the preachers in any town be
careful to do their duty, what quarrelles do wicked men pick, to stop their
mouths, weary them, and to drive them away? and if any of the flock take part
with their teachers, and profess obedience to the truth, they want no evil
words, frovvning looks, and hard practices against them, from popish,
vvorldly, and irreligious men. The practices of our country of Suffolk, (to
let pas^e other parts of the land) witness this to be true, and cry alowde for
vengeance in the ears of the Lord of hosts, as your worships very well
know. We have many godly, learned, wise, faithful, and painful pastors, I
suppose that diverse Counties of the Realm being put together, can scarce
afforde so great a numbe^. They teach the truth of God, with all manner so
dutifulnes and holy loialty to her majesty and the state, they be careful to
live well to the vttermoste of their power: and the Lord be thanked, that
has given them some good measnre of grace, in that behalf. They lack not
countenance, comfort, and relief, from the honorable and worshipful in the
commission of peace for the shire, so far as they may with a good
conscience, and according to the laws of our most gracious sovereign. We
praise God therefore, and think our selves bound to pray daily for you all.
But I pray you, what impes has Satan sturred up amongst us, almost in every
Town where the word is preached, to hinder this work of the Lord? has
there been any way unattempted, to shake some of the preachers, and in them,
no dout all the rest? They which seem to make any account of the teachers, and
to profess more holiness then others, (though alas not so much as they should
do) escape not the vennom of poisoned tongues. The pore people here and there
in the country, that be more careful then the rest, to resort to sermons, to
hear the word, learn their duty, and with a good conscience to discharge
such duties as by oath, are laid upon them, be not without their crosses. Some
(by the malice of naughty insufficient ministers, and other vntovvarde men), to
redeem peace, glad to leave the town where they dvvelled: Others frovvned
upon, for doing otherwise, then their superstitious landlordes do, and would
have them: Others maliced for indicting, and complaining of papists and other
wicked men, for not resorting to the church, not coming to the Communion, and
for misusing of the prechers, and some molested one way, and some another. And
this I speak not of any thing done, by any magistrate or governor in the
church or common weal: let no man take me so: but by wicked papists and
godless persons that be scattered abroad in the counrry, as Goats among the
sheep, and darnell among good corn. Who contrary to the laws, peace,
Crown, and dignity of her highness and the kingdom, purpose and practice
mi^chife and violence, sometime covertly, and sometimes openly, against such as
mean most faithfully to God, and their Counrrye, and desire to take that course
in euersy thing, that might be acceptable to him, that shall judge the quick
and the dead. We have good cause to pray continually for the long preservation
of our renouned princes Elizabeth our gracious Mother and N^^sse, under the
shadow of whose wings (as of the Lorde^ anointed) by the means of her good
laws and Lie^etenauntes, in her own court and in the country, there is
relief for all the good people of the land, against such vexations of the
wicked. Otherwise assuredly it should go hard, with them, that of all others
ought most to be made off: because the devil will not cease to stir up
enemies against them. For the instruction and comfort of such as be any way
troubled for well doings, I confess that I labor somvvhat in this little
book. Praying the Christian reader, if he reap any small good thereby, to
give the praise unto God to whom only it is due: and to pray for me, that my
self, (according to my need, either present or to come) may be partaker of the
doctrine and comforts herein mentioned. Concerning your good worships to whom
I am so much beholden: even as openly and to the view of the country, you have
declared your readiness to further me, in my good and lavvfull causes, and (so
much as in you have lie^) to restrain the^ that have soght to vex me unjustly
and intended my hurt: so have I thought my self in duty bound, to give forth
some public testimony of thankfulues to you. In regard whereof, if it may
please you to accept this my pore travel, it is an especial thing that I
desire. I am bold to join you both in one: because the Lord has knit you fast
together, not only by the bond of kindred and perfect friendship: but also in
care of my good estate, and that which is principal, in an holy desire to
further true religion, and to procure the peace, vvelfare, and prosperity of
the prince, and the country where you dwell. The Lord increase in you all his
graces, that being zealous according to knowledge, you may become yet more
glorious instruments for the furthering of his kingdom, and may go forvvard in
the profession of his gospel even unto the end, to his immortal praise, the
sturring up of many other knights and gentlemen, to be of this your christian
order, in the true obedience of Gods word: and to the everlasting salvation of
your souls in the life to come: which graces in like manner I pray him to
power down from heaven, upon the right worshipful the Ladies of both your
houses, upon your children, and all your company for Jesus Christ's sake, our
only and omnipotent Savior. Amen.

At London this sixth day of April. 1582. the day wherein the great and
fearful Earthquake was two years before: a day to be called to our
remembrance, because, of the greatest number, so rare and terrible a thing is
quite forgotten, and so certain a forerunner of other judgments, is not
regarded.

Your worships in the Lord OLIVER PIGGE.

To the Christian Reader, Grace and peace from God the father by Jesus Christ,
sealed by the spirit of adoption, till he have assurance of everlasting life
in him. Amen.
How necessary books of such like arguments, as this, (by the godly labor of
our faithful and painful brother, now published to the profit of many) are, I
need no^ long to stand upon, and to declare: as well in respect of us* that
profess the gospel, in these breathing days, much forgetting our selves,
though we lack not diverse crosses to put us in remembrance, and to awaken us,
as in respect of of our enemies, who of late have more threatened, and
blustered out against us, then in many years before, crying out of persecution
when they suffer not for Christ, or for any his causes: but against him,
laboring themselves to death to overthrow his kingdom, (which though they
burst, they shall never (I am sure) be able to do) and undermining his
ministers most disloyally: whom he has placed in that highest authority, to
execute his own just judgments against them. It is wonder to hear what
complaints they make of persecution and Tyranny, when for their just deserts
they receive the punishment due to their treasons, conspiracies, and
rebellions. They lay us on, and yet they cry out against us, they complain of
persecution, and yet them selves are the persecutours, that set themselves
against the servants of the Lord, in all ages, against his faithful
minnisters and against al professors, and which is most lamentable against the
holy truth of God, yea, against God himself, to whom they owe all duty
and reverence. But alack this is a thing common together with them and all
other heretics, that when they have no truth at all, yet they must pretend
some, and though they can never justify their cause, they must at least
a^^euer it, as though they possessed it, and face us out, to shroud their
idolatrous abominations and curssed corruptions that they maynteine and stand
for, to their utter destruction. There cannot be a Traitor nowadayes executed
according to his demerits, (but favoring their superstition, which indeed is
always joined with treason, to shake the seat of our gracious sovereign,
August. de Donatist. cap. 7. 8.
and to overthrow any state else wheresoever they live) but by and by, they
take him up and make him a martyr. So did the Donatists as Aug^stine
witnesses: to whom we must make the same answer, that he did to them. They
are true martyrs, of whom the Lord says: Blessed are they that suffer
persecution for righteousness sake. They must not su^fer for iniquity, and for
the wicked rending of Christian unity: but they that suffer for righteousness,
they are the true martyrs in deed. If therefore they endure any thing at our
hands, they may thank their own unquiet and hamering heads that like (Moules,
are always heauing in their dark paths to mar the Lords vineyard) and to
overthrow the gracious work of the Gospel, which God will have to proceed,
Maugre their heads, when they have used all their treasonable practices they
can against it. Neither shall the persecution of Agar, (if it may be called a
persecution rather then a correction) be compared to that of David, nor that of
the thieves to our savior Christ's, whom though the suffering made one, yet
the cause did separate. They cry out of persecution, and fo^ste out their
traitorous books like wildfire, that they might set al on fire ^^make a h^rly
burly, and so open some way to their further devised mischief: In their late
book of english persecution.
They allege examples of parti^ular judgments, against particular persons,
sarced with as many untruths, as their books are* no^ with leaves, but almost
with lines: when yet they will not see that if any offense have been committed
on our parts it has been in this that they have been to much borne with. For
we appeal to themselves that have any modesty in them, whether ever prince or
state, where the Gospel only is professed and maintained (as it ought to be)
by the laws of the land, did ever suffer or bear so much with them, as our
gracious prince and state has done, no doubt of a good purpose to win them,
and to reclaim them to the truth howsoever now they may learn at length by
experi^nce to take better heed of them, seeing they are incorrigible and hate
to be reformed. How long did she keep^ her royal sword within her scabbard,
untouched with any blood? Surely till they had like (if God of his gracious
goodness had not preserved her majesty) to have set her both beside seat,
swotd, scepter and all: and if their devilish practices could have taken place
by rebellion at home, or treason abroad, to laid her full low, and to have
brought us again under the^r cruel and unsupportable yoke of their Egyptiacall
bondage: From the which, the Lord for his mercy sake deliver us. If they count
it therefore any persecution, it is a just persecution against the enemies of
God, against the enemies of our state and Country. It is also done in love, to
draw them from iniquity, to reduce them from error, and for the safeguard of
the whole pollitique body. I will not speak of their persecutions, and
horrible butcheries from time to time: God shall give better opportunity one
day and in another place. But I beseech thee (good Christian reader) mark
what is delivered concerning persecution in this book, then thou shall both^
learn what it is, and upon whose backs it is like to light, if they will be
like him who is entered by the same gate before us. Neither let us be
discouraged, though it be in deed our portion. For it shall be a token unto us of
our salvation, but unto them who are persecuters of perdition and destruction.
The reason is because Christ the Captain and finisher of our battle is with
us, and has troade the pathe before us, with whom as long as we suffer,
let the yssues be never so hard, we can not quail nor perish. He has
forevvarned us, to look for them. They come not by chance but by his
appointment. They are for our good and the cause being just and Gods, according
to his will and for the holding out of his excellent glory, though^ we d^e
for it we shall be most happy. Our adversaries understand not th^s, and
therefore they smite they care not where nor whom, but a time shall come, they
shall see whom they have smitten, and tremble before him, for fear of his
judgments. Be therefore of good comfort, and rejoice, O all the Saints of God,
though we pass through this wretched vale, in contempt and misery, in heaviness,
and sorrow with mourning and tears, with lack of liberty, and commodity, that
many usurpers enjoy: yet a day shall come of an abundant harvest where we
shall sit upon the seats of glory and be satisfied with it, when we shall be
crowned with immortality, and shall see God, even as he is. The troubles are
short, though they be sharp, and though they be many, yet they are light, in
comparison of that eternal weight of glory. And you that are persecuters,
whom the Lord has not given utterly over. Take heed whom you strike. Think
not to overcome him whose power is infinite. God will reign in despite of his
enemies in the midst of them. Look upon your old predecessors what became
of them. Where is Decius and Dioclesian, where is Valerius, Maximinianus and
Maximius, where is Lucius, Iulianus and Aurelius? But you will say: these were
ethnikes and persecuted Christians, surely so do you. You are christians in
name, but you deny the power thereof. You boast of the faith of your
ancestors, but you deny the faith of Christ. You say you vvoulde not have
slain the prophets, but your hands have been the first upon those whom
God has styrred up and sent amongste you? Are you not ashamed to boaste of
the Truethe, and yet to to persecute poor Christians for it? You complayn of
our hard laws, of the severity of the punishment of treason, of the iniquity
of our ministers, of the hard estate of your falsenamed Catholics that live
amongst us: of their infamye after their death, of the contumelies they suffer
in their life, yea when they are taken at their Mass how they are brought
forth in their Pageant apparel, and what revel is kept with your breaden
Idol: ye complain of our prisons, and show the hardness of our Iaylors, at
London, at York and in other places. Mystresse Tomson. Master Dimock and
others are still in your books, as though they had received great wrongs Thus
you kick and flyng as untamed heifers ye care not where, sparing neither noble
nor unnoble, that might once by any occurrent, come to your intelligence: but
all this while you speak not a word, to the proore of it, vvhereupon the proof
lies. For in respect of the cause, yours is false and ours true, ours the
cause of Christ and yours the cause of Antichriste, we suffer for religion
and you for treason. Again there is no comparison betwixt that pun^shment
laid upon you, for your just offenses, and our persecution, laid upon us not
for our sins, but for righteousness sake. If we have laid a finger upon you,
you have laid upon us an intolerable clog. If we have scourged you with
father^y rods for amendment:, you have vvhipped us with scorpions, utterly
to destroy us: if we have derided your superst^tion and brought out your
priests, as they were playing their pageants, that the people might vvonder at
their follies: you have made us spectacles (as much as lay in you) both to men
and angels, and lastly we have with the truth, pursued you, to bring you to
the truth, and so to God, but you with falsehoode have persecuted us to bring
us from the truth to error, and so to the Devil. You talk of orderly
proceeding with us, that we were tried in time past by order of Justice, and
disputed vvithall, that we might if we vvoulde, see our own weakness etc
I pray you in whose Courts has it been most found, either in yours, where
all justice was perverted, or in ours, where the truth of Gods word
guidingal; they have been taught the fear of God, and to do as they would
be done to: Where has been greater murders, by disordered dealings then
amongst you, without all color of law and justice, killing them by whole
multitudes, and sometimes some of your own profession for company, that you
might enjoy their riches? where has private men been more armed, to make
dispatch of princes that might stand in your way, then amongst your selves?
Your pope dispensing with the sins either they had already, or should
afterward commit: Example by that Caitife, that upon his pardon vvoulde
have slain the worthy Prince of Orange, had not God miraculously delivered
him? to how many such treasons, by poisoning and killing have sundry been
sturred up without all pittye amongst you? Surely it is no marvel, that you
should now plead your innocence, when all the world may know your
wicked and traitorous trecheries, that will not willingly shut their eyes.
But it may be, You think by some popish vvitchery, to go in uisible, by
having some of the Popes trumpery about you. But you deceive your selves, and
so does he whom you serve. Therefore repent, and turn to him, who is able to
save your souls, Return to Jesus Christ that high pastor, that suffering
for truth with him, you may likewise be glorified with him, otherwise
howsoever you byte his heel with the Serpent, he will bruise your head and
in the end triumph over you. The Lord Jesus sanctify all that are his, even
thoroughout both body, soul, and spirit, that we may be kept blameless
unto his holy coming. Amen. Amen. the 27. day of this third month.

Thine assured in Christ John Field.

1. Pet. 4. 12. Dearly beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery
trial, which is among you, as though some strange thing were come unto you.
IT appears by the discourse of this epistle, that ye Christians to whom
Peter wrote, were at that time in great persecution: whereupon, after other
things handled before in this text, he comes to give them instructions
touching this matter, how they should patiently ^eare the cross, and
comfortably behave themselves in the midst of their greatest afflictions. A
point of doctrine not unnecessary for us at this time. For although by the
great mercy of God, it fares not with us, as it did with the churches then:
Because we live under a gracious prince that does cherish and maintain the
truth. Yet because our sins: be such, as do justly diserue the taking away
of he^ royal majesty, and the restraint of pure religion, I see no reason why
the teachers should be charged not to take a good course in preparing the
people before hand to bear such troubles, whenever they should come, no more
then our savior Christ was to be challenged. For telling his disciples so often
of his and their own persecutions before they came, and arming of them against
the same. It is the practice of well ordered common wealths, in the time of
peace to teach their people the feats of war. And each man that has any
care of himself and his country, when all things are most quiet, does
nevertheless provide such things in a readiness, as may stand him in steed in
y^ time of trouble. Even so is it necessary, that in the peace of the gospel,
we^ be instructed to bear afflictions for the sa^e: and when the truth has
greatest liberty, we should continually look for persecution, and therefore,
by the precepts and comforts of the word, be always prepared to abide
whatsoever may fall out. Which considerations have moved me at this present, to
speak unto you out of this scripture.

Think it not strange concerning the fiery trial: In this first verse, he
wills the Christians, not to marvel at the persecution of the church (which
he calls by the name of fiery trial) as though some strange thing had
happened. The last words seem to be set down as a reason to persuade that
which he requires. As though he should have said on this wis: the trouble and
affliction of the church or any member thereof, is no strange thing, and
therefore no reason why you should marvel at it. For we marvel at such things
only, as do seldom come to p^sse, and after an extraordinary manner: But if
any thing come to pass often and ordinarily, that we are not wont to marvel
at, although in it self it be never so wonderful. If we should see a horse
fly in the air: if we should see great snowes in the mids of summer: or a
plentiful harvest in the mids of winter: behold just occasions to make us
wonder, because these things seldom or never fall out, and the course of
nature, the order set down by God himself should be inuerted. But to see a
horse run apace upon the ground, to see deep ^snowes in the midst of
winter, and harvest in August or September, does never cause wonder^ng or
astonishment, although in deed they be most marvelous works of the Lord. Even
so persecutions and afflictions for righteousness sake, being the ordinarye
portion which from time to time the saints of God have received in this world,
there is no more cause why we should be amazed or astonished at that whenever
generally or particularly it falls out, then at the snow in the winter, or
harvest in the summer. If we look unto the beginning, we shall see that Cain
persecuted his own brother Abel: afterward Ismael Isaac, Esau Jacob. And when
ye visible church began to be a great people (I mean ye Jews:) the Egyptians
first, and then all the nations round about, ben^ their force against them.
Among the Jews hypocrites, and naughty persons, of the kings, priests*
prophets, and people failed not to hold on the same course, in offering all
manner of cruelty, to such as truly feared the Lord, and zealously executed
the functions in them committed, as the histories of the scripture do plainly
witness. If we look into the enterteinment of our savior Christ and his
apostles in their time, it shall appear to have been nothing better th^n the
former. And that the like condition has been upon the church ever sithence, it
is known to such as have read the stories. In so much as that complaint is
most true, which she makes in the psalm. They have often times afflicted me
from my youth up: Psa. 129. ^.
that is to say, ever sithence I had any being upon the earth, mine enemies
have not ceased to afflict me, and as it were to plowe deep furrows upon my
back. You see then what we have here to learn in the first place, namely not
to be troubled at the persecutions which may happen to our selves, or any other
the members of Christ, For the profession of his truth and doing of our duty,
as though some strange thing were come to pass, seeing it is the ordinary
course, which the wicked world (whose works are naught) taking their direction
from their grandfather Caine, has from time to time practiced against the
church, and the ordinary way, by the which the Lord from age to age, has lead
all his children: to the verifiyng of that, which Paul and Barnabas preached
wheresoever they came: Act. 14 22.
Through many afflictions we must enter into the kingdom of God.

And this being so, It behooves us, when we first join our selves to the
church of God, and enter into the profession of his truth, with purpose to
lead our lives according thereunto: to sit us down, according to the
counsel of our savior Christ and to make our account on this wise. Luk 14. 27.
28. 31. 32.
Surely I see that al flesh is grass, and al things under the sun are but
vanity. The time will come when I must dye, and God has appointed a day
wherein he will judge all the world. Act. 17. 31.
He has prepared life and blessedness for them that fear him, and vengeance
for them that knows him not, nor obey his gospel. 2. These. 1. 8.
I perceive therefore it is necessary, that I care for the life to come, and
provide for the safety of my soul after death. If I take the course of the
world, I run to eternal destruction, If I embrace the word the only way unto
heaven and eternal life, I must make my full reckoning of that which all the
faithful professors thereof have tasted before me, I must prepare my back for
stripes, I must look to be evil spoken of, iested upon, scorned at, to lose
the favor of those that be mighty, to be cast in prison, lose my goods, yea
and my life also. For I see this is the estate of the true servants of God in
this world. He that shall thus debate the matter with him self, and with an
heart careful of his own salvation call upon God for his direction, will soon
be resolved with Moses, Heb. 11. 25.
to choose rather afflictitions with the people of God, then to enjoy the
pleasures of si^ne here for a short time. Moreover when storms arise, the
winds b^ow, and the floods bear upon his house: yt is, when troubles and
persecutions come, he shall be able to bear them more patiently, and with
greater comfort, since in t^ueth he may say, I thought so: Lo, it is come to
pass as I looked for long since. It is a common saying: evils that be thought
upon before do hurt less when they come. Then they pearce us deeply when
they come upon us at unawares, and when we never before suspected any such
matter. Math. 16. 24.
Therefore to couclude this point, since the cross is in: seperably joined to
the profession of the truth, let him that will stand with comfort in the time
of his trial, before hand make his reckoning and look for no better. It
follows in the text.

Concerning the fiery trial, or trial by fire, the words do bear either.
Now the apostle does on this wise, term the persecutions of Gods children.
Vers^. 7.
According as he does before in the first chapter. The speech is metaphorical
or borrowed, signifying thus much: As fire tries the pure gold, from that
which is counterfeit and naught, fining it, and moreover burns, wastes and
sun dreth yt dross and rust from yt which is good, so troubles and afflictions
for Christ's sake, do discern the faithful Christian from the hypocrite, and
time seruer, and wastes away the corruption of sin that creeps and
steals in upon the faithful in their peace and prosperity, making them more
pure and fine to the Lord. For the first, there lurketh so great self love and
hypocrisy in us, and there are so many deceitful corners in our hearts, that
it is a meruelious hard matter, to be undoubtedly persuaded in our consciences
of our integrity and uprightness to the Lord and his truth, while the
profession thereof is commanded by Princes, and has countenance, liberty, and
profit waiting upon it. For then how earnest soever we seem to be,
peradventure we love our selves, and not the Lord, and it is our own
estimation and preferment yt we seek, and not the holding forth of the truth
with a pure conscience. Then in deed we know our selves, when we have been
tried. And if in the midst of al temptations, we continue without fainting
and turning back, we may be bold of our obedience yt it is good, yt we be such
as have built our house upon ye rock, Mat. 7. 24. 25.
and yt neither height nor depth, Romans 8. 38. 39.
principalities nor power, life nor death, things present or things to come,
shall be able to separate us from the love of God. While our savior Christ was
at liberty, Peter thought himself marvelous stout, Mat. 26. 33.
he affirmed very confidently, Ioh. 18. 10.
yt he would not shrink from his master, although all the rest should run
away: yea when the officers came to attach him, he drew out his sword, and
smote of a servant of the high priest his ear. But when ye matter came to ye
pinch in deed, we know how all his courage was quailed, and the very speech
of a damsel caused him to abjure the savior of ye world, to who^ he had
before so earnestly vowed him self. By him we may learn to suspect our
selves, and our own weakness, and not to imagine that we be without all
fear of reuolting, Luke 8. 13
because in the liberty and peace of the gospel we make pro^ession of the
same. The sandye ground nourishes his blade, so long as the weather
continues seasonable and calm, which nevertheless in hot and scorching
wether, withers and is unprofitable. That only we approve for good ground
indeed, which in the extremity of heat, we have seen bring forth the ears
with full corn. Even so, it is nothing in these days to pro^esse the true
religion, the same being commanded by the laws, and countenanced by so many
good means: but if for our sins God should take away the prince, if popery
should be established again, or a mingle ma^gle of religion permitted as in
France: then y^ true and faithful professors should be easily discerned from the
hypocrit and dissemvler. When all the enemies of David were subdued round
about, and the whole kingdom of Judah approved him for their only and true
sovereign, there was no great trial of the fidelity of his subjects But when
Sheba the son of Bichri blew the Trumpet and said, 1. Sam. 20. 1. 2
we have no part in David, neither have we inheritance in the son of Ishai,
every man to his tents O Israel. And this drew away great numbers of the people
to make an insurrection: Then such as in the midst of those rebels by word or
practice, testified their subjection to David with the hazard of their estate,
gave undoubted testimonies of their fidelity. We can not say for a truth, that
al such be faithful to her majesty, which in this her great prosperity
(wherein no enemy dare quech) seems so to be: they which in the days of
Westmerland and Nort humberlaud, stood unto her in those parts of the North
against their Lords to their danger, were faithful in deed, and the land
might make a good reckoning of the^, in any other the like occasion. As
therefore by such means as these, loyal and true hearted subjects to their
prince be tried: so when troubles and persecutions arise for the word, they
which be sincere and upright in the fear of the Lord, be discerned from the
counterfeite, which in their profession ^aue sought nothing but their
advantage and ease. And then in deed we have put the church of God and our
own consciences out of al doubt concerning our entegritye, when in the midst
of afflictions for the gospel sake, we have continued with boldness to profess
the same. We see therefore yt it is not without good cause, why persecutions be
called a fiery trial. Now, even this should teach us, patiently and comfortably
to endure al manner of crosses, for the truth and a good conscience, since yt
our holding out in them, is a certain proof yt our faith is good and our
obedience such as will go for paime^t before the Lord. From whence also we may
undoubtedly persuade our selves, that we shall not faint when the like or
greater dangers fall out. When we have a case in law for any lands yt we
claim, we are glad to have our evidences examined, whether they be good or no,
before we come to the pinch: and if we have gold lie by us, yt we occupy not,
we are content to have it tried before hand, yt we may be sure it will be
current, whenever occasion falls out to use it. Why then be we not glad, of
disgracings, railings, complaints, loss of favor, imprisonment, and such
like, when they come unto us for doing of our duty and righteousness sake?
seeing yt by our suffering of them, the Lord prepares us for greater matters,
and our patience in these is as it were an earnest unto us, that we shall
stand when we be tried to the uttermost. Therefore I conclude this part, Iac.
1. 2. 3. 4.
with that of S. James: count it for great joy (my brethren) when you fall into
many tentations: knowing yt the trial of your faith brings forth patience.
And let patience have her perfect work, yt you may be perfect and entire
lacking nothing.

The second effect of persecutions, whereupon they be compared to a fiery
trial, I said was this. As fire dries up al manner of dross in the good
gold, so they dry up many corruptions, that creep upon the godly, in the time
of their liberty and peace. For thus it fares with the best of Gods children,
when they be a little quiet, and the world seems to smile upon them, if they
break not out, as resty and pampred horses, to open outrage and disorder, yet
at the least there steals upon them much vanity, worldlines, delight in things
earthly, and negligence (if not contempt) of things heavenly. Whereupon ye love
of the word does decrease in them, and they become not so careful and zealouse
of the honor of God as they were before. The examples of Joseph, Genesis 41. 51.
David, and Ezechias, 2 Samuel 11.
may serve to prove the truth of this. Isa. 39.
The Lord seeing the tickle disposition that is in all men to this unruliness,
was wont to meet with the same before hand with mani^olde Crosses, even in
such men as he made especial account of. For no doubt this was one principal
end, of the infinite turmoyles, that Abraham and Jacob were encombred with,
that so they might be brought to despise the earth which is replenished with
so many miseries, seek after eternity, and zealously set them selves to ye
whereunto the Lord did call them. Now as he mercifully and in great wisdom did
on this wise prevent such disordered affections, as were otherwise like to have
postered their hearts: so deals he as graciously with his children in seeking
to reclaim the^ by the like means when they have been overtaken. Whereupon,
beside the inward afflictions of the mind, he often times stirs up against
us, enemies that speak evil of us, and trouble us for well doing, that so he
might fre us from enemies that be more dangerous to our souls. For although
the ignorant and careless, in all the crosses that happen unto them, do only
regard the means and instruments whereby they come, crying out of the injury
of their oppressors, and clearing of them selves as parties unjustly troubled.
Yet it is otherwise with the servants of God, that be wise and understanding,
they look up to the hand of the smiter, Amos. 3 6.
whom they know to be the Lord himself, whom they straight way conclude to
be righteous and so just, 2. Sam. 16. 10.
as he will not punish without cause, and that therefore something is amiss
in them which he would have them to ament: although that be good, commanded
of God, and nothing but their duty for the which they be persecuted by their
adversaries. Whereby it comes to pass, that they examine them selves and
their doings more straightly, and find out many corruptions, which before
were either unknown, or else unregarded, and therefore would have proved very
dangerous to their souls, if they had not thus been rouzed up to consider of
them. Which they do so profit^bly, that in the end they say with David, It is
good for me (O lord) that thou broughtest me low. Psa. 119. 67. 71
For even such troubles cause them to do their duty better, to be marvelous
circumspecie of their ways, that their enemies may have no just matter against
them, and stir up in them a great zeal to prayer, so as they do it more
often and earnestly then before. We ought therefore to be glad, and to thank
the Lord most heartily, whenever it shall please him to purge us on this sort.
Our vessels of silver and gold which in time do gather soil, we desire to
have scoured: and the linen that we use to our tables, we rejoice to have
often washed. And why then do we not take in good part all manner of
persecutions? seeing they be scourgings and washings to our souls, whereby the
Lord minds to make us clean, from some untowardness that is in us. Verily
this is a greater mercy then any man's tongue is able to utter, and the wisdom
of the Lord in this behalf is very wonderful: we be entered into an evil
course some way or other, offensive to the majesty of God, and hurtful unto
our selves, In the mean time God concealeth those disorders of ours from men,
which peradventure would procure our punishmente by their Laws, and
intending to reclayme us, and to bring us to himself again, he sturreth up
some against us, and to our great honor causes some affliction to come unto us
for well doing, that was due unto us for our sin and disobedience. O the
riches of his grace: who is able to conceive it? Certainly the Lord his
retiring of Saul from pursuiug of David, 1. Sam. 23. 27 28.
causing the Pailistines to invade the land, was not so joyful to the wearied
man, as this should be ioifull unto us, when after this manner he stops us
in our evil course, and causes us to retire from that which is not good. But
enough of this fruit of persecutions, and the purpose of God in the same. It
remains that each man in all such troubles stir up his heart, and pray to
God, that he may profit by them as we have heard. It follows.

But rejoice, in as much as you are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when
his glory shall appear, ye may be glad and rejoice. In this verse he requires
more then in the former. There he would have us not to be astonished at our
persecutions for the truth sake: here he says that we must rejoice and be
glad, when any such thing comes unto us. And least he should seem to call
for any thing, without rendering a reason thereof, in this sentence he delivers
two arguments of great force, whereby he labors to persuade the reioy sing
mentioned. The first is drawn from the example of Christ to whose image we
should desire to be conformed, because we were thereunto predestinate: Romans 8.
29.
the next, is from the reward, that we shall have at such time, as Jesus
Christ shall appear, the second time in glory. For the first: his meaning is,
that whenever we be afflicted for righteousness sake, it is no otherwise
with us, then it was with Christ, our Lord, our king, our head and savior
before. Math. 20. 22.
He was baptized with this baptism, Luke 7. 34. and 11. 15.
and he began of this cup unto us. If we be rayled upon, Ioh. 8. 48.
he was charged to be a glutton, a Samaritane, an enemy to Caesar, and to
work by the devil: If men desire to have us out of their companies and
countries: so was he dealt with all by the Gergesenes. Math. 8. 34.
If we be put to our shifts, to fly from place to place for our own safety:
Math. 14. 13.
he was so before us. Ioh. 10. 39..
If some of our friends whom we trust do betray us, so did Judas to our Lord.
If we be arraigned before the indgemente seats of princes, if there, we be
skoffed and mocked at, beaten with rods, and condemned to death: was not this
also the portion of the son of God? If we be thought the worst men upon the
earth, more dangerous and hurtful to the common wealth then any others, we
know that Barrabas was preferred before the Lord of life. This is therefore a
certain truth, that Jesus Christ has gone this way before us. And Cranmer
in those manifold disgracings about his disgrading: ye man whom Bonner scourged
in his garden, and all the martyrs in their torments, were nothing else but his
companions. Now this should be sufficient to comfort us in all our troubles,
and to cause us most joyfully to endure the same. It is an old saying: it is
comfort to the wretched, to have companions in their miseries: how comfortable
then should it be unto us, seeing Jesus Christ took part with us? When Vriah,
2. Sam. 11. 10. 11.
by David's commandment was sent to the court, and by the king himself willed
to go to his wife to his own house to take his ease: he refused it, and chose
rather to sleep at the palace door with the rest of the kings servants. And
being demanded the reason by David of his so doing, he answered that it was
unequal and uncomely for him to be at rest in his bed in the house, when Ioab
his Lord lay in the fields. The valiant and courageous soldier thought it a
matter of delight unto him, to endure hardness with his captein, and the
greatest dishonor that could be, to do otherwise. How much more ought we to
rejoice in all our extremities? seeing in them we do after a sort drink of one
cup with Christ, and as it were draw in one yoke with him. It had been
sufficient to cheer us, if Peter had said as our Lord spoke before in the
gospel of Matthew: Math. 5. 12.
so persecuted they ye prophets which were before you. But when he tells us,
that persecution and affliction was the portion of the son of God, it is an
instruction to patience, and a comfort in trouble, free from all challenge,
exception, and speaking against. If the prince should say unto us, or any
other subject: you must do somewhat for me, which the L. Chanceller, and the
rest of my priuye counsel have done before you, surely the thing being good,
though never so painful, we ought to yield unto it. But if the prince should
say, mine only son and heir, or mine own self have borne this brunt
already: how could we challenge the prince of any hard measure offered unto
us? and how beastly faint hearted, and cowardly should we be to refuse it?
Therefore to end this matter: let us be patient in all our afflictions and
rejoice in the same, seeing therein we be partakers with Jesus Christ the son
of God, and our true sovereign and everlasting king. For as the wood cast into
the bitter waters at Marah, Number. 15. 25.
made them sweet to the children of Israel: so Jesus Christ being thrown into
the sea of afflictions, has made them most sweet to so many as believe in
him. The second reason is the recompense promised unto such, as with Jesus
Chrste suffer afflictions for a good conscience. When his glory shall appear
(says the apostle) then shall you rejoice, and leap for joy: For ye word
seems to signify so much. His meaning is yt the joy of Gods children shall
be perfect then, whereas now by reason of our corruption and mortality, it is
mingled with much heaviness and sorrow. But we must note, that this shall be at
such time, as Christ appears again in his majesty. Which glorious
manifestation of himself, is opposed or set against, that base condition of
his, which he was in here upon the earth, in the sight and judgment of men.
For as he is now in perfect glory, even in respect of his humanity, although
the world neither see it, nor believe it: so when the day comes, wherein the
father has appointed by him to judge the earth, he shall appear most glorious
and excellent as he is, with millions of Angels attending upon him, sitting
upon his throue of majesty, Apoc. 20. 11.
so as from his face, the heaven and earth shall fly away, and all the ungodly
of the world shall run into caves, Apoc. 6. 16.
to hide them, and shall call for mounteines to fall upon them, yt so (if it
were possible) they might not come into his presence, The apostle tells us,
that at that time, we shall lift up our heads and rejoice, Apoc. 7. 17.
all tears being for ever wiped away from our eyes, because after that we
shall never more have any occasion of sorrow. For so we be taught by Sanct
Paul in other places. 2. Tim. 2 11. 12
That if we dye with Christ we shall reign with him, and if we suffer with
him: we shall reign with him: and if we be partakers with him of his shame, we
shall also communicate with him in his glory. Now this reason should be of
great force with us. We see natural men, ver^ well contented to endure some
hardness and pains with the Sons of mortal men, that be of honor and
wealth, during the time of their mynormitye, because when they come to their
lands, they hope for some preferment from them. And to be in great
straightes in a strange Country with the kings son, who would not be
glad for a time? especially having certeynty of their return into their
own Land, and undoubted promise to be preferred then with the prince. Let us
therefore rejoice in the midst of all our tentations, when Jesus Christ shall
restore al things, and come again to declare his authority in iudgeing all
flesh: al our mourning shall be turned into joy, and our shame into honor. The
hope of a most blessed and happy estate at that time, must make us
comfortable in all our troubles, insomuche as in respect of it, they should
seem easy and nothing unto us. Ephe. 6. 17.
And this may be the reason why hope, 1. These. 5. 8.
is compared to an Helmet: because as men having a good Helmette upon their
heads, do not feel any smarte by very great blows given there: so the
hope of eternal life, should cause us not to feel (as it were) the
afflictions of this present. We see the husbandman how he comfort him self
in all his paynfull travel about manuring, tilling, sowing, and weeding his
ground, only with the hope of recompense a good while after in the harvest
time. And the soldier sets light by the cold in winter, the heat in
somner, his lying upon the ground, his hunger, his gross diet, and his
wounds, because he has an eye to the end of the battle, the victory, the
spoil, the praise of his capteyne, and the return into his country with honor.
Now what is all the pelf of this earth, being compared with the kingdom of
God? what is the vic^ory against men, in respect of the triumph against sin
and Satan? and what is the spoil of tents, to the riches of heaven? and what
is the praise of men, to the commendation of of the Lord, saying unto us? O
good and faithful servant enter into the joy of thy master. Math 25. 21.
seeing therefore al these things shall come unto us, if we patiently suffer
afflictions for well doing, there is good reason why we should embrace the
counsel of the Apostle, and in our greatest miseries rejoice our selves in the
hope of that glory that in the world to come shall be powered upon us. It
follows.

If you be railed upon in the name of Christ, etc. By ye name of Christ he
understands the doctrine of Christ, as S. Paul in ye same speech expounds
the meaning of ye holy ghost in another place. 1. Tim. 6. 1.
Where name and doctrine b^ing mentioned, the latter is set down, as the
interpretaion of the first. There is good reason of the speech because as the
name of every thing declares what the thing is, so the doctrine of Christ does
set forth, and as it were painte him out unto us.

Saint Peter here speaks of one particular kind of persecution consisting in
evil and opprobrious words: which although worldly men think no great matter
so long as they proceed not to imprisonment, fire and sword: yet the spirit
of God in this place gives it no better title, agreeing with saint Paul in his
epistle to the Galathians: cap. 4. 29.
whereas it is apparent in ye history that Isaac was but mocked of Ismael. Genesis
21. 9.
If therefore thou will not be counted a persecuter secuter of the church and
servants of God, look well to thy tongue, that it spue forth no taunting nor
reproachful words against the professors of the truth: if thou do, the
sentence against them is penned already, and thou art branded in the cheek,
with the note of a persecuter. And how odious this thing is in the sight of
God, how slenderly soever thou account of it, may appear in the hystory that
we read of in the second book of the Kings: cap. 2. 23. 24.
Two and forty little children were miraculously destrOyed with Bears, for
mocking the Prophet of God, and calling him baldhead: and think thou to
escape vengeance if thou be a rayler upon the servants of God? the
extraordinarye punishment, after so strange a manner, upon young children that
might seem to offend rather of wantonness then upon any set purpose,
declares how the Lord misliketh of the like dealings, by such as be of riper
years, whose fault must needs be ye greter. The instruction is profitable
against the mockers at all times. Now the apostle seems to speak of this
kind of cross, rather then any other, because it does inseperably and always
wait upon the profession of ye gospel: insomuch as in ye gretest peace and
liberty of the church, it is not free from ye same. For even in those kingdoms
where the truth is received by the prince, and established by laws, so as
open tirranie is restrained, yet no man in any calling or condition can walk
uprightly before the Lord, but he offreth himself to hard speeches checks,
taunts, and reproaches. The practice of our own time proves it, wherein
pestelent toungs of professed popish enemies power out their vennom, by giving
ye sound professors of religion and the loyal subjects to her majesty: ye
names of prescisians, puritans, hot of the spirit, family of love, and
disobedient subjects, confounding names, and multiplying their scoffs, not
knowing ye good and faithful protestants, are as far from these heresies as
they are from truth or honesty: seeing therefore it is a thing yt does
ordinarily fall out, ye holy ghost in this place provides well for our
infirmity, in ministering unto us so great comfort against the same. You are
blessed (says Peter) if you be rayled upon for the name of Christ, according
to that speech of our Lord: Blessed shall you be when men hate you, Luke 6. 22.
23.
and separate you, and rail upon you, and put out your (...) as evil, for the
son of man's sake. Rejoice and be glad in that day* for behold great is your
reward in heaven. A natural man whose judgment is corrupt, sees
notblessednes in this condition: neither can he possibly conceive, how we
should be happy in the midst of the shame and reproaches which happen unto us,
when we be mocked and tannted for righteousness sake. Nay, he is of an opinion
clean contrary, imagining those to be happy of whom all men speak well, and
therefore he laboreth to keep an even hand, and to displease neither side:
whereas Christ says, woe unto you when all men speak well of you. ^uk. 6. 26.
Thus the natural man being led by his own reason and sense, pronounces them
accursed, whom the Lord does bless, and them blessed, whom the Lord does
curse. But let it suffize us that he has spoken it which is holy and true: let
us patiently wait for the performaunce of his promise. And seeing he says,
that we be happy, notwithstanding all the railings and speakings against of our
enemies, let us according to the sayings of the Apostle, through honor and
dish^^^^r, 2. Cor. 6. 8.
thorough good report and evil rep^^^ (...) forward, to finish the work
whereunto he has called us. It follows.

For the spirit of glory and of God rests upon you: Lest the Apostle should
seem to affirm any thing without good proof, here h^e renders a reason of
that which he had said before: namely, that it cannot otherwise be, but such
are happy that be railed upon for the name of Christ, because the spirit of
glory and of God rests upon them. His meaning is, that it is a most certain
evidence and demonstration, of the spirit of God (which is always accompanied
with glory) dwelling within us, when we patiently endure persecutions for the
words sake, and hold on our scincere profession notwithstanding all the
mockings of our enemies. It may come from flesh and blood, and the corruption
of our nature, to pretend zeal to the truth in the liberty thereof: but to
continue in the storms and tempests of afflictions, so as no hardness can
remove us from the zeal, which according to knowledge we bear unto God, this
must needs be supernatural, upright, and no other but the fruit of the
spirit: which being the Lords, he cannot but acknowledge wheresoever he find^
it: and therefore must necessarily be glorious in his sight, and everlastingly
honored in heaven hereafter, howsoever for the present time it appear vilde
and odious in the eyes of men. Whereupon saint Paul exhorting the Phillippians,
cap. 1. 28.
not to fear their adversaries which opposed themselves against them,
affirms constantly, that persecutions were manifest signs of the destruction
of the wicked from whom they came, and most evident tokens, and as it were
earnest pence of ye salvation of such against whom they were intended:
agreeing with that which is in his later epistle to the Thessalonians: cap. 1.
5.
where having spoken before of their sufferings, he says, that it was a
manifest declaration of the just judgment of God, to the end they might be
counted worthy of his kingdom. The sense of this place is the same with that
going before, although the words seem somewhat to differ. Let us therefore
despise al ye scorns of ye ungodly, and set light by all the mockings of ye
wicked: in our shame we be honorable, and in all confusion suffered for a good
conscience we are glorious, for the spirit of God and of glory rests upon us,
and we shall be saved if we continue to ye end. This spirit (the apostle says
here) is blasphemed on ye behalf of ye wicked, and glorified on the behalf*
of the godly. The meaning of the first words is, that the enemies of the
Church, deride and scorn the graces of God in his children, and therefore
blaspheme the spirit it self being the author and fountain of the same: as
we see despite offered to the gift of the Prince, is worthily deemed villainy
to the Prince himself. We read that the zeal of God in our Savior Christ
was termed frenzy: Mar. 3. 21. Math. 27. 43.
and his faith reposed in his father scorned on this wise: he trusted in God,
let him deliver him now, if he will have him. The grace of speaking with diverse
toungs in the apostles, Act. 2. 13.
was challenged of drunkenness with new wine: And Festus said unto Paul: Act.
26. 24.
thou art out of thy wits, too much learning has made thee mad. And in all
times of the afflictions of the Church, we shall see not only the professors
taunted and reproched, but also the gifts of the spirit of God in them mocked
and gibed at: As their knowledge, their patience, their chastity, temperance,
trust in God, and watchfulnes over their toungs: In so much as we may find
tirants, that iested at the Christians, because they would not swear when
there was no necessary cause: Well: they deal with one that is more then
their match, and they shall one day feel ye smart of it, since their treachery is
against the holy Ghost even God himself, when they scorn his graces in the
saints. wheretas it is said in this place that the same spirit is glorified on
the behalf of the godly, his meaning is, that we honor the spirit of God,
when in all temptations we continue to profess that which it seals in our
hearts, and think it sufficient comfort against all our troubles, that it
testifies to our hearts, we be the children of God, that we may call upon him
as a father, and that we please him in all our sufferings* To conclude this
verse, let it not appear strange unto us, that evil men despise the grace of
God that is in us. It we glorify his spirit as we have heard, we shall
hereafter be glorified with him eternally in the heavens: even as our Lord by
his own example has taught us to pray with comfort: John. 17. 4.
I have glorified thee upon the earth, now (O Father, glorify me with thy
self. It follows.

Let no man among you suffer as a mans^eier, or a thief, or an evil doer, or
as a busibody. Having spoken before of the blessedness of the Christians, that
be troubled for righteousness sake: in this verse the Apostle calls upon us,
to be so circumspect and wary of all our doings, that we commit no evil for
the which we might justly be punished as malefactors. He rehearses three
particular offenses: the first two be plain: the third which in english we
read a busibody, (yt is, such a one as curiously busieth himself in such
matters as concern not his calling, and neglects them that belong to his
duty) the learned think may as fitly be interpreted, a man greedy of other
men's goods. The other word malefactor or evil doer, may be understood of
every offender whatsoever* as well those that transgress the laws of the
first table in matters of Religion and the service of God, as those that break
the commandments of the second table, in such things as concern our duty
toward men: so that under these. Saint Peter comprehends all manner of sin
and corruption, heresy and idolatry which the word does forbid and punish,
Deu. 13* the whole chapt^r.
as well as disordered behavior of one man toward another. We must therefore
take heed, that as we profess the name and gospel of Christ, so all our
sufferings may come for the truth of that, and not for any Idolatry, heresy,
schism, murder, adultery, whoredom, theft, covetousness, going beyond the
bounds of our callinges, or any such other thing. For if we be evil spoken
of, brought before judges, restrained of our liberty, cast in prison, and put
to death in th^se cases, there is no reason why we should rejoice of the
matter, and think our selves happy therefore. Our master Christ speaking to
his disciples of this point said: Math. 5. 1^.
blessed are you, when they speak al manner of evil of you lying: for my sake:
He says not simplye blessed are you when they speak all eui^l of you: but
when they lie in so doing. And it is an ancient saying of a Father: it is not
the punishment, but the goodness of the cause that makes a Martyr. The
papists therefore in resp^cte of God and his true church, Heritiques and
Schismatiques, and in respect of their prince and country high Traitors, have
no cause to boast themselves of any their sufferinges, as though they were
persecuted for righteousness sake: since besides their heresies and corrupt
opinions concerning religion, for yt which they be worthy of death, they bear
treacherous and traiterous hearts to their sovereign prince and country, which
also from time to time has been found out by their unnatural and curssed
attempts. The like is to be said of the false pretented Family of love, and al
other heretics and evil doers: the unclean person, the oppressor, deceiuer,
usurer, drunkard: the evil minister when he is cried out against, and taunted
by the name of a hireling, Ioh. 10. 12.
a greedy dog that is never satisfied, Isai. 56. 11.
a dumb dog, a blind guide, or an idle pastor: cannot in truth* apply the
comforts to them here mentioned, since they be justly reproched and punished for
their sin: which the Apostle does ^orbid us in this place. And yet this is
not so spoken, as though all men were to despair of them selves, which be any
w^ie corrected for their evil doings: Luke 23. 43.
no, we know what is written of the thief, y^* was crucified with our Lord,
and how he said unto him: this day shall thou be with me in paradise. Even so
assuredly whatsoever the offenses be, that we be evil spoken of for, or
otherwise punished by imprisonment or death, yet we be happy and shall be saved,
if grace be given us with the thief, to repent, to hate our sin, and to believe.
Apoc. 14. 13.
For this is true for ever: blessed are ye dead yt dye in ye Lord, in what
sort, or for what cause soever they die. Therefore, ye man yt sufferreth for
Christ's sake, is blessed in respect of the goodness of his cause: and ^e that
suffers for his sin, is blessed, if the Lord by that punishment bring him
to repentance. But let us with all good conscience attend upon this of the
apostle, to honor our profession and high calling with good life, and
absteining from evil. We see how it fares with the faithful servants of God,
though they walk never so prescisely, yet wicked men will espy somewhat to
speak evil, to take away their crown of suffering for well doing. How then
shall all our honor justly be turned into shame, and lie in the dust, if we
walk retchles^ye and dissolutely? The exhortation is very profitable for our
time, wherein great numbers turn the grace of God into wantonness: and
therefore although they profess the gospel and true religion of God, yet are
worthily, reproched for their uncleanness, riot, vsurye, oppression,
covetousness, and deceit. It follows.

But if he suffer as a christian, let him not be ashamed: nay let him* glorify
God in this behalf: In the former verse, as you hard, he willed us to take
heed of being punished for doing evil, because then there is just matter of
humiliation offered unto us. In this sentence he returns to yt which he had
in hand before, namely to comfort us in all afflictions, yt happen for ye truth
sake. If (says he) any suffer as a christian, yt is for ye scincere profession
of Christ's doctrine, let him never be ashamed of ye matter, but let him tha^k God
in yt behalf. There are two things required of us in this verse: ye one is yt
we be not ashamed of ye persecutions yt we eudure for a good conscience: ye
other yt we rejoice and be glad of them. Concerning ye first: ye evil of yt
which we do, and the unworthiness or baseness of ye party for whom we do it, are
the only occasions yt minister just matter of blusshing and shame unto us. But
the truth yt we profess in the word is so pure and excellent: and the son of
God, in whom we believe, and for whose sake we suffer is so holy, so
glorious, so mighty, and worthy of all honor and service from us, that there is
no cause why we should be ashamed of the crosses which we suffer in that
behalf. S Paul he believed this, and therefore in the midst of all the
calamities that came unto him for doing of his duty, 2. Tim. 1. 12.
could say with confidence. I am not ashamed. For I know him well enough in
whom I have believed, and am fully persuaded, that he is able to keep that
which I have committed unto him against that day. Let us be like minded: and
since Jesus Christ has all power in heaven and earth, so as he is able to
defend us from the rage of our enemies here, and to keep our salvation sure
from being hurt by any means, let us never blush for any thing that happens
unto us for his sake. Natural men think that most vile and ignominious, 2.
Sam. 6. 20.
which in deed is most glorious and beautiful. Michal thought it the
greatest disgrace that might be unto David, to abase himself to dance before
the Ark of God, gyrded with a linen Ephod: 21. 22.
But David thought no honor like this, by humbling himself, and being vilde in
the sight of others, to exalt and set up the Lord. Even so, they which be
carried only by sense and reason, can see n^thing but confusion in the
persecutions of ye saints, when as in deed it is the most honorable thing
under heaven. In so much as neither Iosep^, Genesis 41. 42.
having the kings ring upon his finger, arayde in fine linen, with a chain of
gold about his neck, and set upon the best Charret of the king save on^, and
hono^r ably saluted of all the people: Hester. 6.
nor Mordecay, at the kings commandment most gorgiously carried thorough the
City upon the kings horse, with this proclaimation before him: thus shall it be
done to the man whom the king will honor: were so glorious in the sight of
their* beholders, as the true Christians are in the eyes of God, when in the
judgment of man they seem to be covered with most confusion and shame. And in
deed Cranmer, when he was brought forth, and as it were set upon a stage, to
be mocked at by all the people, his Pall pulled of, his hair cut by a Barber,
his singers ends scraped, an old gown put upon his back, and an old cap
upon his head: the admiral of France first mained with a shot, then most
trecherously slain in his chamber, after tumbled out of a window, his head
cut of, his corpse dragged through the streates in Paris, and after hanged upon
a gallows by ye heels: in ye midst of al these were more glorious then either
Mordecay or Joseph in all their pomp and majesty. Intsomuch as these never
vanted so much of ye one, as they no doubt did of the other. Even as we find
n^ such boasting of any the servants of God in the scripturs, in respect of
their outward estate were it never so good: as we do of S. Paul for his
sufferings: according to ye which is written: Gal. 6. 17.
from henceforth let no man put me to business: for I bear in my body the marks
of ye Lord Jesus. The imprisonments, bands, scourgings, stripes, stonings, and
reproaches yt he endured, he calls the badges of the Lord Jesus, whereby he was
known to be highly in his favor, as a faithful servant of whom he made a
special account, and therefore is not only not ashamed, but also after a godly
sort boasts of the^. Therefore let us not think it any shame unto us,
whenever the Lord shall think it good to have us tried on this wise. It
follows.

But let him glorify God in this behalf: This is the second thing: we must be
glad of our persecutions, and thank God most highly, if he vouchsafe this honor
upon us. For in deed this is an especial token, yt he makes some reckoning
of us, when as he calls us out, to undergo some hardness for his sake. As we
see the prince so thinks of those men, whom he picketh forth from among the
rest, to send about some notable and most famous exploite, whereunto many are
not meet. Act. 5. 41.
This made the apostles to leap for joy, because they were counted worthy to
suffer for the name of Christ, even then when they had been* cruelly beaten:
this stu^red up like affections in some of them after in prison: and this
moved S. Paul to wrighte to the Phillippians, that they should esteem of
their sufferings, as of an especial blessing, or mercy of the Lord bestowed
upon them: Phil 1. 29.
to you (says he) it is given for Christ, that you should not only believe
in him, but also suffer for his sake. Now we have to thank God, not only in
respect of the reward, that shall follow our persecutions, as we have
hard: but espe^iallye in respect of the cause for the which we suffer. And
in deed this offers more matter of joy, then the tongues of men and angels
be able to utter: that, whereas the best of Gods servants for their lewdnes and
evil, Deuteronomy. 27. 26.
might justly be defamed, Romans 6. 23. 1.
brought before governors, Ioh. 1. 10.
cast in prison and put to death, (for who can deny this, seeing eternal
damnation is due to every one): The Lord should conceal and cover all these,
and in the mean time give them over, to be punished for his sake and for well
doing: and that punishment to be recompensed with eternal happiness. Seeing
then we be blessed if we endure troubles for righteousness sake, and al manner
of judgments be due unto us for sin, let us most heartily praise God
(according to the counsel of the Apostle) when soever by any means we be
corrected for well doing. It follows.

For the time is come wherein judgment must begin at God own house. By the
house of God is understood his church, and the peotple that do rightly worship
him* and truly call upon his name: 1. Tim. 3. 15.
as we may learn by the first epistle of S. Paul to T^mothie, Heb. 3. 6.
and that which is written to the Hebrews. The speech teaches: that the
Church of God, ought in every thing to be ordered and governed by his laws
and statutes: as it is equal and right, that the house of each man, and al
things in the same, should be disposed according to the direction of the owner
and master. They which think or practice otherwise* accuse the almighty, either
of want of skill, that he should not know what was best: or else of want of
care for his people, in not delivering that in his word, which he knew most
expedient and necessary to be established. But because it is great blasphemy,
once to imagine any such thing: they shall on day answer for their sin, which
turning al things vpside down, command that for the discipline and order of
Gods house, which he has not given in charge or else forbidden: and neglect or
forbid that, which he most excellently and in great wisdom has set down
and appointed. No prince would think himself well dealt with, if any subject
or subjects should thus presume to inuert the government of his house: and
will earthly princes being subjects to the almighty God, and dust and ashes in
his presence, think to escape unpunished, if they command or suffer to be
commanded any thing for the orderi^ng of the church the house of god, which he
before has not allowed? The master is of more importance then the most be ware
of: and all princes that profess the religion of Jesus Christ, had need to
look unto it. If Moses for the building of the Tabernacle of ye Jews, and for
the ordering of enerye thing apperteining to that first worship of God, Exodus
25. 40.
had a pattern and laws showed him by the Lord, which be must keep himself
unto, and for his fidelity in that behalf has his just commendation: Heb. 3.
5.
It is meet that we think as magnificentlye of the chn^rhe under the gospel,
that nothing is left for the devising of man, since Jesus Christ as the son of
God, Heb. 3. 16.
was faithful in his fathers house by delivering the orders for the government
of the same. Therefore let not the Lords remembrancers keep silence, Isa. 2. 6.
nor give him any rest, until he repair the ruins of Jerusalem.

Moreover, this speech teaches what puritye of doctrine and manners ought to
be continually in the church, and every particular member of it. Even such as
becomes the temple and house of God, and the place where the almigty has his
reside^ce, and does dwell. We see what care there is in the officers of princes
houses, that no filthiness be in any corner of the Court, to offend the prince,
or the nobles passing by: and for this purpose there be writings set up in
every place. But there is not the like regard of the Lords court, to keep
corruption out of his house. We see how the church is pestered, with evil
ministers, with adulterers, whoremasters, swearers, prophaners of the Sabbath,
mockers of the word, and the messengers thereof, usurers, deceivers, riotous
and contentious persons. Against whom there is very small discipline. Although
the Lord have on every wall set up is bills forbidding these enormities, and
commanding they should be thrust out of his church, as unworthy of any place
there, until they have declared openly their true repentance Seeing then the
people that profess the true religion of Christ, be the church and house of
God: it concerns all those to whom God has committed ye ^ouernment, to see
yt it ^e kept from the pollution of sin: and each Christian must look to
himself, to posses his vessel in holiness and honor, 1. These. 4. 4.
1. Cor. 6. 19.
as it becomes the temple of the holy ghost.

The apostle tells us here, that the time was then come, that the Lord would
begin to punish his most faithful servant: and therefore we must either be
contented to endure afflictions, or else not to be acconnted of the household
and Church of God. The Lord in this place is likened unto a wise and careful
prince, who although he have an eye to the disorders of the whole realm and
kingdom, yet does especially regard to correct ye offenses of his own famili.
Even so God: although in all ages he has testified his displeasure against
sin in all kind of people and persons: yet his rods and scourges have at
all times been so occupied about the chastising of his church, that in
comparison of it, he has seemed to spare the rest, and to neglect the
transgressions^ of the heathen. Let us consider the temptations, of Abraham,
Jacob, Joseph. and David. Had not he most wicked of yt time, greater ease and
peace then they had in the greatest part of their life? surely if we know their
stories, we must confess so much. And if we look to the whole nation of the
Jews, first in Egypt, and then after in the land of Canaan: we shall find
that the Lord punished them always first, and that to, so sharply, as the
like vengeance and destruction lightened not upon any people. As it is
mentioned in Daniel: Cap 9 12.
Cap. 25. 29.
And as Jeremy says: I begin to plague the City where my name is called
upon. The reason of this proceeding of the Lord, is best known unto himself,
it suffiseth us for this text to be persuaded of this truth, which we may
understand by the records of the scriptures. Although it might be briefly
said, that he has an especial care of the salvation of his people, and
therefore punishes them above and before the rest, to reclaim them from their
sins, that they should not be damned with the world. 1. Cor. 11. 3^.
Moreover, because his mercies toward his Church, Amos. 3. 1. 2.
are beyond all comparison more then unto others: It is equal and righteous,
that it offending, should both be first punished, and more severely then the
rest. But as this has been the ordinary course of the Lord toward his
Church, from the beginning: so was it especially true of the time wherein the
Apostle writ, after the manifestation of the son of God in the flesh. For
both then, and ever sithence, the Lord was and continues so sharp to them
that truly worship him, and be careful to please his majesty, (in the mean
season seeming often times to spare the wicked and ungodly) that in the
judgment of flesh and blood, Job. 21. 14. 14.
it was better with such as said unto God: depart from us, we will none of
thy law, what is the almighty that we should fear him? then with those that
stood in awe of his commandments, and set naught by all the pleasures, and
torments of the world, in comparison of the favor of God, and keeping a
good conscience before him. Consider the estate of the Apostles, and
professors in the Acts. The condition of the Church has not amended any
thing sithence, but as the glory of it approaches nearer and nearer: so the
warrfare of it upon the earth has increased sharper and sharper: The
persecutions, under the Roman emperors, the Turks, and last in the usurped
dominions of the Priest of Rome, do sufficientlye prove the truethe of this
matter. Let us remember what hardness, Cranmer, Latimer, Ridley, Hooper,
Bradforde, and the rest, endured of late years with in our own realm, when
as it was peaceable and quiet, with all the wicked of the land. And how has
it gone more lately with the true Christians, and faithful servants of God in
our neighbor countries of Flanders, France, and Spayue, as their stories do
witness: when as in the mean time, brothels, witches, adulterers, incestuous
persons, murderers, blasphemers, ruffians, and abominable Idolaters were
untouched. And was there ever such a judgment under heaven, as after that
marriage at Parise fell upon those zealouse and sincere professors of the
truth? S. Paul therefore says truly, of all faithful Christians, that if the
hope of the life to come were taken away, of al other men, they were most
miserable. If in this life only we believed in Christ, 1. Cor. 15. 19.
we were (says he) most wretched of all others. Neither spoke he this,
without good matter to lead him unto it. For whereas the wicked, live
peaceably in the world (because the world loves it own) be free from
adversity, and in their prosperity rejoice them selves: the faithful servants
of God be always hated and persecuted one way or other: they no sooner
creade awry, but the Lord calls them again into the way, with some scourge,
and in the midst of their greatest peace, they be humbled with inward
temptations, sorrow for sins past, grief for present and daily falls,
doubts and terrors, so as they always work out their salvation with fear
and trembling. Phil. 2. 12.
Insomuch as indeed the most wicked were in better case then they, if their
faith, hope, and good conscience, had no other recompense but in this life. But
the life to come is their comfort, because they know, ^ Cor. 5. 1.
that if the tabernacle of this earthly house, be put off and dissolved, they
shall have a building given them of God, that is an house not made with hands,
but eternal in the heavens. Therefore let us not be discomforted in our
troubles, as though for them we might conclude we were forsaken of the
Lord, and did not belong unto him. We see here the apostle tells us, that
judgment begins at his own house. It follows.

If it begin first with us, what shall be the end of them that obey not the
Gospel of God. We have heard before of the troublesome estate of Gods Church
and people upon the earth, and how the Lord seems to favor the wicked,
because for a time they flourish, and be spared in their sins. Now, least the
faithful should be deceived with the prosperity of the wicked, and imagine
that the Lord would ever bear with them in their naughtiness: here the
apostle tells us, that they likewise must have their course, and that
necessarily there must be a time wherein they shall be plagued. For thus does
he reason from the less unto the greater: If God correct them that embrace his
gospel, and be careful to do him faithful service, if he begin first to
scourge such: is it possible that they should escape most fearful vengeance,
which be sworn enemies to his majesty: superstitious, idolatrous, ignorant,
and disobedient to his will? The time certainly will come (God being just) when
they shall be rewarded seuenfolde into their bosoms. Psalm. 79. 12.
Therefore let not wicked men presume upon their safety, because they be spared
for a time: and let them not insult upon the Servants of God, because they
are afflicted and kept under, when themselves, enjoy the desire of their
hearts, and often times be the Lords rods, whereby he whippeth his chosen.
For when the Lord has worn them to the stumps, about the backs of his
children, to their great good, then must themselves be thrown into the fire
of destruction, because the Lord has no more use of them. Isai. 10. 12.
This did Isaiah the prophet prophesy to the comfort of the church in his time:
when says he, the Lord has acomplished all his work upon Mount Sion and
Jerusalem, he will visit the fruit of the proud heart of the king of Ashur.
As though he should have said: although God for a time, give up his church: to
be chastised by the king of Assiria a wicked man, so as he may seem to have
cast of his own people for ever, and to have taken the proud and irreligious
Assirians in their stead, Yet the time will come, when they shall be restored
to their beautye, and the wicked king with his people brought to confusion and
ruin: Even when the Lord has by them, accomplished that correction of his
Church, which he has determined. According to that which he says in another
place: Woe to thee that spoylest, and wast not spoiled: Isai. 33. ^.
and do wickedlye, and they did not wickedly against thee: when thou shall
cease to spoil, thou shall be spoiled: when thou shalt make an end of doing
wickedly, they shall do wickedly against thee. With these testimonies agrees
that of Jeremy, which he prophesied against the Babilonians, after that the
People of God should have been with them in bondage 70. years: I begin to
plague the City (says the Lord) where my name is called upon, Ier. 25.
and should you go free? You shall not go quit.

And how truly these Prophesies against the Assirians, and Babylonians were
accomp^ished, may appear to all those that read the Scriptures of the old
Testament. Genesis 15. 13. 14
To the same purpose might be alleged, that which God long before cold
Abraham, concerning the bondage of Israel in Egypt, their wonderful
deliverance from thence, and the destruction of Pharaoh and his people. 1. Sam.
31. 4.
So it came to pass with Saul, when he had a long time afflicted David: with
Haman when he had obtained that murdering decree against the Jews, 1. Mac. 6.
and 2. 9. read the chapters.
Act. 12.
and with Antiochus the tyrants, when for a time they had blasphemed the God of
heaven, overthrown his true worship, and killed his people. Saul slew
himself: Haman and his children were hanged upon the gallows, that he had set
up for Mordecai: the first Antiochus dyed in great vexatio^ of his mind, and
the later so eaten with woormes, that his most familiar friends could not
abide him for stink.

Of Henry the second the father, and Charles the ninth the son, kings of
France: the first when he had caused much blood to be shed, and lately before
had said, that himself would see the burning of a noble Protestant called
Anduburge, had one of his own eyes first put out by Mountgomerie, after a
wonderful manner, running with him at a Iusting in sport, and dyed in great
weariness of his life by reason of his pain, the tenth of August. 1559. The
other the son, when he had brought to pass that most strange massachre
immediately after the marriage of his Sister with the king of Navarre, and had
sucked much blood of Gods servants afterward, dyed himself most miserably ye
30. of May, 1574. it is written of him in ye french histories, that he was
sick of a bloody flixe, and reported for a truth, that blood issued from
diverse parts of his body where there were other natural yssues, so as tossing
and tumbling himself in his bed most fearfully: horribly curssing, and
blaspheming the name of God, even until his last gasp, which also he had used
to do from his childehood, he so ended his wretched life, being at length
filled with blood which he had before insaciably thirsted after. Of the
Cardinal of Loreine a chief practiser of mischief against Gods church who as
the stories witness of him, dyed in a frenzy, and when the priest brought
oil to annoint him after their popish order, he thrust his hand into the
dishe, and all to be smeared the face of the priest with it. So he dyed at
Auineon. 1574. The like might be said of Herod, Stephen Gardener in England,
and others. Such ferful ends come to diverse bloody persecuters, as our own
countriman M. Fox reports. And assure your selves (O al you wicked of ye
earth,) y^ same portion abides for you, if you turn not to the Lord. Go to
therefore mock on, at the saints of God, set your selves against his truth,
persecute his servants, and proceed in all mischief, and flatter your selves
because God stays to punish, and the world smileth upon you: doubt you not
but the day will come when you shall pay full dearly for it. And we that
suffer, or shall suffer any thing at the hands of the ungodly, let us not be
offended at our sufferings, and their prosperity: 2. These. 1. 6. 7.
For it shall be a righteous thing with God, to recompense trouble to those that
trouble us, and to our selves rest, if not in this world, yet at the least,
when ye Lord Jesus shall again show him self from heaven with his mighty
Angels. ^. These. 1. 8.
And seeing the apostle says here, that it must needs go hard with them,
that obey not the gospel, let us not content our selves, with a bare and naked
profession of the truth: but whatsoever is taught, and we know, let us take
heed, that we be obedient thereunto. It follows.

And if the righteous be scarcely saved, where shall the ungodly and sinner
appear? By the righteous he understands, such as be studious of
righteousness, and be careful to please God, although they be not free
from all sin.

And by sinners he means not all manner of offendoures, but such as yield
them selves to corruption, Psalm. 1. 1.
Luk 7. 39.
Ioh. 9. 31.
and delight in wickedness: according as this word is used in other places
of the Scripture. Now the purpose of the Apostle in this sentence, is the same
with that in the end of the last Verse: He confidentlye affirms, that the
wicked must needs be judged with extreme seueritye, sith the hand of God
is often times heavy upon them that fear him. This hardness for ye righteous
must not be understood, of the last judgment, as some would have it, as though
they should not there acquit thems^lues without great difficulty, and be saved
without much ado. Noe, we see what saint Paul writes touching this matter:
Romans 8. 33. 34
Who (says he) shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? it is God
that justifies who shall condemue? it is Christ which is dead, yea or rather
which is risen again, who is also at the right hand of God, and makes
requests also for us. The sum of his speech is, that there shall be none to
accuse, or to pronounce sentence against any of the elect of God, and therefore
their passage into glory at that time shall be most easy. Whereupon our
savior Christ wills us, that we look up, and lift up our heads for joy,
Luke 11. 28.
whenever there appear any tokens of the approaching of that day. Which there
were no great cause that we should do, if such hardness were then to be
endured as some have imagined. And how should the saying of the son of God
be true? Apoc. 14. 13.
blessed be the dead that dye in the Lord, and they rest from their labors:
if new labors were to be taken in hand at the last judgment. This difficulty
therefore is to be understood of this life, according also as the verb (be
saved) in the present tense does evidently show: So as the Apostle his meaning
is, that the estate of the godly is so troublesome upon the earth, that they
enter not into the kingdom of rest and glory, except first in the world, they
have gone thorough infinite dangers, and escaped as it were a thousand
deaths. Even as the Apostles preached wheresoever they came, exhorting the
disciples to continue in the faith, Act. 14. 22.
affirming that they must thorough many afflictions enter into the kingdom of
God: Psa. 34. 19.
and as David says: Great are the troubles of the righteous: and as S. Paul
sets it down for a principle unto Timothy: 2. Tim. 3. 12.
that all such as will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution.
The truth of this we have heard before: and each man which knows any thing
of himself, and the Church of God as he ought to know, does understand and
believe it. Now this being proved true by continual experience: can the Lord
be just, thus to chastise and keep in heaviness his faithful servants? except
in time, most fearful vengeance light upon the sinners: Genesis 18. 25.
shall not the judge of all the world do right? Yes verily. For this does
certeinely preach unto us, and cries as loud in our ears as all the teachers in
the world, that there shall be a judgment, 2. These. 1. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9.
when all things shall be brought in good order: when the godly shall cease from
all their sorrow, and the wicked shall drink the full cup of Gods wrath.
Therefore as Jesus Christ said of himself, so may it be spoken of all the
children of God for ever: if they do these things to a green tree that is
fruitful, what shall be done to the dry and barren? And if the righteous be not
saved but through so many afflictions: how miserable must the condition of
the sinner be? If Abraham rested not in peace, til he had a great while wandered
as a stranger from place to place, was pinched with famine, Gen 12. 10. 11. and
21. 25. and 22. ^.
driven to deny his wife, to strive for water, and commanded to be a butcher
of that son in whom the hope of his salvation rested? If Jacob ended not his
pilgrimage to pass into glory, Genesis 27. 42. and 28. 11.
till first he was constrained to flee for fear of his own brother: to lie
all night in the broad field with a stone under his head for a pillowe: Genesis
29. 20. 27
to serve seven years for one wife, and seven for another, under an uncivil
and barbarous uncle: to abide manifold stirs and discords in his house
between his wives: to be checked by Labans children: to be deceived by their
father: to have his own daughter ravished: his sons Simeon and Levy, Cap.
30. 14. 15. and 31. 1. 41. and 34. 1. 25.
to commit most horrible murder: to have one of his wives abused by his own
son: his dearling Joseph torn in pieces of wild beasts as he was brought
to believe: Genesis 35. 12 and 37. 32.
and in his old age to be vexed with hungre. Genesis 42. ^.
O Lord, what shall be the end of the ungodly? If the Prophets in their time:
If Jesus Christ himself the Lord of glory: and his holy Apostles, endured the
displeasure of princes, imprisonments in myerie dungeons, buffetings,
whippings, scornings, sawing asunder, crucifying, stoning and beheading, before
they were glorified? Ier. 3^.
O how miserable shall the portion be of the sinner? It the most famous
witnesses of Jesus Christ, Hierome of Prage, John Husse, Wickliffe, Cranmer,
Latimer, Hooper, Ridley, Philpot, Bradforde. the Shatillion of France, Bucer,
Paulus Fagius and the rest, entered not into heaven till they were first
imprisoned, mocked, dragged through the streates, scorched, and their flesh
with fire consumed unto ashes: If the last two, could not be glorified in
their bodies, till first they were taken up being dead, and their bones burnt:
If so strange a kind of manacle was Cuthbearde Simpsons Ladder into heaven?
Acts and (...) nume^tes.
Is any tongue able to express, or any heart able to conceive, the height and
depth of the miseries prepared for the wicked, and all the enemies of the
Church? although for a time in this world, they prosper and have peace. If
such as have lived without all blame before men: or for a time having gone out
of the way, do afterward unfeignedly repent, and become as zealous in Gods
matters, as they have bin forward in corrupt^ (...) and declare as great a
detestation of (...) ^^ines in themselves and others, as ever they showed
liking of the same: yet for all that, in this life endure extreme poverty,
Luke 16.
as did Lazarus: be plunged in the gul^e of all outward miseries as was Job,
who scraped the filth from his body with a po^sherd, Job. 2. 8. 9.
and was even loathed of his own wife: be pressed with such agonies of the
soul, as no tongue can utter, as was that Job, David and others: insomuch as
they refuse all comfort of meat, spend many nights without sleep, flee the
company of men, fear every thing that they see: the earth lest it should take
them down quick, the heavens lest they should fall, and crushe them to
pieces, and all creatures, because they see nothing but horror in them.
Moreover be troubled with strange visions and dreams, be brought merueilous
low in their bodies, their bones weakened, their flesh consumed, and their
eyes sunk in their head: that when it is evening, they say, would God it were
morning, and when it is morning, they say, would God it were evening. And that
which is the depth of all misery, have their sins (committed by them since
they had any understanding) at one time brought to their remembrance, and all
comfort concerning hope of remission so taken away (because they can see
nothing in God but an angry judge) that in the end they break out into these
most lamentable speeches: woe is me poor caytife that ever I was born: curssed
be the hour wherein I was conceived, and the day wherein I first faw the
sun: Job. 7.
O that God had made me a Serpente to lick the duste upon the earth, or a
toade to creep upon the ground: so should my misery have ended at my death. But
now alas I know it shall be mine entrance tnto eternal pains, hell is my
portion, and there I must remain for ever: I am most sure of it. Comfort you
not me (my friends) the promises of God belong to you and to his elect: there
is no mercy for me: I have so grievously offended: I feel my self destitute
of all marks of Gods child: and I was a reprobate from before the beginning.
If for a time such be thus cast down, and peradventure thrown into greater
miseries then any of these rehearsed, that no comforts be able to raise up their
tired souls, but either yet wrestling with satan and despair, or else
overcome by them, be pressed out of al measure: And notwithstanding all these,
recover afterward, and casting away all horror, doubting and slavish sea^e, by
their faith mount above the heavens, where they see their Savior whom their
soul has longed after, sitting at the right hand of God: so as they bewail
their former unbelief, lament those speeches of despair, be thoroughly
persuaded of the remission of all their sins, have certain hope of eternal
life, and become so comfortable in Gods promises, that by his grace they be
able to raise up such as doubt and fear: and finally leave behind them
undoubted proofs of the elect of God, that to all such as have judgment and
understanding, they appear plainly to have bin sealed up unto eternal life
from the beginning? Can it otherwise be, but that there are unspeakable
torments after this life, appointed to such as make a sport of sin, never
turn to God, and dye without repentantaunce: although in this world they
abound with all health, wealth, and prosperity? let us therefore rejoice in
all our afflictions, wherein we take part with all the servants of God: and
let us not be offended at the prosperity of the ungodly: the time will come
when we shall have comfort, and when they shall be tormented: For so does it
stand with the truth and justice of God, according to that which Abraham said
to the rich man in hell: son remember that thou in thy life time receyuedst
thy pleasures, and likewise Lazarus pains: now therefore is he comforted, and
thou art tormented. If follows.

Therefore let them that suffer according to the will of God: commit their
souls to him in well doing, as unto a faithful Creator.

This is the conclusion of the whole treatise: as though he should have
said on this wise: since the afflicting of the church is no new thing, since
it is a mean to try the good from the bad, and to make them better, in whom
there is (by the grace of God) some goodness: since in all sufferings it is a
partaker with Jesus Christ, and shall rejoice with him, when he appears
again in glory: since we be happy when we be railed upon in the name Christ,
because the ^pirite of God and of glory rests upon us: since we suffer not as
evil doers, but as christians, and so have no cause to be ashamed: since the
time is now, wherein the Lord will scourge his own house: and hereafter will
most severely proceed against the wicked although he spare them for a time:
Let us continue in well doing, and commit our selves to him, that is
faithful, and able to keep that, which we trust him with. There is yet
another comfort for us in this verse, that we heard not before: and that is
where he tells us, that we be not afflicted by the will and pleasure of men,
but only at the pleasure and appointment of the Lord. To prove this point of
doctrine, I shall not need to labor much: the truth of it should soon be
granted, if we knew what we said in this confession: I believe in God the
father almighty maker of heaven and earth. For what is this else, but to
ascribe such a sovereign power unto God, that nothing is done nor can be done,
in heaven, earth, or hell, but that only which he determines and appoints?
The devil himself could not stir one foot forward, Job. 1. 12. and 26.
Luc. 8. 30. 32.
to hurt Job in his cattle, children, or himself, till the Lord from heaven
had first said, go: Nay the legion of Devils, could not touch one of the
Gadarenes swine, til the Lord Jesus had first given them license. And shall we
think that mortal men, (whose malice against the hurch is not so deadly, nor
their power so great) can so much as lift up a finger to pull a hair from the
faces of any of Gods children, Luke 127.
till first the Lord have taken order for the matter? we be deceived, and
greatly detogate from the majesty of the almighty, if we once imagine any such
thing. Whereupon Nabucadonizer in the midst of all his malice to the Jews the
church of God, is termed the Lords servant: Ier. 25. 9.
because in deed as an hangman or executioner, he did nothing else, but that
which he had determined. Although the sin of the king was in this behalf
great, because his purpose was not to do the will of the Lord, but to satisfy
his own proud and cruel affections. So is Ashur. Luke 16. 25.
(ye king of Assiria) called the rod of God. And to this purpose it is said in
the acts, that Poncius Pilate and the Jews, Act. 4. 28.
in condemning and crucifying the son of God, did that which the father
before had appointed. Insomuch as it may be truly concluded, that the devil
and all the wicked of the earth, in their extremest rage against the saints,
do nothing else but the will of God, Isa. 10. 5. 8.
although they know it not, neither do it to any such intent, since they wholly
oppose themselves against his majesty. And yet the Lord must not be charged to
be the author of evil: for the self same fact, I mean the troubling of the
church, in respect of God, and his purpose therein, is holy, glorious,
righteous, full of mercy, and to the great good of his servant: which
nevertheless in respect of the instruments by whom God works it, is wicked,
unjust, full of cruelty, and intended to the hurt of his children. But enough
of this common place, that the enemies of the faithful, be nothing else, but the
Lords rods, wherewith he exercises his people: and that of themselves they can
do no more, then a rod or a whippe out of the hand of the smiter. Now this
teaches us not to fear the faces of the ungodly, nor to be dismayed at their
threats: the Lord appoints them certain bonds, beyond the which they can
not pass the breadth of an hair. And this offreth unto us great comfort. For
what child that is wise and has understanding, does not rejoice, in the
correction of his father? since being persuaded of his fatherly and tender
affection, he is out of doubt, that it is well meant, and shall turn to his
good. Seeing then the Lord is our Father, and his compassion over us, passes
the kindness of a mother toward the infant sucking upon her breast: Isa. 49. 15.
Let us be comfortable in all our afflictions, since they come from him, and
fall upon us according to his will. And that we may have to cheer us in all
our distresses, let us seriosly meditate upon this one thing: the Lord sends
them. After which consideration: it by the testimonye of the spirit crying in
our hearts (Abba) father, Gal. 4. 6.
and the sanctification of our lives, we can persuade our selves, that we be
his children: ye present smart shall not quail us, Heb. 12. 11.
because of the fruit of righteousness following after: Romans 8. 28.
and it must needs turn to our best, because it comes from our father. Thus
much of these words of ye apostle: Let so many as be afflicted according to
the will of God. etc.

His conclusion is, that in all well doing we commend our souls unto God,
that has made them. For, as we have before in the time of our peace, declared
some rare of pleasing God, and doing his will: so is it our duties to continue
in our afflictions, and not for them, to take any liberty to do evil. And
therefore we must not murmr against the Lord, as though he dealte hardly
with us: we must not be fainthearted to deny his truth: we must not be
bitter to our enemies in curssing of them, and rewarding them as they deal
with us: but with all patience, weekenesse, gentleness, courage, forgiving of
our adversaries, and praying for them: constantly to endure whatsoever the
Lord will try us with, according to the precepts of the scriptures, and the
example of David, Christ himself, Stephen, and the rest of the holy martyrs,
which blessed their persecuters, Luke. 23. 46.
Act. 7. 59. 60.
and in the destruction of their bodies, committed their spirits into the
hands of God: In whom they believed, that he was faithful, and able to keep
safe whatsoever was commended unto him: 2. Tim. 1. 12.
whose steps if we do follow, according to the doctrine of the apostle in
this place: then, although our bodies be turned into dust, Eccle. 12. 7.
whence they came, being racked by Tyrants, cast in prison, burnt, and the
ashes thrown into rivers: yet unto our souls they shall offer no violence,
but being committed into the hands of the Lord, shall return to him that
gave them, till the day come when all our enemies shall be troaden under our
feet: Apoc. 2. 26. 27
Apoc. 20. 13.
when the earth and Sea, rendering their dead, body and Soul shall meet
together, to be crowned in token of victory, and with all the holy Angels
to take full possession of that glorious and immortal kingdom, which now we
hope for. Apoc. 14. 4.
Where we shall follow the Lamb whersoeuer he goes, and sing praises to him
that has redeemed us for ever. Which days the Lord hasten, that we may be
partakers of that happiness, even for Jesus Christ his sake, to whom with ye
Father and the holy ghost, three persons and one true and everliving God, be
all praise, honor, power, might and dominion, now and for evermore. Amen,
Amen. Amen.

Apoc. 17. 14. These are they, which came out of great tribulation, and have
washed their long robes, and have made their long robes white in the blood of
the Lamb.

15 Therefore are they in the presence of the throne of God, and serve him day
and night in his Temple, and he that sits on the throne, will dwell amomg
them.

16 They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the sun
light on them, neither any heat.

17 For the Lamb which is in the mids of the throne, shall govern them, and
shall lead them unto the lively founteines of waters, and God shall wipe away al
tears from their eyes.


