THE VIRGIN MARY'S LIFE, Faithfully gathered out of ancient and holy fathers,

TOGETHER WITH MEDITATIONS AND DOCVMENTS UPON THE SAME. Written first in
Italian by the Reverend father LVCAS PINELLI of the Society of JESUS.

And now translated in to English by R. G.

Ec. 24. verse. 20. As cynnamon and aromatical balm have I given an odor.

AT DOWAY BY LAVRENS KEL with Priulege. MDCIIII

S IOACHIM

S ANNA

engraved title page depicting the Virgin Mary and Saints Joachim and Anne

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND, RELIGIOUS, AND VIRTUOUS LADY, the Lady Ioane Barkley,
Abbess of the English Nuns in Brussels.
I Have been so bold, Religious and virtuous Madame, as to direct this little
book to you, and make you a present thereof, as one vvorthie to receive and
keep such a jewel. Worthy J say, to receive it, because of your rare virtue,
so many vvayes and years uttered to the world, by your both Religious
vocation and manners: vvorthie to keep it, because J know right well, how much
more you do value and esteem spiritual, then temporal treasures.

The took, Madame, is in quantity very small, but in substance passing
great. For that it contains the life of our blessed Lady, that is, of the
most excellent, most vvorthie, and most holy person (Christ JESUS her son
only excepted) that either lived at any time in this world, or now reigns
glorious in heaven. Jn so much that, al duly considered, for me to commend you
this work it self, were a thing superfluous: to request you to accept it,
were a thing needeles: to pray you to take it in your custody and keep it,
were but to make estimation of you, far otherwise then your godly and
virtuous state does deserve.

This one thing J vvil add and end therevvithal, that if my small pains taken
in the translating of it, may any wise benefit your spiritual good and
consolation, and advance you in the devotion of this blessed Virgin Mother of
God, I vvil think them well employed. And so desiring as well to be remembered
in your fervent devotions, as also that this offer, such as it is, may serve
for witness of my duetiful affection, to further that of your good self and
yours to wards this mother of mercy and her svveete son JESUS, J commend
your to them both, and humblye take my leave: vvishinge you in this world,
Madame, al abundance of heavenly grace and contentement, and in the world to
come, everlasting felicity and joy.

Yours,
Madame, in Christ Jesus, to command R. G.

THE AVTHOR TO THE CHRISTIAN AND DEVOVTE READER.
FOr so much as in this most noble City of Naples, devout Reader, there be
many Congregations dedicated to the glorious Virgin, and blessed mother of
God. which oftentimes did come together, not only to praise and honor the
Queen of heavens, but also to exercise them selves in mental prayer, a mean
most effectual, whereby to amend and direct our life, and my Superiors deeming
that it would be a great help to such, as be devoute to the Mother of God, if
they might have an abridgement of her life and actions, both to consider and
imitate them: this there godly desire did animate and spur me forwards to
write this little book, which does contain first the Story of the Virgin
Mary's life and manners, faithfully gathered out of ancient and holy fathers,
with the citations of their books, which for more briefenes and facilities
sake to find out, the places that be alleged, at here set down in latin.

After this there be imm^diatly set down for each history, three short
points where upon to meditate, taken out either of the history that goes
before, or of some other godly considerations; to the end that each one may
have sufficient matter, whereof to think and discourse: because our mind and
understanding, when it has some beginning and grownde, does easelie discourse
of it self, and finds out diverse conceits and spiritual thoughts, in which
the soul is much comforted, and entering into it self does thereby reap great
fruit and commodity. Finally after the points of meditation, there do follow
three documents or instructions, awnswering to the said points, which documents
put in practice, will serve undoubtedly as a wonderful aid, to direct and
conform our lives and actions, according to those of the blessed Virgin, our
Queen and Sovereign.

Marvel not, Christian Reader, that I in this little book do lay, before
thine eyes the virgin Marie, for a pattern to imitate her life and manners?
seeing that Sophronius does confess the Virgin Marie, to be the form and Rule
of Christian discipline, given by almighty God to men, next after Christ the
first and chiefest president of al perfection. Rupertus likewise avowcheth,
that our Savior Christ ascending up into heaven, leas^ the virgin Marie for a
mistress of Christian belief, and life. And long time before them both, that
worthy and holy martyr S. Ignatius, named the virgin Marie the mistress of
Christian Religion: which office of mistress, she did rather perform in
woorks and examples of perfect and sound virtues, then in words. In so much
that who soever will consider with diligence the course of the virgin Mary's
life, shall evidently perceive that the providence and wisdom of God did so
dispose her life, that it might serve for an example to al sorts of person, as
I will manifest by the ensuing discourse.

The Virgin Marie from three years of her age until fourteen, remained with
other virgins in the temple of Jerusalem, in which place, with her abhorring
the vanity of the world, with her prompt Obedience to the Superiors of that
place, with her diligence in prayer and devotion, with her modesty and
humility she taught as well virgins, as other religious vveomen, how each of
them ought to behave them selves in their state and calling. Afterward til
near forty and five years, she was a mistress to married vveomen, and
such as have care of how should: for albeit she was the Queen of Angels, the
mother of God, and full of al grace and wisdom, yet she did obey, honor and
respect her spouse Joseph, with whom she lived always in concord and
quietness. Besides this, in this care of her house and bringing up of her son
Christ, she was most diligent: for she did so well dispose and appoint her
time, that neither the affairs of her house did hinder her prayers, nor these
were any impediment or let, to such domestical business as pertained to her
charge.

In the rest of her life which was, according to the more common opinion,
until threescore and three years of age, she was an example and mistress to
widows and poor vveomen, because she in her widdowe state, as S. Brigit
writes, as it were dead to the world, did live wholy to God; and given to
co^templation of celestial things, did lead a life rather divine than humane.
Her provision was small and fit for poor folks, and some do esteem that
she, after the Ascension of Christ, did live as the Hebrew widows were wont
to do, of the common alms and collections, which in the primitive Church
were gathered to sustain the poor. To be short, she taught by her example how
every one ought to behave him self as well in time of prosperity and favor,
as of adversity and tribulation: for so much as in all the gifts and favors
that she received at Gods hands, she did humble her self with all her heart; as
appears in this, that being chosen the mother of God, and having understood
such news from the Angel Gabriel, she called her self the servant and
hand-maide of our Lord. And when she went to visit S. Elizabeth, and was by
her saluted very magnificallie, and as the mother of God: she did magnify our
Lord, acknowledging al her good to come from him. So that in prosperity she
teaches us to humble our selves, and to praise alinghtie God.

But in tribulation and adversity she has given us such rare examples of
virtue, that if the afflicted and vexed in this life would well consider them,
their tribulalations would not seem to be so grievous as they do As for
example sake, the Virgin Marie in this life had no other good but one only
son, which was of infinite bounty and perfection, for that he was in one
person both God and man, now she did see this her son to be of envy accused,
and unjustly condemned to the most grievous torments that could be imagined,
even to the most infamous death of the Cross. She did see him also die upon
the Cross betwixt two thieves, and was not able to aford him the least comfort
that could be devised: when not withstanding she did support al these injuries
and cruelties, with incredible fortitude of courage, not moved to indignation
against those envious accusers, not lamenting of the wicked Jews, nor
reproching the Apostles that so disloyallie had forsaken their master.

Yet were the Virgin Mary's tribulations not ended with this, for that
Artopheius says after the Ascension of Christ, she was greatly persecuted of
some malicious and wicked people, who did vex and molest her by using her
spitefully in woorks, and detracting of her good name in words: but she with
patience and praying to God for her persecutours, did overcome the evil will of
them al. Accept then, good Reader, this so perfect a pattern and mirror of
Christian perfection: and I do exhort thee, if to d^^e thou can take thereby
some fruit for thy soul, not to expect and deffer til to morrow. I do also
exhort thee to cleanenes and purity of mind, which will make thee fit first
for meditation, and then to be more beloved and favored of the Virgin Marie,
who has particular care and protection of those that be chaste and pure:
finally I do exhort thee to practice those documents that do immediately
follow the meditations, which documents do direct us to do well, and to bridle
our passions and disordered appetites. For to make goodly discourses, to find
out deep conceits in meditation, and afterward not to work well according to
our good determinations and instructions, is even as if one heard a good sermon
full of excellent doctrine and wholesome counsel, but never did practice any of al
those things he had heard.

THE TRANSLATOR to the Reader.
I Send thee, Benign Reader, this little Treatise of the life of our blessed
Lady, which I transtated out of Italian into English, as a paune of a bigger
bulk concerning the same matter, remaining yet in my hands: which ended, vvil
give thee, I hope such satisfaction and contentment, touching this point of her
life together with many other things, as therein may make for the spiritual
good of thy soul, and further thee exceedingly in devotion and duty
toward the Virgin mother of God and Queen of heaven, that thou shall little
need hereafter, if I be not deceived, to expect any other discourse of this
matter.

In the mean season I do most heartily request thee, that as this my
endeavor does only respect thy sovvles spiritual benifite, that God may be
glorified in thee, and thou thy self be saved: so thou willingly a forde
me, thy prayers to assist me, as well in this work which I do promise
thee, as also that serving his divine majesty according to my vocation, we
may both at length enjoy his everlasting glory.

Thy heartily affected well willer. R. G.

Ad Sanctillimam Virginem-Dei Genitricem Mariam.
HYMNVS.
AVe suprema Virginum,
Magni parentis silia,
Et sponsa Sacri Flaminis,
Christique matter inclyta.
Vestita sole fulgido,
Quae calce lunam subteris,
Et cincta stellis tempora,
Splendiscis intra Regiam.
Tu Mosis arca mystica,
Suaue manna continens:
Tu clausus hortus vndique,
Turrisque munitissima.
Tu fortitudo Martyrum,
Decusque Confitentium,
Tu Virginum pulcherrima,
Regina caelo praesides.
A te parens mitissima,
Opem gementes poscimus,
Dulcem praecare silium,
Vt nostra tollat crimina.
Summo parenti Caelitum,
Magnaeque Proli Virginis,
Sancto simul Paraclito,
Sit summa laus and gloria.
Amen.
. Ora pro nobis sancta Dei genitrix.. Vt digni efficiamur promissionibus
Christi.
Oremus.
Concede nos famnlos tuos, quaesumus Domine Deus, perpetua mentis and corporis
sanitate gaudere: and gloriosa beatae Mariae semper Virginis intercessione, a
praesenti liberari tristitia, and aeterna perfrui laetitia. Per Dominum nostrum
Iesum Christum filium tuum, qui etc.

To the most holy Virgin mother of God Marie.
An Himne.
Hail of al Virgins the most high,
Daughter of father eminent,
And of the holy Ghost the spouse,
Of Christ the mother excellent.
Clodde with the su^ne that shines bright
Thou under foot the moon do tread,
And crowned with a crown of stars,
Iu heavens court sun beams do spread.
Thou Ark of Moses mystical,
Do manna sweet in thee enclose,
Thou garden shut on every side,
And tower that fenced is from foes.
Thou art the martyrs fortitude,
Of Confessors the worthiness,
Above al Virgins fairest thou,
In heaven art Queen Gouernes
Of thee o mother to us most mild.
We much lamenting succor crave:
Pray to thy sweet son that he,
Our sins to took away vouchsaue.
To highest father of al Saints,
To the great son of Virgin free.
Likewise unto the holy Ghost.
Most vvorthie praise and glory be.
AMEN.
. Pray for us o holy mother of God.. That we may be made vvorthie of the
promises of Christ.
Let us pray.

Grant us thy servants, we beseech thee o Lord, to enjoy perpetual health of
mind and body: and by the glorious intercession of the ever blessed virgin
MARIE, to be deliured from this present sorrow, and to enjoy everlasting
gladness. Through our Lord JESUS Christ thy son, w^o, lives and reigns, etc.

THE HISTORY OF the virgin Mary's Conception. 1
THE Virgin MARY'S conceptio^ was of twoe sorts. One was eternal in the mind
of God; when he did choose her to be mother of the Savior of the world, and
allot her the most excellent gifts, that could be imparted to any pure
creature: wherefore Trag^d de Christ^ patiente.
Nazianzenus says, that no creature can be compared with the virgin Marie, who
surmounteth al in grace and perfection: An other conception, was temporal in
the womb of her mother S. Anne, in the year after the creation of the world
according to In cap. 2. Matthew question. 91
Abulensis, three thousand, nine hundred forty and six. Ioachim was her
father, and both her parents were noble no less of lineage then virtue: (...)
contrar Colyr. haer. 70. Nice^ho. li. 1. ^ist. cap 7. Nissen. de humana Christi
generatione.
who as Epiphanius and others do recount, albeit they were old, and lived many
years in wedlock without issue, yet because they had great hope in god, and
had also vowed to consecrate unto him the child they were to have, they did not
cease to demand the same of our Lord continually, with prayers, fastings, and
alms. For so we read in Tomo. 4. de natiuitate B. virginis.
S. Hieroms works, that yearly they divided their substance into three
parts, giving one to the Temple, and ministers thereof; an other to poor
folks, and pilgrims: and reserving the third part for them selves. Beda in
martyrolo.
Finally after twenty years past they obtained the desired favor: for the
eight of December S. Anne conceived our ever B. virgin Marie.

Points for Meditation.
1 Consider how god, choosing the virgin Marie for the mother of his only
begotten son, did adorn her with great perfection, his custom being to
bestow grace and ability upon each one, according to the office and dignity
he does give him.

2 Consider how the virgin Marie was also preserved from original sin, for so
much as god was able to do it, and that he should do so, it was not only
convenient, but likewise did redounde to the honor of Christ, to have a mother
that nether should be enemy to god, nor subject to the devil as al those are,
that be conceived in original sin.

3 Consider how S. Anne, which was great with child, did feel marvelous
effects, because the grace of the virgin Marie was so passing excellent and
plenteous, that it redounded also to her mother.

Documents.
1 Thrust not thy self into offices and dignities, for god does give grace to
those, whom he has elected and chosen, to preeminencie.

2 If original sin do make a man subject to the devil, and an enemy to god,
what will actual sin do? fly it therefore more then death.

3. If thou also have a desire to feel strange effects, have the virgin Marie
always in thy heart.

OF THE VIRGIN Mary's Nativity. 2.
Epiph citato.
EPIPHANIVS and Germa. Sermo* de oblatione Mariae. S. Brigida lib. 1. reuelat.
ca. 9
Germanus Patriarchs of Constantinople do record, that the virgin Mary's
parents retyring them selves, Ioachim into a mountain of the desert, where he
fasted forty days, and Anne into a garden of hers, there to pray God, that
he would vowchsafe to deliver them from the ignominy of barronnes; an Angel
revealed to Ioachim that he should have a child, and that Anne had now
conceived. And so when Herod the Idumean reigned in Iewrie, who by force and
unjust dealing took the roial scepter from the tribe of Judah, and was the
first foreign king of the Jews, in which time according to the Genesis 49.
prophecy of Jacob the Messiah was to come even then the virgin Marie was
borne to wit Abule^^ citat.
three thousand, nine hundred, forty and seven years after the creation of
the world, the eight day of September, and this not without mystery: for that
in the same month, as the Jewish tradition does make mention, Eve was created
by God in the terrestrial paradise in ca. 1^ Joan.
Theophilactus and Euthiminius do write that Marie was the only daughter of
Anne, who never had any other husband than Ioachim; nether had one or the
other any more children than Marie. So that when S. cap 19
John does call Marie of Cleophas, sister of our Marie the virgin, it is to be
understood that she was her kinswoma^, like as Sara said she was Abraham's
sister, that is, allied to him.

Points for Meditation.
1 Consider the joy the virgin Marie brought to her parents, by her nativity;
who, as we may think, did with great devotion offer her up to God, as soon as
she was borne.

2 Contemplate how this celestial and heavenly dawning, with her birth giving
joy to heaven and earth does end the obscure night of damnation, and begin the
happy day of salvation.

3 Behold how Marie is that house, in which the king of eternal glory was to
repose, builded by god for his own use: who wanting nether wisdom to dispose
the same in the best manner, nor power to adorn it, we ought to believe that
she had al perfection possible.

Documents.
1 If thou acknowledge whatsoever good thou have, to come from god; besides
that the same shall be always blessed, and more perfected in thee by him, thou
shall also receive much more.

2 If thou through sin shall become blind, or through passion feeble in the
eyes of thy understanding, thou shall not enioie the dawning, and much less
the son: that is to say thou shall be deprived of the virgin Mary's favor,
and of the grace of Christ her son.

3 Thou may also be the reposing place of god, if yet nether sin, nor
vanity of the world do dwell in thee, which both be odious to him.

OF THE VIRGIN Mary's Presentation in the Temple. 3.
When the virgin Marie was three years old, Ioachim and Anne according as
they had vowed, did present her to the Priests of the Temple, who as Euod sua
epis Ecclesia ca
Euodius and N pho li. cap. 7.
Nicephorus do affirm, received her as a precious gift consecrated to god, to
bring her up with the virgins of the Temple. De hi^ Christi. genera.
Nyssenus writes, that in the Temple there was a separated place, where al
those virgins were trained up, that were dedicated to god, and that Marie
remained there, into which place no weomen entered that had been married. But
Orig tract 2 in Ma
Origenes and Cyril aduers^ Anth. morp. (...)
Cyrillus Alexa^drinus do say that Marie, after she had brought forth Christ,
entered there also as a virgin: a thing which the Jews reprehended, but
Zachary father to John Baptist defended the same, who knew the mystery of the
virgins childbirth, Euod. cit.
Marie dwelt in the Temple twelve years, and Cedren in co^pend. histor.
Cedrenus says that she went not forth from thence, except it were for some
necessity to her cosen Elizabeth, which did make her aboade near the Temple:
moreover Nicom. homil de oblat. virg
Georgius Nicomediensis does say, and Ambros lib. 2 de ^irg.
S. Ambrose confirms it, that the virgin Marie was in that place often
visited by the Angel. In the eight year that she remained in the Temple, which
was the eleue^th from her age according to Cedre cit. and Canis. de B. Maria
lib. 1. cap. 13.
Cedrenus, she became orphane by the death of her parents.

Points for Meditation.
1. Consider the diligence of Ioachim and Anne in fulfilling their vow, for as
soon as Marie was weaned, they did present her to the Priests of the Temple.

2. Consider how the Priests were comforted to see the little virgin Marie so
modest and devout, and how inspired by God, they received her with particular
gust and reverence, as a most holy pledge, to bring her up amongst the other
virgins of the Temple.

3. Consider the devotion with which the virgin Marie did offer her self
wholly to God, and what contentment she did feel in her heart, being to pass
her childhood, separated from the unquietness of the world, in a holy place,
and with holy exercises.

Documents.
1. Not to satisfy a vow made, or to deffer the same without lawful cause,
the one, and the other, does displease God.

2. Have great respect to such things as be dedicated to God, because he
esteems the honor, or contempt done to them, as done to him self.

3 Thou shall live always discomforted, if thou do not separate thy self, at
least with this affection, from the transitory things of the world.

OF THE VIRGIN Mary's life in the Temple. 4.
ANdreas Cretensis does write that the virgin Marie, De dor^itione ^e pa.
whiles she dwelt in the Temple amongst the virgins, did so give her self to
learning, that she understood very well the law and the Prophets. Lib 2.
cemp. ca. and lib. ^. cap. 4
Sabellicus does report, that she divided the daie-time in this manner. In the
morning, for three hours space, she gave her self to prayer and devotion,
from thence forth, until middaie, she sat at her work with the other
virgins, and that for the most part spining; after dinner she did read the
holy scripture. Lib. 1. re^^l cap. 10 and lib. 3. ^^p 8. Ga^^tin. lib. 7
^arca. ^uho. ve^^t. cap. 5.
S. Bright seeteth down very largely the manners and customs of the virgin
Marie in her youth, and amongst others relates these: She contemned riches and
wealth, in so much that what she could get, she gave to the poor; She took
delight in nothing but in god; She did willingly and often talk of the future
Messiah; she did with draw her self, as much as she could, from worldly
discourses; she did force her body, of which the Angels had care, to be
obedient in all things to the soul: she was so comely and modest, that she
moved to devotion such as did behold her. In co^pend. h^stor and Canis. li^
cap. 13.
Cedrenus does recount that at twelve years of age, being at midnight in
prayer, she heard these words Thou shall bring forth my Son, the which she
did not manifest to any man in the world, until Christ was ascended into
heaven.

Points for Meditation.
1. Contemplate how the vigin Marie, all the time she did dwell amongst the
virgins of the Temple, was a lively pattern of perfection, because she did in
every thing observe her self, walking always in the presence of god.

2. Consider how the virgin Marie, for her modest holiness and wisdom, was
beloved of al her companions, and esteemed as their mistress, so that they
had recourse to her for comfort and counsel, and she did most kindly receive,
comfort, and help them.

3. Consider how all the virgins of the Temple did bear great reverence to the
virgin Marie: to whom she was not only a mirror of virtue, but did her best
to instruct them in perfection, and when need was, to pacify and accord them.

Documents.
1. If in all things thou will observe thy self, procure with the virgin Marie
to be always in Gods presence.

2. To be loved and esteemed for any other respect, then for virtue and
goodness, is a thing that dureth little, and is less worth.

3 Good speech, accompanied with good example, does edify, but with il
example, it destroieth.

OF THE VIRGIN Mary's spousage with S. Joseph. 5.
When the virgin Marie, was fourteen years old, the Priests of the Temple,
as In ora^^ de nati. Domini.
Nissenus does recount sent her to her kinsfolks in Nazareth, that according
to the custom, she might be married, because in the Temple they did not treat
of matrimony, and some little while after, by advise of the said Priests, she
was despoused to Joseph a just man, who was of the same country, and Tribe,
that Marie was. De perper. virg. Mariae.
Hugo de Sa^cto Victore writes that the virgin Marie did consent to the
matrimony, because she understood that such was Gods vvil, and knevv likewise
by revelation, that Joseph would live most chaste with her. Concerning the vow
of virginity that Marie did make, although Quidan Scholasti and Brig^da cit.
some say she made it with condition, if it so pleased God, yet S. (...) Thom.
3. (...) q. 28. ar.
Thomas, with Augus^^ de sancta virgini. ^^ cap. 4.
S. Augustine does hold, that she, before she was despoused had purposed
virginity, and after matrimony contracted with her husband, both of common
consent did vow perpetual virginity. History
But be it howsoever, yet two things are here certain. One is, that the virgin
Marie before she was announced by the Angel, had vowed virginity, as f
afterward shall be declared. An other we have out of Bid, Bed. ho^. ^e annun.
and sermon. 4. ^e assump. Ruper. ^^b. 3. in ^ant.
Rupertus, and Abd. in ^^ta S. Bar ^^olom. ^anis. li. 2. ^^p. 14.
Abdias, to wit, that from the creation of the world, the virgin Marie was the
first amongst women, that by perpetual vow did consecrate her virginity to
god.

Points for Meditation.
1 Contemplate how god ordained the virgin Marie should take a husband, to
deliver her from the suspicio^ of the world, if unmarried she had brought forth
Christ.

2 Contemplate how Marie though she did far exceed her spouse Joseph in
wisdom, virtue and holiness, yet did she bear him respect and honor him as
her ealder, considering in his person god, who had given her him.

3 Contemplate how the virgin Marie never leaving her deuotio^s, was withal
most diligent in government of her house: in so much that Joseph was astomed at
it, and did also bear her great reverence.

Documents.
1 Seeing that god is a most wise Lord, if thou be not more then proud, thou
must by the virgin Mary's example, approve and execute whatsoever he does
ordain.

2 If thou do not honor thy elders, thou will displease god, and dishonor thy
self.

3 Temporal exercises must be accomodated, as much as is possible, to those
that be spiritual, so that these be not hindered nor disturbed by the others.

OF THE VIRGIN Mary's Annunciation. 6.
FOuere months, says In epist.
Euodius, after that the virgin Marie was despoused, God sent to her the Angel
Gabriel, who as ^^t. lib. 1. ^^sic ca, 18 Hier. in ^^ist^ ad ^ustochiu^. hom. 3.
S. Ambrose etc Hierome write, entered to the virgin in a man's shape, she then
being recollected as d S. Bernard says in her closet at prayer: he saluted
her; and said that she was to conceive and bear the Savior of the world. B.
virg. cap. 1. Ansel. ^om. intra it JESUS August. ^e sancta ^irgine ca. ^.
Saint Luke tells how the virgin hearing her self saluted with so great
praise; was troubled thereat, and afterward asked how that might be done,
because she knew not man: that is as f Holy fathers do expound it, she had
vowed never to know man, but to remain still a virgin, to whom the Angel
aunswering did say, that it should be done by work of the holy Ghost,
without violating either vow or virgintie. Then the virgin did humbly give
her consent, to what soever god did command her. In Litu^gia.
S. Chrysostom will that the word was incarnate, when the Angel said, our Lord
is with thee. But Augu^^^ de fide a^^ Petr. ca 1^
S. Augustine and Damas^^ de fide orthod. lib. ^^ cap. 2.
Damascene do think, that it took flesh when the virgin Marie did give her
consent, Behold the handmayde of our Lord, be it done to me according to thy
word. Now when the Angel had thus ended his embassage, and given news to the
virgin Marie, that also Elizabeth had by gods will conceived in her old age, he
departed, and she followed on her prayer.

Points for Meditation.
1. Conte^plate how the virgin Marie desiring to be servant to the Messiah
mother, and requesting this at gods hands: the Angel came to her, who saluting
her with humble reverence, did call her full of grace, and blessed among weomen.

2 Contemplate how the virgin hea^ing her self saluted in such manner, ^as
troubled: and thinking what kind of salutation this might be, the Angel told
her, how she was chosen of god, for mother of his son the Mesias.

Comtemplate how understanding also that she should be both a mother and
virgin, she did not wax proud by reason of so great dignity, but did humble
her self saying, Behold the handmayde of our Lord, be it done to me whatsoever
he ordeineth.

Documents.
1 If thou will be exalted of God, procure by the example of the virgin Marie,
that thy humility come in deed from thy heart.

2 Do not thou seek nor rejoice to be praised of men, seeing the virgin Marie,
was troubled when she was praised of the Angel.

3 If thou desire that thy soul be precious and beautiful to the eyes of our
Lord, adorn the same with chastity and humility as Marie did hers.

OF THE VIRGIN Mary's visiting Elizabeth. 7.
Lucae. cap. 1.
When the virgin Marie had understood of the Angel, how God had so favored
Elizabeth that she had conceived, notwithstanding her barre^nes and old age,
rising from her prayer she went to visit her, and rejoice with her of the
favor bestowed upon her. In which voyage, although it were painful, because
it was thorough mountains, and long, for that from Nazareth whence she
departed, it was three days iourneie to the country of Jerusalem, as In
Lucae^ cap. 1.
Bid and S. Augustine do write, where Zachary made his aboade: yet Sermon* de
verbis Apocal.
S. Bernard says that the virgin going thither, did not feel that vvearines,
which weomen ar accustomed to feel after they have conceived, because that
which she had conceived was not humane but divine. Lucae. cap 1.
Arrived that she was to Zacharies house she did greet Elizabeth, and her
salutation was of such force, that even the infant in Elizabeth's womb did
leap for joy. The virgin Marie remained there about three months. In Lucae.
^ap. 1.
Theophilactus does write, that she departed from thence, before Elizabeth was
delivered of her child, and S. Luke does seem to insinuate this, partly
because it was not convenient that virgins should be present at women's
delivery, partly also for that many came thither to see the miraculous
childbirth of Elizabeth. homil. ^duent. 6. and Canis. lib. 4. cap 3.
Eusebius Emisenus says that al those of Zacharies house had taken so great
affection toward the virgin Marie, that they remained extreme sorry at her
departure.

Points for Meditation.
1 Co^template how the virgin Marie, when she had given thanks to our Lord for
the benifit bestowed upon her, went to visit and serve her cosen, Elizabeth: in
which voyage we may well think, that many squadrons of Angels did accompany
their King and Queen

2 Consider how at the going of this sacred arc, Zacharies house was blessed,
for that Elizabeth was repleinished with the holy Ghost, and John Baptist was
sanctified in her womb before he was borne.

3 Contemplate how Elizabeth, astonished that the mother of god with so so great
humility and charity did come to her, crying out did praise her, but the
virgin with a holy canticle did magnify our Lord, referring al her good and
praise to him.

Documents.
1 How much thou art exalted of god so much more ought thou, by the example
of the virgin Marie, to submit thy self, for the love of him, to thy neighbor.

2 Do thou desire to enriche thy soul? Seek to converse with those that be
holy and acceptable to god.

3 To glory of such things as be spoken in thy praise, or not to acknowledge
the good thou have received, to come from God, is naught else but to steal from
god, that which is his.

OF THE VIRGIN Marie suspected of Joseph. 8.
Matthew. ^a. 1.
THe virgin Marie being returned from Elizabeth to her house in Nazareth, and
now great with child for three months, and Joseph not knowing what had past
betwixt the Angel Gabriel and her, he began to suspect: on the one side he saw
the virgin in all her actions resemble holiness and chastity, and knew likewise
that she had vowed virginity: on the other side he beheld her great with
child, and saw that she held her peace, not making him acquainted with the
matter, wherefore douting whether this were a thing done by god, or some humane
weakness, he resolved not to accuse her to the Judges, nor diffame her, but to
depart from her. And as he was thinking of the matter, the Angel appeared to
him in sleep, and told him that he should not fear to abide with the virgin,
because she had conceived by work of the holy Ghost, and should bring forth
a son that should be called JESUS, who should save his people from their
sins. Orig. ser. 1. exdiuersis.
Origin and Bernar^ Hom 2. d^ B. Maria
S. Bernard do hold that Joseph believed the virgins greatness with child to be
some divine thing, and that he thought him self unworthy, to remain in the
company of so holy and virtuous a person, and therefore did think to depart
from her.

Points for Meditation.
1 Consider how Joseph seeing the virgin Marie with child, and not knowing the
manner, remained astonished and confounded: and because he had always known her
to be very holy he resolved to leave her secreatlie, and rather lead a
Pilgrims life abroad in the world, then to accuse or diffame her.

2 Co^template how the virgin Marie not knowing whether it were the will of god,
she should discover the mystery to her spouse, did rather choose to let this
suspicion run of her self, then to disclose it, having yet first commended
the matter to god in her prayer.

3 Contemplate how these two married persons, being so troubled and afflicted,
god by an Angel revealed to Joseph the mystery of the Incarnation, done in the
virgin by work of the holy ghost, where upon both parties did humbly give
thanks to our Lord.

Documents.
1 Learn of Joseph rather to suffer, then to diffame thy neighbor.

2 It is better to conceal the favors of god, which make for our praise, as
the virgin Marie did, then to diuulge them easelie.

3 How much less thou art culpable and worthy of blame, so much the more
willingly accept of tribulatio^s, which if they be not to purge thy fault, will
serve to increase thy glory.

OF THE VIRGIN Mary's Childbirth. 9.
When the virgin Marie had prepared some clothes for her little child,
according to her poverty, and the time of her delivery began to draw near,
there came forth, says Cap. ^
S. Luke, an edict from Caesar Augustus, that the whole world should be
enrolled, for every one to pay tribute in his country, wherefore the virgin
Marie and Joseph, went from Nazareth to the city of David called Bethlem,
because they were of the house and family of David. The voyage was very
noisome to the virgin, for that it was in winter, through mountains, and near
four days long. Being come to Bethelem, they found all the Innes taken up, so
that they were forced to retire them selves into a stal, where the blessed
virgin in the night was delivered of her son Christ JESUS, god and man. In
which childbirth. ^rat. 1. ^resur^^. Christ
Nyssenus and ^erm. 4. ^^igil. ^^iu. Do ^^i. ^^e insti^^. virg.
S. Bernard do auouche that the virgin Marie felt no pain nor travel at al,
but exceeding joy and comfort 4. ^e virgi^ Mariae
S. Amhrose and 4. ^^pr. ^^m de (...) Christ
S. Ildephonsus do add also, that the virginal cloistre of our Lady did
remain entire and whole. ^^ierom. ^^a Hel^^.
S. Cyprian likewise and ^cae. ca. Canis. 2. ca 9.
S. Hierome do teach us, that there was no Midwife present, but the virgin her
self was both Midwife and Nourse. The Sheepheards, who had been warned by the
Angels, that sung Glory in the highest to God, came to the stal, and with
great humility and devotion adored the holy infant.

Points for Meditation.
1 Consider how the virgin Marie and Joseph, to obey the Emperors edict, went
with great travel toward Bethelem, where finding none that would lodge them,
they retired them selves into a stal.

2 Contemplate how there in the night, the virgin feeling an exceeding Jubilee
of heart, lifted up her mind to god, and being wholly ravished in him brought
forth without pain her son Christ our Lord.

3 Contemplate how the virgin, beholding the divine fruit of her womb did
with humility adore it as her god, and afterward obtained of him license to
touch him, did with motherlie love take him in her arms, giving him her virgin
breast, and milk to suck.

Documents.
1 Behold how the virgin does not murmr at the Princes order, nor lament of
those that did not lodge her, do thou the like, when for lodge her, do thou the
like, when for observing the commandments of God thou must needs suffer.

2 Do thou desire to do many good woorks without wearines and pain? do them
willingly and for the love of Christ.

3 Then will Christ become thine, when thou shall use him as the virgin Marie
did, with humility and love.

OF THE VIRGIN Mary's Purification. 10.
AS soon as forty days were ended of the virgins Purification after her
delivery, Lucae. (...) 2.
she went to the Temple in Jerusalem to offer her son, and give as the law
ordained a pair of turtles or two young pigeons, albeit (as diverse holy b
fathers do say) the virgin was not bound to any such law, Beda in ca Lucae.
Guari.
nether needed she purification, for that she had not conceived by woork of
man, (...) Ser. 2. (...) purifitione et ^ij. ^uitici ca. (...).
of which yet law makes express mention. At that very time Simeo^ came into
the Temple, who amongst all the other mothers that were there to be purified,
did see the virgin Marie, In orat (...) Proph. ^meonis.
Marie, as d Timotheus priest of Jerusalem recounteth, environed with a
wonderful great and divine light: and seeing that other weomen were desirous to
be dispatched first, he said to them: o ye servants, will you go before your
Lady and mistress? Cap. 2 Canis. li 4. ca. 9.
S. Luke says that Simeon was a just and religious man, who had received an
answer from the holy Ghost, that before he died he should see the Messiah:
he did see him now, and take him in his arms, blessing god w th al his heart.
And afterward turning him self to the virgin Marie, he told her that Jesus
should be set for a sign of contradictions, and that a sword of sorrow should
pearce her soul.

Points for Meditation.
1 Consider how the virgin Marie, though she needed no purification, yet by the
example of her son, who was circumcised, not needing the same, would
according to the law be purified, leaving thereby, to us an example of
obedience, humility and mortification.

2 Consider with how great modesty and devotion, the virgin entered into the
temple, and with how great zeal and spiritual feeling, she did offer both her
self and her son to the father of heaven.

3 Consider how the virgin having heard that dolorus prophecy of Simeo^, was
nothing astoined at the matter, as who had wholly resigned her self, to gods
will and pleasure.

Documents.
1 Woe to him that is, but will not seem to be a sinner, seeing Christ and his
mother cared not to be accounted of as sinners, to observe the law of god,
though in deed they were not such.

2 Learn of the virgin in what manner thou ought to enter and remain
devoutly in the Church, which is made to honor god therein.

3 Put al thy hope in god, and so neither prosperity shall lift thee up to
much, nor adversity to much abase thee.

OF THE VIRGIN Mary's flight into AEgipt. 11.
THe fame of the child Jesus growing daily more and more, Matt. and Luc. ca.
2. and Rabanus in 2. c. Matthew.
through the wounderful things which were spoken of him, as well by the
sheepeherds touching the revelation they had from the Angel, as also by the
Sages concerning the new star which they had seen, and finally by that
which Simeon and Anne had said in the Temple. Chrisos^ in 2. cap. Matthew.
August. sermon de Epiph. and sermon. de Innocent.
Herod as a most cruel tyrante, entering into suspicion and fear of loosing
his kingdom, principally for that the Sages told in Jerusalem, that he whom
they did seek, was borne king of the Jews: he commanded that all the children
of Bethelem should be murdered, thinking so to make Christ away with the rest.
But god by means of an Angel revealed all the matter to Joseph, ordaining that
he should fly into Aegipt together with the child Jesus and his mother, and
Joseph with great diligence did perform it. This voyage was much more
combresome then the others past, because it was so daine and unexpected, into
foreign countries, and amongst barbarous people. In ca. 2. ^atth.
Anselmus and Niceph. b. 10. ^(...). 31. et ^^ij vt re^^rt Hiero^^ ^^b. 5. in
^^ai. ca. ^9. ^^anis. lib. ^^ cap. 6.
Nicephorus Callystus do recount, how at the entringe of Christ into Aegipt,
the devils trembled, and the Idols fell down to the ground, not being able to
stand in the presence of Jesus who was the true God.

Points for Meditation.
1 Consider how the virgin Marie to save the little child Jesus, whom Herod
sought to murder him, was forced to leave her country and friends, and fly
into Aegipt, God having so ordained.

2 Contemplate how much the virgin did endure, in so paineful and long a way,
and what grief her heart did feel, to see the little infant Jesus also suffer,
not having, by reason of their poverty, what was necessary for him, nor being
able to have provided before necessity constraining them to fly by night, and
also sodenlie.

3 Consider how the virgin does not murmour of Herodes cruelty, nor complain
of god, that he does not deliver the little babe from that danger by some other
means, but she takes al in good part.

Documents.
1 If tribulation were not a thing profitable, god would not have sent it to
his son and the virgin Marie whom he loved so dearly.

2. If thou will suffer nothing in this life, and yet do think to have joy
in the other, thou do deceive thy self, because thou desire to be more,
then was either the virgin Marie or Christ thy Lord.

3. If in adversity thou do lament and murmour, thou errest, showing thereby
to be displeased with that, which pleases God, and he sends thee for thy
good.

OF THE VIRGIN Mary's aboade in Aegipt. 12.
AFter a long and wearisome way, the virgin Marie at the length arrived in the
land of Aegipt, a Brocardus in descriptione terrae sanctae in fine.
distant from Bethelem, whence she departed, twelve long days journey. In
which voyage it is credible, as In concord* eua^g ca. 11.
Iansenius says, that the virgin consumed and spent all that, which by Gods
inspiration she had reserved to this end, of the gifts presented to Jesus by
the three Sages. She did settle her self in a place caled Materea near to
Cairo, for five years space; in which time, with her own labor and that of
Joseph her spouse, they maintained them selves, and brought up Christ. Ita
refe^unt, qui id ^iderunt Peregrini
In the house, where this holy family, did dwell, remains yet a miraculous
fountain of water that springs up: there is also to be seen a little
garden, in which time past did grow certain small trees of baulme. In this
place, those of Aegipt, to conserve the memory of such holy inhabitants, were
wont to keep a Lamp still burning, until the year a thousand, five hundred
and threescore. Many pilgrims likewise do go thither to visit that place for
devotion, who al do tell strange effects of that water* and say it is so
good, that those called the Bassa of Cairo do drink thereof. Moreover they
do report, that there is in the same place a most sweet savor, although the
dwelling be now near fallen down.

Points for Meditation.
1 Co^template how the virgin Marie, arrived in Aegipt, did find nether
provision made, nor house prepared to refresh her self after the trauail of
her voyage, so as we may think that for those first nights, she retired her
self to the poor pilgrims lodge.

2 Contemplate that although the virgin, as a poor stranger, wanted many
things necessary for her, yet did she never want her virtues, in so much that
she never did abandon her devotion, and had diligent care to provide for her
house.

3 Contemplate how the virgin, in all the time of this her banishment, did live
very poorly: and when commodities wanted for bringing up her little babe
Jesus, she did supply with her motherlie love and solicitude.

Documents.
1 If thou will live quiet in whatsoever place, be it never so incommodious,
thou must make small account of thy self, and be contented with little as the
virgin Marie was.

2 Have whatsoever thou can desire, yet thou shall never be content, unless
thou give thy self to the exercise of virtue.

3 Behold how the most dear friends of God live sparingly, and so beware thou
of superfluity, for it displeases God, who has given thee sustinance, and
whatsoever else that is good.

OF THE VIRGIN Mary's leesing of Jesus. 13.
When Herod was once dead, the virgin Marie with Joseph and Jesus returned to
Nazareth, a Matt ca. 2.
as the Angel had ordained, who again appeared to Joseph in sleep. From
Nazareth the virgin went every year with Jesus and Joseph, at the solemn
day of Pasche, to adore in the Temple of Jerusalem, although the same was
distant three days of, and the Exodus ca (...) and Deuter^ ca. 6.
virgin not bound to go. Jesus being then twelve years old, remained in
Jerusalem. The virgin Marie not finding her child, the first day at night,
amongst her kinsfolks, in whose company she thought that he had gone (for as
In cap Lucae Canis. de (...) Mar. li^ 4. c. 15.
Bid says, it was a custom among the Jews, in their devotions, to go
separate men from weomen, and that the children might go with whom of them
they would) she returned back with Joseph to Jerusalem, where the third day
she found him in the temple in the midst of the Doctors. And his mother
asking him what he meant to tarry in Jerusalem, and make him self be sought
with so much grief, he answered that they ought to remember, that he being
sent to seek the glory of his father, was to be found in the affairs and
place of his father.

Points for Meditation.
1 Co^template how the virgin went yearly, for her devotion, at the feast of
Pasche to adore in Jerusalem, and once it fell out that she turning back, Jesus
remained there.

2 Contemplate how the virgin Marie not seeing her beloved Jesus at night, nor
finding him amongst her friends and kinsfolk, with whom she thought he had
been, full of sorrow she went out of hand with Joseph, to seek him in Jerusalem.

3 Consider how the afflicted mother after three days weeping and suspiring,
found her beloved son in the Temple amongst the Doctors, whose sight and
presence gave her no less joy, then his absence and loss had given her
sorrow.

Documents.
1 Learn of the virgin Marie not to abandon nor blame thy devotions, when for
them thou do suffer any adversity or damage.

2 Learn also not to delaie to seek Christ, and have him with thee, for
besides that thou do lose much, thou do put thy self in great danger.

3 Thou see that the virgin did not find Christ amongst her kinsfolk, but in
the Temple, so likewise thou shall find him in spiritual things, but not in
fleash and blood.

OF THE VIRGIN Mary's spouse Joseph his death. 14.
IT is not altogether certain at what time the virgin Marie became a widow.
Haeres. ^8 contra Antid.
Epiphanius is of opinion that Joseph deceased, Christ being thirtene years
old. In com^end. hist.
Cedrenus says he died when Christ was of thirty years. Ambro. de instit.
^irg. c 7. and epist. 79.
S. Ambrose and Hiero. co^tra Hel^uid.
S. Hierome do write only, that Joseph was then dead, when Christ was
crucified. Matthew. ca. 1.
This holy man was of the roial stock of David, and being chosen of God for
the custody of two so precious treasures, as were Christ and the Virgin, it is
to be thought that he was such a one, as the holy scripture and Damasce de
fide orthad lib. 4. ca. 15.
ancient fathers do report him to have been, just, religious, prudent,
faithful, and endued with many other virtues. He was not only chaste, as
Hiero. cont. Heluid.
S. Hierome, Augu. Sermon. 15. de not. Do mini.
S. Augustine and others do affirm, but also did die a virgin, as not having
any other wife then the virgin Marie, with whom, as 3. p. q. 28. ar 4. and ad
Galat. ca. 1.
S. Thomas says he vowed virginity. And albeit the virgin was a most
beautiful creature, nevertheless her countenance did cast forth such holiness and
grace, that as Lib* 1. revel c. 1 and lib. 3 ca. 8.
S. Briget writes she moved all that did behold her to the love of virtue, and
much more did she move Joseph to the same, whose concupisce^ce, says De nat^
Mar. co^s^ 3. Canis. lib. 2. ca. 13.
Gerson, was either extinguished or so repressed, that he never fealt in him
self any disordinate motion.

Points for Meditation.
1 Contemplate how the holy old man Joseph being near the end of his life,
Jesus and the virgin did help him to die well, whose soul was forthwith carried
by the Angel into Abraham's bosom.

2 Contemplate how the virgin, co^forming her self to gods will, did supporte
with patience the death of her faithful spouse, albeit the same was to her a
thing very incommodious, because the life of such a saint did much help and
comfort her.

3 Co^te^plate how the virgin, though she remained young and needy, did not
therefore lament of god, nor complain of her state, nor envy at those that
were married, but seek by good works to please god also in that state of
widowhead, and to perfect her self in the same.

Documents.
1 Be thou pure and chaste as Joseph, and affected to the virgin Marie, and she
will aid thee in that dangerous passage of death.

2 If in the adversities that God does send thee, thou be impatient and
troubled, thou do lose the fruit thereof, and tribulations become more
grievous.

3 Learn of the virgin Marie to please god, and according to his will, to
perfect thy self in the state he has put thee.

OF THE VIRGIN Marie in time of her vvidowhead. 15.
THrough the death of Joseph, there grew to the virgin Marie some difficulty
of househould, Lib. 2. cem ca. ^^ and 9. and lib. 3. (...). 4.
yet a Sabellicus writes that she had so well disposed her spiritual exercises,
and the affairs of her house, that the one did not hinder the other. For she
did give the beginning of the day to godly contemplations, and that toward
night she did apply to read holy scripture, of which she was so greatly
enamoured, that, as Lib. 2. de virgini.
S. Ambrose writes she repeated sleeping the night, what the day time she had
read. She had her appointed time for sleep, albeit as Lib. 1. revel. ca. 10.
and lib. 3. ca. 8.
S. Briget reports, she had so accustomed her body, that not only in
sleep, but in whatsoever else it was obedient to the soul. de arcan Catho.
verat. lib. 7. ca. 5.
Galatinus tells us that the virgin had such a spirit of prophecy, that she
did still shut her eyes and ears, when she was to see, or hear any things
unlawful or impertinent. In epist. Canis. lib. 1. ca. 13.
Ignatius does likewise recount, that the virgin Marie was so sound in the love
of her neighbor, that she did not only show her self kind to the Jews,
that persecuted Christ, but having compassion of their imperfections, did also
seek to do them al kind of service, that she could. when Christ did come to
her house with his Apostles, she did feel particular joy of spirit, so that
she received them with great chearfulnes and contentment.

Points for Meditation.
1 Consider how the virgin Marie now a widow, was no less diligent in prayer,
then in the care of her house so that when Christ and his Apostles did come to
her, she caused al things to be in readiness according to her poverty.

2 Consider how the virgin in her conversation was so grave and modest that she
was amiable to al, and with her ex^aple did inflame others to love God and
virtue.

3 Contemplate how the virgin did never murmour, nor permit others in her
presence to speak evil of the Jews, that were her sons enemies, but did
excuse them and pray god for them.

Documents.
1 Have thou a desire, that thy temporal affairs may have good success do
thy spiritual exercises well, as the virgin Marie did hers.

2 Thou shall never inflame others to virtue, if thou be cold in prayer, and
careless in giving good example.

3 To excuse, and pray god for him that does persecute thee, is the reu^egment
of good Christians: grateful to god, displeasing the devil, and profitable to
the soul.

OF CHRIST HIS departing from the virgin Marie. 16.
CHrist our Savior was in a town called Bethania, Iansenius in concorc. 128.
and Stella. in Luc. (...). 22.
two miles of Jerusalem, in the house of Martha and Marie Magdalen, as Bonau.
in medie. c. 4. and 62.
Bonauenture says, with whom also the virgin Marie was, and when upon
thursdaie he had sent Peter and John to Jerusalem, to find a place where to
celebrate the Pasche, the time of his departure now come, he took his leave of
his dear mother which remained fraught with sorrow, because she knew that Jesus
was to be delivered up into his enemies hands, to endure exceeding torments,
and finally to die upon the cross as a thief. There is no doubt but that the
virgin weeping and taking no repose all that night, did expect still to hear
most heavy news of her son. Canis. lib 4. ca. 25.
And in deed as soon as Jesus was apprehended in the garden, a messenger, who
peradventure was some one of the Apostles, went to Bethania to carry tidings to
the virgin, how Jesus was now betrayed by Judas, taken by the Jews, and lead
away bound to the Judges. The virgin Marie having understood this doleful
news, sobbing and sighing, and accompanied with the other Mary's, went to
Jerusalem.

Points for Meditation.
1 Co^template how the virgin Marie, when she understood of Jesus, that now
the hour of his passion was come; and that for this effect he was to go to
Jerusalem, it being his eternal fathers will, was strooken at the heart with such
bitter sorrow, that not able to speak, she did power out from her eyes
streams of tears.

2 Co^template how the virgin, whiles she stood lamenting, had news that
Jesus was then taken. Think now what a cruel dart this was to the heart of that
most loving and kind mother, which did bear so great affection to her son
Jesus.

3 Co^template how the virgin Marie straight upon this news went to wards
Jerusalem, offering her self, if it had so pleased almighty god, either to die
for Jesus, or to die with Jesus: seeing that to live without Jesus, was to her
(...) continual and most painful death.

Documents.
1 If the virgin Marie did remain so ^uch afflicted for the departing of
christ, in what state shall that miserable ^ule be, which Christ has abandoned
by reason of sin?

2 Learn of the virgin not to blasheme god, nor be angry, when any il news
is told thee.

3 If to live without Jesus be a most painful death, what shall it be to live in
mortal sin, which is to live against Jesus.

OF THE VIRGIN Mary's going to mount Caluarie 17.
When the virgin Marie entered into Jerusalem, Bonau. in Meditatio.
she did find the whole city bent and moved against Jesus; and because the
people were incited, encouraged and persuaded by the Scribes and Pharisees, to
cause Christ to be condemned as a malefactor, the afflicted mother was
constrained to hear infinite injuries, and horrible blasphemies against her
son Jesus, throughout all the streets of Jerusalem, by which she was to pass
going to mount Caluarie. But how much this virgin did suffer this day, which
was good fridaie: holy fathers do declare with diverse examples. Lib. 4. de
fid. orthod. ca. 15.
Damascene writes that the virgin marie did feel those bitter pangs, and
pains at the time of Christ his passion, which she did not feel in the time
of his nativity. And In tractat de Compass. virginis.
S. Bernard says, that what effect the nails, and other instruments (of
torment) did work in the body of our Savior Christ; the very same they
wrought in the soul of the virgin, by reason of her motherlie compassion.
Luthim. in Luc. ca. 2.
Luthimius and Beda ib. and Canis. lib. 4. ca. 25. and 26.
Bid do record, that the pain of our Saviors passion, did pearce even
through the heart of the virgin, like that sharp sword, that was prophesied
and foretold by holy Simeon: in so much that Ansel. lib de excellen. B. Mariae.
ca. 5.
Anselmus, Bernard sermon signum mag.
S. Bernad ^ldeph. Ser. 2. de assum. virgini.
Ildepho^sus and others do affirm, that the virgin Marie was a martyr, and
more then a martyr.

Points for Meditation.
1 Contemplate how the virgin Marie made that voyage, weeping all the way: and
arrived that she was at Jerusalem, she did understand the injuries and outrages
done to her son, which were so many swords to her heart.

2. Contemplate how it also pierced her heart, to hear reported, that not
only any one person had not spoken ought in favor of the innocent Jesus, he
having bestowed so many benifits upon them al: but also that he was forsaken
of his own disciples.

3 Conte^plate moreover, what pain that of the virgin was, when going to mount
Caluarie, she did hear the strokes of those wicked torturers, that so cruelly
nailed her son to the Cross.

Documents.
1 Learn of the virgin Marie how thou must behave thy self in tribulatio^s:
first thou must not grudge against the creatures, that do thee any harm or
iniure, no more then the virgin did against those, that either did procure the
death of Christ, or execute the same.

2 Thou must not lament nether of thine own condition, nor of God who did
permit it to be such as it is, but seek to take profit thereby for thy soul,
as god does pretend.

3 Albeit thou feel grief and disgust, yet with thy will and higher part of
the soul, which remains free, thou must praise god.

OF THE VIRGIN Marie seeing Christ on the Cross. 18.
THe virgin Marie when she was come up to mount Caluarie, Joan. ca. 19.
did see her son crucified betwixt two thieues: and whiles with most doleful
tears she stood beholding this lamentable pageant, Jesus did regard her from
the cross with great compassion, and showing her John his disciple, said to
her, vvoma^ behold thy son, and after he said to the disciple, Behold thy
mother. Sermon. stabatiuxta Cruc.
S. Anselmus does auouche, that the virgin Marie showed in that place such rare
virtues, as she was the glory of al weomen sex: for when the disciples had
forsaken their master, the virgin did not abandone him, and when others fled
for fear, she remained steadfast in faith, and constant at the foot of the
Cross: with great sorrow she had exceeding patience: she did not curse, nor
murmour, nor demand revenge against her enemies at gods hand. And In eadem.
Ser. Stabat.
S. Bernard says, that the virgin, although she was overwhelmed with sorrow,
did not yet commit any indecent act, nor show any sign of impatie^ce, but
keep her self always within the bounds of reason and modesty. In lament.
Mana Canis lib. 4. ca. 25. and 26.
S. Ephrem the deacon does also write, that the virgin, at the foot of the
Cross, did adore, and worship with all reverence the wounds, the
afflictions, and magnanimity of Jesus, and eftsons offer them up to god, for
the redemption of mankind.

Points for Meditation.
1 Contemplate the exceeding great sorrow and compassion of the virgin Marie,
when she did see her innocent and dearly beloved son al beraied with blood,
and as a malefactor hanging upon the Cross, betwixt two thieues.

2 Consider how the virgin was so afflicted, that Jesus enduring the cruel
torment of the cross, had compassion of her, and therefore gave her S. John for
her son, and her self for his mother.

3 Contemplate how the virgin, at the death of her beloved son was the most
discomforted of al mothers, for that she was present, and yet could not help
him, who died in so great pains and torments.

Documents.
1 Every time that thou do look upon the Crucifixe, think that for thy
sins the son god was crucified, and so with the virgin Marie thou will have
compassion and sorrow of him.

2 In all thy necessities make recourse to the virgin, seeing god has given us
her for our mother, in the person of S. John, and us to her for her children.

3 If Christ and the virgin did suffer in this life so great afflictions, how
do thou think to live without adversity, and in continual pleasure and
comfort.

OF THE VIRGIN Marie houlding Christ dead in her arms. 19.
THe virgin Marie stood at the foot of the Cross, (...) Matthew. a. 27. Mar.
ca. ^5. Luc. ^a. 23. ^oan. ca. ^9.
when at Jesus death the sun was darkened, and the earth did quake: and being
very desirous to have in her arms the body of her beloved son, behold,
one of the souldiars with a spear opened his side. There is no doubt but that
this spear did wound also the blessed mother with exceeding grief, who
although she were displeased with that fiercenes of the soldier, which did
show him self so cruelle to wards one that was dead, yet she was not moved
against him. Canis. lrb. 4. de B. Mariae. ca. 26.
To be short, upon fridaie at night, because it was not expedient that the
dead bodies should remain upon the Cross in the Sabbath, the body of Jesus
was vnnailed, and taken down from the Cross and laid in the arms of his
pitiful mother, which she most dearly did embrace and worship, and often
kiss those holy wounds, offering them up to the eternal father for the
salvation of the world. Here the other Mary's did weep most abunda^tlie,
seeking by this means to accompany the virgin, whose sorrow and lamentation,
as In Joan. ca 19 Sermon Stabat in^xta Crucem.
Anselmus says, was passing great, because the love that she did bear to
Jesus, was also great: yet the same was always joined with such comlines and
grave behaueour, that no man could reprehend it.

Points for Meditation.
1 Co^template how the virgin Marie, when she could not have her son alive,
desired to have him being dead: but before she could obtain this, a soldier
with a spear did open his side, not without horror and grief of the mother.

2 Contemplate the dolorous lamentation that the virgin made, when she had once
in her arms that sacred body whose wounds she did kiss with great devotion,
and wash them with streams of tears.

3 Think what grief of heart the virgin did feel, when she was constrained
to leave that holy treasure to be buried, and afterward was forced to depart
from the sepulcher, which yet she did not without many sobbes and sighs.

Documents.
1 Learn of the virgin Marie how thou must behave thy self, in the death of
thy dear friends. Think first that god being a most kind father, what he
does and permits, he does for our good.

2 Hence it is that thou must not lament, nether of god, nor of his creatures,
nor of thine own case.

3 Suffer not thy self so to be carried away with sorrow, although the same be
very great, that thou commit thereby any lightness or vndecencie: having still
before thine eyes, the modesty and gravity of the virgin Marie.

OF THE VIRGIN Marie seeing Christ resuscitate. 20.
THere is noe certainty, into what place the virgin Marie did retire her
self, after that Jesus was buried, nor in what place Christ did appear unto
her after his resurrection: if not, that Lib 2. histo. ca. ^
Nicephorus does say, that she dwelt in S. John's house, near to Sion in
Jerusalem. And this is very likely to be so, for that the virgin was extreme
weak, partly in respect of her continual weeping, partly also because all that day she had eaten nothing: in so much that it is credible she went not
from Jerusalem, but that S. John, to whom Christ commended her a little
before, did lead her to his house, where she expected her son knowing for
certain, that he was to rise from death the third day. But be it howsoever,
that which Augus lib. de sancta virginitate. ca 3. Ruper. lib. 7. diu. offic.
ca. 25. Anselm. de excel. virg. ca. 6.
holy fathers do affirm, and is certain, is this: that the virgin Marie was
the first, to whom our Savior appeared after his resurrection. And as Epiph.
^on. haer. and libel. Aetiq Canis. lib. 5. ca. 1.
Epiphanius does write, she was the first that did adore him, being glorious.
In deed it was convenient for such a son, so to behave him self toward
such a mother, not only because he gave us the law to honor father and
mother, but also because the virgin did receive extreme pain and sorrow, of
his passion and death, more then any othres, yea above al others: so that she
deserved to be comforted before any other, and more then any else whosoever.

Points for Meditation.
1 Co^template how the virgin Marie, being as it were buried in her chamber for
sorrow, Jesus appeared unto her raised from death, and being al glorious, al
brighte, and accompained with squadrons of Angels, and holy fathers out of
Limbo: and think what unspeakable joy the virgin did feel of so glorious
apparition.

2 Co^template how the virgin, seeing Jesus so glorious, did first worship him
as her God, and then embrace him as her son, kissing eftsons the sacred
wounds, which did shine in his glorious body as so many precious stones.

3 Contemplate how the virgin did give her son most hearty thanks, for his
dear visiting of her: and pray him to go comfort the Apostles and other
devout persons, with his glorious resurrection.

Documents.
1 If thou will endure nothing for the love of Christ, thou shall not be
visited nor comforted of him.

2 Learn of the virgin not to be to joyful in time of prosperity, but to
adore and thank God the author of al good.

3 Learn also of her to have charity toward thy neighbors, and to wish and
procure their comfort, in time of afflictions and trauails.

OF THE VIRGIN Marie after Christ his Ascension. 21.
AS the common opinion is, the virgin Marie lived fifteen years after the
Ascension of Christ into heaven: in which time she was occupied in aduauncing
the primitive church of Christ, which in those beginnings was mightily
persecuted; so that she did animate al, and teach them how to behave them
selves in their actions and persecutions, moreover De excel Mar. ca. 7. and
Me^aphrat in ^rat de dor mit Deiparae.
S. Anselmus does write that the virgin understanding more profoundly those
verities, which the holy Ghost had revealed, did teach and declare many
things also to the Apostles, with whom she always lived familiarlie, leading
with them an Apostolical life. Tragae. de Christ patiente.
Nazianzenus says, that after the Ascension of Christ, she did foretell the
Jews of the destruction of Jerusalem, for the sin committed against the
Messiah. Sermon. de Assumptione.
Sophronius also does report, that oftentimes she visited the mount Caluarie,
the holy sepulcher, and with great devotion did kiss the footsteps of Christ,
which he le^t printed in the mount Oliuet. Canisius lib. 5 ca. 1.
Some be of opinion that she did live of the common alms, with which the
widows of the primitive Church were wont to be maintained. Lib. revel. cit.
S. Briget writes, that the virgin did not only fortify and confirm those
new Christians in their faith, but also convert many Jews and Gentiles to the
knowledge of Christ, and that for this cause, God did conserve her alive after
Christ his Ascension.

Points for Meditation.
1 Co^template how after the Ascension of Christ, the virgin Marie remained as
a mistress and giude of the faithful, wherefore in all their doubts and
trauails, they had recourse to her.

2 Contemplate how the virgin did receive every one very kindly, comfort the
afflicted, pacify those that were at discord, and instruct them al in the law
and faith of Christ, in which good works she could not but endure many
incommodities.

3 Contemplate how the virgin at her times appointed, did give her self also to
the conte^plation of celestial things, and to visit the holy places, leaving in all her actions rare examples of virtue, and excellent perfection.

Documents.
1 For so much as the virgin Marie was left us for our mistress and guide;
thou art unwise, if thou go not after her, following her virtues.

2 If Christ and his mother did suffer many incommodities, to help their
neighbors, it is a sign, that whosoever will help others, must also endure
some discommodite, and not seek his own contentment.

3 If thou will have affection to heavenly things, think upon, them often,
as the virgin did, and consider that god did create and make thee for them, and
not for these things upon the earth.

OF THE VIRGIN Marie requesting favor to die. 22.
When the primitive church, through the labors of the virgin Marie, was for
the space of fifteen years meetelie well established, and increased by
persecutions; the virgin demanded of our Lord to end her Pilgrimage, and pass
to an other life, there to be more united with her son. And the time being
now come, which God had appointed for this purpose, Lib 2. hist ca. 21.
Metaphras in orat de vita and morte virginis. Canis. lib 5. ca. 2. and. 3.
Nicephorus does report that our Lord sent her an Angel, which brought her the
ioiful news of her departure from this banishement to heaven, and giving her a
branch of a palm tree, foretold her the day of her decease. This tidings
was to the virgin Marie of exceeding ^oie, and so dear, that she could not be
satiated to thank God, but al full of joy, she did communicate to her frinds
and devout persons the revelation which she had received from the Angel, and
showed the^ the branch of palm which the same Angel brought her. She caused
certain poor garments that she had, to be given to two poor widows her
neighbors Nichephorus does moreover add, that to the house where she was,
there came a great multitude of Christians, which with tears did lament,
seeing them selves to be shortly bereft of such a mistress, and the only
comfort that they had; but the virgin Marie did exhort them rather to be glad,
then to mourn and lament.

Points for Meditation.
1 Consider how the virgin Marie was inflamed with the love of her son Jesus,
in so much that she often demanded of our Lord, to depart out of this life, to
go to him, and enioie him in heaven, remitting her self nevertheless to his
holy will and pleasure.

2 Contemplate how the Angel sent by God, did reveal to the virgin, that now
was the time, in which she must pass to a better life, to enioie
everlastingly her dearly beloved son, and the fruit of her works.

3 Contemplate the great jubilee, which the virgin did feel of so happy
news: for so much as in this pilgri mage she did nether desire, nor think upon
any other thing.

Documents.
1 Because thou know not what is best for thee, thou must even in those
things that seem very holy and good, resign thy self as the virgin Marie
did, to the good pleasure of almighty god.

2 God is wont to grant his favors at the time by him appointed, and
therefore lament not, if thou do not sodenlie obtain what thou demaundest.

3 If thou desire that the tidings of death be ioiful to thee, with draw thy
thoughts from earth lie things, and affect thy self to heavenly things.

OF THE VIRGIN Marie being near to die. 23
THe time approaching near in which the virgin Marie was to depart out of his
life to the celestial Jerusalem, God did not cease to show her new favors, for
he would that all the Apostles should find them selves present at her death as
Metaphras orat de uita and morib. B. virg Nicepho lib. 2. hist. ca. 3. Damasce.
orat. de. dormit and assum virg.
many writers do affirm. And setting a part the testimony of Dion. Areop. de
dui nomi. ca. 2.
Dionysius Areopagita, who was there present, I will here lay down that,
which. Inuenalis apua Euthim in vet. hist.
S. Iuuenalis Bishop of Jerusalem did answer to Marcianus Emperor being
demanded of him touching the death of the virgin Marie. Albeit, says he, holy
scripture does not speak of the death of the virgin Marie, yet we have by an
ancient and most true tradition, that at the time of her glorious parting out
of this life, the Apostles that were in diverse parts of the world, in a moment
were lifted up into the air, and came together in Jerusalem, and were present
at the death of the virgin Marie. Besides this S. Ansel. de excelle^tia virg.
ca 8.
Anselmus and Nicepho citat. ca. 21.
Nicephorus do say, that Christ also came from heaven in company of many
Angels, to be present him self in parson at the death of his most dear
mother, and to receive her soul. The like long before these men did write Vbi
supra Canis. lib. 5. ca. 3.
Damascenus, setting down the discourse and speech, which past at that time
betwixt the mother and the son, as hereafter shall be declared.

Points for Meditation.
1 Contemplate how as soon as the time of the virgin Mary's happy departure
was come, the Apostles came to Jerusalem from diverse parts of the world to be
there then present: almighty God disposing this so for honor and comfort of
the virgin.

2 Consider how Christ our Savior came also down from heaven, to be present
likewise him self at the death of his dear mother, and to receive her soul.

3 Contemplate how the virgin, the more greater joy she felt in her heart, did
the more humble her self, and with most cordial affection thank our Lord, for
so many great graces and favors.

Documents.
1 In the time of thie death or sickness, procure to have always some spiritual
parsons near unto thee.

2 Cease not to lead a virtuous life as the virgin Marie did, and Christ will
not fail to assist thee at thie death.

3 Give thie self to God with all thie heart, and serve him with true
humility, if thou desire to live and die content.

OF THE VIRGIN Mary's death. 24.
THe virgin Marie deceased in Jerusalem in S. John's house, being about
threescore and three years old. Lib. 4. reu^la. ca. 23.
S. Brigett tells us that she died most quietly, without any fear or
pain. In orat. de assump Deipare.
S. Damascenus is of opinion, that a little before the virgin gave up her ghost,
she said to Jesus, Into thy hands o my son, I commend my spirit: receive now
my soul so dear unto thee, which thou have kept free from al spot of sin.
To thee likewise and not to the earth do I give my body, in which it pleased
thee to dwell. draw me to thee, that I may be there, where thou art, the
blessed fruit of my womb. The self same father does also say, that Christ
did answer her in this sort-come, o my blessed mother into my repose, come o
pure and beautiful amongst al weomen, because in thee there is no spotte. Lib.
2 ^hist. ca. 21.
Nicephorus does recount that the virgin Marie speaking these words, Be it done
to me again according to thine word, gave up her blessed soul into the
dear hands of her son Jesus, and so she remained as if she had be^ a sleep
In hist. ^ete. Euhim.
S. Iuuenalis also did say to the Emperor Marcianus, that at the death of the
virgin were seen many Angels, and most sweet songs of the high powers, and
the virgin in an unspeakable manner did give up her gracious soul into the
hands of God, moreover In orat. le Assum to. Canis. ^ib. 5. ca.
Andreas Bishop of Candie does tell how there came a great multitude of Angels
from heaven at the death of the virgin.

Points for Meditation.
1 Co^template how the virgin being ready to pass out of this life, having
commended her soul to her maker, did also commend to the Apostles the faithful
of Christ, particularly those that were afflicted and troubled.

2 After this done, lifting up her eyes to heaven, and beholding steadfastly
her son Jesus, she demanded his benediction; which obtained, that most
blessed soul of hers, did depart out of the body without any fear, and did
fly into the arms of Jesus.

3 Contemplate how Jesus did receive the most pure soul of his dearly beloved
mother, and with Angelical hymns did conuaie the same into heaven; those that
were then present remaining astonished, and with tears giving thanks and praise
to God for all.

Documents.
1 See what account the virgin Marie did make of helping her neighbors; that
departing out of this world she did commend them to the Apostles.

2 If thou wilt not be afraid at thy death time; procure that thie conscience
be clean from sin.

3 Thou art fully deceived, if being a live thou care not for heaven; and yet
do think, that dying thie soul shall fly thither.

OF THE VIRGIN Mary's funerals and burial. 25.
AFter that the virgin Marie was departed this life, the Apostles took her
sacred body out of the bed, in which before her death she did remain appareled
and put in most decent manner, and laid her upon the biere. Lib. 2. bist. ca.
22.
Nicephorus does report that there was great concourse of deaf, blind, and
other lame folks, who al were most miraculouslie cured with touching only that
sacred body. This done-there was a procession set in order: and some of the
Apostles went before with lights in their hands, some others carried the
coffin, and al singing holy himmes Andreas Crete^. orat de Assump. B.
Virginus. Damascin orat de Dormit. and Assap virg. Canis. lib. 5. ca. 3.
went toward getssemani, where she before had appointed to be buried. The same
author does recount, and others also do avouche, that through all the way were
seen in the air many squadro^s of Angels, which did accompany the blessed
body of their Queen. He says moreover, that a certain priest of the Jews,
moved of haterd and envy, was so rash and inconsiderate, as to push the beire
thinking to throw the same to the ground: but he was forth with punished by
god, for that his hands were separated from his arms, and did stick hanging
to the coffin. whereuppo^ the poor wretch astonished with the miracle, did
sodenlie repent him self, and with tears demanded pardon: so that by S.
Peter's appointment the procession was stayed, and the Jew approaching near to
the coffin with great reverence, his hands by a new miracle were restored to
him again.

Points for Meditation.
1 Contemplate how as soon as the virgin Marie was dead, the Apostles with
great reverence, but not without tears, did put her body in order to carry it
to be buried, and to do the funeral exequies accustomed.

2 Moreover consider the procession, with which that holy tabernacle of god,
was carried to be buried by the Apostles: accompanied with a great multitude of
Christians, which by the way did still singe holy himmes.

3 Conte^plate how when they were come to the place, and had celebrated the
exequies that sacred and virgin body was of al blessed with great reverence
and devotion, and after honorably buried.

Documents.
1 Learn heerehence how to celebrate funerals after a christian manner. first
thou must not put thie self to superfluous charges in things, which do not
help the soul of him that is dead, but rather nourish vanity in those that
be alive.

2 Thou must not lament the dead immoderatlie, but rather pray for their
sowles.

3 Thou must make account of funerales, as of a warning which god does give
thee, thereby to prepare thy self to die well.

OF THE VIRGIN Mary's Assumption. 26.
THat holy Bishop Nicepho lib. 2. hist. ca. 23.
S. Iuuenalis does tell us, how the Apostles remained at the sepulcher of the
virgin Marie for three days, hearing continually a most sweet harmony of
holy himnes. After three days were past, it seemed to the Apostles for
consolation of S. Thomas (who was not present at her death) to open the
sepulcher, and to show him the sacred body. And when they had discovered the
place, they found not the body, but they did feel a most sweet savor, and
found only the linen in in which the body was wrapped, which they did kiss
for devotion. And that the blessed virgin was raised up the third day, and in
soul and body assumpted into heaven many holy fathers do tell us. Oration. de
Assup.
S. Damascenus does write that the virgin as the daughter of the old Adam, was
subject to the old law of ^ea^^^: but in as much as she was the mother of the
living god, she was from the sepulcher conioined to him. In entonio de dor nit
virg. (...) Part. 3. ^nnal. and ^d Alip. (...) Sermon. de ^it. and lormit. ^irg
Canis ^ib. 5. ca. 4.5. and (...).
Andreas Bishop of Candia does say in this sort. She that brought forth the
author of life, being raised up again, finds her self now there where is
present the perpetual fountain of life. Michael Glycas does report that the
virgin Marie died according to the laws of nature, but by grace she was raised
again, as her son. Metaphrastes also does auouche that the most blessed body
of the virgin, was by god translated into the divine and celestial tabernacles.

Points for Meditation.
1 Contemplate in what manner the blessed body of the virgin Marie laid in the
sepulcher, was not only void of corruption, but also did cast from it self a
most sweet savor.

2 Contemplate how God ordained that the third day the soul of the blessed
virgin Marie should descend from heaven to earth, to be reunited to the body
her faithful companion, of which she received no small joy and contentment.

3 Contemplate how that glorious soul came from heaven accompanied with
squadrons of Angels, and so was reunited to the body: in so much that the
virgin being raised the third day, went into heaven with great triumph.

Documents.
1 If thou desire that thie body give a sweet savor to God after thou art
dead: endeavor to keep it chaste whilst thou art alive.

2 If thou procure that thie body be a dwelling place for god here on earth,
he will honor and exalt it in heaven.

3 If thou will mount up to heaven triumpha^t as our Lady did, be humble
here on earth and suffer not thie self to be overcome of thie passions.

OF THE VIRGIN Mary's entering into heaven. 27
EPiphanius does plainly confess, Sermo. le Laudi. (...). virg.
that no tongue of men or Angels is sufficient to express the glory and
triumph, that the virgin Marie had in heaven: and concluding he says that next
under god she is Superior to al. Sermo. (...). de as^up. virg.
S. Bernard also writes that none can think with what glory the Queen of
the world did enter into heaven; with what affect of devotion the celestial
legions did behold her: with what cheerful countenance and divine embracings
she was received of Jesus, and exalted above al other creatures. Sermo. le
assump. ^urg.
Sophronius does tell in particular how in the Assumption of the virgin, those
celestial Citizens went to meet her with all solemnity: and so environed with
heavenly brightness, she was conducted by them with music to the throne which
was prepared for her: and how the feast of the Assumption, which we celebrate
but once a year, is perpetual to all that heaue^lie Jerusalem, and to those
blessed spirits. In eua^g. de sanc. deipa.
Athanasius does set down the praises which each Ierarchie did sing to the
virgin Marie. And Lib. de excil virg. ca. 8. Canis lib. 5. ca. 4.
Anselmus does say moreover that God exalted the virgin Marie his mother above
all the heavens, and placed her in a throne of glory, making her the Sovereign
over al creatures. The like do say al those holy fathers that write of the
virgin, or of her Assumption.

Points for Meditation.
1 Co^template how the virgin Marie entering into heaven, the celestial coorte
went to meet her, by which she was received with universal joy as the mother
of god and Queen of heaven.

2 Contemplate how ascending to the place prepared for her, before the creation
of the world, above all the quiars of Angels, every Ierarchie of those blessed
spirits did sing their praise to the most sacred virgin.

3 Co^template how the virgin being placed in her seat next to the throne of
the most blessed Trinity, at the right hand of her son, all the court of
heaven did incline them selves, and do reverence to their Queen.

Documents.
1 If thou desire to be received in heaven with honor, as the virgin Marie
was, receive Christ on earth with love and humility.

2 They shall be praised of the Angels in heaven, which have eschewed the
praises of men upon earth.

3 The more that thou shall a base thy self in this life for the love of god,
the more thou shall be exalted in heaven.

OF THE VIRGIN Mary's protection in heaven of her deuoutes: 28.
THe co^tents of this last history is so manifest and clear, that we need
not quote any other authors then our selves: for so much as we al do see, that
in every kingdom, in every province, and in every city though it be never
so little, there is to be found some image of our Lady that does work
miracles, and to which devout persons have particular recourse, to obtain
graces and favors of God, by means of the virgin Marie. And this has been an
ordinary thing since the beginning of the primitive Church of Christ. Now who
is he that will say, that this is not to be ascribed to the particular
protection, which the virgin has in heaven of her deuoutes here on earth? who
will say, that she is not favored of that infinite maine sea of al good nes?
seeing that she does obtain of him for us, so many great graces and favors,
who is so beside him self, that he will not do honor and reverence to so
diligent and loving an aduocatrice. Lib de excellen. virg. ca. 8.
S. Anselmus says that the virgin has been exalted to such greatness for us, to
the end she might easelie obtain whatsoever good we needed for our soul. And
b S. Augustine teaches that she does help us more, Sermon.
the^ all the other Saints. ^^e As^^mptio. (...) In Can^^ic. lib. 7. (...)
fine. Canis. lib. (...). ca. 8. and 17.
So that c Rupertus calls her the mountain of mountains, from whence comes
to us al succor, obtained of our supreme Lord and maker of al things.

Points for Meditation.
1 Contemplate how the glory and greatness of the virgin Marie in heaven do not
make her to be vngetful of her clients in earth, for whom she prays so much
the more, how much her charity is greater, and she nearer to the fountain of
al grace.

2 Contemplate how the virgin is so greatly beloved and favored of god that
she does not only obtain what she demands for us, but god also takes
pleasure, in showing us favor by her means.

3 Consider likewise of this, how much it imports to be under the protection
of the virgin Marie, who is the Queen of heaven so puissant, and so
charitable, we being so weak and so needeful, and remaining in so dangerous a
banishment as we do.

Documents.
1 He that has charity, as the virgin Marie had, getting up to dignity does
not forget those whom he leaft behind him.

2 The more virtuous that thou shall be, the more God will favor thee: and thou
shall more easily, obtain the graces thou do damaund.

3 Be thou a true devout of the virgin Marie, and she will deliver thee from
the dangers of this troublesome life.

FINIS.
OF THE VIRGIN Mary's stature and manners, taken out of ancient and holy
fathers.
THe virgin Marie was of a mean stature, although some be of opinion as
Nicephorus writes that she was of a little more then a mean stature.
^icephor. (...). 2. hist. (...) 23. ^^iphan. ^onstanti. ^esbyter ^^b. de vita
^ariae. ^edrenus (...) compen ^io hist. Ansel^us apud ^anis. lib. (...). ca. 13.
Her color was so^what more broune then white, and was much like the color
of wheat. Her hear was yellow, yet without art or human industry. Her eyes
were quick and lively and of a grave color, but the apple of her eye was like
to an olive color. Her eye liddes were decently black, and somewhat bowed:
her nose was mean, her lips of coral color, her face something long, her
hands and fingars long.

In conversation she was affable, and gracious in speech, yet grave and
modest: her talk was little, and not without necessity: she did honor al most
willingly: she was shamefast and demure, without laughing, disdain, or any
other perturbation. The holy and famous martyr S. Ignatius, who lived at the
same time the virgin Marie did, In epistel* ad Joan. Evangelist.
in a certain epistle of his, after he had called her a pattern of penance,
and a mistress of christian religion does say that from many parts of the
world there came sundry to see her, as if she had been a celestial miracle,
and a most sacred sight: to whom she seemed so maruailous, that every one of
them was incredibly glad to have seen her, or spoken with her. Amongst those
was that great Dionysius Areopagita, Apud Canis. lib 5. ca 1. inter medium.
and fine^ in and ca 22. post princip.
who being at the majesty of the virgin Marie, and woundering at the holiness
of her manners, and beholding in her I know not what celestial and divine
brightness, did say, that if Christ had not been revealed to him, he would
easelie have believed that there had been no other god then the virgin Marie.
Homil. de hypapan. Domini.
Hence it is that the holy doctor Saint Chrysostom does call our Lady the
great miracle of the world.

CERTAIN Ancient miracles wrought by the virgin Marie.
What time Leo Isauricus sought to take away holy images out of the church
of Christ, S. John Damascene did write three books in defense of them:
wherewith the adversaries (of images) being offended, they did accuse him as a
breaker of the Princes peace, saying that he had written letters of treason,
whereupon his right hand was out of. But Damascene entering into his closet, and
kneeling down before the image of our Lady, said in this manner. See here,
o most holy mother, how for defe^ding holy images, my hand has been cut of:
to thee do I humbly commend mie self: which when he had uttered with tears,
he slept, and in sleep did see the blessed virgin restore him his hand, so
that, waking he found his hand whole: there remayninge only a sign of the
cut. This miracle was most famous in all the East, and written by John
Patriarcke of Jerusalem.

Theophilus Archdeacon in Cilicia, being accused by some envious persons, was
put out of his office, and offended at the matter did deny Christ and our
Lady, and by a certain writing did give him self to the devil, whereunto to he
was induced by a certain Jew that was a magician. But afterward repenting him
self, he went into a church of our Lady, praying her with tears and
fastings for many days and nights, that she would help him. At the length the
virgin Marie made the writing to be restored to him by the devil, and so being
reconciled to the Church, he entered into grace with god, and lived in such
manner that he was a Saint, whose feast is celebrated the 4. day of
february. This history is written by Metaphrastes and others.

Marie surnamed Aegiptiaca of Aegipt, a public harlot, going to see the
church of the holy Cross in Jerusalem, would often have entered, but she
could not; whereat astonished and touched of god inwardly, she did enter into
her self, and ashamed of her life, did turn her self to an image of the
virgin Marie that stood near to the church doare and said: O virgin and
mother, seeing that god, whom thou have brought forth, became man thereby to
call sinners to penance, assist and succor me void of al help: and I do
promise, if I enter into this church, to change my life. She entered and by
the virgin Mary's intercession was reconciled to god, and after this retiring
her self into the desert, she did penance, and died a holy woman. This
history was written by Paulus Diaconus and is to be read in the second Nicene
council, action 4.

In the year 1094 a certain woman of Laudune was condemned to death for
committing a murder secreatlie: and as she went to the place of execution where
she was to be burned, she entered into a church of our Lady, and there
inwardly contrite did confess her sin publicly, and afterward weeping she
turned her self to an image of the blessed virgin, requestingher help for her
soul, and co^me^ding her self to her with all her heart, departing that she
was from the church and come to the place of punishment, she was twice cast
into the midest of a great fire, which nether did burn, nor touch her: and
that which made the miracle more manifest was, that nether her garments were as
much as touched of the fire, whereat all the people astonished, did return with
the woman to the Church, and give thanks to the virgin Marie, by whose prayers
they acknowledge this miracle to have been wrought. Thus writes Sigibert in
his chronicle.

Nestorius was strooken of God with diverse tribulatio^s, Canis. de. Maria
Depara lib. 3. ca. 18. and lib. 5. ca.
for his blasphemies used against the virgin Marie, but because he amended not
him self, his tongue was cruelly eaten, (...) and ^icephor. (...) 14. ^st.
eccl. (...). 36.
with worms, and he did dye most miserably, whose body being buried, the
earth did open and swallowe it up. Moscus Euiratus also does write, that when
the virgin Marie did appear to the Abbot Cyrriacus in sleep, richly adorned,
and having in her company. S. John Baptist, and S. John Evangelist, he did
pray her that she would vouchsafe to enter into his chamber: but she answered
him in this manner, How will thou that I enter into thie chamber, where thou
have mine enemy? And with this she departed. The Abbot when he was awaked was
very anxious for that he knew not who this enemy of the virgin was. But
reading a certain book which Isichius priest of Jerusalem had lent him, he
found that in the end thereof with it were bound twoe books of Nestorius, and
so he straight ways understood who was the enemy of the virgin, and forthwith
burning these two books, the Abbot was much comforted. Of this every one may
gather, that dishonest books also be enemies to the virgin Marie, and so it is
no marvel, if she do not enter into the chamber of the soul of these that
keep such books. Thus we read in the book entitled Pratum spirituale A
spiritual medowe. Chap. 46.

Gregorius Turonensis in his book de gloria martyrum does recount, that a
certain Jews son went to a church of the blessed virgin, and there did
communicate with other scholars, and returning home joyful that he had so done
he told his father of it, who became so enraged at the matter, that being a
glass maker he took the child and threw him into the burning furnace,
heaping more wood, thereby the more toe inflame the furnace. The child's mother
came running to the place, and when she could not approache near to the
furnace, for the exceedinge great flame that it sent forth, she cried out, in
so much that many people did run to the house where she was, who removing
the fire from the furnace, did find the child lying as it were in a most
delicate bead, and asking him how the fire had not consumed his body, he
answered that the woman, at whose Alter he had communicated in the morning,
did stand by him, and defend him from the fire with her mantel. This history
did Menna the Patriarch (as Glycas writes) tell to Iustine the second Emperor
of that name, Part. 4. Annaliu^.
as one who had been present at the fact.

When Rome was grieuouslie vexed with the plague, S. Gregory the great being
at that time Pope, did ordain a solemn procession to be made upon Easter
day, bearing through all the City the image of our Lady (which is said to be
that of S. Marie mayor yet extant in Rome) whervppon the plague did cease very
miraculouslie, at the which the people greatly rejoicing, behold an Angel that
did sing in the air, Regina coeli laetare Alleluya etc. Queen of heaven
rejoice Alleluya: for that he whom thou deseruedst to bear Alleluia, is risen
as he said Alleluya. And the holy Pope answered, Pray god for us Alleluia.
Sigonius amongst others does recount this in his first book de regno Italiae.

In the book entitled Pratum spirituale chap. 45. we read of a certain
monk, who molested with a long temtation, said to the devil, when will thou
let me be quiet. And the devil appearing to him spoke in this manner. Swear to
me, that thou will not utter to any one that which I shall tell thee, and I will
not molest thee any more. The monk did swear, and the devil then said,
worship no more this image of our Lady, and I will let thee alone. The monk
took time to deliberate of the matter, and in the mean season discovered al
to his Abbot, who did reprehend him for giving his oath to the devil, and
afterward exhorted him to worship the image of the virgin Marie, telling him
that he had obtained the victory in so great temptation by the help of the
virgin, and that leaving to worship her, he should easelie be overcome of the
devil. These and other miracles wrought by God thorough the intercession of the
virgin Marie are written largely by Petrus Canisius in his first book of the
virgin Marie chap. 19. and 20.

An instruction how to meditate well.
Take some time assured and determinate for meditation, which thou must not
change without just cause, for that the devil, when at the first he cannot
make thee leave prayer; does seek to make thee differ it until some
inco^modious time, that so thou may make it with many defects, and he more
easelie persuade thee afterward to leave it altogether. The time most fit is
the morning before other affairs, and it is convenient that we give the best
time to this holy exercise, so grateful to god and profitable to our soul.

Let the place be retired, where no other business nor talk may be heard,
which does cause distraction, and if thou have no such place at home thou must
not therefore leave to meditate, but do of thie part what thou can, and
afterward trust in God, who of his goodness will supply with his holy grace,
to make thee be recollected.

The situation of the body must be modest and devout, as kneeling or
standing: walking seems not a fit act for meditation, unless it were little
and softly. And albeit a man sitting may meditate without sin, yet he ought
to choose that manner, which does most further him to attention and devotion so
that it be without violence, and without pain, if sometimes thou do meditate
sitting, it is good (if thy health can bear it) to stand bareheaded, in sign
that thou do not think of other affairs, nor study or speculate
philosophical matters, but pray and deal with god thy creator.

That which a man must do before Meditation.
The night before meditation thou must foresee the points and mystery whereof
thou must meditate in the morning, and when thou do wake; or rise out of thie
bed, think upon, the meditation thou art to make recollected and attentive:
and if in every affair of ours which we handle with men, we think well of it
before we do it, how much more ought we to do so in this thing which is
spiritual, and whereof we must deal with god.

When thou will go to the place of meditation, imagine thie self to be there
looked for of Christ our Lord, to give thee grateful audience; and going pray
thine Angel keeper, or some one of those Saints toe whom thou art most
devout, that he will accompany thee, and bring thee in to our Lord. And when
thou art come to the place thou must do him most humble and devout reverence.

As soon as thou have kneeled down lift up thy mind to god, demanding help
to make thy meditation to the glory of his divine majesty, and f^uite of thy
soul, following in this the holy church, which in the beginning of divine
service does say, Deus in adiutorium meum intend. Domine ad adiuuandum me
festina, that is. O god be attentive to my aid. O Lord make speed to help
me. It does also help in the beginning, to crave pardon of god for our
imperfections and sins, which are wont to offend his divine eyes: but thou
with repenting thie self, and as king forgiveness, shall make him propitious
and well affected toward thee.

That which a man must do in time of Meditation it self.
TO the end thou be more attentive to thy meditation, think thy self to be
present at the mystery whereof thou do meditate, that thou do as it were
see, and hear the persons contained therein, discoursing with thie
understanding, not only about their words and deeds, but also about that
which such persons might religiously think of; for this will give thee more
ample matter of meditation, and make thee much more attentive.

when in any one point thou feel some effect of devotion, or any other
spiritual motion, seek not to pass over speedily to another point, for it is
better for thee that thou arrest thy self somewhat longer in the former.

In meditating, endeavor always to draw to the affection of thy will, that
which the understanding has found out by discoursing: either by rejecting the
same, if it be ought belonging to sin, or by embracing it with great
affection, if it be any thing pertaining to virtue or devotion, because this is
the principal fruit of meditation.

That which a man must do, when he has ended Meditation.
IN the end of meditation thou shall make a colloquie or speech, which is
nothing else but a familiar and affectuous talk with God, now praising his
greatenes: now thanking him for his benefits: now asking him pardon for our
sins, or perseverance in doing good: now offering him our life and works,
with a steadfast purpose nether to do nor think any thing, that may
displease his divine majesty.

Also when meditation is ended, it is profitable to make some little reflection
upon the same, that so thou may see how it has succeeded with thee, and if
thou find any fault or impediment, thou must avoid it for the time to come.

An advise how to overcome some difficulties, that fall out in Meditation.
THat which chiefelie ought to move thee to meditation, must be a pure and
sincere desire, to please God in this holy exercise, and to reform thie life
and manners to the will of thy maker: for this will help thee very much to
surmount some difficulties, that have made many forsake mental prayer.

The first difficulty is to find thie self without gust of devotion, and so
dry, that meditation will not seem only a combersom thing to thee, but also
time lost. To overcome this difficulty, thou must note, that Ariditie or
drines may come so^times of thine own fault, as when thou have no care to
prepare thie self to meditation, by foreseeing that which thou art to
meditate, according to that which before has been said: whereof it comes that
thou do it with negligence and drilie, for that our Lord in punishment of
thie reachlesnes, does woorthelie deprive thee of the consolation and taste of
meditation. The remedy to be ryd of this punishment, is to take away the
cause, which is thy fault.

Sometime this Ariditie co^eth without thie fault, and thou must not for this
leave thie meditation, for as time of consolation does please thee, when our
Lord, like the sun of the springtime, coming near to thee does make thee
have gust in meditation: so thou must not be displeased nor leave to meditate,
when the self same Savior, as the sun of winter does go from thee: that
which he also does for thy good, that then thou may cast roots of humility,
knowing that when he goes from thee, thou remainest dry and aride.

It may be also that he suffers thee to be dry in prayer, to see if thou be
a soldier for love, or for paiement, which thou do expect of him, as if to
pray, thou would he should pay thee with gust of devotion. Or else god does
this, to make thee know that the taste and comfort of meditation is his gift,
and he gives it to whom, and when he will, that by this means thou dispose thy
self to ask it hu^blie of him. Be it howsoever, if thou pray thereby to
please god, as thou ought to do; thou may say, I did not begin mie
meditation to feel gust, but for the love of my god, and for his love will I
follow it on.

The second difficulty is to be molested in time of meditation, with diverse
and importunate thoughts, whether they come by work of the devil, to hinder
the fruit of meditation, or else for that our nature being disordered by sin;
our imagination goes wandering against our will, enta^gling it self with diverse
and impertinent thoughts. In this case thou must be diligent to cast them of
but yet without anxietie, understanding that as long as they come without thy
consent, it is no sin to thee: and the labor in casting them away to
meditate well, is no less grateful to god, then to pray attentively with
taste, yea thou shall merit more, then if thou did feel great comfort in
prayer.

It avails also much in such trauails to make some speeches, and demand
help of god, humbly confessing that of thie self thou can not help thee;
or reprehending thie self, that thou can not stand one hour with thy maker,
without some earthly cogitation, for scrupuls and tentations which do happen
in prayer, a good remedy is not to esteem them, but to be recollected in
meditation. Likewise when any business of small importance does represent it
self to be done^^ (...) of prayer, it is not good to break of meditation and
do it, or for memories sake to note it: because meditation being a work so
prefect and so acceptable to god, it must not for every trifling thing be
broken, or left of.

The third difficulty is, that many seeing no fruit to come of this exercise
do leave it as a thing unprofitable: but this is a manifest tentation, and
comes of not knowing wherein the true fruit of meditation does consist, for
if thou do pray because thou love god, thou must esteem it to be a great
benefit for thee, that thou do please him, and undoubtedly thou do please
him, every time that thou do in meditation what thou art able. True it is
that toe fly sin, and govern well our life, as we see in those that with
humility do frequent meditation, is the proper fruit thereof, and rises of
that light, which men do receive of god in meditation.

The fourth difficulty grows of that we see, we do not obtain of god what
we demand in prayer. But this must not remove thee from meditation, which thou
must chiefelie make to praise, thank, and bless god; and must think it a
singular benefit to frequent meditation, because it is a holy execise and
grateful to god, whom if thou procure to satisfy in this, doubt not but he
will grant thee more then that, which thou do demand, if yet it be for the
good of thie soul.

The fifth difficulty is, that sometimes meditation will seem tedious to thee.
There is no doubt but that the devil will represent meditation unto thee as a
very hard thing, so to make thee differ it, and afterward to forsake it
wholly. But if thou have a true desire to do a thing acceptable to thie
Creator, either meditation will not seem a laboursome thing to thee, or thou will hold al labor well employed for his love, who did take so great labor
and pain for thy sake.

FINIS.

