PIMLYCO. OR, Run Red-Cap.

It Is a mad world at Hogsdon.



AT LONDON, Printed for Io Busbie, and Geo LOFTIS, and are to be sold under
St. Peter's Church in Cornehill. 1609.

Patrono Pimlyconico.
Facie Claro, Facetijs Raro, Thomae Normano.
ALL hayle, (o Tom Norman,)
I make thee, the Foreman
Of Pimlyco Jury:
You are chargde to enquire Sir,
What kindles that fire sir,
That burns with such fury.
What fire do you suppose sir?
It Is the fi^e of your Nose sir,
Which your Face bears about.
For (like to the furnace,
That glowes in the Glasse-house,)
It never goes out.
To keep that hye Color,
And make it look fuller,
You shall die it in grain sir:
Of the Pimlyco Juice,
If you get the right use,
O how well will it stain sir.
I create you Sole Patron
Of the Pimlyco Squadron,
choose therefore Ale-cunners.
That now against Easter,
(If you purpose to feast there)
may be your forerunners.
Hoyst then up your Sail sir,
For rich Pimlyco Ale sir,
That colors like Roses,
With your Copper Seal, mark sir,
All those that Embarke sir,
For Pimlyco-Noses.
Vade, Vale, Cave ne titubes. To all Travelers.
YOu that wear out your lives and weary your bodies, in Discovery of strange
Countries, (be it for pleasure or profit) Rig out a Fleet, and make a Voyage
to an Island which could never be found out by the Portugals, Spaniards, or
Hollanders, but only (and that now of late) by Englishmen. The name of it is
Pimlyco, Here have I drawn a large Map of it: by this Chart, may you in a few
hours, and with little or no wind, ariue in the very mouth of the Haven. Some
that have traveled thither, affirm it to be a part of the Continent, but the
better sort of Nauigators say, it is an Island: full of people it is, and they
are very wild, the women being able to endure more, and to do better Service
than the men. Diverse are of opinion, that it is an enchanted Island, and haunted
with strange Spirits; for the people there, once every Moon, are either stark
mad, or else loose their own shapes, and are transformed into Beasts, yet
within twelve hours, recover their wits and shapes again. The Pimlyconians
are most of them Malt-men, and exceeding good fellows, all their delight
being in Eating and Drinking; they live not long, for a man can hardly star
amongst them two days: if he do, he is in great danger, by reason of a
certain disease, (which the Island naturally breeds) called the Staggers,
through which, many of them come to their Downe-fall, or if they escape that,
then are they in fear to be made away by Smallshot, in discharging of which,
the Pimlyconians are very active and cunning.

The Island begins now to be as rich as it is populous: fish has bin s^ldome
taken there, but flesh is better cheap then Mackrell here. Wild Duckes and
wild Geese fly there up and down in abundance: you may have a Goose sowe'd
in Pimlyco, for the value of twelve pence sterling. Woodcockes (in many months
of the year) are to be catched there by whole dozens. It is full of fat
pasture, and that's the reason such multitudes of young Colts run there. A hot
Climate it is, and by that means the people are subject to infection, which
takes them first in the Head, and so falls down into their legs, and those
failing, they are (in a manner) gone. The Governor of the Island has much ado
to keep himself upright, so that he is compelled to give those that are under
him, often times very Hard measure, yet are they so unruly, that every hour
one or other goes to the Pot.

Thus have I given you a taste, both of the People and of the Country; if you
sail thither, you may drink of deeper knowledge. But take heed you take a
skillful Pilot with you; be fraighted with as much wit as you can carry aboard,
for all will be little enough to bring you from thence, and take heed what
Lading you take in there, for the commodities of Pimlyco have suncke many
Merchants. Pay thanks for my Council, and think well of my Pimlyconian
Discovery.

Farewell.
Pimlyco.
TRees that of late (like wasted Heirs, Description of the Spring.

Or like old men, dried up with cares,)
Stood poorly, now look fresh and green,
As Banck-rupts new set up again.
M^dowes that whilome barren lay,
(More naked than the trodden way,)
Wear garments now, wouen all of Flowers,
And wait on Flora in her Bowers,
Shepherds that du^st not, (for the cold,)
The Snowie heads of Hills behold,
Now (deftly piping) from cool Fountains,
Lead Lambs and Kiddes up to the Mountains.
The Day, when all Birds hold their Weddings,
(Dancing Loue-measures in soft Treddings,)
Is past: The Year did it resign,
In honor of Saint Valentine.
And now his Fethered Couples sing,
Their Nuptial Songs before the Spring.
The Vernall Gates are set wide open,
And strewn with Flowers and Herbs, in token
That May (Loves Queen) is coming in,
Who 12. full Moons has absent bin.
In this Sweet Season, from my bed,
I early rose, being wakened
By The beating of a Golden-flame,
Which (to me) in at window came.
For from his Palace in the East, Description of the Sunrising.

The King of Light in Purple dressed,
(Set thick with Gold and precious Stone,
Which like a Rock of Diamond shonne,)
Was drawn along heavens Silver way,
By the 4. Horses of the Day.
And as the Chariot mounted higher,
The Sun-god seemed to ride in fire,
Forth came he in this brave adorning,
To court his Love (the Rosio Morning.)
The Chains of Pea^le about her neck,
He took from her himself to deck,
They were her favors and he wore them
Till night, and did again restore them.
The wonders (of vn-valued worth,)
Which these two wrought, enticed me forth;
Weary with walking, down I threw
My body, on a bancke where grew
The pretty Dazie, (Eye of Day,)
The Prime-Rose which does first display
Her youthful coloors, and first dies;
Beauty and Death are Enemies.
Cowslips sprung likewise here and there,
Each blade of grass (stiff as a Spear)
Standing upright to guard the Flowers,
As if they had been their Paramoures.
Anon a Yonker and his Less,
Might I see wrestling on the Grass,
She swore she would not fall, and yet
She fell, and did a Greene-Gowne get,
(A Greene-gowne, but no Gown of Green.)
At length (in Couples) more were seen:
Some ran, some walked, and some sat kissing,
Nothing was lost, but what was missing.
So close they joined in their Delights,
That they all seem^ d Hermaphrodites,
Or rather Mermaides on the land,
Because the She Is had the upper hand.
They graced the fields, the fields them graced,
For tho none were in order plac'de,
But sat (as Flowers in Gardens grow)
T^inly, which makes the brauer show.
Yet (like so many in one Room,)
All seemed to weaue within a loome,
Some curious piece whose beauty stands,
on the rare Skill of sundry hands.
As thus they saf, and I them sraw,
A Frame (as rare) mine (...) draw
(With wonder) to (...) a far,
The brightness of the Kingdoms London.
Star;
A thousand Steeples, T^rrets, Towers,
(Lodgings, all fit for Emperors.)
Lifted their proud heads (...) the Sky,
As if they had sole- Souera^gntie,
Over all the Building^ in the ^an^,
And seemed on Hills of Gould to stand,
For the Suns Beams on them being shed,
They showed like Mines new burnished.
Upon the Left hand and the Right,
Two Islington, and Hogsdon.
Towns (like Cities) (...) the Sight,
With pleasure and with admiration,
For (as they stand) they bear proportion,
As to an Army do the Wings,
(The maine Battalion led by Kings.)
Mine eye his objects could not vary,
Yet took delight here still to tarry,
But not knowing how to wear out time,
By chance I found a Book in Ryme, Skeleton.

Writ in an age when few wryt well,
( Pans Pipe (where none is) does excel.)
O learned Gower! It was not thine,
Nor Chaucer, (thou art more Divine.)
To Lydgates grave I should do wrong,
To call him up by such a Song.
No, It was One, that (boue his Fate,)
Would be Styled Poet Laureate;
Much like to Some in these our days,
That (as bold Prologues do to Players,)
With Garlonds have their Fore-he^ds bound,
Yet only empty Sculles are crownde:
Never stopping,
But ever dropping.
Her Skin loose and slack,
Grayned like a Sack,
With a crooked back.
Her eyes gowndy,
Are full, vnlowndy,
For they are bleared,
And she gray heared,
Iawed like a Ietty,
A man would have pity,
To see how she is gummed,
Fingerd and thumbed;
Gentlye Ioynted,
Greased and anointed,
Up to the knuckles,
The bones her buckles,
Together made fast,
Her youth is far past:
Footed like a Plane,
Legs like a Crane,
And yet she will Iet,
Like a Jolly Set,
In her fur'd flocket
And gray russet rocket,
With Simper the cocket.
Her Huke of Lincoln green,
It had been hers I ween,
More than forty year,
And so it does appear:
And the green bare threads
Look like Sere weeds,
Withered like hay.
The wool worn away,
And yet I dare say,
She thinks herself gay
Upon the holliday,
When she does her array,
And girdeth in her getes,
Stitched and prancked with pletes:
Her Kirtle Bristow red,
With clothes upon her head,
That they wey a sow of lead,
Writhen in a wonder wise,
After the Sarazens gise,
With a whim wham,
Knit with a trim tram,
Upon her brain pan
Like an Egiptian,
Capped about,
When she goes out,
Her self for to show,
She draws down the dew,
With a pair of heels,
As broad as two wheels,
She hobbles as she goes,
With her blancket hose,
Her sboone smeard with tallow,
Greased upon dirt,
That danbeth the Skirt.
Primus Passus.
And this comely Dame,
I understand her name
Is Elynor Rumming,
At home in her wonning:
And as men say
She dwelt in Sothray,
In a certain stead
Beside Lederhede,
She is a tonnish gib,
The Devil and she be Sib.
I Red and smilde, but at the last,
^s toward the town mine eye I cast,
In mingled troops I might behold
Women and men (some young, some old)
Like to a Springtide, strongly flowing
To Hogsdon, not one backward going.
Out of the City rushed the stream,
A while (me thought) I did but dream,
That I saw people, till at last,
Hogsdon ore-flowde, it swelled so fast.
I musde that from the City venturde
Such heaps: for tho the Spring was enterde,
They flocked not thus to hear the Tunc
Of that bird who sings best in June,
(Yclip'd the Cuckoe) as yet her note
She had not perfect, but by rot^:
Ne durst she sing yet, being not able
In English, but in -- to gabble.
Nor was it like they made these througs,
To hear the Nightingals sad songs,
For Lust (in these days) bears such price,
They are but mocked that check that Vice.
Still more and more this Sea brake in,
Yet ebbed in one h^lfe hour again,
The Voyagers that first did Veil,
(Having their Lading) homeward s^ile.
But with a side-winde were they driven,
Yet all cast anchor in one Haven.
Up went my sails. With much ad^^,
In the same Port I anchorde too.
Being landed there, all I could find
Was this, They come to (...) the Hind.
Into their Park I forthwith went
Being entered, all the air was rent
With a most strange confused noise,
That sounded nothing but mere voice.
Amazde I stood to see a Crowd
Of Civil Throats stretch^d out so loud:
(As at a New-play) all the Rooms
Did swarm with Gentiles mixed with Grooms.
So that I truly thought, all These
Came to see Shore, (...) Pericles,
And that (to have themselves (...) placed)
Thus brought they victuals (they fed so fast)
But then (again me thought) This shoale
Swom thither for Bakers doale
Or Brewers, and that for their souls sakes,
They thus were served with Ale and cakes:
For Iugs of Ale came reeling in,
As if the Pots had drun^^rds bin.
A sayler (that had narrow eyes
Through fumes that up to his brainess did rize)
Got I by the arm, (children they say,
And Fools and Dronkerds, truth bewray)
Him therefore I desirde to show
Why all these met. -- It Is Pimlyco --
My Friend, It Is Pimlyco (he cryde)
And no word could I get beside.
This made me madder then before,
I asked another, and he swore
Zoundes -- I Am ten strong in Pimlyco --
What Is that said I? -- stowt Pimlyco --
And back, at least three yardes he reeles, --
Pimlyco trips up good men's heels
(Lisping) he cries, and down he falls,
Yet for more Pimlyco -- still he calls.
What Pimlyco should mean I wondered,
Because so loud, that word still thundered
From all their throats through all their ears,
At length, a reverend man (whose years
Had tourn'd his head and beard all gray,
And came but to behold That Play,
And not to act himself The Vice)
Told all the Dronken Mysteries.
And that the Ale got such high Fame,
Only by that fond, senceleffe Name.
I laughed to see a World (so wise,
So subtle in all ^illames,
So scorning to be laughed to scorn)
Should be so drownde with Ale in Corn.
Yet since in Hogsdon all ran mad,
I playde the Madman too, and had
My Iug brought in; a draught or twain
Made such hot boiling in my brain,
That (faster then their Pots were ^^de)
From my Invention were di^ilde
Verses in Pimlyco's high praise,
Pimlyco crownde my head with bay^s.
For straight I felt my self a Poet,
And (like some fools) in Rhyme must show it.
Yet first I tournde over Skeltons Rimes
With those mad times to weigh out Times,
And try how Elynor Rummings Ale,
Was Brewed; and Drawn, and set to Sale,
What Guests drunk there, and what Drink here,
In this wild Lantskip shall appear.
BUt to make up my tale,
She brueth nappy Ale,
And makes thereof poort sale,
To trauaylers, to tynkers,
To sweaters, to swinkers,
And all good Ale drinkers,
That will nothing spare,
But drink till they stare,
And bring them selves bare,
With now away the Mare,
And let us flay care,
As wife as an hare.
Come who so will
To Elynor on the hill,
With fill the Cup fill,
And sit thereby still.
Early and late,
Thither comes Kate,
Cisley and Sare,
With their legs bare,
And also their feet,
Hardly full unsweet,
With their heels dagged,
Their kirtles all to iagged,
Their smockes all to ragged,
With titters and tatters,
Bring dishes and platters,
With all their might running,
To Elynor Rumming,
To have of her Tunning,
She leaves them of the hame,
And thus begins the game.
Some wenches come unbraced,
With their naked pappes,
That flippes and flappes,
It wigges and it wagges,
Like tawney saffron bags,
A sort of foul drabbes,
All scuruy with scabbes,
Some be fly bitten,
Some skewd as a kitten,
Some with a shoe clowte,
Bind their heads about,
Some have no hair lace,
Their locks about their face,
Their tresses untrust,
All full of unlust.
Some look strawry,
Some cawry mawry,
Full vntidy tegges,
Like rotten eggs,
Such a lewd sort,
To Elinor resort,
From tide to tide;
Abide, abide,
And to you shall be told,
How her Ale is sold,
To mawt and to molde.
Secundus Passus.
Some have no monney,
That thither commy,
For their Ale to pay,
That is a shrewd array.
Elinour sweared, nay
Ye shall not bear away
My Ale for naught
By him that me bought.
With hey dog hay,
Have these dogs away,
With get me a staff,
The swine eat my draffe,
Strike the hogs with a club,
They have drunk up my swilling tub,
For be there never so much prease,
These swine go to the hye dese,
The sow with her pigges,
The Bore his tail wrigges
Against the hye b^nch,
With fo, there is a s^ench,
Gather up thou w^nch,
See thou not what is fall,
Take up drit and all,
And bear out-of the hall,
God give it ill preuing,
Clenly as evil cheuing.
But let us turn plain,
There we left again,
For as ill a patch as that,
The hens run in the mash fat,
For they go to roust,
Strayt over the Ale ioust,
And dong when it comes
In the Ale tonnes,
Then Elino^ takes
The mash boll, and shakes
The hens dong away,
And skommeth it in a tray
Where as the Yest is,
With her maungy fistis:
And sometimes she blens,
The dong of her hens
And the Ale together,
And says Gossip come hither,
This Ale shall be thicker,
And flower the more quicker,
For I may tell you,
I learned it of a Jew,
When I began to brew,
Drink now while it is new.
And ye may it brook,
It shall make you look
Younger than you be
Years two or three.
For ye may prove it by me,
Behold she said, and see,
How bright I am of blee,
Ich am not cast away,
That can my husband say,
When we kiss and play,
In lust and in liking,
He calls me his whyting,
His Mulling, and his Nittine
His Nobbes and his Cunny,
His sweeting and his honny,
With basse my pretty bonny,
Thou art worth good and monny,
This make I my falyre fanny,
Till that he dream and dronny.
For after all our sport,
Than will he ront and snort,
Then sweetly together we lie,
As two Pigges in a stye.
But we will turn plain,
Where we left again.
Tertius passus.
In stead of coin and monny,
Some bring her a conny,
And some a pot with honny,
Some a salt, and some a spoone,
Some their hose, some their shoon.
Some ran a good trot,
With a skillet or a pot, etc.
Cum multis alijs, quae nunc perscribere longum est.

Hoc est Skeltonicum, Incipit Pimlyconicum.
OF Pimlyco now let us sing,
Rich Pimlyco, the newfound Spring,
Where men and women both together,
To warm their veins in frosty weather,
Where men and women hot bloods cool,
By drincking Pimlycoes boiled poole.
S^rong Pimlyco, the nourishing food
To make men fat, and breed pure blood;
Deep Pimlyco, the Well of Glee,
That draws up merry company.
Bewitching Pimlyco, that ties
The Rich and Poor, the Fool and Wise,
All in one knot. Of that we write;
Inspire your Poet to indite,
You Barlie Muses Pimlyconian,
He scorns the Muses Helyconian;
(Poor Soules^) they none but water drink,
But Pimlyco dropped into his yncke,
His lines shall fly with merry gale,
No Muse is like to Pimlyco Ale.
Not the neat Wine De Orleans;
Nor of Hebrian, (best in France;)
Not Gascoigne, nor the Burdeux Vine,
Nor that which flows from swift-foote Rhyne;
Not Sheerys S^cks, nor Charnico,
Peter Semine, nor Mallago,
Nor the Amber-colored Candie grape,
Which druncke with Eggs makes men to -- Ape.
Nor can the Greekish Vintage show
A liquor matching Pimlyco.
Not Hipocras (the drink of women.)
Nor Bastards (that are dear, but common,)
Nor the fat lecherous Alligant,
Whose Juice repaires what Backs do want.
Nor Waters drawn by Distillations,
With medcinable Operations,
As Rosa Solis, Aqua Vitae,
And Nugs of Balm, so quick, and sprighty;
No, nor the Irish Vsquebagh,
Of which, the Kerne whole pyntes will quaffe,
Strong Vsquebagh! that hotlier burns
Than Sackes, and white the Entrails turns.
Nor welsh M^theglyn, (brown as berry)
La^^cashier Syder, Werstershier Perry,
Nor yet a draught of Darby Ale,
Nor mother Bunch, (long since grown stale,)
Nor that old two-peny Ale of Pynder,
That many a Porter often did hinder
From carrying Burdens, for (alack!)
The Ale had strength to break his back.
Nor all those Drinks of Northren Climes,
Whose Brewings shall fill up our Rimes,
Brant, Rensque, and the clear Romayne,
The Belo, Crasno, and Patisane,
Peeua (to them as is our Beer,)
With spiced Meades (wholesome, but dear)
As Meade Obarne, and Meade Cherunck,
And the base Quasse by Pesants drunck.
With all the rest that whet the sprites
Of Ruffes and cold Muscouytes.
Not all these Drinks, nor thousand more,
Can reach the fame of Pimlyco.
To prove (o Pimlyeo) these thine honors,
Armies each day spread Crimson benners,
And with h^e Colors, and quick shot,
Fight st^fly till the field be got.
All Sexes, all Degrees, all Nations,
All men of Arts or Occupations,
(As if for gain to some great Fair,)
Only for Ale to thee repair.
The English, Scottish, Dutch and French,
Sit whistling here upon one bench:
If but of Pimlyco they drink hard,
Betwixt them falls not one foul word,
They kiss like brothers, Dutch, French, Scot,
Are all One in a Pimlyco Pot.
Hither come Sergeants with their Maces,
Hither come Bailiffes with red faces,
Hither come Lads and greaste Lownes,
Hither come pockets full of Crowns,
Hither come those can scarce find Bail
For six pence, yet spend eight in Ale.
Usurers battle (here) their pence,
The Devil can scarce keep Brokers hence,
The Lawyer that in Terme-time takes
Fat fees, pleades here for Ale and Cakes.
Doctors, Proctors, Clerks; Atturneis,
To Pimlyco make sweattie iourneis,
And (being well Armed with Buckram bags,)
Fight under Hogsdons skarlet flags.
The Wind our Merchants this way drives,
Whilst their men take up for their wi^es
Rooms before hand: and often it hits,
Not far from them some Fish-wife sits.
For (here) of manners none take heed,
First come, first served, first served first feed.
Citizens, Soldiers, Seamen, Scholars,
Gentlemen, Clownes, Millers, Colliers,
Mercers, Tailors, Poets, Booke-bynders,
Grocers, Curriers, Goldsmiths, goldfiners,
Silkemen, Botchets, Drapers, Dray-men,
Courtiers. Carters, Churchmen, Laymen,
Midwiues, Apple-wiues, Cheape-fide Ladies,
Old Beldames, and y^ng Tiffany Babies,
Scotch-bums, red Wast-coats, fine Pawne-wenches,
In the same rooms, on self same benches,
Crowned All together: All Drink, All Pay,
Why then should any give the way?
R^omes here are by Reuersion got,
As Offices, so men win the Pot.
B^th Pray and Pay, and wait, and woo^,
That Four may buy, what goes for two,
Yet it is refusde. The Sexton scorns
To budge to a Br^ght. All stay their Tourns
As (...) the Conduit or the Mill,
And nothing ^s heard, but Fill, Fill, Fill,
Bespeaking one another Cups.
As men do Chayres in Barbors shops
On Christmasse Geues. A hundred laps
^eld up for cakes; As many caps
Put off for Ale, whose juice embalmes
Their Brows it is begged, as it were an alms,
^et all hold Silver up, and cry
Take mine, (as at the Lottery.)
Drawer, need not baule Anon, Anon,
Each Guest for his own Drinck does run,
Brave men turn Tapsters, Women Caters,
For Te^ that si^, there is Forty Waiters,
French-Hoo^s, and Velvet Caps being proud
Sometimes, in the H^^roost close to crowd.
O strange^ what makes the Cripple here?
When strongest legs can hardly bear
Those that stand on them, if they stand
^ut stifsly too 't in Pimlyco Land:
Yet even that Wretch, (that halts on wood)
All hoe five furlongs off it stood,
Swe^res hee^le lympe too 't, and too 't he goes,
And being there, his false legs does lose.
After him, gro^es the Blind, and cries,
P^ly^ drincks not out mine Eyes.
Pimlyco does so please the Mouth,
They come from East, West, North, ^^^sh.
O Thou, ((...) Pimlyco^an Ho^^,)
Had thy Head bin but like that Post,
Which Scores what Ale and Cakes come in,
Of greater R^ckoning had thou bin.
Had thou had Brains, but like to some,
To know what Wether was to come
By The Almanacke; thou had changde thy luck,
Thy Hynde ^re this had prou'de a Bucke.
Alack! thy wits are lost in Brewings;
Thou Art grown stark mad with too good Doings
Thou, only cryest, Who pays the Shot?
(When the Maine Matters are forgot.)
Thou Barmy Fool, at last grow wise,
Build thy House round with Galleries,
Like to a Playhouse; for thy Ale
(Be It bad, be it good, beet new, be it Stale)
Brings thee good Audience: from each shore,
Ships of Fools lanch, to seek thy Door;
Ere prodigal Gulls sail back again,
The^'le pay thee money to come in:
Keep then thy wife and thou, the doors,
Let those within wipe out the Scores.
Yet (O vile counsel!) why do I labor
To have a Christian wrong his neighbor
Each afternoon thy House being full,
Makes Fortune blind, or Gelds The Bull.
No, no, (thou Pimlyconian Brewer)
Thy Castle of Comfort stands so sure,
(Moated with Ale, and wal'd with ^akes)
Tho whirle-winds blow, it never shakes;
Therefore it needs no reparations,
No Rampyres,^ no Fortifications,
But only Shot: Charge them Pell Mell,
Let Pimlyco Ordinance go off well;
And Hogsdon seems a Town of war,
Where Constables the Captains are,
Leading to Stocks (with Bills and Stanes)
Whole troops of drunken Whores and Knaves,
Who (tho they cannot stand) yet go,
Swearing, Zounds hey brave Pimlyco.
You therefore that do trade in Cans,
(Virginians, or Cracouians,)
You that in whole pots drink your bane,
Lying dead-druncke at The Labor in vain:
You Apron-men, that weekly get
By your hard labor and your sweat,
Silver (earned dear, but honestly)
Enough to find your Family,
Now leave those places (named before)
Or if you will Drink, maintain a Score,
But let your Wages (in one Sum)
Be wisely saved till Sunday come,
But (with it) buy, nor bread, nor broth,
Nor house, nor hose, nor shoe, nor cloth,
For food let wife and children Die,
Suck Pimlyco down merrily,
There dance and spend the day in laughter,
It Is meat and drink a whole week after.
You Ballad-Singers, that do live
On half penny alms that Idiots give,
In every Street (to drunken Notes)
Set out your villainous yelping throats,
That through all ears your Tunes may flow,
With praises of Brown Pimlyco.
You Poets that of Helicon boast,
Whose mornings draught without a toast
You always take, but never (...) so,
Coming to tipple Pimlyco,)
O be more wise, and scorn that licquor,
Drink this, which makes your Muses quicker,
Of This, three full Pots (I assure ye)
Leaves you stark drunk with brauer fury.
You that plough up the salt Sea-flood,
To fetch from far, the Grapes dear blood.
And with Outlandish drinks confound
And mad the Brain that is most sound:
Your very Ships going never so steady,
(With that moist Freight) but ever giddy
And reeling (as an ominous Sign^,
That Those must reele, who Trade in Wine,
From S^ore to Shore what need you sail,
When Pimlyco breeds such Dragon-Ale?
You that of men dear recknings make,
Yet at the Bar (for what they Take)
Arraigne them, Charging them to Stand,
Till they have all held up The Hand:
Down with your Bushes, and your Grates,
Draw your selves through the City Gates,
To Sack the Walls of Pimlyco,
Which day by day more strong do grow,
And will in time (to their own Trench)
Drive back both Spanish Wines and French:
Or if no Shot can batter down
This Pimlyco Fort; then, in the Town,
And in the fields and Common way,
Pitch Tents, and openly (...) play
Your Banners (drawn with Red and White)
Under those colors Men will fight
Till they can stand, else All are lost,
And cut off by the Pimlyco (...).
Here therefore sownd, Anon, Anon,
For the main Army here coms on.
O you that (every Moon) hold Feasts,
(And in the True-loue-knot are Guests)
And do with Wreathes your Temples crown,
(At Lothbury, and at Horsey-downe,)
Let those Dear Fleshly-Meetings go,
And Bath your Brains in Pimlyco.
You that by Engin^^^ Wheels can force
Tides to run back and turn their Course,
Whose wits in water still do Diue,
(O, if you wish that Trades should thrive,)
With loud voice to the City speak,
That she her Conduit-Heads would break,
And only build One Cond^^^^-Head.
At Pimlyco, that through pipes of Lead.
The precious Stream may be connayd,
And Crafts-^en so at home be stayed.
You Bawds, you Pa^dars, Puncks and whores.
That are chalked upon Alehouse scores,
You that lay Pet^^^oats, Gowns, and Smock^
To pawn for drincks to ure the Pox,
At Pimlyco some will take them from you,
To drink there then, shall best become you.
Of Aley-Ilands there are more,
(Some new discovered, some before)
But neither The Old nor New of name,
Can equal Pimlyco in fame.
Of these strange Islands, Malta is one,
Malta does Border close upon
The Continent of Pimlyco,
And by her Stream (...) rich does grow,
On Pimlyco Seas when it is foul weather,
That no Ship can get in; then hither,
(To Malta) fly they with swol^e Sail,
To buy the Jew of Malta's Ale.
Thy Knights (O Malta) now do flourish,
Pimlyco their renown does ^^^rish,
All fealty therefore they doowe
And Service to guard Pimlyco.
Tripoly from the Turk was taken,
But Tripoly is again forsaken;
What News from Tripoly? Would you know?
Christians fly thence to Pimlyco.
Eyebright, (so famed of late for Beer)
Although thy Name be numbered hiere,
Thine ancient Honors now run low;
Thou art struck blind by Pimlyco.
The Newfound Land, is now grown stale.
Few to Terceras Islands sayie;
The once well-mand, (...) Ship of H^ll,
That spread a sail, proud, sti^^^, and full,
Leake^ often, and does at Anchor lie:
Nay, ^uen St. Christopher walks dry.
Not half so many Christians (now)
Their knees before his White-crosse bow.
Run, (Red-cap) Run, amongst the Rest,
Thou art named last, that once were best,
But (Red-cap) now thy W^^ll is worn,
By Pimlyco is Red-cap shorn.
Our weary Muse (here) leapes to Shore,
On these rough Seas she Sails no more,
This Voyage made she (for your sakes,)
Spending thus much in Ale and Cakes.
FINIS.

