^ THE FIRST BOOK OF Songs or Airs of 4. parts: with Tableture for the Lute
or Orpherian, with the Violl de Gamba.

Newly composed by Francis Pilkington, Batcheler of Music, and Lutenist: and
one of the Cathedral Church of Christ, in the City of Chester.

LONDON: Printed by T Este, dwelling in Aldersgate-streete, and are there to be
sold. 1605.

To the Right honorable William Earl of Darby, Lord Stanly, Lord Strange, of
Knocking and of the Isle of Man, and Knight of the most noble Order of the
Garter. Francis Pilkington wishes health, with increase of Honor in this
life, and Eternity hereafter.
ARistoxenus (thrice noble Lord) held that the Soul of man was Music: But
that the being thereof was framed of Bumbees, as the Pithagorians affirm: But
for that it is the subject and object of all harmonicall concents: Intimating
hereby the dignity and high renown of that Art, which descended from so
noble a stem, seeks by all means possible to nobilitate the same, and that
man to be unfit for the society and commerce of men, that honors not so
worthy a Jewel for the life of man. Which opinion verily is worthy
Aristoxenus, that is to say, a noble Philosopher, yet how little squaring with
the time, experience a perfect Mistress of truth has a long time taught. For
who regards the melodius charms of Orpheus, or enchanting melody of Arion?
surely but a few, Quos aequus amauit Jupiter dijs geniti, aut ardeus euexit ad
aethera virtus. Of which rank seeing your Lordship has given undoubted
testimonies of your honor to be one: Musitions should commit an indiscreet
part of ingratitude not to acknowledge so great a favor. For mine own part
(who am meanest of many which profess this divine skill, though not meanest in
good will and humble affection to your Honor) I must confess my self many
ways obliged to your Lordships family, not only, for that my Father and
Brother received many graces of your Honors noble Father, whom they followed,
but that my self had the like of your most honorable Brother, even from the
first notice he chanced to take of me. And therefore (most honorable Lord) I
have here presented this oblation, howsoever mean, a token of mine
affectionate good will Love, yea only devoted to your Lordship, which if it
may gain your gracious acceptance, will fear neither Zoilus nor Momus his
reprehension.

Your Honors in all duty

THE TABLE.
NOw peep, boe peep, thrice happy blessed mine eyes. I My choice is made, and I
desire no change. II Can she disdain, can I persist to Love. III Alas fair
face, why does that smoothed brow. IIII Whether so fast, see how the kindly
flowers perfumes the Air. V Rest sweet Nymphs let goulden sleep, charm your
Star brighter eyes. VI Aye me, she frowns, my mistress is offended. VII Now
let her change and spare not, since she proves false I care not. VIII Underneath
a Cypris shade, the Queen of Love sat mourning. IX Sound woeful plaints in
hills and woods. X You that pine in long desire. XI Look Mistress mine,
within this hollow breast. XII Clime O heart, clime to thy rest. XIII Thanks
gentle Moon for thy obscured light. XIIII I Sigh as sure to wear the fruit,
of the willow tree. XV Down a down, thus Phillis sung, by Fancy once opressed.
XVI Diaphenia like the Dafdowndillie, white as the Sun, fair as the Lilly
XVII Beauty sat bathing by a spring, where fairest shades did hide her. XVIII
Music dear solace, to my thoughts neglected. XIX With fragrant flowers we
strew the way. XX Come, come all you that draw heavens purest breath. XXI A
Pauin for the Lute and Base Violl. XXII
FINIS.
I. CANTO.
^ NOw peep, boe peep, thrice happy blessed mine eyes, For I have found fair ^
Phillis, for I have found fair Phillis where she lies, Upon her ^ bed, with
arms vnspred, all fast a sleep, Unmasked her face, thrice happy grace,
farewell, ^ farewell my Sheep, Look to your selves, new charge I must ap-
prove, Phillis does ^ sleep, Phillis does sleep, And I must guard my Love.
Look. ^

2
Now peep boe peep, mine eyes to see your bliss,
Phillis closd eyes atrackts you, hers to kiss:
Oh may I now perform my vow, loves joy t'impart,
Assay the while, how to be-guile, farewell faint heart.
Taken she is, new joys I must approve,
Phillis does sleep, and I will kiss my Love.
3
Now peep, boe peep, be not too bold my hand,
Wake not thy Phillis, fear she do with-stand:
She stirs alas, alas, alas I faint in spright,
She opes her eye, unhappy I, farewell delight.
Awakt she is, new woes I must approve,
Phillis awakes, and I must leave my Love.
I. ALTO.
^ NOw peep, boe peep, thrice happy blessed mine eyes, For I have found fair
Phillis, for I have ^ found fair Phillis where she lies, vp-on her bed, upon
her bed, upon her bed with arms vnspred, All ^ fast a sleep, vnmas'kt her
face, thrice happy grace, Farewell, farewell my sheep, Look to your selves,
^ look to your selves, new charge I must ap-proue, Phillis does sleep,
Phillis does sleep and I must ^ guard my Love. Look to your etc.

I. BASSO.
^ NOw peep, boe peep, thrice happy blessed ^ mine eyes, For I have found fair
Phillis, for I have ^ found fair Phillis where she lies, Upon her bed with ^
arms vnspred, all fast a sleep, Vnmas'kt her face, thrice ^ happy grace,
Farewell, farewell my sheep, Look to your ^ selves, new charge I must
approve, Phillis does sleep, Phillis ^ does sleep, and I must guard my Love.
Look to etc.

I. TENORE.
^ NOw peep, boe peep, thrice happy blessed mine eyes, For I have found my
Phillis, for I have ^ found my Phillis where she lies, Upon her bed with arms
vnspred, upon her bed with arms vnspred, with ^ arms vnspred, all fast a
sleep, vnmas'kt her face, thrice happy grace, Farewell, farewell my sheep,
Look ^ to your selves, look to your selves, new charge I must ap-proue,
Phillis does sleep, Phillis does sleep, and ^ I must guard my Love. Look to
your etc.

II. CANTO.
^ MY choice is made and I de- sire no change, My wan- The de- serts wild
wherein my wits did range, Are now ^ dring thoughts in li- mits now are bound:
Let him that list sooth hu- mors that made ea- sie walks and plea- sant ground:
Let passions still pos- sesse the i- ^ be vain, Till va- ni- tie all mean ex
-ceeds, dle brain, And care con- sum whom fol- ly feeds. I rest resolved no ^
fancies fits can me e- strange, My choice is made, and I ^ de-sire no more to
change. ^

2
Change they their choice, to whose delicious sense,
The strangest objects are of most esteem:
Inconstant likeing may find excellence,
In things which (being not good) yet best do seem.
Let gallant bloods still crown their sports with joy,
Whom honor, wealth, and pleasure fills:
Let sweet contentment never find annoy,
While Fortune frames things to their wills.
This stirs not me, I am the same, I was before.
My choice is made, and I desire to change no more.
3
Be my choice blamde, or be I thought unwise,
To hold my choice, by others not approved,
I say, that to my self I fall or rise,
By fear, or force I cannot be removed.
Let friends in pity doubt of my success,
Their pity gets no thanks at all:
Let foes be glad to see my hopes grow less,
I scorn the worst that wish they shall:
Still stand I firm, my heart is set, and shall remain,
My choice is made, and never will I change again.
II. ALTO.
^
MY choice is made, and I de- sire no change, my wandering thoughts in li- mits
now are bound.
The de- serts wild, wherein my wits did range, are now made ea- sie walks and
plea-sant ground.
^
Let him that list sooth humors that be vain, till va- ni- tie, till va- ni-
tie all mean ex-ceedes.
Let passions still pos- sesse the I- dle brain, and care consume, and care
consume, whom fol- lie feeds.
^
I rest resolved, no fancies fits can me estrange, my choice is made, and I
desire no more to change.
II. BASSO.
^ MY choice is made, and I de- sire no change, my mandring The de- serts
wild, wherein my wits did range, are now made ^ thoughts in li- mits now are
bound. ea- sie walks and plea- sant gound. ^ Let him that list sooth humors
that be Let passions still pos-sesse the I- dle ^ vain, till va- ni- tie, all
mean exceed. brain, and care con-sume whom fo- lie feeds. ^ I rest resolved,
no fancies sits ^ can me estrange, my choice is made, and I desire no more to
change.

II. TENORE.
^
MY choice is made, and I de-sire no change, my wandering thoughts in li- mits
now are bound.
The de- serts wild, wherein my wits did range, are now made ea- sie walks and
plea-sant ground.
^
Let him that list sooth humors that be vain, till va- ni- tie, till va- ni-
tie all mean ex-ceedes.
Let passions still pos- sesse the I- dle brain, and care consume, and care
consume, fol- lie feeds.
^
I rest resolved, no fancies fits can me estrange, my choice is made, and I
desire no more to change.
III. CANTO.
^ CAn she disdain can I per-sist to love, can she be cruel, I subjected ^
still. Time will my truth, com- passi-on hers a- prove, re- lease the ^ thrald,
and con- quer fro- ward will. I love not lust, ^ Oh, oh therefore let her
daigne, to equal my de- sires, to ij. my de- ^ sires with like a- gain. I love
not, etc. ^

Am I not pleasing in her prouder eyes,
Oh that she knew Loves power as well as I,
Witty she is, but Loves more witty wise,
She breathes on earth, he Reigns in heaven on high.
I love not lust, oh therefore let her daigne,
To equal my desires with like again.
Love scorns the abject earth his sacred fires,
Unites divided minds disseuers none,
Contempt springs out of fleshly base desires,
Setting debate twixt love and union.
I love not lust, oh therefore let her daigne,
To equal my desires, with like again.
III. ALTO.
^ CAn she disdain, can I persist to love, Can she be cruel I subjected
still. Time ^ will my truth compassion hers a prove, release the thrald, and
conquer fro- ward will. I ^ love not lust, I love not lust. Oh therefore let
her daigne, to equal my desires, to ij. ^ with like a gain. I love not etc.

III. BASSO.
^ CAn she disdain, Can I persist to love, can she be cruel ^ I subjected
still. Time will my truth compassion hers a- prove, ^ release the thrald and
conquer froward will. I love not lust, Oh ^ therefore let her daigne, oh ij. To
equal my desires, ^ to ij. with like again. I love not etc.

III. TENORE.
^ CAn she disdain, can I persist to love, can she be cruel I subjected
still. Time will in truth ^ compassion hers approve, release the thrald and
conquer fro- ward will. I love not lust Oh therefore ^ let her daigne, Oh ij.
to equal my desires, to equal my desires with like a gain. I love not etc.

IIII. CANTO.
^ ALas fair face why does that smoo- All in them selves con- firm a scorn- ^
thed brow: those speaking eyes ros'd lips, and blush-ing beauty. full vow: to
spoil my hopes of love, my love of du-tie. The time ^ has bin, when I was
bet- ^ ter grast: I now the same, and yet ^ that time is past. ^

Is it because that thou art only fair,
Oh no such graceful looks banish disdain,
How then, to feed my passions with despair,
Feed on sweet love, so I be loved again.
Well may thy public scorn, and outward pride,
Inward affections, and best likings hide.
Breath but a gentle air, and I shall live,
Smyle in a cloud, so shall my hopes renew,
One kind regard, and second seeing give,
One rising Morn, and my black woes subdue.
If not, yet look upon the friendly Sun,
That by his beams, my beams to thine may run.
IIII. ALTO.
^ ALas fair face, why does that smothed brow. Those speak-ing All in them
selves, confirm a scornful vow. To spoil my ^ eyes, rosd lips, and blush-
ing beauty. The time has been, when I was better hopes of love, my love of
du- tie. ^ grast, I now the same, and yet that time is past. The time has: etc.

IIII. BASSO.
^ ALas fair face, why does that smoothed brow. Those speak-ing All in them
selves confirm a scornful vow. to spoil my ^ eyes, ros'd lips and blushing
beauty. hopes of love, my love of deutie. The time has bin, when I was better
^ grast, I now the same, and yet the time is past. The time has etc.

IIII. TENORE.
^ ALas fair face, why does that smothed brow. Those speak- ing All in them
selves, confirm a scornful vow. To spoil my ^ eyes, rosd lips, and blush-
ing beauty. The time has been, when I was better grast, hopes of love, my
love of du- tie. ^ I now the same, and yet that time is past. The time has,
etc.

V. CANTO.
^ WHether so fast, see how the kindly kindly flowers, perfumes the air, and ^
all to make thee stay, The climing woodbind clipping al these bowrs, clips thee
like- wise, clips ij. ^ wise, for fear pass a- way, Fortune our friend, our
foe will not gainesay. Stay, stay but a while, stay ij. ^ stay ij. Phoe- be no
teltale is, no teltale is, She ^ her En- di- mi- on, I Will my Phoebe kiss my
Phoebe kiss. Stay, stay, etc. ^

Fear not, the ground seeks but to kiss thy feet
Hark, hark how Philomela sweetly sings,
Whilst water wanton fishes as they meet,
Strike crochet time amid'st these crystal springs,
And Zephirus among the leaves sweet murmr rings,
Stay but a while, Phoebe no teltale is,
She her Endimion, I Will my Phoebe kiss.
See how the Helitrope herb of the Sun
Though he himself long since be gone to bed,
Is not of force thine eyes bright beams to shun,
But with their warmth his gouldy leaves vnspred,
And on my knee inuites thee rest thy head.
Stay but a while, Phoebe to teltale is,
She her Endimion, I Will my Phoebe kiss,
V. ALTO.
^ When- there so fast, see how the kindly, kindly flowers perfume the air, and
all to make thee stay. ^ The clymbing Woodbind clipping all these bowers, clips
thee likewise, clips. ij. for fear thou pas away. ^ Fortune our friend, our
foe will not gain- say. Stay, stay but a while, ij. ij. Phoebe no tell- ^ tale
is, no: ij. no: ij. She her Endimion, I Will my Phoebe kiss. my Phoebe kiss.
Stay, stay, etc.

V. BASSO.
^ When- there so fast, see how the kindly flowers perfumes the air, and ^ all
to make thee stay: the climing wodbind clipping all these bowers, clips ^ thee
likewise, clips: ij. for fear thou pass away. Fortune our friend, our ^ foe
will not gain say. Stay, stay but a while, stay: ij stay: ij. Phoebe ^ no
teltale is, no: ij. She her Endimion, I Will my Phoebe kiss. I Will my ^ Phoebe
kiss my Phoebe kiss. Stay, stay: etc.

V. TENORE.
^ WHether so fast, see how the kind- ly flowers perfumes the air, and all to
make thee stay, ^ The clipping woodbind, clipping all these bowers, clips thee
likewise, clips ij. for fear thou pass away. ^ Fortune our friend, our foe
will not gane say. Stay, stay but a while, stay ij. stay ij. stay ij. ^ Phoe-be
no tel-tale is, no ij. no ij. She her Endimi- on I Will my Phoebe kiss, my Phoebe
kiss. Say stay etc

VI. CANTO.
^ REst sweet Nimphs let goulden sleep, charm your star brighter eyes, Whiles
my ^ Lute the watch does keep with pleasing simpa- thies, Lulla lulla- by,
Lulla Lulla-by, sleep sweetly, ^ sleep sweetly, let nothing affright ye, in
calm con- tent- ments lie. Lulla, etc. ^

Dream fair virgins of delight,
And best Elizian groves:
Whiles the wandering shades of night,
Resemble your true loves:
Lulla lullaby, Lulla lullaby
^^ur kisses your blisses send them by your wishes,
^^hough they be not nigh.
Thus dear damzells I do give
Good night and so am gone:
With your hearts desires long live
still joy, and never moan.
Lulla lullaby, Lulla lullaby
Has pleased you and easd you, and sweet slumber sezd you,
And now to bed I hie.
VI. ALTO.
^ REst sweet Nymphs, let goulden sleep charm your star brigh-ter eyes,
whiles my Lute the ^ watch does keep with pleasant simpathies, Lulla lul-la-
by, lul-la-by, lul-laby, sleep sweetly, sleep ^ sweet- ly, let nothing
affright ye, in calm content- ments lie. Lulla etc.

VI. BASSO.
^ REst sweet Nymphs, let goulden sleep charm your star brighter eyes, ^
whiles my Lute the watch does keep, with pleasing Simpathies. Lulla lul-laby,
^ lul-la- by, sleep sweetly, sleep sweetly, let nothing affright ye, in ^
calm contentments lie. Lul-la etc.

VI. TENORE.
^ REst sweet Nymphs let goulden sleep, charm your star brighter eyes,
whiles my Lute the ^ watch does keep, with pleasing sim-pathies, Lulla lul-
laby, lul- laby, lul-laby, sleep sweetly, sleep ^ sweetly, let nothing
affright ye, in calm contentments lie. Lulla etc.

VII. CANTO.
^ AYE me, she frowns, my Mistress is of- fen -ded, Oh pardon ^ dear, my
miss shall be a- mended: My fault from love proceeded, It merits grace ^ the
rather, If I no dan- ger dreaded, it was to win your favor. Then clear those
^ clouds, then smile on me, And let us be good friends. Come ^ walk, come
talk, come kiss, come see, how soon our quarrel ends. Then clear, etc. ^

Why low'rs my love, and blots so sweet a beauty,
Oh be apeasd with vows, with faith and duty:
Give over to be cruel, since kindness seems you better,
You have but changd a Juell, and love is not your detter.
Then welcome mirth, and banish moan, show pity on your lover,
Come play, come sport, the thing that's gone no sorrow can recover.
Still are you angry, and is there no relenting?
Oh wiegh my woes, be moved with my lamenting:
Alas my heart is grieved, mine inward soul does sorrow,
Unless I be releeud, I dye before to morrow.
The coast is cleard, her countnance cheard, I am again in grace,
Then farewell fear, then come my dear, lets dallieand embrace.
VII ALTO.
^ AYe me, she frowns, my Mistres is offended, Oh pardon dear, my miss
shall be a-men-ded: ^ my fault from love proceeded, it merits grace the rather:
if I no dan-ger dreaded, it was to win ^ thy favor. Then clear those Clouds,
then smile on me, and let us be good friends: ^ come walk, come talk, come
kiss, come see how soon our quarrel ends. Then etc.

VII. BASSO.
^ AY me, she frowns, my Mistres is offended, Oh ^ pardon dear, my miss
shall be amended: my fault from love pro- ^ ceeded, it merits grace the rather,
if I no danger dreaded, it ^ was to win thy favor. Then clear those clouds,
then simile on ^ me, and let us be good friends: come walk, come talk, come
^ kiss, come see, how soon our quarrel ends. Then.

VII. TENOR.
^ AYe me, she frowns, my Mistres is offended, Oh pardon dear, my miss
shall be amended my ^ fault from love proceeded, it merits grace the rather, if I
no danger dreaded, it was to win thy favor. ^ Then clear those Clouds, then
smile on me, and let us be good friends: come walk, come talk, ^ come
kiss, come see, how soon our quarrel ends. Then. etc.

VIII. CANTO.
^ NOw let her change and spare not, since she proves false I care not, Fained
^ love so bewitched my de- light, That still I doated on her sight, But she is
gone, but ij. ^ but ij. New desires imbra-cing, And my deserts dis- gracing. But
she is etc. ^

When did I err in blindness,
Or vex her with unkindness,
If my care did attend her alone,
Why is she thus untimely gone?
True love abides till the day of dying,
False love is ever flying.
Then false farewell for ever,
Once false prove faithful never,
He that now so triumphs in thy love,
Shall soon my present fortunes prove.
Were I as fair as divine Adonis,
Love is not had where none is.
VIII. ALTO.
^ NOw let her change and spare not, since she proves falce I care not: feigned
love ^ so bee-witched my delight, that still I doated on her sight. But she is
gone, But: ij. ^ But: ij. new desires embracing, and my deserts disgracing. But
etc.

VIII. BASSO.
^ NOw let her change and spare not, since she proves false I care not: ^
feigned love so be witched my delight, that still I doated on her sight. But
she is gone, ^ but: ij. ij. ij. new desires embracing, and my deserts ^
disgracing. But: etc.

VIII. TENORE.
^ NOw let her change and spare not, since she proves false I care not: fained
love so bewitched ^ my delight that still I doated on her sight. But she is
gone, but: ij. ij. ij. new desires ^ embracing, and my deserts disgracing. But:
etc.

IX. CANTO.
^ UN- der- neath a Cypris shade, the Queen of Love sat ^ mourning, Casting
down the Rosy wreaths, Her heavenly brow a- dor- ^ ning: Quenching fiery
sighs with tears, But yet ^ her heart, but yet her heart, her heart still bur-
ning. Quenching fi-rie ^ sighs with tears, but yet her heart, but yet her
heart, her ^ heart still bur- ning. ^

2
For within the shady mourn, the cause of her complaining,
Mirrhas Son the leavy bowres did haunt, her love disdaining,
Counting all her true desires, in his fond thoughts but faining.
3
Why is youth with beauty graft, vnfeeleing Judge of unkindness,
Spotting love with the foul report, of cruelty and blindness,
Forceing to unkind complaints, the Queen of all divineness.
4
Stint thy tears fair Seaborne Queen, and grief in vain lamented,
When desire has burnt his heart, that thee has discontented,
Then to late the scorn of youth, by age shall be repented.
IX. ALTO.
^ Underneath a Cypris shade, the Queen of Love sat mour- ning, casting down
the To- sie ^ wreathes, her heavenly brow a-dorning, quenching fi'rie sighs
with tears, quenching: ij. but ^ yet her heart still burning, but yet her heart,
but ij. still bur- ning. quenching fi' -rye sighs with tears, ^ quenching ij,
but yet her heart still burning. but yet her heart, but yet her heart still bur-
ning.

IX. BASSO.
^ Underneath a: The Queen of Love sat mourning, casting ^ down the Rosy
wreathes her heavenly brow adoring: quenching si'rie ^ sighs, fi'rie sighs
with tears, quench: ij. but yet her ^ heart, but yet her heart, her heart still
burning. quenching si'rie sighs, ^ si'rie sighs with tears, quench: ij but
yet her ^ heart, but yet her heart, her heart still burning.

IX. TENORE.
^ Underneath a Cypris shade, the Queen of Love sat mourning, casting down
the Rosy wreathes, her ^ heavenly brow ado- ring: quenching fi'rie, fi'rie
fi'rie sighs with tears, quench: ij. but yet her heart, ^ yet her heart still
burning. but: ij. but: ij. quenching fi'rie, fi'rie sighs with tears, ^
quench: ij. but yet her heart, yet her heart still burning. but: ij. but: ij.

For his unfortunate friend William Harwood. X. CANTO.
^ SOund woe- full plaints in hills and woods, Fly my cries, to the skies, Melt ^
mine eyes, and heart lan- guish, Not for the want of friends, or goods, make I ^
moan, though alone, thus I groan, by souls an- guish. Time, friends, chance,
goods, might again ^ re-couer, Black woes, sad griefs, ore my life do houer,
Since my loss is with despair, No ^ blessed Star to me shine fair, All my
mirth turn to mourning, Heart lament, for hope is ^ gone: is gone, Music leave,
I Will learn to moan, Sorrows the sads a- dor- ning. Since my, etc. ^

Aye me my days of bliss are done,
Sorrowing must I sing, nothing can relieve me:
Eclipsed is my glorious Sun,
And mischance does advance horrors lance, still to greiue me.
Poor heart, ill happ has all joy bereft thee:
Gon's the sole good, which the Fates had left me.
Whose estate is like to mine? Fortune does my weal repine,
Envying my one pleasure,
Patience must me assure, other plaster can not cure.
Therefore in this my treasure.
For his unfortunate friend William Harwood. X. ALTO.
^ SOund woeful plaints in hills and woods, fly my cries to the Skies, fly:
ij. melt mine eyes, and heart ^ languish, not for the want of friends, or goods,
of: ij. make I moan, though a-lone thus I groan, by souls an- ^ guish: time,
friends, chance, goods might again recover, black woes, sad griefs ore my life
do houer, since my ^ loss is with despair, no blessed Star to me shine fair,
all my mirth turn to mourning, heart lament, lament, heart la- ^ meant, for hope
is gone, Music leave, lle leave to moan, sorrows the sads ador- ning. Since
my: etc.

For his unfortunate friend William Harwood. X. BASSO.
^ SOund woeful plaints in hills and woods, fly my cries to ^ the skies, fly
ij. melt mine eyes and heart languish, not for the ^ want of friends, not for
ii. or goods make I moan, though a- ^ lone, thus I groan, by souls; an-
guish: time, frinds, chance goods might ^ a gain re-couer, black woes, sad
griefs, ore my life do houer, ^ since my loss is with disparie, no blessed
Star to me shine fair, all my ^ mirth turn to mourning, heart la- meant for
hope is gone, Music leave ^ I Will learn to moan, sorrows the sads adorning.
since my etc.

For his unfortunate friend William Harwood. X. TENORE.
^ SOund woeful plaints in hills and woods, fly my cries to the skies. fly
ij. melt mine eyes and ^ heart languish, not for the want of frinds or goods, of
ij. make I moan, though a-lone, thus I groan, by souls an- ^ guish, time,
friends, chance goods might a- gain reco-uer, black woes, sad griefs, ore my
life, ore ^ my life do houer, since my loss is with despair, no blessed Star,
to me shine fair, all my merth turn to mourning. ^ heart la: ij. heart ij.
heart ij. for hope is gone, Music leave I learn to moan, sorrows the sads
ador- ning since:

XI. CANTO.
^ YOu that pine in long de- sire, help to cry. Come Love, come Love, ^ quench
this bur- ning fire, Least through thy wound I die. Least through thy wound I ^
die. Least through thy wound I die. Come love, etc.

2
Hope that tyres with vain delay,
ever cries
Come love, come love, hours and years decay,
In time loves treasure lies.
3
All the day, and all the night
still I call
Come love, come love, but my dear delight,
yealds no relief at all.
4
Her unkindness scorns my moan,
that still shrykes
Come love, come love, beauty pent alone
dies in her own dislikes.
XI. ALTO.
^ YOu that pine in long desire, help to cry. come Love, come Love, quench
this burning ^ fire, burning fire, least through thy wound I die. least through
thy wound I die, least through thy wound, ^ least through thy wound I die. come
love, etc.

XI. BASSO.
^ YOu that pine in long desire, help to cry, come Love, come ^ Love quench
this burning fire, least through thy wound I die. I die, least ^ through thy
wound I die. least ij. die. come Love etc.

XI. TENORE.
^ YOu that pine in long desire, help to cry, come Love, quench this bur-ning
fire, least ^ through thy wound I die. least through thy wound I die, least
through thy wound I die. least ^ through thy wound I die. come Love etc.

XII. CANTO.
^ Look Mistress mine within this hol- low breast, See here in- closd a ^
tomb of tender skin, wherein fast locked is framd a Phe-nix nest, That save your
^ self, is no passage in. Witness the wou^d that through your dart does
bleed, And ^ craves your cure, and ij. and ij. since you have done the deed.
Witness, etc. ^

Wherefore most rare and Phoenix rarely fine,
Behold once more the harms I do possess:
Regard the heart that through your fault does pine,
Attending rest yet finds no redress.
For end, wave wings and set your nest on fire,
Or pity me, and grant my sweet desire.
XII. ALTO.
^ Look Mistress mine, within this hollow breast, see here enclosed, a tomb
of tender skin, wherein ^ fast locked is framed a Phoenix nest, that, save your
self, there is no passage in there is no passage in. Wit- ^ nesse the wound,
that through your dart does bleed, and craves your care, and craves your care,
since ^ have done the deed. Witness the etc.

XII. BASSO.
^ Look mistres mine within this hollow breast, see here in-closd a tomb ^ of
tender skin, wherein fast locked is framd a Phoenix nest, that, save your self,
there is, ^ there is no passage in. Witness the wound that through your dart
does bleed, and ^ craves your cure, and: ij. and: ij. and: ij. since you have
done the deed witness.

XII. TENORE.
^ Look mistres mine within this hollow breast, see here inclosd a tomb of
tender skin, within fast locked is ^ framd a Phe-nix nest, that, save your
self, there is no passage in, there is no passage in. Witness the wound ^
that through your dart does bleed, and craves your cure, and ij. and: ij. since
you have done the dead.

To his loving friend M. Holder, M. of Arts. XIII. CANTO.
^ CLime O heart, clime to thy rest, Climing yet take heed ^ of falling, Climers
often even at their best, catch love, down falth, heart appa-ling. Climers, etc. ^

2
Mounting yet if she do call,
And desire to know thy arrant:
Fear not stay, and tell her all,
Falling she will be thy warrant.
3
Rise, oh rise, but rising tell,
When her beauty bravely wins thee,
T'sore up where that she does dwell,
Down again thy baseness brings thee.
4
If she ask what makes thee love her,
Say her virtue, not her face:
For though beauty does approve her,
Mildness gives her greater grace.
5
Rise then rise if she bid rise,
Rising say thou risest for her:
Fall if she do thee despise,
Falling still do thou adore her.
6
If thy plaint do pity gain,
Love and live to her honor:
If thy service she disdain,
Dying yet complain not on her.
To his loving friend M. Holder M. of Arts. XIII. ALTO.
^ CLime O heart, clime to thy rest, Clim-ing yet take ^ heed of sal- ling,
Climars often even at their best, catch Love, down falt'h ^ heart ap-palling.
Climars etc.

XIII. BASSO.
^ CLyme O heart, clyme to thy rest, clyming yet take ^ heed of fall- ling,
clymers often even at their best, catch love, ^ down falth heart appalling.
clymars: etc.

To his loving friend M. Holder M. of Arts. XIII. TENORE.
^ CLime O heart, clime to thy rest, Clim-ing yet take heed ^ of falling,
Climars often even at their best, catch Love, down falt'h heart ^ ap-pal-ling.
Clymars etc.

XIIII. CANTO.
^ THanks gentle Moon for thy obscured light, My Love and I be- traid thou ^
set us free, And Zephirus as ma-ny un- to thee, Whose blasts con- ceald, the
pleasures of the night, ^ Re- solue to her thou gave, content to me. But be
those bowers still filled with Ser- pents hisses, ^ That sought by treason, that
ij. to be- tray our kis- ses. to betray our ^ kisses. But be those, etc. ^

And thou false Arbor with thy bed of Rose,
Wherein, whereon touched equal with loves fire,
We reapt of either other loves desire,
Wither the twining plants that thee enclose.
Oh be thy bowers still filled with serpents hisses,
That sought by treason, to betray our kisses.
Torn be the frame, for thou did thankles hide,
A traiterous spy, her brother, and my foe,
Who sought by death, our joys to under go,
And by that death, our passions to divide,
Leaving to our great vows, eternal woe.
Oh be thy bowers still filled with serpents hisses,
That sought by treason, to betray our kisses.
XIIII. ALTO.
^ THanks gentle Moon for thy obscured light, My Love and I betrayed thou set
us free, And Ze-phirus as ^ many vn-to thee, whose blasts conceald, the
pleasures of the night, Resolve to her thou gave, content to ^ me. But be
those bowers still filled with Serpents hisses, That sought by treason, that ij.
to ^ betray our kisses. to be- tray our kisses. But be those etc.

XIIII. BASSO.
^ THanks gentle Moon for thy obscured light, My Love ^ and I betrayed thou set
us free, And Zephirus as many unto thee, Whose ^ blasts conceald, the pleasures
of the night, Resolve to her thou gave, ^ content to me. But be those bowers
still filled with Serpe^ts hisses, ^ That sought by treason, that: ij. to be-
tray our kisses. ^ to betray our kisses. But be those, etc.

XIIII. TENORE.
^ THanks gentle Moon for thy obscured light, My Love and I betrayed thou set
us free, And Zephirus as many ^ unto thee, Whose blasts conceald, the pleasures
of the night, Resolve to her thou gave, content to me. But ^ be those bowers
still filled with Serpents hisses, That sought by treason, That: ij. to betray
our kisses. ^ to betray our kisses. But those: etc.

XV. CANTO.
^ I Sigh as sure to wear the fruit of the Will- low ^ tree, I sigh as sure to
lose my suit, for it may not be. ^ I sigh as one that loves in vain, I sigh
as one that lives ^ in pain, very sorry, ij. ij. very weary of my ^ mi- se-
rye. I etc.

2
I hate my thoughts which like the Fly, flutter in the flame,
I hate my tears which drop, and dry, quench and fri^ the same:
I hate the heart which frozen burns, I hate the heart which chosen turns,
Too and from me, making of me nothing but a game.
3
My thoughts are fuel to desire, which my heart does move,
My tears are oil to feed the fire, smart whereof I prove:
She laughes at sighs that come from me, I sigh at laughes in her so free,
Who does glory, in the story of my sorry love.
4
Her lovely looks, and louelesse mind do not well agree,
Her quick conceit, and judgment blind, as ill suited be:
Her forward wit, and froward heart, that like to knit, this glad to part,
Makes so pretty, and so witty, not to pity me.
5
The more I seek, the less I find what to trust unto,
The more I hold, the less I bind, she does still undo:
I weaue the web of idle love, which endless will, and frutles prove,
If the pleasure for the measure of my treasure go.
XV. ALTO.
^ I Sigh as sure to wear the fruit of the willow tree, I sigh as sure to lose
my suit, my suit, for ^ it will not be, for it will not be, I sigh as one
that loves in vain, that loves in vain, I sigh as one that ^ lives in pain,
very sorry, ve: ij. ij. very weary of my misery. I sigh as etc.

XV. BASSO.
^ I Sigh as sure to wear the fruit, of the willow tree, I sigh as sure, ^ I
sigh as sure to loose my suit, for it will not be. I sigh as one that loves in
vain, ^ loves in vain, I sigh as one that lives in pain, ve-ry so-ry ve-ry
ij. ^ ve-ry so-ry, ve-ry weary of my mi-se-rie. I sigh and

XV. TENORE
^ I Sigh as sure to wear the fruit, the fruit of the willow tree, I sigh as
sure to loose my suit, for it ^ will not be, for it will not be. I sigh as one
that loves in vain, I sigh as one that lives in pain: ^ very so-ry, very: ij.
very sorry very weary of my mi- se- ry. I sigh etc.

Chorus. XVI. CANTO.
^ DOwn a down, ij. Thus Phillis sung, by Fan- cie once op-pres- sed, Who so by
foolish Love are ^ stong, Are worthe-ly distres- sed, and so sing I, and ij.
with a down, ij. ij. ^ with a down a down a down.

^ 1 Verse. WHen Love was first be- got, and ^ by the mothers will, Did fall to
humane, lot, his solace to full- fill, Deuoid of all de- ceit, a ^ chaste and
ho-ly fire, Did quicken man's con- ceit, and women's breast in- spire. The Gods
that saw the ^ good, that mortals did ap- prove, With kind and holy mood,
began to talk of love. ^ Chorus. Down a down.

2
But during this accord, a wonder strange to hear
Whilst love in deed and word, most faihfull did appear:
False semblance came in place, by selocie attended,
And with a double face, both love and fancy blended,
Which made the gods forsake, and men from fancy fly,
And maidens scorn a mate, forsooth and so will I.
Chorus. Down a down. etc.

Chorus. XVI. ALTO.
^ Down a etc. ^ And so sing I, and ij. with a down, with ij. with a down
down with a ij. a down a down. ^ verses. When Love: etc.

Chorus. Down a etc.

Chorus. XVI. BASSO.
^ Down a: etc. ^ and so sing I with a down, ij. ^ ij. with a down a down a
down. ^ Verses. When Love: etc. ^ Chorus. Down a: etc.

Chorus. XVI. TENORE.
^ Down a etc. ^ And so sing I, with a down, ij. with a down a, with a down
a down a down down. ^ Verses. When Love:etc. ^ Chorus. Down a:etc.

XVII. CANTO.
^ DI-a-phe-ni-a like the Dafdown- dillie, White as the Sun, fair as the ^
Lilly, Heigh ho, heigh ho, how I do love thee: I do love thee as my Lambs,
Are be-lo- ued of ^ their dumbs, How blessed were I if thou would prove me. I
do: etc. ^

2
Diaphenia like the spreading Roses,
That in thy sweetes, all sweetes incloses,
Fair sweet how I do love thee?
I do love thee as each flower,
Loves the Suns life giving power,
For dead, thy breath to life might move me.
3
Diaphenia like to all things blessed,
When all thy praises are expressed,
Dear joy, how I do love thee?
As the birds do love the spring,
Or the Bees their careful king,
Then in requite, sweet virgin love me.
XVII. ALTO.
^ D I- a- phe-nia like the Dafdown- dil-lie, white as the Sun, fair as the
Lilly, Heigh ho, ^ heigh ho, how I do love thee, I do love thee as my Lambs,
are beloved of their dambs; how blessed were I if ^ thou would prove me. I
do; etc.

XVII. BASSO.
^ D I-a-phe-ni-a like the Dafdown- dillie, white as the Sun fair ^ as the
Lilly, Heigh ho, high ho, how I do love thee, I do love thee as my Lambs, ^
are beloved of their dambs, how blessed were I if thou would prove me. I do
etc.

XVII. TENORE.
^ D I-aphe-ni-a like the daf- down- dillie, white as the Sun, fair as the
Lilly, Heigh ho, ^ heigh ho, how I do love thee: I do love thee as my
Lambs, are beloved of their dambs, how blessed ^ were I if thou would prove
me. I do love etc.

XVIII. CANTO.
^ Beauty sat bathing by a spring, Where fairest shades did hide her: The ^
winds blew calm, the birds did sing, The cool streams ran be- side her. ^
My wanton thoughts enticed mine eye, To see what was for- bidden: But better
memory said fie, So ^ vain de- sire was chidden. Hey no- ny, hey no- ^ ny, hey
ij. hey nony no nony nony. Hey, etc.

Into a slumber then I fell,
When fond imagination,
Seemed to see, but could not tell,
Her feature, or her fashion.
But even as Babes in dreams do smile,
And sometime fall a-weeping:
So I a-wakt as wise this while,
As when I feel a sleeping.
Hey nonnie, nonnie, etc.
XVIII ALTO.
^ BEau-tie sat bathing by a spring, where fairest shades did hide her: The
winds blew calm, the ^ Birds did sing, The cool streams ran beeside her.
My wanton thoughts enticed mine eye, mine ^ eye, To see what was forbidden: But
better memory said fie, so vain desire was chidden. Hey nony ^ nonie, hey: ij.
hey, ij. nonie, nonie, hey: ij. Hey nonie, etc.

XVIII. BASSO.
^ Beauty sat bathing by a spring, Where fairest shades ^ did hide her: The
winds blew calm, the Birds did sing, The cool ^ streams ran beside her,
bee-side her. My wanton thoughts en- ^ tic'd mine eye, To see what was
forbidden: But better memory said ^ fie, So vain desire was chidden. Hey nonie
nonie, hey: ij. ^ nonie, hey ij. hey: ij. hey: ij. hey ^ no- nie. Hey nonnie.
etc.

XVIII. TENORE.
^ Beauty sat bathing by a spring, Where fairest shades did hide her: The
winds blew calm, the ^ birds did sing, The cool streams ran beside her,
beside her. My wanton thoughts enticed, enticed ^ mine eye, To see what was
forbidden: But better me-mory said fie, So vain desire was chidden. Hey ^
nony, ij. hey ij. hey ij. nony. Hey etc.

XIX. CANTO.
^ Music dear sollace, to my thoughts neg- lected, Music time sporter, ^
Music time sporter, to my most res- pec- ted, Sound on, sound on, thy gol- den
^ harmony is such, That whilst she does vouchsafe her E-bon Lute to tuch. By
descant ^ numbers I do nimbly clime, from Loves se- cluse, Unto his Courts,
vn-to his Courts where I in ^ fresh attire, at- tire my Muse. By descant, etc. ^

2
I do compare her fingers swift resounding,
Unto the heavens Sphaericall rebounding:
Hark, hark, she sings no forced, but breathing sound I hear,
And such the concord Diapasons she does rear,
As when the immortal god of nature from his seat above,
First formd words all, and fairly it combind, combind by love.
3
Divine Appollo be not thou offended,
That by her better skill thy skils amended,
Scholars do often more lore, then masters theirs attain,
Though thine the ground, all parts in one though she contain,
Yet may thou triumph that thou have a Scholar only one,
That can her Lute to thine, and to thy voice, her voice atone.
XIX. ALTO.
^ Music dear selace to my thoughts neg-lected, Music time sporter ij. to
my most ^ res-pected, Sound on, sound on, thy golden harmony is such, That
whilst she does vouchsafe her ^ Ebon Lute to tuch, By descant numbers I do
nim-bly clime, from loves secluse, unto his Courts, unto ^ his Courts, where I
in fresh attire at- tire my Muse. By descant numbers etc.

XIX. BASSO.
^ MV-sick dear sollace, to my thoughts neglected, Music ^ time sporter,
Music time sporter, to my most respected, ^ Sound on, sound on thy goulden
harmony is such, That whilst ^ she does, she does vouchsafe hre Ebon Lute to
tuch. By descant ^ numbers I do nimbly clime, from Loves secluse, Unto his
courts unto ^ his Courts, where I in fresh attire, at- tire my ^ Muse. By
descant etc.

XIX. TENORE.
^ Music dear solace to my thoughts neglected, Music time sporter, Music
time sporter, to my ^ most respected: Sound on, sound on, thy golden harmony is
such, That whilst she does, she does vouch- ^ safe her Ebon Lute to tuch. By
descant numbers I do nimbly clime, from Loves secluse, unto ^ his Courts, unto
his Courts, where I in fresh attire at- tire my Muse. By descant, etc.

XX. CANTO.
^ WIth fragrant flowers we strew the way, And make this our chief ^ ho- ly
day, For though this Clime were blessed of yore, Yet was it ^ ne-uer proud
before: O gracious King, O ij. O ij. O ij: ^ of second Troy, Ac- cept of our
un- fai- ned joy. O, etc ^

2
Now The Air is sweeter then sweet Balm,
And Satires dance about the Palm:
Now earth with verdure newly dight,
Gives perfect signs of her delight.
O gracious King of second Troy,
Accept of our unfeigned joy.
Now Birds record new harmony,
And trees do whistle melody:
Now every thing that Nature breeds
Does clad it self in pleasant weeds.
O gracious King of second Troy,
Accept of our unfeigned joy.
XX. ALTO.
^ WIth fragrant flowers we strew the way, And make this our chief ho-ly day,
^ For though this Clime were blessed of yore, Yet was it ne-uer proud before: O
gra- cious King, ^ O ij. O ij. O ij. O ij. of second Troy, Accept of our
vnfai-ned joy. O, etc

XX. BASSO.
^ WIth fragrant flowers we strew the way, And make this our chief ^ holy day,
For though this Clime were blessed of yore, yet was it ne- uer proud be- ^ fore:
O gracious King, O ij. O ij. O ij. O ij. ^ of second Troy, Ac-cept of our
unfeigned joy. O gracious etc.

XX. TENORE.
^ WIth fragrant flowers we strew the way, And make this our chief ho-ly day,
For ^ though this Clime were blessed of yore, Yet was it never proud before: O
gracious King, O ij. ^ O ij. O ij. O ij. of second Troy, Accept of our
vn-fained joy. O gracious etc.

An Elegy in remembrance of his Worshipful friend Thomas Leighton Esquier.
XXI. CANTO.
^ COme come all you that draw heavens pu- rest breath, Come ^ An- gell brested
sons of har- mo- nie. Let us candole in tragic E- li- ^ gie, Con- dole with
me our dearest Leightons death, Leighton in whose dear loss death belmish-
eth ^ Jones beau-tie and the soul of true de- light, Leighton heavens favorite
and the ^ Muses Jewel, Muses and heavens only here- in too cruel, Leighton
to hea- uen, Leighton ^ to heaven, has taken too time- ly flight. Leighton to,
etc. ^

Come then since Seas of tears, since sighs and groans,
Since mournful plaints, loud cries, and deep laments,
Have all in vain deplord these drerements,
And fate in-explorable scorns our mones,
Let us in accents grave, and saddest tones,
Offer up Musicks doleful sacrifice:
Let these accords which notes distinguist frame,
Serve for memorial to sweet Leightons name,
In whose sad death Musicks delight now dies.
An Eiegie, in remembrance of his Worshipful friend, Thomas Leighton Esquire.
XXI. ALTO.
^ ^ COme come all you that draw, Heavens pu- rest breath, Come Angel brested
sons, come ij. ^ of har- mo- ny, Let us condole in tragic E- li- gie,
con-dole with me our dearest Leightons death, ^ Leighton in whose dear loss
death blemisheth, Jones beauty and the soul, the soul of true delight,
Leighton ^ heavens fauoret and the Muses Iew-ell, Muses and heavens only
here-in too cru-ell, Leighton to heaven, to ^ heaven, Leighton to heaven, has
taken too timely flight. Leighton etc.

An Elegy etc. XXI. BASSO.
^ COme come all you that draw heavens purest ^ breath, Come Angel brested
sons of harmony, Let us con- ^ dole. tragic Eligie, Condole with me our
dearest Leightons ^ death Leighton in whose dear loss death ble- misheth
Jones ^ beawtie and the soul of true de-light, Leighton heavens ^ favorite and
the Mu-ses Jewel, Muses and heavens only ^ herein too cruel, Leighton to
heaven, Leigh: ij. to heaven ^ has taken too timely flight. Leighton to heaven,
etc.

An Elegy, in remembrance of his Worshipful friend, Thomas Leighton Esquier.
XXI. TENORE.
^ COme come all you that draw heavens purest breath, Come Angel brested
sons, come ij. ^ of harmo-ny, Let us condole in tragic Eligie, Condole with
me our dearest Leightons death, Leighton ^ in whose dear loss death
blemisheth Jones beauty, and the soul of true delight, Leighton heavens
favorite and ^ the Muses Jewel, Muses and heavens only herein too cruel,
Leighton to heaven, to ij to heaven ^ has taken too timely flight. Leighton,
etc.

XXII. BASSO.
^ A Pauin. 2 ^

A Pauin for the Lute and Base Violl. XXII.
^

FINIS.



