Festum Voluptatis, Or the BANQUET OF PLEASURE; FVRNISHED WITH MVCH Variety of
Speculations, Witty, Pleasant, and Delightful.

Containing diverse choice Love-Posies, Songs, Sonnets, Odes, Madrigals, Satyrs,
Epigrams, Epitaphs and Elegies.

For variety and pleasure the like never before published.

Musica mentis, medicina moestus.

By S. P. Gent.

LONDON: Printed by E. P. for Bernard Langford, and are to be sold at the sign
of the Blue Bible at Holborne-Bridge. 1639.

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL His much esteemd good Friend, Mr. RICHARD PELHAM, Esquire,
S. P. Wishes all happiness and prosperity here and hereafter.
WORTHY SIR,
IT may seem something strange, that so mean a Muse as mine, upon so unworthy
a Subject as this, should so rudely dare to shelter it self under the
protection of your Name, or intrude upon the consure of so solid a judgment as
resides in your breast; considering how conversant you daily are with raptures
both of a higher strain and better nature, daily proffered to your view and
censure: But the persuasion of your courteous acceptance of such wild Olives
as these are (as of Plants which inoculated and pruned, in time may produce
more mature and delicious fruits unto her fosterers) has emboldned me to it;
and shall therefore (I hope) be the better excused (though it want much of what
I wish it had) because it flies to you as a Refuge, under whose Hands it has
both security and warrant. Expect no quaint language nor fragrant Flowers of
flowing Rhetoric, but such as use to proceed from springing youth, they are
the wanton fruits of idle hours, and so happily cannot yield that relish that
may be expected from them But yet your ingenuity and generous disposition
assures the acceptance being the first fruits of my Muses springing.) And that
you cherish them, that they dye not in their Bud, but (by your promptitude) may
be preferred from the blast of envy, and the rot of time and oblivion. The
persuasion of your liberal acceptance vouchsafed me, not only ympes my Muses
wings for a higher flight in the future, but vows me to acknowledge my self
now and ever

Your Worships most obsequiously to be commanded, SAMUEL PICK.

To the Reader.
GENTLE READER,
I Must now crave thy courteous acceptance of this small worthless Treatise:
this is a granted Maxim, that a slander by has (many times) better eyes than
they that play the game; there is no man that cannot err, well then may the
poor endeavors of a young brain be pardoned. If thou should here expect a
lofty Scene, or Phrases decked with embolished speeches, I am sorry I have given
thee no better content, but (indeed) I must needs tell thee, Eloquence was
never any part of my Essence. Pardon, I pray thee, my presumption, and protect
me from those Cavelling finde-faults that never like well of any thing they see
printed, though never so well compiled: What I have here done, I have done to
pleasure my friends, and thee, and not to make any profit by them; wherefore my
gentle Reader accept kindly, I pray thee, of all, and be not (as hard
Censurers) hasty to blast young springing Blossoms in their tender Bud; so
shall I be obliged to the due observation of thy better content, and remain

Thine at command, SAM. PICK.

Author to his Book.
COme hither Book take counsel, he that goes
Into the world, meets with a world of foes.
Thy Mother was my Muse, a gentle Dame,
Who much adored Apollo's sacred Name;
Then being freeborn, know that thou art going
Into a World of wits, still fresh, still growing:
Yet wonder not that I have got no friend
To write in thy behalf* What! should I send
Thee like a Serving-man, with Letters? No,
The World shall see thee first, and seeing know
Whether thou merits praise: none shall have cause,
To be condemned of folly in the applause
Of thy harsh lines, the worst that can be thought,
Is this, that none would write they were (...) naught.
Alas, poor Book! hunt not thou after praise,
Nor dare to stretch thy hand unto the Bays
Upon a Poets head: let it suffice
To thee and me, the World does us despise.
"'It Is for a better Pen than mine, to say,
"I know it is good, and if you liked, you may.
POEMS.
To TIME.
GRave Censurer of Things, long since o'repast,
Of present actions, and what shall be last,
Think It not amiss, that my unlearned quill,
Has spent some minutes of thee, and so ill;
I Will thank thy present patience, and in time,
My Muse may give thee thanks in better Rhyme.
To the READER.
MOst welcome guest, to thee my homely Cates,
If any thing my barren Muse relates,
That may the palate of thy stomach please,
I wished Ambrosia, though a pulce or pease;
Here is no forced, but voluntary dish,
And should be better, had I but my wish.
To his worthy esteemed good Friend Mr. JOHN WADLAND (son of Mr. GEORGE
WADLAND of Leicester) and to his virtuous Sisters, Mrs. ANNE WADLAND, Mrs.
SUSANNA, Mrs. MARTHA, and Mrs. MARY WADLAND, etc.
WHen I forget to think on ye,
My self must cease my self to be,
For sooner may my flesh dissolve,
And humid earth my bones involve;
Yea sooner shall the glorious Sun,
Loose its bright luster, and the Moon,
Rapt in sable Clouds of Night,
Cease to give her silver light,
Than I forget what your desert,
Has lively graven in my heart.
Yours obliged to do you service, S. P.

To his singular good Friend Mr. THOMAS MOUSLEY.
IF ever there were any, in whose love
I counted my self happy, far above
The rate of common Friends, whose verbal gloze
More of false flattery, than true friendship shows,
'Twas in thy self, and that thrice happy day,
Wherein my heart did by mine eyes survey,
Approve thy matchless worth, and give consent,
To knit our hearts within one Ligament.
Yours, vowed till death, S. P.

To his affectionate good Friend, Master WILLIAM SYKES.
SIR, unto you (in faith) I Am much indebted,
For undeserved love from you received;
My debt's a debt, to pay't I know not how,
The more I pay, the more still I do owe.
To his loving Friend, Mr. BARTHOLOMEW WOLLOCKE.
NO sooner do I think on thee, but straight
My Muse grows frolique, and as if kind fate,
Had to thy Name, annexed a power t'infuse
Life in the deadest, dullest, slowest Muse,
She then begins to revell it, and soar
A higher pitch then ere she slew before;
At least my thoughts suggest so, for I Am sure,
I find my spirits nimbler, and more pure:
My Verse flows ranker, and if this
May argue truth in ought, then so it is.
To his kind Friend, Master GEORGE BROOK.
Since on my worthiest Friends I now do muse,
how should my Muse to mind you, once neglect?
Since you are such, then should she but abuse,
should she not use you with all due respect.
Yours, at command, S. P.

To his loving Friend, Master TIMOTHY LANGLEY.
YOur large, complete, solid sufficiency,
Hid in the veil of your wise modesty;
Your quaint, neat Learning, your acute, quick wit,
And sincere heart for great employments fit:
But stay, I have not time here to relate
Of your desert, what truly might be spoke;
I will refer it till another time,
And I my self your servant will combine.
Your affecting Friend, S. P.

To his dear Mistress, H. P.
LEt but thy beauteous eye look on this Line,
And see as in thy Glass thy beauty shine,
Which beauty, Nature gave thee, to disgrace
Our latter Artists, that make up a face,
Of seeming beauty, for to blind such eyes,
As with Pigmalion them do Idolize,
Should I not praise, what I praiseworthy see,
I should do wrong to Nature and to Thee;
Yet while I speak thee fair, so short I come
Of thy perfections, that I Am deemed by some,
To light the burning Sun, yet from my hand,
Receive this grain unto thy heap of sand.
Loves Hyperboles.
IF Love had lost his shafts, and love down threw,
His thunderbolts, or spent his forked fire,
They only might recovered be anew,
From out my heart cross wounded with desire;
Or if debate by Mars were lost a space,
It might be found within the self-same place.
If Neptunes waves were all dried up and gone,
My weeping eyes so many tears distill,
That greater Seas might grow by them alone,
Or if no flame were yet remaining still,
In Vulcans Forge, he might from out my breast,
Make choice of such as would befit him best.
If Aeole were deprived of his charge,
Yet soon could I restore his winds again,
By sobbing sighs, which forth I blow at large,
To move her mind that pleasures in my pain.
What man but I, could thus incline his will,
To live in love, that has no end of ill.
His Mistress Eyes serve CUPID both for Darts and Fire.
Often have I mused the cause to find,
Why Love in Ladies eyes does dwell,
I thought, because himself was blind,
He looked that they should guide him well:
And since his hope but seldom fails,
For Love by Ladies eyes prevails.
But time at last has taught me wit,
Although I bought my wit full dear,
For by her eyes my heart is hit,
Deep is the wound, though none appear,
Their glancing beams as Darts he throws,
And sure he has no shafts but those.
I mused to see their eyes so bright,
And little thought they had been fire,
I gazed upon them with delight,
But that delight has bred desire:
What better place can Love require,
Then that where grow both shafts and fire?
To his Mistress, who had vowed Virginity.
EVen as my hand, my Pen and paper lays,
My trembling hand, my pen from paper strayes,
Lest that thine eyes which shining made me love you,
Should frowning on my suit, bid cease to move you,
So that I fear like one at his wits end,
Hoping to gain, and fearing to offend:
But whilst like clouds tossed up and down the air,
I wracked hang 'twixt hope and sad despair,
Despair is beaten, vanquished from the field,
And unto conquering hope does yield:
For if that nature love to beauty offers,
And beauty shun the love that nature proffers,
Then, either unjust beauty is too blame,
With scorn to quench a lawful kindled flame,
Or else unlawfully if love we must,
And be unlov'd, then nature is unjust:
Unjustly then Nature has hearts created,
There to love most, where most their love is hated,
And flattering them with a faire-seeming ill,
To poison them with beauties sugared Pill.
That he cannot leave to love, though commanded.
HOw can my Love in equity be blamed,
Still to importune though it nere obtain,
Since though her face and voice will me refrain,
Yet by her voice and face I am inflamed.
For when (alas) her face with frowns is framed,
To kill my Love, but to revive my pain:
And when her voice commands, but all in vain,
That love both leave to be, and to be named.
Her Siren voice does such enchantment move,
And though she frown, even frowns so lovely make her,
That I of force, am forced still to love,
Since that I must, and yet cannot forsake her:
My fruitless prayers shall cease in vain to move her,
But my devoted heart nere cease to love her.
Upon his Mistress hiding her face.
Go wailing accents go,
With my warm tears and scalding tears attended
To the author of my woe,
And humbly ask her why she is offended,
Say, Dear why hide you so,
From him your blessed eyes,
Where he beholds his earthly Paradise,
Since he hides not from you
His heart, wherein Loves heaven you may view.
Upon begging a Kiss.
SOrrow slowly kills any,
Sudden joy soon murders any,
Then (sweet) if you would end me,
It Is a fond course with lingering grief to spend me:
For quickly to dispatch me,
Your only way is, in your arms to catch me;
And give me Dove-like kisses,
For such excessive and unlookt for blisses,
Will so much over-joy me,
As they will straight destroy me.
To CUPID.
AH Cupid, I mistook thee,
I for an Archer, and no Fencer took thee,
But as a Fencer often faines blows and thrusts,
Where he intends no harm,
Then turns his balefull arm,
And wounds that party which least his foe mistrusts:
So thou with fencing Art,
Faining to wound mine eyes, have hit my heart.
To his heart being in thraldom.
NAy, nay, thou striv'st in vain my heart,
To mend thy miss,
Thou have deserved to bear this smart,
And worse than this,
That would thy self debase,
To serve in such a place.
Thou thoughtst thy self too long at rest,
Such was thy pride,
Needs must thou seek another breast,
wherein to bide:
Say now what have thou found?
In fetters thou art bound.
What has thy faithful service won,
But high disdain?
Broke is thy thread thy fancy spun,
Thy labor vain;
Fallen art thou now with pain,
And can not raise again.
And can thou look for help of me
In this distress?
I must confess I pity thee,
And can no less,
But bear a while thy pain,
For fear thou fall again.
Learn by thy hurt to shun the fire,
Play not with all?
When climing thoughts high things aspire;
They seek their fall:
Thou ween'st naught shone but gold,
So wast thou blind and bold.
Yet lie not still for this disgrace,
But mount again,
So that thou know the wished place
Be worth thy pain;
Then though thou fall and die,
Yet never fear to fly.
Upon his Mistress Beauty and voice.
PAssion may my judgment bleare,
Therefore sure I will not swear;
That others are not pleasing;
But I speak it to my pain,
And my life shall it maintain,
None else yields my heart easing.
Ladies I do think there be
Others some as fair as she;
Though none have fairer features,
But my Turtle-like affection
Since of her I made election,
Scorns other fairest creature.
Surely I will not deny
But some others reach as high,
With their sweet warbling voices;
But since her notes charmed mine ear,
Even the sweetest tunes I hear,
To me seem rude harsh noyses.
Upon Visiting his Mistress by Moon light.
THe night say all, was made for rest,
And so say I, but not for all;
To them the darkest nights are best,
Which give them leave a sleep to fall,
But I that seek my rest by light,
Hate sleep and praise the clearest night.
Bright was the Moon as bright as day,
And Venus glistred in the West,
Whose light did lead the ready way,
That brought me to my wished rest:
Then each of them increast their light,
While I enjoyed her heavenly sight.
Say, gentle Dames, what moved your mind,
To shine so bright above your wont,
Would Phebe fair Endimion find?
Would Venus see Adonis hunt?
No, no, you feared by her sight,
To lose the praise of beauty bright.
At last, for shame you shrunk away,
And thought to reave the world of light:
Then shone my Dame with brighter ray,
Then that which comes from Phoebus sight
None other light but hers I praise*
Whose nights are clearer than the days.
Upon a scoffing laughter given by a Gentlewoman.
LAugh not too much perhaps you are deceived,
All are not fools that have but simple faces,
Mists are abroad things may be misconceived,
Frumpes and disdaines are favors in disgraces:
Now if you do not know what mean these speeches,
Fools have long coats, and Monkies have no breches.
Ti'he again, why what a grace is this,
Laugh a man out, before he can get in?
Fortune so cross, and favor so amiss,
Doomesday at hand, before the world begin?
Marry sir then; but if the weather hold,
Beauty may laugh, and love may be a cold.
Yet leave betimes your laughing too too much,
Or find the Fox, and then begin the chase,
Shut not a rat within the Sugar hutch,
And think you have a Squirill in the place:
But when you laugh, let this go for a jest,
Seek not a woodcocke in a Swallows nest.
An invective against Women.
IF Women could be fair, and yet not fond,
Or that their love were firm, not sickle still:
I would not wonder that they make men bound,
By serving long to purchase their good will:
But when I see how frail these creatures are,
I laugh that men forget themselves so far.
To mark the choice they make, and how they change,
How often from Phoebus they do change to Pan,
Unsettled still like haggards wild they range,
These gentle birds that fly from man to man,
Who would nor scorn and shake them from the fist,
And let them go fair fools which way they list?
Yet for their sport we fawn and flatter both,
To pass the time when nothing else can please,
And train them to our lure by substill oath,
Till weary of our wills our selves we ease,
And then we say when we their fancy trle,
To play with fools, O what a doult was I?
SONET.
YOung men fly, when beauty darts
Amorous glances at your hearts,
The fixed mark gives the shooter aim,
And Ladies looks have power to maime,
Now twixt their lips, now in their eyes
Wrapped in a kiss, or smile-love lies;
Then fly betimes, for only they
Conquer love that run away.
SONET.
Cupid calls, O young men come,
And bring my wanton harvest home
When the birds most sweetly sing,
And flowers are in their prime,
No season but the spring,
Is Cupids harvest time.
SONET:
INto loves field, or Garden walk,
Where Virgins dandle on their stalk,
Blown, and playing at fiveteene,
And poynting to their beds,
Come bring your sickle then,
And reap their maiden heads.
SONET. To his Mistress confined.
O Think not Phoebe 'cause a cloud,
Does now thy silver brightness shrowde,
My wandering eyes,
Can stoop to common beauties of the sky,
Rather be kind, and this eclipse,
Shall neither hinder eye nor lips
For we shall meet,
Within our hearts, and kiss when none shall see it.
Nor can thou in the prison be,
Without some loving sign of me,
When thou do spy,
A Sun beam peep into the room, it is I:
For I am hid within that flame,
And thus into the Chamber came,
To let thee see,
n what a Martyrdom I burn for thee.
When thou do touch the Lute, thou may
Think on my heart, on which thou playst,
When each sad Tone,
Upon the strings does show my deeper groan:
When thou do please they shall rebound,
With nimble air struck to the sound,
Of thine own voice,
Oh think how much I tremble and rejoice.
There Is no sad picture that does dwell
Upon thy Arras wall, but well
Resembles me.
No matter though our age does not agree:
Love can make old as well as time,
And he that does but twenty clyme,
If he dare prove
As true as I, shows four score years in Love*
Sonnet on his Mistress.
THe purest piece of nature is my choice,
tomorrowes death,
and this days breath,
Have certain doomes from her all charming voice,
So beyond fair, that no glass can her flatter;
so sweetly mild,
that tongue defiled,
Dare not on her, their envious stories scatter.
The witty forms of beauty that are shed,
In flowing streams
From Poets Theames,
Like shadows, when her self are fled.
Oh let me live in t'heaven of her bright eye,
Great love I Will be thy constant votary.
A Madrigall.
COy Celia, do thou see
You hollow mountain tottering over the plain,
over which a fatal Tree
With treacherous shades betraies the sleeping Swain?
Beneath it is a Cell
As full of horror, as my breast of care.
Ruin therein might dwell,
And fit a room for guilt, and black despair.
There will I headlong throw
This wretched weight this heap of misery,
And in the dust below,
Bury my carcass, and the thought of thee.
Which when I finished have,
O, hate me dead as thou have done alive,
And come not near my grave,
Least I take heat from thee, and so revive.
Sonet Antiphrasticall, to loves fire:
SUrely Love is but a water,
Dew of early clouds of nature,
A dew which on the pricks of Roses,
Venus Lime-twigs, she reposes.
Clouds which from their youthful fire,
Rise in smoke of loose desire,
Borne up by hopes, and rapt by fears
Vanish straight, or melt by tears
Venus made out of the water
Of the Ocean, shows her nature,
In those selfe-betraying eyes,
Envious Cupid does so prise.
When those corpse are crowned with tears,
Twinkling stars swim in their Spheres;
So eyes in water, drencht to prove
The heart first mover, drowned in Love.
SONET. His Mistress unkindnesse.
I Pray thee leave, love me no more,
Call back the heart you gave me;
I but in vain the Saint adore:
That can, but will not love me.
Show me no more those sunny breasts,
With azure rivelets branched;
Where though my eyes with pleasure feasts,
Yet is my thirst not stanched.
Those poor half kisses kill me quite,
Was ever man thus served,
A midst the Ocean of delight,
For pleasure to be starved:
O Tantalus, thy pains nere tell,
By me thou art prevented;
No wonder to be plagued in hell:
But in heaven to be tormented.
A Pastoral of Phillis and Coridon.
ON a hill there grows a flower,
Fair befall the gentle sweet:
By that flower there is a Bower,
Where the heavenly Muses meet.
In that Bower there is a Chair
Fringed all about with gold,
Where does sit the fairest fair,
That did ever eye behold.
It is Phillis fair and bright,
She that is the Shepherds joy,
She that Venus did despite,
And did blind her little Boy:
This is she, the wise, the rich,
That the world desires to see,
This is Ipsa quae the which,
There is none but only she.
Who would not this face admire,
Who would not this Saint adore;
Who would not this sight desire,
Though he thought to see no more?
O fair eyes! but let me see,
One good look, and I am gone,
Look on me, for I am he
Thy poor silly Coridon.
Thou that art the Shepherds Queen,
Look upon thy silly Swain.
By thy comfort have been seen
Dead men brought to live again.
AN ODE, Cupids Marriage with dissimulation.
A New found match is made of late,
Blind Cupid needs will change his wife:
Newfangled Love does Psiche hate,
With whom so long he lead hit life.
Dissembling, she,
The Bride must be,
To please his wanton Eye.
Psiche laments
That Love repents
His choice without cause, why?
Citheron sounds with Music strange,
Unknown unto the Virgins nine,
From flat to sharp the tune does range,
Too base, because it is too fine:
See how the Bride,
Puffed up with pride,
Can mince it passing well,
She trips on toe
Full fair to show,
Within does poison dwell.
Now wanton Love at last is sped,
Dissembling, is his only joy,
Bare truth from Venus Court is fled,
Dissembling pleasures hides annoy.
It were in vain,
To talk of pain,
The wedding yet does last.
But pain is near,
And will appear
With a dissembling cast.
Despair and hope are joined in one,
And pain with pleasure linked sure.
Not one of these can come alone,
No certain hope, no pleasure pure.
Thus sour and sweet
In Love do meet,
Dissembling likes it so,
Of sweet small store,
Of sour the more,
Love is a pleasant woe.
1. Satyr.
ALl hail Tom Tospot, welcome to the coast,
What Paris news can brag of, or make boast?
Thy phisnomy bewrayes thou can relate
Some strange exploits attempted in the state.
I know thou have courted Venus lusting Dames,
'Twas thy intent when thou took'st ship on Thames,
Let Us sympathize thy hap, enjoy some sport,
What art thou senseless, dead-drunke, all a mort?
Gallants this abject object which you see,
Is an old picture of Gentilitie.
With Coriat he traveled has, by land,
To see Christ's Cross, the Tree where Judas hanged,
Divelin and Amsterdam his Sea-crab pace,
With other Countries more did often trace.
Earths circled orb, he frequent trudged, went,
With less expenses then Tom Odcome spent,
With fewer clothes though furnished with more shifts,
With sparing diet, few received gifts.
Tom had one pair of stockings, shoes, one suite,
But Tospots case Tom Coxcombs does confute,
For he has traveled all earths globe a foot,
Without whole clothes, good stockin, shoe or boot.
Yet (God be thank't) he is returned all whole.
Tom had assistants at his Books report,
But Tospot traveled void of all consort,
Having no creature with him whiles he slept,
Or walked, but such as in his bosom crept.
Tospot detests all clothes, hates new found form,
Unless it were no clothes at all were worn.
He is no boasting Thraso which will vant,
Of his adventures, penury and scant.
Yet if you please to read my slender Muse,
I shall describe the humor he does use:
Tobacco, Botle-ale, hot Pippin-pies:
Such traffic, Merchandise he daily buys.
With belly-timber he does cram his gut,
With double Iugs does his Orexis glut,
Swears a God, dam-me for the Tapsters shots,
And may pledge no health less then with two pots.
He has a sword to pawn in time of need,
A perfect beggars phrase wherewith to plead,
For maintenance, when his exhausted store,
Is profuse lavisht on some pockie whore.
Tibornes triangle trees will be the thing,
Must send this knave to heaven in a string.
2. Satyr of the in satiate woman.
MY treatise next must touch before it is late,
A woman-creature most unsatiate:
See this incarnate monster of her sex,
Play the Virago, unasham'd perplexed.
See Omphale her effeminate King,
Basely captive, make him do any thing:
Her whole discourse is of Guy Warwick arms,
Of certain Knights or of blind Cupids charms,
Her civil gesture is to feign a lie,
In decent phrase, and true orthography:
Her modest blush, immodest shame, O fie,
It Is grand disgrace to blush indignity,
She counts her but a Nazard, half a mort,
That will not nimbly use dame Venus sport,
To kiss, to cull, t'admire her painted face,
And do no more, ignoble, vile disgrace,
With costly unguments she paints her brows,
Calls them the Palace of chaste Hymen's vows.
And yet this statue for her honored trade,
With every vassaile will be underlaid.
Her sole delight is fixed in a Fan,
Or to walk ushered by a proper man.
Nature has polisht each external part
Of this vile dame with Oratories Art,
Do but confer and note her private speech,
Her divine frame, will pass your humane reach.
She Will complement, Pathetically Act
A tragic Story, or a fatal fact.
Lively discover Cupid and his Bow,
Manage his savage Quiver in her browe,
Court so completely, rarely tune a song,
That she will seem a Dido for her tongue,
And by the virtue of all-conquering sight,
Infuse even life in him that has no spright.
Yet this proud Iezabell so nice, demure,
Is but a painted Sepulcher impure.
Though she bestow her vigilancie, care,
In coining phrases, pouncing of her hair:
Yet are her Legends, golden mass of wit,
But like Apocrypha, no sacred writ.
Cease austere Muse, this counterfeit to touch,
You Have spoke Satyricall, I doubt too much,
I Will rather pity then Envy invay,
Their Calendar of wretch'dnesse to display:
Shutting my Muse in silence, least she strip,
This Saint-like creature with a Satyrs whip.
3. Satyr, of graceless Grace.
NOw in the name of Fate what Saint is she,
That keeps a shop of public brothelrie?
Harbors the sharking Lawyer for his pence,
And Martyr-like consumes his evidence:
Nusles my damned Atheist, makes him curse
Nature and fortune, that his thin-lin'd purse,
Should be deprived of crowns: do you ask what, etc.
This Saint was sent from th'firie Regiment.
A Sodom Apple, a lascivious stain,
To virtuous habit, or a whore in grain.
A suck-blood Hyene, faining Crocodile,
Worse then the monster bred on th'banks of Nyle,
A purple strumpet, gangrene to the State,
Earths curse, hells-blisse, soules-soyle and Angels hate.
Pitty-fac'd Devil of a ginger pace,
Graceless in all save that her name is Grace:
Soul running ulcer that infects the heart,
With painting, purfling and a face of Art:
Creature of her own making, hollow Truncke,
A Christian Paganis'd with name of Puncke.
A cell, a hell, where she will no others have,
The common Palliard-pandor, Baud, or slave,
A cage of unclean birds, which is possessed,
Of none save such as will defile their nest.
Where bankrupt Factors to maintain a state,
Forlorn (heaven knows) and wholly desperate,
Turn valiant Boults, Pimps Haxtars, roaring-boyes,
Till flesht in blood, counting but murders toys,
Are forced in the end a doleful Psalm to sing,
Going to heaven by Derick in a string.
To the READER.
REader I here present you a Shrimpe-fish;
I hope you will make no bones to taste this dish,
It is no Carpe, unless you will giv't that note:
Which if you do, I wish 'twere in your throat.
Upon two Ladies in strife for the wall.
TWo Madams once were striving for the wall,
Each standing much on terms of worthiness,
The one but young (howbeit rich withal)
The other ancient, tho of substance less,
Said, soft and fair till time has taken fruition,
Your Ladyship is of the last Edition.
To Quindeno the Lawyer.
AS often as my Tinder-box I see,
So often Quindeno do I think on thee:
Thy Clyents fall together by the ears,
Like steel and flint, and each the other wears.
Whilst underneath thou like the willy Fox,
Pursest th eir golden sparks within thy box,
And art by Torch-light ushered through Town,
While (fools) in the dark they stumble up and down.
To Ciclus his trial of all Trades.
CIclus the Soldier and Civisian
The Pandar, Painter, and Musician,
Saw nothing could be gotten by the Arts,
By wit, by fortunes friendship or deserts,
Is now a late turned fool and gotten more,
Then he could do with all his wit before:
To excelling Panpaedes.
AS well as most men Panpaedes they say,
Thou sing'st, can set, and on a Vyoll play,
Pourtract in oil, and parle the languages,
Fence, dance, discourse of State and policies:
Few would believe it, till I told them how,
Most men can none at all, no more can thou.
Of Severus reading my Book.
SEverus having over-look't my rymes,
With rugged brow, and cought a dozen times;
This fellow says, has sure a pretty wit,
Great pity thus he has employed it.
Ostendit haedera vinum.
AScoffing mate, passing along Cheapeside,
Incontinent a gallant Less espi'de,
Whose tempting breasts (as to the sail laid out,)
Incites this youngster thus to gin to flout,
Lady (quoth he) is this flesh to be sold?
No Lord (quoth she) for silver nor for gold,
But wherefore ask you? (and there made a stop)
To buy (quoth he) or else shut up your shop.
Upon two Ladies.
TWo City Ladies, pendants of the Court,
Where late I lived, did commonly resort,
And in the garden one day as they walked,
Thus gathering flowers each to other talked:
What lives (good Lord) these Country creatures lead,
Over one of us within the City bred?
What dainty flowers, what Arbors, walks, and trees,
Poor souls they have, and look where stand the Bees?
Goodness a me, see Madam where Thrift grows,
My sweetheart loves not it should touch his nose:
And by my patience, quoth the other, I
As ill abide this scurvy honesty,
It bears no flower nor casts any smell,
Yet Country Ladies wear't and like it well.
Upon Virtue Mistress Milla's Maid.
Says Aristotle, virtue ought to be
Communicative of herself and free,
And has not Virtue Mila's maid been so,
Who Is grown hereby as big as she can go?
Upon Boon.
WHen unto Boon a book was brought to swear,
He praid the Judge he would that labor spare,
For there is no oath (quoth Boon) that you can name,
But perfect I without book have the same.
Se fingit Adultera castam.
NIsa, who from her window glanst her eyes,
Saw Mopsus come, as fast as foot could trot,
For joy whereof, upon her bed she lies,
As who would think, she slept and saw him not,
'Twas very strange, unless she meant herein,
Her eyes should not be open to her sin.
Degeneres animos arguit.
Monsieur Montanus is no little man,
Of unapproved valor to his foe.
Persuade or woe him with what words you can,
He Will be revenged all the world must know.
But when he found one with his wife in bed,
For fear or shame he durst not show his head,
Rubins glory is soon vanished.
IPray sir, did you note on Sunday last,
How richly Rubin was apparelled?
Well may he be compared to a blast,
Or like to one that is Metamorphosed.
For the next morning ere the day did dawne.
All that he wore, and more, was laid to pawn,
To Emson.
EMson thou once in Dutch would court a wench,
But to thy cost she answered thee in French.
Quae placuit Domino nupta est Anoilla sodali.
MAdame Rugosa knows not where to find,
One Chambermaid of ten to please her mind:
But yet my Lord so likes their comely carr'age,
As he perfers them to his men in marr'age.
Quid queat esse diu?
SIgnior Fantasmos never such pleasure found,
In any thing as in a deep mouthed hound,
Small was that pleasure, when upon one day,
He lost his hair, and hunted all away.
Satis est ditescera fama.
CLitus with Clyents is well customed,
That has the Law but little studied,
No matter Clitus, so they bring thee fees,
How ill the case, and thy advice agrees.
Timid^^ fortuna repellit.
WHen Miles the Serving-man my Lady kissed,
She knew him not (though scarcely could resist
So sweet a youth and well apparelled)
Had not the dunce himself discovered.
For this, quoth he, my master bad me say --
Which hearing made her frown and flying away,
Why thus it is, when fools must make it known,
They come on others business, not their own.
Upon Crab.
CRab being caught, and in the Sergeants power,
For shame and anger looked both red and sower,
Sequitur post gaudia luctus.
AY me (quoth Amy) who would ere have thought,
So great a mischief should arise of naught,
Which had she known ere she began to swell,
Each yard of pleasure should have proved an ell.
Of Cajus, his amissing a blot that lost his game.
CAjus his Love came to his chamber late,
But he that Grace did not congratulate,
But with too bashful chat, who for the same,
(Missing to take her Blot) quite lost his game.
Merchants wives conjuring.
SOme Merchants wives conjure their Maids, in storms,
With wands enchanting, working wonders so:
But on their husbands heads some conjure horns,
By their familiars still with them below.
Friscus secret jesting with a too earnest Lady.
FRiscus in secret jesting with a Lady,
(Which jesting Chaucer far more broadly styles)
Who fearing fainting, called him fool and baby;
But he with jesting pli'd her all the whiles:
Then if she called him fool she did not fable,
For fools are ever jesting with their Babble.
Julias Bookishnesse.
IVlia is Bookish, and does study still,
To fashion Natures favors to her will:
Her Mirror is her book, her time to pass,
And so she ever studies on her Glass.
Against perfumed persons.
THey that smell least, smell best, which intimates,
They smell like beasts that smell like Civet-cats.
Against Doctor Tangus his swelling Physic.
TAngus, the Physic Doctor loves a whore
Better then giving Physic to the poor.
He has the art of baudry better far
Than Physic, yet in both, does make and mar;
He makes a maid a whore, so marres her quite,
And makes a sound man sick, or dead outright.
What Virgin can resist, when he does boast,
He can restore her Maidenhead, if lost;
Which at her marryage shall be found as strict,
As any girls that love did nere afflict.
When he does promise by a Physic feat,
To let the womb and paps from growing great:
To give her unguents and complections store,
To make her Beauties rare reflections more,
To keep her body still in healthful state,
And make her merry in despite of fate.
Which having will to promise, skill to do,
What wench can choose but love and please him too?
Tangus your Art, your nature truly hits,
That helps or hinders loves still burning fits;
But take heed (Tangus) how you empty still,
The wombes which you with working Physic fill,
Least some repentant wench which used you have,
Say at her end you used her like a knave;
Then let me thee admonish (without stripes)
Give no more Physic with such Glister-pipes.
Covetous Patrons.
PAtrons are Latrons, then by this,
They Are worst of greedy people,
Whose Cognizance a Wolfes-head is,
And in his mouth a steeple.
Lucillas white going.
LVcida lightly all in white do go,
To lay her chastity a whitning so.
Of no fish called Salmon.
A Man called Salmon, Sivern banks dwelt under,
That his wife Salmons spawned then, was no wonder.
Stophus married a fair fool.
STophus with his great wit, a fool has wed,
Strange death, the living's bound so to the dead.
Women's Maskes.
IT seems that Maskes do women much disgrace,
Since when they wear them they do hide their face.
Bears bated loose is the worst of loose sports, and why.
I Like not (of loose sports) Bears baitings play,
Since Bears broke loose, teach men to run away.
Of much promising.
LOrds promise soon, but to perform are long,
Then would their purse-strings were tied to their tongue.
To Severus.
Believe Severus, that in these my rymes,
I task no person, but the common crimes.
Upon Hugh.
HVgh should have goue to Oxford the other day,
But turned at Tiborne, and so lost his way.
Of Jack-Cut purse.
IAck-cut-purse is, and has been patient long.
For he is content to pocket up much wrong.
Bell the Tinker.
BEll though thou dye decrepit, lame, forlorn,
Thou wast a man of Metal, I Will be sworn.
Crooke-backs payement.
CRook-back to pay old scores will sell his state,
And though he do, he will never make all straight
Barbars care.
Neat Barber Trim, I must commend thy care,
Which do all things exactly, to a hair.
Case is altered.
TOm Case (some do report) was lately haltered,
If this be true, why then the case is altered.
Of Stupid Binus.
Since time flies fast away, his fastest flight,
Binus prevents with dreaming day and night.
The Prodigal and the Miser all ont.
THe ding Thrift and the Misers fault's all one,
For neither wots how well to use his own.
Of Flavias looks after her fall.
FLavia looks feebly since she caught a fall,
So looks as if she could not do withal.
Against Gella and her Consumption.
GElla is light and like a candle wastes,
Even to the snuff that stinketh more it lasts.
Of false praise.
THe praise of Arts, which ill we deem,
Like smoke goes out as soon as seen.
In medio consist it virtus.
A Gallant courting of a game-some maid,
Said, sweet, oh let me kiss your hands and feet
In sign of humblest love! good sir (she said)
Both those for your sweet lips are most unmeet,
"But virtue's in the midst, than (virtue) there,
If you will kiss you may, if not forbear.
Against Ladies fantastical attire.
IF Ladies manners with their gaudes agree,
Then they seem such they would not seem to be;
But if they would not be as they are in sight,
Let them not wear what makes them seem so light.
Malsters ill measure.
SUch Malsters as ill measure sell for gain,
Are not mere knaves, but also knaves in grain.
Upon Divine Roscios.
TWo famous Roscios chanced I to epsy,
Acting a Metamorphosis, while I,
Sleep under the covert of a shady wood,
Where great Archias for the Empire stood:
Who did their several actions thus define,
Art-full the one, the other most divine.
Drunken promises.
YOu promise mountains unto me,
When over night stark drunk you be:
But nothing you perform next day,
Henceforth be morning drunk, I pray.
The worlds in a Band.
A Fellow judged to dye for filtching ware,
At his confession did himself compare,
In Metaphors unto the world, wherein
Contained is the Centinell of sin.
The hangman hearing this, when he had prayed,
Began to scoff, and thus deriding said:
I may attempt what I desire, were land,
For why? I have the world now in a Band.
The Woman Cuckold.
FRancisco vants he gave his wife the horn,
She frowns, she frets, and takes the news in scorn;
And though you did (quoth she) yet you indeed,
Must wear the horn, because you are the head.
A Cuckold.
A Cuckold is a dangerous beast, why so?
Nam Cornu ferit ille: Caveto.
Rest in motion.
ALl motion cease when it has it is end,
So say Philosophers, then how is it,
That Cailus loving long old Kate (his friend)
Love being a motion in marryage knit,
Does beat her every day; what rest is this?
Why, rest of Love, while hate in motion is.
Dols a drab, and yet no Curtezan.
A Punk's called Courtezan, of courtesy;
Then Dol's a Drab, and yet no Courtezan;
For with her friends she deals most cruelly,
And in loves skirmish spoyleth many a man:
Yet is she kind and courteous where she takes,
And plays with them, but seld' they have their stakes.
On traversing the error of an action.
ONe Lawyer once another wife did woe,
That she with him would enter Action too,
The issue joined the husband wronged so,
Seeing the intruder, quite his wife ore' throw;
He right well swing'd them both for that compaction,
So canvased the error of their Action.
Of women's Metamorphosis, according to the time and place.
SOme women are in Churches Saints or more,
Angels abroad, at home too like the Devil,
At windows Sirens, Parrots at the door;
And in their gardens Goats, or more uncivil:
And Tradesmen that nere match till they have much,
In deadly danger are to meet with such.
Against promise breaking.
VEntus does promise much, yet still does break,
So all his promises are great and weak,
Like Bubbles in the water, (round and light)
Swelling so great that they are broke outright.
No good wives in London.
THe Countri's full of good wives, specially
The wives of all the clownes and yeomandry;
But Tripe-wives, Broom-wives, Oyster-wives and all,
We still in London Mistresses do call:
Then London has no good wives, since they abide
All in the Country better to be tried.
Fast and loose.
PAphus was married all in have,
And now to rack does run:
So knitting of himself too fast,
He has himself undone.
A Man in Print.
A Man in Print, once such a man I saw,
Who whipped but vice in print, and then did draw
Himself in print, so much in print, that he
Comes thus in print, reformed in print to be.
While he that whipped but vice in print does storm,
For being a vice in print, so much in form.
Against the bare breasts of young women.
WHy bare ye so your breasts audacious Dames?
Is it to give men's eyes a taste of that,
You yet do hide, t'augment their lustful flames?
Or else to draw their tongues to wanton chat?
It seems you are hot, that so low naked go,
And look for cooling at some vent below.
Laugh and lie down.
I See and laugh, still laugh at what I see,
Democritus hereing, I play thy part:
I see some Mad-dames, honest held to be,
That often in sport do (W --) it by their art:
Yet merely seem chaste, till they be nie down,
So still I laugh, to see them laugh, and lie down.
Master Glaius and bright Mistress Grace, alight one that lightened a work of
darkness.
GRace in the dark, stood full in Glaius way,,
Whose bravery (like the Sun) turned night to day,
She would not moove although she moved him much,
Nor speak, although he did her homely touch;
Yea touch her to the quick in sinful case,
So Glaius quickly deadly sinned with Grace.
Turpe senilis amor.
OLd doting Clandus does in haste desire,
With beauteous young Penelope to wed;
Whose frozen appetite is set on fire,
Until the match be thoroughly finished.
Indeed as good dispatch as make delay,
That must be horned on his wedding day.
Natura paucis contenta,
MEcus is now become a frugall fire,
That spends no more then nature does require;
And yet his wife will prove a traveller,
Although but once a year he lie with her.
Frustra timet quisperat nihil.
TUsh hang it, have at all (says Curio)
Comes not duze ace, as soon as six and three;
Who would not half his land forgo,
Then be out-dar'd by such a one as he.
Dammee I Will venture all upon a cast,
Were not as good turn Rogue at first as last?
Impar impares odit.
SOtus hates wisemen, for himself is none,
And fools he hates, because himself is one.
The civil Devil.
IT chanced one evening as I went abroad
To cheer my cares, and take away my load
Of disagreeing passions, which were bred,
By the distemper of a troubled head;
Midst of my walk, spying an Alley door,
Which (I protest) I never spyed before,
I entered in, and being entered in,
I found the entry was to the house of sin;
Yet much I wondered how sin there could be,
Where the sins protectresse showed most modesty.
The honest Lawyer.
SPrightly (my Muse) speak like the son of thunder,
And with a full mouth ring out Albions wonder:
No Sussex Dragon, no Virginian,
But of a Lawyer that is an honest man,
Whose definition (if you wish to know)
Is a blak Swan, fair Moore, or milke-white Crow;
He takes no fees till he conceives the cause,
Nor with an oily bribe annoints his jaws;
He wants the use of feeling, fears heavens curse,
Strings not his conscience with his Clyents purse.
A Casstered Courtier.
CVrius Lampert (as he does confess)
For he was taken in the nicke of the business,
H'as done, soon done, God wot a worthy deed,
Setting the Courts wrath on the Cities head,
But for his wrath, before one terms demurre,
He was degraded of his Courtly spur,
True badge of honor: and from that time swore,
Never to approach the Cities confines more.
Anagramma. How riches freed adorn a Gull.
WIfe is that fool that has his coffers full,
And riches freed adorn the veriest Gull,
Yet but uncase the Ass, and you shall see,
An Ass is still an Ass, and so is he.
Upon Tarbon a Country Gentleman.
TArbon (they say) is melancholy grown,
Because his wife takes physic in the Town,
Why? that is no cause, who would not hazard fair,
To leave both land, and name unto his heir;
Yea, but he doubts (so jealous is the man)
That the physic works not, but Physician;
Which if he find, he swears he means to call
The child not Tarbon, but young Urinall.
The Courtier.
NOw heaven preserve mine eyesight, what is here,
A man made up in wainscot? now I swear
I took him for some Colosse; sure I err,
This is not he, yes, it is the Courtier:
Brave Pun-te vallo, for those Arms he bears,
An Ass head rampant, and that chain he wears,
By blessed S. Martin, do descrie it is he;
Well, I Will observe his carriage narrowly.
Like to like.
Upon a time (as I informed am)
A suburbs baud and Country Gentleman,
Coming at the door where I do lie,
A gallant ruffling wench chanced to pass by,
Which the Baud observing -- sir I pray you see,
How like yon Gallant, and my daughter be,
Indeed they much resemble both in face,
Painting complexion, and in huffing pace;
Yea I should say never any, two were liker,
If this be as thy daughter is a striker.
Brawling contention.
TWo railing creatures fell at strife,
and such a clamor made,
That people passing by, stood still
to harken what they said,
Amongst the rest a woman com's
demanding of the rout,
I pray (quoth she) what is the cause
of all this falling out?
One presently made answer thus,
you are a whore (quoth he)
Thou art an arrant scurvy knave,
and rascal rogue, said she,
Why thus (quoth he) these two fell out
the quarrel that they have,
Began at first as we do know
with calling whore, and knave.
A Prize.
TRee darlings have I, and I know not which
To make a wife on: first is meetely rich,
Fair, wise, but we in faith be different,
And where that is there can be no content.
The next, as loving as the Turtle is,
Whose lip distills pure Nectar with her kiss.
But this my fear is, her nature is so prone
To give content, she cannot keep to one.
The third is rich, and wise, and well adorned
With inward graces, but she is deformed.
So as for all that I do treasure lack,
I would not get it on Camels back.
Which should I have of these, they all love me,
One must I have, I cannot have all three.
In Briscum.
BRiscus (his father being dead) was told,
And found (ere long) where was his fathers gold,
All Angels rich, but poorly clad in leather;
Briscus took pity on them, and straight hither,
Sends some for Satin, other some for Tissue,
Gloves, Scarfes, Hats, Hangers, but make the issue,
They all being freed, did all consent together,
And their flight poor Briscus knows whither,
Which he laments, blaming those former Kings,
Who made a Law he might not clip their wings.
On Luces maintenance.
HE that takes pains shall get, the Proverb goes,
But Luce take pleasure, yet does nothing lose,
Poor laboring Portars with much toil and sweat,
Scarce get sufficient victuals for to eat;
But if that Luce at any time does lack,
She with her belly can maintain her back.
In Cornutum:
WHy should Cornutus wife lie in the Strand,
And he poor silly man lie in the City;
Belike the shop was not sufficient manned,
To part the head and members, yet it is pity,
But what cares she for head, I hope she scorns,
Were he seven heads, she would crown them all with horns.
On Age.
IF we love things long sought for, age is a thing
That we are fifty years a compassing.
Upon Church a whore hunter.
HEre lies a Church triumphant still in evil,
That never fought with sin, the world, nor devil,
But still with flesh he changed friendly knocks,
And so to shun the Plague, died of the Pox.
Upon fair Mistress Eliz. Ambar:
REader stay, see who lies here,
Attracting Ambar shining clear;
Yet death that clearness cloudeth now;
But being bright, it shines through.
Upon a Colliar.
HEre lies the Colliar Ienkin Dashes,
By whom death nothing gained he swore,
For living he was dust and Ashes,
And being dead he is no more.
Upon a young Gentlewoman.
STay do not pass, here fix your eyes,
Upon a Virgins Obsequies,
Pay tribute to a troubled heart,
It Is but one tear before you part;
And what are tears? they are but streams
Of sorrow, which like frightfull dreams
Disturb our senses, yet I crave,
No other sacrifice to have.
But if you pass and let fall none,
You Are harder then this marble stone.
Your love is coldet, and your eyes
Are senseless of my miseries.
Upon a great Usurer.
TEn in the hundred lies under this stone,
And a hundred to ten but to 'th Devil he is gone.
On a young Gentlewoman.
NAture (in this small volume) was about
To perfect what in women was left out:
But fearing least a piece so well begun
Might want preservatives when she was young,
Ere she could finish what she undertook,
Threw dust upon it and shut up the Book.
Of one that loved Sack as his soul.
GOod Reader bless thee, be assured,
The spirit of Sack lies here immurd,
Who havoc't all he could come by
For Sack, and here quite sacked does lie.
Of a cursed wife.
IF it be true what I hear tell,
That some affirm the grave is hell:
And if that hell be then so near,
The veriest Devil in hell, lies here.
One that dyed with grief a few days after her husband.
HE first deceased, she a little cried,
To live without him liked it not and died.
A double fellow ill composed:
HEre lies one double in his grave;
For he was still a fool and knave?
Upon fair Elizabeth Butter.
HEre lies sweet Butter turned to grass,
To make sweet Butter as it was.
Upon John Death a good fellow.
HEre Deaths interred that lived by bread,
Then all should live, now Death is dead.
On a self conceited fool.
HEre lies a man that was an Ass;
Then sure he is better then he was.
One that cheated his father.
HEre lies a man who in a span
Of life, beyond his father ran.
On an Usurer.
HEre lies on Ten per Cent.
In deathshouse, and pays no rent:
An Elegy by the Author, upon the death of his dear father, Master Edward
Pick.
TO tell my loss so well to each man known,
Were to lament my self, not him that is gone:
That were to cry, out help to those that ly,
By the same grief dead to eternity.
But yet that men may fully understand,
Know 'twas my father, even by whose hand,
I first had breath, and I will give him fame,
By writing in a double kind his name:
I do confess he is gone, and yet my loss,
If told is undervalued, so gross,
So young are my complaints, that I lament,
In petty notions, sorrows rudiment:
My infant tears yet know not all my woe,
Because I knew not all that was to grow
In him a graft all hope, but riper years,
Shall teach me how to parallel my tears,
And so improove I may, (as he did grow
In virtue) daily thriving in my woe:
Did we not lose enough when Adam fell,
By thee cursed fruit? but thou must longer still,
Produce our myseries, and when we are best,
By tempting one must murder all the rest.
Was he too good for earth, and did heaven call,
To have him there; so that he needs must fall?
If so, it is well, for it was equity,
Mankind and he by the same fate should dye.
But though thou art dead, thy memory survives,
And thy good deeds shall out-last others lives.
SA. PICK.

An Elegy upon the death of his dear friend Mistress PRISCILLA WADL.
HEre though her spot, less span-long life be spent,
Are silent steps to show where goodness went.
Nature did in such rare compleatnesse make her,
To show her Art, and so away did take her.
For she was only to us wretches lent
For a short time to be our president.
Goods we inherit daily, and possession.
O, that in goodness were the same succession!
For then before her soul to heaven she breathed,
She had to each of us a part bequeathed,
Of her true wealth; and closing thus her eyes,
Would have enriched her sex with Legacies.
SA. PICK.

Upon the death of Mistress Sarah Wadl.
Weep, weep, your sorrows are well paid,
For it is a Virgin here is laid,
You that shall see this Monument,
And cannot at this fight lament,
The conscious marble will you show
How to discharge your comely woe.
Either you may the occasion fit,
By melting into tears like it.
Or if you punish not your, eye
By weeping, cause it fatally.
Behold her Tomb, then may you moan,
By standing stupid, like the stone.
Yet both these sorrows are well paid,
For it is a Virgin here is laid.
FINIS.

