THE TRVE REPORT of the burning of the Steple and Church of Poules in London.

Jeremy. ^.iii. I will speak suddenlye against a nation, or against a
kyngedome, to pluck it up, and to root it out, and distroye it. But if that
nation, against whom I have pronounced, turn from their wickedness, I will
repent of the plage that I thought to bring upon them.

Imprynted at London, at the west end of Paul's Church, at the sign of the
Hedghogge by Wyllyam Seres. Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum. Anno. 1561.
The. x of June.

The true report of the burninge of the Steple and Church of Paul's in London.
ON Wednesday being the fourth day of June, in the year of our Lord. 1561.
and in the third year of the reign of our soueraygne Lady Elizabeth by the
grace of God, Queen of England, France and Ireland, defender of the faith.
etc. between one and two of the clock at after Noone, was seen a marvelous
great fyrie lightning, and immediately insued a most terrible hydeous crack of
thunder, such as seldom has been heard, and that by estimacion of sense,
directlye over the City of London. At which instante the corner of a turret of
ye steple of saint Martins Church within Ludgate was torn, and diverse great
stones casten down, and a hole broken through the roof and timber of the said
church, by the fall of the same stones.

For diverse persons in time of the said tempest being on the river of Thamys,
and others being in the fields nere adjoining to ye City, affirmed that they
saw a long and a spear pointed flame of fire (as it were) run through the
top of the Broche or Shaft of Paul's Steple* from the East Westwarde. And
some of the parish of saint Martins then being in the streate, did feel a
marvelous strong air or whorlewynd, with a smell like Brimstone, coming from
Paul's Church, and withal heard the rushe of ye stones which fell from their
steple into the church. Between.iiii. and five of the clock a smoke was
espied by diverse to break out under the bowl of the said shaf of Paul's, and
namely by Peter Johnson principal Registrer to the Bishop of London, who
immediately brought word to the Bishops house. But sodeinly after, as it were in
a momente, the flame brake forth in a circle like a garlande round about the
broche, about two yards to the stimacion of sight under the bowl of the said
shaft, and increased in such wise, that within a quarter of an hour, or little
more, the cross and the Egle on the top fell down upon the south cross
I Will. The Lord Mayor being sent for, and his brethren, came with all speed
possible, and had a short consultacio^ as in such a case might be, with y^
Bishop of London and others, for ye best way of remedy. And thither came also
ye Lord keeper of ye great Seal, and the Lord Treasorer, who by their wisdom
and authority dyrected as good order, as in so great a confusion could
possible be.

Some there were, prete^ding experience in wars, that cou^celed the remanente
of the steple to be shot down with Canons, which counsel was not liked, as
most perilous both for the dispersing the fire, and destruction of houses and
people, other perceiving the steple to be past al recovery, considering the
hugenes of the fire, and the dropping of the lead, thought best to geat
ladders and scale the church, and with axes to hew down a space of the roof
of the Church, to stay the fire, at the least to save some part of the said
church, which was concluded. But before ye ladders and buckets could be
brought, and things put in any order, and especially because the church was of
such height, that they could not skale it, and no sufficient number of axes
could be had, ye laborers also being troubled with ye multitude of idle gasers,
the most part of the higheste roof of the Church was on fire.

First the fall of the Cross and Egle fired the southe cross I Will, which I Will
was first consumed, the beams and brands of the steple fell down on every
side, and fired the other three parts, that is to say, the Chauncel or Quier,
the north I Will, and the body of the church. So that in one hours space ye broch
of the steple was brent down to ye battlementes, and the most part of y^
highest roof of the church, likewise consumed. The state of the steple and
church seming both desperate: my Lord Mayor was advised by one master Winter
of ye admiraltie, to convert the most part of his care and provision to
preserve the Bishops palace adioynyng to the Northwest end of the church: least
from that house being large, the fire might sprede to the streets adjoining.
Whereupon the ladders, buckets, and laborers, were commanded thither, and by
great labor and diligente, a piece of ye roof of the North I Will was cut down,
and the fire so stayed, and by much water, that part quenched, and ye said
Bishops house preserved. It pleased god also at the same time both to turn
and calm the wind, which before was vehement, and continued still high and
great in other parts without ye city. There were abouee.v. C. persons y^
labored in carrying and filli^g water etc. Diverse substancial Citizens took
pains as if they had been laborers, so did also diverse and sondrye gentlemen,
whose names were not known to the writer hereof, but amongst other, the said M.
Winter, and one. M Stranguish, did both take notable pains in their own
persons, and also much directed and encouraged other, and that not without
great danger to themselves. In ye evening came the Lord Clinton, Lord admiral
from ye court at Grenewiche, who^ the Queens majesty as soon as the rage of the
fire was espied by her majesty and others in the court, of the pitiful
inclinacion and love that her gracious highness did bear both to ye said
church and the city, sent to assyst my Lord Mayor for the suppressyng of the
fire, who with his wisdom, authority and dilligent trauayl did very much good
therein. About.x. of the clock the fyercenes of the fire was past, the tymbre
being fallen and lyinge brenninge upon the vaultes of stone, the vaultes yet
god be thanked) standing unperished: so as only the tymbre of the hole
church was consumed, and the lead molten, saving the most part of the two low
Isles of the Queare, and a piece of the north I Will, and an other small piece of ye
southe I Will, in the body of the church. Notwithstanding all which, it pleased
the merciful god in his wrath to remember his mercy, and to enclose the harm
of this most fyerce and terrible fire, within the walls of this one church,
not extending any part of his wrath in this fire upon the rest of the City,
which to all reason and sense of man was subject to utter destruction. For in
the hole city without the church no stycke was kyndled surely.

Notwithstanding that in diverse parts, and streets, and within the houses
both adioyninge and of a good distaunce, as in fletestrete, and newgate
market, by the violence of fire, burninge coals of great bigness, fell down
almoost as thick as haylstones, and flawes of lead were blown abroad into the
gardins without ye City, like flawes of snow in bredthe wtoute hurt, god be
thanked, to any house or person. Many fond talks go abroad of the original
cause of this fire. Some say, it was negligence of plumbers, whereas by due
examinacion it is proved that no plumbers or other workmen labored in the
church for six months before. Other suspect it was done by some wicked
practice of wildfyer or gunpouder but no just suspicious thereof by any
examinacion can be found hitherto. Some suspect coniurers and sorcerers,
whereof there is also no great likelyhode. And if it had been wrought yt way,
yet could not the devil have done it, without Gods permissio^, and to some
purpose of his unsearchable judgments, as appears in the story of Job. The
true cause as it seems, was the tempest by gods suffrance: for it cannot be
otherwise gathered, but that at ye said great and terrible thunderclap, when
saint Martins steple was ^orne, the lightning which by natural order smites
ye highest, did first smite ye top of Paul's steple, and entering in at the
small holes which have always remained open for building skaffoldes to the
works and finding the timber very old and dry, did kindle ye same, and so ye
fire increasing grew to a flame and wrought ye effect which followed most
terrible then to behold, and now most lamentable to look on.

On Sunday following being the.viii. day of June, the reverend in god, the
Bishop of Duresme, at Paul's cross made a learned and fruitful sermon,
exhorting the auditory to a general repentance, and namely to humble obedience
of the laws and superior powers, which virtue is much decayed in these our
days: seming to have intellyge^ce from the Queens highness that her majesty
intends tha^ more severity of laws shall be executed against persons
disobedyent, as well in causes of religion, as civil, to the great rejoicing of
his auditors. He exhorted also his audience to take this as a general
warninge to the whole realm, and namelye to the city of London, of some
greater plage to follow, if amendmente of life in all states did not ensue: He
much reproved those persons which would assign the cause of this wrath of
god to any particular state of me^, or that were diligent to look into other
men's lives, and could see no faults in themselfes: but wished that every man
would descend into himself and say with David (...) I am he that has sinned,
and so forth to that effect ^erye godly. He also not only reproved the
prophanatyon of the said Church of Paul's of long time hertofore abused by
walki^g, ^angling, brawling, fighting, bargaining. etc. namely in Sermons and
service time: but also au^swered by the way to the obiectio^s of such evil
tunged persons, which do impute this token of gods deserved ire, to alteracio^,
or rather reformacio^ of religion, declaring out of ancient records and
histories, y^ like, yea and greater matters had befallen in y^ time of
supersticio^ and ignorance. For in ye first year of king Stepha^ not only ye
said church of Paul's was bre^t, but also a great part of ye city, yt is to
say, from London bridge unto S. Cleme^ts without Temple bar, was by fire
consumed. And in ye days of king Henry ye.vi. y^ steple of Paul's was also
fired by lightning, although it was then staidi by diligence of ye Citizens, ye
fire being the^ by likelyhode not so fierce. Many other such like common
calamities he rehearsed, which had happened in other countries, both nigh to
this realm and far of, where ye church of Rome has most aucthority, and
therefore concluded ye surest way to be, yt every man should judge, examine, and
amend himself, and embrace, believe, and truly follow ye word of god, and
earnestly to pray to god to turn away from us his deserved wrath and
indignacio^, whereof this his terrible work is a most certain warning, if we
repent not unfeignedly. The which god grant may come to pass in all estates
and degrees, to ye glory of his name and to our endelesse comfort in Christ
our savior. Amen.

God save the Queen.

