The fearful example of God showed on a perjured Person, who at the Star
Chamber receiving sentence in that case provided: disperately stabbed himself
on Friday being the 14. of May. 1591.
Whereunto should I liken this generation? Why whereunto should I liken this
generation, but unto that generation in our Saviors time upon the earth, whom
he (the only wisdom) compares unto Children playing in the streets, to whom
their fellows cry, We have piped unto you, and you have not daunced: we have
mounrned unto you, and ye have not wept: yea to this generation, we may again
say, as he to that: Woe be to thee hard hearted people, woe be to thee obdurat
nation, for if the wonders had been shown in Tire and Sidon which have been
showen in thee, they would long since have repented in Sackecloth and ashes.
How many of our fellows, or rather fathers whom we ought to follow, have
cheerfully sung forth the eternal rest of their souls, by the witness of
their upright consciences, having lived christianly and left ioyfullye this
Tabernacle: whose removing from us but few regard, veryfying the wisemans
words. The righteous dies, and no man considers in his heart it is too
lamentable to remember. How many again have in their miserable examples
mourned unto us? some perishing (bewitched through Popery) by treasons, poison
of their own preparations, having (through ye omnipotency of him that shadows
his anointed) the edge of their own Swoords turned to their own throats:
others for barbarous murders and impious fellonies: other through
subbornacions, forgeries, periuries, brought to infamous, yet deserved
reproaches: so that numberless is the number of these miserable mourners, whose
example can nothing terrify this perverse age: The judgments of God before
time has been stretched largelye out against the rabble of the wicked, and
against perjury, he has in all ages, and at this day showen deserved
vengeance.

For upon Friday being the 14. of May, in this case he affoorded a manifest
example at the Star Chamber, on a desperate perjured person, named John
Pitcher, who being with his consort found guilty of periurye, was adjudged to
loose his ears upon the Pillories at Westminster and London.

For the circumstance, that the world may note their merit, it was thus: A
prisoner arested for a lawful debt, the action being two thousand marks, he
was driven to produce especial bail, that is, two men of good account: this
Pitcher and his companion, attired the one Gentleman like, the other Merchant
like: being hired to bail the prisoner, turned their names and places of their
dwelling: this Pitcher calling himself Master Downs, deposed that he was ten
pounds in the Q. Books, and of good woorship in his Country: the Gentleman
indeed whose name he challenged, being well known to be of no less estate:
hereby they bail the prisoner, defeat the Creditor, themselves being of no
esteem: and leaving a copper Chain for one of gold, they embraced likewise
the Devil for God: yet he that punishes such dissemblers, brought forth
these two counterfeites, who appearing before the right honorable the Lord
Chauncellor, the Lord Archbishop his grace of Caunterburye, the two Lord chief
Justices, and the rest of that Court, had sentence as is aforesaid: and
commandment was given to the warden of the Fleet, forthwith to see the
execution done: but as they were carrying from the Star Chamber, even hard
at the door this desperate Pitcher drew out his knife, and giving himself two
wounds in the breast, fell down: whereupon the Lord Chauncellor and the rest
graciously commanded his wounds should be searched, which he obstinatelye
refused: therefore their honors appointed a divine to be sent him for his
souls comfort and that he should be forcibly held while his wounds were
searched for his bodies health. O defexiles charity, O honorable and
christian pity.

But behold the just judgment of God upon this party, the better to make his
odious offense seen manifest and to be apparent to many other, he made his
own consciente witness against him, that he was worthy of death, when with his
own hands he attempted to strike the fatal strokes that might suddenly have
shortened his own life: and this he chose rather to perfourm by the persuasion
of his own conscience, then to sustain the shame which the Law has justly
awarded for so detestable an offense. And yet contrary to the expectation of
himself or those that were eye witnesses of this fearful example, his wounds
being afterward searched and dressed, were not found deadly but recouerable, so
that he is now reasonably amended, and remains close prisoner in the Fleet
with his other companion, until such time as it shall please her Majesty's most
honorable Counsel to command execution according to their former judgments.
Which is appointed to be done forth with.

Now if this mournful act might move the rest of this generation, who sell
the innocent for silver, and the righteous for a reward: converting justice
into woormewood, and judgment into gall: happy were they that brought these
evil ones to light, and happy this fearful example, for all Petyfoggers,
Suborners, Knights of the Posts, and all the unclean kennell of unchristened
periurers, who by swearing and forswearing, bragging and out countenancing,
abuse the Justices, oppress their poor Clients, and for a little piece of
Silver like Judas, sin in betraying the innocent, sin in betraying of their
own souls, sin in despairing of Gods grace, or presuming of his goodness, or
co^temning his judgments: whose heart (O Lord) convert, or according to thy
promise, tear them as a hungrye Lion does his pray: for they shame not to
say, thou art like them because of thy Long suffering. Amen Lord Jesus come
quickly.

FINIS.

