TWELVE RVLES, AND WEAPONS CONCERNING THE SPIRITVALL BATTLE.

Together with a brief exposition upon the sixteen Psalm: With two most
worthy Epistles, written in Latin by that most worthy and noble Gentleman John
Picus Earl of Mirandula.

And translated into English for the benefit of all good Christian Soldiers
in the Spiritual battle.

Imprinted at London by John Windet for John Daldern, and are to be sold in
Canon lane at the sign of the white horse. 1589.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL, MY VERY GOOD UNCLE, SIR NICHOLAS BAGNOLL KNIGHT,
KNIGHT MARshall of Ireland, one of her Majesty's council of Estate in that
Realm.
THat our life is a fight and battle upon the earth, (my very good uncle) both
the holy Scriptures, and our daily experience do teach us, but how little we
regard the war whereunto we are waged, the sacred and honorable vow and
profession of Soldiers that we have taken, the noblenes and excellency of the
General that commands us, the iustnes and importance of the quarrel entered
into by us, the inexplicable reward and triumph (if we conquer) proposed unto
us, the might, malice, and policy of the forces bent against us, the endless
dishonor and ruin that we run into if they do vanquish us, the ambushes that
to that end they lay for us, the stratagems that they use toward us, the hot
and violent charges that they give us, the volue of mischiefs that they
discharge at us, the defection that they practice in us, the battery that they
pla^t against us, the breach that they make in the innermost houlde of us, and
the fierce nd furious assaults wherewith they assail us, their ample and often
conquestes, and our most miserable captiuities do too too much testify. From
the which, though daily raunsomed by the bounty of our General, to allure us
to more value and vigilancie: we ungrateful, and ungracious, to our
perpetual shame (if we amend not) become more dastardly and secure. Whereof
four causes proceeding from one Fountain (the want of Gods grace) may me
thinks be aptly produced.

The first, ignorance of the war, and enemies that do encounter us. The
second, defect of fortitude and resolution in the function undertaken by us.
Thirdly, the lack of armor and weapon, and other necessaries that should
furnish us. Fourthly, the want of martial skill and discipline, that in any
part and action of our service should direct us.

For the first, we ought to consider that there are three mighty camps
enuironing of us: the flesh, the world, and the infernal forces, for we fight
not only against flesh and blood, but also against principalities, against
powers against the worldly gouerners, the princes of the darkness of this
world, and against spiritual wickednesses which are in the high places. These,
under Satan their sovereign, whose kingdom is calamity, whose scepter is
sin, whose laws are lies, whose triumph is torments, whose wages to his
soldiers is eternal woe, and courtesy to his captives is endless death and
destruction: do war with us in four several places. First generally,
against our head and hole army: then particularly, against the legion and
Phalange wherein we are enrolled: next peculiarly, against the statio^ which
we are appointed unto: lastly, they raise civil wars in our selves. Our
Savior and sovereign Christ Jesus (whose kingdom is everlasting bliss,
whose scepter is righteousness, whose law is truth, whose triumph is glory,
whose wages is celestial joy, and whose mercy to his elect is eternal life
and salvation) has himself in person encountered with these our enemies, and
breaking their force and strength to the r confusion and overthrow, has after
his most royal and blessed victory, ascended into the Capitol, and triumphant
part of his kingdom, the heavenly and celestial Jerusalem: leaving us such
directions, as if we follow, we shall also become through him, victorious, and
so accompany him everlastingly in his triumph. Jn the mean time (as it is
laid down by the Cronicler of this conquest, S. John Revel. Cap. 12.) The
dragon in his rage and fury, preuayling neither against the head, nor against
the whole body of this army, the better part whereof (now in triu^ph with
their General) is out of gunshot, pursues his malice against the remnant of
the host which keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of
Jesus Christ. These he assayleth first in a generality, even the whole
Militant Church, for whose good estate we ought to labor and strive in
prayers and supplications unto God, and both defend and enlarge the bounds
thereof to our uttermost power. Next, with force and fraud, by himself, and
his instruments, his vicar general, Antichrist, and his deluded kings and
potentates: he attempteth the overthrow of every principal part and phalange
of her most excellent majesty, and her dominions, her highness being in the
same the Lords lieutenant, in whose most blessed government and legions most
conspicuous we are enrolled: wherein we ought with all care, fortitude, and
industry, to resist both his practices secret, and his open hostility.
Thirdly, in the station appointed us, and function that we are called unto, he
stirs troubles to afflict us, envy and malice to spite us, detraction and
slanders to annoy us, perils to enuiron us, the flesh to puff, and yet to
pine us, the world to allure, and yet to abhor us: troubles we must overcome
with patience, envy and malice with virtue, perils with magnanimity, the flesh
with the spirit, the thorns and nettles of this world with the lillies and
roses of the future, and the hatred of men with the love of God. Lastly, he
works a rebellion in our selves, stirring up the vices and corruptions of the
first Adam, of whom we are borne in the flesh, whose works are adultery,
fornication, uncleanness, wantonness, covetousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred,
debate, emulations, wrath, contentions, seditions, heresies, envy, murders,
drunkenness, gluttony, and such like: against the virtues and perfections of the
second Adam, of whom we are regenerated in the spirit: whose fruit is love,
joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekenes, and
temperancie. He besieges us from without with an army of temptations, under
the banner of worldly vanity: and assaultetb us within with our own sclanes,
under the ensign of fleshly frailty. Against these villains let us redouble
our vigor with indignation, and slaying them with the sword of the spirit, let
us sally out and discomfite under the standard of our Sovereign, both the
world and the devil, and all their accomplices: let us herein show our selves
resolute, virtuous, and valyant, and say with the Spaniard, No virtud sino
vencar, no verdadera gloria sino victoria. There is no virtue but in
vanquishing, there is no true glory but in victory. Let us labor to be endued
with perfect fortitude, let us consider that it beseemes not a noble and
generous mind to ground his value either upon hope of gain, for that is
marchant-like and mercenarie: or upon fear of punishment, for that is abject
and compulsarie: or upon persuasion of advantage for that is fox like and
subtle: or upon rankor and rage, for that is devilish and passionate: or upon
fool hardines and temeritie, for that is inconsiderate and senseless: but
upon discharge of duty, love of virtue, justice of the quarrel, dignity of
the general, and honor of the conquest. Let us propose even before our eyes
the exquisite skill, the singular virtue, the ineffable authority, and the
felicity inexplicable of our king and sovereign Christ Jesus. Let us study to
learn the first, to imitate the second, to depend upon the third, so shall we
participate of the fourth. Let us take unto us the whole armor of God, let our
loins be girded about with verity, let us put on the breast plate of
righteousness, let our feet be shod with the preparation of the gospel of
peace: above all let us take the shield of faith (which is Christ Jesus by
faith apprehended) wherewith we may quench all the fiery darts of the
wicked. Let us take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the spirit,
which is the word of God. Let us pray always with all manner prayers and
supplication in the spirit, and watch thereunto with all perseverance.

Scipio Affricanus, as we read in Liuie, for the better trayning of his
Soldiers, prescribed them the first day to run certain miles armed, the
second before their Tent doors to trim and dress their furniture, the third
day to exercise them selves in a feigned velitation and skirmish one with the
other, the fourth day to rest, the fifth day to return to the first days
practice: and thus to continue while they had leisure from true battles and
conflicts.

But since this spiritual warfare is continual, we may never lay off our
armor, but must (like expert Souldyars) make it as familiar unto us as our
skin, especially since it is of that necessity, that we cannot conquer
without it, and of that metal that it will rust with no wether, and of that
nature that it will wax the brighter the more that we wear it: We shall need
no counterfeit skirmishes, that are ever present with serious combats, wherein
to win is not wearisome, but to lose is laborious: the one carrying with it
solace, the other sorrow. Let us learn carefully, and observe faithfully, the
directions given us by our General, for his doctrine is our discipline. Let us
carry always in mind his cohortation, which is the whetstone of martial
vigor. Let us imitate his example, who is the perfect pattern of all goodness
and virtue. Let us be allured by the exploites of famous Soldiers that have
been before us. Let us follow their course, their counsel, their comfort, in
this spiritual fight, wherein among many I greatly commend the instructions
and practice of that most rare, learned, virtuous and noble Gentleman, John
Picus, Earl of Mirandula, whose advice herein so well pleases me, that I
thought good to communicate it to my friends, and to dedicate it unto you (my
very good uncle) together with a brief exposition of his upon the sixteen
Psalm, with two Epistles unto his Nephewe, a most honorable, virtuous and
learned Prince Johannes Franciscus Picus, Earl of Mirandula, and Prince of
Concordia: which I present unto you as the fruytes of mine idle hours, which
being not many, their labor can be neither great nor exquisite. It rests
that I recommend you to his most blessed tuition that has hitherto led you a
long and honorable race through the warfare, both secular and spiritual:
joining with you in most fervent prayers to his divine Majesty, to establishe
your trauayles in the one throughout all posterity: and your triumphs in the
other, thorowout all eternity.

From the castle of the Island, this tenth of December. 1588. Your loving Nephew
W. H.

TWELVE RVLES OF JOHN PIcus Earl of Mirandula, partly stirring up, partly
directing man in the spiritual battle.
IF THE WAY OF virtue seem hard unto man because we must continually fight
against the flesh, the devil, and the world, let him remember that what way
soever he shall choose, (yea if it be according to the world) he must suffer
much adversity, sorrow, discommoditie and travail.

Let him remember that in things of this world, the fight is longer,
painfuller, and vnprofitabler, wherein labor is the end of labor, and the last
is eternal pain.

Let him remember that it is a foolish thing to believe that any is able to go
to heaven, unless it be through this ba^^ell, even as our head Christ ascended
not into heaven but by his cross, neither ought the state of the servant to be
better then the state of his Lord and master.

Let him remember that this battle is not only to be endured, but also to be
desired, although thereby we receive no reward, only to be conformed to Christ
our God and Lord, and as often as thou striuest against any of thy senses by
resisting any temptation, mark to what part of the cross of Christ thou art
to be conformed: as when thou, resisting gluttony, annoyest thy taste,
remember that he drank vinager mingled with gall: when as thou keep thy
hands from any rapine which likes thee, remember that his hands were fast
nailed to the cross for thee: and if thou resistest pride, remember that when
he was in the form of God, he took upon him for thee the form of a servant,
and humbled himself even to the death of the cross: and when thou art tempted
of anger, remember that he which was God, and the most righteous among men,
when he notwithstanding, saw himself as a thief, to be mocked, to be spitted
on, to be beaten, to be reviled, and to be reputed with thieves, yet he showed
at no time any token of anger or grudge, but enduring all things most
patiently, replied to all men most mildly: and in this wise running through
every thing, thou shall find that there is no passion but shall make thee
conformable to Christ in some sort.

That thou trust not in these twelve weapons in any worldly remedy whatsoever,
but only in the power of Jesus Christ, which has said, Be of good chere I
have overcome the world. And in another place, The Prince of this world is cast
out: wherefore we also by his only power do trust that we are able both to
vanquish the world, and to overcome the devil, therefore we ought always by
prayer to seek his help.

Remember that when thou have overcome one temptation, then another is always
to be expected, for that the devil always goes about seeking who^ he may
devour: wherefore it behooves us always to be ready and regardfull, and to
say with the Prophet: I will always stand upon my watch.

That thou not only be not overcome of the devil, but that thou also overcome
him when he tempts thee: and this is, when thou do not only not offend,
but also take an occasion to do some good by that thing wherein he tempts
thee: as if his work offers thee any good, that thereby thou fall into
vaineglorie, thou forthwith considering it, not as thy work, but as a
benefit of God, do humble thy self, and judge thy self to be too little
thankful unto God for his benefits.

That when thou do fight, thou may fight as though thou were conquering,
and thereby to have everlasting quietness, for that happily God of his grace will
give this unto thee, and the devil shall return no more dismayed by reason of
thy victory: and when thou have overcome, live as though thou were presently
to fight, that in battle thou be always mindful of victory, and in
victory always mindful of battle.

That although thou find thy self in every point well strengthened and
provided, yet notwithstanding thou shun always the occasions of offense,
because, the wise man says, he that loves danger, shall pearish therein.

That in temptations thou be always ready to resist the beginnings, and to
dash the babes of Babylon against the rock. The rock is Christ: for too late is
the medicine provided, if the evil be too far gone.

Remember that albeit in the very conflict of temptation, the fight seem
sharp and difficult, notwithstanding it is far sweeter to overcome, than to
run into sin. Wherefore dispose thy self to the victory. And in this many
are deceived, because they compare not the sweetenes of the victory to the
sweetness of sin, but they compare the sharpnes of the battle to the sweetness
of pleasure: and yet notwithstanding m^n which has a thousand times
experienced what it is to yield to temptation, ought once at the least to try
what it is to overcome temptation.

Believe not because that thou art tempted, that God has forsaken thee or
less regards thee, or accompteth thee the less righteous and perfect.
Remember that Paul after he saw the divine essence, suffered the temptation of
the flesh, wherewith God permitted him to be tempted, lest he should be tempted
of pride. Wherein man ought to consider, that Paul which was an elect vessel,
and taken up even to the third heaven, yet he was tried, lest he should glory
in himself, as he testifies of himself, lest the abundance of revelations
should exalt me, there was given unto me a prick in the flesh to buffet me.
Wherefore above all temptations, man principally ought to arm himself against
the temptation of pride, for that it is the root of all mischief, against the
which there is one only remedy, always to remember that God humbled himself
for us, even unto the death of the cross, and death will humble us, though
against our wills, to be even meat for worms.

Twelve weapons of John Picus, Earl of Mirandula, for the spiritual battle,
which man always ought to have in a readiness, when the desire of sin
tempts him.
1 Of sin, the pleasure short and small. 2 The companions, lothsomnes and
anxietie. 3 Loss of a greater good. 4 Life, a sleep and a shadow. 5 Death,
at hand, and sudden. 6 The dout of impenitencie. 7 Eternal reward: eternal
pain. 8 The dignity and nature of man. 9 The peace of a good mind. 10 The
benefits of God. 11 The cross of Christ. 12 The testimony of martyrs, and
the example of holy men.
Twelve conditions of a lover, by John Picus of Mirandula.
1 To love one only, and to despise all things for him 2 To think him
unhappy which is not with his beloved. 3 To suffer all things, yea death to be
with him. 4 To adorn himself to please him. 5 To be with him in all sorts we
may, if not in body, at least wise in mind. 6 To love all things that pleases
him, his precepts, his council, his doctrine. 7 To seek his praise, and not
to suffer any reproach of him. 8 To believe the best of him in all things,
desiring all men so to believe. 9 To be willing to suffer any discommoditie for
his sake, taking it in very good part. 10 To shed tears with him often, either
for grief if he be absent, or for joy if he be present. 11 To languish often,
and often to be enflamed with his love. 12 To obey him, thinking nothing of
reward or recompense.
We are accustomed to be induced to this chiefly for three causes. The first
is, when the service is such as of it self it is to be desired. The second,
when as he whom we obey, is of himself very good and amiable, that we even
love and reverence him for his virtues. The third is, when he, before we did
begin to serve him, has bestowed many great benefits upon us, and these
three are in God, because for his service there is no travail taken which is
not good for us, both for our soul and body: for that to obey him, is no other
thing then to direct our selves unto him that is the chiefest God. He is also
the best, comliest and wisest, having all conditions accustomably moving us to
love, and to obey freely: which most beneficially has dealt with us, in
creating us of nothing, and redeeming us from hell by the blood of his son
when we were worse then nothing.

THE Commentary of John Picus Mirandula, upon the sixteen Psalm. Psalm. 16.
Preserve me O God. IF any man being perfect, will call in account his estate,
he must take heed of this, that he boast not himself. David therefore,
speaking in the person of the just man, begins of his state in this word:
Preserve me. Which rightly considered, takes away all occasion of pride: for
he which can attain to any thing of him self, can also of himself preserve
that thing for himself. He therefore which desires of God to be kept in the
state of virtue, signifies by this that from the beginning he got not that
virtue of himself. And he which records that he has obtained virtue not by
his own power, but by the power of God, cannot exalt himself of it: but the
more humble himself before God, according to that of the Apostle, What have
thou that thou have not received? and if thou have received it, why boastest
thou as though thou receiuedst it not? There are two words which we ought
always to have in our mouth. The one, have mercy upon me O God, when that we
remember our badnes. The other, preserve me O God, when we call to mind his
goodness.

For I have trusted in thee. This is one thing that causes us to obtain of
God that which we desire: that is, when we have a sure hope to obtain. And if
we observe these two points, that we never desire of God but those things which
are for our good, and that we earnestly ask that thing we desire, not
doubting but that God hears us, our prayers shall never be in vain. Therefore
when we obtain not, it is either for that it is hurtful for us, for we know
not what to ask, according to Christ's saying: And Jesus says, Whatsoever ye
shall ask in my name it shall be given unto you for this name Jesus does
signify a Savior, and therefore nothing is asked in his name, but it is to
the saving health of him that asks, or because we are not hard, for that in
asking good things, we ask not them as we ought, but wavering in hope, and he
whose hope is doubtful has a cold petition: therefore says James, Let him
ask in faith, doubting nothing.

I have said unto the Lord, thou art my God. After he armeth himself against
pride, he begins to describe his estate. The whole state of a good man
consists in this word: I have said to the Lord, thou art my God. The which
word although it seems almost common among all men, yet few there are which
can truly say it. Every man has that for his God which he counts for
chiefest good, which only had, we think our selves happy: if all other
things are wanting, and if that one thing be wanting, yea if we have all
things else that are good, we think our selves unhappy. The covetous man
therefore says unto his money, thou art my God: for if he want honor, health,
virtue and friends, so he has money he is content: and if he have all those
good things which we have rehearsed and want money, he thinks himself a
wretch. The glutton also says to his belly: the incontinent to his lust: the
ambitious to superiority and glory: Thou art my God. See therefore how few
there be which can say, I have said unto the Lord, thou art my God. He only
can do this, whom God only does suffice: so that if all the kingdoms of the
world, and all heavenly and earthly things were set before him, yea to offend
his God but once, he would not take them. In this word therefore consists the
whole state of a righteous man.

For thou stand not in need of my goods. He yealdeth a reason wherefore he
says only to the Lord, thou art my God. The reason is, for that only God
has no need of our goods, for there is no creature which wants not the help
of other creatures, far more imperfect then it self, as Philosophers and
Divines affirm, because if one had not been, the other had not been, for
confound part of that which is called universal, and confound the whole. The
whole being confounded, all the parts are confounded. All creatures are part of
one universal, of the which God himself is no part, but the beginning, nothing
depending upon it, for God has got nothing by the creation of the world,
neither should he lose any thing if the whole world were brought to naught.
Therefore God alone has no need of our goods. We ought therefore to take
shame to account him for God which stands in need of us, such is every
creature. Furthermore, we ought not to account for God, that is, for the
chiefest good, but that wherein is the chiefest good, but in no creature is the
chiefest good, therefore we ought only to say unto the Lord, Thou art my God.

But to the saints that are in the earth. Next unto God we ought to love those
most which are most near unto God: such are the angels, and the blessed in the
celestial Jerusalem, our land, kingdom and country. Therefore after he said
unto the Lord, thou art my God, he adds.

He has made wonderful his pleasure. That is, he has made his love
wonderful, and his good will toward the Saints which are in his land, that
is, in the celestial country, which is called the land of God, and the land
of the living. And if we truly consider what great felicity his Country
yealdeth, and what great misery this world brings, and the great goodness and
excellency of those Citizens, we shall always desire to part from hence, to
be dwelling there. These and such like when we meditate upon, we ought always
to provide that our meditations become not unprofitable. For we ought of every
meditation to reap some fruit: as for an example, when we enter into
meditation of that heavenly Country, we ought to get this benefit thereby not
only to be strong to suffer death, and patient when by course of nature the
hour shall come, or if it be before to be suffered for the faith of Christ,
but also to wish it willingly, desiring to part hence from this vale of
misery, and so to reign in that blessed land with God and his Saints. When
therefore, the just man has described his state, which is wholly in affection
toward God, and things pertaining to his divine majesty, he also from his
heart despises the state of wicked men, and says:

Their infirmities are multiplied. By infirmities he understands Idols, and
so has the Hebrew text: for even as a good man has one God whom he loves and
reuerenceth: so bad and wicked men have many gods and Idols, and because there
are many pleasures, many desires, diverse passions which they obey, they
therefore seek diverse pleasures, because no one suffices them. The wicked
therefore wander about: and he adds, they made haste after, that is, after
their desires: they headlong and inconsiderately fell: whereby we are taught
that we make no less speed to virtue, then they do to vice: neither with
less diligence serve and obey our God, then they their Lord the devil. The
just man considering the state of wicked men, does assuredly purpose, as we
always ought to do, never to follow their ways, and says:

I will make no account of their bloody sacrifices, neither will I make mention
of them within my lips. He speaks of blood, as well for that Idolaters were
accustomed, having gathered the blood of their sacrifices, to exercise
therewith their ceremonies, as also for that the whole life of the wicked (the
right use of reason being left) follows sensuality, which consists in
blood. He has said that he will not only not do sacrifice unto Idols, but
also not name them, (which only without offense can be said and done:) showing
by this, that a perfect man ought not only to abstain from unlawful
pleasures, but also from those which are lawful: that his mind may the rather
be settled in heaven, and given more purely to the contemplation of heavenly
things, and lest that any should deem it mere folly to deprive himself of all
pleasure, he adds.

The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance. As if he had said, marvel not if
I forgo all other things to enjoy God, in whom all other good things are
enjoyed. These ought to be the words of every Christian: The Lord is the
portion of mine inheritance. Because we Christians to whom God is promised for
an inheritance, ought to be ashamed to desire any thing beside him: and least
that it should seem presumption to any to assure this unto himself, he adds
the same.

Thou art he which do give me mine inheritance. As if he had said, O Lord my
God, I know well that I am nothing in respect of thee, by mine own endeavors I
am not able to ascend to enjoy thee, but thou art he which do draw me unto
thee through thy grace, and thou art he which geuest thy self to me to be
inherited. Let the just man then consider how great is this felicity, that God
shall be his inheritance. He adds.

The lots have fallen to me in goodly places. For every man's part and portion
of old time, was divided by lottes: And because there are many which although
they are called to this felicity, as are all Christians, yet notwithstanding
they make no account of it, so that oftentimes for a little light pleasure they
change it. He adds the same.

My heritage is excellent unto me. As if he had said, even as that heritage is
excellent, so do I esteem it exceeding well, and do repute all other things
in respect of it, according to the saying of Paul, but very dong: but because
to have this light of understanding, that man may know this felicity is a gift
given from God, he therefore adds.

I will thank the Lord for giving me to understand. For because man oftentimes
purposes to serve God according to humane reason, when sensuality and the
flesh repugne. But that man is perfect that has not only his soul, but also
his flesh inclined unto God, according to that saying: My heart and my flesh
have rejoiced in the living God. Therefore he adds.

My reins also chasten me in the night season. That is, the very reins
themselves, wherein is accustomed the greatest inclination to concupiscence,
do not move me to evil, but rather rebuke and chasten me: that is, they
withhold me in the night season, insomuch that they tame and scourge the very
body. Then he shows the cause, and says.

J set the Lord always in my sight. For if any man have God always before his
eyes, for a rule of all his works: and in all his works he seeks not his own
commodity, nor glory, nor pleasure, but only to please God: he shall in short
time become a perfect man: and because he so does in all his affairs, he shall
always prosper. Therefore he says.

He is on my right hand that I can not be moved. He shows how that the
felicity of a just man is great, because he shall be for ever happy both in
soul and body: and therefore he adds.

My heart is merry. That is to say, my soul is merry: knowing after death
heaven to be prepared for him.

And my flesh shall rest in hope. That is, although it rejoices not, as if it
were out of hand after death to receive his state, yet notwithstanding, it
rests in the grave with this hope, that it shall rise in the day of
judgment, together with his soul, immortal and most glorious, and this he
declares in the verse following, for because he said his heart was merry, he
gives a reason.

Because he shall not leave my soul in hell. And because that he said his
flesh rested in hope, he yealdeth a reason, saying.

Neither will thou suffer thy holy one to see corruption. Because that which
was corruptible shall rise incorruptible, and because Christ was the first
which entered into Paradise, and made the way for us, and was the first which
rose, and his resurrection is the cause of our resurrection: therefore these
things which we have spoken of are principally to be understood of the
resurrection of Christ, as Peter the Apostle declares. And secondly, they are
to be understood of us, in as much as we are members of Christ which only saw
no corruption, because his body was not putrified in the grave. Therefore,
because the way of well living leads us into perpetual life both of soul
and body. He therefore adds.

Thou have made the ways of life known unto me. And because the whole
felicity of this life consists in the true vision and fruition of God, he
therefore adds.

Thou shall fill me with the joy of thy countenance. And because the felicity
shall endure for ever, he therefore adds.

At thy right hand are pleasures for evermore. He says, at thy right hand,
because our felicity is completed in the sight and enjoying of Christ's
humanity, which sits at the right hand of the majesty of God on high,
according to that of John. This is our full reward, to see God, and him whom he
has sent, Jesus Christ.

TO HIS NEPHEW, John Franciscus, John Picus Earl of Mirandula, wishes health
in him which is the true health.
Marvel not my Son, neither take any grief, or dismaye, that upon thy
departure from me, there are so many occasions of evil ministered unto thee,
which may disquiet thee, and withstand thy determined purpose of good life:
how great a miracle should it be rather, if to thee alone amongst mortal men,
the way to heaven were made plain and easy, without labor and toil, as
though there were no deceitful world nor wicked devil, or as though thou were
not yet in the flesh, which lusts against the spirit, and makes us of men
monsters: unless we shall look well to our selves: but rather rejoice, as S.
James counsels thee, saying, Rejoice my brethren when ye shall fall into
diverse temptations. Nor without good cause, for what hope is there of glory,
when there wants hope of victory: and what victory can there be when there
is no fight. He is lured to the crown, that is allured to the combat, and
especially to such wherein no man can be overcome, if he will not himself:
neither need we any man's help to conquer, but only his, which gives us both
mind and might to overcome. It is great felicity to a Christian, to consider
that the victory consists by the goodness of God in his own will, and the
rewards thereof far greater then either his wish or worthiness possibly
may be. Tell me (my dear Son) is there any thing in this life, of these
things, whose desire troubles earthly minds, that can be attained without
labor, or not enduring many indignities and miseries. The merchant thinks it
well with him, if after many nauigations, many thousand discommodities,
thousand perils of life, he get some gain. It needs not that I write unto
thee as touching the warfare of this world, whose miseries experience it self
has and does sufficiently teach thee. What heaps of griefs, what great
anxietie, how much carefulnes there is in obteyning the favor of Princes, in
purchasing the friendship of our equals, in compassing of honors, I am rather
for to learn of thee, then to teach thee: who contenting my self and mean
leisure with my books, have learned from my very youth to live within my
bounds. These therefore earthly, transitory, uncertain and vile things,
common also to us with brute beasts, shall we with pain and panting scarcely
attain: and shall we be drawn as if we were drousie and sleepy, and as it
were against our will unto heavenly and divine things, the which eye has not
seen, nor the ear heard, as if without us the Lord could not reign, neither
those heavenly Citizens be ever blessed. Truly, if this earthly felicity
might be got with ease, a man might (shunning labor) like better to serve the
world then God. But if we are nothing the less, yea much more then in the way
of God wearied in the way of sinners (whereof is that saying of the damned, we
are tired in the way of iniquity) it cannot be but extreme madness to be more
unwilling to labor where reward is rendered, then where for our labor
punishment is ordained. I omit to show how great the peace and felicity of
the mind is to know it self clear in conscience, free from fault: the which
doubtless is far more to be esteemed then all the pleasures that may be
enjoyed or wished in this life: what is worthy the wishing for in these worldly
plesures, which, while they are a seeking, they defatigate: and being obtained,
do infatuat: and being lost, do excruciat. Doubtest thou, my son, that the
minds of the wicked are not tossed with continual care, it is the word of God,
which cannot be deceived nor deceive: the heart of the wicked is as it were the
raging sea that takes no rest, for there is nothing unto the^ safe, nothing
peaceable: all things import unto them fear, care, death: shall we therefore
envy these? shall we have these in emulation, and forgetting our proper
dignity, our country, and our heavenly father, shall we, when as we are borne
free, become their slaves and bondmen, that living together with them
miserably, dying more miserably, at length in eternal fire we may be tormented
most miserably? O the blind minds and hearts of men! who is he that sees not
truth it self, yet nevertheless leave we undone the things which we know are
to be done. Doubt not my son, but especially in those places wherein thou
remaynest, innumerable impediments will beset thee, and drive thee if it were
possible, from thy purpose of living a holy and godly life, and fling thee
down headlong if thou take not very good heed: but among the rest, it is a
deadly plague day and night to be conversant among those, whose life is not
only in every part an enticement to sin, but wholly set and placed under the
Emperor the devil, under the standerd of death, under the salarie of hell, in
expugnation of virtue, fights against heaven, against the Lord, and against
his Christ. But cry thou out with the Prophet, Let us break their bonds
asunder, and cast away their cords from us. For these are they whom the Lord
has delivered up into their hearts lust, and into a reprobate sense, to do
those things which are not convenient, being full of all unrighteousness,
fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousnes, full of envy, of murder, of
debate, of deceit, taking all things in the evil part, whisperers,
backbiters, haters of God, dooers of wrong, proud boasters, inuenters of evil
things, without understanding, ill natured, without natural affection, without
faithfulness, without mercy. Which men when they daily saw the righteousness of
God, yet notwithstanding, they understood not how that they which do those
things are worthy of death, not only those that do them, but also they which
do favor such as do them. Please not thou therefore, my son, whom virtue
displeases, but let that saying of the Apostle be always before thine eyes,
It behooves us to please God rather then man. And also that of the Apostle: If
I should study to please men, I should not then be the servant of God. Let a
certain kind of godly ambition invade thee, and vouchsafe not them worthy to
be masters of thy life, who were fitter to be thy scholars: For it is far
decenter that they begin to be men by living well with thee, then that thou
omitting thy good purpose, should become a beast by living ill with them.
There holds me (I take God to witness) sometimes as it were an ecstasy, and a
certain kind of astonishment, when I begin, I know not whether rather to
think upon, or to be sorry for, to admire or to deplore the studies of men: (or
to speak more plainly) their mere madness. For truly it is mere madness not
to believe the Gospel: the truth whereof the blood of Martyrs cries, the
voice of the Apostles sounds, miracles proves, reason confirms, the world
witnesses, the elements show, the devils confess. But it is far greater
madness if thou do not doubt of the truth of the Gospel, to live
notwithstanding, as though thou doubtedst nothing of the falsenes thereof. For
if those words be true, that it is most hard for a rich man to enter into the
kingdom of heaven, why do we then daily busy our selves in heaping up riches:
and if it be true, that the glory which is not of man but of God is to be
sought, why do we then always hang and depend upon the judgments of men.
There is no man that cares to please God, and if we steadfastly believe that the
time will come when the Lord shall say, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, and
again, Come ye blessed, and possess the Kingdom prepared for you from the
beginning of the world. Why do we the^ either fear nothing less then hell, or
hope for nothing less then heaven: what else can be said, but that there be
many Christians in name, but very few in deed. Strive thou, my son, to
enter in by the narow gate, and give not heed to that which many men do, but
to that which ought for to be done, the which the law of nature, reason, and
God him self will show thee. For thy glory shall not be the less, if thou be
happy, with a few, nor thy punishment the lighter if thou be miserable with
many. There are two most principal present remedies for thee against the world
and the devil, with the which, as with two wings thou shall fly up on high
from the valley of tears, that is to say, alms and prayer: for what can we
do without the help of God: or how shall he help being not called upon. And
moreover, he will not hear thee calling upon him, which have not first heard
the poor calling upon thee. For it is not unmeet that God despise thee, being
a man, who being a man, have despised a man. It is written, With what measure
ye meat, shall other men measure to you again. And elsewhere, Blessed are the
merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. But when I inuit thee to prayer, I do
not inuit thee to that which consists in much babbling: but to that which
speaks to God within the secret closet of the mind, in the privy chamber
of the heart, with affection most earnest, and in the most bright cloud of
contemplation, does not only present the mind unto God, but it does by
certain ineffable means unite it fast, which the experienced only know.
Neither do I weigh how long thy prayer be, but how effectual and how earnest
it be, interlaced rather with sighs, then poured out with a continual order
and number of words. If thou regardest thy salvation or wilt be free from the
snares of the devil, from the storms of the world, from the ambushes of thy
enemies, if thou desire to be accepted of God, and so at length to become
happy, see that no day pass wherein once, at the least, thou make not thy
prayers unto God, and prostrating thy self with the humble affection of a
godly mind, criest not out with the Prophet, not outwardly from thy lips, but
inwardly from thy heart: Remember not the offenses and ignorances of my youth,
but according to thy mercy, for thy goodness sake, remember me O Lord. The
spirit shall teach thee, which makes request for us, and also necessity
every hour what thou shall ask of God, sacred reading shall also help, which
I pray thee most earnestly use, setting aside the vain fables and triflinges
of Poets. There is nothing more acceptable with God, nothing more profitable
for thy self, as day and night to have in hand the holy Scripture. In it there
is a certain celestial and heavenly power, lively and effectual, which does
transform the mind of the Reader, so that he use it purely and humbly, into a
divine and godly love, by a most wonderful virtue. But I have now exceeded the
limits of an Epistle, the matter and the affection drawing me thereto, which I
have alwais had toward thee: especially from that hour wherein I was first
certified of thy most godly purpose. Lastly, I will admonish thee of that which
when thou wast with me I have often spoken of to thee: that is, that thou never
forget these two things: the son of God to have died for thee, and that thou
(though thou live long) art shortly to die. With these two, as it were with two
spurs, the one of fear, the other of love, drive thy horse through the short
race of this momentary life, unto the gole of eternal felicity, when as we
neither ought, nor can prefixe any other end unto our selves, as then to enjoy
in both body and soul, perpetual peace without end: by the infinite goodness
of him which is both God and man, Christ Jesus. Farewell. Fear God.

John Picus Earl of Mirandula, wishes health to John Franciscus his Nephew.
THou art happy, my son, when as GOD has not only given thee grace to live
well, but by living well in the mean time to hear ill at wicked men's hands,
specially because thou live well. It is an equal praise by the commendable
to be commended, and to be condemned of the condemnable. But I therefore
account thee not happy in that this reproache is glorious unto thee, but
because our Lord Jesus Christ is true: yea truth it self affirms, that our
reward shall be abundant in heaven, when men shall speak evil of us, and shall
falsely say all manner of evil saying against us for his names sake. This is an
Apostolical dignity, to be accounted worthy to suffer reproach for the gospels
sake. We read in Luke, that the Ahostles went out rejoicing from the sight of
the counsel, because they were thought worthy to sustain and endure reproach
and contumely for the name of Jesus. Let us therefore rejoice if that we are
accounted worthy with God, so great glory as to have his glory manifested by
our ignominy, and if we sustain any thing hard or troublesome of the world,
let that most sweet voice of the Lord comfort us, If the world hate you, know
ye that it hated me before you. If the world hated him by whom it was made,
shall we most vile men (and if we consider our wickedness, most worthy all
reproaches) if any detract or speak evil, take it grievously, and to stop the
wicked tongue, shall we begin to live wickedly? Let us therefore rather
content our selves joyfully with their bad reports, and if our felicity be not
such: for virtue sake, and for true h to suffer stripes, bonds, prisonme^t,
sword, as our nobles and worthies have done before us. Yet let us think it
goes well with us, if we suffer reproaches, backbitings and hatred of wicked
men, lest that all occasion of good endeavors being taken from us, there be no
hope of bliss left for us. Furthermore, if men praise thee for thy well living,
this thy virtue, as it is a virtue, makes thee like unto Christ: but in as much
as it is praised, it makes thee unlike, who for a reward of his virtue,
received of men the death of the cross, therefore God (says the Apostle)
exalted him, and gave him a name which is above all names. Therefore it is
rather to be wished, to be crucified of the world and exalted of God, then to
be exalted of the world and condemned of God. The world crucifieth unto life,
God exalts to glory. The world exalts to ruin, the Lord judges to hell.
To conclude, if the world flatter and fawn upon thee, it can scarce be that
virtue, which altogether erected upward, ought to have God only for to please,
do not incline it self somewhat to the plausible favor of men: and if it
loose nothing of his integrity, yet it loses somewhat of his reward, because
when it begins to be performed in earth, where all things are little, the
less shall be rendered in heaven, where all things are great. Happy are the
reproaches that cause safety, that neither the flower of righteousness wither
with the pestiferous wind of vain glory, nor the stipende of eternity be
diminished by the vain applausure of popular fame. Let us, my son, embrace
these contumelies, and as servants of the Lord with a most holy kind of
ambition. Let us triumph, but in the ignominy of the cross of Christ. We
preach (says S. Paul) Christ crucified, to the Hebrews an offense, to the
Gentiles foolishnes, but to us the virtue and wisdom of God. The wisdom of
this world is foolishnes with God, and the foolishnes of Christ is that which
overcomes the wisdom of the world, by the which it has pleased God to save
as many as believe. If thou doubtest not them to be mad which detract thy
virtue, and call Christian life, (that is heavenly wisdom) madness, remember
then how great thy madness would be, to be seduced from thy determined course in
living well, by the judgment of mad men, whereas every error is to be taken
away by correction, not enlarged by imitation. Let them neigh, let them baule,
let them bark, go thou on lustely thy journey, and weigh by their wickedness
how much thou art indebted unto God, who has enlightened thee that satest in
the shadow of death, and translated from their company, who wandered and
wallowed here and there out of the way without a guide in most obscure
darkness, has associated thee with the sons of light. Let that most sweet
voice of the Lord always sound in thy ears: Let the dead bury their dead,
follow thou me. They are dead which live not to God, and in the time of
temporal death most painefully and labouriously purchase to themselves
eternal death: of whom if thou demaundest whether they go, how they apply
their endeavors, works and cares, and to conclude, what end they have prefixed
and prescribed to themselves, by the attaining whereof they are become happy,
they have either nothing at al to answer, or else they speak words of
repugnance and contrariety to themselves as it were the dotings of phanatical
persons, neither know they what to do, but according to the manner of them that
swim in floods (by the force of an evil induced custom) they are carried as
it were with the rage of a stream: on the one side iniquity blinding them, on
the other side Satan provoking them to evil, fall down headlong into all
mischief, being blind guides of the blind, until death unawares take them,
and it be said unto them, Friend, this night will they require thy soul of
thee, but whose shall those things be which thou have provided? Then they
commend those whom they condemned, then they praise those whom they despised,
and would imitate those when they cannot, whom when they might ensue, they had
rather pursue. Listen not, my dear son, to what men shall either say or
think of thee, account it nothing, only view in thy mind the judgment of God,
which he will give to every man according to his works, in his revelation from
heaven, with Angels and powers, taking vengeance on al with fiery flames which
have not known God, and obeyed his Gospel, which (as the Apostle says) shall
be destroyed for ever from the face of God, and from the glory of his virtue,
when he shall come to be glorified in his saints, and to be made wonderful in
all them which have believed. It is written, Fear not him which is able to
destroy the body, but him which is able to cast thy soul down to hell. But
how much less art thou to fear them which are able neither to hurt the body
nor soul, who if they now backbite thee governed by reason, they will not the
less backbite thee, if thou should leave to be virtuous, and come to be
vicious, not because vice displeases them, but because the vice of backbiting
always pleases them. Shun, if thou have any care of thy souls health, shun
as much as thou can their company, and returning to thy self, often pray
thou in secret unto thy most merciful father, crying out with the Prophet,
Unto thee O Lord have I lift up my soul, my God in thee do I trust, I will
not be ashamed though mine enemies mock me and scorn me, for all that hope
and trust in thee shall not be confounded. Let them be confounded that do
wickedly: teach me thy ways, O Lord, and show me thy paths, direct me in thy
truth, and teach me, for thou art God my Savior, in thee will I always
trust. See also that thou remember death to be at hand, and the small time we
have to live, yea less then a geometrical point: then how evil that ancient
enemy is, which promises us the kingdoms of the world, that he might take
from us the kingdom of heaven: how false pleasures are which embrace us to the
end to strangle us: how deceitful are honors, which lift us up to cast us
down: how deadly are riches, which the more they feed us, the more they poison
us: how short, how uncertain, how wavering, how false, how fantastike is all
that which all these together had at wish, are able to accomplish unto us. How
great things are promised and provided for these, which despising the presents,
seek that Country, whose king is Deity, whose law is charity, whose manner is
eternity. With these and such like cogitations occupy thy mind, which will
stir thee up sleeping, kindle thee cooling, confirm thee staggering, and
yields unto thee wings of godly love, tending to heaven, that when thou
shall come unto us, the which we al expect with earnest desire we may not only
see thee whom we would, but also such as we would. Farewell, and love God, whom
thou have so begun.

FINIS.

