USURIES SPRIGHT CONIURED: OR A Scholasticall Determination of Usury by T.P.
Doct. of Divinity, being Moderator at the disputing thereof by certain
Bachelors of Divinity and other learned Preachers: With his Answer to a
Treatise, written in defense of Usury.

BASIL, hom. adv. usur. (...).

Seen and allowed.

LONDON, Printed by MELCHISEDECH BRADVVOOD dwelling in the Little-Old-Bailie in
Eliots Court. 1604.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, my singular good Lord, the Earl of Dorset, L. high
Treasurer of England, Knight of the noble Order of the Garter, and of his
Majesty's Honorable Privy Council.
THere have been many excellent men in our Church, Right Honorable, that have
written exceeding well against the common, but crying sin of Usurie, among
other (whom for Honors sake I name) the Reverend Praelate I. Jewel, L. Bishop
of Sarum; the most accomplished Divine, D. Humfrie, public Reader of Oxford;
and the sage Counselor and wise Statesman, D. Wilson, Secretary to our
Queen Elizabeth of aeternall memory. All whose learned discourses, sound
reasons, impregnable arguments, godly admonitions, and severe co^minations,
little prevailing with the deaf Usurers; for that the same are over grown
Math. 13.
and choked in their thornie hearts with the deceitfulness of riches; that
they could not yield their due and wished fruit: it has seemed good to some,
other since them, to deal with Usurie by course of Law and judiciarie
proceeding. Whereupon at Oxford, Usurie was Potions concerning Usury by G.
Powell.
set upon and apprehended; at London, Examination of Usurie by M. Smith.
examined; Arraignme^t and conviction of Usury by M. Moss.
arrained, and convicted at S. Edmondsburie: and lastly at Cambridge, executed
and put to The death of Usury, printed at Cambridge.
death, and yet notwithstanding all this, Usurie is as rife in this land, and
as commonly and cruelly practiced, as ever, I think, in any age before: as
Iewishly, as when the Jews were here in their prime: as unmercifully, as when
the cursed Caorsini, the Popes factors, by his holy countenance, were here in
their pride. Which thing, (as I conceived) could not otherwise be, after
Usuries death, but that his ghost or spright did walk. Wherefore taking my
Books in hand, I thought good to conjure this spright: and therein have gone
so far (as your L. may see in this short discourse) that I have made the
spright to speak, and to tell both his name and nature, who called him up, and
what makes him walk. But to bind the spright, or to lay him, Hic labor, hoc
opus est: not unwoorthy the labor of great Hercules, that could bind the
three-headed Cerberus, and shoot through the fell eagle which fed upon
Prometheus bowels; or the cunning of the great Miracle-maker and diuel-driuer,
Gregorius Thaumaturgus, which could Gregorius Satanae. Ingredere. Niss. mesus
vita. Caes. Bar. annal. tom. 2. Anno. 253. nu. 137.
write the devil himself apasseport, and send him packing, whence and whither
he pleased. Indeed, I find and confess, that it passes my cunning and power,
without the aid of some greater skill and ability. Wherefore, right Honorable,
seeing Almighty God has blessed you with great advauncementes both of dignity
and honor, and also of authority and power in this commonwealth; and that by
your great office of high Treasurer, you have many employments and daily
experience in the virtue, (...) (as Aristotle terms it) whereof Usurie is a
deadly enemy: Arist. Eth. lib. 4. c. 3. Idem. Polit. l. 1. c. 7.
I make bold to crave your Honorable help herein, that you use the means of
the great favor, which God has given you in the eyes of our gracious King, of
your high place and authority in the State, and of that estimation, which the
whole land has of your wisdom, to the suppressing of this horrible sin,
which like a fretting canker eats up and consumes many notable members, and
great portions of this commonwealth: one part losing or indaungering their
goods and state, and the other part their souls. As we have had manifold
experience of your wisdom in managing matters of great importance for the
common good of us all: so if by your like care and prudence, this canker may be
cured; undoubtedly the whole commonwealth will receive an exceeding great
benefit by you, being freed from the burden of Usurie, whose nature is such,
that it is compared by the wise Philosopher Plutarch. lib. de non foenerand.
Plutarke, to Vultures which gnaw the guts out of a man's belly; (...), as
Homer said: by the expert antiquarie Antiq lect. l. 12. c. 24.
Coelius Secundus, upon the experience of the poor old forlorn debtor Liu.
Dec. 1. l. 2.
in Liuie, to a consumption, which is contagious and infectious, and which
creeps from the goods to the body it self: by the excellent Ciuillian Bald.
cons. 440.
Baldus, to the worm Teredo, which handles as soft as silk, but will bite
through timber: by the autentique Canonist Sext. decret.
Gregory the tenth, to a whirlpoole, because it swalloweth up wealth and
souls; by the noble and learned King Lycosth. apopht. tit. usurae.
Alfonsus, to the Harpyes, which devoured the needy Trojans sustenance; by the
ancient father S. Christ. in Math. 5.
Chrysostom, to the serpent Aspis, whose stinging casts a man into a
pleasant sleep and so kills him. God who is rich in grace, and of infinite
glory, increase his graces upon you in this life, to the advancement of his
Church, and comfort of the commonwealth, and reward them with eternal glory
in the life to come, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Bexhil March 30. 1604.

Your Lordships humble at commandment: TH. PIE.

A SCHOLASTICALL determination of Usurie upon the disputing of that quaestion
by certain learned Divines.
The Praemble to the Disputants.
AS you have learnedlie disputed this quaestion of Usurie, and debated it pro
and con, for the clearing of the Truth; so now let me, lighting my candle at
the fire stricken out of these flints, make an end of this Conference, drawing
my speech to three heads, in the first whereof I will show what usurie is; in
the second, prove it to be unlawful; in the third, answer the arguments which
are urged for the lawfulness of it.

1 What Usury is, will best appear by the Notation of the name, by the
definition, and by the division.
1 The Notation of the name.
Usury has his name of Usura in Latin; but there is this difference between
them, That Usura in Latin is taken according to his proper and general
signification sometime for the same that the masculine Non Marcel. de prop.
sermon. Si pon. in epig. 1.
usus is; as Plant. in Amphyl.
usuramque ejus corporis coepit sibi: he took the use of her body. Cic. pro
Sylla.
Lucisne hanc usuram eripere vis? will thou take away this use of the light?
sometime metonymically it signifies the same which foenus in Latin does, that
is, Quod principali mutuo accedit. Si pont. in Plin. ep.
whatsoever is taken for a Principal lent. But usurie in English is taken
only in this latter signification; and it imports sometime the action, which
the Latins call Foeneratio, the Greeks Arist. pol. l. 1. c. 7.
(...) and sometime (...). as, (...). Plato de leg. l. 1. (...). Arist ibid.
he gathers riches by usurie. Sometime the effect or thing which comes by
that action, which the Greeks call g (...), the Latins Quasi foetus, quia
foetus est, pecuniae Varro l. 3. de Lat. ser. Pomp. fest. de propr. l. 6.
foenus, both termed of bearing or bringing fourth; because it is the fruit,
which the principal in his kind ingendereth or brings forth (whereof Basil.
hom. adu. usur.
Basil speaks thus: they say that hares at one time together do Plutar. de
non soene. (...).
litter, give suck, and are with young: So to the usurer money at one time is
(...).
put to usury and borne and breeding) as when we say: he pays usurie: Athan.
l. 3. (...).
I will give thee nine oboles usurie for a pound. This we call also by the
general word, the use: but most properly the lone. This thing in Hebrew is
called (...) tarbith, that is, increase and multiplication, because the
principal increases it self and brings forth more in his kind: which
comes of (...) to multiply, increase, or to be more in his kind; as the
commandment of Generation Genesis 1.22.8.17.
increase and multiply does show, and of the same the Chaldean Paraphrast
calls it (...) ribbitha. So that the reason of the etymology in the Latin
foenus, the Greek (...), the Chaldaean ribbitha, and the Hebrew tarbith is all
one. And the Latin, Greek, and Chaldaean, have to those their nownes verba
(...) seu conjugata, verbes of the like signification signify in the action,
namely, foenerare, (...) in Puhel, to lend to usurie: the passiues of the Latin
and Especially (...): which yet Basil attributes to the money also.
Greek become Deponentes, and are attributed to the taker upon usurie,
signifying to borow upon usurie: but the passive of the Chaldaean is attributed
to the thing which is at usurie, signifying to be lent to usurie. But the
Hebrews have no verb conjugatum to their nowne tarbith, to signify that
action, marry, they have another name for usurie, and for the increase coming
for a thing lent, that is, (...) neshech: and to that they have verbum (...)
and conjugatum. For the verb (...) in Hebrew is (...), signifying two several
and distinct things, or rather there are two several and distinct verbes
written with those same letters, yet differing one from another genere in kind:
for in the conjugation Call one Nashach is an Active by kind, and by his
syntaxis a (...). Theod. Gaz. l. 4.
transitiue perfect, requiring an accusative case of the sufferer, and this
signifies to bite. The other Nashach in the same conjugation Call, is a (...).
ibid.
Newter absolute, and that is spoken Deuteronomy. 23.19.
de refoeneraticia; of the thing which is at usury: which we for want of a
proper word must circumlocute; as the In usuram datur. Tromel.
Latin and Taenori datur. Vantabl.
Greek Interpreters do, as thus; which goes to usurie: or is given, put, or
lent to usurie. Of which latter Nashach there is made an Active in the
conjugation Hiphil which by his Syntaxis is an (...). which thou shall lend.
Sept. Yet Castle: says foeneretur: and Basil would have said (...). taking
those Deponents Passiuely, as the Chaldean does utter it.
Acquisitive, requiring a Dative case of the sufferer, and an Accusative case
of the thing, wherein the action lies; (which kind of co^pound Syntaxis the
Theod. Gaza. l. 4.
Grammarians call (...)) and it is signifies only (...), foenerare, to usurie
a thing to one: or to lend one a thing to usurie, and so likewise, the Noune
(...), neshech, which is Conjugatum to it, signifies only Usurie.

2 The Definition.
(...).
The action is thus defined: VSVRIE IS LENDING WITH GAIN FOR IT. The effect
thus:. fiscalibus. l. infraudem. de jure fici. Aquin. 2.2. q. 78. Bernard. de
cura rei famil. Melancth. defin. Theolog. (...). Plutarch.
VSVRIE IS GAIN FOR LENDING ANY THING.

The Declaration of the Definition.
The Genus in the former Definition is LENDING: which Moses expresses thus
(...), Exodus 22.21.
when thou lendest. In respect of the party, which takes it to use, and pays
for the use it is borrowing: which the Hebrews express with the same verb,
but in another Conjugation, namely Call, as the former was in Hiphil: as in
Greek the lender is (...), and the borower (...). Of this Genus the principal
(as we call it, like as the Greeks call it (...), and (...), and as the
Latins Principale Mutuum, and in one word Caput and Sors) has his name in
Hebrew (...) Halloah. Now lending I call that, which the Latins call Mutuatio,
mutuating and the Greeks (...) and (...) in their proper signification (for
sometime (...) has (...), for usurie, omitted, and yet is used for lending
upon usury) which also the Hebrew (...) signifies: and not that which the
Latins call Commodatio Commodating: which we also through the penury of our
language, term lending. And yet they may well have one common name, because
they concur in one common quality, whereby they differ from all other kinds
of Contractes, viz. that in them the same thing, that is transferred and passed
to another, is to be restored again, but freely, as the Lawyers say: Cause. 13.
q. 3. c. Quod autem in gloss.
There are two contractes, whose nature is to be free, Mutuating and
Commodating. So then these two differ from those contracts, in which the thing
transferred away is not to be restored again, whether it were transferred away
freely; as giving. for consideration of 1 a price; as buying and selling. 2
some other thing, differing in kind or goodness; as exchanging. 3 a fee; as
Emphytensis, or fee-farming. 4 a moitie of an uncertain remainder at a time;
as society: for in society the venturer does pass away the sole property of
the principal or stock: So that nothing remain, nothing is to be restored; if
any thing remain, every partner is to have his share. 5 some other gift etc.
as contractus innominati.

from those contractes, in which the same thing is to be restored again, but
the use was passed away for consideration either of hire; as letting of
chattels. rent; as setting and farming out of land.
one from another, because the same thing which is transferred and delivered
away, is to be restored again either in Indiuiduo; and that is Commod.
commodating, because the property of the thing was never passed away, but
only the use of it: as I lend you my horse to ride, to draw etc. but you must
restore the same horse again. This co^modating if it be not free, but any
thing taken for the use, is turned into letting and hiring; and Exodus 22.
there the user stands to the hazard, L. 2. si certo petat.
here the owner. Specie, only; and that is mutuating, because the property
of the thing (indiuidui) was clean alienated to the borrower, that he might
spend it by consuming of it, or alienating of it at his pleasure: otherwise
there could not have been that use of it, which that kind of contract
requires, which is to be spent; and therefore the same thing in indiuiduo can
not be restored again being spent: but only the same in specie or quantity,
be it by number, weight, or measure. L. 2. Appellata. ff. de reb. era. Glanvil.
l. 10. c. 3.
For things only which pass from man to man, by number, weight and measure,
may be mutuated: and they are mutuated, when they be delivered to another to be
spent, upon covenant to have restored so much again in eadem specie, otherwise
if those very things be lent to any use or end, so that the borrower spend
them not, but restore the same pieces again; it is commodating, not mutuating:
as if I lend you ten fair Sovereigns to carry in your purse for a show, or to
decoct them in a medicine for Physic, it is commodating; for which use if I
take any thing, it is letting and hiring: but if I lend you the same ten
Sovereigns to spend or lay out, it is mutuating, for which use, if I take any
thing, it is usurie. So this genus does exclude from usurie all other
contracts, save this kind of lending, which in Latin is termed Mutuatio; and
all gain or profit arising from any of these other contracts.




The Differentia.
The Differentia in this Definition is GAIN, Lucrum, idest, Varro de ling.
Lat. l. 4.
si amplius, quam ut exolverit, quanti esset coeptum: that is more, than to
defray so much, as it began for, or, Hier. in Ezech. 18.
quicquid illud est si ab eo quod dederint, plus acceperint, whatsoever it be,
if over that they delivered they receive more, whether it be in money,
Incrementum pecuniae vel pecunia mensurabile. Biel in sent. l. 4. d. 15. q. 11.
art. 1. a. Aquin. 22. q. 78. Arist. Eth. l. 4. c. 1. (...).
or money worth: which may serve to Prou. 28.8. (...). 2. Reg. 4.2.
increase our substance, wealth, or state.

This Definition does exclude from Usurie these cases.

1 The demanding, recovering, and receiueing of the principal, for that is
not lucrum gain, increase, or more than I laid out, and the not paying of it
is accounted sin in holy Scripture. Psalm. 37.21. therefore Helizaeus did
help the widow to pay it with a miracle.

2 Expenses about the paying, recovering, or receiving of the principal, as
for carrying or fetching the money, making of assurance, costs, and charges of
suit. L. Mutuis. ff. pro socio in gloss.
For it is not gain unless the charges be deducted, and likewise charges
about the thing pawned or morgaged for assurance of the principal, for Bald ad
Leg. 6. de pign. and hypoth.
that which the Creditor lays out for or about the thing assured increases
the debt.

3 Consideration for the peril and danger of hazard for exchaunging money
from place to place, as you would borrow for a time 100. pound of one in
London, and give him 10. pound to transport it to Rome, and to abide the
hazard.

4 Interest: for that is not for the lending, but for lawful and due
satisfaction, neither is it gain. Melancth dfien. Theolog.
Interest is a debt, which he owes to the law of nature, who has been to
another effectual cause of damage, or hinderer of his lawful gain, the
lawfulness whereof is grounded upon the law of nature, that no man be enriched
by another hinderance: and the Exodus 22 14.
Law of God, which provideth, that the lender be saved harmless from
contingent damages: and the rule of the Apostle; 2. Cor. 8.13. reduced (...).
not that other men should be eased and you grieved. This Interest coming two
Ant. de But. inc. Salubriter. de usuris.
ways; Aquni. 2.2. q. 78 art. 2. in resp. ad. 1. extr. de side juss. c.
Pervenit. etc. Constituas.
either ex damno emergente, by loss arising: as when by missing my money at my
day till which I lent it, I am damnified by forfeting a lease, or a band, or a
bargain, etc. or ex lucro cessante, by gain ceasing; as when by missing my
money at my day, I am hindered of buying at the best hand, provision for my
house, wares for my trade, stock for my land, etc. Here the Cannonistes and
Schoolmen require that the money be detayned after the day Innoc. ext. de
usuris c. finali Johan. Called. ibidem. Johan. An. ibidem.
against the lenders will. For if he lend it upon allowance for the gain, that
he is like to forgo, it is usurie. Secondly, that the gain hindered were In
actu aut quasi in act. Aquin. 2.2. q. 62.
in esse, or as good as in esse, the lender being in a good way to have it,
nothing wanting but that.

5 Extr. de Simonia c. Dilectus.
Redeeming my own hinderance, for there I have no gain or increase, but only
save my own, which may go with the Principal. As I have bargained with a
Carpenter to build me a house for 10. pounds, which I have paid him all or part
praemanibus: now he will not finish the work unless I lend him 5. pounds more
for a year: So I lend him 5. pounds upon this covenant, that he finish his
work by his time. Here is a consideration, without which I would not have lent
it him: but it is not gain, nor more than my own. Or I lend a Magistrate
money not to put me to a fine, which is in his choice to do or not to do.

6 The taking of a Penalty for non payment at a time couenanted: for that is
not for the mutuating or lending, but for a default made in breaking of
covenant. For it is lawful to take Prou. 20.16. Deuteronomy. 24.10.
assurance for a man's own, and to be saved harmless, as well in mutuating as
in other contractes, and that not only by pawn, pledge, suertie, etc. but
also by penalty of forfeiting something for default: as for non payment of
rent, to forfet the lease, or to double the rent, or to pay ten pounds nomine
poenae: so to forfeit ten shillings for not restoring my hired or borrowed horse
such a day: or I sell you my horse for ten pounds to be paid at Midsummer upon
penalty, that if you deceive me, you forfeit 10 pounds more. The reason and
ground of the equity of Penalties is, Innoc. extr. de poenis c. suam.
Quia interest Reipublicae pacta servari, It stands the Commonwealth upon to
have Covenants kept. For as Cic. off. lib. 2.
Tullie said truly; Nec vlla res vehementius rempublicam conservat, quam
fides: There is not any thing that holds the Commonwealth together more
strongly then faith in keeping promises and covenants, Liu. dec. 1. l. 6.
cum qua omnis humana societas tollitur: together with the which all humane
society is overthrowen: and therefore the breaking and violating thereof, must
needs be a great offense, worthy to be punished with due penalty. Now there
may be great oppression in this, as in other contractes; as I take 100. pounds
fine for a lease of 21. years, reserving ten pounds rent, upon a covenant of
reentrie. In the first payment the Leasee defaulteth; I reenter: as this is
hard dealing, and summa injuria, arising from the extremity of summum jus: so
is it, if the lender take the forfeiture, being nothing damnified by the
default; but it is not direct Usurie. Therefore these Penalties must be
squared, by the same rule of charity, by which all other contracts ought to
be: as, Luke 6.31.
As you would that men should do to you; so do ye to them likewise: and, 1.
These. 4.6.
That no man oppress or defraud his brother in any matter. And the C l. 4.
tit. 32. de usuris. L. 15. cum allegas.
Civil law carries a heavy hand against the taking of a penalty for non
payment of money lent at the day, and condemns it, as savouring of Usurie,
and Bald. ibid.
seeming to be put into the contract for the usurie: and, Salycet. ibid.
therefore so much as it exceeds the lawful rate it holds not.

3 The division of Usury.
This gain or increase is taken for the le^ding either directly, which is
plain usurie, and here the gain is either compacted by both parties, that is
the Usurarius.
Usurer and the Usuarius.
user agreeing upon some certain gain. Which kind the holy Ghost expresses
thus: (...) Levit. 25.37.
to give upon usurie and lone. Which supposes a contract of the giver and
taker, and this compact is either Bare upon the users own promise. Secured upon
assurance of bill, bond, surety, pawn, etc.
Exacted by the Usurer after the lending, and this until the time it be
exacted, is uncertain: for the usurer requires what he list, and the user at
his requiring, or for fear of farther displeasure, does yield it: as the
necessity of them which want (...); Basil. hom. adu. usur.
makes them to undergo many things readily, which are indeed against their
wills. This kind is said (...) Exodus 22.25.
to impose, or to put upon. Offered by the user voluntarily of his mere motion:
either hoping the rather to borrow again, or doubting lest otherwise the
lender will not take it well; or upon some other ground: but it is principally
for the lending of that thing, and otherwise it had not been offered. This
some term foenus liberale: the holy Ghost calls it (...) Levit. 25.36.
to receive usurie and love. Yet for the benefit of mutuating or lending, and
the commodity obtained by it, it is lawful for a man to show himself
grateful, and reddere antidora: but yet in the slender difference between
usurie and gratitude, men need to be careful and curious, as going between
the bark and the tree, lest their conscience before God be defiled thereby.
Indirectly, which is cloaked usurie; our law terms it shifts of sale and
chevisance: for the gain in outward show is made seen to be taken for some
lawful contract; which contract is made the cloak to hide the usurie. These
cloakes and shifts are Eras. in Psalm. 14.
infinite: for usurie is cloaked almost under every lawful contract, the gain
seeming to be gotten by them, whereas indeed it is given for the very lending.
I will show examples of these contracts, which are most abused heerto. usurie
is cloaked sometime under


1 Selling; as I will lend you 100. pounds for a year, if you will give me for
this horse 12. pounds being worth 2. pounds: so the 10. pounds seems to be
given for the price of the horse; but it is for the use of the money.

2 Setting to farm; as I will lend you an hundred pounds a year, but you must
let me that farm for two pounds, being worth well twelve pounds, or give me
twelve pounds for this farm, being worth but two pounds.

3 Hiring out; as I let you have three pounds to buy a Cow, paying me at the
years end, three pounds for the Cow, and a noble for the hire. Or I let you a
Farm, with a stock of twenty kine upon it, prized at an hundred marks for
seven years, to pay the rent of the Farm, and twenty nobles a year for the
hire of my Kine, and at the end of the years to deliver me twenty as good
Kine, or an hundred marks in money.

4 Free mutuating; as I have not an hundred pounds in coin to lend you, but I
will lend you an hundred pounds in wares for a year, and deliver you wares not
worth ninety pounds, and perhaps deliver a Broker ninety pounds to give you,
and receive my wares again. Or, I lend you an hundred pounds in such coin as
I have, and deliver you light gold, not worth ninety pounds.

5 Exchanging; as I lend you an 100. pounds in silver a month, so that you
repay me in sovereigns, supposing them to be worth ten shillings and six
pence. How Usury is cloaked under exchange by bills, see notably discovered
at large by Doct. Wilson. fol. 116. etc.

6 Society; Aquin. 2.2. q. 786.
In which as one may put in money or stock to make a Principal, and another
industry; so these three must be common, the Principal, the gains, the
loss; and the remainder to be divided according to every ones moitie in the
Principal, L. Praeposita. ff. prosocio.
ex arbario boni viri. Here if I deliver money or stock to have part of the
gains, Bald ff. pro socio. L. Mutais 13. q. 3. si foenerareris, etc. plaerique.
so that the Principal be saved me: Ang. de Pertract. de societate.
or venturing but equally take two parts of the gain; or put out cattle,
Monald. in sum.
covenanting to have as much as my Principal was worth, before division, etc.
it is usurie.

7 Nomine poenae; as one gives me an hundredth pounds to be paid by another,
providing that every year it be detained, I be Bald. L. Unica.
paid ten pounds. Or, I lend an hundredth pound upon a bond of two hundredth
pounds, the bond is forfeited, I take ten pounds nomine poenae, and renew his
bond, being nothing damaged, or not so much, by his non payment.

8 Interest; when I take gain under pretense of loss sustained by missing my
money at my day; having indeed sustained none, and perhaps let him keep the
Principal still. Therefore it is good advise which one gives, that the damage
be cessed by the magistrates, to avoid both the cunning and color of usurie.

9 Col. 6. q. 3. de his quaefoenae nomine.
Pawn; as I lend money upon a pawn, and make profit or commodity by the
pawn.

10 Prove. Lindw. l. 3. de vigoribus, c. unico. Extra. de pign. c. illo vos
Extr. de usur. c. 1. 2. and ult. 13. q. 3. c. conquest.
Morgage; as you bind your land worth ten pounds a year to me for lending you
an hundredth pounds. In this case and the former, oftentimes there is a plain
sale made of the thing, with a Proviso retrovendendi, that the seller may
redeem it again, which is a lawful contract: as appears Levit. 25. But
hereif there be more to be repaied, then was laid down for it, Monald. in sum.
it is usurie. As I morgage land, or pawn plate to you for an hundredth pounds,
with a bill of sale, providing that within a year, I may redeem it for an
110. pounds, or if the borower retain liberty to himself to demand his money
again. And though the same price be to be repaied, yet if the seller stand
charged with it, it is usurie, ff. de periculo and con. reivend. L. id quod.
because it is against the nature of selling. Moreover the opinion of Host. in
c. Ad nostram de empt. and vendit. Ext. de pignor. c. Illo vos. Panorm. cons.
76. Ioh. de Imo. in c. ad nostram de empt. and vendit. Et multi alij.
many Lawyers is, that if there concur with the covenant retrovendendi
another conjecture or presumption, it is usurie: as, if the price be under the
value, or the buyer a known Usurer, or has sold his own land as commodious
as that, to make this contract, or it appear, that the seller had no intent of
selling. But the Ang. L. 2. C. de pac. inter emp and vend. Monal. in summa.
Alexan. de Hales p. 3. de praec. 7.
common opinion is, that although in foro conscientiae two of these
presumptions be sufficient, to make a usurer; yet in Bald. in l. emptione C.
plus vaelere. and in c. 1. de feodo dato in vic. leg. com. Paul de Castro ine.
ad nostram. Et multi alij.
foro litigioso three must concur to condemn him. In the Leviticall law,
Levit. 25.27.
whenever the seller would redeem his inheritance ( 28.
unless it were a house in a City) he might, and account the fruits, from the
sale till the redeeming, in part of payment. But that was in respect of the
Jubilee, when the seller was to have his land again 30.
freely: and the nearer that was, the less worth was his land.

2 All Usury is unlawful, and the taking of usurie is sin; because it is
against the law of God, of Nature, of the Church, of the Commonwealth.
1 IT is against the law of God, and his will revealed in his word: Exo. 22.25.
When thou lendest money to my people the poor with thee, thou shall not be to
them like a What manner of Creditor. see page
Creditor: ye shall not impose usurie upon them. Levit. 25.35.36.
If thy brother with thee go down, and his hand do shake, thou shall stay
him: and let him live with thee a stranger and sojourner. Thou shall not take
of him Usury and lone, but fear thy God and let thy brother live with thee.
37.
Thy money thou shall not give to him upon usurie, 38.
nor upon increase shall thou give thy food: I am the Lord your God, which
brought you out of the land of Egypt, to give you the land of Canaan, to be to
you God. Deuteronomy. 23.19.
Thou shall not usurie to thy brother, usurie of money, 20.
usurie of food, usurie of any thing, which is lent-to-usurie. To an Aliant
thou shall lend-to-usurie, but to thy brother thou shall not lend-to-usurie:
that the Lord thy God may bless thee, etc. Psalm. 15.5.
His money he has not given upon usurie: Ezech. 18.13
upon usurie he gives, and love he takes, shall he live? 17.
Usury and lone he does not take, he shall not die. Pro. 28 8.
He that increases his substance by usurie and lone. Luke 6.35.
Lend, hoping for nothing of them. In which places of Scripture, I would have
you to note first the nature of the usurie forbidden out of these phrases: 1
That God forbids (...) foenerare (...), to usurie, or to exercise usurie,
which verb imports generally all practizing of usurie, and taking gain or
consideration for lending. 2 (...) to give upon usurie, which phrase is used in
contractes, if the circumstances do bear it, as Deuteronomy. 7.3.
Thou shall not give thy daughter to his son: as here it may import a
contract between the putter and the taker, the Usurer and the User: for free
giving is excluded by Neshech. 3 (...) to impose usurie upon, which phrase the
holy Ghost uses in things exacted of men against their wills, and imposed
upon them, as burdens are: as, 1. Reg. 12.4.
My father did put a burden upon you. 4 (...) to receive usurie, which phrase
is used also even in those things which are voluntary: and under the same
form of words, as a bribe or reward is said to be received, which is neither
compacted nor exacted, but most freely offered, and yet prohibited and
condemned, as in the same Chap. and verse of Ezichiel: Ezech. 18.17 22.12.
They receive rewards in thee, they receive usurie in thee. Of this Hier. in
Ezech. 18.
S. Jerome speaks: Some for lending their money receive presents or gifts.

Secondly I would you note out of the same places the heinousness of the
offense, which appears, because usurie is contrary to the fear of God,
Levit. 25.36. a forgetting of God, Ezech. 22.12. a sin against the first
Commandment, I am the Lord thy God which brought thee out of the land of
Egypt, Levit. 25.37. and therefore the usurer deprived of Gods temporal
blessing, Deuteronomy. 23.10. made subject to Gods temporal curse, Prove. 28.8. and to
the Magistrates punishment, Nehem. 5.7. hated of God, in so much that he claps
his hands at him, Ezech. 22.13. shut out from Gods tabernacle, and from the
rest upon his holy hill, Psalm. 15.1. excluded from eternal life, and made
subject to eternal death. Ezech. 18.

Now for the cloaking of usurie, it is so far from lessening the offense,
that it does augment it: as S. Augustine said truly: August. in Ps. 63.
Simulata aequitas, non est aequitas, sed duplex iniquitas, quia and iniquitas
est, and simulata. Dissembled equity is no equity, but double iniquity;
because it is both iniquity and dissimulation. For God who is, Luke 16.
(...) and knows the heart, can discern their usurie under their (...),
their painted visards, and goodly cloakes: who loves simplicity and plain
dealing, and hates all hypocrisy and dissimulation: as Pro. 11.20.
Solomon says, The (...) qui simulant and dissimulant, and specie recti
fallunt.
subtle in heart are abomination to the Lord, but the simple in way are his
delight.

2 It is against the law of Nature, as may appear by these five considerations
and arguments. First the Usurer receives two recompenses or satisfactions for
one thing; one of them being aequivalent (contrary to that Arist. Pol. l. 1.
Plato de leg l. 6
aequalitie which is the rule of humane society) in that he requires first
restitution of his own, that is, as much as he delivered: Secondly gain for
the use; whereas in mutuating (as before has been showed) the thing and the
use are but one, and cannot be severed. For the Aquin. 2.2. q. 78. art. 1. ad.
6. ff. Actomod. l. 1. penal. and finali. and l. 4.
using of it is the spending of the very thing.

Secondly, the Usurer makes gain of that, which is none of his own, but
another man's. For the property of the thing mutuated was transferred, and
alienated, and passed away from the lender to the borrower: so that if the
borrower pay any thing for the use of it, he paieth Scot. in sent. l. 4. dis.
15. Lactant. devero cultu. l. 6. c. 18.
for his own, and of his own, which is plain contrary to Suum cuique.
Justice distributive, which yields every one his own.

Thirdly the Usurer makes Scot. in sent. 4. did. 3. (...) Aristoph. in Nub.
private gain of that which is common, that is of times; contrary to the rule
of humane society: Cause. 12. q. 2. c. qui manumittitur.
Quod est commune omnium non erit particulare singulorum.

Fourthly the Usurer makes that Arist. pol. l. 1. c. 7.
breed, gender, and increase, which by nature is barren and unapt to increase:
(...). ibidem.
for in usurie money genders, gets, or bringes forth money; whereupon Plutarke
says, that the Usurer makes something of nothing, mauger the head of the
natural Philosopher.

Fifthly the Usurer perverteth that end and use of money, which is (...)
agreeable to nature: namely commutation, (...) Arist. ibidem.
for commutation was the end wherefore money was ordained in humane society;
and is the use of it, which natural use the Usurer turns into that which is
against nanature, (...). Therefore it is called a kind of Sodomia naturae.
Hug. Card. in Ps. 15.
Sodomie. From these grounds and principles proceeded those many both wise
laws, and worthy speeches of thee Heathen, led only by the starre-light of
reason, and destitute of the light of Gods word, against usurie: which you may
see at large in other.

3 It is against the laws of the Church, which does forbid usurie to the Con.
Nic. c. 18. Con. Arelat. 2. c. 14. Con. Colon. p 2. c. 31. Con. Laod. c. 15
Con. Carthag. 6. c. 17. Con. Tur. 1. c. 1
Clergy under penalty of deprivation both of Communion and Benefice; and to
the Con. Eliber. c. 20. Con. Lat. p. 1. c. 23. Con. Lugd. 1. c. 3
Laity under the penalties of excommunication, of disannulling their wills
and testaments, of excluding them from Christian burial, and many other. And
the Canones Synodi London anno. 1584. c. 4.
law of our Church does set and account usurie in the rank and number of most
heinous sins, as haeresie, schism, incest, adultery.

4 Lastly it is against the temporal law of our own commonwealth, both
common and statute. The Common law does punish usurie, by Glanvil. l. 7. c. 16.
confiscation of all the Usurers goods to the Kings use: and the statute law
now in force, though it punish some kind of usurie ( viz. ten in the hundredth
or under) somewhat lightly in comparison of that heinousness of the sin
which the statute does acknowledge in that usurie: yet it does plainly
affirm, Eliz. 13. c. 8.
that all usurie is forbidden by the law of God, and is sin and detestable.
Which determination of that high Court ought to be prohibition enough to every
true subject under the same government, to avoid it.

3 The objections and answers.
Instead of the objections against this truth urged here, I will take in hand
the book, which is written of purpose in the defense of usurie, as the author
plainly In his answer to Prove. 28.8.
professes; by the confutation whereof, the arguments also urged in this
conference will receive their satisfaction. In this book first there are five
questions propounded, and answered by M. C. whereof the first is.

Whether the commandment of God given to forbid usurie to the Jews. Exodus 22.
Levit. 25. Deuteronomy. 23. M. C.
be general and perpetual, or not. The answer is. The commandment of not
biting, or oppressing with usurie is general and perpetual; albeit it were
permitted to the Jews because of the heardnesse of their hearts, that they
might oppress the nations with usurie, which before the coming of Christ were
foreners from the kingdom of God: which yet is no more permitted unto
Christians, than for every light cause to put away their Wives: And even this
permission for a time proves that the law, whereof the question is moved is
perpetual. For the Jews being so hard hearted as diverse unlawful things were
feign to be permitted them, there is no likelihood, that the Lood would have
laid this commandment upon them, nempe, that they should not take usurie of
their brethren, unless the law of God had necessarily required the same.

First, the substance of this answer I allow, Answer.
that those laws are general and perpetual, notwithstanding the
commandment of taking usury of strangers, which commandment I do not take
to be a permission of the nature of that, whereby a man did for a light cause
put away his wife, as he makes it. The difference I will not stand to show,
pertaining not to this question. The truth of this answer is better confirmed
by other reasons; as that David reckons it among moral duties, or rather
among breaches of the moral law, as Psalm. 15.5. (...). Basil. ibid.
Slander, wrong-doing, perjurie, briberie, against the innocent; and Ezech.
22.12
Ezechiel hedgeth it in between briberie, and deceit, and Ezech. 18.12.13.
coupleth it with oppressing the poor, spoiling by violence, and Idolatry,
and therefore Jerome coupleth usurie with deceit and robbery, Usuras quaerere,
aut fraudare, aut rapere nihil interest, quia septimum praeceptum haec omnia
prohibet. And S. Ambrose: Siquis usuram accipit, furtum facit. As for the
precept for the Jews to take usurie of (...) Deuteronomy. 23.20.
aliantes, that is, (...). Ephesians. 2.12.
from the covenant of God, and the commonwealth of Israel; will make no more
for the lawfulness of usurie, than the commandment for the Israelites to
Exodus 11.2.
rob the Aegytians, or for Abraham to Genesis 22.2.
kill his son, will make for the lawfulness of theft, or murder. Against the
aliantes God commanded Am. lib. de Tobiac. 15.
worse oppression to be used than usurie, and yet that is no reason to excuse
oppression of other, or in other cases, from being a breach of the moral law.

Secondly, the interpretation which he makes of these laws by a distinction
of biting, and oppressing, as though there were kinds of usury, which were not
biting, and oppressing, and therefore not forbidden; will appear straightway
to be frivolous. And so unnatural and forced it is, that himself forgets
it in the end of his former words, when he does expound those commandments
generally of taking usurie of their brethren; avouching, that the Law of God
requires necessarily that we should not take usurie.

M. C.
The second question. If those laws be general and perpetual, whether yet it
may be lawful in any rate, or sort to lend for gain unto such men as are
rich, and wealthy, upon covenantes, and bonds to receive increase, or more
then the principal; for that they are not poor, nor fallen in decay, neither
do borrow for need, but to purchase, or to compass great matters to increase
their riches, and wealth thereby? Answer. It is lawful notwithstanding the
law to lend to usurie, considering that the end of the law is love: Seeing
therefore it is not against the love of thy neighbor so to lend as both the
lender, and the borrower may in all good likelihood be profited; there can be
nothing herein against love, if the affection be not worse then the action of
lending, and borrowing in this kind. Yet such may be the lender, himself not
being able to occupy his money in any lawful trade; and such the borrower
able well to traffic with the same, that not only the persons lending, and
borrowing with their families, but the commonwealth also shall be profited
thereby, and hurt otherwise, if that the money of the lender be not employed,
or the cunning and skill of the borrower lie idle, and dead.

In this second question, Answer.
and answer note first that he puts his case of plain usurie, that is, to
lend for gain, and to receive increase, and more than the principal; and that
compacted usurie too: upon covenant, and moreover strongly secured, upon
bonds. Secondly, note his limitation of this usurie, both in respect of the
person of the borrower, such men as are rich, and wealthy, not poor, and
fallen in decay, and also in respect of the end, to purchase, or to compass
great matters withal, to increase their riches, and wealth thereby, not for
need. This need is expressed in his answer to the third, and fourth
questions which concern borrowing upon usury (which I omit to set down here,
because they belong not to the question of lending upon usurie, neither will I
stand with him therein) to be for his necessary use of preservation of
himself, and his family, and for preservation of his estate, and inheritance,
under which are contained as well occupiers, which live by their trades; as
owners, which live by their rents; and farmers, which live by husbanding other
men's lands: Ergo, by this limitation and restriction, and by confession of M.
C. all lending upon usurie to the poor, that never attained competent wealth,
though it be to purchase and compass some matter to bring them out of
poverty: or to the decayed, till they be out of decay, and have recovered
their former estates; or to noblemen, gentlemen, and other rich men, which are
in decaying, and in danger to impair, and diminish their estate and
inheritance, or have not presently to preserve themselves, and their families
answerablie to their estate, without borrowing for a time, is forbidden by
those laws. And this is enough to break the neck of usurie, and to condemn
all the Usurers in England, I think.

M. C. in his answer to the fourth question makes a quaere: whether he that
is driven to borrow upon usurie to preserve his estate, and inheritance, were
not better to borrow of a man of no sound religion, than of one that professes
the truth, although in all other traffic the law of God does draw us rather
to deal with those which are of the household of faith, than with strangers.
Which argues, that he holds the lending to such a one to be sin, at the
least in the lender. So then M. C. resolution is, that it is lawful to take
usurie only of the rich, and wealthy, and that of them too only then, when
they borrow to purchase, or to compass some great matter, to increase their
riches, and wealth. Now this thing which is lawful in the lender, is unlawful
in the borrower, as M. C. avoucheth in his answer to the fourth question in
these words. Every man may not borrow lawfully, much less of usurie: For
albeit it be no sin to borrow, yet it is a punishment for sin: and a
correction which God lays upon his children when they be driven to borrow,
etc. Wherefore it being a curse of the Law, and a matter wherein every one of
the children of God should be humbled, it is also clear that a man ought not
for light causes to throw down himself into this curse, as for example, to
increase his estate, being able otherwise to mainetaine himself honestly, etc.
Whereby it appears, that the lender to usurie in this case, must needs be
helping, and accessarie to the borrowers offense, and a cause of an unlawful
thing, which himself might prevent, and remedy. Now let every Christian man
judge, whether to lend to usurie, even in this case here propounded, be not a
fearful thing in this regard, that an other man is thereby brought under the
curse of Gods law.

Thirdly, let us weigh his reasons for the lawfulness of this one kind of
usurie. The first is: It is not against love: Ergo, not against the law: for
love is the end of the law. This very reason is used by the wicked Atheist,
that wrote the defense of Adultery. Whatsoever is of love, is neither against
the law, nor disliked of God: but to lie with another man's wife begins of love,
proceeds by love, and ends with love: Ergo, etc. And he adds the correction,
or limitation which this Author here does, so that the affection be not worse
than the action. For some kind of Adultery he condemns, as this does some
kind of usurie. If M. C. would answer this argument for Adultery, he should
easily perceive the weakness of it for usurie. To lend indeed is an office of
love, a work of Christianity, Deuteronomy. 15. Luke 6.
a commandment of God: and to take usurie for the lending is of love too: but
it is the love of money, (...), as Paul calls it, and makes it 1. Tim. 6.
the root of all evil; as for (...), or (...) neighbourly love, or brotherly
love it is quite contrary unto it; as one said: Hug. Card. in Ps. 15.
Usura direct opponitur charitati: Usurie is directly contrary to charity:
and therefore forbidden by it, as another said: Bez. annot. in Math. 19.8.
Foenerari prohibet Christiana charitas. Christian love forbids to put to
usurie. Basil said truly, Men gather not grapes of thistles, nor figs of
thorns, (...). Basil. hom. in usus.
nor love of usurie.

The second reason is as it were an Epilogisme to the former. So to lend as the
lender and the borrower may in all good likelihood be profited, is not against
love; But in the usurie above specified, and qualified both the lender, and the
borrower may in all good likelihood be profited. Ergo, that kind of usurie is
not against love. I deny the minor, with a double distinction: first of the
persons, for in respect of the lender it is past likelihood, because his profit
(for so they term usurie) is certain, and sufficiently secured, and made most
sure: and likewise in respect of the borrower it is past likelihood, for his
loss is (...). Basil. ibid.
certain, because whatsoever he gives for the usurie is loss to him, his
substance being so much diminished: and therefore Basil calls all usurie
(...). Basil. ibid.
gain of loss. For it goes out of his own to the decrease thereof. Which
may further appear by the other distinction: in this action there are two
things: first, Mutuating, by which together with the users industry, and Gods
blessing grows the gain, if any be: secondly, usurie or gain to be paid for
that lending, and that is so far from profiting the payer of it, that it
impayreth his substance so much as it is. This distinction Heming. in fac. 5.
Hemingius has; No good can come by usurie of it self, but if there seem by
chance any good to come of usurie, Non usuris sed mutuation.
that is not to be attributed to the usurie, but to the lending.

Now this profit which he supposes to come to the borrower by the usurie, is
but in all good likelihood, as he confesses; there is no certainty in it; and
yet he will have the usurie, and increase to the lender not only certain, but
assured by bond: is not this great inequality, and injustice? What if the
borrower be indeed at loss by the using of that money? so that he cannot make
up his Principal again to repay the lender, will the lender bear part of
that loss? No I warrant you. But say the borrower does gain, and get wealth,
notwithstanding he pay usurie, as perhaps some may; though in comparison of
them that are undone by it, they be very few, as Basil said, Many, say thou,
are made rich by usurie: (...). Basil. hom. ad v. usur.
more, think I, have come to the halter by it: Yet that they gain is not to
be attributed to the usurie, but to the good bargains they met withal, their
skill in traffic, and principally to God blessing their industry, and labor:
whereby they have reasonable gain to live by, and to increase by, beside that
which the Usurer takes; and shall this excuse the Usurers offense, which
takes away that which is none of his own, but another man's, though he take
not all the other man's, but leave him part for himself? If a theife meeting
me, as I come from the market, take from me but part of that I have gained
there, leaving me enough to countervaile my charges and somewhat over, shall
his theft be excused? I will conclude this point with Leos words not much
varying the sense. Leo sermon. 6. de jejun decimi mensis. c. 3.
Quilibet sequatur eventus, mala est ratio foenerantis. What event soever
follow the Usurers case is naught. This argument he presses by consideration
of the estate as well of the lender as of the borrower; the lender wanting
skill to employ his money; the borrower having skill, but wanting wherewithal
to use it; so that divisim both the ones money, and the others skill lies idle
to the damage of themselves, and of the commonwealth, but conjunctim they may
benefit themselves, and the commonwealth too. All this is true: but what
concludes he hereof? mary, ergo, it is lawful to put to usurie to the rich,
to purchase withal, or to compass great matters to increase their wealth.
Mark how the premises cross the conclusion: the premises describe a borrower,
whose cunning and skill lies idle and dead, which must be by need, or want of
wherewithal, which is poverty: for were he rich himself, his skill needed
not to lie idle, much less to be dead. The conclusion describes a man that is
rich, and wealthy. So then here is the coherence of this argument: by lending
to the skillful poor which want wherewithal to employ their skill, the poor
may be maintained, and the commonwealth benefited. Ergo, It is lawful to lend
to the rich and wealthy to purchase, or to compass great matters to increase
their wealth. So then we are clean gone from the question which was proposed
of the rich, and wealthy, and are come to the poor, and needy. Now let us
consider how this argument holds for them. The money of the lender wanting
skill, and the skill of the needy borrower wanting wherewithal to use it, will
both lie idle: Ergo, that lender may put his money to usurie to this borrower.
How this consequence does hold, you may conjecture by these: A man having a
wife being himself unfruitful, wants children to the decay of his house,
and damage of the commonwealth. Ergo, it is lawful for another that is
fruitful, to lie with his wife, to supply these wants, or thus: A rich man
has a barn full of corn, but cannot thresh it out, to the hinderance of the
commonwealth, and himself; another being able and skillful to thresh, has no
corn to thresh: Ergo, it is lawful for this fellow to break up the others
barn, thresh his corn, steal part for himself, and leave the rest ready for
the others use; here both may be benefited, and the commonwealth too: oh say
you; but there are other lawful means to remedy both these inconveniences;
the rich man may hire another to thresh his corn; and pay him his wages,
holding his own; the poor may thresh for hire, and receive wages for his
maintenance. Even so it is in our case proposed, there are remedies sufficient
provided in humane society, without usurie, that neither the money of him that
is not able to use it, may lie idle; nor the skill of him, that has not
wherewithal to use it, may lie dead: among other there is society, whereby
both these two may join together, and relying upon Gods providence, the one
venturing his money, the other his skill, by Gods blessing may benefit
themselves, and their families, and the commonwealth too. But the Usurer likes
not this; he loves not to trust to Gods providence: he can provide well enough
for himself; as Ajax answered his father. (...). Sophoc. in Ajace.
I will vanquish, and have victory, and that without God. Touching the profit
which comes by usurie, it is true, that unto the Usurer nothing can be of
greater yield, no gain comparable to it: but to the needy occupier (as Basil
says) usurie does not bring (...). Basil. ibid.
a full remission, but a little intermission of want, and hard fortune. No man
can heal a wound with a wound, nor cure a sore with a sore, (...).
neither can any man remedy need by usurie: for how is it possible that money
should (...).
overflow and multiply so excessively as to salve thy need, and satisfy the
Principal, and (...).
beget the usurie too says Basil; and Plutark compares it, even as if a man
that is not able to carry a Kid, should crave to have a great Ox laid upon his
shoulders. And for the profit which may redound to the commonwealth by usurie,
I will tell you what it is; the occupier to make gains of the wares bought
with usury money as will serve to sustain himself, to repay the Principal,
and withal to satisfy the usurie, must hold up his wares the dearer, use the
more craft and deceit, lying, and swearing, to sell them the better, to the
oppression of the commonwealth. So that Chrysostom said truly that the
Usurer was the common enemy of all: and Basil sets down the commodities of
usurie, (...).
lying, ingratitude, deceaving, forswearing, and Plutark reckons up lying,
and forgeing, as fruits of usurie. As for any commodity which may accrue to
the commonwealth by purchasing with usurie money, I cannot imagine, unless
the Purchasers rent-rearing and racking of Farmers to make up his money for die
usurer, be a commodity to the commonwealth.

Unto this answer of M. C. there is annexed a defense thereof by another, who
would feign go a little further, and have usurie, that is so qualified as in
the answer to the former question is set down, to be a thing commanded, yet
he will not at the first dash avouch it plainly, but insinuatingly comes in
with his if.

Defendor.
If it be not a thing which in some case may truly be said, to he commanded,
yet at the least it is in the number of those actions which are indifferent,
and free, either to be used, or not used, according to the inducement of
persons, time, and place counselling or discounselling the same. His reasons,
and arguments I will set down in his own words, and answer them briefly.

Defendor.
To this purpose of the indifferency, and freedom of the action to use it, or
not to use it, comes first the word it self of usurie, which in the learned
tounges carries a middle, and indifferent nature apt as well to note a lawful
limitation of the thing whereto it is applied, as to signify that which is
unlawful.

Answer.
First, this assumption of his is false: for the names of usurie in the learned
tounges are not apt to signify an indifferent thing. Nesheck in Hebrew has no
aptness to signify a lawful action, which is the name of usurie in general:
neither Nuchtetha, nor Chibbuliah in the Chaldaean tongue: nor faenus in the
Latin tongue: nor Tarbith in the Hebrew tongue: for Tarbith is ever used for a
thing unlawful, and condemned: and so is the English Usurie, as himself
confesses, though he lay the fault upon the ignorance of the vulger people:
whereas it is in the nature and property of the thing which it is applied to
signify. Secondly, this consequence the name is apt to note a thing
indifferent. Ergo, the thing which in common speech it is applied to signify
is indifferent is altogether insufficient. This aptness to note must be either
in the Etymology, or in the use, and by this argument I could defend great
sins. Adultery in the learned Latin tongue has his name of ad and alter:
Now what is apter to signify a thing indifferent than alter, another? and for
the use, when a door is opened not with his own key, but of another door it
is called clavis adulterinus: when a letter is signed not with the seal of the
writer, but of another, it is called signum adulterina: and either of these may
be lawfully, or unlawfully done according to the inducement of the
circumstances of persons, place, or time, counselling, or discounselling the
same: and what? shall I with this defendor conclude: Ergo, adultery in some
case may be lawful or indifferent? Likewise fornication comes of fornix, an
arch, or a room built archwise. Which is a lawful thing, and has an aptness
to signify an indifferent thing, a place apt as well for lawful copulation, as
unlawful: is therefore fornication in some case indifferent? A thief in the
learned Latin tongue is called fur, a ferendo of bringing as Sipont.
some say; or of furus that is furvus, black, or dark, as Noun. Marcel. de
prop. sermon. Varro de ling. Lat. l. 4.
other more ancient say: and in Greek (...) of (...) to hide, or keep close:
all which are of a middle, and indifferent nature, apt as well to signify a
thing lawful, as unlawful. Yea by this argument tyranny may be better
maintained than usury; for the word in the learned tongues both Greek and
Latin is of a middle, and indifferent nature, apt by his etymology, and
applied by use to signify either a good or a bad King. By this you may see
also the vainenesse of this argument drawn from the Greek word (...), which
properly signifies that which a living creature procreateth or brings forth
by generation, and because (as Aristotle says) as the living creature in
generation brings forth more of the same kind, or his like: so money put to
usurie brings forth his like, that is, more money, therefore usurie is
likewise called (...), that is a thing generated of the same kind. Now comes
this Defendor and argues thus: (...) signifies children which are gotten by
generation; and children are some legitimate, and some illegitimate; and (...)
signifies also usurie, ergo, usurie is some lawful, and some unlawful. It is
a plain Paralogisme ab aequivoco: Lupus signifies a Woolfe, and woolves have
tails: and Lupus signifies also a snaffle, ergo, some snaffles have tails.
Even as good as this: (...) signifies to hide, and that may be done either
lawfully, or unlawfully: and (...) signifies also to steal: ergo stealing may
be done either lawfully, or unlawfully. And why not this: (...) signifies that
which is begotten, and procreated by generation, as children, and the children
are begotten of male, and female, and are themselves some male, some female:
and (...) signifies also the usurie money which is begot of the principal:
ergo usurie money is begot of a male, and a female: and some usurie money is
male, and some female. This is somewhat likelier than the other: for there are
some Edward pieces, and some Elizabeth pieces; and Phillips, and Mary's may
stand for (...).

In handling of this argument he goes about to meet with an objection out of
Aristotle, making us believe that Aristotle makes for him. Arist. Pol. 1. c. 7.
Aristotle Pol. l. 1. cap. 7. condemning usurie altogether, among other reasons
uses this: Whosoever leaves the use of a thing which is agreeable to the end,
and nature of it, and makes a use contrary to the end, and nature of it, is
to be condemned: but the usurer leaves that use of money which is agreeable to
the end, and nature of it, and makes a use contrary to the end, and nature of
it; ergo, etc. The minor he prooveth, because money was ordained for
commutation, and the nature of it is to serve thereto in humane society, which
use the usurer leaves altogether: again to make money breed, engender, or
bring forth money is against nature: for money has no such gendring, or
procreating nature, being naturally barren: but the usurer makes his money
gender, and procreate more money, that is, more in the same kind. Wherefore
Basil terms usurie (...), a beast of a strange and monstrous nature, in
bringing forth, differing from other creatures: Basil. hom advers. usur.
which he shows, because other creatures have a time to bring forth perfect
yongue: but the usurers money is borne to day, and to day begins to bring
forth. Other creatures the sooner they engender, the sooner they leave of
ingendring: but the usurers money ingendreth quickly, and never leaves off:
Other creatures coming to their growth are at a stand: but the usurers money
is ever growing. Other creatures delivering over their breeding to their
yongue, leave off teeming themselves, but the usurers money, both that is newly
borne, does beget, and the old principal is youthful still. To the second part
of Aristotle's minor this defendor answers, that Aristotle condemns only
that usurie which is practiced with the neighbors loss, and only for this
cause that the Usurer takes it whether the debtor has gained, or not. Whereas
in Aristotle there is no such thing, nor the least inkling of any such
distinction. Aristotle's speech is general, his arguments carry with them a
generality, neither is there in him one title tending that way. Yes, says he,
Defendor.
The very words do show it, where he says, money is barren, and does not
beget money, that is, if it be alone, and of it self: and who denies this;
money in a chest, or hid in the ground does not beget money: but that wares may
be bought with it, and so by man's industry gain be made, who can deny?
Therefore we say, gain may be taken of the gain, not money of the bare money.
Answer.
Who ever heard such an absurd conceit; that Aristotle speaking of the
unnaturalness of money begetting money in usurie, means of money taken upon
usurie to be locked in a chest, or to dig it in the ground? No not old Euclio
in Plautus, I warrant you, would pay usurie for money, to pot up, and put in
the ground, as well as he loved it. If any were ever so witless, shall we
think that Aristotle entreating of the common society of mankind, the weal
public, and the politic state, ever dreamed of such doing? No, he spoke of
that usurie which was in use, and common practice: But see the absurd
consequence of the rest. Wares may be bought with money: true, for that is the
right end of money; commutation: A man by his industry may make gain of his
wares, true, or else all trade and traffic were in vain: but what of all
this? Mary, says the Defendor, Ergo, the Usurers bare money does not yield him
money. And why forsooth? what else comes from the usurer but the bare money?
or for what is the usurie money paid him, but for the bare money? the wares are
none of his; the money which was paid for the wares was then none of his; the
commutation was not made by him; the industry is none of his; the venture is
nothing to him; neither is there any thing his but the bare money which gets
him his usurie money. If the Usurer will plead society and so come in for a
share of the gain, let him keep the laws of society according to the rule
of equity, and take his share of the gain, if any be in Gods name.

The next point, and the same the greatest, Defendor.
and most important (says the Defendor) is to take a view of all those places
of Scripture which are commonly alleged, as carriyng in them the sentence of
condemnation, written in them, against all compact for increase of money over
and above the Principal, whereof the first is, Exo. 22.25. To avoid the
comdemnation of this place he has four evasions, all like to Adams fig leaves.

The first is this: In the 21.22.23.24. verses he does generally forbid the
oppression of the poor, Defendor.
and destitute persons; after verse 25.26.27. that which before he had spoken
of oppression, he expresses by the particularities, and the kinds thereof:
now in the prohibition there being nothing spoken against, but that whereby any
neighbor is oppressed, it cannot be that any thing is reckoned up in the
particulars, but that wherein my neighbor is oppressed. There being then a
kind of usurie, and increase of money by contract which does not oppress my
neighbor, but releiveth him, it must necessarily follow that usurie is not
here forbidden.

Usurie is not a species, or a particular of the sin forbidden in the former
verses 21.22.23.24. Answer.
In those verses there are two several precepts, the one concerns strangers
or sojourners, the other touches widows, and orphans of the people. These
are disparata: and therefore cannot have one species under them. Again the
persons mentioned verse 25. are Gods people the Israelites, and add the
adjunct unto them, the poor: it is the poor Israelites: Now they cannot come
under the Genus strangers, for they are opposite: stranger, and Israelite:
neither can they come under widows, and orphans, but are diverse kinds from
them: for widows and orphans are respected, not in regard of poverty, unless
withal they be poor; but of their inhabilitie to menage worldly affairs, and
to withstand wrong, and of their aptness to be wronged: and if they be poor
withal, then are they but a species of poor people. So that in respect of the
persons he should rather have said contrarily, that this 25. verse had been
genus to the other before. Now for the sin forbidden against the stranger
there are two things prohibited; first, (...), (...) R. D. Chimch. in lib.
radicum.
which the Rabbines to distinguish from the other, do interpret it, of an
abuse by words, as obraiding, and reviling: Now hereof usurie cannot be a
species: for usurie is no verbal matter; words will not serve the turn: If
this interpretation be not liked, there will be little difference between this,
and the other word (...) and that signifies to press, or thrust with
violence; as the Ass thrust Balaams foot against the wall Number. 22. and as
Elizeus commanded Iehorams messenger to be used 2. Reg. 6.32. crush him in the
very door, and metaphorically it signifies that violent injury, oppression,
and tyranny wherewith cruel kings crush, keep under, and afflict their
subjectes, as the case of the Israelites was under the Kings of Egypt, which
Moses expresses by this word. (...)
I have seen the affliction wherewith the Egyptians afflict them. Now that
was plain tyranny in the Egyptians, and slavery in the Israelites being forced
to all kind of drudgerie by beating, and bodily punishment, as Moses shows.
Exodus 1.13.14. and 5.14. Now of this affliction usurie can be no species,
because in usurie there is no force or violence, but all amity, and fair
speech as Basil shows, The Usurer laugheth upon him, and remembers the
acquaintance be had with his Father, Basil. hom. in usur.
and calls him good neighbor, and friend. Against the widows, and orphans
there is forbidden (...) which has the like signification, that (...) has,
that is, an unjust kind of handling with voilence, as tyranny, and servitude
is: for Moses expresses the tyranny of the Egyptians, and slaverie of the
Israelites, with this word also. Exodus 1.11.12. and Genesis 15.13. And Saraes
violent usage of Hagar is expressed with this word. Genesis 16. Now this cannot be
a genus to usurie, because there is no violence, or force in usurie, as before
was said. These sins are abuses (...), of the irascible part of the soul:
Usurie is an abuse (...) of the concupiscible part: they are breaches of the
sixth commandment, Thou shall not kill. Usurie a breach of the eight, Thou
shall not steal: they are vices in excess of the virtue, (...). Usurie is an
excess of the virtue (...) as the Philosopher speaks: and yet this learned
man will have one a species of the other.

Defendor.
The second evasion is this, The particular oppression, which is spoken of in
the 26. and 27. verses, being a thing not simply unlawful, but that which may
be done in some case, it follows that the former, which the holy Ghost has
made Par, and brother to it, is also not simply unlawful. As therefore there
may be a man of such wealth and store of garments, that a man may lawfully
keep his garment that he has pledged with him, not a night alone, but an
whole year of nights: so he may be such an one to whom he has let money, that
he may lawfully expect any increase of money for the lone thereof.

Answer.
The Antecedent is untrue: for the particular oppression spoken of verse 26.27.
is simply unlawful, and may not be done in any case, that is for any creditor
to take of any poor man for pawn, his garment, having none other to cover his
nakedness withal, whether it be by day, or by night, as the Rabbines
understand it of both. It is inhumanitie to see a man go naked, or lie naked
with nothing upon him: and Christianity commands to cover such: but it is
immanitie and savage cruelty to make him go naked, and to take from him that
only thing he has to cover his nakedness: and that the law speaks only of
such a pledge, is more then manifest, verse. 27. For it is his only covering,
it is the very covering of his skin, wherein shall he lie? and of such Job
speaks: They make Job. 24.7.9.
a man lie naked all night without a covering, and they take to pawn that
which the poor has on, and make him go naked without a covering. And yet our
Defendor comes in with his rich man, that may spare one garment a year of
nights, as though he dreamed of nothing but rich men, and wealth. Well, let us
leave him in this sweet dream of his, and come to his third evasion, which is
this.

Both in the verses before, Defendor.
and in the present verse in hand, he speaks of the poor, and destitute, yea
and very poor persons, and therefore without injury of the text, it cannot be
stretched to all sorts of men.

Answer.
It is well that he coupleth this verse with the former verses: for by them he
may see the nature of this. In the verses before, where he forbids abusing
with terms, oppressing with violence, and afflicting, he speaks of the
poor, yea of destitute in respect of ability defensive, namely of strangers,
widows, or orphans: therefore without injury to the text, those laws cannot
be stretched to all sorts of men, but that we may lawfully abuse in terms,
oppress, afflict any other being neither stranger, widow, nor orphane. If the
Defendor will grant me this consequence, I will strain my self to grant him
the other, and seek some other answer to this evasion. Sed quae est ista
dialectica: What Logique is this? said M. Jewel. Solomon commands, rob not the
poor, because he is poor. Ergo, it is lawful to rob the rich, because he is
rich. I add the like out of Moses: Moses forbids Devt. 24.14. (...)
to defraud, or deceive the hireling, that is poor and needy: Ergo, if he be
rich and wealthy, I may defraud, and deceive him. But in this kind of
Logique, I can help the Usurers one ace beyond their Defendor: for as there is
a limitation of the people to the poor, so that of the rest of the people we
may take usury: so there is in this law a limitation also of the poor to one
special kind of poor, namely (...) the poor with thee. Now this addition
(...) with thee, does import not only a vicinitie, commoration, or dwelling
together; for the holy ghost expresses that with other phrases, as (...) and
such like; but it imports withal a bond between them of Dominion, and
servitude or subjection, as to be one of his family, and within his service,
as we use also to speak, he has been with me seven years, that is, has
served me, or been in my family. Which also may appear, because the law
speaking of taking a brother into service uses this word, Levit. 25.
he shall be (...) with thee: and speaking of the manumission of such an one
uses the same word (...) ibidem. Deuteronomy. 15.12.
from with thee, which is not a little enforced in the latter member of this
law, which mentions imposing upon; insinuating a superiority over him. So
then the law speaking only of such poor as are with me, under me, within my
service or family, it cannot be without injury to the text, to stretch it to
all sorts of poor, but that I may take usury of such poor as are not with me,
are nothing to me, owe me no service, and perhaps dwell not near me. Now I hope
I have pleased the Usurers with enlarging their liberty by following this
Defendors Logique. But to return to the place; there are many reasons why in
these laws, and the like there is special mention of these impotent persons.
First, Lyra says, Lyr in Exodus 22
Lex exprimit illud quod frequentius accidit, scilicet afflictio talium, quia
resistere nequeunt. The law expresses that which usually happens, namely the
afflicting of such, because they cannot withstand, or defend themselves:
Secondly, God uses in his laws to express the grosest sins, as murder,
adultery, theft, not allowing whatsoever comes not to that degree, but in
these condemning that. Thirdly, God hereby would testify to the world his care
over these destitute persons, which of all other are least cared for; and
therefore he takes them into his Psalm. 68.6.146.9.
special protection. Now if God forbidding to lend upon usurie to the poor,
should allow men to lend to usurie to the rich, he should have more care of the
rich, than of the poor: for no man would lend to the poor freely, when he
might lend to the rich for usurie. Lastly, I might deny, that this addition,
the poor with thee, does belong to that member which forbids usurie: for in
lending money God forbids two things in that verse: First, (...)
to be as a Creditor; such an one as shall be described Page 46.
anon: and here it was requisite that the specification of poor should
restrain it, because otherwise it is not unlawful, as appears, Deuteronomy. 24.10.
Where there is a law made for the right and lawful practice of it. Secondly,
it is forbidden to impose usurie: and this member has no mention of poor,
because it is a general prohibition, and somewhat it appears, that this
prohibition differs from the other, because the holy Ghost sets it down
in a different form of speech, speaking in this member plurally, whereas in
the former he spoke singularly. Howsoever it be in this law, that the
prohibition concern the poor only, or all in general; it is manifest, that
in other laws usurie is generally forbidden, as Deuteronomy. 23.19. Thou shall not
put to usurie to thy brother: here is no difference of poor, and rich, but a
general comprehension of all Israelites, and members of the Church, which may
further appear by the general opposition (...) of aliantes. And so Ps. 15.5.
He that gives not his money to usurie: here is no exception of aliants
neither, as the Lyra in Exodus 22. Galat. de arca, Cathol. verit. l. 11. c. 4.
Jews themselves confess, and our Savior in the Math 5.42. Luke 6 35.
Gospel takes away that difference of brother and aliant, and of poor and
rich too. And so in the prophet Ezechiel, and the Proverbs. For Livie by long
experience in the Roman State did find, that usurie was Live. dec. 1.
damnosissima etiam divitibus: and Plutarke avoucheth, that Jupiter Ctesius (so
termed because he is owner of all) can not save that man, that will rather
borrow upon usurie, then sell his own goods to serve his turn.

His fourth, and last evasion is, Defendor.
that the word translated usurie signifies biting; so that if there be any
usurie which biteth not the poor, but heals the bite, which the tooth of
poverty has made, it cannot lie under the condemnation of this place.

This is a great evasion with usurers, Answer.
which they stand much upon: insomuch that every illiterate carle, and
bookelesse broker has Neshech in his uncircumcised mouth, and can say that
Neshech signifies biting, and therefore this Defendor translateth this place
thus: Thou shall not lay upon him a biting: as that word is known to signify,
says he: But to fire them all out of this starting hole at once, I tell them
that this word Neshech does never signify biting: nor any thing else but only
usurie, that is, gain for lending. If it be such a known thing, as he makes
it, let him or any of them all show one place in Canonical Scripture, or other
Hebrew writer, where Neshech signifies a biting, or any thing else, but only
that which the Hebrews with another name call Tarbith, the Greeks (...), the
Latins foenus, and we usurie. I have been ten years Professor of Hebrew in a
famous Universitie, and therefore should have read somewhat, and yet I confess
I could never find it. The truth is this; there are many Verbes in Hebrew,
which in diverse Conjugations, or with diverse constructions, or both, do
signify diverse, yea sometime contrary things: and therefore though they be
written with the same letters, yet may well be accounted diverse Verbes, as
Theod. Gaza. Gram. lib. 4.
Theodorus Gaza says, speaking of the like in the Greek tongue. (...): it is
manifest that the same verb being taken diverse ways, (or in diverse
significations) does differ from it self in very essence, and is diversely
called, and construed. Yea in Hebrew some few of them in the same conjugation,
and with the same construction too, do signify very different things: which
difference, and diversity in general is discerned either by the Conjugation,
or Construction, or else by the circumstances of the place: as the Verb (...)
which is used in the next verse, in the conjugation Pihel signifies to
destroy, and dissolve asunder: but contrarily in Call it signifies to bind
together; whence comes (...) a cord, or cable which reteineth the Hebrew
etymology) and because possessions and inheritances were usually divided by
cord, an inheritance is also called by the same name, Chebel. Now shall I say,
because this, or that man's lands were never laid out by cord, but other
ways, therefore it is not inheritance, Chebel; for Chebel signifies a cord?
much less may I say, that Neshech signifies biting, as anon shall appear.
Again the same Verb (...) in Call signifies to take to pledge, and a pledge
is called (...) Chabol, shall I say, that when God forbids to take a
millstone to pledge, I may lawfully do it, so there be no bond, or binding of
it, for Chabal signifies to bind? The Verb (...) in Call is taken Neutrally,
and signifies to kneel, and thence (...) is a knee, and (...) is a pond,
belike because that in swimming there, men bend their knees: as in Greek such
a poole is called Ioh. 5.
(...), a swimming place: Now because in this, or that pond there was never any
swimming, or a man cannot swim in it because of the shallowness of it, or
some other cause; is it not therefore berechah, colymbethra, a pond? or shall I
say, that those words signify swimming, or a swimming place? Again, the same
verb barak in the conjugation Piel is used transitively, and signifies to
bless, or salute, because usually inferiors, blessing, or saluting their
superiors, did kneel or bow the knee, and thence barachab is a blessing, or
saluting, and sometime contrarily it signifies to curse, or ban. Shall I
therefore say, that there is no blessing where there is no kneeling? or that
barachah is known to signify a kneeling? that Genesis 1.22.28.
God did not bless his creatures, because he did not kneel? that Psalm. 103.
the heavens did not bless God, because they had no knees? that Jacob did not
bless his children, Genesis 49.
because he lay along in his bed? or when Number. 23.24.
Balaam answered Balak that God had commanded him to bless Israel, and not
to curse, might Balak have answered, notwithstanding, thou art not forbidden to
use sorcerie, inchauntment, or witchcraft against them, so there be no
kneeling, for that word is known to signify kneeling? Or might Esau have
answered his Father Isaak, that the same which his brother Jacob had stolen
away, was not a blessing, because Isaak did not kneel. Genesis 27.37. Number. 21.
Surely he might have answered so as truly, as our Usurers say, that Neshech
signifies biting. For although the verb Neshach used in Call, transitively
with an accusative case of the sufferer, signifies to bite, as (...) Number. 21.
momordit serpens virum; the Serpent did bite a man; yet in the conjugation
Hiphil, (to which Neshech is (...) and consignificant) it requires a dative
case of the sufferer, and an accusative cognatae significationis (as the Latin
Gramarians speak, the Greek call them (...)) and so it never signifies to
bite, but only (...), foenerare, to usurie (if you will give me leave to make
a word ( or to put to usury as (...) Deuteronomy. 23.19.
Non foenerabis fratri tuo foenus: Thou shall not usurie to thy brother usurie
of silver. In which signification, or acceptio^ it is another verb from that
which signifies to bite, differing from it in very essence, as Theodorus Gaza
said, which is more truly said of this verb, which differs from the other
not only in acception, The Hebrew conjugata cannot be expressed verbatim
without making of words, and scarce with that neither, for as in Greek the
usurer is said (...) actively, and the user (...) depone^tly, so in Hebrew the
principal is said (...) neutrally, and the user (...), as in Greek (...),
and the Usurer (...), actively, which is (...) transiens in tertium, as Chimchi
says which kinds of speaking our tongs cannot express.
and construction, but also in conjugation; which in Hebrew makes a great
difference, as you may see by many examples: as (...) in Call signifies to
redeem, in Ptel, to pollute: (...) in Call signifies to create, or make; in
Hiphil, to fatten: and so (...) is fat: and the same verb in Hiphil, also
signifies to choose; (...) in one, and the same conjugation Call, with the
prepositions (...), or such like signifies to dwell: with (...) or (...) to
fear, or to be afraid of: and an hundredth more of like sort. And that Neshech
signifies usurie, and (...) Nashach, to go to usurie, without any respect of
biting may appear. Deuteronomy. 23.19. where it is applied to the principal, or the
things lent, of any thing, which does usurie, or goes to usurie. Now the thing
lent be it money, meat, or whatsoever else does never bite, but help and
relieve: the intent of the lender is not to bite; the intent of the borrower is
not to be bitten; the nature of the thing itself is not biting; and therefore
that word there cannot probably, or possibly be translated, biting; and
therefore Neshech, and Hisshech being conjugata to it, and Derivatives of it,
ought not to be taken in the signification of biting; but in the same
signification, wherein their original, and primitive is; and what an absurd
construction would it be to translate the derivatives in that sort. Thou shall
not bite (or make to bite) to thy brother a biting of silver, or a biting of
meat, etc. What a senseless speech would this be? And for further
confirmation, that the word Neshech, and Nashach does import usurie without any
respect of biting, let me add the judgment of the most skillful in that
tongue, who do ever translate, and expound it usurie, without any mention, or
insinuation of biting, as the Septuaginta translate it (...)? The Chaldean
Paraphrast does call it (...) ribbitha; The Rabbines expound it (...) which
with them is the general name of usury. But grant that usurie had his name in
Hebrew of a Primitive, which signified biting, what is that to the purpose,
when we know what the thing is, which it is applied to signify? The question
is not of the Etymology, but of the lawfulness of the thing: the thing is
known, what it is; whence the name was first taken that the same thing is
called by, is not material. Ang. Princ. Dialect. c. 6.
S. Augustine gives a very good rule. Verbum non unde dictum sit curandum, cum
quid significet intelligatur. It is no matter whence the word is derived, when
we know the thing which it signifies. In giving names to things, it is well
enough, if the nature which it has (...) ((...) as the Rabbines speak) for
the most part, be agreeable to it: yea if it ever had such a quality which the
name imports, though the same quality, or accident be left, or grown out of
use: as carnal copulation with a single person is fornication still, though it
be not committed in an arched, or vanted room; and yet that sin had his name
first a fornice; as before has been showed, because then often it was
committed in such places, and therefore Gallen. de H^poc. and Plat. decret. l.
2. c. 2.
Gallen said truly (...), Etymology is but a lying witness, Cic. in Topic.
which made Tullie so afraid to translate (...) veriloqutum. Me thinks I could
help the Usurers in this point better, then the Defendor has done: for
therere is no usurie, but that which accedit sorti, as this Defendor said
truly before; but sors imports chance, hazard: Fortuitum rei eventum. Sipont.
therefore whether we lend to poor, or rich; gain they, or gain they not, if
we put the principal out of hazard, and make it sure by bond, suerty, or
pawn, what increase soever we take, it is no usurie, Quia non accedit sorti;
because it comes not to a thing put in hazard. Lastly, grant that the
scripture condemned only biting of the poor, or biting of thy brother by
lending; yet we might easily understand all usurie to be forbidden, because all
usurie biteth more, or less, as one biting is worse then another; and one
sooner felt than another, and therefore no marvel that the most wise (...),
and name-maker linked their names in such near affinity together. The biting
of a Serpent, being done prively, when a man is asleep, or greatly busied, is
not great, nor soon felt, but it grows; and if it continue, it will
overrunne the whole body: and such is the nature of usurie, says Rabbi
Solomon: Rab. Solomon in Ezech. 22.
As the Serpent makes a little black and blew in the foot, and there is no
feeling of it, but afterward it grows, and spreads it self, till it come
over the crown: So in usurie, there is no feeling of it, no perceiving of it,
till it grow great, and diminish a great deal of substance.

The next place is Levit. 25.35.36.37. Defendor.
Out of which place the same may be confirmed, and further reasons gathered,
for the strengthening of the judgment before set down. First, whatsoever is
set down, and forbidden to be done, is not forbidden generally, but to thy
neighbor that is brought low.

Answer.
This argument of our usurie Defendor, videlicet.

God providing for a man that is decayed, forbids to take usurie of him,
Ergo, it is lawful to take usurie of one that is not decayed, has been
sufficiently answered before. And further it may be said here, that the
commandment of helping, and upholding, verse 35. belongs to the brother
decayed; but the commandment forbidding usurie, verse 36. pertayneth to the
brother in general, as well as Deuteronomy. 23.19. which seems to be enforced,
because in this 36. verse he names the brother in general. But it mattereth
not much though both the commandments be restrained only to the brother
decayed.

Defendor.
Secondly, there is a farther reason drawn from the end, which is, that thy
brother may live with thee: wherefore if the love of money be so tempered, that
he may well live with thee, it is plain that such usurie is not forbidden.

Answer.
Here the usurer discovers his mind, that any rate of usurie may be taken,
so the poor borrower may live, and hold soul, and life together. And truly
experience shows, Nec liberum corpus superest. Liu. 1. l. 6.
that usurers have no more respect of their brethren: goods, lands, liberty,
and all they get; and it is well that the brother lives, and vescitur aura
aetherea. But to his argument. First these words (...) let thy brother live
with thee (for so the text is, not as Tremelius notes (...) that the life of
thy brother may be with thee) are not the (...) or rule for the rate of usurie,
as this Defendor would have it, but an argument to moove us to leave it, taken
from our duty to our brother: as in the verse next before, there is another
argument to the same effect, taken from our duty toward God. By duty we are
bound to fear God. Ergo we must not take usurie, because God has forbidden
it: by duty we are bound to preserve, and maintain the life of our neighbor:
ergo, we must not take usurie, because usurie takes from him that, wherewith
he should maintain his life, his living, his goods. Whereby appears, that
Catoes answer was not unreasonable, when being demanded what usurie was,
answered Quid soenerare? quid hominem occidere. Cic. offic. l. 2.
manslaughter: And that Licinius complaint was not unjust, Foenore trucidantur.
Live. Dec. 1. l. 6.
that men were slain with usurie. Now says this Defendor, I may take usurie
so my brother may live: let him say also, I may take usurie so I fear God; and
then all usurers will be excused: for many of them counterfeit such holiness,
that they will be taken for men that fear God; and have ever the fear of God
in their mouths; for as a reverend father said publicly of late, there are of
our holiest brethren which are usurers.

Secondly, this is a bad consequence: I must not take usury of a decayed
brother, who if he pay usury cannot live, ergo, I may take usurie of the rich,
because they may live notwithstanding they pay usurie. Will the special reason
of a special law, given in regard of some one circumstance, abridge and
restrain the general law? Will the exaggeration of a sin in the highest
degree make all those actions no sin, which come not to that degree? God
forbids a man, which has bought an Israelitish maid, to sell her to a
stranger, giving this reason, Exodus 21.7.
because he has abused her: Was it therefore lawful for such a master to sell
an Israelitish maid, if he had not abused her? No, Levit. 25.42.
that is unlawful too. Because it is an heinous offense to steal a cow from a
man, that has no more to live by: is it not a sin to steal a sheep from a
man, that has thousands, and can live well enough for all that, and perhaps
never miss it? The Defendor might have seen a more general reason of the
forbidding of usurie in this place of Leviticus: for first, verse. 37. he
sets down a general law: Thou shall not give him (that is thy brother) thy
money upon usurie, nor thy vittaile upon lone. Then verse. 38. he gives this
reason, for I am the Lord thy God, which brought you (both the lender and the
borrower) out of the land of Egypt. Now he brought the rich, as well as the
poor out of the land of Egypt, and therefore neither rich nor poor (though
they have no other way to live but by a stock of money) may give their money
upon usurie either to rich, or poor. Defendor.


Thirdly, for that the increase of victuals, and consequently of corn, is as
well forbidden, as of money, wherefore corn ordinarily increasing in these
Countries 100. 60. 30. fold, if it be lawful to take increase of corn, it is
lawful to take increase of money; But the former is not denied of some that
are the greatest scourgers of usurie: And therefore, even in their judgment, if
they will be like themselves the other may not be denied.

This proposition it is lawful to take increase of corn, is amphibologicall,
and ambiguous: Answer.
if he mean, that it is lawful for the husbandman to receive the increase of
his corn that he has sowed, as his mentioning of the increase of 100. fold
does import, it is most true; but it will never be fitted to our question of
usurie: for there is no mutuation, or lending, but metaphorical. If he mean,
that a man finding nothing but corn, and putting it to another to sow to
parts, may take his part of that which comes of it; be it less then he put
out, or as much, or more; and so if more, to take increase, it is also true,
but it is nothing to usurie; for it is plain Society. If he mean, that a man
lending corn to another, and the borrower sow the same, the lender may
covenant with him to have his Principal again, and some increase for the use;
he must prove that true. For I deny it, and, until he prove it, say it is
unlawful, because it is usurie. And yet this is nothing to that kind of
increase, which is spoken of in this 37. verse; for that is (...) increase of
food. And indeed it follows consequently, that the forbidding the increase
of food, forbids also the increase of corn borrowed to make food of: but
that differs much from corn sowed for increase; which may be as well for
merchandise, as for the sowers spending. Again, with sowing it has an
aptness to increase naturally, which by sowing reducitur ad actum: which
aptness spending corn, vitaile, and money has not: for the making of that
corn apt to spend, spoyleth it of his aptness to increase. So here is a suite
of non sequiturs. Increase of victual is forbidden: Ergo, increase of corn
sowed is forbidden. Corn sowed increases 100. fould: Ergo, it is lawful to
take usurie of money: or, it is lawful to take increase of corn sowed: Ergo,
it is lawful to take usurie of money. What media will he have to tie these
together?

Defendor.
The lawfulness whereof may appear by the example of Joseph. Genesis 47.13. Who
for food once given, took a fifth for ever.

Answer.
The Relative (whereof) is referred by him to the increase of corn, as I take
it, not to the increase of money. So the argument is this. Joseph for food once
given took a fifth for ever; Ergo, it is lawful to take increase of corn; and
consequently of money. I answer, first the Antecedent is false. It was not
(...) food, nor (...) frumentum, bread-corne, but (...) seed, or seede-corne
that Joseph gave the Egyptians, as Moses shows, Genesis 47.23. Again Joseph's
contract, and bargain was not to have his Principal again, and increase
besides, as in usurie is requisite: but the Principal was transferred away for
ever by that contract, in consideration of that fifth part; which is contrary to
mutuating, and lending. Lastly, he did not only give them seed, but also did
let them land to sow it upon, and to occupy withal; else their seed without
land would have done them no good: for land they had none, unless they
farmed it of Pharao: for Joseph had Genesis 47.20.
bought all their land for Pharao, and had 21.
put them clean out of possession; so they took land again in 24.
farm; and afterward by statute it was granted unto them 26.
in fee-farme, and they became Emphytentae, fee-farmers to Pharao. Now letting
of land in fee-farme will be a slender patronage of putting of money, victual,
or corn to usurie. This consequence will never be proved: Joseph did let to
the Egyptians land with a stock of corn with it in fee-farme, ergo it is
lawful to put corn, victual, and money to usurie. And mark his corollarie.

Out of which place it further appears, Defendor.
how ungroundedly out of Aristotle the increase upon lone of money is condemned
as unnatural, because, forsooth, money begets not money; whereas the
Scripture condemns indifferently the increase of food, as well as of money:
for notwithstanding it increases not, yet being well, and wisely employed,
turned and returned, it causes greater increase than other things which are
lent, which without employment, and manuring will bring no increase; no not the
ground it self of other commodities the best and surest.

Indeed out of this speech it appears how ungroundedly (...), Answer.
and (...) this Defendor argues, and reasons: here is his argument in the
best fashion that I can bring it into: God condemns the increase of vittaile,
as well as of money: but vittaile though it do not increase of it self, or
lying still, yet being employed it does increase, and that increase is lawful
to be taken; ergo, money though not increasing it self, yet being well, and
wisely employed, turned, and returned, it causing increase, that increase
likewise is lawful to be taken. I deny in his antecedent that vittaile does
increase, for I cannot devise how it can, unless it be by miracle, as the
woman of Sareptaes meal, and oil; or as the Disciples loaves and fishes: for
victual has no aptness to increase, no more then money has. How long shall
a man keep a loaf or bread, a gallon of Beer, a pound of Butter, or Cheese,
a stone of Mutton, or Beef before it increase? or what may he do to it to make
it increase? If he mean that the victuler makes increase, and gain by
uttering his victual, that must be by selling, which contract he cannot make of
money; for money is the price, which Eccles. 10.19.
answers to all; and therefore cannot be the ware, and merchandise too. If he
mean of corn; indeed that has a vegetative, augmentative, and increasing
nature, apt to increase; but being turned to victual, and made edible, as
parched, sodden, grinded, it is deprived, and spoiled of that nature, and
aptness. If he mean of (...) seed-corne, he is clean beside the law, and out
of the question; neither will his comparison hold: for money has not in it
naturally such an aptness to increase, as all kind of seed has: do what
you can to money, you cannot make that increase, or more to grow of it, unless
it be by Alcumie, which they call the art of Multiplication: and whether it be
lawful to take increase for money put to the Alcumists, I leave to them which
know the virtue of the Philosophers stone, and have skill in that art. But
without Alcumie I am sure it cannot be. Well more money may be added to it, but
that more never came of it, or grew of it: for it has no (...), potentiam,
faculty, aptness, or nature to increase, or to yield a profit, and commodity
besides the thing, as ground has, which he produces for example: but how
wisely a blind man may see: for who did ever lend or mutuate ground? Ground,
because it has a natural aptness to yield profit, and commodity, so that
the use may be severed from the thing, may be co^modated; and consequently,
something being paid for that use, it may be hired. Now such a use there cannot
be of money, as money; of gold, as gold; of silver, as silver, perhaps there
may be; but not of coin, or money. And if there be any such use, which may be
transferred to the borrower, the property remaining in the lender, it comes
not within our question, or the contract of mutuating. Now here our Defendor
produces two excellent properties of money.

First, Defendor.
money has a property of continuance without danger of perishing, which
cattle, and other things subject to death, and diseases have not.

Our Savior Christ tells us otherwise; Answer.
whom this Defendor, be he never so great, and learned a man, must give me
leave rather to credit. For dehorting us from the treasuring up of earthly
treasures (whereof coin is no small part) he uses one argument taken from the
nature of it, subject of it self to corruption, Math. 6.28.
namely to rust. And S. James tells us plainly, that silver and gold are
subject to rust, and canker: Jam. 5.3.
Your gold, and silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a witness
against you. Math. 6.28.
Another argument is taken from the danger of them, because they are subject to
stealing, not only if a man carry them in his purse, or keep them in a chest;
but even if he wall them within a stone wall. The thieves dig through, and
steal. And Act. 8.
S. Peter tells Simon Magus, Thy money perish with thee. Therefore he did not
think that money was not subject (...) to perishing, as this Defendor does.
Now compare it to cattle, and it is far inferior in the property of
continuance. For though cattle be subject to diseases, and death too: yet they
are by nature (...) auctificous, and multiplicative, and therefore leave other
in their room behind them; whereby they have indeed a property of
continuance, and almost of perpetuity. But grant that money had such a
property of continuance without danger of perishing; is it therefore lawful
to take usury for lending of it? Why, who borrows money to keep it
continually, or to hoord it up? Or who is so mad as to pay usurie for this
use, and property of it? The poor user or borrower cares for no more, then if
it will last telling it to his Creditor.

The second property of it is; Defendor.
that having money there is no commodity which a man may not have: so that
though money be barren in one respect, yet it is more fruitful than other
commodities in regard of a greater and an oftener burden it is delivered off to
the comfort of them, that know how to use it.

First, this is not generally true; Answer.
as the Spaniards found by experience, who coming into the West Indies, had
many commodities of the Country, which they needed, brought unto them by the
Inhabitants: to whom they would offer for them money, goodly pieces of gold
coin, but the Indians taking the money, would put it into their mouths, and
spit it out to the Spaniards again, signifying that they could not eat it, or
make use of it; and therefore would not part with their commodities for money,
unless they had such other commodities as would serve their use. Secondly
though money commonly be the mean for all commodities, and do answer to all;
yet this use of money cannot be severed from the thing it self, that we may
make that use of it, and keep the thing, or the property in the thing too.
For indeed it is the very right use of money, and this use of it, is the
spending of the very thing: and therefore can never be made of that thing but
once; for money cannot be spent twice, nor be twice delivered of young, save
only in Usurie: which kind of birth, if he mean here, when he speaks of
the great and often burden, which money is delivered of, he does but
principium petere: for the lawfulness of that kind of birth, is the thing in
question. Now then the use of money being the spending of the thing, shall I
make even, and equal recompense for the thing, and give for the use beside?
Noe, but one thing answers to both, they both being but one thing, and not
severable. Because a pot of beer has a property to cool thirst; shall I
give a pot of beer again for the beer I borrowed, and somewhat beside for
the property of it, to cool my thirst? Because ten pounds in money will buy a
horse worth ten pounds, must I answer ten pounds for the money, and ten
shillings more for the property of the money to buy a horse? This is the
comfort which the Defendor speaks of, Job 16.2.
A miserable comforter are you, may the poor borrower say.

Defendor.
Now where in this text verse. 36. There is beside the word of biting, another
word which signifies increase in the 37. verse, it is evident that the word
of biting was ascribed to the money, and the word of increase restrained to the
food. So that they do evidently force the words of this place, which apply the
word of increase unto money, which is here by the holy Ghost carried only
unto food. Wherefore also the Prophets being interpreters of the Law, it
follows that the places of Ezech. 18. and Proverb. 28. where both these words
are used of biting, and multiplying: ought to be so expounded, as the biting be
referred to the money, and the word of multiplication to the food, or
victuals, and not to money as is commonly done. If the holy Ghost had in any
place forbidden the increase of money, as he forbids the biting of the
brother in all things, as well money, as victuals; then there had been reason
to have applied the increase to money, but the Scripture not forbidding that
any where, it is an overreach so to apply it.

This evasion is both untrue, and also idle, Answer.
and unable to do him good. It is untrue, that it is an overreach to apply
Tarbith to money, or that Tarbith is restrained only to victual. For the
word which the holy Ghost verse. 37. carries expressly to victual, is not
Tarbith, as he belying the holy Ghost tells us; but Marbith, which is a
word of more general signification, applied to 1. Sam. 2.
issue of body, increase of children, 2. Chron. 9.
increase of wisdom, and so forth. But the word Tarbith which is used verse.
36. and Prove. 28. and Ezech. 18. and 22. is the proper name of usurie, and
signifies nothing else: so that Tarbith, and Neshech be (...) (as the Hebrews
call them) that is Synonyma, words of one signification, though they differ in
Etymology, and origination: as the Latin usura, and foenus be: which though
the one come of faetus, the other of usus, yet signify one, and the same
thing, which we call usury: as appears in Tully, Cic. de Senect.
terra nunquam sine usura reddit quod accepit; sed alias minore, plaerumque
majore cum faenore: and so we have in English use, and lone. And this is a
usual figure in Hebrew, as their Doctors often note (...) to dubble the thing
with two words. And that Tarbith and Neshech be Synonyma may appear by many
reasons. First whereas in this place Moses restrains Neshech to money; yet
Deutr. 23.19. he stretches it to victual also; which argues that Neshech is
generally of all things as well as of money. Secondly, the Chaldaean
Paraphrast, when Neshech, and Tarbith be put together, as he translateth
Tarbith always ribbitha, which come both of one Primative, have one etymon,
and are one word differing only in Dialect, but Neshech he translateth
sometimes Chibbulja, sometime Nuchtetha: yet Deuteronomy. 23.19. he translateth
Neshech also Ribbitha: showing plainly, that he took Tarbith to be the same
which Neshech is, and as general as it, and of money as well as it: for
Ribbitha, and Tarbith differ in nothing but in dialect. Thirdly, as the Verb
signifying (...), foenerare, to put to usurie, in Hebrew is conjugatum to
Neshech: so in Chaldaean, which is but a dialect of the Hebrew, it is
conjugatum to Tarbith, which makes them plain Synonymaes. Fourthly the Hebrew
Doctors make them Synonyma, and say Tarbith is the same which Neshech is, as
Mordochai Nathan in his Iair Nathib says, Tarbith is (...) the same which
Neshechis. Fifthly, the Septuagint do always translate Neshech (...); and
(...), and Tarbith are al one, and have one and the same reason of their
Etymology, as before has been showed. And so likewise does the vulgar Latin
translation translate Neshech sometime usuram, and sometime foenus: Now faenus
also is all one with Tarbith, Nonn. Marcel. de propr. Sermon.
and has the same reason of the Etymology, being so called quia foetus est
mutui accepti; and so is Tarbith, as before has been showed. Sixthly, there
can be no reason given why Tarbith should be attributed to victual, but by the
same reason it may be attributed to money: for the nature of victual, and
money in this respect is all one, and the one does (...), parere, increase, as
well as the other; both naturally unfruitefull, and barren; in usurie both made
to yield fruit contrary to nature: the damage to the borrower in both alike.
For what odds whether I lend you ten pound of butter to have as much again,
and one pound over for lone: or lend you ten groats in money to buy it withal,
to have as much money again, and one pound of butter over, or one groat over
for the lone: and so for all other kind of victuals. And this evennesse, and
equality in the nature of the things (namely that increase is alike lawful, or
unlawful in the one as in the other) the Defendor himself confesses. For
seeing by his own construction that Marbith, increase above the principal
lent, is directly forbidden even in victual, he comes in with his old
limitation, and qualification, so it be such as does not oppress him, but
relieve him: which is the selfsame limitation, and qualification with which
usurie of money is allowed by him: and without which the usurie of money is
condemned by him. So that howsoever he would bleare the eyes of the ignorant
with a distinction of the words, yet he makes the things all one, that is,
alike lawful, or unlawful; and so indeed makes his goodly distinction
merely void, and vain. Now to prove that the increase of victual so
qualified is lawful, he uses this argument.

Defendor.
The word which is termed increase signifies multiplication, which is not
always where more is taken then was given, but where much is given: it being
more to multiply then to increase, as appears, Deuteronomy. 17.16. where it being
forbidden to the King to multiply horses, yet thereby is not forbidden, that
the King should have many horses, but that he should not exceed and go beyond
measure. For it is manifest, that the good and religious Kings in their great
victories against the Churches enemies, having many horses, reserved some for
their own use. And therefore if such an increase of victuals be taken as the
poor may well live of, I see not how it is simply unlawful. Where also may
be recalled back again the example of the Egyptians, which albeit they were
brought to extreme poverty, yet received corn for the yielding of an annual
increase for ever: and that at the hands of Joseph, which governed the land in
justice, and was beneficial to all the subjectes of the same.

Answer.
All the copies of this book, which I have seen, have (when more is given) but
I take his meaning to be, when more is taken, that is, overmuch, and
excessive: which appears to be his meaning, both by his comparison, that to
multiply is more than to increase, and also by his testimony alleged out of
Deuteronomy. 17. Now this acception, and signification of (...) which the holy Ghost
uses, Deuteronomy. 17. and whereof Tarbith is derived, is untrue. For it does not
import an excess, or multiplication beyond measure, but an increase in any
measure, that is, more than that, which it is compared with-all, be it
it-selfe, or another thing; For it is opposite to (...) less; (...) is more,
(...) is less: (...) to grow more, or increase, (...) to grow less, or
decrease: (...) to make more: (...) to make less: as you may see, Exodus 16.18.
Number. 26.54. Hag. 1.6. and other places, where there is a bare comparison made
by these words, without any respect of excess any way. Therefore, when an
excess beyond measure is signified, the word is either doubled, as in
multiplying I will multiply. Genesis 3.16. and 22.17. or else some word of
excess is added: as in this place (...) valde, over much, or exceedingly,
verse 17. which (...) is to be understood in the rest, according to the
exigence of the circumstances; else absurdities would follow. This place
yields rather arguments against his assertion, then anything in favor of
it. As first, 1. Cor. 7.2.
God forbids to multiply wives: but all increase of wives is unlawful above
his (...) his own one: Ergo, God forbidding Marbith, increase of victuals; all
increase of victuals is unlawful above his own Principal. Secondly, the
Verb (...) harbeh, to increase, or multiply is attributed to money, Ergo, the
nowne Tarbith which is conjugatum to it, is attributed to money. And this may
stand for a seventh argument, to prove that Tarbith is a synonyma to Neshech,
and is of money, as well as of victual.

Secondly, his evasion is idle, and would do him no good. For grant that this
distinction of his were true, that in the phrase of Moses the word Tarbith were
restrained only to that one kind of usurie which was in victual, and never
used for that kind which was in money, what would he get by it? Surely if
Tarbith had never been mentioned, the law of usury had not been one whit
enlarged; and being mentioned, it is not one ace abated, or restrained: for the
word Neshech is large, forcible, and effectual enough against usurie, as
before has been showed. And so for his recalling back the example of the
Egyptians to this purpose, I desire the reader to remember what has been
said of it before.

Defendor.
In Deuteronomie 23.19. he forbids to lend to usurie generally to any Jew,
but there expressly in all those interdictes he uses the word of biting only;
a thing which is confessed simply unlawful to be used to any man at any time,
which is also the answer to the place of Psalm. 15. where the word biting is
also used.

Answer.
This is no good answer, for the word does not signify biting, but only
usurie, as before has been showed.

Defendor.
There follows Ezech. 18.8.13.17. In all which places the general which is
forbidden is the oppression of the poor: of which general, this is one
special of biting, and multiplication: the one, as has been said, by money,
the other by victuals, and other things. Wherefore if usurie be so tempered,
and qualified that it oppress not the poor; it is plain that it is not
forbidden in that place: much less if it be so measured as it does greatly
comfort, and relieve him. Moreover, as he forbids usurie there, so does he
in like degree forbid the retaining of a pledge for debt. Wherefore if there
may be such a debtor, whose Creditor may keep the pledge laid down with him,
until he be satisfied of the debt: there may be also such a borrower, as the
lender may without breach of the law take lone of him. But the former of these
two is confessed, therefore the later cannot be denied.

Usurie is not a species of any thing going before in that place of Ezechiel.
Answer.
Neither is oppression of the poor any genus there. In the 8. verse there
goes next before it the exercise of liberality in feeding the hungry, and
clothing the naked; whereto Usurie is an enemy, and therefore next forbidden:
and next after it follows committing of iniquity, and not executing true
judgment between man, and man: which in the 8. verse are coupled with it, and
which may be done to other than to the poor. In the 13. verse he puts it next
to Idolatry, and abomination: and therefore he cannot make Usurie a species of
the oppression of the poor, unless he make them so too. But this evasion has
before been answered; and so have his other evasions of biting, and keeping of
a pledge.

Proverb. 28.8. Defendor.
He that increases his substance by biting (which must be understood through
money, as before has been showed) or by multiplication (which must be
understood by victuals, or such like, as there also is set down) shall gather
it for him, that will show grace to the poor. Which if it be the true
exposition of this place, the usurie before defended remains still untouched.
But if this exposition be not admitted; then the latter end of the verse, which
is an exposition of the former part thereof, declares, that this is to be meant
of such as take increase of the poor, and oppress them by lending. For the
Proverb seems not obscurely to set forth this sense; that that which has
been by a wicked covetous man taken away from the poor, shall be by a
righteous liberal man restored to the poor again. Thirdly, it must be
observed, that this Proverb, etc.

Answer.
His distinction of Tarbith, and Neshech, which himself doubts of, and
distrusteth here, has been answered before. His other evasion, that the later
part of the verse is an exposition of the former, is contrary to the rules of
interpretation; for the one contains the sin, and the other the punishment.
And it is but a shallow conceit, and forced construction, that the Usurer got
his goods of the poor, because his successor will bestow them upon the poor;
whereas Solomon speaks generally. He that increases his riches by usurie.

Defendor.
Thirdly, it must be observed, that the Proverb speaks of him, whose trade
is to gain by usurie, and whose great wealth rises no other way then from
thence, and so consequently is without the compass of that usurie, which by
the answer to the question is maintained.

Answer.
Though the Defendor say it must be, I think it may not be. For the Proverb
says only (...) (...) He that increases, or augmenteth his substance, or
makes it more. Now if a man has gotten 10000. pounds by other ways, and
taken but 10. pounds, or 10. shillings for usurie once in his life, doubtless he
does thereby increase and augment his substance so much, and make it so much
more; and therefore comes within the condemnation of this sentence, though he
make no occupation of usurie, nor have any great wealth arising by it. But I
marveile, what is in the foresaid answer, to shut out him whose trade is to
gain by usurie, out of the compass thereof. For truly I can see nothing
there, but, so that I lend only to the rich, to purchase or compass great
matters withal, he may lawfully make a trade of it, and have his greatest
wealth arising by it.

There is one place more in the old Testament from which M.C. gathers an
argument to prove the lawfulness of usurie, as a thing in his own nature
indifferent; namely, Ier. 15.10. which he produces in his answer to the fifth
question, which question being the last, contains an objection against the
lawfulness of borrowing upon usurie, in these words. Lastly, M. C.
when the Prophet Jeremy says, I have neither lent upon usurie, nor any has
lent to me upon usurie, and yet they curse me, whether the word usurie
expressed there twice, have one and the same sense and signification in either
places, or in the first place to be taken in evil part, but not in the second.
To this M.C. answers thus: The root of the word in both places is one, and
the same, and in neither place taken in evil part, neither in the
signification of lending upon usurie; nor in the signification of borrowing
upon usurie, but is of a thing indifferent of it self. And it is so far,
that that place does make any thing against the lawfulness of usurie, that it
rather gives some strength to it. For the Prophet declares his injury to be
so great, that he did not give them any cause, nay not so much as any occasion
justly to hate him; considering that he did abstain from that, which was not
simply unlawful: whereas if to lend, or borrow upon usurie had been simply
unlawful, their unreasonablenesse had not so greatly appeared.

In this answer M. C. bewrays some want of skill in the Original tongue.
For the word which the Prophet Jeremy uses, does never signify Usury, or
Vsurarious contract; but is quite another thing: and therefore his
indifferency of the practice of usurie cannot be proved, or helped by that.
The interpretation of the place is: I did not credit them, nor they did credit
me. But it was not such a kind of creditor, and debtor, crediting, and owing,
which is usual amongst us, and according to the course of our law: but such a
creditor cui acquirebatur jus in bona debitoris: which had acquired, and gotten
a right unto the goods of the debtor, that he might seize the same to his
proper use, and detain them without further course of law (for so much as I
can find in the Jews judicialls) but only of his own authority, and (...)
handfasting, as Moses speaks, Deuteronomy. 15. till he were satisfied his debt. So
it was not in the nature of an execution, whereby the thing is transferred to
the Creditor absolutely, without liberty to the debtor to redeem it: neither
in the nature of a bare debt, by which with us the Creditor has no right to
the debtors goods; neither of an arrest, or distress which requires a course
of law, and yet does not transfer the property, or use of the thing presently
to the Creditor; but it is a thing of another nature, after the Judicial law
of that state, whereby the Creditor had authority to take any of the goods of
the Debtors for his debt, and to detain the same till he was satisfied; only
provided that the Creditor might not draw latch, or enter into the Debtors
house to take what he thought good; Deuteronomy. 24.10.12.13.
but to take such as the Debtor could, and would spare: and also provided, that
if it were the only garment of a poor man, he restored it to him when he
needed it to cover his nakedness. Such a Creditor is called (...) and (...)
whom the Prophets wife feared would come and seize her two sons: 2. Reg. 4.7.
Wherefore Elisha furnished her with Oil to sell and satisfy him. 1. Sam.
22.2.
And in danger of such Creditors stood the men that fled to David: and such a
debt was to be remitted in the year of Jubilie, Deuteronomy. 15.
the Creditors being forbidden to touch, or seize the Debtor, or his goods. And
such a kind of crediting to the poor is against the law of charity, and
overthrows the office of mutuating, or lending, and therefore prohibited by
God, as well as usurie. If thou lend money unto my people (I mean) to the
Exodus 22.25.
poor with thee, thou shall not be to him as a Creditor. Not meaning a plain
Creditor, for that must he be, so long as the other was in his debt, and did
owe him the thing lent; but such a Creditor as I have described. Nehem 5.7.
And therefore Nehemias condemned it in the rich Jews, and commands release
thereof both in restoring the goods seized, 10.11.3.4.
as lands, Vine-yardes, Olive-yardes, houses: as also in remitting the debt,
were it money, or wares, as Corn, Wine, Oil, which appears before to be the
matter for which they grew in debt. And by this short discourse the Defendor
also may see his error, who makes Nosheh, to be all traffic and negatiation;
whereas it is but one kind of crediting, as has been described, the debtor
whereof (...), obaratus) is called periphrastico^s (...). Out of the new
Testament there is alleged one place, Luke 16.35. where our Savior exhorts
to Christian liberality toward those that want, and to true brotherly love,
whose nature is in her benefits to respect the good of other, 1. Cor. 10.4.
not her own: and for that part thereof which consists in mutuating, or
lending, our Savior sets down the rule thus (as S. Matthew records it)
And from him that would borrow of thee, Math. 6.42.
turn not away: expressing the same, which Moses in his rule for mutuating
delivers thus, Deuteronomy. 15.9.
Let not thy eye be evil against thy brother. S. Luke sets the rule down
thus: lend (...): now (...) is not red in any other place of the New
Testament, and in other Greek writers it signifies to be in wan-hope, or out
of hope, with an accusative case, as is here, as (...), to be out of hope of
the sick man, or to despair of the sick man. In which sense if we take it
here, it seems that our Savior respects that wan-hope, or despair of the
principal in regard of the neerenesse of the year of freedom, wherein there
was to be a plain (...), and general release of all debts, which despair
Moses in his rule of mutuating mentions: Beware that there be no wicked
thought (of despairing thy debt) in thee, that thou should say, the seventh
year is at hand, the year of freedom, therefore it grieveth thee to look on
thy poor brother, and lend him nothing. Which year of freedom, when our
Savior spoke this, was at hand, as I have showed in my book of the ground of
Chronology. But the Interpretors do take this word here in another
signification, in which elsewhere it is never read, in this sense, lend,
hoping for nothing of them: so that the preposition (...) seems to be taken
out of the verb (...) in the former verse, and if you lend to them, whom you
hope to receive of. Now what was that, which our Savior would not have them to
hope for of the borrower? The Principal? or the like kindness in pleasuring
them with lending again, or such offices, when they had need? Not the
Principal, as I take it, for these reasons. First, because then it should not
be lending, but giving. Now our Savior does distinguish these two evidently:
Give to him that asks; Math. 6.42.
and from him that would borrow turn not away: says S. Matthew. Give to every
one that asks, Luke 6.35.
and lend hoping for nothing, says S. Luke. The difference of these two is,
that in giving, the thing is quite transferred away, without any restoring of
it again, or hoping for it: in lending, the thing transferred away is to be
restored again. Secondly, in the end of the former verse, in the example of
the thing forbidden, there is expressed what it is, which in lending, we may
not hope to receive, namely, (...) the like. Now the Principal is not (...)
the like; but (...), the same in specie, as before has been showed. For (...)
imports the requiting the kindness and good turn, in doing the like
again. For that which the Latins say par pari refer, to do him as good a
turn: the Greeks say (...), and such an (...), Col. 4.1.
or requiting, Paul would have Masters yield their servants, that they requite
their diligence, and faithfulness with due wages, and kindness. Thirdly, the
relation of the other Christian offices here expressed by our Savior does
import so much: If you love them which love you; if you do good to them which
do good to you, and so, if you lend to them of whom ye hope to receive the
like, that is, which lend to you: and proportionably in the precepts; love
your enemies, which love you not; do good to them, which do not good to you:
lend to them, which lend not to you. This sense of this place does utterly
overthrow usurie. For if in lending we must not respect, or expect (...), the
like good turn again of the borrower; much less may we compact for usurie.
For usurie is (...), more, which is contrary to (...), in the excess: and he
which forbids the like, does rather forbid that which is more. Now let us
see what he says against it.

This place makes as little against usurie, Defendor.
as that which does least. For, First of all our Savior speaks not at all of
any negotiation, or contractes for gain, but only of relieving the poor, as
appears in the 30. verse.

It is true that he speaks not of any negotiation, or contractes for gain,
Answer.
but of relieving the poor; but he speaks of giving, and lending, which are
contractus gratuiti, free contractes, or else the nature of them is marred:
which two kinds of communicating goods, giving, and lending, are not only
allowed by God, as the contractes of buying, selling, setting, and hiring, and
such like are, but also are straightly and severely commanded by God toward
the poor and needy, having many threatenings menazed, if they be neglected, and
many goodly promises annexed, if they be exercised according to Gods
commandment, and therefore our Savior would have them exercised, and
practiced most freely, even without all hope of any recompense. But it is not
true, that he speaks there only of relieving the poor: for he speaks in
the same verse of loving one another, and of doing good one to another: which
duties are not restrained only to the relieving of the poor; neither does any
such thing appear in the 30. verse. Whereas he speaks of giving them that
ask, which commonly indeed is of the poor: so he joins wthi it, and from
him that takes away thy goods from thee, ask them not again, which is more
likely to be done of other, than the poor, neither does it touch the relieving
of the poor.

Defendor.
Secondly, for that this, which is to be done, Christ commands to be done
even to our enemies. Now there is no reason, or law of God that I should lend
my money to mine enemy.

Answer.
First, the words of the text have no such necessity of lending to our enemies;
for enemies have relation to love, and therefore do not love: but lending has
relation to such as are not able to lend again. Yet by consequence it will
follow from the text, that we must lend to our enemies; for we are commanded
there to do as-much, that is, (...) to do good, verse 27. and 35. yea to do
more a great deal than lending, that is, to love. For it is an easier thing to
lend to an enemy, than to love him. And there is great reason that we should
lend to our very enemies, because God did more than lend to us being more his
enemies. But I pray you how does his conclusion follow hence? That which he
forbids to be done, he commands to be done to an enemy; Ergo, This place
makes nothing against usurie. I understand neither the antecedent, nor the
consequence: that which is forbidden to be done is (...), to hope for the like:
does he command this, that is, to hope for the like of our enemies? This I
understand not: but this I understand out of this place, as he expounds it:
It is not lawful to hope for (...), the like, of our enemies to whom we lend:
Ergo, it is a great deal less lawful to take usurie of our friends, and
neighbors.

Thirdly, for that I am commanded to lend him, Defendor.
although I were in apparent danger, or rather manifest to lose all, even the
Principal: for the Greek word signifies to look for nothing of that thou
lendest; which is not only proved out of the nature of the word, but also out
of the circumstances of the place: for verse 34. he teaches that one sinner
lends to another to receive like, or as much again.

What the Greek word signifies, Answer.
and what the circumstances of the place bear, you have heard better reasons
before, than this Defendors bare word: and therefore I say no more, till I see
more. But to his consequence: Does this place make nothing against usurie,
because, you are commanded to lend franckly, and freely without hoping, or
looking for the principal again? I think nothing makes more against it: If
our neighbor must be helped even without any respect had of receiving the
Principal again: much more are usurie compactes forbidden, Beza in Luc. 6.35.
For much less may you compact for certain gain above the Principal. The
speech of our Savior Christ in this place is indefinite, and in the other
member, which is brother to it, and more than it, it is universal (...), to
every one that asks.

To make some show, that this place makes nothing against usury: he takes
upon him to answer two objections, which he imagines may be made here.

If happily you say, Defendor.
we must lend to the poor oftentimes without hope of recompense, yea, with
hazard of the Principal: Ergo, we may not lend to the rich, of who^ recompense
may be looked for again: non sequitur. Christ commands us to call the poor
to our table, which cannot call us again, Ergo, we may not invite our rich
friends, which can invite us again: non sequitur.

Answer.
And to conclude, Ergo, we may lend to the rich upon usurie, Minus sequitur.

Defendor.
If you say, if he meant of relieving the poor, he would rather have spoken of
giving, then of lending. I answer, that there is oftentimes more charity
showed to a poor man in lending him somewhat, than in giving: for there are
many poor, which being ashamed to beg, and receive an alms, would yet
willingly borrow a piece of money, with mind to repay it, etc.

Answer.
Grant this (for God commands lending to the poor, as well as giving, and
they are both very necessary and beneficial to the poor, in their several
places) yet will it not follow, that it is any charity to take usurie, Basil.
hom. in usurer.
or relief to pay usurie, for that which is lent to poor, or rich. Basil
advising them that were unable to live, unless they took upon usurie, rather
to beg; and they objecting that they were ashamed to beg; answers, that
it is more shame (...).
to take upon usurie, and deceive: for (says he) any thing is more (...).
tolerable than to take upon usurie. Plut. de non foen.
And Plutarke having rekoned up many ways and trades for men to live by,
concludes, that of all those, none is so servile or shameful, as to hear
this voice of the Usurer, Pay that thou owe. And whereas many object, that
they cannot live without taking upon usurie: Basil answers, (...): There are
many devises for a man to live by, many occasions: and Plutark, do thou not
see, how many ways the land, and how many means the sea does offer thee to
live by? And what kind of charity it is, and how much better than giving, to
lend upon usurie, Basil shows in these words, (...), a bad giving to both,
to wit, the giver, and the receiver, bringing loss and damage, to the ones
goods, and to the others soul. For the further defense, and maintaining of
usurie, out of the new Testament he produces three arguments.

1 The Apostles of our Savior Christ in their sundry catalogues of sin,
Defendor.
do never once make any special mention of usurie in all their writings,
whereby grows a strong praesumption of the lawfulness thereof. For in all
likelihood they would not have kept silence therein, if their predecessors the
Prophets had labored so much against it, as they are supposed to have done by
such as draw the testimonies abovesaid to the condemnation thereof: specially
seeing it is well known that in the Roman Empire, under which they preached
usurie, and lone for money was much used, and that as lawful, to the value of
twelve in the hundredth. At the least James, Peeter, and John would not likely
have forgotten it, which wrote particularly to the Jews much given to that
kind of gain.

First I deny this consequence: Answer.
There is no special mention of the forbidding of it by name in the new
Testament: ergo it is lawful: for there are many breaches of the Moral law,
yea many gross sins, which are not expressly mentioned, and forbidden by name
in the New Testament: as namely profaning of the Sabbath day: all the degrees
of Incest save one; removing the neighbors mark: taking for pledge, or upon
execution a poor man's only weed; removing of land marks: Polygamie; gelousie,
etc. 2. It is forbidden in the old: and the new gives no enlargement to sin.
3. Neither is the taking of usurie of a poor man, that is in never so great
distress, forbidden by name in the new Testament, and therefore by this
argument it should be also lawful, contrary to the assertion of M.C. who
affirms it to be a breach of the moral law, and unlawful. And yet by
consequence usurie is sufficiently forbidden in the new Testament, as the
learned Basil. hom. ad usur. Ambros. de Tobia. l. 1. c. 15. Hier. in Ezech. 18.
Conc. lat. p. 16. Tit. de usura. Theses Wittenb. Melancthon. etc.
Divines both of ancient time, and of latter ages do acknowledge: Nazi. de
theol. l. 5.
and those things which are collected out of the Scripture, are as well, as
those things which are written in the Scripture, as Nazianzene said, and they
come under the second member of his quadripartite division there, (...): which
are in the Scripture, and yet are not named there.

Now for his surmise of likelihood for the lawfulnes of usurie in the Roman
Empier, he should have showed how it is so well known, else we shall hardly
believe it, upon these inducements. Appian. de bello Civilly. l. 1.
Appian affirms that the ancient Romans abhorred usurie, and accounted it as
cheating, and consening (as the Persians judged it full of deceit, and lying)
and as a natural breeder of enmity, and discord, as the often and horrible
See Liu. dec. 1. l. 2. and l. 5.
troubles of that state, tumults, uprores, secessions, and seditions about
usurie do testify: which Usurie grew, and was practiced among them, as Appian
there says, Appian. de bello civilly. l. 1. etc.
by evil custom, and corruption of the times; not by any law, for their laws
were ever against it, either to restrain it, when by means of the power of the
Usurers they could do no more; or utterly to abolish and forbid it; and to
punish the Usurers. Liui. dec. 1. l. 7. de unciario soenore.
For in the year of Rome 398. M. Duellius, L. Menenius got a law made, that
the rate of Usurie should not exceed an ounce, that is, 8 in the 100. which
was the highest rate that they suffered by law unpunished: and within ten
years after, it was brought to Liu. ibid. soenus Semiuneiarium.
half an ounce, that is, to 4 in the 100. and all debts were forestald to be
paid at four payments in three years: and in the year Liu. ibid.
411. the Aediles sued diverse usurers upon that Plebiscite, and had them
Iudicia tristia.
cruelly punished. But in the year Liu. ibid. infine.
413. L. Genitius got a Plebiscite enacted Ne foenerare liceret.
that no usurie should be taken, as our late Noble King Edward the sixth
ordained in his Anno 5. Edw. 6. c. 20.
statute. Of this proceeding against usurie from an ounce to nothing Corn. Tac.
annal. lib. 6.
Cornelius Tacitus, who lived near the Apostles times, makes mention. The
punishment of Usurers in that state, was to forfeite Cato de re rust. l. 1. c.
1.
fourefold, whereas theft was punished with restoring only dubble, as Cato
says. The two Liu. dec. 1. l. 10
Ogulnies being Aediles in the year 457. indicted diverse Usurers, and of that
part of the forfeitures, which came to the common treasury, made diverse great
and memorable works, which you may see in Livie. Likewise ^in. dec. 4. l. 5.
M. Tuccius, and P. Iunius Brutus, being Aediles in the year of Rome 502, made
of the forfeitures of Usurers, golden chariots which they dedicated to Jupiter,
and twelve golden shieldes; and built a porch without the gate Trigemina: and
the like severe proceeding against usurers was followed afterward by other good
magistrates of that state. For Appian. de ^lo civilly. l. 1.
Asellius the Praetor punished them severely in the year 665: and a little
before the time of Christ and his Apostles, Cic. ad Attic. 5. epist. 20.
Tully had restrained it in Sicilie; I. Caesar suppressed it generally by a law
Suet. in Iul. ^es. c. 42.
that no usury should be taken, but the Principal only paid: and Plut. in
Lu^llo.
Lucullus in Asia (where the Apostles were most conversant) had utterly
abandoned it, fore-stalling the debts in such sort, that the Creditor should
receive the fourth part of the debtors revenewes, till the Principal was paid,
and if he exacted any usurie he should loose both usury, and Principal; and
so indeed was (...). Plat. de leg. l. 5.
Platoes law, which doubtless Lucullus remembered, and specially respected,
being himself a great Academique, as Plut. ibidem.
Plutarch reports him, and Cic. quaest. Acad.
Tullie makes him in his Academique questions. Therefore it is unlikely that
Usurie was so used in the Roman Empire, as he pretends. And for his other
surmise, that the Jews were so much given to it; and therefore that the
Apostles which wrote particularly to them would not have forgotten it; I think
that he slaundereth the Jews of that time, which did not practice usurie so
commonly, as he weeneth, but rather they offended in another kind, which S.
James reprehended in them, namely, hoording up of money till it rusted, and
cankred: Your gold, and silver is cankred, Iam. 5.3.
and the rust thereof, etc. Now had these Jews been so much given to usurie,
as this Defendor would persuade us; doubtless the turning, and returning of
their money, would have kept it from rusting, and cankring. Moreover, if the
Jews did practice usurie in the Apostles times, yet it was but unto Aliants,
(for even at this day they will not in any wise take usurie of their brethren)
and that usurie was lawful, and commanded by Moses, Deuteronomy. 23.20.
To the Aliant thou shall usurie. With whose ordinances the Apostles were loath
to be over-busie, as appears by the fact of Paul, and the opinion of all the
Apostles. Act. 21.20.21.

2. Defendor.
Our Savior Christ is so far from condemning it, that he seems to give
some allowance to it: for reproving the servant which suffered his talent lie
idle, he affirms, that he should have delivered it to the bankers, that the
Lord might have received his own with increase. Whereby he does speak of that
gain, as of a lawful use of money: and withal seems to note, that if a man
have no other lawful trade to occupy his money in; it were better for him to
let it out to use, then to let it lie idle by him. For Parables, especially of
our Savior Christ do keep a comeliness, and seemelinesse of speech, fit for
the persons, and the things, by whom, and of which they are spoken. This part
of the Parable being the speech of a Master, which resembles the Son of God
himself, it is not like that our Savior Christ would ascribe such a speech
unto him, which represents his own self, as should carry a note of an evil,
and unhonest thing. Neither can it serve for an answer, that he compares his
coming to the sudden breaking of a thief into the house. For although theft
be an unlawful act, that wherein Christ his coming only is compared, is not
unlawful, nor condemned.

Answer. Exodus 22.6.
No? Is not a thieves privy breaking into a man's house in the night an act
unlawful? Then Moses did ill to make the killing of such a man a lawful act,
though he were taken but in breaking in, before he had stolen any thing, or
done any harm. Our Savior likewise sets forth the carfulness, and
forecasting, which Christians should have in compassing eternal life, Luke 16.
to a servant, which to maintain his bodily life deceived his Master in his
accounts, and saved somewhat to maintain his life; and the servant is
commended for his wisdom in it in holy Scripture: does our Savior therein
give any allowance to servants deceiving of their masters in their accounts?
and yet the servants very deceiving of his master in his accounts, is that
wherein the care of Christians is compared, to use the Defendors words. That
which is set down in the Parable is a thing of it self unlawful; but yet is
often done by the men of the generation of this world; and therein (...), the
decorum, and comeliness consists, and is observed: but that which is set
forth, and represented by the Parable, is a thing lawful, namely, the increase
of spiritual graces in the Church to the glory of Christ, gotten by the
profitable employment of the gifts lent us of God. Thus much in defense of
that answer. Yet that answer is not needful to this argument: for that
usurie, which those bankers used, was then a lawful trade, and action: namely,
for the Jews to lend upon usurie to the Aliantes, and to receive usurie of
them: being made lawful in that case by Gods law, being yet then in force: and
therefore lawfully practiced by the Jews upon the Aliantes at that time when
our Savior uttered this Parable: unless he can prove that those bankers took
usurie of their brethren the Jews; which they abhor to do at this day.

3 There is not any of the properties of true love recited 1. Cor. 13,
contrary to this usurie. Defendor.
For even that which seems most to strike at it, Love seeks not her own,
may dwell together with usurie which is here propounded: considering that I am
bound to love my brother no otherwise than my self: and therefore not to seek
him, and his, but that withal I have regard to me, and mine: both which are
performed, when usurie is so handled, that both the lender, and the borower
have reasonable gain, etc.

But usurie can never be so handled that the borrower may gain by paying it:
Answer.
because whatsoever he pays for usurie, he pays of his own goods, and does
so much diminish his own substance, as before has been showed. And therefore
this property of love does strike usurie dead, because the Usurer seeks not
only his own, and assures it too; which love does not; but also seeks, and
takes that which is none of his own, but another man's: which appears most
evidently by the position of this Defendor in the next words almost, where he
says, that in some case the lender may with a good conscience exact his
Principal with increase, where the borrower has gained nothing. Here is the
usurers conscience indeed. And howsoever some pretend that they look but for
part of the gain; lucrum de lucro, not nummum de nummo as he said before: yet
when it comes to the point, the borrower shall find this to be their
conscience, that they will be sure to have their Principal, and lone too;
gain he, or gain he not; yea though he lose by it too: as this Defendor
shows not obscurely in the next words. If the borrower be a man fallen in
decay, the lender is bound in Christian duty not only not to exact his gain
so covenanted, but even to forgive the Principal if his estate will bear it.
Here be two exceptions concurring together, without which the lender may exact
his covenanted gain, though the borrower loose by it. First, the borrower must
be in decay; so that if he be not a decayed man, though he do loose by using
their money, he must pay the usurie. Secondly, the lenders state must bear it.
And this I doubt he will hardly be persuaded, that his estate will bear the
loosing of his lone, for it is his living, he cannot spare it. For there is no
kind of men that make themselves more needy then the Usurers do. So then in
the winding up, the Defendor has acquainted us with the scantling of the
Usurers conscience: and the borrower may assure himself to find it broader,
and worse, pretend they what they will. But he miscalleth it when he calls it
a good conscience: for what conscience is it, that an occupier shall be a rich
man's servant, to occupy his stock for him, while he lies idely at home, or
follows his pleasures: and by such crosses, as God lays upon him, to loose
by it; and yet not only to make his stock good, but also to yield him profit,
and gain for it? Or what conscience is it, that saving but the Principal, he
shall pay all the Principal to the Usurer, and bear himself all the loss of
his own pains, industry, and skill; as dear to him, and commonly a great
deal dearer, than the money to the Usurer? Nay, what conscience is it, that a
man borrowing money of another, and venturing the same together with his
industry, and labor, and time; and in the end by turning, and returning of
it, gain somewhat toward his maintenance: then the Usurer shall come in, and
take away the best part of his gain; never venturing any thing in the action?
And yet all this is good conscience with Usurers; as this Defendor confesses:
and if he denied it, our lamentable experience testifies it too apparently.
But all men know, that it is contrary to natural and common equity, which
requires equality in the actions and dealings between man and man: not that
the one have the ease and profit, and the other be at all the pain and peril;
and the faithful know, that it is against Gods will, who will not that one
have ease, and other the burden. 2. Cor. 8.3. Now in that he said here that
usurie is not against the love of our neighbor; perhaps he means (as some
other object) that the Usurer does, as he would be done unto: for, wanting
money for his need, he would gladly give ten in the hundred; and thanks too.
But this is easily answered. First, that rule of our Savior Christ is not
general, but restrainable to that will of man, which is ruled by nature, and
Gods law: otherwise many absurdities would follow. The Magistrate being in the
malefactors case would gladly be pardoned; Ergo, he must pardon the malefactor.
Some man could be content, that another should lie with his wife, whom he cares
not for himself: Ergo, he may lie with another man's wife, whom he loves
better. Some desperate fellow would be glad that another should kill him, as
Saul was: Ergo, he may kill another. Secondly; the Usurers assumption is false,
for he does not will that absolutely, or freely; but of force, and constraint;
because without paying after that rate, he cannot have it: mary absolutely he
would have it to serve his turn, and pay nothing, If Usurers be so impudent as
to deny, that they had rather in their need and necessity have money lent
them freely, than upon usurie, their own practice does bewray their will. I
have had little conversment with them, or acquaintance with their doings,
(...), as a he said) and yet I can name for need half a dosen at the least of
my knowledge ( and si unum noris omnes noris: ken one ken all, as the Poet
said) that needing money upon occasion, their own being out at use, have
borrowed of other, whom they think will take no usurie, at the least they will
offer him none. And other I have known, and can prove, that not having in hand
to pleasure a sure man, that would give good consideration; have made means to
borrow the sum of a friend, for the time, and taken the usurie himself,
without allowing, or offering one penny of it to him whose the Principal was:
and one of these being in a sort demanded it, took it in such dudgeon, that
he was scarce good friends with the demander afterward. Try it who will, and
he shall hardly find one of a thousand (that is Salomons odds) that will pay
usurie himself, though he lend never so much upon usurie, if there be any
likely means for him to get it without.

Thus have thou gentle reader, my good will, and endeavor to maintain the
truth of God set down in his word, against the common sin of usurie: the
haynousnesse, and horriblenes whereof, other men have set forth at large: of
whom among many excellent writers, I specially commend to thy reading, among
the Philosophers, Plutarch, de non foenerando: among the ancient Fathers S.
Basils homily against Usurers: among latter Divines, Chemnicius common place,
de paupertate, c. 5. and 6: among the Civilians, our own Doctor Wilsons
discourse upon Usurie. I thought it enough for me here, to clear the doctrine
of our Church, from the cavils and sophistications of this Usurie-defendor, set
forth in this Pamphlet; which I know does much harm in our Church, and
Commonwealth, in dazeling the eyes of many, and drawing them into this
notorious breach of Gods law, which otherwise are Christianly minded, and have
a care of their ways, and would be most loath for any gain to run into
contempt of Gods law. And now they having here, as a brief, and familiar, so I
hope a sufficient answer, showing their errors without blazing, or blemishing
their names; I humbly beseech the Lord to open the eyes both of the teachers,
and Defendors of Usurie, and also of all the practizers of the same, that they
may see their nakedness under their fig leaves, and behold the foulness of
their sin, under these (...), and visardes, and weigh the dangerousnesse of
their estate; that they may in time repent, and so avoid the Lords dreadful
judgments, which never can be avoided with the sophistical cavilles, and
colorable gloses of man's wit.

Esaias. 5.20. Woe be to them that call evil good, setting darkness for light,
sower for sweet.



