THE CVRE OF HVRTFVLL CARES AND FEARS.

By Master THOMAS PIERSON late Rector of Brompton-Brian, in the COUNTY of
HEREFORD.

LONDON, Printed by R.B. for P. Stephens, and C. Meridith, and are to be sold
at their Shop at the sign of the golden Lion in Paul's Churchyard. 1636.

TO THE TRVLY NOBLE Sr. Robert Harley Knight of the Honorable order of the
Bath; the glory of holiness in this life, and the happiness of glory in the
life to come.
SIR,
THat I presume to present this little Treatise unto you, is not my respect
only but your right: your interest in all, the Author, the Work, and
Publication, does more then require it: For the Treatise it self, besides the
matter which is excellent, the art showed in it, I conceive is such as may be
exemplary. For the Author, as no man knew him better than your self, of whom I
have heard you say, That you esteemed your self much honored, in presenting
him to the Rectory of Bromptonbrian, where he continued a burning and a shining
light above twenty years together, so no man can better testify with me, that
his name is as an ointment newly powered out, and all the house of God where he
was known, is filled with the odor of it. The sweetness of his voice still
Echoes in the ears of many precious souls which hung upon his lips, whilst
with the wise Preacher he taught the people knowledge, yea gave good heed, and
sought to find out acceptable words, and words of truth, sound speeches
seasoned with salt, and ministering both delight and grace to the hearers. And
like a wise and faithful steward of the mysteries of God, he has left behind
him many written treasuries, so plentifully stored with such spiritual
Provision, that future ages would rise up and call him blessed, if his own
works should stand forth to praise him in the gate. Wherein as no man living
has more interest then your self, so I know no man more able by experience to
commend them to the Church of God for excellent. If this break the way, no
pains of mine shall be wanting, if you please to bring any of the rest out
after it. In the mean time I should have thought my self guilty in some kind
of Sacrilege, if I had not given way to the publishing of this unto the good,
I trust, of many, which by experience has been found already, not acceptable
only but profitable also unto some. So submitting the rest of my thoughts and
desires in this business unto Yours; I rest as I am many ways obliged to be,

Your Worships in all observant duty unfeignedly devoted, Christopher Harvey.

Perlegi hoc Opusculum cai Titulus (The Cure of hurtful Cares and Fears) Vna
cum Epistola dedicatoria, quae continent in toto paginas 76. in quibus non
reperio aliquid sanae doctrinae aut bonis moribus contrarium, quo minus cum
utilitate publica imprimi queant: sub ea tamen condition, ut, si non intra
tres menses typis mandentur, haec licentia sit omnino irrita.

Gulielm Haywood. R. R. D. Arch. Cant. Capellan. Domest.

THE CVRE OF Hurtful Cares and Fears.
Philippians 4.6. Be careful for nothing: but in every thing, by prayer and
supplication, with thankesgiving, let your request be made known unto God. 7.
And the peace of God, which passes all understanding, shall keep your hearts
and minds through Christ Jesus.


IN the nine first verses of this Chapter, The coherence of the Text.
the Apostle prescribes the practice of sundry christian duties: whereof some
be general belonging to all Christians, verse 1.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Others be
special duties belonging to some particular persons in the Church of Philippi,
verse 2, 3. Among the general duties are the words of my Text, prescribing
unto Christians such behavior, as best befitteth them in times of distress,
and in cases of difficulty: urging them thereunto by the singular fruit that
will come thereof. The behavior it self is propounded in a double duty:
First, by way of prohibition, what we must not do: Secondly, by way of
precept, what we must do. The prohibition is against care: the precept is for
the exercise of prayer with thanksgiving, verse 6. The encouragement unto both
is from the assurance of Gods peace, which passes all understanding, to keep
our hearts and minds, through Christ Jesus, verse 7.

For the first, The meaning of the words
be careful for nothing. This prohibition may seem strange, and contrary to
the will of God, who accounts the careless and improvident worse than
infidels, 1 Timothy 5.8. and sends such lazy bodies to the Ant or Pismire, Prove.
6.6. as also commends carefulnes, as well about the matters of the soul, both
for our selves, 2 Cor. 7.11. what carfulness? and for others, 2 Cor. 11.28.
the care of all Churches comes on me daily: as also for the things of this
life, Prove. 27.23. Be diligent to know the state of thy flock: and set thy
heart upon thy herds: which implies a great care in looking well unto them as
the good huswife looks well to the ways of her household, Prove. 31.27.

Answ. As the Apostle speaking of sorrow calls some godly sorrow and some
worldly, 2 Cor. 7.10. so may we truly say of care some is godly, some worldly.
The godly care is that whereby a Christian sets his mind upon the duty of his
place, in sober manner to use lawful means, sanctified by prayer, for the
fruition of blessings, and freedom from evils, either spiritual or
corporal, leaving the issue and success wholly to Gods good will and
pleasure. Worldly care is that, whereby a man, beside the use of means, does
perplexe his mind, about the issue and success of things, which he desires or
fears; and does not rely upon the mercy or providence of God for the same as
he ought to do. And this is the care here forbidden by the Apostle, when he
says, Be careful for nothing, meaning, as worldlings be, who vex
themselves, and perplex their minds, about the issue and success of things,
which they ought to leave to GODS good pleasure. In which prohibition so
conceived this point is plain.

The doctrine observed and confirmed.
The Child of GOD must not perplex his mind; nor vex his heart with worldly
carking care in any thing whatsoever. When in a sober and sanctified manner, a
man has used lawful means, belonging unto him, for the fruition of
blessings, or freedom from evils, corporal or spiritual, he must not busy his
mind, about the issue and succes, but leave that wholly to the Lord. This duty
our blessed Savior does plainly teach his Disciples, Matthew. 6.25. etc. Take
no thought for your life; what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; or for
your body, what ye shall put on. And for their better observance and
remembrance, does twice more in that Chapter repeat the same charge ver. 31.
and 34. Therefore take no thought, etc. And 1 Pet 3.6. The good wife must not
be afraid with any amasement.

The reasons of this duty are strong. Three reasons of the doctrine.


1. Worldly care is needless to a child of God.
First, every Child of GOD has an heavenly Father that cares for him: and so
his own worldly raking care is needless, 1 Peter 5.7. Cast all your care upon
him, for he cares for you. This reason our blessed Savior urges strongly
unto his Disciples: as well from Gods providence over baser Creatures, the
Fowls of the air and the Lilies of the field, and therefore they must not
think he will neglect his Children that are far better, Matthew 6.26, 28. As
also from his special notice of all their wants, verse 32. and assured
readiness to make supply thereto upon their sober use of lawful means, when
they chiefly set their hearts on heavenly things, verse 33.

Secondly, 2. Worldly care is very disgraceful to a Christian.
worldly care is very disgraceful to a Christian: arguing either their
shameful ignorance of Gods providence, which indeed extends it self to the
very hairs of their head Mat. 10.30. Or else their great weakness, if not
their total want, of true faith in God through Christ, and so is plain
heathenish as CHRIST tells his Disciples, Mat. 6. v. 32. After all these
things, food and raiment, do the Gentiles seek in a worldly manner; as not
knowing they have a Father in heaven that cares for them. For they that rest
and rely upon GOD for any blessing that he has promised, will wait for it in
the sober and sanctified use of lawful means, and go no further. He that
believes will not make have, Isaiah 28.16. but will stir up his soul to
wait on GOD as David does, Psalm. 42.5, 11. he that is weary of this waiting
shameth his believing: like to Ioram King of Israel, who in the time of famine
said, This evil is of the Lord, what should I wait for the Lord any longer? 2
Kings 6.33. as they are said not to believe in God, that trust not in his
salvation, that is, that rest not upon his providence for their preservation,
Psalm. 78.22.

Thirdly, 3. Worldly care is a burden to the soul, exceeding hurtful.
worldly care is a great burden unto the the soul, not only vain and
unprofitable, but also exceeding hurtful. That it is a burden David shows
when speaking hereof he says, Cast thy burden upon the LORD; that is,
whatsoever thou art careful for and would have given thee, Psalm. 55.22.
That it is vain and unprofitable he plainly shows, Psalm. 127.1, 2. It is
vain for you to rise early, to sit up late, to eat the bread of sorrows
(meaning through carking care) if the Lords blessing be not with you.

Also Matthew 6.27. Which of you by taking thought can add one cubite unto his
stature? If ye then be not able to do that thing which is least, why take ye
thought for the rest? Luke 12.25, 26. And that it is very hurtful, the
notation of the word used by the Holy Ghost, shows plainly, importing a
dividing, or parting the mind asunder: (...) quasi (...). This carking care is
the covetous man's disease? They pierce themselves through with many sorrows, 1 Timothy 6.10. And hereby many times bring upon themselves most heavy judgments.
What else did move Ananias and Sapphyrah to dissemble with the Apostle, and to
lie unto GOD, about the price, for which they sold their possession, saying,
they had brought all, when as indeed they kept back a part? Undoubtedly, they
were distrustfully careful about their future maintenance and provision: but
it cost them dear, even both their lives by sudden death, Acts 5. verse 1, 2,
3. etc. And are not these worldly cares the chief of those spiritual thorns,
which choke the seed of grace in the ground of men's hearts, whereupon it
becomes unfruitful? Matthew 13.22. and so near unto cursing, whose end is to
be burned? Heb. 6.8.

3. Uses of the doctrine.

1. For instruction. True Religion is the only way to true content.


Now since whatsoever is written aforetime is written for our learning, To. 15.4.
Let us make application hereof unto our selves. And first, would the Spirit of
God have the hearts of his Children void of worldly cares? Then undoubtedly the
sincere embracing of true Religion is the only way to get true content and
comfort in any estate: for what is or can be wanting to his soul, to whom the
God of heaven says be careful for nothing? He speaks not this to all that
have the show of godliness, but to such as have the power and truth thereof: For
Gods kingdom is not in word, but in power, 1 Cor. 4.20. and in whom this power
is, in them is, righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14.17.
Even joy unspeakable and glorious, 1 Pet. 1.8. such as the world can neither
give to its own, Ioh. 14.27. nor take away from the godly, John 16.22.

But me thinks, Two objections propounded and answered. I. Objection.
I hear the men of the world call in question the truth of this point, That
true Religion should afford such sweet content unto the soul. The exercises
thereof be weariness unto them, Mal. 1.13. therein they can meet with no such
thing.

Answ.
I answer. This sweet content and comfort in Religion is a fruit of GODS holy
Spirit, Gala. 5.22. The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, etc. which
Spirit God gives to true believers, John 7.39. who turn from sin, Proverbs
1.23. and make conscience of obedience, Acts 5.32. And therefore have the godly
testified the fruition and feeling of it, as David Psalm. 4.7. Thou have put
gladness in my heart, more than in the time that their corn and their wine
increased. He had more joy in Gods favor then worldlings had in all their
abundance. God was his exceeding joy, Ps. 43.4. his favor was better than
life: and therewith his soul was satisfied as with marrow and fatness, Psalm
63.3, 5. Unto Jeremy also was Gods word the joy and rejoicing of his heart,
Jeremy 15.16. Paul and Silas sang praises to GOD in the prison, when their feet
were made fast in the stocks, and they had been sore beaten and shamefully
entreated the day before, Acts 16.23, 24, 25. They found by experience that GOD
in Christ was the father of mercies and the God of all comfort who comforted
them in all their tribulations: as the sufferings of Christ did abound in them,
so their consolation also abounded by Christ, 2 Cor. 1.3, 4, 5. But natural
men, that live in sin, do want the spirit, Jude verse 19. and therefore no
marvel though they have no savor nor relish of joy in Religion. The natural
man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, they are foolishness unto
him; neither can he know them because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor.
2.14. They are strangers from the covenants of promise, Ephesi. 2.12. and a
stranger does not intermedle with this joy, Pro. 14.10. It is one of the
mysteries of the kingdom which is not known by nature but by the gift of
grace, Matthew 13.11. The Philistims could not read Sampsons riddle till they
had plowed with his Heyfer, Judges 14.18. No more can natural men discern the
sweet content of grace but by the operation of the Holy Ghost the only worker
of grace.

But whence is it, 2. Objection.
says the natural man, that some who are strickt and zealous in Religion, and
seem to make great conscience of their ways, do yet spend their days in
much bitterness and sorrow, giving small evidence that any such joy is to be
found in their Religion.

Answ.
Answer. Surely God does then visit upon them the days of Baalim, Hos. 2.13.
wherein they went after their own sinful pleasures and forgot the Lord:
therefore does the LORD write bitter things against them, and make them to
possess the sins of their youth, Job 13.26. Because they have sinned against
the Lord, and have not obeyed the voice of the Lord, therefore is this evil
happened unto them, Jeremy 44.23. But yet if this their sorrow for their former
sins be godly, which will best appear by the amendment of their lives, they
shall find by good experience, that of very faithfulness God afflicted them:
as David did Psalm 119.75. For the LORD will not cast off for ever; but though
he cause grief yet will he have compassion according to the multitude of his
mercies, Lam. 3.31, 32. In duetime he will comfort all such mourners, and give
them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for
the spirit of heaviness, Isaiah 61.2, 3. For to the upright there arises
light in darkness, that is, joy and gladness in distress, Psalm 112.4. And
though for a time they be in heaviness, yet peace shall come: They that wait
upon the Lord, shall renew their strength, Isaiah 40.31. Many be the troubles
of the righteous, but the Lord will deliver them out of all, Psalm. 34.19.

2. Use for reproof. Worldly care is unworthy the holy profession of adoption.
Secondly, this shows plainly how unworthy of the Lord, and of their holy
profession of adoption, many that live in the bosom of the Church do lead
their lives. For what is more ordinary than to call God Father, in saying the
Lords Prayer? And yet who can say my heart is clean, I am free from these
worldly carking cares? For though like bitter sap it sometime lie hid in the
root of the heart, yet indeed has it a daily spring time, as may appear by
these bad fruits which do fearfully abound in many men's lives.

First, Five evidences of worldly care.

1. Ungodly practices to get worldly wealth.


manifold unjust and ungodly practices to get or increase worldly wealth, as
false weights and measures, lying, swearing and forswearing, extortion,
stealing, oppression, and the like. Where any of these are in use and practice,
plain evidence is given of distrust in GODS providence, and so of the dominion
of this sinful worldly carking care. For were men indeed persuaded that the
power to get wealth came from God, Deuteronomy. 8 18. and that his blessing made them
rich, Proverbs 10.22. they would content themselves with the moderate use of
lawful means to serve his providence, wherein they might comfortably wait for
his blessing; and not betake themselves to such ungodly courses, as are plain
services of the Devil, the God of this world, for the wealth thereof.

2. Ordinary use of wicked means to remove corporal evils.
Secondly, the ordinary use of wicked and forbidden means to prevent or remove
worldly losses and corporal evils, as to consult with Magicians, witches, or
Sorcerers, as Saul did when he was distressed by the Host of the Philistims, 1 Samuel 28.7. Seek me a woman that has a familiar spirit, etc. And Ahaziah King
of Israel, who sent to enquire of Baalzebub the God of Ekron, whether he
should recover of his disease, 2 Kings 1.1, 2. This is a most fearful
proclaiming of distrust in GOD, when they seek to the devil Gods utter enemy.
Is it not because there is no God in Israel, that thou sendest to enquire of
Baalzebub the God of Ekron? ver. 6.

Thirdly, 3. Neglect to sanctify the use of lawful means by prayer.
the ordinary neglect to sanctify the use of lawful means by prayer to GOD for
his blessing. Thus Asa one of the good Kings of Judah sinned, when being
diseased in his feet he sought unto the Physicians, and not unto the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 16.12. And it is the common course of many families, to follow their
worldly business diligently, but seldom or never to sanctify their labor and
pains by prayer and thanksgiving to Almighty God the giver of all blessings.

4. Excessive sorrow and fear in times of danger.
Fourthly, excessive sorrow and fear in times of danger and distress, with
great deadness of heart when outward means do fail and dangers approach: as
though the power and mercy of God for their help and safety were tied to the
means. This was the sin of Israel at the Red Sea: when the Host of Pharaoh
drew near unto them they were sore afraid, and cried out against Moses for
bringing them out of Egypt, Exodus 14.10, 11, 12. Hence also came all their
murmurings in the wilderness, when they wanted bread, or flesh, or water, as
Exodus 16.3. and 15, 24. They had not yet learned to rest and rely upon his
power and providence that brought them thither.

Fifthly, 5. Frailties hearing of GODS Word.
fruitless and unprofitable hearing of Gods word. For the cares of this world
are one kind of spiritual thorns that choke the seed of grace in the ground
of men's hearts, that it brings no fruit to perfection, Luke 8. verse 14.

All these give plain evidence of worldly carking care, and justly deserve
reproof for transgressing this holy command, that bids us, Be careful for
nothing.

3. Use: for admoni ion. This lesson most needful though hard to corrupt
nature.
For admonition, it serves fitly to move every one, to endeavor obedience to
this command, in laboring to free his heart in every thing from distrustful
worldly care. A lesson most needful in these evil days and perilous times;
hard indeed to our corrupt nature, which the Scripture calls flesh and blood.
But the child of GOD must look to a better guide, and not plead for it, for
flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 15.50. The wisdom
of the flesh is death: and so rebellious to the will of God, that they that are
in the flesh cannot please God, Romans 8.6, 7, 8.

Now the practice of this duty stands in this: Wherein the practice of this
duty stands.
that using lawful means moderately, for the fruition of blessings, or
freedom from evils, we then sanctify the same by prayer to GOD for his mercy
and blessing; and then leave the issue and success wholly to his good
pleasure, whatsoever the case be. Thus doing we shall neither tempt God by
neglect of means, nor yet perplex our selves about the success, What ground
we must lay that we may do so.
through distrust in his mercy. And that we may so do, we must lay this good
foundation; Make sure we stand rightly in covenant with GOD through faith in
CHRIST JESUS: for he that comes unto God must believe, Hebrews 11.6. and
then we have good title to all Gods promises, whereat true faith does ever
look: and to them that have obtained that precious grace are given exceeding
great and precious promises, 2 Peter 1.1, 4. All the promises of God are in
him, yea, and in him, Amen, that is, in Christ Jesus most sure and certain to
true believers, 2 Cor. 1.20. This estate once had we must in every thing that
may perplex us stir up this precious grace of faith, and set it a working: which
seems to be the Lords meaning in that golden sentence often repeated, The just
shall live by faith, That faith may have its perfect work three things to be
considered.
Hab. 2.4. Romans 1.17. Hebr. 10.38. And that this grace may have its perfect
work, to free our hearts from distrustful and perplexing worldly cares, we
must rightly inform our selves in three things.

First, in Gods sovereign right to inflict upon his dearest servants, when,
where, and how he pleases either death it self, or any evil that is a
forerunner thereof, for their sins original and actual.

Secondly, in the different nature of Gods promises, and in his divine royalty,
for time, measure, and manner of performance.

Thirdly, in Gods good pleasure to exercise his Children and servants many
times under sore afflictions: all of which he will cause to work for their
good, out of his tender love in Christ which remains constant unto them,
under their greatest miseries.

1. Gods right and sovereignty.
For the first: that God has right and sovereignty to inflict upon his dearest
servants, either death it self, or any evil that is a forerunner thereof, as
famine, sickness, sword of the enemy and the like, when, and where he will,
for their sins original and actual, is most plain, Romans 5.12. By one man
sin entered into the world and death by sin, and death went over all, in as
much as all have sinned, Hebr. 9.27. It is appointed unto man once to dye.
Death then being our debt to God, who shall deny him liberty to call for his
due. And for his right to inflict upon them hunger, thirst, sickness, sorrow
and the like, none can deny it, that considers the afflictions of the godly: as
of Job in loss of goods, and of all his Children by sudden death, Job 1.15.16,
19. in grievous boyles upon his body, from the sole of his foot unto his
crown, Chapter 2. ver. 7. and of David, who complains that he had no
soundness in his flesh, Psalm. 38.3. his wounds stanke and were corrupt verse
5. his loins were filled with a loathsome disease verse 7. he was feeble and
sore broken: yea he roared for the very disquietnesse of his heart, verse 8.

2 (...) different nature of Gods promises.
For the second: Gods promises are of two sorts: some concern the life that now
is; others that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. And among these latter, which be
heavenly and spiritual there is a difference. Some are of blessings absolutely
necessary to salvation, as justification, adoption, regeneration and the like:
others are very comfortable, but yet not simply necessary to salvation, as the
sensible feeling of Gods love, and inward joy thereupon, strength of faith and
great increase in other graces, far above that measure which is simply
needful to the being and truth of grace. Now GODS promises of blessings simply
needful to salvation, be absolutely made in Christ to true believers, without
exception; as Acts 16.31. Believe in the Lord Jesus and thou shall be saved.
But other spiritual graces less necessary, and all temporal blessings must
be understood to be promised with the exception of the Cross: to wit, that
true believers shall have them upon their sober and sanctified use of lawful
means, unless it seem good to GOD, by the want of such blessings, to correct
them for their sins, as he did David, 2 Samuel 12.10, 11. The sword shall never
depart from thy house, because thou have despised me, Psalm 118.18. The Lord
has chastened me sore, but he has not given me over unto death. Or else to
make trial of their faith and patience, as he dealt with Job in his
afflictions, Job 2.3. Thou movest me against him to destroy him without cause:
and Chapter 23.10. He knows the way that I take: when he has tried me I
shall come forth as gold.

Also Gods royalty for time, manner, Gods royalty.
and measure of performing his promises is very remarkable. In these
circumstances he retayneth and exercises divine liberty, and looks that his
Children should wait for the evidence of his good pleasure, and rest contented
therewith when he does manifest the same, though it do not answer their
desires. And he blames those, that will limit or confine him in any of these,
as his people did in the wilderness, when they would as it were point out
their own provision, For time.
Psalm 78.20, 41. In particular, for the time, when GOD will do this or that
thing, which he has promised indefinitely, he shows his royalty to his
Disciples, Acts 1.7. It is not for you to know the times, which God has put in
his own power. In this circumstance he requires the patience of faith,
saying, Manner.
He that believes shall not make have, Isa. 28.15. And for manner of
performance sometime he gives the particular blessing asked: As upon Elias
prayer he sent first drought, and then after rain, James 5.17, 18.

Other while instead of the blessing asked, he gives some other thing
answerable thereunto, making more for his own glory and the good of his
servants: as when Paul besought the Lord thrice, that the thorn in the flesh,
the messenger of Satan might depart from him, God said, my grace is sufficient,
2 Cor. 12.7, 8, 9.

GOD did not free him from the assault, but gave him ability of grace to
resist. Yea our blessed Savior in his bitter agony in the Garden, offered up
prayers and supplications, with strong crying and tears, unto him that was
able to save him from death, and was heard in that he feared, Hebr. 5.7. Not by
a total freedom from the Cup of his bitter passion, though he had said,
Father, if it be possible let this Cup pass from me, Matthew 26.39. but by
making him willing and able to bear it, and in suffering to overcome. For
after this prayer he said to Peter, The Cup which my Father has given me,
shall I not drink it? John 18.11. and in suffering be overcame, And measure of
performing his promises.
Rev. 3.21. Likewise in the measure of his gifts and blessings to his servants,
and of their deliverance from evils, he retayneth and exercises divine
liberty and sovereignty. Some he makes high, others low: some rich, and others
poor, Job 34.19 To one he gives five talents, to another two, to another one,
Matthew 25.15. He suffered no man to do wrong to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
but rebuked Kings for their sakes, Psalm. 105.14. Yet he will suffer Joseph to
be sold for a servant, and to be laid in irons wrongfully, verse 17, 18. and
he suffers his servant Job to be robbed of his goods, bereaved of his
Children, sore afflicted in his body, and grieved by his dearest friends, so as
he escaped, but with the Skin of his teeth, Job 19. verse 19, 20.

3. Gods good pleasure to exercise his Children in affliction for their good
four ways.

1. To purge out some corruption.


For the third, it pleases God many times to exercise his dear children under
sore afflictions, for his glory in their good sundry ways; as First, to purge
out some corruption, and to make them white, Dan. 11.35. Some of them of
understanding shall, fall to try them, and to purge, and to make them white,
Job 23.10. When he has tried me I shall come forth as the gold.

2. To teach them obedience.
Secondly, to teach them obedience, as well in eschewing evil, Psalm. 119.67.
Before I was afflicted I went astray: but now have I kept thy word: as also in
doing good, so Christ Jesus learned obedience by the things he did suffer, Heb.
5.8. and the Apostles learned by afflictions to trust in God, 2 Cor. 1.9.

Thirdly, 3. To try their faith and patience.
to try their faith and patience, as he did in Job: whence great afflictions
are called fiery trials sent to try Gods Children, 1 Pet. 4 12. as Hebr.
11.36, 37. Others also were tried by cruel mockings and scourgings, yea by
bonds and imprisonments: they were stoned, sawen asunder, tempted, slain with
the sword, etc.

Fourthly, 4. To further them in holiness and happiness.
for their furtherance in grace and holiness here, and in joy and happiness
hereafter, James 1.3. The trial of faith works patience, Hebr. 12.10. God
does chasten us for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness,
verse 11. though it be not joyous for the present, yet after it yields the
quiet fruit of righteousness. Affliction is Gods School wherein he teaches
the souls of his Children many a sweet lesson, as Psalm 119.71. It is good
for me that I have been afflicted that I might learn thy statutes.

This brings down their hearts, and causes them to be more frequent in humble
and earnest prayer, and more careful to meditate on Gods word and works, as
Psalm 77.2. In the day of my trouble I sought the Lord, verse 3. I remembered
God: I complained, I considered the days of old, etc. all which are notable
means of growth in grace, whereby, no doubt, their present joy and future glory
shall be much increased: for our light affliction, which is but for a moment,
works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17.
The trial of faith shall be found unto praise, and honor, and glory at the
appearing of Christ Jesus, 1 Pet. 1.7. If we suffer we shall also reign with
him, 2 Timothy 2.12. All which are great benefits of afflictions, and may well
persuade us, that in the very extremity of them Gods love in Christ is constant
toward us. For what shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall
tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril,
or sword, etc. Nay in all these things we are more than conquerers, through him
that loved us. For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels,
nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from the
love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 8.35.37, 38.39. God
corrects every son whom he receives, and therein offers himself unto us,
as to sons, Hebr. 12.6, 7.

These things well understood and thought upon will much enable faith to quiet
and stay the heart in any distress whatsoever. Application of the doctrine in
a case of spiritual distress through fear of damnation.
For, to begin with the greatest matter of all, say thy soul is perplexed
about thy salvation, thou have great fears of hell, and little hopes of
heaven, what must thou now do.

Answ. First, look thou stand rightly in covenant with God, through faith in
Christ Jesus, in whom he reveals himself to be the God of grace and mercy,
justifying the ungodly and saving sinners, and believe in the Lord Jesus.
Secondly, whether thou use the means ordained to this end. Now Gods means for
this blessing is to believe in the Lord Jesus, Acts 16.31. Believe in the Lord
Jesus Christ and thou shall be saved, John 3.16. God so loved the world that he
gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have everlasting life. What it is to believe.
Now thus to believe is to rest and rely upon that which Jesus Christ as
Redeemer and Mediator has done and suffered for the salvation of his Church.
Ask then thine own heart, whether thou be not persuaded, that which God in
Christ Jesus is plentiful redemption and salvation, and in none other? demand
again, whether thou do not unfeignedly desire to be found of God in Christ,
and to rest and rely upon that, which he has done and suffered for thy
justification and salvation? Then consider, whether thou do use Gods
Ordinances conscionably, and in an holy manner, to get this grace of faith, and
to grow therein. Gods Ordinances, we know, GODS means for faith, the Word and
Prayer.
are the word and prayer: for faith comes by hearing the word of God
preached, Romans 10.14, 17. and prayer obtaines the HOLY GHOST, Luke 11.13. Which
is the spirit of faith, 2 Cor. 4.13. therefore did the Disciples by prayer
seek faith at Christ's hands, saying; Lord increase our faith, or put faith
into us, The holy manner of using the means of faith in 3. things. 1. Breaking
of the course of every known sin.
Luke 17.5. The conscionable and holy manner of using the foresaid Ordinances
stands in three things.

First, breaking off the course of every known sin, which is a work of
darkness; wherein we cannot live and have fellowship with Christ, 1 Ioh.
1.6. Therefore Solomon saih, Turn you at my correction. Lo, I will power out
my spirit upon you, Proverbs 1.23. and John Baptist prepared the way of the
Lord by preaching repentance unto the people, Matthew. 3.1, 2, 3. without which
there is little hope of attayning true faith in Christ, Mat. 21.32.

Secondly, 2. Heartily desiring the grace we seek for.
we must truly and heartily desire the grace we seek for. This desire is
spiritual hunger and thirst whereto God has made a promise of satisfaction,
Isaiah 44.3. I will power water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the
dry ground: I will power my spirit upon thy seed, Mat. 5.6. Blessed are they
that hunger and thirst after righteousness for they shall be satisfied.

Thirdly, 3. Yielding conscionable obedience to that we know.
we must yield concionable obedience to that we know, as well in eschewing
evil as in doing good: for to such belongs the gift of the Holy Ghost, Acts
5.32. We are witnesses, and the Holy Ghost, which GOD gives to them that obey
him. Thus every one that would be saved must be careful to do. And when we
have so done we must cast our burden upon the Lord, Psalm 55.22. that is,
rest and rely upon the LORD for that thing, which we so seek for, in the
foresaid use of means: and then have we his promise for the obtaining thereof;
for he has said, Commit thy way unto the Lord, trust in him, and he shall
bring it to pass, Psalm. 37.5. On which promise if we rest, and wait
patiently we shall be sure to speed: for he has said, I will never leave
thee nor forsake thee, Heb. 13.5. What though we yet feel not the joy of his
salvation, whereto David desired to be restored? Psalm 51.12. Yet if we wait
upon God in the use of means, we may say to our selves as David did, Why art
thou cast down, o my soul? why art thou disquieted in me? hope thou in God,
for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance, and my God,
Psalm 42.11. When Abraham believed God, so as it was imputed to him for
righteousness, he had in himself no sense or feeling of any thing, whereon to
ground his hope of that blessing which GOD promised: but only looked at God,
being fully persuaded, that he who had promised was able to perform it,
Romans 4.18, 19, 20, 21, 22. And on this practice of Abraham must we cast our
thoughts, when we our selves are perplexed with doubting in our selves about
our salvation: so shall we give glory to God, and receive his gift of eternal
life, promised to all that believe: As Abraham and Sarah gave glory to God, in
believing his promise, and received a son, when they were past age, in
themselves hopeless Hebr. 11.11.

Again, Application of the doctrine in cases of distress with outward evils
say thou be distressed with outward evils, as wars, famine, sickness,
banishment poverty, imprisonment or the like: Nay, say that many of these come
together upon thee, so as thou art pressed out of measure above strength, and
in thine own thinking thy case is desperate, must thou not be careful now?
Answ. Surely no further than to use lawful means for thy comfort and
deliverance, sanctifying the same by prayer to God for his blessing thereupon:
which when thou have done, though thy misery be with much extremity, yet if
thou have faith, and can set it a working, thou shall undoubtedly, by some of
the three forenamed considerations, much quiet thy self, and free thy soul
from excessive fear of evil.

For first, does this trouble thee, that thou art so sore distressed with
sickness, poverty, want, imprisonment, or the like? Here then call to
remembrance GODS right to inflict upon thee any, or all of these evils, when
and where, and in what manner he pleases. For if thou be a true believer,
thou will not think thy self exempted from any of those evils, which the
Scripture says be incident to Gods children. It is the thought of the wicked
to say to himself, I shall not be moved: I shall never be in adversity, Psalm
10.6. Indeed sometime corruption remaining will suggest the like into the
godly: hence David said in his prosperity, I shall never be moved; but GOD
quickly taught him another lesson, Thou did hide thy face, and I was
troubled, Psalm 30.6, 7. and though godly Job said in the days of his honor
and prosperity, I shall dye in my nest: I shall multiply my days as the sand,
Job 29.18. Yet it seems he had many times thoughts of his changeable estate;
for says he, when his sore afaffliction was upon him, The thing which I
greatly feared is come upon me, Job 3.25. And no doubt, if true faith be called
to council in the days of peace, it will say it is the Lords mercies thou art
not confounded: the continuance of thy freedom is the fruit of his patience:
thou art debtor unto GOD for the suffering of any outward evil, yea and of
many inward fears, either for correction of sin, or trial of grace,
whenever he is pleased to call thee to it: Now shall the debtor think it
strange, that his creditor does demand his due? Here the thief upon the Cross
that repented will shame thee for repyning, though thou should suffer a
shameful and painful violent death: fear thou not God, says he to his
fellow, seeing thou art in the same condemnation (meaning with Christ Jesus)
we receive the due reward of our deeds: but this man has done nothing amiss;
Luke 23.40, 41. Look therefore unto Jesus the Author and finisher of thy
faith, who endured the Cross, and despised the shame, Hebrews 12.2. He was
led as a sheep to the slaughter, and as a Lamb before the sheerer, dumb, so
opened he not his mouth, Acts 8.32. And hereunto we are called, that is to
suffer afflictions patiently, because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us
an example, that we should follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2.21, 22, 23. But here
thou think upon GODS promise of deliverance made to his servants that call
upon him in the day of trouble, Psalm. 50.15. and because thou have prayed and
art not delivered, therefore thou doubtest of his favor, as Psalm. 22.1, 2.

Answ. Here then, according to the second thing before commended to our
consideration, call to remembrance the different nature of Gods promises, and
the exception of the Cross to be understood in all promises of blessings
temporal, and spiritual also, which are not simply necessary to salvation.
Let thy heart also think upon Gods prerogative royal for time measure and
manner, of performing these promises: and know that if God have given thee
faith and patience in afflictions, though they be great and of long
continuance, yet he has vouchsafed gracious audience to thy prayers: even the
same that he did to our blessed Savior in the time of his passion, as before
is showed.

Thirdly, when thy distress and grief is very great, is thine heart afraid
of Gods forsaking of thee? and can thou hardly think he will suffer it to go
so ill with those that be his Children, as it does with thee.

Answer. Yet be not dismayed: it is no marvel to see the weak reeds shaken
with those blasts which make the strong cedars to bow and bend. When Jonas the
Prophet was in the Whales belly, he says to GOD, I am cast out of thy sight,
Jonas 2.4. Nay, our blessed Savior himself cried out upon the Cross, My God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me, Matthew 27.46. know therefore thou that
make conscience of thy ways, that this fear of Gods forsaking thee, in
times of distress, is from humane frailty, which the best have in them while
they be in this world, and will more strongly assault them, upon the
remembrance of former sins, though repented of, and upon the conscience of
corruption remaining, though it do not reign: as we may see in Job when he
says unto God, wherefore hidest thou thy face, and hold me for thine
enemy? For thou writest bitter things against me, and make me to possess
the iniquities of my youth, Job 13.24, 26. and more fully in David
acknowledging his frailty in this very case; My spirit, says he, was
overwhelmed, I am so sore troubled, I cannot speak. Will the Lord cast off for
ever? Is his mercy clean gone? Has God forgotten to be gracious? And I said,
this is mine ininfirmitie, that is, this is my great weakness to doubt of
Gods mercy, because of my present troubles, Psalm 77.3.4, 7, 8, 9, 10.

Here thou must bring thy heart to the third thing before, commended to thy
observation, viz. That GOD is pleased to exercise his own dear children under
great and sore afflictions, for most excellent ends, as before is showed. And
indeed, what distress can befall thee, wherein faith, set a work to consider
of Gods dealing with his own children, may not set before thy view some of the
Lords worthies, better than thy self, who have suffered the like or far
greater evils then are upon thee? Was not righteous Lot taken captive in
War, with all his goods? Genesis 14.12, 14 Was not Joseph sold for a servant,
cast into prison, and laid in irons? Psa. 105.17, 18. Was not the Prophet
Jeremy smitten, and cast into the myrie dungeon? Ier. 37.15, 16. Was not David
hunted after to be slain by Saul, as one hunteth a Patridge in the
Mountains? 1 Samuel 26.20. Was not Ziklag, where David and his men dwelt,
burnt with fire by the Ama lakites and their wives, and Children with all their
goods taken captives, 1 Sa. 30.1, 2, 5. Were not the Lords Priests, to the
number of fourscore and five persons, their City, both men, Women, and
Children and sucklings, Oxen, Sheep, and Asses smitten with the edge of the
sword by the command of their own King, upon a false surmise of conspiracy
with innocent David? 1 Samuel 22.13, 18, 19. Was not Jonathan, David's dearest
friend, slain by the uncircumcised Philistims? 1 Samuel 31.2. Nay was not good
King Josiah slain by Pharaoh-Neco at Megiddo like unto whom there was no KING
before him, that turned to the Lord with all his heart, with all his soul,
etc. 2 King. 23.25, 27. Was not John Baptist, greater than whom there rose none
before him among them that are borne of women, Matthew 11.11. imprisoned by
Herod, for doing his duty, in telling him it was not lawful for him to have
his brother Philips Wife: and afterward beheaded upon a most trivial occasion,
even to gratify a damsel for her dancing? Mar. 6.18.26, 27. Which of the
Prophets did not the people of the Jews persecute? Acts 7. 52. Had not other
of Gods servants, before Christ's incarnation, trial of cruel mockings and
scourgings, of bonds and imprisonments? Were they not stoned, sawen asunder,
tempted, slain with the sword: did they not wander about in Sheepskins, and
Goat-skinnes, being destitute, afflicted, and tormented, though the world were
not worthy of them? Hebrews 11.36, 37, 38. And were not Christ's own Disciples,
and holy Apostles sent forth as Lambs amongst Wolves? Luke 10.3. and set forth
as men approved unto death, made a spectacle to the world, reviled, persecuted,
defamed, made the filth of the world, and the of-scouring of all things? 1 Cor.
4.9, 13. Was not Paul in labors abundant, in stripes above measure, in prison
frequent, in death often? Received he not of the Jews five times forty stripes
save one? was he not thrice beaten with rods? once stoned? and thrice suffered
shipwreck? was he not in journyings often, in perils of waters, in perils of
robbers, in perils by his own country men, in perils by the heathen, in
perils in the City, in perils in the wilderness, in perils in the Sea, in
perils among false brethren: in weariness and painfulness; in watchings
often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness? etc. 2
Cor. 11.23, 24, 27. Nay, which is more than all the former, was not our blessed
Savior himself persecuted, and apprehended by the hands of the ungodly? Was
he not buffeted and spit upon, crowned with thorns, scourged, and most
shamefully condemned and crucified? Now then, what think thou of thy self?
art thou better than these? do thou think God forsook them in their
afflictions? Why then, stir up thy heart to say unto the Lord, with
subjection to his will, even for the sustaining of death it self; It is
enough, Lord, take away my life, for I am no better then my fathers, 1 Kings
19.4.

When affliction increases, and death approaches, then look unto Jesus the
Author and finisher of thy faith lest thou be wearyed and faint in thy mind. He
left himself an example, that we should follow his steps, in suffering
affliction patiently. Now when Peter would have rescued his apprehension by
force of arms, he forbade him, saying, The Cup which my Father has given me,
shall I not drink it? John 18.11. And remember this word of his, The servant is
not greater than his master: If they have persecuted me, they will also
persecute you, John 16. ver. 20.

Add hereunto the consideration of Gods special providence over thee in all
thine afflictions: whereupon Christ Jesus bids thee, not to fear them that can
kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul. Are not two Sparrowes sold
for a farthing? and one of them shall not fall to the ground without your
Father. The very hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear ye not therefore,
for ye are of more value then many Sparrowes, Matthew 10.29.30, 31. God is
faithful who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able, but
will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to
bear it, 1 Cor. 10.13.

Lastly, remember that his love in Christ Jesus is firm and constant unto
thee, in thy greatest affliction; See Romans 8.35, 38, 39. What shall separate
us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus? Surely nothing can do it, as
the things there named, and accounted unable, do plainly show, tribulation,
anguish, or distress, persecution, famine, peril, sword, etc. For whom he
loves in CHRIST his Son, he loves to the end, John 13.1. his gifts and calling
to grace and favor in CHRIST are without repentance, Romans 11.29. Nay more,
rest assured, that as the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be
compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us, Romans 8.18. so our light
affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far more excellent,
and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17.

The conclusion of the whole
By these and such like considerations will the spirits of the godly sustain
their infirmities. Thus will true believers, with godly David, encourage
themselves in the Lord their God, even when violent death approaches toward
them, 1 Samuel 30.6. In the multitude of their own perplexing thoughts within
them, will the Lords comforts delight their souls, Psalm. 94.19. Take notice
therefore of this duty to strive against distracting worldly cares. Consider
the grounds, or reasons, whereby it is pressed: as that thine heavenly father
cares for thee: these worldly cares discredit and disgrace thine holy
profession; they are a great and needless, nay a very hurtful burden to thy
poor soul: for the avoiding whereof thou must set faith a work in every
difficulty, small or great, according to the direction before prescribed. So
though thou be weak in thy self, yet shall thou be strong in the Lord, and
in whatsoever state thou art, thou shall be therewith content. Thou shall know
how to be abased, and how to abound; both to be full and to be hungry; both to
abound and to suffer need: yea, to do all things through Christ which
strengthens thee, Phil. 4.11, 12, 13.

FINIS.
A REQVEST By the Executors of Mr. Pierson, occasioned by the concealing and
detaining of some of his writings and papers, by such as borrowed them in the
life time of Master PIERSON.
Whereas in the former epistle intimation is given of some other writings of
this reverend Author fit to be published, I think it not amiss to let the
Reader understand, that the thing chiefly intended therein, is an excellent
Exposition of the first Epistle of Saint John: a work, as is conceived both of
extraordinary worth and use, and which should have first bin offered to the
public view, but that upon perusal there was found a great breach in it, by
reason that the whole third Chapter, and a few verses in the beginning of the
fourth were wanting: that part being, as others had been, imparted to some
private friend who hitherto has neither made restitution, nor given any notice
of it. Whereupon it is thought fit by those that are interested in the whole,
that this opportunity should be taken to give notice of the defect in that
part, being fully persuaded that none will either be so envious at others, or
deal so unfaithfully with him whose life and labors were wholly devoted to
the public good, as privately to detain the papers themselves, or any
knowledge that they have of them, or their probable conjecture to whom they
have heard any of his writings have bin lent: when as by giving notice of that
part they shall not only deal justly with those whose right it is, but wisely
likewise for themselves; who by that means in stead of a broken part may come
to have the whole in such sort as will be fitter both for their own and others
use, and withal prevent that imputation which will lie upon them, if it be
discovered otherwise; which they may easily conceive is neither impossible nor
improbable. For charity bids me hope that the concealment of it hitherto has
only been out of ignorance in what hand the rest did lie unto which it ought
to be restored: and that since it is thus publicly now called for, it will be
no longer detained, I will not say, from them that are particularly interested
only; but from the Church of God in general, and all good Christians that
might reap benefit and comfort by it.


