TWO SERMONS, on these words of Peter the Apostle: Honor all men:
Love brotherly fellowship,
Epist. 1. chap. 2. verse. 17.

Preached at Marlebrough the seventh of November, and fifth of January 1595.
by Charles Pynner, Minister of the Church of Wotton-Basset in North-wiltshire.

Gal. 6.10. While we have time, let us do good unto all men; but especially
unto them, which are of the household of faith.

LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed. 1597.

TO THE RIGHT honorable, and my especial good Lady, Anne, Lady de La War,
wife unto the L. de La War that now is a grace, mercy, and peace, from God
the Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.
MAdame, when at the request of my worshipful and godly friend, Master John
Bailiffe, the^ Mayor of Marl-brough, I had there preached these two Sermons; I
purposed even the^ (though thwarted til now by some occasions) to offer the
same unto your Ladyship, in part of payment of a much greater sum, which for
many your benefits (as many know, and my self most willingly acknowledge)
is due unto you. And the rather I have done this, and in this kind sought some
part of recompense, because as David says unto God, One day in thy Courts, is
better then a thousand: Psalm. 84.13.
So your whole life tells unto others, and to me especially, that one
Sermon, yea one sentence of the Law of GOD, is dearer unto you then thousands
of Gold and Silver. Psalm. 119.73
And therefore this spark of Gods grace, how little so ever it be, (if any at
al it be) I know will be accepted of your Ladyship, and all other of like
spirit: in which hope I have been bold to make it public: desiring it may
work that good in others, which the like labors of others by Gods grace, (and
I humbly thank him for this grace) in some measure has wrought in me. And I
pray God this zealous care may still be in us, and chiefly in those that have
received most, to help the^ which especially have need thereof, as lacking
the lively voice of their own pastors. In the want of which duty in many
most learned (of whom, how many, have received how many tale^ts, which go not
abroad, or so broad as they might?) even he, which has received a little (I
speak for my self) may, I trust, be allowed to give a little. Which if
there be a willing mind first (as says the Apostle) it is accepted according
to that a man has, and not according to that he has not.

The Lord Jesus preserve your good Ladyship, with my honorable good Lord, and
your happy children (happy, if they know their happiness of such their
parents:) and increase in you the graces of his holy spirit. Amen. From London
the second of August. 1597.

Your Honors bounden, and in all duty to command: Charles Pynner.

THE FIRST Sermon.
1. Pet. Chap. 2. Verse. 17. Honor all men.


THe Apostle in these words, not so much teaches the faithful to whom he
writes, as exhorts them unto certain duties, which it seems they knew
before. Like as himself in this, and his other Epistle, with the rest of the
Apostles, and indeed all the holy Scriptures, both of the old and new
Testament, are very plentiful in this matter of exhorting. These things
command and teach, 1. Tim. 4.11
faith Paul to Timothy, the first and fourth. That which is taught must be
commanded: like as that which is commanded must first be taught. Which
shows our dulnes (dearly beloved) and how restie we are, and needing a
spur in the known way.

And yet it may be, many Philips here, not so unwilling to embrace their
duty, as not knowing what duty is, that they may embrace it. In the
fourteenth of John, If ye had known me (says Christ) ye should have known my
father also: Io^^ 14.7.^, ^seq.
and from henceforth ye know him, and have seen him. Phillip said unto him,
Lord, show us the Father, and it suffices. So we: show us what it is to
honor all men, and we will honor them: What is the brotherhood, and we will
love them: what it is to fear God, and we will fear him: and so forth. But
Jesus said unto him: Phillip, I have been so long time with you, and have thou
not known me? he that has seen me has seen my Father. I cannot challenge
you, as Christ does Philip, I have been so long time with you: for I have bin
seldom with you. Neither yet can your own Pastors so challenge you,
notwithstanding their bodily presence, which you have had much longer time,
then Christ was with his disciples: because they have not so preached and
showed Christ unto you, as Christ his father to his disciples.

And whence this deadly plague should come, I know not, except partly from the
the measels of the Gergesites, contented, rather then they would be at any
cost with Christ, to be without him: and partly from the severity of God
against this sin and others: who despises us in this profaneness, as once
his own people, Israel and Judah, in the eleventh of Zachary, the Lord by the
Prophet denouncing thus: Zach. 11.9.
Then I said, I will not feed you: that that dies, let it die: and that that
perishes, let it perish. As Christ also tells them in the 23. of Matthew,
Math. 23, 38
that they are given over: Behold (says he) your house it left unto you
desolate. O my people (says the Lord by Esaias) They which lead thee, Isa. 3, 12
misleade thee, and hide form thee the way of thy paths.

And yet lo (dearly beloved) some part of your paths, as a stranger that
passes by, and is content to go a little with you, to show you the way that
GOD has showed him. For God that commands the light to shine out of the
darkness (says the Apostle, 2. Cor. 4, 6
the second to the Corinthians, chap. 4. ver. 6.) is he, which has shined in
our hearts, to give forth the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in
the face of Jesus Christ. And he it is which has lighted our candle, not that
we should put it under a bed or under a bushel, but on a candlestick, that it
may give light unto the whole house. And, lo, now it shines upon your
candlestick, to show you some part of the way, which you must walk.

The first step whereof, is this, Honor all men: the second this, Love
brotherly fellowshippe, or the brotherhood: the third this, Fear God: and the
sourth and last this, Houour the King.

And yet it seems this last point needed not to have bin added by the
Apostle, having spoken so largely at the first, saying, Honor all men. For is
the King no body? Yes verily. he is more then any besides: and therefore has
a special honor by himself. In which respect the Apostle says again more
distinctly and particularly of him, Honor the King, but of this in place.

We have therefore here in the first place or point of this exhortation,
Honor all men, a general honor, which respects all men, as well those from
whom it is due; as those unto whom it is due: that is to say, an honor which
all men owe to all men; and each man to each, and every man: the King himself
not excepted, in that duty which he owes to his meanest subject. And
therefore is he called both by profane writers, as also by the prophets, and
namely Ezechiel the 34. The sheapheard of the people. Ezec. 34.2.
VVo to the sheapheards of Israel. And again. Hear the word of the Lord, Verse.
9.
O ye sheapheards. Where he speaks as well to the civil, as Eclesiasticall
Magistrate, as it is in the Psalm, Thou did lead thy people like sheep by
the hand of Moses and Aaron. Psalm 77.20.
The office therefore of Kings and rulers, is to lead and feed the people, and
to do them good.

And this is the thing which so generally is here commanded, and commended unto
us by the name of Honor; even our duty of doing good unto all that especially
need our good. For first that this is due, it appears by another Apostle,
saying, Look not every man on his own things: but every man also on the
things of other men, Philip. 2. and 4. And again, Phillip. 2.4.
, to the Galathians, the 6, and 10. While we have time let us do good unto al,
specially those that are of the household of faith. Gal. 6.10.
And in the third of the Proverbs, Prou. 3.27.
VVithhould not good from the owners thereof, when it is in thy power to do it.
Where note, that he calls the needy the owners of thy good, or benefit, as
due unto them: the enemy himself not excepted considered, not indeed as an
enemy (for that is not possible, unless we should conspire against our
selves) but as a man, and so comes he within the compass of this honor of
the Apostle, Honor all men. For this honor, as all other duties, must not
only be pure and without hypocrisy, but full and perfect in all her parts;
not partial, excluding any, but including all, even the enemy: as Christ also
teaches us by his own example, in the fifth of Matthew. Matthew. 5: 44, 45, and,
48.
But I say unto you, love your enemy: bless them that curse you, do good to
them that hate you, and pray for the^ that hurt you, and persecute you, that ye
may be the children of your Father which is in heaven. For he makes his Sun
to rise on the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the just and unjust.
Ye shall therefore be perfect as your father which is in heaven is perfect.

And secondly that this duty done, is honor, it is plain also by the former
Apostle, in the fifth of the first to Timothy. The elders (says he) which
rule well, 1. Tim: 5, 17
are worthy of double honor, specially they that labor in the word and
doctrine. Where he speaks properly of the wage and maintenance of the
minister, to be allowed unto him according to the weight and worthiness of his
work and labor, as appears by that that follows: For the Scripture says
(says the Apostle) Thou shall not mosell the mouth of the Ox that treads
out the corn. Verse 18.
And again, The Labourer is worthy of his hire. And in the same place
speaking of poor widows that lived well, and had no kindred able to relieve
them, he commends them to the provision of the Church, and says, Verse. 3.
Honor widows that are widows indeed. And in the 15. of Matthew, Matthew. 15.
Christ very sharply reprooueth the Scribes and Pharisees, for loosing the
bands of this duty, and bringing this honor into contempt in children toward
their parents, especially such as were poor and needy, and lay (as we say)
upon their childrens hands. For these hypocritical and covetous Masters had
so preferred in holiness and worthiness, the gold of the Temple, before the
Temple, and the gift of the Altar before the Altar, because they could sweep
away the gold and the gifts, and turn them to the maintenance of their pomp
and pleasure; that the people as (they taught them) did ever well to bring,
bring. And how evil so ever they were, and whatsoever evil they had done, as
a thief that robs on the Plain, yet if the Priest had received their
gifts, and sanctified them in the Temple, they were as safe (as they thought)
and as well shrouded in this hypocrisy from all danger of the wrath of God, as
the thief is in his den, as the Lord also by the Prophet Jeremy obiecteth to
them. Iere. 7.11.


And this went so far (as I said) that if a son, or a daughter, (who
themselves had somewhat, and had their father and mother relying on them) had
carried all to the Temple, and left themselves so needy, that scarcely, or
not at all they were now able to relieve their Parents, yet all was well. For
if the father or mother complaining for maintenance, the son had answer,
Gift, as it is in the fifteenth of Matthew, or as in the seventh of Mark,
Corban, that is gift: (The Verb is wanting which must be supplied, thus, gift
it is, or, become gift, and given already, wherewith thou might be helped
and relieved at my hands:) he was free, that is to say, faultlesse, by their
doctrine. Who to establish their own Tradition, of freeing men from sin, in
such a case as this, had abrogate (as Christ charge them) the commandment
of GOD, saying, Honor thy Father and thy Mother. And again, I will have
mercy and not sacrifice. This mercy therefore, comfort, and relief, which
should be bestowed upon the needy parents, is the honor, which the Son
or Daughter owes unto them, in case, more then gifts or sacrifices unto the
Temple; and therefore is honor in deed: which God so esteems of, and so
allows to be done, that rather then it should not be don, he is content to
want some part of his own outward honor, as here we see.

And in deed these, I mean the needy of all sorts, specially those that
concern us most, are the lively Images, which our Papal men, and great
Pharisaicall doctors should have taught the people to honor, and to bring
their gifts and presents unto, and not to the Church walls and windows, to
stocks and stones, Roode-loftes, and the like, stumbling at the same stone
that their fathers did. For there is in the person of man above al other
things, a certain excellency and dignity, as the Image of God, so to be
honored of us, that we preserve it by all means possible. And therefore in
the Law of murder it is ordained, that he that sheddeth man's blood, Genesis 9.6.
by man shall his blood be shed, because he destroys the Image of God.
What is man (says David) that thou art mindful of him? Psalm. 8.6. Heb. 2, 6,
7
Thou made him little inferior to the Angels, thou crownedst him with glory
and honor, and have set him above the works of thy hands. Which is as true
of him that has nothing (if we respect the right and prerogative of his
creation) as of him that has all things, and wants nothing. In the Law it
is commanded, that if the neighbors Ox, or Ass go astray, we shall turn
them into the way. Has God care of Oxen? Doubtless he has. But much more of
the neighbor himself. For after the same sort Christ reasons in the 12. of
Matthew, Maa. 12, 12
What man (says he) shall there be among you, which if he shall have a
sheep fallen into a pit on the Sabbath day, will not take it, and lift it up?
How much more then (says he) is a (...) better then a sheep? This betterne^^^
therefore and excellency of man's creation must be honored and attended of us
with all helps necessary to maintain it. For this is the greatest honor that
we can do unto it.

As in deed what greater show of contempt (which is contrary to honor) can
there be then this, to turn away the face, and so little to regard a thing,
as not to bestow the looking on it. Even as they do which deny these duties
of love and compassion toward their needy brethren. Give to him that asks,
and from him that would borrowe of thee, Math: 5, 2
(says Christ) turn not thou away. Is not this the fast that I have chosen
(says the Lord by Esaias in the fifty eight Chapter) to loose the cruel
bands, Isay 58, 6, 7
and let the oppressed go free; to deal thy bread to the hungry, when thou
see the naked, to cover him, and not hide thy self from thine own flesh?
And therefore the Priest and the Leuite despised the man which fell into the
hands of Thieves, and lay wounded and half dead between Hiericho and
Jerusalem. For they came by and looked on him (says the text) as stumbling at
a Dog. But then it follows, They passed by on the other side, Luke 90, 32
in contempt of him. As indeed what greater contempt of his person then this,
to pass so by, and to see him perish. Like as it was honorable done of the
Samaritane to take him up, comfort him, and provide for him. A work more
acceptable, and more necessary to be done (as the case may require) then
divine Service it self upon some Sabbath day: as Christ in many places
shows us, and namely in the third of Mark, in the example of the man with
the withered hand. Mark 3, 1, 2 3, etc.


Out of which place we may reason thus for the poor man, against the contempt
of the Priest and Leuite, that because they did not save life when they might,
they did even kill him. For when the enemies of our Savior Christ watched to
see if upon the Sabbath day he would heal this man with a withered hand, he
being about to do it, first to convict their malice, reasons thus: Is it
lawful (says he) to do a good deed on the Sabbath day, Verse. 4
or to do evil? to save life or to kill? Where he yields thus much against
himself, that if he had not done that good deed to the poor impotent person,
he had done evil; and if he had not given life to that dead member of his, he
had so far killed him. And therefore, as here he heals him, so it is said
in the 8. of Matthew, that he healed all that were brought unto him. And though
he were often sought, yet (opportunities observed) we never read that he
denied, or turned back any.

For where both these, as parts of duty, Psalm. 37, 27 P^al. 1, 17, 18
are commanded us, Depart from evil, and do good: Cease from evil, learn
to do well: one alone is not sufficient. And therefore in the 12 of Matthew,
Christ says, He that is not with me, Matt. 12, 30
is against me; and he that gathers not with me scatters. And Solomon in
the tenth of the Proverbs; Prou. 10, 26
As Vinegar (says he) to the teeth, and smoke to the eyes, so is the
slothful to him that sends him: that is, he of whom duty is required to
be done, and does it not. And though in the 9. of Mark, Christ there seems
to say as it were the contrary, Let him alone, Mhr 9, 40
he that is not against us is on our part: yet he means thus, and
understands it by comparison thus, he is so far forth with us, as he is
not against us, and better then he who not only is not with us, but also
against us. For as duty is entirely kept in both these points, Decline from
evil, and do good: so is it broken in both, as when we not only do no
good, but actuallie do evil. And our Savior Christ in that place of Mark,
speaks of one that was inclining and coming to the Gospel, and did him and
his Disciples no harm, though as yet he did them no good, nor kept their
company, as there we read.

But this Cain had not learned, as appears by his churlish answer to GOD, Am
I the keeper of my Brother? Gen, 4, 9
It might have been answered by God; Yes indeed art thou the keeper of thy
brother, and to see to him, and therefore much less should thou have killed
him, as now thou have doubly done: first, by not keeping him; and then in
killing him.

And does not this brood of Cain line yet with us? and is not this voice too
often heard? Am I the keeper of my brother? must I look to him? let him look
to himself if he will. And although his need be never so great, and our hand
never so strong, yet for us (as we say) he may sink, or swim. These care not
who wring, Modo sibi sit been, so they fare well. And their doing, is as their
saying, (more the^ heathen wretches herein) Every man for himself, and God for
us all: as if God were bound to do for them, and they will do nothing but for
themselves.

And yet these bodies in which we live, as it has many members, so every
member does duty one to the other. This house in which we now are, and serves
us for this asse^bly, is so built, that one stone and iu^st stays up another.
And these very Books, in which we read, are so made and compact, that
letter serves to lever, to make syllables; and syllables, words; and words;
sentences; and by altogether we read, and learn knowledge. This duty
therefore of serving one another, and being commonweals men, not
priuate-weals men, nature, and reason, and heathen can teach us. Non nobis
solis nati (says one) partim patria, partim parents, and so forth. We are
not borne only for our selves, but partly our country, partly our parents,
partly our friends and neighbors will claim a right in us.

And indeed God and nature it self, has east all (almost) into communities
and societies, greater, or lesser, as Cities and families, as we see: the
Lord so ordering it at the first for necessity sake, as we read in Genesis,
Bonum est hominem non esse solum. Genesis 2.18.
It is good for man not to be alone. Who therefore as he receives his good
from other, so ought he to minister help, and do good to other.

And therefore if thou do say with Cain; Am I the keeper of my brother, it
shall be answered, Yes indeed are thou the keeper of thy brother, an^ thou
must honor him, as the Apostle here commands, saying, Honor all men. And if
thou do not so honor them as here is taught, thou do contemn them, and in
contemning them do kill them: as Christ before teaches thee in the third of
Mark.

Where I may conclude, that it is not only the fire of the wrath of God, which
has brought this desolation upon this place, where yet we may behold and see
many heaps of stones and dust, moystened no less with the tears of the
afflicted, then with the rain from heaven: but the careless and merciless
hearts of many, which still suffer it so to be. In whom if this of Peter had
taken place, there should now have been no sign of this destruction amongst
us.

Specially, there being so many, who in the days of our peace have received
so much. For this of the Apostle, Honor all men; being spoken generally to
all, does yet so require this honor to be done of all, unto all, that he, that
has most, must do most; and he, that has little, must do according to his
little. Which if there be a willing mind first (as says the Apostle) it is
accepted according to that a man has, 2. Cor. 8.12
and not according to that he has not.

And thus in doing this honor to all men, we must observe the proportion
which pertains to us, according to our portion. For of him, that has
received much, much shall be required: and of him that has received little,
little shall be required. The summer must bear more in the building then the
iuist or rafter, and if one talent may not be dug into the ground, what
shall be the judgment of those evil servants which have hid many talents, but
this, Take from them their talents, Matthew. 25
and bind them hand and foot, and cast these evil servants into utter
darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. And yet see in this
parable, the evil servant wastes not his talent, nor abuses it unto
oppression; but only he uses it not at al, and does no good with it. For of
that seed of Cain, which oppress, kill, and destroy, which griende the face of
the poor, Isa, 3, 15 Amos: 2.6
as it is in the third of Esaias: and in the second of Amos, which sell the just
for money, and the needy, pro pari Calceorum, for a pair of shoes; I will
speak no more.

Only thus, for the order of this honor, he, whose hand has most, his charge
is most: and he that has little has charge for a little. Which if every man
would look unto, as here we are commanded to Honor all men: Lord, what a
heaven (as I may so say) of help would there be amongst us? and how true
would the prouer be be, Homo homini Deus: Man is God to man. And the poor of
the Land should be provided for, (as we are commanded in the 15. of
Deuteronomie) even by the superfluities of manies abundance. Deuteronomy. 25.7. and
seq.


And yet again, as in this honor here required, we observe a proportion in
those from whom it is due: so likewise ought we to do in, and as concerning
those, unto whom it is due: and all must honor all, but not alike; even as
all are bound unto all, but not alike. And therefore the Apostle in the
fifteenth of the first to Timothy, 1, Tim. 5, 8.
makes them dearest, who are nearest to us: If there be any (says he) that
provides not for his own, and namely for them of his own household, he has
denied the faith, and is worse then an infidel. And in the 6. verse of the
same chapter, If any faithful man or faithful woman (says he) have widows,
meaning of their kin, and which are near unto them, let them minister unto
them, that is, let them help and relieve them, and let not the church be
charged.

Thus the father, owes more to the child; the husband, to the wife; the
brother, to his brother; yea, the friend to his friend; (because he has
bound him by a special band) then to any other. And if these will not honor
these, protect and defend, help, comfort, and nourish these, (as too often we
may see this honor wanting) it is because we are fallen into the last times; of
which the Apostle forewarned they should be grievous, it would even grieve any
godly mind to see the manners of them: 2. Tim. 3.3
For men (says he) shall be lovers of themselves, covetous, proud, boasters,
and so forth. At length he adds, without natural affection.

Which in a sort doubtless may be extended even to those also, which deny this
honor of which we speak unto their ioynt-neighbours, and fellow-citizens: unto
whom by a special band they owe more, then to any other; by reason of the
mutual society and c^oiuuction of the members of the body politic, wherein
they are placed. And therefore ought they more especially to rejoice and suffer
one with another, and to procure ye good one of another, because the help or
hinderance, the honor, or rebuke of any member redoundeth to the whole body,
in which every member has his part: as Paul also speaks of the natural
body. 1. Cor. 1^, ^6


And this made Moses first so severe and courageous against the Egyptian, Act.
7, 23, etc.
wh^o he slew in defense, and auenging the cause of one of his brethren: and
afterward so careful to agree his Countri-men and brethren, which strove
together, saying, Sirs, we are brethren, why do ye wrong one to another. A
great wrong, and much duty broken, when a brother shall wrong a brother; a
neighbor, his neighbor; one towns man an other; a citizen, his fellow citizen:
when envy, and debate, deceit, and oppression shall reign amongst them, as
strife in the members of the same body: which reaches home. For if ye bite
(says ye apostle) and devour one another, Gal 5.15
take heed least ye be consumed one of another. Which is the plague of the
people mentioned in Esa. 3. Opprimet in populo alter alter^u; quisque proximum
suum: Esaias 3, 5
One shall oppress another amongst the people; each man his neighbor. As also
in the 9. of the same prophecy. Esaias 9, 20 ^1
Every one shall eat the flesh of his own arm; Manasseh, Ephraim; and
Ephraim, Manasseh; and both these against Judah. And what of this? A city, yea,
a kingdom divided in it self cannot continue. Mat. 12, 25


For it is not the honor of our times that can hold it up; so light and foolish
and full of s^attery, that I am ashamed to name it: and yet many make a pride
and a virtue of it: as if virtue were made of words, as ye wood of trees: and
therefore thus forsooth, father, and brother, and uncle, and cosen, and
captain, and master, when indeed there is no such manner link or ba^d between
the^. And when they light on any of these, or any other their lovers, and
friends, upon whom they will bestow any of this court-holy-water, the^ cap and
knee, and smooth and fine words, and low curtify, and broad embracing, as if we
would reach them a piece of our heart. But if any of these need our help, that
is, honor in deed, then S. James his charity, Abite cumpace, cales^ite, and
satura^ini: Goin peace, be ye warmed, and filled: but we give them not the
things that are fit for the body. I am, 2, 6
What profit is in this? says the Apostle.

And yet we are so used to this unprofitable, yea, reproachful honor, that
we cannot leave it: but even when we have in hand some mischief toward
men, they shall yet have some of this honor therwhile to hide it, like that
was bestowed on our Savior: Hail King of the Jews, and smite him on the
face. Or, as Judas, Hail Master, kiss him, and betray him.

And yet (my brethren) neither this, nor any thing which before has been
taught us, is brought to abridge all outward honor, or show of outward
reverence. Which we acknowledge also to be due, Suo modo, in a certain
manner, even from all men, to all men, and from each man to each and every
man, as is the other honor in fact before mentioned. Which as it is indeed
harder, and asks cost, and therefore also is more high and excellent: so this
likewise is of that praise, and price, that it ought not to be neglected, but
embraced of us. For God has so imprinted his own Image in us, that each man
moved with a proper and serious sense of his sins, acknowledges his own
baseness, and gives reverence unto him, which scarcely will acknowledge it to
be due unto him, because he feels his sins, as the other does. And here
is a right good straining of courtesy, when (as Peter wills us in the fifth
Chapter of this Epistle) we submit our selves every man one to another. 1. Pet
^.5
According also to that golden rule of the Apostle in the second to the
Philippians: Let every man think better of another then of himself. And in
the 12. Philip. 2, 3
to the Romans: In giving honor, Romans 12, 10
go one before another.

This would take us down from the upper end of the table, and make us of our
selves seek the, Luke 14, 7 8, etc.
lower rooms first: and then the master of the house would set us up highen.
For this modesty is amiable, and this humility, honorable. And therefore no
marvel if the good man of the house be so delighted with it, that he vouch
safeth it the highest room at the end of the Table. This is meant by our
Apostle in the 5. chapter, and 5 verse. of this Epistle, saying: Deck your
selves inwardly with low lines of mind. 1. Pet. 5, 5
Mark, there is a marvelous decking, beauty, and ornament in modesty. But
he says, It is inward, in the hid man of the heart: and yet so, that it
shows it self outward: or else it were nothing worth, as Solomon says in
the 27. of the Proverbs, Better is open rebuke, then secret love. Yea, it so
shows it self in the body, prou 2^, 5
that it decketh, adorneth and beautifieth the body, so as all men shall
honor us, when the bragger shall go by with contempt and scorn.

For so it is added by the Apostle, as a reason to persuade us to embrace this
duty: For God (says he) resists the proud. What is that? To wit, this:
Proud persons look for more then is due unto them; but they shall not have
it. They would be honored of all, Tanqu^^ minores Dii, as little Gods: but
they shall be broken of their wills. For as they have measured unto others,
so shall it be measured to them again. They have showed in the pride of their
minds contempt and disdain to others: and they shall reap it seven fold again
into their bosoms. For thus I take Saint Peter to expound that place of the
Proverbs, the third Chapter, the sour and thirtieth verse. prou 3, 34
With the scorner he scorneth. Then it follows in the very words that Peter
alleges, But he gives grace, that is to say, favor, love, honor, and
acceptance, both with God and men, unto the lowly. As it is said of our
Savior Christ, that he grew in wisdom, Luke 2, 52
and stature, and in favor both with God, and men. And why? Because, as well
in this lowliness and humility, (no doubt) as in all other virtues, it was
necessary that he should be our most perfect pattern, and leave us an
example, that we should follow his steps; and acknowledge no less by his
personal humility, then by his doctrine taught us in the fourteenth of Luke,
that he that exalts him self shall be brought low, Luke 14
and he that humbles himself shall be exalted.

Fie upon therefore this outward flaunt of apparel, this bragging behavior,
and coy countenaunces of many in this age of most corrupt manners, which would
seem to snatch honor to themselves, and even force it from us. But they must
remember (as Aristotle says,) Honor in honorante, non in honorate. Honor
is in him that honors, not in him that is honored. And therefore thou may
(happily) be despised of others, even when thou deseruest to be honored: much
more shall thou be sure to go without this honor, when by this ambitious
humor of craving honor, thou deseruest no honor, but contempt.

But here we are to observe a distinction. For as before in the honor of
fact, he owed most that had received most, to do good unto others according
to his quantity: so in this outward honor, or honor of outward reverence, it
falls our contrary, that he owes most unto others, that has received
less then others. For so it is in the civil bodies, and bodies politic, at in
the natural body: wherein one member has received more, or less honor, then
another; and all less, then the head: as Paul also shows us in the 12. of
the first too the Corinthians: that in a certain variety, as well in this, as
in sundry other things, there might be a maruailous consent and harmony, For
God is not the author of confusion, but of peace. 1. Cor. 14.33,
And as one star differs from another star in glory, for the beauty of
the heavens, so one man differs from another in glory, to the beauty of the
earth. And therefore there is now in some the honor of age, which is not in
others: in some, the honor of wisdom and virtue, not in others: in some the
honor of dignity, not in others: beside the honor of majesty in the king and
magistrate, of whom we speak not yet.

And all these must have their honor, every man, as he excels most, and
has most of this honor in himself, as a mark or print of a certain
majesty, which God has placed in him. And it was a piece of the confusion
threatened to Judah in the third of Esaias, and not the least part of the
confusion, which at this day reigns amongst us: Superbient p^er i^ senem,
Isay 3, 5
and vilis in honor ^ium. The boy shall bear himself brag against the
ancient, and the base against the honorable. And it grieved Job at the heart;
Job 2, 2, 3
and helpe^^ppe the heap of all his miseries, what once he had this honor,
and no we had it not. Oh that I were (says he) as in times past when God
preserved me, when his ^^ig ^^^shined upon my head. And afterward in the
f^^^enth v^^se: When I went (...) to the Gate to the s^ate of judgment, Verse
^
and (...) bed^^ caused them to prepa^^^ ^^y. sea^^ i^ the^ Streetos. The young
(...) sam^^^e, and bid themselves; and the ag^dor^se and stood up. But in the
(...) Chapter he says, But new, Job 3, ^
^ident me minore ^^^pores, My younger laugh (...) me: and those so base borne
and vile, that, as there he says, Whose ^athers I would have disdeyned to
set with the Dogs of my flock.

This was Jobs case, to want that honor and reverence, which once he had, and
had well deserved. Which if it be any of ours; (as doubtless never was there
more contempt, and less honor yielded unto Superiors) let us charge this sin
upon the Inferiors: yet so, as that we wholly discharge not our selves of
blame. For besides that this plague is partly upon us, Isa. 3.4
in the third of Esaias, Dab^ puer^^ principes co^um, I will set children to rule
over them; and so indeed we have in many places rulers, no more able to rule
themselves and others, then women and children: and therefore are despised of
men, women, and children: there is also another plague mentioned by the Prophet
in the next words, thus, Quifacinero se do^ine^tu^ in ^os^ that is, I will set
children to be their Rulers, which shall mischi^^ously reign over them. And
afterward in the same chapter. Verse 13
The babie oppresses my people, and Women ^aue rule over them. And yet as
very babes as they are in government, and weak as women, to rule themselves, or
other, as they ought to do, they are strong enough to oppress the people: and
this makes them to be despised of the people. Vt ameris amabilis esto, (says
the poet) If thou will have love, thou must bear thy self lovely. And if thou will have other to honor thee in high place, do thou stoop down to them, and
honor them in those rooms and places wherein they are, even the meanest. Do
not oppress them, but relieve them (for this is the best honor, as before is
proved) and show all kindness and courtesy, and affability toward them.
And thou shall see that kindness will beget kindness; as Moses was honored of
all the people. And yet it is said that he was the mildest man in all the earth.
Number. 12.^
Which doubtless could not have been, if in his high place he had ouerlookt
them, and not rather in all faith fullness, love, and diligence, had looked to
them, and lived with them as a common friend.

And therefore the king himself also in the 17. of Deuteronomy. was commanded not to
multiply horses, Deuteronomy. 17, 6, and seq.
nor augment his pomp overmuch, least he should wax proud, and have his heart
lifted up above his brethren. Wherefore, give, you that are even the greatest,
give unto the meanest their honor, and they shall give you yours, Good measure
(as Christ says) pressed down, Luke 6, 38
shaken together, and running over, shall men give into your bosom: Matthew. 7, 2
for with what measure you meat, with the same shall men measure unto you
again. For otherwise every man does bear a kingdom in his breast, how soever
his outward obedience or reverence may be wrested from him.

And yet may, and must the Ruler, and every superior maintain his place, and
show himself, as he is, in keeping the grace, and gravity; the port, and
support of a superior: as it is said of a Roman governor, that he bare up
the Commonweal with his brow or cou^tena^ce. Which no man may impute to pride
or immodestie for it is majesty. Therefore Solomon makes a comparison in the
thirtieth of the Proverbs: Prou. 30, 29 30, 31.
There be three things (says he) that order well their going, yea four which
have a comely gate, an old Lion mighty among Beasts, and turns not at the
sight of any: an Horse that has his Belly taken down: a Goat, and a King
against whom there is no rising up. And therefore it is counseled in
another place, Ne sis humilis in sapientia tua. Eccl, ^.19.
Be not ouerlowly in thy wisdom, nor out of conceit with thy self for thy
place: least it be true which is said, Tanti eris aliis, quanti tibi fueris:
Thou shall be just so much esteemed of others, as thou (in this sense)
esteemest thy self. And therefore it was commanded Timothy, 1. Tim. 4.12
being a young man, to show himself grave in his ministry. Let no man (says
Paul) despise thy youth. That is, see thou give none occasion by any over
familiar, light, or loose behavior, that any should despise thy youth. And no
less the Pastor of the Commonweal, then the Pastor of the church, in the
person of Titus, Tit. 2.15.
is commanded thus: These things speak and exhort, and rebuke with all
authority. See that no man despise thee.

Thus the superior must know what honor he has; and much more what honor
he owes to the inferior, and pay it: and the inferior for his part must do
the like. And all men (as Peter here says) must honor all men. A necessary
doctrine, for all, who in that state of franchisement, which we have in the
heavenly city of our God and King, have, or ought to have our conversation (as
Paul had his) in heaven, Philip. 3, 20
or heavenly, or as in heaven already, according also as we pray, Mat. 6.20.
Thy will be done, in earth as it is in heaven.

And thus much of the first step of these four duties here required. Which is
as far as at this time I can go with you. Now let us pray.

THE SECOND Sermon.
2. Pet. 2.17. Love brotherly fellowship.


THis whole verse breaking it self into four principal parts, which are so
many several exhortations, of the first, in these words, Honor all men, we
have spoken already, and are now come unto the second, in these words, Love
brotherly fellowship, or, as I had rather interpret them, according to the plain
signification of the Greek word, thus, Love the brother hood: referring the
word which the Apostle uses not unto the mind and affection of him that
loves, or the virtue of loving, as it seems our English translation here
does: but to the brethren themselves, which must be loved.

For as before he had showed us the matter, or, as we call it, the subject of
our honor, saying, Honor all men: and afterward will show us the subject of
our fear, saying, Fear God: and lastly, the subject of a particular and more
especial honor, saying, Honor the King: so here he shows us the subject or
matter of our love, or, if ye will, the persons on whom our love must work, to
wit, the brethren: even the whole society of the^. So as, (a little to inuert
our own translation, and yet to keep as near as we may) in steed of this, Love
brotherly fellowship, we may read thus, Love the fellowship of brethren. So we
name the whole state of the Commons of the realm, the Co^munaltie: and so
here, the whole state of the brethren, joined in one fellowship, the
brotherhood, or, fellowship of brethren.

Now in this sentence we have to observe generally, these two parts, The
brethren, which must receive our love: and, The love it self, which we owe
unto them.

And touching the brethren, first, we see them commended to us by the name of
brotherhood, which is a society or fellowship of brethren, and indeed such
(according to the force of the word which Peter uses) I say, such brethren as
lay in the same belly with us. Even as in deed we have all but one mother,
Jerusalem (as says the apostle in the 4. to the Gal.) which is above, and yet
beneath, the Church scattered throughout the world, Gal. 4, 26
which is (says he) the mother of us all. In her womb we are begotten, being
borne anew (as Peter before says) not of mortal seed, 1. Pet. 1, 23
but of immortal, by the word of God. Who of his own will (as James also
says) begatte us by the word of truth, Iam. 1, 18
that we should be the first fruits of his creatures. And to our mother was
the promise made in the four and fiftieth of Esaias, Isay 54, 13
And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord, and much peace shall be to
thy children. Thus all that are taught of God, and have obeyed his word, are
brethren both by father and mother; and the whole number joined in one society
or fellowship, is the brotherhood: which also is called the household or family
of faith. While we have time (says the Apostle in the sixth to the Galathians)
let us do good unto all, Gal. 6.10
specially unto those that are of the family of faith. And again in the
third to the Ephesians: Ephesians 3, 14
For this cause I bow my knees unto the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of
whom is named the whole family in heaven, and in earth. And the band of this
family, or conjunction of brethren, is faith and holiness, in that heavenly
vocation, unto which they are called. In which respect they are named (as
before we heard) the family of faith, and faithful brethren in Christ; and
holy brethren. In the first to the Colossians, Paul an Apostle of Jesus
Christ, by the will of God and Timotheus our brother, Col. 1, 1, 2
To them which are at Colosse, Saints and faithful brethren in Christ. Heb.
3.1
And in the third to the Hebrews, Therefore holy brethren, partakers of the
heavenly vocation, consider the Apostle and high Priest of our profession,
Christ Jesus.

Wherefore let not thine eyes wander to seek thy love; but see who are joined
in faith and holiness, and they are the brethren: and there thou must fasten
thy whole desire. It is not in all the world besides, that thou must so
delight in, as in them. For tell me, if any thing be so commanded, or
commended to us, as the brethren, or some duty which pertains to them?

Here only we except the love of the Father: which yet is revealed, and, as
it were, accomplished in the love of the brethren. If ye love me (says
Christ) keep my commandment. John 14, 15
And, This is my commandment, John 15, 12
that ye love one another, as I have loved you. And again, By this shall all
men know that ye are my disciples, John 13, 35
if ye have love one to another. As if the love of the brethren were the love
of Christ: because he delights in them, yea, dwells in them, and they in
him; he is one with them, and they with him; by a true, and real conjunction
(though the same not natural, and carnal, but spiritual) as in the
seventeenth of John, I pray not for these alone, but for them also which shall
believe in me through their word. John 17, 26 21, etc.
That they all may be one, as thou, O Father in me, and I in thee: even that
they may be also one in us; that the world may believe that thou have sent
me. And the glory that thou gave me I have given them, that they may be
one, as we are one, I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect
in one, and that the world may know that thou have sent me, and have loved
them, as thou have loved me. And so the Church considered with her head, is
mystical Christ, or Christ in a mystery; and so called by the Apostle in the
twelfth of the first to the Corinthians: 1. Cor. 12.12
For as the body (says he) is one, and has many members, and all the members
of the body, which is one, though they be many, yet are but one body: so is
Christ, that is to say, Christians, in one society, even the Church, considered
as a body, but with her head Christ. Who, by an excellency of the head above
the members, gives name unto the whole, and it is called Christ.

Hence comes this acceptance in the second of Zachary, He which touches
you, Zach. 2, 8
touches the apple of his eye. And in the tenth of Matthew, Math. 10, 42
Whosoever shall give unto one of these little ones a cup of cold water only
in the name of a Disciple, verelie I say unto you, he shall not loose his
reward. And in the sieve and twentieth of Matthew: Mat. 25, 37, etc.
When saw we thee an hungered, and fed thee? And when saw we thee a
stranger, and took thee in? and so forth. Verily I say unto you (says
Christ) inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my Brethren,
ye have done it unto me. And again, When saw we thee an hungered, or a
thyrst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister
unto thee? These also are answered, Verelie I say unto you, in as much as ye
did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me. And in the ninth
of the Acts, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? it is hard for thee to kick
against the prick. And I answered, Act. 9.4.5.
who art thou Lord? and he said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest. Yet were
they indeed the Christians, and the bodies of the Saints, which he cast into
prison, and lead them bound unto Jerusalem.

But note I pray you out of the place of Matthew, that he reckons there with
the wicked, on his left hand, not for any other sins, or for the want of that
love, which properly appertains unto himself, but that, which properly
appertains unto his brethren: because it is best seen by loving his, how
we love him. For that sometimes touches the purse, where love is best tried:
and that love of the lip, Lord, Lord, deceives many: and therefore John
says, He that has this worlds good, and sees his brother have need, and
shuts up his compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? And
therefore Christ our Savior does not there challenge them simply and generally
for the want of love toward his brethren, but the outward works and deeds of
love are specified, of feeding and drinking, of clothing, and harboring, and
the like. For love being once inwardly inflamed, like fire, it breaks out,
and works outwardly, as need requires, or, it is no love, and nothing
worth; and sometimes angereth more then rebuke. Prou. 27, 9
Therefore Solomon says in the seven and twentieth of Proverbs, Better is
open rebuke then secret love. And it gawleth the needy. Brother more to hear
that in James, Iam. 2, 16
Depart ye in peace, be ye warmed, and be ye filled; when we give them not
those things which are fit for the body, it greeueth them, I dare say, more
that we seem thus to wish them well, and do them no good indeed, then if
we were silent and said nothing. And Saint James rejects it thus, saying,
What profit is in this my brethren? even as we may also, and say, What love
is this my brethren? it is no love, but a shadow of love. For love, though an
affection, is all in action, and such kind of action, that faith it self
cannot show it self, nor work without love, which therefore is necessarily
engendered of her, as the heat^ and light which issue from the Sun, by which he
shows his force and virtue. Therefore the Apostle in the fifth to the
Galathians, writes thus, Gal. 5, 6
In Jesus Christ neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision,
but faith which works by love: both inwardly and outwardly, when and as often
as need requires, and means are notwanting unto the work. And further, to
note the property and work of love, in the first of the first to the
Thessalonians (he says) We give thanks unto God always 1. These. 1, 3
for you all, making mention of you in our prayers, without ceasing,
remembering your effectual faith, and diligent love. As if without labor and
diligence, there were no love: even as faith, without effect or efficacy, and
not effectual, is no faith at all. And therefore in the matter of alms, Paul
tries the naturalnesse (as he speaks) of the love of the Corinthians. This
say I (says he) not by commandment, 2. Cor. 8, 8
but because of the diligence of others: therefore prove I the naturalnesse of
your love.

And because those works of love do show her most, which bring most good and
profit to that which is loved, and none can add to the Almighty: Look unto
the heaven (says Elihu in Job) and see and behold the clouds which are
higher then thou. Job. 5.5. and.7
If thou be righteous, what give thou unto him? or what receives he at thy
hands? This also is another cause, why the Apostle without any express mention
of God, and the love which we owe unto him, turns over our love unto the
brethren, and sets it a working there, as if we had nothing to do with
God: who only of his own good pleasure may have pleasure in us, and in that
we do; but no profit at al by us, or by ought of ours: that only
appertains unto the Brethren. God may profit us, and we by love may profit
them, and God is pleased in this love, as himself loved in it; and therefore
indeed do we love the Brethren. This David expresses in the sixteenth Psalm:
Save me, O mighty God, psalm. 16, 1, 2 and 3.
says he: (lo he fetches good from God, he brings none to him:) for in thee
have I put my trust. O my soul, say unto God, thou art my lord: good from me
comes none to thee. All my delight is in the Saints that are in the earth,
and in them that excel in virtue. This also I thought good to add, least any
man should think the Apostle in prescribing this love, as only due unto the
Brethren, had forgotten himself, or the first and cheifest part of the Law,
which says, Thou shall love God above al things. For all love, I confess, is
not due unto the Brethren, but most specially is declared in, and on the
Brethren. For which cause the Apostle doubts not to say expressly, as here he
does, Love the Brotherhood, or fellowship of brethren. Who also, when he
bids to love the the brethren, forbids not to love God; but rather, in
bidding of the one, secretly, and by impliment, he bids both, because of
necessity they go together.

Why then, dearly beloved, and why again, are we so vain, to skippe the
brethren, and to leave that we should love, and love that we should leave,
or it will leave us, I mean the world and the things of the world. Of which
John says, 1. Joan. 2, 15.
Love not the world, nor the things of the world. If any man love the world,
the love of the Father is not in him: and much less the love of the Brethren,
which are his children, and are not loved, but for the fathers sake.

Alas then for the Brethren, which have lost their love of all the worldlings,
who can love nothing but this world, and the things which are in this world.
But of this it is said, All that is in the world (as the lust of the flesh,
the lust of the eyes, Verse 16, 17
and the pride of life) is not of the Father, but of this world: and the
world passes away, and the lust thereof. And therefore thrice alas, yea, and a
woe to them, because they love, and loose their lust: for the world perishes to
them, and they unto the world. And therefore how much better were it for them
if they could love the brethren? of which is said in the words next following,
Verse 17
But he that fulfilleth the will of God abides ever. And this is his will and
commandment (as before we have heard) that we love one another, Joan. 15, 12
as he has loved us: and so, loving together, may live together, again, 1.
Joan 3: 14
We know that we are translated from death unto life, because we love the
brethren.

Therefore for the love of the brethren, we go not to the world, but to the
brethren themselves: for they will love us, unless they be turned from
themselves, and fall away from their own steadfastness. 2. Pet. 3.17.
Of which the Apostle admonishes, saying, Qui stat, 1. Cor: 10, 12
videat ne cadat: He that stands, let him take heed that he fall not. And
therefore look well to your love, my brethren, as Paul did to the faith of the
Thessalonians, in the first Epistle and third chapter, 1. These. 3.5
Even for this cause (says he) when I could no longer forbear, I sent him
(to wit Timotheus) that I might know of your faith, least the Tempter had
tempted you in any sort, and that our labor had been in vai^^. What if he had
said, That I might know^ often your love? For faith, and love, do go to gither;
they dwell together, and they depart together; they live together, and they die
together. And therefore is t^^ tempter as busy about the one, as about the
other, and as mighty over the one, as over the other. And (look we well unto
it) he should not be called the Tempter, if daily he tempted nor, and at no
time effected any thing: even as too much is daily seen, that those that are
baptized in the faith of brethren, make a mock of the brethren* as Ismael was
circumcised in the house of Abraham, and mocked Isaac, there circumcised
together with him. And Sarah (says Moses) saw the son Agar the Egyptians
(which she had borne unto Abraham) mocking. G^n. 21, ^
If Sarah, if Abraham, if Isaac himself, and the seed of Isaac this day lift
up their eyes, lo, the sons of Agar, mocking: and so bitterly, that Sarah
our mother cannot abide it. Verse: 10
Wherefore she yet says, Cast out the bond woman and her son. And the Apostle
in the 4. to the Galat^ians calls it persecution. But as then (says he) he
that was borne after the flesh, persecuted him that was borne after the spirit,
Gal. 4, 29.
even so is it now. Lo therefore, dearly beloved; some part of our affliction,
to hear and see the scorn of these baptized and only baptized brethren,
which point with the finger, and mock home (as they think) saying, lo, ye holy
brotherhood who, as they taunt us with their tongue, would tear us with their
teeth, in the time were come, notwithstanding our common and joint profession.

And yet if this were all it were the less. Romans 9, 6 2. The 3, 2
For all are not Israel which are of Israel. And all have not faith, says the
Apostle. And he means it of those that profess the faith. So all have not
love, which profess love, and are vowed brethren. Yea, it is a note of these
last times in the third of the second to Timothy: This know, Tim. ^.1 etc.
(says the Apostle) that in the last days grievous times shall be at hand.
For men, says he, what men? Verse 5
members of the visible church, and professed in y^ faith: (for of other it
were no marvel) e^uen such men shall be lovers of themselves, covetous,
proud, boasters, cursed speakers, and so forth, in a great rank. In which to
fill up the number, are placed also these, Love less brethren. no lovers of
them that are good, says Paul: no they cannot love a good man for their
lives. And therefore of these counterfets, the brood of Ismael (almost) we
look for no better.

But the Tempter to show himself has gone yet further, to alter the seed of
Isaac from their true love, perverting our eie-sight, when we look on the
brethren; judging some to be worthy of our company, and countenance; and
othersome (no less worthy in themselves, the^ our selves, but to us as
unworthy) we reject and go by them, and hang the brows at them, as strangers
and enemies. And all because of some odds in some points, which are between
us, Act ^5, 36, 37, etc.
less sometimes then that in the Acts, when Barnabas counseled to take John
Mark, in visitation; But Paul thought it not meet, because he had departed
from them from Pamphilia, and went not with them to the work. And there was
stricken such a heat between them both about this matter, that they parted
asunder one from the other, so that Barnabas took Mark, and sailed into
Cyprus and Paul took Silas and departed. Two apostles so incensed one against
the other, that (as ye word Paroxismos may also signify) they were, as it were
in the sit of an ague. And yet the matter not great. For Mark was a good man,
and Paul might have taken him; and Barnabas might have left him, if they had
been pleased.

Romans 14.17
The kingdom of God (says Paul) is not meat, nor drink, (and yet the
question of our liberty in meat and drink, which there he handles, was not
small) but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. And in Jesus
Christ (says he) neither circumcision, Gal. 5.6.
avails any thing, neither uncircumcision, but faith which works by love.
Yet who may cure our Paroxismes, yea, our Schisms, and join us in love unto
the Brethren, which have, and hold Christ, and his kingdom, righteousness
and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost: and yet for some other things, wherein we
judge them they are not for our company; and still we will distinguish
between brethren and brethren: and some we will take, and some we will leave
to live to themselves: some we will love, and some we will hate. And so out of
one mouth (as Saint James says) yea out of one heart, Iam. 3, 10, 11, etc.
proceeds blessing and cursing. My brethrenthese things ought not so to be,
Does a fountain send forth at one hole sweet wa^^ and bitter also? Can the
fig tree, m^brethren, bring forth Olives; or else a (...), Figs? So can n
o fountain give both salt water and bitter also. And so touching the brethren,
we love all, or none: and our love to like things must be alike; or else we
love not as we ought.

And so, Saint Peter here speaks not singularly, or diuisiuelie, but as it
were, collectiuelie, saying, Love the brethren, that is, all the brethren, even
the whose number of them, joined in one society, not one excepted. And Paul
in the first to the Collossians: We give thanks (says he) to God, even the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Colos. 1, 3.
always praying for you since we heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and of
your love toward al Saints. And Christ, to show how he has loved us, all,
and every one, respecting the singulars, and each singular in the general,
giving us also the name of brethren, says, as before we heard out of the live
and twentieth of Matthew. Mat 25, 40
Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye
have done it unto me. Verse. 45
And again, Inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did
it not to me. And in the seventeenth of John: John 17, 2
Those that thou gave me, have I kept, and none of them is lost, save the
child of perdition, that the Scripture might be fulfilled. Where he
descends to account for every particular, which the Father had given him:
and so must we, for every brother, whom he commends unto our love.

But note, I pray you, out of the place of Matthew, Verse 40
a distinction of brethren. For he says, Unto one of the least of these my
brethren. Therefore some are greater, and some are less, not in the brother
hood it self, or nature of brethren, wherein all are alike: but in some
outward respects, wherein they may be, and are unlike. as here in this place
of Matthew, the 25. there is mention of hungry, and thirsty, of naked, and
harbourlesse, and prisoned brethren, who in this respect are less, as the Lord
has humbled them, then those brethren which are full, and clothed, housed, and
at liberty, having other furniture also sometime of pomp and dignity. The one
sort Saint James in the first Chapter of his first Epistle calls Brethren of
low degree: Iam. 1, 9
and the other he calls rich. Thus, there are poor, and abject brethren,
low, and little: and there are great, and rich, and flourishing brethren: and
we must love all. But yet out love is chiefly approved (as before was showed)
by such outward works, and duties, which we do unto our lesser brethren; for
our greater brethren need them not: as Paul speaks of the members of the
natural body: 2. Cor. 12, 23
And upon those members (says he) of the body which we think to be the
less honorable, we put on more honor: and our uncomely parts have more
comeliness: for our comely parts need it not. Thus, the hunger, and
nakedness, the wants and distresses, the bands and prisonments of our little
Brethren should be our care, and the matter especially to fire our love: much
less should we set light of them, because they are little. Saint James
compares the profane rich men of the world, with the rich Brethren, and
reproves the love of the faithful to whom he writes, for preferring the one
before the other. And what do we else, if in respect of their riches, their
pomp, and dignity, we prefer in our love, and the duties of love, our
greater Brethren before the less? but let us hear his words: Iam. 2, 1, 2,
and seq.
My brethren (says he) have not the faith of our glorious Lord Jesus Christ
in respect of person. For if there come into your company a man (I add, a
brother) with a gold ring, and in goodly apparel, and there come in also a
poor man, (to wit, a brother) in vite raiment, and ye have a respect to him
that wears the gay clothing, and say unto him, sitt^ thou near in a goodly
place, and say unto the poor, stand thou here, or sit here under my
foote-stoole: are ye not partial in your selves, and are become judges which
have evil thought? Hearken my beloved brethren, has not God chosen the poor
of this world that they should be rich in faith, and heirs of his kingdom,
which he promised to the^ that love him? but ye have despised the poor. Here
he touches the boil. For there is a kind of estimation, which belongs unto
men of dignity, as the Lord has divided degrees in the world, some brethren
having more honor, and some less. But our love unto all must be alike, as
well poor, as rich. And we must have somewhat ye more care of the poor, that
we exclude them not, for Saint James his reason, because the greater number of
us, I mean the brethren, are poor, and not rich, weak, and not strong; base,
and not honorable; foolish, and not wise. Hearken my beloved brethren (says
he) has not God chosen the poor of this world, Verse 3
that they should be rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom, which he
promised to them that love him? not that he excludes the rich, but more
commonly and generally in this choice respects the poor, as Paul also
shows in the first of the first to the Corinthians. Brethren (says he) you
see your calling, that is, who, 1. Cor. 1.26 and seq.
and what manner of men amongst you, are called, and come unto Christ, not many
wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble. But God has
chosen the foolish things of the world, to confound the wise, and God has
chosen the weak things of the world to confound the mighty, and vile things
of the world, and things which are despised has God chosen, and things which
are not, to bring to naught things that are, that no flesh should glory in his
sight. And therefore I fear, if my heart give a better welcome to a rich
brother, then to a poor, that I love not the brethren as I ought. Wherefore
let not the carnal and outward beauty of Brethren beguile our minds. The
Kings Daughter is all glorious within. Psalm. 45, 14 Hebr. 13, 2.
Angels may be strangers, as in the thirteenth to the Hebrews, and the
beauty of a brother may be hid under a very sorry weed.

The same may be said for the weak brethren, of whom somewhat already has
bin spoken. And therefore briefly thus: be their weakness never so great, even
as of children in Christ, and their infirmities never so many; lack they
knowledge or conscience sometimes in somethings ( For who can say, says
Solomon: Prou. 20, 9
I have cleansed my heart, I am clean from sin:) We must take them with all
their faults, as we are taken, and love them as we are loved, and were loved,
even when we were enemies, as says the Apostle: and the weaker our brethren
are, Rom., 510
the more must be our care, and our burden the greater to bear them and make
them better. Brethren (says the Apostle in the sixth to the Galathians^ if a
man be prevented in any fault ye which are spiritual restore such a one in the
spirit of meekness, Gal, 6, 1
considering thy self least thou also be tempeed. Bear ye one another
burden, and so fulfill the law of Christ.

And thus much touching the first general point of this sentence, what, or whom
we must love, to wit, the brotherhood or fellowship, of brethren none excepted.
Now somewhat of the love it self, and so an end.

And first, when as the Apostle here says, and exhorts, saying, Love the
brotherhood, he means not that the faithful to whom he writes, and in
whom he acknowledges all the graces of God, were simply void of love, or that
they had not some love already, when he wrote unto them: but that they should
continue in love, and increase in love, and love more perfectly then before.
For otherwise for the Brethren to love together, is as kind and as natural, as
for the birds to fly together; for the heardes to feed, and to lie together;
yea, for the members of the body to live and move together: for love is as it
were, the life and soul of the Brethren. And therefore it is monstriloco, a
monster, to see Brethren not to love together. And when it fell out otherwise in
the Church of Corinth, it seemed so absurd and strange to the Apostle, that he
makes as it were, an outcrie upon it, as if they had lost their wisdom, and
almost their wits, that some brethren fell out, and others could suffer it. I
speak it to your shame (says he) is it so that there is not a wise man
amongst you? 1. Cor. 6, 5, 6, and seq.
no, not one that can judge between his Brethren? but a Brother goes to Law
with a brother, and that under the Infidels. Now therefore there is altogether
infirmity in you, in that you go to Law one with another. Why rather suffer
ye not wrong. Why rather sustain ye not harm? Nay, you your selves do
wrong, and do harm; and that to your Brethren. There is the wonder.

But to speak more distinctly of this love, we may shortly consider in it
these three points before mentioned, first the continuance secondly the
increase: and thirdly, the perfection, or rather the synceritie and purity of
our love. For the first, in the thirteenth to the Hebrews, and first, Let
brotherly love continue, Heb. 13.1
says the Apostle: that is, see that it break not off but run in one thread,
and hold together unto the end. For the reward is certain. For as the apostle
exhorts the Galathians, saying, Gal 6.^
Let us not be weary of well doing, for in time we shall reap, if we faint
not. So because nothing is better then love, let us not be weary of loving,
for in time we shall reap if we faint not.

And indeed why should we leave so good a thing? which we cannot do, but we
are in danger to fall into the contrary. For anger it self, what is it, but a
breach of love, of which the Apostle faith, Be angry and sin not: Ephesians. 4, 26
Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath, neither give place unto the
devil, who quickly takes it, and tempts unto discord.

And besides it is a goodly thing to see the stream of love run clear
without troubling; as Solomon speaks of the prosperity, and adversity of
the righteous, in the five and twentieth of Proverbs: Prou. 25, 29
As a fountain trampled with the feet, or a spring mard, so is the just which
is removed before the wicked. The prosperity of the just, is the clear
spring, and the adversity of the same, is the spring troubled. and even so the
course of our love continued is the clear spring, and it is a goodly thing to
see it clear, as still it would be, were it not for troubling. And therefore
Paul in a certain holy impaciencie, and zealous desire of the continuance of
the love of the Galathians, exclaimeth thus, Vtinam and abscindantur qui vos
conturbant: Gal, 5, 12
I would they were even cut off that trouble you.

And also we ought to look the more unto our love, that it break not with
any brother that loves us, because the kind heart is soonest, and deepest
wounded, and the cure thereof is very hard. Of which Solomon says in the
eighteenth of the Proverbs: Prou. 18, 19
A brother offended is harder to win then a strong City, and their contentions
are like the bar of a Palace.

And yet we deny not, but as the Sun sometimes is darkened by the Clouds,
engendered of some gross exhalations from the earth: so the light of our love
is misted; and the heat thereof rebated by some sinister and corrupt affections
of our fleshly nature. And as in phrenetical persons we see that they have
their lucida interualla, bright and calm inter missions, which are not in the
nature of the disease: So the loving brethren have turbida interualla, their
troubled fittes, which are not in the nature of their love And therefore, as
the Sun at the last breaks through the mist, and cloud: and those that are
taken with the phrenzie, return to their madness as before: so the brethren
to their love, which no more can be parted, or depart from their hearts, then
the light from the Sun; or life from the soul, which is impossible. And
therefore, as Pharaoh, notwithstanding his sundry pretenses, yea, his
purposes, and permissions, and at the last his own fact in letting the
Israelites go out of his land, returned to his own nature, repenting, where
be should not, and follows after the same people to bring them back, whom
himself by commandment had sent away: so on the other side brethren,
notwithstanding for a season they have a bent another way, which leads from
their love, as blinded with error, tempted by Satan, and carried with the
violence of their affections: yet time will try them, and if they be
brethren, they will come to themselves, and their love agained notwithstanding
some unkindness for a season: For greater is he that is in us (says John)
then he that is in the world. 1, John 4, 4
And as Paul in the fifth of the first to Timothy, 1. Tim. 5, 24 25
speaks of two sorts of Ministers, the one hypocritical, deceiving the
Church at the first, and proving bad at the last, of whom he says, some men's
sins, or faults, are open before hand, and go before unto judgment, but
some m^^^ follow af^^ and the others such, who ^hough^^^ y^^le^i^e; and are
neg^ligent, and bu^^^ their gifts for a season, yet coming, to themselves
again, and as it were reui^ing, do afterward show the fruits of their
labor, and approve themselves to the Church of God; and of these he says in
the words next following: Likewise also the good works are manifest before
hand and they that are otherwise (...) be hid: So may we say, comparing the
brethren unto this better sort of Ministers, that though some of them sometimes
break off from that course of love, which they ought to continue, and sleep
in the forgetfulness of their duty (as of both sorts of virgins, both the
wise, and the foolish, it is said they slep^^ yet the brethren even all cope,
have Oil in their Lamps, and their love awaketh with them, and embraces the
brethren, whom before it did not. And the good works of their o^e, which at
their first calling appeared, and were manifest to all men, (yet altered ^or^ a
time, and carried into other behauiors, and be seeming the course which first
began) cannot be hid, as says Paul, but shall be seen to be ^^^o such at
the last, as they were at the first. For love breaks through all lettes, and
passes by (...) covers the multitude of sins, suffering all things, 1.
Cor. 13, 7
^^^^^ning all things, hoping all things, ^dd^^ing all things at the hands of
our brethren. And with a godly sorrow works repentance and reformation for
our own offenses toward them, with great care, yea, 3 Cor. 7, 11
with clearing of our selves, yea, with indignation, yea, with f^are; yea; with
great desire, yea with zeal; yea; with punishment, for reconciliation, till
the strong City be won; and one contentions, though as hard to break as
the bar of a palace, be yet broken a sunder, and our selves reunited in the
love of brethren. So all at the last was forgiven, and forgotten, between
Joseph and his brethren; and their love brast out in tears, and they wept, and
rejoiced, and kissed, and embraced, and their hearts were comforted in the love
of brethren. Genesis 45


The second consideration which we have of our love, is the increase of the
same. Of the which the Apostle in the fourth of the first to the Thessalonians,
1. These. 4, 9 14
writes thus: But as touching brotherly lo^^ (fayeth he) ye need not that I
write unto you: for ye are taught of God to love one another Yea, and that
thing verelie ye do unto all the brethren, which are throughout all
Macedonia: but, we beseech you brethren, that you increase more and more. We
are not therefore to stand at a stay in love, but still to walk forward from
love to love. For this is the way of the righteous: and of it Solomon says in
the fourth of the Proverbs, Prou. 4.18
The way of the righteous shyneth as the light, that shyneth more and more unto
the perfect day. And the right love of brethren is as fire, which still
increases, and inflameth them with a certain natural affection and
inclination to embrace one another, of which the Apostle in the twelfth to the
Romans says. Romans 12, 10
Be affectioned to love one another with brotherly love. And this affection or
inclination cannot stay it self, until it come to the highest degree of love,
and leads us to that which Peter requires in the first Chapter of this
Epistle, namely, 1 Pet 1, 22
That we love one another out of a pure heart, vehemently, or as our English
translation gives it, Fervently, with all the heart, and with all the soul,
and with all the might: and so our love become zeal, which has eaten us up,
and we all in a zeal do love the brethren. Which condemns (my brethren) the
love of these times, the last I think; in which it is come to pass, as our
Savior foretold, that because iniquity shall abound, the love of many, yea,
many brethren, I had almost said toward brethren is waxen cold.

But (to come to the third and last point) whether we love little, or whether
we love much, according to the measure of grace which we have received, let
us yet love purely; and that love which we have, let it be love in deed. Not
every one (says Christ) that says unto me. Lord, Mat. 7, 22.
Lord, that is, which professes himself my servant, shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven: but he that does the will of my Father which is in
Heaven. Not every one that says Brother, Brother, shall have the praise of
true love, but he that will do for his brother indeed. 2. Sam. 20, 9, 10.
Not as Ioab, which saluted Amasa, and said, Art thou in health my brother?
Feigned love
and he took. Amasa by the ^eard with the right hand, to kiss him. But with
his sword he smote him in the fifth rib, and shed out his bowelles to the
^round. This was not love, but dissimulation, which ought to be far from the
love of brethren. So the Apostle commands in the twelfth to the Romans, Let
love (says he) be without dissimulation. Romans 12, 9
And Peter in the first Chapter of this Epistle, requires brotherly love
unfeigned; 1. Pet. 1, 22
With brotherly love unfeigned (says he) not of a pure heart love ye one
another fervently. Therefore this love which kisseth; and kills, which
marries, and burieth all in a day, is not worthy of mention with the love of
brethren.

No, nor a better love then this: Idle love.
a better, I call it, because it does no harm: and yet is not good enough,
because it does no good. If a brother or asister (says James) be naked, Iam.
2, 15, 16
and destitute of daily food; and one of you say unto him, Depart in peace,
beeye warmed, and be ye filled: not withstanding, ye give them not those
things that are needful for the body, what helps it? This lip-loue Saint
James refuses: and Saint John will none of it, saying, in his first Epistle and
third Chapter, My little children, let us not love in word, neither in tongue
only; but in deed and in truth. 1 Joan. 3, 18
As if there were no truth in love, without the deed, if do it can, and does
it not.

And yet again there is another love not aright, which does some good, and
leads to some duties which are profitable, but not for love sake; but because
we received some good before, or may receive profit by the fame again. And
this we may call a servile love, Servile love.
because it works for wages and nothing else; and is no better (as our Savior
teaches us) but that sinners and Publicans may have the like. Matthew, 5, 46,
47. Luke 6, 32, 33.


But to leave these loves, which are none of ours, and to note that which
indeed the Apostle means, Simple love
it is a simple love, pure, and void of all respects, and loves the brethren
for the brethrens sake. Of which we may say as Salomo^ speaks in the
fourteenth of Proverbs, of the sense and judgment of the mind toward mirth,
or mourning: The mind (says he) acknowledges his own bitterness, Prou. 14, 10
or what is better to it self: and in the mirth thereof no strange thing does
mixed it self. That is, it tries al things, and takes what it loves, and
leaves what it likes not. And even so this love of brethren, it has her
proper judgment, and nothing it aloweth but what is like her self. It
admits no respects of rich or poor; wise, or unwise; strong, or weak;
profitable or unprofitable: but looks to the brotherbood or company of
brethren (as Peter requires) and in the name of brethren, as Christ speaks
in the tenth of Matthew, Matthew. 10
that is, as brethren, and in the only nature of Brethren, it embraces them,
and nothing in them besides. Paul saluteth Timothy thus, Unto Timothy my
natural Son in the faith: 1. Tim. 1, 2
so calling him, because he had a true and a natural faith. For there is a
natural faith, which brings forth a natural love, of which we speak: and
there is a bastard faith, of which is engendered a bastard love of false
Brethren. These also are amongst us, but they are not of us: and how little
worth their love is, I need not speak: the white of in egg, or a stick has
as much taste as it. And these, as they lie in out way, needs we must deal
with them but still we scare them, as a quauer mice that shal^eth under us, and
sometime or other they will deceive us. The Apostle in the eleventh of the
second to the Corinthians, reckoning up all his ^e^illes, to make vp^e the
heap, 1. Cor 11, 26
at last adds this; I^ perilles amongst false brethren. And who of us my
Brethren, in casting up the sum of all our troubles, can leave out this, In
perils of false brethren or, if for the present we can, the time may come that
it may be added. For the brood of Ismael does spawne apace. He that eat
bread with me, Psalm. 41, 10 Joan. 13, 18
has lift up his heel against me, says David, says Christ. And how should
any Christian look for better? Most men (says Solomon in the twelfth of
Proverbs) Do praise each man his own kindness: but who can find a faithful
man? Prou. 3, 6
to wit, which shows so much, as he says he is. Thus many say they love,
but proof makes all. Wherefore (says the Apostle to the Corinthians, 2.
Cor, 8, 24
in the second Epistle and eight Chapter) Show toward them (to wit, Titus,
and another brother sent unto them) show (says he) toward them, and before
the Churches, the proof of your love, and of the rejoicing that we have of
you.

And what proose or testimony of our love (my Brethren) shall I call for
here? surely none at this time but this, which none will deny, but love will
yield it, or none at all; it is so light, it is so little: and yet I would to
GOD our love would yield it. And this it is, namely, that at the least we would
come together, and see one another, and talk together, as loving brethren, of
our father, and of our mother, and of our elder Brother, in whom, and whose
love we are adopted children; of their love toward us, and our faith toward
them; as likewise of our love one toward another; of our necessities, of our
afflictions, of our joys and comforts, of our hope, of our happiness, and of
the crown, of our inheritance laid up in heaven; and further, to instruct,
to exhort, to comfort, to admonish, and edify one another: Without the which I
see not how love can work. Wherefore the Apostle in the tenth to the Hebrews,
exhorts thus: Heb. 10, 24, 25
Consider (says he) one another, to provoke unto love, and to good works.
Then he shows the mean. Not forsaking (says he) the fellowshippe that we
have amongst our selves, as the manner of son is. And who are those some, but
even we, which should consider one another to provoke unto love, and to good
works; which we do very little; and all because we forsake the fellow
ship that we have, or should have amongst our selves, each man contenting
himself with himself, when lawfully and without let, we might join with
many Brethren. Did Christ so, who never (almost) went without his Brethren? or,
did Paul so, who so earnestly prayed for a journey to Rome, to see the
faithful, For I long (says he) to see you, that I might bestow among you some
spiritual gift; that you might be strongthened, that is, that I might be
comforted, (says out) Translation) together with you. But the words of the
Original I interpret thus, That there might be joint exhortation amongst you,
that is that, I might exhort together with you, or, join my exhortaion
together with yours. For this is the spiritual gift, which beforech says, he
reth to bestow upon them, by their ^^^tall faith: that is, by each others gift
and knowledge in the faith, or doctrine of faith, both theirs and his.

But all are not Apostles, all are not ministers. Yea, but are all brethren, as
the Thessalonians; and the Apostle in the sift of the first exhorts thus: 1.
These 5, 11
Wherefore exhort one another, and edify one another even as ye do. Which
how can it be better done, then when we come together? Which though it be not
always, nor cannot be, yet as often as it may be, let it be, my brethren; and
when it may not be, let it be, as it may. And how is that? let the hand be the
mouth, and the pen our speech; and our Epiftles and Letters, as the lively
characters of our hearts and minds, let them present us unto the brethren.
For I am ashamed (almost) to think that we are not ashamed of so many bunches
and bags full of Letters, written only for the things of this perishing life,
and scarce one or two in a year (if any at all) sent, or received of this
kind, I mean, concerning the love of Brethren. As if neither Saint Peter
here, nor any Apostle besides, had ever said; Love the brotherhood: or, as if
we could love them, and do nothing for them, never so much as fee them, speak
with them, or hear how they do.

And this (dearly beloved) makes our greater and public assemblies (which
what are they also but certain holy communications between God, and his
people, when either he, by the word preached, does speak unto us; or we, by
our prayers do speak unto him?) this I say makes them so cold and
fruitless, that afterward we put our sparkles on the cold hearth, and
single our selves one from another, and have not these private and lesser
meetings between our selves, to confer of the things which we heard before. As
if before we had assembled but for a fashion only: which is not to assemble,
but to dissemble. Paul, though absent in the flesh, Colossi. 2, 5
yet was present in the spirit, rejoicing (as himself says) and beholding the
order of the Colossians in coming together. But we, as present in the body,
but absent in the spirit, (which is absence indeed) have no such joy in the
unities and societies of our holy Brethren. Whereby we even hazard the loosing
of our Fathers blessing: who loves to call us, and to see us together, and
then, and there to bless us; as Jacob, his' children: Genesis 49, 1, 2
whom he called together, and then he blessed them. For this is a promise to
the plural number, not so expressly given unto the singular: Where two or
three are gathered together in my name, Matt. 18.20
there am I in the midst of them. And in the hundred thirty and third
Psalm. Psalm. 133
Behold (says David) how good and pleasant a thing it is brethren, to dwell
together in unity. It is like the precious Ointment upon the head, that
ran down unto the bearde; even unto Aarons beard, and went down to the
skirtes of his clothing: Like as the dew of Hermon, which fell upon the Hill
of Sion. And why so precious? and why so pleasant? The reason is added: Verse
3.
For there (this word he uses significantlie, and as we say, emphaticallie)
there, as if he said, there, and not elsewhere, as there, The Lord promises
his blessing, and life for evermore.

Balaam beguiled with the wages of unrighteousness, Jude ver. 11 Number. 22, 13
would have cursed the righteous. And yet he cries out: Let my soul die the
death of the just; Number. 23, 10
and let my latter end be like unto theirs. All would die the death of the
brethren; and many profess the faith of brethren: but all will not live the
life of the brethren, for the life of the brethren is their love, which dies
not, but lives ever. 1. Cor. 13, 13
As Paul says, Now abides faith, hope, and love, even these three. But the
chiefest of these is love. For it abides now, and ever. Whereupon Saint John
concludes thus, (and with this I conclude also.) By this we know that we are
translated from death to life, 1. John 3.14
because we love the brethren. For we and our love must live together.

The God of peace, and love, increase this love, and knowledge in us, and
present us blameless in his sight, through Jesus Christ: to whom be praise for
ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

