PHILLIS and FLORA.

The sweet and civil contention of two amorous Ladies.

Translated out of Latin: by R. S. Esquire.

Aut Marti vel Mercurio.



Imprinted at London by W. W. for Richard Iohnes. 1598.

THE PRINTER. To the Gentlemen Readers, as well such as profess to be Mars his
Soldiers, as those devoted to be Mercuries Scholars.
COurtuous Gentlemen, according to my accustomed manner, which is, to acquaint
you with any Book, or matter I print, that bears some likelihood to be of
worth, or might seem pleasing or acceptable in your favorable censures: So
now, happening upon a sweet Poem, containing, A civil contention of two
amorous Ladies (both virgins, and Princesses) The one devoted, in her love, to
a Soldier; the other affecting a Scholar: And both to mayntaine their choice,
they contend (as women) to commend and reprove either others Love, by the
best and soundest reasons they can allege, whether the Scholar or the
Soldier, were the more allowable by his profession in women's minds; and
aptest and worthiest to be best accepted into Ladies favors. Please it you
therefore, to read the Poem to the end, then favorably to censure of their
opinions: and the rather with more favorable justice, because they were
Ladies. If the matter like you, thank the Gentleman that translated it, who
craves no other reward for his labor: If otherwise, yet of your wonted
courtesies, I pray you to pardon me the Printer, that procured the same from
him to be published: So shall you bind me yours, as I have been ever, willi^^
to please you.

R. Iohnes.

THE AMOROVS CONTENTION OF PHILLIS and FLORA:
Translated out of Latin, by R. S. Esquire.
IN flowery season of the year,
And when the Firmament was clear,
When Tellus Hierbales painted were
with issue of dispatent chere.
When th'vsher to the morn did rise,
And drive the darkness from the skies,
Sleep gave their visuale liberties
To Phillis and to Floras eyes.
To walk these Ladies liked best,
For sleep reiects the wounded breast,
Who jointly to a Meade addressed,
Their sportance with the place to feast.
Thus made they amorous access,
Both virgins and both Princesces,
Fair Phillis wore a liberal tresse,
But Flora, hirs in Curls did dress.
Nor in their ornamentall grace,
Nor in behavior were they bace,
Their years and minds in egall place
Did Youth and his effects embrace.
A little yet unlike they prove,
And somewhat hostilely they strove:
A Scholar Floras mind did move,
But Phillis likt a Soldiers love.
For stature and fresh bewties flowrs,
There grew no difference in their dowrs:
All things were free to both their powrs
Without and in their courtly bowrs.
One Vow they made religiously,
And were of one society:
And only was their impacie,
The form of eithers fantasy.
Now did a timely gentle gale,
A little whisper through the dale,
Where was a place of festiuale,
With verdant Grass adorned all.
And in that Meade-prowd-making Grass,
A River like to liquid Glass,
Did in such sound-full murmr pass,
That with the same it wanton was.
Hardby this Brook a Pyne had seat,
With goodly furniture complete,
To make the place in state more great
And lessen the inflaming heat.
Which was with leaves so bewtifide,
And spread his Breast so thick and wide,
That all the Suns estranged pride,
Sustainde repulse on every side.
Fair Phillis by the foorde did sit,
But Flora far removed from it,
The place in all things sweet was fit,
Where Herbage did their seats admit.
Thus mild they opposite were set,
And could not their affects forget,
Loves Arrows and their Bosoms met,
And both their hearts did Passion-fret.
"Love, close and inward shrowds his fires,
"And infaint words firm sighs enspires,
"Pale Tinctures change their checks attires
"But modest shame enoombs their ires.
Phillis did Flora sighing take,
And Flora did requitale make:
So both together part the stake,
Till forth the wound and sickness brake.
In this changed speech they long time staide,
The process all on Love they laid,
Love in their hearts their looks bewraide,
At last in laughter Phillis said:
Brave Soldier said she, O my Paris,
In fight, or where so ere he tarries,
The Soldiers life, lyfes glory carries,
Only worth Venus household quarries.
While she her warr-friende did prefer,
Flora looked coye and laughed at her;
And did this adverse speech aver:
"Thou should have said, I love a Beggar.
But what does he my heart embraces?
A thing create, that all things passes,
Whom Nature blessed with all her graces,
O Clerks, in you Bliss all bliss places.
This hard speech Phillis hardly takes, Phillis to Flora.

And thus she Floras patience crakes:
Thou love a Man pure love forsakes,
That God his godles belly makes.
Rise wretch from this gross Ecstasy,
A Clerk sole Epicure think I,
No Elegance can bewtifie,
A shapeles lump of Gluttony.
His heart sweet Cupids tents reiects,
That only meat and drink affects:
O Flora, all men's intelects
know Soldiers vows, shun those respects.
Mere helps for need his mind suffiseth
Dull sleep, and surfetts he despises,
Loves Trump his temples exercises,
Cooradge and love, his life compriseth.
Who with like band our loves combineth?
Even Natures law thereat repineth,
My love in conquests palme-wreths shines,
Thine feast deforms, mine fight refineth.
Flora her modest face enrosed, Flora to Phillis.

Whose second smile more fair disclosed
At length with moving voice she losed,
What Art in her storde Breast reposed.
Phillis, thy fill of speech thou have,
Thy wit with pointed wings is grast,
Yet vrdgest not a truth so vast,
That Hemlocks Lillies have surpast.
Ease loving Clerks thou holdst for clear,
Servants to sloth, and belly cheer;
So Envy, Honor would enpheere,
But give me ear, I Will give thee answer.
So much enioyes this Love of mine,
Henere enuies, or hirs, or thine;
Housholdstuffe, Honny, Oil, Corn, wine,
Coin, Jewels, Plate, serve his design.
Such pleasing store, have Clerks by-lying,
As none can feign their dignifying:
There; Love clasps his glad wings in flying,
Love ever firm, Love never dying.
Loves stings in him are still sustained,
Yet is my Clerk nor pinde nor pained:
Joy has no part in him restrained, (fained.
To whom his love bears thoughts-vn-
Palled, and lean, is thy Elected, (tected;
Poor, scarce with Cloths, or skin con-
His Sinews weak, his Breast dyiected,
For nothing causde, maks naught effected.
Approaching Need is Loves mere hell,
Soldiers want gyfts to woo Loves well:
But Clerks give much, and still heaps swell,
Their Rents, and Riches so excel.
Right-well thou know (Phillis replide) Phillis to Flora.

What in both Arts, and lives abide,
Likely, and clenly thou have lide:
But thus our difference is not tried.
When Holy Day the whole world cheeres,
A Clerk life's modest figure bears:
His crown is heaven, black weeds he wears
And shows a mind, half dround in tears.
None is so poor of sense or eyne,
To whom a Soldier does not shine:
At ease, like sprightles Beasts lives thine,
Helms, and barbd Horse, do wear out mine
Mine, low with arms makes Foe-towrs ly
And when on foot he fight does try,
While his fair Squire his Horse holds by,
Mine thinks on me, And then they die.
He turns, fight past, and Foes inchased,
And looks on me with Helm unlaced,
Lifts his strong lyms, and breast strait graced,
And says kyss-blesse me, O hart-placed.
Flora her wrath, in pants did spy,
And many a Dart at her lets fly; (cry
Thou can not make with heauen-reacht Flora to Phillis.

A Camel pierce a needels eye.
False goes for true, for Honny, Gall,
To make a Clerk, a Soldiers thrall:
Does Love to Soldiers coradge call?
No, but the need they toil withal.
Fair Phillis, would thy Love were wise,
No more the truth to contrarise:
Hunger and thirst bow Soldiers thies,
In which Deaths path, and Plutos lies.
Sharp is the wasting bane of War,
The lot is hard, and strayneth far:
The life is stooping, doubts does jar,
To get such things as needful are.
Knewst thou the case, thou would not say,
Shaven hair shamd Clerks, or black array:
Worn higher honors to display,
And that all states they ouersway.
All things should to my Clerk incline,
whose crown sustains the Impereal sign;
He rules and pays such friends as thine,
And Lay must stoop, to men divine.
Thou say that sloth, a Clerk disguiseth,
Who I confess base works despises;
But when from cares his free mind rises,
Heavens course and Naturs be compriseth.
Mine Purple decks, thine Maile bedighteth
Thine lives in war, mine peace delights
Old acts of Princes he resighteth,
All of his friend thinks, seeks, and wrighteth.
What Venus can, or Loves wingd lord,
First knows my Clerk, and brings me
Music in cares does mine afford, (word:
Thine joys in rapine and the sword.
Here speech and strife had both their ending,
Phillis asked judgment, all suspending:
Much stir they made, yet ceast contending,
And sought a Judge in homewards wen-
(ding.
With Countnances that egale been,
With egale Majesty beseene:
With egale Voice, and egale spleen,
These Virgins ward upon the Green.
Phillis a white robe bewtifide,
Flora wore one of two hews did:
Phillis upon a Mule did ride,
Flora did back a horse of pride.
The Mule was that which being create,
Neptune did feed, and subiugate:
Which after fair Adonis fate,
He Venus sent to cheer her state.
This she the Queen of Iberine,
Phillis fair Mother did resign,
Since she was given to works divine,
Whence Phillis had the Mule in fine.
Who of the Trappings asks, and Bit,
The Mule (though silver) champing it:
Know all things were so richly fit,
As Neptunes honor might admit,
Then Phillis no decorid wanted,
But rich and bewtious, all eyes daunted:
Nor Floras virtue less enchaunted,
Who on a welthy Palfrey vaunted.
(lightness,
Tamde with his Raines, won heaven for
Exceeding fair, and full of wightnes,
His Breast Art dectt with diverse brightness,
For Ieate black mixed, with Swans pure
(whightnes.
Young and in dainty shape dygested,
His Looks with Pride, not Rage invested:
His Main thin haird, his Neck high crested,
Small Ear, short Head, and burly Brested.
His broad Back stoopt to this Clerks-loued,
which with her pressure naught was moved:
Strait Legd, large Thighd, and hollow Houed,
All Natures skill in him was proved.
An Iuorie seat on him had place,
A hoope of Gold did it embrace,
Graven: and the Poitrell did enchace
A Stone that star-like gave it grace.
Inscription there allurde the eye,
With many a wondrous mystery:
Of ancient things made novelty,
That never man did yet descrie.
The God of Rhetoriques nuptial bower,
Adornd with every heavenly power,
The Contract, and the Marriage hour,
And all the most vnmeasurd dowre.
No place was there that figurd naught,
That could through all the world be sought:
But more excess of Meruails wrought,
Then might inceede a humane thought.
The skyll of Mulciber alone,
Engran'd that admirable Throne:
Who looking steadfastly thereon,
Scarce thought his hand such art had shone.
The Trappings wrought he not with ease,
But all his pain employde to please:
And left to go in hand with these,
The Tardge of great Aeacides.
A Styrrop for her feet to press,
And Bridle-Bosses he did dress,
And added Rains in worths excess,
Of his sweet Spowses goulden Tresse.
Thus on their famous Caualrye,
These Prince-borne Damzels seemd to fly:
Their soft young cheekebales to the eye,
Are of the fresh Vermilion dye.
So Lillies out of Scarlet peer,
So Roses of the Vernall year,
So shoot two wanton Stars yfeere,
From the eternal burning Spheere.
The Child-Gods graceful Paradise,
They jointly purpose to inuise:
And lovely emulations rise,
In note of one another guise.
Phillis to Flora, laughter led,
And Flora Phillis answered:
A Merlin Phillis managed,
A Sparhawlke Flora carried.
In little time these Ladies found,
A Grove with every pleasure crounde:
At whose sweet entry did resounde,
A Poorde that flowrd that holy ground.
From thence the sweete-breathd winds convey,
Odors from every Myrtle spray:
And other flowrs, to whose array,
A hundred Harpes and Timbrels play.
All pleasurs Study can invent,
The Dames ears instantly present:
Voices in all sorts different,
The four parts, and the Diapent.
Two tunes that from those Voices fly,
With admirable harmony:
The Tymbrell, Harp, and Psalterie,
Rejoice in rapting symphonie.
There did the Vials voice abound,
In Music Angellike profounde:
There did the Phife dispredden round,
his song in many a variant sound.
All Birds with tunefull bosoms sing,
The Blackbird makes the woods to ring:
The Thrush, the Iay, and she in Spring
Rues the past Rape of Thraces king.
Their shrill notes to the Music plying,
Then all the different Flowrs descrying:
The Odors in abundance flying,
Proved it the Bower of Loves soft-lying.
The Virgins something entered here,
And sprinkled with a little fear:
Their hearts before that held Love dear,
In Cupids flames increased were.
And while each winged Forester,
Their proper Rumors did prefer:
Each Virgins mind made weight on her,
Applauses apt and singular.
Deathles were he could there repose,
Each path his spycie Odor stroes:
Of Mirh and Synamon there groes,
And of our blessed Ladies Rose.
Each Tree has there his several bliss,
In fruits that never season miss:
Men may conceive how sweet Love is,
By that Celestial Court of his.
The dancing companies they see
Of Young men and of Maidens free:
Whose Bodies are as bright in Blee,
As Stars illustrate Bodies be.
In which so meruaylous a guyse,
Of unexpected Novelties:
These Virgins bosoms through their eyes,
Were daunted with a quick surprise.
Who stay their Boyall Steads outright,
And almost from their Seats alight:
Forgetting their endeavors quight,
with that proud Rumors sweet affright.
But when sad Philomene did strain
Her Rape-full-Rauing Breast again,
These Ladies hearing her complain,
were reinflamd in every vain.
About the Center of the Spring,
A secret place is where they sing:
And use their supreme worshypping,
Of Loves neare-darting fiery king.
There many a two-shapt company
of Faunes, Nymphs, Satyrs, meet and plie:
The Tymbrell, and the Psalterie,
Before Loves sacred Majesty.
There bear they Goblets, bigg with wine,
And Coronets of Flowrs combine:
There Nimphs, and Fauns demy-diuine,
Does Bacchus teach to foot it fine.
Who keep true measure with their feet,
That to the Instruments do fleet:
But old Silenus plays not sweet,
In Consort, but indents the street.
The Spring-sleepe did his temples lode,
As on a long-eard Ass he rode:
Laughters excess to see him nod,
Dissolved the Bosom of the God.
Fresh Cups he ever calls upon,
In sounds of imperfection:
With Age and Bacchus ouergon,
They stop his voices Organon.
Amongst this gamesome crew is seen,
The issue of the Cyprian Queen,
Whose head and shoulders fethered been,
And as the stars his countnance sheene.
In his left hand his Bow he bare,
And by his side his Quiver ware:
In power he sits past all compare,
And with his Flames the world does dare.
A Scepter in his hand he hild,
With Chloris native flowrs, untilled,
And Nectars deathles Odors stild,
From his bright looks the Sun did guild.
The triple Graces there assist,
Supporting with their Breasts commist:
And Knees that Tellus bosom kissed,
The Challice of this Amorist.
These Ladies now approached near,
And worshipped exempt from fear
Loves God: who was enuirond there
with Youth, that honored styles did bear.
Their joy is superexcellent,
To see a Court so confluent:
Whom Cupid seeing, their intent,
Does with his greeting interuent.
He asks the cause for which they came:
They confidently tell the same:
And he gives praise to either Dame,
That durst so great a war proclaim.
To both he spoke to make some pause,
Until their honorable cause
Profoundly wayde in every clause,
Might be explande with all applause.
He was a God which well they know,
Rehearsal needs it not bestow:
They light and rest, and plainly show,
where Love strives, Love will Master grow.
Love, Laws and Judges has in fee,
Nature, and use his Judges be:
To whom his whole Courts censures flee,
Since past, and things to come, they see.
These do the heart of Justice try,
And show the Courts severity:
In Judgment, and strong Customs eye,
The Clerk is first for venerie.
Against which the Queens but little strove,
Since Loves high voice did it approve:
So both to their Abodes remove:
But as at first, rest firm in Love.
Explicit Rhithmus Phillidis et Flora.

FINIS.

