Sundry new and Artificial remedies against Famine.

Written by H. P. Esquire; upon thoccasion of this present Dearth.

Non est quo fugias a Deo irato nisi ad Deum placatum, Aug. printer's device of
P. Short P S
ET VSQVE AD NVBES VERITAS TVA

Printed by P. S. dwelling on Breadstreet hill, at the sign of the Star.
1596.

NEW REMEDIES against famine.
THe first, and principal, and most Christian counsel that I can give in these
threatening days of sword and famine, is by hearty prayers from a zealous heart
to call upon the name of the great and mighty Jehovah, and of the gracious and
merciful God of Israel, that it may please him to forget and forgive our
manifold sins and transgressions, which have turned his favorable countenance
so long from us, and brought down from heaven so many clouds of wrath upon
the fruits of the earth, as that the great hope of our harvest is smitten and
daunted already, and that it would please him of his fatherly goodness by such
means as shall seem best in his own eyes, for the relief of these our
present wantes, to turn this our penury into plenty, and so to bless us with
his bountiful hand, that we may all sing a full song of thanksgiving unto
him, as well for these new and undeserved favors, as for that glorious victory
of late obtained against our popish adversaries, by the hand of those honorable
commanders that have already begun the peace of our common wealth.

Secondly, I could wish that all inferior officers in their places, would have
a more charitable and religious care in the execution of those orders, which
have of late been penned, and published with grave and deliberate advise from
the higher powers for the furnishing of our markets with all kind of grain.
For the execution is the very life of the law, and the letter thereof though
set down by authority and graced with a most honorable Chorus, does give some
hope at the first, but no full satisfaction in the end unless the executing
magistrate, together with those high directors do join hand in hand for the
common good of their distressed country.

Thirdly, I cannot want good will to wish though I have no authority to
command, that the very food of the earth even the blessing of the Lord, should
be no longer subject to this copyhold and slavish tenure, of such base and
unmerciful lords, who upon every rumor of foren scarcities, upon every petit
transportation, yea rumor of transportation only, upon fair weather, or
foul weather, or any weather if they list, can make the same finable ad
voluntatem Domini, and set what price they list upon the bushel. Is there no
Court of Chauncery, neither in heaven nor upon earth, to bridle these covetous
and unmerciful Lords, yea and to stint them, that howsoever it shall please
the God and giver of all things to cross us from the heavens, that yet no
inferior person should dare to exceed a certain price to be set down by
authority, upon the co^fiscation of whatsoever grain he should so ouerrate
unto his poor and needye neighbor?

Fourthly, if ever Abstinence were a true Christian an virtue, then now let it
appear amongst us, for why should the rich men feast, when the poor are ready
to famish? was there never but one Dives, and one Lazarus upon the earth? or
do we want wit, or will, or grace to apply a parable? Here I may well cry out
and say to the rich, and fat weathers of our time, as Tully sometime said to
Anthony. Te miror Anthoni, vt quorum facta imitere, eoreum exitus non
perhorrescere. I wonder at you o you Epicures that you are not terrified with
their destructions whose deeds you seem to imitate. Well if we have brought
our pampered bodies to those delicacies, that we can now as well leave our
lives, as our lusts; yet if every rich man would spare but one meal in a
week, and confer the estimate upon the poor of the parish where he dwells
(nunquam nimis dicitur, quod nunquam satis discitur) I say even this one meal
would serve well to mend a whole weeks commons of a poor Subscisor.

My sift and last petition should be to move us to a Christian charity. And
if that Roman Poet and orator, that sententious Seneca in the danger and
distress of a private friend could give in precept: Quod amicorum necessitati
magis occurrendum, quam succurrendum, that we ought rather to prevent then
relieve the necessity of a friend. Then what is to be expected at our hands in
a case of so great weight and importance, as does not only touch the credit of
our profession, but also the lives and welfare of many thousands of our poor
Christian brethren, whereof some cannot labor, and many are without labor, and
those which labor can hardly maintain themselves by their labor. Yea if we
would look more narrowly and pierce more deeply with a sharp eye into the
threats and terrors of these times, though religion could work no charity in
us toward others, yet reason, and civil policy might prevail so much with
us for our selves and those which are dear unto us, that we should not stay so
long until our neighbors flames take hold of our own houses, nor try the
extremities that hunger, and famine may work amongst us.

Thus much by way of Christian advise and counfell, now because I had rather
be any way wanting then in good will unto my native Country, unto the which I
confess that I owe my wit, my wealth, my labor, my life, and whatsoever else
I possess under my gracious sovereign: and seeing that many grave, and
learned sermons have already in vain beaten upon this Subject, many careful
provisions have been from time to time made and published from our prudent,
and provident Prince, and from those honorable Senators of our state, which as
yet can work no impression in the steely, and adamant hearts of our English
Rookes and Cormorants, though I cannot win the goal in so great a purpose as I
have in hand, yet I will bid the base to those choice, and delicate wits of
England, who if they would either associate themselves unto me at the first, or
second me, when I have begun this proud attempt, I would not doubt, but that by
these our joint labors we should frustrate the greatest part of these
covetous comlots, and by new, and artificial discoueries of strange bread,
drink, and food, in matter and preparation so full of variety, to work some
alteration and change in this great and dangerous dearth.

Nevertheless (though I do only break the ye, for those that shall follow me in
this kind) yet according to that poor talent of mine, I will try mine own
strength and confer as well my conceit, as knowledge herein: which though it
be neither such as I could wish, nor as these urgent times require, yet I will
be bold (in the fulness of mine affection) to prefer and present the same to the
view of the well disposed Reader, whose courteous acceptance hereof, may one
day peradventure wring from me some matter of higher reach, and farther
service then as yet I see either just cause to promise or reason to speak of.

And because in the treatise following my Author has raunged over all manner
of trees, plants, roots, green pulse and herbs, out of which he might by any
probability draw any kind of sustenance for the relief of man, I will only
content my self with the handling or preparation of some of these particulars
which are most plentiful in their quantity, least offensive in their nature
and most familiar with our soil and bodies, so as their offensive taste being
first removed by art, they may serve us in a far better manner and to our
greater liking then now they do, either for bread, drink or food.

How to take away a great part of that rank and unsavory taste of Beans,
Pease, Beechmast, Chestnuttes, Acornes, Veches, and such like.
IF this may in some good measure be performed, then I doubt not but that the
bulk and body of our meal and flower will be much increased and multiplied at
the least for the poor man's Table: then receive mine own experience
therein. Boil your beans, pease, beech mast, etc. in fair water, and if
they be not yet pleasing enough, change your water again, and at the second
or third boiling, you shall find a strange alteration in taste, for the water
has sucked out and imbibed the greatest part of their rankness, then must
you dry them (and if you think good, you may also hull them, according to the
manner set down hereafter in the Abstract of Anchora Famis, etc.) or else you
may grind them vnhulled, and then make bread thereof, either simply of it
self, or with the addition of some third or fourth part of other wheat flower;
or else for better expedition at the least in drink, if not in bread, you may
take ye ground meal of them, and infuse warm water thereon, and as it
begins to cool, dreyne the same away, and reinfuse fresh warm water till
the taste please you: then dry up the meal, and make bread thereof either
simply, or compounded as before. And as concerning the Chestnuts, we have the
experience of France therein already, where in great abundance they are spent
and consumed in their usual bread in diverse parts of that Country.

The beech mast does yield a most sweet and delicate oil, and every way
comparable with the nut it self, and therefore it is very probable that it will
make an excellent bread with a very small correction: and if there might be some
easy way or manner found out for the ready husking or hulling of them (which
seems no matter of any great difficulty) then I durst promise a most rich and
plentiful oil of our own growing and serviceable for many necessary uses. But
if notwithstanding my former preparation of beans, pease, etc. the meal
thereof do not yet content you, then work it into paast, with a liquor first
strengthened with some bruised Annis seeds, licoras, or sweet Fennel seeds,
or with the seeds themselves incorporated in the paast, or for the avoiding of
charge with pepperwort, Thime, wintersauery, penniroyal, etc. For if you can
but deceive the taste, you shall find the bread very hearty, wholesome, and
nourishing. And whatsoever is here spoken of beans, pease, etc. may be
generally understood of all other grain, seeds, plants, pulse, roots, etc.
And that which is serviceable for bread, will be much more tolerable in drink:
for the making whereof in some more cheap manner then as yet is known or usual
amongst us you shall find some few notes of mine upon the Abstract following, in
their several places.

Certain strange and extraordinary ways for the relieuing of a prisoner, or
other poor distressed creatures, when al hope of usual victual is taken from
him
THese as I dare not warrant, so yet because I have received them either from
good Authors, or from the credible report of men of worth, I will deliver them
as faithfully as I have received them.

1 And first of al Paracelsus himself affirms, that a fresh turfe or clod of
earth, applied every day unto the stomach of a man, will preserve him from
famishing for some small number of days.

2 I have heard many trauailers deliver of their own knowledge and experience,
that a man may live 10. or 12. days by sucking of his own blood.

3. Bapt. Port. tells us of a poor fellow upon whom a ruinous house fell, and
the man so hedged in with the floores and timber that fell upon him, as that
not being able to get out, he was forced to relieve himself with his own
urine for 9. or ten days, making his hand his cup to drink in.

4 But the strangest and most incredible of all the rest, is that story which
Parson Bateman, sometime Parson of Newington, had by relation of that reverend
father D. Grindal then Archbishop of Canturbury, from the mouth of two English
captives, yt were imprisoned in Turkey, and for their offense condemned to be
famished to death, and escaped by this means. The keeper affecting his
prisoners for those good parts which he found in them, having received an oath
of their secrecy, delivers unto each of the^ a small piece of Allom, which
he willed them five or six times a day to roll up and down in their
mouths. How at ten days end, the great Turk sending to know if the
christians were dead or alive, and being informed of their lives, he commanded
that upon pain of death no man should dare to relieve them with any manner
of food. Now when 10 days more were expired, and the like inquiry and return
made as before. Well, quoth. the Turk, if they can continue yet 10. days more
without food, I will say yt the God of the christians will have them preserved,
and they shall be enlarged. The last 10. days expiring, and the prisoners lives
certified unto the Turk, they were forthwith delivered out of prison, and
returned for their own country, and here discovered the secret. The reason,
and probability hereof I will leave for better* Magitians then my self. For
though we might suppose that the salt of nature might receive some strength or
vigor from this mineral salt, yet how the guts should be filled with so
small a proportion I cannot guess much less determine.

A sift food but receiving some help from come was commended by Mendozza
himself, wherewith he assured me upon his honor that he had relieved a
Spanishe town, in an extreme dearth, and scarcity of victual, and
therewithal showed me a loaf of that composition, which was of wheat straw,
chopped into short pieces, and ground with some proportion of wheat into meal.
But since I have been farther informed, that the same practice has been
usual in hard years in some parts of England, and for mine own better
satisfaction, I caused some of the same flower to be kneaded into bread, but
it was very brown in color, and very grettie in the mouth, and therefore it
should seem that our stones be not so apt for the grinding of it, and I have
heard some affirm, that the same cannot well be ground but in a steel mill, or
hand mil.

6 And the East Indians, as I have read, do use to make little balls of the
juice of the herb Tabaco, and the ashes of cockle shells wrought up together,
and dried in the shadow, and in their travail they place one of these balls
between their nether lip, and their teeth, sucking the same continually, and
letting down the moisture, and it keeps them both from hunger and thirst for
the space of three or four days.

7 The seventh and last of this kind, is that sweet root called Licoras, which
being chewed only (if we may believe Pliny) does in small quantity satisfy
both thirst and hunger, and yet maintain sufficient strength in the body.

How to make an excellent bread of the roots of Aaron called cuckowpit, or
starch roots.
THe making thereof is set down by a late writer in this manner. First, the
roots that are large must be cleansed from all skin and filth, and then cut
into small and thin slices, the thinner you make them the sooner they are
prepared, sees them in boiling water, so long as you find the water hot and
biting, and til the roots begin to wax svveet. Then change your water, and
pour fresh water unto them, and so continue boiling until the water become
sweet, and that the roots have lost al their acrimony. Then take them out, and
lay them abroad upon Canuas, supported with frames, and being dry grind them
with hand mils, and they make a most white and pure meal, which either of it
self, or by the mixture of one third of wheat meal with it, makes a most
fair and sauory bread. This carries some good sense and likelihood of truth
with it, for we find by daily experience, yt it makes as fair, if not a
fairer starch, then our wheat. And therefore it were to be wished, that some
good husbandry were used in the planting, and multiplying of these roots,
observing the nature of such soil and place wherein they most delight. And
though it should fail us in this kind, yet we shall find our labor richly
requited, if we convert them into starch only. But here it is to be remembered,
that the root must be gathered when it is plump full, and in his pride, which
is about the latter end of March, and April al: for when it begins once to
spire, and that the sap is run up into the leaves, then the root shrinketh, and
also loses much of his virtue. Here a just occasion is offered to practice the
like upon the Turnep, whereof there are both good store and the price of them
likewise very reasonable.

Bread, and other food made of Pompions.
THis fruit being both cheap, and great, does also make a very sauorie bread,
if a little meal be mixed therewith, yielding food to a great number with a
small charge. And if you bestow sugar, and other sauce upon it, it may also
pass for a delicate dishe. The manner of making the same is thus discribed by
Porta: Choose the greatest and ripest Pompions, cut them into thin slices,
and take away the hard crust or coat, and the inner marrowe or softnes, sees
them in boiling water, and bring them to a pulp or pap, and then streine it,
adding thereto a third part of meal or flower, and make it up into bread, the
fresher you eat the same, the more pleasant and delicate you shall esteem it.
But with mine Authors favor: I think you will find it in his best form, and of
farthest extention, when it is in his pap or pulpe, for his body is exceeding
waterish, and vanishes away to a small substance if you seek to dry it. This
I write by mine own trial, yet peradventure the Goord of Naples, which he
calls Cucurbita, may be of a differing nature from our Pompions.

How to save much flower, or meal that is lost in all our usual Corn mils,
that grind either with wind or water.
IF I teach the Miller so to grind his wheat, as that neither the starchmaker
(if I be not deceived) shall have stuff to make his starch with, except he
grind for himself after the ancient manner; nor the brown Baker any bran to
make horsebread withal, I hope that my fault will be pardonable at this time,
because I hold it much better to want flower about our necks then in our
bellies, and that horses should starve before their masters. The conceit is
short, and easy, and I hope without controlment. Let every Mill that grindeth
corn, have also a boulting mil annexed unto it, that the same mouer may play
upon both, and by shaking of the boulter make a division of the bran from the
flower. This bran as soon as it is divided from the flower must be returned
again into the hopper amongst the rest of the wheat that is vnground, and so
as fast as you gather any branne, you must mix it with more corn: and by this
means you shall have much less bran, and also more flower, though you would
notwithstanding this course, pass the same through a fine boulter again. It
is an usual manner in the higher part of Germany to boult with these milles, but
not to grind over their bran again in the first mill, for ought that I know,
or as yet can learn.

How to make starch without any corn.
IT is well known that those Aaron roots before mentioned, will make a white
and delicate starche. You must gather them in March or April, washing them
clean, and paring away all the filthe, or foul skins from them, and after
slicing them into thin slices, and so leaving them in fair clear water, and
changing your water every 12. hours, for the space of four or five days,
till they become exceeding white and clean; then stamp them, and force them
through a strainer with clean water, and when the substance of the starch is
settled in the bottom, which will be in a few hours, then dreine away all the
clear water that fleeteth on the top, very gently, and expose the rest being
in flat earthen pans or clean tubs to the Sun, which will attract or draw up
all the water, and leave a hard cake in the bottom. But in the winter time,
when you cannot have the Sun of a sufficient force for this purpose, then set
your stone pannes, or pewter basins wherein you have strained out your starch
upon a pot with scalding water, and so you may dry the same in a sufficient
quantity for your own use all the year long. And if you would harden the same
without charge, then place your pan upon your biefe pot, and so you shall make
one fire to perform several actions at once. But because these roots are not
to be had in all places, nor at all times of the yeeare, therefore for a second
supply I have thought good to set down this receipt following.

Take of the whitest Gum Arabique that you can buy at the Grocers, let them
beat the same into pieces for you as big as hafell nuttes in their great
morters, then take 3. ounces of this gum, and first wash it in fair conduit
water, in a stone basin, stirring it up and down with your hands to take the
filth from it; then wash it again with some more water, and power that also
away, and then to every 3. ounces so washed put a wine pint of fair conduit
water, stirring it up and down 3. or 4. times a day to procure a speedy
solution or dissoluing of the gum: then cover your pan, and when all the gum
is dissolved, streine the water through a clean and thin linen cloth, and
reserve the same in glasses well stopped, till you have cause to use it. It will
last sweet at the least three weeks after it is made. When you would use this
starch, if you desire to have your ruffes to carry a pure and perfect white
color, you must mingle some blew with the water, stirring it up and down
with your finger in a porrenger, and before the blewe settle to the bottom,
wet your ruff therein, and presently wring it out again; then pat it till it
be clear, and after set it, as you do in your common starch, I do find by
experience, that half the time that is lost in ye other manner of starching, is
here gained* for by reason that your starch is in a thin water, the Lawne
and Cambricke will be soon cleared, and with much less beating. And I think
that a second profit will here likewise fall out by the way, viz. that your
Lawne and Cambricke will last much longer: for (if I be not deceived) the
continual patting, or beating thereof between the hands in our usual
starching, works a great fretting and wearing of the same. And I doubt not,
but that there be many other sorts of grain, pulse and roots, which will make
as good starch as wheat, which at this time I leave unto the studious
endeavors of those that are careful for the common good. It may be that at my
better leisure I may handle this subject more at large, but now the present
times enforce me, to deliver that knowledge which I have. And thus much for
starch.

Sweet and delicate cakes made without spice, or Sugar.
SLice great and sweet parsnep roots (such as are not seeded) into thin
slices, and having washed and scraped them clean, dry them, and beat them into
powder (here a mil would make a greater dispatch) searcing the same through a
fine searce, then knead two parts of fine flower with one part of this ponder
and make the same into cakes, and you shall find them to taste very daintily. I
have eaten of these cakes diverse times in mine own house Quaere, what may be
done in carots, turnips, and such like roots after this manner.

Here I think it not impertinent to the purpose, which I have in hand, to wish
a better survey to be made of my book of Husbandry, being a parcel of the
Jewel house of Art and Nature, printed an. 1594. Wherein sundry new sorts of
Marle are familiarlie set down, and published for the good of our English
farmers: amongst the which, those waste ashes of the Sopeboilers (for such as
dwell near unto the City of London, or may by easy water carriage convey them
unto their hungry and lean grounds) have a principal place for ye enriching of
al cold, moist and weeping grounds. The book is to be had at the Greyhound in
Paul's churchyard. And if there were such plenty as I could wish of those
shauings or cuttings of horn, whereof those ye work for lanthorns only make ye
greatest store, I would the^ in respect of the infinite extention thereof,
commend that before any other manuring of ground whatsoever, and for the only
garden doung yt I know, although for arable ground I must needs confess, that I
have one secret, not as yet made known or common to the world, that would prove
more general, and more easy of price then any other whatsoever that I as yet
have either heard, or read of, but for some reasons best known unto my self, I
do as yet forbear the discovery thereof.

There is also a certain victual in the form of hollovv pipes, or wafers,
wherewith, as also with a defensatiue oil for his armours, pieces, and other
weapons, I furnished sir Frances Drake in his last voyage, which has been
well approved and commended by sundry of his folowers upon their return for
England, whereby I was the more encouraged to make a second trial thereof in
the Bear which went lately for CHINA. This food I am bold to commend in
this place, both because it argues ad propositum, and for that I know that if
the masters, owners, or Mariners of ships, would advisedly look into it,
they should find it one of the most necessary, and cheap provisions that
they could possibly make, or carry with them. The particular commendation
whereof, rests upon these few branches following:

1 First, it is very durable, for I have kept the same both sweet and sound, by
the space of 3. years, and it agrees best with heat, which is the principal
destroyer of Sea victual. 2 It is exceeding light: for which quality Sir
Frances Drake did highly esteem thereof, one man may carry upon any occasion
of land service, so much thereof, as will be sufficient to relieve two hundred
men a day. 3 It is speedily dressed, for in one half hour, it is
sufficiently sodden, by which property it may also save much fevvell and
fiering, which occupies no small room in a ship. 4 It is fresh, and thereby
very pleasing unto the Mariner in the midst of his salt meats. 5 It is cheap,
for in this dearth of corn, I dare undertake to feed one man sufficiently,
for 2. pence a meal. 6 It serves both in steed of bread and meat, whereby
it perfourmeth a double service. 7 Not being spent it may be laid up in store
for a second voyage. 8 It may be made as delicate as you please, by the
addition of oil, butter, sugar, and such like. 9 There is sufficient matter to
be had all the year long, for the composition thereof. 10 And if I might
once find any good encouragement therein, I would not doubt but to deliver
the same prepared in such sort, as that without any farther dressing thereof,
it should be both pleasing, and of good nourishment unto a hungry stomach.
Al those which are willing to victual their ships therewith, if they repair
unto me, I will upon reasonable warning, furnish them therewith to their good
contentment.

A speedy or present drink which Trauailers may make for themselves
(extempore) when they are distressed for want of good beer or ale at their Inn.
TAke a quart of fair water, put thereto five or six spoonfuls of good Aqua
composita, which is strong of the Annis seeds, and one ounce of Sugar, and a
branch of Rosemary, brew them a pretty while out of one pot into another, and
then is your drink prepared. Or if you leave out sugar, it will be pleasing
enough. I have been credibly informed that diverse Gentlemen of good credit,
when they trauail abroad, and cannot like the taste or relishe of their drink,
that they use no other then the aforsaid composition, and find the same both to
refresh and cool them very well, neither are they troubled with the rawnesse
of cold water, by reason that it has received some correction by the Aqua
composita, and that the Annis seeds do give a delicate taste unto it. It were
not amiss for all Seaman to carry some store of Aquauitae with them, that when
their wine, Cider, Perry, and beer are spent, they may transmute their water
into the said drink.

A cheap liquor for poor men, when malt is extreme dear.
IF a poor man in the time of flovvring, do gather the tops of Heath with
the flowers, which is usually called and known by the name of Linge in the
Northerlie parts of this Realm, and is that plant whereof our common heath
brushes are made, and lay up sufficient store thereof for his own provision
being well dried and carefully kept from putrefying or molding, he may at all
times make a very pleasing and cheap drink for himself, by boiling the same
in fair water, with such proportion thereof, as may best content his own
taste. And this liquor is commended unto me, by one of the most sufficient
professors of Physic of our times, and that upon his own and often
experience, for a most wholesome and medicinable drink, as well for the
Liver as the Spleen. It may be graced with a little licoras in the decoction,
if he see cause.

I have also heard Sir Frances Drake affirm, that fair water and vinegar
mixed in a due proportion, does make a fine cooling and refreshing drink in
hot wether, which he esteemed for a rare secret at the Sea. And I have also
known them that have made a voluntary drink thereof on the land, when they
have had sufficient choice of others before them.

How to brew good and wholesome Beer, without any Hoppes at al.
SInce my profession in this book, is in some sort to anatomize both Art and
Nature, without any regard of private men's profits, whom it either may
essentiallie or accidentally touch, I am bold therefore, without craving any
leave to do good: to renew, or rather to confirm and ratify an ancient
opinion and practice, which long since in the great dearth and scarsitie of
hops, many brewers of this land have been enforced to put in use for the
better suportation of their weak and declining estates. But because they
failed in proportion (without the which there can be nothing complete or
absolute) they suffered a good conceit to die in the birth. And no marvel
then, if wormwood notwithstanding it be a simple so highly commended of all
the ancient and nevve Herbarists, for his great and singular effects in
Physic, be in a manner utterly abandoned of all the bruers in our time (except
a few that can make a difference betvveene five shillinges, or 5. pound
charge, when hops are sold for 50. s. an hundred) seeing as yet not any one of
them has so clerkly wrought upon this simple, as to cover and hide the taste
thereof, from the well mouthed ale-cunners of our commonwelth, which weakness of
theirs, because it consists wholly in the want of a due proportion between the
malt and other beer corn, in respect of wormwood, I have thought good to
set down a sufficient direction for those that are wise, and willing to do
good both to themselves, and to their country, whereby they may easily even in
one days practice attain to the full perfection thereof. Supposing then that
your wormwood is either cut down in the leaf before it be seeded, or being
seeded that it is cut into short pieces, whereby there may be made an equal
mixture of the whole bulk together (for you must note that the seedie tops
are much stronger and much more oily then the rest of the leaves or stalks)
make first a decoction of 4. ounces of hoppes with nine gallons of water (which
is the proportion which some Bruers in some sorts of drink do use) and when
you have gotten out by ebulition or boiling, the full strength and virtue of
them, keep the same, and begin likewise with some small proportion of
wormewoode to the like quantity of water as before; and when you have
bestowed as much time and fire therein, as you did about the hops, then taste
each of them by it self, and if you find the same to exceed the first in
bitterness, then begin with a less proportion of Wormwood, and so
reiterate your work, till you have equally matched the one with the other:
then may you safely proceed by the rule of proportion to a barrel, and from
thence to a tun, and so to a whole bruing. Neither let the bitterness of
Wormwood in his present taste any thing dismay you, for if you did but taste
the decoction of hoppes only before the mixture of ground malt (which does
wonderfully sweeten the same) you would think it a very unapt licour to be
wrought up into so pleasing a drink as our ordinary beer does show it self
to be: for it is the hop only which makes the essential difference between
beer and ale, and that by alaying the exceeding lusciousnes of malt by his
bitterness, whereby both uniting themselves together, become a sauourie and
wholesome drink for man's body: which may be in every respect as well performed
in wormwood, as in the hop, yea, and peradventure with Centaury, artichoke
leaves, or Aloes hipatique, as some work masters have confidentlie affirmed
unto me. And though the hop be usually in drink, and the wormwood only in
medicine, whereby some may happily be persuaded, that it is inconvenient for
men that are in health to drink a medicine continually to their meat: yet
let this be a sufficient answer to that objection, that it is the dose only
that makes the difference herein. For I can assure you in mine own
experience, and by the experience of one of the best experienced Bruers in
London, who yet lives, that if you give a double or treble quantity of
English hoppes to an ordinary guile of strong beer, you shall find the same
to be a sufficient preparatiue to your body for the best purgation that shall
be ministered after. And this is the reason why Venice Turpentine, which being
ministered in a small dose, is given for the strengthening of the back, and to
stay the running of the reins: yet if it be taken in the quantity of an ounce
at once, it will purge sufficiently in diverse bodies. So then either let there
be no more taste of wormwood, then there is of hops in our drink, and we
shall find no difference in effects, but such as shall commend and grace ye
wormwood beyond the hoppe; or let beer be advanced with the hop to the
bitterness of wormwood wine, and so we shall find the hop far to exceed the
wormwood in his malign quality.

Thus much I have thought good to publishe, for the credit of wormwood and for
the benefit of this Island in sundry respects, which I shall not need to
particularize at this time, because they are so commonly known to all men.
And though I know I may be ouerweyed either with the Flaunders Merchants, or
with the great hop masters of England, whose foundation is so deeply laid,
that a few loose lines can neither shake nor stir the same: yet either knowing
or at the least persuading my self to maintain the truth, before I give it
over, I will crave the liberty of the schools, quod fiat controuersia. And in
the mean time, those which will not be satisfied of the wholesome and rare
medicinable helps of the one, together with the weak and feeble virtues of the
other (which was but a hedgebird the other day, though now it be perking so
proudly upon his poles) I will refer them to the learned Herbals of Dioscorides
Matheolus, Doctor Turner, Dodoneus, Turnizerus, and the rest.

An abstract of certain frugall notes, or observations in a time of Dearth or
famine, concerning bread, drink, and meat, with some other circumstances
belonging to the same, taken out of a Latin writer, intituling his book,
Anchora famis and sitis.
FIrst, for the avoiding of all putrefaction, as well in bread, as in corn, it
is very requisite that they be perfectly dried, or gently parched, either in
the sun, or by the warmth of the air, or else in the want of these two, in
some apt oven, or rather in a Stoue, but with such care, as they do not burn,
or savor of adustion.

2 After the baking of your bread, it is necessary that the same be left in
the oven, well closed, for some reasonable time, the heat thereof being
lessened by degrees, for so the bread being thoroughly baked, and suffered to
cool of it self again, will satisfy the hunger of a man in double proportion
to that which otherwise it would.

3 Each kind or sort of bread being a little tosted over the coals, and
afterward sopped in wine, will fill or glut exceedingly: such a breakefast as
this taken in the morning, is a sufficient repast for the whole day after.

4 The meal of parched corn does fill the gutte exceedingly.

5 Bread may be made of Rice, Indian millet, or Turkish wheat, either by
decocting the whole grain in water, and so bringing it to the form of a
pulteis, and after baking the same, or else by grinding it into meal, but the
latter way makes the fairer bread. This may as sufficiently be performed
with our ordinary wheat, for ought that I can imagine.

6 All manner of pulse, as Lentils, vetches, beans, and such like, if they be
first rubbed over in Lee, and then hulled and after ground, they will yield
both fayrer meal, and better bread.

7 Paast, or dowe is soon baked upon thin plates of iron or brass.

8 Those which ride post, are oftentimes content both to bake their bread, and
also to roast their meat under the seats of their saddles, here I think that
our climate will prove too cold.

9 Men must be broughr by degrees, and not too suddenly from their usual and
natural food and drink, into these artificial diets.

10 A pulteis or hochpot, made of flower or meal sodden amongst apples,
pears, plums, and such like fruit, or of some bread and water, or the broth
of flesh that has been tosted in the smoke, or with milk well boiled
together, does fill the stomach more then thrice so much of dry bread eaten
alone, especially, if the same be high boiled to a stifnes, or consistencie.

11 Such like compositions do also extend farther in the satisfieng of hungry
mawes, being made of Biskets, or dry, hard, or stale grated bread. And by this
means one loaf will go as far as two new loaves.

12 All sorts of good cakebread, or spicebread steeped a convenient time in
fair water, will convert the water into a most pleasant or wholesome drink,
the bread notwithstanding being very wholesome to be eaten.

13 Pound your pepper, ginger, and such like spices, and having steeped them in
water, place the same well covered over a gentle fire, and then work your
paast with the imbibition, or decoction thereof. And by this means your spice
will extend much farther in cakebread. And the same spice also being nevve
pounded or beaten, may be afterward wrought up in paast for cakebread. Here
you may practice upon these plants, which be hot and wholesome withal: as the
wild Cresses, otherwise called Pepperwort, Galingale, Thime, Orrace, Isop,
Wintersauery, Penniroyall, and such like herbs instead of spices.

14 Some of these artificial kinds of bread and drink, if there be any left
that may be well spared, will serve for the feeding and fatning of cattle,
geese, Hens, Hogs, etc.

15 The smell or sent of bread (I think he means that, which is new and hot
from the Oven) does nourish the body, and refresh the spirits greatly. Some
commend the spirits of bread extracted by distillation, as a most soueraign
preservative in the consumption, and other pining diseases.

16 If any of these artificial foods or drinks do happen to offend, either in
color, taste, or savor, they may be helped with honey, sugar, saffro^, wine,
annis seeds, Coriander seeds, sweet Fenel, Cinnamon, and such like.

17 In the time of necessity, even green corn taken as it grows of it
self, or a little parched or dried against the fire, or steeped, or boiled in
wine, or water, affoordeth a reasonable kind of sustenance.

18 The distilled water of oats, does so warm ye stomach, as it does overcome
the senses. It is well known that many do brue a very strong and mighty drink
with malted oats, how profitable the same might be to all our English
Brewers (if there might be sufficient store of them had) in a dearth of wheat
and barlie, the same being rightly matched, or rather mastered a little with
the hop, to alter their taste: they can best tell that have made their private
experience and profit of them, when others very inconsideratly have run on in
their common, and chargeable course of brewing.

19 The licour of the Birch tree is both wholesome, and sauerie, and deserves
to be recommended in his kind.

20 There may be an excellent extraction made of ale, which you may term
either a spirit, or a quintessence, and that in a small dose, far more excellent
then all the tartareous, sulphurous, or mercuriall preparations. If the
Author do here mean any philosophical course, it will be both too curious
and costly for the common sort of people: if only a well rectified Aquauitae,
or an euaporation of the phlegmatic part to a thick body, I cannot see how
we shall raise any store, or quantity of matter to furnish the subject which we
have in hand If he mean physically, we will reserve the strict examination
thereof, till a fitter occasion be offered.

21 The meal of such corn as is ground in the month of August, is remembered
amongst the writers of best credit, to keep and last best all the year after.

22 Such bread as is made up of the flower of dry beans is most strong in
nourishment, and may be corrected of his taste by the addition of Cominseed.
And it is also a usual matter in Germany to make drink of Beans. Our
English Brewers do also find good use of them amongst other corn in a small
proportion, wherein they have a special care not to surcharge the rest of their
beer corn, with too great a quantity of Beans, least they should give a bad
smacke or farewell to their beer: but I am verily persuaded that if either
beans, or pease were artificially handled according to the manner before
expressed, that they would not only prove serviceable, and that in a large
manner for Beer only, but also for the making of wholesome, sweet, and delicate
bread.

23 Of Veches first hulled, and of the herb Aphace, which receives diverse
translations, and is called Dandelion, Priests crown, Swines snowt, Monks
head, Dogs teeth, or common Cicory, may be made a bread so as it be mixed with
a convenient proportion of other usual meal, for it yields a very fair and
sauerie flower, as the Author testifies of his own experience the same may
be corrected with Annis seed, Fenell seed, Coryander seed, etc.

24 Both bread, and drink may also be made of Lentils.

25 Bread may be made of Pannicke, as also of Millet, whose seed even in a
small quantity does arise greatly both in bulcke, and substance.

26 A solid, and wholesome bread may be made of wheat starch. But such bread, by
reason of his price, will have no fit place here except every private man do
make his own provision.

27 A decoction of Annis seed, Fennel seed, Caraway seed, and such like,
either in wine, or water, is a most wholesome drink. Hereunto may be added a
decoction also of Licoras with Annis seeds together in fair water in a dew
proportion.

28 Of Beechmast, Acorns, and the barks or raping of trees that are wholesome,
a convenient drink may be had.

29 Mushroms will spring abundantly if you slit the barks of the black, and
white Poplar, and bury them in furrows well dou^ged. So likewise the white
Poplar being cut off close by the ground, and watered with warm water well
seasoned with leaven, in four days space will bring forth most pleasant, and
delicate Mushroms. These being dressed in their kinds are accounted amongst the
most lusty, and stirring meats with the Italians.

30 A good bread may be made of the Rape, or Nauew, being first scorched, and
after sodden, and then baked.

31 A bread may be made of the powdered, or ground leaves of the pear tree,
apple tree, beech and oak, and so likewise of drink.

32 Dow may be kneaded up with wine, vinegar, or ale, if you would make the
same hot, and hearty. But I think the new must of wine, or the best wurt of
ale, or beer much better, for that we may well doubt, or rather assure our
selves that the whole spirit of wine, or ale will fly away in the baking,
because the same had first wrought it self into a body, whereas in wurt that
never came to workmanship, the fire or spirit does as yet lie close, and
couched within it.

33 A dronken bread may be made with spirit of wine and flower. But I think
that common Aquacomposita would prove ouerchargeable.

34 A paast consisting of meal, and the oil of Olives, or other fruit, or
seeds mixed together may be made into bread.

35 Mizaldus reports of a certain Trauailer, who undertaking a long journey
did relieve himsefe with one pound of the oil of Violets, and soft grease
mixed together, and therewith he preserved himself by the space of ten days.
The like effect has also been found in the oil of Almonds mixed with the
grease of a Cow, and that by reason of the clammines thereof.

36 A bread made of Eggs is both wholesome, and more filling then other
ordinary bread, but especially if the same be kneaded up with the yeist of the
strongest beer or ale.

37 Those eggs are most carefully to be gathered, and kept, which are laid from
the new moon in August, others do rather commend the waine, and the time of
both the Sunsteads. And new laid eggs will keep long in dry chafe, or bran.

38 An excellent bread may be made with milk either leauened, or unleavened,
and of exceeding nourishment being taken but in a small quantity, but they fill
more if resty bacon being fried be also incorporated therewith.

39 A man may live with milk only, and it will serve instead of meat, and
drink, and medicine.

40 A glutting kind of bread may be made of new cheese, and likewise of old
being grated; mixed, and wrought up with meal. For it comes all to one end
whether we eat bread and cheese severally, or both mixed together.

A petition to the courteous Reader.
Here I have thought good (Gentle Reader) to entreat thus much favor at thy
hands, that seeing my new fire of Coleballes, together with some other few
inventions, first mentioned in mine Apology, do as yet attend some courtly
favors, whereby they cannot so presently as I wish, break forth into the
public service of this land: that thou would for a little time (which I
hope is now drawing to his period) intertain them with a good conceit and kind
opinion, not regarding the censures of those ignorant, or malicious spirits of
our age, who presuming to know the simples of my fire, may happily range into
base and offensive matter, and thereby labor to discredit that secret, whose
composition they could never yet reach unto, nor, if they had the particulars,
were they able to combine and knit them with their left handed workmanship.

And for the better satisfaction of my welwishing friends, and the full
confutation of mine undeserved foes, I would have them to understand, that
seeing the premised secrets, have not only bin seen, and allowed, but at this
present are also countenanced by those which are right Honorable in their
places: that from henceforth they will scorn the malice both of viperous
tongues, as also of slanderous pens, if any man should happen to be so
extremely, or desperately mad, as to take upon him to argue upon that
project, whereof he can neither find a medium, nor communes terminos, and
therefore impossible to conclude Sillogistice sinon in Bocardo against it.

ANd if I shall here discover a secret both new and profitable for our English
Maltsters, whereof as yet there is not so much as any model extant, and that I
could fall into M. Ajax vein, and had some of his glib paper, and gliding pens,
I might soon scribble ten sheets, and sell every sheet for two pence, toward
necessary charges: and in the end conclude the expectation of many leaves, in
a few sweeter lines then he has done before me: but because I will bind my
self to no such privy presidents, I will deliver my conceit in as plain and
naked terms as I may.

New Malt kills for wood or Seacole.
INstead of those spars which support the hearcloth place a few single
quarters, sawed in equal parts, here and there scatteringly, or make what
other devise you shall think best, to bear a floor or platform of lead,
which (for the avoiding of charge) may be made of sheet lead thinlie driven:
and if you mean to use Seacole, then must you have a grate of iron bars to lay
your coals on, and let there be four vents within a foot of the floor, made
in equal distance each from other, both to draw up the heat and steame of the
fire, as also to convey the smoke by small leaden pipes into some wooden
trunk or tunnel of brick or plaster: and if you find the lead too hot for the
barley, you may either lessen your fire till you have attained a true degree
thereof, or else you may spread a hearecloth upon the lead, and so avoid the
danger of hasty malting, peradventure ye steame of boiling water, issuing out
of a great copper vessel being placed over the fire, may give a sufficient
heat for this purpose. And here I hope, that both the bad sent and taste which
is usually found in wood dried-malt, as also the continual attendance upon a
straw fire will be much avoided: besides that saving which will fall out in such
shires, as afford either wood or Seacole in any plentiful manner. I have
been also credibly informed, that a fire of bean stalks, maintained in an
usual kill, will defraye his own charge, by reason of the ashes, which are
more worth then the fuel it self. But whether they serve best for the
making of glass, soap, or salt Peter, I cannot determine, only I know them
to be full of a strong and sharp salt, and such as serves the Surgeon to make
his Cawsticke withal.

A new and extraordinary means for the enriching of arable grounds.
ANd because the multiplying of corn is not greatly abhorring from our purpose,
and seeing the greatest part of Dearth, must of necessity begin from scarsitie
of grain, I will here (without praying in aid of M. AJAX, or of his stale
marginal notes, whose reformation has already more offended the ears of
Honorable persons, then his first salts could ever offend their noses) make a
public offer to all those Gentlemen and Farmers of England, who dwell in such
parts of this Realm, as do neither yield any store of Marle, or other common
and ordinary dung or soil, how they shall be sufficiently furnished, with a
new and plentiful Compost, and whereof there have been already sundry and
rich trials made, whose quantity shall not exceed eight bushels, whose
yearly charge shall not amount to xviii. pence the acre communibus Annis, one
year with another, and whose nature is so transmuted and disguised, as that one
neighbor, yea M. Ajax himself, though he were present at the disposing or
scattering thereof, shall not be able to discern what his next neighbor has
done to his ground. In which secret, all those whom the author shall find
willing and worthy of the same, may upon reasonable composition, become
owners of the skill, as well for their own as for the good of their country.
Neither do I know any just objection, why the same should not enrich as well
pasture ground as arable.

FINIS.

