The precepts of the excellent clerk and grave philosopher Plutarche for the
preseruacion of good Health.

LONDINI.

In officina Richardi Graftoni. 1543.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

To the right honorable lord, the lord Audeley of Walden, lord Chau^cellour
of England, Ihon Hales heartily wishes most prosperous health with increase
of honor.
THe custom to give new years gifts grounded upon benevolence, confirmed by
ye consent of people, calls and wills, yea rather commands me (right
honorable lord) at this time to re^dre unto your honor my duty: which my
good will is redye and veraie desirous to observe, not myndyng ye breach of a
custom that has a foundation so charitable, a continuau^ce so lauda^le* and
an end so honest and profitable. Musyng therefore in what thing both for this
time grateful, and herafter fruitful, I might chiefly declare the same, no
thing in my mind could be wisshed, nothing could be devised, nothing could
be provided, so requisite, so meet, so necessary for your good lordeship, who
is continually occupied either in ye high affairs of ye common wealth, or in
hearing and determinyng causes of controversy, causyng peace ye most
coumfortable nourissher of people to reign every where: as some brief thing to
advertise your goodness of the preseruacion of your health, how ye may long
to Gods pleasure continue in your vocacion, how ye may ma^^ ^eres execute
your office according to the godly zeal and love, yt ye bear to justice,
which ye have and do daily declare and express to the world. And sith it
has pleased almyghtie God, and the kings most gracious majesty, to
constitute and depute you in the chiefest authorite and office under his
highness in this realm, to be to his majesty in ye stead and lieu that Aaron
was to Moses (the chief mynister of God over the children of Israel) which
is to be his graces mouth, to utter to us his most humble subjects, yt his
highness shall receive of God, to be to yt come^ laws of this his realm a
lifely equytee, having power by your conscience to ordeine remedy, where it has
provided none, to mytigate the same, where it shall seem to be rigorous: we ought
daily not only to give praise and thanks to his most excellent goodness for
the same, but we be also bound to study and deuyse to our power, how so just
and virtuous an offycer may long continue among us. For as they that bear
good will, and love to the comen wealth most rejoice and be glad, when
justice and the laws be justly executed and mynistred, and hertely desire that
they may be so maynteyned and kept as pyllers without the which no public
weal can stand, no, nor any little famyly ca^ endure. So ought they to be
joyful, when the rulers and mynisters thereof be in health and prosperitee
hable to execute the same: and besides to study and endeavor how they may so
co^tynue. For as a woman that has no head nor governor is little hable to
govern and rule her servants, if they be froward: so can justice and law
little do in a comen wealth, where people be evil disposed, if those lack yt
should supporte, maynteyne and put them in execucion. On the other part they
that be in autorite and office, as they be bound not to be remyf^e and
negligente in executyng their duty, so ought they not overmuch vex, molest,
weary, and consume their bodies, but so preserve their health, as they may
longeserue God, and their prince in their vocacion. And as Iethro seeing Moses
ouermuche troubled in hearing the peoples suites and causes, said: It is not
well dooen thus to consume and waste your self: So may (...) be justly said
to such as be in authoritee and office, having their mind so fixed to the
expedicion of causes, that they regard not their health: Ye do not well,
thus to cosume your selfs. For as in a camp or army, no soldier may
depart without license and pasporte of his Captain, but must so use him
self while he is there, as he may be at all times ready and hable to serve
at commandment, so ought every christen man to lead his life in this world,
not to seek or labor to be out of it, not to shorten his days, but to tarry
unto such time as he shall have license and pasporte of the Lord almighty, and
not in the mean season to make his body feeble and weak, that he shall not
be hable to do that he is elected and called unto.

Plato says that Aesculapius (who for his excellent knowlage in phisyk is
called God thereof) would not that such as professed yt faculty and science,
should enterprise or take in hand to cure such as were of nature subject to
disseases, or had gotten sickness willingly by inte^peraunce, although they were
never so rich. The one, because they engendered and begat children like them
selfs, that is feeble, weak, syckely, not hable to serve in the common
wealth. And the other, for yt they wyllingly vnhabled them selfs to serve
therein, and yet besides consumed that others lacked, who were both hable and
wylling. But men sometime wyllingly must bring their bodies out of temper, and
sonest of all such as be great rulers and Counsailours, who for ye safete of
the hoole common wealth be enforced upon present occasion, to provide present
remedy, to do things out of hand, which without great danger will not
tarry time, whom neither Aesculapius nor any man that has reason, would to be
without redress. For the which cause many excellent clerks as well in other
sciences as in phisycke, have devised how to restore such me^ne to their
pristyne state and health of body, and among others the exellent clerk and
grave Philosopher Plutarchus Chaeronensis both Scholemaister and Counsailour
unto the most virtuously disposed Emperor of all Gentiles ^ra^anus, in a
book entytled Precepts to p^serue good health wherein not like a botcher with
poticarye ware, but naturally he teaches those that be in authoritee and
office in the public weal, and such as be given to the study of good
letters, how to preserve and maynteine their health. And because it is not
only his, but also all other learned and wise men's opinion, yt there is none
so great enemy to health, as surfaicting and distemperaunce, whereby more men
has and do daily dye, then by y^ sweord or plague: he first teaches how
the appetite and sensual lusts of the body may be restrained and brydeled,
that they shall not procure and cause intemperaunce, then if it chance a man
to fall therein, how he shall come out again, afterward being in health what
diet he shall keep, what exercises he shall use to preserve and keep the same.
Which I have translated into our English tongue, and do present unto ^our
honorable lordship for a new years gift, most heartily desiring and praiyng
God the father almighty, that his most godly minyster the Kings most royal
majesty may many years more reign over us in most prosperitee, and
felicitee: and your good Lordeship long to serve and rule under his highness
in honor and health.

At London the first day of Ianuarye, in the year of Christ's incarnacyon.
1543.
The precepts of PLVTARCHE for the conservation of good health, made in
form of a dialogue.
The speakers. MOSCHION. ZEVSIPPVS.
GLAVCVS the Phisician was yesterday desirous fre^d Zeusippus to have disputed
with us philosophically, if ye had not put him in fear. ZEVSIPPVS. That is
not so friend Moschion, neither I did dyscourage him, neither he was minded to
confer with us. But rather I did escheue his company because I would not
provoke him to strife, that was desirous of it. ^aucus a ^yng phy^an.
For without doubt, in Physike he alone may compare with a great many. But he
is not well affected and minded toward Philosophy: he has always in his talk
some bitter overthwart and wayward toys, ^lacuus not ^ll affected ^ward
phi^ophie.
and at that time he was purposelye set and dysposed to be out with us, criyng
with a loud voice yt he had enterprysed a very naughty part, that dysputyng
how men should live to preserve their health did confound and myngle together
the lymytes of faculties.

He said that the professyon of Philosophers and Physicians were two things
and several, even as the borders of Misia and Phrigia be diverse. And many
things that we spoke (in deed I confess) not very cyrcumspectly, another as
we mente, but yet not without some profit, he repetyng did check, taunte, and
shake in pieces. MOSCHION. Yet Zeusipdus, I would very fain have heard both
those, and the reast. ZEVSIPPVS. You Moschion being a Phylosophier natural
are dyspleased with a Phylosophier that does not study Phisike: The offi^
part of ^ philosoph^
and take it for a non decet if he should think it his part and office rather
to seem to be occupied in the study of Geometry, Logike, and Musyke, then to
search out and desire to know what things good or evil be done in his
own house, that is, in his body. And yet a man shall see more resort of
people there, where money is delte to the comers to allure them, as is used in
Athens. ^he praise ^ comme^^io^ of phi^e
But Physike is so to be esteemed among lyberal Sciences, that for finesse,
clerenesse, and pleasau^tnesse, it may be compared wytb the rest. And it
draws and enticeth men to the study and love thereof with a bou^tifull and
large reward and gift, which is, holsomenesse of body, and prosperous health.
Wherefore men may not be displeased with philosophiers as though they exceded
their bounds, ^hilosophie ^tural and ^isik be an^red either ^ other.
if they dyspute of those things, that be mete and profitable for good
health, but rather Philosophiers ought to be challenged and accused, if they
mingle not together sciences, The stu^ of philo^phiers
if they thought it not their very duty to be seen generally in all things
that be honest, appliyng the^ selfs both to that yt in argument may delight,
and that for man's life is necessary. MOSCHION. I pray the Zeusippus leat us
leave talkyng of Glaucus: who is so proud, and so much stands in his own
co^ceipt, that he thinks he has no need of Philosophy, yet of good feloship
repete you to me all the dysputacyon: and first, if ye think good, what Glaucus
did reprove, which ye say ye spoke not in earnest. ZEVSIPPVS. That same ioyle
friend of ours said that he heard a man say that it was very profitable for
bodily health to keep always the hands warm, and not to suffer them to be
cold. And that the cold of the extreme parts of the body, while it did drive
the heat inward, did induce a famylyaritee and custom of the fever. On the
other part in case those things, that come outewardely unto ye extreme parts
do bring and bestow the matter together with the heat through all the
body, ^v the bo^is to be ^ed for ^or heat
it is very wholesome. And therefore, when we do any thing whereby our hands
be occupied, the^ the heat of it self by the mouyng of the body is brought
into the members and there kept. But when we do nothing, then ought the
extreme parts to be kept from cold. This was one of the things that he had
in derision. An other was (as I remember,) of meats that be used to be
mynistred to the sick, he would that men should receive and take them
long before, to use them in the time of health, that afterward as children
do, we do not abhor and loathe that diet, but he would we should make
them by little and little acqueynted and famyliar with the stomach so that in
syckenesse we should not therewyth as with medicines be offended. Me^ne m^
use in hea^ some part^ diet y^ mu^ be had i^ time of si^nesse.
And that we should not be grieved if necessytee should compel us, to take ye
that were sodden without spices and other ingredience. His mind was also that
sometime we should alter our diet, meats ^ee exhibit^in sycke^e.
and take our meat although we were not washed before in the bayne, and that
we should now and then drink water when we had wine present, and an other
while warm drink albeit we had snow to alaye the heat (as in some places it
is used) despisyng them that for ostentation and under the color of
temperaunce, ^w the sto^ke is to ^ accusto^.
bostyng and crakyng do absteyn from such things. But rather leat us of our
selfs by little and little so accustom the stomach, that when need shall be it
may without grefe take that that is profitable.

And leat us put clear out of memory when we be sick over much scrupelous
and supersticious care of such things, that we may not lamente with those
that howl and cry that they be brought from their old delycate and
pleasant life, to that filthy and base kind of diet.

Certes that goodlye saying Choose the best kind of living, Use shall make it
plesau^t, The best kind o^ living to be chose^
is very profitable in what soever ye shall go about, and chiefly in those
things that concern the diet of ye body, and the manner of living. Use of
things.
By use of those things that be wholesome, ye shall make them fre^des acquainted
and famyliar with nature, remembryng what many in their syckenesse both suffer
and do, how grievously they take it, how they can scace suffer to receive
warm water, a supping, or a soppe of bread, calling not only those things
detestable and unsavory: but also those that compel them to receive ye same
detestable and lothesom. Moreover, baynes have destroyed many me^ne, ^any men
^roied by ^nes.
used at ye first, not when they were very sick, but because they could not
nor were able to receive sustenau^ce unless they had been first washed, whereof
Titus the emperor was one, as they report, that waited on him whilst he was
sick. He did also besides reprehende this, ^e and ^er bo^ are the ^e heal^.
that sclender and lean bodies were ever more healthier, and that
ingurgitacion, fyllyng of ye pau^che, drunkenness, and unmeasurable use of
delicates were chiefly to be taken head of and eschewed of them that entende
to make solemn banquettes, or do prepare to receive their fre^des with
feasts: or yt be invited by some rich manne or prince to a set dinner,
appoyntyng on the common guyse of prouyng masteries i^ quaffyng, which at
such time may not be refused, whereby doubtless they make ye body then
quiet, pressed, and light, even as it were, a yenst a great storm of wyndes and
fludde of waters toward. For verily the entisementes prouocacions, and laws of
good fellowship (as they call) be such, The sav^ of good f^lowship e^mies to
health.
yt it shall be very hard if ye chance to come among them, not to do as they
do, to keep your self within a mean and to observe your accustomed diet: but
yt either ye shall be thought disdeignfull and not contented with ye compaignie,
or they shall be weary of you. Therefore to thentent that fire may not be put to
fire, as the proverb is, yt is, Gluttony ^st not ^ laid on ^ttonie. ^nerie
con^pte and ^ of Phi^pus.
that glottony be not laid on glottony, intemperau^ce couched on
intemperau^ce, it shall behoue you to remember diligently that Philippus king
of Macedonie did merrily in sport. The matter was this. One had desired him to
supper, as he was going thither, he met with diverse whom he took with him for
his geastes. The good ma^ne of ye house seeing him bring so many, and having
made but little provision, was moved and troubled. Philippus perceiuyng the same
caused a servant to warn all his friends, yt they should not eat to much,
but yt they should reserve a place, and keep a corner for a delicate dishe yt
was to come. They trustyng thereunto, eat little of that yt was before them. By
this means the prouysion yt of it self was very scle^der, was made sufficient
for them all. After this sort ought we to prepare our selfs against inevitable
quaffyng: reseruyng a place in our bodies for meats, iunkettes, To feastyng we
must bry^ a perfec^ appetite.
yea and drunke^nesse, and to bring with us to such feasts a perfect
appetite. If when we be full already and have surfaicted, we shall soodenly for
the compaignie of our betters, or by confluence of strangers, for shame be
forced to come to drink with such as be hable to bear it, there must the
saying of Creon that he speaks in the tragedy be our chief buckler and
defense against shame, a thing very noysom to men, and against uncomely
blusshyng.

Your boune o friend, frendeship doothe not savor,
But malice rather, and hatred great,
That to your friend so vnfrendely does labor.
His no small hurt, and your self no profete
Adieu therefore friend, welcome foo,
Better it is in time to depart
Then thus to continue, and at length in woo
To lamente our folly when we smarte.
Good ma^er vama^erly.
Verily, he that for fear to be reputed without good manner, will willyngly cast
him self into apleuresis or the dissease of ye reins, may be in deed
accou^pted without good manner: yea without wit and reason, which things who
so has, knows how to keep compaignie with men, with out eating and drynkyng
out of season and such good manners. For he that iently and curteisly refuses,
shall have as much thank for refusyng as for drynkyng. Besides, How both to
keep te^perau^ce a^ to please co^paigni^
he that deyntely does carue and distribute the meat, tastyng nothing himself
but absteinyng, and in the mean season at their eating and drynkyng doothe
provoke them to myrthe and pastyme with some plesau^t talk of him se;lf,
shall be reputed for more meryer, then if he did both drink drunk and fill the
paunche with meat. I had alleged for my purpose one example out of
antiquite, Alexand^ dyed of v^ measura^ quaffyng
how Alexander ye great conqueror after he was well whitteled, being provoked
of fresshe to quaffe with Medius, and fearyng ye by his refusyng the other
should win the victory, sanke under ye bourde, and lost his life for his
labor. And of our own time I brought forth an other exaumple how one Riglus
a great wrastler called into the bayne erely in ye morning by Titus the emperor,
^iglus*
went thither and washed with him, and when he had drou^ke but ones (as the
common voice is) being taken with an universal palsy, he died soode^ly. The
things before rehearsed did Glaucus in ye way of derisio^ obiecte unto us like
a scholemaister as pri^ciples and rudime^tes of his science. Of other matters
the^ propouned, neither he was willing to hear, neither we disposed to
declare: for he regarded nothing yt was spoken Socrates therefore first of all
aduisyng us to forbear meats that provoke to eat of fresh when we be not
hu^grye, Socrates
and drink yt calls come drink me when we be not thurstie, does not
utterly forbid us to use them, but teaches us to use them when need shall
require, that we should apply the delectacio^ and pleasure of those things to
profet and necessity, as they do, that in a common wealth do convert the
money that was given to be bestowed in commen plays and disguysynges, to
thuses of war. For what thing soever of nature deliteth as long as it is
part of that that nourissheth her it is her own good. And they yt be
hungry, ought rather to eat that is necessary then yt is sweet, and
specially not to provoke a fresh stomach and a new appetite when they have
dooen with their accustomed diet of fedyng. For in like manner as leapyng was to
Socrates no vnplesau^t exercise, ^e when ^ee well.
so he yt uses to feed on iunkettes, fruits, and deyntie disshes, takes
less hurt of them. But who so already has received that is co^petent for
nature, and has filled himself, leat him specially beware yt he be not gredy
on such things. And herein lack of knoweledge and ambicio^ be as much to
be exchued, as voluptuousnes and gluttony because these things many times
provoke a ma^ne to eat when he is not hungry, to drink when he thristeth
not, whilst they minister unto him uncleanly and unquiet ymagynacions, even as
though it were a great shame to leave at any time a delicate morsel uneaten,
as a fat tripe, mushroms of Italy, a march pain or such like deintie
meat. Ignorance and pride, many times do entise and draw a ma^ne by the
train and savor of vain glory to use strange and deintie meats, when the
body has no need to eat, Many ^ surfaict^ vain gl^
to the intent he may make vau^t thereof to other, who shall wonder at him, and
think him happy that may have the sruicion of such delycate and fine
dishes. In like sort be some me^ne disposed toward women. The in^peraunc^
voluptu^ persone^
It happens sometime that when they be with their own wifes being both
beautiful and loving they have no pha^sie nor courage, but with money obteinyng
ye l^ue of Phryne, Lais, Julian of Rumfo^d or such like abominable harlottes
they stiere and procure theimselfes through wanto^nesse to folly when they be
weak and feeble of body and not apt thereto, to the intent they may crake and
boste yt they have had to do with so notable an harlott, and that only for
vain glories sake: witness hereof Phrine her self, who when youth had taken
her leave, when beauty had bid her farewell, and age with deformite were come to
associate her abominable co^uersacio^, would then say, that many bought the
dregs or lies for the name and glory of ye wine, undoubtedly it were a thing
much to be meruailed at, if we shu^d escape hurt yeldyng to ye body all
such pleasures as nature either desires, or is able to bear, yea to take no
harm, where for our business, we should so strive with her desires, as we
would differ the use of veraie necessary pleasures, when nature required
them, or then to avoid danger, when (as Plato says,) we should, as often as
appetite incensed or moved us, utterly yield to all kind of lusts. Neither
may it by any reason be, The so^ taill of ^ luptuo^nesse pr^dyng of mind.
that desires and lusts of nature which out of kind do break out of the
mind into the body, forcyng the same to obey and follow her lusts shall so
clean return, but that they shall leave behynd in ye same very grievous and
great inco^modities of her fo^de, vain, and feeble pleasures. It is in no wise
convenient to provoke and stiere ye body to pleasure through the desire of ye
mind. For it is against nature ye pleasure should from thens proceed. For
likewise as ye ticklyng of ye armepittes do not mynister to the heart cause of
hertie nor earnest laughyng, but displeasaunt and like to a crampe, which
causes a man to seem to laugh when he does not. ^sures ^asaunt
So whatsoever pleasures the body stired and troubled receives of the mind,
^e glory ^th of ^nyng of ea^
they be like hardes, soon set on fire, and soon out, troublyng the nature
and contrary thereto. Wherefore whenever any notable or dentie dishe shall be
set before us to be eaten, we ought rather to seek glory by absteinyng, then
by eating: reme^bryng yt (as the philosophier Simonides said) it never
repented him that he held his peace, The saiy^^ of Simo^^des.
but often that he spoke: so leat it not repent us at any time, yt we have
refused eating, neither yt we have drou^ke water in ye stead of strong wine:
but rather on the contrary part not only nature ought not to be enforced to
these things, but also if any thing be set before us yt she desires, The
app^tite mus^ sometym be restr^gned.
it shall be rather convenient for use and exercise oftentimes to call back, and
turn her from her appetites to light things, and such as she is used with. For
if we shall break ye law (says the Thehane although not rightly) let us break
it to rule and govern. But leat us mende that saying, and say: If we shall
needs desire glory, leat us desire it for ye love of health by abstynence from
such delycacies. Yet there is a great noumbre in whom nygardenesse and
gluttonye be joined together, that in their own houses can restrain their
appetites, any that ^ytle ea^ at home ^luttons ^de.
and be lords over them: but when they are at others tables, lay their
hands about them on every side, their tethe cease not gryndyng as long as
the belie will hold, even as they do that come to the sackyng of a town in
time of war, snatchyng and ryflyng as though no more such prays should
chance. ^ guar^ of gur^ndyng.
But their reward is at hand, soon after their bodies weaxe unlusty, their
heddes heavy and dull, and the next day they faill not of cruditie of
stomach. The saiy^ of Crates against sup^fluitee in fare.
Crates therefore thynkyng that sedicions and tyrannyes grew in co^me^ wealths
through de^tie meats and superfluitee, by a merry word gave this taunte unto
a certain manne: Syrha (quod he) make no sedition in the commen wealth by
enlargyng thy disshes, when little meat will serve. But let every manne dispose
and enjoin him self to a competent rate, not utterly contempnyng, cresses,
olives, Surfaicty^ reiseth se^cion wit^ the body.
and other comme^ fare, and in steed thereof fall to delicate made meats,
deyntie fysshes, and costelye disshes, and so through surfaityng reyse wtin his
body sedition, trouble and a flixe. For ye comen meats cause ye appetite shall
not desire more the^ serves nature. Diuersitee sauces ^oe corrupt ^ holsom ^s
of the eat.
But the cunning of those that be deuysers and dressers of dyuersytee of
meats, their subtle dyshes, their sweet sauces always do set forward,
and increase the lymytes of appetyte and corrupt the virtue and holsomnesse of
the meat.

But yet I can not see how it hangs together, that we should abhor and have
in disdain women that seek to have the love of men with drynkes and charms,
when we hyre Cooks, pastelers, and such others, to corrupt our meats with
their confectyons. I had almost forgotte my self, and called it Sorceries and
Juglynges. The saying of Arces^laus against lecherous persons.


Therefore that Arcesilaus says so^what bitterly against aduoutecers and
lecherous persons.

It forces not whether the act be dooen naturallye or unnaturally: Yet it
agrees well with that whereof we now speak. For what difference is there (to
be plain) between these two, whether ye move and stiere intemperaunce to
sensualitee with plays and gestes, or provoke the taste with sweet odours and
deintyes, so that always we should need clawynge and rubbing as scabbed
members do? But an other season perchance we will speak against sensualitee,
and set forth how honest a thing of it self temperaunce is: our purpose now
is to treat of the diversity and greatness of s^nsuall pleasures.

We be not hindered nor do we lose so many matters, so many hopes, so many
iourneys, so many exercises through disseases as we do pleasures. Who would
^aue plea^ure must ^ot neglecte ^ealthe.
And therefore is it not expedient for him yt most seeks for pleasure to
neglecte the health of his body. Many there be in deed, to whom sycknesse
is none impediment, but yt they may apply their study, ne to others, but
that they may be in ye wars, Sickness ^oste co^tra^ie unto plea^ures.
ne to some but that they may do their duetye in the commen weal: but the
bodyly pleasure is such, that in sickness no man can have the very
fruicion thereof. ^leasures ^n sickness ^ke to son shinyng in stor^e.
Yet the delectacio^s that come thereof, being of their very nature short, be
not pure but very much mixed and enterlarded with hurtes, and may be
compared to a little fair wether or son shinyng that happens in ye midst
of a great tempest or storm.

And verily Venus bears no rule when the belly is glutted, but rather when the
belly is quiet and at rest. For the end and perfection of love is pleasure, as
it is of meat and drink. And pleasure receives no less co^moditee of health
of the body, then sea gulles take of the calmness of the wether, yt suffers
them to lay their eggs, and to hatche forth their birds. The saty^ of
Prodic^
Prodicus said veraye feately, that the fire was the best sauce. And so may a man say very truly, Health the best sauce all.
that health is ye most heavenly and most pleasant sauce of all. For if a man be sick, or have eaten to much, or have an evil stomach, meats
though they be sodde, roasted, or broyled, be neither sauerie ne pleasant.
But if he be in perfect health and have a good and pure appetyte, there is
nothing that comes amiss, ^ealth ma^th al thing ^uerye
every thing is sweet touthsome, wholesome, and such as he will be desyreeus to
have a snatche at.

But as Demades said of the Atheniense, that they would begin war ever
out of season, and that they would never make any decree to have peace,
^emades ^iyng of the ^theniens
but in mournyng weeds sorowyng the loss of their me^ne so we never remember
moderate and mean fare, but when we lie bournyng in the fever as hootte as
coals, and be driven to our Poticarie ware and sloubber-sawces.

And yet when we be fallen in to them, The fals^ clooke of o^ folly in ty^ of
^yckene^
it is to be woondered how we can cloak and cover our folly, leaning over
much to fame and opynion, as the common sort of people does, that turn the
fault sometime to the alteration of the air, sometime to the vnholsomenesse of
the country, or to over much labor, because it should not be known that
superfluitee, and immoderate eating and drynkyng was ye cause thereof.

But even as Lysimachus being emonge the barbarous. The saiy^ of Lisimachus
Scithyans and for lack of drink constrained to yield him self to his
enemies, after he had received a syppe of could water to quench his thirst
withal, said, good lord how great felicitee have I forsaken and put away
for a short pleasure, ^ we^emea^s have often ^mes sour ^uce.
eue^ so ought we in our syckenesse to call to remembrance that for a draught
of water taken out of due time, or by going to ye bayne out of season, and by
quaffyng for good fellowship, we have forgon many pleasures of ye same things,
a great many notable businesses have remained undone, and besides we have
lost not a few merry pastimes and pleasant exercises. For the continual
thynkyng thereon shall cause sorrow to byte us by the stomach, and leave in y^
memory s^che a scarre and mark, that we shall be the more chare and
circumspecte, when we be hole to chose and observe good diet. For then the
body being restored to health will not bread veraie great lusts and
appetites such as cannot be brydeled and restrained, nor strange, nor such
as cannot be subdued, but it shall be requysite if any such gredie appetyte
happen to break out, The app^tites mu^ be resiste^
and to leap at such things as it coueteth, that we be of valiau^t and
bold courage to resist. For ye appetite can do nothing but weep and sobbe
for a while like a child, Appetite compared to a child.
and afterward by and by does hold her peace, when the meat is out of sight
and will neither complain nor be angry, but on the contrary part, rather
being clean and lusty, and not heavy nor fulsom endures till the next day.
^ow Ti^theus did ^ise Pla^is fare.
As Timotheus after he had fared meanly and sobrely at supper with Plato in
the university, said, yt those which used to suppe with Plato, were the better
in health the next day after for that supper. The report gooeth also that
Alexander after he had rejected out of his service his cooks and belly
mynistres, ^exanders ^kes and ^^ce.
used to say that he had retained better in their place, that is, stirryng of
the body erely in the morning before day, and puttyng it to labor to make
his dinner fauerye, and small fare at dinner, Labour^ or cold sometime ^ sickenes^
to make his supper pleasant and touthesome. And yet I know it right often to
chance, that labor, heat, and cold, do cast a man in a fever, but as
the savor of flowers of them self not very strong, being myngled with oil
have a more vehement sent, The bo^ replenish with humo^ is apt q^kely to
r^ceiue sick^nesse.
in like manner does abundaunce of humors before gathered, make apt and
dispose the body to receive such disseases as proceed of the external causes
aforesaid. If exterior causes find the body empty, the bloodde pure and
subtle, and the spirits clean, there is no danger of them, they be easyly
and soon dispeched. but if the body be full and replete with humors, the^ as
mudde makes the water foul when it is stiered, so it infecteth all parts,
and brings them in case that they cannot be easily cured. ^ier char^g ye
sto^ke must diligently ^yded.
Therefore we must take heed that we do not as shipmen do, who for gredynes
to carye much in their ship do cause it to take in waters, and be
constreyned by ladyng it out to labor still at the pumpe. So we ouerladyng and
chargyng the stomach be forced to pourge and empty it with purgacions and
clysters. But it shall be requysite to preserve it pressed and light, ^ow ye
sto^acke must ^ preserved.
that if so be it fortune to be overwhelmed, it may for the lightness rise up
and appear as a cork does in the water. Disseas^ the beg^nyng m^^ be look^^
unto.
And we must be charie and circumspecte at the first in any wise, when
sickness is toward and felt. For not all disseases steal on a man
suddenly without warnyng, but they have messagers and posts that run before,
Most p^^^ of dissea^^ give wa^nyng ere (...) come.
and declare their coming, as cruditee of stomach, slougth, and dulnes of
body. Heaviness of the body (says Hippocrates) and werynesse growyng
without cause, be tokens that sickness is at hand: Foresign^^^ of sickene^^
and the cause thereof seems to be by reason of aboundau^ce of humors and
the puffyng out, swellyng, and the grossness of the spirits, Hippoc^^tes
lesson (...) sickness ^^warde.
that hang on the synowes. And yet there be some that when the body self in
a manner strives ^e folishe ^erdyng ^ome per^es in dietyng ^m selfs.
and would be fayn laid at rest, will forthwith into the baynes, fall to
drynkyng, and furnyshyng the body with vytayles, even as though a long
assault and obsession should follow, and as though they feared least the
fever should take them ere they had dyned. Other again much estemyng them
selfs, follow not this trade, ^de shame disse^bling ^enesse.
but while they be ashamed to confess ouermuche eating and crudite of the
stomach, to keep theimselfes all day in their clothes, will forthwith their
compaignio^s to practice feactes, and put of their clothes, to do as they
do that be in perfect health. Hope ma^th some to ^de in sick^s.
Many there be whom in defense of their intemperaunce and delycacie hope
pricketh and persuadeth, that forsakyng their beds they may boldelye
return to their pristinate diet, to taste a hear of the mad doggue that
has byten them, even as though they might expel wine with wine, and surfeit with
surfeit. Thereme of Cato against ho^
Against this hope Cato his remedy must be used: Hope (says he) makes
those things yt be great little, and those that be little it makes nothing.
And it shall be also necessary to remember, yt it is better to absteyne from
eating when a ma^ne needs it not, and to be at rest, Better it to abstey^ with
healt^ then to ea^ and be sick^
then to eat, and afterward to be drawn and allured to y^ baynes, and to
eating and drynkyng, there to synke down, and to be in ieoperdie. For if there
be any danger, he may fortun^ to have his part thereof if he be not wise,
and have not prevented the matier and absteyned from it. If there be no
danger, yet shall it be no hurt to have rectif^ed and pur^fied the body.
But that childishe person that fears to disclose to his fre^des and
servants, that his sickness came of ingurgytacion and superflu^tee, that
fool that for shame will not at the beginning confess crudite of stomach,
shall shortly after maugre his tethe be compelled with shame to declare yt he
has a flixe, a fever, or frettyng and grypyng in ye belly. Me^ne take it for
a great shame to be a houngred, but they may well think it a greater
reproach, if any go to ye baynes with a raw stomach ouerladen or puffed out
with meat, The proche gluttoni^
eue^ as they should bring to ye sea an old rotten ship yt leaketh. Vereli in
like manner as some Maryners be ashamed to keep the shore in a great tempest,
but after not able to brook the seas be with more shame cast on land criyng
out and vomityng: so those that perceive their body disposed to sickness,
while they think it a reproach to keep their bed, or to forbear meat for a
day, Pl^^e^^ be geu^ sickene^
are afterward to their great shame constreined to keep it many days,
whylest they be pourged, rubbed, emplaistred, enointed: while they must be
at all commandments of the Phisicya^s, while they desire to drink wine or
cold water, being compelled in the mean season partly for fear not only to
say but also to do many things both contrary to reason and also vncomlye.

But it shall be requisyte to enstructe and warn those that being drouned in
sensualite be not lords of their selfs, but disposed and given to affectes
and lusts be rapte hedlong into the same, how the greatest part of pleasures
and delectacions comen of the body self, and as the Lacedaemonians when they
gave their cooks vineagre and salt, wylled them to seek out other sauce in
the meat it self: ^he best ^e for ^e is to ^eceiued a whole ^e.
so the best sauce for any kind of meat is to be received into a lusty,
whole, and clean body, for a thing may be sweet and deintye of it self
without confectyons. How meats are man delectable.
It is made after this sort pleasant, if it be received into a body that
has delight and pleasure thereto, and that lives according unto nature. But on
the contrary part if they chance to come into a body that has no fancy
thereunto, being crude and evil disposed, they lose their relyse and virtue.

Therefore this is not to be pondered wehther the fish be new, or the bread
fine and pure, whether the bayne be warm, More r^pecte mu^ be had t^ body
felf^ then to the meats.
but a man must consider in what case he him self is, whether his stomach
stands ayenste it, or whether he be out of quiet, whether his body be
corrupted or throughlye distempered, which thing if he do not, this shall
follow, yt as if a sort of reuellers and drou^kardes come into a place where
people be mournyng and sorrowful, they shall cause no pleasure nor mirthe, but
rather make them to cry out: so if Venus, meats, baines, wynes be myngled
in a body that is evil dysposed, and unnaturally affected, they bread and
make no pleasure: but the humors which as yet be not perfectely corrupted,
they stiere and trouble, and more and more provoke phleugme and cholere.
Moreover, there is no delectacyon in them greatly to be esteemed, neither the
pleasure of the fruicio^ of them does answer to the expectation. Therefore the
precise diet observed to the vttermust poincte, both makes the body fearful
and subject to perilles, Over pr^cise diet i^ not best.
and breaks the strength and courage of the mind, while it refuses all
business, while yt dare not be occupied neither in pleasure nor in labor,
while it has in suspiction the doing of every thing lest it should hurt,
and gooeth about nothing courageously and boldly. But ye body must be
ordered as the shypmen do their sails in a calm weather, who neither take
them in, nor utterly strike them down, nor suffer their sheates to be lose,
them selfs being neglygent or slothful when they thyncke a storm toward.
So it is convenient to take heed, to make the body light and pressed when we
look not for crudite, flixe, burning or dullness, which things be messagers
and tokens yt the fever is at hand, ^cke^s that ^e fever is hand
yet some there be yt when they perceive the^ selfs already distempered, do
scacely then fall to good diet. But rather before sykenesse come, we ought to
prevent and provide for it as shipme^ do against a tempest when they se the
northe^ wynd does sheuer and wherle the top of the water of the seas. ^nes
must provided before it ne.
Forverely it is a thing repugnau^t to al reason, and a very fondnes diligently
to observe and mark the alteration of the wetherby criyng of crows, the
crowing of cocks, the hogs towsyng the straw about their eres as though they
were mad (as Democritus was wo^t to say) and not to note and perceive the
motions and storms of the body and other prognosticatio^s of diseases, to be
ignorant in ye tokens whereby ye shall perceive a tempest toward in your
self. By wha^ things state of ye die may gathered perceived
Wherefore it shall be requisite and expedient to observe and note the body, not
only in his meats and exercises, whether it be offended or do grudge at
the^, more the^ he was wont, or whether it be more thirsty, or desirous of
meat the^ it used to be, but also ye must mark if ye sleep not sou^dly, if ye
be troubled or vexed therein, if ye make many slepes. It shall be also well dooen
to note ye absurdites of dremes For if ye have any foul or unaccustomed
visio^s, it betokens yt the body is replenished with gross humors, or the
spirits vital of the body be distempered within. By the affections and
dispositio^s of the mind a man may also gather whether ye body be disposed
to a disease. For often times it happens, that a man shall be sad and pensife
without just cause and be put suddenly in fear.

Some be also mad angry, and will be offended and displeased quickly. Other
will be sad, weep, and mourn for a trifle, and this happens as often as evil
vapoures sower and gross exhalacio^s do stop or occupy the cyrcuites of
the mind. Wherefore those persons to who^ such things do chance, must
consider and remember that if ye occasion proceed not of the mind, it must
come of the body, which requires to be kept more temperate and abated. It
shall do good, also that a man having his fre^des disseased do ask ye
cause thereof, Sophistic^ bablyng stead of g^ counsaile^
not to the^te^t to chattre sophistically and nothing to yt purpose of
de^sitees, incide^cies, and co^mutacions, and such like folishe terms, and to
show and oste^te how cu^nyng and well seen he is in doctors names: but when
he shall not neglige^tly hear this light and commen things, yt is of
surfaictyng, emptines, werynes, dreams, he ought chiefly to enquire what diet
he kept when he fell into the fever, and afterward to say, A marine ought to
be warne^ by others faults.
(as Plato was wont to say, seeing other men's faults,) that I herafter be
not in yt case. Thus of his friends sickness and euilles it is requisite yt a man provide for himself, and take heed and remember that he come not to the
like, that he like wise kept in his bed, have not cause to praise and desire
yt most precious jewel of health. ^ltha pre^is jewel ^ so to be ^t.
But when an other is sick, he will note with himself what a jewel it is to
be in health, and be diligent, that having that treasure he preserve it well,
regard it, and favor it. ^e must ^e ma^ne himself ^ember ^ diete.
It shall not be unprofitable also, if we remember by our selfs what our diet
is, for if it shall chance that we shall be at drinkyng, or feastyng, or at
great labors, and other intemperate business, the body in the mean season
not suspectyng ne felyng any dissease: yet it shall be best for us of our own
minds to take heed and prevent, that after venereall acts or werines we keep
y^ body in quiet and rest, that after surfaictyng and quaffyng we drink water.
What i^ be dooen ^ter surfa^tyng or m^tes heaui^ digestion*
And specially if we have eaten meats heavy of digestio^, as of flesh or
other meats of diverse sorts: the^ it shall be requisite to eat littell, and
to leave nothing superfluous in ye body. For as these things of them selfs
are the cause of many disseases: so they bread matter and give strength to
other. And therefore it is notably said yt to eat without saturite, to be
lusty to labor, What things are m^ wholesome.
and to conserve natural seed, be things most wholesome. For verily
immoderat co^gressio^ with women, because it pulls out chiefly yt strength
whereby the meat is digested, Venus hu^tefull to t^ health.
bredeth very much superfluity, and therefore leat us repete our
communicacion setting every thing in his place and order, and first leat us
talk of such exercises as be meet for those yt be given to ye study of
good lettres. But as he which said yt it was nothing needful to write unto
them yt dwell by ye sea costs any medicines for the touthe ache, did in yt
words teach them to use saltwater: so may a man say, we ought not to
prescribe to students precepts of exercisyng their bodies, ^utuall di^tacio^s
of ^udentes a ^eruaillous ^oo exerci^e ^ the body.
forasmuch as the daily use of disputacions (if it be used by mouth) is a
marvelous exercise, and profitable, not only for ye health, but also to ye
strength of the body. I mean not such strength as wrastlers have, nor yt
retcheth ye skin from ye flesh, or does make a scurfe on it and stops
it without as masons do a wall of a house, what stre^^ stude^tes ^quire by
^sputacion^
but such as does in the lively and vital parts (which vital parts we
may most aptely call ours) give and increase an inward strength, and a
perfect lustynesse. Breath^ much increases the strength ^ the body.
And to prove that the breathe much increases the strength of the body, the
masters and teachers of wrastlers do declare, co^mau^dyng them to rub one
another, to be always pattyng, and iently beatyng ye skin, to preserve ye
parts of the body with enoyntyng and continual handlyng. The voice stiereth the
breathe.
And for as much as y^ voice is a mouyng and stirryng of the breath, which
works not lightly nor on the outsyde, but in the inward parts at ye veraie
founteyn, encreasyng heat, and making the bloodde subtle and pure, pourgyng
the veins, and openyng the sinews, it suffers not ye superfluous humors to
weaxe gross, nor to congele, which like dregs remayn in ye place where the
meat is received and digested. Therefore they must endeavor chiefly to use and
make theimselfes famylyar with this kind of exercise contynually disputyng,
talkyng, readyng or repeti^g, ^eadyng ^o loud voice kind of ex^cise.
if they suspect their body to be any thing weary or weak. For what proporcion
ridyng on horsbacke or in a wago^, or like being carried has to ye violent
labor of wrastlyng, and rennyng and such like strong exercises: the same
proportion and co^pariso^ has readyng with a loud voice to disputacion. For
readyng does as it were in the wagon of an other ma^s talk ie^tly move us,
Disput^ a stro^ge^ ^ercise the readyn^
and after a quiet sort co^ueigheth and carries our voice. But disputacion
has annexed unto it straynyng of the voice, and a kind of enforceme^t, when ye
labor of ye mind with ye labor of ye body be clapsed together. Clamor
streigny of the br^is hurt
Howbeit we must refrain from to loud noise and brallyng clamor. For
unmeasurable straynyng and violence of ye breath do induce and cause cra^pes
and rupturs. But when your repeticio^s and disputacio^s be ended, before ye
walk, After d^tacio^s ^ be used rubbyng fore walkyng.
it shall be convenient to use warm, ie^tle, soft and smoth fricacio^s or
rubbi^g with oil to make soft ye fleashe, and so fair to wipe it, as (ye skyn
and fleashe being opened) ye inward humors may have the more free course to
come out, and yt the spirit may in due proporcion ientely sprede abroad into
thextreme parts of the body. Leat this be your proporcion, yt ye use it so
long, till ye perceive your body pleasant and lusty. Whosoever after this
sort quieteth and recreateth the motion or trouble grown within, and ye
intencio^ and streinyng of yt breaeth, shall neither feel grief ne heaviness
of superfluitee. ^hole na^ of her correc^ that is ^sse in y^ ^ye.
And although the time will not serve, or his business will not suffer him to
use walkyng, yet there shall be no danger, for nature self has corrected and
emended yt belonged to her. Neither let to do this while ye be on shipbourd, ^e
of the ^th mu^t be neg^d.
or being in yt co^me^ ynne, no nor although every man laugh at you. Verily
where it is no dyshonestie to eat, there it is no shame to walk* but rather
it is more dyshonestye to fear shipme^, horsekepers, hostelers, and tapsters
mocking you, not because ye play at ye sphere, wherlegyg, or tables, or do
not exercise to fight with your own shadow, but because in your exercise ye
do dyspute, teach, demand questions, learn, or exercise the memory, The
sai^ of Socra^ for exerci^ the body
wherefore Socrates used to say that he yt would leap, needs a large room to
exercise him self: but he yt would occupy him self in singing or speaking,
every place would serve both to stand and sit. One thing also in that must
be forseen, Having al^dy surfai^ we must f^beare ^e^.
that knowing our selfs to have surfaicted, or to have exercised ye body over
much with woman, or yt we be weary, ^loudes ^kyng.
we be not to vehement of spirit, nor cry out over loud, which is a common
practice among lawiers and schoolmen criyng out and exclaming more the^
needs, some for glory and ambicyon, and some hired to be at a bar, ^iger
the ^phiste and ^ he died.
or at common disputacions. Our friend Niger professyng sophistrye in Galatia
by chance had swalowed in, the back bone of a fyshe. In the mean season
while an other Sophiste being a stranger had begoonne to exercise his feate,
Niger fearing to be prevented by him, and to be defrauded of his glory and
praise, if he should g^^^ place, the bone sticking still in his throat he
began also to cry out. But the place beginni^g to ^w^ll and to be hard,
and he not hable to abide the pain, was forced to be launced and cut and to
be serched very deep with an instrument of iron: ye bo^e was taken out, but
ye wound being made very dangerous, and renning dispeched ye man of his life.
Cold ^nes afte^ ^bour of ^ body a^ hurteful^
Some man will remember this an other time when he sees cause. But it is
rather ambityon and ye part of a young fool, then a thing healthful to use
cold baines after labor of the body, for the evil disposicion and hardness
which it seems to make in thexteriour parts, bredeth much more mischief
inward lie, stopping the pipes, congeling humors, letting exhalations yt
alwaie covet to be lose and at libertee. And besides this, they yt use cold
baynes must of necessyte fall to the precise and prescripte diet, (which we
utterly forbed) ever careful and doubteful lest if they omit any jot
prescribed, every fault forthwith may be sharply laid to their charge. But
in using hot baynes is much perdo^ and libertee. ^e vtilitee ^tte bat^.
For yt decreaseth not so much ye lustines and strength of the body, as it
increases health, because it minystreth such things as be profitable and
frendely to digestion. Those things that cannot be digested it does without
great grief sprede abroad and dissipate, unless they be crude and stick in
the top of ye stomach, it recreateth and refreshes ye preuy werinesse, and
with the heat does mitigate the same. Yet when ye shall perceive by nature
declaryng the same, Enoynt in stead baynes
that the body is in good tempere and well desposed, it is better to leave
baynes, and to be enoynted by the fire, if the body shall need heat, for
because that does conueigh and bestow the heat through all parts of the
body. In the soonne ye may use it neither to much nor to little, but after
such measure as the temperatenesse of the air will suffer. Hitherto have we
sufficiently spoken of exercises, now leat us come to diet. If y^ that we have
said before concerning the restreynt and mytigation of appetite, The pau^ has
no e^res said ^ to.
do anythyng avail, what shall we need any further to give precepts and
rules? If it be peinful to entreat and handle the belly as one set at lybertee
and out of prison, and to contend with the paunche that lacks ears, ^he
order ^tet
as Cato said, then must we goo about to feed it with meats lyghter of
digestio^. That shall be thus, if we feed charely on gross meats, and of much
nutriment being set before us, as gross flesh, ^osse vian ^.
cruddy meats, dry figs, hard eggs. Utterly to forbear the^ it will be hard
Leat us tede well of such as be fine and light, ^^e mea^.
of which sort be diverse herbs, wild foul, and such fish as is not fat. It
may so be, that taking these ye shall content your appetite, and yet not hurt
your body. But chiefly we must take heed of that crudite which comes of
eating flesh, ^dite^ of ^yng flesh ^efely to be ^ewed.
because it doothe not only make the body forthw^th very heavy, but also
their hurtful leauinges do afterward remain. Much e^tyng of fl^^s to be
^ steined
And it shall be best so to accustom the body, yt it desire not to eat flesh.
For the ground does bring forth many things, which be not only for the
sustenau^ce of man, but also for delicacie and pleasur suffycient: whereof some
it so gives, The gro^ bri^geth for enoughe t^ feed o^.
that ye may use them forthwith without any business. Other again being
myngled with other things do sauce and make them very pleasant. Now
forasmuch as use and custom so little does differ from nature, that in a
manner it is turned thereunto, Custom next cos^ to nature
we may not use the eating of fleash to fyl the gredye appetite as woulfes and
Lions do: but when we have made a foundation and ground thereof, Fedyng
flesh mu^ be moder^
it shall be requisite then to feed on other meats, those that shall most agree
with the nature of the body, ^he vsyng things ^uide.
and that lest shall dulle the reasonable part of the mind, which then
appears and shyneth as out of a fine and light matter. ^ilke must ^ used for
^eate and ^t for a ^nke
Concerning those things that be lyquyde, ye may not use milk for a drink
but for a meat, for that it causes heaviness, and it is of much nutrymente.
To wine we may say as Euripides said to Venus God send me to have enough of
the, he saying Euripides Venus.
but not to much nor to little. Truly wine is a drink much profitable, a
medycine most pleasant, ^yne.
a meat least of all hurtyng, if it be used temperately, ^ater
and received by little and little at ones, rather by it self, then alayed with
water. Water not only if it be mixte with wine but also a draught thereof alone
now and then among wine alaied, makes that that is alaied less hable to
hurt. And therefore we must daily use beside our general diet to drink two
or three cups of water, whereby the strength and force of the wine maiebe
abated. And the body used to drink water, Water da^ to be dro^ken.
shall not be offended with the strangeness and novelty thereof, nor refuse
it when necessity shall require. Many men sometime desire wine, and then
especially, when water were most convenient, as when they burn in the soonne,
or contrarily when they be veraie cold, or when they have been much occupied
with talkyng, or have fixed their mind on a thing earnestly, to be short
they think that wine ought to be drounken after labors and werynesse, as
though nature desired some coumforte to be given to the body to refresshe it
after labor. But nature desire the no coumforte, nature re^ireth no ^licacie.
if ye call dilicacie coumforte. But it lokethe for such recreacion as is
mean between pleasure and labor.

Wherefore at such time ye must eat little, and drink no wine, or at the
least it must be alaied and te^pered with drynkyng water now and then.

Wine must ^ee alaied with ^ater.
For wine being vehemente and subtle in efficacy and virtue, does make the
body that is already out of temper, more out of temper. And it does exasperat
and stiere more, that that already is moved: when it ought rather to be
assuaged and quieted: for the which purpose water serves. Experience teaches
that if we drink hot water, not when we be thirsty, but after werinesse,
or vehement commocion, or heat, we shall by and by perceive inwardly a locyng
or mollifiyng: because the humor of the water is ientle and does not bind.
Water loceth and mo^fieth inw^dely
On the contrary part, drynkyng of wine has a great violence and a
strength, nothing frendely ne pleasant when disseases begin to grow.

But because there be that say that hunger breeds a dryness and
bytturnesse in the body, if any manne fear that, or if any (like children)
think it hard to forbear meat till the fever come which he mistrusteth
will come in deed, it shall be convenient for him to drink water.

For oftentimes when we honor and celebrate the feast of Bachus the god of
wynes, yet we live sobrely and absteyne from drynkyng wine, taking up a good
use that we do not allwaies desire wine, by it self unmixed. But Minos king
of Creta among other his laws ordained that pipyng should not be used at the
feasts of gods, ^we made Minos ^ of Cre^
nor dauncyng when they mourned, and yet we know yt the pensife mind is not
offended nor can be hurted with melodye or myrthe, The p^ mind is hurted ^
melody.
but no body is so strong but it wylbee hurt if when it is moved and
enflamed, wine be put into it. Men say, that certain people called the
Lydes, The c^stome of Lydes i^ time of scarcitee.
would eat but ones in two days, if any famyn or scarcitee of vitailles
happened among them: the rest of the time they spent at dice and other games.
But he yt is a student and loves learning, if he shall have occasion to suppe
late, will look on a Map, or a book, or play at the lute, striuyng and
fyghtyng with the belly, Studen^ have m^ means ^ restreign^ appetite.
and by dyligentlye calling the mind from meat, and tournyng it to study,
will with learning soon shake of his appetite For if the rude Scythian be not
ashamed in ye myddest of his drynkyng oftentimes to draw his bow, and when it
is vubent, to sing, by this means keeping him self from drou^ke^nesse, shall a
Greek fear to be mocked, that with letters and his books does by little and
little shake of importune and the unruly appetites? The young men of whom
the famous Poet Menander in his comedies treats: (whom while they were
banquettyng, an old Bawd thought to trappe in a snare with bryngyng in diverse
fair and gorgeous harlottes,) did cast down their heddes, and fell to their
delycates, not so hardy as ones to cast their iyes on them. But those that
love good learning have many honest and pleasant ways to withdraw and
pluck back the mind, if they ca^ by none other means restreigne the gredye
and beastely appetite when it sees meat.

And where those ye be teachers of feactes do cry out, the masters of games
do often inculke into their scholars, that dysputyng of learning at meals
corrupts the sustenaunce, and causes heaviness of the hedde. It is not
always to be feared, but when we goo about to defyne weighty matters, or to
dispute for the victory who shall bear the bell. The brain of a Phoenix is
veraye pleasant and delicate, yet it is said, that it causes the hedde ache.

Disputacion at meat, as it is no pleasant susteinaunce, against ^m that
^llowe ^utyng reaso^g at ^les.
so it bredeth veraye much ache and heaviness of hedde: Thus say they. But
if they will not suffer us at meals to demand or oppose, dispute, or read
any other thing then that shall delight and help pleasure: and if they reken
that to be a part of honesty and profit, we will give them warnyng that
they trouble not ne molest us, leat them piycke them from us, and teach it
their fellows and scholars. Whom while they discourage from good lettres, and
use to spend their life in mockyng and rayllyng, they make like to the pyllers
of their school, gross in body, and dull in wit, like a stone, as Aristo.
very featly said. And yet theself same men being counsailled and persuaded by
Physicia^s do always command, A pause t^ be made ^twene sup^ and gooi^ to
bed.
not to gooe to bed immediately after supper. But suffer a pause to be between
supper and gooyng to bed, not heaping together ye meat, troubling and
oppressing the spirits, lest they ouerlaye concoction, ye meat being raw
and boilyng in ye stomach, as they be wont that entende after supper to move
y^ body, who do it not with renning nor with extreme, but with soft and
ientle exercise, as walking, The min^ after mea^ must be ^ quiet as^ as the
bod^
or moderate dancing: even so ought we to think yt the mind after supster
must not be troubled, neither with business, nor with cares, nor with subtle
contentions, which commenly grow into an ambicious conflicte and tumulte:
^xercise of ^de^tes af^ supper.
but there be many questions of the nature of things, which as they be not
weighty, so be they probable, many narracions also that concern good manners,
wherein some thing is worthy to be considered and weighed, void from all
contention and strife, and yet mixed with such pleasures as may coumforte and
delight the mind. And some there be, that for pleasure have called such
exercises in questyons of historyes and of Poets, the secound course of
students and learned men. There be narracions beside that be easy, and
wherein is no tediousness, there be also fables. To hear of ye conceiptes of
ye lute or other i^strume^t it is more easy the^ to hear ye harp or shalme
gooing. There is also a proporcio^ of time herin to be regarded, yt is,
Aristotle ^ opinion o^ walking ^ter supper
when by the soft and ientle setteling of the meat ye digestion is temperat,
and such as we would have. But forasmucheas Aristotle is of this opinion, yt
he thinks walkyng after supper does stiere the heat, and sleep inco^tine^tly
does suffocate the same, and other think the contrary, that digestio^ is
furthered with quiet, and yt it is hindered with mocion: some folowi^g
Aristoteles mind, do walk immediately after supper, other inclini^g to
the other part do rest. Mine opinion is, that ye follow a peculiar way made of
both, yt may cou^fort the body after supper, and keep it, not vexing the
mind, nor yet suffering it to be idle, but (as before is said) ientely moving
the spirits, and making them more pure and fine by tellyng or hearing some
pleasant and merry co^ceipte, that neither may frette the mind nor cast it in
dumpes. ^omites and ^rgacious ^t to be v^ but in ne ^ytee.
Ye shall besides not practice vomites nor laxes or losyng of ye belly made with
medicines, except great necessytee requires, because they be evil
coumfortes and solaces of surfaicting. And yet the common sort of people use
it, who to thente^t to pourge and euacuate their bodies, do purposely fill ye
belly and again do pourge and empty the body to fill it, booth against nature,
no less in ye mean season troubled with replecion, then with emptiness, yea,
rather by all means auoydyng repletion as a let to delicacie, prepare and
make ready emptines as a place and space for pleasures. It is evidently known,
The hurtfulnes of v^mite.
that either of those things troublyng and shrinkyng the body hurts the
same. Vomit has a peculiar mischefe, in yt it increases and nourishes
insacyabilitee, and is never satysfied. There comes of it vehemente hounger
and troublesome, as it were flouddes at diverse times, which by violence pulls
a ma^ne to meat being always tormented, not by reason of appetite desiryng
meat convenient, but by the infla^macions and exulcerations of medicines, and
playstres. By reason whereof of when they have pleasures, the same are nothing
pleasant ne profitable, but ye parties have much trouble in the fruicion of
the^, and beside, the retchynges and violent co^mocions of the pores and
spirits, do impresse and leave behind them certain remains, that will not
tarry and look for a purgation, but so redounde and flow into all the body, as
the fylth does in a ship when the pumpe is full, which has need rather of
castyng out, ^urga^yo^s ^d medyci^s do of^n times ^ore harm ^en good.
then to have more lode laid on. And the co^motions that through medycines
be made in the botome of the bellye, do corrupt and make moist the parts
subject thereunto, and increase more superfluitee then they bring out. And
therefore, even as one being dyspleased with the multitude and great
compaignie of Greeks dwelling in a cytee does banyshe the^ and replenysh the
same with Arabians and Scythes being strangers: so, many being out of ye way,
when they have emptied their bodies of those things that it was used with, and
superfluitees, they put therein strangers, as for exaumple, ye grains which
the Potecaries call grana Cnidia, and Samonie, and an houge quantitee of such
like things that can so little pourge nature, yt they them selfs have more
need to be pourged. Wherefore it shall be best to keep the body by moderate and
sobre diet in such case concerning emptiness and replecions, that it shall
not need of it.

^ow the ho^ may be ^ewed, if ^de shal^e*
And if it shall be requisite at any time to renew the state of the body, then
use a vomyte without medicines and without tormente such as may nothing
trouble you. For in like manner as clothes washed in a bucke and scoured with
ashes and salt peter, be more freted and wasted then when they be washed in
fair water: so vomytes that be forced with medicynes, do more hurt, corrupt,
and consume the body. When a man is bound there is no better medicyne, the^ to
use such meats that will easily move and stir and gentlye lose the bellye.
Whereof, when ye have familiar experience, ^he way to ^e the belly ^hen it is
^unde.
the use thereof is without grief. If it will not be losed with those meats,
ye must drink water many days, or keep abstinence, Clisters better (...)
purgacio^
and afterward receive a clister rather then any medicines, because they both
trouble and corrupt the body. And yet the commen people very gredyly and
lightly desire them: Why the men sort^ people t^ purgacio^
but for none other purpose then harlottes use sorcery to make aborsions, and
to destroy that they have in their wo^bes, to the^tent they may quickly fall
again to lechery, but leat us pass these things. Those yt be to much
diligent and prescribe to them selfs abstinence and fast^ng at certain times,
do not well. For they when nature nedethe not, do teach it to need
scarcitee of meat, and by use makes abatement, and minisshyng of meat
necessary, which ought to be given in time. It is better to add such
correccions freely when need shall be, then to use prescribed times. But when ye
feel not, nor suspecte any dissease toward you, it shall be requysite to prepare
so for all the other rate and order of your diet, that upon occasion given, it
may easily and for the profit of the body suffer novelty and be obediente,
not to serve and to be bound to that trade of living, so taught and used,
that it must of necessite be reduced unto certain times, qua^titees, and
courses.

For that is neither sure, nor easy, nor good manner, and it appears rather to
be the life of an oyster that gapeth at certain tides, or of a stock rather
then of a man. For they that so tie theimselfes at all times to one trade in
meats, abstynences, exercises, or rest, do bring them selfs to a vain
and vile life, fantastical, that no man uses, clean contrary to amytie,
glory and ciuilytee. And that I said I commended not.

Verily good health is not made nor ordained to be idle and at rest, which
be the two greatest mischiefs that be annexed we sickness. Idleness a^
rest be t^ of ye chief^ eiuilles the be toyn^ we sickenes^
And there is no difference between him that preserves the sight of his eyes
by that means that he may see nothing, and his voice that yt may not speak,
and between him that thinks that good health cannot be preserved but by not
vsyng and not exercisyng the same. And although he fare well, yet he nothing the
more profits himself to do diverse things yt belong to humanite, and
ientlenes. The^fore we may not think that idleness is wholesome, Idleness
destroieth health and pleasures.
for it destroieth yt, wherefore health is desired. And it is not true that they
fare better yt live in quiet. For Xenocrates that lived in most quiet, fared
no better then Phocio^, who was still occupied: nor Theophrastus better then
Demetrius. And the fleyng of administracion of things and ambicion, nothing
auailed Epicure, or his Epicurians, to that state of the body that they so
much commended. But the natural habit and state of the body must be
preserved by other means, so that in all kinds of living we ought to
remember, that there is in the body of man one place for sickness, an other
for health. And yet those yt have to do in matters of ye common wealth, Plato
h^ admonic^ to his sc^lars at hi^ going ou^ of ye schoo^
(I said) must be otherwise admonyshed, then Plato used to teach his
scholars: Departing out of the schole, he used to say to them: Take heed my
children, that ye bestow this idle time in some honest thing. Wherein r^lers of
ye ^ men wea^ shall exercise their b^dies and wh^
But we will exhort such as have to do in the commen wealth, to exercise
them selfs in honest and necessary labors, and that they stiere not ye
body for light and mean matters. Many troublyng them selfs for every matier,
watchyng, taking iourneyes, rydyng up and down fall into sickness, whe^in ye
mean season they do nothing profitatable or for thaduauncement of a common
wealth, but lie in awayte to hurt, do envy and hate others, and hunte for a
little vain and unprofitable glory. That that Democritus said agrees
chieflye against them (if I be not deceived) If ye body should sue his
tenant, ^e mind tenant to body.
the mind, it could not be avoided but he should be found guilty for evil
vsyng his office. Perchance Theophrastus said true, when by a metaphore he
said, that ye mind gave the body a great reward and fine, to admytte him to
be his tenant. For verily the body receives more hurt then ye mind, not
vsyng his lord as is convenient, nor regardyng him as he ought. For as often as
the mind is occupied in his affeccicions, labors, and cares, he favors
not the body. I meruaill therefore what Jason meant when he said, the law must
be broken in trifles, to thentent that justice may be executed in great
matiers, When ru^ shall take creacion.
We will upon a good ground warn him yt is a minister in the comme^ wealth, to
be remiss and quiet, and to take his ease when he has but trifles to do, to
coumforte and recreat him self in them, if he will have his body hable to
suffer pains in notable and hard matiers, not sick, dull or weak, to hinder
him: but as it were healed and renewed in an idleness and rest whilst he were
on shipbourde, so that when the mind shall call him again to his necessary
affairs, he may follow his trade as the colt used to suck renneth with the
dame. Wherefore when they may for their business, leat them cou^forte and
cherishe them selfs, and leat them defraude the body neither of sleep
neither of meat, nor of such ease and recreacion, as is mean between
pleasure and pain, and does not observe prescripte time. For as burning ^ro^
wastes being quenched in water after it is driven out and beaten together with
vehement labor: ^ten alte^ions co^^e the bo^.
so is the body of ma^ne consumed by alteracio^s, sometime ouercharged and
laden with business, another while drouned and overwhelmed in pleasures, and
when after being made dissolute and feeble through bodily pleasure and
drynkyng wine it is forced to come to hear causes, or to exercise some like
funccion which requires sore labor, effectual diligence, Heraclit^ called
ye dr^sie a co^tiral shoure rain, an^ sought to cured the but the m^ part of
n^ do so the^ selfs though t^ sought to^ have sick^ rather t^ health.
and earneste study. Heraclitus being syck of the dropsy willed his
phisician to turn the shoure into dries: a great many go clean out of
the right way, who after they have been long occupied tossed and tourmoiled
in labors and werinesse, when they have kept the body long without meat and
sleep, then chiefly go about, and give them selfs to make the body weak and
feeble with wantonness and pleasures. And by and by upon the same do eftsons
put it to as much pain as it is able to bear. For nature desires not such
patching and botching of the body, but the folysh mind rather being
inte^perate and unnatural. For in like manner as shypmen and maryners when they
come to the land give them selfs to pleasures and wantonness and theruppon
incontinently be called to the sea again to their former painful labors: so
the mind sequystred from business, is rapt with pleasurs and immediately upon
the same returns to his accustomed labors and will not suffer nature to have
yt she has most need of, y^ is quyetnes and reast: but ever often changing
from contrary to contrary doothe trouble it, and brings her out of her own
state and course. Those that have wit will not apply their bodies to pleasure
when it is weried. They do not desire it, no they remember no such thing,
because the wit is given to honest business, and ye part of the mind yt
should desire pleasur, is over whelmed and occupied with other desires. Truly
that which Epaminondas said meryly when an honest man died in the time of the
wars between the Thebans and a town in Boeoti^ called Leuctrum, Studente have
no me to sper^ in dyssol^ living.
good lord what lesure had this man to dye at this time in this great
business it may be truly said of him that 'is occupied in matters of the
common wealth, or in study of good learning, what time has this man to be
balkyng, to be drou^ken, or to play the wanton? Yet when they have time to
cou^forte refreshe and recreat the body, let them beware and eschew both
labors unprofitable and chefly pleasures not necessary, as enemies to
nature. For I heard Tiberius Caesar ones say, yt he was a very lobcoke that
after he passed ye age of.lx. years did desire a physician to feel his hand.

But it was somewhat arrogantlye spoken. Nevertheless, I think this to be
true that it is requisite that a man be not ignoraunte in his own pulses:
^ery man ^ht to ^we ^ own pull ^and what ^ng is ^d or evil his body.
every man has a diuersitee therein, yet nomanne ought to be ignoraunte in his
own temperature, how hot, how dry his body is: neither what things do
it good or hurt. For he lacks the knowlage of him self, and a blind and
brute mind dwells in that body, yt must learn these things of a
Phisician, whether he be more in health in somer then in winter, and whether
he may use things yt be moist easlyer then dry, and whether he have a dull
or fast beating pulse. To know these things it is not only profitable but
also easy: because we be dailye in experyence therwt, and be parties thereto.
But in the diuersytee of meats and drinks it is more requisyte to know what
is good, what is evil, and to be expert in those that be fre^des to the
stomach, rather then enemies: to know what furthereth digestion, then what is
pleasant and delicate to the mouth.

^s a shame ^ske of a ^ysician at mea^ be good digestion ^ what co^^rye.
To demand of a Physician what is easy to be digested, and what is hard,
what provoke a laxe, and what byndeth: is as much shame, as to ask what is
sweet, what is bittur, what is sour, what is sharp. Ye shall see some that
will check and correct their cooks, subtly discerninge if there be to
much sweetness, salt, or tartness in their meat. ^^y pot^e is seldo^e ^l
season, and the ^y common ^ceinpe^.
And yet they know not what thing, if it be received into y^ body is light,
vnnoysome, or profitable: whereof this follows yt their pottage is seldom
evil seasoned, and yet tempering and seasoning them self very evil and out
of course, they cause ye Physicia^s daily to have much business. And such
mouthed me^ take not their pottage to be best, when it is most delicate but
they put thereto many things that be sharp: yet into the body they pour i^
many pleasures yt fill and provoke it to vomit, partly because they know not,
partly for yt they do not rememe^bre, ye nature has joined with things y^ be
holsom and profitable such pleasur as is without hurt and still endures. This
also makes to y^ purpose, to remember what be friendly, and apt, for the
body, and what otherwise: to know in sudden affeccio^s y^ do daily and hourly
chance and other circumstau^ces how tapply to every thing his propre and
peculiar diet. For ye scrupulosite and frowardnes of ye co^me^ people yt find
theimselfes grieved with alteracion of the palm of y^ hand, and who by other
displeasaunt tokens growing of lack of sleep and swimmyng in the head, gather
and coniecte that ye body within is corrupted and infected, is not to be
feared nor regarded of stude^tes, or such as be occupied in affairs of the
commen wealth, to whom we speak. But they must avoid an other more vehemente
doubt in learning, whereby it happens that they be forced not to favor or
spare the body, nor to regard it, oftentimes when it is almost dooen, still
constraining it to make mortal war with immortal things, ^^ery tale ^ust
stu^tes that ^our not ^r bodies.
and earthly conflictes with heavenly matiers. But at length it chau^ceth to
them as it did to the camele, whom his fellow the ox desired to ease him of
his burden, to help him being weryed to bear it, the camele refused it: well
said the ox, it will not be long, but thou shall both carry me and all my
burden. The ox was a south sayer, for being ded, the camele was compelled to
do it in deed. Even so it hapeneth to the mind, who deniyng for a while to
give ye body being werired time to be recreated and refreshed, not long after
falling into a fever, or into head ache is compelled to be sick, and to be
payned with the body, plato wo^ that y^ bo^ should ^ be exerc^ without mind
n^ mind w^out the b^
leaving books dysputacions, and all other exercises of learning. Wherefore
Plato did give a good lesson, that we should neither exercise the body without
the mind, nor the mind without the body, but that we should indyfferently
preserve the body as married to the mind, specially when it attends on the
mind, and makes it self partaker of the labors thereof, ^othyng so
^c^ll^nt as ^lth.
then should we again bestow on it care and solicitude, geuyng to it for
reward that noble and desired health, thinking y^ of al things that proceed
from the mind, no gift more excellent may be given to the body, then that it
may be without all impedimente and hynderaunce either to the knowledge of
virtue, or to ye profit of speaking and doing *

printer's device of Richard Grafton


