DELIGHTS for Ladies, to adorn their Persons, Tables, closets, and
distillatories: WITH Beauties, banquets, perfumes and Waters.

Read, practice, and censure.

AT LONDON, Printed by Peter Short. 1602.

To all true lovers of Art and knowledge.
SOmetimes I writ the forms of burning balls,
Supplying wants that were by woodfals wrought
Sometimes of tubs defended so by Art,
As fire in vain has their destruction sought:
Sometimes I writ of lasting Beuerage,
Great Neptune and his Pilgrims to content:
Sometimes of food, sweet, fresh, and durable,
To maintain life when all things else were spent:
Sometimes I writ of sundry sorts of soil,
Which neither Ceres nor her handmaids knew,
I writ to all, but scarsly one believes
Save Diue and Denshire who have sound the^ true
When heavens did mourn in cloudy mantles clad,
And threatened famine to the sons of men:
When sobbing earth denide her kindly fruit
To painful ploughman and his binds, even then
I writ relieuing remedies of dearth,
That Art might help where nature made a sail:
But all in vain these newborn babes of Art,
In their untimely birth straight way do quail.
Of these and such like other new found skils,
With painful pen I whilome writ at large,
Expecting still my Countries good therein,
And not respecting labor, time, or charge.
But now my pen and paper are perfumed,
I scorn to write with Coppres or with galle,
Barbarian canes are now become my quils,
Rosewater is the ink I write withal:
Of sweetes the sweetest I will now commend,
To sweetest creatures that the earth does bear:
These are the Saints to whom I sacrifice
Preserues and conserues both of plum and pear.
Empalings now adieu, tush marchpaine walls
Are strong enough, and best be fits our age:
Let piercing bullets turn to sugar bals:
The Spanish fear is hushed and all their rage.
Of Marmelade and paste of Genua,
Of musked sugars I intend to wright:
Of Leach, of Sucket, and Quidinia,
Affording to each Lady her delight.
I teach both fruits and flowers to preserve,
And candie them, so Nutmegs, cloves and mace:
To make both marchpaine paste, and sugared plate,
And cast the same in forms of sweetest grace.
Each bird and foul so molded from the life,
And after cast in sweet compounds of art,
As if the flesh and form which nature gave,
Did still remain in every lim and part.
When crystal frosts have nipt the tender grape,
And clean consumed the fruits of every vine,
Yet here behold the clusters fresh and fair,
Fed from the branch, or hang^ng on the line,
The walnut, small nut, and the Chestnut sweet,
Whose sugared kernels loose their pleasing taste,
Are here from year to year preserved,
And made by Art with strongest fruits to last.
Th'artichoke, the apple of such strength,
The Quince, Pomegranate, with the Barberie,
No sugar used, yet color, taste, and smell,
Are here maintained and kept most naturally.
For Ladies closets and their stillatories,
Both waters, ointments, and sweet smelling bals,
In easy terms without affected speech,
Theere present most ready at their calls.
And least with careless pen I should omit,
The wrongs that nature on their persons wrought,
Or parching sun with his hot fiery rays,
For these likewise, relieuing means I sought.
No idle thoughts, nor vain surmised skils,
By fancy framde within a theorique brain,
My muse presents unto your sacred ears,
To win your favors falsely, I disdain.
From painful practice, from experience,
A sound though costly mysteries I derive
With fiery flames in scorching Vulcans forge,
To teast and fine each secret I do strive:
Accept them well and let my wearied muse
Repose her self in Ladies laps a while,
So when she wakes, she happily may record,
Her sweetest dreams in some more pleasing style.
H. Plat. THE TABLE.
GOod Reader, for the understanding of this Table, know that a, b, c, d, do
give directions unto the four several parts or treatises of this Book, (a)
for the first, the rest in their order.

A
AENula Campana roots preserved. a, 1 Almonds in Leach a, 27. Almond butter to
make a, 57 Almonds into gelly a, 58 Alliger distilled b, 16 Apples kept dry
all the year a, 47 Aqua rubea. b, 7 Aqua composita of D. Steuens b, 8
Artichokes kept long. a, 69
B
BAgs sweet to lie amongst linen. d, 35 Ball to take out stains d, 3 Ball to
wash with d, 8 Balm water. b, 5 Beaumanger. c, 11 Beef roasted kept long. c,
18 Beef powdered kept long without charge. c. 19 Beef fresh at the sea. c. 20
Beauty for the face. d. 7.14 Biscuit bread or French biscuit. a. 19 Biscuit
called prince biscuit a. 20 Biscuit called biskettello. a. 21 Blood of herbs.
b. 22 Borage candied. a. 11 Botling of beer truly. c. 27 Bottles mustie
helped, c. 28 Bottle ale most excellent. c. 32 Brawne to eat tender and
delicat. c. 13 Broom capers preserved. a. 37 Broyling without smoke. c. 26
Bruise helped. d. 24 Butter tasting of spice or flowers. c. 21
C.
Cakes sweet without spice or sugar. a. 60 Candying of flowers. a. 9.53
Candying in rock candie. a, 33.42 Candying of Orange pills. a. 35 Candles for
Ladies tables. c. 39 Candles hanging in the air. c. 40 Capers of broom
preserved. a. 37 Capon boiled in white broth. c. 5 Casting in sugar plate. a,
13 Casting of sugar in party moldes. a, 43 Casting and molding of fruit. a,
44. Cheries preserved. a, 8 Cherie pulpe kept dry all the year. a 45 Cheries
dried in the sun. a, 46 Cheese extraordinary. c, 22 Chestnuts kept long. a,
73 Chilblaines helped. d, 15 Chine of veale or chicken boiled. c. 10 Cinnamon
water. b, 10 Collis white and like gellie. a, 55 Comfits of all sorts. a, 54
Conserve of Prunes or da^sons. a. 50, 52 Conserve of Strawberies. a, 51
Cowcumbers preserved. a, 36 Cowslep paste. a, 40 Cowslip water or vinegar of
the color of the cowslep. c. 34 Crayfish kept long. c. 31 Cream clowted c. 23
D
Damask powder. d, 1, 9 Damsons in marmelade. a, 31 Damson pulpe kept all the
year. a, 45 Damsons in conserve. a, 50, 52 Dentifrises for the teeth. d, 26
Distillation of herbs in a new manner. b, 11 Drying of fruits in the sun a, 46
E
EGlantine water b, 20 Eringo roots preserved. a, 1 Extract of vegetables. b,
19
F
FAce spotted or freckled to help. d, 6 23 Face made fair d, 7.14 Face full of
heat helped. d, 11, 16 17, 18, 19, 20, 21 Face kept white and clear d, 12 Fish
into paste c, 14 Fish fried kept long c, 17 Flesh kept sweet in summer c, 24
Flies kept from oil pieces c, 30 Flounder boiled on the french fashion c, 3
Flowers preserved a, 7 Flowers candied a, 9, 11 Flowers in rock candie. a, 42
Flowers dried without wrinkling a, 63 Fruit preserved a, 8 Fruit how to molde
and cast a, 44 Fruit kept dry all the year. a, 45, 46.47 Fruit kept long
fresh. a, 70
G
GEllie chrystalline a, 26 Gelly of fruits a, 29 Gelly of Almonds a, 58
Gilloflowers kept long a, 61 Gillowflowers preserved a, 7 Gilloflower water b,
20 Gingerbread a, 22 Gingerbread dry a, 23 Ginger in rock candie a, 33.42
Ginger green in sirup a, 49 Ginger candied a, 53 Gloves to persume d, 34
Gooseberies preserved a, 8 Grapes growing all the year a, 62 Grapes kept till
Easter a, 64
H
HAndwater excellent d, 2, 28 Hands stained to help. d, 5 Hands freckled to
help. d, 6 Handwater of Scotland b, 21 Hasell nuts kept long a, 72 Hair
black altered d, 30, 37 Hair made yellow. d, 36 Herbs distilled in a new
manner. b, 11 Herbs to yield salt b, 12 Herbs to yield blood b, 22 Honey to
yield spirit b, 13
I
IRish Aqua vitae b, 9 Isop distilled in a new manner b, 11 Juice of Orenges or
lemmons kept all the year. c, 35 Iumbolds to make a, 16
L
LArkes to boil c, 4 Lauender distilled in a new manner. b 11 Leach of almonds
a 27 Leach a, 59 Leg of mutton boiled after the French fashion c, 7 Lemmons in
Marmelade a, 41 Lemmon molded and cast a, 44 Lemmon juice kept all the year
c, 35 Lettuce in sucket a, 32 Liquerice paste a, 40 Lobsters kept long c, 31
M
MAce in rock candie a, 42 Mallard to boil c, 6 Marchpaine paste a, 12, 18
Marigolds preserved a, 7 Marigolds candied a, 9, 11 Marigold paste a, 40
Marmelade of Quinces or Damsons, a, 3^ Marmelade of Lemmons of Orenges. a, 41
May deaw clarified d, 33 Morphew helped d, 21, 22 Mulberies in gellie a, 29
Musk sugar a, 2 Mustard meal c, 25 Mustinesse helped or prevented in waters
b, 24
N
NVtmegs in rock candie. a, 33, 42 Nutmegs candied a, 53 Nuts molded and cast
off a, 44 Nuts kept long a, 72
O
ORenges preserved. a, 34 Orange pills candied a, 35 Orenges in marmelade a,
41 Orange molded and cast off a, 44 Orange juice kept all the year c, 35
Oisters kept long. c. 15
P
PAste of flowers a, 14, 40 Paste of Nouie a, 15 Paste to keep one moist a, 17
Paste called pust paste a, 24 Paste short without butter a, 25 Paste of Genua
of Quinces a, 30 Paste of fish c, 14 Pear molded and cast off a, 44 Pears
kept dry a, 47 Perfumes delicate, and suddenly made. d, 31 Perfuming of gloves
d, 34 Pickerel boiled on ye french fashion. c, 3 Pigeons of sugar paste a, 10
Pigeons boiled with Rice c, 9 Pig to sowse c, 1, 2 Pigs petitoes boiled after
the French fashion c, 8 Plums preserved a, 8 Plums dried in the sun a, 46
Pomander to make d, 4 Pomander renewed d, 32 Pomatu^ most excellent for the
face. d, 13 Pomgranats kept long a, 68 Pieseruing of Roots a, 1 Preserving of
cowcumbers a, 36 Prunes in conserve a, 50, 52 Pulpe of fruit kept all the
year. a, 45
Q
QVidinia of Quinces a, 28 Quinces into paste of Genua. a, 30 Quinces in
marmelade, a, 31 Quinces kept dry all the year. a, 47 Quinces kept long. a,
67
R
Rabbets of sugar paste. a, 10 Raspices in gellie. a, 29 Roots preserved, a, 1
Roots candied a, 53 Rosa solis to make b, 6 Rosemarie flowers candied. a, 9
Roseleaues to dry. a, 3, 6 Rose sirup, a, 5 Roses preserved. a, 7 Roses and
Rose leaves candied. a, 9, 11 Rose paste. a, 40 Roses kept long. a, 61 Rose
leaves dried without wrinckles. a, 63 Rosewater distilled at Michaelmas. b, 14
Rosewater distilled in a speedy man^^r. b, 15 Roses to yield a spirit. b, 17
Rosewater most excellent b, 18 Rosewater, and yet the Roseleaues not
discolored. b, 23 Rosewater and oil drawn together. b. 25 Rosewater of the
color of the Rose. c, 34 Rose vinegar of the color of the Rose. c, 34 Rose
vinegar made in a new manner. c, 41
S
SAlet oil purified and graced in taste and smell. c, 36 Salmon kept long
fresh c, 16 Salt of herbs b, 12 Salt delicate for the Table c, 38 Sawsedges of
Polonia c, 12 Sirup of Violets a, 4 Sirup of Roses a, 5 Sparrowes to boil. c,
4 Spirit of wine extraordinary b, 1 Spirit of wine ordinary b, 2 Spirits of
Spices b, 3 Spirit of wine tasting of any vegetable. b, 4 Spirit of honey b, 13
Spirit of herbs and flowers b, 17 Skin white and clear d, 2 Sunburning helped
d, 22 Stoue to sweat in, d, 27 Strawberies in gellie a, 29 Strawberies in
conserve a, 51 Sucket of Lettuce stalks a, 32 Sucket of green walnuts a, 49
Sugar musked a, 2 Sugar paste for foul a, 10 Sugar plate to cast in a, 13
Sugar plate of flowers a, 14 Sugar plate to color a, 38 Sugar cast in party
molds a, 43 Sugar smelling and tasting of the cloue or cynamon. a, 71
T
TEale to boil c, 6 Teeth kept white and sound d, 10 25, 26 Time distilled in
a new manner b, 11 Trosses for the sea a, 39
V
Vinegar distilled b, 16 Vinegar to clarify c, 37 Violet sirup. a, 4 Violet
paste a, 40, 14 Violet water or vinegar of the color of the violet c, 34
Vsquebath b, 9
VV
WAfers to make a, 56 Walnuts in sucket a, 49 Walnuts kept fresh long a, 65.66
Wardens kept dry all the year. a, 47 Washing water sweet. b, 21, d, 2, 28,
29 Whites of eggs broken speedily. c, 29 Wigin to boil c, 6 Wine tasting of
wormwood made speedily. c, 33
Y
Ytch helped. d, 25.21.
FINIS.
The Art of preserving, conseruing, candying, etc.
1. How to preserve Eringo roots, Aenula Campana, and so of others in the same
manner
S^eth them til they be tender, then take a^ay the piths of the^, and leave
them in a cola^der til they have dropped as much as they will, the^ having a
thin sirup ready, put the^ being cold into the sirup being also cold, and let
them stand so three days, then boil the sirup (adding some more fresh sirup
unto it to supply that which the roots have drunk up) a little higher, and at
three days end boil the sirup again without any new addition, unto the full
height of a preserving sirup, and put in your roots, and so keep them. Roots
preserved in this manner will eat very tender, because they never boiled in
the sirup.

2. How to make musk sugar of common sugar.
Bruise 4 or 6. grains of musk, place them in a piece of sarcenet, fine lawne
or cambricke doubled, lay this in the bottom of a gallie pot, straining your
Sugar thereon, stop your pot close, and all the sugar in a few days will both
sent and taste of musk, and when you have spent that sugar, you may lay more
sugar thereon, which will also receive the like impression. Such musk sugar is
fold for two shillings the pound.

3. How to dry Roseleaues in a most excellent manner.
WHen you have newly taken out your bread, then put in your Roses in a sieue
first clipping away the whites, that they may be all of one color, lay them
about one inch in thickness in the sieue, and when they have stood half an
hour or therabout they will grow whitish on the top, let them yet remain
without stirring till the uppermost of them be fully dried, then stir the^
together, and leave them about one other half hour, and if you find them
dry in the top, stir them together again, and so continue this work until
they be thoroughly dried, then put them hot as they are into an earthen pot
having a narrow mouth, and being well leaded within, (the Refiners of gold and
silver, call these pottes hookers) stop it with cork, and wet parchment, or
with Wax and Rosen mixed together, and hang your pot in a chimney or near a
continual fire, and so they will keep exceeding fair in color and most
delicate in sent. And if you fear their relenting, take the Roseleaues about
Candlemas, and put them once again into a sieue stirring them up and down
often til they be dry, and then put them up again hot into your pot. Note
that you must set up your oven lidde, but not lute it about when you set in
your Roseleaues, either the first or second time. post. numero 6.

4. A most excellent sirup of Violets, both in taste and tincture.
Express the juice of clipped Violets, and to three parts of juice take one
fourth part of conduit water, put the same into an Alablaster mortar, with the
leaves which you have stamped, and wring the same out through a cloth, as you
did at the first into the other juice, put thereto a sufficient proportion of
the finest sugar and brought also into a most fine powder, let the same stand
10. or 12. hours in a clean glased earthen pan, then draine away the
clearest, and put it into a glass, and put thereto a few drops of the juice of
Lemmons, and it will become clear, transparent, and of the violet color. Then
you may express more juice into the sugar, which will settle in the bottom,
with some of the thickest part of the juice: and heating the same upon a gentle
fire, it will also become a good sirup of violets, but not comparable to the
first. By this manner of work you gain one quarter of sirup more then diverse
Apothecaries do.

5. A singular manner of making the sirup of Roses.
FILL a silver basin three quarters full of rain water, or rosewater, put
therein a convenient proportion of Rose leaves, cover the basin and set it upon
a pot of hot water (as we usually bake a Custard) in three quarters of an
hour, or one whole hour at the most, you shall purchase the whole strength
and tincture of the Rose, then take out those leaves, wringing out all their
liquor gently, and steep more fresh leaves in the same water, continue this
iteration seven times, and then make it up in a sirup, and this sirup works
more kindly then that which is made merely of the juice of the Rose. You may
make sundry other sirups in this manner. Quaere of hanging a pewter head over
the basin, if the ascending water will be worth the keeping.

6. Another way for the drying of Roseleaues.
Dry them in the heat of a hot sunnie day upon a Leads, turning them up and
down till they be dry (as they do haie) the^ put them up into glasses well
stopped and luted, keeping your glasses in warm pleaces, and thus you may keep
all flowers: but herbs after they are dried in this manner, are best kept in
paper bags, placing the bags in close Cupboards.

7. How to preserve whole Roses, Gilloflowers, Marigolds, etc.
DIp a Rose that is neither in the bud nor ouerblowne, in a sirrup, consisting
of sugar double refined, and Rosewater boiled to his true height, then open the
leaves one by one, with a fine smooth bodkin either of bone or wood, and
presently if it be a hot sunnie day, and whilst the sun is in some good
height, lay them on papers in the sun, or else dry them with some gentle
heat in a close room, heating ye room before you set them in, or in an Oven
upon papers, in pewter dishes, and then put them up in glasses and keep them
in dry cupbords near the fire. You must take out the seeds if you mean to
eat them. You may prove this, preserving with sugar candy, in stead of sugar
if you please.

8. The most kindly way to preserve plums, cherries, goosberies, etc.
YOu must first purchase some reasonable quantity of their own juice, with a
gentle heat upon imbers between two dishes, dividing the juice still as it
comes in the stewing, then boil each fruit in his own juice, with a
convenient proportion of the best refined sugar.

9, How to candie Resemarie flowers. Rose leaves, Roses, Marigolds, etc. with
preservation of color.
DIstolue refined, or double refined sugar, or sugar candy it self in a little
Rosewater, boil it to a reasonable hight, put in your roots or flowers when
you sirup is either fully cold, or almost cold, let them rest therein till the
sirup have pierced them sufficiently, then take out your flowers with a
skimmer, suffering the loose sirup to run from them as long as it will, boil
that sirup a little more and put in more flowers as before, divide them also,
then boil all the sirup which remains and is not drunk up in the flowers,
to the height of manus Christi, putting in more sugar if you see cause, but no
more Rosewater, put your flowers therein when your sirup is cold or almost
cold, and let them stand till they candie.

10. A most delicate and stiff sugar paste whereof to cast Rabbets, Pigeons,
or any other little bird or beast, either from the life or carved molds.
FIrst dissolve Isinglasse in fair water or with some Rosewater in the latter
end, then beat blanched almonds as you would for marchpane stuff, and draw
the same with cream, and Rosewater (milk will serve, but cream is more
delicate) then put therein some powdered sugar, into which you may dissolve
your Isinglasse being first made into gellie, in fair warm water) note, the
more Isinglasse you put therein, the stiffer your work will prove) then
having your rabbets, woodcocke, etc. molded either in plaster from life, or
else carved in wood (first anointing your wodden moldes with oil of sweet
almonds, and your plaster or stone moldes with barrowes grease) pour your
sugar-paste thereon. A quarte of cream, a quarterne of almonds, 2. ounces of
Isinglasse, and 4. or 6. ounces of sugar, is a reasonable good proportion for
this stuff. Quaere of moulding your Birds, Rabbets, etc. in the compounde wax
mentioned in my Jewel house, in the title of the art of moulding and casting,
page 60. For so your moulds will last long. You may dredge over your foul with
cru^s of bread, cinnamon and sugar boiled together, and so they will seem as if
they were roasted and breaded. Leach and gelly may be cast in this manner. This
paste you may also drive with a fine rolling pin, as smooth and as thin as you
please; it lasts not long, and therefore it must be eaten within a few days
after the making thereof. By this means a ba^quet may be presented in the form
of a supper, being a very rare and strange devise.

11 To sandy Marigolds, Roses, Borage, or Rosemary flowers.
Boil Sugar and Rosewater a little upon a chasing dish with coals, then put
the flowers (beings thoroughly dried, either by the sun or on the fire) into
the sugar, and boil them a little, then strewe the powder of double refined
sugar upon them, and turn them, and let them boil a little longer, taking the
dish from the fire, then strew more powdered sugar on the contrary side of the
flower. These will dry of themselves in two or three hours in a hate sunny
day, though they ly not in the sun.

12. To make an excellent Marchpane paste, to print off in molds for
banque^ting dishes.
TAke to every Jordan almond blanched, three spoonfuls of the whitest refined
sugar you can get, searce your sugar, and now and then as you see cause put in
2. or three drops of damask Rosewater, beat the same in a smooth stone
mortar, with great labor, until you have brought it into a dry stiff paste,
one quarterne of sugar is sufficient to work at once.

Make your paste into little bals, every ball containing so much by estimation
as will cover your mold or printe, then roll the same with a rolling pin, upon
a sheet of clean paper without strewing any powdered sugar either upon your
paste or paper. There is a country Gentlewoman whom I could name, which
venteth great store of sugar cakes made of this composition. But the only
fault which I find in this paste is, that it tastes too much of the sugar,
and too little of the almonds, and therefore you may prove the making thereof
with such almonds, which have had some part of their oil taken from them by
expression, before you incorporate the^ with the sugar, and so happily you may
mix a greater quantity of them with the sugar, because they are not so oily
as the other. You may mix cinnamon or ginger in your paste, and that will both
grace the taste, and alter the color; but the spice must pass through a fair
fearce: you may steep your almonds in cold water all night, and so blanch
them cold, and being blanched, dry them in a sieue over the fire. Here the
garble of almonds will make a cheap paste.

13. The making of sugar-pla^e, and casting thereof in carved moldes.
TAke one pound of the whitest refined or double refined sugar, if you can get
it, put thereto three ounces (some co^fit-makers, put 6. ounces for more gain)
of the best starch you can buy, and if you dry the sugar after it is poudred,
it will the sooner pass thorough your lawne searce: then searce it and lay the
same on a heap in the midst of a sheet of clean paper: in the middle of which
mass, put a pretty lump of the bigness of a walnut of gum dragagant, first
steeped in Rosewater one night; a porenger full of rosewater is sufficient to
dissolve one ounce of gu^ (which must first be well picked, leaving out the
dross) remember to strain the gum through a canuas, then having mixed some
of the white of an egg with your strained gum, temper it with the sugar
betwixt your fingers by little and little, til you have wrought up all the
sugar and the gum together into a stiff paste, and in the tempring let there
be always some of the sugar between your fingers and the gum, then dust
your wodden moulds a little with some of that powdered sugar thorough a piece
of Lawne or fine linen cloth, and having driven out with your rolling pin a
sufficient portion of your paste to a convenient thicknes, cover your mold
therewith, pressing the same down into every hollow part of your molde with
your fingers, and when it has taken the whole impression, knock the mold on
the edge against a table, and the paste will issue forth with the impression of
the molde upon it: or if the molde be deep cut, you may put in the point of
your knife gently into the deepest parts here and there, lifting up by little
and little the paste out of the molde. And if in the making of this paste, you
happen to put-in too much gum, you may put more sugar thereto, and if too much
sugar, the^ more gum: you must also work this paste into your molds, as
speedily as you can after it is once made, and before it harden, and if it
grow so hard that it crack, mix more gum therewith. Cut away with your knife
from the edges of your paste all those pieces which have no part of the work
upon them, and work the^ up with the paste which remains; and if you will
make sawcers, dishes, boawls, etc. then (having first driven out your paste
upon paper, first dusted over with sugar to a convenient largeness and
thickness) put the paste into some saucer, dish, or boawle of a good fashion,
and with your singer press it gently down to the insides thereof, till it
resemble the shape of the dish, then pare away the edges with a knife, even
with the skirt of your dish, or sawcer, and set it against the fire till it be
dry on the inside, the^ with a knife get it out as they use to do a dish of
butter, and dry the backside; then guilde it on the edges with the white of an
egg laid round about the brim of the dish with a penfill, and press the gold
down with some cotton, and when it is dry skew or brush off the gold with the
foot of an Hare or Conie. And if you would have your past exceeding smooth,
as to make cards and such like conceiptes thereof, then roll your paste upon
a sli^ed paper with a smooth and polished rolling pin.

14. A way to make sugar-plate both of color and taste of any flower.
TAke Violets and beat them in a mortar with a little hard sugar, then put into
it a sufficient quantity of Rosewater, then lay your gum in steep in the
water, and so work it into paste, and so will your paste be both of the color
of the violet, and of the smell of the violet. In like sort may you work with
Marigolds, Cowslips, Primroses, Buglosse or any other flower.

15. To make paste of Nouie.
TAke a quarter of a pound of Valentian almonds, otherwise called the small
almonds or Barbary almonds, and beat them in a mortar til they come to paste,
then take stale Manchet being grated, and dry it before the fire in a dish,
then fifth it, then beat it with your almondes, put in the beating of it a little
cinnamon, ginger and the juice of a Lemmon, and when it is beaten to perfect
paste, printe it we your moldes, and so dry it in an oven after you have drawn
out your bread: this paste will last all the year.

16. To make Iumbolds.
TAke half a pound of almonds being beaten to paste with a short cake being
grated, and 2. eggs, 2. ounces of caroway seeds, being beaten, and the juice of
a Lemmon, and being brought into paste roll it into round strings, then cast
it into knots, and so bake it in an oven, and when they are baked, ye them
with Rosewater and sugar, and the white of an egg being beaten together, then
take a feather and guilde them, the^ put them again into the Oven, and let
them stand in a little while, and they will be yced clean over with a white
ice, and so box them up, and you may keep them all the year.

17. To make a paste to keep you moist, if you list not to drink often, whi h
Ladies use t^ carry with them when they ride abroad.
TAke half a pound of damask prunes and a quartern of dates, stone them both,
and beat them in a mortar with one warden being roasted, or else a slice of
old marmelade and so print it in your moldes, and dry it after you have
drawn bread, put ginger unto it, and you may serve it in at a banquet.

18. To make a Marchpane.
TAke two pounds of Almonds being blanched and dried in a sieue over the fire,
beat them in a stone mortar, and when they be small mix with them two pound
of sugar being finely beaten, adding two or three spoonefulls of Rosewater,
and that will keep your almonds from oiling: when your paste, is beaten fine,
drive it thin with a rolling pin, and so lay it on a bottom of wafers, then
raise up a little edge on the side, and so bake it, then ice it with Rosewater
and sugar, then put it into the oven again, and when you see your ye is risen
up and dry, then take it out of the Oven and garnish it with pretty conceits,
as birds and beasts being cast out of standing moldes. Stick long co^fits
upright in it, cast biscuit and carowaies in it, and so serve it; guild it
before you serve it: you may also print of this Marchpane paste in your molds
for banqueting dishes. And of this paste our comfit makers at this day make
their letters, knots, Arms, escocheons, beasts, birds, and other fancies.

19. To make biscuit bread, otherwise called french biscuit.
TAke half a pecke of fine flower, two ounces of Coriander seeds, one ounce
of annis seeds, the whites of four eggs, half a pinto of Ale yeast, and as
much water as will make it up into stiff past, your water must be but blood
warm, then bake it in a long roll as big as your thigh, let it stay in the
oven but one hour, and when it is a day old, pare it and slice it
overthwart, the^ sugar it over with fine poudred sugar, and so dry it in an
oven again, and being dry, take it out and sugar it again, then box it, and
so you may keep it all the year.

20. To make prince biscuit.
TAke one pound of very fine flower, and one pound of fine sugar, and eight
eggs, and two spoonfuls of Rosewater, and one ounce of carroway seeds, and
beat it all to batter one whole hour, for the more you beat it, the better your
bread is, then bake it in coffins of white plate, being basted with a little
butter before you put in your batter, and so keep it.

21. To make another kind of biscuit, called biskettello.
TAke half an ounce of gum Dragagant, dissolve it in Rosewa Rosewater with
the juice of a lemmon and two grains of musk, then strain it through a fair
linen cloth with the white of an eg, then take half a pound of fine sugar
being beaten, and one ounce of carroway seeds, being also beaten and searced,
and then beat them altogether in a mortar till they come to paste, then roll
them up in small loaves about the big mall egg, put under the of a small egg,
put under the bottom of every one, a piece of a wafer, and so bake them in an
Oven upon a sheet of paper, cut the^ on the sides as you do a manchet, and
prick them in the midst: when you break them up, they will be hollow and
full of eyes.

22. To make Giagerbread.
TAke three stale manchets and grate them, dry them, and sift them through a
fine sieue, then ad unto them one ounce of ginger being beaten, and as much
Cinnamon, one ounce of liquerice and anniseedes being beaten together and
searced, half a pound of sugar, then boil all these together in a posnet,
with a quart of claret wine till they come to a stiff paste with often
stirring of it; and when it is stiff, molde it on a table and so drive it
thin, and print it in your moldes, dust your moldes with Cinnamon, Ginger, and
liquerice, being mixed together in fine powder. This is your Ginger bread used
at the court, and in all gentlemen's houses at festival times. It is otherwise
called dry Leach.

23. To make dry Gingerbread.
TAke halse a pound of almonds and as much grated cake, and a pound of fine
sugar, and the yolke of two new laid eggs, the juice of a Lemmon, and 2
grains of musk, beat all these together till they come to a paste, then
print it with your molds, and so dry it upon papers in an oven after your bread
is drawn.

24. To make pusse paste.
TAke a quart of the finest flower and the whites of three eggs, and the
yolks of two, and a little cold water, and so make it into perfect paste,
then drive it with a rouling pin abroad, then put on small pieces of butter as
big as Nuts upon it, then fold it over, then drive it abroad again, then
put small pieces of butter upon it as you did before, do this ten times,
always folding the paste and putting butter between cuerie fold. You may
convey any pretty forced dish, as Florentine, Cherry tarte, rice, or pippins,
etc. between two sheets of that paste.

25. To make paste short without butter.
TAke a quart of fine flower, and put it into a pipken, and bake it in an oven
when you bake manchet, then take the yolks of 2. or three eggs, and a pint of
cream, and make paste, put it into two ounces of sugar being sinely beaten,
and so you shall make your paste short without butter or sewet. In like sort
when you make sugar cakes bake your flower first.

26. To make crystal gelly.
TAke a knockle of veale, and two calves feet (your calves feet being flayed
and scalded) and boil them in fair spring water, and when they are boiled
ready to eat, you may save your flesh and not boil it to pieces, for if you
do so, the gelly will look thick, then take a quart of the cleerest of the
same broth, and put it into a posnet, adding thereunto ginger, white pepper, 6.
whole cloves, one nutmeg quartered, one grain of musk. put all these whole
spices in a little bag, and boil them in your gelly, season, it with some
ounces of sugar candy, and three spoonefuls of Rosewater, so let it run
through your gelly bag, and if you mean to have it sooke of an amber color,
bruise your spices, and let them boil in your gelly loose.

27. To make Leach of Almonds.
TAke half a pound of sweet Almonds, and beat them in a mortar, then
strain them with a pint of sweet milk from the Cow, then put unto it one
grain of musk, two spoonfuls of Rosewater, two ounces of fine sugar, the
weight of three whole shillings of I singlasse that is very white, and so
boil them, then let all run through a strainer, then may you slice the same
and so serve it.

28. To make Quidini of Quinces.
TAke the kernells out of eight great Quinces, and boil them in a quarte of
spring water, till it come to a pint, then put into it a quarter of a pint of
Rosewater, and one pound of fine sugar, and so let it boil till you see it
come to be of a deep color: then take a drop, and drop it on the bottom of a
saweer, and if it stand, take it off, then let it run through a gelly bag
into a basin, then set on your basin upon a chasing dish of coals to keep it
warm, then take a spoone, and fill your boxes as full as you please, and when
they be cold cover them: and if you please to printe it in moldes, you must
have molds made to the bigness of your box, and wet your it run into your
mold, and when molds with Rosewater, and so let it is cold turn it off into
your boxes. If you wette your moldes with water, your gelly will fall out of
them.

29. To make gelly of strawberies, Mulberies, Raspisberies, or any such tender
fruit.
TAke your beries and grind them in an Alablaster mortar with four ounces of
sugar and a quarter of a pint of fair water, and as much Rosewater, and so
boil it in a posnet with a little piece of Isinglas, and so let it run through
a fine cloth into your boxes, and so you may keep it all the year.

30. To make paste of Genua of Quinces.
TAke Quinces and pare them, and cut them in slices, and bake them in an oven
dry in an earthen pot without any other juice then their own, then take one
pound thereof, strain it, and put it into a stone mortar with half a pound
of sugar, and when you have beaten it up to paste, print it in your molds and
dry it three or four times in an oven after you have drawn bread, and when it
is thoroughly dry and hardened, you may box it, and it will keep all the
year.

31. To make marmelade of Quinces or Damsons.
WHen you have boiled your Quinces or Damsons sufe ficiently, strain them;
then dry the pulpe in a pan on the fire, and when you see there is no water in
it, but that it begins to be stiff, then mix two pound of sugar with 3.
pound of pulp, this marmelade will be white marmelade: and if you will have it
look with with an high color, put your sugar and your pulpe together, so
soon as your pulpe is drawn, and let them both boil together, and so it will
look of the color of ordinary marmelade, like unto a stewed warden, but if
you dry your pulpe first, it will look white and take less sugar: you shall
know when it is thick enough, by putting a little into a sawcer, letting it
cool before you box it.

32. To make sucket of Lettuce stalks.
TAke Lettuce stalks, and pill away the outside, then perboile them in fair
water, then let them stand all night dry, then take half a pint of the same
liquour; and a quarter of a pint of Rosewater, and so boil it to sirrup, and
when your sirup is betwixt hot and cold, put in your aforesaid roots, and let
them stand all night in your sirup to make them take sugar, and then the next
day your sirup will be weak again, then boil it again, and take out your
roots. In the like sort may you keep Orange pills, or green walnuts, or
any thing that has the bitterness first taken from it, by boiling in water

33. To candie nutmegs or ginger, with an hard rock candie.
TAke one pound of fine sugar, and eight spoonefuls of Rosewater, and the
weight of 6. pence of Gum Arabique, that is clear, boil them together to such
an height, as that dropingsome thereof out of a spoone, the sirup do rope and
run into the smalnes of an hair, then put it into an earthen pipken, wherein
place your nutmegs, ginger, or such like, then stop it close with a saucer, and
lute it well with clay, that no air may enter, then keep it in a hot place
three weeks, and it will candie hard. You must break your pot with an hammer,
for otherwise you cannot get out your candie. You may also candy Orenges, or
Lemmons in like sort if you please.

34. To preserve Orenges after the Portugal fashion.
TAke Orenges and coare them on the side and lay them in water. then boil them
in fair water til they betender, shift them in the boiling to take away their
bitterness, then take sugar and boil it to the height of sirup as much as
will cover them, and so put your Orenges into it, and that will make them take
sugar. If you have 24. Orenges, beat 8. of them till they come to paste with a
pouade of fine sugar, then fill every one of the other Orenges with the same,
and so boil them again in your sirup: then there will be marmelade of orenges
within your orenges, and it will cut like an hard egg.

35. To candie Orange pilies.
TAke your Orange pills after they be preserved, then take fine sugar and
Rosewater, and boil it to the height of Manus Christi, then draw through your
sugar, then lay them on the bottom of a sieue, and dry them in an oven after
you have drawn bread, and they will be candied.

36. To preserve Cowcumbers all the year.
TAke a gallon of fair water, and a pottle of veriuice, and a pint of bay
salt, and a handful of green fennel or Dill: boil it a little, and when it
is cold put it into a barrel, and then put your Cowcumbers into that pickle,
and you shall keep them all the year.

37. To preserve broom capers all the year.
Boil a quart of Veriuice and an handful of baye salt, and therein you may
keep them all the year.

38. To color sugar plate with several colors.
YOu may mix Roset with your fine sacred sugar until the color please you,
and so shall you have a fair murrey color. Sap-greene must be tempred in a
little Rosewater, having some gum first dissolved therein, and so lay it on
with a pensill upon your paste in apt places. With saffron you may make a
yellow color in the like manner, first drying and powdering your saffron, and
after it has colored the Rosewater sufficiently, by strayning it through
fine linen. The powder of Cinnamon, makes a walnut color, and ginger and
Cinnamon together a lighter color.

39. To make crosses for the sea.
FIrst make paste of sugar and gum Dragagant mixed together, the^ mix
therewith a reasonable qua^tiry of the powder of Cinnamon and ginger, and if you
please a little musk also, and make it up into rols of several fashions,
gilding them here and there. In the same manner you may also convey any
purgative, vomit, or other medicine into sugar paste.

40. To make paste of Violets, Roses, Marigolds, Cowslips, or liquerice.
SHred, or rather powder the dry leaves of your flower, putting thereunto some
fine powder of Ginger, Cinnamon, and a little musk if you please, mix them all
confusedly together, then dissolve some sugar in Rosewater, and being boiled a
little, put some saffron therein, if you work upon Marigolds, or else you may
leave out your saffron, boil it on the fire unto a sufficient height, you must
also mix therewith the pap of a roasted apple being first well dried in a
dishe over a chafing dish of coals, then pour it upon a trencher, being
first sprinkled over with Rosewater, and with a knife work the paste together.
Then break some sugar candy small, but not to powder, and with gum
dragagant, fasten it here and there to make it seem as if it were roch
candied, cut the paste into pieces of what fashion you list with a knife first
wet in Rosewater. In licorice paste you must leave out the pap of the pippin,
and then work your paste into dry rolls. Remember to searce the liquorice
through a fine searce. These rolls are very good against any cough or cold.

41. To make Marmelade of Lemmons or Orenges.
TAke ten lemmons or orenges and boil them with half a doze^ pippins, and so
draw them through a strainer, then take so much sugar as the pulp does wey, and
boil it as you do Marmelade of Quinces, and then box it up.

42. How to candie Nutmegs, Ginger, Mace, and flowers, in half a day with hard
or roch candie.
Lay your Nutmegs in steep in common Lee made with ordinary ashes 24. hours;
take them out and boil them in fair water till they be tender, and to take
out the Lee: then dry them and make a sirup of double refined sugar and a
little Rosewater to the height of a manus Christi, place this sirrup in a
gentle balneo, or some small heat, putting your Nutmegs into the sirup. Note
that you must skim the sugar as it casts any skumme, before you put in your
Nutmegs, then having sugar candy first bruised grossly, and searced through
colanders of several bigness, take the smallest thereof, and roll your
Nutmegs up and down therein, either in a dish or upon clean paper, then stoue
your Nutmegges in a cupboard with a chafing dish of coals, which must be made
hot of purpose before you set them in: and when they are dry enough, dip them
again in fresh sirup boiled to his height as before; and roll them in the
grosser sugar candy, and then stoue them again till they be hard, and so the
third time if you will increase their candie. Note that you must spend all the
sugar which you dissolve at one time with candying of one thing or other
therein presently: the stronger that your lee is, the better; and the nutmeg,
ginger, etc. wouldly in steep in the lee, 10, or 12, days, and after in the
sirup of sugar in a stoue or Cupboarde with a chafing dish and coals one whole
week, and then you may candie them suddenly, as before. Flowers and fruits are
done presently without any such steeping or stouing as before: only they must
be put into the stoue after they are coated with your powdered sugar candy:
and those flowers of fruits as they are so dainely done, so they will not last
above two or three days fair, and therefore only to be prepared for some set
banquet.

34. Casting of sugar in party moldes of wood.
LAy your moldes in fair water three or four hours before you cast, then dry
up your inward moisture with a cloth of Linen, then boil rosewater and
refined sugar together, but not to any great stiffnesse, then pour it into
your moldes, let your molds stand one hour, and then gently part or open the
moldes, and take out that which you have cast, you may also work the paste
any numero. 12.13. into these molds, first printing or pressing gently a
little of the paste into the one half, and after with a knife taking away the
superfluous edges, and so likewise of the other half: then press both sides
of the mold together, two or three times, and after take away the crest that
will arise in the midst: and to make the sides to cleave together, you may
touch the^ first over with Gum Dragagant dissolved, before you press the sides
of the mold together: note that you may convey comfits within, before you close
the sides. You may cast of any of these mixtures or pastes in alablaster molds,
molded from the life.

44. To mold of a Lemmon, orange, pear, Nut. etc. and after to cast it hollow
within, of sugar.
FIll a wooden platter half full of sand, then press down a Lemmon, pear,
etc. therein to the just half thereof, then temper some burnt Alablaster with
fair water in a stone or copper dish, of the bigness of a great silver boll,
and cast this pap into your sand, and from thence clap it upon the Lemmon,
Pear, etc. pressing the pap close unto it. Then after a while take out this
half part with the Lemmon in it, and pare it even in the insides as near as
you can, to make it resemble the just half of your Lemmon, then make 2. or 3.
little holes in the half ( viz in the edges thereof) laying it down in the
sand again, and so cast an other half unto it, then cut off a piece of the
top of both your party moldes, and cast thereto another cap in like manner as
you did before. Keep these three parts bound together with tape till you have
cause to use them: and before you cast, lay them always in water, and dry up
the water again before you pour in the sugar. Coloury our Lemmon with a little
saffron steeped in Rosewater; use your sugar in this manner: Boil refined or
rather double refined sugar and Rosewater to his full height, viz. till by
pouring some out of a spoone, it will run at the last as fine as a hair; the^
taking off the cappe of your molde, pour the same therein, filling up the mold
above the hole, and presently clap on the cap, and press it down upon the
sugar, then swing it up and down in your hand, turning it round, and
bringing the nether part some times to be the upper part in the turning, and
e conuerso. This is the manner of using an Orange, Lemmon, or other round
molde: but if it be long as a pigs foot will be, being molded, then roll it,
and turn it up and down long ways in the air.

45. How to keep the dry pulpe of Cheries, Prunes, Damsons etc. all the year.
TAke of those kind of cherries which are sharpin taste ( Quaere if the common
black and red cherry will not also serve, having in the end of the
decoction a little oil of Vitrioll or Sulphur, or some veriuice of sour
grapes, or juice of Lemmons mixed therewith, to give a sufficient tartness)
pull off their stalks and boil them by themselves without the addition of any
liquour in a caldron or pipken, and when they begin once to boil in their own
juice, stir them hard at the bottom with a spattle, least they burn to the pans
bottom. They have boiled sufficiently, when they have cast off all their
skins, and that the pulp and substance of the cheries is grown to a thick pap:
then take it from the fire, and let it cool, then divide the stones and skins,
by passing the pulpe only through the bottom of a strainer reuersed as they
use in cassia fistula, then take this pulpe and spread it thin upon glazed
stones or dishes, and so let it dry in the sun, or else in an oven presently
after you have drawn your bread, then loose it from the stone or dish, and
keep it to provoke the appetite, and to cool the stomach in fevers, and all
other hot diseases. Prove the same in all manner of fruit. If you fear
adustion in this work, you may finish it in hot balneo.

46. How to dry all manner of plums or Cheries in the sun.
IF it be a small fruit, you must dry them whole, by laying the^ abroad in the
hot sun, in stone or pewter dishes, or Iron or brass pannes, turning them
as you shall see cause. But if the plum be of any largeness, slit each plum on
the one side from the top to the bottom, and then lay them abroad in the
Sun: but if they be of the biggest sort, then give either plum a slit on each
side: and if the sun do not shine sufficiently during the practice, then dry
them in an oven that is temperately warm.

47. How to keep apples, pears, quinces, wardens. etc. all the year, dry.
PAre them, take out the coares, and slice them in thin slices laying them to
dry in the Sun in some stone or metalline dishes, or upon high frame covered
with course canuas, now and then turning them, and so they will keep all the
year.

48. To make green Ginger upon sirup.
TAke Ginger one pound, pare it clean, steep it in red wine and vinegar
equally mixed, let it stand so 12. days in a close vessel, and every day once
or twice stir it up and down, then take of wine one gallon, and of vinegar a
pottle, sees altogether to the consumption of a moitie or half, then take a
pottle of clean clarified honey or more, and put thereunto, and let them boil
well together, then take half an ounce of saffron. finely beaten, and put it
thereto with some sugar if you please.

49 To make sucket of green Walnuts.
TAke Walnuts when they are no bigger then the largest hasill nut, pare away
the uppermost green, but not too deep, then sees them in a pottle of water
till the water be sodden away, then take so much more of fresh water, and when
it is sodden to the half, put thereto a quart of vinegar and a pottle of
clarified honey.

50. To make conserve of prunes or Damsons.
TAke ripe Damsons, put them into scalding water, let them stand a while, then
boil them over the fire till they break, then strain out the water through a
colander, and let them stand therein to cool, then strain the damsons through
the colander, taking away the stones and skins, then set the pulpe over the
fire again, and put thereto a good quantity of red wine, and boil them well
to a stiffenesse, ever stirring them up and down, and when they be almost
sufficiently boiled, put in a convenient proportion of sugar, stir all well
together, and after put it in your gally pots.

51. To make conserve of strawberies.
FIrst sees them in water, and then cast away the water, and strain them,
then boil them in white wine, and work as before in damsons, or else strain
them being ripe, then boil them in wine and sugar till they be stiff.

52. Conserve of prunes or Damsons made another way.
TAke a pottle of damsons, prick them and put them into a pot; putting thereto
a pint of Rosewater or wine, and cover your pot, let them boil well, then
incorporate them by stirringe, and when they be tender let them cool, and
strain them with the liquor also, then take the pulpe and set it over the
fire, and put thereto a sufficient quantity of sugar, and boil them to their
height or consistencie, and put it up in gally pots, or jar glaffes.

53. How to candie Ginger, Nutmegs, or any Root or flowers.
TAke a quarter of a pound of the best refined sugar, or sugar candy which
you can get, powder it, put thereto two spoonfuls of Rosewater, dip therein
your Nutmegs, ginger, roots, etc. being first sodden in fair water till they
be soft and tender, the oftener you dip them in your sirrup, the thicker the
candie will be, but it will be the longer in candying: your sirrup must be of
such stiffnesse, as that a drop thereof being let fall upon a pewter dish,
may congeale and harden being cold. You must make your sirrup in a chafing dish
of coals, keeping a gentle fire: after your sirup is once at his full height,
then put them upon papers presently into a stoue, or in dishes, continue fire
some ten or twelve days, till you find the candie hard and glistering like
diamonds; you must dip the red rose, the gillow flower, the marigold, the
borrage flower, and all other flowers but once.

5. The art of comfetmaking, teaching how to cover all kinds of seeds, fruits
o^ spices with sugar.
First of all you must have a deep bottomed basin of fine clean brass or
latton, with two ears of Iron to hang it with two several cords over a basin
or earthen pan with hot coals.

You must also have a broad pan to put ashes in, and hot coals upon them.

You must have a clean latton basin to melt your sugar in, or a fair brazen
skillet.

You must have a fine brazen ladle, to let run the sugar upon the seeds.

You must also have a brazen slice, to scrape away the sugar from the hanging
basin if need require.

Having all these necessary vessels and instruments, work as follows.

Choose the whitest, finest, and hardest sugar, and then you need not to
clarify it, but beat it only into fine powder that it may dissolve the
sooner.

But first make all your seeds very clean, and dry them in your hanging
basin.

Take for every two pound of sugar, a quarter of a pound of annis seeds, or
Coriander seeds, and your Comfites will be great enough, and if you will make
them greater, take half a pound more of sugar, or one pound more, and then
they will be fair and large.

And half a pound of Annis seeds, with two pound of sugar will make fine small
comfits.

You may also take a quarter and a halse of annis seeds, and three pound of
sugar, or half a pound of annis seeds and four pound of sugar. Do the like
in Coriander seeds.

Melt your sugar in this manner, viz. Put three pounds of your powder sugar into
the basin, and one pint of clean running water thereunto, stir it well with
a brazen slice, until all be moist and well wet, then set it over the fire,
without smoke or flame, and melt it well, that there be no whole gristie sugar
in the bottom, and let it sees mildelye, until it will stream from the
ladle like Turpentine, with a long stream and not drop, then it is come to his
decoction, let it sees no more, but keep it upon hot imbers that it may run
from the ladle upon the seeds.

To make them speedily. Let your water be seething hot, or seething and put
powder of sugar unto the, cast on your sugar boiling hot: have a good warm
fire under the hanging basin.

Take as much water to your sugar, as will dissolve the same.

Never skim your sugar if it be clean and fine.

Put no kind of starch or amylum to your sugar.

Sees not your sugar too long, for that will make it black, yellow or tawnie.

Move the seeds in the hanging basin as fast as you can or may, when the sugar
is in casting.

At the first coat put on but one half spoonful with the ladle, and all to
move the basin, move, stir and rub the seeds with thy left hand a pretty
while, for they will take sugar the better, and dry them well after every
coat.

Do this at every coat, not only in moving the basin, but also with the
stirring of the comfits with the left hand and drying the same: thus doing you
shall make great speed in the making: as, in every three hours you may make
three pound of comfits.

And as the comfits do increase in greatness, so you may take more sugar in your
ladle to cast on. But for plain comfits let your sugar be of a light decoction
last, and of a higher decoction first, and not too hot.

For crispe and ragged comfits, make your sugar of a high decoction, even as
high as it may run from the Ladle, and let fall a foot high or more from the
ladle, and the hoter you cast on your sugar. the more ragged will your comfets
be. Also the comfets will not take so much of the sugar as they will upon a
light decoction, and they will keep their raggedness long. This high
decoction must serve for eight or ten coats in the end of the work, and put on
at every time but one spoonful, and have a light hand with your basin, casting
on but little sugar.

A quarter of a pound of Coriander seeds, and three pounds of sugar will make
great, huge, and big comfets.

See that you keep your sugar always in good temper in the basin, that it
burn not into lumpes or gobbets: and if your sugar be at any time too high
boiled, put in a spoonful or two of water, and keep it warily with the ladle,
and let your fire always be without smoke or flame.

Some commend a ladle that has a hole in it to let the sugar run through of a
height, but you may make your comfites in their perfect form and shape only
with a plain ladle.

When your comsites be made, set your dishes with your comfits upon papers in
them before the heat of the fire, or in the hot sun, or in an Oven after the
bread is drawn, by the space of an hour or two, and this will make them very
white.

Take a quarter of a pound of Annis seeds, and two pound of sugar, and this
proportion will make them very great, and even a like quantity take of
Carroway seed, Fennel seed, and Coriander seed.

Take of the finest Cinnamon, and cut it into pretty small sticks being dry,
and beware you wette it not, for that deadeth the cinnamon, and then work as in
other comfits. Do this with Orange rindes likewise.

Work upon ginger, cloves, and Almonds, as upon other seeds.

The smaller that Annis seed comfits be, the fairer, the harder, and so in all
other.

Take the powder of fine Cinnamon two drammes, of fine musk dissolved in a
little water one scruple, mingle these altogether in the hanging basin, and
cast them upon sugar of a good decoction, then with thy left hand move it to
and fro, and dry it well, do this often, until they be as great as poppie
seeds, and give in the end three or four coats of a light decoction, that
they may be round and plain, and with an high decoction you may make them
crispe.

You must have a coorse searce made for the purpose with hair or with
parchment full of holes to part and divide the comfets into several sorts.

To make paste for comfets. Take fine grated bread four ounces, fine elect
Cinnamon powdered half an ounce, fine ginger powder one dram, saffron powdered,
a little, white sugar two ounces, and a few spoonfuls of borrage water, sees
the water and the sugar together, and put to the saffron, then first mingle the
crummes of bread and the spices well together, dry the^; put the liquor
scalding hot, upon the stuff, and being hot labor it with thy hand, and make
balls or other forms thereof, dry them and cover them as comfets.

Coriander seeds two ounces, sugar one pound and a half makes very fair
comfets.

Annis seeds three ounces, sugar half a pound, or annis seeds two ounces, and
sugar 6. ounces, will make fair comfits.

Every dram of fine Cinnamon, will take at the least a pound of sugar for
biskets, and likewise of sugar or ginger powder.

Half an ounce of gross Cinnamon will make almost three drams of fine powder
searced, after it is well beaten.

Sugar powder one ounce will take at the least a pound of sugar to make your
biskets fair.

Carrowaies will be fair at 12. coats.

Put into the sugar a little Amylum dissolved for five or six of the last
coats, and that will make them exceeding crispe and if you put too much Amylum
or starch to the comfits which you would have crispe, it will make them flat
and smooth.

In any other confection of pasted sugar mixed with gum Dragagant, put no
kind of Amylum: beware of it, for it will make thy work clammie.

To make read comfits, sees 3. or four ounces of brasell with a little
water, take of this red water 4. spoonfulls, of sugar one ounce, and boil it
to his decoction, then give 6. coats and it will be of a good color, or else
you may turn so much water with one dramm of turnesole, doing as before.

To make green comfits, sees sugar with the juice of beets.

To make them yellow, sees saffron with sugar.

In making of comfits, always when the water does sees, then put in your
sugar powder, and let it sees a little until it be clean dissolved and
boiled to his perfect decoction, and that the whiteness of the color be clean
gone, and if you let it settle, you shall see the sugar somewhat clear.

For biskets take two spoonfulls of liquor, of sugar searced in a course searce
one dram, and of sugar powder to be melt and cast, one ounce. This done will
make the biskets somewhat fair, and somewhat greater then poppie seeds.

Aliter. Take sugar powder four drams, sugar to cast four ounces with liquor
sufficient, lay gold or silver on your comfits.

Every dramm of sugar powder will take an ounce of sugar to be cast. 8. drammes
make one ounce. To thus much powder, for biskets take half a pound of sugar to
cast thereon.

Coriander seeds a quarter of a pound, sugar 3. pound, Coriander seeds half
a pound, sugar, 3. drams will make fair comfits.

For biskets, Annis seeds half a pound, Fennel seeds a quarter of a pound, and
sugar two pound suffices.

In six or eight of the last coats put in two spoonefuls of sugar very hot to
make them crispe.

To one pound of sugar take 9. ounces of water.

55. To make a cullis as white as snow, and in the nature of gellie.
Take a cock, scalde, wash and draw him clean, seethe it in white wine or
rhenish wine, sku^ it clean, clarify the broth after it is strayned, then
take a pint of thick and svveete cream, strain that to your clarified
broth, and your broth will become exceeding fair and white: then take
powdered ginger, fine white sugar and Rose water, seething your cullis when
you season it, to make it take the color the better.

56. To make Wafers.
TAke a pint of flowr, put it into a little cream with two yolks of eggs
and a little rosevvater, with a little scarced cinnamon and sugar, work them
altogether and bake the paste upon hot Irons.

57. To make Almond butter.
BLanch your almonds, and beat them as fine as you can with fair water, 2. or
three hours, then strain them through a lynnen cloth, boil them with
Rosewater whole mace and annis seeds, till the substance be thick, spread it
upon a fair cloth, dreining the whey from it, after let it hang in the same
cloth some few hours, then strain it and season it with Rosewater and sugar.

58, A white gelly of Almonds.
TAke Rosewater, gum Dragagant dissolved, or Isinglasse dissolved, and some
Cinnamon grossly beaten, feethe them altogether, then take a pound of almonds,
blanch and beat them fine with a little fair water, dry them in a fair
cloth; and put your water aforesaid into the Almonds, sees them together and
stir them continually, then take them, from the fire, when all is boiled to a
sufficient height.

59. To make Leach.
Sees a pint of Cream, and in the seething put in some dissolved Isinglas,
stirring it until it be very thick, then take a handful of blanched Almonds,
beat them and put them in a dish with your Cream, seasoning them with sugar,
and after slice it and dish it.

60. Sweet Cakes without either spice or suga^.
SCrape or wash your Parsneps clean, slice them thin, dry them upon.
Canuas or networke frames, beat them to powder mixing one third thereof with
two thirds of fine wheat flower, make up your paste into coats, and you shall
find them very sweet and delicate.

61. Roses and Gilloflowres kept long.
Cover a Rose that is fresh, and in the bud, and gathered in a fair day after
the dew is ascended, with the whites of eggs well beaten, and presently strew
thereon the fine powder of scarced sugar, and put them up in luted pots, setting
the pots in a cool place in sand or gravel. With a fillip at any time you may
shake off this enclosure.

62. Grapes growing all the year.
PVt a Vine stalk through a Basket of earth in December, which is likely to be
are Grapes, that year, and when the Grapes are ripe, cut off the stalk under
the basket (for by this time it has taken root) keep the basket in a warm
place, and the grapes will continue fresh and fair a long time upon the vine.

63. How to dry Rose leaves, or any other single fl^wer without wrinkling.
IF you would perform the same well in rose leaves, you must in rose time make
choice of such roses as are neither in the bud, nor full blown (for these have
the smothest leaves of al other) which you must especially cull and choose from
the rest. Then take right Callis sand, wash it in some change of waters, and
dry it thoroughly well, either in an oven, or in the sun; and having shallow,
square or long boxes of 4.5. or 6. inches deep, make first an even lay of
sand in the bottom, upon the which lay your rose leaves one by one (so as
none of them touch other) till you have covered all the sand, then strowe sand
upon those leaves till you have thinly covered them all, and the^ make another
lay of leaves as before, and so lay upon lay, etc. Set this box in some warm
place in a hot sunnie day, (and commonly in two hot sunnie days they will be
through dry) then take them out carefully with your hand without breaking.
Keep thief leaves in Jar glasses bound about with paper near a chimney, or
stoue, for fear of relenting. I find the red rose leaf best to be kept in
this manner; also take away the stalks of pansies, stock gilloflowers, or
other single flowers, prick them one by one in sand, pressing down their
leaves smooth with more sand laid eue^ly upon them. And thus you may have
Rose leaves, and other flowers to lay about your basins, windows, etc. all the
winter long. Also this secret is very requisite for a good simplifier, because
he may dry the leaf of any herb in this manner, and lay it being dry in
his Herball with the simple which it represents, whereby he may easily learn
to know the names of all simples which he desires.

64. Clusters of Grapes kept till Easter.
CLusters of grapes hanging upon lines within a close press will last till
Easter, if they shrink you may plumpe them up with a little warm water
before you eat them. Some use to dip the ends of the stalks first in pitch:
some cut a branch of the vine with every cluster, placing an apple at each end
of the branch, now and then renewinge those Apples as they rot, and after
hanging them within a press or cupbord, which would stand in such a room (as
I suppose) where the grapes might not freez: for otherwise you must be forced
now and then to make a gentle fire in the room, or else the grapes will rot and
perish.

65. How to keep Walnuts a long time plumpe and fresh.
MAke a lay of the dry stampings of crabs when the veriuice is pressed from
them, cover that lay with Walnuts, and upon them* make another lay of
stampings, and so one lay upon another till your vessel be full wherein you
mean to keep them. The Nuts thus kept will pill as if they were new gathered
from the tree.

66. An excellent conceit upon the kernels of dry Walnuts.
GAther not your walnuts before they be full ripe, keep the^ with out any Art
until Newyeers tide, then break the shells carefully, so as you deface not the
kernels (and therefore you must make choice of such nuts as have thin shells)
whatsoever you find to come away easily, remove it: stiepe these kernels in
conduit water, forty eight hours, then will they swell and grow very plumpe
and fair, and you may pill them easily, and present them to any friend you
have for a Newyeares gift: but being pilled, they must be eaten within two or
three hours, or else they lose their whitenes and beauty, but vnpilled they
will last 2. or 3. days fair and fresh. This of a kind Gentlewoman, whose
skill I do highly commend, and whose case I do greatly pity; such are the
hard fortunes of the best wits and natures in our days.

67. How to keep Quinces in a most excellent manner.
MAke choice of such as are sound, and gathered in a fair, dry and sunny day,
place them in a vessel of wood, containing a firkin or thereabout, then cover
them with penny ale, and so let the^ rest: and if the liquor carry any bad
scum, after a day or two take it off, every 10. or 12. days let out your penny
ale at a hole in the bottom of your vessel, stop the hole and fill it up
again with fresh penny ale, you may have as much for two pence at a time as will
serve for this purpose, these Quinces being baked at Whitsontide did taste more
daintily then any of those which are kept in our usual decoctions or pickels.

Also if you take white wine lees that are neat (but then I fear you must get
them of the Merchant, for our Tauernes do hardly afford any) you may keep
your* Quinces in them very fair and fresh all the year, and therein may you
also keep your barberies both full and fair colored.

68 Keeping of Pomegraenats.
Make choice of such Pomgranates as are sound and not pricked as they term it,
lap them over, thinly with wax, hang them upon nails, where they may touch
nothing, in some cupbord or closet in your bedchamber, where you keep a
continual fire, and every 3. or 4. days turn the vndersides uppermost, and
therefore you must so hang them in packthred, that they may have a bow knot at
either end. This way Pomgranates have been kept fresh till whitsontide.

69. Preserving of Artichocks.
CVt off the stalks of your Artichokes within two inches of the Apple, and of
all the rest of the stalks make a strong decoction. slicing them into thin
and small pieces, and keep them in this decoction: when you spend them you
must lay them first in warm water, and then in cold, to take away the
bitterness of the^. This of M. Parsons, that honest and painful practicer in
his profession.

In a mild and warm winter about a month or three weeks before Christmas, I
caused great store of Artichokes to be gathered with their stalks in their
full length as they grew, and making first a good thick lay of Artichoke
leaves in the bottom of a great and large vessel I placed my Artichokes one
upon another as close as I could touch them, covering the^ over of a pretty
thickness with Artichoke leaves: these Artichokes were served in at my table
all the Lent after* the apples being red and sound, only the tops of the leaves
a little vaded, which I did cut away.

70. Fruit preserved in pitch.
DWayberries that do somewhat resemble black cherries, called in Latin by the
name of Solanum laethale, being dipped in molten pitch, being almost cold, and
before it congeale and harden again, and so hung up by their stalks, will
last a whole year Probatum per M. Parsons, the Apothecarie. Prove what other
fruits will also be preserved in this manner.

71. To make Cloue or Cinnamon sugar.
LAy pieces of Sugar in close boxes amongst sticks of Cinnamon, cloves, etc.
and in a short time it will purchase both the taste and sent of the spice.
Probat. in cloves.

72. Hasell Nuts kept long.
A Man of great years and experience assured me, that Nuts may be kept a long
time with full kernels, by burying them in earthen pots well stopped, a foot or
two in the ground: they keep best in grauelly or sandy places. But these nuts
I am sure will yield no oil as other nuts will, that wax dry in the shells
with long keeping.

73. Chestnuts kept all the year.
AFter the bread is drawn, disperse your Nuts thinly over the bottom of the
Oven, and by this means the moisture being dried up, the Nuts will last all
the year: if at any time you perceive them to relent, put the^ into your Oven
again as before.

Secrets in Distillation.
1. How to make true spirit of wine.
TAke the finest Paper you can get, or else some Virgin parchment, strain it
very right and stiff over the glass body, wherein you put your sack,
malmsie or muskadine, oil the paper or virgin parchment with a pensil moistened
in the oil of Ben, and distill it in the Balneo with a gentle fire, and by
this means you shall purchase only the true spirit of wine. You shall not have
above two or three ounces at the most out of a gallon of wine, which ascends
in the form of a cloud, without any dew or veins in the helm, lute all the
joints well in this distillation. This spirit will vanish in the air, if the
glass stand open.

2. How to make the ordinary spirit of wine that is sold for 5. shillings,
and a noble, a pint.
PVt sack, malmesie, or muskadine into a glass body, leaving one third or
more of your glass empty, set it in balneo, or in a pan of ashes, keeping a
soft and gentle fire, draw no longer then till all or most part will burn
away, which you may prove now and then, by setting a spoonefull thereof on
fire with a paper as it droppeth from the nose or pipe of the helm, and if
your spirit thus drawn have any phlegm therein, the^ rectify or redistil ye
spirit again in a lesser body, or in a bolt receiver in sted of an other body,
luting a small head on the top of the steel thereof, and so you shall have a
very strong spirit, or else for more expedition, distill five or six gallons
of wine by a Limbecke, and that spirit which ascends afterward, redistil in
glass as before.

3. Spirits of Spices.
DIstill with a gentle heat either in balneo, or ashes, the strong and sweet
water, wherewith you have drawn oil of cloves, mace, nutmegs, Juniper,
Rosemarie, etc. after it has stood one month close stopped, and so you shall
purchase a most delicate Spirit of each of the said aromaticall bodies.

4. Spirit of wine tasting of what vegetable you please.
MAcerate Rosemarie, Sage, sweet fennel seeds, Marierom, Le^mon or Orange
pills, etc. in spirit of wine a day or two, and then distill it over again,
unless you had rather have it in his proper color: for so you shall have it
upon the first infusion without any farther distillation, and some young
Alchimists do hold these for the true spirits of vegetables.

5. How to make the water which is usually called Balmewater.
TO every gallon of claret wine put one pound of green balm Keep that which
comes first and. is clearest, by it self: and the second and whiter sort
which is weakest, and comes last, by it self, distill in a pewter limbeeke
luted with paste to a brass pot. Draw this in May or June when the herb is in
his prime.

6. Rosa-solis.
TAke of the herb Rosa-solis, gathered in July one gallon, pick out all the
black moats from the leaves, dates half a pound, Cinnamon, Ginger, cloves, of
each one ounce, grains half an ounce, fine sugar a pound and a half, red rose
leaves, green or dried four handfuls, steep all these in a gallon of good
Aqua Composita in a glass close stopped with wax, during twenty days, shake
it well together once every two days. Your sugar must be powdered, your spices
bruised only, or grossly beaten, your dates cut in long slices the stones
taken away. If you add two or three grains of Amber greece, and as much
musk in your glass amongst the rest of the ingredientes, it will have a
pleasant smell. Some add the gum amber with coral and pearl finely poudred, and
fine leaf gold. Some use to boil Ferdinando bucke in Rosewater, till they
have purchased a fair deep crimson color, and when the same is cold, they
color their Rosa-solis and Aqua Rube a therewith.

7. Aqua Rubea.
Take of musk six grains, of Cinnamon and ginger of each one ounce, white
sugar candy one pound, powder the sugar, and bruise the spices grossly, bind
them up in a clean linen cloth, and put them to infuse in a gallon of Aqua
co^posita in glass close stopped twenty four hours, shaking them together
diverse times, then put thereto of turnesole one dram, suffer it to stand one
hour, and then shake al together, then if the color like you after it is
settled, pour the cleerest forth into an other glass: but if you will have it
deeper colored, suffer it to work longer upon the turnesole.

8. Steeuens Aqua composita.
TAke a gallo^ of Gascoign wine, of ginger, galingale, cinamo^, nutmegs and
grains, Annis seeds, fennel seeds, and carroway seeds, of each a dram, of
Sage, mints, red Roses, Time, Pellitorie, Rosemary, wild thime, camomil,
lauender, of each a handful, braie the spices small, and bruise the herbs,
letting them macerate 12. hours, stirring it now and then, then distill by a
limbecke of pewter, keeping the first clear water that comes by it self, and
so likewise the second. You shall draw much about a pint of the better sort
from every gallon of wine.

9. Vsquebath, or Irish aqua vitae.
TO every gallon of good Aqua composita, put two ounces of chosen liquerice
bruised, and cut into small pieces, but first cleansed from all his filth, and
two ounces of Annis seeds that are clean and bruised, let them macerate five
or six days in a wodden Vessel, stopping the same close, and then draw off as
much as will run clear, dissoluing in that clear Aqua vitae five or six
spoonfuls of the best Malassoes you can get, Spanish cute if you can get it, is
thought better then Malassoes, then put this into another vessel; and after
three or four days (the more the better) when the liquor has fined it self,
you may use the same: some add Dates and Raisons of the sun to this receipt;
those grounds which remain you may redistill and make more Aqua composita of
them, and of that Aqua co^posita you may make more Vsque bath.

10. Cinamon-water.
Having a Copper body or brass pot that will hold 12. gallons, you may well
make 2. or 3. gallons of Cinnamon water at once. Put into your body ouernight 6.
gallons of conduit water, and two gallons of spirit of wine, or to save charge
two gallons of spirit drawn from wine lees, Ale, or low wine, or six pound
of the best and largest Cinnamon you can get, or else eight pound of the second
sort well bruised, but not beaten into powder: lute your Lymbeck, and begin with
a good fire of wood and coals, till the vessel begin to distill, then moderate
your fire, so as your pipe may drop apace, and run trickling into the receiver,
but not blow at any time: it helps much herein to keep the water in the
bucket, not too hot. by often change thereof, it must never be so hot but that
you may well endure your finger therein. Then divide into quart Glasses the
spirit which first ascends, and wherein you find either no taste or a very
small taste of the Cynamon, then may you boldly after the spirit once
begins to come strong of the cinamo^, draw until you have gotten at the
least a Gallon in the receiver, and then divide often by half pintes and
quarters of pintes, least you draw too long: which you shall know by the
faynte taste and milky color which distilleth in the end: this you must now
and then taste in a spoone. Now, when you have drawn so much as you find
good, you may add thereunto so much of your spirit that came before your
Cinnamon water, as the same will well bear: which you must find by your taste.
But if your spirit and your Cinamo^ be both good, you may of the aforesaid
proportion will make up two gallons, or two gallons and a quarte of good Cinnamon
water. Here note that it is not amiss to observe which glass was first
filled with the Spirit that ascended, and so of the second, third, and fourth:
and when you mix, begin with the last glass first, and so with the next,
because those have more taste of the Cinnamon then that which came first, and
there fore more fit to be mixed with your Cinnamon water. And if you mean to
make but 8. or 9 pintes at once, then begin but with the half of this
proportion. Also that spirit which remains unmixed does serve to make Cinnamon
water the second time. This way I have often proved and found most excellent:
take heed that your Limbecke be clean and have no manner of sent in it, but of
wine or Cinnamon, and so likewise of the glasses, sunnelles and pots which you
shall use about this work.

11. How to distill Isop, thime, lauender, Rosemary, etc. after a new and
excellent manner.
Having a large Pot containing 12. or 14 gallons, with a Limbecke to it, or
else a copper body with a serpentine of 20 or 24. gallons, and a copper head,
being such a vessel as is commonly used in the drawing of Aqua vitae, fill
two parts thereof with fair watet, and one other third part with such
herbs as you would distill, the herbs being either moist or dry it
skilleth not greatly whether, let the herbs macerate all night, and in the
morning begin your fire, then distill as before in Cinnamon water, being
careful to give change of waters to your color always as it needs: draw
no longer then you feel a strong and sensible taste of ye herb which you
distill, always dividing the stronger from the weaker, and by this means you
shall purchase a water far excelling any that is drawn by a common pewter
still: you may also gather the oil of each herb which you shall find
fleeting on the top or summity of your water. This course agrees best with
such herbs as are not in taste, and will yield their oil by distillation.

12 How to make the salt of herbs.
BVrne whole bundles of dried Rosemary, Sage, Isop, etc; in a clean oven, and
when you have gathered good store of the ashes of the herb, infuse warm water
upon them, making a strong and sharp Lee of those ashes, then euaporate that
Lee, and the reside^ce or settling which you find in the botto^ thereof, is the
salt which you seek for. Some use to filter this lee diverse times before
euaporation, that their salt may be the clearer and more transpare^t. This salt
according to the nature of the herb has great effects in physic.

13. Spirit of honey.
PVt one part of honey to 5. parts of water, when the water boileth, dissolve
your honey therein, skimme it, and having sodden an hour or two, put it into a
wodden vessel, and when it is but blood warm, set it on work with yeaste
after the usual manner of Beer and Ale, tun it, and when it has lain some
time, it will yield his spirit by distillation; as wine, beer and ale will do.

14. To distill Rosewater at Michaelmas and to have a go^d yield as at any other
time of the year.
IN the pulling of your Roses, first divide all the blasted leaves, the^ take
the other fresh leaves, and lay them abroad upon your table or windows with
some clean linen under them, let them ly 3. or four hours, or if they be
dewy until the dew be fully vanished, put these rose leaves in great stone
pottes, having narrow mouths, and well leaded within, (such as the Goldfiners
call their hookers, and serve to receive their Aqua fortis, be the best of all
others that I know) and when they are well filled, stop their mouths with good
corkes, either covered all over with wax or molten brimstone, and then set
your pot in some cool place, and they will keep a long time good, and you may
distill them at your best leisure. This way you may distill Rosewater good
cheap, if you buy store of Roses, when you find a glutte of them in the
market, whereby, they are sold for 7. pence or 8. pence the bushel, you then
engrosse the flower. And some hold opinion, that if in the midst of these
leaves you put some broken leaven, and after fill up the pot with Rose leaves
to the top, that so in your distillatio^ of them you shall have a perfect Rose
vinegar without the addition of any common vinegar. I have known Refeleaues
kept well in Rondlets, that have been first well seasoned with some hot liquor
and Roseleaues boiled together, and the same pitched over on the out side, so
as no air might penetrate or pearce the vessel.

15. A speedy distillation of Rosewater.
Stamp the leaves, and first distill the juice being expressed, and after
distill the leaves, and so you shall dispatch more with one Still, then others do
with three or four stils. And this water is every way as medicinable as the
other, serving in all sirrups, decoctions, etc. sufficiently, but not
altogether so pleasing in smell.

16. How to distill wine vinegar or good Aligar, that it may be both clear and
sharp.
I Know it is an usual manner among the Nouices of our time to put a quart or
two of good vinegar into an ordinary leade^ still, and so to distill it as they
do all other waters. But this way I do utterly dislike, both for that here is
no separation made at all, and also because I fear that the Vinegar does carry
an ill touch with it, either from the leaden botto^ or pewter head or both. And
therefore I could wish rather that the same were distilled in a large body of
glass with a head or receiver, the same being placed in sand or ashes. Note
that the best part of the vinegar is the middle part that arises, for the
first is fainte and phlegmatic, and the last will taste of adustion, because it
grows heavy toward the latter end, and must be urged up with a great fire,
and therefore you must now and then taste of that which comes both in the
beginning and toward the latter end, that you may receive the best by it self.

17. How to draw the true spirit of reses, and so of all other herbs and
flowers.
MAcerate the Rose in his own juice, adding thereunto being te^perately warm, a
convenient proportion either of yeast or ferment, leave the^ a few days in
fermentation, till they have gotten a strong and heady smell, beginning to
incline toward vinegar, the^ distill them in balneo in glass bodies luted to
their helms (happily a limbecke will do better and rid faster) and draw so long
as you find any sent of the Rose to come, then redistill you have purchased a
perfect spirit of the Rose. You may also ferment the juice of Roses only, and
after distill the same.

18. An excellent Rosewater.
Upon the top of your glass body, strain a hair cloth, and upon that lay
good store of Roseleaues, either dry, or half dry, and so your water will
ascend very good both in smell and in color. Distill either in balneo, or in
a gentle fire in ashes, you may reiterate the same water upon fresh leaves.
This may also be done in a leaden Still, over which by reason of the breadth
you may place more leaves.

19. An excellent wvy to make the extract of all Vegetables.
Express a good quantity of the juice thereof, set it on the fire, and give it
only a walme or two, then it will grow clear: before it be cooled, pour away
the cleerest, filter with a piece of cotton, and then euaporate your filtred
juice, till it come to a thick substance, and thus you shall have a most
excellent extracte of the Rose, Gilloflower, etc. with the perfect sent and
taste of the flower, whereas the common way is to make the extracte either by
spirit of wine fair water, the water of the plant, or some kind of menstruum.

20. To make a water smelling of the Eglantine, Gilloflowers, etc.
Dry the herb or flower, and distill the same in fair water in a limbecke,
draw no longer the^ you find sent in the water that issues, reiterate that
water upon fresh herbs, and distill as before, dividing the sweetest from the
rest.

21. A Scottish hand water.
PVt thyme, Lauender, and Rosemary confusedly together, the^ make a lay of
thick wine Lees in the bottom of a stone pot, upon which make an other lay
of the said herbs, and then a lay of Lees, and so forward, lute the pot well,
bury it in the ground for 6. weeks distill it, and it is called Dames water in
Scotland. A little thereof put into a basin of a common water makes very sweet
washing water.

22. How to draw the blood of herbs.
Stamp the herb, put the same into a large glass, leaving two parts empty
(some commend the juice of the herb only) nip or else lute the glass very
well, digest it in balneo. 15. or 16. days, and you shall find the same very
red, divide the watrish part, and that which remains is the blood or essence
of the herb.

23. Rosewater, and yet the Roseleaues not discolored.
YOu must distill in balneo, and when the bottom of your pewter Still is
through hot, put in a few leaves at once and distill them: watch your Still
carefully, and as soon as those are distilled put in more. I know not whether
your profit will requite your labor, yet accept of it as a new conclusion.

24. How to recover Rosewater, or any other distilled water that has gotten a
mother, and is in danger to be musty.
INfuse your water upon fresh Rose leaves, or upon Rose cakes broken all in
pieces, and then after maceration for three or four hours with a gentle fire,
redistill your water. Do this in a Limbeck, take heed of drawing too long for
burning, unless your Limbecke stand in balneo.

25. To draw both good Rosewater, and oil of Roses together.
AFter you have digested your Rose leaves by the speace of 3. months, sicut
ante, number. 13. either in barrels or hookers, then distill the^ with fair water
in a limbeck, draw so long as you find any excellent smell of the Rose, then
divide the fatty oil that fleeteth on the top of the Rose water, and so you
have both excellent oil of Roses, and also good Rosewater together, and you
shall also have more water then by the ordinary way, and this Rosewater
extends farther in physical compositions, and the other serves best for
perfumes and casting bottles. You may also distill the oil of Li^num Rhodtum
this way, saving that you shall not need to macerate the same above 24 hours
in your water or menstruum before you distill: this oil has a most pleasing
smell in a manner equal with the oil of Roses.

COOKERIE AND Huswiferie.
1. To souse a young Pig.
TAke a young Pigge being scalded, boil it in fair water and white wine, put
thereto some Baye leaves, some whole Ginger, and some Nutmegs quartered, a few
whole cloves, boil it thoroughly, and leave it in the same broth in an earthen
pot.

2. Aliter.
TAke a Pig being scalded, collar him up like brawne, and lap your collers
in fair clothes: when the flesh is boiled tender, take it out, and put it in
cold water and salt, and that will make the skin white, make sowsing drink for
it, with a quart of white wine, and a pottle of the same broth.

3 To boil a flounder or Pickerel, of the French fashion.
TAke a pint of white wine, the tops of young time and Rosemary, a little
whole mace, a little whole pepper seasoned with Veriuice, salt, and a piece of
sweet butter, and so serve it: this broth will serve to boil Fish twice or
thrice in.

4. To boil Sparrowes or Larks.
TAke two ladles full of mutton broth, a little whole mace, put into it a piece
of sweet butter a handful of Parsley being picked, season it with sugar,
veriuice, and a little pepper.

5. To boil a Capon in white broth.
Boil your Capon by it self in fair water, then take a ladlefull or two of
mutton broth and a little white wine, a little whole mace, a bundle of sweet
herbs, a little marrowe, thicken it with Almonds, season it with sugar, and a
little veriuyce, boil a few currants by themselves, and a Date quartered,
least you discolor your broth, and put it on the breast of your Capon, Chicken
or Rabbet: if you have no Almonds, thicken it with Cream, or with yolks of
eggs, garnish your dishes on the sides with a Lemmon sliced and sugar.

6. To boil a Mallard, Teale, or Wigin.
TAke mutton broth, and put it into a pipken, put into the belly of the foul a
fevve sweet herbs and a little Mace, stick half a dozen of Cloves in his
breast, thicken it with a tofte of bread stieped in veriuice, season it with a
little pepper, and a little Sugar, also one Onion minced small is very good in
the broth of any water foul.

7. To boil a leg of Mutton after the French fashion.
TAke all the flesh out of your leg of mutton, or at the but end, preserving the
skin whole, and mince it small with Ox suet, and marrow, then take grated
bread, sweet Cream, and yolks of eggs, and a few sweet herbs, put unto
it Currants, and Raisins of the sun, season it with Nutmegs, Mace, Pepper, and
a little sugar, and so put it into the leg of Mutton again where you took it
out, and stew it in a pot with a marrow bone or two, serue-in the marrowe bones
with the stewed-broath and fruit, and serue-in your leg of mutton dry with
carot roots sliced, and cast gross pepper upon the roots.

8. To boil Pigs petitoes on the French fashion.
Boil them and slice them, being first rolled in a little batter. your batter
being made with the yolke of an egg, two spoonefuls of sweet cream, and one
spoonful of flower, make sauce for it with Nutmeg, vinegar and sugar.

9 To boil Pigeons with rice.
Boil them in mutton broth, putting sweet herbs in their bellies, then
take a little Rice and boil it in Cream, with a little whole mace, season it
with sugar, lay it thick on their breasts, wringing also the juice of a Lemmon
upon them, and so serve them.

10. To boil a chine of veale, or a chicken in sharp broth with herbs.
TAke a little mutto^ broth, white wine and veriuyce, and a little whole mace,
the^ take lettuce, Spinach, and Parsley, and bruise it, and put it into your
broth, seasoning it with veriuice, pepper and a little sugar, and so serve it.

11. To make Beaumanger.
TAke the brawne of a Capon, toase it like wool, then boil it in sweet Cream
with the whites of two eggs, and being well boiled, hang it in a cloth, and
let the whey run from it, then grind it in an Alablaster mortar with a wooden
pesteell, then draw it thorough a thin Strayner with the yolks of two eggas,
and a little Rosewater, then set it on a chafing dish with coals, mixing four
ounces of sugar with it, and when it is cold dish it up like Almond butter, and
so serve it.

12. To make a Polonian sawsedge.
TAke the fillets of an hog, chop them very small with a handful of red sage,
season it hot with Ginger and pepper, and then put it into a great sheep gut,
then let it lie three nights in brine, the^ boil it and hang it up in a
chimney where fire is usually kept, and these sawsedges will last one whole
year. They are good for sallades, or to garnish boiled meats, or to make one
relish a cup of wine.

13. To make tender and delicate Brawne.
PVt collars of brawne in kettles of water or other apt vessels, into an oven
heated as you would for household bread, cover the vessels, and so leave them as
long in the oven as you would do a batch of bread. A late experience amongst
glentlewomen far excelling the old manner of boiling brawne in great and
huge kettles. Quaere if putting your liquor hot into the vessels, and the
brawne a little boiled first, if by this means you shall not give great
expedition to your work.

14. Paste made of fish.
INcorporate the body of saltfish, Stock fish, Ling, or any fresh fish that is
not full of bones, with crumbs of bread, flower, Ising less, etc. and with
proper spices agreeing with the nature of every several fish, and of that
paste molde off the shapes and forms of little fishes: as of the Roch, Dace,
Perch, etc. and so by art you may make many little fishes out of one great and
natural fish.

15. How to barrel up Oysters, so as they shall last for six months sweet
and good, and in their natural taste.
Open your oisters, take the licor of the^, and mix a reasonable proportion of
the best white wine vinegar you can get, a little salt and some pepper, barrel
the fish up in small caske, covering all the Oysters in this pickle, and they
will last a long time; this is an excellent means to convey Oysters unto dry
towns, or to carry them in long voyages.

16. How to keep fresh Salmon a whole month in his perfect taste and
delicacie.
FIrst sees your Salmon according to the usual manner, the^ sink it in apt
and close vessels in wine vinegar with a branch of Rosemarie therein. By this
means Vintners and Cooks may make profit thereof when it is scarce ^n the
markets, and Salmon thus prepared may be profitably brought out of Ireland and
sold in London or else where.

17. Fish kept long, and yet to eat short and delicately.
Fry your fish in oil, some commend Rape Oil, and some the sweetest Civil
Oil that you can get, for the fish will not taste at all of the Oil because
it has a watrish body, and oil and water make no true unity, then put your
fish in white wine vinegar, and so you may keep it for the use of your Table
any reasonable-time.

18. How to keep roasted Beef a long time sweet and wholesome.
THis is also done in wine vinegar, your pieces being not over great, and well
and close barrelled up: this secret was fully proved in that honorable voyage
unto Cales.

19. How to keep powdered beef five or six weeks after it is sodden, without
any charge.
WHen your beef has been well and thoroughly powdered by ten or twelve days
space, then sees it thoroughly, dry it with a cloth, and wrap it in dry clothes
placing the same in close vessels and Cupbords, and it will keep sweet and
sound two or three months, as I am credibly informed from the experience of a
kind and loving friend.

20. A conceit of the Authors, how beef may be carried at the sea, with out
that strong and violent impression of salt which is usually purchased by long
and extreme powdring.
Here with the good leave and favor of those courteous gentlewomen, for whom
I did principally if not only intend this little treatise; I will make bold to
lanch a little from the shore, and try what may be done in the vaste and
wide Ocean, and in long and dangerous voyages; for the better preservation of
such usual victuals, as for want of this skill do oftentimes merely perish,
or else by the extreme pearcing of the salt, do lose even their nutritive
strength and virtue: and if any future experience do happen to control my
present conceit, let this excuse a scholar, quod in magnis est voluisse
satis. But now to our purpose, let all the blood be first well gotten out of
the beef, by leaving the same some nine or ten days in our usual brine,
then barrel up all the pieces in vessels full of holes, fastening them with
ropes at the stern of the ship; and so dragging them through the salt sea
water (which by his infinite change and succession of water will suffer no
putrefaction, as I suppose) you may happily find your beef both sweet and
fauourie enough when you come to spend the same. And if this happen to fall out
true upon some trial thereof had, then either at my next impression, or when I
shall be urged thereunto upon any necessity of service, I hope to discover
the means also whereby every Ship may carry sufficient store of victual
for her self in more* close and convenient cariages then those loose vessels
are able to perform. But if I may be allowed to carry either roasted or sodden
flesh to the sea, then I dare adventure my poor credit therein to preserve for
six whole months together, either Beef, Mutton, Capons, Rabbets, etc. both in
a cheap manner, and also as fresh as we do now usually eat them at our
Tables. And this I hold to be a most singular and necessary secret for all our
English Navy; which at all times upon reasonable terms I will be ready to
disclose for the good of my country.

21. How to make sundry sorts of most dai^tie butter, having a lively taste of
Sage, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Mace, etc.
THis is done by mixing a few drops of the extracted cyle of Sage, Cinnamon,
Nutmegs, Mace, etc, in the making up of your butter: for oil and butter will
incorporat and agree very kindly and naturally together. And how to make the
said oils, with all necessary vessels, instruments and other circumstances by
a most pl^ine and familiar description, See my Jewel house of Art and nature
under the Title of distillation.

22. How to make a larger and daintier Cheese of the same proportion of milk
then is commonly used or known by any of our best dairiewomen at this day.
Having brought your milk into curds by ordinary rennet, either break them
with your hands according to the usual manner of other cheeses, and after
with a fleeting dish, taking away as much of the whey as you can, or else put in
the curds, without breaking, into your moate, let them so repose one hour, or
two, or three; and then to a cheese of two gallons of milk, ad a weight of
ten or twelve pound, which weight must rest upon a cover; that is fit with
the moate or case wherein it must truly descend by degrees as you increase
your weight, or as the curdes do sink and settle. Let your curdes remain so
all that day and night following until the next morning and then turn your
cheese or curds, and place your weight again thereon, adding from time to time
some more small weight as you shall see cause. Note that you must lay a cloth
both under and over your curdes at the least, if you will not wrap them all
over as they do in other cheeses, changing your cloth at every turning. Also
if you will work in any ordinary moat, you must place a round and broad hoope
upon the moat, being just of the self same bigness or circumference, or else
you shall make a very thin cheese. Turn these cheeses every morning and
evening, or as often as you shall see cause, till the whey be all run out, and
then proceed as in ordinary Cheeses. Note that these moates would be full of
holes, both in the sides and bottom, that the whey may have the speedier
passage. You may also make them in square boxes full of holes, or else you may
devise moates or cases either tounde or square of fine wicker, which having
wicker couers, may by some slight be so stayed, as that you shall need only
morning and evening to turn the wrong side upward, both the bottomes being
made loose and so close, and fitting, as they may sink truly within the moate
or molde, by reason of the weight that lies thereon. Note that in other
cheeses the cover of the moat shuts over the moat: but in these the couers
desfce^d and fall within the moates. Also your ordinary cheeses are more
spongious and full of eyes then these, by reason of the violent pressing of
them, whereas these cheeses settling gently and by degrees, do cut as close and
firm as marmalade. Also in those cheeses which are pressed out after the
usual manner, the whey that comes from them, if it stand a while, will
carry a Cream upon it, whereby the cheese must of necessity be much less,
and as I guess by a fourth part, whereas the wheye that comes from these
new kind of cheeses is like fair water in color and caryeth no strength with
it. Note also that if you put in your curdes unbroken, not taking away the whey
that issues in the breaking of the^, that so the cheeses will yet be so much
the greater: but that is the more troublesome way, because the curds being
tender will hardly endure the turning, unless you be very careful. I suppose
that the Angelotes in France may be made in this manner in small baskets, and
so likewise of the Parmeesan; and if your whole cheese consist of un flatten
milk, they will be full of butter and eat most daintily, being taken in their
time, before they be too dry, for which purpose you may keep them when they
begin to grow dry, upon green rushes or nettles. I have robbed my wifes Dairy
of this secret, who has hitherto refused all recompenses that have been
offered her by Gentlewome^ for the same: and had I loved a cheese my self so
well as I like the receipt, I think I should not so easily have imparted the
same at this time. And yet I must needs confess, that for the better gracing
of the Title wherewith I have fronted this pamphlet, I have been willing to
publish this with some other secrets of worth, for the which I have many times
refused good store both of Crowns and Angels: and therefore let no Gentlewoman
think this book too dear, at what price soever it shall be valued upon the
sale thereof, neither can I esteem the work to be of less then twenty
years gathering.

23. Clouted cream.
TAke your milk being new milked; and presently set it upon the fire from
morning until the evening, but let it not seethe: and this is called my Lady
Youngs clowted cream.

24. Flesh kept sweet insummes.
YOu may keep veale, mutton, or venison in the heat of summer 9. or ten days
good, so as it be newly and fair killed, by hanging the same in an high and
windy room (And therefore a plate cupboard full of holes, so as the wind may
have a through passage would be placed in such a room, to avoid the offense
of fly-blowes) this is an approved secret, easy and cheap, and very necessary
to be known and practiced in hot and tainting weather. Veale may be kept ten
days in bran.

25. Mustard meal.
IT is usual in Venice to sell the meal of Mustarde in their markets as we do
flower and meal in England: this meal by the addition of vinegar in two or
three days be comes exceeding good mustard, but it would be much stronger
and finer, if the husks or huls were first divided by searce or boulter, which
may easily be don, if you dry your seeds against the fire before you grind
the^. The Dutch iron handmils, or an ordinary pepper mill may serve for this
purpose. I thought it very necessary to publish this manner of making of your
sauce, because our mustard which we buy from the Chandlers at this day is
many times made up with vile and filthy vinegar, such as our stomak would
abhor if we should see it before the mixing thereof with the seeds.

26. How to auold smoke, in broyling of Bacon, Carbona^o, etc.
MAke little dripping pans of paper; pasting up the corners with starch or
paste, wet them a little in water, but Pope Pius Quiniu: his Cook will have
them touched over with a feather first dipped in oil or molten butter, lay
them on your gridiron, and place therein your slices of bacon, turning the^ as
you see cause. This is a cleanly way, and auoydeth all smoke. In the same
manner you may also broile thin slices of Polonian sawsedges, or great oysters,
for so were the Popes Oysters dressed. You must be careful that your fire
under the gridiron flame not, least you happen to burn your dripping pannes,
and therefore all colebrands are here secluded.

27. The true bottling of beer.
WHen your Beer is ten or twelve days old, whereby it is grown reasonable
clear, then bottle it, making your corkes very fit for the bottles, and
stop them close, bur drink not of this beer till they begin to work again
and mantle, and then you shall find the same most excellent and sprightly
drink: and this is the reason why bottle ale is both so win die and muddy,
thundering and smoking upon the opening of the bottle, because it is commonly
bottled the same day that it is laid into the Cellar, whereby his yeast being
an exceeding windy substance, being also drawn with the Ale not yet fined,
does incorporate with the drink, and makes it also very windy, and this is
all the lime and gunpowder wherewith bottle Ale has been a long time so
wrongfully charged.

28. How to help your bottles when they are mustie.
SOme put them in an oven when the bread is newly drawn, closing up the oven,
and so let them rest till morning. Others content themselves with scaulding
them in hot liquor only till they be sweet.

19. How to break whites of Eggs speedily.
A Fig or two shred in pieces, and then beaten amongst the whites of eggs
will bring them into an oil speedily: some break them with a stubbed rod,
and some by wringing them often through a spoonge.

30. How to keep flies from oil pieces.
A Line limed over and strained about the crest of oil pieces or pictures,
will catch they Flies, that would otherwise deface the Pictures. But this
Italian conceit both for the rareness and use thereof does please me above
all other: viz, Prick a Cowcumber full o^ barley corns with the small spiring
ends outward, make little holes in the Cowcumber first with a wodden or bone
bodkin, and after put in the grain, these being thick placed will in time
cover all the Cowcumber, so as no man can discern what strange plant the same
should be. Such Cowcumbers are to be hung up in the midst of Summer r omes
to draw all the flies unto the^, which otherwise would fly upon the Pictures
or hangings

31. To keep Lobsters, Crafishes, etc. sweet and good for some few days.
THese kinds of fish are noted to be of no durabilitie or lasting in warm
weather, yet to prolong their days a little, though I fear I shall raise the
price of them by this discovery amongst the fishmongers (who only in respect
of their speedy decay do now and then afford a peniworth in them) if you
wrappe them in sweet and course rags first moistened in brine, and then bury
these clothes in Callis sand, that is also kept in some cool and moist place,
I know by mine own experience that you shall find your labor well bestowed,
and the rather if you lay the^ in several clothes, so as one do not touch the
other.

32. Diverse excellent kinds of bottle Ale.
I Cannot remember that ever I did drink the like sage ale at any time, as
that which is made by mingling two or three drops of the extracted oil of
sage with a quart of Ale, the same being well brued out of one pot into
another: and this way a whole Stand of sage ale is very speedily made. The like
is to be done with the oil of Mace or Nutmegs. But if you will make a right
gossips cup that shall far exceed all the Ale that ever mother Bunch made in
her life time, then in the bottling up of your best Ale, tun half a pint of
white Ipocras that is newly made, and after the best receipt, with a pottle of
Ale, stop your bottle close, and drink it when it is stale: Some commend the
hanging of roasted Orenges pricked full of Cloves in the vessel of Ale till you
find the taste thereof sufficiently graced to your own liking.

33. How to make wormwood wine very speedily and in great quantity.
TAke small Rochell or Coniake wine, put a few droopes of the extracted oil of
wormwood therein, brewe it together (as before is set down in bottle ale) out of
one pot into an other, and you shall have a more neat and wholesome wine for
your body, the^ that which is sold at the Stillyard for right wormwood wine.

34. Rosewa^er and Roseuinegar of the color of the Rose, and of the Cowslep,
and violet vinegar.
IF you would make your Rosewater and Rose vinegar of a Rubie color, then make
choice of the crimson velvet colored leaves, clipping away the whites with a
pair of sheeres, and being through dried, put a good large handful of them
into a pint of Damask or red rosewater, stop your glass well and set it in
the sun, til you see that the leaves have lost their color. Or for more
expedition you may pecforme this work in balneo in a few hours, and when you
take out the old leaves, you may put in fresh till you find the color to
please you. Keep this Rosewater in glasses very well stopped, the fuller the
better. What I have said of Rosewater, the same may also be intended of Rose
vinegar, violet, marigolde, and cowslep vinegar, but the whiter vinegar you
choose for this purpose, the color thereof will be the brighter, and therefore
distilled Vinegar is best for this purpose, so as the same be warily distilled
with a true division of parts, according to the manner expressed in this book
in the distillation of vinegar.

35. To keep the juice of Oranges and Lemmons al^ the year for sauce, Iuleps
and other purposes.
Express their juice, and pass it through an Ipocrasse bag to clarify it
from his impurities, then fill your glass almost to the top, cover it closely,
and let it stand so till it have done boiling; then fill up your glass with
good sallet oil, and set it in a cool closet or butterie where no Sun
comes; the aptest glasses for this purpose are straight upright ones, like to
our long beer glasses, which would be made with little round holes within two
inches of the bottom to receive apt fawcets, and so the grounds or lees would
settle to the bottom, and the oil would sink down with the juice so closely
that all putrefaction would be avoided: or in steed of holes if there were
glass pipes it were the better and readyer way, because you shall hardly
fasten a fawcet well in the hole. You may also in this manner preserve many
iuyces of herbs and flowers.

And because that profit and skill united do grace each other, if (courteous
Ladies) you will lend ears and follow my direction; I will here furnish a
great number of you (I would I could furnish you all) with the juice of the
best civil Orenges at an easy price, About Alhallontide or soon after you
may buy the inward pulpe of civil Ore^ges wherein the juice rests, of the
comfetmakers for a small matter, who do only or principally respect their
rindes to preserve and make Orengeadoes with all, this juice you may prepaire
and reserve as before.

36. How to purify and give an excellent smell and taste unto sallet oil.
PVt sallet Oil in a Vessel of wood or earth, having a hole in the bottom, to
every 4 quartes of water add one quarte of oil, and with a wooden spoone or
spattle beat them well together for a quarter of an hour, then let out the
water, preventing the oil from issuing by stopping of the hole, repeat this
work two or three times, and at the last you shall find your oil well cleansed
or clarified. In this manner you may also clarify capons grease, being first
melted, and workinge with warm water. All this is borrowed of M. Bartholomaeus
Scapius the Master Cook of Pope Pius Quintus his privy kitchen. I think if
the last agitation were made in Rosewater, wherein also cloves or Nutmegs had
been macerated, that so the oil would be yet more pleasing.

Or if you set a Iar glass in balneo full of sweet oil with some store of
bruised cloves, and rinds of civil Oranges or Lemmons also therein, and so
continue your fire for two or three hours, and then letting the Cloves and
rindes remain in the oil til both the sent and taste do please you: I think
many men which at this day do loath oil (as I my self did not long since)
would be easily drawn to a sufficient liking thereof.

37. How to clarify without any distilla^ion both white and and claret wine
vinegar for gellies or sauces.
TO every six pintes of good wine vinegar, put the whites of two new laid
Eggs well beaten, then put all into a nevve leaden pipkin, and cause the same
to boil a little over a gentle fire, then let it run through a course gelly
bag twice or thrice, and it will be very clear, and keep good one whole year.

38. To make a most delicate white salt for the table.
FIrst calcine or burn your white salt, the^ dissolve it in clear conduit
water, let the water stand without stirring, forty eight hours, then
carefully draw away all the clear water only, filter it, and after euaporate
the filtred liquor, reserving the salt. Some leave out calcination.

39. A delicate Candle for a Ladies Table.
CAuse your Dutch Candles to be dipped in Virgin wax, so as their last coat
may be merely wax, and by this means, you may carry them in your hand
without melting, and the sent of the tallow will not break through to give
offense, but if you would have them to resemble yellovve wax candles, then
first let the tallow be colored with Turmericke boiled therein, and strayned,
and after your Candles have been dipped therein to a sufficient greatness,
let them take their last coat from yellow wax, this may be done in a great
round Cane of tin plate, having a bottom, and being somewhat deeper then the
length of your candles: and as the wax spends, you may still supply it with
more.

40. How to hang your candles in the air without candlestick.
THis will make a strange show to the beholders that know not the conceit,
it is done in this manner: Let a fine Virginal wier be conveyed, in the midst
of every week and left of some length above the Candle to fasten the same to
the posts in the roof of your house, and if the room be any thing high
roofed, it will be hardly discerned, and the flame though it consume the
tallow, yet it will not melt the wier.

41. Rose Vinegar made in a new manner.
MAcerate or steep Rose-leaues in fair water, let them lie therein, til they
wax sour in smell, and then distill the water.

SWEET Powders, ointments, beauties, etc.
1. An excellent damask powder
TAke of yreos half a pound, Rose leaves 4. ounces, cloves one ounce, lignum
Rhodium two ounces, Storax one ounce and a half, musk and ciuet of each 10
grains, beat and incorporate the^ well together.

2. An excellent hand water or washing water very cheap.
TAke a gallon of fair water, one handful of Laue^der flowers, a few cloves,
and some orace powder, and four ounces of Be^iamin; distill the water in an
ordinary leaden still: You may distill a second water by a new infusion of
water upon the feces, a little of this will sweeten a basin of fair water for
your table.

3. A ball to take out stains from linen.
TAke four ounces of white hard Soape, beat it in a mortar with two small
Lemmons sliced, and as much roche allome as an hafell Nut, roll it up in a
ball, rub the stain therewith, and after fetch it out with warm water if
need be.

4. A sweet and delicate Pomander.
TAke two ounces of Labdanu^, of Benjamin and Storax one ounce, musk six
grains, ciuet six grains, Amber greece six grains, of Calamus Aromaticus
and Lignum Aloes, of each the weight of a groat, beat all these in a hot
mortar, and with an hot pestell till they come to paste, the^ wet your hand
with rose water, and roll up the paste suddenly.

5. To take stains out of ones hands presently.
THis is done with the juice of Sorrel, washing the stained place therein.

6. To take away spots and freckles from the face or hands.
THe sap that issues out of a Birch tree in great abundance, being opened
in March or April, with a receiver of glass set under the boring thereof to
receive the same, does perform the same most excellently and makes the skin
very clear. This sap will dissolve pearl, a secret not known unto many.

7. A white fucus or beauty for the face.
THe iawe bones of a Hog or Sow well burnt, beaten, and searced through a
fine searce, and after ground upon a porphire or serpentine stone is an
excellent fucus, being laid on with the oil of white poppey.

8. A delicate washing ball.
TAke three ounces of Orace, half an ounce of Cypres, two ounces of Calamus
Aromaticus, one ounce of Rose leaves, two ounces of lauender flowers, beat all
these together in a mortar, searcing them through a fine searce, then scrape
some castill soap, and dissolve it with some Rosewater, then incorporat all
your powders therewith by laboring of them well in a mortar.

9. Damask powder.
TAke five ounces of orace, two ounces of Cipres, two ounces of Calamus; half
an ounce of Cloves, one ounce of Benjamin, one ounce of Rose leaves, one ounce
of Storax calamitum, half an ounce of Spike flowers, mix them well together.

10. To keep the teeth both white and sound.
TAke a quart of honey, as much Vinegar, and half so much white wine, boil
them together and wash your teeth therewith now and then.

11. To delay heat, and clear the face.
TAke three pintes of conduit water, boil therein two ounces of French barley,
change your water, and put in the barley again: repeat this so long, till your
water purchase no color from the Barley, but become very clear: boil the
last three pintes to a quart, then mix half a pint of white wine therein,
and when it is cold, wring the juice of two or three good Lemmons therein, and
use the same for the Morphewe, heat of the face or hands, and to clear the
skin.

12. Skin kept white and clear.
VVAsh the face and body of a sucking child with breast milk, or Cow milk,
or mixed with water, every night, and the childs skin will wax fair and
clear, and resist sunburning.

13. An excellent Pomatum to clear the skin.
WAsh Barrowes grease often times in May dew that has bin clarified in the
sun, till it be exceeding white, then take Marsh mallow roots scraping off
the outsides, then make thin slices of them and mix them, set them to macerate
in a seething balneo, and scumme it well till it be thoroughly clarified and
will come to roap, then strain it, and put now and then a spoonesull of
May-dewe therein, bearing it till it be through cold in often change of
May-dew, then throw away that dew, and put it in a glass coueing it with
May-dewe, and so reserve it to your use. Let the mallowe roots be two or three
days dried in the shade before you use them. This I had of a great profes sour
of Art, and for a rare and dainty secret, as the best fucus this day in use.

14. Another mineral ficussor the face.
INcorporate with a wooden pestle and in a wooden mortar with great labor
four ounces of sublimate, and one ounce of crude Mercury at the least six or
eight hours (you cannot bestow too much labor herein) then with often change
of cold water by ablution in a glass, take away the salts from the
sublimate, change your water twice every day at the I-ast, and in seven or
eight days (the more the better) it will be culcified, and then it is
prepared. Lay it on with the oil of white poppey.

15. To take away chilblanes out of the hands or feet.
Boil half a pecke of Oats in a quart of water, till they wax dry, then
having first anointed your hands with some good Pomatum and well chafed them,
hold them within the oats as hot as you may well suffer them, covering the
bowl wherein you put your hands with a double cloth to keep in the steame of
the oats. Do this three or four times, and you shall find the effect. The same
Oats will serve to be sodden with fresh water three or four times.

16. To help a fa^e that is red or pimpled.
Dissolve common salt in the juice of Lemmons, and with a linen cloth, pat
the patients face that is full of heat or pimples. It cures in a few
dressings.

17. Aliter.
TAke of those little whelkes or shells which some do call giny money, wash five
or six of the^, and beat them to fine powder, and infuse the juice of Lemmons
upon them, and it will presently boil: but if it offer to boil out of your
glass, then stop the mouth thereof with your finger, or blow into it. This will
in a short time be like an ointment, with which you must anoint the heat or
pimples of the face often times in a day till you find help. As the ointme^t
dries put more juice of Lemmons to it I his of an outlandish Gentlewoman, and
it is an asiured remedy if the heat be not very extreme. Some have found by
experience, that bathing of the face with hot vinegar every night when they go
to bed does mightily repel the humor.

18. Aliter.
QVilt baye salt well dried and powdered, in double linen sockes of a pretty
bigness, let the patient wear them in wide hose and shoes day and night, by
the space of fourteen days, or till he be well: every morning and evening let
him dry his sockes by the fire and put them on again. This helped M. Foster
an Essex man and an Attorney of the Common pleas within these few years, but
now deceased, whose face was for many years together of an exceedinge high
and firye color, of my own knowledge, and had spent much money in Physic
without any success at all, until he obtained his remedy. The patient must
not take any wet of his feet during the cure.

19. Aliter and optime.
TAke half a pound of white distilled vinegar, two new laid Eggs with their
shelles, two spoonfuls of the flowers of brimstone, let these macerate in the
vinegar by the space of three days: then take out the Eggs, and prick them
full of holes with a needle, but not too deep, least any of the yolke should
happen also to issue, let that liquor also mix with the vinegar, then strain
all through a fine cloth, and tie up the brimstone in the cloth like a little
ball, dippe this ball in the strained liquor, when you use it, and pat it on
the place three or four times every day, and this will cure any red face in
twelve or fourteen days. Some do also commend the same for an approved
remedy against the morphew; the brimstone bal must be kept in some close thing
from the air.

20. How to take away any pimple from the face.
BRimstone ground with the oil of Turpentine, and applied to any pimple one
hour, makes the flesh to rise spungeous, which being anointed with the
thick oil of butter that arises in the morning from new milk sodden a
little over night, will heal and scale away in a few days, leaving a fair
skin behind. This is a good skinning salve.

21. To help any Morphew, sunburning, itch, or red face.
Steep two sliced Lemmons being large and fair in a pint of Condu it water,
leave them four or five days in infusion covering the water, then strain the
water, and dissolve therein the quantity of a hasell nut of sublimate (some
hold a dram a good proportion to a pint of water) finely powdered: let the
patient wet a cloth therein, and rub the place where the grief is every
morninge and evening a little, till the hew do please he: you may make the
same stronger or weaker according to good discretion.

22. For the Morphew.
TAke a pint of distilled vinegar, lay therein two new laid eggs whole with
their shelles, three yellowe Docke roots picked and sliced, two spoonefulls of
the flowers of brimstone, and so let all rest three days, and then use this
liquour with a cloth, rubbing the place three or 4. times every day, and in
three or four days it commonly helps: put some bran in your cloth before
you moisten your cloth therein, binding it up in form of a little ball. This
of Master Rich of Lee, who helped himself and a gallant Lady therewith in a
few days.

23. To take away the freckles in the face.
WAsh your face in the wane of the moon with a sponge, morninge and evening
with the distilled water of elder leaves, lettinge the same dry into the
skin. Your water must be distilled in May. This is of a Trauailer, who has
cured himself thereby.

24. To cure any extreme bruise upon a sire fall, on the face, or any other
member of the body.
PResently after the fall make a great fire, and apply hot clothes one
after another without intermission, the patient standing near the fire for one
hour and a half, or till the swelling be clean abated. This I knew proved
with good success in a maid that fell down a pair of stairs, whereby all
her face was extremely dis figured. Some hold opinion that the same may be
performed with clothes wet in hot water and wroonge out again before
application. Then to take away the chaungeable colors, which do accustomablie
follow all bruises, shred the root of a green or growing flower deluce,
beat it with red rose water, and grind it till it come to a salve, apply the
same, and in a few hours it takes away all the colors: but if it lie too
long it will raise pimples, and therefore so soon as the colors be vanished,
immediately remove the salve.

25. How to keep the teeth clean.
CAlcine the tops and branches of Rosemarie into ashes, and to one part there
of, put one part of burnt allome, mix them well together, and with thy finger
first moistened a little with thy spettle, rub all thy teeth over a pretty
while every morning till they* be clean, but not to galling of thy gums, then
sup up some fair water or white wine, gargling the sa^e up and down thy mouth a
while, and the^ dry thy mouth with a towel. This of an honest Gentleman and a
painful gatherer of physical receipts.

26. Sweet and delicate dentifrices or Rubbers for the teeth.
Dissolve in four ounces of warm water, three or four drammes of gum
Dragagant, and in one night this will become a thick substance like gellie,
mingle the same with the powder of Alablaster finely ground and fearced, then
make up this substance into little round rolls, of the bigness of a childs
arrowe, and four or five inches in length. Also if you temper Roset or some
other color (that is not hurtful) with them, they will show full of pleasing
veins. These you may sweeten either with Rosewater, Ciuet, or musk. But if
your teeth be very scaly, let some exper barbar first take off the scales with
his instrument, and then you may keep them clean by rubbing them with the
aforesaid rolls. And here, by those miserable experiences that I have seen
in some of my nearest friends, I am enforced to admonish all Gentled women to
be careful how they suffer their teeth to be cleansed and made white with
any Aqua fortis, which is the Barbars usual water: for unless the same be
both well delayed, and carefully applied, she may happen within a few
dressings to be forced to borrow a rank of teeth to eat her dinner, unless
her gums do help her the better.

27. A delicate stoue to sweat in.
I Know that many Gentlewomen as well for the clearing o^ their skins as
cleansing of their bodies, do now and then delight to sweat. For the which
purpose I have set down this manner following, as the best that ever I
observed. Put into a brass pot of some good content, such proportion of sweet
herbs, and of such kind as shall be most appropriate for your infirmity,
with some reasonable quantity of water, close the same with an apt cover, and
well luted with some paste made of flower and whites of Eggs: at some part of
the cover you must let in a leaden pipe (the entrance whereof must also be
well luted) this pipe must be conveyed thorough the side of the Chimney, where
the pot stands in a thick hollow stake, of a bathing tubb crossed with
hoopes according to the usual manner in the top, which you may cover with a
sheet at your pleasure. Now the steame of the pot passing thorough the pipe
under the false bottom of the bathing tub, which must be boared full of big
boles, will breath so sweet and warm a vapor upon your body, as that
(receiving air by holding your head without the tub as you fit therein) you
shall sweat most temperately, and continue the same a long time without
fainting. And this is performed with a small charcoale fire maintained under
the pot for this purpose. Note that the room would be close wherein you place
your bathing tub, least any sudden cold should happen to offend you whilst
your body is made open and porous to the air.

28. Diverse sorts of sweet or hand waters made suddenly or extempore, with the
extracted oils of spices.
FIrst you shall understand that whenever you shall draw any of the
aforesaid oils of Cinnamon, Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs or such like, that you shall
have also a pottle, or a gallon more or less, according to the quantity which
you draw at once, of excellent sweet washing water for your table, yea some
do keep the same for their broths, wherein otherwise they should use some of
the same kind of spice. But if you take three or four drops only of the oil
of Cloves, Mace, or Nutmegs (for Cinnamon oil is too costly to spend this way)
and mingle the same with a pint of fair water, making agitation of them a
pretty while together in a glass having a narrow mouth, till they have in
some measure incorporated themselves together, you shall find a very pleasing
and delightful water to wash with, and so you may always furnish your self
of sweet water of several kinds, before such time as your guests shall be
ready to sit down. I speak not here of the oil of spike, which will extend
very far this way, both because every gentlewoman does not like so strong
a sent, and for that the same is elsewhere already commended by another Author.
Yet I must needs acknoweledge it to be the cheaper way, for that I assure my
self there may be five or six gallons of sweet water made with one ounce of
the oil, which you may buy ordinarily for a groate at the most.

29. An excellent sweet water for a casting bottle.
TAke three drams of oil of Spike, one dram of oil of Thyme, one dram of
oil of Lemmons, one dram of oil of cloves, then take one grain of Ciuet, and
three grains of the aforesaid composition well wrought together. Temper them
well in a silver spoone with your finger, then put the same into a silver boll,
washing it out by little and little into the boll with a little Rosewater at
once, til all the oil be washed out of the spoone into the boule, and then do
the like by washing the same out of the boule with a little Rosewater at once,
till all the sent be gotten out, putting the Rosewater still in a glass, when
you have tempered the same in the boule sufficiently. A pint of Rosewater will
be sufficient to mingle with the said proportion: and if you find the same
not strong enough of the ciuet, then you may to every pint put one grain and
a half, or two grains of ciuer to the weight of three grains of the
aforesaid composition of oils.

30. To color a black hair presently into a Chestnut color.
THis is done with oil of Vitrioll, but you must do it very carefully not
touching the skin.

31. A present and delicate perfume.
LAy two or three drops of liquid Amber upon a glowing coal, or a piece of
lignum aloes, lignum Rhodium, or storax.

32. To renew the sent of a Pomander.
TAke one grain of ciuet, and two of musk, or if you double the proportion it
will be so much the sweeter, grind them upon a stone with a little Rosewater,
and after wetting your hands with Rosewater, you may work the same in your
Pomander. This is a slight to pass away an old Pomander, but my intention is
honest.

33. How to gather and clarify May-dewe.
When there has fallen no rain the night before, the^ with a clean and large
sponge, the next morning you may gather the same from sweet herbs, grass, or
corn: strain your dew, and expose it to the sun in glasses covered with
papers or parchment pricked full of holes, strain it often, continuing it in the
sun, and in an hot place till the same grow white and clear, which will
require the best part of the summer. Some commend May dew gathered from
Fennel and Celandine, to be most excellent for sore eyes, and some commend the
same (prepared as before) above Rosewater for preserving of fruits flowers, etc.

34. Diverse excellent sentes for gloves, with their proportions and other
circumstances, with the manner of perfuming.
THe Violet, the Orange, the Lemmon duly proportioned with other sentes,
perform this well, so likewise of Labdanum, Storax, Benjamin. etc.

The manner is this. First lay your vmber upon a few coals till it begin to
crack like lime, then let it cool of it self, taking away the coals, then
grind the same with some yellowe ocre, till you perceive a right color for a
glove: with this mixture wash over your glove with a little hairebrush upon a
smooth stone in every seame and all over, then hang your gloves to dry upon
a line, then with gum Dragagant dissolved in some Rosewater, and ground with a
little oil de Ben, or of sweet Almonds upon a stone, strike over your gloves
in every place with the gum and oil so ground together, do this with a
little spoonge, but be sure the gloves be first thoroughly dry, and the color
well rubbed and beaten out of the glove; then let them hang again till they
be dry, which will be in a short time. Then if you will have your glove to lie
smooth and fair in show, go over it again with your spoonge, and the
mixture of gum and oil, and dry the glove yet once again. Then grind
upon your stone two or three grains of good musk, with half a spoonefull of
Rosewater, and with a very little piece of a spoonge take up the composition
by a little and little, and so lay it upon your glove lying upon the stone.
Pick and strain your gum Dragagant before you use it. Perfume but the one
side of your glove at once, and then hang it up to dry, and then finish the
other side. Ten grains of musk will give a sufficient perfume to eight pair
of gloves. Note also that this perfume is done upon a thin Lambs leather
glove, and if you work upon a kids skin or goats skin, which is usual
leather for rich perfumes, the^ you must add more quantity of the oil of Ben
to your gum, and go over the glove twice therewith.

35. Sweet bags to lie among linen.
FIll your bags only with lignum Rhodium finely beaten, and it will give an
excellent sent to your linen.

36. To make hair of a fair yellowe or golden color.
THe last water that is drawn from honey being of a deep red color
performs the same excellently, but the same has a strong smell, and
therefore must be sweetened with some aromatical body.

Or else the hair being first clean washed and then moistened a pretty while
by a good fire in warm alum water with a sponge, you may moisten the same in
a decoction of Turmericke, rubarb, or the bark of the Barberie tree, and so it
will receive a most fair and beautiful color. The Dog^ berrie is also an
excellent berrie to make a golden liquor withal for this purpose, beat your
alum to powder, and when the water is ready to sees, dissolve it therein:
four ounces to a pottle of water will be sufficient, let it boil a while,
strain it, and this is your allom licour wherewith you must first prepare the
hair.

37. How to color the head or beard into a Chestnut color in half an hour.
TAke one part of lead calcined with sulphur, and one part of quick lime,
temper them somewhat thin with water, lay it upon the hair, chafing it well
in, and let it dry one quarter of an hour or thereabout, then wash the same
off with fair water diverse times, and lastly, with soape and water, and it
will be a very natural hair color. The longer it lies upon the hair the
browner it grows. This colors not the flesh at all, and yet it lasts
very long in the hair. Saepius expertu^.

FINIS.

