THE PATHWAY TO PERFECTION.

A Sermon preached at Saint Maryes Spittle in London on Wednesday in Easter
week. 1593.

By Thomas Playfere, Doctor of Divinity.

AT LONDON, Printed by James Roberts for Andrew Wise, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Angel. 1597.

To the most noble and worshipful Knight, my honorable good Patron, Sir
George Carey, Knight Marshall of her Majesty's most honorable household, and
governor of her I Will of Wight, all joys, external, internal, eternal.
SIR, as soon as I had preached this Sermon, it pleased the L. Bishop of
London last deceased, both by his letter, and by word of mouth, to request a
copy of it for the press. The like did diverse other also. But in truth I had
then no copy of it. Or if I had been possessed of any, yet I was resolute to
yield to no such motion. Which some (I know not who) understanding, that
being by so many, and so many times importuned, to print this, or some other
Sermon, I always utterly refused so to do, have presumed to print the Mean
in Mourning; altogether without true judgment, or calling me to counsel
therein. And that so falselie, and in most places so quite contrary to my
meaning, that I may say to him, whosoever was the procurer thereof, as Martial
the Poet said to one,

Quem recitas meus est, o Fidentine, libellus:
Sed male dum recitas, incipit esse tuus.
O Fidentine, a book of mine
Thou printst against my will;
And yet not mine, but it is thine
Because thou printst it ill.
When in the triumph of Julius Caesar, the Romans had carried about the
model of those Cities, which he had subdued, graven in yuorie, and not long
after in the triumph of Fabius Maximus, they showed (...) description of his
Cities, carved in wood: Chrysippus beholding the difference, said merrily,
that Fabius cities were but the sheathes of Caesar's Cities. And certes I may
be bold to auerre, that as much diversity as there is between yuorie and
wood: so much there is between that Sermon which was first once preached, and
that which was afterward twice printed. For those two editions were but wooden
sheathes. Or if there were any metal in them, yet it had not an yuorie but a
dudgin haft, being blunt and dull, without any point or edge.

Therefore after I was, not only persuaded by the advice of all my friends,
but even enforced by the necessity of the thing it self, to print that Sermon
as it was preached, I thought good likewise to let this go with it. That as
the grauer of images in Aesop tells Mercury, if he would give a groate for
the image of Jupiter, he should have his own image for nothing: so if any one
who has cast away his money upon the former editions, will bestow a groate
upon the true copy now set out by my self, he may have this sermon with it
for nothing, in surplussage over and besides the bargain. Which if it shall
please you out of your true worth favorably to patronise and protect, then
all that reap any benefit by perusing it, shall have good cause to honor
your most noble mind, by whose munificence and bounty my studies have been
hitherto continued. And so craving your honorable acceptance of my faithful
endeavors I humbly take my leave. From Saint John's College in Cambridge the
first day of February. 1595. ()

Your Worships ever, and in all duty most bounden, Thomas Playfere.

To the Reader.
GEntle Reader, the sentences are so framed, as thou may read them, without
any regard of the marginal notes, as though they were not set down at all.
Do therefore herein as thou shall think best. The quotations which are
marked without a parenthesis, as thus, a b c, were all uttered when the Sermon
was preached. The rest, which are marked with a parenthesis, as thus, (a) (b)
(c), were thought convenient to be printed, though, not the quotations
themselves, but only the matter contained in the^ was preached. Farewell.

THE PATHVVAIE TO Perfection.
The Text.
But one thing, I forget that which is behind, and endeavor my self to that
which is before, and follow hard, toward the mark, for the prize of the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus. Philip. 3. 14.
RIght Honorable, right Worshipful, and most Christian and blessed brethren;
perfection is all in all. The only thing in every thing. But that which is
imperfect, is like either the untimely birth of a woman, or else the untimely
fruire of a tree. The one dying before it be borne, the other rotting before it
be ripe. Therefore it is said of the law, He. 7. v. 19
That it made nothing perfect: but of the Gospel, Ih* 19. 13.
that it is most perfect in it self. And of the tower of Babell, Lu. 14. 30.
these men began well to build, yet could not perfect it: but of the frame of
the world, Ge. 1. v. 1.
thus the heaven and the earth were perfectly finished, yea so perfectly, that
every thing since which has had any little resemblance of this perfection, is
said to be as perfect as God made the world. Now of all things in the world,
man especially is borne, not to dye, as an untimely birth, but to live: and man
lives, not to rotte away as untimely fruit, but to flourish for ever.
Therefore we that do not dye under the law, but live under grace, Romans 9. 14
must not be like the law, but like the Gospel: and we which shall not rotte
away as the Tower of Babel, but flourish for ever, as the building of God, 1.
Cor. 3. 9
must not be like the tower of Babell, but like the frame of the world;
laboring continually to be perfect, as our heavenly Father is perfect. Mar. 5.
48.
Labor, I say, we must: for as nothing is excellent, and easy both together;
in like sort perfection, though it be so excellent a thing, that it ought to be
much desired, yet it is not so easy a thing, that it can be soon attained.
Therefore says the Apostle in the former verse, I do not think that I have
yet attained to it. For, says Bernard: Quomodo proficis si, i^ tibi su^^icis?
How can thou possibly be a proficient, if thou think thy self already
sufficient? The arc of the covenant was but a Cubit and a half high. Exo. 25.
10. i1. Ki. 7. 32
So likewise the wheels of the Cauldron were but a Cubit and a half high.
Now we know that a Cubite and a half is an imperfect measure, which shows
that none in this life are perfectly perfect. The very highest are, as the
Arc in Moses tabernacle, or as the wheels in Salomons temple, but a Cubite
and a half high: (...).
perfectly imperfect when they begin: imperfectly perfect when they end.
Benaiah was honorable among thirty, but he attained not to the first three:
1. Sa. 3, 23.
And so some one man may be as perfect as thirty, yea, as a thousand other
men, and yet not attain to the perfection of the blessed Trinity, which is
the first three. Nay when we have done the best we can, we are but unprofitable
Servants Lu. 17. 10.
. All our righteousness is as a stained cloth Esa* 64. 5
. Our greatest strength is confirmed in weakness 2. Cor. 12. 9.
. We know but in part, not as we are known 1. Cor. 13, 12.
, We walk by faith, not by sight 2, Cor. 5. 7.
. We behold as in a Glass darkely, not face to face 1. Col. 13. 12.
. So that the most perfect perfection we can attain to in this life, is an
humble acknowledging of that imperfection which we have Est quaeda^ imperfecta
perfectio, vt sciat homo se non esse perfectum in hac vita. Primaesius in Col.
c. 1. in fine.
, and an earnest laboring for that perfection which we have not (...).
Nyssenus (...). in fine
. We live here in that we hope for life Spes vitae immortali^ est vita
vitae mortalis. Au. in p. ^03.
: and we are perfect here in that we labor for perfection (...). Oecume. in
H^. c. 6.
. Wherefore as Solomon went up six steps to come to his great throne of Iuory
Reg. 10. 19.
, so must we ascend six degrees to come to this high top of perfection. The
first (Not many things) But one thing. The second (I do not remember, but I
Forget that which is behind. The third (I stand not still, but) I endeavor my
self to that which is before. The fourth (I run not amiss, but) I follow
hard, The fifth (Not beside the mark, but) Toward the mark. The sixth, (Not for
any other prize, but) For the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.

Touching the first, he says (Not many things) But one thing. Gregory has
this sentence Cum animus diuiditur ad multa fit minor ad singulae.
The mind of man is like the stone Tirrhenus. That stone, so long as it is
whole swimmeth, but being once broken sinketh. And so the heart of man being
once broken, it soon sinketh, and being diversely distracted, it is easily
ou^rwhelmed. Z^dikias Iere. 39. 5.
did well enough so long as he stayed in Jerusalem, ^ignifying the vision of
peace which is one thing* but when he was carried to Riblah, signifying a
multitude which is many things, then were his eyes put out. What so near
one as two? And yet we must not go so far from one as two, seeing it is a
very hard matter and almost impossible, that one mind should well heed two
diverse things: Vt res opposstas men's ferat vna duas. Cor. Gallus.
Hercules himself could not cope with two adversaries at once. So that Peter
was unwise to ware two swords at once. Lu. 22. 3^
Alexander said, the whole world could not hold two Suns at once. So that
Issacar was an Ass to bear two burdens at once. Genesis 49 14.
No man sits upon two seats together. No man hunteth two games together. No
man iustleth with two Spears together. He that has two hearts, if he have a
true heart of the one, he will have a false heart of the other. Therefore says
Saint James: Iam. 1, 8.
A double hearted man is unconstant in all his ways. He that has two tongues,
if he tell truth with the one, he will lie with the other. Therefore says
Saint Paul: 1. Ti. 3, 8
Deacons must not be double tongued. He that serves two Masters, if he please
the one, he will displease the other: therefore says our Savior: Lu. 10, 13
No man can serve two Masters. He that walks two ways, if he go well in
the one, he will stumble in the other. Therefore says Ecclesiasticus: Eccl. 2,
13
Woe be to the sinner which walks two manner of ways. Wherefore we must not
be like the Philistines which had two hearts, 1, Sa. 5. 2.
one heart that cleaued to God, another that cleaued to Dagon. We must not be
like the Jews which had two tongues, Soph. 2, 1.
one tongue that sweared by the Lord, another that sweared by Malcham. We
must not be like the Israelites which served two Masters, 1, Kin. 18. 12.
they halted betwixt two opynions serving sometimes God, sometimes Baal. We
must not be like Solomon which walked two ways, 1, Ki, 11, 5
his heart was not perfect with God, but sometimes he walked the way of the Lord,
sometimes the way of Ashteroth. We must not do so, I say; we must not follow
God and Dagon; God and Malcham: God and Baal: God and Ashteroth. If we would
be perfect indeed, we must follow (Not many things, no not so much as two
things) But one thing.

For this One thing, is the very band of Perfection Collo. 3. 4 (...).
Theodor^^ grae, Affect. eur. 2.
. Heere-vpon Christ speaking to his Spouse, says thus Cantica. 4, 9.
, Thou have wounded my heart with one of thine eyes, and with one chain of thy
neck. The Church, I grant, has many eyes. But because as the eyes of a
maiden look unto the hand of her mistress Psa. 123. 2.
: so all these eyes wait only on the Lord, look only one way, and so (in
a sort) make only one eye, therefore he says, with One of thine eyes. So
likewise the Church has many chains. But because these chains are so linked
and intorteled together, that they all make (in a manner) but one golden chain
of Christian virtues, which is the band of Perfection, and binds the Church
to Christ, as the neck joins the body to the head, therefore he says,
with One chain of the neck. This one eye it is, this one chain it is, which
makes Christ in love with his Church, which ouercomes him, and wounds his
heart. Thou have wounded my heart, says he, with one of thine eyes, and with
one chain of thy neck. The Spouse of Christ must have but One chain about her
neck. The Disciple of Christ must have but One coat upon his back. Luke 9.
3.
He must not be a turne-coate, much less a change-coate. Seeing indeed that
which Cyprian speaks of Christ's coat, may be as truly said of every
Christians coat, That either it must be Vnica, or else it cannot be Tunica,
either it must be One or none. For as Rebeccaes two Twins did strugle and
wrestle before they were borne, for hatred and malice, but Elizabeth's one
child did spring and skip before he was borne, for joy and gladness; so he
that busies himself about more things then one, shall never prove singular
in any thing, (...). Plat^ de. rep. l. 3.
nay he shall find that strife and resistance in his head, which Rebecca did
in her womb, but he that labors and travails only about One thing, shall
bring it to good perfection, and be as well delivered of it, as Elizabeth was
of John Baptist. Hence it is that we are exhorted, for our heart, Act. 4, 32.
to have One heart and one soul, for our tongue, 1, Cor. 1, 10.
to speak One and the self same thing, for our Master, Mat. 13, 8.
to serve One Master in heaven, for our way, Phil. 3, 16
to walk after One and the self same rule. According to that most wise and
worthy word Cor vnu^, via vna. My L. Treasurer his word.
One heart, One way. Which is also agreeable to the word of God, who says, I
will give them one heart, and one way, that they may fear me for ever, for the
wealth of them and of their children after them, Ie. 32, 39
Wherefore let us not have many minds, or trouble our selves about many
things, but with Mary, He. 10, 41
mind only One thing which is necessary: let us not have many tongues, or
desire many things, but every one of us say with David, Psalm. 1^, 1
One thing only have I desired of the Lord: let us not serve many Masters, or
be many Masters our selves, but as Sophony speaks, Soph. 3, 9.
with One shoulder serve the Lord our God, and only worship him: let us not
walk many ways, or kick against many pricks, Act. 9, 5.
or shoot at rouers (as I may say) but with Saint Paul in this place, aim
only at one mark, and follow But one thing. This is the first degree to
perfection.

TOuching the second he says, (I do not remember, but) I forget that which
is behind. Truth it is, we may remember, both that we have done ill, to amend
it, and also that we have done well, to continue it. For the first Chrisostom
says, (...).
Nothing does so well help us forward in a good course, as the often
remembrance of our sins. Whereas in the bitterness of our souls we call to
remembrance the dais of old, which we have passed away in sin. Whereupon the
Psalmist particularly intituleth the eight and thirtith Psalm. a Memorandum, or
a Remembrance, because he made it, when he called to remembrance his sins,
which he had in former time committed C^^^ commissa olim a se delicta memoriae
repeteret. Euthymius. ibidem
, And generally Baruch says to us in this sort. Remember well what you have
done, and as it came into your hearts to turn away from God, so now strive
with your selves ten times more to turn again unto him n. Thus did Paul,
remembering he had once been a persecutor, (...). Bar. 4, 28. 1. Tim. 1. 13
he did repent him of it, and made amends for it, and was afterward ten times
more zealous to save the wicked, then before he had been to destroy the
godly. For the second, an other says, Quam immensa est laetitia de
recordatione tran^o^^^ vir tu^is, etc. Ber. in se^t^ omniu^ saenc. ser. 2.
o what heavenly comfort do they inwardly feel, which are delighted, with the
remembrance of virtue past, with the fruition of joy pesent: with the
expectation of felicity to come? This threefold cord of comfort, as it can
never be broken, so it must always be drawn forth at length, that he which is
just may be still more just, that he which is strong may be still more strong
Re. 22, 11
Thus did David, 1. Sa. 17, 36.
remembering he had once slain a Bear, he did not repent him of it, but
gathered strength and courage by it, and was afterward more bold to combat with
a mighty Giant, than before he had been to deal with an eluish Bear,
Therefore as they which leap, the further they go backward to fetch their run,
the further they leap forward, when they have run: so here we may look back
a little, and remember both that we have done ill, to amend it, and also that
we have done well to continue it. Otherwise the remembrance either of vices or
virtues, is so far from putting us any whit forward, that it casts us quite
backward. For as Mark the Eremite witnesses, The remembrance of former sins
is enough to cast him down altogether, (...).
who otherwise might have had some good hope. Our sins and Elies Sons are
alike. Ely hearing his Sons were slain, whom he himself had not chastised
and corrected as he ought, fell down backward and brake his neck 1. Sa. 4, 17
. And so all they that remember and hearken after their former sins, which they
should have mortified and killed, fall down backward, and turn away from God.
For this is the difference between the godly and the wicked. Both fall: But
the godly fall forward upon their faces, as Abraham did when he talked with
God: the wicked fall backward upon the ground, as the Jews did when they
apprehended Christ. He that remembers his sins, to be sorry for them, as
Abraham did, falls forward upon his face: but he that remembers his sins, to
rejoice in them, as the Jews did, falls backward upon the ground. Wherefore if
thou be upon a mountain, look not backward again unto Sodom, as Lots wife
did: Genesis 19, 27.
if thou be within the Arc, fly not out again into the world, as Noah's Crow
did: Genesis 8, 7
if thou be well washed, return not again to thy mire as the Hog does: 2,
Pet. 2, 22.
if thou be clean purged, run not again to thy filth, as the Dog does: Pr.
16. 11
If thou be going toward the Land of Canaan, think not on the flesh pots of
Eg^pt: Ex. 16, 3
If thou be marching against the host of Madian, drink not of the waters of
Harod: Iud. 7, 6
If thou be upon the house top, come not down: Mark, 13. 11.
If thou have set thy hand to the plough, look not behind thee; Lu. 9. 62
remember not those vices which are behind thee: no, nor those virtues neither.
For as Gregory writes, Memoria virtutis forma mentis. De arcae pastorali. par.
4, ca. 1.
The remembrance of former virtues does many times so besot and inueigle a man,
that it makes him like a blind Ass fall down into a ditch. When Orpheus went
to fetch his wife Euridice out of hell, he had her granted to him upon
condition, that he should not turn back his eyes to look upon her, till he
had brought her into heaven. Yet having brought her forward a great way, at
length his love was so excessive, that he could not contain any longer, but
would needs have a sight of her. VVhereupon forthwith he lost both her sight
and her self, she suddenly again vanishing away from him. Flexit aman^
oculos, et protinus illa relapsae est. Ovid. Met. l. 1o. Fab. 1, Memin^t et
Virgilius Geor. l. 4, in fin.
This is a poetical fiction. Nevertheless it serves very fitly to this
purpose. To admonish us, that if we have any virtue, which is to be loved as a
man is to love his wife, yet we must not be so blind in affection, as to doat
too much upon it, or to fall in admiration of our selves for it, or to be
always gazing and wondering at it, lest by too much looking upon it, and by
too well liking of it, and by too often remembering it, we loose it. Because
indeed he that remembers his virtues, has no virtues to remember. Seeing he
wants humility which is the mother-vertue of all virtues. For this is the
difference between the godly and the wicked. Both remember virtues. But the
godly remember other men's virtues: the wicked remember their own virtues. They
remembering other men's virtues, make the^ ensamples to imitate: these remembering
their own virtues, make them miracles to wonder at. Therefore the godly
remembering they have some one or other little vice in them, are humble, though
they have very many great virtues: but the wicked remembering they have some
one or other little virtue in them are proud, though they have ve^^e many
great vices. Wherefore though thou have conquered Kingdoms yet crack not of
it, as Zenacharib did Esa. 37. 13.
: though thou have built Babel, yet brag not of it, as Nabuchodonozer did Da.
4, 27
: though thou have a great people, yet number (...) not; as Diuid did 2, Sa.
24, 2.
: though thou have rich treasures, yet show them not, as Ezechias did 2, Reg.
20, 13.
: though thou have slain a thousand Philistines, yet glory not in it, as
Sampson did Iud. 15, 16.
: though thou have built seven, altars, yet vaunt not of it, as Balack did
Number. 23, 1.
: though thou give alms, yet blow not a trumpet Mat. 6, 2.
: though thou fast twice a week, yet make no words of it Luke 18 12.
, (remember it not but) Forget that which is behind.

If thou will be Perfect, Mat. 19. 22
sell all that thou have, and follow me, says our Savior, S^ll all that thou
have. Or if no man will buy it, give it. Or if no man will take it, Forget it.
Themistocles said, he had rather learn the Art of forgetfulness, then of
memory. That is, as I understand it, rather divinity, then philosophy. For
philosophy is an Art of memory, but divinity is an Art of forgetfulness.
Therefore the first lesson that Socrates taught his Scholar was, Remember
Reminiscere.
. For he thought that knowledge is nothing else but a calling of those things to
remembrance which the mind knew, before it knew the body. But the first lesson
that Christ teaches his Scholar is, Forget Obliuiscere.
. Harken o daughter (says he) and see. Forget thine own Country and thy
fathers house. So that faith is that fair Hellena, which drinks to us in a
cup of Nepenthes, and says Reu. 21, 4.
, Be of good cheer, there shall be no more sorrow, neither crying, neither
death, neither pain, for the first things are past. And the water of the word
of God is, that fountain Lethe, which when we come to drink of it, speaks to
us (as it were) in this sort Esa. 43, 18.
, Remember not the former things, neither regard the things of old. For as
they which die cloth, do not immediately change one contrary into an other,
but first turn a white into an azure, and then make a puke of it: so we can
never hold color, as a good puke, except first our white be turned into an
azure, that is, as Lirine^sis says D^nec dediscimus been quod didicimus non
been cap. 25.
, except first we do well to Forget, that which we did ill to get, except
first we do happily vnlearn, that which we did unhappily learn. And like as
they which work in wax, cannot frame any new impression in it, till the old
be defaced (...). Bas. E. 1. p, 28.
: so the Image of Caesar the Prince of this world, the devil must first be
defaced, before the image of Christ can be formed in us. For this image of
Christ, (as Clemens testifies) (...) Prot. p. 5.
is seen only in them, which Forget the hill of Helicon, and dwell in mount
Sion. Wherefore though thou have had a bloody issue twelve yeeeres, yet thine
issue being now stopped, Forget all bloodines: Mar. ^, 25.
, though thou have had a crooked body eyghteene years, yet thy body being
now straightned, Forget all crookednes Luke 13, 11.
: though thou have had blind eyes, yet thine eyes being now cleared, Forget all
blindness in seeing the truth, Mar. 10, 5.
though thou have had deaf ears, yet thine ears being now opened, Forget all
deafnes in hearing the word Mar. 7, 34.
: though thou have had a dry hand* yet thy hand being now restored, Forget all
dryness and nigardlines with men Mat. 12, 10.
: though thou have had a lame foot, yet thy foot being now recured, Forget
all limping and halting with God Act. 14. 8
: though thou have been dead and buried in the grave four days, as Lazarus
was, yet being now revived, Forget all deadnes in sin Ih. 11, 39
: though thou have been possessed and tormented with seven devils, as Mary
Magdalen was, yet being now delivered, renounce the devil and all his works,
Lu. 8, 2.
and Forget all thy wicked works which are behind thee (...). Uide na 2.
(...). Vide Not. (...)
. Yea, and all thy good works also. For if thou Forget them, then will God
remember them. The patriark Abraham was content for Gods pleasure to sacrifice
his Son Isaac. Ge. 21, 16.
. But as soon as he had done, he Forgets it. Therefore God remembers it, and
sets down every several circumstance of it. By mine own self have I sworn
(says the Lord) because thou have don this thing. There is the general. But
what thing? The particular follows. And have not spared; yea not thy servant,
but thy Son; nay, not only thy Son, but thine only Son, And have not
spared thine only Son, therefore I will surely bless thee. That good woman
Lu. 7, 7, 42
gave Christ loving and frindly intertainment. But as soon as she had don she
Forgets it. Therefore Christ remembers it, and amplifies it from point to point.
He turned to the woman and said to Simon, See thou this woman? when I came to
thy house, thou gave me no water for my feet: but she has washed my feet
with the tears of her eyes, and wiped the^ with the hairs of her head. Thou
gave me no kiss: but she since the time I came in has not ceased to kiss
me feet. My head with oil thou did not anoint, but she has anointed my
feet with ointment. Lo ye how true it is which I said before, that if we
remember our good works, then God will forget them; but if we Forget them,
then God will remember them; yea and he will reward them when we have forgotten
them. If we wage war with God Lu. 14, 31
, and think to overcome him with ten thousand of our good deeds, then will he
like a puisant Prince, bring forth into the field a huge army of our sins,
twenty thousand of our sins against us, and with twenty thousand of our sins
will easily overthrow ten thousand of our good deeds, and so finally confound
us. But if one the other side we can be content to Forget all our good
works; and to strowe our best garments, and our most flourishing branches at
Christ's feet Mat. 21, 8
; and to cast down our very crowns before the throane of the Lamb Reu. 4, 10
, then he will be a right Lamb indeed, he will not fight with us, but he
will crown us with honor and glory. Almighty God appointed his people not to
sheare the first borne of the sheep De. 15. 16
. The first borne of the sheep are the best of our good works. These we must
not sheare, nor lay naked and open to the view and knowledge of all men, but
Forget them, and hide them under the fleece of silence, and keep them secret
to our selves. So Joseph, whom God did lead as a sheep Psa. 80, 2
, having a first borne, did not sheare this first borne of the sheep, but
called him Manasses, that is, Forgetfulness of those things which were behind,
when God had now answered the desires of his heart Ecl. 5, 19
. The faithful speaking to Christ say thus, we will make for thee borders of
gold guilt with silver Murenulas ^ureas vermiculatas ar^ento. Can 1 10.
. This is quite contrary to the fashion of the world. The fashion of the world
is to guild silver with gold, and to put the best side outward. But the
faithful guild gold with silver, and put the best side inward. So Moses having
a glorius countenance, did not set it out to the show, but did Forget it, and
covered it with a veil Ex 34, 33.
Now, a glorious countenance covered with a veil, what is it else, but a
border of gold, guilt with silver? But we, we alas, for the most part, have
such base minds, that we are scarce worth the ground we go upon* We do not
guild our borders of gold with silver; but we sheare the first borne of our
sheep. We do not cast down our garments and our branches and our
crownes-before the throane of the lamb, but we war against God with ten
thousand of our good works. Or rather indeed, which of us all can muster
together so many good works to fight for him? Nay, if we have done one thing
well, or one time well, we think all is well* we need do no more, we have done
good enough, and often enough. Yea, if others do not commend us also, we do so
wonderfully please our selves in it, that we are ready presently to praise our
selves for it. But here we may all of up learn true humility Humilitas animi
sublimitas christiani* Leo.
, which is true magnanimity of S. Paul. Paul had a most noble and most stately
heart, higher than the very poles of heaven it self. All that ever he had done
hitherto, or could do, he thinks too little, nay, he counts it nothing. He
was not a whit inferior to the very chiefest Apostles 2, Cor. 12, 11.
, yet he Forgets it. He labored more than they all. 1, Cor. 15, 10.
yet he Forgets it. He spoke with tongues more than they all 1 Cor. 14, 18.
, yet he Forgets it. He had care of the churches 2, Cor. 11, 28.
, yet he Forgets it. He fought with beasts at Ephesus 1, Cor. 15, 32.
, yet he Forgets it. He troad fathan, that vile beast under his feet To. 16,
30.
, yet he Forgets it. He spoke wisdom among them that are perfect 1. Cor. 2,
6.
, yet he Forgets it. He was rapt up to paradise into the third heaven, where
he first learned that among the Angels, which afterward he taught amongst men
1, Cor. 12, 4.
, yet he Forgets it, All this is nothing with him. Quae retro sunt obliuisci et
ad ea quae ^nte sunt Apostolum seq^i. Ep. 15.
All this he Forgets, and says, I Forget that which is behind. This is the
second degree to perfection.

TOuching the third, he says, (I stand not still) but I Endeavor my self to
that which is before. Saint Bernard writing to one Haimericus Chancellor of
Rome, in his very first salutation, wishes him to forget those things which
are behind, and to follow the Apostle to those things which are before. Which
no man can do, that either stands still, or is idle. Wherefore Hermes says
generally, Nothing in the whole world is altogether idle (...) Dial. 11.
. The wise man has allowed a time for every thing else, but for idleness he
has allowed no time. Moses Arc had rings; and bars within the rings Ex. 24,
14.
, to signify that it was not made to stand still, but to be removed from place
to place. Jacobs ladder had slaves Ge. 28, 12
, upon which he saw none standing still, but all either ascending or else
descending by it. Ascend you likewise to the top of the ladder, to heaven, and
there you shall hear one say, My Father does now work, and I work also.
Whereupon Basil notes, that king David having first said, Lord who shall dwell
in thy tabernacle, adds then Psalm. 15, 2. (...).
, Not he that has wrought righteousness heretofore, but he that does now
work righteousness, even as Christ sais, My father does now work, and I work
also. Descend you likewise to the foot of the ladder to the earth, and there
you shall hear that fig tree accursed, which did bear leaves and no fruit.
VVhereupon Theophylact notes, that John Baptist having first said, The axe is
laid to the root of the tree, adds then Mat. 3, 11. (...).
, Not every tree that has not brought forth good fruit heretofore: but every
tree that does not now bring forth good fruit shall be cut down, even as that
fruitless fig tree was cut down, and cast into the fire. Therefore we must so
walk, as God seeing our continual fruitfulnes may say of us, I see men
walking like trees Mar. 8, 24
. Men walk like trees, when as men are never idle, but always abounding in
the work of the Lord 1. Cor. 15. 58.
. As the tree of life every month brings forth twelve manner of fruits Reu.
22, 2
. For so Christ said to him whom he healed Mar. 2, 10
, Take up thy bed, and walk. He sais not, Take up thy bed and stand still, like
a stone, but take up thy bed, and walk, like a tree. Otherwise to them whom he
found standing still, he said in his wrath and in his sore displeasure, why
stand ye still all the day idle? why are ye like Moab settled upon your lees
Ie. 48, 11.
, and not poured from vessel to vessel? we must make account to give account
for every idle word, we speak Mat. 12, 36.
. And much more then for every idle hour we spend. He has called the time
against me, says Jerusalem Lam. 1, 15
. So that for the very time which we have contemned, we shall be condemned: and
for every day which we have spent idly, we shall be shent severely. The
Istaelites were commanded, not once in a week, or once in a month, but every
day to gather Manna, except only the Sabbath day Ex. 16, 26.
. To teach them, and all us, that till we come to the saboth of our
everlasting rest in heaven, we must never stand still, but every day be doing
somewhat. Wherefore Apelles posey was this, Let no day pass without a line
Nulla dies sine line^.
. Be sure every day thou do some good then draw one line at the least.
According to that Esa 28, 10
, Line upon line, line upon line. And Pithagoras posey was this Cha^nici ne
insideas.
, Sit not still upon the measure of corn. Do not look to eat, except thou
sweat for it. According to that 2, These. 3, 10.
He which will not work, let him not eat. In my Fathers house, says Christ,
are many mansions Ioh. 14, 3.
, So that no man may sing his soul a sweet Requiem, saying with that
cor^orant in the Gospel, Soul take thy rest. For in heanen only, which is in
our father^ house, there are many mansions to rest in. In this world, which is
out of our fathers house, there are not many mansions, no not any mansions to
rest in* but only (...) to work in. We are come, says the author to the
Hebrews He. 12, 23
, to the spirits of just and perfect then in heaven* So that no man may ^ue out
for himself a Quietus est, saying with the church of Laodicea, I am rich and
have enough. For in heaven only, are the spirits of just and perfect men,
which are rich and have enough. In this world we must never think we are rich,
but we must always be poor in spirit: we must never think we have enough,
but we must always hunger and thirst after righteousness. Wherefore if thou have
a talent Lu. 19, 20.
, put it not into a napkin, but into the bank: if thou light a candle, Mar. 4,
21
set it not under a bushel* but upon a candlestick: if thou build a City Mat.
5, 14.
, place it not under a dale, but upon a hill* if thou seek Christ Cant. 3, 1.
, seek him not in thy bed, but in the garden. Lie not still: Sit not still:
(stand not still) but Endeavor thy self to that which is before.

Walk before me, and be perfect says God to Abraham Genesis 17, 1
. As if he should say, if thou will be perfect, then walk before me, and
Endeavor thy self to that which is before thee. For the Apostle in the other
part, speaking of those things which are behind, says that he does not only
not bear them in body, But not so much as bear them in mind. Here
contrariwise, speaking of those things which are before, he says, that he
does not only intend his mind to them, but also extend his very body toward
them. So that as they which run in a race, bend forward they^ breasts, and
stretch out their arms, to show that they have a desire to run faster then
possibly their feet can follow them: after the same sort we which run in
this course of Christianity* must cast away every thing that presses down, and
sin which cleaves so fast Heb. 12, 1
, that we may Endeavor our selves, or (as the Greek word (...).
here signifies) stretch our selves, to those things which are before. And like
as Aeolus left all the other winds, which might have been a trouble to him
with his friend Ulysses, to be packt up in a male, and kept only the western
wind for his own use, to bring him home into his country: so we must reject
all other things, which may be as contrary winds to drive us from the shore
of salvation, and retain only that western wind of the spyrit of God,
whereby we may Endeavor our ^elues to that which is before, and stretch out our
sails, and so come safely to the haven of heaven. Every thing, as Austine
testifies, is either a hinderance, or a furtherance Aut vin^^ulum aut
^vehiculum De ciu^. Dei. l. 9, c. 5.
: if it be a hinderance, cast it away: If it be a furtherance, then keep it.
For even as the silk worm keeps her body spare and empty, and uses to fast
two or three days together, that she may stretch out her self the better, and
spin her thread the finer: so we must Endeavor to bring under our bodies 2,
Cor. 9 ^, 27.
, and (as I may say) diet them for the nonce, that we may not any longer weaue
the spiders web Esa, 59, 5.
, but with the silk worm spin a new third. The spiders webb is vinculum, the
silk worms third vehiculum. And like as the viper perceauing her old skin to
be so stiff that she cannot easily stretch out her self in it, strips it
quite off: after the same sort we which are by nature a generation of vipers,
must strip off our old skin Colo. 3, 9.
, and perceauing we cannot well do our Endeavor and stir our selves in the
armor of Saul, we must with David put it of, and put on the armor of light.
When long war had bin between the two houses of Saul and David, at length
the house of Saul waxed weaker and weaker, and the house of David waxed
stronger and stronger 2. Sa. 3. 1.
. In like manner the spirit must always Endeavor it self to that which is
before, and never leave fighting with the flesh, till the house of Saul, who
was a lim of the devil, that is, the flesh, wax weaker and weaker, and the
house of David, who was a figure of Christ, that is the spirit, wax stronger
and stronger. Thus the Baptist being but a child waxed stronger and stronger in
spirit. And yet speaking of Christ and himself, he says thus Ioh. 3. 30.
, He must increase, I must decrease. But the Baptist was borne of old
Elizabeth: Christ was borne of young Marie. Whereby we see, that that which
is borne of the old man, which is the flesh, must daily decrease in us, and
grow downward: but that which is borne of the new man, which is the spirit,
must daily increase in us, and grow upward. For so indeed Christ in the
beginning of the new world increased, in wisdom for his mind, and stature for
his body Luke 2, 52
. To teach us that if we be lively members of the same body, then we must in
like sort Endeavor our selves to that which is before, and increase and
multiply Crescite et multiplicamini. Non solum ad corpus sed etiam ad animum
refer^ur, (...).
and grow up into him who is the head, till we all come to the measure of the
age of the fulness of Christ. The holy ghost also in the beginning of the old
world, was moved upon the waters Genesis 1, 2.
To teach us that if we be inspired and moved by the same spirit, then we must
in like sort be moved upon the waters, and pass apase over the red sea of this
world, that we may quickly come to the celestial Canaan, which is the kingdom
of God. We pray indeed that the kingdom of God may come. But the kingdom of
God comes not by observation, Lu. 17 20
if we stand still gazing and gaping for it Act. 1. 11 Non dormientibus,
prouenit regnu^ coelorum, nec otio disidiaque torpentibus beatitudo
aeternitatis ingeritur. Leo de epiph. ser. 5.
. Therefore as Abraham did run from the door of his Tent, to meet the
Angels Genesis 18. 2
: So must we Endeavor to run forward, not only looking for, but also hasting
unto, the coming of the day of God 2, Pe. 3. 2. (...)
, that we may (if it be possible) meet the Lord in the air 1. These. 4. 17.
, with all his holy Angels, if we would have his kingdom come. We pray
also that the will of God may be done in earth as it is in heaven. (...).
But the will of GOD will be not done if we will do nothing. Therefore as the
Cherubins spread out their wings on high, and cover the mercy seat Exo. 37. 9
: So must we spread out our wings, and stretch out, or Endeavor our selves, and
be always pressed and ready to fly, as it were, to do the will of God Ez. 1.
11 No^ solum aquila, sed et bos, et leo, et homo volant.
, if we would have his will done in the earth, as it is in heaven. When God
at the first had made a paradise upon earth, he took the man, and put him
into it, to dress it and keep it Genesis 2, 15 vt operatu^ et custodiret illu^.
vulgata.
. Adam was not enjoined to bestow any bodily labor in dressing it at that
time. For this was a part of his punishment afterward. Neither yet had he need
to keep it from wild beasts. For all these were then subject and obedient unto
him. So that he dressed and kept it, by keeping those graces which God has
given him, yea and Endeavoring himself to increase them continually Quamuis
paradisus operib. ruralibus no^ egeret tamen quia primus homo lex posteritatis
futurus erat, legitimi etiam in paradiso spetiem suscepit laboris. Ambro. de
Parad. c. 4.
. Therefore the Apostle beseeches us also, that we receive not the grace of
God in vain, but that in all things we approve our selves, as the servants
of God, in much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, and so
forth 2. Cor, 6. 1
See ye, how many posts and props he puts under us, that we may be stayed
up and confirmed in the grace of God. How many tools, as it were, and
implements he gives us, that we may not receive the graces of God in vain,
but that as they are received and kept in us, so they may be daily dressed and
bettered by us. For, as Saint Peter witnesses 2. Pet. 1. ^.
, if these things be and abound, we shall neither be idle nor unfruitful in
the knowledge of Christ. Whereupon O^cumenius observes, that the graces of God,
as the flowers of a garden, must not only be kept, but also be dressed, that
they may have, not only a being, but also an abounding (...).
. Because a man may have great good things being in him, and yet be himself
like a garden that is kept indeed, but not dressed, altogether idle and
unfruitful. But if they be both being and abounding in him, if he Endeavor
himself to go on further every day then other, then surely he is neither idle
nor unfruitful in the knowledge of Christ. Hereupon Charles the fifth gave this
Emblem, Vlterius
. Stand not still but go on further. Vlterius, as God sais to his guest,
Superius Luk, 14, 10
Sit not still, but fit up higher. So the water rises up higher and higher
which Ezechiel speaks of Eze. 47. 4.
. First to the ankles: then to the knees: the^ to the loins: lastly to the
head. So the wheat grows up riper and riper, which Christ speaks of Mar, 4. 28.
. First there is the blade: the^ the ear: the^ the full corn: lastly comes
the harvest. So must we with the water, rise up higher and higher, till we
come to the head, which is the son of God: and with the wheat grow up riper
and riper, till we come to the harvest, which is the end of the world.
Always Endeavoring our selves to that which is before, and continually singing
one of the Songs of Sion, that is, one of the Psalms of degrees, Nomine
graduum significatur ascensio, qua profici^ntes quique a tenporalibus ad
^eterna, a terrenis ad coelestia prouebunter. Prosper. in ti tulump. 120
till we behold the Lord in Sion, till we see the head, in the harvest, the
son of GOD in the end of the world. Even as he did, who says here, I
endeavor my self to that which is before. Thus much concerning this part,
being the third degree to perfection.

TOuching the fourth, he says, (I run not amiss, but I follow hard. A man
may run amiss, otherwise then he should, by running either too slowly or
too fast.

Now for overmuch slownesse, Rusticus Diaconus says Turpe est contra
ardenter peruersa asserentes, nos pro veritate frigidiores inueniri. li.
aduersus Acephalos.
, It is a stark shame for us to be cold in maintayning a truth, seeing our
adversaries are so hot in defending a falshoode. When the adversary had sown
tares among the good corn, the Master said to his Servant, Let both grow
together. He says not, Let the tares grow, and the good corn not grow,
but, Let both grow together. If the tares grow so fast for the fire, then let
the good corn grow as fast for the barn. If the wicked run so fast to
damnation, then let the godly run as fast to salvation. Yet the Prophets
have ever complained, that the children of this world are much more forward
in their kind, then the Children of light. David speaking of the Children of
this world, says, They encourage themselves in an ill purpose. But Esaias
speaking of the Children of light, says Esa. 59, 4.
, No man calls for justice, no man contendeth for the truth. When the time
drew near that our Savior should be taken and carried away to be crucified,
only Judas that vile traitor was vigilant and watchful to bring his
mischievous purpose to pass, but all the other disciples were fast a sleep.
Therefore as Jerusalem said of her eye La. 3. 51.
. Mine eye has spoiled my soul: So might these drousy disciples have said of
their eye, Our eye has spoiled our soul. And as the Centurion said of his
servant Mat. 8. 6.
, My servant lies at home sick of the palsy and is ill troubled: So might
Christ have said of these his sleepie disciples, My disciples lie at home sick
of the palsy, and are ill troubled. Well said, ill troubled. For he that is
diligent to discharge his duty, and takes pains in his calling as he ought, is
well troubled Been torquetur.
. But he that has the palsy and is dissolute and negligent, and lies at home
sick of the lazy disease, is ill troubled Male torquetur.
. Ill troubled, with an evil spyrite, with the spirit of slumber, which, as
Job testifies Job. 40. 16.
lies in the covert of the reeds. They that are lazy and lither fellows,
and have nothing in them, are here called reeds, in whom the devil himself
lies and sleeps securely. But though he be well quieted in them, yet (as I
said before) they are ill troubled with him. Ill troubled with him, as those
seauenty Kings were ill troubled with Adonibezec, when he did cut off the
thumbs of their hands and feet. For he that has the thumbs of his hands cut
off, may perhaps do something, but he is so long about a little that he were
better sit still and do nothing, then be so long pidling about nothing. So he
that has the thumbs of his feet cut off, may peradventure go forward, but
it is Testudineus gradus. Plaut.
such a snayles pace which he goes, that he were better stand still and not go
at all forward, then go so slowly forward. Wherefore we must not go so slowly
forward, as though the thumbs of our hands and feet were cut off, but rather
we must run as fast as it is to be supposed that mighty man could 2. Sam.
21. 20.
, which had upon every hand six fingers, and upon every foot six toes.
But yet says Bernard Et feruor discretionem erigat, et discretio feruorem
dirigat.
, As zeal must erect our discretion, that we run not too slowly, so
discretion must direct our zeal, that we run not too fast. That wise woman,
by whom is meant the Church of Christ, labors with the counsel of her
hands Consilio manuum. Pr. 31, 13.
. Her hands are full of eyes Oculatae manus. Plautus.
. She has more foresight and wisdom even in her little finger, then many a
man has in his whole head. She labors with her hands. There is zeal.
She labors with the counsel of her hands. There is discretion as well as
zeal. In Leuiticus they are forbidden to bring any blind offering to GOD Le.
22. 22.
. All zeal without discretion, is an offering without an eye. All blind zeal,
is a blind offering. Which God will never accept. So that as Minerua is said to
put a golden bridle upon Pegasus, that he should not fly too fast: in like
sort our Minerua, that is our Christian discretion, must put a golden bridle
upon Pegasus, that is our earnest zeal James. 3. 3
, least if our zeal be unbridled, it make us follow too fast. Therefore
Octauian the Emperor did bear in his Eschocheon, a Crabfish and a Butterfly,
with this mot, Festina lent.
Soft pace, goes far. A Crabfish creepes. That's soft pace. A Butterfly
flies. That goes far. A Crabfish, a Butterfly, Soft pace, goes far. And
Vespasian the Emperor did stamp in his coin a Dolphin and an anchor, with
this impresa Sat cito, si sat been.
, Soon enough, if well enough. A Dolphin out-strips the ship. That's soon
enough. An anchor stays the ship. That's well enough. A Dolphin, an Anchor,
Soon enough, if well enough. For as if the lower spheres in the heaven should
not be stayed with the contrary course of the highest sphere in the
firmament, they would soon set the whole world on a light fire: So the
inferior affections of the mind, if they be not stayed with the contrary
course of reason, and with the mild motion of the spirit of God, they will
soon ouer-heat thee, and overthrow all thou go about. Therefore Chilo gives
us this precept, not to ouer-heat Jacobs sheep by driving them too fast Ge.
33. 13.
, not to make over much have in the way. According to that in the Prophet Esaias,
where it is said Qui crediderit non festinabit. c. 28 v. 16.
, He which believes shall not make have. The string of an Instrument may be
as well too high as too low. If it be too low it iarres, if it be too high it
breaks. So the mind of man may be as well too intent, as too remiss. If it be
too remis, it runs too slowly: if it be too intent, it runs too fast. Wherefore
Clemens gives us this precept, that we should not be strained and wrested too
high, but set and tuned aright Non (...), sed (...). Paedag, lib, 1 cap. 12.
. According to that in the second to the Corinths Non (...), sed (...). 2, Co.
10 14
, where it is said, that we must not outstretch our selves, but stretch out our
selves; not run amiss (either too slowly or too fast) but Follow hard.

For the way of the righteous Pro. 4, 18.
, it glittereth as the light, which shyneth more and more unto the perfect day.
It glittereth as the Sun, which comes forth as a bridegroom out of his
chamber, and rejoices as a giant, to run his course. Indeed the wicked are
like a wheel. O my God make them like a wheel, says David Psa. 82. 13
. A wheel tilts up behind, and shootes down before. So the wicked are forward
to all badnes, and backward to all goodness. But the godly are like a Panther. A
Panther has four claws and no more, on each hind foot, but five claws, and
no less on each fore foot. So the godly, though they be weak to the
worldward, yet they are strong to Godward. And setting the better foot before
(as we say) they Follow hard and run with might and maine most violently to
lay hold on that hope which is set before them (...). Cursum corripiunt. Beza
Hebr. 6. 18.
. For there are two sorts of violent men. Of the first sort the Apostle
says, b. No extortioners or violeent men shall inherit the kingdom of heaven.
Of the second sort our savior says Ma. 11. 12
, The kingdom of heaven suffers violence and violent men lay hold on it.
Both are violent men: but both are not violent to men. For they offer violence
to men: these offer violence to God. Therefore they do not enter: but these do
enter into the kingdom of heaven. For though God be not content that we
should offer violence to men, yet he is well content that we should offer
violence to himself Bona violentia qua acquiritur regnum Dei. Vis intrare in
regnum celorum? Esto violentus et improbus Em Dominica. 3. Aduent. (...).
. And that we should Follow hard, and as Pirates or thieves set upon him (if it
be lawful for me so to speak) and by the force of faith spoil him* and rob
him of al his eternal treasures More latronum suis eum spol^are nitimur,
cupimus illi auferre regnum thesauros and vitam. Am. Par. se. 15.
. Therefore calling his church he says Can. 2, 13.
, Arise my love, my fair one, make have and come away. He that does make
account to come to GOD, must make have to come to God. He must use violence,
and Follow hard, and come down quickly with Zacheus, and for speedines he
must be like a Do or a Roe upon the mountains of Bether. Even as those
beasts in Ezechiel Ezec. 1. 14
did run and return as lightning: So must every one who is enlightened with the
spirit of God Follow as swiftly as lightning, which does no sooner flash down
from heaven to the earth, the^ he must in affection mount up from the earth to
heaven. And like as the Isralites were commanded to eat the pass over in have
Ex. 12. 11.
: Semblably all we which are true Isralites must girde up the loins of our
minds, and Follow hard, and run a pace, and redeem the time, that both the
wrath of God may pas over us, and also the mercy of God may abide with us. For
God among other arguments of his mercy says thus Job. 39. 16
, Who has given wings to the Ostridg? The Ostridg never flies with his wings
but only a little lifts up his body with them when he runs. And in ye pinion
of each wing he has a sharp spur, wherewith he pricketh his own self, that he
may run the faster. So that God has given wings unto ye Ostridg not for the
Ostridge, but for us. That we might thereby learn, how we ought by all good
means to quicken our dull disposition, that we may Follow hard, even as we
see the Ostridge eggeth his own self forward with the flapping of his wings.
For they that wait vpopn the Lord shall change their strength, they shall lift
up their wings, (not only as the Ostridge, but also) as the Eagle: they shall
(I say) lift up their wings as the Eagle Esa. 40, 31
, they shall run and not be faint, they shall walk and not be weary. Even as
Pindarus writes that King Therons coursers were such as would never be weary of
going l: so shall these Follow still, and never be weary of well doing. But the
most especial thing to be considered here is this, that the Prophet says,
They which weight upon the Lord, shall change their strength Mutabunt
fortitudinem
. He says not, they shall loose their strength, that whereas before they were
strong, now they shall be weak: but they shall change their strength (namely,
the use of their strength) that whereas before they were strong, and did follow
hard, to serve sin, now they shall be as strong, and shall Follow as hard,
to serve God. To. 6. 19.
For God only it is which can melt brass out of a stone Job. 28. 2.
. I wot well there is a stone called Almacrasia, which being molten becomes
brass. But these words have a far more hidden meaning. To wit, that God does
melt brass out of a stone, when he takes the heart of a sinner which is as
hard as a stone, and melting it with the holy Ghost, and with fire, does
afterward make it as tough as brass. This was seen in the conversion of Paul.
For when Paul was made an Apostle, the^ a stone was made brass. He was as hard
as any stone, before his conversion, when he stoned Stephen Act. 7, 58
. He was as tough as any brass after his conversion, when he did Follow so
hard, that no affliction could separate him from the love of Christ To. 8, 35
. Which thing was prophesied of long before Ge. 49, 27
. When the Patriarch Jacob said, Benjamin shall be as a ravening Wolf; in the
morning he shall devour the pray: in the evening he shall divide the spoil.
Paul was this Benjamin, because he was of the tribe of Benjamin Phil. 3. 5.
. Paul was this ravening wolf, because he breathed out threatening and
slaughter against the Disciples, and was even mad upon them as a ravening Wolf
Acts 9, 5.
. Paul in the morning devoured the pray, because in the beginning of his days
he wasted and devoured the Church of God as a pray Gal. 1, 13
. Paul in the evening divided the spoil, because in the latter end of his
days, he did Follow his calling hard, and divided the word of God aright 2,
Tim. 2, 15.
, of which the Psalmist says, I rejoice in thy word, more then they which have
found a great spoil. So that this is no loss of strength, but only a change
of strength. O blessed Benjamin! O holy Apostle! Thou have now changed thy
strength. Yea by changing it thou have much increased it. For thou were nothing
so strong before, as thou art now. Nothing so strong before, being a ston, as
thou art now, being brass. Nothing so strong before, being a ravening wolf, as
thou art now, being a meek lamb. Nothing so strong before, in the morning,
as thou art now, in the evening. Nothing so strong before, when thou did
devour the pray, as thou art now, when thou do divide the spoil* When no
impediments, no stumbling blocks can stay thee, but thou will needs Follow
hard, and run over the whole world, to divide the spoil among all Nations,
to preach the Gospel unto all people. So likewise Baruch was inflamed, as the
Hebrew word signifies Hekeriah. Nehemi. 3, 20.
, he was (I say) inflamed, to fortify the wall of Jerusalem. In man's body
the arteries running along the veins, and beating upon them, stir up the
blood, and keep it warm, least otherwise by standing still, it should
congeale and wax cold Vide Theodor. (...) lib. 1.
. After the same manner in Baruch his heart, there were lively and quick
motions of the holy Ghost, which did blow coals, and stir up the gift of
GOD in him 2, Tim. 1, 6.
, which did warm his blood, and make him Follow the matter hard, being
wholly inflamed with a burning desire, to see the City of GOD restored again
to her former glory. So Abraham when the Angels came to him Genesis 18, 7.
, made have to run to his tent: and his wife made have to kneade three
measures of fine meal; and his boy made have to kill and dress a good and
tender calfe. Lo ye how all are employed in a godly man's house. Abraham and
his wife, man and woman; Abraham and his boy, old and young; all make have, and
Follow hard. So David did run the way of Gods commandments. Nay, no
ordinary pace would serve him, but he must needs dance before the Arc. Yea,
his feet could not hold him, but he must needs have wings as a Dove. O that I
had wings as a Dove (says he) then would I fly and be at rest Ps. 55, 6
. He wishes for wings, not that he might first be at rest, and afterward
fly, but that he might first fly, and afterward be at rest. That he might
first Follow hard, and fly up with the wings of faith, into the heavenly
paradise, and afterward be at rest, and settle there, in the tree of eternal
life. O that I had wings, that I had wings, as a Dove (says he) then would I
fly, would I fly, and be at rest. And so must we after the example of David,
of Abraham, of Baruch, of Paul, fight for the faith which we have received
Jude, 1, 3
: and strive to enter in at the straight gate Lu. 13, 24.
: and labor for the meat which perishes not Ih. 6, 27.
: and study to enter into rest He. 4. 11
. We must* I say, study: and labor; and strive; and fight; and Follow hard.
This is the fourth degree to perfection.

TOuching the fifth he says (not beside the mark, but) Toward the mark.
Austine holds, that a man were better run, either too slowly, or too fast in
the way, then follow hard out of the way. For the harder thou followest out of
the way, the further thou runnest from the Mark. Hereupon the Apostle, after
following hard, adds immediately* Toward the Mark. Insinuating thereby, that
to follow is nothing, but the Mark is the matter. And consequently that he
which is not a skillful Mark-man, can never be a faithful follower. Therefore
we must mark well, what this Mark is. In one word it is the cross of Christ
(...). Laert, in Diogene. Quod ille ioco, id nos seris dicamus.
. For Christ has set up his cross, as a spell Hinc dicitur Gospel quasi Gods
spel.
, or as a Mark for us to aim at, as a pattern of all perfection, as an
everlasting sign, which shall not be taken away Esa, 55, 13.
. Hence it is that speaking of one, who should be his Disciple, he says Mar.
8, 54.
* He that would come after me, let him take up his cross, and follow me. Let
him take up his cross, that he may come the nearer to my cross; and follow
me, that he may be directed all the way by me. For thou can never err, or
go beside the Mark, so long as thou walk in this way (...). Basil. de
spiritu. S. c. 8.
. Therefore Maximus says, If thou would find the way which brings unto
life, then seek it in that way which says, I am the way: the truth: and the
life (...). Centu. 2.
, The way, to them that begin; the truth, to them that proceed; the life, to
them that are perfect Via est incip^e^tibus. veritas proficientibus: and vita
perfectis Tho.
. Now the way of this way is the word. Which S. Peter confirms saying Campis
in seliloquio animae. c. 12. z. 1, Pe. I, 25
, The word of the Lord endures for ever, and this is the word which is
preached among you. He avouches that the eternal word, is the preached word,
meaning thereby that the only way, to the begotten word, is the written word.
According to that of the Psalmist Ps. 119, 1
, Blessed are they which are upright in the way, and walk in the law of the
Lord. So that if thou would be upright in the way, which is the word Christ,
then thou must walk in the law of the Lord, which is the word of Christ. For
the holy scripture is given by the inspiration of God, to be a lantern unto
our steps, and a light unto our paths, that the man of God may be absolute,
being made perfect unto all good works 2* Tim. 3, 17.
. Wherefore (to define this whole matter in few words), we shall in mine opinion
follow hard toward the mark, if we labor earnestly in our several vocations to
express the vertuss of Christ our good Lord (...) Basil. page 554.
, wc he showed forth in all the course of his life, and especially in his death
upon the cross for us to imitate and follow, by walking faithfully in the way
of his commandments, and squaring all our actions, speeches, and thoughts,
according to the rule of his word. Even as on the contrary part, it is very
evident, that all they run beside the mark, which do not propound to
themselves to follow the ensample of Christ, but either in their doctrine, or
in their life, either in their opinions, or in their actions, continually
swerve from him. Such are, all Atheists: Temporizers: Newters: and Humorists.
For Athiests run beside the mark by going too much on the left hand. They
do not make Christ a mark to aim at that they may follow him, but a sign to
shoore at that they may blaspheme him Luke 2, 34.
. They bend their tongues as bows, and shoot out their arrows even bitter
words Psalm. 64, 3.
. They corrupt others, and speak of wicked blasphemy, their talking is against
the most high Psalm. 73, 8.
. They say unto God, Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy
ways Job. 21, 13 Excede pietas si modo in nostra domo v^^quam fuisti. Atreus
apud Senecam in Thyeste Actu. 2.
. And no marvel that they speak so impiously which live so ungodly. Running
altogether upon the left hand in the broad way of the world, of the flesh, of
the devil. For the world has a kind of course (...). Ephesians. 2, ve. 2
, which Atheists follow being past feeling, and even stark dead in their
trespasses and sins. The flesh also has a by-path (...). Heb. 3, 3.
, whereby they are seduced and deceived. Lastly the devil has a method (...).
Ephesians 6, v. 11. Part sinistra Centifidum confundit iter. Prud con. Sim. li. 2
which is without any method, and an order which is contrary to all good
order, and a left handed direction which brings them to final confusion. Now
Temporizers also run beside the mark by going about in a circle. They go
about many things, but bring about nothing These. 3, 11
. They do all things for the time, but nothing for the truth Omnia protempore,
nihil pro veritate Optatus. lib. 1.
. They make many a period, but never a full point (...). Chryso.
They are always learning but never come to knowledge Tim. 3, 7.
. The hedgehog has two holes in his siege, one toward the South, an other
toward the North. Now when the southren wind blows, he stops up that hole, and
turns him Northward. When the Northren wind blows, he stops up that hole
likewise, and turns him again Southward. Such vrchins, are all temporizers.
They believe for a time, as long as the warm Sun shines upon them. But as
soon as any storm of persecution arises, by and by they have a starting hole
to hide themselves in, they change their religion, and turn about with the
time. For as the hearts of such men are as a cart-wheele, and their thoughts are
like a rolling axeltree Eccl. 33, 5
. Or as a top which always runs round, and never goes forward, unless it be
whipped (...). Hesy. verbo (...).
. Or like a mill-horse which making many steps, turns about, and is
continually found in the same place (...). Bas. page 563
. Or as door which riding upon his hinges all the day long, is never a whit
nearer at night Pro. 26, 14
. So likewise Newters run beside the mark by going forward and backward in a
maze. These do not ask of their Father an egg, but a Scorpion. For an egg
would teach them to go only forward, but a Scorpion does teach them to go
both forward and backward Augustine. Ep. 121 cap. 5. and Basil. in Psalm. 32.
mitio.
. Like the Barnacles, which are both flesh and fish Auibus is it is tanquam non
carneis viri religios^ ieiuniorum tempore vescisolent. Giral. Came. App. c. 8.
. Or the Israelites, which speak both Ashdod and Hebrew Ne. I3, 24
. Or Ianus, which sees both before and behind Ianus bifrons exprimitur, quod in
medio constitutus annuinciqientem pariter et excedente^ spec^are videatur
Cypri. l. de Idol. vani.
: Or Balaam which does both bless and curse Nu 23, 25
. Such a Newter among the Romans was Tully, who could not resolve, whether he
should take Caesar's or Pompeis part Que^ fugiam sci^, qmem sequar nescio.
. Among the Grecians was Tytides, who could not determine, whether he should
join himself with Achilles or Hector (...). Homer. Iliad. 5.
. Among the Jews was the tribe of Ephraim, which was as cake upon the harth not
turned Ose, 7, 8.
, bakt on the one side, and raw on the other side. Among the Gentiles was the
Church of Laodicea, which was neither hot, nor cold Reu. 3, I5.
, neither hot, because it was raw on the one side, nor cold, because it was
bakt on the other side. So it is with all Newters. Their cake is dowe, as we
say, and they hold of both sides: and as ambidexters with Ehud Iu. 3, 15.
, they play with both hands Malefaciunt ambabus manibus henefaciendo Micheas 7,
3
: and as the sun in Ezekias time they go both forward, and backward Esa. 38,
8
. Running up, and down; in, and out; and yet indeed are neither above, nor
beneath, neither within, nor without (...). Irenae. l. 1, c 9
. Panarches ridle was this, How a man and no man, can with a stone, and no
stone, kill a bird, and no bird, sitting upon a tree, and no tree? Athenaeus
makes the answer (...). Conuiuaelium l. 10.
, That an Eunuche is the man: a Pumeise is the stone: a Bat is the bird:
Fennel is the tree. After the same sort a Newter is a very hard riddle. You
can not tell what to make of him. For going forward and backward, he is a
Christian and no Christian. Like an Eunuche, which is a man, and no man; or a
Pumeise, which is a stone, and no stone; or a Bat, which is a bird, and no
bird; or Fennel, which is a tree, and no tree. Now Humorists also run beside
the mark, by going too much on the right hand. Therefore David could wish his
vttter enemy no geater harm, then that satan might stand at his right hand
Psalm. 109. 6
. Satan stands at a man's left hand, when he draws him by the arm into the
old way of Atheism. At a man's right hand, when he pulls him by the elbow,
into the newfound way of Puri^anisme. For so blessed Cramner says, Initio
prologi sui ante magna Bibliae.
Some lose their game by short-shooting, some by ouer-shooting: some walk too
much on the left hand, some too much on the right hand. The first which shoot
short, and walk too much on the left hand, are Atheists: these latter which
ouer-shoote themselves and walk too much on the right hand, are Humorists. Of
both which S. Austine writes thus Cauenda pernitias, vel Zizaniorum, vel
praecisoru^ de vite domini sarmentorum. Epist. 203.
we must in any case beware and take heed, says he, of the mischievous
infection, not only of tares (which are Atheists) but also of those branches
that have cut themselves from the Lords Vine (which are Humorists.) For as
Atalanta ranging out on the right hand to gather up those gold apples which
Hippomanes for the nonce threw forth before her, did lose the wager she ran for
(...). Arauibus apud Notalem Comitem Myth. li. 7. cap. 8.
: no otherwise they which are not thankful to God for the glorious peace and
prosperity of his Church, but run after every strange-deuised discipline, and
take up all pretty novelties as golden apples, which every man le^s fall, shall
without question miss the mark, and lose the garland of glory. Wherefore we
must run, not too much on the left hand, as Atheists do: not round about in a
circle as Temporizers do: not forward and backward in a maze as N^wters do:
not too much on the right hand as Humorists do: (not any other way beside the
mark) but toward the Mark.

John Baptist did go before Christ to make ready a perfect people for the Lord
Parare domino plebem perfectam. Luke 1, I7.
. Now the sum of John's preching was this, Prepare the way of the Lord, and make
his path straight. So that they which walk in a straight path directly toward
Christ, are a perfect people for the Lord. Therefore we which would run
toward the Mark, must leave all Atheism, all Gentilisme, all prophanenes, all
lewdnes on the left hand, as Paul did leave Cyprus on the left hand, when he
sailed toward S^^ia Act. 33 1
. For thus touching the world, Saint Basil tells us, That we must for sake
all those worldly affections, which may draw us any way beside the Mark of
true godliness (...). Page 448.
. Touching the flesh, Maximus tells us, That when our mind is perfectly freed
from fleshly desires, then it goes on straight without any declining from the
Mark. Touching the devil Macarius tells us, That we cannot avoid that
gaping gulf wherein the powers of darkness are ouer-whelmed, except the spirit
of Christ be our pilot, and guide us in a straight course toward the Mark, and
in a right line as it were to the haven of rest (...), Homil. 44.
. For indeed Hymenius and Alexander wanting this guide, made shipwreck of their
faith, and were overwhelmed in the gulf of damnation, being delivered to the
devil, that they might learn not to blaspheme 1, Tim. 1, 20.
. Whereupon Occumenius says that it asks good Art, and is a point of great
cunning, for a man to keep the scope of Christianity, and to go right toward
the Mark of truth (...). ^ v. 6.
. And therefore as gunners wink with their left eye, that they may level more
truly: in semblable sort we must not behold any ungodliness or sinister dealing
with our eyes, but we must aim directly toward Christ, and either, if it be
possible hit the Mark, or at the leastwise with those left handed Beniamites
come within a hayres breadth of it I u. 20, 16
. When Diogenes saw a bungling Archer shoot, he ran as fast as he could to the
Mark. The lookers on demanded what he meant in so doing? He answered, to make
sure that he might not be hit. For this fellow (saise he) means never to come
near the Mark. Thus must we do. When we see profane straglers, starting a
side like a broken bow, and rouing a great way wide on the left hand, we must
presently run to the Mark. That not only we may keep our selves safe from
the danger of their ill ensample, but also we may give aim (as it were) to
others, by our good ensample, and direct them that they be neither wide nor
short of the Mark Paulus dicit se insta* s^gitary ad prepositu^ and ad signum
iacula dirigere, ne sagitta ad partem declinans altera^, imperitu^ ostendat
sagittarium. Hiero. aduer. P. l. 1, initio.
. Now for Temporizers, we know that Joseph's brethren stood so long dallying
and delaying, and trifling out the time, that having a journey to buy corn,
they might have returned twice before they would go once Ge. 43, 10
. Also that Elizeus when Elias called him, went about the bush (as we say) and
would needs go bid his Father and his Mother farewell, before he would follow
the Prophet 1, Kin. 19, 20.
. Paul did not so. Being called of God, he did not stand temporizing, and
cirkling, and consulting with flesh and blood Gal. 1, 16.
, before he would follow toward the Mark, neither did he fetch a compass,
as he was constrained to do when he arrived at Rhegium Act. 28. 13
, but as he came with a straight course to Cous Act. 21, 1.
, so here straight ways he came to Christ. There is but one place in the
whole Scripture, which may seem to serve them, which serve the time. And that
is, where the Apostle exhorts us, not to be slothful in service, but fervent
in spirit, serving the time To. 12, 11. (...).
. They that by serving the time, understand, taking all oportunities to do
good, expound it nevertheless thus, That we must apply our selves to the
time, yet so, as in every inclination, and turning, we keep a straight course
Sic tamen, vt in qualibet inclinatione rectum cursum ten^amus, Calvin ibid.
. But all the fathers, Origin only excepted, do read the place otherwise.
Jerome by name says most peremptorily I lli legant, tempori seruientes, nos
legamus, Domino seruientes. Epistola ad Marcel.
, Let others read, serving the time, I for my part will read, serving the
Lord. And this reading in deed is much more agreeable to the text. So that
here is nothing said in defense of timeseruers. For they that are such, serve
not the Lord Jesus Christ, they are not Christ-seruers, but they serve their
own bellies, and with their glauering and flattering, they seduce the hearts of
the simple, and lead them beside the Mark To* 16, 18
. Therefore as fleachers to make their shatts f^ie stedily, piece them with
sugarchest, or holy, or such like heavy wood: so we must adioyne, to that aspe,
or service tree, or such other light matter, which we are all made of, the
sweet sugarchest of the holy ghost, that we may not be vnsteadie as arrows of
aspe, nor yet slothful in service, but fervent in spirit, serving the Lord.
Saint Ambrose reports, that the Be being to fly home to her hiue, and
fearing least if she should be taken by the way with the wind, she might
perhaps be blown about in the air, counterpeizes her self with a little
stone, and so flies straight home Apis cum aeris motus suspecto* habet laplllis
saepe sublatis per inania se librat nubila ne leave alari^ remigiu^ praecipitent
flabra ventoru^. De Vir. prop. f. l. 3.
. This may teach us also what we ought to do. We must not be wavering, and
carried about with every blast of doctrine Ephesians. 4, 14
, like a reed shaken in the wind Vide Fox um in praefatione ante Pa^dectas
locorum communium
: but as the Be is balaunced with a little stone, so we must be built upon
the chief corner stone Ephesians. 4, 20
, and grounded upon a rock Lu. 6, 24
, and established with grace He. 13, 9
, that howsoever the rain fall, or the floods arise, or the winds blow Mat. 7,
25.
or what times soever come, yet we may stand fast in the street which is
called straight Act. 9, 11.
, always following Christ directly toward the Mark. To come now to Newters,
they may be compared to a Weauers shittle Job. 7, 6.
which if it go forward one way, presently goes backward again as much
another way. Or to a Weauer himself, such an one as Penelope was, who would
do, and undo, weauing that in the day time, which she did unweave in the
night. But contrariwise says our Apostle, Gala. 2, 16
If I build again the things that I have destroyed, I make my self a
transgressor. As if he should say, If I weaue, and unweave, if I build, and
destroy, I make my self a Newter, and so consequently run beside the Mark.
For no man does more transgress, then he that is doubtful, and uncertain in
religion, one while putting his foot forward, another while pulling it
backward again Nihil turpius dubio and incerto, pede^modo refere^te, modo
producente. Seneca. Ep^ 96.
. God says to his people which come to worship him in his temple, That he
which enters in by the way of the North gate, shall go out by the way of the
South gate, and he that enters by the way of the South gate, shall go forth
by the way of the North gate, he shall not return by the way of the gate,
whereby he came, but they shall go forth over against it Ez^* 46, 9.
. Thus the wise men which came to worship Christ, returned not home the same
way they came, but returned home another way Mat. 2, 12
. For it was behoofull that believing now in Christ, they should not walk any
more in the ways of their old conversation, but that taking a new course,
they should leave all their former errors, and go forward continually toward
the Mark Opertebat enim vt tam in Christum credentes, non per antiquas co^uer
sationis semitas ambularent, sed noua^ ingressi viam a relistu erroribus
abstinerent, Leo de epiphania. ser. 3.
. Among those sowles, which are counted abominable, the Sea-mew, or the Gull
is one Le. 11, 16
. Now this is unclean, because it lives in both elements, both in the water,
and in the earth, swimming as a fish, and yet flying as a bird Larus animal est
in vtroque viuens, id est aqua and terra, qui sicut auis quidem volat, vt
aquatile aute^ natat. Cui no^ male comparantur hi qui circumcisionem vener^^tur
and Baptisma, a^ quos Paulus dicit, si circumcidamini Christus vobis nihil
prodest. Isychiu in Le^^. lib. 3
. And certainly, those wise men should have been such fools, and such gulls,
as these are, if they had worshipped both circumcision, which is an earthly
rudiment, and also Bap^^sme, which is administered by water, and by the holy
Ghost. For the holy Ghost says, if you be circumcised, Christ shall profit you
nothing. As if he should say, If you go backward again to the circumcision
of Herod, having gone thus far forward to the baptism of Christ, you make your
selves Newters, and shall never come to the Mark. The Jews were charged not
to wear a garment of diverse sorts, as of linen and woollen together Deu. 22,
11
. Has God care of Oxen, and has he not much more care of preachers 1, Cor. 9
9.
? Has God care of those garments, wherewith our bodies are covered, and has
he not much more care of those virtues wherewith our minds are adorned 1, P^.
3. 3 (...). 1, Pet. 5, 5. (...)
? Yes verily we must so understand it, that by this Jewish law we are all
charged, not to run with old clouted shoes upon our feet Judge. 9, 5
, when our feet should be new shod with the preparation of the Gospel of
peace Ephesians. 6, 15.
, not to sow a piece of new cloth into an old garment Mar. 2, 21
, when old things are now past, and al things are become new 1, Cor, 5, 17.
. In one word, not to have a linsie woolsie religion, or a parcht moath-eaten
conscience, but to wear such a fair cognizance of certainty and constancy
upon our coat, as all men may see, that without any newtrality or hipocrasie,
we follow hard toward the Mark, and sincerely serve God. Therefore as Theseus
being guided by Ariadnes thread, which she tied at the entrance into Dedalus
labyrinth, escaped all the danger and error of it: even so we must make Christ
the door, by which we must enter into the labyrinth of all our affairs, and
tie Rahabs thread Iosu. 2, 14.
at this entrance, and follow it all the way, that so we may be safe, and go
in, and out, and find pasture Ioh. 10, 9.
. For to go in and out after this sort, is not to go forward and backward,
but to go only forward. Seeing, whether we go in by remembrance of Christ's
mercies, or go out by consideration of our own miseries, whether we go in by
faith, or go out by good works, whether we go in by life, or go out by
death, always we find pasture, that is heavenly comfort in Christ, always we
go forward, always we follow toward the Mark. Now for Humorists, S. Paul
advises us to put on the armor of righteousness, on the right hand, and on the
left 2, Cor. 6. 7
. Marcus Caelius was said to have a good right hand, but an ill left hand,
because he could plead, against a man better, then for him. But here it is
contrary. For these are armed well enough on the left hand, but they lie open
to the devil on the right hand. Who like a cunning fencer does strike a great
deal^ more fiercely, at the right hand then at the left. Ampliori soli citudine
vulnerare in nobis dextra^ satagit quan* sinistra^. Ber. qui hab^ ser. 7
. Therefore David says, The Lord upon the right hand shall wound even Kings, in
the day of his wrath Ps. 120, 5
. If satan stand at thy right hand, he shall wound thee: but if the Lord stand
at thy right hand, thou shall wound him; and bruise his head, and break the
hairy scalp of all the kings, and princes of darkness Ep. 6. 12
. Wherefore every Christian must say with the Psalmist Psalm. 19, 9
, I have set God always before me (there is the Mark) for he is at my right
hand, so that I shall not fall. And again Psa. 73, 23
Thou have holden me up by my right hand, thuo shall guide me with thy
counsel, (there is toward the Mark) and after that receause me to glory. S.
Bernard writing to one Guido a Cardinal of Rome in his very first salutation,
wishes him no greater gift of God, then that he might have grace to turn,
neither to the right hand nor to the left Guidoni Barnardus, non declinar^ ad
dextram nec ad ^inistram. Epistola. 192.
And a little after in the same Epistle, he requesteth him, that he would
learn to know himself, and not go beyond his own medio^rity, but be wise
unto sobriety Seipsu^ cognosceret, nec egrederetur me^suram suam, sed saperet
ad sobrietatem ib.
. This lesson the wisest that ever was teaches us Eccl. 7, 18.
, Not to be over much just, neither to make our selves over much wise Quisquis
plus iusto non sapit ille sapit. Martial. li. 14
. For that which is too good, is stark naught: and he that is too wise, is a
stark fool. Because he is never contented with the time present, but needs
he must have a Praeter. And yet no Praeter will content him neither, not an
imperfect, no not a perfect, but only that which is more then perfect. Now he
which will needs be more then perfect, shall whether he will or no^ be less
then imperfect. He that seeks to be more wise, then he can be, shall be found
to be less wise, then he should be. And he that thinks himself seen in all
things, shall soon show himself ouerseene in most things. Because a
self-conceit of surmised wisdom, will not let him come to a happy increase
of true wisdom (...).
. And certain it is that God will not reveal wisdom, but only to such as
walk continually in the way of peace, and do not at any time, like scattered
sheep, run too much on the right hand, out of the way of peace, into the way
of precisenes Invi^^pac ^ tantum ambulantibus reuelab^t, and in nullam
praecis^^nem deuiantibus. Aug. l. 2, de Bap. contr^ Done. c. 8. and citatur a
Brun^ de haereticis. l. 4, c. 4
Wherefore though it be thy right eye, yet if it offend thee, or cause thee to
offend the Church of God by thy running beside the Mark, pluck it out hardly
and cast it from thee Mat. 5, 30
. For thou know than he which would needs forsooth in all the have call for
fire from heaven Lu. 9, 54
had too hot a spirit, and at that time, went too much on the right hand, and
therefore not with a right foot to the Gospel Gal. 2, 14
. But he that did shave his head in Cenchrea Act. 18, 18 Paulus Timotheum
circumeidit, hostias in te^plo immolauit, cum Aquila and Priscilla caput
Corinthi totondit. Wilfridus apud Bedam. Historia lib* 3, cap. 25.
, and yielded to many other ceremonies for peace sake, which otherwise perhaps
he did not greatly allow, and like of, as he exhotteth others to do, so he did
himself make straight steps for his feet He. 12, 13
, and went directly toward the Mark. To return then now at the length to
that which ere-while I was about to say, It has been thought in former time
that none could be perfect but they which led a solitary life. Hence it is that
so many writers both old and new have so largely discoursed of the perfection
of that life Venire ad erenium summa perfectio est. C^e^sar. Arelate^sis. ho.
23, p. 143. Vide praeter alios Laurentium Iustinianum de disciplina, and
perfectione monasticae conue^sati^^is page 118.
. Yea diverse, not only inferiors but even Princes, and not only of other
Countries, but even of of this realm of England Kymgilsus^* Ceolulsu^:
Eadbert^s: Ethelredus: Kenredus* Sigebertus: Offa: Sebbi: Iue.
, have voluntarily relinquished, their crown, their scepter, and all their
royal robes, and cloystered up themselves in Monasteries, that they might
live, as they thought, in a more perfect state. And certes I will not deny but
that such as can well away with this kind of life, have many oportunities to
serve God, which we have not Nihil aliud quickquam ^rat olim monach^ professio,
qu^ priscae liberaequ^ v^tae meditatio ac pure christianae. Erasmus in
praefatione ante Hier. Ep
, and have not many imperfections of the world which we have Cellae and Caeli
habitati^ cog^natae sunt. Ber. de vitaeso.
. Yet this is not the only perfect state, which tends toward the Mark. But
as diverse have lived very badly in Monasteries: so many have lived very
blessedly without them. Yea there is no calling so mean, but if a man follow
Christ in it, he may well enough, according to the measure of grace which it
shall please GOD to give him, become a perfect man. Let Joseph be an example
for servant; Jacob for shepherds; Amos for cottagers; Mathewe for farmers;
Peter for fishers; Paul for tentmakers; and so forth in the rest Vide
theodoret. (...). li. 7. in fine. Et Philo. Iudaeum (...). p. 593.
. For if a man have the right Mark always before his eyes, he may live as
well in a City, as in a sanctuary (...). Chrysostom. ad pop. ancho. 17
, as well in a shop, as in a cell (...). Vbi supr^ hom. 22.
. So that no one calling simply of it self, does make a man perfect, but the
answer of a good conscience to God 1, Pet. 3, 21.
, that is it which makes a man perfect. Briefly the point is this. What
lawful calling, state, or condition soever thou art in, if over and besides
the plying of thy worldly bu^ines, thou have a conscionable care every day to
increase spiritually also, in such a faith as works by charity Gal. 5, 6
, I warrant thee, fear nothing, thou art right enough, and do go straight
toward the Mark. The superstitious pagans thought that an Idol which they
termed Vibilia, kept them from erring out of their way Ab erroribus via^^^ dea
vibili^ liberat Arnob. aduers. gent. l. 4, initio.
. But faith is our Vibilia which vvil not suffer us to wander out of the way,
so long as we do all things according to that pattern which was showed us in
the mount Exo. 25* 40.
. For Christ with his cross in mount Caluary has gone before us, and broken
the ice already for us, and left us an example, that by faith we might follow
his steps 1, Pet. 2, 21.
. Every one of us saying unto him with holy Job, My foot has followed thy
steps, thy way have I kept, and have not declined Job. 23, 11.
. This we shall do if we walk in the Kings high way of charity Number. 21, 22.
(...). Nazi^anzen* pa. 19. (...) Basil. pa. 139
, and keep the royal law of love Iam. 2, 8.
. For we that are Christians go toward the Mark, not by living, but by
loving: not with our feet, but with our affections. Neither is there any thing
which makes a good or a bad life, but a good or a bad love Imus e^im n^
ambulando sed amando. non ped^bus, sed moribus. Nec faciv^t bonos vel malos
mores, nisi b^^ vel mali amores. Aug. Epist 52.
. Therefore he that would be perfect, must be rich in good works, and according
to the rule of Evangelical perfection, he must love, not only his frinds in
God, but also his foes for God Ami^^s in D^^, and inimicos propter Deum
Prosper. in l. sententiarum.
. Because as that is the hottest fire which warmeth the^ that are furthest off:
so that is the most fervent and perfect love which forsakes none, though they
be never so far off, neither friend nor foe, that may be loved, but embraces
all in him who never does forsake unless he be forsaken. Now this charity of
ours ought to be skarlet twice dyed Coc^us bis tinctus. Exodus 28. 6.
, I mean extended, not only toward men, but also toward God. Which love of
God must make us contemn the world, and loath our own selves Duo amores, duas
constituunt civitates. Amor Dei crescen^ vsque ad contemptum sui, ciuitatem
Dei. Amor suivsque ad contemptum Dei, ciuitate^ diaboli. Aug
, and mortify all our inordinate desires, and keep no propriety in any thing
we have, but renounce, and resign, our whole will, and our whole soul, to the
good will, and pleasure of God. For indeed so many times we step out of the
way, as we desire any thing which is not finally referred to the love of the
Lord Tot gressus extra via^ ponimus, quot peruersis desiderijs a c^lis^is vitae
meditatione separamur. Grego. Mag.
. And therefore as a cunning archer will hit, not only the white. but even that
very black, in the midst of the Mark^, which is commonly made in the form
of a heart; semblably a sincere lover of God, must never leave darting, and
shooting up to God his most passionate and piercing desires Iaculatoria
desideria Au.
, till he has hit the Mark (...). Ignat. Epst. 12.
, and with his wounded heart has also wounded Gods heart, that the Lord may
mercifully, and lovingly confess unto him and say, Thou have wounded my heart,
my sister, my spouse Can. 4, 9
. But now as in our charity to men we must love, not only our friends, but also
our foes; so in our charity to God, we must love the Lord, not only when he
shows sensible signs of familiarity and favor toward us, but also when he
seems to frown as it were, and to be offended with us. David says in one
Psalm Psalm. 119, 143.
, Trouble and heaviness have found me: but in another Psalm Ps. 116, 3.
, I have found trouble and heaviness. Between these two speeches there is a
great difference. For trouble and heaviness may find him, which runs into a
corner, and hides himself, and would not be found by affliction. But he
finds trouble and heaviness, who when it is in his own free choice whether
he will be afflicted or no, willingly with Moses chooses to suffer
affliction Heb. 11, 25.
, and loves the Lord most of all, when he lays some fatherly chastisement,
and correction upon him. Knovving that, as Christ was consecrated and
perfected by afflictions ^^eb. 2, 10. and cap. 5, 9.
: so nothing does more perfect a Christian, and make him fine gold indeed (as
S. Paul also in the very next verse almost before my text declares) the^ the
fellowshippe of his afflictions, and to be made comfortable unto his death
(...).
. For the sweet lamb of God was in such an extreme agony, and anguish and
distress, and desolation of spirit, that his blessed body was bathed all over
m^a sweat of blood. To teach us, that though we have suffered very much already
for the love of Christ, yet if we be not content to suffer a thousand times
more, and even to endure martyrdom, and to sweat a bloody sweat for his sake,
we are not of his body Haec pugna salu^toris nostri, martyru^ agones, and
certamina significabat. Ille sudor san guineus eor^ sanguine^ de toto eius
corpore (quod est ecclsia) vtique fundendum manifestabat Emisse. ^eria 4. post
Domi* in palmis. p. 116.
. But on the other side, that this is the hiest perfection that can be in this
life, not only in prosperity, but also in the greatest adversity to bless
God, and if it please him for our further trial to take away from us all
comforts, both outward, and inward, yea and to bring us in a manner, to the
very point of desperation, yet even then, then also to show an inuinsible
faith, and only for the pure, and perfect love which we bear toward his
Majesty, to wrestle with the whole world, and to fight manfully against the
powers of hell it self, and to brave it out, and triumph over all
tribulations, each one of us saying with Job Job. 13, 15.
, Though he kill me, though he kill me, yet will I love him, and put my trust
in him; and with Christ Mat. 26, 39.
, Father, father, O my loving Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass
from me, nevertheless not my will, not my will, but thy will be fulfilled. This
is indeed to follow hard toward the Mark. This is the fifth degree to
perfection.

TOuching the sixth he says (not for any other prize, but) For the prize of the
high calling of God in Christ Jesus. A man were as good to shoot at no mark
(...) Eras. in prouerbio, Nullo scopo iaculari
, as at a wrong mark. And a man were as good venture for no Prize (...). Marcus
Ereinita.
as for a wrong Prize. For he that suffers martyrdom, (which, as I said even
now, is the highest top of perfection, that any mortal creature can reach to in
this life) he, I say, that suffers martyrdom, to this intent, to have his
relics honored of all men, or is willing any other way to have his blood
shed, to this end, to make himself famous in the world, follows hard (I
grant) toward the mark, yet he follows not for this perfect Prize, but for
popular praise Si ita martyriu^ fecerimus quo^ nostras ab omnibus velimus
honorari reliqui^ and si opinion^ vulgi sectantes intrepide sanguinem
fuderimus, huic operi non ^am praemium qua^ poen^ debetur, and perfidiae magis
tormenta sunt. quam corona victoriae Amb.
. And therefore all that he suffers, does rather torment him for his
hypocrisy, then crown him for his victory. Wherefore it will not be amiss to
consider, what ought to be the chiefest end of all our actions, and what is the
greatest felicity that man may attain by following hard toward the mark,
which the Apostle here calls, The prize of the high calling of God in Christ
Jesus. Varro reports, that the ancient Philosophers have held and
maintained, two hundred threescore and eight several opinions, concerning
felicity Libro de philosophia apud August. de ciuit^. Dei. lib. 19. cap. 1.
. No marvel then though Athens, and Rome, and all the brave and gallant wits
in the world, could never attain to the true knowledge of perfect blessedness.
For following so many, they could never find any, but vanishing away in their
own smokie conceits, when they thought themselves wise men they proved in
the end to be very fools To. 1, 22
. Seeing this is the greatest folly that can be, and a misery of all miseries,
for a man but once to dream of so diverse and so contrary felicities. I will
touch but a few of them at this time. And that very briefly. Some therefore
define perfect happiness, to be an action of the mind, according to virtue, in
a perfect life. But by this perfect life, they understand this present life.
Whereas the Apostle avouches, that the Servants of God have their fruit in
righteousness, and their end everlasting life To, 6, 22.
. Therefore as everlasting death is the greatest misery, so everlasting life
is the greatest felicity. Which iuerlasting life being the perfect life, is
not this present life, nor in this present life, but the life to come, and in
the life to come. This is, and then is, everlasting life. Others esteem
worldly honor to be pe^fect happiness. But Hilary contrariwise affirms Omnis
seculi honor diaboli est neg^tium. Canon^ 3. in Math.
, That all the honor of the world, is the merchandise of the devil, not the
prize of perfection. And Eucherius also says, That the honors of the world,
are the waves of the world Honores mu^di, tumores mundi. Epist. paraene. de
contemp. mund.
, which Christ did teach us to contemn, and tread under our feet, when he
himself did walk upon the water Mar. 6, 48
. For so the very heathenish Romans did. They had for the difference of their
nobility a little ornament in the form of a moon, which they did wear upon
their shoes Isidorus calc^os lunatos senatoru^ vocat, ad^^^ que Romul^ calceos
patricios reperisse, assuta luna. Sigo. de Iudi lib. cap. 20.
. What did they but think all worldly honor very mutable, when they did
represent it in the form of a moon? And what did they but tread it under
their feet, when they did wear it upon their shoes? Now we that are
Christians see, and ought to see our calling better then they. How that not
many wise men according to the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are
called. But that we must as well by dishonor 2 Cor. 6. 8
, as by honor enter into eternal glory. Some others imagine that carnal
pleasure is perfect happiness. But what says the Apostle? Meats for the belly,
and the belly for meats, but God will destroy both it and them 1, Cor, 6, 13.
. Meats for the belly. That is true, we do eat to live. And the belly for
meats. That is false, We do not live, to eat. Therefore GOD will destroy
both it and them. Both the belly, and the meats of all Epicures. Because they
think their belly is made for meats Machometus credidit beatitudinem
consistere in cibo, potu, and delectationibus corporalibus. Ioh. Galensis
Anglus. l. de orig. Match. cap. 5.
, whereas indeed only meats are made for their belly. Because they think
they may live to eat Nihil aliud putant esse vita^ nisi vescendi and potandi
lice^tiam. Firmicus in lib. de errore profa. relig.
, whereas indeed only they may eat to live. For the prize of our hie
calling is not meat or drink (or any carnal pleasure) but righteousness and
peace, and joy in the holy Ghost.

Others account transitory riches to be perfect happiness. And certainly, if we
use our riches well, as diverse worthy Citizens of this City have done, to the
maintenance of learning, to the building of Hospitals, and to such other good
purposes, then riches (I grant) are a great help to a virtuous mind, and a
special furtherance to felicity. Otherwise that complaint of Saluianus may
take place even in those our times Tanta est miseria huius temporis, vt nullus
habeatur magis faelix quam qui est plurimum dives. De guber. lib. 3.
. Our times are so miserable (says he) that now adays no man is thought to
be more happy, then he that is known to be most wealthy. And that also of
Innocentius ^r^h pu^or, secundu^ fortunam aestimatur persona, quum ^otius
secunlum persona^ estimandae sit fortuna. Tam ^onus reputa^ur quam di^es, tam
malus qua^ pauper, cum potius tam dives sit reputa^dus quam bonus, tam pauper,
quam malus De co^tem. mundi. l. 1, c. 16.
Fie for shame (says he) now adays a man is esteemed according to his money,
whereas rather the money should be esteemed according to the man. Every one is
reputed worthy if he be wealthy, and naught if he be needy, whereas rather
every one should be reputed wealthy if he be worthy, and needy if he be
naught. For questionless riches of themselves do encumber and entangle the
mind, even as an Ape is tied and teddered to his clogge. We read according to
the Greek translation, that Abraham was very rich. But there is a Latin
translation, which says, that Abraham was very heavy. And the original Hebrew
Genesis 13, 2 Chauedh.
indifferently bears both. Which proves, that riches are a heavy burden,
and do many times hinder them very much, which would attain to blessedness.
Yea if thou set thy heart upon them, they will likewise set themselves upon thy
heart, and lie so heavily upon thy heart, that they will press, and way thee
down with thy heart into hell. Therefore diverse holy men and women heretofore
have voluntarily abandoned their wealth, and preferred poverty before it, that
they might the sooner and the easier come to perfection. For as it is hard for
a Periwinkle in the sea to swim, or for a Snayle upon the land to creep, while
they bear their houses upon their backs Domi^orta.
: even so it ^s hard for a rich man that trusts in his riches, with all his
big bunches of wealth upon his back, to go through the needles eye Mar. 10, 25
, and to enter into the kingdom of heaven. Wherefore we must follow hard
toward the mark (not for any action in this life, but) for everlasting life*
(not for any worldly honor, but) for eternal glory: (not for any carnal
pleasure, but) for joy in the holy Ghost: (not for any transitory treasure,
but) for the kingdom of heaven: (not for any other prize, but) For the prize of
the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.

This everlasting life, is the only perfect life, because it is the prize:
this eternal glory is the only high honor, because it is of the high
calling: this joy in the holy Ghost is the only godly pleasure, because it is
of God: this kingdom of heaven, is the only Christian treasure, because it is
in Christ Jesus. This (I say) this everlasting life, is the only perfect life,
because it is the prize. Which makes the Marchant-venturer, that gets it,
most absolutely blessed. As the Psalmist, says Psa. 127, 1
, speaking of another, Blessed art thou, that fear God, and walk in his
ways. For thou shall eat the labor of thy hands. O well art thou, and happy
shall thou be! O well art thou! For thou have feared God, and walked in his
ways, for thou have followed hard, toward the mark. And happy shall thou be!
for thou shall eat the labor of thy hands; for thou shall have, by the
gracious gift of God, everlasting life, the only perfect life, The prize of
the high calling of GOD in Christ Jesus. As the Apostle says 2, Ti. 4. 8. Romans
6, 22.
, speaking of himself, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith. There
is henceforth laid up for me the crown of righteousness. O well art thou,
and happy shall thou be! O well art thou! For thou have finished thy course,
and kept the faith; for thou have followed hard, toward the mark. And happy
shall thou be! for there is henceforth laid up for thee, the crown of
righteousness; for there is henceforth laid up for thee everlasting life,
the only perfect life. The prize of the high calling of GOD in Christ Jesus.
This eternal glory is the only high honor, because it is of the high
calling. For all of the visible Church, have a calling. Seeing the Church is
nothing else, but the company of them which are called (...). Cyril. Hierosoty
(...): 18.
. Yet all that are called, are not worthy of this calling. Seeing many make
excuses, and will not come, when they are called Lu. 14, 8
. Therefore Saint Peter prays for the dispiersed Jews a 1. Pe. 1, 10
, That the God of all grace, which has called them to his eternal glory,
would make them perfect, confirm, strengthen, and establish them therein. And
S. Paul likewise prays for the Thessalonians 2. These. 1 11.
, That God would make them worthy of his calling (to eternull glory) and
perfect all the good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of faith in them.
Whereby we see that they are the only worthies of the world, which are so
happy, as to have this high honor, and dignity (...). Dignitatem. Bez^. Io. 1,
12.
given them, to be called the sons of God. Which was prefigured in the
seeling of the temple. Where were graven palme-trees and chains 2, Chr. 3, 5
. The palm tree is high, the chain is calling. The palm tree chain, the
high calling. For God the Father by his effectual calling, as by a strong
chain Ioh. 6. 44.
, does draw his children to Christ. And then standing before the Lamb, they
hold palms in their hands Reave. 7, 9.
, which are the ensigns of their honor. So that being drawn up to the high
palm tree by the calling chain, they are made partakers of eternal glory,
the only high honor, The prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.
This joy in the holy Ghost is the only godly pleasure, because it is of God.
Indeed sometimes even in this life we have a taste Can. 8, 2
* (as it were) of this joy. As the Israelites had a taste of the Grapes and
other pleasures of Canaan before they came thither Number. 13 14.
. But we cannot enjoy the full fruition of it until we come to the presence
of God. Therefore David says Psa. 36, 12
, In thy presence is the fulness of joy, and at thy right hand are pleasures for
evermore. And again, They shall be satisfied with the fatnes of thy house, and
thou shall give them drink out of the river of thy pleasures Psalm. 36, 8
. For this fatnes of the house of God is that meat, and this river of the
pleasures of God; is that drink, which shall perfectly satisfy; and fill our
hearts with joy in the holy Ghost. When the Lord shall say to every one of us,
Enter thou into thy Lords joy Mat, 25, 23.
. Not, ^et thy Lords joy enter into thee. For it is so great, that it can not
enter into thee, thy heart cannot hold it No^ ergo totum illud gaudium intrabit
in gau dentes, sed to (...) gaudentes intrabunt in gaudium domini sui Au.
Manua. c. 36
. But, Enter thou into the Lords joy. For thou shall even bathe thy self in
blessedness, and swim in the bottomless st of the sweet pleasure of God, as a
little fish takes his pastime in the huge Ocean Sea. And look how he that
has once tasted of the fountain named Clitoriu^ fons, will never afterward
drink any wine Clitorio quicunque si tim de font leuarit, Vina fugit,
gaudetque meris abstemius vndis. Ovid. Meta. 15. In Arcadia ciuitas est non
ignota Clitor I, in c^ius agris est spelunca pro^^uens aquae, quam qui biberi^t
fiunt abstemij V^tr^^ius lib. 8 cap. 3.
: in like sort when thou have once tasted this pure crystal water of life,
thou shall never any more relish the wine of the world, but be perfectly
delighted with joy in the holy Ghost, the only godly pleasure, The prize of the
high calling of God in Christ Jesus. This kingdom of heaven in the only
Christian treasure, because it is in Christ Jesus. For all treasures which are
laid up in earth may be stolen with thieves, or corrupted with cankers Mat. 6,
19.
. But this treasure is an enduring substance Heb. 10, 34.
hoorded up in heaven, where neither thief steals, nor cankar corrupts
V^ras diuitias illam prorsus immortale^ gl^riam supernoruque bonorum retri
buti^^em ess* existimamus Cyril in Genes. lib 5, in fine
. Therefore the kingdom of heaven is likened to a treasure hidden in the field
Mat. 13, 44.
. And the field is Christ Jesus Thesaurus in agro absconditus, deus est latens
in carne sua Vigilius eon Eutych. lib. 3 cap. 3.
, in whom are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge (...).
. O blessed then, O blessed is the man that finds this wisdom, and the man
that gets this knowledge. Pro. 3, 13.
. Because the merchandise thereof is better then silver, and the gain thereof is
better then gold (...). Clem^ns in Protrep p. 32
. It is more precious then pearls, and all things that thou can desire are
not to^ be compared unto it (...).
. Yea doubtless (says one) I think all things but loss for the excellent
knowledge sake of Christ Jesus my Lord. O wise! O worthy! O holy! O heavenly
Merchant! Here is a frank chapman indeed, which prizeth the kingdom of heaven
according to the right worth and true value of it. Knowing that this Christian
treasure was bought and purchased for him, not with corruptible things, as
silver* or gold, or such like, but with the most dear, and precious blood of
Christ 1, Pe. 1, 18.
. For whom (says he) I have counted al things loss, and do judge them to be
doung that I may gain Christ Phil. 3. 8
. For Christ Jesus only is the wisdom of his Father; and by him only we
come to the knowledge of God. He is the wisdom of his Father, because he
does give us grace in this life, that we may be wise unto salvation, and see
the Father by faith, and receive the earnest of our inheritance Ephesians 1, 14
. By him we come to the knowledge of God, because he will give us glory in
the life to come, that we may know, as we are known, and behold GOD face to
face, and receive, not only the earnest-peny, or the pledge-peny, but also the
prize-peny, or the possession-peny of perfection Mat. 20, 10.
So that Christ Jesus is, the Alpha, and the Omega, the beginner, and the ender
of our perfection Reu. 1. 8
, the author, and the finisher of our faith; who for the joy which was set
before him; endured the cross, and despised the shame; and is set at the right
hand of the throne of God Heb. 12, 2.
. He is the author, and finisher of of our faith, that is, our forerunner He.
6, 20.
. and mark: who, for the joy which was set before him; that is, for the
kingdom of heaven, the only Christian treasure, The prize of the high calling
of God in Christ Jesus: endured the cross, and despised the shame; that is
again, followed hard, toward the mark: and is set at the right hand of the
throne of God; that is again, and is now possessed of the kingdom of heaven,
the only Christian treasure, The prize of the high calling of God in Christ
Jesus. Lo ye, lo ye, whether we are now come. So high that we can go no
higher. Namely, to the right hand of the throne of God. Which is, everlasting
life: eternal glory: joy in the holy Ghost: the kingdom of heaven; The prize:
of the high calling: of God: in Christ Jesus. For this rich throne of God, is
that yuory throne of Solomon, whereof I spoke in the beginning. Which is the
only perfect life: the only high honor: the only godly pleasure: the only
Christian treasure; The prize: of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. This
is the sixth, and last degree to perfection.

NOw then, my dear brethren, let us hear, if it please you, pause a while,
and seriously consider how Christ prayed for his chosen, that they might be
made perfect in one Ioh. 17, 23
. That they might bend the whole forces of all their actions and affections to
this one thing, namely, to the attayning of perfect blessedness, or (if you had
rather so call it) of blessed perfection. And therefore forgetting that which
is behind, and leaving the doctrine of the beginning of Christ Heb. 6, 1.
; let us Endeavor our selves to that which is before, and be led on forward
unto perfection. Yea let us follow hard, and run with patience the race that
is set before us Heb. 12, 1.
; looking unto Jesus:, who is our mark, and has given us an example Ioh. 13, 15
. That every one of us might say unto him with good David, I have applied my
heart to fulfill thy statutes, Psalm. 119, 112. Leghola^ghe chebh. Heb. (...).
Septagin^. Propter aeternam retributione^ vulga.
, for the eternal recompense of reward; for the prize of the high calling of
God in Christ Jesus. Tell me (beloved) I beseech you, if it will be no great
trouble to you, as I trust it will not, tell me, I pray you, wherefore says
the same David Ps. 86, 11 lached leuaui. Called. Vnicu^ fac cormeum. Hi^^^.
, speaking to God, O knit my heart unto thee, that I may fear thy name, but
only to teach us, that, But one thing, is the first degree to perfection? For
whereas we usually read it, O knit my heart unto thee, that I may fear thy
name, the Chaldee paraphrast and S. Ierom translate it, O make my heart but
only one heart, that I may fear thy name. So that a man cannot any way, so
much as enter into the fear of Gods name, which is the beginning of all
perfection, except first his heart be made one in it self, and one in GOD, that
he may principally mind but one thing. Almighty God concerning the East gate
of the Temple says thus, This gate shall be shut, and shall not be opened,
and no man shall enter by it, because the Lord God of Israel has entered by
it Ezec. 44, 2
. Here-throgh signifying, that although the heart of a Christian, which is the
temple of the holy Ghost, may let many things enter into it at other gates, yet
it must keep the East gate, the most illuminate and highest power and part of
it, continually shut against all men, yea against all the world, and opened
only to one thing, I mean to God, who has already entered into it, and
enlightened it with his spirit. That as at the window of Noah's Arc, there
entered in, no mist, no water, nothing else but one thing only, which is light
Genesis 6, 16 Fenestra dicitur Zohar, quia non aliud quam me ridia^em lucem
recipit. Et Esaias 54, 12. Shemashah, quia so lum solemn intromittiv.
* so at this East gate, no mist of human errors, no water of worldly cares
may enter in; but only the light of heaven, and a sanctified desire, to be
fast knit, and perfectly united, by faith and love to God. Hence it is that
Moses, coming to talk with God upon the mountain, was commanded to bring no
man with him, but to come up himself alone Ex. 24, 18.
. Nay more-ouer being upon the mountain alone, he was covered and compassed
about with a thick cloud, which made him fear the name of the Lord, and
hooded him, as I may say, in such sort, that he could see nothing, but one
thing, which was God. And therefore the Psalmist says, O make my heart like
Moses heart, when he was upon the mountain: O make my heart like the window
of Noah's Arc, and the East gate of the temple: O make my heart but only one
heart, one in it self and one in thee: O knit my heart unto thee, that I may
fear thy name. Tell me, wherefore says Christ Can. 7, 4
, speaking to his spouse, Thy nose is like the tower of Lebanon, but onley to
teach us, that I forget that which is behind, is the second degree to
perfection? For seeing Christ is now risen again, and ascended up into
heaven, which is the high tower of Lebanon, therefore we which are the Saints
of God, must not be like the Idols of the heathen, which have noses and smell
not, but we must have noses like the tower of Lebanon Si verb rum faciem
consideremus quid poterit magis diei ridiculum? E^ go spiritua^^ requirunt
intelligentiam Titelm^^^u^ in hunc locu^
, which forgetting all earthly things and leaving them behind, must smell and
seek those things which are above. God appointed Gedeon to dismiss all those
of his army which bowed down their knees to drink, and to retain only those
which lapped water out of their hands, as a dog lappeth Judge. 7, 5
. Because he which drinks upon his knees like an Ox, cannot possibly go
forward while he drinks. But he which with some of the Polonians (...).
Clem. Alex and. Stro. lib 1, page 110.
, or with that dog Diogenes (...). Laertius in Dioge.
, lappeth water out of his hands, may nevertheless go forward while he
lappeth, as an Egyptian dog does, while he lappeth the water of Nilus Ae^ypti
canes e Nilo n^nquaem (...) lambitant Solinus Po^yhist. cap 20.
. And like as a lusty hound of a good kind, orders his going so well P^. 30.
31
, that though he have run over very many fields, and through a thousand
thickets already, yet he never remembers any labor which is behind, but
forgets it; and if he chance to lap water in some brook by the way Ps. 110,
7 De torrente in via bibet.
, yet even while he lappeth he lifts up his head, and still goes on, and
plieth him forward to his gain: so must we do in this pursuit of
perfection. Seeing Christ has now sprinkled all the way between heaven and
earth with his blood, and so has made it a fresh and a living way He. 10, 20
(...).
, therefore we which have noses like the tower of Lebanon, must as bloodhounds
trace him by the foot, and run after him in the smell of his ointment Can. 1, 4
(...). Septuagint.
, and hunt hotly upon this fresh and living way, with a fresh and lively faith:
and though we have gone very far, and done a thousand goods deeds already, yet
we must always forget that which is behind, till we have got, if not the
childrens bread, yet, at the leastwise, some little crum of mercy, that falls
from our Masters table, some little drop of blood, that falls from our Lords
side, which shall I assure you be sufficient, to make us perfect men in Christ.
Tell me, wherefore was the altar of perfume set within the Sanctuary Exo. 36, 6
, but only to teach us, that And endeavor my self to that which is before, is
the third degree to perfection? For even as that altar of perfume was placed,
not in any common room, or in any odd corner of the tabernacle, but in the
Sanctuary it self, somewhat beyond the veil, close to the golden censer Heb.
9, 4
very near the mercy seat: so a Christian heart which is a spiritual altar of
perfume and of a sweet savior to God 2, Cor. 2 15.
, must daily endeavor it self to that which is before, and still more and more
aspire to heavenly things Beda de tabernaculo. l. 3 c. 1, 11.
, and always nearer and nearer aproach unto the throne of grace, and
continually higher and higher advance it self to him that is the highest and
holiest of all. Tell me wherefore did the Israelites, when they had pitched in
Mithkah, remove their tents from thence and pitch in Cashmonah Nu. 33. 29
but only to teach us, that And follow hard is the fourth degree to
perfection? For even as they, as soon as they had pitched in Mithkah, which
signifies sweetness, by and by removed their tents from thence, and pitched in
Cashmonah, which signifies swiftnes: so we must join, Mithkah and Chashmonah,
sweetness and swiftnes both together Hierony. Ep. ad Fal^^lam. Mansione. 26.
, and as soon as we have pitched in Mithkah, as soon as we have tasted and
seen how sweet the Lord is, presently we must remove our tents from thence,
and pitch in Chashmonah, presently we must follow hard, and run, not only
sweetly, but also swiftly, in this way of peace which leads unto life. Tell
me, wherefore says Christ again Can. 4, 13
, speaking of the praise of his spouse, Thy plants are as an Orchard of
Pomegranates, but only to teach us, that toward the mark, is the fifth degree to
perfection? For a Pomegranate has many graynes within him in his case, and a
little round circle or a crown without him upon his head. Now these graynes
being sweet in taste and red in color, are orderly set one by another, and
point up, or as it were look up, altogether to the crown. To intimate thus
much, that we which are plants of the Church, as an Orchard of Pomegranates,
must grow on still toward the mark, not only when we enjoy the sweet taste of
pleasant prosperity, but also when we bear the red color of bloody
persecution Memini^ malogranatorum quod rubore granoru^ oblectent, and
suauitate grata sint. Quod ad co^^rem, ad ardentem ecclesiae charitate^ referri
potest. Mercerus. Ma^a punic^ sanguineo rubent color scilicet Martyrs
Haigrinus in cant. l 7. Idem Beda, and Haim^ ^abent in com. in hunc locum.
: and consenting in a kind of conformity and perfect peace and unity one with
another, we must point up altogether with the finger of faith to Christ, and
look up continually with the eye of love to our head, who by being first
crossed is now come to be crowned with honor and glory. In the arc of the
covenant there was; the golden pot that had Manna; and Aarons rod that had
budded; and the tables of the testament; and the propitiatory or covering; and
a crown of gold round about it Heb. 9. 4. Exo. 25, 11.
. O how notably and marueilously do these things sort and agree together! The
pomegranate and the ark: the sweet taste, and the pot of Manna: the red color,
and the rod of Aaron: the order of the graynes, and the tables of the
testament: the head of the pomegranate, and the covering of the ark: the crown
upon that head, and the crown about this covering. To inhinuate thus much,
that we which are like an orchard of pomegranates, must also be like the arc
of the covenant, being builded and reared up still toward the mark, not only
when our Lord feeds us with the sweet Manna of his mercy, but also when he
afflicts us with the sharp rod of his correction: and always keeping the
tables of the testament, which are the commandments of perfect love to God and
to our neighbor Gnullemaijc malion piccudhaia ha^erimmo nin Thargum. Iuuenes,
tui pleni praeceptis sicut malegranata. Montanus,
, that by faith in Christ, who is the covering and the propitiation for our
sins, we may obtain the golden crown of life. King Darius upon a time by
chance opening a great pomegranate, and being demanded of what he would wish
to have as many as there were graynes in that pomegranate? answered in one
word, of Zopyrusses (...). Plut. ^nitio Apoth. Regum.
. Now Zopyrus was a right noble and a valiant Knight, who seeing the King his
master could hardly surprise Babylon, where the traiterous Assirians were
entrenched, bethought himself of a wonderful strange practice. He went home to
his own house, and caused his sernants to rent his whole body all over with
scourging him, and to cut off his nose, his lips, and his ears Domi se
verberibus lacerari toto corpore inbe^ nasum and la, bia, and aure^ sibi
praecidi* Justin. li. 1. in fine.
. Then straightwaies running to Babylon, he made the Assyrians believe that
Darius had misused him in this s^rt, because he had spoken in their behalf,
counselling him to break up his siege, and to remove his army from assaulting
their City (...). Herodotus. l. 3, Thalia in fine.
. They hearing this tale, and the rather thinking it to be true, because they
saw him so shamefully disfigured in his body, were persuaded to make him their
chief Captain. By which means he betrayed them all, and surrendered both
them, and their City into his masters hands. O most faithful and loving
subject! O most worthy and courageous heart! One Pomegranate full of such
graynes, yea even one grain full of such valor and virtue, is suffi^ient for
a whole Country, either to recover it if it be lost, or to keep it that it be
not lost. O that I could tell where to find such a man! O that I could tell
where to see but one such amongst us all! I would, I assure you, honor the very
ground he goes upon, and kiss even the shadow of his feet. Well (beloved) I
pray God, I pray God with all my heart, that her sacred Majesty, whom the Lord
for his glory sake always shield and defend, that her sacred Majesty I say may
find very many, yea may see us al, as true to God, to her, and to our
Country, as Zopirus was to his prince. That if any time of trial should come,
we may have so much will, and holy manhood in us, as to put our selves upon
the pykes, and ieopard a joint, yea venture the martyring and mangling of our
whole body, and even the losing of our lives, rather the either foreign
enemies, or homebred rebels should have their wills of us. Knowing that our
life is frail and mortal, and we may dye every moment, but for a man to do
some notable piece of service before he dye, and to sheath his sword in the
sides of his enemies, and to kill if it be but one that is a sworn rebel, to
his God, to his Prince, and to his country; this indeed is a most honorable
and a most glorious thing, this is it which shall be chronicled, and registered,
and remembered, yea and rewarded for ever. But ^o return to the Mark again.
We which are plants of the Church like an or^hard of pomegranats, and like the
arc of the covenant, must love, not only the head of the pomegranate, and the
covering of the arc; but also the order of the grains and the tables of the
testament* not only the sweet taste, and the pot of manna; but also the red
color, and the rod of Aaron. It is a miracle, and would amaze any man to
consider, how zealous the Christians* were in the Primitive Church; how
unsatiably they thirsted after the crown of martyrdom; what (...) with
Zopyrus, what rackings, what wild beasts, what broylings, they endured. How in
a manner, if I durst say so, they suffered almost as horrible torments when
they dyed for Christ, as Christ did when he dyed for them. Well, well, so
great, and so absolute* and so excellent, and so admirable perfection, is not
now required at our hands* Yet this by your good leave and favor I will be bold
to say, That we can never be perfect Christians indeed, and run toward the
mark ^right, except at the loast wise we have that in resolution, which they
did put in execution. Except, if need require 1, Pe. 1, 6
we that are faithful, can find in our hearts, to do that and to suffer
that, for batred of the spiritual Babylon, and for love of our heaven by Lord;
which Zopi^us an infidel, did, and suffered, for hatred of the earthly
Babylon, and for love of a mortal King* Except we can be content, not only to
be white (...), by living purely and patiently in those afflictions and
crosses, whereof our miserable life is full, which is in some sort a kind of
martyrdom Est quaedam sangui^nis effusio, afflictio. Bernard No^ putemus
effusionem sanguinis tantum esse Martirium. Semper Martyrium est. Caesarius
Arelatensis Hom 21, Sine serro Ma^^tyres esse possumus si patientiam in anim^
veraciter conseruemus. Gregor Omnis pioru^ vita testimonium reddit Deo. Cypria
de dup. Martyrio initio. vide locum.
: but also to be red Roses, by dying constantly and joyfully for the truth, if
the good pleasure of God should so appoint it 1, Pet. 3 17.
, and by making our garments red in the blood of Grapes Ge. 49, 11.
, which is the most perfect martyrdom, and comes nearest of all to the
mark, Duplex est species Martyrij, vna quando quis pro Christo occiditur: a^la
quand^ caro pro deo maceratur. Primo dabitur corona d^rosis, secunde de lilijs.
H^e. Erat ante ecclesiaa operi^bus fratrum candida nun^ facta est in Martyrum
cruore purpu^rea. (...) ^. 2, Ep. 6, p. 44
, that so Christ may rightly say to his Church here amongst us, Thy plants are
as an Orchard of pomegranates: Tell me wherefore says David again, speaking of
the oath of God Ps. 10^ 10
, He appointed the same unto Jacob for a law, and unto Israel for an
everlasting testament, but only to teach us, that for the prize of the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus, is the sixth and last degree to perfection? For
Jacob and Israel are two several names, and yet they signify but one singular
man. Nevertheless in a diverse respect, Because Jacob is he that supplanteth or
wrastleth: Israel is he that sees or beholds God (...) Inition. (...)
. Now Jacob supplanting or wrestling is a subject or a servant: Israel seeing
or beholding God, is a friend or a son. This is confirmed by Baruch, saying
Baru. 3, 36
, God has found out the way of knowledge, and has given it unto Jacob his
servant, and unto Israel his beloved. So that Jacob is only a faithful
servant: but Israel is a beloved son. Therefore there is appointed unto Jacob
a law: but unto Israel an everlasting testament. Seeing a law Lex. Vul.
, or a statute Koah. Heb.
, or a decree Ghezarah. Caldai.
or a precept (...) Septuagint.
, properly belongs to Jacob, a subject or a servant, but a testament (...).
Septuagint.
, or a covenant Berith. Heb.
, or an agreement Keia^. Ca
, or an accord Pactum. Vulga^a.
properly belongs to Israel, a friend or a son. For as long as Jacob
vvrastleth with many great imperfections and spiritual adversaries in this
life, he must as a faithful subject or servant of God, keep the law of
wrestling (...). 2. Tim, 2, 5.
appointed unto him; to wit, that he mind but one thing* and forget that which
is behind, and endeavor himself to that which is before; and follow hard;
toward the mark; but when Israel has once overcome all his worldly and
ghostly enemies, and is become a perfect man in Christ, and sees the Lord in
the life to come, then he shall as a beloved friend or child of God, possess
that inheritance, which the father has by his everlasting testament written
with the blood of Christ Jesus (...). Heb. 13, 20.
, appointed unto him, to wit, everlasting life; eternal glory: joy in the holy
Ghost; the kingdom of heaven. The prize; of the high calling; of God; in
Christ Jesus. O happy, happy man art thou, and thrice happy man art thou,
whosoever thou art, which with Jacob do wrestle, and keep the law, as a
faithful servant, for no other end, but only this, that with Israel thou
may see God, and enjoy the everlasting testament, as a beloved son. For when
we shall see God, we shall see: and what shall we see? That which no mortal eye
has seen, that we shall see. We shall see our own selves sitting and shining
at the right hand of the throne of Majesty. We shall see all our dear friends
which we have not seen this many a day, embracing us, and welcomming us into
Christ's kingdom. We shall see all the noble army, of Martyrs, of Apostles,
of Prophets, of Patriarchs, shouting day and night, and singing out the praises
of the lord. We shall see all the invincible host of Angels, of Archangels,
of Principalities, of Dominations, reverently attending upon the king of glory.
We shall see the king himself Christ Jesus, disparkling and displaying those
beams of beauty, which are the heavens vvonder, and all the Angels bliss. If
there were no we amongst us one as fair as ever Absolon was* who would not be
glad to behold him? But suppose some one were ten times as fair as Absolon,
how then would men look and gaze upon him? I but if another were a hundred
times as fair as Absolon, what a matter of admiration would that make? Put the
case then some one should now step forth and sh^we himself a thousand times
fayrer then ever Absolon was, what wondering, what maruailing would there be
amongst us? how would our eyes be dazeled, how would our very minds be
amazed at this sight? Well, all this is but a counterfeit, but a shadow, in
respect of the bright-blazing beauty of our spiritual spouse. For Christ
Jesus is ten times fairer, yea a hundred times fayrer, yea a thousand times
fayrer, yea ten hundred thousand times fayrer, then all the children of men. So
that if the whole beauty not only of all men, but even of all this inferior
Globe, were put together in one, yet it would not be any way co^parable not
only to Christ's glory, but not so much as to the least glorified body in
heaven. And yet all this is but the outside of heaven* all this we shall see
with our bodily eye. The inside and the insight is much more glorious. For the
least glorified body seeing innumerable Saints and Angels more highly exalted
then he is, has his joy doubled, and trebled, and beyond all measure
multiplied, when he co^sidereth, that he is loved unspeakably more, by all of
them, yea by every one of them, then he can be by himself. And therefore
again seeing himself so dear unto them, he for his part likewise as a hot
burning coal is set on fire and inflamed with love, and the more he sees any
other excel him in glory, the more does he rejoice, and is gladder of his
glory, then his own. But now when he lifts up his eyes to the glorious
Trinity, and sees how the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, do
eternally and perfectly love and like and enjoy one another in surpassing
sweetness and content, then all his affections are swallowed up in love, all his
spirits are ravished in delight, all his desires are imparadized in pleasure. In
so much as if on the one side were laid the love of Christ as he is man, and of
all the Saints and Angels among themselves, and on the other side, the love
which the least glorified body in heaven beholding the blessed Trinity
breaths out to GOD, this love would without all comparison excel and exceed
that as far, as light does darkness, or as heaven does the earth. Wherefore for
man to see God; for Jacob to be called Israel; for him that has bin a servant,
to become a son; for him that has kept the law, to enjoy the testament; is
the highest degree to perfection, yea it is the very perfection of perfection
it self; The only perfect life; the only hye honor; the only godly
pleasure; the only christian treasure. The prize: of the high calling: of God;
in Christ Jesus. Seeing then, blessed brethren, seeing we fight not as they
that beat the air 1, Cor. 9 26.
, but our reward is so great, so exceeding great in heaven Mat. 5,
, therefore as Jacob wrastled all the night long and never gave over, til about
the breaking of the day he was called Israel Ge. 32, 24
so let us wrestle all the night long of this life Mar. 13. 35.
, and never give over til the day break, and the shadows fly away Can. 4. 6.
and we come to the maruailous light and sight of God. And like as the same
Jacob said to the Angel, I will not let thee go, except thou bless me Genesis
32, 26.
* even so let every true Israelite say to Christ, I took hold of him, and
left him not Can. 3, 4.
. O Lord Jesus, who would leave thee? or who would let thee go? or rather who
would not hold thee fast? which strengthenest him that holds thee fast, and
make him persevere, that is strengthened, and crownest him that perseuereth,
and make him perfect that is crowned. Therefore I will hold thee fast, and
will not let thee go, except thou bless me, that is indeed, I will never let
thee go, because thou do never bless but only those that always hold
thee fast. Hold fast then, and Stand fast, good beloved, once again I say.
Hold fast that which you have, that no man take your crown from you Reu. 3. 11,
. Stand fast in that liberty, whereby Christ has made you free, and be not any
more entangled with the yoke of bondage Gala, 5, 1*
. But so run, so run, as ye may attain 1, Cor. 9 24.
. As ye may attain? How (...) Nilus in Paraene circamed.
is that? Mary faithfully, patiently, constantly unto the end. A shame it
would be, and a vile shame for us, if it should be said of us, not, you do
run well, but, you did run well Gala 5, 7,
. ^ye upon it. Having been hitherto brought up in skarlet, shall we now
embrace the dung Lam. 4, 5
? Shall we be like those antickes or monsters, which are half men and half
beasts (...). Niss^nus, l. (...) Illa actio Chym^ra est quae initium habet a
ratione sinem a sensualitate. Cu^ igitur sic agitur hum no capiti ceruicem
pictor depingit equ^^nam. Innoce^. Eleemo c 6. Operare igitur perseuerantur ne
(vt Horatius ait) Desinat in pisce^ mul. ter formesa superne. Nebrissensis. H^.
2, in fine.
? Shall we be like Nabuchadnezzars image which had a head of gold and feet of
clay Dan. 3, 33
? Shall we begin in the spirit and end in the flesh (p)? God forbid. God for
his mercy sake keep us from such fearful falling from him. Nay rather let us
remember, that Joseph signifies increasing, and Arimathea signifies getting
the reward (...). Theo in c. 15. in Mar.
, to teach us that if we would be like to Joseph of Arimathea, we must
always increase and go on till we get the reward. The other Joseph also had a
coat reaching down to his feet Aquila interpretatus est (...). id est
tunica^ talarem. Hier. in Quaest. Heb. in Genesus. Joseph typum ecclesiae
praetendens, vestis suae habitu perseuera^tia^ certaminie habere nos admonet,
cuius longitudo rsque (...) eius peruenit. Tanqa^ diceretur, Antequa^ ite^
perficias, noli in vita latescere. Auobertus in cap. 2 Apocalyp.
, to teach us that we must not have skarlet about our head and dung about our
feet, not gold about our head and clay about our feet, but that when we put
on the Lord Jesus, we must put on such a skarlet robe of righteousness, such a
golden garment of grace, such a vesture of a godly and virtuous life, such a
coat of a holy and heavenly conversation; as may reach to the feet, as may
continue to the end: considering our Savior has said, He that perseuereth
unto the end shall be saved: and again, Be faithful unto death, and I will
give thee the crown of life. This crown of life is promised to all those
which make a good beginning, but performed only to those which make a good
ending Non campo capitur, sedfine corona Pros. Sapientia in exitu canitur. qui^
laudari penitus anteact^ vitae prudentia non mer^bitur, nisi bono fine
claudatur. Saluia. ad Eccle. lib. 4.
. And they which run in a race run all, yet one only, that is he which
holds out to the end, receives the prize 1. Cor. 9.
. And none are saved but such as are marked in their foreheads with the letter
Tau, which is the note of perseuera^ce and perfection Eze, 9, 6,
And if we would be conformable to the cross of Christ, the lively picture of
all perfection, we must be like unto it, not only in the depth of faith, and
in the height of hope, and in the breadth of charity, but also in the length of
perseverance Ephesians, 3, 18,
Because all the depth, height, and breadth of the cross is nothing without
the length: and so all the faith, hope, and charity of a Christian, is to no
purpose without continuance in them even unto the end. Wherefore (my good
brethren) yet once again I will say, and then I will say no more, Let us draw
near unto God with a true heart in assurance of faith He. 10. 23,
: and let us keep the profession of our hope without wavering Verse, 23,
: and let us consider one another to provoke unto charity and to good works
Verse, 24.
and so much the more, because we see the breaking of the day draws near
Verse, 25
, and the kingdom of heaven is at hand. There is a Greek word signifying the
end of a race, which is derived of another Greek word signifying to spur or
prick on forward (...). Hesych. verbo. Nu^ea. Idem habet Pollux. l. 3. c. 30.
and Theodoret. de Pro. ui. lib. 9. circa intium, vbi hunc textum recitat.
Which proves, that as they which run their horses for a wager, spur
hardest at the races end (...). Chrysostom.
so seeing our salvation is nearer now then ever it was To. 13. 11
, therefore we must run faster now then ever we did (...); Laert. in Dio
. Especially because the very horse and mule and diverse other brute beasts
which have no understanding, though they have been never so much wearied and
tired before, yet when they come near home they will mend their pace Pecoribus
sagitatis quoque veloci^r domu^ gradu est Senaca de tranquilli. vitae. lib. 1.
cap. 1.
. And therefore the more to blame should we be, if having travailed thus far
already in the way to perfection, and being come by this time almost to our
iournies end, we should now go no further, when in deed we ought if it be
possible, to run much faster to our everlasting home in heaven. O beloved, all
the Saints in heaven think long, yea they think of us, and they long for us
Ergo quia omnis caelestis curia expectat nos, et desiderat, desideremus iam
quanto possumus desiderio. vide quaeso Bernard. medit. cap. 6
, and they earnestly desire to be perfected with us, because they certainly
know they cannot be perfected without us He. 11. 40
. The holy Angels also as they blush, and hold down their heads, when they
see us stumble, or trippe never so little: so on the other side, they shoute,
and clap their hands when they see us run cheerfully in a good course, and
come away apace to perfection. Lastly, Christ himself does stand waiting for
us, and beckning to us, and hartning us on all the way, being ready to receive
us, and to embrace us in the arms of his loving mercy, as soon as ever we
come to the end of our race. For even as a royal King, when one of his nobles
returns home, which has in a foreign Country by chiualry, or feats of
arms, or other like excellent parts achieved great renown to his realm,
presently sends for him to the Court, and in open audience gives him words
of grace, and aduanceth him to high preferments and honors: so Christ our most
magnificent King, immediately upon our arrival into heaven out of the foreign
Country of this world, will reach forth unto us his holy hand, conducting us
to the eternal tabernacles of rest, and as for all the prayers that we have
made, all the tears that we have shed, all the alms that we have given, all
the other exercises of a Christian life that we have performed, though never so
secretly in this pursuit of perfection, he will openly reward them, and most
gloriously crown them; when as all the host of Angels shall triumph for our
coronation, and the blessed Saints shall think themselves more perfect for our
pefe^^ion, and all the Court of heaven shall applaude our praises, and God
himself shall say Amen to our felicities. Which that it may so happily come
to pass, and that every one of us, which now with Jacob vvrastleth unto the
breaking of the day, and constantly keeps the law appointed unto him, may in
the end with Israel see God, and have the full fruition of his glory, and
enjoy the everlasting testament, which is The prize of the high calling of God
in Christ Jesus, grant we beseech thee, O dear Lord, grant it to us I say,
not for our own deserts or merits, but for the tender mercies of the same, our
sweet Savior Christ Jesus, to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, be
all honor and glory, power and praise, dignity, and dominion, now and
evermore, Amen.

FINIS.

