A poor man's benevolence to the afflicted Church.

Acts. 3. a * Gold and silver have I none such as I have give I unto you

Imprinted at London in little Britain, by Alexander Lacy.

The. 29. of January. 1566.

Grace, mercy, and peace, from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ,
be with all that are afflicted for the testimony of Jesus Christ. Amen.
Well-beloved in our savior Jesus Christ, understanding of your great trouble
and the greuons persecutions of our brethren in Christ in Spain and else where,
I could not but some what according to my duty, and to the tale^t which God
has given me, write (although it were but small) trustyng that it should be to
the coumforte of those, that for the truth be in any place afflicted: vsyng
none other order, nor collecting no other Scripture (as a particular thing to
treat of) but whollye to refer you, according to your godly understanding, to
the. 2. 2. Tim. 1
epistle of S. Paul to Timothe where he notes first unto him with what he is
endued, that is with an unfeigned faith, in Timothe is endued with an unfeigned
faith.
the self same faith which dwelt before in his gra^dmother Lois, and in his
mother Eunica. And here S. Paul comfort not only Timothe, that his
grandmother and mother was such: but also comforts them (if they were then
alive) that they had such a son. Here is also to be noted, what coumfort
parents and children may have each of other (if they be Godly) but I leave that
to be considered. But to the matter, since that he knows Paul and Ti mothe,
is of one spirit,
where with he is endued, he wills him to be steadfast, for God (says he)
has not given us the spirit of fear: but of power, and of love, and of a
sound mind. Be not ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, neither of me his
prisoner: but be partaker Paul is prsoner in Rome.
of the affictions of ye gospel, according to the power of GOD. That worthy
thing which was committed unto thee keep, through the Holy ghost.

*They of Asia be turned from me, of which sort are Phigelus and Hermogenes.
Thus Paul by a certain manner dismaieth Timothe: yet not wtstandynge he
encorageth him again, and wills him not only to be steadfast because he is
endued with the spirit and power of God: but also to be pacient, though all
should depart from him, and he put in prison: yet though Phtgelus 2. Lim. 2
and and Hermogenes, be The faithful will stick to one, when the wicked will
forsake him.
gone from the preaching of the Gospel: yet Onesiphorus will visit thee in
prison, and will not be ashamed of thy chains.

Whereby Paul does give to understand, though the greatter number forsake
thee: yet ye faithful in Christ will not leave thee And therefore says Paul,
look what thou have heard of me by many witnesses, y^ put forth. As who should
say: you have be ne a dilligent learner, and thou have nothing, but yt which is
approved by many witnesses, go foreward i^ it, make no stay, detract no time,
lookyng this way or yt way, be not as a reed shaken with ye wynd: but like a
bold soldiour of Jesus Christ, suffer aflictions. Therefore I beseech you, you
that have learned in Gods scoole, and have your doctrine approved by many
witnesses, stand steadfast in it: be pacient. Though your friends, kindred, or
cuntry men depart from it, Gala. 4.
be you fervent, continue you still, let your light so shine before Math. 5
men, that they may glorify your father which is in heaven. Therefore says
Paul, I suffer al things, and for the elects sake it is, that they might also
obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus, with eternal glory. For if
(says he) with Christ we suffer, we shall also reign with him. If we deny him,
he also will deny us. Therefore says he, study to show thy self approved unto
GOD, a workman that needs not to be ashamed. For God reueleth to the
faithful, the wickedness of the time before it come.
know that in the last days shall come perilous times, for men shall be lovers
of themselves, covetous, boasters, proud, cursed speakers, disobedient to
parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affections, 2. Tim. 3
truce breakers, false accusers, This is the state of our ^^u^e, we are
therefore in a perilous time.
intemperate, fyerce, despysers of them which are good, traitors, heady, high
minded, lovers of pleasure more then the lovers of God, having a show of
godliness, but have denied ye power thereof. Courne away therefore from such. As
Jannes and Jambres wtstood Moses, Exodus. 7
so do these also resist the truth, men of corrupt minds, reprobate
concerning the faith: but they shall prevail no longer. For their madness shall be
evident unto all men, as theirs was. To travel in explicating of the matter I
need not, for ye words be so plain, that it may pass without: and therefore I
leave it to your good considerations, puttyng you in remembrance of that which
is written by S. Paul to the Romans. That Romans 15.
whatsoever is written, is written for our learning, and for our coumfort. But
thou Timothe, 2 Timothy 3.
thou have known my doctrine, not in part, but in whole. Fully thou have
known it, my manner of living to my doctrine is not unknown unto thee. My
mind, purpose, and will, thou knew: my faith thou vnderstodest, my long
suffryng, love, and patience, is not hyd from thee: and also my persecutions,
and afflictions, which came un to me at Antioch, at Iconium, and at Listra,
thou art not ignorant of, which persecutions I suffered: but from them all the
Lord delivered me. Therefore The Lord only does deliver from trouble
Timothe, if thou continue in this doctrine which thou haste begun: keep the
manner of living to thy doctrine, as you have had example of me, being faith
full, being ready to bear all greefes, showyng all love, and vsyng patience:
then be sure yt the Lord in persecutions, will Aspecal comforc.
deliver thee. For this I tell thee of a truth, that all that will live godly in
Christ Jesus, shall suffer 2 Timothy 3.
persecutions. And here S. Paul gives Timothe a watch A watch word to the
godly of all states, given by S. Paul to Timothe.
word, and not to him alone, but to al pastors and teachers. Not to pastors and
teachers only, but to al people in general, of what calling soever they be of,
whether they be high or low, rych or poor, oulde or young, King or subject,
if he will live godly in Christ Jesus (says S. Paul) he then must suffer
persecutions. But here perchance you will ask me how it may be A question.
that Kings should be persecuted for the testimony of Jesus Christ, and who
it is that dare persecute them for the same? But whether Kings have been
Answer.
persecuted or no. I refer it to them to tell, which are skylfull in ye
Chronicles, and who they were that did persecute them. Paul does not say here,
if ye live godly in ye godliness of the Augustines, that you shall be The
godlynes of the papacy, is not persecuted.
persecuted: or in ye godlynes of the Frau^ciscanes, that you shall have any
trouble take hold of you: or if you live godly in the godliness of ye
Benedicts, or Dominickes and such like, that any hurt shall come unto you. But
if you live godly in Christ Jesus (says Paul) you must 2. Tim. 3.
suffer persecutions. Well says our Savior Christ, happy are ye when men
revile you and persecute The faithful hated.
you for my names sake, for Math. 5
you shall not lose your reward. For this I tell you, you shall be Math. 24
hated of all men for my names sake, therefore if the world hate you: know ye,
that it hated me Christ was hated. John. 16
before you, but for as much as ye are not of the world, but yt I have chosen
you out of ye world Wherefore the faithful is hated of the world.
therefore does ye world hate you. But be of good chere, I have overcome Luke. 12
the world: and therefore fear not little flock, for it The faithful shall be
rewarded with a kingdom
is your fathers will to give you a kingdom. And fear not them that can kyl the
body, but fear Math. 5
him that can cast both body and soul into hell fire, be faithful Apoc. 2 They
shall be ^round with the crown of everlasting life.
therefore unto the death, and I will give thee ye crown of life. Therefore (my
beloved) since that we have such sweet promises of God ye father, in his son
Christ Jesus: let us cleave unto him, he will perform them, he never God ^^
faithful
failed none that put their trust in him, as ye prophet David says, I have
called upon ye Lord and he has heard me, I have trusted in the Lord and he
has helped me, he therefore often times cries, as in the. 12. Psalm. 12
psalm. Help me O God, in the 69. psalm. Save me O God, in Psalm. 69
the. 16. psalm. Preserve me O Psalm. 16 Psalm. 30
God, in the. 30. psalm. I have called upon the Lord in my trouble, and he
has heard me, and delivered me. Therefore do you now with the prophet David
in the. 66. psalm, burste forth Psalm. 66
and say: Thou (O God) haste and do prove us. Thou also, have and will
try us, even as Silver is tried. Thou broughtest us in to the snare, and
laidst trouble upon our loins. Thou suffredst men to ride over our heads, we
went and go through fire and water, but we know that you wylt bring us in to a
comfortable place. Thus said Christ to his disciples, that where I am, John. 14
there shall ye be also. Therefore we beseech thee most merciful father, to aid us
with thy grace, and assist us with thy holy spirit, that we may perfectly learn to
know thee to be our creator, and Jesus thy son to be our only savior, and y^
Holy ghost to be our only sanctifier. To these three, as to one eternal God, be
all honor and glory, now and for evermore. Amen.

Your brother in Christ, Ihon Pits.

To the afflicted Church, in Scotland, France, Spain, or any other land.
BE of good chere my brethren all,
do not now faint nor quayle:
But to the Lord do ye now call,
lest that in truth ye fail.
For Satan's ire pass not a pin,
though that he rule and rage:
His power it is to small and thin,
the truth for to assuage.
Though Kings be strong, and wine likewise
and women thought to be:
Yet Truth (in any manner wise) 3. Esdr. ^

more stronger shall ye see.
Kings have failed, and also wine,
and women have not stood:
Truth has remaind from time to time
as proof we have full good.
Truth was good, and kept still his place,
when Woman had a fall:
Truth was still Truth and had his grace,
when Woman was in thrall. Gene. ^

What Truth has said, performd it was
as in all states we see,
Let Woman speak what is cum to pas
let her tell tale for me.
As touching wine, what shall I say?
his force I think not great:
Although the heart he merry make,
yet is he best with meat. Prou. 31.

The empty body does not gree,
with wine, though it be good:
Solomon to the sorry (says he)
give wine to chere their mood.
Give good wine (Solomon does say)
then is there that does fail:
In Truth there is no manner way,
that can make it to quayle.
For Truth shall stand both firm and fast,
and keepth his taste full sweet, Psalm. 117

When wine and women shall be past,
and kings laid under fete.
With Truth is no comparison, John. 14

no match with him may be:
For God and Truth, they be both one,
vncompared to be.
Who dwelth i^ truth, does dwell in God
and God in him likewise: ^. Joh. 4

So, dwell in Truth, and then have God
to make thee perfect wise.
For who against the truth does kick,
against God kicketh to:
Then is he like to fall on prick,
which will make him cry woe.
When Truth did speak in Noes days, Gene. 7.

wyllyng them to repent:
Lest that they perished in their wai^es,
they would not, but felt dent.
Truth to the Zodomites preached Gene. 9.

by Lot, this is certain:
Their licensiousnes he counsayled,
that they should not maintain.
The Zodomits would not Truth hear
but kept their whole desire:
Therefore they paid for that full dear,
for burnt they were with fire.
What got king Pharao for hes pain
when truth he did pursue? Exodus 14.

He and his host were dround certain,
as Exodus does show.
Sisara, and Abimelech to,
of women were both slain: Judi. 4. and. 9.

The book of Judges declares so,
which is both true and plain.
Hieroboam, because he wrought
against the well known Truth:
Baasa to death his stock has brought,
and thereon had no ruth.
What became of queen Jezabell, 4. Re. 9.

the Truths great enemy?
Dogs did eat her in Jezraell,
Truth said it should so be.
Ahabs house, by Iehu was slain, 4. Ke. 10

for that he did conspyre:
Gods prophets for to put to pain,
and give them death for hyre.
So read we of Zedechias, 4. Ke. 25

which troubled Jeremie:
That both his eyes destroyed was,
and he felt misery.
What is said of Herod the king, Acts. 12

that sought the Truth to kill?
Who was full of most deadly styng,
to wurke his cruel will.
His kyngly power could not p^uayle,
nor help him in his need:
When stinking worms did him assayl^
which on his corpse did feed.
How strong kings be when God does stryke,
the scripture does well sho:
In other books we have the like,
we need not far to go.
If that the king will needs rejoice,
let him rejoice in this:
That he has God to hear his voice,
to keep him from all mis.
Therefore let kings now serve ye Lord Psalm. 2

and not put Truth to flight:
But in the same for to accord,
lest that they leese their might.
Let them that do the Truth embrace,
embrace and keep it still:
For kings shall not the Truth deface,
though that it be their will.
What kings have done with Satan's aid Exodus. 1 Math. 2 Mar. 6. Eath. 14

it is not now vnshowne,
What women have thereto assayd,
it is not much unknown.
What wine i^ ba^kets has forth sought,
many the tale can tell:
How by yt way Truth has been bought
as time can show full well.
What Jews there be ye Truth to by,
I need not much to say:
And Judasses that traitorously,
seek Truth, him to betray.
Even here at hand hard by the door,
of both those sorts there be:
Which persecute Truth evermore,
that he can not go free.
Truth to exile has often ben brought,
and driven from place to place:
His confusion has been wrought,
by them of little grace.
But yet how Truth prevailed has,
and worn the garland green:
This day does teach that rule and path
which thought not to be seen.
Thus God the Truth p^serued has,
and set him in the seat:
For to appoint the perfect path,
which is both right and feate.
Walk therefore in Truth ye godly,
let ill men walk their way:
To God and Truth do ye now hy,
and take your joyful day.
Stand fast to Truth stick to your hold
fear not the cruel king:
He shall not hurt you (be you bold)
in any manner thing.
For God is yours, and you are Gods,
in God dwell you now still:
Although ye have these grievous rods,
it is not for none ill.
For whom the Lord does love be sure,
him does he chastise, why?
Because he will have us full pure,
his name to magnify.
For tribulation is our part,
if Christ we will confess:
Confess him still, fear not the smart,
you shall have life enelesse.
Farewell brethren, be of good chere,
in Truth have you your stay:
For God is Truth (your father dear)
which will keep you always.
Fear not the cross, nor yet the pain
that you a while do suffer:
You shall have heaven for your gain,
which life does last for ever.
FINIS.
THE. 67. PSALM.
David here in this Psalm does teach
the faithful for to pray,
The Lord to show his countinaunce
that they go not a stray.
And that his mighty power be known,
which is of noble fame:
That all the nations on the earth,
may praise his holy name.
GOD be merciful unto us, Psalm. 67.

thus does king David write:
In ye three score and seventh psalm
he does the same resite.
And bless thou us (says he) O Lord,
for that we stand in need:
The light of thy countinaunce show,
thy mercy give with speed.
That thy right way here on the earth,
unto us may be known:
And thy most high and saving health,
unto all natons shown.
Let the people praise thee (O God)
let all the people sing:
O let the nations on the earth,
acknowledge thee their king.
For thou the righteous wylt defend,
and govern every where:
And make the wicked on a row,
of thee to stand in fear.
Let the people praise thee G God,
now let them all thee praise:
In this our most troublesome time,
and in these heavy days.
Then shall the earth her increase bring
and thou our God shall give
Thy only good and great blessyng,
that we with thee may live.
God shall us bless for evermore,
and us defend from sin:
And all the ends of the whole world,
shall stand in awe of him.
Glory be to the Father high,
and to the Son therefore:
And to the Holy ghost which spirit,
keep us for evermore.
FINIS.
THE. 100. PSALM.
David in this Psalm does exhort,
to praise the Lord always:
For that he did us make and port,
and guydes us all our days.
OBe ye joyful in the Lord,
serve ye him all ye lands:
With gladness cum, and with a song,
commit you to his hands.
The Lord our God he did us make,
of this we may be sure:
Not we our selves, we are his folk,
and sheep of his pasture.
Now let us go in to his gates,
with thanks to give him praise,
In to his court even for to speak,
good of his name always.
For why? the Lord is gracious,
his mercy is full sure:
His Truth does euerlastyngly,
for evermore endure.
FINIS.
Christ speaks to the people.
Whosoever is of the truth, hears my voice. John. 18. John. 10.
My sheep do hear it, and I do know them, and they do follow me, and I give
them everlasting life. He that has my precepts and keeps them, John. 14
he it is that loves me. If any man loves me, he will keep my word, my father
will love him, and we shall come to him, and dwell with him. Walk John. 12.
while ye have light, least darkness over whelme you, he that walks in
darkness, knows not whether he goes. While ye have light, believe in the
light: that ye may be children of light. He that is of God, hears Gods word:
if any man keep John. 8
my word, he shall never see death.

God to the Prophet, or Preacher. STand in the court of the Lords house, and
speak unto all the cities of Juda which come Jere. 26.
to worship in the Lords house, all the words that I have commanded thee to
speak, keep not a word back. If so be they will harken, and turn every man
from his evil way, that I may repent me of the plague which I have determined
to bring upon them because of the wickedness of their works, and you shall say
unto them: thus faith the Lord. etc

Moses, or Preacher, to the people. IF thou shall obey diligently the voice of
the Lord thy God, and observe and do all his commandments Deuteronomy. 28
which I command thee this day, then the Lord thy God will set thee on high
above all the nations of the earth, and al these blessings shall come on thee,
and overtake thee: if thou shall obey the voice of the Lord thy God. Blessed
shall thou be in the city, and blessed in the feelde. etc.

But if thou wylt not obey the voice of the Lord thy God to keep and to do al
his commandments and his ordinances which I command thee this day, then al
these curses shall come upon thee, and overtake thee. Cursed shall thou be in
the town and in the feeld. etc. From the which curses, the Lord deliver us,
and grant us to be diligent hearers of his holy word, and faithful folowers
of the same: for his dear sons sake Jesus Christ, to whom with the Holy
ghost, three persons and one God, be al honor and glory for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
(quod) John Pits.


