Let us pray.
O God, merciful father, that despisest not the sighing of a contrite heart,
nor the desire of soch as be sorrowful, mercyfully assyst our prayers that we
make before ye in all our troubles and adversities, whenever they oppress us:
And graciously hear us, that those evils which the craft and subteltye of the
devil or man worcketh against us be brought to naught and by the providence of
thy goodness they may be dyspersed (...) servants, (...) ^t, being hurt by no
persecutions, may evermore give thanks unto the, in thy holy church, through
Jesus christ our lord. amen.

O lord arise, help us, and deliver us for thy names sake.

O God, we have heard with our ears, and our fathers have declared unto us
the noble works that thou dyddest in their days, and in thee old time before
them.

O lord arise, help us, and deliver us, for thine honor.

Glory to the father. etc.

As it was in the begi^ni^g is and ever sh^^^ (...) always having sufficyent,
may be rych and ple^tiful in all good works through our lord Jesus christ
Amen.

Lord have mercy upon us Christ have merci upon us Lord have mercy upon us Our
father etc. and let us not be led into te^ptacion. But deliver us from evil.
Lord hear my prayer. And let my cry come to the. From the fir^ (...) of the
de^il (...) our christ's sake. Amen.

ALmighti god, which have given us grace at this time with one accord to make
our common supplicatyons unto the, and doeste promise that when two or three
be gathered in thy name, thou wylt grant their requests: fulfill now O Lord,
thee desires and peticio^s of thy servants as may be most expedient for the^:
Grau^ting us in this world, knowledge of thy ^^^th, and in the world to (...)
^e, life everlasting. Amen.

Certain graces to be said before and after meat.
Grace before dinner.
THe eyes of al things do look up and trust in the, O Lord: Thou geuest them
meat in due season. Thou doeste open thy hand, and fyllest with thy blessing,
every liui^g thing Good lord bless us and all thy gifts, which we receive
of thy bounteous liberality. Through christ our lord. Amen.

The king of eternal glor^ make us perteners of the heavenly table. amen.

God is charity, and he that dwells in charity, dwells in god, and god in
him, god grant us all to dwell in him. Amen.

Grace after dinner.
THe god of peace and love, vouchsafe alwai to dwell with us. And thou lord have
mercy upon us, glory, honor, and praise be to the, O God, which have fed us
from our tender age, and g^ (...) ^nce to e^ (...) ^ge re^ (...) with the life
everlasting, thoroughe our Lord Jesus christ. amen.

Grace before dinner or supper.
Praised be thou our most merciful and heavenly father which of thy
inestimable goodness have given thy most dearly beloved son Jesus to paynful
death for our sakes, thereby not al only deliueringe us and al faithful from
everlasting death and damnation but also purchasing unto us everlasting life,
joy and felicite: se^de we beseech the thy holy spirit into our hearts that
we may daily more and more walk and go forward in the pleasant pathwayes of
thy righteous laws and commandments. So be it.

After dinner or supper.
NOw you have well refreshed your bodies remember the lamentable afflictions
and miseries of many thousands of your neighbors and brethren in christ,
visited by the hand of god, some with mortal plages, and diseases some with
imprisonment, some with extreme pouertye and necessitye, so yt either they ^a^
not or they have not to ^ede on as ye have done, remember therefore how much and
how depely ye present are bound to the goodness of almighty god, for your
health, welthe, lybertye, and many other his benefytes given unto you.

Responce.
Graces and thanks, be now unto him and always, for these and al other his
benefytes so mercyfully, lovingly and abundantly powered upon us. amen

God save our King and the Realm, and send us peace in christ. Amen.

Imprinted at London in Fletestrete at the sign of the Sun, over against the
Conduyte, By Edward Whyt-churche.

M.D.LI.

Cum Priuilegio ad Imprimendum Solum


