The goodli history of the most noble and beautyfull Lady Lucres of Scene in
Tuskane, and of her lover Eurialus very pleasant and delectable unto ye reder

THe Emperor Sigismo^d enteryng into the town of Scene in Tuskane, what
honors he received: is all ready every where published His palayce was prepared
at saint Marthies chapel, in the street that ledeth un to the posterne, called
Tophore. After the ceremonis finished, when Sigismo^d was come thider, four
ladies in noblenes, facion, age and apparel semblable, did mete him not like
mortal women: but as gods, to every man's iudgmente and if they had been but
three they had been to be rekened the^ that Paris saw in his dreme. Sigismond
(though he were aged) was prone unto lust, and delited much in desireing with
ladies, and reioised in bla^disments of women nor nothing was to him more
plesaunt, then to be hold goodly women. Then in aduisynge them (unlike to the
rest) he was received from his horse among the^ and turning to his familiers
said, saw ye ever any like to these women? I am in doubt whether these faces be
mankind, or angels, but surely they are heavenly. They casting their eine to
the ground in blushyng becam fayrer, and ye ruddy flushing in their chekes gave
such a color to their countenance, as has the yud iuery stoined with the
scarlet, or the whit lilies among the purple roses: But among al: Lucres the
young Lady, not yet of twenty years, shone in great bryghtnes yo^g married in
the famyly of the Camilles, unto a very rich man, named Menelaus, unworthy
(...) such. beautye should serve at home: but well worthy of his wife to be
deceived. The stature of the Lady Lucres was more higher than the other. Her he
are plenteous and like unto the goulde wyre, which hanged not down behind
her, after the manner and custom of maidens: but in goulde and stone she had
enclosed it, her forhed high of semelye space, without wrynkell, her brows
bente, facyoned wythfe we he ares, by due space divided, her eyne shynyng with
such bryghtnes that like as the son, they overcame the behoulders lokyng:
with those she might whom she would, flee (and slain) when she would reuyue.
Strayt as thriede was her noose, and by even division parted, her fair chekes,
nothing was more amiable, then these chekes nor nothing more delectable to
behold, wherein (when she did laughe) appeared two proper pyties, why^^^ no man
did se, that wished not to have kyssed. Her mouth small and comely, her lyppes
of coral color, handsome to hyte on her small tethe, well set in order, seemed
Cristal through which the quiuering tongue did send forth (not words) but most
pleasant armony. What shall I she we the beautye of her chynne, or the
whytenesse of her neck? Nothing was in that body not too be praised as the
outward aparaunces showed token of that that was inward, no man beheld her
that did not envy her husband, she was in speech as the fame is, that the
mother of Graccus was, or the daughter of Hortentius. Nothing was more sweter,
nor soberer than her talcke. She pretended not (as does many) honestye by heavy
countenance: but with merry vysage, showed her sobernes, not fearful, nor over
he ardye: but under d^ed (...), she cared in a woman's heart Her apparel was
diverse, she wanted nether broches, borders, gyrdels, nor rings. The
abilimentes of her head, was sumptuouse, many pearls, many dyamantes, were on
her fyngers and in her borders. I thyncke the day that the Greek Menelaus
feested Paris. Helen was no fayrer: Nor Adromaches no more gorgeus when she
was married unto Hector. And among those, was Katheryne of Perusia, that
shortelye aftere dyed, in whose funerals the Emperor was prefounte (and
though he were but a child) made her Son knight, at her sepulcher, and of
her the beautye was al so meruelouse: but nothing so great, as of Lucres.

Her did the Emperor Sigismonde, and all othere, praise and behold, but one
among them, more than enough was set upon here. Eurialus of the contre of
Francony, whom neither shap nor richesse caused to be vnmere to love, he was
of the age of two and thyrty years, not very high of stature, but of gladsome
and pleasant facion, with noble eyne, his chekes ruddy and fair, as the white
lilies among the purple roses, his other members (as who says) with a
statelynes of shape correspondent to his stature. The other courtiers by long
w^^^^, (...) poor. He besides his own substance, by famylyarytie with the
Emperor, received daily rewards. He was more and more gorgeouse in syghte
of men, and led a great train of servants after him, and he had such
a horse (as the tale reports) as Mennon had, when he came to Troy. Nothing
he wanted to provoke the same hete of the mind, called love, but only ydlenes
Yet, youth lust, and the glad goods of fortune, with which things he was
well (...) overcame him out of his own power. Eurialus, as soon as he had seen
Lucres, he brent in the love of the Lady, and fyxyng his eyes in her face,
never thought he to have seen enough, yet loved he not in vain, it is a
wounderouse thing, there were many goodly young men but Lucres had only chosen
this, there were many goodly women: but Eurialus had chosen her only.
Nevertheless, not at that time knew Lucres the fame of Curialus toward her,
nor he hers, but each one of them thought to have loved in vain.

THe ceremonies unto the Emperor finished, she returned whom, hoole vowed
unto Eurialus, and Eurialus clean given unto Lucres, remains. Who now should
marvel of the rale of Piramys and Thysbe? betwyxte whom, both acquayntaunce
and neyghbourhode might be enter of their love, and (...) time grew their
love. These lovers Eurialus and Lucres, never saw nor heard before either of
othere, he a Franconyen, and she a Tuskan, nor in these busenes they occupied
not their tongues: but it was all done with eye ne, sythens that the one so
pleased thee other. Lucres then wounded with grievous care, and taken with thee
blind fire, forgetting all ready that she is married, hates her husband,
and with wounds nouryshynge the wound, holds fyxed in her breast the
countenance and face of Eurialus, nor gives no manner reast unto her lymmes,
and with her self says, I wot not what lets me that I can no more
company with my husband, nothing delyteth (...) his (...) hynge pleases me
his kysses his words anoye me so stands always before mine eyes the image of
the stranger that to day was next unto the Emperor. Cast halas, oh
unhappy, out of my chaste breast that conceived stames if thou may, if I
might, halas, I should not be as I am, evil at ease. A new kind of strength
against my will draws me, my desire and my reason meueth me dyuerslye, I know
the best, and the worste I follow. Oh Noble citezen, what have thou to do with
an unknown man? why brennest thou in a strangers love? why seek thou thy
lust in a straung country? if thy husband loves the thine own country may
give the that thou love. Oh, but what a manner of face has he? what woman
would not be meaued with his beauty, youth noblenes, and virtue? surely I a^,
and without his help I despair, God grant us better. Shall I betray halas,
the chaste spousels. and betake me too a stranger, I wotte not whence? which
when he has abused me, shall depart, and shall be an others, and so leave me
be hynde, but by his countenance, it is not like to be so, and the noblenes of
his mind seameth not to be such, nor so pretends not the grace of his beuty
that I should fere disceyt or his forgetting of love. And he shall promise
aforehande assured, why do I dread? I shall apply it without ferther abroad,
parde, I am so fair that he will no less desire me, than I him, he shall be
mine for ever, if ones I may receive him to my kysses. How many do woo me
where so ever I go? how many ryuals do watch before my door? I shall entende to
love, either he shall tarry here, or at his departing carry me with him. Shall I
than forsake my mo thee, my husband, and my countr^ (...) is (...) ward and
always against mine appetites my husband I had rather want, than have, my
country is there as I delight to dwell, but shall I so lease my fame? why not?
what have I to do with men's words which I shall not here? Nothing shall
he dare, that fears the threatnyng of fame, many other have don the same.
Helena would be rauyshed. Paris carried he not away against her will. What
shall I tell of Diana or Medea? no man blames the fauter that fauteth with many.
Thus said Lucres nor within his breaste^ nouryshed Eurialus no less flames.

IN the mid way, betwixt the emperors court, and Eurialus loging was Lucreses
house, and Eurialus might not go unto ye palace, but showing her self out of
the high windows, was in his ein but always Lucres blusshed, when she saw
Eurialus, which thing gave unto the Emperor knowledge of the love. For as by
custom he used to ride here and there, passing often yt way, he saw the woman
change countenance by Eurialus coming, which was as next unto him as Mecena
to Detauian to who^ the Emperor, loking aside, said doste thou bren women on
this facion Eurialus? that woman surely loves the, and ones in manner as though
he had envied his love, when he came before Lucres house, he put Eurialus
cappe over his eyne, thou shalt not se quod he that that thou love, I will
myself use that syghte. Eurialus answered, sir what means (...)? I (...) to
do with her, but take heed what ye do, least ye bring suspecte in them
that be here about us. Eurialus was mounted upon an high rayned courier, with
a small head, whose short belly and fair hear caused him to show goodlye, well
breasted, lusty, and courageous so that herynge the trumpet he could no where
reast. he received the fury of the noise, his fair mane honge upon the right
side, and the ground resowned, beten with his foot, and not much unlike him
was his master, when he had espied Lucres who being alone, as soon as she
had seen him, could neither temper the flame, nor her self so the un happy
Lucres did burn. In mean houses dwells chastytie, and only poverty uses
good affection, and chastity that haunteth small cotages, knows not the
policies, for rich men, who that haboundeth in prosperity lightlye desires
unaccustomed things, fires lust, companyon to fortune has chosen delycate
houses and statelye mancions. Lucres, that oftentimes beholding Eurialus
passing by, might not assuage her ardaunte desire, busely thinckynge to whom
she might her self discover, for who that secreatlye brenneth, more grievously
suffers. There was among the servants of her husband, one zosias an Almayne
old and faithful to his master: whom he had long served, very honestlye,
him does she go unto, trusting more to the nacyon than to the man.

THe Emperor accompanied with many Noble men, went solacinge through the
town, and even now did he pass by the house of Lucres who^ wha^ she knew yt
Eurialus was there: Com hither quod she zosias I would speak with the, look
hear out of the wyndowe, where in the world is there any youth like this,
see thou how vpryghte and fair spredde shoulders they have? behoulde their
bushes and well kempte hears. Oh what faces, what fair necks.

What noble hearts their countenaunces does pretend this is an other kind of
people than our Country does bread, they seem Gods or of heavenly kind.
O that fortune had given me an husband of one of these, if mine eyene had
not seen them, I would never have believed the; if thou had could me of
them. Yet the fame is that the Almaynes excels all other people, and surely
I believe that the cold gives to them great whytenes, the countries so
drawing toward the North. But dooest thou know any of them. Yea many quod
zosias. Than quod Lucres, Eurialus the Franconien. dooste thou know him? Ye as
mine own self says zosias, but why doste thou ask? I shall tell the quod
she. I know it shall not be disclosed, this hoope has thy goodness given me.

Among all them that are about the Emperor, none pleases me like him. In him
my mind is meaned. I wotte not with what flames I burn, I can neither
forgette him, nor yet my self apease, except that I may make my self
acquaynted with him. Go therefore I beseech the zosias, seek Eurialus, tell him
I love him, nothing else I desire of thee, and yet this shalt thou not do in
vain. What is this quod zosias? shall I either do such outrage, or ones think
it Madame? shall I betraye my Master? shall I now old begin too deceive,
which I have hated in my youth? Rather most Noble Lady of this town cast
fourth the wicked furoure out of thy chaste breast follow not thy cruel hoope,
but quench the fire. He does not paynfullye put back love, that resysteth
the first assautes, but he that the sweet ill flattering does nouryshe,
gives him to the bondage of a right hard and cruel master nor when he
would, may not forsake the yocke, which if thy husband should know, halas
under what facyon would he torments the? no love can long lie hyddene. Houlde
thy peace quod Lucres, there is no fear at all, nothing he fereth that fears
not death. I am content to suffer it what soever happens, what opinion dooste
thou houlde? Oh unhappy quod zosias, thou shalt shame thy house, and only
of all thy kynne thou shalt be adulteress, thynkeste, thynkest thou the
dead can be secreate. A thousand eyne are about thee. Thy mother, if she do
according, shall not suffer thy outrage to be preuye, not thy husband, not
thy Cousyns, not thy maidens, ye, and though thy servants would hold their
peace, the bestes would speak it, the dogs the poostes, and the marble
stones, and though thou hyde all, thou can not hyde it from God, that sees
all. Understand that pain is present unto a Gyltye thought, and the mind,
filled with offense, fears him self. Faith is denied in great crimes.
Assuage I beseech the, the flames of wicked love, fear too mengle strange
makes in thy husbands bed, I know quod she it is according as thou sayste,
but the rage makes me follow the worse. My mind knows how I fall hedlyng,
but furour has ouercom, and reigns and over all my (...) rules love. I am
determined to follow the commandment of love, ouermuche much alas have I
wreflied in vain: if thou have pity on me, carye my message. Full he auye was
zosias with this word, and said to her thus, for these hoore hears on my
head, by age, and for the faithful service that I have done unto thy kynne,
humblye I besche the leave this furour and help thy self, a great part of
health, is to will to be healed. To whom says Lucres all shame has not
forsaken my mind, I will obey the zosia, in the love that can not be hyd,
only the exchuyng of this ill is by death to prevent the offense. zosias
affeared with this saying moderate quod he my Lady, the rage of thy
unbridled mind, tempere thy thought, now art thou worthy life, when thou
iudgest thyselfe worthy of death I am determined quod Lucres to dye.
Collatinus wife the fault committed, venged with aswearde. I more honestlye
shall prevent it, I study but the kind of my death, a cord, swearde, fall,
or poysone, shall revenge chastity, one of the ese. I shall assaye, I will not
suffer the quod zosias, quod Lucres, who that determyneth to dye, can not be
let. Perria, at the death of Brutus, when weapon was taken from her, did eat
hot coals. If the furoure be so froward in thy mind quod zosias, thy life
is rather to be socoured, than thy fame, deceytfull is fame that to the ill,
better and to the good worser, is often given. Let us assay this Eurialus, and
let us intend to love, the labor shall be mine, and as I think, I shall
bring it to effect.

WIth these words the kindled thought he enflamed, and gave hoope to the
doubtefull mind, but his mind was not to dee as he said, he sought to
defer the mind of the woman, to aswage the desire, as oftentimes time
quenches flames and sufferannce heals diseases. zosias went with falls trust
to drive her forth till the Emperor should depart, or she should change
her mind, least if he had denied it, another messanger should have been
found, or else the woman should have slain her self, oftentimes therefore he
feigned him self to goo and comme, and that he rejoiced in her love, and sought
a convenient time that they might talk together, sometime that he could not
speak with him, some time he sought to be sent out of the town, and till
his return deferred her glad days, so, many days he did feed the sick
mind, and because he should not lie in all things, once only he brake unto
Eurialus, saying. O how thou art here beloved, yet when he asked what that
mente, he answered not. But Eurialus, stryken with the secret dart of Cupido,
gave no rest nor sleep to his lymmes, the fire so crepte in his veins and
utterly wasted his marye: yet knew he not zosia, nor thought him to be the
messenger of Lucres, so have we all less hope then desire. He when he saw him
self burn, a great while with this wisdom wondered, and under this facyon
oftentimes blamed him self. Lo Eurialus, thou know what the rage of love
is, long playntes, and short laughters, few joys, and many dreades,
always he dies, and is never dead that loves. What dooste thou meddle in
vain: at last quod he, all for naught. O wretch, why strive I against love?
May not I do that Julius that Alexander, that Hanybal did? and these were
worthy warryoures. Look desydes upon Pocies, Vngyll drawn up by a roape,
honge in the mydwaye to the wyndowe, trusting to have enbraced his love. If
any man will excuse the Poet, as a follower of a more dissolute life, what
shall we say of Philosophers, maistres of learning, and rulers of good living.
A woman did ride Aristotle like a horse, and ruled him with a bridle and
spurred him. It is not true that is said commonly honor and love accord not
together. The Emperoures power is equal with the goods, and who is a greater
lover then he? They say that Hercules that was strongest of all men, and of
the race of Gods the disroyle of the lion and his quyuere laid a part,
took in hand a rock, and trymmed rings for his fyngers, and set in order
his rudde busshe, and with his hand, wherewyth he wonted too carye a mace, by
tyrlynge of a spyndell he drew a threde, it is a natural passion. Birds are
brent with this fire. The turtull and the dove does love. What shall I say of
beasts? The horse meueth battle forloue. The fearful heart seeks to fight,
and by beleuinge shows his furoure The fires Tegre, and the cruel Boore,
wheftyng his teathe, does use it. And the Lions of Libia set up their roughe
manes, when love moves. The monstures of the sea do feel this heat, nothing
is free, ne nothing unto love denied. Hate gives place unto it. If styrred the
fyers flames of youth, and unto weryage itreuoketh the dead heat, and strikes
the breasts of maidens with a brennynge fire. Why then do I strive against
the laws of love? Love overcomes all thing, and let us give place unto him:
When these things were concluded, he seeks a (...) too whom he might take
her letters to carye to her. Nisus was his faythefull fellow, and understood
much in such matters. He takes the busynes in hand, and hyreth a woman to
whom the letters were taken, written as follows.

Eurialus unto Lucres.
I Would send the greatynge and health with my letters if I had any my self,
but surely, both of my health and life, the hope hangs in my hands. More
than myself I love thee, and I ween it is not unknown unto thee, my face
often moysted with tears, may show token of my wounded breaste, and the
syghtes which in thy presence I have cast fourth. Take it well I beseech the
that I discouere me unto the, thy beautye has takenne me and the grace of
godly head, wherein thou passest all othere, houldeth me, what love mente unto
now I never knew, but thou haste subdued me too thy power of thy desire,
long did I strive (I confess) to escape so violente a master, but thy
bryghtnesse has overcome mine endeavor, the beamys of thine eyne passing
the son, has over come me. I am takenne and am no moore mine own, the use
of meat and drink thou take fro me, contynually I the love, the I desire,
the I call, thee I awayte, thee I think on, the I trust in, and with thee I
delight me, thine is my mind, and with the it is hole. Thou only may save
me, thou only may lose me, the one of these choose, and what thou
intendest, write it unto me. Be no more hard in thy words in answering me,
than thou was with thine eyne in bynedynge me. It is no great thing that I
ask. To speak conuenyentlye with the I ask, this only desires my letters.
That that I write, I may say before the, this if thou grant me, I live, and
well hap I live, if not thou sseest my heart that the more then me loves. I
recommend me unto thy good grace, and to the trust that I have in the. And
thus fare well the delight and resydue of my life.


These letters sealed, when the woman had received, hastelye she went unto
Lucres, and fine dynge her alone, said unto her thus. The most Noble of the
Emperoures Court, thy lover sends the these letters, and prays the
instantlye to take him unto thy grace. This woman was noted for a baude, and
that knew Lucres and took it very displeasauntlye to have a naughtye womanne
sent unto her, and to her she said, what madness has meued the to come to
my presence? art thou so boulde to enter the houses of noble menn? dare thou
provoke great ladies to violate sacred marriage? ska^t can I houlde my hands
from thy ear? bryngest thou letters unto me? speak thou unto me? dare
thou look me in mi face? If I regarded not more what becomes me, thanne what
thou deseruest, I should so order the that thou should after this day never
carye more letters of love, enter out of my syghte abominable queen, and take
thy letters with the, yea rather give them me, that I may cast them in the
fire and snatchynge the paper from her, tare it in peaces and trod under her
fete, spyttynge at it, cast it in the ashes so should thy self be punyshed,
baud quod she more worthy the fire, than thy life pycke the hence shortly
least that my husband, finedynge the hear give the that that I remytte unto
the, and while thou lyuest, never come in my syghte. Another would have been
afraid, but she well acquaynted with the manners of women, thought to her self,
now would thou most, when thou show most the contrary, and said
unto her forgive me madame, I thought I had not done a mysse, and that it
should have stand with thy pleasure, if it be otherwise, pardone mine
ignorance, if thou will not that I return unto the, I shall obey thy
commandment, but take thou heed what a lover thou forsakest, and with
these words departed from her, and when she had found Eurialus: be of
good conforte quod she thou lover, the woman loves more the, then she is
loved, but now it is was no time to write unto the, I found her sad, but when
I named the, and gave her thy letters, she made good countenance, and kyssed
the paper a thousand times doubt not, thou shalt shortly have an aunsweare,
and thus the old woman departing, she was well ware no more to be found
least she had suffered for her lyinge. Truly Lucres, after the woman was
departed sought up the pieces of the lettre, and set each in their place,
and joined so the torn words, that she made it legeable which when she
had read it a thousand times, a thousand times she kyssed it, and at the
last wrapped it in a fair napkyn, and put it among her Iuels, and
remembryng now this word, now that word, continuallye she sooked in more
love, and determined too write to Eurialus, and sent her lettere on this
fashyonen, dyted.

Lucres to Euriales.
O Eurialus leave to hope, after that thou canste not attain, leave to bear me
with thy letters and messangers, thyncke not that I am of that sort that sell
them selves, I am not she that thou take me for nor unto whom thou should
send a bawd, seek for thy lust anothere. No affeccione but chastity shall
follow, with othere do as the likes, but of me ask nothing, for be thou
sure I am unmeet for the. Farewell. This letter (though it seemed unto Eurialus
very hard, and contrary to the womannes words) yet did show him the redye
way how too send his letters, for he doubted not to trust, whom she
trusted, but the ignorance of the Italien toungue combred him, therefore with
busye study he learned it and because love made him diligent, he was in short
while cunning, and himself alone endited his letters, which before he was
wont to borowe, when he should write any thing in Italien. He answered
than to Lucres, that she should not be dyspleased with him, because he sent an
dishonest womanne to her, sythen he as a stranger knew it not, and could use
none other messangere. The cause of his sendyng was his love, desiringe no
dishonestye, he believed her very honest and chaste, and so much more to be
beloved, and that dishonest womenne, and over lyberall of their honor he did
not only not love: but also greatly hate, for chastitye, lost, nothing is
in a womanne to be praised, for beautye is a delectable pleasure, and a frail,
and naught to be esteemed without honestye, and that she that honestye
wynneth with beauty, passes in both gifts, and that therefore he did honor
her, and only he desired to speak with her, that he might by his words
declare his mind, that he could not by his letters. With such manner of
letters he sent her a tokene, not only rich in value, but excellent in the
workmanshyp.


To these letters Lucres thus answered.
I Have received thy letters, nor it is not the womanne now I blame the for.
That thou love me I esteame not greatelye, for thou art neither alone, nor
the first whom they say my beautye has deceived. Many have loved me, and
do love me, but thy labor as well as theyres shall be in vain. I neither can
nor will talk with the and except thou were a swalowe thou canste not find me
alone. The houses be byghe, and the gates be kept. I have takene thy token for
that the facione pleases me, but because I will nothing of thine for naught,
and that it shall not be as a tokene of love, I send the ring, which my
husband gave my mothere, that it may be to the as price of thy Iuels for it
is of no less value than thy gift. Farewell.


TO these letters Eurialus replied. Great comfort were thy letters unto me that
thou co^playnest no more of the womane. But that thou set thy love so
light, greueth me sore for though many do love the, none of their love is so
fervent as mine, but thou beleuest it not, for that I may not speak with the,
but if I might, thou should not wey it so light. Would to God as thou
say, that I might be a swalow, ye, or a less thing, that thou might not
shytte thy wyndowe against me, but my most grefe is not that thou can not, but
that thou wylt not. Ah my Lucres, what means that thou wylt not, if thou
might would thou not speak with me that am a^l thine? and that naught
desires so much as to please the. If thou bydde me goo into the fire, I shall
sooner obey then thou shalt command. Send me word I beseech the, that if
thou might thy will were good. Give me not death with thy words, that may
give life unto me with thine eyene. If thou will not speak with me because
thou maiste not, I am content, but change that word I pray the that say
my labor shall be in vain, God forbid in the such crueltye. Be I beseech
the more genteller to thy very lover, if thou continue so, thou shalt s^ee
me, and be thou sure, sooner thou with a word, then another with asworde. I
ask, thou have none excuse, no man can forbid the that, say thou love me,
and I am happy that my tokene remains with the, how soever it be I am glad
of it, it shall sometime remember the of my love, but it was to simple, and
that that I send the now is less, but refuse not thou that thy lover sends
the, I shall have out of my country daily better when they come, thou shall not
lack them. Thy ring shall never part from my finger, and instead of the I
shall moist it with continual kysses. Farewell my health, and in that thou may
healpe me.

At the last after many wrytings and answers Lucres sent him such a letter.


Lucres to Eurialus.
I Would feign Eurialus do the pleasure, and as thou desyrest, reward the with
my love, for that asks thy Nobleness, and thy condycyons deserves it, that
thou should not love in vain, besides thy beauty and goodlye face but it is
not for me to love the. I know my self, if I begin to love I shall neither
keep measure nor rule. Thou canste not long be hear, and if I fall unto the,
I can not lack the, thou would not take me with thee and I surely would
not long tarry behind the. Many examples do meue to refuse a strangers
love. Jason that wanne the golden flece by Mede as council, forsook her. These
us had been cast to the Minaturs had not the council of Adriana healped him,
yet did he leave her behind him in an Island. What became on the unhappy Dido.
that received the wanderyng Ene as Was not her love her death? I know what
pearyll it is to receive a strangers love, nor I will not put me into such
hasardes. You men are of more stronger mind, and sooner can quench the fire.
A womanne when she begins to love, only by death makes an end. Women
rage, they do not love, and except they be answered with love, nothing is
more terryble, after the fire be kyndled, we neither regard fame nor life. The
only remeadye is the obtaynyng of the lover, for that that we most lack,
we most desire Nor we fear no danger for our appetites. I than since am
married, and unto a noble rich man, am determined too exclude all loves, and
specyallye thine, which can not be contynual least I be noted as Philis or
Sapho. Therefore I desire the no more to ask my love, and little by little to
assuage and quench thine, for it is more easy to men then to women, nor thou
if thou love me, as thou say, would not desire that that should be my
destruction. For thy token I send the a cross of gold, set with pearls,
which though it be little, is of some value. Farewell.

Eurialus to this letter held not his peace, but as he was with the new
writing kyndeled, so took he the pen in hand, and under this form
following endyted a letter.


Eurialus unto Lucres.
Honor and health be unto my dear heart Lucres she that gives me health with
her letters, though they be meddled somewhat with galle, yet I trust when thou
haste heard mine thou shall withdraw it. Thy letters are come to my hands
sealed, which I have red oftentimes and kyssed as often. But it seems to me ane
another thing than thy mind would. Thou desire me to leave to love, because
it is not mete for the to follow a strangers love, bryngyng examples of such
that has been so deceived (so eloquently) that I must rather wonder of the,
then forget the. Who would then leave to love, when he sees such wit and
learning in his maystres? If thou would have swaged my love thou should not
have showed thine eloquence, for that it is not too quench the fire, but too
make it rather flame, the more I read it, the more I burned, seeing thy beauty
and honesty so joined, with learning but it is in vain to desire me to leave to
love the. Desire the hills too be come plain, and the ryuers to return
into the sprynges. For as well may I leave to love, as the son his course. If
the high mountains may want snowes, or the sea fishes, if the forestes may
want Dear, then may Eurialus forget the. Men are not so prone as thou wenest
Lucres, to quench their desires, for that that thou geuest unto our kind,
men do ascribe it unto youres, but I will not undertake that to debate, to that
must I answer which touches me near, for the deceytes of other, thou
bryngest in examples whereby thou will not reward me with thy love. But more
are too be brought my Lucres, whom womenne has deceived Troylus by Cresyde.
Deiphus by Helena. And Circes by her enchauncementes deceived her lovers, But
it were not according, by the deeds of a few, to judge all the rest. Should
thou for a certain ill man abhor and accuse all men? Or I for many ill
women, hate all the rest? nay, rather let us take other examples, as was of
Anthonius and Cleopatra, and of other whom the shortness of my letters lets
to reherce, but it is red that the Greeks, retournynge from Troy, have been
holden by strangers loves, nor never have come to their countries, but tarried
with their loves, content rather too want their friends, their houses,
their reygnes, and othere dear things of their country, than to forsake
their Ladies. This I beseech the my Lucres, remember and note those few things
that be against our love. So do I love the, to love the always, and ever to
be thine. Nor call me no stranger, I pray the, for I am rathere of this
contrye, than he that is borne hear, sythens he is but by chance and I by
mine own choice, no country is mine, but where thou art. And though I
depart at any time, my return shall be short, nor I shall not return at
all into my country, but too set ordere in my busynesses, that I may dwell
long with thee, wherefore, occasyon may be found sone enough. The Emperor
has much to do in these parties the charge whereof I will sue to have, sometime
as ambassatoure, sometime as commyssyoner, and he must have a lieuetenaunt in
Strucia, and that will I obtain. Doubt not my delight, my heart, and my only
trust. If I may live yet pitye thy lover that melts like snow before the.
Sone consider my trauayles, and now at last set an end to my torments, why
punyshest thou me so long I wonder of my self, how I have suffered so many
euyles, how I have waked so many nyghtes, how I have forborne my mefe and my
drink so long behold how lene I am, and how pale, a small thing is it that
holds the life within my body, if I had slain thy Parents or thy
children, thou could punyshe me no sorer, if thou so handle me for that I
love the, what shall thou do to them that have offended the Ah my Lucres, my
Lady, my health, and my socoure take me unto thy grace, and at last write
unto me that I am thy beloved, nothing I would elsse, but that I might say
I am thy Servant. Pardye boothe Kings and Emperoures love their faythefull
servants, nor the Gods disdain not to know them that loves them.
Farewell my trust and my dread.

Like as a tower craked wythinne, sowndynge outward impreuyble, if a piece of
ordinance be shot against it, furthwith it rent in pieces: So was Lucres
overcome with Eurialus words, for after she had perceived the diligence of the
lover, her dissembled love she declared with such letters.


Lucres to Eurialus.
I May no more Eurialus resyste thy requests, nor longer wythhold my love
from the. I am overcome, unhappy womane, by thy letters, which if thou
obseruest not, according to thy writing, you shall be of al perjured traitors,
the worst. It is easy to deceive a woman, but so much, is it the more shameful,
now that I am come into thy love, and as a woman, can consider but little, thou
that art a man, take charge both of thy self and of me. Thine I am, and thy
faith I follow, and thine would I not be, except it were for ever. Fare well the
stay and leader of my life. After this were many letters written on both
parties, and Eurialus wrote not so vehementlye, as Lucres did answer
fervently, and that had both one desire of their metinge, but it seamed
heard, and almooste impossible, since the eyne of every body did behoulde
Lucres, which never went forth alone, nor wanted a keeper, Nor Argus never
kept Iunos Cow so dilygentlye as Menelaus caused Lucres to be kept This vice
is of propertye to the Italyens, too shut up their wives as their treasoure
and on my faith (to my iudgmente) too little purpose, for the most part of
women be of this sort, that most they desire, that most to them is denied,
and when thou would, they will not, and when thou would not, they would,
and if they have the brydell at lybertye, less they offend so that it is as
easy to keep a woman against her will as a stock of flies in the heat of
the son, except she be of her self chaste. In vain does the husband set
kepers over her, for who shall keep those keepers. She is craftye, and at them
lyghtlye she begins and when she takes a fantasye, she is unreasonable,
and like an unbridled mule, Lucres has a brother in law he carried her
letters, and was of Council in her love with him she had appointed to shut
preuelye Eurialus in his house, and he dwelled within his stepmother, that was
Lucres mother, whom Lucres did oftentimes visit, and was also of her of
tentymes vysyted, for they dwelte not far a sonder. Now this was the order
of it, Eurialus should be shut in the parlere, and after the mother was gonne
to the church, Lucres should come as it were to speak with her, and not
finedyng her, should tarry for her return, in the mean time she should be
with Eurialus, this should be within two days, but these two days were two
years to the lovers for too them that hope well, the hours be long, and too
them that trust little, they be as short, but fortune followed not their
desires. The mother mystrusted, and at that day when she went forth, shut her
son in law out, which brought to Eurialus the heavy news, to whom the
displeasoure was no less, then too Lucres, which when he saw her craft
perceived, let us go quod she another way to work, yet shall not my mother
let my appetyte. One Pandalus was her husbands consyn, whom she had also
made preuy of her secreates, for the flamynge mind might no where rest. She
aduertysed Eurialus to speak with him, for he was trusty, and could find
well a mean for their meting but Eurialus thought it not sure to trust him,
whom he saw always with him. Menelaus fearyng thereby deceyte. In taking
deliberatyon, he was sent by the Emperor to Rome, to determyne with the
Pope for his Coronacyon, which was both unto him and her grievous, but it
must be obeyed, so was his Iourneye two months long. In the mean time
Lucres kept here house, shut up her wyndowes, put on sad apparel, and
no where went she fourth, every body marueled, and knew not the cause,
sythen the wyndowes of the town showed them self, and they of the house
thought them self in darckenesse, as though they had wanted the son,
seeing her often on her bed, and never merye, thought it syckenes, and sought
all remedies that might be, but she never neither laughed nor came out of her
chambere, till time she knew that Eurialus was comme to the presence of the
Emperor, for than, as waked out of a steape, she laid aparte her sad
clothes, and dressed with her former gorge ousnes, opened her wyndowes gladlye
lokynge for him, whom when the Emperor saw, deny no more quod he Eurialus,
the matter is per ceyued, never man in thy absence might see Lucres now that
thou art come, we may se the bryghte morning, what measure is in love? it can
not be cloked nor hydden with hemmes. Ye mock sir quod Eurialus, and find
your laughter at me, I know not what it means, the nayhynge of your horses
has perauenture wakened her, and when he had said, preuelye he beheld
Lucres and fyxed fast his eyne in here is, and that was their first salutacion
after his return. Shortly after Nisus Eurialus trusty friend diligently
pursuyng his friends cause, found a Tavern, which behind Menelaus house had
a wyndowe toward Lucres chamber. He makes the Tauerner his friend, and when
he had void the place brings thither Eurialus, saying; out of this
wyndowe may thou speak with Lucres, betwyxte booth houses was a dark canel,
which no man came to deuydynge Lucres wyndow from the chamber, by the space
of three else. Here sat the lover awaytynge if by, chance he might see her
and he was not deceived, for at last she came to the wyndowe, and lokyng hers
and there, what do thou quod Eurialus, the nouryse of my lyefe, whether
tournest thou thine eyne, my dear heart? hither turn them I pray the, soke
hither my health, behold thine Eurialus is here, I my self am here. Art
thou there quod Lucres? Oh my Eurialus, now may I speak with the, and would god
I might embrace the. It shall not need no great busynes quod Eurialus, I shall
set to a ladder, opene thy chamber, to long have we differred the inioinyng
of our love Beware of that quod she my Eurialus if thou love, mi life, he are
is a wyndowe on the right hand, and a very ill neighbor, and the Tauerner
is not too be trusted, that for a little monye would perauenture betraye both
the and me, but let us work otherwise it is enough if hear we may talk
together. But this is death to me says Eurialus, without I might in mine
arms embrace the. In this place did they task long, and at the last reached
each to other tokens upon a read, and Eurialus was no more lyberall in his
gifts, then Lucres was. zosias perceived the craft, and said to him self.
In vain do I resyste the mind of the lovers, and except I provide wisely, my
maystres is undone, and the house shamed for ever of both these ylles, it is
best too wythstande the one, my maystres loves, if it be secret, it makes no
matter, she is blind for love and sees not well what she does. If chastitye
can not be kept, it is enough to hyde the noise, least the hole house be
slaundered, or least there be any murdre done, surely I will go to her, and
healpe her, while I might I did wythstand that no offense should be done, and
because I might not, it is now my part too hyde that that needs will be,
least it be known. Love is an universal rayngnyng mischief, nor none there is
not enfected with this sickness, and he is judged most chaste that is most
secret. And thus thinking with him self, Lucres came out of her chamber,
and zosias meatynge her, said thus. What means it that thou deuysest with me
no more of thy love? and nevertheless Eurialus is beloved of the, take heed
whom thou trustest. The first point of wisdom is, not to love at al. The
next that at the least it be secret, and thou alone without a messanger,
can not do it. In what trust thou may put me in, by long time thou haste
learned, if thou wylt trust me, tell me, for all my most care is lest this
love, if it be known, thou shall suffere, and thy husband most of all. To
this answered Lucres, it is as thou say zosias, and I trust the much, but
me thought I wot not how negligente, and against my desire. Now that thou
offerest thy self, I will use thy diligence, and I fear not too be deceived
of the. Thou know how I burn, and long I may not endure this flambe,
healpe me that we may be together, Eurialus for love languyssheth, and I dye.
Nothing is to us worse, than to let our appetytes, if we may ones mete
together, our love shall be more temperate, and it shall well be hid. God
than and show Eurialus the only way too come to me, if he will within these
four days when the vyllaynes bring in whete disguyse him like a portour, and
clothe him self in sackeclothe, and carye the corn in too the garner. Thou
know my chamber has a back door by the lader, tell all unto Eurialus, and
I shall wait for him and when time is, I shall be alone in my chamber, and when
he is alone, let him put opene the door and come into me. zosias though it
were a high matter fearing a worse, takes in hand the busynes, and fyndyng
Eurialus, appoynteth with him the order of every thing, which he as light
things gladly acepteth, and makes him ready to this messege, and naught
playneth but of long aboade. O insensyble breast of a lover. O blind thought.
O hardye mind and vnfearful heart. What is so vnaccessyble that thou thynkest
not open enough? what way so sharp that the seems not plain? what is so
close that is not too be unclosed? thou set light al dangers, thou find
nothing to hard, vain is the gelousye of husbands against the, neither law
nor fear does hold the, to no shame art thou subject, to the all labors is
but play. Oh love, subduer of all thing, a noble man, derely beloved with the
Emperor, rich, of good age, well learned and of great wit, thou bring in
that case, that purple laid a part, he clothes him self in sack clothe, he
dissembleth his own face, and of a master, he is becomen a seruante and he
that deliciouslye has been nouryshed, now dresseth his sholders for the
burden, and lets him self to hyre for a common portour Oh maruelouse thing
and almost incredible, to see a man, in other things a grave counceller,
among the company of boystrous portoures, pressynge him self among such
rascal people, who will seek a greater charge? This same it is that Ouide
means in his transformacyons, when he tells how women becam beasts,
stones, or trees. That same is it that the noble Poet Virgyll means when he
tells how Circes enchaunted her lovers into beasts, for so fares it by
love, so is the mind of man thereby changed, that little he differreth from a
be ast.


THe morning forsaking the golden bed of Titan, reduced the disired day, and
shortly the son declaring the color of each thing rejoiced the wayter
Eurialus, that thought him the^ happy and fortunate, when he saw him self
among the vile portours, so goes he furthe into the house of Lucres, charged
him self with whete and settinge it in the garner, descended last of the
company, and as he was taught, the door of the chamber then was put too,
he thrust open, and went in, and shutting the door after him, he found
Lucres about sylkworcke and coming toward her, god speed quod he my dear
heart and the only healpe and hoope of my life, Lucres, though she had
appointed this matter, at the first sight, was somewhat abashed, and thought
it had been rather a spyrite, than her lover Eurialus for she could not
well believe that such a man as he would venture such bylles but afterward
in kissing, and embracing she knew well Eurialus, and said. Art thou here
quod she pore portoure, art thou here mine own Eurialus and than she
straynynge him strayter. lookynge in his face, began her words again thus
Alas quod she my dear heart Eurialus, what danger haste thou adventured,
what shall I say now, I perceive I am most dear unto thee, I have made
proof of thy love, and thou shalt never find me noone otherewyse unto the.
God send us only good luck, in our love, and while the spyryte shall rule
my lymmes, noone shall be before thee with Lucres, no. Not my husband if I
call him right: My husband that was given me against my will, whereto my
mind never consented. But now I beseech the my Eurialus, cast away this sack
clothe, and show thee unto me as thou art put away this porters garmente and
lay away these ropes. Let me se my Eurialus, than he cast of the fylthy
apparel, and shone al in gold and purpull, and began to entende busely to the
office of love, when zosias scrapynge at thee door, said take heed ye
lovers, Menelaus seekynge I wot not what, comes hyder hide all thing
preuelye for out, ye can not escape. Than quod Lucres there is by the bed a
dark closette where be Iuels, thou wottest what I wrote unto the, if my
husband came in, while thou were with me, goo thou thythere, there thou may
be sure in the derke, and neither stir nor spytte, Eurialus being in doubt
what he should do, followed the woman's bidding she set open the door and
went to her work. Then came Menelaus, and one Bertus a scryuener with him, to
seek things that belonged to the common weal, which when they were not in
diverse boxes found, they are perauenture quod Menelaus in the closet. Go
Lucres, and fetch a light for to seek here. With this word, Eurialus was sore
afraid and began straight to hate Lucres, and to him self said. Ah fool that
I am. Who caused me too comme hither, but mine own lyghtenesse. I am takenne,
I am ashamed, I shall lease the Emperoures favor, what for favor? I would God
my life were safe. How shall I escape a live? I am sure too dye. Oh vain, and
of all fools most folyshe, I am fallen intoo these breres wylfullye, to
what purpose is thee enioyinge of love, if it be bought so dear? the
pleasures be short and the doloures infinite. Oh if we would endure, these
things for heaven, it is a marvelous folyshnes of men that forsakes light
labors, for long joys and for love, whose joys be comparable to smoke, we
put our selfs into extreme dangers, Loo, myself now shall I be a tale
and example too every body, and know not what end shall becomme of it, if
any good Saint would healpe me hence, never again shall such labor
deceive. O good Lord healpe me hence, and pardon my youth. Remember not mine
ignoraunces, but save me to repent me of this fault. She has not loved me,
but as a dear has takene me in the net, my day is come, no man may healpe
me, but thou good Lord. Often have I heard the deceytes of women, and I could
not eschew it if I escape now there shall never no craft of women deceive me.
But Lucres was all ill combred, that feared as much his health as her own,
and as women's wits is more redye than man's, in sodeyne peryls, had found
a remedy. Come hither quod she husband, here is a casket in this wyndowe,
wherein I have seen you put diverse things of charge let us se if the writing
be thee and runnynge as it were to opene it, ouerthrewe yt into the street, and
as it had been bechaunce, alas quod she, come hither, husband least we lose
any thing the casket is fallen out of the window, go quyckelye, least any
Jewels or wrytynges fall out, go goo for gods sake, why tarry ye? I will
look out that no man take nothing. Se the desceyte of the womanne now
trust them hardely, no man is so circumspecte, that can not be deceived, he
was never kyndlye deceived whom his wife never assayed to deceive, we are often
more fortunate then wise. Menelaus and Bertus abashed with this same ran
both hastily into the street, the house was high after the Italian facion and
many steps down. Whereby Eurialus had space to change and put himself
by her council in to another darcke corner. They when they had gathered the
wrytinges and the jewels, because they found not that that they sought, went
intoo the closette, where they found it, and so bidding her farewell,
departed, and she barred the door. Come forth quod she Eurialus come forth
my dear heart, and the sum of my joys, come the well of my delytes, and
spring of my gladness, all thing is sure, we may talk at lyberty and now is
the place sure for our enbracynges, fortune would have let our kyssynges,
but God has favored our love, and has not forsaken so faithful lovers,
why ^aryest thou? here is thy Lucres, why let thou to embrace her?
Eurialus at the last forsakig high fear, clapseth her with his arms. I in my
life quod he, was I never so fered, but thou art well worthy for whom such
things should be suffered. These kyssynges and sweet enbracynges quod he, no man should have for naught, nor I (too say truth) have not boughte dear
enough so great a pleasure. If after my death I might live, using thy
company, a thousand times would I dye to bye thy enbracinges so oftene. O
how happy and how blessed, is it a vision or is it in deed? do I hold the
in mine arms? or do I dream? surely it is thy self, and the I have. Lucres
was in a light garmente, that without plyghte or wrynkell showed her body as
it was, a fair neck, and the light of her eyne like the bryghte son,
gladsome countenance and a merye face, her chekes like lylyes, medeled with
roses, sweet and sober was her laughing, her breaste large, and the two
pappes semynge apples, gathered in Venus gardayne meued the courage of the
toucher. Eurialus could no longer suffer the spur, but forgetting all fear,
and sobernes laid a part, said unto the woman: Let us now taste of the
fruit of love, he pressed her soore, and she too the contrary resysted,
showing how she cared for her honestye, and that her love desired nothing
but only words and kysses: Unto which Eurialus smiling did answer. It
is known quod he that I am here, or it is not known, if it be known there is
no man that will not Judge the reaste, if it be not known, no more shall
this be, it is thee reward of love, and let me dye rather than want that O
but is offense quod Lucres. It is offense quod Eurialus not to use pleasure
when thou may, should I forsake such occasion granted and desired so
greatly? and taking her garmente. The stryuynge woman that would not be
ouercomen, he overcame Yet did he not quench thee desire of Venus: but rather
provoked a greater thyrste, but Eurialus fearyng a further danger, after he
had a little banqueted, departed, somthyng against her will and mind, and no
man suspected, because he was as one of thee portoures. As he went through the
street, Eurialus won derynge on him self, said. Oh if the Emperor should
now mete with me, and know me. What suspecte would this garmente bring him
in? how would he mock me. I should be a tale for every body, and ever a
laughter for him. Never would he leave me, till time that he knew all, and
neades tell him I must what this apparel means, but I would say that it
were for another woman than this, for perauenture he loves her, and also it
were not mete too declare him my love, for I would never so betray Lucres,
that has both received and saved me and thus as he thought he saw Nisus,
Achates, and Plinius, and gothe before and was not known of them till he came
home, whereas chaungynge his clothes, under color of other names, he tells
the chance of the mattere, and as he remembers the fear and the Joy so did
he in telling fear and rejoice, and in the mids of his fear, ah ^ole that I
was quod he, I trusted a woman with my head: so was I not councelled of my
fathere, when he taught me to trust the faith of no woman, for that they wexe
cruel, deceytfull, chaungeable, and full of diverse passions, and I ill
remembering the lesson, put my life in a woman's hands, what if any man had
known me, when I was charged with wheat? what shame what slander had both
I and mine had for ever? The Emperor would have refused me, and as light and
mad brayned, might have esteemed me, what if her husband had found me in the
closet? The civil law is cruel to adulterers, but the furoure of the husband
would have had greater pain, the tone had been but short death: the other,
death with cruel torments but set case that he has favored my life, at
the least he would have bound me, and sent me shamed unto the Emperor. Ye,
though I had escaped his hands because he had no weapon, and I had a
sweard by my side, yet had he a man with him, and weapons honge at hand
upon the wall, and there was many servants in the house, the noise should
have risen and the doors shyt and I should have been handled according. Alas
mad that I was, no wisdom, but chance has delivered me from this danger
sorrow for chance, and it was the ready wit of her. O trusty woman. O wise
lover. O noble and excellent love, why should I not trust unto the? why should
I not trust thy faith, if I had a thousand lives, I durst trust the with
them all, thou art faithful and wise, and wisely thou can love, and healpe
thy lover, who could so sone have the way to avoid them that sought me, as
thou had? than haste saved my life, and I vow it unto thee, the life that I
live, is not mine, but thine, and it shall not be grievous unto me, for the to
lease that by the I have, thou haste the right of my life, and commandment
on my death. O fair breast. O pleasant tongue. O sweet eyes O fresh wit, O
goodly lymmes and well furnyshed, when shall I see you again? when shall I
byte that same coral lyppe, and here the speak within my mouth? shall I
neuere handell again those round breasts? O Achates, it is but little that
thou haste seen in any woman in comparyson to this, the more nearer she is, the
more fayrer she is. Lidia, thee fair wife of Candalus, the King was no
fayrer: I wonder not if he would show her naked unto Satius for to do him
the greater pleasure for on my faith, if I myghts, so would I show thee this
Lady, for else may I not declare unto the her beuty nor thou perceive what joy
I had, but rejoice with me, I beseech the: that my pleasure was greater than
can be expressed with words. Thus talked Eurialus with Achates, and Lucres
with her self said as much, but so much less was her gladness that she
might trust none to show it unto, and unto zosias the durst not for shame tell
al.

IN the mean time a knight called Pacorus, of a noble house foloing the
Emperor, began to love Lucres, and because he was fair and goodli, thought to
be beloved and only rekened the chastitye of the woman to let him. She (as the
custom of Italy is) beheld every body with a lourynge countenance, whether it
were by disceyt or craft, least the true love should appear. Pacorus rages and
can not be in reast till he have felt her mind. The matrones of Scene went often
to visit the chapel of our Lady of Bethlee in. Hither was Lucres come with two
maidens and an old wife. Pacorus followed her with a vyolet with golden leaves
in his hand. in the stalk whereof, he had hid a letter of love, written
in fine letters, and have no maruayle thereof. For Cicero says there was
showed him the hole history of Troy, so fynelye written, that it might all
have been closed in a nut shel. Pacorus offers the violette too Lucres,
recommendynge him unto her, and she refuses it. He desires her instantlye to
take it. Take the flower madame quod the old wife, what fear you? there is no
pearell, it is but a small thing: wherein peradventure ye may do the gentelman
pleasure. She followed her counsel, and took the flower, and when she had
gone a little way, she took it unto the toone of her maidens, and shortelye
after they met with two scholars, which I wot not how lightly obtained the
flower of the maid, and opening the stalk, found the pleasant letter. Now
after the matronnes of Scene, had found the lovers, that the Emperor
brought, and after the Court was come thither, these folk were mocked and
deceived, and little esteemed, for the clatterynge of harneys delyted more these
women then eloquence of learning Here upon grew great envy, and the long
gowns sought always how to let the courtyers. Than when the craft of the
vyolet was known, strayghte was Menelaus gone unto, and desired to read the
letter he being very angry, goes home, blames his wife, and fylleth all the
house with noise. And she to the contrary denies that there is one fault in
her and telling the hole tale, brings the old wife for witness. The
Emperor is gone to, complaynte is made, Pacorus is called for, and he
confesses the faut asks forgeuenes and swears never more to vex Lucres
but right well knew he that Iupyter rather laugheth, then takes angerly the
periuring of lovers and so the more that he was let, the more he follows the
vain flame.

THe winter is come, and the Northwinds had brought down snows ye town falls
on plaing yt wives cast snow balls into the streets, and the young men out of
ye streets into their windows. He are had Pacorus gotten occasion, and had
enclosed in wax an other letter, and puts it in a snow ball, and castyng
it unto Lucres wyndowe who will not say that fortune rules al thing? one
happy hour is more worth to the, than if Mars should recommende the in his
letter too Venus Some say that fortune has no powere in wysemenne, I
grant it too such wise men that only delight in virtue: and sufferynge
pouertye syckenesse, and presonne can thyncke them self blessed, which one
yet I neuere saw, nor never thyncke there was. The commone life of men
neadeth fortunes favor. She, whom she will she auaunceth, and whom she
lysteth, overthrows who hindered Pacorus, but fortune, was it not wyselye
handeled, in a violettes stalk too hide his letters and now again to send
his letter closed in snow would any man say it myghteeb craftyer, so that
if fortune had help he had be judged crafty, and excellently wise, but
contrary chance brought the ball that fell out of her hand too the fire, so
that the snow ones wasted, and the wax melted, the letters appeared, which
both an old womanne that warmed her, and Menelaus being by, did read, and
there began a new noise, which Pacorus did not tarry too excuse, but went
his way. This noise healped Eurialus, so that it is true that has been said:
it is hard defendyng that is dyuerssy assauted. The lovers awayted for the
second marriage, and there was a little strayte lane betwyxte Lucres house and
her neighbors, by the which setting his fete upon each wall, he had not over
hard clymynge to Lucres wyndowe, but this might only he by night. Now must
Menelaus goo into the country and there must he lie all night, which day
was waited for of those two lovers, as it had been a Iubile. The good manne
is gone, and Eurialus, chaungynge his clothes, is come into the lane, there
had Menelaus a stable, wherein by the teaching of zosias, all the evening
he lay hid in the hay, and loo where Dromo came, that was a servant of
Menelaus, and had rule of his horses, to fill the rackes, and hard by
Euriolus side did pulle out hay, and had taken more, and stryken in him with
the forcke, had not zosias he alped, who when he saw thee daungere, brother
quod he give me this work. I shall give hay to the horses, thou in the mean
time, look that our supper be ready, we must be merry while our masters is
forth, our maystres is better fellow, she is merye and liberal, he is
angrye, full of noise, covetous, and hard, we are never well when he is at
home, se I pray the what lanke belyes we have, he is hungry himself to sterue
us for hunger, he will not suffer one moist piece of brown bread to be
lost, but the fragmentes of one day, he keapeth five days after, and the
gobbets of salt fysh and salt eles of one supper, he keeps unto an other, and
marketh the cut chese, least any of it should be stolen. The fool that by
such wretchedness seeks his riches, for nothing is more folysh than to live
pore, for too dye rich, how much are we better with our maystres? that
feeds us not only with veale and kidde, but with hens and birds, and
ple^tye of wine. Go Dromo and make the kytchen smoke, Mary quod Dromo, that
shall be my charge, and sooner shall I lay the tables, thanne rub the horse, I
brought my master into the country to day that thee Devil break his neck,
and never spoke he word unto me, but badde me when I brought home my horses,
to tell my maystres that he would not come home to night but by God quod he,
I praise the zosias that at the last have found fault at my masters
condycions. I had forsaken my master, if my maystres had not given me my
morrow meles as she has, let us not steape to night zosia, but let us
eat and drink till it be day, my master shall not win so much this
month, as we shall waste at one supper. Gladlye did Eurialus here this, and
marked the manners of servants, and thought he was served a like, and when Dromo
was gonne, Eurialus arose, and said, O happy night that through thy healpe
zosia, I shall have that haste brought me hither, and wyselye taken heed that
I was not discovered, and thou shall not see that I shall be unkind. The hour
was come, and the glad Eurialus, that had passed two dangers clame up that
wall, and at the wyndowe went in where all thing was ready, and Lucres by the
fire. She when she saw her lover, clapsed him in her arms, there was
embracyng and kyssyng, and with full sail they follow their lusts and weryed
Venus, now with Ceres, and now with Bachus was refreshed. Alas, how long
business and how short be the pleasures skante had Eurialus one glad hour
and lo where zosias brought word that Menelaus was comme, and marred all the
play: Eurialus makes him ready too depart, Lucres when she had hidden the
banquet, meteth her husband welcommynge him home. Welcome quod she my husband,
by my truth quod she I wened that thou had been lost in husbandrye what
haste thou done in the country thus long? why tariest thou not at home thou
make me sad with thine absence, I fear least thou have some other that
thou love, these husbands be so false to their wives, if thou will that I
shall not mystruste the, never sleep out of my company, For I can sleep no
night without the, but let us suppe here and go to bed, they were than in
the hall, where they used to dyne, and she sought for too have kept him
there till Eurialus had space for to goo his way, for it required sum
leisure, but Menelaus had supped forth, and hasted toward his chamber. Now
on my faith and truth quod Lucres, thou art unkind, why dyddest thou not
rather sup with me, because thou was from hence. I have eaten no meat to day,
and there were here men of the country that brought in marvelous good wine, as
they said and yet I tasted not of it, but now that thou art come let us goo
into the celler I beseech the and taste if the wine be, as they say, and so
having the lantern in her one hand, pulling her husband with the other hand
went into the celler, and so long perced this vessel and that, and supped
with her husband, till she thought that Eurialus was gonne, and so at the
last went with her husband to the evil pleasant bed.

Eurialus in the still of the night, went home. And on the morrow, either for
that it were necessary to take heed or for some ill suspecte: Menelaus walled
up the wyndowe: I think as our Cytezens be suspectuous and full of
conjectures: so did he fear thee commodyte of the place, and would eschew
the occasyon, for though he knew naught, yet wyste he well that she was
much desired, and daily provoked by great requests, and judged a woman's
thought unstable, which has as many minds, as trees has leaves, and that
their kind always is desirous of new things, and seldom love they their
husbands whom they have obtained. Therefore did he follow the: common opinion
of married men: to avoid mysshap. though it come with good luck. So was their
metynge let, and their sendynge of letters also stopped, for the Tauerner
that dwelte behind Lucres house, where as Eurialus was wont to speak with
her, and give her letters: at Menelaus persuasion was put out by the
Aldermen, and only remained the behouldynge of their eyene, and with beckes
the lovers saluted each other, and skante might they use this vttermoeste
point of love, their sorrows were great, and their formentes like the death,
for they could neither forget, nor use their love. While Eurialus doothe study
diligently what auyse he might take in this matter, he remembered Lucres council
which she wrote unto him of Menelaus cousyn Pandalus, and did as these
cunning Phisicians, whose manners is, in dangerous syckenes to give
indyfferente medecins and in extreme to use the last medecynes, rather than
leave the disease incurable, He determined to goo unto Pandalus, and follow that
way that before he had forsaken, and when he had sent for him, called him
into a secret place. Sit down quod he my friend, I must tell the a great
thing that requires such things as be in the, that is dilygence, faith, and
secretnesse. I would err now have showed it the, but I knew the not, now I
do know the, and because thou art an honest faithful man, I love the and
entrete the, so that I knew nothing else, it is enough that thy neygheboures
praise the, and my fellows too, with whom thou haste entered frendshyppe, and
who and of what sort thou art, they have toulde me, of whom I have learned
that thou desyrest my frendshyppe, which I promise now unto the, for thou
art as well worthy mine, as I am thine. Now for because among friends a
thing is done in few words, what I would, I will show the. Thou know
how the kind of man is prone unto love, whether it be virtue or vice, it
reygneth every where, nor no heart there is of flesh that sometime has not felt
the pryckes of love. Thou know that neither the wise Salomone, nor the
strong Sampson has escaped from this passion. Furthermore the nature of a
kyndeled heart and of a folyshe love is this the more it is let, the more I
bourne, with nothing sooner is this disease healed, than with the obtaynynge of
the loved. Many there has been, both in our time and in our elder to whom
their let has been cause of cruel death, and again many after the thing
obtained, have left too rage, nothing is better when love is crepte into the
bones than too give place too thee rage, for who so stryueth against the
tempest, often times suffers wrack and who dryueth with the storm escapes.
This I tell the for that thou shalt know me love, and what for my sake thou
must do, and then what profytte thou shall have thereby, I will show the
all, for now I reaken the as one part of my heart. I love Lucres, and truly
Pandalus it is not by my faut, but by the governance of fortune: in whose
hands is the hole world that we inhabyte. The customs of the country were
unknown to me, I thought your women had felt in their hearts that they
showed with their eyene, and that has deceived me, for I thought Lucres
had loved me, because she beheld me pleasantlye and I again began to love
her, for I thought such a lady was not unmeet to be beloved for love, and yet
did I not know the, nor none of thy kynne. I loved, and wened to have been
loved, who is so stonye hard (being loved) that do the not love (But after I
saw I was deceived (least my love should be vain) with all manner of ways I
assayed too kyndell her with like and like fire, for I bourned, and pyteouslye
wasted and shame and trouble of my mind day and night, did marueloussye
tormente me, and I was so tangled, that with no ways I could escape, and at
the last I continued so long, that the love of us both was like she is
kyndeled, and I burn, and we both pearyshe, nor we se no remedy to our lives,
but only thy healpe, her husband keeps her in his chamber. The waker dragon
did never keep so well the golden steece: nor Cerberus the enter of hell, as
Lucres is kept I know your kynrede, and also I know that ye are noble and
rich, and among the best of this town be loved but who can wythstande
destenye? halas Pandalus it was not by my choice, but by chance, and thus
stands this matter, it is as yet secret but without it be well guyded, it
is like, as God forbid, to bread a great myschefe. I peradventure might
apeace my self, if I went from hence, which though it were grievous unto me,
I would do for your families, if I thought that should healpe, but well I
know her rage, either she would follow me, or else if she were constrained to
tarry, would kill her self, which would be unto your house a perpetual
dishonor. That I sent for you, is for your cause to wythstande these
myscheues, nor there is none other way but that thou will be gouernoure of
our love, that the dissembled fire may be secreate. I recommende, I give, and
I dowe me holy unto the, be diligente in this furoure, least while it be
let, it flame the more, do so much that we may mete together, and so shall
the heat be aslaked, and made more sufferable, thou know the ways of the
house, thou know when the good manne is absent, thou know how too bring
me in, but Menelaus brother must be had out of the way, which wayteth ever
diligently for these inatters, and keeps Lucres in stead of her brother, and
marketh dilygentlye her words, her looks, her countenance, her spyttynges
her coughes, her laughes, and each thing hre consydereth, him must I deceive,
and it cannot be without the. He alpe therefore I beseech the, and when her
husband Menelaus is from home, advertise me, and his brothers that taryeth,
bring them out of the way that he neither take heed to her, nor set none
other kepers, over her, which if thou will undertake, and healpe me as my
trust is in the, all is safe, for thou may pryuelye, while the other be fast
in sleep, let me in, and ease our fur yous love, what profit shall ensue of
this, I think thou understand by the dyscrecyon.

For first thou shalt save the honor of the house, and hyde the love that in
no wise can be publyshed without your shame. Secondlye thou shall save thy
cosen in laws life, and also too Menelaus save a wife, too whom it shall not
be so hurteful that she were mine for one night (no man knowing of it) as if
he should lose her, all the world wonderynge, when she should follow me.
Diverse womenne have followed their lovers, what if she determined to follow me?
what dishonor should it be to your kynne? what mock among people? what shame
as well to all the town as to you? some would peradventure say, put her to
death rather than she should do thus, but woo be unto him that fyleth him
with bludshedding, and reme dies one faut by a greater. Myscheuousnes be not
to be increased but to be lessed, of two good things, we know the best is to
be chosen, and of a good and of an ylle, thee good, and of two ylles, the
least. Every way is dangerous, but this that I show the, is least
peryllous, by which thou shall not only help thine own blood, but also me
that am almoost out of my wit to se Lucres suffer as she does for me: who I
would rather did hate me, than I would entreat the but thus it is and at
this point, and without thy craft, thy wit and thy diligence the ship be
guyded there, remains no hope of health. Help therefore both her and me, and
save thy house from shame, and thyncke not that I will be unkind, thou know
what I may do with the Emperor, and what thou will, I will get the
granted, and this I promise thee on my faith thou shall be an Earl by
patent, and all thy posteritye shall inioye that same title, I commit unto the
both Lucres we, our love and fame, and the honor of thy kynne, I trust unto
thy faith, thou art the arbyte, and al these be in thine hands: Take heed now
what thou doste, for like as thou may save, so may thou spyl.

Pandalus when he heard this, smyled and after a little pause, said (All this
have I known quod he Euri alus, and would God it had not happened, but now
as thou say: it is at that point that I must needs do as thou byddest me:
except I would shame all our kyn and raise a great slander: The woman in deed
brenneth, and has no power over her self, and without I healpe, she will sle
her self with some knife, or break her neck out of some wyndow, neither
cares she for her honor, nor for her life, she has toulde me her desire, I
have blamed her, I have busyed me to quench the flame, and all in vain, she
cares for naught but for the, thou art always in her mind, the she wysheth,
the she desires, and the only she thinks upon, often times calling me by
thy name, so is the womanne changed by love, that she seems not the same.
Halas what pitye and what sorrow, there was none in all the town more chaste
or more wyfer then Lucres. It is a marvelous thing if nature have given love
such law over the minds of men. This dissease must be healped, and with
none other cure, than thou haste showed, I will goo about this busynes, and
when time is, I shall warn thee, nor I seek no reward of the, it is not
the office of an honest manne too ask thank where none is deserved. I do it
to avoid thee same of our house, and if thou take any benefyt thereby I am not
therefore to be rewarded. Yet quod Eurialus for all that I thancke thee, and as
I said, I promise the to cause the to be made Earl, and refuse not hardly this
honor. I refuse it not quod Pandalus, but I would not it should come by this
means, if it comme let it come, I will nothing do by couenaunte, if I
might have done it by unknown too the, that thou might have been with
Lucres, I wol de gladly have done it. Farewell, and thou also quod Eurialus,
now that thou have given me comfort, make feign, find, or do by some
means, that we may be together.

Thou shall praise me quod Pa^dalus, and he departed full glad that he had
entered in Eurialus grace. Hoping to be an Earl, where of he was more
desirous, in as much as he showed least, for there be many men, so women
like, that when they say most nay, they would fayneste, he has gotten by
furtheraunce of love the name of an Earl, and his posteriars shall show for
their noblenes a gylted bull.

NOt long after there was afray in the country among Menelaus husbandmen, and
diverse of them that had drank over much, were slain, wherefore Menelaus must go
forth to set good order in these matters, to who^ Lucres said, husband thou art
heavy and weak, and thy horse goes hard, borowe therefore some ambeling horse.
And when he asked where he might borow any Mary quod Pandalus Eurialus had a
very good one, and sure he will gladly lend him the, if thou will I shall ask
him. Do quod Menelaus, and Eurialus as soon granted as he was desired, taking
it for a good token, and to him self said, if thou leap upon my horse, I
shall do the same unto thy wife. Now the covenant was that at five of the
clock Eurialus should wait in the street, and should hoope well-yf he hard
Pandalus sing: Menelaus was gone, and the cloudy night had covered the heaven,
Lucres tarried her time in her chamber, and Eurialus was before the door, and
tarried the token, but he neither heard him sing nor spytte, the hour was
past, Achates meued him too depart. It was hard to depart, and ymagyned now
one cause now another. Pandalus sang not be cause Menelaus brother was left
there, that sought each corns for fear of deceytes, and waked all the while.
To whom Pandalus said, shall we not go to bed this night, and I am
wondrous slepy, I wonder of the that art a young man, and like an old manne,
too whom drynes takes away sleep, thou never dooste sleep, but before day
when other men do rise. Let us goo to bed to what purpose do we watch:
Let us go quod Agemennon, if thou will, but let us look first to the
doors, if they be well shut for doubt of thieves. And when he was come to the
door, he put to it, now one lock, now another, and bolted it. There was a
great bar of iron that scante two could lift wherwyth the door was never
shut, which when Agamennon could not put to desired healpe. Thou shuttest the
door quod Pandalaus as if the house should be beseged, are we not in a sure
city? we are at lyberty in this town, and quyetnes is come to us all. The
Florentynes our enemies with whom we have war be far hence. If thou dread
enemies, this house can not healpe us. I will this night lift no burdons, my
shoulders ache, and I am sore bruised within, I am not mete for the burden,
therefore lift thou thy self, or let it alone. Well then quod Agamennon it is
enough, and went to bed. Then quod Eurialus, I will tarry here this hour to se
peradventure if any body do appear. Achates that was with Eurialus was weary of
so long taryinge, and preuely cursed Eurialus, which had kept him so long
from sleep. Yet they carried not long after, but they saw Lucres through a
creues, caryinge a light in her hand. Toward whom Eurialus went, and said,
god speed quod he my dear heart Lucres and she being a feared, would have gone
her way, but than remembrynge her self what man art thou quod she that
call me? I thine Eurialus am here quod he, open the door my delight, I have
tarried here half this night. Lucres at the last knew his voice, but because she
feared deceyte, she durst not open till she knew some token that it was he,
and so with great labor she removed the locks, but because there were many
fasteninges to the door that a woman's strength could not undo, she opened it
but half a foot wide. Good enough quod Eurialus, and stretchyng him self at
last gat in and takes her in his arms. Achates watched without. Lucres,
either for fear or for Joy swowmed in Eurialus arms, and her strength
faylynge with pale face seemed al ready dead, but that her pulce and hete
remained. Eurialus with the sodeyne chance affeared, wist not what to ^o, if I
goo hence thought he, the faut of her death shall be in me to leave a womanne in
such danger, if I tarry, Agamennon or some of the house shall come, and than I
am undone. Alas unhappy love that have in the more gal, than honey the bitter
wormewod is no more sour than thou art What dangers have thou already put me
in? with how manidethes have thou thretened mi head? and have thou left me now
too have a woman dye in mine arms? why have thou not rather slain me? why
have thou not torn me with lions. Alas how much had it been that I had dyed in
her lap, than she in my bosom? Love had overcome the man, and regarding not
his own health, tarried with the womanne, and lyftyng up her body all be
moysted with teres kyssed her. Alas Lucres quod he, where art thou become?
where be thine ears? why answerest thou not? why herest thou not? open thine
eyes. I beseech the look upon me, smile on me as thou art wont, thy Eurialus is
hear, he does embrace the, why do thou thus trouble me? I wonder, art thou
gone, or do thou sleep? where shall I seek the? if thou would dye, why
dyddest thou not warn me that I might have dyed with the? if thou will not
hear me, my sword shall strayghte open my side, and we shall boothe dye at
ones. Ah my life, my darlyng, my delight, my only hope, and my hole health,
shall I thus lose the? open thine eyne, lift up thy head, thou art not yet ded,
If ele thou art warm, and thy breathe is yet in the, why doste thou not
speak to me? dooste thou receive me of this sort? do thou call me to such
pastyme? dooste thou gy^e me such a night? Rise I beseech the mydewhart,
look on thy Eurialus, I am here and with that word the flood of his teres
flushed so upon her face, that as with drops of water the woman awaked out
of her sleep, and seeing her lover. Alas quod she Eurialus, where have I ben?
why dyddest thou not suffer me to dye? happelye had I dyed in thy arms, and
would God I might so dye? ear thou should depart the town. Thus talckynge
together, they went into the chamber, where they had such a night, as we
judge the two lovers Paris and Helena had after he had taken her away, and it
was unto them so pleasanut, that they thought Mars and Venus had never none
such, thou art quod Lucres my Canimedes, my Ypolitus, my Diomedes. Thou art
quod Eurialus my Polexena, my emly, ye, and Venus her self, and her mouth and
now her eyene, and now her chekes he kysseth, and some time casting down the
clothes, he saw such beautye as he never before saw. I have found more quod
he than I wened, such a one saw Acteon of Dians, when she bathed her in the
fountain what is moore pleasaunter or more fayrer than these lymmes, now have
I bought them with pearyl, but what thing should I not have suffered for the? O
fair neck, and pleasant breasts, is it you that I touch? is it you that I
have? are ye in my hands? O round lymmes, O sweet body, have I thee in my
arms? Now where does pleasante in the freshness of my joy, that no
displeasure might here after hurt it. Do I hold the or do I dreme? O
pleasant kysses, Oh dear enbracynges, O sweet bytynges, no man lyuinge is
more happy than I, or more blessed.

But alas how swyfte be these hours? Thou spytefull night, why go thou
away? abide Apollo and tarry under the earth, why do thou so sone put thy
horse in to the chair? let them repast, give me this night as thou dyddest to
Alemena, why do thou Aurora leave so sone the bed of Titan, if thou were as
pleasant unto him as Lucres is to me, he would not suffer thee to arise so
earlye. Never saw I so short a night, yet have. I been in Britayne and in
Denmark, thus said Eurialus, and Lucres said no less, nor suffered not one
kiss nor one word to pass unrecompensed. He strayned, and she strayned, and
when they had done they were not wearye, but as Athens, rose from thee
ground stronger, so after battle were they more desirous of war. The
night ended when aurora took from the Ocean her dew here, he departed, and
long after might not return, by the dayelye watch that was put unto her,
but love overcame all thing, and at last they found way for their metynge,
which long while they used.

IN the mean time the Emperor that already was reconciled to Eugenius,
determined to go to Rome. This did Lucres perceive, for what is that ye love
knows not? or who can deceive a lover and therefore

Lucres wrote thus unto Eurialus.
IF mi mind could be wroth toward the, I would now be angrye with the, for that
thou haste dissembled thy departing but it loves the better then me, and may
for no cause be meued against the. Alas my heart, why have thou not told me
of the Emperors departure he makes him ready toward his journey and I know
well you shall not tarry behind, alas what shall become of me, what shall I do
pore woman, where shall I reast, if thou do forsake me, my life lasts not two
days. For these letters therefore moysted with my tears, and for thy
ryghthande, and thy promised faith if ever I have deserved any thing of the,
or if ever thou have had any de lyte by me, have pyty on thy unhappy lover. My
desire is not that thou should tarry but that thou should take me with the,
I will make as I would go in the evening to Bethlem, and take but one old
woman with me. Let two or three of thy servants be there, and by force take me
away. It is no great pain too take one away that would be gone, nor think
it no shame, for Paris the son of a King did likewise, and thou shalt do
no wrong unto my husband, for he shall algates lease me, for if it be not
by thy taking, it shall be by death, but I am sure thou will not be so
cruel to leave me behind too dye, that ever has made more of the than of my
self. Farewell my only trust. To whom Eurialus answered after this facion.


Hitherto have I hid fro the my Lucres my departing, because thou should
not tourmente thee ouermuche before the time, I know thy conditions, and under
what manner thou soroweste, but the Emperor departs not so that he shall not
return, and when we shall return from Rome, this is in our way to our
country, and if so be the Emperor will goo any other way, if I live thou
shalt se me return let God never suffer me to come into my countreye, but
make me wander like Vlyxes, if I come not hither, confort thy self therefore my
dear heart and be of good cheer, be not sad, but rather live merely. Thou
say thy taking away should be the greatest pleasure that could be to
me, it is truth, and greater delight I could not have, than the alwais at my
desire: But I must rather take heed too thy honor than to my lust, for the
faith that thou be rest unto me, byndeth me to give the such faithful
counseyll as should be mete for the. Thou know thou art married into a noble
familye, and haste the name of a right beautyful and chaste Lady, and it is not
only in Italye, but as well in Teutonia, Panonia, Bohemia, and all the worthy
parties, so that if I take the away (beside my shame that for thy sake I set
little by (what dyshonoure should thou do to all thy friends? what sorrow
should thy mother take? what should be then spoken of the? what rumoure should
all the world hear of the? Lo, Lucres that was called more chaste then the
wife of Brutus, and better than Penelope, follows an adulterer, not
remembrynge neither her parents, nor countreye, it is not Lucres, but Ippia,
or Medea that followed Jason. Halas what grefe should it be to me to here such
things of the? Our love is yet secret, there is no man that dysprayseth the.
Thy taking away should mar all, nor thou were not so praised as thou
should then be blamed. But besides our honor, how were it possible that we
should use our love? I serve the Emperor, he has made me rich and of great
power, and I cannot depart from him without the loss of my state, so that if
I should leave him, I could not conuenientlye entertayne the, if I should
contynuallye follow the court, we have no reast, every day we change places.
The Emperor has tarried no where so long as he has done here, and that
because of war, so that if I should carye the about with me, and have the
in my Tent as a follower of the field, what reprefe and shame should it be both
too the and me? For these causes I beseache the my Lucres put away this mind
and remember thy honor, and flattter not rather thy rage than thy self:
Another lover perauenture would otherwise counsel the, and desire the to run
thy way, that he might abuse the as long as he might, nothing regarding what
should befall of it, while he might satifye his appetite, but he were no true
lover that would regard rather his own lust, than thy fame. I council the my
Lucres for the best, tarry hear I beseech the and doubt not in myretourne:
what soever the Emperor has to do hear, I will sue to have it committed
unto me, that I may accompanye with the without danger. Farewell live and love
me, and thyncke my fire no less than thyns own, and most contrary to my
mind I depart. Farewell again the delight and fode of my life.


With these letters the woman somewhat had appesed her self, and answered that
she would follow his council.

SHortelye after, Eurialus went to Rome with the Emperor, where he had not ben
long, but he was sick of an hot ague. The pore unhappy man when he was
burning in love, began also to burn in sycknes, and when love had wasted his
strength by dolor of the disease, little remains of his life, and that
spirit was rather entertaygned with Phisicions, than tarried of it self. The
Emperor visyted him daily, confortynge him as his son, and commanded that
he should have all cure of medecynes that might be, but none was of more
effect for his remedy, then a letter from Lucres, whereby he understood her
health, which somewhat mynysheth his sycknes, and made him recover his fete, so
that he was at the coronacion of the Emperor, and there was made Knight.
After this when the Emperor went to Perusia, he tarried at Rome, and from
thence went too Scene, all though he were but yet weke and very grene of his
sycknes but he might only behoulde Lucres, and not speak to her. Many letters
went betwext them, and again there was practisinge for her goinge away, three
days; did Eurialus tarry there, and when he saw no manner of ways too come to
her, that as then was taken from him, he did aduertyse his Lady of his
departing but never had they such pleasure in their conversation as they had
displeasure in their departing. Lucres was in her wyndowe when Eurialus ryd
through the street, and with their moist eyes the one beheld the other, he
wept and she wept, and both were distrayned with grievous doloures, as they that
felt their hearts turn of their places. If any man does not know the dolor
of death, let him consider the departing of two lovers, which has more
heaviness and more paynfull tormente. The soul suffers in death, for that it
part from the beloved body, and the body (the soul ones departed) suffers
not, but when two minds, be joined together so much is the division more
pain full, in so much as the delight of either of them is more sencyble, and
surely hear was not two minds, but surely as weneth Aristophanes one soul
in two bodies so departed not one mind from another, but one love and one
mind was in two divided, and the heart suffered particion. Part of the mind
went and part remained and all the senses were disperpled and playned too
depart from their own self. Nor one drop of blood remained in thee lovers
faces, but only tears and bewaylinges, and very death apced in their vysages
who may write or declare, to think the grefes of those minds, but he that
has ones in his life been like wise mad. Laodomia, when Prothesilaus went to
the siege of Troi snowned, and when she knew of his death, dyed. Dido, after
the predestinate departing of Eneas, slew her self. And Percia would not live
after Brutus death. But this our Lucres, after Eurialus was out of her sight,
falling to the earth, was taken up by her maid as, and laid in her bed and
when she came too her self, all purple and golden clothes, and glad apparel
she laid a part, and ware displeasaunt tawny and never after was hard sing
or seen laughe, nor by no sportes, no joy, nor myrthe, might ever be
reconforted, in which condition when she had a little while continued, she
fell into sycknes and because her heart was absente, the mind would receive
no consolacion, and at the last betwyxte the arms of her much weeping mother
(using vain confortable words) she gave up the weryed ghost, dysdayninge
the sorrowful life.

EVrialus after he had passed the sight of those ein yt should never again se
him: never spoke to any body in his journey, but carried only Lucres in his
mind, and thought busilye if he might return, and at last came unto the
Emperor at Perusia, and went with him to Ferrar, to Mantua, to Tridente, to
Constantia, and to Basile, and so into Hungery, and to Bohemy. But like as he
followed the Emperor so did Lucres follow him in his sleep and suffered him no
nights rest, whom when he knew his true lover to be deed meued by extreme
dolor, clothed him in mournyng apparel, and utterly excluded all comfort,
and yet though the Emperor gave him in marriage a right noble and excellent
Lady, yet he never enioied after, but inco^clusion pitifulli wasted his pain
full life.

Le. A. to the Reder.
BY this little book you may perceive mi friend
The end of love not fained nor fortunable
By which right plainly thou may entend
That love is no plesur, but a pai^ perdurable
And ye end is death which is most lamentable
Therefore ere thou be chayned with such care
By others peryls, take heed and beware.
First by Eurialus, by whom perceive thou may
The best it is, to eschew shortly
To drink of the cup, or of it to taste
That sauoured more of gall than of honey
Also I could show the hystoryes of many
That if they by time had made resistance
They might have eschued al such inconuenyence.
There was also the noble Troylus
Which all his life, abode in mortal pain
Delayed by Cresyde whose history is piteous
Till at the last Achylles had him slain
Yet other there be, which in this careful chain
Of love have continued; all their life days
Death was their end, there was non other ways.
We read also of Piramis and Thisbe
Which slew them self by their seruent love
Of Hercules, and of the fair Ioyle
With many other, which I could not attain
And of Dido, which with her self strove
For love of Eneas, when she could not attain
Till at the last she had her self slain

