A Discovery of Subterraneall Treasure, viz. Of all manner of Mines and
Mineralls, from the Gold to the Coal; with plain Directions and Rules for the
finding of them in all Kingdoms and Countries. And also the Art of Melting,
Refining, and Assaying of them is plainly declared, so that every ordinary man,
that is indifferently capacious, may with small charge presently try the value
of such Oars as shall be found either by rule or by accident. Whereunto is
added a real Experiment whereby every ignorant man may presently try whether
any piece of Gold that shall come to his hands be true or counterfeit, without
defacing or altering the form thereof, and more certainly than any Goldsmiths
or Refiner could formerly discern. Also a perfect way to try what color any
Berry, Leaf, Flower, Stalk, Root, Fruit, Seed, Bark, or Wood will give: with
a perfect way to make Colors that they shall not stayne nor fade like ordinary
Colors. Very necessary for every one to know, whether he be Travailer by Land
or Sea, or in what Country, Dominion, or plantation soever he shall Inhabit.

Imprinted at London by I. Oaks, for Jasper Emery, and are to be sold at his
shop at the sign of the Eagle and Child in Paul's Churchyard next
Watlin-street. MDCXXXIX.

Imprimatur: Tho. VVykes. February 19. 1638.

TO HIS WORTHY FRIEND MASTER William Englebert Esquire. Health, and Happiness
Temporal and Eternal, is heartily wished.
SIR,
THe goodness of your disposition has brought you to this trouble and pains
at this time, to peruse these Lines; by giving me so freely your Judicious
approbation of my former labors: now you have gotten a Customer of me, for
the like courtesy to be renewed; for which I shall be bound in a double Bond.

When I read the words of our SAVIOVR CHRIST, after he had fed such a number
of people with a few Loaves and Fishes, viz. How he Commanded the broken Meat
to be gathered up carefully that nothing be lost; when as he could (no doubt)
have made an hundred times as much with a word speaking: I conceived that it
was done for a pattern of frugality, to show us how careful we ought to be
in the preservation of such things from loss, which are ordained to releeve
and sustain the lives of Men: therefore I being from my Childhood a strict
observer of the great loss that came to this Country, partly through
ignorance, and partly through negligence, in raising that benefit out of the
superficial, and subterraneall Treasures of the Earth, ordained of GOD (no
doubt) for the relief and sustenance of men's livings; thought that I could not
be better employed, then to advertise the World thereof, and to Divulge my
knowledge, and experience in these affairs for the common profit; deeming my
self obliged thereunto; for that it has pleased GOD to give a large blessing
to my long labors, and Charges spent in these and such like affairs.

Also when I heard the manifold complainings of indigent people, of the
hardness of the World, and of the difficulty of obtaining their livings: I
have known many people of indifferent virtuous dispositions, for very want of
means, to take in hand some actions which were not laudable.

These with diverse other Motives have been spurs to me, to Publish not
only this Book of the discovery of Subterraneall Treasures; but also my other
Book, mentioned in the Preface ensuing, of the Discovery of hidden Treasures
in the superficies of the Earth: Both which Books, if they shall be
diligently perused, and industriously practiced; will administer sufficient
cure for all the Maladies before mentioned.

Now whereas the Custom is to make choice of a Patron to protect the Author
from the Calumniations of malevolent spirits; yea, though experience her self
(the Mistress of Art) shall be ready as an Handmaid, to manifest the truth of
his assertions; for that opinion is generally Deified, and almost every where
swayeth all; and this worthy Mistress Experience (which suffers no imposture
to reign) is many times lightly esteemed and thrust out of the doors.

I therefore beseech you once again to lend me your grave Judgment, and
approbation, ripened by threescore years practice, and experience, in things
partly of this nature, which I will make bold to put into the Balance, to
over-weigh the ignorance, and unskilfulnesse of all detractors whatsoever;
making no question, but that as Thunder and Lightning caused Heliogabalus to
creep into an hole: notwithstanding his boldness, and hardness in calm
weather: In like manner so manifest experience will drive away all Sophistical
opposition. So I humbly take my leave

Your bounden Servant, Gabriel Plattes.

To the Reader.
WHereas diverse reasons have joined together to move me to take in hand this
Task: I will declare some few of those that may give the best satisfaction to
the Reader, in this manner following. First, when I considered the great number
of Treasure and riches which lies hidden in the belly of the Earth, and does
no good at all: and also the great benefit which might accrue to diverse
Kingdoms and Countries, by setting people on work; not only in the
discovering of them, but also in the several opperations about the digging,
melting, and refining of them: also when J considered that the most part of the
Mines hitherto discovered have come by mere accident: I thought that J could
not be better employed, than to give Rules and Directions for the same: for
though it is not unpossible, that if two men be sent to seek a thing that is
lost, and one of them be hudwinked, and the other have the use and benefit of
his eyes, yet the person hudwinked may casually stumble upon it; nevertheless
it is twenty to one that the other should have found it before him: so in this
case, I dare hazard a Wager of twenty to one, that there will be more good
Mines discovered within seven years after the divulging of these Rules and
directions, than has been in twenty-seven years before: Also when I
considered that many Mineralls found out by accident, have come to no good by
reason of the distance of place from Refiners, and men of judgment and
experience: for that the finders thereof were loath to come so far, and spend
so much money upon an uncertainty at the trial thereof would require: I
thought I could not do a better deed, than to show the manner of such trials
in such plain manner that every man may try the same in his Ship, or Chimney
Corner with little cost and labor.

And the truth of this I can witness by experience; for when I was a youth,
and had no skill in these affairs; I happened upon a Mineral fair to see to,
and could find no man nearer than an hundred miles which could inform me of
the true value thereof: whereupon, rather then to be at such charges as the
trial required, I suffered the same to be neglected.

And though that the rules and directions given in this Book be exquisite,
and give strong signs of Mettalls and Mineralls; yet I would be loath that
any man should be thereby animated no take in hand great Voyages, and consume
his Estate in the pursuit of this design; deeming them to be unpossible ever
to fail: but rather to make this a part of his business, when he shall come
to such places as yield strong probabilities.

And so far I am from envying the former ways in finding them by accident,
that I have partly taken this pains; that those which shall hereafter be
found by accident may not be neglected as I conjecture, that many have been
by my own formerly mentioned.

For I could wish that many men had the like fortune that one had, who in the
climbing up of the great Mountain called Potersee, in the Kingdom of Perue in
the West Indies, took hold of a young Tree to stay himself withal; and
thereby plucked it up by the roots, whereunto there did adheare good Silver
Oar; which being tried and found rich, has ever since been wrought upon: and
innumerable treasure and riches have therehence been dug, to the value of
many hundred Millions of pounds Sterling.

And to the end I may no longer stay the Reader with Preambles, I will divide
my book into 12. Chapters, like as I did my Book Printed Anno. Dom. 1638.
Entitled, A discovery of hidden Treasure: wishing all those that desire to be
skillful in these affairs; to take a little pains to read that Book, which
differs from this no otherwise, but as the Art of Surgery differs from the
Art of Physic: for as Surgeons deal chiefly with the external parts of man's
body, yet stand in need of the knowledge of all the parts; and as Physicians
chiefly deal with the internal parts, yet cannot be without the knowledge of
the exterttall parts: So though that Book treat wholly upon the discovering
of the Treasures hidden in the superficies and exurball parts of the
Terrestrial Globe, yet the knowledge of many things therein contained are very
conducible to make a skillful Mineralist, giving you further to understand,
that if any good will be done at all, it will be done with a small Charge:
and with somewhat less than before this Book was published; if you observe
the Contents thereof advisedly: So I take my leave and rest,

Your hearty Well-wisher. G. P.

THE TABLE.
CHAP. 1. Wherein is showed by a plain Demonstration the natural cause of the
Generation and production of Mountains and Metals: whereby the Seekers may
obtayn a good competent measure of knowledge to guide them where to seek for
the other external signs. Chap. 2. Wherein is showed the signs of Mines and
Minerals, with the manner how to work to find the same. page 9 Chap. 3. Now
that we are come to the melting and refining of Metals, I will begin first with
the Oar of Lead, because that is one of the most common Metalls found in these
Northern Countries. p. 14 Chap. 4. Wherein is showed the operations for Tinns.
pa. 20 Chap. 5: Wherein is showed the operations of Jron. pa. 24 Chap. 6.
Wherein is showed the operations of Copper. p. 26 Chap. 7. Wherein is showed
the operations of Silver. pa. 30 Chap. 8. Wherein is showed the operations of
Gold: and real experiments whereby any man may presently try whether any
piece of Gold be true or counterfeit, without defacing or altering the form
thereof. page 33 Chap. 9. Wherein is showed how true and perfect Gold may be
made by Art, with loss to the workman. page 40 Chap. 10. Wherein is showed the
operations for some of the inferior Metals. page 44 Chap. 11. Wherein is
showed the ways to find out pit-coales: Also the natural cause of the
generation of them, by a plain demonstration. p. 47 Chap. 12. Wherein is showed
a perfect way to try what color any Berry, Leaf, Flower, Stalk, Root, Fruit,
Seed, Bark, or Wood will give: Also a perfect way to make colors fixed, which
will not abide the ordinary way. page 52.
A Discovery of all sorts of Mines and Minerals.
CHAPTER I.
Wherein is showed by a plain Demonstration the natural cause of the
generation and production of Mountains and Metals; whereby the Seekers may
ohtaine a good competent measure of knowledge to guide them where to seek for
the other External signs.

SOLOMON says, that Hope deferred breaks the heart; but the desire obtained,
is a Tree of Life: If Hope only deferred break the Heart; then Hope
frustrated must needs break it a great deal more.

To the end therefore that our Hope may not be too frequently frustrated, I
will first declare the places where there is no probability to find out
Mettalls, and afterward I will show where there is strong probability: and
then in the next Chapter I will show how to go about the work, to find out
the strong signs which may rightly guide the seekers to obtain their desire.

And first, there is no probability that any Mettalls can be generated near
unto the North and South poles of the Globe, for those can by no means have
any convenient Matrix for such a generation, being by all probabilities nothing
but two Islands of Ice, for if they were any thing else, the course of Nature
must needs alter, and change, and run presently out of order.

For as there is in the burning Zones a continual exhalation of Water, and
rarifying of the same into Air: so there must needs be in the North and
South a continual condensation of Air into Water to supply the same again,
else the motion cannot be perpetually circular.

Now whereas the North and South parts, by reason of their coldness, cannot
suffer the said condensed Meteors to descend in form of Water, but in the
form of Snow, Hail, or some substance of like nature, which there cannot melt
in the superficies for want of heat, it is very probable that the new
Accretion this way produced, does press down still with its weight the said
Islands of Ice toward the Center, where the centrall heat melts it off
continually, by which means the sphericall form of both Earth and Water are
perpetually preserved.

And if any man be of a contrary opinion, I will not envy him; but as for my
own part, I will sell my Interest and hope of Mettalls in those places for a
Farthing, although I had a device that the cold there could not prevent my
seeking for them.

Also in Valleys and plain Champion Countries, there is no hope to prosper in
this design, for the womb of such earth is not apt for such a generation, the
Reasons whereof will presently follow.

Now that we have left us no other places to seek in but the rocky
Mountains, I will spend the rest of this Chapter in demonstrating the natural
cause of the generation of Rocks, Mountains, and Metalls, and so proceed
forward.

And first I will set down the Opinions of others with their Confutation, and
lastly the confirmation of mine own Opinion by irrefragable Demonstration.

Some have thought that the mighty Creator made the vast, deformed, and craggy
Rocks and Mountains in the beginning, but this appears to be an Opinion,
whereby great dishonor may reflect upon the Creator, who besides his
Omnipotent power, does continually make use of his admirable Wisdom, and
exquisite Artifice in all his Works, and made nothing deformed or unfit for
the use for which it was created: Now the Earth being ordained to bear Fruits
for the use of Men, and Rocks are not fit for that purpose, it plainly
appears that they came by accident.

Some others have thought that they came by accident, but yet that they were
produced by accretion in length of time, even as Warts, Tumors, Wenns, and
Excrescences are engendered in the superficies of men's bodies: and of this
Opinion I my self was in my minority, till such time as by practical
experience I found out a more probable opinion.

Now for a plain demonstration, let this Experiment following be tried, and I
make no question, but that it will satisfy every one that has an inquisitive
disposition.

Let there be had a great retort of Glass, and let the same be half filled
with Brimstone, Sea-coale, and as many bituminous and Sulphurious subterraneall
substances as can be gotten: then fill the neck thereof half full with the
most free earth from stones that can be found, but thrust it not in too hard,
then let it be luted, and set in an open Furnace to distill with a temperate
Fire, which may only kindle the said substances, and if you work exquisitely,
you shall find the said Earth petrified, and turned into a Stone: you shall
also find cracks and chinkes in it, filled with the most tenacious, clammy,
and viscous parts of the said vapors, which ascended from the subterraneall
combustible substances.

Whereby it appears that the same thing is done by Nature, and that the Rocks
and craggy Mountains are caused by the vapors of Bituminous and Sulphurious
substances kindled in the bowels of the Earth, of which there be diverse so
well known, that they need not be here mentioned: Also it appears that
the veins of Mettalls are engendered in the crackes and crannies of the said
Mountains, out of the most clammy and glutenous part of the said vapors there
adhering, where the cold gave them leave to be congealed and condensed.

Now concerning the exaltation of the Mountains above the Valleys, it
appears to come to pass by the water in former times, whose property is to
wear away by its motion the most loose earth, and to leave the more firm
ground, and rockie places highest: but whether this was done by Noah's Flood, or
by the Sea in former Ages, is doubted. As for my opinion, I refer the Reader
to my Book formerly mentioned, and if any man be in doubt of this, let him
take the Stone formerly made by Art, and place it so, that the motion of the
water may work upon it, and you shall find it worn most in the loosest
places, and least in the more firm compacted places; thereby showing the
natural cause of Mountains and Valleys. Also if a River should be turned
out of its course, and the bottom thereof accurately considered upon, how the
water by his motion has worn away the Earth most in the loosest Earth, and
least in that which is more firm, it does evidently demonstrate the natural
cause of Hills and Valleys, and the unevenness of the Earth caused by the
motion of the Sea in former Ages.

CHAP. 2.
Wherein is showed the signs of Mines and Minerals, with the manner how to
work to find the same.

WHen we come to the Rocky and Craggy Mountains, the first thing we are to
observe, is the barrenness of them; For the more barren they are; the greater
probability there is that they containerich Mines and Minerals.

The next work is to find out the Springs of Water issuing out of the said
Mountains; and those being found, a quantity of the said water is to be boiled
in a new clean pipkin, to the consistency of thin Oil, but not so thick as
a Syrrup, and when it is almost cold, then to put it into an Vrinall, and to
set it in the coldest place that can be found for 3 days, then to play the
Physician, and to observe it exquisitly what residence it yields: if nothing
settle but a black earth or mudde, it is a sign of Coals: if some part
thereof shoot into Ice, or a substance like Ice or Vitrioll, then to observe
the color thereof; if it be green or bluish, it is an evident sign of
Copper; if whitish, then it may signify any other Metal without exception.

The next work is to go to the bare Rocks, and there to find out the clifts,
cracks, and cranies: this done, to go to the top: or till you find some
Grass growing right upon the top of the said Cranies, and then to observe
diligently the kind of that Grass, and how it differs from other Grass,
ordinarily growing in the same Mountain; not only in form, but also in
color, which color shows the greatest difference in the heat of Summer, for
the subterraneall Vapors issuing out of the Orifice of Mines, differ from
those which issue out of the more solid places of the Mountains,

The next work is to see if there be any marcasites to be found in the
superficies of the said Mountains: which though they are usually of diverse
colors, and seldom good for any thing, yet they are strong signs of
Mineralls within, being themselves the spume and froth of the better Metals,
breathed forth, even as Drink breaths up his Yest or Froth to the
Superficies.

And these if they be put in an ordinary fire, they will turn black, and
yield a smell of Brimstone, Arsnicke, Antimony, or some other thing, commonly
called or known by the name of a middle Mineral.

The next work is to try the operation with the Virgula divina, as beneath is
declared: and where it shows the strongest signs, as is likewise beneath
taught: and also the place is most accompanied with the other signs formerly
mentioned: there by digging or boaring to try your fortunes.

The operation with the Virgula divina is thus to be performed: some observe a
set day and hour with certain words and Ceremonies at the cutting up of the
same, which I have found to be little to the purpose: thus I wrought about
Midsomer, in a calm morning: I cut up a rod of Hasell, all of the same springs
growth, almost a yard long: then I tied it to my staff, in the middle, with a
strong thread, so that it did hang even, like the Beam of a Balance: thus I
carried it up and down the Mountains where Lead growed, and before Noone it
guided me to the Orifice of a Lead mine: which I tried, having one with me
with an hacke of Iron and a Spade; and within two hours we found a vein of
Lead Oar, within less than a foot of the grass: the signs that it shows
is to bow down the root end toward the earth as though it would grow there,
near unto the Orifice of a Mine* when you see it do so, you must carry it
round about the place, to see that it turns in the string still to the place,
on which side soever you stand.

The reason of this attraction I conceived to be of Kin to the Lodestone,
drawing Iron to it by a secret virtue, inbred by nature, and not by any
coniuration, as some have fondly imagined.

And the Reason of this my opinion was, because that in diverse of my practical
Experiments I have observed an Attraction betwixt several things, like that of
the Lodestone, and Iron; and if it were to good purpose, I suppose that I
could show more experience of that kind than any man in England.

Now in the new Plantations, as New England, Virginia, Bermudas, etc. where it
is like that few or none have ever tried, that had any skill in these affairs,
it is very probable that the Orifice of diverse Mines may be discerned with the
eye in the clifts of the Rocks in many places, as some have been in England at
the first, before that men grew a little skillful, and these to be lost and
neglected, were a shame to the Planters; for these Mines if they prove rich,
would yield more gain in one year, than their Tobacco and such trifles would
yield in their whole lives.

CHAP. 3.
Now that we are come to the melting and refining of Mettalls, I will begin
first with the Oar of Lead, because that is one of the most common Mettalls
found in these Northern Countries.

THE first work therefore to be done, is to have a little grate of Iron about
a foot broad, like such as are used in a Still to make the fire upon: this is
to be placed in your Chimney-corner with loose Bricks, one thickness
underneath, and empty in the middle, to give air to the fire; then lay more
Bricks above four course high, round about, and if they be laid without
Mortar, the fire will burn the better: then fill it with Char-coales kindled,
in the midst whereof set your melting Pot, with one pound of Lead-oare, and
four ounces of filings of Iron mingled together, and so blow to it strongly
with a pair of good hand-bellows, till it be well melted down; then let the
Pot be taken out with a pair of Tongs, and set to cool: when it is cold,
break it, and knock off the brittle cinder lying upon the top of the Metal
with an Hammer, till none be left but the malleable metal, which you may
assay and refine in this manner following: Take a little Test made as beneath,
and place it in the middle of your Chimney; lay ashes about it, about six
inches broad, and as high, or rather higher than your Test: lay Bricks about
the ashes to hold them up one Brick thickness, and 2. Bricks broad, then lay
about half a peck of Char-coales upon the Test kindled, and when they are
almost consumed, and the Test red-hot, put them by a little in the midst over
the Test, and lay over a piece of good Oake-wood about five inches square, and
eighteen inches long; lay it so upon two Tyle-sheards, that it may lie about
an inch and an half above the Test, then lay on more ordinary Billets and some
Char-coales amongst: make the fire about so strong as to roast a Pigge, then
blow to it a little, till the fire burn clear, then put upon the Test two
Ounces of your Lead, and blow to it gently, and in three quarters of an hour,
all the Lead will be consumed, and the Silver will lie in the middle of the
Test like a little Beade or Pearl, then put aside the fire, and let all be
cold.

Then you may weigh the Silver in a pair of Gold-scales, and so cast it up how
much there is in a Tun of Lead: I have thus tried many Oars, and have found
them to differ in goodness of all sorts, from Forty shillings worth of Silver
in a Tun, to Thirty five pounds worth of Silver in a Tun, and there is no
Lead but it holded some Silver, yet it is not worth the refining, unless it
yield eight or ten pound upon a Tun at the least.

The Test may thus be made: first, let a Smith make a Ring of Iron about four
inches wide, and two inches deep, and a quarter of an inch thick, and as wide
above as beneath, and without a bottom.

Then burn Mutton and Beefe-bones in the Fire til they be white, then beat
them small in a Mortar, and scarce them fine like meal: then with a little
beer or water temper a small part thereof like pappe, then put to so much more
of the dry powder by little and little, as will make it so stiff that it will
not be made into a ball, but remain clammish, betwixt powder and paste: then
with a Pestle stamp it gently into your Ring till it be top full, being set
upon an even board, then stamp it a little lower in the middle then at the
edges, and smooth it with a slight stone or some round glass, so set it in the
Chimney Corner to dry a day or two, and it is ready for your work.

If you put a quarter of an ounce of Sandivert, and as much Salt Peter mingled
together with your Powder of Lead, and filings of Iron at your first melting,
it will melt somewhat sooner, and with less blowing: besides that the Sinder
will part cleaner from the malleable metal.

And if you want Char-coales, you may burn Wood in an Oven, and when it is
red, and has done smoking, you may set up the Oven stone, and dampe it.

Or you may do the like in an open Chimney, and dampe it in an earthen Pot, or
cover it with Ashes, or dampe it in an hole in the ground, by covering it with
a cover, or with Ashes.

Any of these Coals will serve to make your assayes and trials: as for
directions for great works here is no such thing intended in this little
Book: but only to be sure whether the work will quit the cost: which if it
will, then provision for great works will easily be brought to pass.

And if you want pots, you may be at choice whether you will buy the same at
the Goldsmiths, or Potters in London, which sell Flanders melting Pots, of
make them your self by this direction following.

Take right Flanders Iugges, such as they usually put Bottle-Beere in, beat
them to fine powder, and searce them fine as Meal: Take of this meal four
pound, of the fine powder of Tobacco pipe Clay one pound, temper them together
with the red fattish water that issues out of an Horse Dunghill, beat it
strongly upon a broad board with a Rowling-pin, till it be stiff Paste, then
fashion your Pots upon a piece of wood, turned like a Top, only let the
sharp end of the Top be thicker and flatter than an ordinary Top; then set
them to dry in your Chimney Corner a day or two: when you use them, set them
in the fire at the first kindling: and so let the Fire steal upon them till
they be red hot: then put in your Mettle and ingredients, and cover it with a
Tile-sheard, or cover of Iron, and so melt it down.

Chap. 4.
Wherein is showed the Operations for times.

THis Metal may be melted down like the Lead, only omitting the filings of
Iron: but when it is melted it is not malleable, till it be compounded with
certain proportions of other Mettalls, which I will not declare, because it is
a secret of weight belonging to the Pewterers Trade.

And as for refining of it, I am sure it cannot be done by any artifice; for I
suppose that I have tried more experiments about it, than any 10. men in
England, because that I saw the Refiners could not do it: therefore I took
the more pains and industry to bring it to pass; which if I could have
affected, I do verily believe it would have proved a rich Metal: but the
more I tried the worse I sped, for at the last of all I melted Gold and Silver
equal parts with the Tin, thinking thereby to bring it down into the Lead,
and to make it to drive fair, and refine kindly, but all was vain, for the
Tin poisoned and consumed some of my rich Mettalls.

Now whereas there is no hope of any royal metal ever to be gotten out of
this Mineral: to supply the shortness of this Chapter, I will show a way how
every one that has a mind to meddle with these affairs, may have good
possibility to enrich themselves and their posterity; and be out of danger to
undo themselves, or to damnifie themselves in any manner of value that is
considerable.

For my meaning is, in the taking in hand of this task, to do good to all,
and hurt to none: and that no man from henceforth shall need to be at a
quarter of the charge, study, or labor, which I my self have undergone.

Therefore seeing that if the most ingenious and exquisite ways be taken in
the design that wit can attain unto: yet it is but an adventure; for
sometimes all the labor may be lost, though not often, if good heed be taken;
and sometimes Mines maybe found, which will not quit the charges to be wrought
upon.

Therefore as wise Merchants will not hazard all in one Bottom, so let this
never be any man's design totally: for now there is no such need but they may
do all that can be done at such spare times, as any Gentleman, or man of
quality, usually spends in Hawking, Hunting, Gaming, or other pleasures;
whereof he need but set a part of that time for these purposes; having the
most part of his work done to his hands in this little Book.

If the Refiners shall grudge at me, for disclosing some of their secrets of
their Trade, I will answer them in this manner: First, I my self have spent
the time of diverse Apprentiships in these affairs, and therefore claim a
privilege to disclose my experience for the public benefits at my pleasure.

Secondly, I affirm, that there can be no damage to any refiner, by the
divulging of these secrets: but on the contrary, a great probability of much
gain to that trade: for that, here is nothing, but the skill to make the
assayes disclosed for the Searchers satisfaction, before he take in hand great
works; which if he find cause so to do, I advise him to choose the best
workman that he can get, and one that has been long experienced in these
Works; and in so doing he shall prosper the better in his design: And if that
every year some of the increase of that Trade shall be entertained in these
affairs, as there is good probability they may; the rest will have cause to
give me thanks for my pains, rather than opprobrious speeches.

CHAP. 5.
Wherein is showed the Operations of Iron.

AS for the melting hereof, seeing that it is no work to be done in the
Chimney corner, I will turn over the Reader to learn the practice thereof in
every Country almost where he shall come.

As for the Refining thereof it may be done in this manner: Take filings of
Iron two parts, Antimony one part, it will melt down like your Lead Oar: take
the pure metal, which will be much more brittle than the Lead was, and melt
it with four times as much Lead as it weighs, then refine it, as before is
taught: if you know the goodness of your Lead before, you may know the
augmentation out of the Iron, which will not quit the charges out of any Iron
made in these Northern Countries, nor yet out of Spanish Iron: but what it may
do out of Iron made in the burning Zone I know not; but I conceive it may do
well, if any such Iron can be found and made in that Climate.

It is true, that good gold may be extracted out of any Iron, but not by any
common way, but by a tedious, laborious, and costly way: and when all is done,
there will be no gain, unless it be in conceit, which satisfies no man, but
those who are of my disposition, which thinks experience to be the greatest
gain that can be in the world.

CHAP. 6.
Wherein is showed the Operations of Copper.

FIrst, take your Oar, and break it into little pieces, about the bigness of
Hazell Nuts: then lay a Leere of small Char-coales, an inch thick in your
Chimney Corner: then lay on your pieces of Oar, then lay on more Char-coales
an inch and an half thick upon the Oar, then kindle it, and let the fire
burn out of it self.

Then beat it into small powder, and mingle it with your Sandiver, and
Saltpeter, as you did your Lead, without any filings of Iron, and so melt it
down as you did your Lead Oar: only this difference must be used, by reason
that it is harder of fusion than the Lead Oar: therefore you must lay the
bricks somewhat wider than you did for the Lead, that it may hold more Coals:
besides that, you must take the choysest Coals that can be picked out, and no
very small ones amongst them: also you must have two pair of hand-Bellowes,
and two men to blow very strongly, and so melt it down.

As for the refining it is needless to show the manner; for no Copper in these
Northern Countries holds any royal Metal, that is considerable; neither
English nor Danske Copper: yet in regard that in some Mines in Hungary, there
is generated Gold, Silver, and Copper, all in one mass of Oar: and also in
regard that if any Mines of Copper shall be discovered in Virginia, or other
southern Countries, there is some good probability that it may contain royal
Metal: therefore I will show the manner how to refine it, and also to part the
Gold from the Silver, if it shall contain both together.

First, melt one ounce of Copper with four ounces of such Lead, as you know
the goodness of before: then refine it, and by the augmentation, you shall
know the worth of the royal metal contained in the Copper.

If you will try whether the Copper contained any gold in it, put the assay,
viz. the little Bead or pearl of silver into good Aqui-fort is well purified
before, and if all dissolve then the Coppcr held no gold; but if it leave a
black powder undissolved, that is gold: for Lead holds no Silver that has
any gold in it at all: therefore it is evident that the Gold came out of the
Copper.

But if it happen, as often it does in the refining of base Metals, especially
Tin, Iron, and Copper, that the little Bead, or Pearl remaining in the
middle of the Test, is not bright and shining, like the eye of a Bird, or Fish,
but rough, black, and full of scurfe; then if it be but a little in quantity,
an I that the Test be not cracked not ^^ll of lifts, then put to it some more
of the same Lead, whereof you know the goodness, and drive it off again as
you did at the first; and re-iterate this work till the assay be pure and
clean like a little Pearl, or Bead, as it ought to be.

But if it happen that the Test is very foul, as often it comes to pass in
the Refining of strange Minerals, as Marcasites, and especially those which the
Minerallists call by the name of Devils Dirt: Then there is no way but to let
all cool; and then to dig it out, and with more Lead to melt it anew in a
Pot, and then to let it cool, and then to break the Pot, and to beat off the
Cynder with an hammer, till you come to the malleable Metal, and you may be
assured that no royal Metal will stay in the Cinder, but sink down into
the Lead, through an attractive virtue betwixt them.

CHAP. 7.
Wherein is showed the Operations of Silver.

AS for the melting thereof, when it is found in the Mine of Lead, the
Operation is taught in the Chapter of the Lead: but if it be found by it self,
or mixed with Gold without Lead, as many times it comes to pass, then it is
to be beaten to powder, and mixed with Sandivere, and Saltpeter, without any
filings of Iron, and so melted down like the Lead Oar; only the fire must be
somewhat stronger.

Then it is to be melted with four times as much Lead, whereof you know the
goodness: and so to be refined, as before is declared.

But whereas sometimes this Oar is so strongly mixed with Sparre, and stony
substances, that it cannot be separated therefrom, by any common manner of
work used by the refiners; then this course is to be taken with it: First,
beat it into small powder; then wash away with water the greatest part of the
terrestreity and filth: then dry the powder, and use it in this manner.

First, melt four ounces of Lead, and when it is melted put to it four ounces
of quicksilver, made hot in another melting pot: but let the Lead be almost
cold before you put to the Quicksilver: but yet it must be done whilst that
the Lead is liquid.

This done, cast it into an Iron Mortar, set warm before upon Embers, and it
will be like Pap; then presently with a Pestell, labor in one ounce of your
powder, or two at the most, till it be incorporated; or so much thereof as will
incorporate: for the strong and earthy substance will not incorporate with the
Lead and Quicke-silver by any Artifice whatsoever: but the silver, if any there
be, will forsake the Earthy and stony substance, and join it self with the
Lead and Quicksilver by an attractive virtue. This done, put it altogether
into a melting Pot* with a little Sandivere, and Salt Peter, and melt it down
as you did the Lead Oar: only this must be observed, that the sire must be
more mild at the fitst a great deal, till the Quicksilver be evapourated,
and more strong at the last, that all may slow well together. Then take out the
Pot, and let it cool; then break it, and with an hammer beat off all the
Cynder and Scurfe, till nothing be left but malleable metal.

Then refine it according to the common manner before declared, and cast up
with your Pen the augmentation that is more than the Lead yielded of it
self: and if there be no augmentation, then that Mineral stone contained
neither gold nor silver: for this is the most exquisite way in the world to
reduce gold or silver, which is hard to be reduced to a mettallicall body,
through being strongly mixed with either corrosive substances, or any other
filth which hinders his reduction: therefore if this way fail, you may set
your heart at rest for the seeking out of any other devices whatsoever, though
the glistering sparks contained in the said Mineral do never so strongly
invite you; and you may conclude with the old saying, that all is not gold that
glisters.

But if it prosper, and yields any augmentation that is considerable: then if
you desire to know whether there was any Gold mixed with the Silver, as
oftentimes there is, where silver is sound without lead, then put the little
bead, or pearl of silver, which remained on the Test into Aquafortis, and if
all dissolve, then there is no glold in that Mineral; but if a black powder
remain, then that is gold, and the quantity may be found by further trial.

CHAP. 8.
Wherein is showed the Operations of gold: and real experiments whereby any
man may presently try whether any piece of gold be true or counterfeit,
without defacing or altering the form thereof.

As for the melting of it: if it be found mixed with silver Oar, as oftentimes
it comes to pass, then it is to be melted, refined, and parted from the
silver with Aquafortis, as is before declared, and if there be not five times
as much silver, as there is gold in the composition, then you must put to so
much, or else the Aquafortis will not dissolve it.

But if it be found in grains or powder, as often times it is, then you must
put to it Borax in stead of Sandiver and Salt Peter, and so melt it down as
you did the other Oars before mentioned.

Now for so much as this metal is the most rich of all the rest, and most
thirsted after, I will enlarge my Discourse for the gaining of means to find it
out: also I will show the reason why this royal Metal is many times found pure
of it self, with little or no mixture of other base metal with it.

And first, whereas it is oftentimes found in the sand in Rivers, let no man
think that it could be generated there, but that the swift motion of the water
from the high Mountains, brought it thither, with earth and altogether, till
such time as the motion of the Water grew more slow: and so according to its
property, being not able to carry forward still both the substances, did still
carry the earth with it, and let the heavier body sink.

Therefore I would have those that have occasion to deal in the hot Countries
where gold is usually generated, to make trial in all such Rivers which run
from great Mountains with a swift course in such places, where the motion of
the water begins to grow slow.

And for this purpose he may have a little Bucket of Iron that will not lie in
the bottom, but on one side, which side must have a shoe like a shovell; so
that being drawn a little forward, as it lies in the bottom it will fill it
self with sand: which you may try by grinding it with Quicksilver whether it
contain any gold: for if there be any gold in the sand, it will mix with the
quicksilver willingly: then you may wash away all the sand, and streine the
quicksilver through a skin of leather, and if any gold be gathered into it,
there will remain a Ball in the Leather: then you may evapourate the
Quicksilver from the Ball in a melting pot, and so melt down the gold with a
little Borax.

Also sometimes gold is found in Rivers in powder and grains, far distant
from any mountains of swift motion of water: this plainly demonstrateth that
the earth therabout contains gold: a thing usually in hot Countries, and that
the water in that place had a convenient motion to wear away the earth, and to
leave the gold behind, and this is manifestly seen by experience where they
wash whole mountains of earth with water, thereby to separate the gold from it.

Now whereas I have formerly affirmed that al metals in general are generated
of the clammy and gluttenous part of the subterrancall vapors, arising from
from Bituminous and Sulphurous substances, kindled in the bowels of the earth:
it behooveth me to show how gold, such a sixed substance can be found pure of
it self; and not mixed with other base metals.

And the reason of this can be no other, but because that all other mettalls
whatsoever will putrify in the earth in length of time, and turn to earth
again; but gold will never putrify by reason of his excellent composition,
being made of a Balsamic Sulphur, or fatnes, which is incombustible, and
distereth from the Sulphur or fatnes contained in the other mettalls, even as
natural Balsome differs from all other oils, fat substances: so that though
it be an oil in show, yet it will sink in water, whereas all other oils will
swim upon the top of the water.

And this is the cause why gold sinketh so eagerly in water, which may be
proved by weighing a 20. shillings piece of gold against his Brass weight, and
then letting his scales sink in a Basin of water 3. or 4. inches deep, the gold
will there over-weigh the brass about 9. or 10. grains, by reason that the
brass is more inclined to swimming through the cumbustible fatnes or sulphur
in its composition; and as for the 20. shillings piece, so for any other piece
of gold whatsoever according to its several brass weight you may in like
manner try whether it be true or counterfeit.

Now whereas the substance of gold is not subject to putrify in the earth by
any length of time, it is probable enough that other mettalls might be
generated with it at the first, and afterward putrified and consumed from it in
length of time, leaving the gold pure.

For I have drawn Iron, or a substance much like to filings, or attoms of Iron
out of grain gold that was brought from Gynnie with a Lodestone, which seemed
to be Iron not fully putrified, and turned into earth.

And the reason why the hotter the Country is, the richer the Minerals are, can
be no other but the same, that roasted meats are sweeter than boiled meats,
or raw meats: the reason whereof is plain, for that the rawish and unsavory
part is exhaled by the heat of the fire, leaving the sweeter part behind.

Even so in hot Countries, all that part of the subterraneall vapors, which
here is condensed into Lead, and other base mettalls, can there have no leave
to congeale, by reason of the heat: but is all or most part thereof exhaled
out of the Mines, leaving behind the royal metals, whose property is to
coagulate with heat: whereas the property of the base mettalls is to evapourate
with heat and to congeale with cold.

The contrary opinion to this; namely that the substance of the best metals are
convertible into royal metals by heat and digestion, has filled the world
with false Books and receipts in Alchimy, and has caused many men to spend
much money, labor, study, and charges to no purpose.

For I know by good and long experience, and by many accurate trialls that
Quicksilver the most friendly mineral to the royal mettalls, can by no means
or Artifice whatsoever be fixed and coagulated into either of the Royal
Mettalls: also I have found since that no Author of any credit or Reputation
teaches any such thing, but contrarily, condemns all such operations to be
false, vain and frivilous.

For the matter or substance of the Royal metals is quite contrary to that of
the base metals, even as the fixed salt of any vegetable is different from the
volatill or fugitive salt of the same. Yet I deny not but that by Art there may
be drawn some small fixed part out of the base mettalls, and may be converted
into Royal Metal, though with much labor, charges, and loss.

For as a Tree or other vegetable being burned, does yield a fixed salt or
Ashes: so the base mettalls do contain in them some small quantity of matter
of the same nature that the royal metals are compounded of.

And for the further satisfaction to the Reader, I will show in the next
Chapter a true receite to make real and true gold abiding all trials, and
having all properties active and passive which true natural gold has: but in
stead of gain, loss will be ready to follow the work.

CHAP. 9.
Wherein is showed, how true and perfect gold may be made by Art with loss to
the workman. Thus I wrought.

I Took eight ounces of Regulus of Iron and Copper, made as beneath is
declared, and 16. ounces of common Sublimate, bought at the Apothicaries, and
made these ingredients into line powder: first, severally, and then I ground
them well together upon a Marble stone, and so put them into a a retort of
glass, and drew from them first an Oil, then a substance like a Butter, and
lastly a yellow Sublimate, tincted with the tincture of Iron and Copper, which
yellow Sublimate I rectified three or four times, till it was very pure: then
I mixed it with equal parts of an Amalgam of silver, and quicksilver, made as
beneath is taught, and put it into another retort of Glass, and forced away
all but the silver, which remained like yellow horn: this yellow silver I
amalgamed again with new quicksilver, and set it in gentle heat about a week,
then in very strong heat for 6. hours; so that the quicksilver rose up, and
fell down again upon the silver; till such time as that it had carried up all
the silver from the bottom of the glass into branches like trees: then I
melted down the silver, and sined it, and parted it with Aquafortis, and had
diverse grains of pure and good gold abiding all trials: but the quantity
would not pay for half the charges and labor.

I made the Regulus thus: I took 4. ounces of Iron in stub nails, and made
them red hot in a crusible: and then I put to it 8. ounces of crude antimony,
and melted it down, and when it was well and thin melted, I let it cool in
the pot, and so knocked off the regulus from the lop, or cynder which lay upon
the top of it, then I did the like with 4. ounces of Copper in thin plats: and
then I mixed equal parts of these two, and melted them 3. or 4. times, every
time casting into the pot half an ounce of salt peter, as it was in melting to
purify it, till it was pure and bright almost like silver, but yet brittle: so
that I could beat it in a Mortar to fine powder.

The yellow silver that was like yellow horn, did Amalgam with much difficulty,
and grinding with salt and vinegar, and some of it was lost, do what I could:
but the first silver was water silver, which I bought at the refiners, out of
which they had taken all the gold before: this did Amalgam very easily, then I
strained it to a Ball through a Leather skin, and so mixed it with the yellow
sublimate that was tincted yellow with the tincture of Iron and Copper.

The proportion of the quicksilver to the silver was 5. or 6. parts to one.

If any one doubt the truth of Alchimy, he may be satisfied by this trial; but
in stead of gain he shall pay for his learning, by going away with loss.

I do not deny but there are works of less loss and charge, yet none of
them lucrous by reason of the change of times.

For if any one will uphold me as good a lease, or purchase of land, as I can
prove by credible records, has bin had in former times for an ounce of gold, I
will undertake to make an ounce of gold by Art to pay for it, and yet have a
good bargain.

But the difference of times has confounded this Art, as may appear more
plainly beneath.

First, in ancient times a man's work was not worth above a penny a day, which
now is worth two shillings six pence a day, as may appear by ancient records
for buildings, and the like: so that there is thirty to one loss in the
workmanship.

Secondly, then coals, vessels, and other things necessary for these affairs
did cost little, in respect of the charge now.

Thirdly, when the gold was made, it would then have bought thirty or forty
times as much, either lands, leases, victuals, or workmanship as now.

So that I conclude, that then the owners of this Art might gain 30. or 40.
for one, and yet now they shall lose extremely.

The cause that moved me to search so much into these affairs, was, because I
saw by the books, that so diverse men in diverse ages, and in diverse Countries
did agree in one tale; whereby I conceived it unpossible to be a lie, now I
conceive it might be true, but that the times have made an alteration.

CHAP. 10.
Wherein is showed the operations for some of the inferior Mineralls.

AS for these base Minerals, viz. Cinabar natural, Antimony, Sulphur,
Auripigment, Arsenick, Talcum, Muscovy glass, Emery, and many other things of
like nature, because they are of small value, and not worth the seeking for on
set purpose, I will omit further to discourse of them: if any man shall find
them, or any of them, by accident, let him use his own pleasure, skill, and
industry in the proceeding of them.

Nevertheless, because Cinabar natural may contain much quicksilver, which
is very useful for many things, and may prove as beneficial as a good mine of
metal, especially if it shall be found in great plenty: I will therefore show
the refining separating,and purifying of the same in small proportion: so that
if it shall be found a profitable work, then the finder thereof may proceed to a
greater work. The first thing then to be done, is to consider of the weight
thereof: if it be very ponderous, reddish in color, and full of clear streakes,
shining almost like the streaks of Antimony, then it is a good sign of a rich
Mine.

The first trial to be made thereof is to weigh a piece thereof, and so put it
into a gentle fire for an hour or two, in such sort that it may only be red
hot; then to let it cool, and to weigh it again, and so by the lightness
thereof, being compared with the former weight, you may judge somewhat of the
richness thereof.

Then take a pound thereof, and beat it into fine powder,and mingle it well
with as much unslect Lime, put it into a retort of glass, luted with Potters
clay, and some horse dung well beaten and tempered together; then set it in a
little furnace in your Chimny corner, and force it with fire 12. hours: let it
be kept red hot the last 4. hours, and let the nose of the glass enter into
another glass, filled almost full of water, in such manner that the vapors of
the Cinabar must needs enter into the water, for the better condensation
thereof into quicksilver.

This done, separate your quicksilver in the bottom of the water, and dry it,
and weigh it; if you find the quantity considerable, then you may proceed in
this manner.

First, make an hole in the earth with very good tempered clay that will hold
water, and let it be narrow in the bottom, and wider and wider above to the
top to the breadth of 2. or 3. or 4. yards; then fill the Pit with water, and
lay over it bars of iron of sufficient strength and thickness to bear the
burden that must lie upon it; and let them lie so near together that the
stones and wood cannot fall through: then lay thereupon a leere of dry wood,
and a leere of your red stone not broken small, and so do again till it be a
yard thick or more, then give fire to it on the wind side, and go away out of
the danger of the fumes, till you see a far off that the fire is finished and
burned quite out.

Then repair to your work, and let out the water through a pipe of Lead,
which should be formerly laid almost at the bottom of the Pit, into another
pit near to it, made so deep that it may receive the water, and in the
bottom you shall find great store of Quicksilver, if the Mine was good.

The water may be pumped up again to serve the next day for the same use; and
you need but to take up a few of the bars of Iron every day to go down into
the pit, to take out your Quicksilver, and so lay them down again.

CHAP. II.
Wherein is showed the ways to find out Pit-coales: also the natural cause of
the generation of them, by a plain demonstration.

THough this Mineral be of small value, yet if a good Mine thereof shall be
discovered in some particular places of this land, the benefit thereof will
far exceed the profit of any metal Mine usually found in these Northern
Countries, by reason that wood is so greatly decayed of late years, that were
it not for this help many people would be in danger to be starved.

The first thing therefore which I would have to be diligently observed is;
that this Mineral is usually found in ground that is proane to bear wood and
thorns, and not in the very fertile grounds, nor yet in the extreme barren
grounds, but of an indifferent fertility, and in grounds that are usually
flower in their growth in the Spring time, than the fertile Champion countries
by a week or a fortninght.

Also the said grounds are proane to bring forth large Cattle, and well
horned: but not to feed the said Cattle without a long time, nor yet will they
ever be very fat upon the same ground. Also the springs issuing out of the said
grounds, are apt to color the earth ruddy at their Orifice, like unto the rust
of Iron.

Also the said spring water being boiled as before is taugh, does usually yield
a black residence.

Also if you bury a new bowl of pure white Wood in the said grounds, from
March till Midsummer, with the mouth downward, it will be colored blackish,
with the subterraneal vapors.

Also I had a receipt given me for this purpose by one, that for his great
experience, and excellent skill in natural causes, seemed to be one of Natures
Darlings: which because I have nor tried, for want of opportunity, I will
commend it as a very probable sign, and give such Cautions, that any man may
be sure of it, before he try his fortunes by digging or boaring, or any
chargeable way.

And this was his direction: about the middle of May, when the subterraneall
vapors are strong, which may be discerned by the Firne, which about that time
will suddenly grow out of the earth in a night or two, almost an handful in
length, then take a pure white piece of Tiffany, and wet it in the dew of the
grass, which is all of that springs growth, and not soyled with cattle, nor
no other thing, then wring out the dew from it; and do so five or six times,
and if there be coals the Tiffany will be alittle blacked, and made foul with
the sooty vapors arising through the Coals, and condensed amongst the dew.

Now to be sure not to be deceived, do thus: first try it where there are
coals, and if ye find the signs above said, yet trust not to the experiment,
till you have tried where there is no Coals in some other place, wherein it
behooves you to try in diverse places, till you find a place where the Tiffiany
is not soyled at all: then you may be sure that the experiment is true and
unfailable.

I admonish him that shall try with the Tiffany upon the dew, to let his hands
be washed before with soap and hot water; and wiped with a pure white cloth,
til they will not foul the cloth at al; else if they spend their money in
digging, and find nothing, they may thank their foul fingers for that
misfortune.

As for the natural cause of the generation of Coals, this demonstration
following does make it manifest.

Take a piece of the black fat earth, which is usually dug up in the west
Country, where there are such a multitude of Fur trees covered therewith,
and which the people use to cut in the form of Bricks, and to dry them, and
so to burn them in stead of coals; use this substance as you did the other
earth in the beginning of the book, to find out the natural cause of rocks,
stones, and mettalls, and let it receive the vapors of the cumbustible
substances, and you shall find this fat earth hardened into a plain coal; even
as you found the other Ieane earth hardened into a stone.

Whereby it appears that nature does the same thing in the generation of
coals under the ground, by the indurating of a fat earth with the subterraneal
vapors which are apt to work a various effect according to the substance which
they meet withal.

Now whereas some of inquisitive dispositions will desire to know the natural
cause of that fat earth, generated in such subterraneall Cavernes, let them be
pleased to consider that such places in former times have bin the superficies
of the earth, and afterward have bin covered by the sea with other earth, which
may be demonstrated by two ways: first, it is evident that the mines of Coals
do lie in some places higher, and in other places lower, lively resembling the
superficies of the earth, which is never directly equal, but every where
various.

Secondly, every one may see in the west Country, where such a multitude of
Fur trees do lie covered so deep in the earth, that the superficies of the
earth was deeper then it is now in former ages, when those trees were brought
thither by the sea: for it is evident that they never grew there: first, for
that there grows no Fur trees in that Country: secondly, for that they do
lie cross, and in such uncooth manner, that no humane strength could ever
imitate nor parallel by any device whatsoever.

Also they may see the power of the sea to alter the superficies of the earth,
by the multitude of earth there laid so many yards deep upon the top of the
trees.

Also they may see that the sea does make the difference of the nature of
earthes by its varirious motion, as well as the unevenness thereof by hills and
valleys: for there they may see that some earth will burn, and some will not
burn, being both sorts brought thither by the Sea, as appears evidently by
the former discourses.

Also the sea never resting, but pepetually winning land in one place, and
losing in another, does show what may be done in length of time, by a
continual operation, not subject unto ceasing, or intermission.

CHAP. 12.
Wherein is showed a perfect way to try what color any Berry, Leaf Flower,
Stalk, Root, Fruit, Seed, Bark, or Wood will give: also a perfect way to make
colors fixed, which will not abide the ordinary way.

HEre I must confess a manifest digression from my Subject: yet in regard of
the great benefit which this experiment may bring to the Country, out of the
new Plantations, and other places, where it is very probable that many of these
things be hidden and unknown, I will crave pardon, for that my intent was
chiefly to prevent the loss of those things which may do much good, were it
not through ignorance or negligence.

First then take half a pint of water, and half a pint of float, made as
beneath, 2. penny weight of Allom, 12. grains of Tartar finely beaten, and put
all into a Tin vessel, which is better than earth lead, or copper; set it on
a Trivet to dissolve the Allom upon a gentle fire: as soon as it begins to
boil, take a piece of white woollen cloth, well scoured with Soap, fullers
earth, or Lee, or altogether, to take out the grease of it, being well washed
out with fair water, and then dried in the air or Sun, not by the fire: the
cloth must weigh but half an ounce; then tie a third to the end of the cloth,
and when the liquor begins to boil, then put in the cloth, and let it boil
an hour; then take out the cloth, let it cool, wash it in two or three
waters; then take any berry leaf, flower, stalk, root, fruit, seed, bark, or
wood, and bruise them well; put them in fair water, and boil them with a
gentle fire to extract the tincture; then put in the cloth formerly prepared,
which will show what Color they will give.

To make the Float.

Boil an Hogs-head of water, then cast in a Bushel of wheat Branne, then
draw the fire, then let it stand three or four days, till it grow sowrish.

But for small trials a little will serve, observing proportion between the
Water and the Branne.

A proportion must be observed in the allowing of all stuffes before they
receive their colors: First, the proportion of Allom to the water; which is
one of Allom to 16. of water, and floate: Secondly, the proportion of the
Tartar to the Allom; which is one of Tartar to 4. of Allom: Thirdly, the
proportion of Allom to the Cloth, which is one of Allom to five of the Cloth.

Note that all silks must be Allomed cold, or else they will lose their luster.

The way to find what tincture is hidden in any vegetable or in any part
thereof.

Take the vegetable, being cut green, and stamp and grind the same, as if it
were to make juice thereof, then press out the superfluous moisture; the
remainder make up in Balls, and lay them up together, that they may gather a
little heat, but let them not heat too much, for then they will turn to dung:
these being sufficiently fermented must be dried, and afterward used as Oade
is used.

Another way as Indico is made.

Make a pit with Timber and boards, about a foot deep, and as wide, and as
long as you please, being well clayed in the bottom and sides; then fill this
pit with any vegetable cut green; then put as much water to it as will cover
the herbs: let it stand exposed to the Sun two or three days: then with a
plugge at the bottom draw out all the water, and cast it away: then fill the
pit again with fresh water, and when it has stood the like time, draw it away
as the former: this do so often, till you find that the herb will be easily
brought into a mussilage; then it must be trod, and beaten with wodden
instruments, like rammers, til it will come al to a mussilage: then it must be
taken and wrung through hair Sives, like Cassia Fistula extracted, to keep
the stalks, and great Fibers for passing through: afterward the Mussilage or
pappe that passes through, must be dried in the Sun, and so formed into
Cakes like to Indico.

Another way.

Take the vegetable cut green, and stamp and grind it: then take an Hogs-head
and fill it with half water, and half bruised herbs, set it out of the
Sun, with the bung hole open two or three inches, till it firment and work
like Wine or Beer: after it has done working the Herbs will sink, which at
the first did swim, and the liquor will grow a little sowrish; then let it be
set abroad in the Sun, and brought into vinegar, as wine and Beer is brought
into vinegar, and then that color can never be stained with other Vinegar or
Urine, because it is sufficiently impregnated, and his appetite satisfied with
his own proper Vinegar: when his substance is thus turned into Vinegar, the
clear Vinegar must be drawn from it, the remainder must be used as the former
Indico, and some water to that, to be sure to fetch out all his tartarous
mussilage, must be put to the Vinegar, and dried away in the Sun, and so they
come like Indico: In tincturamtartarizatam fixam I Would occulto in manifestum.

And whereas Barks, Woods, and Roots are of a dry composition, and will not
ferment of themselves with water like green Herbs, or vegetables: therefore
they must be well ground, or thin shaven, and there must be added in stead
of Water, Juice of Grapes, Pears, Apples, or Wort made of Malt, or other
grain, into which the Wood, Bark, or Roots must be put: let them ferment
together, and afterward be turned into Vinegar; then the clear Vinegar must
be extracted: be residue of the tincture must be extracted with fresh water,
and both of them must be breathed away in the Sun, as before, and so brought
in his perfect tincture.

By this which has been declared in this Chapter, it may appear to every one
having an inquisitive disposition, what is the true natural cause why some
colors are fixed, and will not stain with vinegar, urine, nor yet fade with
the Air; which has in it a certain acetosity, or sharp aerie salt of the
nature of vinegar, which those tinctures draw to them, which have not their
appetites fully satisfied before with such spiritual or aerie salts; and this
is further manifest for that all such tinctures which are most firm and fixed,
and are not subject to staining or fading, being tasted upon the tongue, may be
felt somewhat sharpish or sowrish.

And the cause of this appetitive and attractive virtue in colors is no other
but the very same which is betwixt the Lodestone and Iron: for take the
Lodestone, and burn it till all his blew vapor be exhaled, and then he will
draw no more Iron: thereby showing plainly, that it was that aerie salt,
tincted with the venereall, or vegetable greenness, which the iron thirsted
after, to satisfy his thirsty and dry nature and constitution, which he got
by his calcination and fusion.

And the like attraction may be discerned by the intellectual eyes, in
anything that is strongly burnt, so that all his spirits are exhaled: as Lime
will draw the aerie substance to him, and thereby quench himself: Also Tartar
burned, and laid in the Air, will draw the sharper part of the air to it, and
thereby dissolve it self; and in sum, all corporeal substances, the more
they have lost their spiritual parts by natural, or artificial operation,
the stronger is their Attractive virtue.

Now in stead of filling the Readers head with Proclamations, I will conclude
my Book with giving case to his memory, by prescribing what necessaries he is
to provide for the accomplishing of his several designs, in his Voyages or
Plantations, whither his occasions shall draw him.

And first for him that will only try his fortunes in the searching for
Mineralls.

He will need nothing but two or three Pipkins, two or three Vrinalls, an Iron
Picke-Axe well steeled, a Spade, and a Crow of Iron, if he will be at the charge
thereof: but there is no great necessity: also if he be not acquainted with
the several Oars of mettalls, it will be convenient that he take with him a
little piece of every sort of Oars: or so many several kinds as he can get.

And for him that would proceed further, to try the value of them himself,
he must provide these things following.

A Grate of Iron of a foot broad, some Bricks, two pair of good
hand-bellowes, a pair of Tongues, some Lead, Saltpeter, Sandiver, Borax,
Flanders melting Pots, a ring of Iron for the Test, an hatcher, or handsaw to
cut wood: some good Aqua fortis, Weights and Scales: and if any man be not
active handed, he may have a man for a trifle to show him the Manuell practice
in a day before he go his voyage.

And for him that will search for Dying stuffes, he may see in the last
Chapter what things he shall stand in need of: Also the other Chapters may be
perused, whereby every one may be the better accommodated for their several
enterprises.

FINIS.

