A new, cheap and delicate Fire of Cole-balles, wherein Seacole is by the
mixture of other combustible bodies, both sweetened and multiplied.

Also a speedy way for the winning of any Breach: with some other new and
serviceable Inventions answerable to the time.

Regium est cum feceris been, audire male. S. Ha. depiction of coal balls
burning on the hearth

Imprinted at London by PETER SHORT dwelling at the sign of the Star on
Bredstreet-hill. 1603.

TO THE CVRTEOVS AND well disposed Reader.
BEing every way willing, though no way able, out of my many and manifold
travels to bring forth some substantial and commodious invention for the
avoiding of idleness, and relieuing the present misery, which the fortune of
wars, together with the want of profitable labors has brought upon us: I
could not (on the sudden) bethink my self of a better discovery, then how
to employ the poor and maimed persons of this land, who (having their hands
only) might be sufficiently able to work up these sweet and profitable
fireballes, for the benefit and pleasure of the rich. And as I have already in
my book of Remedies against famine, freely and plainly delivered, sundry new
and cheap kinds both of meat and drink to be used in a dearth of victual;
so if now in the scarsitie of fuel I may also prove so happy, as to bring
forth a cheap and saving fire to warm and cherish their cold and frozen
limbs, with the recompense of their labors, I shall be greatly encouraged
to deuote and consecrate the fruits of some of my intermissiue hours upon
these and such like charitable and godly uses. But without all question if the
rare and excellent spirits of this land, might have their best inventions by
some act of Parliament privileged to themselves for some reasonable time, with
some proportionable part of the gains reserved for the succor of the poor (a
matter well moved of late, but crossed and swallowed up, I know not how in the
bare and naked word of Monopolies) I would not doubt, but though priuatum
commodum be the first mouer in every Artists intention (as it is in all
manual and mechanical trades) yet that bonum publicum would also follow and
flow abundantly in the execution and publication of such ingenious devises: out
of which maine root many large and plentiful branches of gainful
imploiments, for idle and vagrant persons, were by all probable consequence
likely to arise and spring.

In the mean time whilst these long deserved favors do yet remain rather
to be wished of all then hoped of any, I have thought good to kindle such a
fire, as I hope ere long will blaze in his full brightness, both in the halles
and chambers of diverse Noble men and Gentlemen of this land, who finding the
great difference between their former fires of seacole, and this new and
sweet composition, both themselves, and by their example also many other
persons of inferior quality, will be ready as well for their own good, as
for the relief of their poor and distressed neighbors (which almost in
every place of this land are ready even with tears and prayers to crave
either charity, or emploiment toward the maintenance of themselves and their
poor families) to give all the best furtherance which they may, and that with
all speedy and diligent expedition.

And so having satisfied your long and earnest expectation in this my new
conceited fire, I hope you will afford me the recompense which I am to require
at your hands, which is nothing else but veniam promunere posco.

H. Plat Esquier.

Seacole sweetened and multiplied.
BEfore I disclose the matter and manner in this new composition of Cole-balles,
I think it very necessary, first (in the behalf of those poor and
miserable wretches, for whose good I do principally intend this Treatise) to
entreat all such Magistrates, unto whom the care and provision of fuel does
any way appertain, that they so far forth, as either their authority,
skill, or travel may give any furtherance hereunto; would be very provident
and careful not to suffer any seacoles to be sold or landed at any wharfe or
key, unless the same by good experience shall be found to be of the best
mines: or at the least of such kind and quality as will cake and knit
together, and so make a hot and durable fire. For the better performance
whereof, I hold it the plainest and most evident trial of all other, first to
cause a convenient fire to be made of some parcel of the coals of every ship,
before the owner be suffered to unlade, with a special charge given, that if
the whole bulk do not fall out to be of the self same and equal goodness
with the sample, that the rest should either be returned or confiscated, if any
law or custom of that place will bear it. For herein I my self have been a
feelnig witness, who at the first (not having any skill in the choice of my
coals) have sometimes bought such, as I have been forced even freely to give
to those which could make any use of them, at which time no doubt many poor
and unskillful men did likewise to their great hinderance, and some of the^
almost to their utter undoing, make a most miserable provision for themselves
and their poor wines and children. And if happily the Magistrate shall either
grow negligent, or deal corruptly herein, then do I advise every man to make
the like trial for himself. And because I will no way be wanting in good will
to the furtherance of so general a commodity as I have now in hand, I will
here set dowe some few examinations of mine own, which may happily serve for
the instruction of all such buyers, as have no better experience then mine to
direct them.

First I do hold it an infallible rule to know a good cole by, viz. if the same
being held over a candle, or rather over a flaming fire, do melt, and as it
were drop or fry: for this is an argument of his fattie and sulphurious
nature, which ministers store of food for the fire; but if the same grow hard
and dry over the flame, it is a sign of a lean and hungry cole, and such as
will not cake or knit in the burning: of which kind are the Sunderland coals,
whereof the poores wharfe in London can give a sufficient testimony; which
have lien one winter already without any great decrease, saving that some
parcel thereof has rather been translated to another place, to make the
bulk seem less, then sold and distributed amongst the poor, for whom that
charitable provision was first meant. Here xviii. pence or five grotes in the
price of a chaldron was ill saved.

Secondly, the brightness and glistering of the cole both within and without,
is some argument of his goodness (although I have heard that some kind of bad
seacole newly dug out of the mine, and brought dry in summer time, will
both show and break fair) but most commonly if it break in the color and
luster of pitch, it proves a good cole to the buier: but without all question,
if the same be of a dark, duskish, and dead earthly color, it is utterly
unprofitable for him that shall spend it.

The last and most assured proof of all the rest (except the making of a fire
with them, wherein no man of any sense can easily be deceived) is the
lightness of the coals in weight. This weight, as in many other bodies, so
especially in water, does argue either his pureness, or his impuritie: for the
lighter and clearer water, is ever held the better and more wholesome, as least
participating with earth or minerals. Now if you have but half a peck of the
best and lightest coals, finely powdered always remaining by you, with this
you may examine the goodness of any other cole, and by how many degrees it
differs from the same (the lightest coals being always the best) the nearer
your cole comes in lightness to the pattern (both being equally measured,
and brought to fine powder) you may assure your self that it is so much the
better; and the more that the same measure of any other coals exceeds the
other in weight, so much the more earthie and worse burning cole you shall find
it. And thus much concerning the goodness of the cole, wherein if the buyer
happen to fail, then shall he labor in vain, either to sweeten, or multiply
the same; the seacole it self being the basis and foundation of the whole
work, which must give both strength and substance to the bals. And because it
is not impertinent to the subject which we have in hand, to know the places of
our best mines already discovered, etc. I have thought good here to name the
principal places or mines, from whence the best seacole is brought, viz.
Durrham, Blaidon, Stillow, Redhew, and Bourne; the rest being ten or eleven
more, are of a worser kind, and the worst of all are those of Sunderland. I
would the owners of these pits or mines, would deal simply and truly with us:
for by the report of many, that are acquainted with their practices, there is
such a medley made of these mines, as no man can tell which is the predominant
cole in the whole bulk.

I have here also a fit occasion offered me to move the right Honorable the
Lord Mayor of the City of London, and the right worshipful the Aldermen his
brethren, that if this new fire of mine prove a substantial and profitable
invention, according to that show and countenance which (prima facie) it
seems to carry, that they would immediately upon good proof thereof, gather
up all the idle and vagrant persons, and all the maimed and vnpensioned
soldiers, which (notwithstanding all our new taxations and contributions) do
still pester the streets and suburbs of this city, and employ them in their
profitable labors in that unprofitable pest house. And that which is here
spoken for London, I hope will also serve for all the houses of correction
within this realm, where there shall be found sufficient store of matter to
work upon.

The last petition or request which I do here make in the behalf of the poor,
is that at such time as by the slender provision of the Magistrate, and by an
extreme hard, and frostie winter ensuing, whereby great store of feacole is
spent (which does oftentimes happen) that the Magistrates of all places would
never suffer or permit the cole it self to be sold above the rate of three
shillings gain upon the chaldron to any colemonger, which commonly falls out
(respecting the time of the forbearance of his money) to be at the least 20. or
30. in the hundred, and upward, if you add hereunto that five in the hundredth,
which he gains by over measure, when he buyeth a whole ships lading in the
poole together.

And if usury be so dangerous a trade, as both the word of God and all the
ministers thereof do daily publish and proclaim unto us, the same for the most
part being drawn from men of good estate and credit (for the usurer will
seldom trust any other) what shall we think of a double and treble usury,
may of a doubling the principal it self (whereof there has been a miserable
and wretched experience of late memory within this honorable city of London)
and that wrung out even from the backs and bellies of the poorest sort of
people.

I had thought also to have spoken somewhat for reformation of the cole sacks,
which (by the opinion of diverse men) do in dry and wet weather differ greatly
from themselves, and by that means cannot produce so certain a measure to the
buyer as the bushel or fat does, which is always of one and the self same
content: but I doubt not (if the allegation be sound) but yt the wisdom of the
Magistrate will soon reform this fault. But now to mine own part: wherein
because no Author of any new invention (though having Lincius eyes, or enjoying
the piercing spirit of Mercury himself) is able truly to foresee all the
future effects and accidents that in time may happen to cross a matter of
innovation or novelty: I do here (expecting nothing else but a thankful
acceptance of my painful and costly labors at your hand, if the secret
prove rich and beneficial to the poor, which is my hope and desire, or else
your gentle pardon if it fall out otherwise, which is the least that I can
deserve) freely offer and publish the greatest part of my knowledge in this
kind, and so I proceed to the composition.

In the winter season after some few frosts, gather so much lome as will serve
your house for one whole years spending (for then it will crumble and dissolve
more easily in water then at other times, although at all times with a little
more labor in stirring the same it may be made serviceable enough for this
purpose) half a peck, and happily a less proportion of this lome, dissolved in
a little tub of water, is a sufficient quantity for the knitting up of a
bushel of seacole into balls, and your water and lome incorporated and well
labored together must be like a very thin pap.

Then take a bushel of the best seacole, which being strewed upon a stony or
paued floor, you must break or bruise with a hammer, mallet, or some other
apt tool or instrument, or otherwise you may sufficiently powder them under
your feet, which I have found the readiest and cheapest way of all other. This
is intended of the greater sort of coals; but if your coals be of the smaller
kind, then are they sufficiently prepared for this work to your hand.

Spread these coals abroad some handful thick, or thereabouts, equally upon
the floor, then sprinkle some of your thin pap all over the heap: then
turn them with a shouell or a spade, and spread the^ again as before,
throwing more of your lomy liquor upon them. Continue this course till you have
made the whole mass or lump of your coals soft enough to be wrought up into
balls, between your hands, according to the manner and making of snowbals:
then place them one by one, so as they touch not each other til they be thorough
dry, which will be in a few days. Then may you pile or lay them up in heaps
in any convenient place, where they may be defended from rain, which if it
should fall in any great quantity upon them, they would be in danger to be
dissolved again. And so you have seacoles wrought up into bals simply of
themselves, according to the manner of Lukeland in Germany: which form of
firing has been in use with them for many years past, and does as yet
continue to this day, as I am credibly informed.

Here happily the workman may be taxed of a needles and unprofitable labor,
in that a convenient fire may be made of seacoles only according to our usual
manner without any further charge or labor, and it is an ancient and approved
Maxim as well amongst sound Lawyers as also amongst al good Politicians. Quod
frustra fit per plura quod fieri potest per pauciora. But to give some
reasonable satisfaction herein, I do first presume that those frugal and
thriftie Germans have found some good use of their labors, or else they would
long since have discontinued the same. Secondly, I have found in mine own
experience, that such fires as consist of bals be neither so offensive in smell,
nor yet in soil, as the ordinary seacole fires are. And if experience the
undoubted mother of truth will not serve to satisfy doubtful wits in this
point, but that they will also call for reason at my hands (quia turpe est
philosopho quidquam sine ratione proferre) I will give you my conceit freely
either to be controlled or confirmed at your pleasures. And therefore my
opinion is, that the smoke which in our usual fires does immediately ascend
from the seacoles unprepared, must needs according to the foul and gross
matter of the cole, be also foul and smooty it self. But when the smoke does
pass, and become as it were searsed thorough the lome (which is the band that
knitteth the coals together) it is then so refined and subtilated before his
penetration, as that it either consumes and swalloweth up, or else leaves
behind it the gross residence of his own nature, whereby that black kind of
pepperingor seacole dust (if I be not greatly deceived) is either wholly or for
the most part avoided: being a matter of so great offense to all the pleasant
gardens of Noblemen, Gentlemen, and Merchants of this most honorable City and
the suburbs thereof, besides the discoloring and defacing of all the stately
hangings and other rich furniture of their houses, as also of their costly and
gorgeous apparel, as that I presume though these my charitable and well
intended labors should only produce a remedy for this long and hitherto
inauoideable mischief, that yet they would be received with a sufficient
applause and liking of all men. Also the stirring up of common seacole fires
after they are once caked and knit together does make a hellishe smoke and
smoder, dispersing the smootie substance and subtle atomies abroad into the
air, which in a fire of balls does never happen, because after they are once
piled in such artificial manner as is hereafter expressed, they continue a
strong and lasting fire without any touch or removing of them. Besides the
beauty of this fire does greatly commend it self, whose form and shape in
my opinion does far surpass all other fires whatsoever; whose bals being round
and all of one equal bigness, when they are all truly placed together, they do
much resemble the piles of shot as they ly in a most beautiful manner within
the tower of London.

But now to come to our new and English fires, such as neither Germany nor any
other foreign kingdom or country, did ever to my knowledge as yet either use
or enjoy, being also more sweet by many degrees (as being wrought up with
mixtures of less offense) yea some very pleasing and delicate, and fit for
Ladies chamber, and also more profitable (their multiplication being of less
price by a great deal then seacole it self) I will here first begin with the
most profitable and lasting composition of all the rest that ever I could find,
and secondy I will proceed to the sweetest fire, and after that to some other
cheap and worse compositions, yet al being such as in the dearth and scarsitie
of other fuel may be commendably used and spent.

1. The first and principal fire that I will commend unto you, is a
composition of seacole, and small cole, or thorn cole either in equal
proportion (which will make a reasonable good fire) or else taking only a third
part of small cole to your seacole (which makes the best and most durable fire
of all the rest) working them into balls and knitting them with lome as is
formerlie set down in your seacole bals that have no other mixture: but if your
thorn coals be of the biggest sort you must first bruise them a little under
your feet, or else they will require some more pains in balling them. These
thorne-cole with careful provision may be had in the summer for three
halfepense the bushel, far under the price of seacole, besides the addition
of half a pecke of lome which gives some increase to the bulk. Now least
small coals by this means should grow to a higher rate, al me^ may easily judge
how suddenly by the planting or pricking in of small twigs of willow, sallow,
alder and such other speedy growing plants, in all such places as may best be
spared and are fittest to increase them, what great store and quantity of this
fuel may be had yearly, without any fear of scarsitie; so as unless we will be
wanting unto our selves, we shall not need to want this part of our new firing.
Also to ease the charge of your small coals, you may take one part of earth,
and one part of small-cole, and the rest seacole; but this makes not
altogether so bright a fire as the former.

2. The second and sweetest fire of all the rest, but not so lasting as the
first, is a mixture of the saw dust of deal or fur boords amongst your
seacoles, either in a third, or a moitie, as you did in small cole: using still
the first band of lome both in this and all the other compositions following.
And the sawdust likewise of elm or oak may be mixed with seacole and made up
into bals, and this makes a very good and sweet fire.

3. Many have thought my fire to consist of seacole and Cowdunge, and one among
the rest has so adventured to publish the same, as being assured of my
composition: but now you may see that rash pens do soon run riot. Yet I do not
utterly dislike this mixture, because it may also have a place amongst my
cole-bals: but the matter thereof not being substantial enough to match with a
seacole, cannot bring forth so lasting a fire as my first is, and the same
having also some use already in the enriching of grounds, can hardly be spared
in some places to be consumed into firebals. Yet (to speak truly of it) it
makes a sweet and pleasing fire: and if you bestow labor enough therein you
may make colebals, with it and seacole, without any other band.

4. Some would have my multiplication to consist of chopped straw and seacole,
but that conceit I hold not to be worth a straw: for what does sooner consume
with fire then stubble and straw, which are apt to catch, but unapt to continue
the flame which possesses them.

5. The Tanners barks broken and incorporated with seacole, are very like to
prove a good fire, but this secret will have no great extension for want of
matter.

6. The remainder of an old fire may be wrought up into new bals, or else piled
in the midst of a new fire to kindle the bals the sooner, so that in this
kind of firing there is no loss of coals at all.

7. How turfe in his own nature may be mixed with seacoles, I have made no
experience: but if the same be first charcoled, no doubt it will make both a
sweet and a lasting fire.

8. What the oozes will do either for the multiplying or binding of our
colebals, I can not certainly determine, only I have thought good to mention
them, and so leave them to other men's labors.

The last circumstance which we are to observe in this our new fire, is the
manner of making the same; which though a man without direction might easily
aim at, yet seeing I have bin liberal in the matter, I will not be niggardly
in the form thereof. And therefore for the better placing or piling of these
bals, I do first lay bricks edge wise on my hearth one by one, each brick
distant a full inch from the other, according to the breadth or compass of the
fire which I intend to make (these bricks do both save the harth from burning,
as also are in steed of an iron grate to draw wind to the bals, to make the^
burn the better:) then do I place a row of faucon or saker shot for the
neathermost rank (and they which have no iron bullets, may lay colebals in
steed of the^) and then an other row of these bals upon the nether most, and
so I frame my fire to what hight and compass I think best; but I have always
used to place each rank in the form of a semicircle; but within toward the
midst of my fire, I convey a few short cleft pieces of a faggot stick, and a
few charcoles with them, or charcoles alone, and there I begin to kindle my
fire. It may be this fire will bear an artificial core of stone, brick or
iron, whereby the fewer bals may serve the turn: here every man will please
himself with his own fancy, and so I leave him to his best conceit.

These bals may also be mingled among billets and charcole being wisely placed,
and though the ashes be this way lost, yet I doubt not but they will easily be
requited in the saving of the fire.

And thus I have discovered the best part of my skill in this new fire of
colebals; whose good entertainment may happily one day draw matters of
greater worth from me, tending as well to the enriching as the strengthening of
this little Island, whose Lady and virgin Queen the great and mighty Jehovah
long maintain and bless, with all his heavenly favors and glorious
benedictions, to his honor, her delight and our comfort.

I hope though the principal scope of this discourse does only consist in the
bettering and altering of seacole, yet that I may also with good leave discover
some profitable advise in charcole and other fuel, and that no man will be
offended though I teach him how to raise an extraordinary gain by planting of
firewood, far exceeding the usurers reckoning both in commodity and
lawfulnes: yea I am fully persuaded, and that not by reason only, but by the
uncontrollable M^stres of al truth, that every pound laid out in this manner,
will by a natural kind of usury at the least treble it self within the compass
of seven years; which in the second and third return (besides the yearly
benefit after the first seven years far exceeding 10. or 20. in the hundredth)
is able to give a good contentment to the most miserable peni-father of this
land. The tree which I mean is a willow, whereof one plant in seven years
commonly brings forth seven plants, besides other boughs and spray, that may
be converted into fagots, charcole and small-cole. This kind of husbandry
proves best in most unprofitable and surrounded grounds, which may best
endure a dead rent for seven years, such as were of late plentifully to be
found in the ouerflowed fennes of Lincolneshire, whereof Captain Louel by his
skilful and industrious labors has newly won 33000. acres, being a most
memorable and ingenious work, and well deserving her Majesty's most gracious
privilege conferred upon him. I would that Erith marshes had twenty years
since met with such a workman. It may be they have bin hitherto reserved for
my Inning, whereat you shall see me aim unhappily in some of my last lines.
But me thinks I am now so far entered into water-work, that I have almost
quenched the fire which I have in hand. To return therefore to our first
discourse, I say, that although there shall not be found sufficient store of
such moist ground, whereon to plant whole woods of willowes, yet I doubt not
but if the bare and naked banks about all the ditches in Rumney marsh, and all
the rivers, brooks, ditches, pooles, and marsh grounds of England besides,
were well replenished with Willowes, Sallowes, etc. but that in a few years
space we might in some good measure supply the woodfals that have been
committed in firewood, and so bring down the price both of billet, charcole
and small cole.

And thus much as a cole-maker: I will now alter my trade, and play the Cooper
another while.

A wooden vessel being as serviceable for the boiling of liquors as any
copper kettle, or other metalline vessel whatsoever.
I Have thought good at this time also to touch my wooden vessel, long since
mentioned in my Iewell-house; not because I would sort it with a fire of mine
own fancy (as though it could not endure the most usual and strongest fires
that other metalline vessels and kettels are able to bear) but partly for that
(being a matter of new invention) it does well become this place; but
principally, for that within a term or two, I purpose (God willing) to make a
public show thereof to all comers, unto whom the secret it selse shall also
be revealed and made good: and therefore I do here labor to prepare their
minds to a kind and probable conceit thereof, least when it shall be offered to
a public view, it may happily be taken for the second part of M. Venners
Tragedy, lately acted at the Swanne on the bank side, with better profit to
himself then pleasure to the beholders.

And because seuetal men have conceived several and strange opinions herein,
some expecting a miraculous preparation of the wood, some doubting the
durabilitie thereof (of the which sort for the most part I find the
Coppersmiths, who are unwilling to believe any thing that makes against their
trade and living) others charging the Author, as not having hitherto disclosed
any matter of worth, any way answerable to the glorious titles of his books,
and so (arguing, re ad personam) do utterly condemn this secret with the rest:
and some imagining the same both to be possible and durable, but yet so
curious, as that simple wits are never able to repair it, being once out of
frame: al these, I say, are either in some measure to be satisfied, or else they
may well conclude, that I have hitherto told but a tale of a tub. All which
objections (although I have elsewhere sufficiently answered) yet once again I
will cursorily run them over; that I may clear both my self and the
invention of all unjust, malicious, and ignorant calumniations, And here (not
only to rely upon the grave censure of the right honorable the Lord high
Treasurer of England, my good Lord and master, who vouchsafed me his honorable
presence at my house, when both my fire, tub, portable pumpe, and boulting
hutch were made ready for his coming; whose good approbation only is able to
counterpoise and ouerwey the shallow and light conceits of all my adversaries)
to the first I answer, that my defense is merely natural, and not drawn from
that chargeable and incombustible oil of Talcum, fitter to be thinly laid
upon the face of a Lady, then grossly spent or dawbed upon the sides of a
wooden vessel, nor yet from the hair of a Salamander, whose bodies are rare
and hard to come by. Yea it is such, as upon the discovery will prove so easy
and familiar, as that I fear the beholders will rather condemn their own
weakness, then wonder at my invention, and yet the same both royally and
really performed.

And as for the durabilitie thereof, I will make this warrant to all that shall
have cause to use it, that how long soever any wooden vessel will last that is
continually employed about cold water, the same shall endure as long, though in
the like manner exercised in the heating or boiling of liquor. And so I dare
boldly conclude, as sometimes heretofore I have done, that if my wooden
Salamander were not more endangered by the element of water, then it is by the
element of fire, we should not need new vessels but for new ages.

The third sort of cauillers, because they show themselves to be only carping
Sophisters, and no sound logitians, as arguing from the matter to the person,
and syllogizing upon particulars, in hoc and in illo errauit, Ergo in omnibus.
I hold them scarcely worth the answering: and yet because I will have no
advantage taken of my silence, though I might answer them, as others have done
before me to the like: Carpere vel noli nostra, vel ede tua. Yet least that
great and costly Mill in Iremonger lane, where the horses trampling upon a
moveable floor, did even with fear and trembling spend and wast their
spirits: or that monstrous timber stote that should have blown up and dispersed
the Spanish squadrons, but now lies rotting in his own ruins not worth either
the time or timber that was consumed in it, together with some other martial
engines, whereof there has bin a great and long expectation without any good
and serviceable use made of them, (so as hitherto they do nothing else but
ludere hiantem coruum) I say, least these and a few other of the like kind and
quality, should in the gulf of disgrace drown all the credit and future hope
of other Artists; that there are already, both by my self and other
Englishmen, many new, excellent, and most profitable devises both by writing,
and otherwise made known to the world: whereof some are not sufficiently as
yet understood, most of them not regarded, and in a manner all of them, either
not at all, or very slenderly rewarded: I mean not with pension, for that
were chargeable, nor with favors, because they are not usual, but with thanks,
which is the basest recompense that Art may look for. But you require some
instances of particulars at my hands, what say you then to such a carriage for a
cannon, whereby the piece with the help of two men only may be turned,
mastered, and charged at pleasure in as good sort as ten men are able to do at
sea with their usual cariages? What think you of a portable boat, which one
man may carry with ease, and yet will hold eight persons? And of a light, strong
and sudden bridge to be made by uniting these boats, and thereby suddenly to
convey even a whole army over a large river? What if an invention be showed
how a serviceable vessel may chase with ten or twelve great pieces of ordinance
as readily, and as aptly, as now any ship does with two or with four pieces
only? What if such new kind of sails be devised, as shall very near double
the way which any ship now makes? Nay, what if such a Pinnesse were warranted
to be made, as should upon her own motion, without the help of any mariner to
direct her, make a speedy way against all wind and weather upon the seas for
one half mile at the least, and being laden with all kind of shot and
fire-worke, upon the first touch of any other vessel, shall presently give fire
to a train, and so spend her self, and endanger such ships as are then next
unto her? And what would you say to a piece of ordinance which one man may
sufficiently manage, and yet twenty of them shall make five hundred Musketeers
to abandon the field? But to conclude these warlike inventions with a shot of
the highest execution both for land and sea. What if a bullet be delivered
that shall break into a thousand parts, each part carrying both his fire, powder
and shot with it, so as no garrison under the walls of any warlike town or
city, no band of soldiers lying in the safest trenches they can devise to
make, can possibly be free from the fury of this bullet: which because it may
be shot compass at any reasonable distance, must needs force them to forsake
their ground.

Some of these new inventions the Author has already showed to diverse of his
honorable and private friends, and the rest upon reasonable reward shall be
made good for any public service; I could wish that some profitable use of
this Gentleman's wit were presently made whilst God does spare him on earth
amongst us; for I fear, when death has deprived us of this worthy Inginer,
he will scarcely leave any true successor of his skill behind him.

In this military kind of knowledge, if I should not acknowledge mine own
weakness, it would easily discover it self: and yet I dare boldly say, that
omitting many other secrets of good use, faithfully and familiarly described
for the benefit of the reader in my books already published, yt my new and
late discovery in Peter-works being the true foundation and ground work of the
last letters patents granted for the same; as it brings in yearly and freely
many 100. pounds to the Pate^tees (my self not having received one half years
profit for the invention) so it, has also eased the country of many
cariages, wherewith (by the ignorance of some Petermen in former times and yet
to this day by the wilfulness of others) it has been and is now and then
most grievously oppressed, whereof it may be ere long I will find some
sufficient relief in a strange manner.

But if the new (though natural) grounds of husbandry were first well
understood, and after truly and painfully practiced according to my printed
directions; (leaving the conceit of digging and setting in a gentle slumber for
a while) I would not doubt but that both for plenty of grass and corn this
last age of ours would far surpass the days of al our ancestors (excepting the
golden age of Saturn only) and yield sufficient store of corn both for our
selves and some of our neighbor countries. And this can two English Gentlemen
of my knowledge yet alive sufficiently prove by their own experience to be
true, who have assured me that for diverse of these latter years, they have in
a manner doubled the usual yield of an acre, and that by plowing and sowing
only; all the enriching thereof not exceeding the charge of three shillings upon
an acre, toward which they have also yeerlie saved the third part of their
seed corn, every corn for the most part branching it self into 10.15. and
20. stalks and ears both large and full of grain: yea the color and greatness
of the stalk and ear has bin such, as in harvest time their corn (though
one of their parts lay altogether in a common field) was easily discerned from
al other men's that environed the same. And where grass without excessive
charge would never exceed twelve inchesin height before, with the charge of
four shillings bestowed upon an acre, for four years together there has
grass grown knee deep and very plentiful.

I had almost forgotten the winning of Earith marshes, whereby also the breach
made by a Cannon in the time of my siege though of five or six yardes in height
and of twenty or thirty in breadth, is presently repaired and made
sufficiently defensible against the enemy. And had the counsel of some men
that I could name taken place in that unfortunate voyage of Lisbone, whereby
they had carried but the outside of this secret with them, they might have found
lining enough to have raised a fort even upon the sands, and suddenly have
planted the cannon that should have commanded the town it self. For so was
the Golletto won by the Turk: a fort otherwise impregnable, whereby that
honorable and glorious victory of don John de Austria obtained against the
Turk by sea, was mightily eclipsed by a miserable overthrow at the same time
given to the Christians by land. Here we shall neither have need of nails or
timber, stones or mortar, but linen cloth and needles to make our strong
defense either against the fury of the cannon or the sourges of the sea, the
whole art whereof consists in bags or sacks of linen to be filled upon any
present occasion either with sand or earth; and these to be suddenly laid or
sunk upon any cause of service or irruption of waters. And though all the dutch
marsh-men have hitherto pusled themselves about the inning and winning of the
foresaid breach, and have given it over as impossible to be won at the Thames
mouth (because they find it in some part to be nine or ten foot in depth
underneath the low water-marke, before they come to any firm ground) yet I
doubt not but by sinking of sacks of earth the workman shall soon find or make
a foundation sufficient to bear a strong marsh-wal, which may also consist of
sacks of earth worke-manly placed, and after well backed; which before the sacks
be thoroughly rotten will closely couch and knit together, and likewise be so
fronted and filled up with ooze, as that in a short time you shall have a firm
and substantial marsh-wal against al wind and weather whatsoever. There are
also some other new and warlike uses of linen cloth, which may be reserved
for some better occasions then (thanks be to God) these times do as yet
require out of which and some others which I have partly seen, and partly
heard of, I dare boldly conclude, that the most valiant army of the best
approved soldiers, (yea though consisting of lovers themselves, and that giving
battle in the presence of their Ladies and Mistresses) may easily even with a
small band of ingenious scholars and Artists be utterly over thrown and
vanquished. And therefore O happy and thrice happy are those wits, (but most
infinitely happy are those kingdoms and countries which enjoy them) who have
drawn and derived their knowledge from the great God of nature, from the
firmament, from the four elements, from the great Anatomy and from the little
world, and the rest of those unwritten books, whereof Paracelsus in his
Labyrinth makes a large and learned discourse.

The last and least objection, will be sufficiently refelled upon the bare sight
and view of the vessel, and I make no question but that all the Coopers in
England will be my sureties in this behalf, unto whom I do freely resign the
gains of my wooden tub for their general counterband, and so I do leave both
them and the rest of my contrimen in a wooden expectation for a while.

Nec omnes, nec omnia mihi placuere, cur ego omnibus. H. P.
FINIS.

