A Summarie of the Antiquities, and wonders of the world, abstracted out of
the sixtene first books of the excellent Historiographer Pliny, wherein may
be seen the wonderful works of God in his creatures, translated out of
French into English by. I. A.

Imprinted at London by Henry Denham, for Thomas Hacket, and are to be sold at
his shop in Lumbert streate.

The Translator to the Reader.
FOr as much (gentle Reader) as the works of God are marvelous, not only in us
his creatures, whom he has fashioned and formed like to his similitude, but
also in others, as beasts, fowls, fishes, trees, plants, and such like,
whose miraculous works, although unto us some things seem incredible: yet if
we did consider ye omnipotency of God, unto whom nothing is impossible,
doubtless we should not run into so many dangers of sin as we daily do.
And therefore I thought good somewhat to profit my country, with that small
talent that God has lent me, in translating out of French, into our English
tongue, part of the Secrets of that notable Historiographer Pliny,
abstracted out of the sixtene first books of his natural history wherein is
contained wonderful and strange things (unto us) of the diversity of
cou^treyes, the commodities thereof, with the most monstrous, and vggly shape
of men inhabiting the said countries, which though it some unto us as fables
and lies, yet (as I said before) nothing is impossible unto god. For as his
hand has made all things, yea and strange things, which unto us is well
known: so can he also make foreign things, which unto us are unknown. But
least it should seem to the Reader, that I should affirm that which I do
not know, therefore I refer it unto the learned reader, to this end, that he
may judge the truth. And whereas Pliny commends the notable wit, policy,
strength, and memory of diverse Romans: so might I in like case, of many of
our own country, whose notable policy, tried strength, sharpness of
wit, and perfect memory, unto us is well known, to be equal with those
Romans, of whom Pliny does recite. But I omit that for prolixitie,
following mine aucthour. (neither adding nor diminishing) As touching the rest
contained in this book, whereof we have heard, and somewhat seen by
experience, I doubt not, but the Readers will veref^e the same. And therefore I
refer al things unto the gentle Reader, whom I desire to judge indifferently.

Fare well.
To my Lord the right reverend Cardinal of Meuldo^, Bishop of Orleauns, and
Master of the Kings Oratorie, Blaysse of Changy his most humble Servant
wysheth health.
COnsidering with my self the incomparable benefyte of good spirits (most
souerain prelate) through whose most worthy diligence and means a most
aboundaunt and plentiful fruit, is ^owen through the universal world, not
only by the means of the Greek and latin Rethoricke, but also by ye
celelebration of our french tongue, the which daily more and more most
aboundantlye flourishes. I could not by any means restrain the heat of of
my good will, but that in this present work, being (a traduction of Pliny) thy
most Illustrious name should be spoken of, to the end that with more
diligence it might be brought to light, and presented before the eyes of those
clear beholders, that in good erudition and learning, have most sound and
perfect knowledge: among the which foreseeing, that thy nature is inclined to
support and maintain those that are the lovers of Muses, I have therefore
boldened my self to dedicate or direct unto thee this new traduction, it is a
little labor of my father, which after his deceasse, among other of his works
is fallen into my hands. It is a sum of the secrets of Pliny, abstracted
out of the sixtene first books of his natural history, so that the matter is
so requisite and necessary to man, that I think the publishing thereof to be
very delectable to the Readers. And because I would not defraud the author of
this same so profitable a traduction, I am constrained to cause it to be
opened, and under the title of a most mighty and sovereign prelat to put it
forward. For I thought it not good to prefer any one to thy magnificence,
which has such an ardente zeal, toward those that battle or war under
the standarde of Pallas. Receive therefore (my good Lord,) this my fathers
work, and accepting it in good part, excuse this mine enterprise, esteeming
that of a good will and due obedience, this present work most worthy unto thy
noble priesthod is derected.

The Secrets of the sixtene first books of Pliny natural Historian.
Pliny the natural Historiographer, was borne under the Emperor Tyberian, and
dyed under Titus, the Emperor, that destroyed Jerusalem, after the death and
passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, in which time he did attribute his works.

In the first book (which is brief,) he makes his preambles. In the second,
he treats of the world, and of other matters. He describes that the world
is alone and round, naturally vnmoucable, although that there are certain
places moveable, and that may move, by the concauites of the earth, being full
of wind. There are four Elements, the earth, the water, and the fire above
the air, near to the first firmament. Which is fire natural, and therefore
there needs no wood to continue the same. Under the earth are the planets,
which are called strayers, and yet they move less than the others, but it is
of the mutation of their influences, and of the firmament: among the which is
the Sun rector and guider of the other planets, principal governor of
nature. The other stars are not atributed (as some do think, as the greatest
and clearest to the rich: and the least to the pore, and the obscure and dark
Star^es, to those that of nature are infected. For we have no such society
with the stars, that they should die with us, and therefore they are equally
divided, serving to each one. The moon has her planet coming before her, as
the Sun has the day star, she does increase and diminish, and sometimes is
at the full, and sometimes she has horns, even as the Sun does give and
take away her clearenesse. The earth is between them both, the Moon is in the
first heaven, the Sun in the fourth, and when the one is high, the other is
low, and the other stars are more higher in the sky, and therefore they seem
less than the Moon. The obscurity and dar^knesse of the Moon, comes by the
humors of the earth that is drawn or s^uked up, from the earth. By ye
geometry of this world, ye Stade which is sorty rods, does contain. 125.
paces, the which are. 525. foot. Sometimes there has been seen in the
appearance, three Suns, and three Moons. In the air it rayneth sometimes
naturally, stones, suck up by the vapors of ye earth, sometimes Frogs, and
sometime blood in diverse figures. The Heliotropium in his flower does turn
every day and follow the sun. The Ant does never begin to hourd up but in the
full Moon. The nature of the winds are diverse, according to the diversity of
Countries, and they proceed of the earth, and of the vapors of the same,
which causes sometimes in many places earthquakes. The thunders and lightninges
do never fall in the winter, for the coldness of the air does keep them in
and choakes them, and therefore they fall in the Summer, and many times they
mar the wine, without touching the vessel. There was a woman at Rome whose
child was slain within her wom be, by thunder and lightning, and the woman had
no hurt at all. Three things there are that never feel any harm by thunders
and lightnings: the Laurel tree on the earth, the Eagle in the Sky, and the
Seacalfe in the sea, for they never fall upon their skins, therefore best
assured are they that are so clad. Naturally there are signs and tokens in the
earth, the sea, and the air, and therefore it has rayned sometimes blood,
stones, woll, yea great stones acumulated in the air by the coldness thereof.
The Raynebowe is not seen in a close and rainy day: but ye sun beams
entering into the concauites of ye earth, do reflere the Sun, and make
variety of colors, by the mixture of the clouds in the air, and is seen
most commonly in ye So^met. Also there are never lightly seen above two
Rainbowes. The earth is ye mother of al living creatures. In the air is seen
many times darkness and clouds, the hayles are deryued of the wa^ers, but
the earth is lowely, serving to all cr^atures, she brings forth corn, wine,
fruits, and all kind of things pertaining to man. She brings forth iron,
lead, gold, silver, precious stones, and herbs, serving unto man's health, yea
if yt a s^rpe^t chance to byte any person, the earth will not receive that
serpent when it is dead. The earth is compassed round about with waters, the
which is mo^e known by experience, than by arguments, and some part thereof is
not inhabited toward the North, because of the great cold. An other part is
not inhabited because of the extreme heat, toward ye south. The middle of the
earth is the Centry, to the which most wayghtiest things do take hold. In
some places there is no shadow of ye sun, specially in Alexandria ye great,
where as there is a deep well without shadow. Anaxemenes Milesius was the
first fou^der of Dials. There are many signs of mouings, and mutation of
times, without great appearance, as in the sea when that without wind, the
waves do rise and rage. And in the sky, when yt there is a long strype or
line: and when that the well waters are troubled. Two mountains have been
seen naturally hit and touch one another, as if they had foughten, ye waters
meting together to strive and maruellously to increase, and beasts to dye. In
Asia twelve cities were subverted by ye earthquakes, without perceiving thereof
at Rome. Near unto Rome there are two hundredth acers of ground, the which does
shake when there are horses running thereon. In the I Will of Paphos there is a
place where there did never fall rain. And in the same I Will Nea in the City of
Troados, the sacrifices do never putrifle nor rot. Nere Nere to Harpasa a town
in Asia, there is a great Mountain, yt one may shake with their finger, but if
you put your whole strength to it, it remay^eth immovable. There are two
mountains near to the flood of Nyle, the nature of them are diverse, for the
one re^ayneth iron, the other casts it off, in such sort, that if any of
their shoes be clouted with nails, that go upon the said hill, they can
neither go nor stand, but are cast off: and on the other hill, their shoes
will stick fast. In the City of Charagena, there is a certain ground that
heals all kind of sores, and diseases, the Sea does pourge in the full
Moon: and the fluctuations of the seas, comes by the Sun and Moon, the
which causes it. In the his Sea there never falls snow, the sea is most
hottest in winter, and saltest in Summer. Of fresh waters there are diverse
sorts. In Dodone is the fountain called Jupiters spring, which does kindle
firebrandes, it diminishes at Noone, and increases at midnight, and then
afterward decreaseth, and fails at myd day. There are many hot waters
because of the smoke and closeness of the hills from whence these hot waters
spring. There are springs that ^il make black sheep become white, and other
waters that makes white sheep become black by continuance of drinking, and
others that the ewes that drink in them their milk will become black. At
Lincestis there is a fountain of water, that will make them that drink thereof
dronken. Also in Paphlagonia, and in the field Calenus, in the I Will of Andro,
there is a Fountain or spring, that renders wine every year in the Nonas of
January. In a field called Carrimensis, in Spain, there is a River that will
make the fishes that are therein to seem of the color of gold, and if they
are put into any other water, they will seem as other fishes. Among the
maruelles of fire, the Mountain called Ethna, in Sicilia burns continually,
the flames whereof are seen above the hill top. An other hill that is called
Chimera, burns in like manner, the fire of which hill is so^er quenched with
earth or with hay, than with water.

In the third, fourth, fifth, and sixth books, Pliny describes the earth,
the waters, and the Islands, and deuideth the world into Asia, Africa, and
Europa. Asia contains the half of the world, in the which is Armenia,
Capadocia, Albania, Suau^a, whereas there is no metal but gold. Scithies
where as is the sweet Sea, and there are trees that bring forth silk, ready
to spinne. India where there are people very rich, they labor with
Elephantes, and go to war with them. Their king has ordinarily six
hundredth thousand foot men, thirty thousand horsemen, and nine thousand
Camels to his gages, and to his daily cost, and when they be so old yt they can
scarce see, nor can live no longer, they cast them selves into a great fire.
Beyond the Indias, is the I Will called Taprobane, where as is the green Sea,
and there is planted precious stones, with metals of gold and silver. The men
of that Country are more greater tha^ others, they sell their merchandise by
making of signs, the Moon never shines with them above six hours, they
have small edifices or buildinges, and their vitayles never waxes dear: for
their God they have Hercules. They do elect and choose an old man to their
king, which has no children, and if he chance to have any whylest he is king,
they do kill them, to that end that the kingdom be not inherited by their
elected king: they do co^stitute. xxx. governors without whose assente none
can be condempn^d to death. If their king does missedoe, they do punish him,
or depose him from the crown. This Nation takes great delight in the chase of
Tigres and Elephants, and does abound in corn and fruits, they do delight to
fish for shell fishes, which are there very great, in so much that one may
hyde themselves in their sh^lles. Alexandria the great was founded by the
great king Alexander, and near unto that is the red Sea, by the repercussion
of the Sun, that does so color it, or else for that ye mood and the gravel
is such, or for that it is the nature of the water. Also Siria and Arabia whose
people are tanned and heary al save the head, and they are apparelled with the
skins of fish. There is also Mesopotanie, Babylon, Assiria, Arabia: the flood
of Tiger, has his original in a fountain of Armenia. In the I Will of Sagaros,
there can no dog live, for as soon as he enters into the I Will, he turns
round till he fall down dead. The Sabiens are ry^h with the fertillitie of
their Forests, with metals, honey, and wax. The Candeans live with Serpents,
and in the I Will of Gagaudes was first found Popengaies. Idumea, Judah, Jerusalem,
Galile, Si^ie, Palestin, which was the first founder of letters, and at the
first, instead of letters, used certain figures of beasts. Also there is a
Nation called Hessenians, living without wives, and without licherie. When they
are dead, they are cast into the Sea, they live without money, and grow of the
dead. Of the Ethiopians there are diverse forms and kinds of men. Some there
are toward the East, that have neither nose nor nostrels, but the face all
full. Others that have no upper lip, they are without tongues, and they
speak by signs, and they have but a little hole to take their breath at, by
yt which they drink with an ot^n straw^. There a^e some called Syrbote, that
are eight foot high, they live with the chase of Elephantes. In a part of
Affricke be people called Ptoemphane, for their king they have a Dog, at whose
fancy they are governed, to whom they do pro^osticate their doings, and
their conduct in wa^xe. Toward the west there is a people called Arimaspi,
that has but one eye in their foreheade, they are in the desert and wild
Country. The people called Agriphagi, live with the flesh of Panthers and
Lions: and the people called Anthropomphagi which we call Canibals, live with
human flesh. The Cinamolgi, their heads are almost like to the heads of
Dogs. Africa aunciently called Libia, does contain the Moors, and the
pillars of Hercules, (among the floudes) there is Onylus that does engender
Cocodrils. There are goodlye Forrestes with unknown trees, some of the which
trees bear small threades, of the which is made clothing of cotton. Cyrenes
and Syrtes, make their houses of salt stones cut out of the mountains, there
is the mountain of Giry, the which does engender and bring forth many precious
stones. In Libie which is at the end of the Ethiopes, there are people,
differing from the common order of others, they have among them no names, and
they curse the Sun for his great heat, by the which they are al black
saving their teeth, and a little the palm of their hands, and they never
dream. The others called Troglodites, have Caves and holes in the ground, and
have no other houses. Others called Gramantes, they make no marriages, but all
women are common. Gamphasantes they go all naked. Blemmyis a people so called,
they have no heads, but have their mouth and their eyes in their breasts. And
others there are yt go more by trayning of their hands tha^ with their fete.
There are gathered ye spices, and there is nothing that they are afraid of, but
of great Dogs that will bark at them, and byte them. Afric begins
beyond the Realm of Spain and Grenado, and is divided in ye sea of Europa,
as between Dover and Calis, there begins the kingdoms of Feoz* of Tunis, of
Barbaria, of Carthage, and of others of the Ethiopians.

Europia begins from the sea Meditarene so called, because it is a floude in
the midst of the world. Upon this sea that deuideth Asia and Europia, the king
Xerses caused to be made a bridge of ships, such a number he had for the
war. Europa conteyneth Rome the ancient City, the plentiful Italy, Venice
descended of the Troyans, Greece, Thessalia, Aca^a, Macedonia, and Thessalie
where as is a flood called Peneus, nauigable in the midst, for into the said
floude enters the River of Orcon, but his water swimmeth above the other,
without mingling together as does Oil. Italy has the noble River of Post,
bearing veins of gold. In the Isles of Pont, there are people that live with
the eggs of wild foul, others that have ^ete like horses, whose ^ares are so
great and so long, that therewith they cover their whole bodies. Europe does
contain Germany which is the hye and base Almaine, Burgony, Sauoy,
Britain: Gaul that is divided into three parts. From the River Lescault to
the River of Said is called Gaul, the fair from Said, to Gyrrond, is Gaul
the ancient, and contains Lionois, and from Girronde to the hills of
Pirennes, that deuideth Spain and France, is Aquittaine. Spain also is of
Europia where as is Cath^lognia, Ararago^, Castilian, Portingall, Syuell,
Andelosia, Leon, Galicia, and the kingdom of Granado, even to the Sea.

The seventh book treats of man.
THe world has brought forth many things, of ye which man is almost the
least. He has clothed the beasts, birds, fishes and trees, with skins,
feathers, scales, bark, and otherwise. But man comes forth all naked ready
to weep, and lightly before fortye days, he does not laugh: he yt ought to
reign over the beasts on the earth, is at the beginning weaker than any, he
knows nothing without he be taught, neither to speak nor to go, and
naturally does nothing but weep. Naturally the beasts seek their living,
fly from their enemy, swim, with many other things given them of nature. The
Lions do not war between the^ selves, the Serpents do not byte one an
other, but men study how to destroy one another by wars, and dess^tions.
Men never lightlye in all points resemble one like an other in their faces,
the which comes by the diversity of the cogitations of their parents, the
which makes their symilitudes so far unlike: and therefore the brute beasts
that have no such varieties in their thoughts, eng^der none but their like.
Men there are called Arimaspi, that have but one eye in their forehead, which
incessantlye war against the Griffons about metals, and they find in the
ground gold and other metals. Those that are toward the end of the west,
drink in dead men's (...). In Albania, some have their eyes yellow, y^ (...)
to them in their youth, and they see better by night than by day. In Africa in
some places there are a great multitude of serpe^ts, whose properties they use
for the trial of their wives chiefly, after this sort. If the husbands will
have probation of the honesty of their w^ues, they will present their children
before the Serpents, which will fly away if that the children be legitimate,
but if that the Serpents remain and fear not, then are they bastardes. When
they are bitten with serpents, they put their spittle upon the place for to
he^le it, specially their fasting spittle, for the Serpente fears man's
spittle as hot water In India there are hye m^n, and also marvelous hie
beasts, as for a witness there are dogs as great as Asses, trees as hye as
an archer can scarce shote to the top, and under the shadow of one figtree,
may a hundredth horses stand, because of the fertilitye of the land, the
temperance of the air, and the abundance of waters, there are men five
cubits in hight, the which never use to spit, nor are troubled with the pain
of head, eyes, or teeth, and are seldom sick. Others there are in the
Mountains, with heads like dogs. In a part of India the women never bear
children but once, whose children wax straight way old. And others called
Sciopedae that have their feet so broad that when they are laid, they cover
them therewith from the heat of the Sun, and they be very swift in running.
Some toward the East have no heads, but have eyes in their shoulders, and
others called Epithamai Pigmei that are of one yard hye. In the farther part
of India toward the East near to the River of Gangis, there is a people clad
with leaves, that live by smelling, they never eat nor drink in their
iourneys, they bear flowers and roots to smell at, and they are easily killed
by filthy smelles and savors. There are little men called Pigmei, among which
the highest pass not the hight of two cubits, having a wholesome air and
pleasant country where they dwell, the which men are molested with Cranes, as
writes Homer, therefore it is no marvel though often times they are carried
away with those Cranes. In the spring time the Pigmei assemble together mounted
upon sheep and Goats, armed with darts and arrows, for to descend down to
the sea, and for the space of three months, consume and break the Cranes
Eggs, and kill the young ones, otherwise they would so multiply, that those
little men should never rest in quiet. Some there are in the valleys called
Pandore that live two hundredth years, in their youth having white hair, in
age their hairs become black. There is a people that lives but forty
years, whose wives do bring forth children at the age of seven years. There
are people that have long hairy tails growing. These things and others has
nature made monstrous, for our examples. Among the women there are diverse
childings, some have had six children, some eight, and some nine, and sometime
children of diverse kinds, which are called Hermaphrodites, which are both man
and woman. There has been that have had in their life time thirty Children,
and among the maruelles of the world, a child being new borne did enter
again into his mothers womb, in the City of Saguntra. And it is no fable nor
tale, to have seen women and maids transformed into men. The females are sooner
engendered than the Male, and become sonest old, the Females do move in their
mothers womb, most on the left side, and the Males on the right side. And
Pliny recites to have seen a maid, on the night of her marriage, to be
naturally tra^sformed into a man, and incontinent her beard to grew, and she
to be married again to a woman. If that a woman bring forth two children at one
burden, lightly there is short life, either to the mother, or to one of her
children, and if they be both Males, or Females, then are they lightly of a
short life. Among the women there is no certain time prefixed of their
trauailings with child, for some be delivered in seven months, some in eight,
and most commonly in nine months. Also sometime at ten and. xi. months.
Before the seventh monthe the child has no life, the tenth day after she has
conceived. Pain in the head, a shadow or mist before the eyes, no taste nor
relisse in meats, and a ^ndigesting stomach, are signs of conceptio^. That
woman that brings forth a male child, has better color, and easyer
deliverance. Miserable is ye condition of man. For the Princes by this means
have their original, and are subject to fortune, and has nature as others. We
read of a Roman Prince that dyed in the morning in pulling on his hose, an
other dyed with the stinging or biting of a Grape, an other was chooked with a
hair, in eating of Milk. Scipio Affricanus was the first called Caesar, for
that ( Caesus fuit matris Vterus) his mothers womb was opened, for him to
pass out. Of those that are crypple, lame, and counterfeite of nature, comes
whole lymmed and perfect children, in their members: and sometimes of perfect
and well proporcioned people, comes lame and imperfect children. A woman does
not bear children after fiftye years, and there are many that cease at
fortye. As touching men we read truly of a Prince, which at the age of four
score and six years begat a child. When Cato was borne, his father was four
score years old. Unto children their teeth come commonly at sene^ months,
the seventh year they renew, for then their teeth fall, and there comes to
them others, and some are borne with teeth. And if that a dead body be burned,
the teeth will never burn but remain whole. Unto some their teeth fail them
at middle age, co^monlye a man has thirty two teeth, and he that has more, is
esteemed to be the longer liver. Zoroastes did laugh that day he was borne, yea
that with the very force of laughing he did reiecte the hand that was upon his
head, for the placing and fashioning of his head, and settling of his brains.
A man is as long from the foot to the head, as the extending or spreading
abroad of his arms, counting from the great fingers. Men do way more than
women, the dead bodies way more than the living, and those that are a sleep,
way more than they that are awake. Some live without marow in their bones, and
therefore they never thirst, and for this cause women drink less than men: and
such do never sweat. It is recited of Crassus the Senator, yt he did never
laugh. Socrates the great clarke, was never seen merry nor joyful, nor angry at
one time more than at an other, and therefore men's complexions are diverse.

In Rome has been seen a Princess called Antonia Drusi never to spitte,
Pomponius never to belk. The strength of men has been great, and more in one
than another. It is readde of one that with one hand did hold a Chariot, that
three horses could not make to go forward nor remove. Hercules did carry his
great Mule on his back. Fusius Saluius did bear two hundredth on his feet,
two hundredth in his hands, and two hundredth on his shoulders, so being laden
or charged with six hundredth weight, went upon a ladder. Pliny writes to
have seen one named Athanatus, to have a jack on his back waying five
hundredth weight, going to a play with shoes on his feet waying fifty pound
weight a piece. Milo set his foot in a place, from which place, there was no
man able to make him go back or remove. If that he held a staff in his
hand, there was no man able to take it away or wrythe it out of his fist. For
running there has been many light and nimble men, that would run a thousand
a hundredth and threscore furlongs a day and more. Also there are some yt have
their sight very singular. We read of a man called Strabo of the country of
Sicilia, that is toward the East, to reckon and cou^npt the ships that parted
from Carthage for to enter into the South sca. Cicero did recite that he did
see the Ihades of Homer in verse written, being included in a Nutte shell, so
small were the figures. Marmecides made a Cart, or Wagon so little, that a fly
did cover it. And he made a ship that a Be might cover with both her wings.
For a truth there have been people that have heard battayls and fighting fifty
Leagues of, for they have counted the time and hours of the assaults. The
memory has been very singular to some. Cyrus King of Persie, had the memory
to know and call every one of his army by their names. Methridates the king did
talk one day to his people, in.xxij. languages without stutting or stammering.
Others leese their memory by fa^tastes, or otherwise have forgotten their
understanding. Messalla the orator, did forget by grievous sickness his
sciences yea his own name (in such sort) that he knew not from whence he
was. Marvelous was the memory of Julius Caesar, the which named to four
scribes or writers at one time, and in the mean time, he read, writ, and
heard, and if he had no other affairs, he would name to seven. He sought.
52. battayles. And Marcellus. 40. Caesar in his battayles is reputed to have
slain of his enemies 1192. thousand men. Pompeus did spoil and take from the
pirates, and sea robbers, against whom he was sent by the Romans. 876. ships.
Moreover Caesar had this constancy, that the letters that Scipio did send him
for to betray Pompeus, he cast into the fire, without reading them. Cato was
accused to the Senators. 42. times, and always absolved. Sicinus dictator of
Rome sustained six score battayles: he had five and forty wounds before, and
not one behind. Sergius was a worthy warrior, he delivered Cremona from the
siege, kept Placentia, took in France twelve Castles and Towns. He had his
right hand cut off, and he made one of iron, with the which he fought four
battayles. Pitiful things are found worthy of memory, through all parts,
among the which, it comes to my remembrance, of a woman taken in Rome, for to
dye for offense, and being put into straight Prison there to be famished, her
daughter had license of the Iayler to go see her every day, but she was
searched for fear least she should bring her mother food. In the end it was
found, that every day she did give her mother suck with her breasts, and for
to satisfy her she came daily. The Senators having intelligence thereof, did
pardon the mother for the virtue that was in the daughter, and did appoynte
them a living during their lives. Marucllous are the operations of human
creatures, among others only of paintings, that do resemble the living so
nere, that there rests nothing but ye speech. The king Attallus bought a
table or picture of a Painter, which cost a hundredth Marks. Caesar bought two
for eight hundredth Marks. Man's age has been reputed great among the
ancients, which do name Princes and kings to have lived eight hundredth years,
and a thousand years, but it is by the variety of years, for some make the
Summer a year, and the winter another year, and others make three months a
year, as the Arcadians, and you must not stay nor judge things by the
constellation of the firmament. For in one present hour many are born as well
servant as masters, kings and magistrates, whose fortunes are al diverse and
contrary. Many examples we have of sickenesses. Publius Cornelius Rufus in
dreaming to have lost his sight, became blind and lost his sight. Some there
are that live but til middle age, and others that dye in their youth, and
nature does give a man nothing better than short life. To live long the senses
and understanding become blunt, the whole members feel dolor, the sight, the
hearing, and the going fail, the teeth also, and the instruments of meats:
therefore age is but pain, and there is a time prefixed to live. We read no
better example than of Zenophilus the Musician, that lived a hundredth and five
years without sickness. The signs of death, are to laugh in the ^uror and
grief of the malady or sickness, to be bu^e in folding or doubling the clothes
of his bed with his hands, to void from one in sleeping behind, a fearful
look, with other things, and therefore seeing that by experience we see
innumerable signs of death, therefore there is no certainty. Sickenesses are
diverse both to old and young. Sirius died by the multitude of Serpents
proceeding from his body. Some have had an Ague all their life time. Mecaenas
was seven years in the end of his days without sleep. Antipater lived long
without sickness, saving that every year on that day that he was borne, he
had the Ague. We read of one that lived. 157. years, that slept in his age.
57. years, and weakened as though he had slept but one hour. Others that
have returned a foot from their grave, when they were borne to be buried.
Po^peus caused a man's head to be smitte^ off, which when it was laid again
to the body, did speak an hour, both to the master of the house, and to
many others of the house. Death brings repentance. Some die for joy: men in
the hearing of joyful news, of victoryes, and women to see their children.
The father of Julius Caesar dyed in putting on his hose, and felt before no
harm. Some in drinking, some in writing, and others in diverse manners as we
daily see by experience. Aunciently the use was among the Romans to bury the
dead, but for the often battayles of the Romans, that had all the world in
their subjection, they use to burn the dead. Among men Liber Pater found
first the means to sell and buy, also Diademes for kings, and for triumphs.
The Lady Ceres found the means to sow corn, and to grind it, and therefore
she was called a Goddess. For before they used Acornes. The Assirians found
first the mean to write letters, but the invention has been since the
beginning of the world. Two brethren in Athens found first the means to make
houses and bricks. Gellius Doxius invented lathing and loming of walls, for
before they had Caves and holes in the ground, and they took example of ye
Swalowes which do make their neastes. Cynira son to Agriope, found out
metal, of copper, brass, and of lead, he made first many Hammers therewith.
Danaus was the first in Grecia that made wells, and dug for water. Thrason
made the first walls and towers. The Lidians found the means to dress
woolles. Arachneus found the means to make Lin^, and Canuas. The Egiptians the
art of medicine. Lydius to mingle and temper metals together. Erichtonus
found silver. Cadmeus gold in the mountain of Pangy. The Cyclopians were the
first workers in small iron work. Corebus the Athenian made earthe^ pots.
Theodore the Samyan made the first keys. Palamides the measures and waightes.
Phrigies the Charrets and Wagons. Penius the first trader for Merchandise. The
Athenians to plant and set trees and vineyardes. Staphilus to mingle water to
wine. Aristeus to make Oil and honey. Briges of Athens did first yoke Oxen to
Cart and Plough. The Lacedaemonians found harness, and habiliments for war,
Lances, Spears, Swords, Bucklers, etc. Cares the Bow and Arrows. The
Phenitians the Cross bows. Belerophons first mounted upon horses. Palamydes
in the war between the Greeks and the Troyans, found the order of Sta^darts,
signs, pe^nons, streamers, to give warning and to keep watch. Jason did first
sail on the Sea in long Ships, or Galleys. Before that time there were made
little ones of wood, and hydes: and since that time some have added to the^
masts, sails, Cabels, tackelings, and many other things, that we see by
experience to be necessary. The first Dyals were made at Rome with water,
according to the course of the Sun, and since they are reduced to houses and
churches, as it is seen at this present, which was very agreeable to the
Romans. Finally, among all the knowledge that man has ( Pliny) thinks this
to be the chefest point, for man to know him self, of what estate so ever he
be.

The eight book treats of beasts that are on the earth.
IN the earth there is no beast greater than ye Elephant, they have knowledge
to understand their Country speech, they have obedience and understand their
duties and charges, they never pass the Sea till that their master or
governor does promise to bring them home again, they kneel down for to be
laden, and carry the Ladies litters in fear, prudence and equity: their teeth
are of yuory, with their other bones there are made goedly works, they are
full of clemency, and if they chance to find a man, strayed out of his way,
they know it, and will lead him through the Forest into his way: but if
they find a company of men seeking to chase them, then naturally they know
their enemies, as other beasts do. The Elephants never commit adultery, and
they hyde them to cover their females, they carry two years their young ones,
and the Females never have but one young in their lives, they live two hundredth
and three hundredth years, they love the shallow and clear waters, for because
of their greatness they can not swim, they eat stones and earth, they fear
cold, they will cast to the ground with their fro^tes or foreheads, trees for
to eat the fruit. Among the beasts they hate Mice, and Rats, and they will
not feed where as they have run and tasted. They increase in the borders of
Africa, and the greatest in India, where as there are Dragons so puissant that
they fight with the Elephantes. They are tamed by famine, and when they are
tamed, they carry Castles on their backs in stead of Saddles, wherein their
may stand six or eight men, and toward the East they make in them, the most
part of their battails, although that they being wounded or hurt do retire.
There were Elephants at Rome, but they were slain with shot, for the Romans
would not nourish them, nor give them to Princes. The Ethiopians make them
there ven^son, and they kill them with shooting and casting darts, which they
cast on them standing in trees, where the Elephantes use to pass, or else they
take them in holes or caves in the earth covered above, they never lie down,
but sleep leaning against great tr^s, and they that know their repair, will
saw the tree so far, that when they come to rest them against the tree, it
breaks, and they fall down, then they kill them, (for being once down, they
can never rise again.) The blood of Elephantes is very cold, and therefore
the Dragons and Serpe^ts in that country do assemble under their ears and on
their bodies, and suck from them so much blood, that they therewith dye.
Dragons there are in Ethiopia, of ten fadome long, and in India, there hau^
been found Serpents of a hundredth foot long, and some will fly in the air to
catch birds in flying. In Africa there are a great number of wild horses,
and in Asia great Asses like unto Mares, but for their long ears. So writes
Aristotle the wise, which was appointed by Alexander the great, to describe the
diversity and nature of beasts. The Lion is full of noblesse and ^lemencie,
the Lioness for the first time brings forth five, the next year after
four, then three, and when she brings but one, then she ceasseth. The young
ones are two months without moving, and six months before they can go, they
do sooner assail men than women, and never young children, unless it be for
great sa^ine. In their age they love and follow men, when that they can no
more seek their pray, and they live till their teeth fall out. By their
clemency they demand nothing of those that prostrate them selves before
them, and their ire is mitigate by prayers, as we have seen by the experience
of women that name them selves strangers, and poor vagabonds, but they are
fierce to those that strive against them, their tail does demonstrate their
amity and furor, as does the ears of horses. When they are chased they never
hide them, they know and pursue among others those that hurt them. The female
if that her young ones are taken, closes her eyes against^ those that chase
them, to the end that she fear not their weapons. Hanus was ye first that
dau^ted or tamed their fearcenesse, and they are taken in holes that are made
of purpose in the ground. In Syria they are all black. The Panthers are also
full of clemency. We read that if the Female meet a man strayed or lost in
the woods, that flees for fear of her, she will compass him moving her
ta^le, showing unto him a sign of amity and love, and after that he is
assured, she will lead him into a cave or hole, where as are fallen her young
ones by misfortune, which the man pulls out, and then she tumbleth and
plays before him to give him thanks. The Tygres are very light and nimble,
therefore those that steal their young ones, as soon as the femall finds them
lost, she smells their way and runs after them, and when she is spyed of
those that have her young ones, they let one of them fall, the which she
takes up, and caryeth it to her repair, and in the mean time, they escape
with the rest, and bring them to their ships. Camels they are driven to
pasture toward the East as we do sheep. Wild Dogs have hands and feet
almost like men. In the north part there are marvelous swift beasts, which
have the upper lip so long, that when they will feed they go backward. The
Woulfe before he be seen, will easily draw from a man his breath, they couple
not with the females, but. xij. days in the year. There are wild wolves,
which in eating of their pray, if they turn once about, forget their pray, and
go again to seek another. Among the Serpents the Bassalicke does infecte and
kill people with his look. There are innumerable kinds of others, whereof
some have double heads at both ends, for to cast venime. For the biting of an
Aspis, there is no remedy but to cut that that he has touched. The Cocodrils
are engendered in Nylle, a River of Egypt, which have four feet, the skin
very hard, and they have no moving but the upper lip, and they make as many
eggs as Geese, and they have sharp claws for their defense, in the day they
remain on the earth, and the night in the waters, when they open their throat
in sleeping, there are little birds called Trochilos that will pick and
cleanse their teeth, in the which they take great delight. The Stork does show
the manner how to take glisters, for by her nature she fills her neck with
water, and behind with her beck, makes infusion into her belly for to cleanse
her. And many other beasts naturallye know the herbs that for them are
most proper. The Swallow knows how to find an herb called Chelidonia,
which serves for her yo^g ones, when their eyes are endomaged. Of little
beasts we find Cities destroyed and people driven away. In Spain with
Conies. In Thessaly with Moles. In France with Frogs. In Affricke with Locustes.
In the I Will of Ciclados with Rattes. In Italy with Ser pents. In Ethiopia with
Scorpions. Hyaena is said to be a beast of doubt nature, Male and Female, they
will hearken at the Cottes of the sheepeheards, and learn the proper name that
a man is called by, and calling him, when the man is come forth, they will
straight way kill him, and they will call dogs. They are found in Africa,
which is the cause of so many wild Asses, that they engender, the Males do
correct the young ones by biting, they will ^utte the trees along the Ryuers,
as with a knife, they have tails like to fishes. Dear that are oppressed with
Dogs, if they can find no water for their refuge, then they retire to man:
the females bear eight weeks, and often times two, and for to bring them
forth, they seek secrece places, not nere the hye ways accustomed by men. The
Hind teaches her young ones to run, to fear, and to leap, the Males that
have left ye Females, have their mussell black, when they know them selves
heavy, they seek secret places, they will stand still to hear the cry of
the Dogs, they run with the wind, to take away the smell of ye trase, they
rejoice to hear whistling, and to hear a noise of singing. Moreover the Heart
is simple, and all things are to him marvelous, if that he see a man with a
bow, or a crosse^owe, he looks more on them, than on the man, the Males have
horns, and in the spring time they cast their horns, that day that they leese
their horns, they hyde them selves as all astonyed and sorrowful, as they that
have lost their armours. It is said that the right horn can not be found, for
that they hyde them in the ground. At the burning of the horns, the serpents
fly away: their horns grow till they be three score years old, and the
said time passed, there comes up others like, and then they never fall after
that: there is no knoweledge of their age, but their age is known by their
teeth, they being without horns feed in the night, and when their horns
begin to come, they will but te and run against the trees, they live a
hundredth years, they never have the Fever or Ague, and therefore some dames
always delight to break their fast with Uenson, by ye v hich means they have
lived a hundredth years without having the Ague. Camelion lives not but by the
air, and changes his color according to the thing he touches, saving white
and read, they inge^der in Africa, and in India. The Bears do join with
the Females, in the beginning of Winter, not as other four footed beasts do,
for the Male and the Female lie down embracing, and after that they do retire
in sundry caves, and the Female does bring forth her young ones within thirty
days, and most commonly brings five, which have the skin white,
deformed, without hair, and eyes, and there appears but their claws, in
licking of them they are figured. There is nothing so little seen of man, as
to see the Bear bring forth her young, she hydeth her four months, and the
Male forty days, they couch or lie upon soft leaves, and the first fouretene
days they sleep so soundlye, that you shall scarce waken them with strokes,
then they fatten much, and their fat or grease is co^uenable to many
medicines, also to keep hair from sheading. They being wakened, for the most
part stand up, and live with the licking of their fore feet, they warm their
young against their breasts, they have little blood about the heart, and less
in the body, they have little eyes, and as feeble or weak heads as the Lion
has strong, therefore they defend their heads with their fore feet, when they
fall and leap from the Rocks, or when they are bayted with dogs. The Dogs
among all other beasts that unto us are common, are most faithful. We have
true histories of men that have been defended from thieves by their Dogs,
others have fought to revenge their masters death, and constrained the
murderer to confess the deed. Two hundredth Dogs did rescue by force the king
Garamantus, being taken by the hands of his enemies. Many people have
assembled dogs together for the war. We read of Dogs that have cast
them selves into the fire, when in times past their Masters body have been
burned. We read also of a Dog of Nicomedes the king of Bythinia, to have
almost torn the Queen in pieces, for that she played familiarly with the
king, the Dog thinking it had been for harm. A Senator of Rome, was defended
by his Dog on a night, retourning to his house, from the hands of those,
that would have put him to death. At Rome a prisoners Dog would never
depart from the Prison door, and when his master was dead, he would eat
nothing, and when bread was given him he brought it to his masters month. The
same Dog was seen openly to hold up his masters body being cast into the
River of Tyber. They know their master, and understand his voice, above all
other beasts they do best know a man's voice, and their names, they do
remember the ways and iourneyes be they never so far off, and there is none
of so long a memory (except man.) In their chase they have great diligence,
specially hounds. In India they tie proud Bytches to trees, and the Tygres do
cover them, by the which means, comes fierce and cruel Dogs. The king of
Albania did give to Alexander the great, a Dog of marvelous highness, which
would take Lions and Elephants. The Females have whelps three times a year
lightly, and they carry them two mo^thes, they are borne blind, they can not
see till seven days after they be whelped: If she bring but one whelpe, it
sees not till ye nynth day, the better whelpe is that that the Bitche brings
out first, or that that sees last. Horses are faithful, and full of great
knowledge, for they know their masters, and they that attend on them. Many
are singular in their doyngs, the Males line till fifty years, and the females
less, at six years the males grow no more, and the females but five years.
Among the beasts they have least fertility. The most eigrest and fiercest
Horses, put their nose mussell depest in the water to drink, and have almost
as many diseases as men. Asses there has been bought for four hundredth
Crowns. In Acaia they are much requested to have Mules. They fear cold, the
Males are very slow in their work, they do bear as d^e Mares, and in
thirty months the young ones are ready to help them selves. After they are
horsed they must be constrained to run, or else they would reject the seed
by making water. The females bear all their life, which is thirty years,
they be afraied to wette their feet, and they never drink but in small and
shallowe waters, where they are accustomed to drink dry footed, the Females
do hyde them selves when they bring forth, in dark places, that they be not
seen of men, they will not pass the bridges when the Sun shines in the
water, it is marvel that they run not mad for thirst, for he that daily
changes their water or River accustomed to drink at, must constrain them
perforce to drink. The little Mule is engendered of the Ass and of the Mare.
The Mules that comes of a Horse and of a she Ass, are beasts full of
strength and labor. The Ass that covers the Mare brings forth before her
time, if she before have retained the horse, but not else, the seventh day the
females should be filled, after their foale is borne, the Males fatigated of
labor, does sooner replen^she the Females. Some of them are not like to their
Syres, and the Mule of her nature is barren, saving that in Capadocia they
bear, by force of drinking wine, often times the Mules ^asse from casting or
stryking. The Athenians knowing for a truth a Mule to have done service
fourscore years, did ordain, that in the fi^ldes none should desturbe him,
neither in the corn nor otherwise. The Oxen live twenty years, and the Kine
commo^lye fiftene years, at five years they have taken their strength: it is
said that to wash them with warm water they will fatten, the strength of the
Bull is at three years: for to make them draw, it is good to yoke them with a
drawing Ox, for he will teach the other. In times past among the Romans, it
was esteemed as great offense to kill an ox, or to steal one, (because of
their ploughes,) as it was to kill a man. The Bull requyring co^bat, shows
magnanimity of courage and gentilitie, he turns the head, lifts up the
ears, remains on his forefeete, and makes the dust to fly with his hinder
feet. At Rome has been seen an Ox speak. The Ox of Egypt has a kyrnell
called Apis under his tongue, and a white spotte on the right side, which
grows as the horns of the Moon. The nature of sheep is that they live not
above nine or ten years, the Males couple with the Females in the midst of
May, till the midst of August, the females bear a hundredth and fiftye days.

The Ram if the right genetorie be bound, makes all Females, and if the left
be bound in the sa^son, makes all Males. If ye look under the Tuppe or Rams
tongue, he does engender Lambs of the color that the veins are, if they be
of diverse colors, he ingendreth Lambs of diverse sorts. Also the mutation of
waters, does varefie the color of Lambs, also the winds. It is esteemed not
good to cut or gueld Lambs before five mo^thes, and commonly the Females bring
forth not above four Lambs. Goats conceive commonly two Kiddes, and sometime
four, they bear five months as do sheep, they become barren with fatness,
and they engender not before the fourth year, they conceive in November, for
to be delivered in March, when the trees begin to budde: the Goat fears
cold, every one of these beasts have not horns, but the milk of those that
have no horns, is fatter than those that have, and those that have horns,
their age is known by the knots in their horns, they asspyre through the
ears, and not by their nose, and they are never without Fevers or Agues,
because of the heat of their bodies, which makes them much subject to
lechery, they see as well by night as by day, they have all beardes on their
chinne, if one of them be taken or driven, all the rest will marvel thereat, if
they croppe or bite a young tree, it dies, and if they lick an Olive tree, it
will dry away. Among the swyne the Sow does farrow two times a year, and
sometime they have twenty Pigges, but they cannot nouryshe so many: the tenth
day the Pigges have teeth: in once knowing ye Boar they are filled, but they
double it for fear not to have retained. Some think that if they leese an eye
that they will soon die, otherwise they live til fiftene or twenty years, the
most fattest have least milk, they willinglye wallow in the dirt and mire, and
couch most on the left side, they fat^e^ in six days, they know their Masters
house, and defend one an other, for if that one cry, all the rest will run
thither. Among the wild boares, the Male has great pain to acquaint him with
the Female, and she has great dolor to make her young ones: they are borne
with teeth, and are black. In Arabia they can not live neither wild, nor yet
tame. Apes do approach much to the sense of man, and their kind is, to have
no tails, these kind of beasts, are much affectioned to their young ones,
they keep them or hold them always between their arms or legs, before their
breasts, whereby many times they kill them: they have beard on their ^hinne,
and some in Ethiopia have tails, that can live no where el^e. Of Hares, there
are diverse kinds in the hye Mountains, there are white ones, and in winter
they live with snow. It is said that a Hare is as old as there are pourgings
or voydings in her belly, they have both kinds, and engender one with an
other, and the Hare alone is meat unto men, beasts, and fowls, and therefore
he is ever in fear, and goes more by night than by day. Conyes are of another
kind, the Males have great desire to ^ate the young ones when they are born,
but the female hydeth them, and they make great multiplication. Many sorts of
beasts there are on the earth, that do mingle one kind with an other. Among
the Beasts, Origes have the hair long always, tending toward the head,
and of other beasts the hair te^deth toward the tail. Mice are engendered on
the earth. We read that when Haniball had besieged a town, a Mouse was sold
for two hundredth crowns, the seller dyed for famine, and the buyer did escape
the hunger. The old Mice are nourished of the young ones, by great clemency. In
Africa there is neither Dear, wild Boares, Goats, nor Bears. In other
places neither Wolves, nor Fo^es. In some places there are no Hares, in other
places no Conyes. And in other places there is great diversity of beasts,
that are not in other places. The Scorpions or Serpents do sooner hurt
strangers, than the Country inhabitants.

The ninth book treats of water beasts, and of fishes.
IN the sea there are many great beasts, as well as on earth for the moisture
thereof, and because it is more larger and bygger. Also there is many monsters
and diversity in many fishes, for they couple in many kinds, and there is the
similitude of all kind of beasts on the earth, and rather more. Whales are
the most greatest and grossest beasts in the Sea, there are of two hundredth
yeards long. In many places there are rib bones of Whales of twentye yeardes.
Alexander the great was afraid to meet them, least his Navy should have
perished. In the Sea there are Eeles three hundredth foot long. In the night
there comes many fishes out of the Sea, that will eat the corn in the
fields, and after return again. There is in the Sea Meermaydes that have
been seen, and some that have the shape of men, and their voice like unto men's
voice, having the body of man's shape, and the lower parts scaled like fishes,
with a tail. And there are Woulfes, Horses, Asses, Hogs and other sea
beasts, as on the earth. If the fishes asspire and respire as other beasts,
there are diverse opinions. Pliny does believe that the most part sleeps and
respireth, except those that have no liver, and instead of blood have humor.
The Dolphin is the most swiftest fish in the Sea, and most hardest to be taken:
every one follows his like, they have young in ten months in So^mer, and
nourishe them as do the Whales, the old ones carry the young ones, and there
is always a great Dolphin, that follows the little one, they have the
tongue mo^ing like a Hog. Above the nature of other fishes, they love young
children, and the sound of Instruments, they live three hundredth years, and
they have their greatness at ten years, they rejoice when one calls them
Simon, and they love human voice. Many examples are both seen and read of
little children, that they have carried by Sea on their backs and brought back
again without doing them any harm. Shell fishes are so great in some places,
that with their shells they cover their houses. The beasts of the Sea have
diverse clothings, some are covered with leather, and with hair, as ye Sea
calfe, some only with leather as the Dolphins, others with great thick and
hard shelles, others softer shelles, as Oysters, Cockles, and Mus^les, that
have no heads, others with sharp prickles, as the Ecchinus called the sea
Porcupen, others with scales, as Carpes and many other fish, others with rough
skins with the which they shave fine wood and Iuory, some with soft skins,
and others that have none. The Sea calfe which is clothed with skin and
hair, they join Male and Female together as dogs, and they never have but
two at a burden, they nourishe their young ones with their pappes or tettes,
and are delivered on the land, and within twelve days after they bring them to
the Sea. The Sea calfe, is more grieved and more constrained to sleep than any
other beast, and therefore their skin put on a man's head does provoke
him to sleep. Great is the diversity of beasts, in some there is neither
bone nor thorn, and of many kinds there is no Male. Among the fishes the
Females are greater than the Males, there are some that have their scales
tending toward their heads, clean contrary to ye nature of others. Some
there are that go always to sleep upon the dry land. The Whale makes her
young ones alive without Eggs. Eeles live commonly eight year, they will live
six days without water, specially when the wind is at west, and less with
other winds. In Winter they covet deep and clear waters, and swim in the
bottom, they feed in the night, and they of all other fishes, flote not above
water, when that they are dead. In the Laake of Verone they are taken by
thousands. Some kind of fishes renders their young ones alive, others that
fly by the Sea, as ye Sea swallow. Some make eggs and cover or sit on them,
as do the fowls in the air, so does the Sea kite, a foul called Lucerna, of
the property of his name, seeks the maine Seas, whose tongue shines or
glistereth, as may well be seen in a fair and calm night. The Dragon of the
Sea, as soon as she is taken and brought to land, she makes incontinently an
entery or hole in the sand, that she might be lost. Some fishes have no
blood, and have their heads in their bellyes between their feet, and with
their feet they cast meat into their mouths. The Sea Locusts hide them
selves for the space of five months, and swim in the spring time, they
battle between them selves with their horns. If they be put alive into hot
water for to sees, they will be tender. The sea Creuices live in Rocks and
stony places, and there are very great ones. In Summer and in the Spring they
fatten, and in the full Moan, and they augment and diminish with the Moon, they
are of a long life, and they have al eight feet, The Females have the first
foot folded or double, and the Males single, and they creep as much backward
as forward. Cockles have two little horns wherewith they feel ye way, for they
have no eyes. The fishes join Male and Female, joining their bellyes, then the
female runs or swimmeth away, touching with her mussell the belly of the
Male, and the Males ^ate the Females Eggs, for if all the Eggs should
profit, the Seas, Ryuers, and Pondes, would be filled with fish, there would
be such an innumerable multitude. The Sea Mouse makes her Eggs on the land,
and covers them with earth, and thirty days after does uncover them, and
brings her young ones into the Sea. Some fish live three score year, as by
the experience of marks put on them. Some fishes there are, that live on the
land, when that in Summer, the Ryuers and Pondes are dried up, and some will go
feed in the corn, and on the land, tarying for the water, and such is the
nature of some; to live on the earth with worms. There are certain fishes with
sharp pryckles on their backs, that will cut the line of fishers Nets.
Other fishes that are called Sea stars, do burn other fishes by their great
heat. In the Sea there is war among the fishes as among the foul in the
air, for one feeds not with another.

The tenth book treats of the Fowls of the air.
IN Africa and Ethiopia, there are birds that are called Stiuthiocameli, as
hie as a man on horse back, which do not forsake the earth, but run faster
than horses. The Phoenix lives in Arabia, I say not that he is alone, but
never man saw him eat, he lives six hundredth years, and in his age makes a
Nest of the branches of spice trees, wherein he dies, and of his bones
comes a worm, the which afterward naturally becomes a Phoenix. He is as
great as an Eagle, the feathers about his neck are of the color of gold,
the tail yellow, and the surplus like to Azure. Eagles there are of six
kinds, some live with their pray on the earth, other in the water, that fish
with one foot, they have the knoweledge to take Whelkes, and other shelled
fish up into the air, and then let them fall, to break their shelles, for to
have the fish, they cause their young ones to look up into the Sun beams,
and cast those out of the neast that will not behold the Sun, as bastards,
they die in their age, because that their upper bill does grow so long that
they can not eat, they fight against Dear and against the Dragons, and in
flying they cast dust that they take up on the land, in the eyes of Crows and
other beasts for to blind them. The Cuckoe resembles to the color of the
wood Dove, they are killed of others of their kind, they change their voice,
and come in the spring time, and do always bring up their young ones in
other birds nestes, specially in the nestes of stock Doves, she never lightly
makes above one egg, and very seldom two, because she knows yt she is hated
of all other birds. They think them selves very fair, and disprayse others,
and there is no flesh sweeter than theirs. The Kyte is always a revenging
foul: it seems by the removing of their tail, that they that have learned
to guide or govern the ships by the Helm, have learned by her. Crows will
break or crack nuts, with often letting them fall in flying. The Ravens
engender by the mouth, as some suppose, as do Doves: it is an evil toke^ or
sign when that they cry as though they were choked. The night Owls do
defend them selves from other fowls, with their bill and claws, because they
are hated they fly in the night, in winter they sleep two months, and they
have nine manner of voices. Among the flying beasts, some have fingers and
nails, and other flat and broad feet, as Geese, Duckes, Swannes, and others
living for the most part in the waters. The proud Pecocke spreads abroad
his feathers, specially against ye sun, to make the^ shine, and then puts
them down together: his tail shedeth as the leaves on trees, and comes
again with the spring, when he has no tail, he does hyde him self as
ashamed, at three years his tail begins to color, and lives. xxv. years,
his feet are foul, and his voice fearful. The Cock kno^eth the stars,
and when the day dawneth he ryseth, and goes to rest when the Sun is set,
by his crowing he gives warning of the hours in the night, and waketh those
that go to their labor, he is king of beasts that are in the house of his
bigness, and fights with his spurs: if he have the maysterie, he will sing
or crow, if he be vanquyshed, he hydeth him self: he is stout in his going,
and makes the Lion afraid: he beholds the Sun more than any other bird:
if he be kerued or gelded, he will not crow, being ker^ed he will soon ware
fat. The Goose keeps the Romans Capitol, it has been recyt^d of a Goose,
that has followed his master from Svvecia, to Rome: there feathers are plucked
twice a year, with Goose grease is made many good ointments. Cranes they fly
hye, they do elect one whom they follow, there are among them S^rgeantes,
which make them keep order in their assemblyes, in the night they sleep the
head under their wing, and one leg under their feathers, and sustain them
selves with the other. Those that are appointed to make watch, hold a stone
in one of their claws, for to waken those that sleep, when he lets the
stone fall into the water. The Storkes go their ways in the Summer, and none
knows whither, nor from whence they come, as well as Cranes, the one comes
in in Summer, and the other in winter, they assemble for to take their flight,
but no man ever saw their congregations, for that is done in the night,
without noise. They assemble in Asia at a certain day, and he that is last
come, is killed and torn in pieces, and then they take their flight, ye
Swannes eat Serpents, and therefore there is as great pain to kill them, as
to kill a man, the young ones do nourishe the old. The Quails come by night,
and in danger of mariners when they aproch the land, because of their great
multitude. In time of rain, or of a great wind, they never pass the seas, in
winter they cast their feathers, so does the Turtle. Swalowes live with
flesh, they are so swift, and turn so suddenly, that no other fowls can get
them for to feed on, and they will feed in flying. Swallows tarry but half a
year, some change their voices, and their feathers mount every year. The Iay
loves to steal Gold and Silver. In some places there are no Partriges. In
Rhodes there are no Eagles. At Rome in the house of Hercu^es, there enters
neither Dogg^, nor flies. And so it is, that in many places there is great
diuersi^e of birds. A long the Sea coasts in some place there are birds that
live with fish, and every one of them make^h seven Nestes, and in every nest
young ones, but their nestes are so hard, that they can scarce be broken, and
there is no way into the nestes but one little hole for the Dame to come in and
out, and their nestes are of thorns, that are ranged one against another, with
earth and feathers, and they are seldom seen. There are Swallows of diverse
kinds, there are some called Marlions that make their neastes six foot in
the ground. Birds have marvelous great industry and knoweledge in making
their Neastes, with feathers, earth, and chafe, hair, wool, moss, and such
like. Also they carry water to temper it, and to fortify it, by the which
means their young ones are sure and safe against the rain, the dames do
cleanse and make clean the nestes from ordure, when their little ones are young,
and when they become great, they force them to come forth of their nestes for
to be clean. And in India, some fowls seek Hares skins to make their
nestes. The Partridge so makes her nest, that the wild beasts can not find
them, and where she lays her Eggs she hatcheth not her young, fearing that
her often frequentation should be known. The Female for the intemperancie of
lust of the Male, seeks to deceive him, because if she be upon the nest, he
will break her Eggs. The Males do fight, for the Females. At the cry or
singing of the Female, the Male runs so blinded, that he will sometimes
strike against the foulers head, he is so much subject to imbitilitie, more
than any other bird. The Female when she hears any approach her young ones,
she faineth to have her wings broken, that she can not fly, and cries that
she may be heard, for to retire the people and Dogs, to the end they find
not their nestes, and she flies a far of from her little ones, and they
live, by common estimation, till sixtene years.

The Doves are chaste and leave not their dwelling or remaining place, if that
they are not without makes, they do suspect adultery: by this means they
quarrel with their throat, and sight with their bill, then they flatter with
their fete. The male is as careful toward the young ones, as the female: at the
first they bring their young of the salt of the earth, for to temper their
^ppetite, and they conceive by the bil. The Pigeons and Turtles drink as do
horses, without often pulling their bil out of the water when they drink: they
live about eight years, but the wild Doves live thirty years. The Sparrowe
lives not above a year, and the female lives somewhat more, because of the
freque^tation yt the^ have together. Birds fly in diverse kinds, some go,
some leap, some run, and some cast there feet forward before they fly,
as Cranes and Storkes, and there are none but Drakes, that fly bolt upward at
the first leap, others advance them before they fly. Some have no feet, and
have no rest but in their nest. Hens have understanding, and when they have
laid an ^gge, they cackle and make a noise. The Cardnelis does those things,
that she ^s commanded. The Popingay can speak human speech, they come from
the Indias, they have their head as hard as their bill, they live most
commonly with Acornes, and they speak best yt have five claws on their feet,
they are taught secretly where as there is no other noyses but the teachers.
Crows have been seen speak, and call noble men by their names, specially ^e
at Rome, which by that means was solemnly buried. It is easier to ^ame a
Lion, an Eliphant, or any other great beast or foul, than to tame a Mouse or a
swallow. Strabo was the first that did cage birds, which before had liberty in
the Sky: he taught the way to fatte^ Capo^s, with meal and milk. Among the
birds many have four feet, and some lay many eggs, some four, and some
two. They join together in two manners, the Cranes, with their height. And
Hens and other Females the Cocks tread them doowne. Some eggs, and the mo^e
part are white, others colored, and others read, as the Eggs of Fesantes:
and all kind of eggs within are of two colors, white and read. Eggs of
fishes are round, and they have no white, the Eggs of feathered souls living
on the water are round, and of others long: the young ones come out of the shell
at the round end. Horace says that the longest eggs have the best savor,
and that Hen is best and most tenderest, that lays round eggs. Some birds
engender at all times, as Hens that lay every day an egg, some two at a
time, and some so many that therewith they dye. In some places Doves engender
ten times in a year. In Egypt the Turtle twyce a year, and other birds but
once a year. As touching eggs there is a red drop in the midst of the
yolke, the which makes the birds heart, and it is the first formed, and of
the white is formed the body, and within the egg the head is greater than the
body, and lives with the surplus of the yolke: the twentye day he has life
and cries within the Egg, and then the feathers begin to come. The young one
in the egg lies after this sort, it has the head under the right foot, and
the right wing upon the head; and they grow on their feet, contrary to the
nature of other beasts. Ye ought not to give a Hen above. xxv. eggs to coue
on, and those Chickens that are hatched about the beginning of the year, are
the best. For to set Hens to brood, take eggs of ten days old, for
they are better, than older, or more fresher, and ye ought to put odd: when
the Hen has co^ed four days, in looking on them in the Sun, ye shall
know whether they be good or no, or in putting them in warm water, for the
good eggs will sink to the bottom, and those that are pu^rified and naught,
will flotte and swim. If the eggs are never so little craysed that are
set, they will never prove. It is best to set Hens to coue in the new
Moon, for if they are set in the wane of the Moo^e, or at the full, they will
profit little. When the weather is hot, chicke^s will come within one and
twenty days, and if it be cold, not til five and twenty days. If it thunder
the eggs that are coued will be lost, and also at the voice of the Kyte or
Puttocke. The remedy against the thunder, is to put a name in the Hens nest,
or else of the earth of a Carte wheel. It has been recited of a Cock, which
atfer the Hens death has achieved couing, and by this means to cease from
crowing. The Ducke maruelleth at the first to see her Ducklins, but after most
carefullys she calls them together, and lamenteth if she see them drowned in
the water, and some there are that can make Chickens come in warm water, as
well as if the Egg were coued. The pip comes lightly unto pullaine, between
harvest and the vintage: for a remedy therefore, it is good to let them hunger,
and to give them little meat, or to give them to eat Garlike and butter. Doves
they lay two eggs, and if they lay three they will hatche but twain, they
bring forth a Male and a Female, the Male first and two days after ye Female.
The Male is hatched in the day time, and the female in the night, the young
Pigions come forth of the shell twentye days after they are hatched, and the
Female lays Eggs within five days after yt she has known the Male. In
so^mer often times they have yo^g ones thrice in two months, for if the
weather be hot, they co^ceyue in eightene days, and therefore in the nest is
found many times eggs and young ones. And Pigeons conceive at five Months. The
Peacocke at the age of three y^ares brings forth young ones, the first year
one, and every year after she increases, the Male breaks the eggs to have
the Female at his pleasure, and therefore she hydeth her eggs, and for one
Male, she has five Females: in thirty days she brings forth her young
ones. Geese conceive in the water, they make their Eggs in the spring: it is
necessary to give them nine or eleven eggs to coue, at xxv. or. xxx. days
they are hatched, co^monlye Swannes or such like coue thirty days, the
Female crow alone coueth, and the Male feeds her in the nest. The Batte has
the members and wings as feathers, she brings two young ones, the which she
nourishes with the milk of her breasts. U^pers do wind one about another in
conceyuing, that they seem to be but one serpent, and the Female concey^eth by
sucking ye Males head, which she puts into hirs. Some Serpents make their
eggs on the ground, and then covers them with earth, and the next year after
brings forth their young ones. Men are more proner to lust and fornication in
winter, than in Summer, and women more in Summer than in Winter. Beasts have
society, and know when the female will have the Male. Among the four footed
beasts, their smelling brings the operation of lechery. The greater the
beasts are, the fewer young they bring forth, and the longer they bear them.
All beasts are replenished with ye Male at one time though they bring never so
many, and the young ones lie in the Females belly, the joints or knees against
the belly. But a young Child in the mothers Womb has his face between his
knees, and is like a City. ^attes and Myce do engender by licking one another,
and it has been seen that one has made six score, so it comes to pass
that by this means there are so many both in the fields, and in men's houses.
The Salmander in touching ye fire does quench it as if it were yse, and
notwithstanding that she casts by the mouth, which is like milk, if it
touch any part of a man, the hair of his skin will fall away, they grow as
the Eele in the water, and among them there is neither Male nor Female, and
they never conceive nor make eggs nor yet have young. Man's sense is perfect,
but in seeing, the Eagle does surmout him. The Uulture to smell, and the Mole to
hear, what soever is on earth. Fyshes does both smell and see, and yet have
neither ear nor hole in the head. Some fishes get their pray with their
teeth, others with their feet, and others with sucking and licking according
to their nature.

Some live by sucking of venime, as Serpents, and Spyders, that have neither
blood, nor heat, nor sweat, and to them needs no meats. Wolves do often
times live with earth. Beasts do fatte^ with drinking, and therefore salt for
them is necessary. Those beasts that have their teeth close, do lape as Dogs
in their drinking, and they that hold their teeth together do sowpe hume as
do Oxen and Horses. The Bear in drinking seems to bite the water. In
Africa wild beasts drink not in the Summer for default of water, and there
are certain beasts that never drink, and yet they have always thirst within
the body. There is that have a bladder full of lyquor, in drinking thereof one
shall endure long without thirst. Birds have both (...) and war among them
selves as well as beasts on the earth. One robs from the other their
nestes, young ones, eggs, and meat. All beasts having heart will sleep, both
on the earth and in the water. A child new borne to let him sleep long, is
to him nourishment, as he grows to age he sl^peth less, and young children
dream in their sleeping.

The. xj. book treats of little beasts.
NAture has made more maruelles, and has given more sense and understanding
to little beasts, worthy of more greater memory than the great. They have no
blood, but in steed of blood have humid^ie and moisture in the body, which
makes them give both sound and voice, to asspire and respire, they have
neither heart nor liver, but only certain bowels, and have eyes and other
sentementes and feelings, their head moves not without the body, unless it
be pulled off. Among the which, the good flies or honey Bees have sense, and
labor for the public profit, they have among them Princes, and conductours
of their council, and manner how to behave them selves in their
frequentations. In the Winter they are hidden, for that they can not resist the
Snowes, Winds, and Frostes, they make honey and ware, when they go to their
work they never leese no time. First they wype or rub their Hyue with things
that are bitter, as the Gum of trees, and other things for to take the taste
from other beasts of the sweetness of their honey: afterward they make their
chambers or dwellings, then they make their young ones without corruption, and
after that they make their honey and wa^e, of flowers, and provide food for
winter, otherwise bitter meat full of humor separated from honey. On nights in
their voyage, when they are from their wonted place to rest, they lie their
belly upward, to keep their wings from the dew. The manner of their works is
to remain some of them at ye gate or door of their Hyue there to keep watch,
as the custom is of a Castle: in the night they rest till the morning, except
those that are appointed to watch, of the which one of them in the morning
goes about making a sound or noise, as it were a Trumpet, and then every one
departs and flies away, if the day be fair, otherwise they continue in
their house, and they know the disposition of times, the young ones go or fly
abroad into the fields, and the old ones remain to make the work, or to
divide the rowmes within. Some bring the flowers to the entry of their place,
others do discharge it, and caryeth it in, others bring water in their throat
for to te^per or give moisture to their works, and they divide their offices.
Some do garnish, some pollishe, some suck, and others make ready food of that
which is brought in, for they live together and do not separate, to the end,
that equally their food be divided: they make double alleyes or paths, some
to come in at, and some to go forth by: the most honey is in the highest rowme.
If there chance to rise a great wind whylest they are in the fields, then
they fly close to the ground along the hedges, and they take a little stone or
earth to be more waightier, to the end the wind bear them not away, and lode
their flowers in their fore feet, against their breasts. Those that are
appointed masters or overseers of their house, will chastise those that are
negligent and slow. They never file nor make filth in their Hiue they are so
clean. In the night their watch being set, they retire into their lodging, and
make a murmuring or noise, still deminishing till that one makes the last
sound or Trumpet, flying in the midst of them, and then they cease often al til
the morning. First they make their common houses, and then the house of their
king or Captain whom they do elect and choose. Among these good flies,
there are others more greater without sting, which serve at the works, and to
chafe or warm ye young ones between their feet, and they are straightly
corrected, and if they fail, without any remission. These make their king a
fair house, pinacled like a Castle, separated from other houses. The lodgings
of the common sort, have six rowmes or corners for the work of their six
feet, and they make them in close, dark, or raynye days, and at such times
they fill the upper Celles with honey, and in a fair and clear day they go to
the fields. The manner how the young ones are borne, there is great
defficultie, for they never cover one another. There was a Roman that made a
hiue of clear lantern horns for to see their works, and it seems that
they make little worms, that become flies, and before that they have feathers,
there is nothing that ye dame desires more to eat, when their heads are
pulled of. Their king is chosen in every swarm or company, and they choose him
that is greatest: he is known for he has a spot in the foreheade. If he go or
fly to the fields, the others follow him as his guard, and he goes not out of
the Hyue unless that all the rest do follow. If he have a wing broken or
perished, he goes not out of the Hyue, he only takes no pains, but
admonishes them of their work. If by advise of council he comes forth,
every one puts their pain to serve him, and will carry him if he be weary.
If he have a sting, yet he uses it not. When they intend to depart and leave
the hiue, certain days before, they murmr and make a noise, and fly their
way by tempests. Often times they be at strife for their bonds and flowers, or
if one Hyue have no food, they will spoil another, and their king does defend
them. If there want vittayles, they kill or drive away those flies that have no
sting. If their sting be once broken, they are tamed or faint hearted, as a
gelded body, and can profit no more, such have places a part for to retire
them. They hate sheep, for they can scarce get out of their wool. Also they
hate Crabbes or Creuices, and if there be any sodde^ nere to their place, the
smell of them will make them dye. They have many diseases, and if any of them
dye, they bring him out of their rowmes, and cast him out of their Hyue as
making of funerals. If their King dye, they do more, for then they make such
dolor and sorrow, that they do nothing. By this and by to much taking off of
their honey, they die often times. They have sense and understanding to hear,
and do rejoice, and at the sound of a Basan they will assemble. When their
work is finished they fly abroad, then return to their hyue or house. Their
age is seven years, they never touch any Carrion, as Crows, Kytes, and other
flies do. Their honey comes as it were a sweat from heaven, spittle from the
stars, or lyquor from the air, when in the spring time the said moisture
falls on the leaves and the Dew, and the Bees receives it, and caryeth it
into their byue. The honey at the first is as clear as water, it boyleth like
new wine, and purges, the twenty day it fatteneth, then it hardneth, and
casts a little skin like a scumme, there is ways how to get the honey, for
want of food causes the Bees to disperse and fly their ways, or die, and to
great abundance makes them unprofitable, for they labor no more than is
necessary or nedeful, and therefore the twelueth part is their portion that
they ought to leave them. Of honey is made many medicinable things, serving to
each one. Some leave the tenth part, and if it be not full but almost empty, ye
ought not to touch it. That honey that cleaves together or threedeth, is not
good, but when incontinently it breaks in taking of it, it is a good sign.
Also the good smelling honey that has a color like gold, and sweet in the
taste, is a sign of goodness. The wild honey is not so good as the other.
Spiders or Spinners have within them such fertility, that they spinne
beginning in the mydst, and they make threedes very subtle. They make their
young ones like worms. Scorpions toward the East are very venomous, and they
make little worms like eggs, of which comes their young ones, but in Italy
they do little harm. They byte or sting with their tail. Locusts or
Grasshoppers make eggs, they go on the ground with their claws. The Parthians
do eat them. Also Ants make eggs, of the which grow their young ones: and as
the good flies do congregate their works, so they hide their food in the
earth, for to live with in the winter. They have knowledge how to divide the
great grain Acorne, and they dry them that are wet in the Summer, they work
by night in the full Moon, one comes to another for their burdens, and it
seems that in them is mutual love in the diligence of their work. Among
other beasts they bury one another when they are dead. The Butterflye comes
of a little worm in three days, she grows also of wood wherein is
humiditie. There are beasts full of blood that dye ^o sone as they are full,
for behind they have no issue, they are ingendered under the Oxen, and
sometime on Dogs. In Cypres there grow in the furnaces, of flies, great
flying flies, called Piralis or Piransta, that dye when they are out of the
fire. And some there are called Hemorobios, that dye that day that they take
life. Dead flies if they be hidden or buried in Ashes, will revive. All
beasts have their horns hollow saving at the very end, except the Dear.
Asses in India have one horn. Man alone has his ears immovable. Hares
sleep with their eyes open, so do many men which the Greeks call Corybantia.
The eyes of young Swallows will come again, if they be pulled out. The eyes of
man principallys does show love, furor, folly, and wisdom. Great eyes
signify small wit or discretion. The heart lives first, and dies last. A man
has eight ribs on a side, the Hog ten, the Serpent thirty. Among fowls the
Batte has teeth and no other. Man grows til he be. xxi. years old. Blood
preserves the life of every person: that being gone no remedy but death. They
that have the thickest and fattest blood, are the strongest. They that have it
most fine and clear, are the wysest. They that have least are fearful. The
blood of an ass is most fattest. The blood of a Bull will sone ware hard.
The blood of Dear and Goats is not thick nor hardneth no^. Man alone will
change his color even in a moment. The man that is hairye, is inclined to
fleshely lust. If a man's hair does not grow nor his bearde, it is a sign
that he is barren, so is the woman that has no hair growing on her body. The
hair of a man's bearde comes not as the grass in the field that is mowed,
but it proceeds from the root. There is no Male that has any appearance of
breasts but man: a woman has two in her stomach, the Cow has four in her
belly, Goats and sheep two, the Sowes ten, and some twelve. Every Pigge
knows the dugge that they have been nourished with. Whales, and Sea calves
nourishe their young ones with milk of their breasts. A woman's milk is
unprofitable before the seven months. A Cow has no milk before she has had
a calfe. The Ass has milk when she begins to bear. And to let the young
Ass take the Dames milk before two days, is dangerous. Certain Dames of
Rome did bathe them selves in Asses milk, for it makes their skin smoth and
white. Milk of Goats is worsse to make chese than the milk of Kyne. The
milk of beasts having above four breasts, is unprofitable to make cheese,
and that of two breasts is better. The cheifest and best cheeses are made in
Italy. Zoroastes lived twenty years with cheese without feeling age. Man has
two feet of one length and measure, and two arms with two hands. The thombe
and the little finger are of one measure, the other two also of a measure, and
that in the midst is longer. Every finger has three joints, and they shut or
bow inward and not outward, the thombe has but two that bow in like manner.
The Ape is the beast that most approaches the fashion of feet, hands, nose,
and ears to man, for with the forefeete he fedeth, and has the bowels like to
man's. At three years man has taken half his growth of hight. He has the
knees and arms contrary in bowing, the one forward the other backwarde.
Beasts that engender their like, bow their knees backewarde, and those that
make eggs, forward. Nails grow unto each one, yea unto dead men as well as
their beardes. Birds that have elawes and one at the heel, streatch their
feet toward their tail in flying. All beasts have feet in number equal.
Flies have six and so have Locustes or Grasshoppers that leap, because that
their hinder feet are long. The genitores of Wolves, Foxes, and ^a^mes are of
bone. Boares have them joining, and sheep have them hanging. The tail of
fishes serves to conduct them, and so it does to other beasts, and all have
tails except man and the Ape. Those beasts have voice that have lungs and
artiers. Others make but a sound or noise, and murmr inward. A Child never
renders voice till he be wholly out of the mothers womb. They that sonest
speak latest go. The boyces of men are diverse, as well as their similitudes
and likeness, and we understand them before we see them. The voice of men is
more grauer than the voice of women. Members that grow out of time are
unprofitable, as the sixte finger. There was one that had two eyes behind the
head, but he saw nothing. It is a vain thing says Arisrotle to judge any
person by signs. Often times comes judgments of short life, that is to
we^e, few teeth, very long fingers, color like to lead, and other things. The
contrary signs of long life is to crook the shoulders, on one hand two
strikes along, to have more tha^. xxxij. teeth, great ears. Great fore heads
signifies a stout and manly courage, little fore head, lightness, a round
fore head, wrath. If the brows be straight it signifies imbecilitie. If they
bend toward the nose, hastiness. If they bend toward the cheeks,
signifies a mocking person. If they bend wholly toward the eyes, malice and
envy. Long eyes signify malice. The greatness of ye ears signifies a
foolish babbler. The breath of a Bear is naught, and worsse a Lio^s. The
Serpent flies the breath of the Elephant, and the burning of Hearts horns.
The honey Bees oil being cast on them, dye. The Scithians in their wars,
temper their Darts heads in human blood, and in Uipers poison, and if they
strike any therewith, there is no remedy but death. The best food for man is
to eat but of one meat at one time or meal, the accumulating of savors is
pestiferous, and Wine makes a smelling or stinking breath, if it be not
tempered. With great difficulty shall a man digest that which is taken
gredely, excessiuely, or hastily. There is more pain in the stomach to digest
in Summer, than in Winter, and in age more than in youth. The vomytings that
are made after excess, makes the body cold, are hurtful to the eyes and
teeth. A man's body grows and waxes gross, to use sweet things, fat
meats, and good drinks. A man may easily live seven days without drink.
Butter asswageth hunger and thirst: nevertheless things excessiuely taken are
hurtefull, and therefore it is good to deminishe that away which hurts.

The. xij. book treats of sweet smelling trees.
TRees have life which they take of the earth. There are many strange trees
in diverse countries, which unto some are unknown. In some places they water
fine trees at the ^oote with wine, the which profits much the roots. The
Parthians which have trees bearing wool, of the which is made fine cotton
cloth, as it is said, have a tree bearing Apples, but ye fruit is not to be
eaten, but they have a meruellous smell, so have the barks, the which being
in your Chest among your apparel, casts a sweet savor or smell: and this
tree has always fruit, some growing some dying, and some ready to gather, and
the graftes of this tree will take in no other country. In India there is both
wood and trees that will not burn in the fire. There has also been seen a
Fig tree of a great height, the branches of the same tree to spread sixty
paces, and it has leaves so broad, that the sun beams can not by any means
enter between, and therefore the fruit of this tree can not dye, but the shadow
of the same is very delectable. There is also in the Indias, Apple trees which
have the leaves three cubits long, and two broad, bearing such great fruit,
that four men can scarce eat one Apple. The trees name is Pala, the Apples
name Aripa. Pepper grows on little trees as does Ienuper. In ye Indias it is
sometimes mingled with Ienuper berries of that Country, which have some
strength, but no such taste: it grows almost white, but for to last it is
dried in the smoke, which causes it to be black, and with the shrubbes of
the same tree dried in the Sun, is made long Pepper* There are other trees
which in the morning after the dew, rendereth a certain kind of honey. In
Arabia there are trees which never cast their leaves. Others that have their
flowers, that begins in the morning at ye sun rising to open, and at hye
noone they are opened, and after noone they begin to close, and so remain all
night till the morning, and the Paysauntes of that country say that the tree
slepeth. There is the tree of Nardus, the which casts a marvelous sweet
smell or odor. And in Arabia of trees grow Frankencense, and Myrre.
Frankencense grows in a Forest of Arabia, in a fruitful ground, full of
Fountaynes pertaining to diverse persons. It is a hanging matter among them to
steal any thing. The men do purify them selves, and abstain from women for
a certain space, to take or gather the Frankencense, otherwise they can not
profit. On this side the sea it is mingled with a kind of Rosen which is
like, but the difference is known by the color, by the breaking, and by the
fire, for Frankencense will sooner burn, and is sooner broken with your teeth.
Also there is in those woods of Arabia, trees bearing Myrre, and the Masticke.
The Sabians burn no other wood, wherefore they are weary of their smell. In
the Sea of Arabia grows the Margets and other precious stones. Cynamon is the
bark of a little tree, which grows in great quantity in base Ethiopia, in
full places among the bushes, the best is that of the highest branches, the
worst is that that is nearest to the root. When there is any deawe in the
Summer it is gathered by great defficultie. The tree has no smell when it is
green, and it is gathered from the Sun rising, to the Sun setting. The
ships remain six months for their fraught. That that is carried into this
country of Ethiopia to sell them, is glasses, vessels of Copper, and Brass,
woollen cloth, and linne. The worst bark or pelle, is that that is soft and
white. Baulme grows only in the pronince of Judah, in two Gardins of the
Kings, the one containing about ten Ak^rs, the other less, and it comes of
little trees not four foot long growing after the manner of a Uine, ^
resembles and is near to the taste of wine, red in color and fat, the
fruit is cut with a knife of glass, stone, or bone, for the branch dye^h
to be cut with ^ron, and it is cut to take away the superfluities, then in yt
season the bark is only cut, and then comes out the sweat by small
drops. This experience is true, that if any of it be spilte upon any
apparel, it will never stain. There is danger in Worms, for they will mar
the tree. Alexander the great in a Summers day filled a little Uyall of one
tree. Ginger grows in the earth, and is roots.

The. xiij. book treats of strange trees.
THe sweet oyntmentes, perfumes, and smellings, are made of these trees. Some
for the pleasure of others buy them dear, for they that carry them, have not
the smell and pleasure, but it is for ye smell of others, which is great
vanity. Palms are in diverse kinds, and there are none fruitful, but toward
the East, for they make wines: and as in trees and leaves there are Male and
Female, so there is also in these. The Male buddeth within the root, and the
Female outward. They bear every year Apples, and when the tree is cut the
root casts again. The Cedar grows in Siria, of which comes the
sovereign root. That that flourishes bears no fruit, and that that
fructifieth bears no flower, and the wood lasts perpetually. The Fig
trees in Egypt are like to Mulbery trees, the fruit comes four times a
year, against the wood and not against the branches. There are many unknown
trees, specially those that have ye good Gum. There are made Cords or Ropes of
this tree. At Rome have been found books of Philosophy in a Sepulcher between
two stones covered with Cedar wood, that had laid there five hundredth thirty
five years without harm, for the Cedar never rotteth, and there is no wood so
good to make works. There are Cedar trees so hye, that ye can not see the
tops, and so great that there was presented to Tiberius Caesar, a table that
was four foot large, and sixty foot long. Lotten or Celtis is a tree in
Africa, the fruit of which is so sweet that it heals al pains in the
belly, and out of that fruit being bruised or pressed, comes wine that will not
continue above ten days. Pomgranets there are of diverse kinds, sweet, sour,
and wynishe. The pell of the sower ones are good, and best to tanne skins,
and the flowers are good for Dyars. The thorn that is called Royal, grows in
one day, and keeps wine from being naught. Citisus is a singular tree, the
wood is good to all beasts, as well sheep as others. If it be sodden in water,
it renders to Nources that drink it, plenty of milk, and makes the children
more sure and more greater, and makes Hens to lay eggs. Upon the flower of
this tree a fly will never sit. Many other strange trees there are in the
Sea, yt will break like glass, and others that are as hard as stones, and many
other trees that are in the Islands of the Sea, which we have not here, and
which unto us are also unknown.

The. xiiij. book treats of trees and fruitful plants.
IN times past men were wont to have many pleasant trees, of the which now
there is no mention, for every one studieth covetousness. The Wine grows of
wild plants, and among all other plants it is the principallest fruit, and
there are many kinds, and every year it must be cut, or else otherwise it
would compass a whole Town. Wine is the blood of the earth, it being taken
within a man's body is hot, and without it is cold, it is both comfortable
and profitable to a man, if it be taken measurably, otherwise it is very
hurtful. Alexander the great did van^uishe the whole world, and yet could not
so well keep him self, but was overcome with the force of wine. Wines is not
permitted to the wives of Rome. We read that King Romulus did pardon and
forgive a Senator of Rome called Ignatius Mecenius which had killed his wife
with a Clubbe, for that she was found drinking Wine out of a tun. And
therefore Cato did ordain that women and maidens should be kyssed of their
parents and kinssolke, to the end they should know whether they did smell of
wine or no. Marcus Varo writes of a Consul which never made banquet, nor had
at his Table more at one time than at another, for fear of to much drinking.
In times past at Rome the price was set on wine, to the end that little should
be drunk, but since Caesar made great banquettes, which gave occasion to make
provision at Rome for all kind of Wynes. Wine alone serves to make medicines.
There is wine made of Pears, Apples, and of other trees, which they use
toward the East.

Some make Wine of herbs, of water and honey sodden, which in Wales is called
Metheglyn that will last five years, or with honey and Uineger, which is
called Oximell. The small wynes ought to touch the ground for to be the better
kept, but not the good. The flower of white Wine is good, and that of red is
naught. By drunkenness men reveal their secrets, and make debates.

The. xv. book treats of trees bearing fruit.
THe Olive tree grows not near the Sea, nor in places to hot nor to cold:
they must be cut like Uines. The Olive oil is of a better savor when the
Olives begin to ripe, but there is not so much when they begin to be black,
but that is the time to take them, and of their rypenesse. There is more pain
to make Oil than wine. The Olive has stone, oil, and flesh, the grene are
bitter, by drying they become less though that the heat is cause of oil.
The lyquor of the Olive is the Oil, but is lasts not as does Wine, for it is
best the first year. Some there are that tarry till the Olives fall from
trees, for it hurts the trees again the year following, to be cut,
broken, or smitten. Olyues before they are ripe will be kept with salt, after
that they have been in hot water. If the Olive be not clean, it is washed and
dried, three or four days and seasoned with salt. There is Oil made of
many things, of Nuttes, of Acornes, of small graynes, of sweet smelling
trees, of Gum that serves for medicines, of Almo^ds, Chesnuttes, and diverse
other things, according to the Countries. Apples and Pears ought to be kept
in a dry and cold place, and for them the north wind is good, and no other
wyndes, when the weather is fair, they should be put on hay, separated one
from another for to take the air, and they ought to be gathered before the
full Moon. Nuttes make a sound or (...) in falling, when they are ripe, and
among other fruits they are parted in four within, with a little skin
between both. They will keep green, being put in earthe^ Pottes, in the
earth, and with them is made good Oils. Chesnuttes, are a kind of maste, and
it is maruayle that nature has so closed them in shelles. Mulberryes stayne a
bodies fingers, and they are of three colors, at the first they are white,
after that become read, and when they are ripe then they are black. Cheryes
will keep dried with the Sun as Olyues. There are many relessinges in
fruits, as sweet, waterishe, sower, bitter, green, salt, brackish, fat,
and diverse others, among the which there are that have many tastes together.
The Wynes are sweet and sour, pricking. Milk is sweet and fat, but there
are three principal Elements, without savor and without smell, as water,
fire, and the air. The Laurel is didicated to triumphs, and Emperors bear
thereof on their heads, principally because it keeps the persons from thunder.

The. xvj. book treats of wild trees.
THe Acornes comes of Oak trees of diverse sorts, for some there are better
than others, and in time of famine the good Acornes dried may be grinded to
make bread. Acornes be most sweetest when that they are new, and roasted in
the imbers. The Oak is best for to build withal either houses or ships
because it will longest last. If an Oak tree be smitten with the thunder, it
bears few Acornes or none, and is so bitter, that no beast will eat thereof
but Hogs, and when they are very hungry. The Beache tree, bears a kind of
maste the which rejoices the Hogs being fed with them, their flesh is
soon sodden, and very profitable for the stomach. Taxus is a tree like unto
a Pyne tree. In Arcadia it is so venomous that no beast dare sleep under the
shadow of it, nor eat thereof. The Cups that are made of this woodde to
put Wine in, are venomous. It is said that the venime of this woodde
ceasseth, when there is nailed therein a nail of brass. An Esshe tree the
leaves thereof is mortiferous to Mares, but it hurts not the beasts that
shadow under it, to drink the lyquor of it, is good against the biting of
Serpents, for never serpent rests under the shadow thereof, and he that will
compass a Serpent about a fire with ye leaves of this tree, the Serpent will
rather take the fire than escape through those leaves. The Tilia of some called
the Teybe, has Male and Female, for the Female alone bears flowers and
seed. The luyce of the bark and leaves is sweet, but no beast will eat of
the fruit, between the bark and the woodde there are many little thin
pelles or skins with the which are made Ropes. The Mapple if it were so great
and so high as the Cedar, should be preferred because of his propernesse. With
this tree is made Tables being of a blackishe color. The Box tree spreads
very large and thick, and is very proper because of his shadow. There are
certain wild trees, that never leese their leaf, as the Cedar, the Ienuper,
the Holly tree, and others. The Ienuper for his leaf has a sharp prick or
thorn. There are certain places in Egypt whereas some trees will not grow.
Other trees there are that leave their leaves sooner than the rest, and the
difference thereof comes, for that their fruit is sooner ripe than others:
but Almonde trees, the Esshe, and others, have their fruit with the first, and
cast their leaves with the last. The Mulberrye tree brings her fruit late,
and falls her leaves with the first. The trees after the manner of beasts do
conceive in January with the wind, some sooner than others, and after a
straight wind, begins the flowers to appear, and nourishe the fruit.
Uynes in some places bears twice a year. The roots are diverse according to
the dyuersitie of trees. Esculus as writes Virgill is a tree, that has such
profunditie or deepenesse in the earth, as it has above the ground in height.
The Ciper tree is slow in growing without fruit, having bitter leaves, violent
smell, and naughty shadow. The trees have moystu^ which is their blood, with
the which they ^ut as well as beasts. They have skin, fl^she, blood, s^newes,
veins, bones, and mary. There are trees of a marvelous height, and
greatness. A tree like to a Pine called Larix was six score foot long, and so
thick that four men could scant f^dome it. In Germany they cut such great
trees for to swim on the Ryuers, and such there are as will bold thirty
men. Commonly wood will flote above the water, but some there are so weighty
that they will sink. Diverse woods there are that will never rotte, as Cedar,
Box, Ienuper, and others. Ciper, Box, and Cedar, of their own nature do
never crack nor crayse, nor are eaten of worms. There were brought to Rome
Cypers that were 400. years old, which seemed as if they were new. Worms
hurt many woods, but never Cipers, because of his bitterness, neither Box
because of his strength. Alexander the great his soldiers found in an Island of
the red sea, ships that had been made two hundredth years before, of a certain
kind of wood, not used on the water. The Olive trees last two year, and Uines
six hundredth years.

It shall suffice at this present with the one half of Plinies book, the
other half is of husbandry, with the nature of Uynes, that unto us is well
known by experience, as well by the diversity and situation of places, as of
the property of every herb serving for medicine, the which I leave out for
prolixitie and obscurity of the same. Also it serves more for the science of
medicines, than to us. Making upon this an end, with praise to God the father
that has us in his tuicion.

FINIS.

