THE Secrets and wonders of the world. A BOOK RIGHT rare and strange,
containing many excellent properties, given to Man, Beasts, Fowls, Fishes and
Serpents, Trees, Plants etc.

Abstracted out of that excellent natural Historiographer Pliny. Translated
out of French into English.

At London Printed for Thomas Hacket, and are to be sold at his shop in
Lumberd street, under the Popes head. 1585.

To the worshipful and his very good friend Master Richard Candler, as one
that wishes the favor of God long and happy life, increase of worship, with
continual health and felicity.
SO it is worshipful Sir, I have devised with my self many times how to
gratify you with some token of my good will toward you, but wealth and
ability lacking to accomplish my desired pretense, yet now at the last, I
have presumed knowing your wonted courtesies toward all men, to dedicate this
Abstract of Plinies desiring you to take it with as good a will as I have meant
it, till hereafter that some seriusser matter come to my hand, and thus I bid
you most heartily farewell in the Lord, who keep you and all yours, prosper and
preserve you in all your good and godly enterprises. Amen.

Yours to use. T. H.

To the Reader.
HEre have thou gentle Reader, set forth unto thee this Book, named The
Secrets and wonders of the World, abstracted out of the sixteen first Books
of that excellent natural Historiographer Pliny, for the strangeness and
worthiness thereof, I refer thee to thine own judgment, requesting thee to
take this in good part, and shortly shall be by Gods grace, set forth unto thee
three worthy and learned books, the first is of the Cituation of the world,
writ by Pomponius Mela, The second is a perfect Peregrination and true
discovery of Graecie, Turkey, Arabia, and Siria, with the manner of their
Cities, and their Antiquities: The third is, Julius Sollinus Pollihistorie, the
which books thou shall find both to be pleasant and profitable, And thus I
bid thee farewell in Christ, who keep us. Ame^.

The Secrets and wonders of the World, abstracted out of the principal of the
natural Historiographers.
PLINY the natural Historiographer, was borne under the Emperor Tyberian,
and died under Titus, the Emperor that destroyed Jerusalem, after the death
and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, in which time he did attribute his
works. In the first book (which is brief,) he makes his preambles. In the
second, he treats of the world, and of other matters.

He describes that the world is alone and round, naturally immovable,
although that there are certain places moveable, and that may move, by the
concauites of the earth, being full of wind.

There are four Elements, the Earth, the Water, and the Fire above the Air,
near to the first firmament. Which is fire natural, and therefore there
needs no wood to continue the same.

Under the Earth are the Planetes, which are called Strayers, and yet they move
less then the others, but it is of the mutation of their influences, and of
the Firmament: among the which is the Sun rector and the guider of the other
Planets, principal governor of nature.

The other Stars are not attributed (as some do think, as the greatest and
clearest to the rich: and the least to the poor, and the obscure and dark
stars, to those that of nature are infected. For we have no such society
with the Stars, that they should die with us, and therefore they are equally
divided, serving to each one.

The Moon has her Planet coming before her, as the Sun has the day
Star, she does increase and diminish, and sometimes is at the full, and
sometimes she has horns, even as the Sun does give and take away her
clearenesse.

The earth is between them both, the Moon is in the first heaven, the Sun
in the fourth, and when the one is high, the other is low, and the other
Stars are more higher in the Sky, and therefore they seem less then the
Moon. The obscurity and darckenesse of the Moon, comes by the humors of
the earth that is drawn or sucked up from the earth.

By the Geometry of this world, the Stade which is forty rods, does
contain 125. paces, the which are 525. foot. Sometimes there has been seen
in the appearance, three Suns, and three Moons.

In the Air it raineth sometimes naturally Stones, sucked up by the vapors of
the earth, sometimes Frogs, and some time blood in diverse figures.

The Heliotropium in his flower, does turn every day and follow the Sun.

The Ant does never begin to hourde up but in the full Moon.

The nature of the winds are diverse, according to the diversity of
Countreies, and they proceed of the earth, and of the vapors of the same,
which causes sometimes in many places Earthquakes.

The Thunders and Lightnings, do never fall in the winter, for the coldness
of the air does keep them in and choakes them, and therefore they fall in the
Summer, and many times they mar the Wine, without touching the vessel.

There was a woman at Rome, whose child was slain within her womb, by
thunder and lightning, and the woman had no hurt at all.

Three things there are that never feel any harm by thunders and lightnings:
the Laurel tree on the Earth, the Eagle in the Sky, and the Seacalse in the
Sea, for they never fall upon their skins, therefore best assured are they
that are so clad.

Naturally there are signs and tokens in the earth, the Sea, and the Air, and
therefore it has rained sometimes Blood, Stones, Wool, yea great stones
accumulated in the air by the coldness thereof.

The Rainebowe is not seen in a close and rainy day, but the Sun beams
entering into the concauites of the Earth, do reflexe the Sun, and make
variety of colors, by the mixture of the clouds in the air, and is seen
most commonly in the Summer. Also there are never lightly seen above two
Rainbowes.

The earth is the mother of all living creatures. In the air is seen many
times darkness and clouds, the Hailes are derived of the waters, but the
earth is lowly, serving to all creatures, she brings forth Corn, Wine,
Fruits, and all kind of things pertaining to man. She brings forth Iron,
Lead, Gold, Silver, precious Stones, and Herbs, serving unto man's health,
yea, if that a Serpent chance to bite any person, the earth will not receive
that Serpent when it is dead.

The earth is compassed round about with waters, the which is more known by
experience, then by arguments, and some part thereof is not inhabited toward
the North, because of the great cold.

An other part is not inhabited because of the extreme heat, toward the
South.

The middle of the earth is the Centry, to the which most waightiest things do
take hold.

In some places there is no shadow of the Sun, specially in Alexandria the
great, where as there is a deep well without shadow.

Anaxemenes Milesius, was the first founders of Dials.

There are many signs of mouings, and mutations of times, without great
appearance, as in the Sea, when that without wind, the waves do rise and
rage. And in the Sky, when that there is a long stripe or line: and when that
the well waters are troubled.

Two mountains have been seen naturally hit and touch one another, as if they
had foughten, the waters meeting together to strive and marueilously to
increase, and beasts to dye.

In Asia twelve Cities were subverted by the Earthquakes, without perceiving
thereof at Rome.

Near unto Rome there are two hundredth acres of ground, the which does shake
when there are horses running thereon.

In the I Will of Paphos there is a place where there did never fall rain. And in
the same I Will Nea in the City of Troados, the sacrifices do never putrify nor
rot.

Nere to Harpasa a town in Asia, there is a great Mountain, that one may
shake with their finger, but if you put your whole strength to it, it remains
immovable.

There are two Mountains near to the flood of Nyle, the nature of them are
diverse, for the one retains iron, the other casts it off, in such sort,
that if any of their shoes be clouted with nails, that go upon the said
hill, they can neither go nor stand, but are cast off: and on the other hill,
their shoes will stick fast.

In the City of Charagena, there is a certain ground that heals all kind
of sores and diseases, the Sea does purge in the full Moon: and the
fluctuations of the Seas, comes by the Sun and Moon, the which causes it.
In the hie Sea there never falls snow, the Sea is most hottest in Winter,
and saltest in Summer. Of fresh waters there are diverse sorts.

In Dodone is the Frountaine called Jupiters Spring, which does kindle
firebrandes, it diminishes at Noone, and increases at midnight, and then
afterward decreaseth, and fails at midday. There are many hot waters,
because of the smoke and closeness of the hills, from whence these hot
waters spring.

There are Springs that will make black Sheep become white, and other waters
that makes white sheep become black, by continuance of drinking, and others
that the ewes that drink in the^ their milk will become black.

At Lincestis, there is a Fountain of water, that will make them that drink
thereof drunken.

Also in Paphlagonia, and in the field Calenus, in the I Will of Andro, there is a
Fountain or Spring, that renders wine every year in the Nonas of January.

In a field called Carrimensis, in Spain, there is a River that will make the
fishes that are therein, to seem of the color of gold, and if they are put
into any other water, they will seem as other fishes.

Among the meruailes of fire, the Mountain called Ethna, in Silicia, burns
continually, the flames whereof are seen above the hill top. An other hill
that is called Chimera, burns in like manner, the fire of which hill is sooner
quenched with earth or with hay, then with water.

In the third, fourth, fifth, and sixth books, Pliny describes the earth,
the waters and the Islands, and deuideth the world into Asia, Africa, and
Europa. Asia contains the half of the world, in the which is Armenia,
Capadocia, Albania, Suauia, where as there is no metal but gold. Seithies,
where as is the sweet Sea, and there are trees that bring forth silk, ready
to spinne.

India, where there are people very rich, they labor with Elephantes, and go
to war with them. Their king has ordinarily six hundredth thousand footmen,
thirty thousand horsemen, and nine thousand Camels to his gages, and to his
daily cost, and when they be so old that they can scarce see, nor can live no
longer, they cast them selves into a great fire.

Beyond the Indians, is the I Will called Taprobane, where as is the green Sea,
and there is planted precious stones, with mettalls of gold and silver.

The men of that Country are more greater then others, they sell their
merchandise by making of signs, the Moon never shines with the^ above six
hours, they have small edifices or buildings, and their vitailes never waxes
dear: for their God they have Hercules. They do elect and choose an old man
to their King, which has no children, and if he chance to have any whilst he
is king, they do kill them, to that end that the kingdom be not inherited by
their elected king: they do constitute. xxx. governors, without whose assent
none can be condemned to death. If their king does misdoe, they do punish
him, or depose him from the crown.

This nation takes great delight in the chase of Tigres and Clephantes, and
does abound in corn and fruits, they do delight to fish for shell fishes,
which are there very great, in so much that one may hide themselves in their
shelles.

Alexandria the great was founded by the great king Alexander, and near unto
that is the red Sea, by the repercussion of the Sun, that does so color
it, or else for that the mood and the gravel is such, or for that it is the
nature of the water.

Also Siria and Arabia, whose people are ta^ned and heary all save the head,
and they are apparelled with the skins of fish.

There is also Mesopotanie, Babylon, Assiria, Arabia: the flood of Tiger, has
his original in a fountain of Armenia.

In the I Will of Sagaros, there can no Dog live, for as soon as he enters
into the I Will, he turns round till he fall down dead.

The Sabiens are rich with the fertility of their Forests, with metals,
Honey, and Wax.

The Candeans live with Serpents, and in the I Will of Gagaudes was first found
Popeniayes.

Idumea, Judah, Jerusalem, Galile, Sirie, Palestin, which was the first founder
of letters, and at the first, in steed of letters, used certain figures of
beasts.

Also there is a Nation called Hesseneans, living without wives, and without
lechery. When they are dead, they are cast into the Sea, they live without
money, and grow of the dead.

Of the Ethiopians there are diverse forms and kinds of men. Some there are
toward the East, that have neither nose nor nostrelles, but the face all full.
Others that have no upper lip, they are without tongues, and they speak by
signs, and they have but a little hole to take their breath at, by the which
they drink with an Oten straw.

There are some called Syrbote, that are eight foot high, they live with the
chase of Elephantes.

In a part of Affricke, by people called Ptoemphane, for their king they have a
Dog, at whose fancy they are governed, to whom they do pronosticate their
doings, and their conduct in war.

Toward the West there is a people called Arimaspi, that has but one eye in
their forehead, they are in the desert and wild Country.

The people called Agriphagi, live with the flesh of Pa^thers and Lions: and
the people called Antropomphagi which we call Canibals, live with human flesh.

The Cinamolgi, their heads are almost like to the heads of Dogs.

Africa aunciently called Libia, does contain the Moors, and the pillars of
Hercules, (among the sloods) there is Onylus that does engender Cocodrils.

There are goodly Forests with unknown trees, some of the which trees bear
small threades, of the which is made clothing of Cotton.

Cyrenes and Syrtes, make their houses of salt stones, cut out of the
mountains, there is the mountain of Giry, the which does engender and bring
forth many precious stones.

In Libie, which is at the end of the Ethiopes, there are people, differing
from the common order of others, they have among them no names, and they curse
the Sun for his great heat, by the which they are all black saving their
teeth, and a little the palm of their hands, and they never dream. The
others called Troglodites, have Caves and holes in the ground, and have no
other houses. Others called Gramantes, they make no marriages, but all women
are common. Gamphasantes, they go all naked.

Blemmy is a people so called, they have no heads, but have their mouth and
their eyes in their breasts. And others there are that go more by training of
their hands then with their feet. There are gathered the spices, and there is
nothing that they are afraid of, but of great dogs that will bark at them,
and bite them.

Afric begins beyond the Realm of Spain and Grenado, and is divided in
the Sea of Europa, as between Dover and Calis, there begins the Kingdoms of
Feoz, of Tunis, of Barbaria, of Carthage, and of others of the Ethiopians.

Europia begins from the Sea Meditarene so called, because it is a flood in
the midst of the world. Upon this Sea that deuideth Asia and Europa, the King
Xerses caused to be made a bridge of ships, such a number he had for the
war.

Europa contains Rome the ancient City, the plentiful Italy, Venice
descended of the Troyans, Greece, Thessalia, Acaia, Macedonia, and Thessalie,
where as is a flood called Peneus, nauigable in the midst, for into the said
flood enters the River of Orcon, but his water swimmeth above the other,
without mingling together as does Oil. Italy has the noble River of Post,
beating veins of gold.

In the Isles of Pont, there are people that live with the eggs of wild foul,
others that have feet like horses, whose ears are so great and so long, that
therewith they cover their whole bodies.

Europe does contain Germany, which is hie and base Almaine, Burgony, Sauoy,
Britain, Gaul that is divided into three parts.

From the River Lescault to the River of Said is called Gaul the fair, from
Said, to Gyrrond, is Gaul the ancient, and contains Lionois, and from
Girronde to the hills of Pirennes, that deuideth Spain and France, is
Aquittaine.

Spain also is of Europia where as is Cathelognia, Araragon, Castilian,
Portingall, Syuell, Andelosia, Leon, Galicia, and the kingdom of Granado, even
to the Sea.

The seventh Book treats of man.
THe world has brought forth many things, of the which man is almost the
least. He has clothed the Beasts, Birds, Fishes and Trees, with skins,
feathers, scales, bark, and otherwise. But man comes forth all naked ready
to weep, and lightly before forty days, he does not laugh: he that ought
to reign over the beasts on the earth, is at the beginning weaker then any,
he knows nothing without he be taught, neither to speak nor to go; and
naturally does nothing but weep.

Naturally the beasts seek their living, fly from their enemy, swim, with
many other things given them of nature. The Lions do not war between
themselves, the Serpents do not bite one another, but men study how to
destroy one another by wars, and dissentions.

Men never lightly in all points resemble one like another in their faces, the
which comes by the diversity of the cogitations of their parents, the which
makes their similitudes so far unlike: and therefore the brute beasts that
have no such varieties in their thoughts, engender none but their like.

Men there are called Arimaspi, that have but one eye in their forehead, which
incessantly war against the Grissons about metals, and they find in the
ground gold and other mettalls. Those that are toward ye end of the West,
drink in dead men's sculles.

In Albania, some have their eyes yellowe, that comes to them in their youth,
and they see better by night then by day.

In Africa in some places there are a great multitude of Serpents, whose
properties they use for the trial of their wives chiefly, after this sort.

If the husbands will have probation of the honesty of their wives: they will
present their children before the Serpents, which will stye away if that the
children be egitimate, but if that the Serpents remain and fear not, then
are they bastardes.

When they are bitten with Serpents, they put their spittle upon the place for
to heal it, specially their fasting spittle, for the Serpent fears man's
spittle as hot water.

In India there are hye men, and also marvelous hye beasts, as for a witness
there are Dogs as great as Asses, trees as hye as an Archer can scarce shoot
to the top, and under the shadow of one Fig tree, may a hundredth horses
stand, because of the fertility of the land, the temperance of the air, and
the abundance of waters, there are men five cubits in height, the which never
use to spit, nor are troubled with the pain of head, eyes or teeth, and are
seldom sick.

Others there are in the Mountains, with heads like Dogs. In a part of India
the women never bear children but once, whose children wax straight way old.

And others called Sciopedae yt have their feet so broad that when they are
laid, they cover them therewith from the heat of the Sun, and they be very
swift in running.

Some toward the East have no heads, but have eyes in their shoulders, and
others called Epithamai Pigmei, that are of one yard hye.

In the farther part of India toward the East near to the River of Gangis,
there is a people clad with leaves, that live by smelling, they never eat nor
drink in their iourneies, they bear flowers and roots to smell at, and they
are easily killed by filthy smelles and savors.

There are little men called Pigmei, among which the highest pass not the
height of two cubits, having a wholesome air and pleasant country where they
dwell, the which men are molested with Cranes, as writes Homer, therefore it
is no marvel though often times they are carried away with those Cranes.

In the spring time the Pigmei assemble together mounted upon Sheep and
Goats, armed with darts and arrows, for to descend down to the sea, and
for the space of three months, consume and break the Cranes Eggs, and kill
the young ones, otherwise they would so multiply, that those little men should
never rest in quiet.

Some there are in the valleys called Pandore, that live two hundredth years,
in their youth having white hair, in age their hairs become black.

There is a people that lives but forty years, whose wives do bring forth
children at the age of seven years.

There are people that have long hairie tails growing. These things and others
has nature made moustruous, for our examples.

Among the women there are diverse childings, some have had six children, some
eight, and some nine, and sometime children of diverse kinds, which are called
Hermaphrodites, which are both man and woman.

There has been that have had in their life time thirty Children, and among
the maruailes of the world, a child being newborn did enter again into his
mothers womb, in the City of Saguntra.

And it is no fable nor tale, to have seen women and maids transformed into
men. The females are sooner engendered then the Male, and become soonest old,
the Females do move in their mothers womb, most on the left side, and the
males on the right side.

And Pliny recites to have seen a maid, on the night of her marriage, to be
naturally transformed into a man, and incontinent her beard to grow, and she
to be married again to a woman.

If that a woman bring forth two children at one burden, lightly there is
short life, either to the mother, or to one of her children, and if they be
both Males, or Females, then are they lightly of a short life.

Among the women there is no certain time prefixed of their trauailings with
child, for some be delivered in seven months, some in eight, and most
commonly in nine months. Also sometime at ten and eleven months.

Before the seventh month the child has no life, the tenth day after she
has conceived. Pain in the head, a shadow or mist before the eyes, no taste
nor relisse in meats, and a vndigesting stomach, are signs of conception.
That woman that brings forth a Male child, has better color, and easier
deliverance.

Miserable is the condition of man. For the Princes by this means have their
original, and are subject to Fortune, and has nature as others.

We read of a Roman Prince that died in the morning in pulling on his hose,
an other died with the stinging or biting of a Grape, an other was choked with
a hair, in eating of Milk.

Scipio Affricanus was the first called Caesar, for that (Caesus fuit matris
Vterus) his mothers womb was opened, for him to pass out.

Of those that are cripple, lame, and conterfeite of nature, comes whole
limmed and perfect children, in their members: and sometimes of perfect and well
proportioned people comes lame and imperfect children.

A woman does not bear children after fifty years, there are many that
cease at forty.

As touching men, we read truly of a Prince, which at the age of four score
and six years begat a child.

When Cato was borne, his father was four score years old.

Unto children their teeth come commonly at seven months, the seventh year
they renew, for then their teeth fall, and there comes to them others, and
some are borne with teeth. And if that a dead body be burned, the teeth will
never burn but remain whole. Unto some their teeth fail them at middle age,
commonly a man has thirty two teeth, and he that has more, is esteemed to
be the longer liver.

Zoroastes did laugh that day he was borne, yea that with the very force of
laughing he did reiecte the hand that was upon his head, for the placing and
fashioning of his head, and settling of his brains.

A man is as long from the foot to the head, as the extending or spreading
abroad of his arms, counting from the great fingers.

Men do way more then women, the dead bodies way more then the living, and
those that are a sleep, way more then they that are awake.

Some live without marow in their bones, and therefore they never thirst, and
for this cause women drink less then men: and such do never sweat.

It is recited of Crassus the Senator, that he did never laugh. Socrates the
great clarke, was never seen merry nor joyful, nor angry at one time more then
at an other, and therefore men's complexions are diverse.

In Rome has been seen a Princess called Antonia Drusi never to spitte,
Pomponius never to belke. The strength of men has been great, and more in one
than another. It is read of one that with one hand did hold a Chariot, that
three horses could not make to go for wards nor remove.

Hercules, did carry his great Mule on his back.

Fusius Saluius did bear two hundredth on his feet, two hundredth in his hands,
and two hundredth on his shoulders, so being laden or charged with six hundredth
weight, went upon a ladder.

Pliny writes to have seen one named Athanatus, to have a jack on his back
waying five hundredth weight, going to aplay with shoes on his feet waying
fifty pound weight a piece.

Milo set his foot in a place, from which place, there was no man able to make
him go back or remove. If that he held a staff in his hand, there was no
man able to take it away or writhe it out of his fist.

For running there has been many light and nimble men, that would run a
thousand a hundredth and threescore furlongs a day and more.

Also there are some that have their sight very singular.

We read of a man called Strabo, of the country of Sicilia, that is toward
the East, to reckon and count the ships that parted from Carthage for to enter
into the South sea.

Cicero did recite that he did see the Iliades of Homer in verse written, being
included in a Nut shell, so small were the figures.

Marmecides made a Cart, or Wagon so little, that a fly did cover it. And he
made a ship that a Be might cover it with both her wings.

For a truth there have been people yt have heard battles and fighting
fifty Leagues of, for they have counted the time and hours of the assaults.
The memory has been very singular to some.

Cyrus King of Persie, had the memory to know and call every one of his army
by their names.

Methridates the king did talk one day to his people, in two and twenty
languages without stutting or stammering.

Others leese their memory by fantastes, or otherwise have forgotten their
understanding.

Messalla the Orator, did forget by grievous sickness his sciences yea his
own name (in such sort) that he knew not from whence he was.

Marvelous was ye memory of Julius Caesar, the which named to four Scribes or
writers at one time, and in the mean time, he read, writ, and heard, and if he
had no other affairs, he would name to seven. He fought 52. battles.

And Marcellus 40. Caesar in his battles is reputed to have slain of his
enemies 1192. thousand men.

Pompeus did spoil and take from the Pirates, and sea robbers, against whom
he was sent by the Romans 876, ships. Moreover Caesar had this constancy,
that the letters that Scipio did send him for to betray Pompeus, he cast into
the fire, without reading them.

Cato was accused to the Senators 42. times, and always absolved. Sicinus
dictator of Rome sustained six score battayles: he had five and forty
wounds before, and not one behind. Sergius was a worthy warrier, he
delivered Cremona from the siege, kept Placentia, took in France twelve
Castles and Towns. He had his right hand cut off, and he made one of Iron,
with the which he fought four battles.

Pitiful things are found worthy of memory, through all parts, among the
which, it comes to my remembrance, of a woman taken in Rome, for to dye for
offense, and being put into straight Prison there to be famished, her daughter
had license of the Iailer to go see her every day, but she was searched for
fear least she should bring her mother food.

In the end it was found, that every day she did give her mother suck with
her breasts, and for to satissie her, she came daily.

The Senators having intelligence thereof, did pardon ye mother for the virtue
that was in the daughter, and did appoint them a living during their lives.
Marvelous are the operations of human creatures, among others only of
paintings, that do resemble the living so near, that there rests nothing
but the speech.

The king Attallus bought a table or picture of a Painter, which cost a
hundredth Marks. Caesar bought two for eight hundredth Marks.

Man's age has been reputed great among the ancients, which do name Princes
and Kings to have lived eight hundredth years, and a thousand years, but it is
by the variety of years, for so me make the Summer a year, and the Winter
another year, and others make three months a year, as the Arcadians, and you
must not stay nor judge things by the constellation of the firmament.

For in one present hour many are borne as well servants as masters, Kings
and Magistrates, whose Fortunes are all diverse and contrary.

Many examples we have of sicknesses. Publius Cornelius Rufus, in dreaming to
have lost his sight, became blind and lost his sight. Some there are that live
but till middle age, and others that die in their youth, and nature does give
a man nothing better then short life.

To live long the senses and understanding become blunt, the whole members
feel dolor, the sight, the hearing, and the going fail, the teeth also, and
the instruments of meats: therefore age is but pain, and there is a time
prefixed to live.

We read no better example then of Zenophilus the Musician, that lived a
hundredth and five years without sickness. The signs of death, are to laugh
in the furor and grief of the malady or sickness, to be busy in folding or
doubling the clothes of his bed with his hands, to void from one in
sleeping behind, a fearful look, with other things, and therefore seeing
that by experience we see innumerable signs of death, therefore there is no
certainty. Sicknesses are diverse both to old and young.

Sirius died by the multitude of Serpents proceeding from his body.

Some have had an Ague all their life time. Mecaenas was seven years in the
end of his days without sleep.

Antipater lived long without sickness, saving that every year on that day
that he was borne, he had the ague.

We read of one that lived 157. years, that slept in his age 57. years, and
wakened as though he had slept but one hour. Others that have returned a foot
from their grave, when they were borne to be buried.

Pompeus caused a man's head to be smitten off, which when it was laid again
to the body, did speak an hour, both to the master of the house, and to many
others of the house. Death brings repentance. Some die for joy: men in the
hearing of joyful news, of victories, and women to see their children.

The father of Julius Caesar died in putting on his hose, and felt before no
harm. Some in drinking, some in writing, and others in diverse manners as we
daily see by experience. Aunciently the use was among the Romans to bury the
dead, but for the often battles of the Romans, that had all the world in
their subjection, they use to burn the dead.

Among men Liber Pater found first the means to sell and buy, also Diademes
for kings, and for triumphs.

The Lady Ceres found the means to sow corn, and to grind it, and
therefore she was called a Goddess. For before they used Acornes.

The Assirians found first the mean to write letters, but the invention has
been since ye beginning of the world.

Two brethren in Athens found first the means to make houses and bricks.

Gellius Doxius invented lathing and loming of walls, for before they had
Caves and holes in the ground, and they took example of the Swalowes, which
do make their neastes.

Cynira son to Agriope, found out metal of copper, brass, and of lead, he
made first many ha^mers therewith. Danaus was the first in Grecia yt made
wells, and dug for water. Thrason made the first walls and towers. The
Lidians found the means to dress woolls. Arachneus found ye means to make
Linen, and Ca^uas. The Egyptians ye art of medicine. Lydius to mingle and
te^per metals together. Erichtonus found silver. Cadmeus gold in ye mountain
of Pangy. The Ciclopia^s were the first workers of small Iron work. Corebus ye
Athenian made earthe^ pots. Theodore ye Samyan made ye first keys. Palamides
ye measures and waights. Phrigies ye charrets and wagons. Penius the first
trader for Merchandise. Aristeus to make oil and honey. Briges of Athens did
first yoke Oxen to Cart and Plough. The Lacedaemonians found Harness, and
habilime^ts for war, Lau^ces, Spears, swords, Bucklers, etc. Cares ye Bow
and Arrows. The Phenitians ye cross bows. Belerophons first mounted upon
horses. Palamides in ye war between the Greeks and the Troyans, found ye
order of Sta^darts, signs, penuo^s, streamers, to give warning and to keep
watch. Jason did first sail on ye Sea in long Ships, or Galleys. Before ye
time there were made little ones of wood, and hydes: and since that time some
have added to the^ masts, sails, cabels, tackelings, and many other things,
that we see by ye experience to be necessary. The first Dials were made at
Rome we water, according to ye course of the Sun, and since they are reduced
to houses and Churches, as it is seen at this present, which was very agreeable
to ye Romans. Finally, among al ye knowledge ye man has (Pliny) thinks
this to be the chiefest point, for man to know him self, of what estate soever
he be.

The eight book treats of beasts that are on the Earth.
IN the Earth there is no beast greater then the Elephant, they have knowledge
to understand their Country speech, they have obedience and understand
their duties and charges, they never pass the Sea till that their master or
governor does promise to bring them home again, they kneel down for to be
laden; and carry the Ladies litters in fear, prudence and equity: their
teeth are of Iuorie, we their other bones there are made goodly woorks, they
are full of clemency, and if they chance to find a man strayed out of his
way, they know it, and will lead him through ye Forest into his way: but if
they find a company of men seeking to chase the^, then naturally they know
their enemies, as other beasts do. The Females never have but one young in their
lives, they live 200. and 300. years, they love the shallow and clear waters,
for because of their greatness they can not swim, they eat stones and earth,
they fear cold, they will cast to ye ground with their fronts or foreheads,
trees for to eat ye fruit. Among ye beasts they hate Mire, and Rats, and they
will not feed where as they have run and tasted. They increase in ye borders
of Africa, and the greatest in India, where as there are Dragons so puissant
yt they sight to the Elepha^ts. They are tanied by famine, and when they are
tamed, they carry Castles on their backs in stead of saddles, wherein there may
stand six or eight me^, and toward ye East they make in the^ the most part of
their battails, although yt they being wounded or hurt do retire. There were
Elepha^ts at Rome, but they were slain with shot, for the Romans would not
nourish the^, nor give them to Princes. The Ethiopians make the^ their venison,
and they kill the^ with shooting and casting darts, which they cast on the^
standing in trees, where ye Elephants use to pass, or else they take the^ in
holes or caves in the earth covered above, they never lie down, but sleep
leaning against great trees, and they yt know their repair, will saw ye tree
so far, yt when they come to rest the^ against the tree, it breaks, and they
fall down, then they kill the^, (for being once down, they ca^ never rise
again.) The blood of Elepha^ts is very cold, and therefore ye Drago^s and
Serpents in ye country do assemble under their ears and on their bodies, and
suck from them so much blood, that they therewith die.

Dragons there are in Ethiopia, of ten fadoms long, and in India, there have
been found Serpents of a hundredth foot long, and some will fly in the air
to catch birds in flying.

In Africa there are a great number of wild horses, and in Asia great Asses
like unto Mares, but for their long ears. So writes Aristotle the wise, which
was appointed by Alexander the great, to describe the diversity and nature of
beasts.

The Lion is full of nobleness and clemency, the Lioness for the first time
brings forth five, the next year after four, then three, and when she
brings but one, then she ceasseth. The young ones are two months without
moving, and six months before they can go, they do sooner assail men then
women, and never young children, unless it be for great famine.

In their age they love and follow men, when that they can no more seek their
pray, and they live till their teeth fall out. By their clemency they demand
nothing of those that prostrate them selves before them, and their ire is
mitigate by prayers, as we have seen by the experience of women that name them
selves strangers, and poor vagabondes, but they are fierce to those that
strive against them, their tail does demonstrate their amity and furor, as
does the ears of horses. When they are chased they never hide them, they
know and pursue among others those that hurt them.

The female if that her young ones are taken, closes her eyes against those
that chase them, to the end that she fear not their weapons.

Hanus was the first that daunted or tamed their fierceness, and they are
taken in holes that are made of purpose in the ground. In Syria they are all
black.

The Panthers are also full of clemency. We read that if the Female meet a
man strayed or lost in the woods, that flees for fear of her, she will
compass him moving with her tail, showing unto him a sign of amity and love,
and after that he is assured, she will lead him into a cave or hole, where as
are fallen her young ones by misfortune, which the man pulls out, and then she
tumbletly and plays before him to give him thanks.

The Tygres are very light and nimble, therefore those that steal their young
ones, as soon as the female finds them lost, she smells their way and
runs after them, and when she is spied of those that have their young ones,
they let one of them fall, the which she takes up, and carries it to her
repair, and in the mean time, they escape with the rest, and bring them to
their ships.

Camels they are driven to pasture toward the East as we do sheep.

Wild Dogs have hands and feet almost like men.

In the North part there are marvelous swift beasts, which have the upper
lip so long, that when they will feed they go backwarde.

The Wolf before he be seen, will easily draw from a man his breath, they
couple not with the females, but xij. days in the year. There are wild
Wolves, which in eating of their pray, if they turn once about, forget their
pray, and go again to seek another.

Among the Serpents the Bassalicke does infect and kill people with his look.

There are innumerable kinds of others, whereof some have double heads at both
ends, for to cast venime. For the biting of an Aspis, there is no remedy but
to cut that that he has touched.

The Cocodrils are inge^dred in Nylle, a River of Egypt which have four feet,
the skin very hard, and they have no moving but the upper lip, and they
make as many eggs as Geese, and they have sharp claws for their defense, in
the day they remain on the earth, and the night in the waters, when they open
their throat in sleeping, there are little birds called Trochilos that will
pick and cleanse their teeth, in the which they take great delight.

The Stork does show the manner how to take glisters, for by her nature she
fills her neck with water, and behind with her beacke, makes infusion into
her belly for to cleanse her.

And many other beasts naturally know the herbs that for them are most
proper.

The Swallow knows how to find an herb called Chelidonia, which serves
for her young ones, when their eyes are endamaged.

Of little beasts we find Cities destroyed and people driven away. In Spain
with Conies. In Thessaly with Moles. In France with Frogs. In Affricke with
Locustes. In the I Will of Ciclados with Rats. In Italy with Serpents. In
Ethiopia with Scorpions.

Hyena is said to be a beast of double nature, Male and Female, they will
hearken at the Cottes of shepherds, and learn the proper name that a man is
called by, and calling him, when the man is come forth, they will straightway
kill him, and they will call Dogs. They are found in Africa, which is the
cause of so many wild Asses, that they engender, the Males do correct the
young ones by biting, they will cut the trees along the Rivers, as with a knife,
they have tails like to fishes.

Dear that are oppressed with Dogs, if they can find no water for their
refuge, then they retire to man: the Female bear eight weeks, and oftentimes
two, and for to bring them forth, they seek secret places, not near the hye
ways accustomed by men.

The Hind teaches her young ones to run, to fear, and to leap, the Males
that have left the Females, have their mussell black, when they know them
selves heavy, they seek secret places, they will stand still to hear the cry
of the Dogs, they run with the wind, to take away the smell of the trase,
they rejoice to hear whistling, and to hear a noise of singing.

Moreover the Heart is simple, and all things are to him marvelous, if that he
see a man with a bow, or a cross bow, he looks more on them, then on the
man, the Males have horns, and in the spring time they cast their horns, that
day that they leese their horns, they hide them selves as all astonished and
sorrowful, as they that have lost their armours.

It is said that the right horn can not be found, for that they hide them
in the ground. At the burning of the horns, the Serpents fly away: their
horns grow till they be three score years old, and the said time passed,
there comes up others like, and the^ they never fall after that: there is no
knowledge of their age, but their age is known, by their teeth, they being
without horns feed in the night and when their horns begin to come, they
will butte and run against the trees, they live a hundredth years, they never
have the Fever or Ague, and therefore some dames always delight to break
their fast with Venison, by the which means they have lived a hundredth years
without having the Ague.

Camelion lives not but by the air, and changes his color according to the
thing he touches, saving white and read, they engender in Africa, and in
India.

The Bears do join with the Females, in the beginning of Winter, not as
other four footed beasts do, for the Male and the Female lie down
embracing, and after that they do retire in sundry caves, and the Female does
bring forth her young ones within thirty days, and most commonly brings five,
which have the skin white, deformed without hair, and eyes, and there
appears but their claws, in licking of them they are figured.

There is nothing so little of man, as to see the Bear bring forth her young,
she hides her four months, and the Male forty days, they couche or lie
upon soft leaves, and the first fourteen days they sleep so sou^dly, yt you
shall scarce waken them with strokes, then they fatten much, and their fat or
grease is conuenable to many medicines, also to keep hair from sheading.

They being weakened for the most part stand up, and live with the licking of
their fore feet, they warm their young against their breasts, they have little
blood about the heart, and less in the body, they have little eyes, and as
feeble or weak heads as the Lion has strong, therefore they defend their
heads with their fore feet, when they fall and leap from the Rocks, or when
they are bayted with Dogs. The Dogs among all other beasts that unto us
are common, are most faithful.

We have true histories of men that have been defended from thieves by their
Dogs, others have fought to revenge their masters death, and constrained the
murderer to confess the deed.

Two hundredth Dogs did rescue by force the king Garamantus, being taken by the
hands of his enemies.

Many people have assembled Dogs together for the war. We read of Dogs
that have cast them selves into the fire, when in times past their masters
body have been burned.

We read also of a Dog of Nicomedes the king of Bythinia, to have almost torn
the Queen in pieces, for that she played familiarly with the king, the Dog
thinking it had been for harm.

A Senator of Rome, was defended by his Dog on a night, retourning to his
house, from the hands of those, that would have put him to death.

At Rome a prisoners Dog would never depart from the prison door, and when
his master was dead, he would eat nothing, and when bread was given him he
brought it to his masters mouth. The same Dog was seen openly to hold up his
masters body being cast into the River of Tyber. They know their master, and
understand his voice, above all other beasts they do best know a man's voice,
and their names, they do remember the ways and iourneyes be they never so
far off, and there is noue of so long a memory (except man.) In their chase
they have great diligence, specially hounds.

In India they tie proud Bitches to trees, and the Tygres do cover them, by
the which means, comes fierce and cruel Dogs.

The king of Albania did give to Alexander the great, a Dog of marvelous
highness, which would take Lions and Elephants. The Females have whelps three
times a year lightly, and they carry them two months, they are borne
blind, they can not see till seven days after they be whelped: If she bring
but one whelpe, it sees not till the ninth day, the better whelpe is that that
the Bitch brings out first, or that that sees last.

Horses are faithful, and full of great knowledge, for they know their
masters, and they that attend on them. Many are singular in their doings, the
Males live till fifty years, and the females less, at six years the males
grow no more, and the females but five years. Among the beasts they have
least fertility.

The most egrest and fiercest Horses, put their nose mussell deepest in the
water to drink, and have almost as many diseases as men. Asses there has been
bought for four hundredth Crowns.

In Acaia they are much requested to have Mules. They fear cold, the Males
are very slow in their work, they do bear as do Mares, and in thirty
months the young ones are ready to help them selves. After they are horsed
they must be constrained to run, or else they would reject the seed by
making water.

The females bear all their life, which is thirty years, they be afraid to
wette their feet, and they never drink but in small and shallowe waters,
where they are accustomed to drink dry footed, the Females do hide
themselves when they bring forth, in dark places, that they be not seen of
men, they will not pass the bridges when the Sun shines in the water, it is
marueil that they run not mad for thirst, for he that daily changes their
water or River accustomed to drink at, must constrain them perforce to drink.

The little Mule is engendered of the Ass and of the Mare. The Mules that
comes of a Horse and of a she Ass, are beasts full of strength and labor.

The Ass that covers the Mare brings forth before her time, if she before
have retained the horse, but not else, the seventh day the females should be
filled, after their foale is borne, the Males fatigated of labor, does sooner
replenish the Females.

Some of them are not like to their Syres, and the Mule of her nature is
barren, saving that in Capadocia they bear, by force of drinking wine, often
times ye Mules cease from casting or striking.

The Athenians knowing for a truth a Mule to have done service fourscore
years, did ordain, that in the fields none should desturbe him, neither in ye
corn nor otherwise.

The Oren live twenty years, and the Kine commonly fiftene years, at five
years they have taken their strength: it is said that to wash them with warm
water they will fatten, the strength of the Bull is at three years: for to
make them draw, it is good to yoke them with a drawing Ore, for he will teach
the other.

In times past among the Romans, it was esteemed as great offense to kill an
Ore, or to steal one, (because of their ploughes,) as it was to kill a man.

The Bull requiring combat, shows magnanimity of courage and gentilitie, he
turns the head, lifts up the cares, remains on his forefeete, and makes
the dust to die with his hinder feet.

At Rome has been seen an Ore speak. The Ore of Egypt has a kyrnell called
Apis under his tongue, and a white spotte on the right side, which grows as
the horns of the Moon. The nature of sheep is that they live not above nine
or ten years, the Males couple with the Females in the midst of May, till
the midst of August, the Females bear a hundredth and fifty days.

The Ram if the right genitorie be bound, makes all Females, and if the left
be bound in the season, makes all Males. If ye look under the Tuppe or Rams
tongue, he does engender Lambs of the color that the veins are, if they be
of diverse colors, he ingendreth Lambs of diverse sorts.

Also the mutation of waters, does varefie the color of Lambs, also the
winds. It is esteemed not good to cut or gelde Lambs before five months,
and commonly the Females bring forth not above four Lambs.

Goats conceive commonly two kiddes, and sometime four, they bear five
months as do sheep, they become barren with fatness, and they engender not
before the fourth year, they conceive in November, for to be delivered in
March, when the trees begin to budde: the Goat fears cold, every one of
these beasts have not horns, but the milk of those that have no horns, is
fatter then those that have, and those that have horns, their age is known by
the knots in their horns, they aspire through the ears, and not by their nose,
and they are never without Fevers or Agues, because of the heat of their
bodies, which makes them much subject to lechery, they see as well by night as
by day, they have all deardes on their chinne, if one of them be taken or
driven, all the rest will marvel thereat, if they croppe or bite a young tree,
it dies, and if they lick an Olive tree, it will dry away.

Among the swine the Sow does farrowe two times a year, and sometime they
have twenty Pigges, but they cannot nourish so many: the tenth day ye Pigges
have teeth: in once knowing the Bore they are filled, but they double it for
fear not to have retained.

Some think that if they leese an eye that they will soon die, otherwise they
live til fifteen or twenty years, ye most fattest have least milk, they
willingly wallowe in ye dirt and mire, and couch most on the left side, they
fatten in six days, they know their masters house, and defend one an other,
for if that one cry, all the rest will run thither.

Among the wild Bores, the male has great pain to acquaint him with the
Female, and she has great dolor to make her young ones: they are borne with
teeth, and are black.

In Arabia they can not live, neither wild nor yet tame.

Apes do approach much to the sense of man, and their kind is, to have no
tails, these kind of beasts, are much affectioned to their young ones, they
keep them or hold the^ always between their arms or legs, before their
breasts, whereby many times they kill them: they have beard on their chinne.
And some in Ethiopia have tails, that can live no where else.

Of Hares there are diverse kinds, in the hie Mountains, there are white ones,
and in Winter they live with snow. It is said that a Hare is as old as there
are purgings or voydings in her belly, they have both kinds, and engender one
with another, and the Hare alone is meat unto men, beasts and fowls, and
therefore he is ever in fear, and goes more by night then by day.

Conies are of another kind, the Males have great desire to eat the young ones
when they are borne, but the Female hides them, and they make great
multiplication.

Many sorts of beasts there are on the earth, that do mingle one kind with
another.

Among the beasts, Origes have the hair long always, tending toward the
head, and of other beasts the hair tends toward the tail.

Mice are engendered on the earth. We read that when Hanibal had besieged a
Town, a Mouse was sold for two hundredth Crowns, the seller died for famine,
and the buyer did escape the hunger. The old Mice are nourished of the young
ones, by great clemency.

In Africa there is neither Dear, wild Bores, Goats, nor Bears. In other
places neither Wolves, nor Foxes. In some places there are no Hares, in other
places no Conies. And in other places there is great diversity of beasts,
that are not in other places.

The Scorpions or Serpents do sooner hurt strangers, then the Country
inhabitants.

The ninth Book treats of Water beasts, and of Fishes.
IN the Sea there are many great beasts, as well as on earth for the moisture
thereof, and because it is more larger and bigger. Also there is many monsters
and diversity in many fishes, for they couple in many kinds, and there is the
similitude of all kind of beasts on the earth, and rather more.

Whales are the most greatest and grossest beasts in the Sea, there are of two
hundredth yardes long. In many places there are rib bones of Whales of twenty
yardes.

Alexander the great was afraid to meet them, least his Navy should have
perished. In the Sea there are Eeles three hundredth foot long.

In the night there comes many fishes out of the Sea, that will eat the corn
in the fields, and after return again.

There is in the Sea Mermaides that have been seen, and some that have the
shape of men, and their voice like unto men's voice, having the body of man's
shape, and the lower parts scaled like fishes, with a tail.

And there are Wolves, Horses, Asses, Hogs and other sea beasts, as on the
earth. If the fishes aspire and respire as other beasts, there are diverse
opinions.

Pliny does believe that the most part sleeps and respireth, except those
that have no liver, and in steed of blood have humor.

The Dolphin is the most swiftest fish in the Sea, and most hardest to be
taken: every one follows his like, they have young in ten months in Summer,
and nourish them as do the Whales, the old ones carry the young ones, and
there is always a great Dolphin, that follows the little one, they have the
tongue moving like a Hog.

Above the nature of other fishes, they love young children, and the sound of
Instruments, they live three hundredth years, and they have their greatness at
ten years, they rejoice when one calls them Simon, and they love human
voice.

Many examples are both seen and read of little children, that they have
carried by Sea on their backs and brought back again without doing them any
harm.

Shell fishes are so great in some places, that with their shelles they cover
their houses.

The beasts of the Sea have diverse clothings, some are covered with leather,
and with hair, as the Sea calfe, some only with leather as the Dolphins,
others with great thick and hard shelles, other softer shelles, as Oysters,
Cockles, and Muscles, that have no heads, others with sharp prickles, as the
Ecchinus called the Sea Porcupen, others with scales, as Carpes and many other
fish, others with rough skins with the which they shave fine wood and Iuory,
some with soft skins, and others that have none.

The Sea calfe which is clothed with skin and hair, they join Male and
Female together as Dogs, and they never have but two at a burden, they
nourish their young ones with their pappes or tettes, and are delivered on the
land, and within twelve days after they bring the^ to the Sea.

The Sea calfe, is more grieved and more constrained to sleep then any other
beast, and therefore their skin put on a man's head, does provoke him to
sleep.

Great is the diversity of beasts, in some there is neither bone nor thorn,
and of many kinds there is no male.

Among the fishes the Females are greater then the Males, there are some that
have their scales tending toward their heads, clean contrary to the nature
of others.

Some there are that go always to sleep upon the dry land.

The Whale makes her young ones alive without eggs.

Eeles live commonly eight year, they will live six days without water,
specially when the wind is at West, and less with other winds.

In Winter they covet deep and clear waters, and swim in the bottom, they
feed in the night, and they of all other fishes, slote not above water when
that they are dead. In the Lake of Verone they are taken by thousands. Some
kind of fishes renders their young ones alive, others that fly by the Sea, as
the Sea swallowe.

Some make eggs and cover or sit on them, as do the fowls in the air, so
does the Sea kite, a foul called Lucerna, of the property of his name,
seeks ye maine Seas, whose tongue shines or glistereth, as may well be seen
in a fair and calm night.

The Dragon of the Sea, as soon as she is taken and brought to land, she
makes inco^tinently an entery or hole in the sand, that she might be lost.
Some fishes have no blood, and have their heads in their bellies between their
feet, and with their feet they cast meat into their mouths.

The Sea Locusts hide them selves for the space of five months, and swim in
the spring time, they battle between themselves with their horns.

If they be put alive into hot water for to sees, they will be tender.

The Sea Creuices live in Rocks and stony places, and there are very great
ones.

In Summer and in the Spring they fatten, and in the full Moon, and they
augment and diminish with the Moon, they are of a long life, and they have all
eight feet. The Females have the first foot folded or double, and the Males
single, and they creep as much backward as forward.

Cockles have two little horns wherewith they feel the way, for they have no
eyes.

The fishes join Male and Female, joining their bellies, then the female
runs or swimmeth away, touching with her mussell the belly of the Male, and
the Males eat the Females Eggs, for if all the Eggs should profit, the Sea,
Rivers, and Pondes, would be filled with fish, there would be such an
innumerable multitude.

The Sea Mouse makes her Eggs on the land, and covers them with earth, and
thirty days after does uncover them, and brings her young ones into the Sea.

Some fish live three score year, as by the experience of marks put on them.
Some fishes there are that live on the land, when that in Summer, the Rivers
and poudes are dried up, and some will go feed in the corn, and on the
land, tarying for the water, and such is the nature of some, to live on the
earth with worms.

There are certain fishes with sharp prickles on their backs, that will cut
the line of fishers Nets.

Other fishes that are called Sea stars, do burn other fishes by their
great heat.

In the Sea there is war among the fishes as among the foul in the air, for
one feeds not with another.

The tenth Book treats of the Fowls of the Air.
IN Africa and Ethiopia, there are birds that are called Struthiocameli, as
hie as a man on horseback, which do not forsake the earth, but run faster
then horses.

The Phoenix lives in Arabia, I say not that he is alone, but never man saw
him eat, he lives six hundredth years, and in his age makes a Nest of the
branches of spice trees, wherein he dies, and of his bones comes a worm,
the which afterward natarally becomes a Phoenix. He is as great as an Eagle,
the feathers about his neck are of the color of gold, the tail yellowe, and
the surplus like to Azure.

Eagles there are of six kinds, some live with their pray on the earth, other
in the water, that fish with one foot, they have the knowledge to take
Whelkes, and other shelled fish up into the air, and then let them fall, to
break their shelles, for to have the fish, they cause their young ones to look
up into the Sun beams, and cast those out of the Neast that will not behold
the Sun, as bastards: they die in their age, because that their upper bill
does grow so long that they can not eat, they fight against Dear and against
the Dragons, and in flying they cast dust that they take up on the land, in
the eyes of Crows and other beasts for to blind them.

The Cuckoe resembles to ye color of the wood Dove, they are killed of others
of their kind, they change their voice, and come in the spring time, and do
always bring up their young ones in other birds nestes, specially in the
nestes of stock Doves, she never lightly makes above one egg, and very
seldom two, because she knows that she is hated of all other birds. They
think them selves very fair, and dispraise others, and there is no flesh
sweeter the^ theirs.

The Kite is always a revenging foul: it seems by the removing of their
tail, that they that have learned to guide or govern the ships by the Helm,
have learned by her. Crows will break or crack nuttes, with often letting
them fall in flying.

The Ravens engender by the mouth, as some suppose, as do Doves: it is an
evil token or sign when that they cry as though they were choked.

The night Owls do defend them selves from other fowls, with their bill and
claws, because they are hated they fly in the night, in winter they sleep
two months, and they have nine manner of voices.

Among the flying beasts, some have fingers and nails, and other flat and
broad feet, as Geese, Duckes, Swannes, and others living for the most part in
the waters.

The proud Pecocke spreads abroad his feathers, specially against the Sun,
to make them shine, and then puts them down together: his tail shedeth as
the leaves on trees, and comes again with the spring, when he has no tail,
he does hyde him self as ashamed, at three years his tail begins to
color, and lives xxv. years, his feet are foul, and his voice fearful.

The Cock knows the stars, and when the day dawneth he rises, and goes
to rest when the Sun is set, by his crowing he gives warning of the
hours in the night, and waketh those that go to their labor, he is king of
beasts that are in ye house of his bigness, and fights with his spurs: if
he have the masterie, he will sing or crow, if he be vanquished, he hydeth
him self: he is stout in his going, and makes the Lion afraid: he
beholds the Sun more then any other bird: if he be kerued or gelded, he
will not crow, being kerued he will soon wax fat. The Goose keeps ye
Romans Capitol, it has been recited of a Goose that has followed his master
from Swecia, to Rome: their feathers are plucked twice a year, with Goose
grease is made many good ointments.

Cranes they fly hie, they do elect one whom they follow, there are among
them Sergeantes, which make the^ keep order in their assemblies, in the night
they sleep the head under their wing, and one leg under their feathers, and
sustain them selves with the other. Those that are appointed to make watch,
hold a stone in one of their claws, for to waken those that sleep, when he
lets the stone fall into the water.

The Storkes go their ways in the Summer, and none knows whether, nor from
whence they come, as well as Cranes, the one comes in Summer, and the other in
winter, they assemble for to take their flight, but no man ever saw their
congregatio^s, for that is done in the night, without noise. They assemble in
Asia at a certain day, and he that is last come, is killed and torn in
pieces, and then they take their flight. The Swannes eat Serpents, and
therefore there is as great pain to kill them, as to kill a man, the young ones
do nourish the old.

The Quails come by night, and in danger of mariners when they aproche the
land, because of their great multitude. In time of rain, or of a great wind,
they never pass the Seas, in winter they cast their feathers, so does the
Turtle.

Swalowes live with flesh, they are so swift, and turn so suddenly, that no
other fowls can get them for to feed on, and they will feed in flying.

Swallows tarry but half a year, some change their voices, and their
feathers mount every year. The Iay loves to steal Gold and Silver. In some
places there are no Partriges. In Rhodes there are no Eagles.

At Rome in the house of Hercules, there enters neither Dog, nor flies.

And so it is, that in many places there is great diversity of birds.

Along the Sea coasts in some places there are birds that live with fish, and
every one of them makes seven Nestes, and in every Nest young ones, but their
Nestes are so hard, that they can scarce be broken, and there is no way into
the Nestes but one little hole for the Dame to come in and out, and their
Nestes are of Thorns, that are ranged one against another, with earth and
feathers, and they are seldom seen. There are Swallows of diverse kinds,
there are some called Marlions ye make their nests six foot in the ground.
Birds have marvelous great industry, and knowledge in making their Nestes,
with feathers, earth, and chafe, hair, wool, moss, and such like.

Also they carry water to temper it, and to fortify it, by the which means
their young ones are sure and safe against the rain, the dames do cleanse and
make clean the nestes from ordure, when their little ones are young, and when
they become great, they force them to come forth of their nestes for to be
clean.

And in India, some fowls seek Hares skins to make their nestes.

The Partridge so makes her nest, that the wild beasts can not find them,
and where she lays her Eggs she hatcheth not her young, fearing that her often
frequentation should be known.

The Female for the intemperancie of lust of the Male, seeks to deceive him,
because if she be upon the nest, he will break her Eggs. The Males do
fight, for the Females. At the cry or singing of the Female, the Male runs
so blinded, that he will sometimes strike against the foulers head, he is so
much subject to imbicilitie, more then any other bird.

The Female when she hears any approach her young ones, she faineth to have her
wings broken, that she can not fly, and cries that she may be heard, for to
retire the people and Dogs, to the end they find not their nestes, and she
flies a far of from her little ones, and they live, by common estimation,
till sixtene years.

The Doves are chaste and leave not their dwelling or remaining place, if they
are not without makes, they do suspect adultery: by this means they quarrel
with their throat, and fight with their bill, the^ they flatter with their
feet. The Male is as careful toward the young ones, as the Female: at the
first they bring their young of the salt of the earth, for to temper their
appetite, and they conceive by the bill. The Pigeons and Turtles drink as do
horses, without often pulling their bill out of the water when they drink:
they live about eight years, but the wild Doves live thirty years.

The Sparrow lives not above a year, and the Female lives somewhat more,
because of the frequentation that they have together.

Birds fly in diverse kinds, some go, some leap, some run, and some cast
their feet forewarde before they fly, as Cranes and Sorkes, and there are
none but Drakes, that fly bolt upward at the first leap, others advance the^
before they fly. Some have no feet, and have no rest but in their nest.

Hens have understanding, and when they have laid an Egg, they cackle and
make a noise.

The Cardnelis does those things, that she is commanded.

The Popingay can speak human speech, they come from the Indians, they have
their head as hard as their bill, they live most commonly with Acornes, and
they speak best that have five claws on their feet, they are taught secretly
where as there is no other noyses but the teachers.

Crows have been seen speak, and call noble men by their names, specially
one in Rome, which by that means was solemnly buried.

It is easier to tame a Lion, an Eliphant, or any other great beast or foul,
then to tame a Mouse or a Swallow.

Strabo was the first that did cage birds, which before had liberty in the
Sky: he taught the way to fatten Capons, with meal and milk.

Among the birds many have four feet, and some lay many eggs, some four,
and some two. They join together in two manners, the Cranes, with their height.
And Hens and other Females the Cocks tread them down. Some eggs, and the
most part are white, others colored, and others red, as the eggs of Fesantes:
and all kind of eggs within are of two colors, white and red.

Eggs of fishes are round, and they have no white, she Eggs of feathered
fowls living on the water are round, and of others long: the young ones come
out of the shell at the round end.

Horace says that the longest eggs have the best savor, and that Hen is best
and most tenderest, that lays round eggs,

Some birds engender at all times, as Hens that lay every day an egg, some
two at a time, and some so many that therewith they dye.

In some places Doves engender ten times in a year.

In Egypt the Turtle twice a year, and other birds but once a year.

As touching Eggs, there is a red drop in the midst of the yolke, the
which makes the birds heart, and it is the first formed, and of the white is
formed the body, and within the Egg the head is greater then the body, and
lives with the surplus of the yolke: the twenty day he has life and cries
within the Egg, and then the feathers begin to come.

The young one in the Egg lies after this sort, it has the head under the
right foot, and the right wing upon the head, and they grow on their feet,
contrary to the nature of other beasts.

Ye ought not to give a Hen above xxv. Eggs to coue on, and those Chickens
that are hatched about the beginning of the year, are the best.

For to set Hens to brood, take eggs of ten days old, for they are
better then older, or more fresher, and ye ought to put odd: when the Hen
has coued four days, in looking on them in the Sun, ye shall know whether
they be good or no, or in putting them in warm water, for the good Egg will
sink to the bottom, and those that are putrified and naught, will flotte and
swim. If the eggs are never so little craised ye are set, they will never
prove.

It is best to set Hens to coue in the new Moon, for if they are set in the
wane of the Moon, or at the full, they will profit little. When the weather
is hot, Chickens will come within one and twenty days, and if it be cold,
not til five and twenty days. If it thunder the eggs that are coued will be
lost, and also at the voice of the Rite or Puttock.

The remedy against the thunder, is to put a nail in the Hens nest, or else
of the earth of a Cart wheel.

It has been recited of a Cock, which after the Hens death has achieved
couing, and by this means to cease from crowing.

The Ducke meruaileth at the first to see her Ducklins, but after most
carefully she calls them together, and lamenteth if she see them drowned in
the water, and some there are that can make Chickens come in warm water, as
well as if the Egg were coued.

The pip comes lightly unto pullaine, between harvest and the vintage: for a
remedy therefore, it is good to let them hunger, and to give them little meat,
or to give them to eat Garlike and butter.

Doves they lay two eggs, and if they lay three they will hatche but twain,
they bring forth a Male and a Female, the Male first, and two days after the
Female.

The Male is hatched in the day time, and the Female in the night, the young
Pigeons come forth of the shell twenty days after they are hatched, and the
Female lays eggs within five days after that she has known the Male. In
summer oftentimes they have young ones thrice in two months, for if the
weather be hot, they conceive in eightene days, and therefore in the nest is
found many times eggs and young ones. And Pigeons conceive at five months.

The Pecock at the age of three years brings forth yo^g ones, the first year
one, and every year after she increases, the Male breaks the eggs to have
the Female at his pleasure, and therefore she hides her eggs, and for one Male,
she has five Females: in thirty days she brings forth her young ones.
Geese conceive in the water, they make their eggs in the Spring: it is necessary
to give them nine or eleven eggs to coue, at xxv. or xxx, days they are
hatched, commonly Swannes or such like, coue thirty days, the female Crow
olone coueth, and the Male feeds her in the nest.

The Bat has the members and wings as feathers, she brings two yo^g ones,
the which she nourishes with the milk of her breasts.

Vipers do wind one about another in conceiving, that they seem to be but one
Serpent, and the Female conceiueth by sucking the Males head, which she
puts into hers.

Some Serpents make her eggs on the ground, and then covers them with
earth, and the next year after brings forth their young ones.

Men are more proner to lust and fornication in Winter then in Summer, and
women more in Summer then in Winter.

Beasts have society, and know when the Female will have the Male.

Among the four footed beasts, their smelling brings the operation of
lechery.

The greater the beasts are, the fewer young they bring forth, and the longer
they bear them.

All beasts are replenished with the Male at one time though they bring never
so many, and the young ones lie in the females belly the joints or knees
against the belly.

But a young Child in the mothers Womb has his face between his knees, and
is like a City.

Rattes and Mice do engender by licking one another, and it has been seen
that one has made six score, so it comes to pass that by this means there
are so many both in the fields, and in men's houses.

The Salamander in touching the fire does quench it as if it were Ise, and
notwithstanding that she casts by the mouth, which is like mike, if it touch
any part of a man, the hair of his skin will fall away, they grow as the
Eagle in the water, and among them there is neither Male nor Female, and they
never conceive nor make eggs nor yet have young.

Man's sense is perfect, but in seeing, the Eagle does surmount him.

The Vulture to smell, and the Mole to hear, what soever is on the earth.

Fishes does both smell and see, and yet have neither ear nor hole in the
head.

Some fishes get their pray with their teeth, others with their feet, and
others with sucking and licking according to their nature.

Some live by sucking of venime, as Serpents, and Spiders, that have neither
blood nor heat, nor sweat, and to them needs no meats.

Wolves do often times live with earth.

Beasts do fatten with drinking, and therefore salt for them is necessary.

Those beasts that have their teeth close, do lap as Dogs in their
drinking, and they that hold their teeth together do sowpe hume as do Oxen
and Horses.

The Bear in drinking seems to bite the water.

In Africa wild beasts drink not in the Summer for default of water, and
there are certain beasts that never drink, and yet they have always thirst
within the body.

There is that have a bladder full of liquor, in drinking thereof one shall
endure long without thirst.

Birds have both amity and war among them selves as well as beasts on the
earth.

One robs from the other their nestes, young ones, Eggs and meat.

All beasts having heart will sleep, boeth on the earth and in the water.

A child new borne (to let him sleep long) is to him nourishment, as he
grows to age he sleeps less, and young children dream in their sleeping.

The eleventh Book treats of little Beasts.
NAture has made more meruailes, and has given more sense and understanding
to little beasts, worthy of more greather memory then the great. They have no
blood, but in steed of blood have humiditie and moisture in the body, which
makes them give both sound and voice, to aspire and respire, they have neither
heart nor liver, but only certain bowels, and have eyes and other senteme^ts
and feelings, their head moves not without the body, unless it be pulled off.

Among the which, the good flies or honey Bees have sense, and labor for the
public profit, they have among them Princes, and conductours of their
counsel, and manner how to behave them selves in their frequentations. In the
winter they are hidden, for that they can not resist the Snowes, winds, and
frostes, they make honey and wax, when they go to their work they never leese
no time.

First they wype or rub their Hiue with things that are bitter, as the Gum
of trees, and other things for to take the taste from other beasts of the
sweetness of their honey: after ward they make their chambers or dwellings,
then they make their young ones without corruption, and after that they make
their honey and wax, of flowers, and provide food for winter, otherwise bitter
meat full of humor separated from honey.

On nights in their voyage, when they are from their wonted place to rest, they
lie their belly upward, to keep their wings from the dew. The manner of their
works is to remain some of them at the gate or door of their Hyue there to
keep watch, as the custom is of a Castle: in the night they rest till the
morning, except those that are appointed to watch, of the which one of them in
the morning goes about making a sound or noise, as it were a Trumpet, and then
every one departs and flies away if the day be fair, otherwise they
continue in their house, and they know the disposition of times, the young ones
go or fly abroad into the fields, and the old ones remain to make the
work, or to divide the rooms within. Some bring the flowers to the entry of
their place, others do discharge it, and carries it in, others bring water in
their throat for to temper or give moisture to their works, and they divide
their offices.

Some do garnish, some pollishe, some suck, and others make ready soode of
that which is brought in, for they live together, and do not separate, to the
end, that equally their food be divided: they make double alleyes or paths,
some to come in at, and some to go forth by: the most honey is in the highest
room.

If there chance to rise a great wind whylest they are in the fields, then
they fly close to the ground along the hedges, and they take a little stone
or earth to be more waightier, to the end the wind bear them not away, and
lode their flowers in their fore feet against their breasts.

Those that are appointed masters or overseers of their house, will chastise
those that are negligent and slow.

They never file nor make filth in their Hiue they are so clean. In the night
their watch being set, they retire into their lodging, and make a murmuring or
noise, still diminishing till that one makes the last sound or Trumpet, flying
in the midst of them, and then they cease off all till the morning. First they
make their common houses, and then the house of their king or Captain whom
they do elect and choose.

Among these good flies, there are others more greater without sting, which
serve at the works, and to chafe or warm the young ones between their feet,
and they are straightly corrected, and if they fail, without any remission.

These make their king a fair house, pinacled like a Castle, separated from
other houses.

The lodgings of the common sort, have six rowmes or corners for the work of
their six feet, and they make them in close, dark, or raynie days, and at
such times they fill the upper Celles with honey, and in a fair and clear day,
they go to the fields.

The manner how the young ones are borne, there is great difficulty, for they
never cover one another. There was a Roman that made a hiue of clear
lantern horns for to see their works, and it seems that they make little
worms, that become flies, and before that they have feathers, there is nothing
that the dame desires more to eat, when their heads are pulled of.

Their king is chosen in every swarm or company, and they choose him that is
greatest: he is known, for he has a spot in the forehead. If he go or fly
to the fields: the others follow him as his guard, and he goes not out of
the Hiue, unless that all the rest do follow.

If he have a wing broken or perished, he goes not out of the Hiue, he only
takes no pains, but admonishes them of their work. If by advise of counsel
he comes forth, every one puts their pain to serve him, and will carry
him if he be weary. If he have a sting, yet he uses it not. When they intend
to depart and leave the hiue, certain days before, they murmr and make a
noise, and fly their way by tempests.

Oftentimes they be at strife for their bonds and flowers, or if one Hiue have
no food, they will spoil another, and their king does defend them.

If there want vittailes, they kill or drive away those flies that have no
sting. If their sting be once broken, they are tamed or faint hearted, as a
gelded body, and can profit no more, such have places a part for to retire
them.

They hate sheep, for they can scarce get out of their wool. Also they hate
Crabbs or Creuices, and if there be any sodden near to their place, the smell
of them will make them die.

They have many diseases, and if any of them die, they bring him out of their
rowmes, and cast him out of their Hiue as making of funeralles.

If their King die, they do more, for then they make such dolor and sorrow,
that they do nothing. By this and by to much taking off of their honey, they
die often times.

They have sense and understanding to hear, and do rejoice, and at the sound
of a Basan they will assemble.

When their work is finished they fly abroad, then return to their Hyue or
house. Their age is seven years, they never touch any Carrion, as Crows Kites,
and other flies do. Their honey comes as it were a sweat from heaven,
spittle from the stars, or liquor from the air, when in the spring time the
said moisture falls on the leaves and the Dew, and the Bees receives it,
and carries it into their Hyue.

The honey at ye first is as clear as water, it boyleth like new wine, and
purges, the twenty day it fatteneth, then it hardneth, and casts a little
skin like a scumme, there is ways how to get the honey, for want of food
causes the Bees to disperse and fly their ways, or die, and to great
abundance makes them unprofitable, for they labor no more then is necessary
or needful, and therefore the twelfth part is their portion that they ought
to leave them.

Of honey is made many medicinable things, serving to each one. Some leave the
tenth part, and if it be not full but almost empty, ye ought not to touch it.

That honey that cleaves together or threedeth, is not good, but when
incontinently it breaks in taking of it, it is a good sign.

Also the good smelling honey that has a color like gold, and sweet in the
taste, is a sign of goodness. The wild honey is not so good as the other.

Spiders or Spinners have within them such fertility, that they spinne
beginning in the midst, and they make threedes very subtle. They make their
young ones like worms.

Scorpions toward the East are very venomous, and they make little worms like
Eggs, of which comes their young ones, but in Italy they do little harm.
They byte or sting with their tail.

Locustes or Grasshoppers make eggs, they go on the ground with their claws.
The Parthians do eat them.

Also Ants make eggs, of the which grow their young ones: and as the good
flies do congregate their works, so they hide their soode in yt earth, for to
live with in the winter. They have knowledge how to divide yt great grain
Acorne, and they dry them that are wet in the Summer, they work by night in
the full Moon, one comes to an other for their burdens, and it seems that
in them is mutual love in the diligence of their work.

Among other beasts they bury one another when they are dead.

The Butterfly comes of a little worm in three days, she grows also of
wood wherein is humiditie.

There are beasts full of blood that die so soon as they are full, for
behind they have no issue, they are engendered under Oxen, and some time on
Doggess.

In Cypres there grow in the furnaces, of flies great flying flies, called
Piralis or Piransta, that die when they are out of the fire. And some there are
called Hemorobios, that die that day that they take life. Dead flies if they be
hidden or buried in ashes, will reuine. All beasts have their horns hollow
saving at the very end, except the Dear.

Asses in India have one horn. Man alone has his ears immovable. Hares
sleep with their eyes open, so do many men which the Greeks call Corybantia.

The eyes of young Swallows will come again, if they be pulled out.

The eyes of man principally does show love, furor, folly, and wisdom.

Great eyes signify small wit or discretion. The heart lives first, and
dies last.

A man has eight ribs on a side, the Hog ten, the Serpent thirty. Among
fowls the Batte has teeth and no other. Man grows till he be xxi. years
old. Blood preserves the life of every person: that being gone: no remedy but
death. They that have the thickest and fattest blood, are the strongest. They
that have it most fine and clear, are the wisest. They that have least are
fearful.

The blood of an Ass is most fattest. The blood of a Bull will soon wax
hard. The blood of Dear and Goats is not thick nor hardneth not.

Man alone will change his color even in a moment. The man that is hairie, is
inclined to fleshly lust.

If a ma^s hair does not grow nor his beard, it is a sign that he is barre^,
so is the woman yt has no hair growing on her body.

The hair of a man's beard comes not as the grass in the field that is
mowed, but it proceeds from the root.

There is no Male that has any appearance of breasts but man: a woman has
two in her stomach, the Cow has four in her belly, Goats and Sheep two,
the Sowes ten, and some twelve. Every Pigge knows the dugge that they have
been nourished with.

Whales, and Sea calves nourish their young ones with milk of their breasts.

A woman's milk is unprofitable before the seven months. A Cow has no milk
before she has had a calfe. The Ass has milk when she begins to bear.
And to let the yo^g Ass take the dammes milk before two days, is dangerous.

Certain Dames of Rome did bathe the^-selues in Asses milk, for it makes
their skin smooth and white.

Milk of Goats is worse to make cheese the^ the milk of Kyne. The milk of
beasts having above four breasts, is unprofitable to make cheese, and that of
two breasts is better.

The chiefest and best cheeses are made in Italy.

Zoroastes lived twenty years with cheese without feeling age.

Man has two feet of one length and measure, and two arms with two hands.
The thombe and the little finger are of one measure, the other two also of a
measure, and that in the midst is longer. Every finger has three joints, and
they shut or bow inward and not outward, the thombe has but two that bow in
like manner.

The Ape is the beast that most approaches the fashion of feet, hands, nose,
and ears to man, for with the forefeete he fedeth, and has the bowels like to
man's.

At three years man has taken half his growth of height. He has the knees
and arms contrary in bowing, the one forward the other backwarde.

Beasts that engender their like, bow their knees backwarde, and those that
make eggs, forewarde. Nails grow unto each one, yea unto dead men as well as
their beardes.

Birds that have claws and one at the heel, stretche their feet toward
their tail in flying.

All beasts have feet in number equal. Flies have sire and so have Locustes
or Grasshoppers that leap, because that their hinder feet are long.

The genitors of Wolves, Fores, and Rams are of bone. Bores have them
joining, and Sheep have them hanging.

The tale of fishes serves to conduct them, and so it does to other beasts,
and all have tails except man and the Ape. Those beasts have voice that have
lunges and artiers. Others make but a sound or noise, and murmr inward.

A Child never renders voice till he be wholly out of the mothers womb. They
that sonest speak latest go.

The voices of men are diverse, as well as their similitudes and likeness, and
we understand them before we see them. The voice of men is more grauer then the
voice of women. Members that grow out of time are unprofitable, as the sixth
finger.

There was one that had two eyes behind the head, but he saw nothing. It is a
vain thing says Aristotle to judge any person by signs. Oftentimes comes
judgments of short life, that is to wit, few teeth, very long fingers, color
like to lead, and other things.

The contrary signs of long life is to crook the shoulders, on one hand two
strikes alo^g, to have more then xxxij. teeth, great ears.

Great fore heads signifies a stout and manly courage, little forehead,
lightness, a round forehead, wrath. If the brows be straight it signifies
imbecilitie. If they bend toward the nose, hastiness. If they bend toward
the cheeks, signifies a mocking person. If they bend wholly toward the eyes,
malice and envy. Long eyes signify malice. The greatness of the ears
signifies a foolish babbler. The breath of a Bear is naught, and worse a Lions.

The Serpent flies the breath of the Elephant, and the burning of Hearts horn.

The honey Bees oil being cast on them, dye. The Scithians in their wars,
temper their Darts heads in human blood, and in Vipers poison, and if they
strike any therewith, there is no remedy but death.

The best food for man is to eat but of one meat at one time or meal, the
accumulating of savors is pestiferous, and Wine makes a smelling or stinking
breath, if it be not tempered. With great difficulty shall a man digest that
which is taken greedely, excessiuely, or hastily.

There is more pain in the stomach to digest in Summer, then in Winter, and
in age more then in youth.

The vomitings that are made after excess, makes the body cold, are hurtful
to the eyes and teeth.

A man's body grows and wareth gross, to use sweet things, fat meats, and
good drinks. A man may easily live seven days without drink.

Butter asswageth hunger and thirst: nevertheless things excessiuely taken are
hurtful, and therefore it is good to deminish that away which hurts.

The twelfth Book treats of sweet smelling Trees.
TRees have life which they take of the earth. There are many strange trees in
diverse countreies, which unto some are unknown.

In some places they water fine trees at the foot with wine, the which
profits much the roots.

The Parthians which have trees bearing wool, of the which is made fine Cotto^
cloth, as it is said, have a tree bearing Apples, but ye fruit is not to be
eaten, but they have a marvelous smell, so have the barks, the which being in
your Chest among your apparel, casts a sweet savor or smell: and this tree
has always fruit, some growing, some dying, and some ready to gather, and
the graftes of this tree will take in no other country.

In India there is both wood and trees that will not burn in the fire. There
has also been seen a Fig tree of a great height, the branches of the same
tree to spread sixty paces, and it has leaves so broad, that the Sun beams
can not by any means enter between, and therefore the fruit of this tree can
not dye, but the shadow of the same is very delectable.

There is also in the Indias, Apple trees which have the leaves three cubits
long, and two broad, bearing such great fruit, that four men can scarce eat
one Apple. The trees name is Pala, the Apples name Aripa.

Pepper grows on little trees as does Ienuper.

In the Indias it is sometimes mingled with Ienuper berries of that Country,
which have some strength, but no such taste: it grows almost white, but for
to last it is dried in the smoke, which causes it to be black, and with the
shrubbes of the same tree dried in the Sun, is made long Pepper.

There are other trees which in the morning after the dew, rendereth a
certain kind of honey.

In Arabia there are trees which never cast their leaves. Others that have
their flowers, that begins in the morning at the Sun rising to open, and
at hye noone they are opened, and after noone they begin to close, and so
remain all night till the morning, and the Paysauntes of that country say
that the tree sleeps.

There is the tree of Nardas, the which casts a marvelous sweet smell or
odor.

And in Arabia of Trees grow Frankencense, and Myrre. Frankensence grows in
a Forest of Arabia, in a fruitful ground, full of Fountains pertaining to
diverse persons.

It is a hanging matter among them to steal any thing.

The men do purify themselves, and abstain from women for a certain space,
to take or gather the Frankensence, otherwise they can not profit.

On this side the Sea it is mingled with a kind of Rosen which is like, but
the difference is known by the color, by the breaking, and by the fire, for
Frankensence will sooner burn, and is sooner broken with your teeth.

Also there is in those woods of Arabia, trees bearing Myrre, and the Masticke.

The Sabians burn no other wood, wherefore they are weary of their smell.

In the Sea of Arabia grows the Margets and other precious stones.

Synamon is the bark of a little tree, which grows in great quantity in
base Ethiopia, in full places among the bushes, the best is that of the highest
branches, the worst is that that is nearest to the root. When there is any
dew in the Summer it is gathered by great difficulty.

The tree has no smell when it is green, and it is gathered from the Sun
rising, to the Sun setting.

The ships remain six months for their: fraught. That that is carried into
this country of Ethiopia to sell them, is Glasses, vessels of Copper, and
Brass, Woollen cloth, and Linen.

The worst bark or pelle, is that that is soft and white.

Baulme grows only in the province of Judah, in two Gardens of the Kings, the
one co^taining about ten Akers, the other less, and it comes of little trees
not four foot long, growing after the manner of a Vine, it resembles and is
near to the taste of Wine, red in color and fat, the fruit is cut with a
knife of glass, stone, or bone, for the branch dies to be cut with Iron,
and it is cut to take away the superfluities, then in the season the bark is
only cut, and then comes out the sweat by small drops. This experience
is true, that if any of it be spilt upon any apparel, it will never stain.

There is danger in Worms, for they will mar the tree. Alexander the great
in a Summers day filled a little Vial of one tree.

Ginger grows in the earth, and is roots.

The thirteenth Book treats of strange trees.
THe sweet ointments, perfumes, and smellings, are made of these trees. Some
for the pleasure of others buy them dear, for they that carry them, have not
the smell and pleasure, but it is for the smell of others, which is great
vanity.

Palms are in diverse kinds, and there are none fruitful but toward the East,
for they make wines: and as in trees and leaves there are Male and Female, so
there is also in these.

The Male buddeth within the root, and the Female outward.

They bear every year Apples, and when the tree is cut the root casts
again.

The Cedar grows in Siria, of which comes the sovereign root. That that
flourishes bears no fruit, and that that fructifieth bears no floor, and
the wood lasts perpetually.

The Fig trees in Egypt are like to Mulbery trees, the fruit comes four
times a year, against the wood and not against the branches.

There are many unknown trees, specially those that have the good Gum. There
are made Cords or Ropes of this tree.

At Rome have been found books of Philosophy in a Sepulcher between two
stones covered with Cedar wood that had lain there five hundredth thirty five
years without harm, for the Cedar never rotteth, and there is no wood so good
to make works.

There are Cedar trees so hie, that ye can not see the tops, and so great
that there was presented to Tiberius Caesar, a table that was four foot
large, and sixty foot long.

Lotten or Celtis is a tree in Africa, the fruit of which is so sweet that
it heals all pains in the belly, and out of that fruit being bruised or
pressed, comes wine that will not continue above ten days.

Pomegranets there are of diverse kinds, sweet, sower, and winish. The pell of
the sower ones, are good and best to tanne skins, and the flowers are good
for Dyars.

The Thorn that is called Royal, grows in one day, and keeps wine from being
naught.

Citisus is a singular tree, the wood is good to all beasts, as well Sheep as
others. If ^^e sodden in water, it renders to Nources that drink it, plenty
of milk, and makes the children more sure and more greater, and makes Hens
to lay eggs. Upon the flower of this tree a fly will never sit.

Many other strange trees there are in the Sea, that will break like glass,
and others that are as hard as stones, and many other trees that are in the
Islands of the Sea, which we have not here, and which unto us are also unknown.

The foureteenth Book treats of Trees and fruitful Plants.
IN times past men were wont to have many pleasant trees, of the which now
there is no mention, for every one studieth covetousness.

The Wine grows of wild plants, and among all other plants it is the
principallest fruit, and there are many kinds, and every year it must be
cut, or else otherwise it would compass a whole Town.

Wine is the blood of the Earth, it being taken within a man's body is hot, and
without it is cold, it is both comfortable and profitable to a man, if it be
taken measurably, otherwise it is very hurtful.

Alexander the great did vanquishe the whole world, and yet could not so well
keep him self, but was overcome with the force of Wine.

Wines is not permitted to the wives of Rome.

We read that King Romulus did pardon and forgive a Senator of Rome called
Ignatius Mecenius, which had killed his wife with a Clubbe, for that she was
found drinking wine out of a tun.

And therefore Cato did ordain that women and maidens should be kissed of
their parents and kinsfolk, to the end they should know whether they did
smell of Wine or no.

Marcus Varo writes of a Consul which never made banquet, nor had at his
table more at one time then at an other, for fear of to much drinking.

In times past at Rome the price was set on wine, to the end that little
should be drunk, but since Caesar made great banquettes, which gave occasion
to make provision at Rome for all kind of wines. Wine alone serves to make
medicines.

There is wine made of Pears, Apples, and of other trees, which they use
toward the East.

Some make Wine of herbs, of water and honey sodden, which in Wales is called
Metheglyn, that will last five years, or with Honey and Vinegar, which is
called Oximell.

The small wines ought to touch the ground for to be the better kept, but not
the good. The flower of white wine is good, and that of red is naught. By
drunkenness men reveal their secrets, and make debates.

The fifteenth Book treats of Trees bearing fruit.
THe Olive tree grows not near the Sea, nor in places to hot nor to cold:
they must be cut like Vines. The Olive oil is of a better savor when the
Olives begin to ripe, but there is not so much when they begin to be black,
but that is the time to take them, and of their ripeness. There is more pain
to make Oil then wine.

The Olive has stone, oil and flesh, the green are bitter, by drying they
become less though yt the heat is cause of oil. The liquor of the Olive is
the oil, but it lasts not as does wine, for it is best the first year.

Some there are that tarry til the Olives fall from trees, for it hurts the
trees again the year following, to be cut, broken, or smitten.

Olives before they are ripe will be kept with salt, after that they have been
in hot water.

If the Olive be not clean, it is washed and dried, three or four days and
seasoned with salt.

There is Oil made of many things, of Nuttes, of Acornes, of small grains, of
sweet smelling trees, of Gum that serves for medecines, of Almonds,
Chesnuttes, and diverse other things, according to the Countreies. Apples and
Pears ought to be kept in a dry and cold place, and for them the North wind
is good and no other wyndes, when the weather is fair, they should be put on
hay, separated one from another for to take the air, and they ought to be
gathered before the full Moon.

Nuttes make a sound or rattling in falling, when they are ripe, and among other
fruits they are parted in four within, with a little skin between both.
They will keep green, being put in earthen pottes, in the earth, and with
them is made good Oils.

Chestnuttes, are a kind of maste, and it is marvel that nature has so
closed them in shelles.

Mulberies stayne a bodies fingers, and they are of three colors, at the first
they are white, after that become read, and when they are ripe then they are
black.

Cheries will keep dried with the Sun, as Olives. There are many relessings
in fruits, as sweet, waterish, sower, bitter, green, salt, brackish, fat,
and diverse others, among the which there are that have many tastes together.

The Wynes are sweet and sower, pricking. Milk is sweet and fat, but there
are three principal Elements, without savor and without smell, as water,
fire, and the air. The Laurel is dedicated to triumphs, and Emperors bear
thereof on their heads, principally because it keeps the persons from thunder.

The sixtenth Book treats of wild trees.
THe Acornes comes of Oak trees of diverse sorts, for some there are better
then others, and in time of famine ye good Acornes dried may be grinded to make
bread. Acornes be most sweetest when that they are new, and roasted in the
imbers.

The Oak is best for to build withal, either houses or ships, because it
will longest last.

If an Oak tree be smitten with the thunder, it bears few Acornes or none,
and is so bitter, that no beast will eat thereof but Hogs, and when they
are very hungry.

The Beeche tree, bears a kind of maste the which rejoices the Hogs
being fed with them, their flesh is soon sodden, and very profitable for the
stomach.

Taxus is a tree like unto a Pyne tree.

In Arcadia it is so venomous that no beast dare sleep under the shadow of
it, nor eat thereof.

The Cups that are made of this wood, to put Wine in, are venomous.

It is said that the venime of this wood ceasseth, when there is nailed therein
a nail of brass.

An Eshe tree, the leaves thereof is mortiferous to Mares, but it hurts not
the beasts that shadow under it, to drink the liquor of it, is good against
the biting of Serpents, for never Serpent rests under the shadow thereof,
and he that will compass a Serpent about a fire with the leaves of this tree,
the Serpent will rather take the fire then escape through those leaves.

The Tilia of some called the Teybe, has Male and Female, for the Female alone
bears flowers and seed. The juice of the bark and leaves is sweet, but no
beast will eat of the fruit, between the bark and the wood there are many
little thin pelles or skins, with the which are made Ropes.

The Maple if it were so great and so high as the Cedar, should be preferred
because of his propernesse.

With this tree is made Tables being of a blackishe color.

The Box tree spreads very large and thick, and is very proper because of
his shadow.

There are certain wild trees, that never leese their leaf, as the Cedar,
the Ieniper, the Holly tree, and others.

The Ieniper for his leaf has a sharp prick or thorn.

There are certain places in Egypt whereas some trees will not grow.

Other trees there are that leave their leaves sooner then the rest, and the
difference thereof comes, for that their fruit is sooner ripe then others:
but Almond trees, the Esshe, and others, have their fruit with the first, and
cast their leaves with the last.

The Mulberie tree brings her fruit late, and falls her leaves with the
first.

The trees after the manner of beasts do conceive in January with the wind,
some sooner then others, and after a straight wind, begins the flowers to
appear, and nourish the fruit.

Vines in some places bears twice a year. The roots are diverse according to
the diversity of trees.

Esculus as writes Virgil is a tree, that has such profunditie or deepenesse
in the earth, as it has above the ground in height.

The Ciper tree is flow in growing without the ground be fat and fertile, then
it spreads very large and long. And thus to conclude, I finish this abstract,
till further occasion shall serve, giving God most hearty thanks for these
his benefits and gifts given for the use of mankind. To whom be all honor
and praise for ever and ever Amen.

FINIS.

