THE FAVOVRITE: OR, A plain Demonstration from Holy Scripture of Gods
especial love to the righteous, in a Sermon preached at S. Andrews in
Norwich, the 18. of Nouemb. 1625. since enlarged and newly published for the
Comfort of Gods people.

By TIMO: PLVMMER Preacher of Gods Word.

Psalm. 1. verse. 6. The Lord knows the way of the righteous, but the way of
the wicked shall perish.

Prou. 11. verse. 28. He that trusts in his riches shall fall, but the
righteous shall flourish as a Branch.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Man, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of
the Swanne. 1622.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL MASTER GEORGE BIRCHE, now Mayor of the City of
Norwich, to the Worshipful Sheriffs and Aldermen his Brethren, to the Commons
and to all the Citizens in the same City; Timothy Plummer wishes all
happiness here, and hereafter the Crown of Righteousness.
RIGHT Worshipful and Right Christian Friends, as I am willing to acknowledge
Gods gracious Providence, and therein the manifold favors received of and in
the City of Norwich, for the space of no less then 14. years, both from
private persons Christianly affected in the time I was a poor
Grammer-scholler, and from public Magistrates, godly and religious, who have
showed me more then ordinary favor, partly in freely allowing me a yearly
pension during the time I continued and proceeded in Cambridge, and partly in
bestowing upon me, that painful place which now by Gods blessing I do enjoy;
I say, as I am willing to acknowledge these benefits with a thankful mind, so
I am as forward to express true and real thankfulness to every one of you. I
know very well that you will think your love and cost well bestowed, if you
may but see my profiting answer your expectation. And thus much I understand to
my greater encouragement, that my poor endeauours already showed have been of
you, most lovingly accepted; which I wish may be a testimony unto you, that I
have endeavored (in some measure and desire) to be faithful in a little: And
of all my meditations I know none have had better acceptance, then this which
I name the Favorite; which kind acceptance I may truly say, was the cause of
publishing this little Treatise.



In magnis volitisse s^^t est.
and the rather, because in the whole discourse they shall not be able to find
any one line which may make the heart of the righteous sad whom God has not
made sad; Ezech. 13.22.
or strengthen the hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his
wicked way: And now, all that I will say to you, to whom I owe so much, is
this, If there be any thing in this short Sermon, (which God has brought to
my hand by his gracious Spirit) whereby any of you may be furthered in the way
of righteousness, I humbly praise Almighty God, and send it unto you all as the
first fruits in this kind; the best New-yeeres gift that I have, being the
fittest token and testimony of my unfeigned thankfulness. Further commending
to your Christian consideration a place of Scripture, viz. Ezech. 33.12. etc.
unto the 20. verse, And adding this petition to the Father of lights from whom
comes every good and perfect gift, Iam. 1.17.
that he would be pleased to make you and me abound more and more in every good
word and work, 2 Thessalonians. 2.17.
causing our paths as the shining light to shine more and more unto the
perfect day, Prou. 4.18.
I rest and remain. London this first of January, 1621.

Yours in all offices of Christianity to be commanded: Timo: Plummer.

To the Christian Reader, T. P. wishes all furtherance in the way of
righteousness.
CHristian Reader, we find in History both Sacred and profane, and easily
observe in the practice of all nations that Kings and Princes have always had
some or other to be their special Favorites, that is to say,

1. Such as they have privileged above others to be most near in attendance
about their Royal persons.

2. Such as they have graced and dignified with excellent names, styles and
titles of honor.

3. Such as they acquaint with the greatest and weightiest secrets of State,
admitting them to be of their Privy Council.

4. Such as they readily hear and grant petitioning and soliciting for
themselves and others.

And nothing is more obutious in holy writ, then that God the King of Kings
does make the righteous man his only Favorite; The Lord sets apart him that
is godly for himself. Psalm. 4.3.


1. He makes him attend upon him in his special presence, in his House, in his
Courts, in the best place he has: A day in thy Courts is better then a
thousand: Psalm. 84.10.
I had rather be a doore-keeper in the house of my God then to dwell in the
tents of wickedness.

2. He gives him glorious names and titles, especially, calling him The Son
of God: Behold, says S. John, 1. Ioh. 3.1.
what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called
the sons of God.

3. He reucales to him his secrets, The secret of the Lord is with the
righteous, Prou. 3.32. Psalm. 25.14 Matthew. 13.11.
To you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of heaven.

4. He willingly hears his requests, put up in the behalf of himself and
others, The fervent prayer of the righteous avails much. Iam. 5.16. 1. Pet.
3.12. Ier. 14 11. Deuteronomy. 9.14.
It is strange to observe how God seems to suffer violence by their prayer:
he is enforced to cry out, Pray not for this people, let me alone.

And will you see all these particulars exemplified in one of Gods favorites,
namely, in faithful and righteous Abraham.

1. God takes him from Vr of the Caldoes from Idolatry and superstition, Genesis
11. and 12. chap.
and entertaines him into his own service; covenants to be his God, and
commands him to walk before him and be upright. Genesis 17.1.


2. His name is changed in token of further blessing, from Abram to Abraham, He
must be a father of many nations, the father of the faithful, Genesis 17.5. Romans
4.13. Iam. 2.23.
the heir of the world, the friend of God, and what not?

3. God cannot find in his heart to hide from Abraham his secret purpose,
shall I hide from Abraham the thing that I do? Genesis 18.19


4. He is allowed to be a Master of Requests both for himself and for others.
As for Ishmael I have heard thee; Gen 17.20
Behold I have blessed him and will make him fruitful, etc. Again, God says
to Abimelech, Restore the man his wife, Genesis 20.7
is a Prophet, and he shall pray for thee and thou shall live: But mark how
in one prayer he prevailed with God in the case of Sodom; observe, how soon
he brought God to an abatement; Genesis 18.3
from fifty to ten: And I think if he had said, If there shall be found
one righteous in the City, God would have spared it for ones sake; This I am
sure of, that God never ceased granting till Abraham ceased praying. But to
what end tends this discourse? to comfort and encourage thee Oh Christian in
these last and perilous times wherein wickedness seems to get the upper
hand and true righteousness is outfaced. Eccles. 3.16 Mal. 3.15.
We may see the place of judgment, that wickedness is there; and the place
of righteousness, that iniquity is there. What though Antichrist for a time
do domineere withal deceiueablenesse of unrighteousness in them that perish?
^. Thessalonians. 2. ^10.
what though the number of them be increased that believe not the truth but
have pleasure in unrighteousness? Verse 12.
Be not thou disheartened, let them fear the Spirit of Gods mouth and the
brightness of his coming; Verse 8.
but lift up thy head; Be thou as bold as a Lion, Prou. 28.1
what though the wicked be rich and in amity with the world? ^am. ^.4.
thou art more rich; thou have the better part, that shall never be taken from
thee. Prou. 8.13
Durable riches and righteousness, thou art most happy in Gods savor, if thou
knew thine own happiness; and that thou may know it in some degree, I
have for thy sake willingly published this little Treatise, It is my first
borne, my might, and the beginning of my strength; If thou reapest any profit
by it, it is the thing which I desire, only praise God in my behalf, for
enabling me to perform any service for the good of his Saints, and afford me
thy prayers unto the same God, that I may grow in grace, and in the knowledge
of our Lord Jesus Christ. 2: Pet. 3.18


Thy brother in the same Lord. T. P.

PSALM. 37.16. A little that a righteous man has, is better then the riches of
many wicked.


BEsides that maine and manifest difference which God will make between the
righteous and the wicked at the day of judgment, Mal. 3.18. Math. 13.43 Mat.
25.30.
when the righteous all shine forth as the Sun, and the wick^^ be cast into
utter darkness; He has ^ade even in this life a great difference between
them, not only in respect of that inward portion of true sanctifying grace,
which the righteous partake inabundance, and the wicked not so much as taste of,
and so differ as much as light and darkness; Ye were sometimes darkness,
Ephesians. 5.8.
but now are ye light in the Lord. But also in regard of their outward estate
(which seems a Paradox) in temporals the righteous have the better of it, he
goes away with the better share; so says this Text, A little that the
righteous man has is better then the riches of many wicked.

The Method which I use in the unfolding of these words, is: 1. I point out the
righteous man. 2. I observe the little that he has. 3. I show how this little
is better then the riches of many wicked.


First, we enquire for the Righteous man, 1. Part. Romans 3.10. Eccl. 7.29 in
Genesis 1.27
Saint Paul finds it written, There is none righteous, no not one; Solomon
has only found this, that God made man righteous, according to his own image
in righteousness and true holiness. But as the Devil stood not long in the
truth, so man not long in that perfect estate, but by sin defaced Gods work
of original righteousness, both in himself, and in his posterity. Genesis 5.3.
Adam begat a son in his own likeness, after his own image, not in the
image of God in which he was created, but in his own image, that is, a sinful
wretch like himself. Hence Eliphaz says, Job. 15.14. Esaias. 64.6.
what is man that he should be clean? and he that is borne of a woman that
he should be righteous? And Esaias, we are all as an unclean thing, Romans 5.19.
and al our righteousnesses are as filthy rags; But the same Saint Paul says
again, As by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, Esa. 53.11.
so by the obedience of one (namely Christ) shall many be made righteous:
according to that in the Prophet, by his knowledge shall my righteous servant
justify many. 1. Ioh. 2.1. Ier. 23.5. and 33.15. Mal. 4.2. Reu 12.1.
So then we see that Gods children derive all their righteousness from Jesus
Christ the Righteous; yea from that righteous Branch spring all their
righteousness, they are covered about with the rays and beams of the Sun
of righteousness; The Church is clothed with the Sun.

Now for the further clearing of this point, we are said to be righteous two
ways.

1. By imputation of Christ's righteousness unto us, so Christ is made unto us
(amongst other things) righteousness, 1. Cor. 1.30 2. Cor. 5.21. Romans 10.4. Ier.
23.6. Iustitia Euangelica. Phil. 3.9. Gen 15.6. Romans 4.3, etc.
and God has made him to to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might
be made the righteousness of God in him. And in another place, Christ is the end
of the law for righteousness, to every one that believes, therefore we call him
the Lord our Righteousness, and this is called the righteousness of
justification, or the righteousness of faith. An example of this we may see
in Abraham, He believed in the Lord, and he counted it to him for righteousness.

2. By inchoation of inherent righteousness, we being changed in our natural
qualities by the power of Christ's Spirit, are led on to perform (in some
measure) the righteousness of the moral Law, following the example of our
Savior Christ; 1. Ioh. 3.7.
according to that pregnant place, He that does righteousness, is righteous,
even as he is righteous, and (this is called the righteousness of
Sanctification, or the righteousness of the Law. Romans 8.4. Iustitia ^egalis.
Psalm. 106.31
An example of this we hane in Phineas, who executed judgment, and that was
counted to him for righteousness.

A Righteous man is such an one as being found in sinful Adam, A description
of a Righteous man. Ephesians. 2.3. Romans 8.
a child of wrath, is through Gods eternal grace of election in Christ, called
to be the Son of God, and heir of heaven, whose sin is freely pardoned,
and person accepted in the active and passive righteousness of Christ applied by
faith, Mat. 3.17.
who being endued and renewed with the Spirit of Christ is so thoroughly altered
and changed in soul, body, and spirit, 1. These. 5.23.
that he is daily enabled to dye unto sin, and to live unto righteousness,
that is, willingly to perform some new and pleasing obedience to Gods revealed
will, the only rule of righteousness, 2. Cor 3.18. 1. Cor. 15.49.
and that from one degree unto another, until at the last he has Gods image
repaired and restored in as ample and better manner then ever it was at the
first, Psalm. 17.15 Ephesians. 5.27.
to the praise and glory of Gods rich grace.

When on the contrary a wicked man is such an one, A description of a wicked
man. Ephesians. 2.1. 1. Tim. 5 6. Ephesians. 4.18. 2. Tim. 2.26. Ephesians. 2.3. 1. Cor. 2.14.
Phil. 2.13. Prou. 15.8. Esa. 26.10.
as being the cursed offspring of rebellious Adam, is by Gods eternal and
just appointment left in that damnable estate, who being dead in sins and
trespasses, that is to say, having his mind darkened, his will captiuated, his
affections disordered, is not able to understand, will, or do any thing
pleasing unto God in the whole course of his life; yea notwithstanding all the
means God uses, and favor he shows to reclayme him, there is none
effectual unto him, he will not learn righteousness, but daily walk in the
wilful breach of Gods righteous Law, waxing worse and worse, and treasuring
unto himself wrath against the day of wrath, 2. Tim. 3.13 Romans 2.5.^
and revelation of the righteous judgment of God.

FIrst if we now make a suruay of the face of the world, 1. Use.
we shall find the wicked swarm and gather together in great multitudes, but
for men qualified according to our description of the righteous man, the number
will be very small, so that we may have just cause to observe and bewail the
paucitie and fewness of those that are truly righteous: God in the old world
found only Noah that righteous man, and a preacher of righteousness; 2. Pet.
2.5. Genesis 7.1.
Thee have I found righteous before me in this generation: In Sodom and
Gomorrha there was not found ten righteons men, though they might have saved
the whole Cities from perdition, Genesis 18.
Only Lot is delivered, that righteous man that dwelt amongst them, who seeing
and hearing, 2. Pet. 2.7.
vexed his righteous soul from day to day, with their unlawful deeds. Job
1.8.
In Jobs time there was none like to him in the earth: Yea, it is the
continual complaint of the Prophets and Apostles, Psalm. 12.1. Esaias 57.1. Mich.
7.2. Romans 9.
that few are found walking in Gods righteous Law. And shall we that are fallen
into the dregs of time, look to sinde a greater plenty, though we search
the world with lights? But what shall we say or do when we find such
scarcity and want of righteousness on the earth? We must pray that
righteousness may look down from heaven; Psalm. 85.11 Psalm. 4.1.
Let us desire the God of our righteousness to array the Church his Bride with
fine linen, clean and white; the fine linen is the righteousness of the
Saints. Revel. 19.8
In particular, let us put up our suites in the behalf of our English nation,
Prou. 14.34.
that righteousness may exalt it, and that sin may not be a reproach unto
it; In special manner for the Kings most excellent Majesty, Prou. 16.12. and
25.5. Psalm. 7^.1.
that his Royal throne may still be established through righteousness. Give
thy judgments oh Lord unto the King, and thy righteousness unto the Kings
Son. Let us not forget the Illustrious Prince and Princess Palatine, with
their hopeful issue, but pray, that God would bless him in all his just
designs, that his righteousness may be brought forth as the light, Psalm. 37.6.
and his judgment as the noone day. Let all in authority under his Majesty
in Church and Commonwealth, be compassed about with righteousness. Let the
Magistrates put on righteousness, as a Robe and a Diadem; Job 30.14. Psalm.
132 9.
and let thy Priests be clothed: endue thy Ministers with righteousness; yea
let us pray that every private man may have on him the brestplate of
righteousness, Ephesians. 6.14.
that we may offer daily the sacrifice of righteousness, Psalm. 4.5.
putting our trust in the Lord; Oh Lord lead every one of us by thy Spirit in
the paths of righteousness, until thou come to judge the world in
righteousness, Psalm. 9.8. Act. 17.31. 2. Pet. 3.13.
making a new heaven, and a new earth, wherein shall dwell righteousness. Amen
and Amen.

hold the truth in unrighteousness, Romans 1.18.
whose lust is there law, who have no fear of God before their eyes, Psalm.
36.1.
etc. as ye may read every where in the book of God. Against such the wrath
of God is revealed from heaven; 1. Cor. 6.9. Verse 10.
Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be
not deceived, neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor
effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous,
nor drunkards, nor reuilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of
God; And is this all their punishment? this is punishment enough, It is a hell
to be out of heaven; yet it were happy for them if they might escape with the
deprivation of heaven, but they shall be turned into hell, Psalm. 9.17.
the place prepared of old for the devil and his angels: Mat. 25.41.
It was principally ordained for the devil and his angels, but wicked men
sinning do as it were encroach upon the devils right; It is just with God
since wicked men will sin like the devil, that they be punished with the
devil; But oh thou living man! while their is life in thy body, there is hope
of thy soul, if thou will turn unto the Lord he will receive thee into
favor; as I live says the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of the
wicked, Ezech. 33.11.
but that he should turn from his way and live; Turn ye, turn ye from your
evil ways, for why will ye die, ye house of Israel? Discite iustitiam moniti,
and non temnere diuos. Learn in time before the gate of Gods mercy be shut, to
break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities by showing mercy
to the poor, Dan. 4.27.
by a holy restitution of wrongs, by the daily practice of repentance, if it
may be a lengthening of thy tranquillity, both in this life, and in the life to
come, Let my counsel be acceptable unto thee, do not sell thy self to work
wickedness, and gain nothing but a room in hell, 1. King. 21.25.
in Tophet ordained of old; Yea for the King it is prepared (says the Prophet)
he has made it deep and large, Esaias, 30.33
the pile thereof is fire and much wood, the breath of the Lord like a stream
of brimstone does kindle it.

Luke 18.9. Prou. 30.12.
who have only the outward show and conceit of righteousness, without the
inward, sound, solid, and substantial change in heart and life. Math. 23.27,
28.
Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for you are like unto painted
Sepulchers, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within full of
dead men's bones and of all uncleanness; even so ye also appear righteous unto
men, but within are full of hypocrisy and iniquity. Therefore let me say unto
you, as our Savior said unto his hearers, Except your righteousness exceed
the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, Math. 5.20
ye cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven. Ye see in what damnable estate
you are in; ye are in no better case then notorious sinners, nay I fear in
worse; There are most woes denounced against such; Math. 23.
The hypocrite is hateful to God and man; Fained sanctity, is accounted double
iniquity, and when God threatens to punish extremely, he will give them
their portion with hypocrites. Mat. 24.51.




1. That every one of us would go out of our selves, First exhortation. Romans
13.14. Matthew. 22.11.
and get into the true fountain of righteousness; Put on the Lord Jesus
Christ; Put him on as a rich robe of righteousness, the only wedding garment
of our soul; Let us not content our selves with a dream, figment, and vain
shadow of righteousness, but labor with S. Paul to be found in him, not
having our own righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is through
the faith of Christ, Phil. 3.9.
the righteousness which is of God by faith; If we be not found in him, clothed
with his righteousness, we shall be clothed with perpetual shame. Let not the
enemies of Gods grace, the Papists persuade us to weaue the spiders web of
our own works; Act. 13.10. Esaias. 39.5.
They shall not become garments, neither shall they cover themselves with their
works, says the Prophet. Indeed if we presume to bring before God our
works, they will be in his sight but works of iniquity, Verse 6.
as in the same place. Yea, Beloved in the Lord, Knowing that a man is not
justified by the works of the Law, Gal. 2.16.
but by the faith of Jesus Christ, let us freely confess, In the Lord we have
our righteousness and strength; Esa. 45.24.
If God should enter into judgment with us, no man living could be justified.
Psalm. 143.2.


Does not Saint James labor to make men see, 1. Object. Iam. 2.24.
that by works a man is justified and not by faith only? And yet S. Paul from
good premises concludes, That a man is justified by faith without the deeds of
the Law; Romans 3.28.
Do these Master builders and maine pillars of the Church differ and disagree,
in this fundamental point of our salvation?

James speaks of justification before men, and so he makes works to
justify, Declaratiue, declaring who are to be accounted righteous, in the
Court of Sanctification, and by this means, the Apostle lays the idle,
empty, verbal professor upon his back, who only braggeth of faith, not
having the fruits thereof, but remain a dead and fruitless tree, ready to be
cut down and cast into the fire. But Saint Paul speaks of justifying before
God, and so he makes the poor hand of faith to justify Apprehensiue,
apprehending, Math. 3.10
applying, and appropriating the righteousness of Christ unto the sinner, Romans
4.5:
by which the sinner may with boldness appear before Gods tribunal, in the
Court of justification; and by this means the Apostle beats down the proud,
conceited, Pharisaicall Iusticiary, that dares obtrude and thrust upon God his
own good works, good intents, and good meanings. Yea this shall be found an
infallible truth, that Christ came not to call such righteous, but sinners to
repentance. Math. 9.13
The poor Publican that humbly confesses his sins, and desires Gods mercy
in the merits of Christ, Luke 18.14
is the man that goes away justified rather then the other.

Judge me oh Lord, according to my righteousness? Psalm. 7.8. Ans.


I answer by distinguishing of righteousness, there is a double righteousness,
one of the person, another of the cause, David there would have God to judge
him, according to the goodness or righteousness of his cause; therefore if thou
look ever to come to heaven, cast away thine own righteousness as dung and
dross; For as the Israelites did not possess the land of Canaan for their
righteousness, Deuteronomy. 9.4.5, 6. Tit. 3.5.
so think not thou to climb up to heaven by thine own works and merits. Let
me deal plainly, be not so sortish to think of deserving at Gods hands by
thy works of legal righteousness, considering what thou may read in Job
against this conceit, Job 22.3. and 35.7.
Is it any pleasure to the almighty that thou art righteous? or is it gain to
him that thou make thy ways perfect? If thou be righteous, what give thou
him? or what receives he of thine hand? When we have done all things
commanded us of God, let us say in truth, and humility, we are unprofitable
servants.



Causae regnandi, and put in the top of Justification? May they not be Viae ad
Regnum, Ephesians. 2.10.
ways that God have appointed us to walk in? Is it nothing that our heavenly
Father is glorified by good works? Mat. 5.16. Gal. 6.10. 2. Pet. 1.10
And that our brethren are many ways bettered by them, and that we our selves
are by the same assured of our effectual calling and eternal election? And
know further, that we do not so strictly call for faith only, but that we
require works, Iam. 2.18.
the fruits of faith, to justify, and testify the life and truth of the same
faith, Gal. 5.6.
yea although faith, other graces and works be together in a Christian, yet
they do not justify together, they concur not in the act of Justification;
But as the cares and eyes are together in a man, and the eyes only see, and as
light and heat are together in the fire, and the heat only warmeth; So faith,
love, and works are in a true Christian, but faith (as it is an instrument to
lay hold, not as it is a virtue, grace, or work) only justifies. To make an
end of this matter, we are undoubtedly to believe, that this doctrine of Gods
free justification, does most plainly arise from holy Scripture; It does most
fully establish the righteousness of God; Romans 3.21, 22, 23, etc.
It does most plentifully demonstrate the deep misery of man; It affords
most strong consolation to every true Christian soul; for then may Gods Child
say with courage and boldness; Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
elect? Romans 8.33.
when he is thoroughly persuaded, that It is God that justifies.

2. That every one of us would follow after righteousness, Second exhortation.
1. Tim. 2.22. Pron. 2.20: Luke 1.6.
and daily walk in the way of good men, and keep the paths of the righteous;
that it may be said of us, as of Zachary and Elizabeth; they were both
righteous before God, walking in all the commandments and ordinances of the
Lord, blameless; though not without all sin, yet without open reproof or
blame: So let us endeavor to be blameless and harmless, the sons of God,
Phil. 2.15
without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation; amongst whom
let us shine as lights in the world.

To press this point yet further. Let us but seriously consider why God did
elect us; but to be like to the image of his Son? Romans 8.29.
Why did he create us, I pray, but that we should bear and show forth some
resemblance of himself, Psalm. 145.17.
who is righteous in all his ways? Did he redeem us for any other purpose,
then to serve him in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life?
Luke 1.75.
were we not made free from sin for that very cause, that we might become
the servants of righteousness? Romans 6.18.
And wherefore did God reveal his Gospel of grace (called the word of
righteousness) but to teach us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, Tit.
2.11, 12. Heb. 5.13.
and to live righteously? To what other end tends Gods ordinance of preaching
but to turn men unto righteousness? Does not the Apostle call true Preachers
the Ministers of righteousness? Dan. 12.3.
Are not the Sacraments which we receive seals of righteousness? 2. Cor.
11.15. Romans 4.11. 2. Pet. 2.21
I think true Religion is nothing else, but the way of righteousness; and can
we please God better then by this? or be any way better assured of his love
and acceptance? Prou. 15.9. Psalm. 11.7. and 45.7. and 146.8. Math 21.32.
He loves him that follows after righteousness. And again, the righteous
Lord loves righteousness? Finally, how can we think to escape death and
attain to life, unless we walk in the way of righteousness? Prou. 12.28
Jn the way of righteousness is life, and in the pathway thereof there is no
death; We must resolve to finish our course of well-doing if we look for the
crown of righteousness, 2. Tim. 4.8
which God the righteous judge will give unto us: We must not foolishly think
to dye the death of the righteous, Numb. 23.10. Psalm. 15.2. Gal. 6.7. Prou.
11.18 Hos. 10.12.
except we live the life of the righteous. O vain world, be not deceived, as a
man sow so he shall reap: To him only that sows righteousness shall be a
sure reward, God renders to every man according to his work. Esa. 32.17.
It is the work of rightenesse that shall be peace, and the effect of
righteousness, quietness and assurance for ever.

righteous have but a poor pittance, a very little of these outward things;
when on the other side, many wicked are full-handed, build there nests on high,
have riches, Hab. 2.9.
as it is in the text. If we expostulate the cause with Jeremy, Ier. 12.1.
we must acknowledge the justice of God as he did, and that for good reasons,
he thus unequally disposes and dispenses these common things to the wicked
and to the righteous.

First, he deals thus bountifully with the wicked for these reasons.

1. To show his absolute power and infinite goodness. The Lord is good unto
all, his mercy is over all his works: Psalm. 145 9.
He stampeth and printeth some of his communicable goodness upon the vilest of
his creatures, and who may control him, doing what he will with his own?
Mat. 20 15. Psalm. 17.14.
Therefore he gives the wicked their portion in this life, and they may look
for no more, for even as Abraham gave all he had to Isaac, Genesis 25.5.6
and sent away the sons of his concubines with gifts, so God gives the
wicked outward gifts, Gal. 4.28
reserving the eternal inheritance to the children of promise.

2. To leave them without excuse, Act. 14.17.
and himself not without witness, in doing them good, in giving them rain
from heaven, and fruitful seasons, and in filling their hearts with food and
gladness; He can say to them as he said to wicked Saul, 1. Sam. 15.17.
When thou wast little in thine own sight, I advanced thee, etc. and they
shall not be able to say unto him, Math. 25.24.
We knew that thou art an hard man.

3. That he might give us an example of doing good against evil, Matthew. 5.44
45. Romans 12.20.21. 1. Sam. 24.17.
as we may read in the Gospel. A duty too much neglected, yet further
commanded by S. Paul, and practiced by David and many other of the Saints of
God.

4. In judgment many times for their hurt, Eccles. 5.13 1. Tim. 6.9. Opes
irritamensa malorum. Horat. -- Horum semper ego optarim pauperrimus esse
bonorum. Psalm. 39.6.
J have seen (says the preacher) riches, kept for the owners thereof to their
hurt. So they prove as a knife in the hand of a child, or as a sword in a
mad man's hand, dangerous and deadly. Surely many men had never been so deep
in sin and misery, if they had not been so rich; Even their wealth through
Gods judgment is a snare and a trappe unto them.

To say nothing of the care, fear and sorrow that accompany the same, in
getting, keeping and loosing of them; to conclude; As God gave the children of
Israel quails dainty meat, but a plague with it; Psalm. 106.15.
he gave them their request, but sent leanness into their soul; they had
better have been without it; So God gives the wicked the wealth of the world
in severe judgment, as I might enlarge in many particulars. Hence a Reverend
Doctor of your own was wont to pray, Doctor Bound.
Give us nothing Oh Lord in thine anger, though we should ask it of thee.

Secondly, he deals thus sparingly with the righteous, for these reasons.

1. That he may bring them to some conformity and correspondencie, with his
Son Christ there head and elder Brother; who though he was rich, 2. Cor. 8.9.
yet for our sakes became poor; He was poor in his birth, life and death.
Luke 2.7.
His birth was not allowed a fit room in a common Inn. In his life, the foxes
and fowls, Luke 9.58.
had a more certain dwelling. At his death he had not a grave of his own to
be buried in; Ioh. 29.42.
Ergo they must in some proportion drink of Christ's cup of poverty; The
Disciple is not above his Master. Luke 6.40.


2. That he may put a difference, between the time of our nonage, and the time
of possessing our inheritance; Gal. 4.1.
that we may sensibly discern the time of our soiourning here, 1. Pet. 1.17.
Act. 3.21.
from the times of the restitution of all things; God will not let us find a
heaven upon earth, Math. 17.4.
and so dream; It is good for us to be here.

3. Being Pilgrims and Travelers in their present condition, Heb. 11.13
it is not meet they should be cumbred and laden with too much thick clay;
God will allow us a light staff to ease us in our way; but not a heavy burden
to hinder our progress.

4. That the wicked may have occasion to do good; that their mouths may be
stopped, and they not able to say, but that there was some little ones in
estate to do good unto; Mat. ^5.45. Mark. 14.7. Deu. 15.11
according to that; Ye have the poor with you always, and whenever ye will
ye may do them good.

5. That he may exercise his special graces in their hearts, In infortu. nus
vn^^s ^^^cet.
as Faith, Patience, Hope, Humility, etc.

Faith, for if they should have riches, in abundance, they would go near to
trust in them; (...)
in dead uncertain riches, and not in the living God; and therefore God often
keeps back greatness, that himself might be our chiefest trust and stay.
Patience, God brought Job to a little, Job 1.
that he might inure his patience, and in very truth, God by this dealing will
try how willingly we submit, and subscribe to his provident allowance.

Hope, He will have us hope for a plenty elsewhere; 1. Cor. 15.19
If in this life only we have hope, we are of all men most miserable.

Humility, because riches do eleuate and lift up the heart: God by the
Prophet tells the Prince of Tyrus, Thou have increased thy riches Ezech. 28.5.
and thy heart is lifted up because of thy riches.



Deuteronomy. 8.14.
that their heart be not lifted up, and they forget God which brought them
forth of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage. Omnibus nobis vt res
dant sese, ita humiles aut elati sumus. Terent. in Hecyra.
For the most part, as the purse fills, the heart swells; The heathen Poet
could say as much; According to our outward estate, we are either proud or
humble. It is pity fair weather should do hurt; but it comes often to
pass that in abundance Gods children are subject to surfeit; when penury,
want, and their competent little keeps them in good temper; Viuitur exiguo
melius. -- Prou. 30.8, 9.
This made Agur pray as heartily against riches, as against poverty; Give me
neither poverty nor riches, least I be full, and deny thee, and say, who is
the Lord?

First, this does disprooue that false glass and crooked rule, 1. Use.
by which many rich men judge of their spiritual estate before God; they
think themselves highly in Gods favor, because rich; Ier. 9.23.
but let not the rich man glory in his riches. For alas, this is a mere
deceit; Eccl. 9.1.2.
These outward things fall out alike unto all; or commonly Gods chief
Favorites have the least portion; when profane Esau, Genesis 27.39.
whom God hates, is allowed the fatness of the earth: Prou. 3.16.
I tell thee riches are but a gift of the left hand, and if any have the
vantage, it is the poor man. Have ye not read that God is called, the God of
the poor and needy, the Father of the fatherless? Psalm. passim.
Has not God chosen the poor in this world, rich in faith, and heirs of the
kingdom, which he has promised to them that love him; Iam. 2.5. Luke 7.22.
Yea, to the poor is the Gospel preached; ordinarily the poorer sort of
people, do give best well-come and entertainment to the same, 1. Cor. 1* 26
when not many mighty and rich in the world are effectually called; Ioh. 7.48.
Have any of the rulers believed on him? How hardly shall they that have riches
enter into the kingdom of God? such as trust in riches, Mark. 10.23, 24.
as is there expounded. Therefore I may say to rich and poor, Ioh. 7 24.
Judge not after the appearance, but judge righteous judgment, and always
remember that in heaven is poor Lazarus, as well as rich Abraham; poverty,
Luke 16.
rags, nakedness, cannot separate us from Gods love in Christ; Romans 8.35
He that fears God and works righteousness is accepted of him; though he
be never so poor, Act. 10.35
this is ancient doctrine, that God accepts not the persons of Princes, Job
34.19.
nor regards the rich more then the poor.

Jacobs request, food and raiment, Genesis 28.20. 1. Tim. 6.8. Heb. 13.5.
things for the present, our portion, our lot, our little, let us therewith be
content; let us learn with the Apostle (a deep point of Christian learning) I
have learned says he, Phil. 4.11, 12.
in whatsoever estate I am, therewith to be content; I know both how to be
abased, and I know how to abound every where and in all things I am instructed,
Simus contenti ista mediocri fortuna, etc. modico, substantiola. Westmer.
both to be full and to be hungry, both to abound and to suffer need. Learn
then, since God has cut thee out but a little, to be heartily well content,
with his good will and pleasure.



Verse 25.
Observe the Prophets long experience, I have been young and now am old, yet
have I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread.



2 Thessalonians. 3.11.
when religion does so school the righteous, that he works in some lawful
vocation, and so is not usually brought to so great extreamitie. Solomon in the
book of Proverbs is very copious and plentiful in this Argument; showing
that through sinful courses, many miscreants do come and crouch for a piece
of silver, and a morsel of bread. In particular, By means of a whoorish
woman, a man is brought to a piece of bread. Prou. 6.26.
Again, The drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty, Prou. 23.21
and drowsinesse shall cloth a man with rags: These are the fruitful
mothers that bring forth the numberless troops of our evil beasts and slow
bellies, I mean those unprofitable burdens, the caterpillars and devouring
droanes of our Commonwealth, viz. the wandering sturdie and incorrigible
rogues; He becomes poor that deals with a slack hand, but on the other
side, Prou. 10.4.
the hand of the diligent makes rich: In all lawful and honest labor there
is profit, Prou. 14.23.
but the talk of the lips tends only to penury: See thou a lazy,
slothful, idle wretch with his hand in his bosom, that can talk of work but
do nothing? there is more hope of the homeliest labourer then of him; the
poor plowboy, shall come to preferment before him, He that tilleth his land
shall be satisfied with bread, Prou. 12.11.
but he that follows vain persons is void of understanding, and so in just
proportion shall want bread, and beg in the end as a witless and improuident
fool.



not so poor as we take them to be. Read what the Script. 2. Cor. 6.10.
says: As poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, yet possessing all
things. Not simply poor, but quasi pauperes, as poor. No, no, God will make
hard shift (that I may speak it with reverence) before his children shall want
necessaries, the hard flint, Number. 20.11
the rock of stone shall gush out water, and the hungry Raven shall bring them
bread and flesh in the morning, 1. Kin. 17.6
and bread and flesh in the evening, as it did Eliah. Heb. 13.5.
We have Gods promise, that he will neither leave us, nor forsake us; and these
reasons to induce us to believe the same.

1 Because he provides for the unreasonable Creatures: Psalm. 145.15. and
104.21. Mat. 6.26.
The Ravens, Lions, and the rest, seek their meat at God, wait upon him, and
have it in due season: and will he not feed his own dear children? Shall they
want? No, the Lions shall lack first, Psalm. 34.10
and suffer hunger.

2 He is kind even to the wicked, which are strangers to his Covenant, his
enemies, ergo, he will not fail those of his own family, that are under his
own charge. If God be the Savior of all men, then especially of those that
believe. 1. Tim 4.10.


3. He has sustained us heretofore, when we were young: First, when we were
in the womb, before we had a mouth to receive meat, his gracious hand made
another passage: for as in the womb we are wonderfully made, so are we
admirably preserved and fed. Then out of the womb, Psalm. 139.14. Mal. 22.9, 10.
when we yet hung upon our mothers breasts he was our God: When we had not a
tongue to express want, yet he made us cry and bend by a natural instinct to
the breast of our mother, richly filled with fit sustenance for us: Afterward
he fed us when we did nothing, and when we did that which was evil, and can
he now fail us about his own business? No, Genesis 48.15
he feeds the godly all their life long.

4 He has given us his Son, Rom, 8.32.
therefore he will give us with him all things also: And this is a very strong
and Apostolical argument: we may reason thus: If he has given us his Son, to
be meat, drink, and cloth to our souls, he will not stand with us for so
small a triflle, as may serve our bodies.

5 He will give us a royal inheritance, therefore we should not fear, that he
will starve us before we come of age, and are capable of it. Fear not little
flock, it is your Fathers pleasure to give you a Kingdom. Luke 12.32.


6 And lastly, if God do forsake us, and not sufficiently provide for us, it
is, because he is either unable or unwilling: now for his ability, we believe
that he is Almighty, and so rich in grace to all that call upon him: Hag. 2.8.
Psalm. 50.10 11.
The silver is mine, and the gold is mine, says the Lord of hosts. Every
beast of the forest is mine, and the cattle upon a thousand hills: I know the
fowls of the mountains, and the wild beasts of the field are mine. In a word,
Psalm. 24.1.
The earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof. And for his willingness,
that is transcendent, infinitely exceeding that of natural parents toward
their children: yea, it surmounteth and surpasses that compassion of the most
indulgent and tender mother. Esaias 59.15
Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on
the son of her womb? Yea, they may forget, yet will not I forget thee. So
then, content thy self with thy little, forasmuch as thy little will prove
enough. Exo. 16.18
He that gathered a little had no lack. If God give but a little, he can make
a little serve the turn, and be enough; and then a little is as good as a
feast. Is thy provision small? thy appetite shall be the less. Remember the
speech of the woman in the Martyr-booke; M. Fox. Acts and Mon^ments, page 1874.
If you take away my meat, God I trust will take away my hunger. We know, as
it is all one in respect of Gods omnipotency to work with means, or without
means: and as good Jonathan says, There is no restraint to the Lord to save
by many or by few: 1. Sa. 14.6.
so in regard of Gods ordinary blessing upon the righteous, it is all one to
preserve them by dainty delicates, or by courser commons; by much or by little.
And learn this of, our Savior Christ, That a man's life consists not in the
abundance of the things which he possesses, Luk, 12.15
but in the goodness of God engraven upon them, whereby a few dead things are
made sufficiently serviceable to preserve and maintain his natural life, as
you shall hear by and by.



Briefly then, as I conceive the matter, in these three respects: 1 Because he
has right to his little. 2 Because he has Gods blessing with it. 3 Because he
has power to enjoy it.
First, in that he has right and just title to his little; it is his own: now
a little of ones own, is better then thousands without due claim and
interest, according to that true Proverb, Prou. 16.8.
Better is a little with righteousness, then great revenues without right.
Indeed Gods child is the right and undoubted heir of the world; God gives
us richly all things to enjoy. 1. Tim. 6.17.
The righteous man's tenure is in Chief, in Capite, in his head Christ Jesus;
all are yours, and you are Christ's: His assurance is Gods firm promise;
Godliness has the promises of this life, as well as of that which is to come;
1. Cor. 3.22 1. Tim. 4.8.
He does enter or take possession of any thing without prayer; Give us this day
our daily bread, Matthew. 6.11.
remembering that every creature of God is good, when it is sanctified by the
word and prayer; 1. Tim. 4.5.
His homage, suite, and service is the faithful discharge of his calling, both
general and particular: With quietness he works and eats his own bread; 2 Thessalonians. 3.12.
When the wicked have no right at all (in the court of conscience) to
whatsoever he haueth and holds; though in the courts of men, he has a civil
right, as Peter said to Ananias, Act. 5.4. Genesis 1.28.
Was it not thine own? That undoubted right once granted to the sons of men
is forfeited now, and lost in Adams downfall; so that a man out of Christ is a
thief, a robber and an usurper of all that he possesses, and albeit he will
boldly say with Nabal, 1. Sam. 25.11.
My bread, and my water, and my flesh, yet they are unto him but unrighteous
Mammon. Luke 16.9.
It matters not though he come by them, by reason of inheritance, gift, or
labor, but then especially are they unrighteous, when they are got by force,
fraud, or any unlawful means open or secret: Mich. 6.10.
Now do but weigh in an equal balance, the mean man's modicum, possessed and
held by so good and warrantable a right, and the riches of many wicked,
purchased and procured, per fas aut nefas, by hook or by crook, by briberie,
perjury, Simonie, usury, by the lying tongue, the false weight, the scant
measure, the deceitful ware, etc. and then tell me whose estate is best? tell
me plainly, Are not the gleanings of Ephraim better then the vintage of
Abiezer? Surely, thou will say of these riches as Erasmus said of pleasure;
Colloq. Voluptas non est voluptas, quae cum mala fama, malaque conscientia
coniuncta est. Prou. 9.17. Job 20.
Riches are not riches (not worthy any account) when they are joined with an
ill report and a wicked conscience; for although stolen waters be sweet to the
wicked for a time, yet know that there will be bitterness in the latter end;
Mark what Zophar says, handling this very argument of the wicked man that
oppresses and forsakes the poor, and violently takes away the house that
he builded not, Verse 19. Verse 12.13.
Though wickedness be sweet in his mouth, though he hide it under his Prou.
21.6. Paululum quod insti possident est suauius and fructuosius quam impiorum
magna affluentia, ob arcanam Dei benedictionem. Genebrard. Pro. 10.22. Psalm.
113.7
viz. Vanity tossed to and fro of them that seek death.

Secondly, in that he has an operative or working blessing with his little, to
better it both in quantity and quality.

First, in quantity, which may be proved by testimonies, Divine, Humane, and
Diabolical.

1. Divine, The blessing of God makes rich; Again, He raises up the poor
out of the dust, and lifts the needy out of the dunghill, that is, gives a
large increase to small beginnings.

2. Humane, old father Jacob may be here produced. Genesis 32.10
With my staff (says he) I passed over this Jordan, and now I am become two
bands. This testimony is upon record; And may not we confirm this, and say to
Gods glory, with nothing, or with little we came into these gates, but now God
has multiplied us exceedingly. The lines are fallen unto us in pleasant
places, yea, Psalm. 16.6.
we have a goodly heritage.

3. Diabolical, The father of lies, the devil utters this truth; thou have
blessed the work of his hands (speaking of that righteous man Job) and his
substance is increased in the land: Job 1.10.
He acknowledges the augmentation of the godly man's wealth to be from the
blessing of God; so that as it is said in the motto, Concordia res paruae
crescunt, so we may say, By Gods blessings small things increase, God we see can
quickly double the talents of his faithful servants, soon increase the little
oil in the cruse; Math. 25. 1. King. 17.14. 2. King. 4. Ioh. 6.9.
and in the pot of the poor widows, and by his powerful blessing, multiply
the few loaves and the small fishes; When on the other side, either the secret
and hidden curse of God like a canker, eats, wastes, and utterly consumes
the fair estates of many wicked, God blows upon that they have, with such a
blast, as they sow much, and bring in little, Hag. 1.9.
earne wages and put it into a bag with holes, as the Scripture speaks; or
else some open and manifest judgment do bring them down from bravery to
beggary, from the ruff to the ragge, from a girdle to a rent as the Prophet
threatens, In short, God seems to say to many wicked men, Because you served
not the Lord your God with ioyfulnes and gladness of heart for the abundance
of all things; Esaias. 3.24.
Therefore you shall serve your enemies which the Lord shall send against you
in hunger, and in thirst, in nakedness, and in the want of all things. Deuteronomy.
28.47 48. Job 37.17. Non horrenda res est aqua et polenlenta. Senec. 18. epist.
Dan. 1.15.


Secondly, in quality, By Gods blessing, poor and mean clothes do keep us
warm, and course diet, pulse and pottage do feed and fat us. See this in that
excellent example of Daniel and his companions; Their countenances appeared
fairer and fatter inflesh, then all the children which did eat the portion of
the Kings meat. It is not the greatness and daintiness of fare, but Gods
good blessing that do nourish and strengthen the body of man, Leu. 26.26. Isa.
3.1. Ha 9.1.6* Mic. 6.14. Prod. 13.25 Pauxillum pium satiat-affluentia impium
non satiat. Scultet. Dcut. 8.3.
God makes bread to be a staff and stay, to satiate and strengthen the
righteous man, when the wicked have the staff of bread broken, and the stay
taken away; they eat, eat, eat and are not satisfied. The righteous eats
to the satisfying of his soul, but the belly of the wicked shall want; In a
word, man lives not by bread only, but by every word of God: Now one word of
God, is a word of blessing which the wicked have not. So that as Solomon says
of the laborers sleep. The sleep of the laboring man is sweet, Eccles. 5.12
whither he eat little or much, so may I say of the righteous man's meat, it
is sweet whether it be little or much; for the blessing of God does so sweeten
and season it; that his very appetite and hunger is a sauourie sauce unto it.

Thirdly, in that he has an heart comfortably to enjoy his little. Esaias. 3.10.
Say ye to the righteous, it shall be well with him; for they shall eat the
fruit of their doing; As it is Gods mercy to reward the righteous for
well-doing, so it is Gods gracious blessing, that they taste, eat and enjoy,
even in this life, a part of their reward; That men may say. Psalm. 58.11.
Verily there is a reward for the righteous, verily there is a God that judges
in the earth; And that this is a special favor, hearken what Solomon says,
Behold that which I have seen, to eat and to drink, Eccles. 5.18 19.
it is good and comely for one, Iustus dirigi tur a deo vt sciat vti divitijs
non est avarus non est prodigus, etc. Bellarm.
and to enjoy the good of all his labors, that he takes under the Sun all
the days of his life, which God gives him, for it is his portion; Every man
also to whom God has given riches and wealth, and has given him power to eat
thereof, and to take his portion, and to rejoice in his labor, This is the
gift of God. When, on the other side, there is an evil seen of him under the
Sun, and it is common amongst men; Eccle. 6.1.2
A man to whom God has given riches, wealth, and honor, so that he wants
nothing for his soul, of all that he desires; yet God gives him not power to
eat thereof, but a stranger eats it, This is a vanity and an evil disease;
Horat. Quo mihi fortunas si non conceditur vti? Prou. 15.16, 17. and 17.1.
Eccles. 4.6.
Is not then a little eaten and enjoyed, better then abundance laid up and
looked on? I think I cannot conclude better then with that of Solomon, Better
is a little with the fear of of the Lord; Better is a dinner of herbs;
Better is a dry morsel, Better is a handful with quietness, etc. then the
abundant superfluity of many wicked.

Ezekiel. 18.^4.
or slack his pace, but rather go on, since the righteous man's estate is so
good, He may say as Job in another sense; Job 27.6.
My righteousness I hold fast, Reu. 22.11.
and I will not let it go. If God be so good to the righteous, Let him that is
righteous be righteous still: Hos. 6.4.
Let not thy goodness (O Christian professor) be as the morning cloud, or the
early dew, soon dried up and gone away; but as I would have the sow the
seed of righteousness in the morning of thy age, Eccle. 11.6.
begin betimes; so I would not have thee withhold thy hand in the evening, give
in in thy old age; but be faithful unto the death; Reu. 2.10.
Yea, since God dorh not (in his mercies, graces and blessings) forsake us when
we are old and gray headed; Psalm. 71.18.
let us not forsake him in our old age, but let our gray-head be a crown of
glory unto us, Prou. 16.31.
being found in the way of righteousness. Let us increase in all well-doing,
Prou. 4.18.
that our paths as the shining light, may shine more and more unto the perfect
day.

Secondly, this may move all men to be much affected, yea, 2. Use.
even ravished with this estate and happy condition, and to be induced with all
speed to seek the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, Math. 6.33.
since all things shall be so comfortably added unto them: Let us labor to be
partakers of that kingdom, which consist not in meat and drink, Romans 14.17
but in righteousness: Let this be first sought after of us, and it will be
the most ready way to thrive in the world: for all things shall be so added,
blessed and bettered, as nothing needful shall be wanting to us. Psalm. 4.6.
It is the only question in the world, Who will show us any good? We that are
preachers, do show thee, Mic. 6.8.
O man, what is good, and what the Lord requires of thee: nay, we show thee
the good and right way, to increase and better thy outward estate: It is the
Devils Proverb, He that uses plain dealing shall die a beggar: The plain
and just way is the sure, safe, and gainful way: It is a slander to say, It is
vain to serve God, and what profit is it that we keep his ordinances? etc.
David has long since confuted that saying, M^l. 3.14. Job 21.15. Psalm. 19.11.
In keeping Gods righteous judgments there is great reward. If we would try
God in the practice of his will, see if God would not open the windows of
heaven, Mal 3.10.
and pour us out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive
it: Hos. 2.22.
yea, when God has betrothed us unto himself in righteousness, then he will
hear the heavens, and the heavens shall hear the earth; and the earth shall
hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil, and they all shall hear us.

So long as thou go on (O vain man) in the way of wickedness, thou art an
outlaw, out of Gods protection; God need take no care of thee: But when thou
turnest thy feet to Gods commandments, thou may claim the privilege of a
good subject, take the benefit of Gods Covenant, and promise, wherein God is
tied in little or much, to bestow upon thee a great blessing: I think we may
say as Bildad to Job, If thou be pure and upright, Job 8.6.7.
surely now he will awake for thee, and make the habitation of thy
righteousness prosperous, though thy beginning was small, yet thy latter end
shall greatly increase: so it came to pass with him; the Text is evident for
it, Job. 42.12.
The Lord blessed the latter end of Job more then his beginning: yea, Verse 10.
Deuteronomy. 28.1.
God gave him twice as much as he had before: And so it will be with thee, if
thou shall harken diligently unto the voice of thy God, to observe and to do
all his Commandments, with sincerity and uprightness of heart: Verse. 3, etc.
Blessed shall thou be in the City, and blessed shall thou be in the field:
Blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy ground, and the
fruit of thy cattle, the increase of thy Kine, the flocks of thy sheep.
Blessed shall be thy basket and thy store. And a little after, The Lord shall
command the blessing upon thee in thy storehouses, and in all that thou
set thine hand unto, etc.

Iam. 2.6.
this sharply reprooueth the wealthy-wicked, that usually despise and disdain
the poor righteous man, and count him as the dung, and offscouring of the
world, let them know, that although he has but a little, Pro. 12.26.
yet, The righteous is more excellent then his neighbor: and again, Better is
the pore that walks in his uprightness, Pro. 28.6.
then he that is perverse in his ways, though he be rich. And to say truth,
the righteous poor man, is better then the wicked rich; inasmuch as
righteousness is better then riches: Now righteousness excels rithes, in many
particulars, especially in these four:

1 Riches cannot secute us from Gods wrath, Prou. 11.4.
but righteousness can. Riches avail not in the day of wrath, but
righteousness delivers from death: 1. Pet. 1.18.
We are not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold: but learn
what this means, Esa. 1.27.
Sion shall be redeemed with judgment, and her conuerts with righteousness.

2 Riches adorn but the body, but righteousness decketh and beautifieth the
soul. Luke 16.19. Act. 12.21. Esa. 61.10. Ezekiel. 16.
He has clothed me with the garments of salvation; he has covered me with the
robe of righteousness, as a bridegroom decketh himself with ornaments, and
as a Bride adorneth her self with jewels.

3. Riches cannot give content; Eccl. 4.8. and 5.18.
neither the eye, nor the heart can be satisfied with riches: man's spirit, his
immortal soul cannot be filled with these terrene and transitory things. We
read but of one ^^au that said, I have enough. Genesis 33.9.
These trifling toys cannot satisfy the insatiable heart of a natural man;
Matthew. 5.6.
but they that hunger and thirst after true righteousness, shall be satisfied:
yea, Ioh. 4.14.
he that drinks of the water that Christ does give, shall thirst no more.

4 Riches continue not, they are not permanent and durable; they make
themselves wings and are soon flowne away; Prou. 23.5.
but righteousness is called everlasting by the Prophet Daniel, Dan. 9.24.
Psalm. 82.3.
and we read of the man that fears God; his righteousness endures for
ever. Well then, thou that despisest Gods poor, God will contemn thee, and
set thee at naught, and highly exalt his name and memory. Verse. 6.
The righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance: and in another place,
Prou, 10.7.
The memory of the just shall be blessed, but the name of the wicked shall rot.

envy the unhappy flourish of the wicked; as we are admonished in the
entrance of this Psalm, Verse 1. Prou. 24.1. Psa. ^.1.16.
and by Solomon also in his book of Proverbs. Habakuk seems to repine at
their prosperous estate, saying, Their portion is fat, and their meat
plenteous: Job 21.7.
Job calls their estate into question, when he says, Wherefore do the
wicked live, become old, yea, are mighty in powwer? etc. David himself
stumbled at this rock of offense; Psalm. 73.
He was offended at this through ignorance, until he went into the Sanctuary
of God, and was well catechized concerning the point. Then he understood their
end, and would not change his estate with them: Ibidem.
For though they prosper in the world, and increase in rickes, yet he saw that
God did set them in slippery places, and cast them down to destruction.

Therefore, do we see them aloft upon the top of Fortunes wheel? Claud. --
Iamnon ad culmine rerum, iniustos creuisse queror tollu^tur in altum vt lapsu
grauiore ruant
do they build their nests in the clouds? stay awhile, they will not be long
there; they will come down as fast as ever they went up: So says the Prophet,
Man being in honor abides not, he is like the beast that perish: Be not thou
afraid when one is made rich, when the glory of his house is increased, Psalm.
49.12. Verse 16.
as in the same place, neither stand amazed, when they that work wickedness are
set up, as another Prophet speaks, because, Computatis, Computandis, that is
to say, in right reckoning, thou art above ten thousand times a better man in
thy estate; Mal. 3.15.
rather pity such as have no more profit and gain by that which they possess;
What does it profit a man to gain the whole world, and to loose his own
soul; Mat. 16.26.
And rejoice in thine own advantage and profit, in that thou do not labor
in vain: Light is sown for the righteous, and joy for the upright in heart:
therefore, 1. Cor. 15.58 Psalm. 97.11. Phil. 1.11.
rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous, for if thou be filled with the fruits of
righteousness, know assuredly that the fruit of Righteousness shall be unto thee
a Tree of life. Prou. 12.3^


FINIS.
I. S. to the Reader.
REader, if gladly thou would be resolved
Whom God delights in, see thou here involud,
A plain description of his Favorite,
Not the profane, ne yet the Hypocrite.
It thwarts the purtnes of the jealous Lord,
To favor sinners, or with them accord,
But he who out of nature claspeth sure,
By faith unfeigned, on his Savior pure,
Shows forth his light, abandons wickedness
And serves the Lord in truth, and righteousness:
NExt, if thou seekst, wherein his favor stands;
It Is not in worldly wealth, ne goods or lands,
But in his inward gifts and special grace,
Wrought in the hearts of such as he embrace.
Let not the rich then in his outward fate,
Think himself happy, and in blessed estate:
Nor let the poor repine, but rest content,
With that same little, which the Lord has sent.
FOr lastly, here is proou'd how God does bless
The little portion that his own possess:
But cur eth, wastes, and consumes the store
Of rich-vngodly grinders of the poor.
Let then the righteous man be righteous still,
And frame his life according to Gods will:
For though the wicked here exalted be,
The righteous man is better far then he.
FINIS.

