portrait of a lady

pictures of a lady in domestic settings THE Accomplisht-Ladys Delight In
Preserving, Physic, Beautifying and Cookery



TO ALL Ladies and Gentlewomen.
Ladies,
THough there have been many Books Extant of this kind, yet I think something
have been Deficient in them all. I have therefore adventured to make another,
which, I suppose, comprehends all the Accomplishments necessary for Ladies, in
things of this Nature. For you have here,

1. The Art of Preserving and Candying all Fruits and Flowers; as also of
making Conserves, both Wet and Dry; and also the preparing of all sorts of
Syrups, Jellies, and Pickles.

2. Here are some Excellent Receipts in Physic and Surgery, for Curing most
Diseases incident to the Body: Together with some Rare Beautifying Waters,
Oils, Ointments and Powders, for Adorning the Face and Body, and to cleanse it
from all Deformities that may render Persons Vnlovely.

3. You may have here a Guide to all manner of Cookery, both in the English and
French Mode, with the preparing all kind of Sallets and Sauces proper thereunto.

4. Directions for making all sorts of Pyes, Pasties, Tarts and Custards, with
the Form and Shape of many of them, to help your Practice; ^ith Bills of Fare
upon all Occasions.

5ly, and Lastly, The Lady's Diversion in her Garden. Containing, A handful of
Choice and Novel Curiosities and Observations, relating to Plants and Flowers.
Together, With brief Directions for the Nice Adorning Balconies, Turrets, and
Windows, with Flowers, or Greens, every Month in the Year. So that in the
whole, I hope it may deserve the Title of the Accomplished Ladies Delight, and
may Acquire Acceptance at your Fair Hands, whereby you will very much Encourage
and Oblige,

Ladies, Your very Humble Servant, And Admirer, T. P.

The Art of Preserving, and Candying Fruits and Flowers, as also of making all
sorts of Conserves, Syrups and Jellies.
1. To make Quince Cakes.
BAKE your Quinces in an Oven with some of their own Juice, their Cores being
cut and bruised and put to them, then weigh some of this Juice with some of the
Quinces, cut into small Pieces; with their weight in Sugar, and with the
Quinces some quantity of the Juice of Barberries, take the clearest Syrup, and
let it stand on the Coals 2 or 3 Hours, let them Boil a little on the Fire,
Candy the rest of the Sugar very Hard, and put them together, stirring it while
it is Cold, and put it into Glasses.

2. To make Conserve of Barberies
When the Stalks are picked off, Boil them in fair Water till they Swell and be
very soft, then Bruise them in a Mortar, Strain them, and Boil them by
themselves, then take for every Pound of them, 2 Pound of Sugar, and Boil them
together, but not too long, for then it will Rope.

3. To make Conserve of Roses.
Take the Buds of red Roses, and Slip away the white Ends, then Slip the rest
of the Roses as small as you can, and beat them fine in a Marble Mortar; and
put to every Pound of Roses, three Pound and a half of Sugar, then but it up in
a Gally-pot, and set it in the Sun for a Fortnight.

4. To Make Cinnamon Water.
Take a Quart of White Wind, a Quart of Rose Water, a Pint of Muscadine, half a
Pound of Cinnamon Bruised, lay the Cinnamon to Steep in the Wine 12 Hours,
stirring them now and then, afterward put them into an Alembick, and Still
them with a gentle Fire, and you may draw off from it three Pints: But if you
will not have it Strong, instead of Muscadine ^ut in so much Rose Water or
White Wind.

5. To preserve Quinces White.
Take to every Pound of Quince, a Pound and a Quarter of Sugar, Clarify the
Sugar with the white of an Egg, Core your Quinces, but not too much, put this
Sugar, and Water, and Quince, being Raw together, and so make them Boil so fast
that you can see no Quince, forget not to turn them, take off what Scum you
can, keep them Boiling thus till they are enough.

6. To preserve Raspices.
Take the Fairest well Colored Raspices, Pick off their Stalks very Clean,
then Wash them, Besure not to Bruise them; Weigh them, to every Pound of
Raspices, put 6 Ounces of hard Sugar, 6 Ounces of Sugar Candy, Clarify it with
half a Pint of fair Water, and 4 Ounces of Juice of Raspices, being Clarified,
Boil it to a Weak Syrup, then put in your Raspices, Stirring them, and let them
Boil till they are enough.

7. To make Mackroons.
Take Almonds, Blanch them, Beat them in a Mortar, with Serced Sugar mingled
therewith, with the white of Egg and Rose Water, then Beat them altogether till
they are as Thick as Fritters, then Drop it upon your Wafers and Bake it.

8. To preserve Cherries.
Take some of the Worst Cherries and Boil them in fair Water, and when the
Liquour is well Colored, Strain it, then take some of the best Cherries you
can get, with their Weight in Beaten Sugar, then lay one laying of Sugar and
another of Cherries, till all are laid in the Preserving Pan; then pour a
little of the Liquor of the Worst Cherries into it, Boil your Cherries till
they be well Colored, then take them up, and Boil the Syrup till it will
Button on the side of the Dish, and when they are Cold, put them up in a Glass
Covered Close with paper, until you use them.

9. To make Conserves of Oranges, Lemons, Pippins.
Boil any of these Fruits, as you would do to make Paste thereof, and when it
is ready to Fashon upon the (...) it into your Gally-pots, and never dry it;
and this is all the Difference betwixt Conserve and Paste, and this serves for
all hard Fruits, as Pippins, Oranges, and Lemmons.

10. To make Symballs,
Take fine Flower dried, and as much Sugar as Flower, then take as much whites
of Eggs, as will make it Paste; put in a little Rose Water, with a quantity of
Coriander-seed and Anniseed, then Mould it up in the Fashion you will Bake it
in.

11, To make Syrup of Clove-gilly Flowers.
Take a Pound of Clove-gilly-flowers, the White; being Cut off, Infuse them a
whole Night in a Quart of fair Water, then with 4 Pound of Sugar dissolved in
it, make it into a Syrup without Boiling.

12. To make Syrup of Violets.
Take of Violet Flowers fresh, and pick a Pound, put them into clear Water
Boiling, 1 Quart, shut them up close together in a New Glazed Pot, a whole day,
then press them hard out, and in 2 Pound of the Liquor Dissolve 4 Pound and 3
Ounces of white Sugar, take away the Scum, and make it into a Syrup, without
Boiling.

13. To make Marmalade of Quinces.
Take a Bottle of Water, and 4 Pound of Sugar, let them Boil together, when
they Boil, Scum them Clean take the Whites of 2 or 4 Eggs and beat them to
Froth, put the Froth into the Pan to make the Scum rise, Scum it Clean; take
off the Kettle, and put in the Quinces and stir them, when Boiled enough put
them into boxes.

14. To make Hippocras.
Take a Gallon of White Wind, 2 Pound of Sugar; and of Cinnamon Ginger, long
Pepper, Mace not bruised, Grains, Galingal, Cloves not Bruised, of each 2 penny
Worth, Bruise every kind of Spice a little, and put them together in an Earthen
Pot for a day, then Cast them through your Bags 2 or three times, as you see
cause, and so Drink it.

15. To make Almond-Butter.
Take your Almonds and Blanch them, and beat them in a Mortar very small; and
in Beating put a little, Water, when they are beaten pour in water into two
pots, put half into one, and half into another, put Sugar to them, and stir
them, let them Boil a good while; strain it and so dish it up.

16. To preserve Quinces red.
Pare your Quinces and core them; take as much Sugar as they weigh, put to
every pound of Sugar 1 quart of Water, boil your Quinces very Leisurely close
Covered, turn them to keep them from spotting; when they are very tender and
well colored, boil the Syrup till it will button on a dish, and so put your
Syrup to them.

17. To pickle Cucumbers.
Wash them and dry them in a Cloth, take Water, Vinegar, Salt, Fennel-tops,
some Dill-tops, and a little Mace, make it sharp enough to the taste, boil it a
while, and take it off, and let it stand till cold, then put in the Cucumbers,
and keep them down close, and within a week they will be fit to eat.

18. To Candy Pears, Plumbs, Apricocks, clear as Amber.
Take your Apricocks or Plumbs, and give every one a cut to the Stone in the
Notch, then cast Sugar on them and bake them in an Oven as hot as for Manchet
close stop, let them stand half an hour, then lay them one by one upon
Glass-plates, and so dry them: In this, manner you may Candy any other Fruit.

19. To preserve Oranges.
Take a pound of Oranges, and a pound of Sugar, Peel the outward Rind, and the
inward white skin off, then take juice of Oranges and put them into the juice,
and boil them half an hour, and take them off.

20. To make Oil of Violets.
Set the Violets in sallad Oil and strain them, then put in other fresh
Violets, and let them lie twenty days, then strain them again, and put in other
fresh Vioets, and let them stand all the year.

21. To make Cream of Quinces.
Take a roasted Quince, pare it, and cut it into thin Slices to the Core, boil
it in a pint of Cream with a little whole Ginger, till it taste of the Quinces
to your liking, then put in a little Sugar and strain it, and always serve it
cold to the Table,

22. To make a March-Pane.
Steep 2 pound of pickled Almonds one day and 2 nights in fair Water, and
Blanch them out of it, then beat them well in a Mortar, and bedeck them with
Rose Water, put it to your Almonds so many pound of Sugar, beat it with your
Almonds, then make fine Crust of Paste, and sprinkle it with Rose Water, and
Sugar; then spread the Stuff on it, and bake it at a very soft fire, always
bedewing it with Damask Water, Civet, and Sugar; and lastly with a gut of Dates
gilt, or the Kernels of Pineapple, and so set it forth.

23. To make Almond Milk.
Boil French s Barley, as you boil it, cast away the water, till you see the
water leave to change Color; as you put in more fresh water, then put a bundle
of Strawberry leaves, and as much Cullumbine leaves, and boil it a good while,
then put in beaten Almonds and strain them, and then strain it with Sugar and
Rosemary, then strew some Sugar about the dish, and send it to the Table.

24. To preserve Apricocks, or Pears, Plumbs, when green.
Take the fruit and scald them in water and peel them, scrape the spungy
substance off the Apricocks, or Quinces, boil them very tender, taking their
weight in Sugar, and as much water as to cover them, boil them very Leasurely;
then take them up and boil the Syrup till it be thick; and when they are cold
put them up with your Syrup, into your preserving Glasses.

25. To pickle French Beans.
Take your Beans and string them, boil them tender; take them off, let them
stand till they are cold, put them into pickle of Beer Vinegar, Pepper, Salt,
Cloves and Mace, with a little Ginger.

26. To make an Excellent Jelly.
Take 3 Gallons of Water, boil in it a knuckle of Veal, and Calves feet slit in
two, with all the fat clean taken from between the claws, let them boil to a
very tender Jelly keeping it clean scum'd, and the edge of the pot always wiped
with a clean Cloth, that none of the scum may boil in, strain it from the meat,
let it stand all night, the next morning take away the top and the bottom, and
a quart of this Jelly, half a pint of Sherry Sack, half an ounce of Cinnamon,
and as much Sugar as will season it, 6 whites of Eggs well beaten, mingle all
these together, then boil it half an hour, and let it run through your bag.

17. To make Aqua Mirabilis.
Take of Cloves, Galanga, Cubebs, Mace, Cardamums, Nutmegs, Ginger, each 1
dram, juice of Celandine half a pound, Spirit of Wine 1 pint, White Wind, 3
pints infuse them 24 hours, and draw off a quart with an Alembik.

28. Dr. Stevens 's Water.
Take of Cinnamon, Ginger, Galanga, Cloves, Nutmegs, Grains of Paradise, seeds
of Annis, Fennel, Caraways, of each 1 dram; herbs of Time, Mother of Time,
Mint, Sage, Pennyroyal, Pellitory of the Wall, Rosemary, Flowers of red Roses,
Cammomile, Origanum, Lavender, of each one handful, infuse them 12 hours in 12
pints of Gascoign Wine, then with an Alembick draw away 3 pints of the strong.

29. To make good Cherry Wine.
Take the Syrup of Cherries, and when it has stood while, bottle it up, and
tie down the Cork, and in short time it will be pleasant Wine.

30. To make Wafers.
Take a pint of Flower, a little Dram, the yolks of 2 Eggs, a little Rose Water
with some searced Cinnamon and Sugar, work them together, and bake them upon hot
Irons.

31. To preserve Grapes.
Stamp and strain them, let it settle a while, before you wet a pound of Sugar
or Grapes with the Juice, stone the Grapes, save the Liquor, in the stoning
take them off and put them up.

32. To pickle Purslain.
Take Purslain and pick it into little pieces, and put it into a pot or
Barrel,, take a little water, Vinegar, and Salt, to your taste, it must be
pretty strong of the Vinegar and Salt, and a little Mace, and boil all these
together: And pour this Liquor boiling hot into the Purslain, and when it is
cold tie it close down, and in a Week or two, it is fit to eat.

32. To preserve green Walnuts.

Boil your Walnuts till the water taste bitter, then take them off, and put
them in cold Water, and peel off the Bark, and weigh as much Sugar as they
weigh, and a little more water than will wet the Sugar, set them on the fire,
and when they boil up take them off, and let them stand 2 days, and then boil
them again once more.

34. To preserve Currants.
Part them in the tops, and lay a laying of Currants, and a laying of Sugar, and
so boil them as fast as you do Rasberries, do not put them in the Spoon but
Scum them, boil them till the Syrup be pretty thick; then take them off, and
let them stand till they be cold, and put them in a Glass.

35. To make Goose-berry Cakes.
Pick Goose-berries, and put them in an earth Pitcher, and set it in a Kettle
of water till they be soft, then put them in a sieve, and let them stand till
all the juice be out, and weigh the juice, and as much Sugar as Syrup, first
Boil the Sugar to a Candy; and take i^ off, and put in the juice, and set them
in the press till they be dry.

36. To make excellent Broth.
Take a Chicken and set it on the fire, and when it boyls Scum it then, put in
a Mace, and a very little Oatmeal, and such herbs as the party requires, and
boil it well down, and bruise the Chicken and put it in again and it is good
broth: And to alter it you may put in 6 Prunes, and leave out the Herbs or put
them in as you please, and when it is well boiled, strain i^ and season it.

37. To make Angelets.
Take a quart of new Milk, and a pint of Cream and put them together in a
little Runnel, when it is come well, take it up with a spoon, and put it into
the Vate softly, and let it stand 2 days till it be pretty stiff, then slip it
out and Salt it a little at both ends, and when you chink it is salt enough set
it a drying and wipe them, and within a quarter of a year they will he ready to
eat

28. To make Jelly of Hartshorn.
Take 4 Ounces of shavings of Hartshorn, of the inside, and 2 Ale-quarts of
Water, put this in a Pipkin, and boil it very gently till it come to a quart,
the Hartshorn must be steeped 3 or 4 Hours first, afterward put a little into
a Saucer till it be cold, and if it jellieth, it is boiled enough, then being
warm take it off the fire, and strain it hard through a Cloth, and set it a
cooling till it be a hard Jelly, then take 2 whites of Eggs, and beat them very
well, or with a sprigg of Rosemary or Birch, (but not with a spoon) till a
Water come in the bottom, then put these beaten Eggs, and the Water thereof
into a Skillet, and all the Jelly upon it with 3 Spoonfuls of damask
Rose Water, and a quarter of a pound of Sugar, and when it boyls, stir and lay
it pretty well, then strain it through a Cloth, and let it cool: And of this
take 4 spoonfuls in the morning fasting, and at 4 a Clock in the Afternoon, and
this is excellent good for the weakness in the Back.

39. To preserve Damsons, Red, or Black Plumbs.
Take their weight in Sugar, and Water enough to make a Syrup to cover them, so
boil them a little therein being close covered, turning them from spot^ing, let
them stand all night in their own Syrup, then set them upon a pot of seething
Water, and suffer your Plumbs to boil no faster, than the Water under them, and
when they are both sweet and tender take them up, and boil the Syrup again till
they be thick, then put (...) your Plumbs and it together in your Preserving
^^a^^es.

40. To make Rosemary-water.
Take Rosemary and the flowers in the midst of May before the Sun rise, strip
the Leaves and the Flowers from the stalks, take 4 or 5 Elecampane Roots, and a
handful or 2 of Sage, and Roots together, till they be very small, then take 3
Ounces of Cloves, and so much of Mace, and half a pound of Anniseeds, and beat
all these Spices every one by themselves, then take the Herbs and the Spices,
and put thereto 4 or 5 Gallions of good White Wind, then put in all these
herbs, and Spices and Wine into an earthen pot, and put the Pot into the ground
about sixteen days, then take it up and distill it with a very soft fire.

41. To make Pomatum.
Take fresh Hogs suet cleansed from the films, and washed in White Wind one
pound and as much sheeps suet washed in White Wind, then take about 16 Pomwater
apples cleansed and boiled in Rose Water; add to these Rose-wood, Sassafras,
Roots of Orrice, Floreirtine of each six Drams, of Benzoin, Storax, Calamita,
half an Ounce of each, and so make it into an Ointment.

42. To make Oil of sweet Almonds.
Take dried sweet Almonds as many as you please beat them small, and put them
in a hempen cloth, and without fire by degrees press out the Oil.

43. An Excellent Water against fits of the Mother.
Take Briony-roots, Elder berries ripe, dressed at a gentle heart in a Furnace,
and cleans'd from their stalks of each 2 Onnces; leaves of Mugwort, Bittany,
Peatherfew, Nep, Basil, Pennyroyal, Rue, Sabine, all dried in the Sun, of each
half an Ounce peels of Oranges, the outside dried, and Ounce and a half Mirrh
Castoreum, of each 3 drams, Saffron 1 dram, powder them and steep them 8 days
in 2 quarts of the Spirit of Wine; then strain them through a very quick
Hairstrainer, keep the Liquor in a glass very well stopped.

44. To make Syrup of Wormwood.
Take Roman Wormwood, or Pontick Wormwood half a pound, of red Roses 2 Ounces,
Indian Spike drams, old White Wind and juice of Quinces of each 2 pints and a
half, bruise them in an earthen Vessel 24 hours, then boil them till half be
Wasted, strain it, and put to the straining two pounds of Sugar, and boil it to
a Syrup.

45. To make Conserve of Quinces.
Take 3 quarts of the juice of Quinces Clarified, boil it until two parts be
wasted; then put to it 2 pounds of white Sugar, then boil them to the thickness
of Honey.

46. To make Syrup of Poppies.
Take the heads and seeds of white Popy and of black, of each 50 drams, Venus
hair, 15, Licorice 5 drams, Jnjubes 30 drams, Lettice seed 40 drams, add of the
seeds of Mallows and Quinces tied up in a fine rag, of each 1 dram and a half;
boil them in 8 pints of Water, until half be wasted, strain it, and to 3 pound
of Liquor put thereto Perides and Sugar, of each 1 Pound; boil them to a Syrup.

47. To make Honey of Roses.
Take of white Honey despumed, fresh juice of red Roses one pound, put them
into a Skillet, and when they begin to boil, throw into them fresh red
Rose-leaves picked, 4 pounds, and boil them till the juice be wasted; always
stirring it, then strain it and put it up in an earthen Pot.

48. To make Syrup of Lemons.
Take of the juice of Lemons purified by going through woolen strainer, with
crushing, 3 quarts and a half, and of white Sugar 5 pound, boil them with a
soft ^ire to a Syrup.

49. To make Spirit of Wine,
Take of good Claret, or White Wind, or Sack enough fill the Vessel wherein you
make your distillation (...) a 3d part, then put on the Head furnished with
^ose or Pipe, and so make your distillation first in ^shes, drawing about a 3d
part from the whole as for ^^ample, 6 or 8 pints, out of Twenty-four, then ^^ll
it again in B. M. drawing another 3d part which (...) a pints, so that the
oftener you distill it, the less Liquour you have, but the more strong, some do
rectify it 7 times.

50. To make Syrup of Maidenhair.
Take of the herb Maidenhair fresh gathered and out a little 5 Ounces, of
roots of Liquorish scraped 2 Ounces, steep them 24 hours in a sufficient
quantity of hot water, then boil them according to Art. Add 4 pound of Sugar to
5 pints of the clarified Liquor and boil them to a Syrup.

51. To make Syrup of Licorish.
Take of the roots of Licorish scraped 2 Ounces, of Colts foot 4 handfuls, of
Maidenhair 1 Ounce of Hysop half an Ounce, infuse them 25 hours in a
sufficient quantity of Water, boil them till one half be wasted, add to the
strained Liquor a pound of the best clarified Honey, and as much white Sugar,
boil them to a Syrup.

52. To make King William 's perfume.
Take 6 spoonfuls of Rose Water, and as much Amber-grease as weighs two
Barley Corns, and as much Civet, with as much Sugar as weighs 2 pence, beaten
in fine powder, all these boiled together in a perfuming Pan, is an excellent
perfume.

53, The Late Queens Perfume.
Take 4 Spoonfuls of Spike-water, and 4 spoonfuls of Damask-water, 30 Cloves,
and 8 Bay Leaves shred, as much Sugar as weighs twopence, all these boiled
make a good Perfume.

54. King Edwards Perfume to make your house smell like Rosemary.
Take 3 spoonfuls of perfect Rosemary, and as much Sugar as half a Walnut
beaten in small powder, all these boiling together in a perfuming Pan upon hot
Embers, with a few Coals.

55. To make Conserve of Rosemary.
Take your Flowers of Rosemary, which you may gather either in March or Sep.
when you have beaten them to pap, take three times their weight in Sugar, pound
them altogether and set them in the Sun, and so use them.

56. To make Syrup of Cowslips.
Take the distilled water of Cowslips, and put thereto your flowers of Cowslips
clean picked, and the green knobs in the bottom cut off, and boil them up into
Syrup, take it in Almond Milk, or some other warm thing; it is good against the
Palsy and Frenzy, and to procure Sleep for Sick.

57. To make Marmalade of Lemons and Oranges.
You may boil 8 or 9 of either, with 3 or 4 Pippins, draw them through a
strainer; then take the weight of the pulp altogether in Sugar, and boil it as
Marmalade of Quinces, and box it up.

58. To make Angelica Water.
Take a handful of Cardus Benedictus, and dry it, and 3 Ounces of
Angelica-roots, 1 dram of Myrrh, half an Ounce of Nutmegs, Cinnamon and Ginger,
4 Ounces of each, 1 Dram and a half of Saffron, of Cardamons, Cubebs, Galingal
and Pepper, of each a quarter of an Ounce, 2 Drams of Mace, 1 dram of Grains,
of Lignum Aloes, Spiknard, Junius Odoratus, of each a dram; Sage, Borage,
Buglos, Violets, and Rosemary flowers, of each half a handful, bruise and steep
them in a pottle of Sack 12 hours, and distill it as the rest.

59. To make Quiddany of Cherries.
When your Cherries are fully ripe, and red to the stone, pull out the stones,
and boil them till they be all broken, then strain them, take the Liquour and
boil it over again, and put as much Sugar to it as you think convenient, and
when it is boiled, that you think its thick enough, put it in Boxes.

60. To dry Cherries.
Take 6 pound of Cherries and stone them, then take a pound of Sugar and wet it
with the juice of the Cherries, boil it a little, then put in your Cherries,
and boil them till they are clear, let them lie in the Syrup (...) Week, then
drain them from the Syrup, and lay them ^n thin boards to dry in a Stove, turn
them twice a ^^^y till they are dry, wash off the claminess with warm ^ater,
and dry them a little longer.

61. To make brown Metheglin.
Take strong Ale-wort, put as much Honey to it as will make it strong enough to
bear an Egg, boil them well together, set it a cooling, when it is almost cold
put in some Ale-yeast, then put it in a strong Vessel when it has done
working, put a bag of Spices into the Vessel, and Lemon Peel, stop it up close,
in a few days it will be fit to drink.

62. To Candy Oranges or Lemons after preserved.
Take them out of the Syrup, drain them well, then boil some Sugar to a candy
height, and lay your Peels in the bottom of a sieve, pour your hot Sugar over
them, then dry them in a Stove, or warm Oven.

63. To preserve Oranges after the Portugal Fashion.
Open your Oranges at the end, take out all the meat then boil them in several
waters, till a straw may go through them, then take their weight and half in
fine Sugar, and put to every pound of Sugar a pint of water, boil it and scum
it, put in your Oranges and boil them a little more, then take them up, and
fill them with preserved Pippins, and if you will have them Jelly, make a new
Syrup with the water wherein sliced Pippins have been boiled, and some Sugar,
and that will be a stiff Jelly.

64. To make good Vquebagh.
Take 2 Gallions of Aquavitae, 4 Ounces of the best Liquorice bruised, 4 Ounces
of Anniseeds bruised, put them into a Glass, or stone Vessel, and cover them
close, and so let them stand a week, then draw of the clearest with Molosso's,
and keep it in another Vessel, and put in some Dates, Raisons stoned; keep it
close from the Air.

65, To make Italian Biscuit.
Take serced Sugar, and a little of the white of an Egg, with some Ambergrease
and Musk, beat them all to a paste in an Alabaster Mortar, mould it into a
little Anniseed finely dusted, then make it up in Loves, and cut them about
like Manchet, then bake them in an oven as hot as for Manchet, and when they
are risen some what high upon the Plates, take them forth and remove them not
off till cold, for they will be apt to break.

66. To make French Biscuit.
Take half a peck of flower, with 4 Eggs, half a pint of Ale-yeast, one Ounce
and half of Anniseed, a little sweet Cream, and a little cold Water, make all
into a Loaf; and fashion it something long, then cut it into thick slices like
Toasts, after it has stood 2 days so, rub them over with powdered Sugar, and
lay them in a warm Sun, and so dry them, and Sugar them as you dry them 3 or 4
times, then put them into Boxes for use,

67, To make Sugar Plates.
Take serced Sugar, and make it up in a paste with Gum-Dragon steeped in
Rose Water, and when you have brought it into a perfect Paste, roll it as thin
as e're you can, and then print it in moulds of what fashion you please, let
them dry.

68. To make Pomander.
Take half an Ounce of Benjamin, and as much Storax and Labdanum, with 6 grains
of Musk, and as much Civet, and 2 grains of Ambergreese, and one dram of sweet
Balsam, then ronl it up in Beads as big or as little as you please, and whilst
hot, make holes in them for your use.

69. To make Conserve of Damsons.
Take ripe Damsons and put them into scalding Water, and half an Hour after set
them over the fire till they break, then strain them through a Culender and let
them cool, then strain them through a piece of Canvas from their stones and
skins, then set them over the fire again, with a good quantity of red Wine, so
boil it, stirring it till it be thick, and when it is even boiled enough, put
in a Convenient proportion of Sugar, stir it well together, and put it into
your Gally pots.

70. To Bake Oranges.
Peel the Bark off, and boil them in Rose Water and Sugar till they are tender,
then make your Pie, and ^et them whole in it, and put the Liquor they were
boiled in into the Pie, season it with Sugar, Cinnamon and Ginger.

71. To preserve Peaches.
Take a pound of your fairest and best colored Peaches, and with a wet linen
cloth wipe off the white coar of them, then parboyl them in half a pint of
White Wind, and a pint and a half of running Water, and being parboyld, peel of
the white skin of them and then weigh them; take to your pound of Peaches 3
quarters of a pound of refined Sugar, and dissolve it in a quarter of a pint of
white wind, and boil it almost to the height of a Syrup, then put in your
Peaches and let them boil in the Syrup a quarter of an hour or more, then put
them up and keep them all the Year.

72. To preserve Goosberries.
Take Goose-berries, or Grapes, or Barberries, and take somewat more than their
weight in Sugar beaten fine, lay one laying of Fruits, and another of Sugar,
till all are laid in your preserving Pan, then take 6 spoonfuls of fair Water,
and boil your Fruits therein as fast as you can, until they be very clear,
then take them up, and boil the Syrup by it self, till it be thick; when they
are cold put them into Gally-pots.

73. To preserve Angelica Roots.
Wash the Roots, slice them very thin, and lay them in Water 3 or 4 days,
change the Water every day, then put the Roots into a pot of Water and set them
in the embers all night, in the morning put away the Water, then take a pound
of Roots, 4 pints of Water, and 2 pound of Sugar, let it boil, and Scum it
clean, then put in the Roots, which will be boiled before the Syrup, then take
them up and boil the Syrup after, they will ask a whole days work very softly,
at St. Andrew's time is the best time to do them in all the Year.

74. To make Syrup of Quinces.
Take of the juice of Quinces, clarified 3 quarts boil it over a gentle fire
till half of it be consumed, scum it, and add to it three pints of red Wine,
with four pound of white Sugar; boil it to a Syrup, and Perfume it with a dram
of Cinnamon, Cloves, and Ginger of each 2 Scrupels.

75. To make Walnut Water.
Take of green Walnut a pound and a half, Garden Radish-roots 1 pound, green
Asarabacca 6 Ounces, Radish-seeds 4 Ounces, bruise them and steep them in 3
pints of White Wind Vinegar for 3 days, then distill them in a leaden Still till
dry.

76. To make Treacte-water.
Take of the juice of green Walnuts 4 pound, juice of Rue 3 pound, juice of
Carduus, Marigolds and Balm, of each 2 pound, green Petasits Roots 1 pound and
half, Roots of Burrs 1 pound, Angelica and Masterwort of each half a pound,
Leaves of Scordium 4 handfuls, old Venice-treacle and Methridate, of each 8
Ounces, Canary 6 Quarts, Vinegar 3 quarts, juice of Lemons 1 quart, digest them
2 days, either in Horse-dung, or Bath, the Vessel being close shut, then distill
them in Sand, in which you may make a Theriacal extraction.

77. To make Syrup of Cinamen.
Take of Cinnamon grossly bruised 4 Ounces, steep it in White Wind, and small
Cinamon-water, of each half a pound, 3 days in a glass by a gentle fire, strain
it, and with a pound and a half of Sugar, boil it to a Syrup. This Syrup
refreshes the vital Spirits, and cherishes the Heart and Stomach, helps
digestion, and cherishes the whole Body exceedingly,

78. To make Syrup of Citron-Peels.
Take of fresh yellow Citron Peels, 5 Ounces, the berries of Cherms, or the
juice of them brought over 2 drams, spring water 2 quarts, steep, them all
night, boil them till half be consumed, take off the Scum, strain it, and with
2 pound and a half of the whitest Sugar boil it into a Syrup; let half of it be
without Musk, but Persume the other half with 3 grains of Musk tied up in a Bag.

79. To make Syrup of Hartshorn.
Take of Hartshorn, 3 handfuls, Polypodium of the Oak, the roots of both sorts
of Bugloss, barks of the roots of Capers and Tamaris of each 2 Ounces, Hops,
Dodder, Maidenhair, Balm, of each 2 handfuls, boil them in 5 quarts of
spring water till it comes to four, strain it, and with 4 pound of Sugar make
it into Syrup, according to Art.

80. An everlasting Oil Perfume, for Gloves.
Take Benjamin two Ounces, Storax and Calamint each an Ounce, the 2 first must
be finely beaten by themselves: then take a pound of sweet Almonds and mix it
with the Storax and Benjamin upon a Marble stone, then put it into an earthen
pot with more Oil, then put in your Cloves poudered, so let it stand close
covered, and when you will perfume a pair of Gloves, take a little fair Water
in a spoon and wipe your Gloves fine with it, take another spoon, and dip it in
your Oil, and rub it on your Gloves, and let them dry.

81. An excellent water for a Consumption.
Take 3 pints of Milk, and one pint of red Wine, 24 yolks of Eggs, beat them
very well together, then add so much white-bread as will drink up the Wine, put
to it some Cowslip Flowers and distill them. Take a spoonful of this Morning
and Evening, in Chicken or Mutton Broth, and for a Month it will cure any
Consumption.

82. To make Barley Water.
Take a pennyworth of Barley, a pennyworth of Raisins of the Sun, a
pennyworth of Anniseeds an half pennyworth of Licorish, about 2 quarts of
water, boil all together till half be consumed, then strain it, when it is cold
drink it, your Licorish must be sliced into small pieces.

83. Dr. Deodate's Drink for the Scurvey.
Take Roman Wormwood, Carduus Benedictus, Scurvey-grass, Brook-lime,
Water-creeses, Watertrifoil, of each 1 handful, Dodder, Cetrach, Scolopendria,
Burrage, Bugloss, Sorrel, Vervain, or Speedwell, of each half a handsul,
Elicampaine Root one Ounce, Raisins of the Sun 3 Ounces, slices of Oranges and
Lemons, of each 13, insuse these in a double glass with so much White Wind as
will make a pint and a half of liquor when done.

84. A Conserve to strengthen the Back.
Take Eringo roots, and conserve them as you do Damask white and red Roses, in
every respect the pith being taken out; one pound and a half of Sugar is enough
for every pound of Roots, with 3 pints of Water, stew them closely at first as
you do your Roses; if you add to them 5 or 6 grains of Ambergreese, beaten to
fine powder it will be much more Cordial.

85. An excellent Aqua Composita for a Surfeit.
Take a handful of Rosemary, a root of Enulacampane, a handful of Hysop, half a
handful of Time, 6 handfuls of Sage, as much Mint, and as much Pennyroyal, half
a handful of Hore-hound, 2 Ounces of Liquorish well bruised, and as much
Anniseeds, take two gallions of the best strong Ale, and all the herbs
aforesaid, and wring them asunder, and put them into an earthen pot well
covered, and let them stand a day and a night; from thence put it into a brass
pot, and set it on a fire, and let it stand till it boil, then take it from the
fire, and set your Limbeck on the pot, and stop it close with paste that there
come no air out of it, and still it out with a soft fire, add to it a little
Red Fennel.

86. To make Balm-water.
Take 4 gallons of strong stale Ale: half a pound of Liquorish, 2 pound of
Balm, two Ounces of Figs, half a pound of Anniseeds, one Ounce of Nutmegs,
shred the Balm and figgs very small, and let them stand steeping 4 and 20
hours, and then put it in a still as you use Aquavitae.

87. To pickle Broom-buds.
Take Broom-buds, put them into linen bags, and tie them close, then make some
brine with water and salt, and boil it a little, let it be cold, then put some
brine in a deep earthen pot, and put the bags in it, and lay some weight on,
let it lie till it look black, boil them, and put them in Vinegar a Week or 2,
and they will be fit to eat.

88. To make good Rasberry-wine.
Take a Gallon of Sack, in which let 2 Gallons of Rasberries stand steeping the
space of 24 hours, then strain them, and put to the Liquor 3 pound of Raisons
of the Sun stoned, let them stand together 4 or 5 days, being sometime stirred
together, then pour off the clearest and put it up in Bottles and set it in a
cold place, if it be not sweet enough you may put Sugar to it.

89. To make excellent Hipprocas in an instant.
Take of Cinnamon 2 Ounces, Nutmegs, Ginger, of each half an Ounce, Cloves 2
Drams, bruise these small, then mix them with as much Spirit of Wine, as will
make them into a paste, let them stand covered in glass the space of 6 days in
a cold place, then press out the Liquor and put it in a glass. A few drops of
this Liquor put into any Wine gives it a gallant relish and Odor, and makes
it as good as any Hippocras whatsoever in an instant.

90. To make Artifical Malmsey,
Take 2 Gallons of English Honey, put into it eight Gallons of the best Spring
water, set these in a Vessel over a gentle fire, when they have boiled gently
an hour take them off, and when they be cold put them into a small Barrel or
Runlet, hanging in the Vessel a bag of Spices, and set it in the Cellar, and in
half a year you may drink of it.

91. To make Artificial Claret Wine.
Take 6 Gallions of water, 2 Gallions of the best Cider, put thereto 8 pound of
the best Malaga raisins bruised in a Mortar, let them stand close covered in a
warm place the space of a Fortnight, every two days stirring them well
together. Then press out the Raisins, and put the Liquor into the said Vessel
again, to which add a quart of the juice of Rasberries, and a pint of the juice
of black Cherries; cover this Liquor with bread spread thick with strong
Mustard, the Mustard, the Mustard Seed being downward, and so let it work by
the fire side 3 or 4 days, then turn it up and let it stand a Week, and then
bottle it up, and it will taste very pleasant, far better than our Common
Claret.

92. Ta make Spirit of Ambergreese.
Take Amber-greese 2 drams, of Musk a dram, cut them small, and put them into a
pint of Wine, close up the Glass Hermetically, and digest them in a very gentle
heat till you perceive they are dissolved, then you may use it; 2 or 3 drops or
more if you please of this spirit put into a pint of Wine, gives it a rich
Odor, or if you put 2 or 3 drops round the brims of the Glass it will do as
well, half a spoonful of it self or mixed with specifical liquor is a rich
Cordial.

93. An Excellent sweet water.
Take a quart of Orange-flower water, as much Rose water, 4 Ounces of Musk,
Willow seeds grossly bruised, or Benjamin 2 Ounces, of Storax an Ounce, or
Labdanum 6 drams, of Lavender flowers 2 Pugils, of sweet Marjoram as much, of
Calamus Aromaticus a dram, distill all these in a Glass Still in Balneo, the
Vessel being very well closed that no vapor breathe forth; Note that you may
make a sweet water in an instant, by putting in a few drops of some distilled
Oils together into some Rose Water, and brew them all together.

94. Dr. Burge's Plague water.
Take 3 pints of Muscadine and boil in it Sage and Rue, of each a handful till
a pint be wasted, strain it, and set it over the fire again, put thereto a dram
of long Pepper; Ginger and Nutmeg, of each half an Ounce, being all bruised
together into some Rose Water, and brew them all together.

95. To make Syrup of Hysop.
Take of Hysop 1 handful, of Figs, Raisins, Dates, of each an Ounce, boil these
in 3 pints of water to a quart, then strain and clarify it with the whites of
a Eggs and 2 pound of Sugar, and so boil them to a Sy^^^ and being boiled
enough keep them all the year.

96. To make Rosa-Solis.
Take Liquorish 8 Ounces, Anniseeds and Carraway of each an Ounce; Raisins
stoned and Dates of each 3 Ounces, Nutmegs, Ginger, Mace, of each half an
Ounce, Galingal a quarter of an Ounce, Cubebs 1 dram, Figs 2 Ounces, Sugar 4
Ounces; bruise these and distill them with a Gallon of Aquavitae as the rest,
when it is distilled, you must color it with the Herb Rosasolis or Alkanet
Root.

97. To make Museadine Comfits.
Take half a pound of Musk, Sugar beaten and searced, then take Gumdragant
steeped in Rose Water and 2 grains of Musk, and so beat them in an Alabaster
Mortar till it come to a perfect Paste, then roll it very thin and cut it in
small diamond pieces, and then bake them, and so keep them all the year.

98. To make Conserve of Burrage flowers.
Let your flowers be well colored, and pick the blacks from them, then weigh
them, and to every Ounce of flovvers you must take 3 Ounces of Sugar, and beat
them together in a stone Mortar with a wooden Pestle till they be very fine,
then take them off, and put the Conserve into a Pipkin, and heat it thorovv
Hot, put them up, and keep them a year.

99. To Candy Ginger.
Take fair large Ginger and pare it, and lay it in water a day and a night;
then take double and refined Sugar, and boil it to the height of Sugar again,
and when your sugar begins to be cold, take your Ginger and stir it well
about while your sugar is hard to the Pan; then take it out piece by peace and
lay it by the Fire 4 hours, then take a pot and warm it, and put the Ginger in
it, tie it up close, and every other Morning stir it about thoroughly and it
will be Rock-Candyed in a little time.

100. To make Manus Christi.
Take half a pound of refined Sugar, and some Rosewater, boil them together
till it come to Sugar, then stir it about till it be some^^^^ (...) Gold and
mingle with it, then cast it into round Gobbets, and so keep them.

101. To make Conserve of Pruants.
Take the best Pruants, put them into scalding Water, let them stand a while,
then boil them over the Fire till they break, then strain out the water through
a Cullender, and let them stand therein to cool, then strain the Pruans through
the Cullender, taking away the stones and skins, then set the pulp over the
fire again, and put thereto a good quantity of red Wine, and boil them to a
thickness, still stirring them up and down, when they are almost enough, put in
a sufficient quantity of Sugar, stir all well together, and then put it up in
your Gally-pots.

102. To make Chrystial Jelly.
Take a Knuckle of Veal, and 4 Calves-feet, put them on the fire with a gallon
of fair Water, and when the stesh is boiled tender take them out, then let the
liquor alone till it be cold, then take away the top and bottom of the Liquor,
and put the rest into a clean Pipkin, and put it into one pound of refined
Sugar, with 4 or 5 drops of Oil of Cinnamon and Nutmegs, and a grain of Musk,
and so let it boil a quarter of an hour Leasurely on the fire, then let it run
through a Jelly bag into a Basin, with the whites of 2 Eggs beaten, when it is
cold cut it into lumps with a spoon, and so serve 3 or 4 lumps upon a Plate.

103, To make Jelly of Strawberries, Mulberries, etc.
Take your Berries and grind them in a stone Mortar with 4 Ounces of Sugar, and
a quarter of a pint of fair Water, and as much Rose Water, boil it in a Skillet
with a little Ising-glass, and so let it run through a fine cloth into your
Boxes.

104. To Candy Rosemary-flowers.
Pick your flowers very clean, and put to every Ounce of Flowers 2 Ounces of
hard Sugar, and one Ounce of Sugar Candy, and dissolve them in Rosemary flower
water, and boil them till they come to a sugar again, when your sugar is almost
cold, put in your Rosmary flowers, and stir them together till they be enough,
then take them out, and put them in your Boxes, and keep them in a stove for
use.

105. To Candy Burrage-Flowers.
Pick the flowers clean and weigh them, and do in every respect as you did your
Rosemary-flowers, only when they be Candyed, you must set them in a Still, and
so keep them in a sheet of white Paper, putting every day a Chafing Dish of
Coals into your Still, and it will be excellently Candyed, in a small time.

106. To make Biscuit Cakes.
Take a peck of Flower, 4 Ounces of Corianderseed, 1 Ounce of Anniseed; then
take 3 Eggs, 3 Spoonfuls of Ale Yeast, and as much warm Water, as will make it
as thick as paste for Maunchets, make it into a long Roll, and bake it in an
Oven an hour, and when it is a day old, pare it and slice it, sugar it with
searced Sugar, and put it again into the Oven, and when it is dry take it out,
and new sugar it again, and so box it and keep it.

107. To make Paste-Royal.
Take a pound of refined Sugar, beaten and searced, and put into a stone
Mortar, with an Ounce of Gumdragant steeped in Rose Water, and if you see your
paste be too Weak, put in more Sugar, if too Dry, more Gum, with a drop or two
of Oil of Cinnamon, beat it into a perfect Paste, and then you must Print it in
your Moulds, and when it is Dry, Gild it, and so keep them.

108. To make Apricock Cakes.
Procure the fairest Apricocks you can get, and let them be Parboyl'd very
Tender, take of the same quantity of sugar, whereof the pulp is, and boil them
together very well, always keeping them stirring for fear of burning to; when
the bottom of the Skillet is Dry, they are enough, then put them into ^ittle
Cards sowed round about, and Dust them with fine Sugar, and when they are cold,
stone them and ^^^n them up with some more of the same stuff, but let them
stand 3 or 4 days before you remove them from the first place; when you begin
to find them Candy, take out the Cards and dust them with Sugar.

109 To make Conserves for Tarts all the year.
Take Damsons or ripe Plums, and peel of their skins, and so put them in a Pot,
to Pippins Pared, and cut in pieces, and so bake them, then strain them through
a piece of Canvas, and season them with Cinnamon, Sugar, Ginger, and a little
Rose Water: Boil it upon a Chafing Dish of Coals, till it be as thick as a
Conserve, and then put it into your Gally-pots, and it will keeps all the Year.

110. To dry Pippins.
Take the fairest yellow Pippins, pare them, make a hole through every one,
then barboyl them a little in fair water, then take them up, and put them into
as much clarified Sugar as will cover them, let them boil gently a little while
in that Syrup, then take them out and put them into an Earthen Platter, and
cast fine sugar upon them, and set them into the Oven half an hour, then take
them out, and cast some more sugar on them, (being turned) and so three times,
and they will be well dried.

111. To make Paste of Genua.
Take 2 pounds of the Pulp of Quinces, and as much of Peaches, strain it, and
dry it in a dish upon a chafing dish of Coals, then weigh it, and boil it to
the height of Manus Christi, and then put them together and so fashion it upon
a Pye-plate, and dry it in an Oven with a Chafing Dish of Coals till it be
through dry, and you may spot them with Gold.

112. To make Leach.
Make your Jelly for your Leach with Calves-feet as you do your ordinary Jelly,
but a little stiffer; and when it is cold take off the top, and the bottom, and
set it over the Fire with some Cinnamon and Sugar, then take your Turnsole being
well steept in Sack, and crush it, and strain it in your Leach, boil it so
thick as you may slice it.

113. To dry any kind of Fruits, after Preserved.
Take Pippins, Pears or Plums, after they are preserved, out of the Syrup, and
wash them in warm Water, and then strew them over with sugar, finely Searced,
as you do flower upon Fish, to fry, and set them into a broad earthen Pan, and
lay them one by another; then set them into a Warm Oven, until they be dry, and
turn them every day, until they be quite dry; and you may if you please, Candy
them therewithal, cast Sugar 3 or 4 times as you dry them.

114. To make Quiddany of Quinces.
Take the Kernels out of 7 or 8 great Quinces, and boil them in a quart of
Spring Water, till it come to a pint, then put into it a quarter of a pint of
Rosewater, one pound of fine Sugar, and let it boil till it come to be of a
deep Color, then take a drop, and drop it into the bottom of a Saucer, and if
it stand, take it off, then let it run through a Jelly-bag, into a Basin, then
set it over a chafing dish of Coals, to keep it Warm, then take a Spoon, and
fill your Boxes as full as you please; when they be cold, cover them, and if
you please to print it in Moulds wet your Moldswith Rosewater, and let it run
in, and when it is cold, turn it into Boxes.

115. To make sweet Cakes without Spico or Sugar.
Take Parsnips, and scrape them clean, slice them Thin, and dry them well, beat
them to Powder, mixing one third part thereof, with two thirds of fine
Wheat Flour, make up your Paste into Cakes, and you will find them very sweet
and Delicate.

116. To make Worm wood Wine.
Take small Rochel or Camahe-wine, put a few drops of the extracted Oil of
Wormwood therein, brew it together, out of one pot into another, and you shall
have a more wholesome wine for your Body than that which is Sold for right
Wormwood-wine.

117. To make Sweet-bags to lie among Linen.
Fill your bags only with Lignum and Rhodum finely beaten, and it will give an
excellent Seent.

118. To make Spirit of Honey.
Put one part of Honey to five parts of Water, when the Water boyleth, Dissolve
your Honey therein, Scum it, and having boiled an Hour or two, put it into a
Wooden Vessel, and when it is blood-warm, set it on the fire with Yeast, after
the usual manner of Beer and Ale, tun it; and when it has lain some time, it
will yield a Spirit by Distillation, as Wine and Ale.

119. To preserve Artichoaks.
Cut off the stalks of your A'rtichoaks within two Inches of the Choke, and
make a strong Decoction of the rest of the stalks, slicing them into Thin small
pieces, and let the Artichoaks lie in this Decoction, and when you use them,
you must put them first in Warm-water, and then in Cold, and so take away the
bitterness of them.

120. To make Syrup for a Cough of the Lungs.
Take a Pottle of fair running Water in a new Pipkin, and put into it half an
Ounce of Sydrack, half an Ounce of Ma^den-hair, and a good handful of
Elecampane Roots sliced, boil all together, until half be boiled away, even to
Syrup, then put into it the whites of Eggs, and let it boil two or three Walms,
and give the Patient a spoonful Morning and Evening.

121. To make Baubury Cakes.
Take 4 pound of Currants, wash and pick them very Clean, dry them in a Cloth,
then take three Eggs, and put away one Yolk, and beat them, and strain them
with Yeast, putting there to Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon, and Nutmegs, then take a
pint of Cream; and as much Mornings Miilk, and let it Warm, then take Flower,
and put it in good store of cold Butter and Sugar, then put in your Eggs,
Yeast, and Meal, and work them altogether an hour or more, then save a piece of
the Paste, and break the rest in pieces, and work in your Currants, then make
your Cake what quantity you please, and cover it very Thin with the Paste
wherein were no Currants, and so bake it according to the bigness.

122. To make Ginger-bread.
Take a quart of Honey, and set it on the Coals and Refine it, then take
Ginger, Pepper, and Licorise, of each a Pennyworth, a quarter of a pound of
Anniseeds, and a pennyworth Saunders; beat these and Searce them, and put them
into the Honey, add a quarter of a pint of Claret, or old Ale, then take three
penny Manchets finely Grated, and strew it amongst the rest, and stir it till
it come to a stiff Paste, make them into Cakes, and dry them gently.

123. To make Wormwood-Water.
Take two Gallons of good Ale, a pound of Anniseeds, half a pound of Liquorise,
and beat them very fine, then take 2 handfuls of the crops of Wormwood, put
them into Ale, and let them stand all Night, and let them stand in a Limbeck
with a moderate Fire.

124. To make Paste of Quinces.
First boil your Quinces whole, and when they are soft, pare them, and cut the
Quince from the Core, then take the finest Sugar you can get, finely beaten or
searced, and put it in a little Rose Water, and boil it together till it be
stiff enough to Mould, and when it is cold, roll and print it. A pound of
Quinces will require a pound of Sugar, or thereabouts.

125. To make thin Quince-Cakes.
Take your Quince when boiled soft, and dry it upon a Pewter-plate, with a soft
Heat, and stir it with a slice till it be hard, then take searced sugar to the
same weight, and strew it upon the Quinces as you beat it in a Wooden or stone
Mortar, and so roll them thin and print them.

126. To make fine Cakes.
Take a Pottle of ^ine Flower, and a pound of Sugar, a little Meal, and good
store of Water, to mingle the Flower into a stiff Paste, with a little Salt,
and so Knead it, and roll out the Cakes thin, and bake them on Paper.

127. To make Suckers.
Take Curds, and the paring of Lemons, Oranges, or Pome-Citrons, or any half
ripe green Fruit, boil them till they be tender in sweet Wort, then take 3
pound of Sugar, the whites of 4 Eggs, and a Gallon of water, beat the water and
Eggs together, and then put in your Sugar, and set it on a gentle Fire, and let
it boil 6 or 7 walms, then strain it through a Cloth, and set it on again, till
it fall from the Spoon, and then put it into the Rinds or Fruits.

128. To make Leach Lombard.
Take half a pound of blanched Almonds, 2 ounces of Cinnamon beaten, and
Searced, half a pound of Sugar, beat your Almonds, and strew on your Cinnamon
and Sugar, till it come to a Paste, then roll it, and print it as aforesaid.

129. To make rare Damask-water.
Take a quart of Malmsey-Leaves, or Malmsey 1 handful of Marjoram, as much
Basil, 4 handfuls of Lavender, 1 handful of Bay Leaves, 4 handfuls of
Damask-Rose-Leaves, as many red Roses, the Peels of 6 Oyanges, or else one
handful of the tender Leaves of Walnut-trees, half an Ounce of Benjamin,
Calamus Aromaticus as much, Camphire 4 drams, Cloves an ounce, Bildanum half an
Ounce, then take a pottle of running Water, and put in all these Spices
bruised, into your water and Malmsey together, in a Pot close stopped, with a
good handful of Rosemary, and let them stand for the space of 6 Days, then
Distill it with a soft Fire, and set it in the Sun 16 Days, with 4 Grains of
Musk bruised, this Quantity will make 3 quarts of Water.

130. To make Wash-halls.
Take Storax of both kinds, Benjamin, Calamus, Aromaticus, Lapdanum, of each
alike, bray them to powder, with Cloves and Orris, beat them all with a
sufficient quantity of Soap, till it be stiff, then work them like Paste, and
make round balls thereof.

131. To make a Musk Ball.
Take Nutmegs, Mace, Cloves, Saffron, and Cinnamon, of each the weight of
Twopence, and beat it to fine Powder, add as much Mastick, of Storax the
weight of Sixpence, of Lapdanum the weight of Ten-pence, of Ambergreese the
weight of Sixpence, and of Musk 4 Grains, dissolve and work all these in hard
sweet Soap, till it come to a stiff Paste, and then make balls thereof

132. To make Imperial Water.
Take a Gallon of Gascoign Wine, Ginger, Galingal, Nutmegs, Grains, Cloves,
Anniseeds, Fennel-seeds, Caraway-seeds, of each one Dram; S^ge, Mint,
red-Roses, Time, Pellitory, Rosemary, Wild Thyme, Camomile, and Lavender, of
each a handful, then beat the Spices small, and the Herbs also, and put
altogether in the Wine, and let it stand so 12 Hours, stirring it diverse times,
then Distill it with a Limbeck, and save the first Water, for it is best: Of a
Gallon of Wine, you must not take above a quart of Water. This water Comfort
the vital Spirits, and Hel^eth the Inward Diseases, that come of Cold, as the
Palsy, and Contraction of Sinews, it also Kills Worms, and Comforts the
Stomach, it Cures the Cold Dropsy, helps the Stone, and stinking Breath,
and makes one seem Young.

133. To make Verjuice.
Gather your Crabs, as soon as the Kernels turn Black, and lay them a while in
a Heap, to Sweat, then Pick them from the Stalks, Blacks and Rotteness, then
Crush and beat them all to pieces in a Tub, then make a Bag of Course
Hair-cloth, as big as your Press, and Press it as long as any Moisture will
drop out, having a clean Vessel underneath, to receive the Liquor, then Tun it
up in sweet Hogs-heads, and to every Hogs-head, put 6 Handfuls of Damask
Rose-leaves, then bring it up, and spend it as you have occasion.

134. To make dry Sugar Leach.
Blanch your Almonds, and beat them with a little Rose Water, and the white of
an Egg, and then beat it with a good quantity of Sugar, and work it as you
would work a piece of Paste, then Roll it, and Print it* only be fare to strew
Sugar in the Print, for ferr of Cleaving to.

135. To make fine Jumbals.
Beat a pound of Sugar fine, then take the same quantity of fine wheat Flower,
and Mix them together, then take 2 Whites, and 1 Yolk of an Egg, half a quarter
of a pound of Blanched Almonds, then beat them very fine all together, with
half a pound of sweet Butter, and a spoonful of Rose Water, and so work it with
a little Cream, till it come to a stiff Paste, then ^oul them forth as you
please; you may add a few fine dried Anniseeds finely Rubbed, and strewed into
the Paste, with Coriander-seeds.

136. To make Spirit of Roses.
Bruise the Rose in his own Juice, adding thereto, being Temperately Warm, a
Convenient Proportion either of Yeast, or Ferment, leave them a few days to
Ferment, till they get a strong and Heady smell, near like to Vinegar, then
distill them, and draw so long as you can find any scent of the Rose to come,
then distill it again, so often till you have purchased a perfect Spirit of the
Rose. You may also Ferment the Juice of Roses only, and after Distill it.

137. To make Syrup of Elder.
Take Elder Berries when they are Red, bruise them in a stone Mortar, strain
the Juice, and boil it away to almost half, Scum it very Clean, take it off the
Fire, whilst it is Hot, put in Sugar to the Thickness of a Syrup, put it no
more on the Fire, when it is Cold, put it into Glasses, not filling them to the
Top, for it will work like Beer.

138. To make Oranges of Water,
Take 2 quarts of the best Malaga-Sack, and put in as many of the Peels of
Oranges as will go in, Cut the White clean off, sleep them 24 Hours, then still
them in a Glass-still, and let the water run into the Receiver, up on fine
sugar Candy. You may still it in an ordinary Still.

139. To make a Cordial of great virtue.
Take a pint and a half of the strongest Ale, as may be gotten, 20 Jordan
Almonds clean Wiped, but neither Washed nor Blaunch'd, with 2 Dates Minced very
small, and Stamped; then take the Pith of Young Beef, the length of 12 Inches,
lay it in Water, till the Blood be out of it, then strip the Skin off it, and
stamp it with the Almonds, and Dates, then strain them altogether into the Ale,
boil it till it be little Thick, give the party in the Morning 6 Spoonfuls, and
as much when he goes to Bed.

140. An excellent Surfeit-Water.
Take Cellandine, Rosemary, Rue, Pellitory of Spain, Scabious, Angelica,
Pimpernel, Wormwood, Mugwort, Bettony, Agrimony, Balm, Dragon, and Tormentile,
of each half a pound, shred them somewhat small, and put them into a narrow
Mouthed Pot, and put to them five quarts of White Wind, stop it close, and let
it stand 3 Days and Nights, stirring it Morning and Evening, then take the
Herbs from the Wine, and distill them in an ordinary Still, and when you have
distilled the Herbs, distill the Wine also, wherein is virtue for a weak
Stomach. Take three or four spoonfuls at any time.

142. To make Syrup of Sugar-Candyed.
Take Sugar-Candied, and put it into a clear Bladder and tie it, but so that it
may have some Vent, then put it into a basin of Water, so that the Water come
not over the top of the Bladder, and cover it with a Pewter Dish, and let it
stand all Night, and in the Morning take of it with a Licor^se-stick.

143. To make an Excellent Syru^ against the Scurvey.
Take of the Juice of Garden Scurvey-grass, Brooklime, and Watercresses, of
each 6 Ounces, and after it has stood till it is clear, take 16 Ounces of the
clearest and put to it 4 Ounces of the Juice of Oranges and Lemons, make it a
clear Syrup, with so much fine Sugar, as will serve the turn.

144. To make Syrup of Roses.
When your Liquor is ready to boil, put as many Roses as will be well steept
into it, cover it close, and when the Roses are thoroughly White, then strain
it, and set it on the Fire again, and so use it 13 times, and to every pint of
your water or Liquor, you must put a pound of Sugar, and let it stand together
steeping for the space of one Night, then Scum it clean and seethe it over a
quick Fire, a quarter of an Hour, then take some whites of Eggs, and beat them
well together, take off your Pot, and put in the Whites, and then set it on the
Fore again; and let it boil a good while, then let it run through a Jelly-bag,
till it will stand still upon your Nail.

145. To make a comfortable Syrup.
Take a handful of Agrimony, and boil it in a pint of Water till half be
Consumed, then take out the Agrimony, and put in a good handful of Currants, and
boil them till they are ready to break, then strain them, and make a Syrup of
them, then set it on a Chafing Dish of Coals, and add thereto a little white
Saunders, and Drink it hot or cold,

146. To make Almond Caudel.
Take 3 pints of Ale, boil it with Cloves and Mace, and slice Bread in it, then
have ready beaten a pound of Almonds blanched and strain them out with a pint
of White Wind, and Thick the Ale with it; sweeten it if you please, but besure
scum the Ale when it Boyls.

147. To Caudy Cherries.
Take your Cherries before they be full Ripe, take out the Stones, put
Clarified Sugar boiled to a height and then pour it on them.

148. To make Rose Water,
Take a pint of Endive-water, 2 Ounces of Saffron finely beaten, then sleep it
therein all Night, the next day boil it and strain out the Safron, then with
Sugar boil it up to a Syrup.

149. To make Syrup of Saffron.
Stamp the Leaves, and first distill the Juice, being squeezed out, and after
distill the Leaves, and so you may dispatch more with one Still, than others
will do with 3 or 4, and this Water is every way as Medicinable as the other,
serving very well in Decoctions and Syrups, etc: Though it be not altogether so
pleasing to the smell.

150. To make Suckets of Green-Walnuts,
Take Walnuts when they are no bigger than the largest Hasel-Nut, pare away the
uppermost Green, but not too deep, then boil them in a pottle of Water, till
the Water be boiled away, then take so much more fresh Water, and when it is
boiled to the half, put thereto a quart of Vinegar, and a pottle of Clarified
Honey.

151. To make white Leach of Cream.
Take a pint of sweet Cream, and 6 spoonfuls of Rose Water, 2 grains of Musk, 2
drops of Oil of Mace, and so let it boil with 4 Ounces of Ising-Glass, then let
it run through a Jelly-bag, when it is Cold, slice it like Brawn, and so serve
it out. This is the best way to make Leach.

152. To preserve Pome-citrons.
You must take a pound and a half of Pome-Citrons, and cut them in Halves and
Quarters, take the Meat out of them, and boil them tender in fair Water, then
take 2 pound of sugar Clarified, and make Syrup for them, and let them boil
therein a quarter of an Hour, very Gently, then take them up, and let your
Syrup boil till it be Thick, then put in your Pome-Citrons, and you may keeep
them all the Year.

153. To pickle Clove Gilly Flowers for Sallats.
Take the fairest Clove Gilly-Flowers, clip of the Whites from them, put them
into a Wide-mouthed Glass, and strew a good deal of Sugar finely beaten among
them, then put as much Wine Vinegar to them as will thoroughly Wet them, tie
them up close and set them in the Sun, and in a little while they will be fit
for use.

154. To make Leach of Almonds.
Take half a pound of sweet Almonds, and beat them in a Mortar, then strain
them with a pint of sweet Milk from the Cow, then put to it one grain of Musk,
two spoonfuls of Rose Water, 2 ounces of fine Sugar, the weight of 3 Shillings
in Isinglass that is very white, boil them together, and let it all run through
a Strainer, then still it out and serve it.

155. To Candy Marigolds in Wedges, the Spanish Fashion.
Take of the fairest Marigold Flowers, 2 ounces, and shred them small, and dry
them before the Fire, then take 4 ounces of Sugar, and boil it to a Height,
then pour it upon a Wet Pye-plate; and between hot and cold cut it into Wedges,
and lay them in a sheet of White-paper, and put them in a Stove.

156. To Candy Eringo Roots.
Take your Eringo's ready to be Preserved; and weigh them, and to every pound
of your Roots take of the purest Sugar you can get, 2 Pound, and Clarify it
with the whites of Eggs, exceeding well, that it may be as clear as Crystal,
for that will be best; it being Clarified, boil it to the height of Mauus
Christi, then dip in your Roots 2 or 3 at once, till all be Candyed, and put
them in a Stove, and so keep them all the Year.

157, To Candy Elecampane-Roots,
Take of your Fairest Elecampane Roots, and take them clean from the Syrup, and
wash the sugar off them, and dry them again with a linen Cloth; then weigh
them, and to every pound of Roots take a pound and 3 quarters of sugar.
Clarify it well, and boil it to a height; and when it is boiled, dip in your
Roots, 3 or 4 at once, and they will Candy very well, and so stove them, and
keep them all the Year.

158, To make Cinnamon Sugar:
Lay pieces of sugar in close Boxes, amongst sticks of Cinnamon, or Cloves, and
in a short time it will have the taste and scent of the spice.

159. To make a Trifle.
Take Cream and boil it with a cut Nutmeg, add Lemon Peel a little, then take
it off; Cool it a little, and season it with Rose Water and Sugar, to your
Taste, put this in the thing you serve it in, then put in a little Runnet to
make it come, and serve it up.

160. To Candy Barberies.
First preserve them, then dip them quickly into warm Water, to wash off the
ropy Syrup, then strew them over with searced Sugar, and set them into an Oven
or Stove 3 or 4 Hours, always turning them, and casting more fine sugar upon
them, and never suffer them to be cold, till they be dried, and begin to look
like Diamonds.

161. To make Cream Apricoks,
First boil your Apricocks with Water and Sugar, till they are Tender, and
afterward boil them in Cream, then strain them and season it with Sugar.

162. To make Quince Cream.
Take a roasted Quince, pare it and cut it into Thin slices to the Core, boil
it in a pint of Cream, with a little whole Ginger, till it taste of the Quince
to your liking, then put in a little sugar and strain it, and always serve it
cold to the Table.

163. To Preserve Barberries,
Take one pound of Barberries picked from the stalks, put them in a pottle Pot,
and set it in a brass pot full of hot Water, and when they be Stewed, strain
them, and put to them a pound and a half of Sugar, and put to them a pint of
Red Rose Water, and boil them a little, then take half a pound of the fairest:
Clusters of Barberries you can get, and dip them in the syrup while it boyleth;
then take the Barberries out, boil the syrup while it is Thick, and when cold,
put them in the gla^ses with the Syrup.

164. To make Cullice.
Take a Cock and dress him, and boil him in Whitewine, Scum it clean, and
clarify the Broth (being first strained) then take a pint of sweet Cream, and
strain it, and so mix them together; then take beaten Ginger, fine Sugar, and
Rose Water, and put them altogether, and boil it a little more.

165. To make a Cordial strengthening Broth.
Take a Red-Cock, strip off the Feathers from the Skin, then break his Bones to
shivers with a Rolling pin; set it over the Fire, and just cover it with Water,
put in some Salt, watch the scuming and boiling of it, put in a handful of
Hartshorn, a quarter of a pound of blue* Currants, and as many Raisins of the
Sun stoned, and as many Pruans. 4 Blades of large Mace, a bottom Crust of a
white Loaf, half an ounce of China-Root sliced, being steeped three Hours
before in Warm-water, boil 3 or 4 pieces of Gold, strain it; and put in a
little fine Sugar, and Juice of Orange, and so use it,

166. To make Sugar-Cakes
Take one pound of fine Flower, one pound of Sugar finely beaten, and mingle
them well together, then take 7 or 8 Yolks of Eggs, then take 2 Cloves, and a
pretty piece of Cinnamon and lay it in a spoonful of Rose Water all Night, and
heat it almost Blood-warm, Temperate it with the rest of the stuff, when the
Paste is made, make it up as fast as you can, and bake them up in a soft Oven.

167. To take spots and stains out of Cloths.
Take 4 ounces of white hard Soap, beat it in a Mortar with a Lymon sliced, and
as much Roch-Allom as an Hasel-Nut, Roll it up in a Ball, Rub the stain
therewith, and after fetch it out with Warm-water, if need be.

168. To make Cucumbers Green.
You must take 2 quarts of Verjuyce or Vinegar, and a Gallon of sair Water, a
pint of Bay Salt, and a handful of Geeen Fennel or Dill, boil it a little, and
when it is cold put it into a Barrel, then put in your Cucumbers to that
Pickle, and you may keep them all the Year.

169. To make Cakes of Lemons.
Take of the finest double refined Sugar, beaten very fine, and searced through
fine Taffany* and to half a porringer of Sugar put two spoonfuls of Water and
boil it till it be almost sugar again, then grate of the hardest Rinded Lemon,
and stir it into your sugar put it into your Coffins, and a Paper, and when
they be Cold, take them off.

170. To make Black Cherry Wine.
Take a Gallon of the Juice of Black-Cherries, keep it in a Vessel close
stopped, till it begin to work, then filter it, and an ounce of Sugar being
added to every pint and a Gallon of White Wind, and keep it stopped for use.

171. To make Rose Vinegar.
Take of Red-Rosebuds (gathered in a dry time, the whites cut off, then dry
them in the shade 3 or 4 Days) one pound, of Vinegar 8 Sextaries, set them in
the Sun 40 days, then strain out the Roses, and put in Fresh, and so repeat it
3 or 4 times.

172. To make Syrup of Vinegar.
Take of the Roots of Smalledg, Fennel, Endive, of each 3 ounces, Anniseeds,
Smalledg, Fennel, of each one ounce, Endive half an ounce, clear Water three
Quarts, boil it gently in an Earthen Vessel, till half the Water be Consumed,
then strain and Clarify it, and with 3 pound of sugar, a pint and a half of
Whitewine-Vinegar, boil it into a syrup. This is a gallant syrup for such whose
Bodies are stuffed either with Phlegm, or tough Humors, for it opens
Obstructions or stopping, both of the stomach, Liver, spleen, and Reins, it
cuts and brings away tough Phlegm and Choler.

173. To make Syrup of Apples.
Take 2 quarts of the juice of sweet-scented Apples and the juice of Bugloss,
Garden and Wild, of Violet leaves, and Rose Water, of each a pound, boil them
together, Clarify them, and with 6 pound of very fine sugar boil them into a
syrup.

174. To make the Capon-water against a Consumption.
Take a Capon, the Guts being pulled out, cut it in pieces, and take away the
Fat, boil it in a close vessel in a sufficient quantity of Spring Water. Take
of this Broth 3 pints, of Burrage and Violet-water, a pint and half, White Wind
one Pint, red Rose-leaves two drams and a half, Burrage-flowers, Violets, and
Bugloss, of each one dram, pieces of bread out of the Oven, half a pound,
Cinnamon bruised half an ounce. Still it in a glass Still according to Art. This
is a Sovereign Remedy against Hectic Fevers and Consumption: Let such as are
subject to those Diseases, hold it as a Jewel.

175: To make Elder Vinegar.
Gather the flowers of Elder, pick them very clean, dry them in the sun, on a
gentle heat, and to every, quart of Vinegar, take a good handful of Flowers,
and let it stand in the sun a Fortnight, then strain the Vinegar from the
Flowers, and put it into the Barrel again, and when you draw a quart of
Vinegar, draw a quart of Water, and put it into the barrel Lukewarm

176. To maka China Broth.
Take an ounce of China-root clipped Thin, and steep it in 3 pints of Water all
Night, on Embers Covered, the next day take a Cock-chicken clean Picked and the
Guts taken out, put in it is belly Agrimony and Maidenhair, of each half a
handful, Raisins of the sun stoned, one good handful, and as much French
Barley, boil all these in a Pipkin, close covered on a gentle Fire, for 6 or 7
Hours, let it stand till it be cold, strain it, and keep it for your Use: Take
a good Draught in the Morning, and at 4 in the Afternoon.

177. To make paste of tender Plumbs.
Put your Plumbs into an Earthen pot, and set it into a pot of boiling Water,
and when the Plumbs are dissolved, then strain the thin Liquor from them,
through a Cloth, and reserve that Liquor to make Quiddany, then strain the pulp
through a piece of Canvas, and take as much sugar as the pulp in weight, and as
much water as will Wet the same, and so boil it to a Candy-heighth, then dry
the pulp upon a Chasing-dish of Coals, then put your syrup and the pulp so hot
together, and boil it, always stirring it till it will lie upon a Pye-plate, as
you lay it, and that it run not abroad, and when it is somewhat dry, then use
it, but put to it the pulp of Apples.

178. To make Cream of Coddlings.
First scald your Codlings, and so peel off the Skin, then scrape the pulp from
the Core, and strain them with a little Sugar and Rose Water, then lay your
pulp of Codlings in the middle of the Dish, and so much raw Cream, round it as
you please, and so serve it:

179. To make Sugar of Roses.
Take of Red-rose-leaves, the whites being cut off an Ounce, dry them in the
Sun speedily, put to it a pound of white Sugar, melt the Sugar in Rose Water,
and Juice of Roses, of each two Ounces, which being consumed by degrees, put in
the Rose-leaves in powder, mix them, put it upon a Marble, and make it into
Lozenges according to Art.

180. To make a Cream Tart.
Cut the Crust of a Manchet, and grate it small, and mix it with thick Cream,
and some sweet Butter, then take 24 Yolks of Eggs, and strain them with a
little Cream, putting thereto a good quantity of Sugar, mix these very well,
and set it upon a small fire, and so let it boil till it be thick, then make 2
sheets of Paste as thin as you can, and raife the sides of one of them the
height of one of your fingers in Breadth, and then fill it, and cover it with
the other sheet, then bake it half a quarter of an hour, then put Sugar on it,
and so serve it.

181. To make Poppy-water.
Take of red Poppies 4 Pound, put to them a quart of White Wind, then distill
them in a common Still, then let the distilled water be poured upon fresh
Flowers, and repeated 3 times, to which add 9. Nutmegs sliced, Red
Poppy-flowers a Pugil, white Sugar two ounces, set it to the Fire, to give it a
pleasing Sharpness, and Order it according to your Taste.

182. To make Mathiolus Bezoar's Water.
Take of Syrup of Citron-peels a quart, and as much of Dr. Mathiolus great
Antidote, with 5 pints of the Spirit of Wine five times distilled over, put all
these in a Glass, that is much too big to hold them, stop it close, that the
Spirit fly not out, then shake it together, that the Electuary may be well
mingled with the Spirit, so let it stand a Month, shaking it together twice a
Week (for the Electuary will settle at the bottom) after a Month pour off the
clear Water into another Glass, to be kept for your use, stopping it very close
with Wax and Parchment, else the Strength will easily fly away in Vapors.

183. To make Marmalade of red Currants.
Take the juice of red Currants, and put it into a pretty quantity of white
Currants, clean picked from the stalks, and Buttons at the other end; let these
boil a little together, have also ready some fine Sugar boiled to a
Candy-height, put of this to the Currants, according to your Discretion, and
boil them together till they be enough, and bruise them with the back of your
spoon, that they may be as thick as Marmalade, and when it is Cool put it into
Pots: You need not stone the whole Currants, unless you please.

184. To make a Syllabub.
Take a pint of Verjuice in a Bowl, milk the Cow to it, then take off the Curd,
and take sweet Cream and beat them together with a little Sack and Sugar, put
it into your Syllabub-pot, strew Sugar on it, and serve it.

185. To make pleasant Mead.
Put a quart of Honey to a Gallon of Water, with about 10 sprigs of sweet
Marjeram, and half so many tops of Bays, boil all these well together, and when
it is Cold, Bottle it up, and in 10 days it will be ready to Drink.

186. To make Steppony.
Take a Gallon of Conduit-water, a pound of blew Raifins of the Sun stoned, and
half a pound of Sugar, Squeese the juice of 2 Lemons upon the Raisins, and
Sugar, and slice the Rhinds upon them, boil the Water, and pour it boiling hot
upon the Ingredients of an earthen Pot, and stir them well together, so let it
stand 24 Hours, then put it into Bottles, having first let it run through a
strainer, and set them in a Cellar, or other Cool place.

187. To make Syder,
Take a peck of Apples and slice them, and boil them in a Barrel of Water, till
the third part be Wasted; then Cool your Water, as you do Wort, and when it is
Cold, you must pour the Water upon 3 Measures of grown Apples. Then draw forth
the Water at a Tap, 3 or 4 times a Day, for 3 Days together, then press out the
Liquor, and Tun it up, when it has done working stop it up close.

188. To make Cock-Ale.
Take 8 Gallons of Ale, then take a Cock and boil him well, with 4 pound of
Raisins of the Sun, well stoned, 2 or 3 Nutmegs, 3 or 4 Flakes of Mace, half a
pound of Dates, beat all these in a Mortar, and put to them 2 quarts of the
best Sack, and when the Ale has done Working, put these in, and stop it close
6 or 7 Days, and then Bottle it, and a Month after you may Drink it.

189. To make a Caraway-cake.
Take 3 pound and a half of the finest Flower, and dry it in an Oven, one pound
and a half of sweet Butter, and Mix it with the Flower very small, that none of
it be seen, then take 3 quarters of a pint of new Ale-Yest, and half a pint of
Sack, and half a pint of New- Milk, with 6 Spoonfuls of Rose water, and 4
Yolks, and 2 Whites of Eggs, then let it lie before the fire half an hour or
more, and when you go to make it up, put in 3 quarts of Carawey-Comfits, and a
pound and half of Biskets. Put it into the Oven, and let it stand an hour and
half.

190. To make Strawberry-wine.
Bruise the Strawberries, and put them into a Linnenbag, which has been a
little used, that so the Liquor may run through more easily, then hang in the
Bag, at the Bung, into the Vessel. Before you put in your Strawberries, put in
what quantity of Fruit you think good, to make the Wine of a hgh Color; during
the Working, leave the Bung Open, and when it has Worked enough, stop your
Vessel. Cherry-wine is made after the same Fashion, but then you must break the
Stones.

191. To make a Cordial Water of Clove-gilly-Flowers.
Put Spirit of Wine or Sack, upon Clove-gilly-Flowers, Digest it 2 or 3 Days,
put all in a Glass-body, laying other Clove-gilly-Flowers at the Mouth of it,
upon a Cambrick or Boulter-cloth; that the Spirit rising, and passing through
the Flowers, may Ting it self of a beautiful Color) add a head with a Limbeck,
and Receiver: Then Distill the Spirit as strong as you like it, which sweeten
with Syrup of Gilly flowers, or fine Sugar.

192. To make an excellent Surfeit-water.
Take Mint and Carduns 4 parts, Angelica one part, Wormwood 2 parts; Chop and
Bruise them a little, put a sufficient quantity of them into an ordinary Still,
and put upon them enough New Milk to soak them, but not to have the Milk swim
much over them. Distill this as you do Rose Water, stirring it sometime with a
Stick, to keep the Milk from growing to a Cake.

193. To make Mint-water.
Take 2 parts of Mint, and one part of Wormood, and 2 parts of Carduus, ptt
these into as much New Milk as will soak them: Let them Infuse 5 or 6 Hours,
then Distill as you do Rose Water, but you must often take off the Head, and
stir the Matter well with a Stick: Drink of this Water a Wine-Glass full at a
time, sweetened with fine Sugar to your Taste.

194. To Pickle Artichoaks.
Take your A'rtichoaks before they are Overgrown, or too full of Strings, and
when they are pared Round, that nothing is left but the bottom, Boil them till
they be indifferent Tender, but not full Boiled, take them up, and let them be
Cold, then take good Stale-Beer and White Wind, with a great quantity of whole
Bepper, so put them up into a Barrel, with a small quantity of Salt; keep them
close, and they will not be Sour, it will serve for Baked and Boiled Meats,
all the Winter.

195. To make Rasberrie-Cream.
When you have boiled your Cream, take 2. Ladlefuls of it, being almost cold,
bruise the Rasberries together, and season it with Sugar and Rose Water, and
put it into your Cream, stirring it altogether, and so dish it up.

196. To make Snow Cream.
Break the whites of 6 Eggs, put thereto a little Rose Water, beat them well
together, with a Bunch of Feathers, till they come perfectly to resemble Snow,
then lay on the said Snow in heaps, upon other Cream that is Cold, which is
made fit for the Table: You may put under your Cream in the bottom of the Dish,
part of a Penny-Loaf, and stick therein a branch of Rosemary, or Bays, and fill
your Tree with the said Snow, to server it up.

197. To make Hodromel
Take 18 quarts of Spring Water, and one quart of H^ney; when the Water is
Warm, put the Honey into it, when it boyls up, Scum it very well, even as long
as any Scum will rise; then put in one Race of Ginger, Sliced in thin slices, 4
Cloves, and a little Sprig of Green Rosemary, boil altogether an Hour, then set
it to Cool, till it be Blood-warm, and then put to it a Spoonful of Ale-Yeast,
when it is Worked up, put it into a Vessel of a fit Size, and after 2 or 3 Days
Bottle it up; you may Drink it in 6 Weeks, or 2 Months.

198. To make Whipped Syllabub
Take the Whites of 2 Eggs, and a Pint of Cream, with 6 Spoonfuls of Sack, and
as much Sugar as will sweeten it, then take a Birchen rod and Whip it, as it
rises in the Froth scum it, and put it into the Syllabub Pot, so continue it
with Whipping, and Scuming, till your Syllabub Pot be full.

199. To make Marmalade of Cherries.
Take 4 pound of the best Kentish-Cherries, before they be stoned, to one pound
of pure Loaf-Sugar, which beat into small ponder, stone the Cherries, and put
them into a Preserving-pan, over a gentle Fire, that they may not boil, but
dissolve much into Liquor. Take away with the Spoon much of the Thin Liquor,
leaving the Cherries moist enough, but not Swimming in clean Liquor; then put
to them half your Sugar, and boil it up very quick, and scum away the Froth
that rises, when it is well incorporated and clear, strew in a little more of
the Sugar, and continue so by little and little, till you have put in all your
Sugar, which will make the Color the Fairer; when they are boiled enough take
them off, and bruise them with the back of a Spoon, and when they are Cold, put
them up in Dots.

200. To make a Flomery-Caudle.
When Flomery is made, and cold, you may make a pleasant and wholesome Caudle of
it, by taking some lumps and spoonfuls of it, and boil it with Ale and
White Wind, then sweeten it to your Taste with Sugar. There will remain in the
Caudle some lumps of the congealed Flomery, which are not ungrateful.

201. To Preserve Fruit all the Year.
Put the Fruit into a fit Case of Tin, and soder it together, so that no Air
can get in; then lay it at the bottom of a cold Well, or running Water.

202. To make a most Rich Cordial.
Take Conserve of Red Roses, Conserve of Orange-Flowers, of each 1 Ounce;
Confect. Hyacinthi, Bezoardick, Theriacal Powder, of each 2 Drams; Confection
of Alkermes 1 dram; of Powder of Gold one scruple; mix all these well together
in the form of an Opiate, and if the Composition be too dry, add to it some
syrup of Red Currants, as much as is needful; take of this Composition every
Morning the quantity of a Nut.

203. To make Red, Currants Cream.
Bruise your Currants with some boiled Cream, then strain them through your
strainer for sieve and put the liquid substance thereof to the said Cream being
almost cold, and it will be ready; so serve it up.

204. To Preserve Medlers.
Take the weight of them in Sugar, adding to every Pound thereof a Pint and a
half of fair Water, let them be scalded therein, till their skin will come off,
then take them out of the Water, and stone them at the Head, then add your
Sugar to the Water, and boil them together, then strain it, and put your
Medlars therein, and let them boil apace till it be thick; take them from the
Fire, and keep them for use.

205. To make White Mead.
Take 6 Gallons of Water, and put in 6 Quarts of Honey, stirring it till the
Honey be thoroughly melted, then set it over the Fire, and when it is ready to
boil, scum it very clean, then put in a quarter of an ounce of Mace, and as
much Ginger, half an ounce of Nutmegs, sweet Marjoram, broad Thyme, and sweet
Briar, of all together a handful, and boil them therein, then set it by till it
be thoroughly cold and then barrel it up, and keep it till it be Ripe.

206. To make Naples Biscuit.
Take of the same stuff the Makroons are made of, and put to it an Ounce of
Pineapple seeds, in a quarter of a pound of stuff; for that is all the
difference between Mackroons and Naples Biscuit.

207. To make Chips of Quinces.
Scald them very well, and then slice them into a Dish, and pour a Candy syrup
to them scalding hot; and let them stand all Night, then lay them on Plates and
searce Sugar on them, and turn them every day, and scrape more Sugar on them
till they be dry. I, you would have them look clear, heat them in Syrups but
not to boil.

208. To make Lozenges of Roses.
Boil Sugar to a hight, till it is Sugar again, then beat your Roses fine, and
moisten them with the Juice of Lemons, and put them into it, let it not boil,
till your Roses are in, but pour it into a Pye-plate, and cut it into what sorm
you please.

209. To make Conserve of Bugloss-Flowers.
Pick them as you do Burrage-Flowers, weigh them, and to every ounce, add 2
ounces of Loaf-Sugar, and 1 of Sugar Candy, beat them together, till they
become very fine, then set it on the Fire, to Dissolve the Sugar, and when it
is so done, and the Conserve Hot, put it into your Glasses, or Gally-pots, for
your Use.

210. To Pickle Lemon and Orange-peel.
Boil them with Vinegar and Sugar, and put them up into the same Pickle, you
must observe to Cut th^^ into small Thongs, the length of half your Lemon,
being pared, it is a Handsome Winter Sallet; boil them first in Water, before
you boil them in Sugar.

211. To make Goose-berry Paste.
Take Goose-berries, and Cut them one by one, and Wring away the Juice, till
you have got enough for your Turn, boil your Juice alone, to make it somewhat
Thicker, then take as much fine Sugar as your Juice will sharpen, dry it, and
then beat it again, then take as much Gum-dragoon steeped in Rose Water, as
will serve, then beat it into a Paste, in a Marble-Morter, then take it up, and
Print it in your Moulds, and dry it in your Stove, when it is Dry, Box it up
for your use, all the Year.

212. To wake Suckets of Letuce-stalks.
Take Letuce-stalks, and Peel away the outside, then Parboyl them in sair
Water, and so Boil it to a Syrup, and when your Syrup is almost cold put in
your Roots, and let them stand all Night, to take Sugar, then boil your Syrup
again, because it will be Weak, and then take out your Roots.

213. To make Musk Sugar.
Bruise 4 or 5 Grains of Musk, put it in a piece of Cambrick or Lawn, lay it at
the bottom of a Gally-pot, and strew Sugar thereon, stop your pot close, and
all your Sugar in a few days will both smell and Taste of Musk, and when you
have spent the Sugar, lay more Sugar thereon, which will also have the same
Scent.

214. Do Preserve Roses or Gilly-Flowers-whole.
Dip a Rose that is neither in the Bud, nor Overblown, in a Syrup, consisting
of Sugar double Refined, and Rose Water, boiled to its full Height, then open
the Leaves, one by one, with a fine smooth Bodkin, either of Bone or Wood, then
lay them on Papers, in the Heat, or else dry with a gentle Heat, in a close
Room, Heating the Room before you set them in, or in an Oven, then put them up
in Glasses, and keep them in dry Cup-boards, near the fire.

215. To make Syrup of Mint.
Take the Juice of sweet Quinces, and between sweet and sour, the Juice of
Pomegranates, sweet, and between sweet and sour, of each a pint and Half, dried
Mint half a pound, red Roses 2 ounces, let them lie in sleep one day, then boil
it half away, and with 4 pound of Sugar boil it into Syrup, according to Art.

216. To make Honey of Mulberries.
Take the Juice of Mulberries, and Black-berries, before they be Ripe, gathered
before the Sun be up, of each a Pound and Half, Honey 2 Pound, boil them to
their due Thickness.

217. To make Syrup of Purslain.
Take of the Seed of Purslain, Grossly Bruised, half a Pound, of the Juice of
Endive Boiled and Clarified, 2 Pints, Sugar 2 Pound, Vinegar 9 Ounces, Infuse
the Seeds in the Juice of Endive, 24 Hours, afterward boil it half away, with
a gentle Fire, then strain it, boil it with the Sugar, to the consistence of a
Syrup, adding the Vinegar toward the latter end, of the Decoction.

218. To make Honey of Raisins.
Take of Raisins of the Sun cleansed from the stones, 2 Pound, steep them in 6
Pints of Warm Water, the next day boil it half away, and Press it strongly then
put 2 Pints of Honey, to the Liquor that is pressed out, and boil it to a
Thickness: It is good for a Consumption, and to loosen the Body.

219. To make a Syrup of Comfry.
Take the Roots and Tops of Comfrey, the greater and the less, of each 3
handfuls; red Roses, Bettony, Plantain, Burnet, Knot-grass, Scabious,
Colts-feet, of each 2 handfuls; press the juice out of them, all being green
and bruised, boil it, scum it, and strain it, add to its weight of Sugar, and
make it into a Syrup according to Art.

220. To Pickle Quinces.
Boil your Quinces in Water till they be soft, but not too violently, for fear
of breaking them, when they are soft take them out, and boil some Quinces
pared, quartered and cored, and the paring of the Quinces with them in the same
Liquor, to make it strong; and when they are boiled, that the Liquor is of a
sufficient Strength, take out the quartered Quinces and parings, and put the
Liquor into a Pot big enough to receive all the Quinces, both whole and
quartered, and put them into it when the Liquor is thorough cold, and keep them
for use close covered.

221. To make Plague water.
Take a pound of Rue, of Rosemary, Sage, Sorrel, Celandine, Mugwort, of the
Tops of red Brambles, Pimpernel, wild Dragon, Agrimony, Balm, Angelica, of each
a pound; put these Compounds in a Pot, fill it with White Wind above the Herbs,
so let it stand 4 Days; then distill it for your use in an Alimbeck.

222. To make clear Cakes of Quinces.
Prepare your Quinces and Barberries as before, and then take the clearest
Syrup, and let it stand on the Coals 2 or 3 Hours; then take the weight of it
in Sugar, and put near half the Sugar to the juice, and so let them boil a
little on the Fire, and then Candy the rest of the Sugar very hard, and so put
them together, stirring it till it be almost cold, and so put it into Glasses.

223. To make all sorts of Comfits, and to cover Seeds, or Fruits, with Sugar.
You must provide a Basin very deep, either of Brass or Tin, with 2 Ears of
Iron, to hang, with a Rope, over an Earthen Pan with hot Coals, then provide a^
broad Pan for Ashes, and put hot Coals upon them, and another clean Basin to
melt your Sugar in, or a Skillet; as also a Ladle of Brass, to run the Sugar
upon the Seeds, together with a slice of Brass, to scrape away the Sugar from
the Basin that hangs, if there be occasion; then take some of the best and
fairest Sugar you can get, and beat it into Powder, cleanse your Seeds well,
and dry them in the hanging Basin, put a quarter of a pound of Seeds, whether
Anniseeds, or Coriander-seeds, to every 2 pound of Sugar, and that will make
them big enough; but if you would have them bigger, add the more sugar, which
you must melt thus; put 3 pound of Sugar into your Basin, adding to it one pint
of clean Running-water; stir it well with a brazen Slice, till it be well
moistened, then set it over a clear Fire, and melt it well, and let it boil
mildly till it Ropes from the Ladle, then keep it upon hot Embers, but let it
not boil, and so let it run upon the Seeds from the Ladle: If you would have
them done quickly, let your Water be boiling hot, and putting a Fire under the
Basin, cast on your Sugar boiling hot; put but as much Water to the Sugar as
will dissolve the same, neither boil your Sugar too long, which will make it
black; stir your Seeds in the Basin as fast as you can, as you cast on the
Sugar; at the first, put in but half a Spoonful of the Sugar, moving the Basin
very fast, rubbing the Seeds very well with your Hand, which will make them
take Sugar the better, and let them be very well dried between every Coat,
repeat this rubbing and drying of them between every Coat, which will make them
the sooner rot; for this way in every 3 Hours, you may make 3 pound of Comfits.
A quarter of a ^ound of Coriander-seeds, and 3 pound of Sugar, will make very
large Comfits; keep your Sugar always in ^ood temper, that it run not into
lumps. When your Comfits are made, lay them to dry on Papers, either before the
Fire, or in the hot Sun, or in an Oven* which will make them (...)

224. To Candy Nutmegs or Ginger.
Take a pound of fine Sugar, and 6 or 7 spoonfuls of Rose Water; Gum-Arabick,
the weight of a Sixpence, but let it be clear, boil all these together, till
they Rope; put it then out into an earthen Dish, put to it your Nutmegs or
Ginger, then cover it close, and lute it with Clay that no Air enter in; keep
it in a warm place about 20 Days, and they will Candy into a Rocky Candy; then
break your Pot, and take them out: In the same manner you may Candy Oranges and
Lemons.

225. To make Curran-Wine.
Pick a Pound of the best Currants, and put them in a deep strait mouthed
earthen Pot, and pour upon them about 3 quarts of hot Water, having first
dissolved 3 spoonfuls of the purest and newest Ale-yeast, stop it very close,
till it begins to Work, then give it Vent, as is necessary, and keep it warm
for about 3 days; it will work and ferment, taste it after 2 days, to se^ if it
he grown to your liking; then let it run through a strainer, to leave behind
all the Currants and Yeast and so bottle it up; it will be very quick and
pleasant, and is admirable good to cool the Liver and cleanse the Blood; it
will be ready to drink in 5 or 6 days after it is bottled, and you may drink it
safely.

226. To make a Sweet-Meat of Apples.
Make your Jelly with slices of John-Apples, but first fill your Glasses with
slices cut round ways, and pou^^ in the Jelly to fill up the Vacuities; let the
Jelly b^ boiled to a good stiffness, and when it is ready to tak^ from the
Fire, put in some juice of Lemon and Orang^ if you like it, but let them not
boil, but let if sta^^ upon the Fire awhile, upon a pretty good heat, th^^ the
juice may incorporate well; a little Amber-gre^^ added does very well.

227. To make Conserve of Sage.
Take a pound of Flowers of Sage fresh blown, an^ beat them in a Mortar,
afterward put them in a Gh^^^ (...) or in the Sun, and be sure to stir them
once a Day at least, and it will keep good a Twelvemonth at least.

228. To make Paste of Cherries.
Boil some fair Cherries in water till they come to pap, and then strain them
through a sieve, then boil some good Pippins unto pap, also put a quarter of a
pound of the Apple-pap to a pound of the pap of Cherries, and mingle them
together, then dry it, and so make it up into Paste.

229. To make Marmalade of Oranges.
After you have pared your Oranges very thin, let them be boiled in three or
four waters, even till they grow very tender, then take a quarter of a hundred
of good Kentish Pippins, divide them, and take out the Cores, boil them very
well to pap or more, but let them not lose their color, then pass your Apples
through a strainer, and put a pound of Sugar to every pint of Juice, then boil
it till it will Candy, then take out the pulp of the Orange, and cut the peel
into long slices very thin, put in your peel again adding to it the Juice of 2
or 3 Lemons, and boil it up to a Candy.

230. To make a Paste of Apricots.
Let your Apricots be very ripe, and boil them, then put them into a skillet,
and set them over the Fire without water, stir them very well with a skimmer,
and let them be over the Fire till they be very dry, then take some Sugar and
boil it into a Conserve and mix an equal quantity of each together, and so
makeii tuto Paste.

231. To Pickle Artichoak-Bottoms.
Take the best Bottom of Artichoaks, and parboyl them, and when they are cold
and well drained from the water and dried in a cloth, take away all the
moisture, then put them into pots, and pour your Brine upon them, which must be
as strong as you can make it, which is done by putting so much Salt to it as
will receive no more, so that the Salt sinks whole to the bottom; cover over
your Artichoaks with this water, and pour upon it some sweet Butter melted to a
thickness of two Fingers, that no Air may come in, when the Butter is cold, set
up your Pot in a warm place, covered close from Vermin. Before you put the
bottoms in a Pot you should, pull off all the leaves and choke, as they are
served at Table: The best time to do this is in Autumn, when your plants
produce those which are young and tender, for these you should pickle before
they open and flower, but not before their Heads are round, when you would eat
them you must lay them in water, shifting the water several times, then boil
them once again, and so serve them again.

232. To Pickle Cornelians.
Gather the fairest and biggest Cornelians when they first begin to grow red,
and after they have lain a while, put them up into a Pot or Barrel, filling
them up with Brine, as for Artichoaks, and put to them a little green Fennel,
and a few Bay Leaves to make them smell well, then stop them up very close, and
let them stand for a Month, if you find them too salt, make the Pickle weaker
before you serve them to Table.

233. To make Jelly of Apples.
Take either Pippins or John-Apples, and cut them into quarters, either pared
or unpared, boil them in a good quantity of water till it be very strong of the
Apples, take out the clear Liquor, and put to it a sufficient quantity of Sugar
to make a Jelly, with the slices of Apples, boil all together, till the Apples
be enough, and the Liquor like a Jelly; or else you may boil the slices in
Apple Liquor without Sugar, and make Jelly of the other Liquor, and put the
slices into it when they be Jelly and it is sufficiently boiled, put to it some
Juice of Lemon and Amber, and Musk if you will.

234. To make Jelly of Gooseberries.
Let your Gooseberries be full ripe, then strain them through a Strainer, and
to every Two pound of Juice put Three quarterns of Sugar, boil it before you
mix it and then boil it again together; when they are mixed try them upon a
plate; when its enough it rises off.

235. To make Bragget.
Put 2 bushels and a half of Malt to 1 Hoshead of water, the first running
makes half a Hogshead very good, but not very strong, the second is very weak:
Boil but half a quartern of Hops, put your water to the Malt the ordinary way;
boil it very well, and work it with very good Beer yeast: Now, to make Bragget,
take the first running of this Ale, but put less Honey in it then you do for
your ordinary Mead, put twice or thrice as much Spice and Herbs, then put it in
a Vessel, after its working with the Yeast, hang within it a bag of bruised
Spices, rather more than you boiled it with, and let it hang in the barrel all
the while you draw it.

236. To make a Syrrup for one short-winded.
Take a good handful of Hyssop, and a handful of Horehound, and boil them in a
quart of spring water to a pint, then strain it through a clean Cloth, and put
in Sugar to make it pleasant. Stir it Morning and Evening with a Liquorise
stick, and take about three spoonfuls at a time.

Excellent Receipts IN Physic and Surgery.
1. A true Receipt for making that famous Cordial-Drink; known by the Name of
Daffy's Elixir Salutis. As it was given by him to Sir Richard Ford, when
Lord Mayor of London.
TAke of Anniseeds, Coriander-seeds, sweet Fennelseeds, Parsley-seeds, of each
2 Ounces; of Spanish Licorise 2 Ounces; Senna 2 Ounces; Rhubarh 2 Ounces;
Elecampane 2 Ounces; Guaicum 2 Ounces Six penniworth of Saffron; and one pound
of Raisins of the Sun stoned: Mix these all together, and put them into 3
quarts of the smallest Aqua-Vitae, in a Stone or Glass Bottle; let it stand and
infuse fourteen days, (at least, but the longer the better) near the fire, that
it may receive some warmth, for it will infuse the better and sooner; then pour
off your Liquor into a Vessel, and take your drugs and press them as dry as you
can, and put the Liquor you squeeze out to the other; and so bottle it up for
use.

2. An Approved Medicine for the Stone and Gravel.
Take the hard Roe of a Red Herring, and dry it upon a Tile, in an Oven, then
beat it to powder, and take as much as will lie upon a Sixpence every Morning,
fasting, in a Glass of Rhenish-Wine.

3. An Excellent Drink for the Scurvy.
Take a pound of Garden Scurvy Grass, six handfuls of Wormwood and Elder-tops,
one Ounce of Caraway-seeds, and an Ounce of Nutmegs, put them all together into
6 Gallons of New Ale, and let them work together, and after a convenient time
of working, drink of it every Morning fasting.

4. A Receipt for the Gout, known to be very helpful.
Take 5 or 6 Black Snails, and cut off their heads, then put to it one
Pennyworth of Saffron, and beat them together, spread them on a woolly side of
a piece of Sheeps Leather, and apply it to the soles of the feet, anointing the
sore place with the Marrow of a Stone-horse.

5. For Griping of the Guts.
Take Anniseeds, Fennel, Bay berries, Juniper Berries, Tormentil, Bistort,
Balaustius, Pomegranate-Pills, each one ounce, Rose leaves a handful, boil them
in Milk, strain it, and add the Yolk of an Egg, six grains of Laudanum,
dissolved in the Spirit of Mint, prepare it for a Glister, and give it warm.

6. A Sovereign Medicine for any Ach or Pain.
Take Barrows-grease, a lapful of Arch-Angel-leaves, flowers, stalks and all,
and put it into an Earthen-pot, and stop it close, and paste it, then put it in
a horse dunghill nine days in the latter end of May, and nine days in the
beginning of June, then take it forth, and use it.

7. For the Sciatica, and Pain in the Joints.
Take Balm and Cinquefoyl, but most of all Betony, Nep, and Featherfew, stamp
them, and drink the Juice with Ale and Wine.

8. For an Ague.
Take the Root of a Blew Lilly, scrape it clean, and slice it, and lay it in
soak all night in Ale, and in the morning stamp it, and strain it, and give it
to the Patient Lukewarm, to drink, an hour before the Fit comes.

9. For all Fevers and Agues in sucking Children.
Take powder of Crystal and steep it in Wine, and give it to the Nurse to
drink, also take the Root of Devils-bit, with the Herb, and hang it about the
Child's Neck.

10. A good Medicine to strengthen the Back.
Take Comfrey, Knot-grass, and Flowers of Archangel, boil them in a little
Milk, and drink it off every Morning.

11. For the Headache.
Take Rose-Cakes, and stamp them very Well in a Motter with a little Ale, and
let them be dried by the Fire on a Tile sheard, and lay it to the Nape of the
Neck to Bed-ward.

12. For the Yellow-Jaundice.
Take a great white Onion, and make a hole where the blade goes out, to the
bigness of a Chestnut, then fill the hole with Treacle, being beaten with half
an ounce of English Honey, and a little Saffron, and set the Onion against the
Fire, and roast it well that it do not burn, and when it is roasted, strain it
through a cloth, and give the Juice thereof to the sick three days together,
and it will help them.

13. For the Black-Jaundice.
Take Fennel, Sage, Parsley, Gromwel, of each much alike, and make Pottage
thereof with a piece of goo^

14. For Infection of the Plague.
Take a spoonful of Running water, a spoonful of Vinegar, a good quantity of
Treacle to the bigness of a Hasel-nut, temper all these together, and heat it
lukewarm, and drink it every four and twenty hours.

15. For the Cramp.
Take Oil of Camomile, and Fenugreek, and anoint the place, where the Cramp is,
and it helps.

16. For the Ach of the Joints.
Take Marshmallows and sweet Milk, Linseed, Powder of Cummin, and the Whites of
Eggs, Saffron, and White Grease, and fry all these together, and lay it to the
aching Joint.

17. For an Ague.
Take a pottle of thin Ale, and put thereto a handful of Parsley, as much Red
Fennel, as much Centory, as much Pimpernel, and let the Ale be half consumed
away, and then take and drink thereof.

18. To make the Countess of Kent 's Powder.
Take of the Magistery of Pearls, Crabs Eyes, prepared, Hartshorn, Magistery of
White Coral, of Lapis contra Yarvum, of each a like quantity, to these Powders
infused, cut off the black tops of the great Claws of the Crabs, the full
weight of the rest: Beat these all into a fine Powder, and searce them through
a fine Lawn Searce. To every ounce of this Powder add a dram of Oriental
Bezoar, make all these up in a lump or mass with Jelly of Hartshorn, and color
it with Saffron, putting thereto a scruple of Amber-Grease, and a little Musk
finely powdered, and dry it in the Air, after they are made up into small
quantities, you may give to a Man twenty Graints, and to a Child twelve Grains.
It is excellent against all malignant and pestilent Diseases, French Pox, Small
Pox, Measles, Plague, Pestilence, Malignant, or Scarlett Fevers, and
Melancholy, twenty or thirty Grains thoreof being exhibited (in a little warm
Sack, or Hartshord Jelly) to a Man, and half as much, or twelve Grains to a
Child,

19. For the Falling Sickness, or Convulsions.
Take dung of a Peacock, make it into Powder, and give so much of it to the
Patient as will lie upon a Shilling; in a little Succory-water fasting.

20. For the Pleuresie.
Take the round Balls of Horse-dung, and boil them in a pint of White Wind till
half be consumed, then strain it out, and sweeten it with a little Sugar, let
the Patient drink of this, and then lie warm.

21. To prevent Miscarrying.
Take Venice Turpentine, spread it on black brown Paper, the breadth and length
of an hand, and lay it to the small of her back, and let her drink a Caudle
made of Muscadine, putting into it the Husks of about 20 sweet Almonds dried,
and finely poudered.

22. For the Worms in Children.
Take Worm-seed boiled in Beer and Ale, and sweetened Clarified Honey, and then
let them drink it.

23. For the Whites.
Take white washed Turpentine, and make it up in Balls like Pills, then take
Cinnamon and Ginger, and roll the Balls in it, and take them as you would do
Pills, Morning and Evening.

24. For a dry Cough.
Take Anniseed, Ash-seeds, and Violets, and beat them to Powder, and stamp
them, of each a like quantity, then boil them together in fair water, till it
grows thick, then put it up, and let the Patient take of it Morning and Evening.

25. To make Vnguentum Album.
Take a pint of Oyl-Olive, and half a pound of Diaculum, Anniseeds a pretty
quantity, and put them together, and put thereto a pound of Ceruse, small
grounded, boil them together a little, and stir them always till it be cold,
and it is done.

26. To destroy the Piles.
Take Oil of Roses, Frankincense and Honey, and make an Ointment of them, and
put it into the Fundament, and put Myrrh unto the same, and use often to anoint
the Fundament therewith, and let the Fume thereof ^o into the Fundament.

27. For the Canker.
Take a handful of unset Leeks, with the roots, and a small quantity of Yarrow,
and boil them in Whitewine, till they be very soft, then strain and clarify
them, and let the Patient drink thereof, Morning and Evening blood warm.

28. For the Itch.
Take the Juice of Pennyroyal, the Juice of Savin, the Juice of Scabius, the
Juice of Sage, the Juice of Pellitory, with some Barrows grease, and Black
Soap, temper, all these together, and make a Salve for the Itch.

29. For the King's Evil.
Take 2 ounces of the water of Broom Flowers distilled, and give it in the
Morning to the Patient fasting, and i^ will purge the Evil Humor downwards,
and wastes, and heals the Kernels without breaking them outwardly.

30. To break an Imposthume.
Take a Lilly Root and an Onion and boil them in Water, till they be soft, then
stamp them, and fry them with Swines grease, and lay it to the Imposthume as
hot as the Patient may suffer it.

31. For biting of a Mad Dog.
Stamp large Plantain, and lay it to the grieved place, and it will cure the
Sore.

32. The Green Sickness.
Take the Keys of an Ashen-tree, dried and beaten to powder, and take of Red
Fennel, of Red sage, Marjoram, and Bitony, and sees them in Running water,
from a pottle to a quart, then strain them, and drink thereof a good draught
with Sugar, Morning and Evening lukewarm.

33. For Deafness.
Take Wild-Mint, mortify it, and squeeze it in the Hand till it re^^teth juice,
then take it, with its juice, and put it into the Ear, change it often, this
will help, the Deafness, if the Person has heard before.

34. For the Dropsy.
Take a Gallon of White Wind, and put into it a handful of Roman Wormwood, and
a good piece of Horseradish, and a good quantity of Broom Ashes tied in a
Cloth, then take a good Bunch of Dwarf Elder, beat it in a Mortar, and strain
out the Juice, and put into the Wine when you will drink it, but if the Elder
be dry, you must steep a good quantity in the Wine. Take of this half a pint
Morning and Evening.

35. For a Sprain in the Back, or any other Weakness.
Take a quarter of a pint of good Muscadine. a spoonful of Madder, incorporate
them well together, then give it to the Patient to drink for three Mornings
together, and if need requires, you may use it often in a day, this will
strengthen the back exceedingly.

36. An Excellent Remedy for sore Eyes.
Take a Gallon of pure Running Water, and eight drams of White Copperas, and as
much of fine White Salt, mix them together, and let it simper half an hour over
a slow Fire, and then strain it for use.

37. Catholicon; a most excellent Cordial.
Take half a peck of Ripe Elder Berries, pick them clean and let them stand
two-or three days in an Earthen pan, till they begin to hoar or mould, then
bruise and strain them, and boil the Liquor till half be consumed, then putting
a pound of Sugar to every pint of Liquor, boil them to Syrup.

38. A Medicine for an Ague.
Take a quart of the best Ale, and boil it to a pint, and let the Party take
it, and then let the Patient lie down upon a Bed, and be covered warm, when the
first sit grudges, and let a Basin be ready to vomit in.

39. Another for an Ague.
Take a large Nutmeg and slice it, and so much Roch-Alom, beaten to powder, and
put them both into one pint of White Wind and incorporate them well together,
and let the Patient take one half thereof about half an hour before the Fit,
and then walk a-pace, or use some other Laborious Exercise, and when the fit
begins to come, take the other half, and continue Exercise. Both these I have
known to cure to Admiration.

40. For a great Lax or Looseness.
Take one quart of New Milk, and have ready one half pint of distilled Plantain
water, and set your Milk over the Fire, and when your Milk by boiling rise up,
take two or three spoonfuls, as occasion shall be, to allay the rising, and
when it rises again, do the like, and so in the like manner till the Plantain
water be all in, and then boiling up as before, let the Patient drink thereof
warmed hot, or how else he likes it; I never yet have found it fail of Curing.

41. For Curing of Deafness.
Take Herb of Grace, and pound it, then strain it, and take two spoonfuls of
the Juice, and put thereto one spoonful of Brandy-wine, and when it is well
evaporated, dip therein a little Black wool or fine Lint, being first bound
with a silk thread, and put it into your Ear.

42. For the Scurvy.
Take half a peck of Sea-scurvy-grass, and as much Watercresses, of
Dwarf-Elder, Roman Wormwood, Red sage; Fumitory, Hartshorn, and Liver-wort, of
each one handful, wash the Watercresses, and dry them well, the other Herbs
must be rubbed clean, and not washed, then add one Ounce of Horse-Raddish, and
a good handful of Madder Roots, beat these with the Herbs, and strain the juice
well out, for the last is best, then set it on a quick fire, and scum it clean;
then let it stand till it is settled, and when it is quite cold, bottle it up,
and keep it in a cold place, you must take four or five spoonfuls with one
spoonful of Syrup of Lemons put into it, each Morning fasting, and fast one
hour after it.

43. To Procure Conception.
Take of Syrup of Mother-wort, Syrup of Mugwort half an Ounce, of spirit of
Clary 2 drams, of the Root of English snake-weed in fine powder one dram,
Purslain-seed, Nettle-seed, Rochet-seed, all in subtle powder of each two
drams: Candied Nutmegs, Eringo-roots, Satyrion-roots, preserved, Dates,
Pistachoes, Conserve of Succory, of each 3 drams, Cinnamon, Saffron in fine
powder, of each a scruple, Conserve of Vervain, Pineapple Kernels, picked and
peeled, of each 2 drams, stamp and work all these Ingredients in a Mortar, to
an electuary, then put it into Gally-pots, and keep it for use: Take of this
Electuary the quantity of a good Nutmeg in a little Glass full of White Wind,
in the Morning fasting, and at four a Clock Afternoon, and as much at night
going to Bed, but be sure do not use violent exercises.

44. For a sore Breast not broken.
Take Oil of Roses, Bean-flower, the Yolk of an Egg, a little Vinegar, temper
all these together, then set it before the Fire that it may be a little warm,
then with a Feather strike it upon the Breast morning and evening, or any time
of the day she finds it pricking.

45. To heal a sore breast when broken.
Boil Lillies in new Milk, and lay it on to break it, and when it is broken,
Tent it with a Mallow-stalk, and lay on it a plaster of Mallows boiled in
sheeps Tallow: These are to be used if you cannot keep it from breaking.

46. For a Consumption.
Take a pound and half of Pork, Fat and Lean, and boil it in water, and put in
some Oatmeal, and boil it till the heart of the Meal be out, then put to it two
quarts of Milk, and boil it a quarter of an hour, and give the Patient a
draught in the Morning, Afternoon, and Evening, and now and then some
Barley-water.

47. For the Falling Sickness.
Take powder of Hartshorn, and drink it with Wine, and it helps the Falling
Evil.

48. For the Toothache.
Take Featherfew and stamp it, and strain it, and drop a drop or two into the
contrary Ear to the pain, and lie still half an hour after.

49. For a Wen.
Take Black-soap and mix with unslaked Lime, made (...)

50. For the Wind.
Take the Juice of Red Fennel, and make a Posset of Ale therewith, and drink
thereof.

51. For the Dropsy.
Take two Gallons of New Ale, then take Serwel, Calamus, Aromaticus, Galingale,
of each two Penny worth, of Spikenard four Pennyworth, stamp all together, and
put them into a bag, and hang it in the Vessel, and when it is four days old
drink it Morning and Evening.

52. For a scald Head.
Wash thy Head with Vinegar and Camomile stamped and mingled together; there is
no better help for the Scald, or grind white Hellebore with Swines Grease and
apply it to the Head.

53. To make Plague-Water.
Take a handful of Sage, and a handful of Rue, and boil them in three pints of
Malmsey or Muscadine, till one pint be wasted, then take it off the Fire, and
strain the Wine from the Herbs, then put into the Wine two pennyworth of long
Pepper, half an ounce of Ginger, and a quarter of an ounce of Nutmegs, all
grossly bruised, and let it boil a little again. Then take it off the Fire and
dissolve it in half an ounce of good venice-Treacle, and a quarter of an ounce
of Methrido, and put to it a quarter of a pint of strong Angelica water, so
keep it in a Glass close stopped, for your use. This Water cures Smallpox,
Measles, surfeits, and Pestilential-Feavers.

54. A precious Eye-Water.
Take of the best White Wind half a pint, of whiterose-water as much, of the
Water of Celendine, Fennel, Eye bright, and Rue, of each two ounces, of
prepared Tutia six ounces of Cloves as much, sugar Rosate a dram, of Camphire
and Aloes, each half a dram, wash the Eyes therewith.

55. A Cordial Julep.
Take water of Endive, Purslain, and Roses, of each 2 ounces, sorrel water half
a pint, Juice of Pomegranats, and for lack thereof, Vinegar 4 ounces, Camphire
3 drams, sugar 1 pound, boil all these together in the form of a Julep, and
give 3 or 4 ounces thereof at a time.

56. To make Green Ointment.
Take a pound of Swines Grease, 1 ounce of Verdigrease, half a scruple of Sal
Gemmae, this ointment may be kept 40 years, it is good against Cancers and
Running sores, it fretteth away dead flesh, and brings new, and heals old
Wounds, put it within the Wound that it fester not.

57. For Fits of the Mother.
Take a brown Toast of four Bread, of the nether ^rast, and wash it with
Vinegar, and put thereto Black-soap, like as you would butter a Toast, and lay
it under the Navil.

58. For Rickets in Children.
Take of Fennel-seeds and Dill-seeds, but most of the last, boil them in Beer,
and strain it, and sweeten it with Sugar, and let the Child drink often.
Probatum.

59. For the Shingles.
Take the Green leaves of Coltsfoot, stamped and mingled with Honey, apply it,
and it will help.

60. To heal a Fistula or Ulcer.
Take Figs and stamp them, with Sho^-makers Wax, and spread it upon Leather,
and lay it on the Sore, and it will heal.

61. For a Woman in Travail.
Take 7 or 8 leaves of Bettony, a pretty quantity of Germander, a branch or two
of Pennyroyal, 3 Marygolds, a branch or two of Hyssop. boil them all in a pint
of White wine, or Ale, then put into it Sugar and Saffron, and boil it a
quarter of an hour more, and give it to drink warm.

62. To make a Woman be soon delivered, the Child being dead or alive.
Take a good quantity of the best Amber, and beat it exceeding small to powder,
then searce it through a fine piece of Lawn, and so drink it in some Broth or
Caudle, and it will by God's help cause the Patient to be presently delivered.

63. For Infants troubled with wind and Phlegm.
Give them a little pure sugar candy, finely bruised in saxifrage water, or
scabrous water, in a spoon well mingled together.

64. A most excellent Medicine to breed their Teeth easily.
Take of pure Capons Grease very well clarified the quantity of a Nutmeg, and
twice as much of pure Honey, mingle and incorporate them well together, and
anoint the Child's Gums therewith three or four times a day when its Teething,
and they will easily break the Flesh, and prevent Torments and Agues, and other
Griefs which usually accompany their coming forth.

65. For Agues in Children.
Take a spoonful of good Oil of Populeon, and put thereto 2 spoonfuls of good
Oil of Roses, mingle them well together, and then warm them before the Fire,
anoint the Child's Joints and Back, also his Forehead and Temples twice a day,
Chasing the Ointment well in.

66. To cause a young Child to go to stool.
Chafe the Child's Navel with May Butter before the Fire, then take some Black
Wool and dip it in the Butter and lay it to the Navel, and it will procure a
stool; this is also good for one in years, that can take no other Medicine.

67. For Worms in Children.
Take of Myrrh and Aloes very finely powdered, of each a Pennyworth, and put
thereto a few drops of Chemical Oil of Wormwood or savine, and a little
Turpentine; make these up into a Plaster, and lay it to the Child's Navel.

68. To help one that is blasted.
Take the White of an Egg, and beat it in a Mortar, put to it a quarter of an
ounce of Coperas, and grind them well together till it come to an Ointment, and
therewith anoint the sore Face, and it will ease the pain, and take away the
swelling; and when it is well nigh whole, anoint the place with a little
Populeon, and that will make the skin fair and well again.

69. An Excellent salve.
Take a pound of Beeswax, a pint of sallet-oyl, three ounces of Red-Lead, boil
all together in a new earthen Pipkin, keeping it stirring all the while till it
grows of a darkish Color, then keep it for use, or make searcloaths of it
while it is hot.

It is most approved against any Pain, sore, scald, Cut, Burn; to stre^gthen
the Back, or remove any old Ach whatsoever.

70. A Julep of Doctor Trench for the Fits of the Mother.
In the time of the year distill Black Cherry-Water, Piony flower-water,
Cowslip-water, Rue, of Herb-grace-water; then take of the Waters of Cowslip,
Black Cherries, Piony, Rue, of each an ounce, and add to them water of Castor,
half an ounce, of Cinamon-water one dram, Syrup of Clove-gilly flowers three
drams, mix all these together, and take two spoonfuls at a time of it, as often
as you please.

71. For a Tympany.
Take a handful of the blossoms of Marygolds, stamp them, and strain them, and
give the juice thereof to the Patient in a draught of Ale fasting.

72. To provoke Terms, a good Medicine.
Take Wormwood and Rue, of each one handful, with five or six Pepper-corns,
boil them all together in a quart of White Wind, or Malmsey, strain it, and
drink thereof.

73. For the Bloody Flux.
Take a great Apple and cut out the Core, and put therein pure Virgins Wax,
then wet a Paper and lap it therein, then rake it up in the Embers, and let it
roast till it be soft, then eat of it as your stomach will give leave.

74. For a Rheumatick Cough or Cold.
Take a pint of Hyssop-water, Syrup of Gilliflowers, Syrup of Vinegar, Syrup of
Maidenhair, Syrup of Coltsfoot of each an Ounce, mingle all together, and
drink it when you please.

75. To kill a Fellon.
Take an Egg and roast it hard, and take out the Yolk thereof, then roast an
Onion soft, and beat the Yolk and the Onion together, and lay it the sore, and
it will kill the Fellon.

76. For the white Flux.
Take the powder of the flower of Pomegranates, and drink it in Red Wine.

77. For the Red Flux.
Take Sperma Ceti, and drink it, and truss up your self, with a piece of black
Cotton.

78. For the Cancer in a Woman's breast.
Take the Dung of a Goose, and the Juice of Celendine, and bray them well in a
Mortar together, and lay it to the sore, and this will stay the Cancer, and
heal it.

79. For an Ague in the Breast.
Take Grounsel, Dasie-leaves and Roots, and course Wheat sifted, make a
Poultess thereof with the parties own Water, and lay it warm to the Breast.

80. For bleeding at the Nose.
Take Bettony, and stamp it with as much Salt as you can hold betwixt your two
Fingers, and put it into your Nose.

81. For spitting of Blood.
Take Smallage, Rue, Mints, and Bettony, and boil them well in good Milk, and
drink it warm.

82. To stanch the bleeding of a Wound, or at the Nose.
There is no better thing than the powder of Bole-Armoniack, to stanch the
bleeding of a Wound, the powder being laid upon it, or for the Nose, to be
blown in with a Quill. Or take the shavings of Parchment, and lay it to the
wound, and it stancheth and heals.

83. To make the Gascoign Powder.
Take of Pearls, white Amber, Hartshorn, Eyes of Crabs, and White Coral, of
each half an ounce, of black thighs of Crabs calcined, two ounces; to every
ounces of this powder put in a dram of Oriental Bezoar, reduce them all into a
very fine powder, and searce them then with Hartshorn Jelly, and a little
Saffron (...) therein, make it up into paste, and make therewit^ Lozenges, or
Trochises, for your use. Get your Crabs for this powder about May or September,
before they be boiled, dry your Lozenges in the Air, not by Fire nor Sun.

84. For the Megrim or Imposthume in the Head.
Take four penny weight of the Root of Pellitory of Spain, a farthing weight of
spikenard, and boil them in good Vinegar, and when it is cold, put thereto a
spoonful of Honey, and a Saucer-ful of Mustard, and mingle them well together,
and hold thereof in your mouth, a spoonful at once, and use this eight or nine
times, spitting it out continually.

85. For Pain in the Ears.
Take the juice of Wild Cucumbers, and put it into the Ears, and. it assuageth
the Pain. Also put the Wood of Green Ash in the Fire, and save the Liquor that
comes out at the end, and put it into the Ears, it causes the pain to cease,
and amendeth the Hearing; Also beat the juice of Wormwood, and drop it into the
Ears.

86. A precious Water for the Eyesight, made by King Edward the Sixth.
Take Smallage, red Feunel, Rue, Vervain, Bettony, Agrimony, Pimpernel,
Eufrane, Sage, Celendine, of each a little quantity, first wash them clean,
then stamp them, and put them in a brazen pan, with the powder of 14 or 15
Pepper corns, fair searced into a pint of good White Wind, put them into the
Herbs with 3 spoonfuls of Honey, and 5 spoonfuls of the Water of a Man-child
that is sound; mingle all together and boil them over the Fire, and when it is
boiled, strain it through a Cloth; and put it into a Glafs, and stop it well
and close, till you use it, and when you need it, put a little thereof into the
sore Eyes with a Feather, but if it be dry, temper it with White Wind, and it
profits much all manner of sore Eyes; This water was used by King Edward the
Sixth.

87. My Lord Dennies Medicine for the Gout.
Take Burdock leaves and stalks, cut them small and stamp them very small, then
strain them, and cleanse them, and when you have so done put them into Glasses,
and put pure Oil of Olives on the the top of them, and stop it stop it from the
Air, and when you would use it for the Gout, pour in into a Porringer, and warm
it, and wet Linen Cloths in it, and apply it warm to the grieved place,
warming your Cloths one after another as they grow cold that are on.

88. Dr. Steven's Sovereign Water.
Take a Gallon of good Gascoin Wine, then take Ginger, Galingale, Cancel,
Nutmeg, Grains, Cloves, Anni-seed, Carraway-seeds, of each a dram; then take
Sage, Mint, Red Roses, Thyme, Pellitory, Rosemary, Wild Thyme, Camomile,
Lavendar, of each a handful, then bray both Spices and Herbs, and put them all
into the Wine, and let them stand for twelves hours, diverse times stirring
them, then distill in an Alembick. but keep that which you distill first by it
self, for that is the best, but the other is good also, but not so good as the
first. This Water comfort the Vital Spirits, and helps inward diseases,
which come from Cold; it helps Conception in Women that are Barren, and kills
Worms ^n the Body, it cures the old Cough, and helps the Toothache, it
comfort the Stomach, and cures a stinking breath, it preserves the Body in
good liking, and makes them look young.

89. The Water called Aqua Mirabilis and Pretiosa, made by Doctor Willoughby.
Take of Galingales, Cloves, Mace, Cucubes, Ginger, Cardanum, Nutmegs,
Mellilot, saffron, four ounces, and beat all these into powder, Agrimony water
the quantity of a dram; and somewhat more; then take of the juice Celendine
half a pint, and mingle all these together with a pint of good Aqua-Vitae, and
3 pints of White Wind, put all these together in a Still of Glass, and let it
stand all Night, then distill it with an easy Fire. This Water dissolveth the
swelling of the Lungs without any Grievance, and helps and comfort them
being Wounded, and suffers not the Blood to putrify; he shall never need to
be let Blood that uses this Water, it suffers not the Heart to burn, nor
Melancholy nor Rheum to have dominion above Nature; it also expels Rheum,
and purifieth the Stomach.

90. To make Allom-Water.
Take a pound of Allom, and beat it to powder, then take a Gallon of clean
Water, and set it on the fire, letting it boil till all the Allom be melted,
then take it off the Fire, and when it is cold, put it into a Glass, and keep
it for use.

91. To make an Excellent Electuary, called the Electuary of Life.
Take Scorlegio, Morre, Gentiana, Grandoret, and Jalaim, of each a little
quantity, stamp them and mingle them with Honey, that has been well boiled on
the Fire, and scummed clean. This is excellent for Sickness in the Stomach, or
pain in the Belly, Heart, or Head, or for those that are bitten with any
Venomous Beast, or poisoned; it must be taken in water 3 or 4 spoonfuls at a
time, in the Morning fasting; if the Disease be of any long standing, he must
drink it fifteen days, together, and he will be whole.

92. Against Heat of the Liver.
Take Fennel, Endive, Succory, Plantain, of each alike, distill them with Red
Wine and Milk, and use it every Morning, nine spoonfuls at a time, with a
draught of Wine and Sugar, or else five spoonfuls thereof alone.

93. For swooning fits.
For swooning, and weakness of the Heart, in Fever and Sickness, or if it come
from other Cause, stamp Mints with Vinegar, and a little Wine, if the Patient
have no Fever, then toast of bit of Bread, till it almost burnt, and put it
therein till it be well soaked, then put it in the Nose of the Patient, and rub
his Lips, Tongue, Gums, Teeth, and Temples, and let him chew and suck the
moistness thereof, and swallow it.

94. A Water for the Eyes, to make a Man see in forty days, who has been blind
seven Years before, if he be under fifty Years of Age.
Take smalledge, Fennel, Rue, Betony, Vervain, Agrimony, Cinquefoyl, Pimpernel,
Eyebright, Celandine, sage, of each a quartern, wash them clean, and stamp
them, do them in a fair Marshing-pan, put thereto a quart of good White Wind
and the powder of thirty Pepper-corns, 6 spoonfuls of live Honey, and 10
spoonfuls of the Urin of a Man Child that is wholesome, mingle them well
together, and boil them till half be wasted, then take it down and strain it,
and afterward Clarify it, and put it into a Glass Vessel well stopped, and put
thereof with a feather into the Eyes of the Blind, and let the Patient use this
Medicine at night when he goes to Bed, and within forty days he shall see. It
is good for all manner of sore Eyes. Wild-Tansie-water i^ good for the
Eyesight, and eating of Fennel-seed i^ good for the same.

95. For a Web in the Eye.
The Leaves of White-honey-suckles and Ground Ivy, of each a like quantity
ground together, and put every day into the Eye, cures the Web. Or else Salt
burnt in a Flaxen-cloath, and tempered with Honey, and with a Feather anointed
on the Eyelids, kills worm that annoy the Eyelids.

96. For the moist Scabs after the Smallpox.
Take Lapis Calaminaris, Letharge of Gold and Silver of each two drams,
Brimstone and Ceruse two ounces bring all these into a fine Powder, and then
beat then in a Mortar with so much Barrows-grease as is sufficient to make it
up in an Ointment, and anoint the places therewith Evening and Morning.

97. To bring down the flowers.
Take of Alligant, Muscadine, or Claret a pint, burn it, and sweeten it well
with Sugar, put thereto two spoonfuls of Sallet-Oyl; then take a good Bead of
Amber in powder in a spoon, with some of the Wine after it, take this Evening
and Morning.

98. To stay the flowers.
Take Amber, Coral, Pearls, Jeat, or each alike, grind them to a fine powder,
and serse them, take as much as will upon a six pence with Conserve of Quinces,
and drink a draught of New Milk after it: Use this every Morning.

99. To Cure Corns.
Take Beans and chew them in your Mouth, and tie it fast to your Corn, and it
will help: Do this at Night.

100. To make Oil of Roses.
Take red Rose-leaves a good quantity, and stamp 'em in a Mortar, and put
thereto Oyl-Olive, and let it stand in the Sun 12 days, and then put it in a
Glass, and bind the Glass fast about with Ropes of Hay, and set it in a Pan
full of Water, and let it boil sortly two hours, and then let it cool, then put
it in small Glasses, and put thereto the leaves of Red Roses all whole, and
stop it fast, and set it in the Sun for sixteen days, and so use it at your
need.

101. For any Itch, or Breaking out.
Take Frankincense, and beat it small in a Mortar, and mingle it with Oil of
Bays, and therewith anoint all over, and it will destroy the Itch.

102. For the Piles after Childbirth.
Make a Bath of Wormwood, Southern-wood, Cinnamon Rhind, and the bark of Cassia
Fistula boiled well in Wine; when the woman delivered goes forth of the Bath,
put Bombace, or Cotton with powder of Alloes, mixed with Oil of Peny-royal,
unto her lower parts.

103. For a stitch in the side.
Take three handfuls of Mallows, boil them in a little raw Milk, and put
thereto a handful of Wheatbran, and let them boil together, and then wring out
the Milk, and lay it hot to the Stitch, apply it often: Or take a few leaves of
Rue and Yarrow, stamp them together, and wring out the Juice and drink it with
a little Ale.

104. For a Tertian, or double Tertian Ague.
Take a good quantity of Celandine, a spoonful of salt and the bigness of an
Egg in Leven, and as much Abgant and spanish soap, stamp them well in a Morta^
and make a Plaster of them, and apply them to the Patients Feet one hour
before the coming of the F^^^ add thereto 4 or 5 yolks of Eggs: Or take of Am^
seed-water the best as you can get, half a pound of O^^ of Vitriol, shake them
well together, and drink one (...) two spoonfuls thereof an hour before the Fit
come^

105. For the spleen.
Boil the Rhinds and Keys of an Ash tree very tend^ in White Wind, and drink a
good draught thereof for 6 (...) 7 Mornings together, and it will much ease the
Pa^^ent; when you drink this, anoint the spleen with V^guentum Dialthea, every
Morning and Evening, appl^ing also a Plaster of Mellilot to the place.

106. An Excellent Powder for the Green Sickness.
Take 4 scruples of Gentian made into fine Powder rasp Ivory and Harts-born, of
each 2 scruples; make the into fine Powder, give a spoonful hereof, with
Whi^^wine, or the like, at once.

107. A drink that heals all Wounds without any Plasters or Ointment, or
without any Taint, most perfectly.
Take Sanicle, Milfoil, and Bugle, of each a like qu^tity, stamp them in a
Mortar, and temper them wi^^ Wine, and give the Person wounded to drink twice
(...) thrice a day, till he be whole; Bugle holds open t^^ Wound, Milfoil
cleanses the Wound, and sanicle hea^eth it; but sanicle may not be given to
him that is (...) in the Head, or in the Brain pan, for it is ange^^^ This is a
good and tried Medicine.

108. For Pricking of a Thorn.
Take of Violet-leaves one handful, stamp them to^^ther, and take a quantity of
Boars-grease, and of Wh^^ bran one handful, set it on the Fire in clean Water,
(...) make a Plaster thereof, and lay it to the Grief.

109. To make Oil of St. John 's Wort, good for any Ach or Pain.
Take a quart Sallet-Oyl, and put thereto a quart of Flowers of St. John's Wort
well picked, let them lie therein all the Summer, till the Seeds of the Herb be
Ripe, the Glass must be kept warm, either in the Sun or the Water, all the
Summer, till the Seeds be Ripe, then put in a quarter of St. John's Wort Seeds
whole, and so let it stand 12 hours, the Glass being kept open, then you must
boil the Oil 8 hours, the Water in the Pot full as high as the Oil in the
Glass, when it is cold strain it, that the Seed remain not in it, and so keep
it for your use.

110. For the Ptisick.
Take 2 ounces of Liquorish scraped and bruised, of Figs 3 ounces, of Agrimony,
Horehound, Enula Campana, of each a handful, boil them all together in a Gallon
of Water, till half be wasted, then strain the Herbs from the Juice, and use it
early and late. Also for the dry Ptisick, stamp Fennel-roots, and drink the
Juice thereof with White Wind.

111. To make Oil of Fennel.
Put a quantity of Fennel between 2 Tile-stones, or Plates of Iron, make them
very hot, and press out the Liquor; and this Oil will keep a great while, for
it is good for the Ptisick, dry Scab, Burning and Scalding.

112. To make the black Plaster for all manner of Griefs.
Take a quantity of Oyl-Olive, a quantity of Red Lead, boil these together, and
stir them with a slice of Wood continually; till it be black and somewhat
thick; then take it off the Fire, and put into it a pennyworth of Red-Wax, and
a pound of Rosin, and set it to the Fire again, but do not blaze it, and stir
it, then take it off, and let it stand till it be cold, and make it into a
Lump. It is good for a new Wound, or to staunch Blood, pour a little of it in a
Dish, and if it stick fast to the Dish's side, then it is enough, keep it for
your use as need Requires.

Directions for Nurses.
LET there be given unto the Infant new born, Honey to lick, after let it be
nourished with the Mother's Milk, which of all things best agrees with it: But
if by reason of some necessity it cannot enjoy it, a sound healthy Nurse is to
be chosen, neither younger than 24 Years, nor elder than five and thirty, of a
white and ruddy Complexion, which is not infected with other Vices, nor yet
has too lately been brought to Bed, nor has not long given Suck; let her not
have sore Dugs or Breasts, nor too big, but a large Breast, and moderately Fat.
Let her use choice Meats, of easy and light Concoction, engendring good blood
or juice; let her abstain from hot aromatical Spices, as Pepper, Ginger,
Cardamum, and such like; also from Leeks, Onions, Garlic, Salt, austere and
tart things; Let her avoid strong Wines, as also cold Water: Let her eschew
immoderate eating and drinking, for that corrupts the Milk, and begets in
Children leprosy or scurf, and other contagious Diseases: Let her abstain from
Cares and Vexations, and let her take heed, lest she provoke her menstruous
Disease.

She must not Sleep much, or be given to Sleep, for that makes the Milk
Phlegmatic; she ought not to watch more than is meet, for from hence the Milk
comes to be more hot, sharp, and distastful to the Infant; she ought
moderately to exercise her self, especially her Arms, to wit, either in sowing,
spinning, or knitting for by this means evil humors are consumed, as by ease
and sloth they are augmented.

Also Copulation of the Nurse exceedingly offends, and hurts the Child, as
that which chiefly retracteth and deminisheth the Milk, and m^keth it of an
unfavory Taste, tasting hot and rank, or Goatish, which brings no small
inconvenience, and hurt to the Child.

But if the Milk decrease, Pultesses of Bean-meal, Rice, are meet to be used,
also like Paps ma^e of Bread, with Milk and Sugar, to which may be added a
little (...)

And if the Milk be thick, it must be made thin with slender Diet, and subtle
Wine, and Syrup of Vinegar, as also with exercises: But if it be too thin and
waterish, gross and strong Meats, and longer Sleeps, will be convenient. For
the Corruption of the Milk, a little Mugwort grossly bruised, and put into a
linen Cloth, and so into Broth, with a little Honey added thereto, will do
very much good.

The care of the Infant.
And if the Child's Belly be loose, the Food ought to be the more gross and
strong, and her Sleep longer; but Children may suck so long as till they have
brought forth sharp and great Teeth; but if you suffer them to drink Wine or
strong drink, or other Potions, before they have toothed them, they will be
corrupted; but when they have gotten the Teeth, their Arms and backbones are
gently to be rubbed after their Sleep.

And it is not of little concernment in what Swadlingcloaths Children are
wrapped; for when they are not tied up at all, or the Clouts are too loose,
they are subject to Fluxes, Imposthumes, apt to be crooked backed, and other
discommodities; but especially when their Knees are too strictly tied and bound
up, and their Thighs left at liberty, they are lamed.

When they cry, or feel pain, or will sleep, they are to be pacified, either by
showing the Breast, or Singing, or by Rocking, either in Cradles or
Hanging-beds, carrying up and down: But we must observe, that Children may lie
strait whenever they lie down, and ought not to be covered too much, or hot
with coverings, nor yet with too few, lest they may catch cold: Moreover, let
the Linen Cloth wherein they are wrapped, be neat and clean, for Children are
offended and insected by foul and filthy Excrements.

From three Years of Age till the seventh, they are to be Educated gently and
kindly, not to be severely reprehended, chidden or beaten, for by that means
they are made throughout their whole Life after, too timorous, or too much
terrified, astonished, and sottted.

Being yet in their first Years, they are not to be compelled to going, for
seeing all their bones are soft as Wax, and their body fall the heavier, they
either become lame, or universally resolved in their Feet.

Food must be daily given them thrice a day, till they are 3 Years old; for if
they be much filled, they are subject and accustomed to be troubled with
Convulsions, and other Diseases.

In the sixth or seventh Year of their Age, they are to be sent to School, and
committed to the breeding and instruction of courteous and temperate
Schoolmasters, who may not terrify them.

Before these Years, they are not to be compelled or forced to hard Labors,
otherwise they will not thrive well, but stand at a stay and keep little, or
else become Dwarfs.

When as the Infant begins to grow sick, as for example, from a cold
Disease, the Nurse is to be nourished with hot and dry Meat and Drink, so that
thereby forthwith it may grow well again; so also if it be taken with other
Diseases, as with an Ague, the Nurse shall use Plantain-water, and such like
things. Paps made for Children of Crumbs, or Morsels of Bread broken or sliced,
are more wholesome than made of Meal or Flower.

Till 2 Years old give them Honey often, for that keeps them from
Convulsions, and Costiveness of the Belly, and that the Milk they eat hurt them
not.

When Infants cast up their Milk, a Corral should be hung about their Neck,
down to their middle; for it is useful for them in teething; and Ivory also is
good for the same purpose.

What is to be Administered unto the Child after it is Born, for the first thing
it takes.
ARnoldus de villa Nova, a most Learned Physician, writes, That if you give
unto a Child half a scruple of Coral, finely powdered with Woman's Milk first,
before it takes any other thing, after it is Born, that it shall never be
troubled with the Falling Sickness.

Also, I know Persons of good Quality in England, who give unto all their own
Children (and advise all other Women, where they are desired to be assistant at
the Birth, to exhibit unto the Children Newborn, the first thing they take) a
little Salt, well mingled in a spoonful of Saxifrage, or Hysop-water, to
prevent the trouble of Frets, and other Diseases in Children following their
Birth.

For Infants troubled with Wind and Phlegm.
Many Midwives advise the Nurses, to give them a little pure Sugar Candy,
finely bruised in Saxifrage-water, or Scabious-water, in a Spoon, well mingled
together.

A most excellent Medicine, to cause Children to Teeth easily.
Take of pure Capon's-grease very well Clarified, the quantity of a Nutmeg, and
twice as much of pure Honey, mingle and incorporate them well together, and 3
or 4 times in a day anoint the Child's Gums when they are Teething, and they
will break Flesh easily, and prevent Torments and Agues, and other Griefs,
which usually accompany their coming forth.

To cause a young Child to go to Stool.
Take a good big green Mallow Sprig, and strip off the outward Skin, and anoint
the Sprig well with fresh Butter, and put it up into the Child's Fundament, and
let it stay a while there, and in a very short time it will procure a Stool.

For an Ague.
Take the Herb called Hartshorn, stamp it, then mingle it with Bay Salt, and 3
or 4 hours before the Fit comes, apply it, spread upon a Linen Cloth, to the
Child's Wrists, and when the Fit is past, apply a fresh one before the next
Fit, and in a few Fits (God willing) it shall be cured.

Beautifying Waters, Oils, Ointments, and Pouders to Adorn and add Loveliness
to the Face and Body.
1. To make the Hair very Fair.
WASH your Hair very Clean, and then take some Alom Water warm, and with a
Sponge moisten your Hair therewith, and it will make it Fair.

2. Another.
Take the last Water that is drawn from Honey, and wash your Head therewith,
and it will make the Hair of an excellent fair Color, but because it is of a
strong smell, you must Perfume it with some sweet Spirit.

3. To make the Hair grow thick.
Make a strong Lie, then take a good quantity of Hyssop Roots, and Burn them to
Ashes, and Mingle the Ash and Lie together, and therewith wash your Head, and
it will make the Hair grow; also the Ashes of Frogs Burnt, do increase Hair, as
also the Ashes of Goats-dung Mingled with Oil.

4. To make the Hair Grow.
Take Marshmallows, and Boil them, Roots and all, and wash the Head therewith,
and it will grow in a short time; also take a good quantity of Bees, and dry
them in a Sieve, by the Fire, and make Powder of them, and Temper it with
Oyl-Olive, and Anoint the place where the Hair should grow; also take the Oil
of Tartar, and warm it, and Anoint any Bald-Head therewith, and it will Restore
the Hair in a short time.

5. To make the Hair Fair.
Take the Ashes of a Vine Burnt, of the Knots of Barley-Straw, and Licorice,
and Sow-bread, and Distill them together in Fair Water, and wash the Head with
it; also sprinkle the Hair while it is Combing, with the Powder of Cloves,
Roses, Nutmegs, Cardamum, and Galingale, with Rose water; also the Head being
washed with the Decoction of Beech-Nut-Trees, the Hair will become Fair.

6. To make the Hair Grow.
Take Hasle-Nuts with Husks and all, and Burn them to Powder, then take
Beech-mast, and the Leaves of Enula Campana, and stamp the Herb and them
altogether, then Sees them together with Honey, and Anoint the place
therewith, and strew the Powder thereon, and this will make the Hair Grow.

7. To take away Hair.
Take the Juice of Fumitory, mix it with Gum-Arabick, then Lay it on the place,
the Hairs first Plucked out by the Roots, and it will never permit any more
Hair to Grow on the place. Also Anoint your Head with the Juice of a Glo-worm
Stamped, and it has the same Virtue.

8. For the falling of Hair
Take the Ashes of Pidgeons-dung in Lie, and wash the Head therewith, also
Walnut-leaves, beaten with Bears-Suet, restores the Hair that is plucked away.

2. To make the Face fair.
Take the Flower of Beans and distill them, wash the Face with the Water.

10. For cleansing the Skin.
If the Face be washed with the Water that Rice is sodden in, it cleanses the
Face, and takes away Pimples.

11. A Water to Adorn the Face.
Take Eggs cut in pieces, Orange-peels, the Roots of Melons, each as much as is
sufficient, in a large Vessel, with a long Neck, distill it by an Alimbeck, with
a strong and careful Fire.

12. To Beautify the face.
Take of Cuckow-pintle a pretty Quantity, Bruise the thick parts with
Rose Water, dry them by the Sun 3 or 4 days, then pouring more Rost-water on
it, use it.

13 To make the face look Youthful.
Take two Ounces of Aquavita, Bean-flower-water, and Rose wate^ each 4 Ounces,
Water of Water Lillies 6 ounces, mix them all, and add to them one dram of the
whitest Tragacanth, set it in the Sun 6 days, then strain it through a fine
Linen Cloth: Wash your Face with it in the Morning, and do not wipe it off.

14. A Water to take away Wrinkles in the face.
Take of the Decoction of Briony and Figgs, each a like quantity, and wash the
Face with it.

15: An excellent Water called Lack Virginis, or Virginis Milk, to make the
face, Neck, or any part of the Body fair and White.
Take of Alumen, Plumosi, half an Ounce, and also add thereto of Camphire one
Ounce, of Roch-Allom one Ounce, and a Dram, Sal Gemmi half an Ounce, of White
Frankincense 2 Ounces, Oil of Tartar one Ounce, and a half, make all these into
most fine Powder, and mix it with one quart of Rose Water, set it in the Sun,
and let it stand 9 days, often stirring it, then take Lethagge of Silver, half
a pound, beat it fine and Searse it, then Boil it with one pint of White Wind
Vinegar, till 1 third be Consumed, ever stirring it with a Stick, while it
Boyleth, then distill it by a Philter, or let it run through a Jelly-bag, then
keep it in a Glass Vial, and when you will use those Waters, take a drop of the
one, and a drop of the other in your Hand, and it will be like Milk, which is
called La^ Virginis; wash your Face, or any part of your Body therewith, it is
most precious for the same.

16. To take away Sun-burn.
Take the Juice of Lemon, and a little Bay Salt, and wash your Face or Hands
with it, and let them dry of themselves, and wash them again, and you shall
find all the Sun-burn gone.

17. To make the face fair.
Boil the Flowers of a Rosemary in White Wind, with which wash your Face.

18. To Clear the Skin, and make it White.
Take fresh Boars grease, and the white of an Egg, and Stamp them together with
a little Powder of Bays, and therewith Anoint the Skin, and it will clear the
Visage, and make it White.

19. To take away freckles in the face.
Anoint your Face with Oil of Almonds, and drink Plantain-water, or Anoint your
Visage well and often with Hairs Blood.

20. To Smooth the Skin.
Mix Capon's grease with a quantity of Sugar, and let it stand a few days close
Covered, and it will turn to a clear Oil, with which Anoint your Face.

21. To Blanch the face.
Take the Pulp of Lemons, and take out the Kernels, and put to them a quantity
of fine Sugar; Distill these, and keep the Water to wash your Face every Night.

22. To take away the Holes or Pits in the face, by reason of the Smallpox.
For helping of this Accident I have tried many things, and the best means I
have found, is to Wash the Face one day with the distilled water of strong
Vinegar, and the next day with the Water wherein Bran and Mallows have been
Boiled, and continue this 20 days or a Month together.

23. For the Redness of the Hands or the face, after the Smallpox.
Take Barley, Beans, Lupines, of each one. Handful, bruise them all in a Mortar
grossly, and Boil them in 3 pints of Water, till it grow thick like a Jelly,
then strain it, and Anoint the Face and hands three or 4 times a day, for 3 or
4 days together, and then Wet the Face and Hands as often with this Water
following.

24. Another.
Take Vine-leaves 2 Handfuls, Bean-flower, Dragon, Wild Tansie, of either one
Handful, Camphire 3 Drams, 2 Calves Feet, the Pulp of 3 Lemons, a pint of Row
Gream, Shred the Herbs small, as also the Lemons, and Break, and Cu^ the
Calves-feet small; then mix them together, and distill it in a Glafs-Still, and
use it. Also the Water of May-dew is excellent good for an high Color, or
Redness in the Face.

25. For Pimples in the face
Wash your Face with Warm Water when you got Bed, and let it dry; Then take the
white of an Egg, and put it into a Saucer, and set it upon a Chafing Dish of
Coals, and put it into a piece of Allom; beat it together with a Spoon, till it
become thick, then make a Round Ball, and therewith Anoint the Face where the
Pimples are.

26. For Morphew, or Scurf, of the face or Skin.
Take of Brimstone beaten into Powder 2 Ounces, mix it with as much black Soap
that stinketh, and tie the same in a Linen Cloth, and let it hang in a pint of
strong Wine-Vinegar, or Red-Rose-Vinegar, for the Space of 8 or 9 Days, and
wash the Scurf, dipping the Cloth in the Vinegar, Rubbing it therewith, and let
it dry of it self.

27. For heat and swelling in the face.
Boil the leaves or blossoms of Rosemary, either in White Wind, or fair water,
and use to wash thy hands and face therewith, and it will preserve thee from
all such inconveniences, and also make both thy face and hands very smooth.

28. For a Red face.
Take Brimstone that is whole, and Cinnamon, of either of them an even
proportion by wight, beat them into small powder, and searse it through a fine
cloth upon a sheet of white Paper, to the quantity of an ounce or more, and so
by even proportions in weight, mingle them together in clean clarified Capons
grease, and temper them well together till they be well mollified, and put to
it a little Camphire to the quantity of a Bean, and so put the whole Confection
into a Glass and use it.

29. To take away Pimples.
Take Wheat Flour mingled with Honey, and Vinegar, and lay it upon them.

30. An Excellent Ointment for an inflamed Face.
Take an ounce of the Oil of Bays, and an ounce of Quicksilver, and put them
in a Bladder together with a spoonful of fasting spittle, and then rub them
well together, that none of the quicksilver be seen, take this Ointment* when
it is made, and anoint the face therewith, and ^t will heal it well and fair,
Proved true.

31. For a rich face.
Take 3 yolks of Eggs raw, as much in quantity of fresh butter, or Capons
grease without salt, Camphire two penny worth, Red Rose Water half a pint, two
Grains of Civet, and boil all these together in a Dish, then strain them
through a clean Cloth, and set it to cool, and take the uppermost, and use it.

32. To make the Skin white and clear
Boil two ounces of French Barley in three pints of Conduit water, change the
water and put in the Barley again; and do this till your Barley do not
discolor the Water, then boil the last three pints to a quart, then mix half a
pint of White Wind therein, and when it is cold, wring the juice of 2 or 3 good
Lemons therein, and use it for the Morphew, heat of the Face, and to clear the
Skin.

33. An excellent Pomatum to clear the Skin.
Wash Barrows-grease or Lard oftentimes in May dew, that has been clarified in
the Sun till it be exceeding white; then take Marsh-Mallow-roots, scraping off
the outsides, make thin slices of them, and mix them, set them to macerate in
a Balneo, and scum it till it be clarified, and will come to rope, then strain
it, and put now and then a spoonful of May dew therein, beating it till it be
thorough cold in often change of May-dew, then throw away that dew, and put it
in a Glass, covering it with May-dew, and so keep it for your use.

34. To take away Spots and freckles from the face and Hands.
The Sap that issues out of a Birch-tree in great abundance, being opened in
March or April and a Glass Receiver set under it to receive it: This cleanses
the Skin excellently, and makes it very clear being washed therewith. This Sap
will dissolve Pearl, a Secret not known to many.

35. To take away freckles and Morphew.
Wash your face in the wain of the Moon with a Sponge, Morning and Evening with
distilled water of Elder-leaves, letting it dry on the Skin; you must Distill
your Water in May. This I had from a Traveller, who has cured himself thereby.

36. To make the Teeth White and Sound.
Take quart of Honey, and as much Vinegar, and half so much White Wind, boil
them together, and wash your Teeth therewith now and then.

37. A Dentifrice to whiten the Teeth.
Take of Hartshorn and Horses teeth, of each 2 ounces, Sea shells, common
Salt, Cypress-Nuts, each 1 ounce, burn them together in an Oven, and make a
powder, and work it up with the Mucilage of Gum Tragagant, and rub the Teeth
therewith.

38. To make the Teeth as white as Ivory.
Take Rosemary, Sage, and little Allom and Honey, and boil them together in
fair Running water, and when it is well boiled strain out the fair water, and
keep it in a Glass, and use it sometimes to wash your Mouth and Teeth
therewith, and it will make them clean: Also wash your Teeth with the Decoction
of Lady Thistle-Root, and it will cleanse and fasten the Teeth, and the sore
Gums make whole: also the Root of Hore-hound drunk or chewed fasting, does
quickly heal the Gums, and makes the Teeth clean; Strawberry-leaves also
cleanses the Teeth and Gums, a sure and tried Experiment.

39. To make the Teeth White.
Take one drop of the Oil Vitriol, and wet the Teeth with it, and rub them
afterward with a course Cloth; although this Medicine be strong, fear it not.

40. For a stinking Breath.
Take two handfuls of Cummin, and stamp it to powder, and boil it in Wine, and
drink the Syrup thereof Morning and Evening for fifteen days, and it will help.
D^^red.

41. To make Breath sweet.
Wash your Mouth with the Water that the Shells of Citrons have been boiled in,
and you will have a sweet Breath.

42. To sweeten the Breath.
Take Butter and the juice of Featherfew, and temper them with Honey, and take
every day a spoonful. Also these things sweeten the Breath, the Electuary of
Aromaticks, and the peel of Citrons.

43. To cleanse the Mouth.
It is good to cleanse the Mouth every Morning by rubbing the Teeth with a Sage
leaf, Citron peels or with powder made with Cloves and Nutmegs; forbear all
Meats of ill Digestion, and raw fruits.

44. For running in the Ears.
Take the juice of Elder and drop it into the Ear of the party grieved, and it
cleanses the Matter and the Filth thereof, also the juice of Violets used, is
very good for the Running of the Ears.

45. For Eyes that are Blood-shot.
Take the roots of Red Fennel, stamp them, and wring out the juice, then temper
it with Clarified Honey, and make an Ointment thereof, and anoint the Eyes
therewith, and it with take away the Redness.

46. To make the Hands White.
Take the flower of Beans, of Lupines, of Starch-Corn, Rice, Orice, of each six
ounces, mix them and make a powder, with which wash your hands in Water.

47. A delicate Washing-ball.
Take 3 ounces of Orice, half an ounce of Cypress, two ounces of Calamus
Aromaticus, 1 ounce of Rose-leaves, (...) ounces of Lavender-flowers; beat all
these together in a Mortar, searsing them through a fine searse, then scrape
some Castle soap, and dissolve it in Rose Water, mix your powders therewith,
and beat them in a Mortar, then make them up in Balls.

48. For the Lips chopped.
Rub them with the Sweat behind your Ears, and this will make them smooth and
well colored.

49. To prevent marks of the Smallpox.
Boil Cream to an Oil, and with that anoint the whales with a Feather as soon
as they begin to dry and keep the Scabs always moist therewith; let your face
be anointed almost every half ho^r.

50. To take away Child-blains in hand or feet.
Boil half a peck of Oats in a quart of Water till its dry, then anoint your
Hands with Pomatum, and after they are well Chased, hold them within the Oats
as hot as you can endure them, covering the bowl wherein you do your hands with
a double cloth to keep in the stem of the Oats, do this 3 or 4 times and it
will do.

51. To take away Pock-holes or Spots in the Face.
Wet a Cloth in White-Rose-water, and set it all night to freeze in the
winter, then lay it upon your Face till it be dry, also take 2 or 3 Poppies,
the reddest you can get, and quarter them, taking out the Kernel, distill them
in a quart of Red-Cows-Milk, and with the water wash your Face.

54. An excellent Beauty Water used by the D. of C.
Take of white Tartar 2 drams, Camphire 1 dram, Coperas half a dram, the whites
of 3 or 4. Eggs, the juice of a couple of Lemons; Oil of Tartar 4 ounces, and
as much Plantain-water, white Mercury a pennyworth, 2 ounces of bitter
Almonds; beat all these to powder, and mix them with the Oil and some Water,
and then boil it upon a gentle Fire, strain it, and so keep it; when you use
it, you must rub your face with a Scarlet cloth, and at Night wash your face
with it, and in the Morning wash it off with Bran and Whitewine.

53. Against a stinking Breath.
Take a handful of Wood bine, and as much Plantain, bruise them very well, then
take a pint of Eyeselt, and as much water, with a little Honey and Allom; keep
all these waters together in a Glass, and wash your mouth well therewith, and
hold it in your Mouth, and it will destroy all Cankers, and Cure a Stinking
Breath, and preserve the Teeth from Rottenness.

54. To Procure an Excellent Color and Complexion to the Face used by the C.
of S.
Take juice of Hyssop, and drink it in a Morning fasting, half a dozen
Spoonfuls in Ale warm, it will procure an excellent color, is good for the
Eyesight, destroys Worms, and is good for the Stomach, Liver, and Lungs.

55. To keep the Teeth white, and kill Worms.
Take a little Salt in a Morning fasting, and hold it under your Tongue till it
be melted, and then rub your Teeth with it.

56. To procute Beauty, an Excellent Wash.
Take 4 ounces of Sublimate, and one ounce of Crude-Mercury, and beat them
together exceeding well in a Wooden Mortar, and Wooden Pestle; you must do it
at least 6 or 8 hours, then with often change of cold Water, take away the
Salts from the Sublimate, change your Water twice every day at least, and in 7
or 8 days it will be dulcified, and then it is prepared; lay it on with Oil of
white Poppy.

57. A beauty-water for the face, by Madam G.
Take Lie that is not too strong, and put 2 pee^s of Oranges, and as much
Citron-peel, Blossoms of Camomile, Bay Leaves, and Maidenhair, of each a
handful, of Agrimony, 2 or 3 ounces, of barly-straw chopped in pieces a handful,
as much Fenugreek, a pint of Vine-leaves, 2 or 3 handfuls of Broom-blossoms;
put all these into the lie, and mingle them together, and so wash the Head
therewith, put to it a little Cinnamon and Myrrh, let it stand, and wash your
face therewith every Evening. It is good to wash the Head, and to comfort the
Brain and Memory.

58. Against stink of the Nostrils.
Take Cloves, Ginger, and Calamint, of each a like quantity, boil them in
White Wind, and therewith wash the Nose within; then put the powder of Piritrum
to provoke one to sneeze, If there be Phlegm in the head, you must purge the
Head with Pills of Colchie, or of Hiera-picra: Or if the stink of the Nose come
from the Stomach, Purge first.

59. To make the Hands white.
To make the Hands White and Soft, take Daffodil in clean Water till it grow
thick, and put thereto powder of Centarium, and stir them together, and put
thereto raw Eggs, and stir them well together, and with this Ointment anoint
your hands, and within three or four days using thereof, they will be white and
clear.

60. A sweet Water for the Hands.
Take of the Oil of Cloves, Mace or Nutmegs, 3 or 4 drops only, and mingle it
with a pint of fair water, stirring them a pretty while together in a Glass,
having a narrow Mouth, till they are well mingled together, and it will be very
sweet water, and will cleanse and whiten the Hands very much.

61. For Heat and Worms in the Hands.
Bruise a little Chick-weed, and boil it in running water, till half be wasted
away, and wash your Hands in it as hot as you can suffer it, for the space of
six days, and it will drive away the Heat or Worms in the Hands.

62. To make the Nails grow.
Take wheat flour and mingle it with Honey, and lay it to the Nails, and it
will help them.

63. For Nails that fall off.
Take Powder of Agrimony, and lay it on the place where the Nail was, and it
will take away the Aching, and make Nails grow.

64. For Cloven Nails.
Mingle Turpentine and Wax together, and lay it on the Nail, as it grows cut
it, and it will heal.

65. For Nails that are rent from the flesh.
Take some Violets and stamp them, and fry them with Virgins Wax and
Frankincense, and make a plaster, lay it to the Nail, and it will be whole.

66. Another.
Anoint your fingers with the ponders of brimstone, Arsnick, and Vinegar, and
you shall find great ease.

67. For Stench under the Arm-holds.
First pluck away the Hairs of the Arm holes, and wash them with White Wind and
Rose Water, wherein you have first boiled Cassia Lignum, and use it 3 or 4
times.

63. For the Yellow Jaundice.
Take the Juice Wormwood, and Sorrel, or else make them in Syrup, and drink it
at Morning.

69. To take away Warts from the hands or face.
Take Purslain, and rub it on the Warts, and it makes them fall away; also the
juice of the Roots of Rushes applied heals them.

70. To smooth the skin from Morphew and Freckles.
Anoint the Face with the Blood of a Hare or Bull, and this will take away
Morphew, and Freckles, and smooth the Skin.

71. For taking away Spots in the face, after the Smallpox.
Mix the juice of Lemons with a little bay salt, and touch the spots therewith
oftentimes in a day, for it is excellent good.

72. A good Ointment for the same.
Take Oil of sweet Almonds, Oil of White Lillies, of either one ounce; Capons
grease, Goats tallow, of each 4 drams, Litharge of Gold one dram and a half,
Roots of Briony and Ireos, of either one scruple, Sugar Candy white one dram,
make powder of all those that may be brought into powder, and searce them, then
put them all in a Mortar together, beat them together, and in the working put
thereto Roses, Beanflower, and white Lilly-water, of each a good spoonful, put
in by little and little, and so work them together till they become an
Ointment; anoint your face; and hands with it every Evening, and in the Morning
wash it away in water boiled with Barley, Wheaten bran, and with the seed of
Mallows.

73. A beauty water.
Take of Bean-flowers 6 handfuls, Lemon-water one pint, Lilly-roots 8 ounces,
Bean-flower a pound, Gum Arabic and Tragacanth of each one ounce, distill all
these together, and wash the face therewith.

74. Another, Approved.
Take of distilled Turpentine 2 pound, frankincense 3 ounces, Mastick,
Dragon's-blood, of each half an ounce, powder them, and mix them with
Turpentine-water, and distill them again, then take of fresh hog's grease melted
one pound, 2 drams of Cloves, 3 Nutmegs, Gold one dram, Silver 2 drams, powder
them finely, and distill them in an Alembick.

75, To take away freckles and scars in the face.
Take of Aque-vitae four times distilled 3 parts, the tops of Rosemary-flowers
2 parts, steep them together a day and a night, in a vessel well stopped, then
distill them.

76. To make the face fresh and ruddy.
Use the Shavings of Brazeel-wood dissolved in Rose Water, with a little
Camphire added thereto, and you will find it very effectual to make a good
Color and Complexion.

77. To make the face Youthful.
Take 2 Calves feet, River-water 9 Quarts, boil them till one half be wasted,
then add 1 pound of Rice, the Crumb of a Penny-loaf softened in Milk, fresh
Butter, whites of Eggs with their shells, mix them all, and boil them, and
distill all the water from them, to which add at last Camphire, and Sugar, each
a little, and it will be excellent.

87. A Water to whiten the Skin, and take away Sunburn.
Take of Rainwater, the juice of unripe Grapes, each a like quantity, boil
them together till one half be consumed, then whilst it boyls, add so much
juice of Lemons as was boiled away before, when it is boiled then take it off,
and add 4 whites of Eggs after it is cold, and keep it for use.

79. To clear the face.
Take of Lilly-roots roots roasted under the Ashes, one pound, bruise them in a
Mortar, to which add Sugar Candy 3 ounces, make an Ointment to apply to the
Face.

80. To take away Ring-worms in the face.
Take of Vinegar of Squills 2 ounces, Aloes, the juice of sower Dock; Oil of
Tarter, of each 3 drams, make a Leniment.

81. An Ointment for beautifying the face.
Take of Citron Ointment fresh made 3 ounces, sweet Almonds, very well bruised,
flower of Beans, of each 1 dram* the bone of the Fish sepia, Hartshorn,
Barley-flower, each two drams, incorporate them all with Honey.

82. Another excellent beautifier.
Take of Pomatum 2 ounces, Citron Ointment 4 Ounces, mix and anoint the Face
therewith Night and Morning, and afterward wash your Face with
Bean-flower-water.

83. An Ointment to illustrate the face.
Take the Oil of the Marrow of a Heart 2 ounces, Oil of Gourd-seed 1 ounce,
Goats-fat, washed Turpentine, each half an Ounce, new Wax 3 drams, melt them by
the fire, then add Mastick, Borax burnt, each two drams, mix them and make an
Unguent, with which anoint the face at Night, and in the Morning wash it off
with bran-water.

84. To Curl the hair.
Take a quantity of Pine-Kernels burnt and beat to powder, mix them with Oil of
Myrtles, make an Ointment therewith, and anoint the Head.

15. To make the hair black.
Take the juice of Red Poppy, the juice of Green Nuts, Oil of Myrtles, Oil of
Costomary, each one part, boil it a while, and anoint the Hair therewith.

86. An Excellent beautifier for the face, used by the Venetian Ladies.
Take of burnt Tartar half a pound, powder it and dry it as they do Salt, then
take that Salt, and put it within the whites of Eggs boiled.

87. To cure a Red face.
Take 4 ounces of Peach-Kernels, Goard-seed, two Ounces, bruise them, and make
an Oil to anoint the Face Morning and Evening.

88. To increase the hair.
Take the Seeds of Marsh mallows a sufficient quantity, boil them in common
Oil, with which anoint the Hair. Also the Oil of Earthworms does increase the
Hair.

89. To make the Breasts small.
Take of Roch Allom powdered, and Oil of Roses of each a like quantity, mix
them together, and anoint the Breasts therewith.

90. To take away the wrinkles of the face.
Take Oil of Turkey-millet, and the decoction of the Berry of the same, and it
will mollify and consolidate Wrinkles. Also Oil of Nuts is very good for the
same.

91. To cleanse the Body and make it comely.
Take of Sage, Lavendar-flowers, Rose-flowers, each two handfuls, a little
Salt, boil them in Water or in Lie, and make a Bath not too hot, in which bathe
the Body 2 hours before Meat.

92. A Sweet-scented Bath for Ladies.
Take of Roses, Citron-peels, Citron-flowers, Orange-flowers, Jasimine, bays,
Rosemary, Lavender, Mint, Pennyroyal, of each a sufficient quantity, boil them
together gently, and make a bath, to which add Oil of Spike 6 drops, Musk 5
grains, Ambergrease 3 grains, sweet Asa 1 ounce, let her go into the bath 2
hours before Meat.

93. To make the body fat and comely.
Take of Milk and Spring Water each one pint, boil them together till the Water
be consumed, then add Sugar of Penedies, fresh Butter, each one ounce, Oil of
sweet Almonds, newly drawn half an ounce, give them one boiling more, and so
let it be taken betimes in a Morning fasting, and sleep upon it.

94. To starch Tiffanies or Lawns.
You must soap your Tiffany on the Hems or Laces only with brown Soap, then
wash them very well in 3 Lathers pretty hot, and let your last Lather be made
thin of the Soap, do not rince them, nor wring them hard, then dry them over
brimstone, and keep them all the time from the Air, for that will spoil them,
then make your Starch of a reasonable thickness, and blue it as you please, and
to a quarter of a pound of Starch, put as much Allom as a Hasel-nut, boil it
very well and strain it, and while it is hot, wet your Tiffanies with it very
well, and lay them in a Cloth to keep them from drying, then with your hands
clean and dry them, then hold your Tiffanies to a good Fire till they be
thorough hot, then clap them and rub them between your Hands from the Fire,
till you see they be very clear, then shape them by a piece of Paper, cut out
by them before they are washed, and Iron them with a good hot Iron, and then
they will look Glossy like new Tiffany. And so you also starch Lawns, only
remember to Iron them upon a Cloth wetted and rung out again, and turned on the
wrong side, and instead of Starch, you may sometimes use Gum Arabic in Water;
and when it is dissolved, wet the Lawns in that instead of Starch, and hold
them to the Fire as afroesaid, clapping and rubbing them till they are very
clear.

95. To make clean Gold and Silver Lace.
You must pull off your Lace from your Garment, and being laid on a clean
Table, take a little burnt Allom, beaten very fine, and with a small brush rub
it all over very well, till you find it comes to its Color, then shake it, and
wipe it very well over oftentimes, with a clean Linen Cloth.

96. To cleanse all sorts of Silver Plate.
Wash your Plate in Soap-suds, and dry it very well, and if any spots remain,
take Salt and Vinegar, and rub them out, then daub your Plate all over with
Chalk and Vinegar, and lay it before the Fire, or in the Sun to dry, then rub
it off with warm Linen Cloths very well, and it will look like new.

97. To Wash Silk Stockings.
Make a strong Lather with Soap, and pretty hot, then lay your Stockings on a
Table, and take a piece of such Cloth as the Seamen use for their Sails, double
them up and rub them soundly with it, turn them first on the one side and then
on the other, till they have passed through 3 Lathers, then rince them well,
and hang them to dry with the wrong side outward, and when they are near dry,
pluck them out with your Hands, and smooth them with an Iron on the wrong side.

98. To make clean Points and Laces.
Take new White-bread and pare off the Crust, then lay your Points upon a clean
Cloth on the Table, and rub the White-bread all over upon them, and afterward
rub it over again with a small clean brush, and the Crumbs of Bread, till you
have rubbed it very clean, then cleanse it from the Bread, and gently slap it
over with a clean Linen Cloth; in the same manner you may take off the Soil
from Tabbey, Taffety, or white satin, or any other Colored, if it be not too
much Soiled and Greasy.

99. To get Ink-spots out of Linen.
As soon as any such Accident happens, lay it immediately in Urin, and there
let it lie all Night, and the next day wash it out again, and in so doing 2 or
3 times, you will find the Spots and Stains quite gone.

100. To take spots of Grease out of silk, stuff, or cloth.
Wet a Linen Rag in fair Water, and then put a live Wooden or Sea Coal upon
it, and close it up about the Coal, and presently lay it upon the greasy Spot,
whilst it is smoking hot, and when you perceive it to cool, do so again till
the Spots are taken out.

101. To take away the stains of Linen Cloth, caused by any sort of Fruit.
Take any of your Garments so stained before they are washed, and rub every
Spot thereof very well with a little Butter, then let it lie a little while in
the scalding hot Milk, and when it is cooled, rub the spotted places in the
Milk till they are quite out, and then wash it out with Water and Soap.

104. To wash white sarsenet.
First take your Sarsenet and spread it very smooth and strait upon a board,
and spread Soap upon those places that are soiled, and afterward take a hard
brush that is small, and dip it in Water, and make an indifferent thick Lather,
and with the brush rub your Sarsenet well with it the right way of the Silk,
and when one side is well washed, wash the other also, then make a clean Lather
scalding Hot, and put in your Hoods double into it, and cover it up, and so
fast as you wash them into it, give them 3 good Washes upon the board, and
after the first Lather, let the rest be very Hot, and cast them in a Scald
every time, then make up a Scaldinghot Water, and after you have Steeped some
Water of Gum-Arabick, put it therein, adding thereunto-some smalt to blue it a
little, let the Hoods be doubled up therein, and close covered for an Hour, and
when you take them out, dip them very well all over, and fold them up in a very
small Compass, and smooth them very well betwixt your Hands, till they be more
than dry, after you have smoothed them over Brimstone, then smooth them with
Hot-Irons, the way you washed them, and upon the right side of the Sarsnet.

105. To wash black Sarsenets.
Wash them, the same with the other, only Rince them in Small-Beer, without any
Gum, and Iron them upon a Woolen-Cloth, on the wrong side.

106. To wash colored Silks.
They must be washed the same way with the White Sarsnet, only you must not use
any blue with them, neither must you Smoke them over Brimstone but in all
things else you must do as in the White Sarsenet.

107. To Embroider Belts, Bodices, or Petticoats.
Get your Pattern drawn, and then form it about with what you like best, black
Gimp or other, and fill up the under parts and Leaves, with Saxen-stitch, some
Light and some Darker, and let the upper parts and Seeds of Flowers be done
with high Work, as Purple stitcht or others, and let the stalks be all alike,
with a great Gimp Twisted, you may make your Flowers of what fancy you please,
in Shadows, and being well Shadowed, they will appear very Natural.

108. To Wash and Starch Points.
You must first put your Points into a Tent, then take very good Soap, and make
a strong Lather therewith, then take a small Brush and dip it therein, and
therewith rub your Point very well on both sides, and continue so to do, till
you have washed it in 4 Lathers, and then wash it in fair Water only, and
afterward in blue Water, and then take some Starch that is made thin with
Water, and wash it over on the wrong side, with your Brush, and so let it dry,
then lay it upon a Table, and with an Ivory Bodkin made for that purpose, open
it in the closest and narrowest parts thereof, then open the Gimp, and
Overcast, and also the Islet-holes, and when they are thus opened, you must
Iron them on the wrong-side, but before your Water be Warm, that you make your
Lather with, and let not your Water, with which you wash them, be too Blue.

The Complete Cook's Guide, or Directions for the Dressing of all Flesh, Fowl,
and Fish, both in the English and French Mode; with the preparing of all manner
of Sauces and Sallets proper thereunto.
Together with the making of all Sorts of Pyes, Pasties, Tarts, and Custards;
with the Forms and Shapes of many of them. With Bills of Fare, both for
Ordinary and Extraordinary:
1. To make a Lamb-Pye.
FIrst, cut your Lamb into Pieces, and then season it with Nutmegs, Cloves, and
Mace, and some Salt, with Currants, Raisins of the Sun, and sweet Butter; and if
you will eat it hot, when it is baked, put in some Yolks of Eggs, with
Wine-Vinegar, and Sugar beaten together, but if you will eat it cold, put in no
Eggs, but only Vinegar and Sugar.

2. To make a Rice Padding.
Take thin Cream, or good Milk, of what quantity you please, boil it with a
little Cinnamon in it, and when it has boiled a while, take out the Cinnamon,
and put in Rose Water, and Sugar enough to make it sweet and good; then having
your Rice ready beaten, as fine as Flowen, and Searced as some do it, strew it
in, till it be the thickness of a Hasty Pudding, then pour it into a Dish, and
serve it.

3. To make Cheese Cakes, the best way.
Take 2 Gallons of New Milk, put into them 2 Spoonfuls and a half of Runnet,
heat the Milk little less then Blood-warm, cover it close with a Cloth, till
you see the Cheese be gathered, then with a scuming-dish, gently take out the
Whey, when you have Dreyn'd the Curd as clear as you can, put it into a Sieve,
and let it drain very well there; then to 2 quarts of Curds, take a quart of
thick Cream, a pound of sweet Butter 12 Eggs, a pound and half of Currants, a
Peny-worth of Cloves, Nutmegs, and Mace beaten, half a pound of good sugar, a
quarter of (...) pint of Rose water; Mingle it together, and put it into
Puff-paste.

4. To make an Egg Pie, or Mince Pie, of Eggs.
Take the Yolks of 2 dozen of Eggs hard Boiled, shred them, take the same
quantity of Beef Suet, half a pound of Pippins, a pound of Currants well washed
and Dried, half a pound of sugar, a Pennyworth of beaten Spice, a few Carraway
seeds, a little Candied Oringe ^^el thread, a ^ittle Verjuice and Rose Water,
fill the Coffin, and bake it with gentle heat.

5. To Carbanado Muttou.
Broyl a Shoulder, or Breast of Mutton, then scotch them with your Knife, and
strew on Minced Thyme, and salt, and a little Nutmeg; when they are Broyled
dish them up: The Sauce is Claret Wine, Boiled up with 2 Onions, a little
Camphire, and Capers with a little Gravy, Garnished with Lemons,

6. To stew a Pheasant French fashion.
Roast your Pheasant, till it be half Roasted, then Boil it in Matton Broth,
and put into the Broth whole Pepper, whole Mace, Onions and Vinegar, and make
it sharp, and put in Pruans and Currants, and color your Broth with bruised
Pruans.

7. To make Biscuit Bread.
Take half a peck of sine flower, 2 Ounces of Anniseeds, 2 Ounces of
Coriander-seed, the whites of 6 Eggs, a pint of Ale-Yeast, with as much warm
Water as will make it up into a Paste, so Bake it in a long Roll; when it is 2
days Old, pare it, and slice it, then sugar it, and dry it in an Oven, and keep
it all the Year.

8. To make a Dish of Marrow,
Take a pint of fine Paste, and Roll it very thin, then take the Marrow all as
whole out of the Bones as you can, and Cleave it into 4 quarters, then take it
and season it with a little Pepper, salt, sugar, and Dates small Minced, then
lay one piece in your Paste, and make it up like a Pescod, so make half a Dozen
of them, and fry them with Clarified Butter, scrape sugar on and serve them.

9. To make a Herring Pie.
Put great store of sliced Onions, with Currants and Raisins of the Sun, both
above and under the Herrings, and store of Butter, put them into your Pie, and
bake them

10. To make Black-Puddings
Take a quart of sheeps-blood, and a quart of Cream, 10 Eggs, the Yolks and the
whites beaten together, stir all this Liquor very well, then thicken it with
grated bread and Oat meal finely beaten, of each alike quantity, Beef Suet
finely shred, and Marrow in little Lumps, season it with a little Nutmeg,
Cloves, and Macc mingled with salt, a little sweet Marjorum, Thyme, and
Pennyroyal shred very well together, and mingle them with the other things:
Some put in a few Currants, then fill them with Clarified Guts, and boil them
very carefully.

11. To make a good Spanish Olio.
Take a Rump of Beef, or some of a Brisket or Buttock, cut it to pieces; a Loyn
of Mutton with the Fat taken off, and a fleshy piece of a Leg of Veal, or
Knuckle, a piece of Enterlarded Bacon, 3 or 4. Onions, or some Garlic, and if
you will, a Capon or 2, or else 3 great Tame-Pigeons. First put into the water
the Beef and Bacon, after a while the Mutton, Veal, and Onions, but not the
Capons or Pigeons, only so long till they are Boylled enough, if you have
Garavanza's put them in at the first, after they have been soaked with Ashes,
all Night in Heat, wash them well in warm Water, or if you have Cabba^^-Roots,
Leeks, or whole Onions, put them in time enough to be sufficiently Boiled. You
may at first put in some crusts of Bread, or Vension Pye-Crust, it must boil in
all 5 or 6 Hours gently, like Stewing: After it is well boiled; a quarter, or
half an hour before you intend to take it, take out a Porringer full of Broth,
and put to it some Pepper, and 5 or 6 Cloves, and a Nutmeg, and some Saffron
and mingle them well in it, then put that into the Pot and let it boil, or Stew
with the rest a while, put in a bundle of Sweet-Herbs, Salt must be put to it
when it is Scum'd.

12. To stew Venison.
If you have much Venison, and do make many cold baked Meats, you may stew a
dish in haste thus, When it is sliced out of your Pie, Pot, or Pasty, put it in
your stewing Dish, and set on a heap of coals, with a little Claret wine, a
sprig or two of Rosemary, half a dozen Cloves, a little grated bread, Sugar and
Vinegar, so let it stew together a while, then grate on Nutmeg, and dish it up.

13. To boil a Leg of Veal and Bacon.
Lard your Leg of Veal with Bacon all over, with a little Lemon Peel amongst
it, then boil it with a piec of Middle-bacon, when bacon is boiled, cut it in
slice^ season it with Pepper and dried Sage mixed together Dish up your Veal
with Bacon round about it, send up with it, saucers of green Sauce, strew over
it Parsley and Barberries.

14. To make Furmety.
Take French barley, and pick it, and wash it, lay it in sleep one night, then
boil it in 2 or 3 several waters, and so cover it, as you do Wheat, to make it
smell, then take a qua^t of good Cream, and boil it with a Race of Ginger cut
in two pieces, one blade of Mace and half a Nutmeg all in one piece, then put
thereto so much of the barley as will thicken it, and when it is almost boiled,
stir in two or three yolks of Eggs well beaten, and so strained with a few
beaten Almonds and Flower, or five spoonfuls of Rose Water, then take out the
whole spices and season your Furmety with Salt, and sweeten it with Sugar, and
so serve it.

15. To make a Pig pie.
Flea your Pig, and cut it into pieces, and season it with Pepper, Salt,
Nutmeg, and large Mace, lay into your Caffin good store of Raisins of the Sun,
and Currants, and fill it up with sweet butter, so close it, and serve it hot.

16. To make a Neats foot-Pye.
First boil your Neats-foot, and take out the bones, then put in as much
beef-snit as in quantity thereto, and so mince them, then season them with
Cloves, Mace, Nutmeg, Sugar, and Salt, and put into your Coffin with some
Barberries, Currants, and Raisins of the Sun, then bake it and always serve it
hot.

17. To make an Orangado Pie.
Make a handsome thin Coffin, and hot buttered Paste, slice your Orangado, and
put over the bottom of it, then take some Pippins and cut every one into eight
parts, and lay them in also upon the Orangado, then pour some syrup of
Orangado, and Sugar on the top, and so pie shapes. Double Bordered Cuslard.

Vumble-Pie.

Sturgeon-pie

Custard.

Carp-Pie.

Custard.

Oister-pie.

Pie Orangado.

goo^ berytar

Custard

Lumber-Pie.

Chicken-Pye.

Mine'd-pie.

Tongur-PYE.

Lumber-Pye.

Minc'd-Pye.

Minc'd-Pye.

Custard

Preserved Tare.

Custard.

make it up, and bake it, and serve it up with Sugar scraped on it.

18. To make a Pork-Pye.
Boil your Leg of Pork, season it with Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt, and bake it
five Hours in a round Pie.

19. To make a Fricacie of Veal.
Cut your Veal into thin slices, beat it well with a rouling-Pin, season it
with Nutmegs, Lemon, and Thyme, fry it slightly in the Pan, then beat 2 Eggs,
and one spoonful of Verjuice, put it into the Pan, stir it together, Fry it and
dish it.

20. To make a Quince-Pye.
Take a Gallon of Flower, a pound and half of Butter, 6 Eggs, 30 Quinces, 3
pound of Sugar, half an ounce of Cinnamon, half an an ounce of Ginger, half an
ounce of Cloves, and Rose Water; make them into a Tart, and being baked, stew
on double refined Sugar.

21. To make Goose-berry-fool.
Pick your Goose-berries, and put them into clean Water, and boil them till
they be all as thick that you cannot discern what it is, to the quantity of a
Quart* take 6 Yolks of Eggs well beaten with Rose Water, before you put in your
Eggs, season it well with Sugar, then strain you Eggs, and let them boil a
while* put it in a broad Dish, and let it stand till it is cold, and serve it.

22. To make a tart of Green Pease.
Boil your Pease tender, and pour them out into a Cullender, season them with
Saffron, Salt, sweet Butter, and Sugar, then close it, and let it bake almost
an hour, then draw it forth and Ice it, put in a little Verjuice, and shake it
well, then scrape on Sugar, and serve it.

23. To Souce an Eel.
Souce an Eel with a handful of Salt, split it down the back, take out the
Chine-bone, season the Eel with Nutmeg, Pepper, Salt, and sweet Herbs mine'd;
then lay a pack-thread, at each end, and the middle ^oul up like a Collar of
Braw^, then boil it in Water, Salt, and Vinegar, a blade or two of Mace, and
half a ^^ice of Lemon, boil it half an hour, keep it in the same Liquor 2 or 3
days, then cut it out in round pieces, and lay 6 or 7 in a Dish with Parsley
and Barberries, and serve it with Vinegar in Saucers.

24. To make a Bacon-tart.
Take a quarter of a pound of the best Jordan-Almonds, and put them in a little
warm Water to blanch them, then beat them together in a Mortar with 3 or 4
spoonfuls of Rose Water, then sweeten them with fine sugar; then take Bacon
that is clear and White, and hold it upon the point of a Knife, against the
Fire, till it has dropped a sufficient quantity, then stir it well together, and
put it into the Paste, and bake it.

25. To make an Vmble-Pye.
Lay Beef suit minced in the bottom of the Pie, or slices of interlarded bacon,
and cut the Vmble as big as a small Dice, cut your bacon in the same form, and
season it with Nutmeg, Pepper, and Salt, fill your Pyes with it, with slices of
bacon, and butter, close it up and bake it: Liquor it with Claret, Butter, and
stripped Thyme, and so serve it.

26. To keep Asparagus.
Parboyl your Asparagus very little, and put them into clarified butter, cover
them with it, and when the Butter is cold, cover them with Leather, and about a
Month after refresh the butter, melt it and put it on again; then set them
under ground, being covered with Leather.

27. To roast a Haunch of Venison.
If your Venison be seasoned, you must water it, and ^ick it with short sprigs
of Rosemary; let your Sauce be Claret Wine, a handful of grated Bread, Cinnamon,
Ginger, Sugar, a little Vinegar; boil these up so thick, as it may only run
like butter; it ought to be sharp and sweet: Dish up your Meat on your Sauce.

28. To Carbonado Hens.
Let your Sauce be a little White Wind and Gravy, half a dozen of the yolks of
Hard Eggs minced, boiled up with an Onion, add to it grated Nutmeg, thicken it
up with the yolk of an Egg or two, with a Ladle full of drawn Butter; Dish up
your Hens, and pour over your Sauce, strew on your yolks of Eggs minced, and
garnish it with Lemon.

29. To fry Artichoaks.
When they are boiled and sliced, fitting for that purpose, you must have your
yolks of Eggs beaten with a grated Nutmeg or two; when your Pan is hot, you
must dip them into the Yolks of Eggs, and charge your Pan; when they are fried
on both sides, pour on drawn Butter; And if you will fry Spanish Potatoes, then
the Sauce is Butter, Vinegar, Sugar, and Rose Water; these for a need may serve
for second Course Dishes.

30. To make a Hedge Hog Pudding.
Put some Raisins of the Sun into a deep Wooden Dish, and then take some gra^ed
bread, and one pint of sweet Cream, 3 Yolks of Eggs, with 2 of the Whites, and
some Beef Suet, grated Nutmeg, and Salt, then sweeten it with Sugar, and temper
all well together, and so lay it into the Dish upon the Raisins, then tie a
Cloth about the Dish, and boil it in Beef-broath, and when you take ^^^up put
it in a Pewter Dish, with the Raisins uppermost, and then stick blanched
Almonds very thick into the Pudding, then melt some Butter, and pour it upon
the Pudding, then strew some Sugar about the Dish, and serve it.

31. To stew a Leg of Lamb.
Cut it into pieces, and put it into your stewing-pan, being first seasoned
with Salt and Nutmeg, and as much Butter as will stew it, with Raisins of the
Sun Currants and Gooseberries; when it is stewed, make a Caudle with the yolks
of 2 or 3 Eggs, and some Wine-Vinegar and Sugar, beaten together and put it
into your Meat, and stew all a little longer together, then dish it; strew
Sugar on the brims, and serve it hot.

32. To bake a Pickerel.
Boil your Pickerel, and pull out the ribs and bones then put it into your
Pasle, and season it with Pepper and Salt, and put in some Butter, and Raisins
of the Sun, and so bake it.

33. To make a Haggess-Pudding.
Take a fat Haggess, parboyl it well, take out the kernels, shred it small, and
temper it with a handful or two of grated Manchet, then take 3 or 4 Eggs well
beaten, Rose Water, Sugar, Cloves, Nutmeg, Cinnamon, and Mace finely beaten,
Currants and Marrow good store; temper them altogether with a quantity of Cream,
being first moderately seasoned with Salt.

34. To make a Dish of Meat with Herbs.
Take Sives, Parsley, thyme, Marjoram, and roast 3 or 4 Eggs hard, and a
quantity of Murton suet, Beef or Lamb, chop them fine altogether, and season it
with Cloves, Mace, Ginger, Sugar, and Cinnamon, and a little Salt, then fry them
with a little sweet butter.

35. To make Cream of Eggs.
Take one quart of Cream, and boil it, then beat 4 Whites of Eggs very well
with 2 spoonfuls of Rose Water; when the Cream is boiled enough, take it off
the Fire, and when it is cool, stir in the Eggs with a little Salt, then
garnish your dish with fine Sugar scraped thereon, and serve it always cold,
for a closing dish.

36. To make a fine Pudding in a Dish.
Take a Penny White-loaf, and pare off all the crust, and slice it thin into a
dish with a quart of Cream, and let it boil over a Chafing dish of Coals, till
the bread be alm st dry, then put in a piece of sweet butter, and take it off,
and let it stand in the dish till it be cold, then take the yolks of 3 Eggs and
the quantity of one with some Rose water and Sugar, and stirring them
altogether, put it into another dish well buttered, and bake it.

37. To boil Scollops.
First boil the Scollops, then take them out of the ^hells, and wash them, then
slice them, and season them (...) with Nutmeg Ginger, and Cinnamon, and put them
into ^he bottom, of your Shells ag^in, with a little But^er, White Wind,
Vinegar, and grated Bread, let them ^e boiled on both sides; if they are sharp,
they must have Sugar added to them; for the fish is luscious, and sweet
naturally; therefore you may boil them with Oyster Liquor and Gravy, with
dissolved Anchovies, minced Onions and Thyme, with the juice of Lemon in it.

38. To boil Wild Ducks.
First half roast them, then take them off, and put them in a shallow broad pan
that will contain them, with a pint of Claret Wine, and a pint of strong
broth, a dozen of Onions cut in halves, a Faggot or two of sweet Herbs, with a
little whole Pepper, and some slices of Bacon; cover your Pan, and let them
stove up, add gravy to part of the Liquor, at least so much as will serve to
dish them: Garnish them with Bacon and Onions if you please.

39. To make a Venison-Pasty.
When you have powdered your Haunch of Venison or the sides of it, by taking
away all the Bones and Sinews, and the Skin or Fat, season it with Pepper and
Salt only, beat it with your Rowling-Pin, and proportion it for the Pasty, by
taking away from one part, and adding to another, your paste being made with a
peck of fine Flower, and about 3 pound of Butter, and 12 Eggs, work it up with
cold water into a stiff paste as you can, drive it forth for your pasty, let it
be as thick as a Man's Thumb, roll it up upon a Rowling-pin, and put under it a
couple of sheets of Cap-paper well flowered, then your white being already
minced and beaten with Water, propor^^on it upon the Pasty to the breadth and
length of the Venison, then lay your Venison in the said white, wash it round
with your Feather, and put on a border, season your Venison on the top, and
turn over your other leaf of paste, so close up your Pasty; then drive out
another border for garnishing the sides up to the top of the Pasty, so close it
together by the Rowling-Pin, by rolling it up and down by the sides and ends,
and when you have flourished your garnishing, and edged your Pasty, vent it at
the top, set it in the Oven, and let it have 4 or 5 hours baking at the least
and then draw it.

40. To make a Damson-tart.
Take Damsons, and seethe them in Wine, and strain them with a little Cream,
then boil your stuff over the Fire till it be thick, and put thereto Sugar,
Cinnamon, and Ginger, but set it not in the Oven after; but let your Paste be
baked before.

41. To roast a Rabbet with Oysters.
Wash your Rabbet, and dry it well, then take half a pint of Oysters, wash
them, and wipe them clean one by one, and put them into the Rabbet's belly, a
couple of Onions shred, whole Pepper, large Mace, 2 or 3 sprigs of Thyme, sow
up the belly; and for the sauce, as usual, the Liver and Parsley; and a hard
Egg, shred them together, and beat some butter thick; put into the Dish, and
serve it.

42. To stew Collops of Beef.
Take of the Buttock of beef thin slices, cross the grain of the Meat; then
hack them, and fry them in sweet butter; and being fried fine and brown, put
them in a pipkin with some strong broth, a little Claret Wine, and some
Nutmeg; stew it very tender, and half an hour before you dish it, put to it
some Gravy, Elder, Vinegar, and a Clove or two; when you serve it, put some
juice of Orange, and 3 or 4 slices on it, stew down the Gravy somewhat thick,
and put unto it when you dish it beaten butter.

43. To make a Beef-pasty like Red Deer.
Take fresh beef of the finest, without sinews or suet, and mince it as small
as you can, and season it with Salt and Pepper, and put in 2 spoonfuls of
Malmsey, then take Lard, and cut it into small pieces, and lay a layer of Lard,
and a layer of Beef, and lay a shin of Beef upon it like Venison, and so close
it up.

44. To bake a Hare.
Take the best of the Hare minced and seasoned with Pepper, Salt, and Mace,
then make a proportion of the Head, or Shoulders, as you make for an Hare
pasty, and lay in a layer of Flesh, and a lay of Lard, and butter a loft and
beneath, and make a Gallentine for it in a Saucer,

45. To boil a Salmon.
Take as much water as will cover it, then take Rosemary, Thyme and Winter
Savory, and Salt, boil all these very well, and then put in some Wine-Vinegar,
and when your Salmon is boiled, let him remain in the same Water always until
you have occasion to eat of it.

46. To make an Oyster-pye.
First dry your Oysters, and then put them into your Coffin with some Butter,
and whole large Mace, and so bake it; then take off the Lid, and fill it up
with more butter, putting some of the Liquor of the Oysters also thereunto,
then season it well with Sugar, and serve it hot to the Table at the first
Course.

47. To butter Eggs upon toasts.
Take 20 Eggs, beat them in a dish with some Salt, and put butter to them, then
have two large Rolls, or fine Manchets, cut them in Toasts, and toast them
against the fire, with a pound of fine sweet butter, being finely buttered in a
fair clean Dish, put the Eggs on the Toasts, and garnish your Dish with Pepper
and Salt, otherwise half boy! them in the Shells, then butter them, and serve
them on Toasts, or Toasts about them.

48. To make a Fricacie of Chickens.
Scald 3 or 4 Chickens, and flea off the Skin and Feathers together, put them
in a little water; take half a pint of White Wind, and 2 or 3 whole Onions,
some large Mace and Nutmeg, tied up in a cloth, a bundle of sweet Herbs, and a
little Salt, and put them all in a Pipkin close covered; let them simper a
quarter of an hour; then take 6 yolks of Eggs, half a pound of sweet butter, 4
Anchovies dissolved in a little Broth; shred your boiled spice small, take a
quarter of a pound of Capers, and shred them very small, put the Anchovies
dissolved into the Eggs and Butter, and Capers, and so stir it altogether, over
a Chafing Dish of Coals, till it begin to thicken, then take the Chickens out
of the Broth, and put lear upon them, serve them with Sippets, and Lemons
sliced.

49. To make an Eel-pye with Oysters.
Wash your Eels and gut them, and dry them well in a Cloth; to 4 good Eels
allow a pint of Oysters well washed, season them with Pepper, Salt and Nutmeg,
and large Mace, put half a pound of Butter into the Pie, and half a Lemon
sliced, so bake it; when it is drawn, take the Yolks of 2 Eggs, a couple of
Anchovies dissolved in a little White Wind, with a quarter of a pound of fresh
Butter, melt it, and mix it altogether, and make a lear of it, and put it into
the Pie.

50. To make a Puff-paste.
Break 2 Eggs in 3 pints of Flower, make it with cold Water, then roll it out
pretty thick and square; then take so much butter as paste, and divide your
butter in 3 pieces, that you may lay it on at 5 several times, ^oul your paste
very broad, and break 1 part of the same butter in little pieces all over your
paste, then throw a handful of Flower slightly on, then fold up your paste and
beat it with a Rowling-pin, so roll it out again, thus do several times, and
then make it up.

51. To make Barley-broth.
Put your barley into fair Water, give it 3 qualms over the Fire, separate the
Waters and put it into a Cullender, and boil it in a fourth Water with a blade
of Mace and a Clove, and when it is boiled away, put in some Raisins and
Currants, and when the Fruit is boiled enough take it off, and season it with
White Wind, Rose Water, Butter and Sugar, and a couple of yolks of Eggs beaten
with it.

52. To bake a Pig.
Take a good quantity of Clay, and having molded it, stick your Pig and blood
him well, and when he is warm, put him in your prepared Coffin of Clay thick
every where, with his Hair, Skin, and all his Entrails drawn, and belly sowed
up again then throw him into the Oven, or below the Stock-hole under the
Furnace, and there let him soak, turn him now and then when the Clay is
hardened, for 12 hours, and he is sufficiently baked, then take him, and break
off the Clay, which easily parts, and he will have a fine crispy Coar, and all
the Juice of the Pig in your Dish, but remember to put a few leaves of Sage,
and a little Salt in his belly, and you need no other Sauce.

53. A Grand Sallet.
Take a quarter of a pound of Raisins of the Sun, as many blanched Almonds, as
many Capers, as many Olives, as much Samphire, as many pickled Cucumbers, a
Lemon shed, some pickled French Beans, a Wax tree set in the middle of the
Dish, pasted to the Dish, lay all their quarters round the Dish, (you may also
mince the flesh of a roasted Hen, with Sturgeon and Shrimps) and garnish the
Dish with cut Beans and Turnips in several Figures.

54. To make a Sallet of a cold Hen or Pullet.
Take a Hen and roast it, let it be cold, Carve up the Legs, take the Flesh and
mince it small, shred a Lemon, a little Parsley and Onions, an Apple, a little
Pepper and Salt, with Oil and Vinegar, garnish the Dish with the Bones and
Lemon Peel, and so serve it.

55. To boil a Capon, Pullet, or Chicken.
Boil them in good Mutten-broath, with Mace, a Faggot of sweet Herbs, Sage,
Spinach, Marygold-leaves and flowers, white or green Endive, Burrage, Buggloss,
Parsley, and Sorrel, and serve it on Sippets.

56. To stew Ducks the French fashion.
Take the Duck and half roast it, put half a score of Onions in the Belly
whole, some whole Pepper, a bundle of Thyme, and a little Salt, when it is half
roasted, take it up and slash it into pieces, put it between two Dishes, and
pierce the Gravy, mix some Claret Wine with that Gravy, and a little sliced
Nutmeg, a couple of Anchovies, wash them and slit them, slice the Onions in the
Ducks belly, cover the Dishes close, so let them stew while enough, take some
butter, beat i^ thick, and shred a Lemon in it, and serve it: Garnish your dish
with the Lemon Peel, and your Onions.

57. To make a Florentine.
Take the Kidney of a Loin of Veal, or the wing of a Capon, or the leg of a
Rabbit; mince any of these small with the Kidney of a Loin of Mutton, if it be
not fat enough, then season it with Cloves, Mace, Nutmeg, and Sugar, Cream,
Currants, Eggs, and Rose Water; mingle these four together, and put them into a
Dish between two sheets of Paste, then close it, and cut the paste round by the
brim of the Dish; then cut it round about like Virginal keys, and let the other
lie, prick it, bake it, scrape on Sugar, and serve it.

58. To make Curd-Cake.
Take a pint of Curds, 4 Eggs, take out a of the whites, put in some Sugar, a
little Nutmeg, and a little Flower; and drop them in, and fry them with a
little butter.

59. To roast a Leg of Mutton the French way.
Take half a pound of Mutton, and a quarter of a pound of Suet, season it with
sweet Herbs, and a little Nutmeg, and 2 or 3 shallots; slice these very small,
and stuff the Mutton round, then take some of the best Hackney Turnips, and
boil them in beef-broth very tender, then squeeze the Water from them a little,
set them in a dish under the leg of Mutton, when it is half roasted, and so let
the Gravy drop into them, and when the Meat is roasted serve them in the dish
with it, with a little fresh Butter and Vinegar,: Garnish your Dish with sliced
Onions, and Parsley, and some of the Turnips sliced.

60. To stew a Carp.
Take a living Carp, and knock him on the head, open him in the belly, take
heed you break not the Gill, pour in a little Vinegar, and wash out all the
blood, stir it about with your Hand, and keep the blood safe; then put as much
White Wind into a Pan or Skillet, as will almost cover, and set it on the Fire;
put to it an Onion cut in the Middle, a Clove, or less of Garlic, a Race of
Ginger shred, a Nutmeg quartered, a Faggot or bundle of sweet Herbs, and 3 or 4
Anchovies; your Carp being cut out, and rubbed all over with Salt, when the
Wine (into which you may put a little Water) does boil, put the Carp in, and
cover him close, and let him stew up about a quarter of an hour, then put in
the Blood and Vinegar, with a little Butter, so dish up the Carp, and let the
Spawn Milt, and Revet be laid upon it, the Liquor that boiled him with the
Butter, is the best Sauce, and is to be eaten, as broth: Garnish the dish with
Lemons and grated bread.

61. To make Marrow-Puddings.
Take a pound of the best Jordan-Almonds, Blanch them, beat them fine in a
Stone or Wooden Mortar [not in Brass] wilh a little Rose Water, take a pound of
fine powder Sugar, a Penny-loaf Grated, Nutmeg Grated, a pint of Cream, the
Marrow of 2 Marrow-bones, 2 Grains of Amber-greese, Mingle them all together
with a little Salt, fill the Skins, and boil them gently as before.

62. To make a Sack-Posset.
Set a Gallon of Milk on the Fire, with whole Cinnamon and large Mace, when it
boyls stir in a half, or whole pound of Naples-bisket, Grated very small,
keeping it stirring till it boyls, then beat 8 Eggs together, casting of the
Whites away; beat them with a Ladleful of Milk, then take the Milk off the
Fire, and stir in the Eggs; then put it on again, but keep it stirring for fear
of Curdling; then make ready a pint of Sack, warming it upon the Coals, with a
little Rose Water, season your Milk with Sugar, and pour it into the Sack, in a
large Basin, and stir it apace, then throw on a good deal of beaten Cinnamon,
and so serve it up.

63. To Hash a Rabbit.
When your Rabbit is Washed, you must take the Flesh from the Bones, and Mince
it Small, then put to it a little strong Broth, and Vinegar, an Onion or 2,
with a Grated Nutmeg, and let it Stew up together, the^ Mince a Handful of
boiled Parsley Green, with a Lemon cut like Dice, and a few Barberries, put it
into the Hash and Toast it altogether, and when it is enough, put a Ladle full
of sweet Butter to it, and Dish it upon the Chines, and Garnish it with Lemons.

64. To make a Fresh Cheese.
Take some New Milk, or Cream, and a Race of Cinnamon, Scald it, then take it
off the Fire, sweeten it with fine Sugar, then take a Spoonful of Runnet to 2
quarts of Milk, set it by, and keep it close covered, and so let it stand, when
the Cheese comes, strew a little fine Sugar, and Grated Nutmeg, and serve it in
with Sippets, Sops in Sack or Muscadine.

65. To make an Artichoak Pie.
Take the bottoms of 6 A'rtichoaks Boiled very Tender, put them in a Dish, and
some Vinegar over them; season them with Ginger and Sugar, a little Mace whole,
and put them in a Coffin of Paste, when you lay them in, lay some Marrow and
Dates sliced, and a few Raisins of the Sun in the bottom, with a good store of
Butter, when it is half baked, take a Gill of Sack, being boiled first with
Sugar, and a Peel of Orange. Put it into the Pie, and set it into the Oven
again, till you use it.

66. To make Marrow-Pasties.
Shred the Marrow and Apples together, and put a little Sugar to them, put them
into Puff-paste, and Fry them in a pan with fresh Butter, and serve them up to
the Table, with a little White Sugar, strewed on it:

67. To make Green Sauce.
Take a good Handful of sorrel, beat it in a Mortar, with Pippins pared and
quartered, with a little Vinegar and sugar; put it into Saucers.

Or take sorrel, beat it and stamp it well in a Mortar, squeeze out the juice
of it, and put thereto a little Vinegar, sugar, and 2 hard Eggs Minced small, a
little Nutmeg Grated, and Butter, set this upon the Coals till it is hot, and
pour it into the dish on the Sippets: This is Sauce for Hen, Veal, and Bacon.

68. To Pickle oysters.
Take a quart of the largest Oysters, with the Liquor, wash them clean, and
wipe them, add to them a pint of Fair-water, and half a pint of
White-wine-Vinegar, half an Ounce of whole Pepper, an handful of salt, a
quarter of an Ounce of large Mace, with the Liquor of the Oysters Strained; put
all together in a Pipkin over a soft Fire, let them Simper together a quarter
of an hour; when the Oysters are enough, then you may safely take them up, and
also put them into a little Fair-water and Vinegar, till they be cold, the
Pickle boiling a quarter of an hour, after the Oysters are taken up; both being
cold, put them up together. When you use them, Garnish the Dish with Barberries
and Lemons, and a little Mace and Pepper, and pour in some of the Pickle.

69. To make Scotch Collops of Veal.
Cut out your Fillet into very broad slices, Fat and Lean, not too Thick: Take
8 Eggs, beat them very well with a little salt, grate a whole Nutmeg, take a
handful of Thyme, and Strip it, then take a upond of Sausages, half a pint of
stewing Oysters of the largest, wash and cleanse them from the Gravel, then
half Fry your Veal with sweet Butter, then put in your Sausages and Oysters,
then take a quarter of a pound of Capers, shred them very small, with 3
Anchovies dissolved in White Wind and Fair-water, so put in your Eggs, shred
Capers and Anchovies, Butter and Spice, and mingle them, and strew them in the
Pan, upon the Veal and Oysters, serve it with Sippets, with a little Butter and
Vinegar, with Lemons sliced, and Barberries, with a little Salt. You must have
a care to keep the Meat stirring, lest the Eggs Curdle with the heat of the
Fire.

70. To make a Rare White-pot.
Take 3 Pints of Cream, whole Cinnamon, a little sliced Nutmeg, set on the
Cream, and Spice, and Scald it, take a Penny-loaf, and slice it very thin, take
a Couple of Marrow-Bones, lay the Marrow sliced, on the bottom of the Dish,
upon the Mrrrow lay the Bread, then lay Reasons of the Sun over the Bread, and
lay Marrow again as before: To the 3 Pints of Scalded Cream, add 9 Yolks of
Eggs, well beaten with Rose Water, sweeten the Cream with White Sugar, and take
out the whole Cinnamon, and beat the Cream and Eggs well, fill up a broad and
Shallow Basin, and bake it, when it is enough scrape fine sugar on it, and
stick it with Red and White Muscadoes, and so serve it.

71. To make a very fine Custard.
Take a quart of Cream, and boil it with whole spice, then beat the Yolks of 10
Eggs, and 5 Whites, Mingle them with a little Cream, and when your Cream is
almost cold, put your Eggs into it, and stir them very well, then sweeten it,
and put out your Custard into a deep Dish, and bake it, then serve it with
French Comfits strewed on it.

72. To make Minced Pyes of an Eele.
Take a fresh Eel, flea it, and cut of the Fish from the Bones, Mince it small,
then Pare 2 or 3 Wardens, or Pears, Mince of them as much as of the Eel, Temper
them together, and season them with Ginger, Pepper, Cloves, Mace, Salt, a
little Sanders, some Currants, Raisins, Pruans, Dates, Verjuice, Butter and
Rosewater.

73. To Bake Rabbits, to be eaten Cold.
When your Rabits are Parboyled, take out all the bones you can well take out,
and Lard them, then season them with Pepper, Salt, Cloves, Mace, and Nutmegs;
with a good quantity of Savoury, and forced Meat; ^hen put them if to your
prepared Coffin, put in Butter, and close your Pie, bake it, and when it is
Cold fill it with Clarifi'd Butter.

74. To Take a Joll of Ling in a Pie.
Let your Ling be almost boiled, and then Season it with Pepper only (the Skin
being first taken off) strew the bottom of your prepared Coffin with an Onion
or 2 Minced small; close your Pie, and bake it; then take the Yolks and Whites
of about a dozen Eggs, not boiled altogether hard, Mince them small with your
Knife, and put them into drawn butter, Toss them together, then draw your Pie,
and pour in this Lear of Eggs all over, and shake it together, so put on your
Lid, and Dish your Pie.

75. To Bake a Turkey.
Boil and Lard your Turkey, when it is parpoyl'd season it with Pepper, Salt,
and a little Cloves and Mace, then put him into your prepared Coffin, lay on
butter and close it: put the Head on the Top, with your Garnish, then bake it,
and fill it with ^larified butter, when it is cold.

76. To Roast Calves Feet.
First boil them tender, and blanch them, and being cold, Lard them thick with
small Lard, then Spit them on a Spit, and Roast them; serve them with Sauce
made of Vinegar, Cinnamon, Sugar, and butter.

77. To Bake a Goose.
Break the bones of your Goose, and Parboyl him then Season him with Pepper and
Salt, and a little Cloves and Mace, if you please, you may bake a Ribit or 2
with it, because your Stubble Geese are very Fat, and your Rabits dry, you need
not Lard either, bake thin good hot Butter-Paste.

78. To make Apple-pyes to Fry.
Take about 12 Pippins, pare them, cut them, and almost cover them with Water,
and almost a pound of Sugar, let them boil on a gentle Fire close Covered, with
a stick of Cinnamon, Minced Orange-Peel, a little Dill-seed beaten, and
Rose Water, when this is cold and stiff, make them into little Pasties, with
Rich Paste, and so fry them.

79. To make a Rare Dutch Pudding.
Take a pound and a half of fresh Beef, all Lean, with a pound and a quarter of
Beef Suet, both sliced very small, take then a Stale half-pe^ny-loaf, and Grate
it, a handful of Sage, a little Winter-savoury, and a little Thyme, shred all
these very small, take 4 Eggs, half a pint of Cream, a few Cloves, Nutmeg,
Mace, and Pepper finely beaten; Mingle them altogether very well, with little
Salt, Roll it all up together, in a Green Colwort-leaf, and then tie it up hard
in a Linnen-cloath. Garnish your Dish with Grated Bread, and serve it up with
Mustard in Saucers.

80. To make Sausages.
Take Pork, more lean than fat, mince it exceeding small together, then take
part of the Fleak of Pork, which is the Suet, in pieces, about the bigness of
the top of your Finger, season each apart with Sage minced, good store of
Pepper and Salt, with some Cloves and Mace mixed in the seasoning each of them,
then take small Sheep-guts and cleanse them, (some use Capon'sguts) and fill
them with your Funnel, always putting some of the Fleak between the minced, if
you have it ready, you may sprinkle a little Sack on the top of the
Sausage-meat, and it will make it fill the better.

81. To stew Beef in Gobbets, the French Fashion.
Take a flank of Beef, or any part but the Leg, cut it into slices or Gobbets,
as big as Pullets Eggs, with some Gobbets of fat, and boil it in a Pot or
Pipkin, with some fair Spring Water, scum it clean, and after it has boiled an
hour put to it Carrots, Parsnips, Turnips, great Onions, some Salt, Cloves,
Mace and whole Pepper; cover it close, and stew it till it be very tender; and
half an hour before it is ready, put into it some Thyme, Parsley,
Winter-savoury, sweet Marjoram, Sorrel, and Spinach, (being a little bruised
with the back of a Ladle, with some Claret Wine; then dish it on fine Sippets,
and serve it to the Table hot: Garnish it with Grapes, Barberries or
Gooseberries; or else use Spices, the bottoms of boiled Artichoaks put into
beaten Butter, and grated Nutmeg, garnished with Barberries.

82. To boil a Capon or Chicken with Sugar-pease.
When the Cods be but young string them, and pick off the Husks, then take 2 or
3 handfuls and put them into a Pipkin, with half a pound of sweet Butter, a
quarter of a pint of fair Water, gross Pepper, Salt, Mace, and some Sallet-Oyl;
stew them till they be very tender, and strain to them 3 or 4 yolks of Eggs,
with 6 spoonfuls of Sack.

83. To boil Perches.
Let your Liquor boil, and your Pan be seasoned with a little White Wind, Gravy
and Vinegar, with a grated Nutmeg, and almost boil it over a Chafing dish, then
pour sweet Butter over it: Garnish it with Barberries and sliced Lemons.

84. To boil Eels.
Cut the Eels and stew them; when they are half done, beat a little Ale with
Vinegar and put to the Liquor with some Parsley and sweet Herbs; Dish them and
serve them up in their Broth, with a little Salt.

85. A Turkish Dish of Meat.
Take an inter-larded piece of Beef, cut it into thin slices, and put it into a
Pot with a close cover, or stewing-pan; then put into it a good quantity of
clean picked Rice, skin it well, put into it a quantity of whole Pepper, 2 or 3
whole Onions, and set it boil very well, take out the Onions, and dish it on
Sippets; the thicker it is the better.

86. To boil a Chine of Beef poudered.
Take either a Chine, Rump, Surloin, Brisket, Rib, Flank, Buttock, or Fillet of
Beef, and give them in Summer a weeks poudering, in Winter a Fortnight, you may
stuff them, or let them be plain; if you stuff them, do it with all manner of
sweet Herbs, with fat Beef minced, and some Nutmeg; serve them on brew is, with
Roots, or Cabbage boiled in Milk, with beaten Butten.

87. To make a Hash of a Capon or Pullet.
Take a Capon, or Partridge, or Hen* and ro^st them, and being cold, mince the
Brains and Wings very fine, and tear the Legs and Rumps, whole to be
Carbonaded; then put some strong Motton-broath, or good Gravy, grated Nutmeg, a
great Onion and Salt, then stew them in a large Earthen Pipkin, or Since Pan^
stew the Rumps and Legs in the same strong Broth in another Pipkin; then take
some light French bread chipt, and cover the bottom of the Dish* steep the
Breal in the same Broth, or good Mutton Gravy, then ^our the Hash on the
steeped Bread, lay the Legs and the Rump on the Hash with some fried Oysters,
sliced Lemon and Lemon Peel, the juice of an Orange, and yolks of Eggs
strained, and beaten Butter, Garnish the Dish, with Carved Oranges, Lemons,
etc. Thus you may Hash any kind of Fowl.

88. To dress a Cods Head.
Cut off the Cods-head beyond the Gills, that you may have part of the Body
with it, boil it in Water and Salt, to which you may add half a pint of
Vinegar, the Head must be little more than covered; before you put it into the
Cauldron, take a quart of the biggest cleanest Oysters, and a bunch of sweet
Herbs and Onions, and put them into the moath of the Head, and with a
Packthread bind the Jaws fast, you must be sure to pick and wash it very clean:
When it is boiled enough, take it up and set it a drying over a Chafing Dish of
Coals, then take the Oyster Liquor, four Anchovies, and a sliced Onion, put to
them a quarter of a pint of White Wind and sweet butter, and melt them
together, and pour it on the Cods-head; stick all, or most of the Oysters upon
the Head, or where they will enter, and Garnish it over with them; Grate on a
little Nutmeg, and set it smoking up; Garnish the brim of the Dish with Lemon,
and sliced Bay leaves.

89. To boil Widgeons or Teal.
Parboyl your Widgeons or Teal, and then stick whole Cloves in their Breasts,
put into their bellies a little Winter-savory or Parsley; boil them in a Pipkin
by themselves, thicken it with Toasts, season it with Verjuice, Sugar, and a
little Pepper; Garnish your dish with Barberries and Pruens, and so serve them.

90. To make a Veal Pie.
When your Paste is raised; then cut your Leg o^ Veal into pieces, and season
it with Pepper, Nutmeg, and Salt, with some whole large Mace, and so lay it in
your prepared Coffin, with good store of Raisins o^ the Sun, and Currants, and
fill it up with sweet Butter then close it, and set it in the Oven, and when
baked, serve it hot.

91. To make a fried Pudding.
Take grated Bread, Currants, Cloves and Mace, with Beef Suet and Sugar, and one
yolk of an Egg beaten, ^ix all well together, and make them into flat bowls,
^^en fry them in Beef Suet, and Garnish your Dish ^ith Sugar, serve them always
at the first Course.

92. To bake a Breast of Veal.
First parboyl it, and take out the long Bones, and so lay it in a Dish, in
Vinegar two or three hours, ^hen take it out, and season it with Pepper and
Salt, and so lay it into a thin fine Paste, with good store of ^ne sweet Herbs,
finely chopped, and good store of But^er or Marrow, then bake it, then put in
some juice of ^ranges, and serve it hot.

93. To make Paste for all manner of tarts.
Take very sweet Butter, and put into fair water and make it boil on the Fire;
then take the finest flower you can get, and mix them well together, till (...)
come to a paste, and so raise it; but if you doubt ^at it will not be stiff
enough, then you may mix ^^me Yolks of Eggs with it, as you temper all your
^^uff together.

94. To make a baked Pudding.
Grate a penny-loaf, and put thereto more Suet than ^ead minced small, with
some Nutmeg and Sugar, ^^d two yolks of Eggs, tempering it only with Rose^ater;
then butter a little Pewter Dish in the bottom, ^^d put your stuff after it is
well tempered therein, ^^en bake it, when it is baked, stir it up from the
bot^^m of the Dish, and so turn the underside upper^ost, then strew some Sugar
upon the brims of the ^^ish, and serve it first to the Table.

95. To boil Sparrows, Larks or other small Birds.
Take a Laddle full of strong Mutton-broath, a little ^hole Mace, and a handful
of Parsley, put in a little ^^uter-savory, season it with Verjuice, Sugar, and
a lit^^ Pepper, thicken it with a spoonful of Cream, and ^olk of (...).

96. To boil a Capon with Asparagus.
Boil your Capon or Chicken in fair water, and some Salt, then put in their
bellies a little Mace, chopped Parsley, and sweet Butter; being boiled, serve
them on Sippets, and put a little of the Broth on them; Then have a bundle or
2 of Asparagus boiled, put in beaten butter, and serve it on your Capon or
Chicken.

97. To boil a Chicken or Capon in white Broth.
First boil the Capon in Water and Salt, then 3 pint of strong Broth, and a
quart of White Wind, and stew i^ in a Pipkin with a quarter of a pound of
Dates, hall a pound of fine Sugar, four or five blades of large Mace the Marrow
of 3 Marrow bones, a handful of white Endive, stew these in a Pipkin very
leasurely, that it but only simper, then being finely stewed, and the broth
well tasted, strain the yolks of ten Eggs, with some of the broth; before you
dish up the Capons or Chickens, put the Eggs into the broth, and keep it
stirring that it may not Curdle, give it a Walm and set it from the fire: the
Fowls being dish'd up put on the Broth, and Garnish the Meat with Dates,
Marrow, large Mace, Endive, preserved barberries, Oranges, boiled Skirre^.
Pomegranates, and Kernels. Make a Lear of Almond paste and Grape Verjuice.

98. To boil a Capon with Sage and Parsley.
First boil it in Water and Salt, then boil some Parsley, Sage, 2 or 3 Eggs
hard and chop them; then ha^^ a few thin slice of Manchet, and stew altogether
b^ break not the slices of bread; stew them with some of the broth wherein the
Capon boyls, some larg Mace, Butter, a little White Wind, or Vinegar, wit^ a
few Barberries, or Gr^pes; Dish up the Chickens o^ the Sauce, and run them over
with sweet butter, an^ Lemon, cut like Dice, the Peel being cut like sma^ Lard,
and boil a little peel with the Chickens.

99. To fry Rabbits with sweet Sauce.
Cut your Rabbit in pieces, wash it, and dry it we^^ in a Cloth, take some
fresh butter, and fry the Ra^bit in it, when your Rabbit is little more than
half fried, take a little Vinegar, fresh butter and sugar; melt it together,
and so serve it with Sippets, the Dish Garnished with Flowers, etc.

100. To make French Pottage called Skink.
Take a Leg of Beef, and chop it into 3 pieces, then boil it in a pot with 3
pottles of Spring Water, a few Cloves, Mace, and whole Pepper: after the Pot is
scummed put in a bundle of Sweet-Marjoram, Rosemary, thyme, Winter savory,
Sage, and Parsley, bound up hard, some Salt, and 2 or 3 great Onions whole,
then about an hour before Dinner put in 3 Marrow-bones, and thicken it with
some strained Oat-meal, or Manchet sliced and steeped with some Gravy, strong
broth, or some of the Pottage; then a little before you dish up the Skink, put
into it a little fine powder of saffron, and give it a walm or 2; Dish it on
large slices of French bread, and dish the Marrow-bones on them in a fine large
Dish, then have 2 or 3 Manchets cut into toasts, and being finely toasted, lay
on the Knuckle of Beef in the middle of the Dish, the Marrow-bones round about
it, and the Toasts round about the Dish brim; serve it hot.

101. To make Gooseberry Cream.
First boil, or you may preserve your Gooseberries; then having a clear Cream
boiled up, and seasoned with old Cinnamon, Nutmeg, Mace, Sugar, Rose Water, and
Eggs, dish it up, and when it is cold, take up the Gooseberries with a pin, and
stick them on in rounds as thick as they can lie upon the said Cream;
Garnishing your Dish, with them, and strew them over with the finest Sugar, and
serve them up.

102. To make a Quaking Pudding.
Take a quart of sweet Cream, and near half a pound of Almonds blanched, and
finely beaten, then strain them, and boil it with large Mace, and season it
with Rose Water and sugar, then take 10 Eggs, and 5 of their whites well beaten
with small Cinnamon, and 2 or 3 spoonfuls of flower, mix all well together, and
make it of the thickness of Butter, then wet a Cloth and rub it with Flower,
tying your Pudding round therein, and boil it in Beef-broath 2 hours; take it
up, and put a little White Wind, Sugar, and sliced Nutmeg into a Pewter-dish,
and put your Pudding into it; then scrape some Sugar on the brims, and serve it.

103. To make clouted Cream.
Take New Milk and set it on the fire from Morning till Evening, but let it not
boil; And this is called my Lady Youngs Clouted Cream.

104. To souce a young Pig.
Scald a young Pig, boil it in fair water and White Wind, put thereto some bay
leaves, whole Ginger and Nutmegs quartered, and a few whole Cloves boil it
thoroughly, and let it lie in the same Broth in an Earthen-pot.

105. To make Polonian sausages.
Take the Fillets of a Hog, chop them very small with a handful of Red Sage,
season it hot with Ginger Pepper; then put it into a great Sheeps Gut, let it
lie 3 nights in Brine, then boil it, and hang it up in a Chimney where Fire is
usually kept. These Sausages will keep a whole year, and are good for Sallets,
or to garnish boiled Meat, or to relish a Glass of Wine.

106. To keep salmon fresh a whole Month.
First boil your salmon as usually, then put it into an Earthen-pot, and cover
it in good White Wind Vinegar, putting thereto a branch of Rosemary, and keep
it very close covered, and so you may keep it, that it will retain its perfect
taste and delicacy for one Month or more.

107. To make tender and delicate Brawn.
Put a Collar of Brawn in a Kettle of Water, and set it into an Oven, as for
Houshold-bread, cover it close, and let it stand as long as you would do bread,
and it will be very excellent Brawn.

108. To keep powdered beef after it is boiled, sweet 5 or 6 Weeks.
When your Beef has been powdered about a fortnight, then boil it well, and
dry it with a Cloth, and wrap it in dry Clothes, and put it into some pot or
Vessel, and keep it close from the Air, and it will keep sound 2 or 3 Months.

109. To dress Neats-tongues and Vdders.
When they are boiled enough in Beef-broath, and scumm'd; von must have Turnips
ready boiled, cut in pieces, and soaked in butter, or else Colliflowers and
Carrots, or all of them; then put the Turnips all over the bottom of a large
Dish, then slice out the Tongues, and lay the sides one against another, slice
the Udders, and lay them between, opposite to one another; Garnish the
Colliflowers all over them, and the Carrots up and down between the
Colliflowers, and Barberries and Parsley on the brim of the dish.

110. To make Pannado.
Take a quart of Running-water, and put it on the fire in a Skillet, then cut a
little Roll of bread in slices, about the bigness of a Groat, and as thin as
Wafers, lay it on a dish on a few Coals, then put it into the Water, with 2
handfuls of Currants picked and washed, a little large Mace, when it is enough
season it with Sugar and Rose Water.

111. To make Liver Puddings.
Take the Guts of a young Hog, wash them very clean, and lay them 2 or 3 days
in water, take the Liver of the same Hog and boil it till it will grate; then
grate it very small and fine, take to the weight of the Liver almost the weight
of Beef-suit, season it with Salt, Cloves, Mace and Nutmeg finely beaten, a
Penny loaf grated, a pound of the best White Sugar, 2 pound of Currants, a pint
of good Cream, a quarter of a pint of Rose Water, 3 Eggs, mix all together to
such a thickness, that you may fill the Guts, then prick them, and put them
into boiling water, and keep an even fire for half a quarter of an hour; then
take them up, and lay them upon straw, you must have a care not to tie them too
hard nor too slack, lest they break in boiling.

112. To make a rare Citron-Pudding.
Take a Penny loaf and grate it, a pint and half of Cream, half a dozen of
Eggs, one Nutmeg sliced, a little Salt, an ounce of Candied Citron sliced
small, a little Candied Orange-peel sliced, 3 ounces of Sugar, put these into a
Wooden dish well flowered, and cover it with a Cleath, and when the water
boyleth, put it in, boil it well, and serve it up with Rose Water and Sugar,
and stick it with Wafers or blanched Almonds.

113. To bake a Gammon of Bacon.
Water it fresh enough, and seethe it as tender as you may to handle it, and
then pull off the skin and stuff it with Parsley, Penny royal, Thyme, Marjoram,
Marigolds, Camomile and Sugar, chop them small, and season them with Salt and
Pepper, Cloves small Raisins, yolks of Eggs hard roasted, then sturf your
Bacon, and cut off the lean of the Bacon, and mince it small, and take a
handful of your Stuffing, and mingle it with 3 or 4 yolks of raw Eggs, and then
put it upon the Gammon, then close on the skin again, and close it in paste.

114. To boil Woodcocks or Snites.
Boil them either in strong Broth, or in Water and Salt, and being boiled, take
out the Guts, and chop them small with the Liver, put to it some Crumbs of
grated White bread a little Cock broth, and some large Mace, stew them together
with some Gravy, then dissolve the yolks of 2 Eggs in some Wine Vinegar, and a
little grated Nutmeg, and when you are ready to dish it, put in the Eggs, and
stir it among the Sance with a little Butter, dish them on Sippets, and run the
Sauce over them with some beaten Butter and Capers, a Lemon minced small,
Barberries or whole pickled Grapes.

115. To make a made Dish of Apples.
Put on your Skillet of Water, with some Currants, a boiling, then pare about a
dozen of Pippins, and cut them from the Core into the said Water, when they are
boiled tender pour them into a Cullender, when the Water is drained from them,
put them into a Dish, and season them (but stay till they are cold, least it
melt your Sugar) with Sugar, Rose Water, Cinnamon, and Carraway-seeds, then roll
out 2 sheets of paste, put one into the Dish, bottom, and all over the brims,
then lay the Apples in the bottom round and high, wet it round, and cover it
with the other Sheet, close it, and carve it about the brims of the Dish as you
please, prick it, and bake it, scrape Sugar upon it, and serve it up.

116. To make a Fool.
Set 2 quarts of Cream over the Fire, let it boil, then take the yolks of 12
Eggs, and beat them very well, with 3 or 4 spoonfuls of cold Cream, and then
strain the Eggs in the Skillet of hot Cream, stirring it all the time to keep
it from burning, then keep it still stirring for fear of burning, then take it
off, and let it stand and cool, then take 2 or 3 Spoonfuls of Sack, and put it
in the Dish with 4 or 5 Sippets, set the Sippets a drying and when they are dry
that they hang to the Dish, sweeten the Cream, and pour it into the Dish
softly, because the Sippets shall not rise up; this will make 3 Dishes: When it
is cold it is fit to be eaten.

117. To boil Flounders or Jacks the best way.
Take a punt of White Wind, the tops of young Thyme and Rosemary, a little
whole Mace, a little whole Pepper, seasoned with Verjuice, Salt and a piece of
sweet Butter, and so serve it; you may do Fish in the same Liquor 3 or 4 times.

118. To boil a Haunch of Venison.
First stuff your Venison with a handful of sweet Herbs, and Parsley minced
with a little Beef Suet, and yolks of Eggs boiled hard; season your Stufling
with Pepper, Nutmeg, Ginger, and Salt; put your Haunch of Venison a boiling,
being poudered before; then boil up 3 or 4 Colliflowers in strong Broth, and a
little Milk; when they are boiled, put them forth into a Pipkin, add to them
drawn Butter; and keep them warm by the Fire, then boil up 2 or 3 handfuls of
Spinach in the same Liquor, when it is boiled up, pour out part of the broth
and put in a little Vinegar, and a Ladleful of sweet Butter, and a grated
Nutmeg, your Dish being ready with Sippets in the bottom, put on your Spinach
round toward your Dish side; then take up the Venison, being boiled, and put it
into the middle of your Dish, put in your Colliflowers all over it, pour on
your sweet bttter over your Colliflowers, and garnish it with Barberries, and
the brims of the Dish with green Parsley minced; Cabbage is as good, done in
the same manner as Colliflowers.

119. To make an Eel-pye.
Wash, Flea, and cut your Ecls in pieces, put to them a handful of sweet Herbs,
Parsley minced with an Onion, season them with Pepper, Salt, Cloves, Mace and
Nutmeg, and having your Coffin made of good Paste, put them in, and strew over
them 2 handfuls of Currants, and a Lemon cut in slices, then put on Butter and
close the Pie, when it is baked, put in at the Funnel a little sweet-Butter,
White Wind and Vinegar, beaten up with a couple of Yolks of Eggs.

120. To bake Steaks the French way.
Season the Steaks with Pepper, Nutmeg and Salt lightly, and set them by; then
take a piece of the leanest of the Leg of Mutton, and mince it small with some
Beefsuet, and a few sweet Herbs, as tops of Thyme, Pennyroyal, grated Bread,
yolks of Eggs, sweet Cream, Raisins of the Sun, etc. Work all these together,
and work it into little balls or puddings, put them in a deep round Pie on the
Steaks; then put to them some Butter, and sprinkle it with Verjuice, close it
up and bake it, when it is enough cut it up, and liquor it with the juice of 2
or 3 Oranges and Lemons.

121. To make a Warden or Pear-pye.
Bake your Wardens or Pears in an Oven with a little Water, and a good quantity
of Sugar, let your Pot be covered with a piece of Dough; let them not be fully
baked by a quarter of an hour; when they are cold make a high Coffin, and put
them in whole, adding to them some Cloves, whole Cinnamon, Sugar, with some of
the Liquor in the Pot, so bake it.

122. To stow a Trout.
Take a large Trout fair trimmed and wash it, put it into a deep Peuter Dish;
then take half a pint of sweet Wine, with a lump of Butter, and a little whole
Mace, Parsley, Savory and Thyme; mince them all small, and put them into the
belly of the Trout, and so let it slew a quarter of an hour, then mince the
yolk of an hard Egg, and stew it on the Trout, lay the Herbs about it, scrape
on Sugar and serve it up.

123. To make Sauce for Pigeons.
Melt some Vinegar and butter together, and roast some Parsley in the belly of
the Fowl; or else Vineleaves, and mix it well together, and pour it on.

124. A general Sauce for Wild-fowl.
The most general Sauce for Wild-fowl roasted; as Ducks, Mallard, Widgeons,
Teal, Snipe, Sheldrake, Plovers, Puets, and the like, is only Mustard and
Vinegar, or Mustard and Verjuice mixed together, or else an Onion, Water and
Pepper.

125. To Roast a Cows Vdder.
Boil your Udder very well, then stick it thick all over with Cloves, and when
it is cold spit it and lay it to the Fire, and baste it very well with sweet
Butter, and when it is sufficiently roasted and brown, draw it from the Fire,
and put some Vinegar and Butter on a Chafing Dish of Coals, and crumb in some
White-bread, and boil it till it be thick, then put to it good store of Sugar
and Cinnamon, and putting it into a clean dish, lay the Cows Udder therein, and
trim the sides of the Dish with Sugar and so serve it.

126. To make a Spinge-tart.
Take of good Spinach, and boil it an White Wind till it be very soft as Pap;
then take it and strain it all in a Pewter Dish, not leaving any unstrained;
put to Rose Water, good store of Sugar, and Cinnamon, and boil it till it be as
thick as Marmalade, then let it cool, and afterward fill your Coffin and adorn
it, and serve it, it will be of a green Color.

127. To make a Tart of Rice.
Pick your Rice very clean, and boil it in sweet Cream till it be very soft,
then let it stand and cool; put to it good store of Cinnamon and Sugar, and the
yolks of a couple of Eggs, and some Currants; stir and beat all well together:
Then having made a Coffin as for other Tarts, put your Rice therein, and spread
it all over the Coffin, and break many small bits of sweet Butter upon it all
over, and scrape some Sugar over it, then cover the Tart and bake it, and serve
it as other Tarts.

128. To make a Codling-tart.
Take Green Apples from the Tree, and Coddle them in scalding Water, without
breaking, then Peel the skin from them, and so divide them into halves, and cut
out the Cores, and so lay them into the Coffin, and do as in a Pippin tart, and
before you cover it, when the Sugar is cast in, sprinkle a good store of
Rsose-water on it, then close it, and do as in the Pippin-tarts.

129. To make a Pippin-tart.
Take of the Fairest Pippins, and pare them, and then divide them just in
halves, and take out the Cores clean, then Roll the Coffin flat, and raise a
small verge of an Inch or more high; lay the Pippins with the Hollow side
downward, close one another, then put in a few Cloves, a stick of Cinnamon
broken, and a little piece of Butter, cover all clean over with sugar, and so
cover the Coffin, and bake it as other Tarts; when it is baked, boil some
Butter and Rose Water together, and anoint the Lid all over with it, and then
scrape, or strew on it good store of sugar, and so set it in the Oven again,
and then serve it up.

130. Eo make a cherry-tart.
Take the Fairest cherries you can get, and pick them clean from Leaves and
stalks, then spread out your Coffin as for your Pippin-tart, and cover the
bottom with sugar, then cover the sugar all over with cherries, then cover
these cherries with sugar, some sticks of cinnamon, and a few cloves; then lay
in more cherries, sugar, cinnamon, and cloves, till the Coffin be filled up,
then cover it and bake it, in all points as the codling and Pippin-tarts, and
so serve it, In the same manner you may make Tarts of Goose-berries,
strawberries, Rasberries, Bilberries, or any other Berry whatsoever.

131. To make a Mince-Pye.
Take a Leg of Mutton; or a Neats-Tongue, and Parboyl it well, the Mutton being
cut from the bone, then put to it three pound of the best Mutton-suet, shred
very small; then spread it abroad, and season it with Salt, Cloves and Mace,
then put in good store of Currants, great Raisins, and Pruans clean washed and
Picked, a few Dates sliced, and some Orange-Peels sliced: then being all well
mixed together, put it into a Coffin, or many Coffins, and so bake them, and
when they are served up, open the Lids, and strew store of Sugar on the Top of
the Meat, and Lid.

132. To make a Calves-Foot-Pye.
Boil your Calves-Feet very well, and then Pick all the meat from the Bones,
when it is Cold shred it as small as you can; and season it with Cloves and
Mace, and put in good store of Currants, Raisins and Pruans, then put it into
the Coffin with good store of sweet Butter, then break in whole sticks of
Cinnamon, and a Numeg sliced, and season it with Salt, then close up the Coffin,
and only leave a vent-hole, put in some Liquor made of Verjuice, Sugar,
Cinnamon, and Butter boiled together, and serve it.

133. To make a Tansie.
Take a certain number of Eggs, according to the bigness of your Drying Pan,
and break them into a Dish, taking away the white of every third Egg, then with
a spoon take away the little White Chicken-knots, that stick upon the Yolks,
then with a little Cream beat them very well together, then take of Green
Wheat-blade, Violet-leaves, Strawberry-leaves; Spinach and Succory, of each a
like quantity, and a few Walnut-Tree-Buds; Chop and beat all these very well,
and then strain out the Juice; mix it then with a little more Cream, put to it
the Eggs, and stir all well together; then put in a few Crumbs of fine Grated
Bread, Cinnamon, Nutmeg, and Salt, then put some sweet Butter into a Drying Pan,
and as soon as it is Melted put in the Tansey, and fry it brown without
burning, and with a dish turn it in the Pan, as occasion shall serve, strew
good store of sugar on it, and serve it up.

134. To slew a Pike.
After your Pike is dressed, and opned in the back, and laid flat, as if it were
to Fry, then lay it in a large Dish, put to it White Wind to cover it, set it
on the Coals, and let it boil gently, if Scum arise, take it off, then put to
it Currants, Sugar, Cinnamon, Barberies, as many Pruans as will Garnish the Dish,
then cover it close with another Dish, and let it slew till the Fruit be soft,
and the Pick enough, then put to it a good piece of sweet Butter; with your
Scummer take up the Fish, and lay it in a dish with Sippets, then take a couple
of Yolks of Eggs only, and beat them together well, with a spoonful of Cream,
and as soon as the Pick is taken out, put it into the Broth, and stir it
exceedingly, to keep it from Curdling, then pour the Broth upon the Pike, and
Trim the sides of the dish with Sugar, Pruans, and Barberies, with slices of
Oranges and Lemons, and so serve it up.

135. To Roast Vension.
If you would Roast any Vension, after you washed it, and cleansed all the
Blood from it, you may stick it with Cloves, all over on the outside, and if
it be Lean, Lard it with either Mutton or Pork-Lard, but Mutton is the best,
then Spit it, and Roast it by a soaking. Fire, then take Vinegar, crumbs of
Bread; and some of the Gravy that comes from the Vension, and boil them well in
a Dish, then season it with Sugar, Cinnamon, Ginger, and Salt, and serve the
Vension upon the Sauce, when Roas

136. To Roast a piece of fresh Sturgeon.
Stop your Sturgeon with Cloves, then spit it, and let it roast very leasurly,
basting it continually, which will take away the hardness; when it is enough,
serve it upon the Vension sauce; with Salt only thrown upon it,

137. To Boil a Gurnet or Roach.
First draw your Fish, and then either split it, or Joint it open in the back,
and Truss it round; then wash it clean, and boil it in Water and Salt, with a
bunch of sweet Herbs, then take it up in a large Dish, and pour into it
Verjuice, Nutmeg, Butter, and Pepper, after it has stewed a little, thicken it
with the Yolks of Eggs, then remove it hot into another Dish, and Garnish it
with slices of Oranges and Lemons, Barberries, Pruans and sugar, and so serve
it up.

138. To make a carp Pie.
After you have drawn and washed, and scalded a fair large carp, season it with
Pepper, salt, and Nutmeg, and then put it into a Coffin, with good store of
sweet Butter, and then cast on Raisins of the sun, the juice of Lemons, and
some slices of Orange-Peels, and then sprinkle on a little Vinegar, close it
up, and bake it.

139. To make a chicken Pie.
After you have trust your chickens, then break their Legs and Breast-bones,
and raise your crust of the best Paste, lay them in a Coffin, close together,
with their bodies full of Butter, and then lay upon them, and underneath them,
currants, great Raisins, Pruans, cinnamon, sugar, whole Mace and sugar, whole
Mace and salt, then cover all with good store of Butter, and so bake it; then
pour into it White Wind, Rose Water, sugar, cinnamon, and Vinegar mixed together,
with the Yolks of 2 or 3 Eggs beaten amongst it, and so serve it.

140. To make Almond-Water.
Take blanched Almonds beaten in a Mortar very small, putting in now and then
one spoonful of Cream, to keep them from oyling: Then boil as much Cream as you
please with your beaten Almonds, together with a blade of Mace, and season it
with Sugar; then strain it, and stir it till it be be almost cold, and then let
it stand till you serve it; and then Garnish your Dish with fine Sugar scraped
thereon.

141. To make an Almond-Pudding.
Take a Pound of Blanched Almonds, and beat them small; put therere some
Rose Water and Ambergreese often thereinto, as you beat them, then season it
with Nutmeg, and Sugar, and mix them with grated ^read, Beef-fuet, and 2 Eggs,
and so put it into a dish, tying a Cloth round about, and boil it.

142. To make Water Gruel.
Take a Pottle of Water, a handful of great Oatmeal Picked, and beat in a
Mortar, put it in boiling* when it is half enough, put to it 2 handfuls of
Currants, washed, a Faggot or 2 of sweet Herbs; 4 or 5 blades of large Mace, and
a little sliced Nutmeg, let a grain of Musk be infused a while in it, when it
is enough season it with Sugar and Rose Water, and put to it a little drawn
butter.

143. To stew sausages.
Boil them a little in fair water and salt, and for sauce boil some Currants
alone, when they be almost tender, pour out the Water from them, and put to
them a little White Wind, Butter and sugar, and so serve it.

144. To make a Rare Fricacie.
Take young Rabbits, young Chickens, or a Rack of Lamb, being cut one Rib from
another, and Parboyl either of these very well, in a Drying Pan, with a little
Water and Salt, then pour the Water and Salt from it, and fry it with sweet
Butter, and make sauce with 3 Yolks of Eggs beaten well, with 6 spoonfuls of
Verjuice, and a little shred Parsley, with some sliced Nutmeg, and scalded
Goosberries, when it is Fried pour in the Sauce all over the Meat, and so let
it thicken a little in the Pan; then lay it in a Dish with the sauce, and serve
it.

145. To make an Oatmeal-Pudding.
Take a pint of Milk, and put to it a pint of large Oatmeal, let it stand on
the Fire till it be scalding hot, then let it stand by and soak about half an
hour, then pick a few sweet Herbs and shred them, and put in half a Pound of
Currants, and half a pound of Suet, and about 2 spoonfuls of Sugar, and 3 or 4
Eggs; these put into a bag and Boiled, do make a very good Pudding.

146. To make an Almond Tart.
Raise an excellent good Paste, with 6 Corners an Inch deep, then take some
Blanched Almonds very finely beaten with Rose Water, take a pound of Sugar to a
pound of Almonds, some grated Nutmeg, a little Cream, with strained Spinach, as
much as will cover the Almonds Green, so bake it with a gentle heat, in an
Oven, not shutting the door, draw it, and stick it with a Candied Oringe,
Citron, and put in Red and White Muskadine.

847. To Boil Pigeons with Rice.
Boil your Pigeons with Matton-broth, putting sweet Herbs in the bellies, then
take a little Rice, and boil it in Cream with a little whole Mace, season it
with Sugar, lay it thick on their breasts, wringing also the Juice of Lemon
upon them, and so serve them,

148. To Barrel up Oysters.
Open your Oysters, take the Liquor from them, and mix it with a reasonable
quantity of the best White-Wine-Vinegar, with a little Salt and Pepper; then
put the Oysters into a small Barrel, and fill them up with this Pickle, and
this will keep them 6 Months, sweet and good, and with their Natural Taste.

149. To make a Cowslip Tart.
Take the blossoms of a Gallon of Cowslips, Mince them exceeding small, and
beat them in a Mortar, put to them a handful or 2 of Grated Naples-bisket, and
about a pint and half of Cream, boil them a little on the Fire, then take them
off, and beat in 8 Eggs with a little Cream, if it do not thicken, put it on
the Fire till it does gently, but take heed it Curdels not, season it with
Sugar, Rose Water, and a little Salt: Bake it in a dish, or little open Tarts;
it is best to let your Cream be cold, before you stir in the Eggs.

150. To Bake a calves head to be eaten cold.
You must half boil a fair Calves-head, then take out all the bones on both
sides, and season it with the aforesaid. Seasoning, and Lard it with Bacon, and
a little Lemon Peel; then having a Coffin large enough, not very high nor
thick, but make it Apiece, lay on some Sheets of Lard, on the Top, and
butter, when it is baked and cold, fill it with clarified butter,

151. To make Pear-Puddings.
Take a Cold capon, or half Roasted, which is much better, then take Suet
shread very small, the Meat and Suet together, with half as much Grated bread,
two spoonfuls of Flower, Nutmegs, Cloves, and Mace, Sugar as much as you
please, half a pound of Currants, the Yolks of 2 Eggs, and the White of one, and
as much Cream as will make it up into a stiff Paste: Then make it up in Fashion
of a Pear, a stick of Cinnamon for the stalk, and the Head of a Clove.

152. To make a Hotch-Pot.
Take a piece of Brisket of Beef, a piece of Mutton, a Knucle of Veal, a good
Cullender of Pot Herbs, half Minced Carrots, Onions, and Cabbage, a little
broken, boil all these together until they be very thick.

153. To make a Tart of Medlers.
Take Medlers that are Rotten, then scrape them, and set them upon a
chafing dish of Coals, season them with the Yolk of Eggs, Sugar, Cinnamon, and
Ginger; let it boil well, and lay it on Paste, scrape on Sugar, and serve it.

154. To make a Lemon Caudel.
Take a pint of White Wind, and 2 pints of Water, and let it boil, put to it
half a Manchet, cut it as thin and as small as you can, put it in with some
large Mace, then beat the Yolks of 2 Eggs to thicken it, then squeeze in the
Juice of half a dozen of Lemons, and season it with Sugar and Rose Water.

155. To make an Italian Pudding.
Take fine Manchet, and cut it in small pieces like Dice, then put to it half a
pound of Beef Suet Minced small, Raisius of the Sun, Cloves, Mace, Dates
Minced, Sugar, Marrow, Rose Water, Eggs, and Cream, mingle all these together,
put them in a buttered Dish, in less then an hour it will be well baked, when
it is enough, scrape on Sugar and serve it up.

156. To make a Gooseberry-Custard.
When you have cut off the sticks and eyes of your Gooseberries, and washed
them, then boil them in water till they will break in a Spoon, then strain
them, and beat half a dozen Eggs, and stir them together upon a Chafing Dish of
Coals with Rose Water, then sweeten it well with Sugar, and always serve it
cold.

157. To make a Fricacie of Rabbits.
Cut your Rabbits in small pieces, and mince a handful of Thyme and Parsley
together, and season your Rabbits with a Nutmeg, Pepper, and Salt; then take
two Eggs, and Verjuice beaten together, then throw it in the Pan, stick it, and
Dish it up in Sippets.

159. To make Cracknells.
Take 5 or 6 pints of the finest wheat flower you can get, to which put in a
spoonful, and not more of good Yeast; then mingle it well with Butter, Cream
and Rase-water, and Sugar finely beaten, and working it well into Paste, make
it into what form you please, and bake it.

160. To make Pan-cakes.
Put 8 Eggs to 2 quarts of Flower, casting by 4 whites, season it with Cinnamon,
Nutmeg, Ginger, Cloves, Mace, and Salt, then make it up into a strong Batter
with Milk, beat it well together, and put in half a pint of sack, make it so
thin that it may run in your Pan how you please, put your Pan on the fire with
a little Butter, or Suet, when it is very hot, take a Cloth and wipe it out,
so make your Pan very clean, then put in your Batter, and run it very thin,
supply it with little bits of Butter, and so toss it often, and bake it Crisp
and Brown.

191. To make a Junket.
Take Ews, or Goats-Milk, or for want of these Cows-Milk, and put it over the
Fire to warm, then put it in a little Runnet, then pour it out into a dish, and
let it cool, then strew on some Cinnamon and Sugar, and take some of your Cream
and lay on it, scrape on Sugar and serve it.

162. To make Excellent Marrow-spinage-pasties.
Take Spinach and chop it a little, then boil it till it be tender, then make
the best rich light crust you can, and roll it out, and put a little of your
Spinach into it, and Currants, and Sugar, and store of lumps of Marrow; clap the
Paste over this to make little Pasties deep within, and fry them with Clarified
Butter.

163. To make a Pineapple tart.
Beat two handfuls of Pine-apples with a pricked Quince, and the pulp of two or
three Pippins, when they are well beaten, put to them half a pint of Cream, a
little Rose Water, the yolks of 6 Eggs, with a handful of Sugar, if it be
thick, add a little more Cream to it, so having your thin low Coffins for it
dried, fill them up, and bake them; you may garnish them with Orangado, or
Lozenges of sugar-plate, or what else you please.

164. To dry Neats-tongues.
Take Bay Salt beaten very fine, and saltpeter, of each alike, and rub over
your Tongues very well with that, and cover all over with it, and as it wastes,
put on more, and when they are very hard and stiff they are enough, then roll
them in Bran, and dry them before a soft Fire, and before you boil them, let
them lie one night in Pump-water, and boil them in the same Water.

165. To stew Birds the Lady Buttlers way.
Take small Birds, pick them, and cut off their Legs, fry them in sweet butter,
lay them in a Cloth to dry up the butter, then take Oysters and mince them,
and put them in a Dish, put to them White Wind and Cinnamon, put in the birds
with Cloves, Mace and Pepper; let all these stew together covered till they be
enough, then put into it some Sugar, and some toasted Manchet, and put it in
the Dish, and so serve it up to the Table.

166. To make a sweet-Pye with Lamb-stones, and sweet-breads and sugar.
Slit the Lamb-stones in the middle, and skin them, wash the Sweet-breads both
of Veal and Lamb, and wipe them very dry; take the Lamb's Liver, and shred it
very small, take the Udder of a Leg of Veal and slice it, season all with a
little Salt, Nutmeg, Mace and Cloves beaten, and some whole Pepper, then shred
two or three Pippins, and Candied Lemon and Orange-peel, half a dozen Dates
sliced, with Currants, white Sugar, a few Caraway-seeds, a quarter of a pint of
Verjuice, and as much Rose Water, a couple of Eggs, roll up all these together
with the juice of Spinach, and lay a Pudding, then a sweetbread, then a
Lamb-stone, till you have, filled up the Pie, and cover them with Dates, and
sliced Citron and Lemon. When it is drawn, take two or three Yolks of Eggs,
beat them, and put to them a little fresh Butter, White Wind and Sugar, and
pour it into the Tunnel, scrape some Loaf-sugar, upon the Lid, and so serve it.

165. To Roast Eels.
When they are flayed, cut them to pieces, about 3 or 4 Inches long, dry them,
and put them into a dish, mince a little Thyme, 2 Onions, a piece of
Lemon Peel, a little Pepper beaten small, Nutmeg, Mace, and Salt, when it is
cut exceeding small, strew it on the Eels, with the Yolks of 2 or 3 Eggs, then
having a small Spit, or else a couple of square sticks made for that purpose,
spit through the Eels cross-ways, and and put a bay-leaf between every piece of
Eel, and tying the sticks on a spit, let 'em roast; you need not turn 'em
constantly, but let 'em stand till they hiss, or are brown, so do them on the
other side, and put the dish, (in which the Eel was with the seasoning)
underneath to save the Gravy, baste it over with sweet butter. The Sauce must
be a little Claret Wine, some minced Oysters with their Liquor, a grated
Nutmeg, and an Oni(...)

168. To boil Cocks or Larks.
Boil them with the Guts in them in strong broth, or fair Water, and 3 or 4
whole Onions, large Mace and Salt, the Cocks being boiled make sauce with some
thin slices of Manchet, or grated bread in another Pipkin, and some of the
broth where the Fowl or the Cocks boil, then put to it some butter, and the
Guts and Liver minced, then take some yolks of Eggs dissolved with Vinegar, and
some grated Nutmeg, put it to the other ingredients, stir them together, and
Dish the Fowl in fine sippets, pour on the sauce with some sliced Lemons,
Grapes, or barberries, and run it over with beaten butter.

169. To broyl Oysters.
Take the biggest oysters you can get, then take a little minced Thyme, grated
Nutmeg, grated bread, and a little salt, put this to the Oysters, then get some
of the largest bottom-shells, and place them on the Grid-Iron, and put 2 or 3
Oysters in each shell, then put some butter to them, and let them simper on the
fire till the Liquor bubbles low, supplying it still with butter, when they are
crisp, feed them with White Wind, and a little of their own Liquor, with a
little grated bread, Nutmeg, and minced Thyme, put as much only as to relish
it, so let it boil up again, then add some drawn butter to thicken them, and
dish them.

170. To pickle Oysters.
Take a quart of the largest great Oysters, with all their Liquor, wash them
clean, and wipe them, add to them a pint of fair water; and half a pint of
white wind Vinegar, half an ounce of whole Pepper, an handful of Salt, a
quarter of an ounce of large Mace, with the Liquor of the Oysters strained; put
all together in a Pipkin over a soft fire, let them simper together a quarter
of an hour; when the Oysters are enough take them up, and put them into a
little fair water and Vinegar, till they be cold; let the Pickle boil a quarter
of an hour after the Oysters are taken up, both being cold, put them up
together; when you use them, Garnish the dish with Barberries and Lemon, and a
little of the Mace and Pepper, and pour in some of the pickle.

171. To make English Pottage.
Make it with Beef, Mutton, and Veal, putting in some Oatmeal, and good
pot herbs, as parsley, Sorrel, Violet-leaves, and a very little Thyme, add
sweet Marjoram, scarce to be tasted, and some Marygold-leaves at last; you may
begin to boil it over Night, and let it stand warm all Night, and make an end
of boiling it next Morning, it is good to put into the pot at first 20 or 30
corns of whole Pepper.

172. To stew Beef.
Take very good Beef and slice it very thin, beat it with the back of a knife,
put to it the Gravy of some Meat, and some Wine, and strong broth, sweet Herbs
a quantity; let it stew till it be very tender, season it to your liking, and
garnish your dish with Marygold-flowers, or barberries.

173. To make excellent Minc'd-Pyes.
Parboyl Neats-tongues, then peel and hash them with as much as they weigh of
Beef Suet and stoned Raisins, and picked Currants; chop all exceeding small, that
it be like pap; employ therein at least an hour more than ordinarily is used,
then mingle a very little Sugar with them, and a little Wine, and thrust it up
and down, some thin slices of green Candied Citron-peel, and put this into
Coffins of fine light, well reared crust; half an hours baking will be enough:
If you strew a few Caraway-Comfits on the top it will not be amiss.

174. To Pickle Roast Beef, Chine, or Surloin.
Stuff any of the aforesaid Beef with Pennyroyal, or other sweet Herbs, or
Parsley, Minced small, and some Salt, prick in here and there a few whole
Cloves, and Roast it; then take Claret Wine, Wine-vinegar, whole Pepper,
Rosemary, Bays, and Thyme bound up close in a bundle, and boiled in some
Claret Wine, and Wine vinegar; make the Pickle, and put some Salt to it, and
pack it up in a barrel that will but just hold it, put the Pickle to it, close
it on the Head, and keep it for your use.

175. To make a Double tart.
Peel codlings Tenderly boiled, cut them in halves, and sill your Tart; put
into it a quarter of an hundred of codlings, a pound and half of Sugar, a few
cloves, and a little cinnamon, close up the Coffin and bake it. When it comes
out, cut off the Lid, and having a Lid cut in flowers ready, lay it on, and
Garnish it with Preserves of Damsons, Rasberriess Apricots and Cherries, and
place a preserved Quince in the Middle, and strew it with Sugar-biskets.

176. To make a Warden or Pear-pye.
Bake your Wardens, or Pears in an Oven, with a little Water, and a good
quantity of Sugar, let your pot be covered with a piece of Dough, let them not
be fully baked for a quarter of an hour, when they are cold make a high Coffin,
and put them in whole, adding to them some Cloves, whole Cinnamon, Sugar, with
some of the Liquor they were baked in, so bake it.

177. To bake a Pig Court Fashion.
Flea a small Young Pig, cut it in quarters, or smaller pieces, and season it
with Pepper, Ginger and Salt, lay it into a fit coffin, strip and Mince small a
handful of Parsley, 6 sprigs of Winter-savory, strew it on the Meat in the Pie,
and strew upon that the Yolks of 3 or 4 hard Eggs Minced, and lay upon them 5
or 6 blades of Mace, a handful of Clusters of Barberies, a handful of currants
well washed and Picked, a little Sugar, half a pound of sweet-butter or more;
close your Pie, and set it in an Oven, as hot as for Manchet, and in 3 hours it
will be well baked, draw it forth, and put in half a pound of Sugar, being
warmed upon the Fire, pour it all over the Meat, and put on the Pye-lid again,
scrape on Sugar, and serve it hot to the Table.

178. To make a Pudding of Hogs-Liver.
Boil your Liver, and Grate it, put to it more Grated Bread then Liver, with as
much fine Flower of either, put 12 Eggs to the value of a Gallon of this
Mixture with about 2 pound of Beef Suet Minced small, and a pound and half of
Currants, half a quarter of a pint of Rose Water, a good quantity of Cloves and
Mace, Nutmeg, Cinnamon, and Ginger, all Mixed very small, Mix all these with
sweet Milk, and Cream, and let it be no more thicker then Fritter-batter, to
fill your Hogs-guts, you make it with the Maw, fit to be eaten hot at the
Table; in your Knitting or tying the Guts, you must Remember to give them 3 or
4 Inches Scope: In your putting them in boiling Water, you must handle them
round, to bring the Meat equal to all parts of the Gut; they will ask about
half an hours Boiling, the boiling must be Sober, if the Wind rise in them, you
must be ready to prick them, or else they will Fly and burst in pieces.

179. Olives of Beef Stewed and Roasted.
Take a Buttock of Beef, and cut some of it into thin slices as broad as your
hand, then Hack them with the back of your Knife, Lard them with small Lard,
and season them with Pepper, Salt, and Nutmeg; then make a Farsing with some
sweet Herbs, Thyme, Onions, the Yolks of hard Eggs, Beef Suet or Lard, all
Minced, some Salt, Barberries, Grapes, or Gooseberries; season it with the
former Spice lightly, and work it up together, then lay it on the slices, roll
them up round, with some caul of Veal, Beef, or Mutton, bake them in a dish in
the Oven, or Roast them; then put them in a Pipkin, with some butter and
Saffron, or none; blow off the Fat from the Gravy, and put it to them, with
some Artichoaks Potatoes, Skirrets blanched, being first boiled, a little
Claret Wine, and serve them on Sippets, with some sliced Orange, Lemon,
barberries, Capers or Gooseberries.

180. To make French-barley Posset.
Put 2 quarts of Milk to half a pound of French-barley, boil it small till it
is enough; when the Milk is almost boiled away, put to it 3 pints of good
Cream, let it boil together a quarter of an hour; then sweeten it, and put in
Mace and Cinnamon, in the beginning, when you rirst put in your Cream, when you
have done so, take White Wind a pint, Sack and White Wind together, of each
half a pint, sweeten it as you love it with Sugar, pour in all the Cream, but
leave your Barley in the Skillet; this will make an excellent Posset, nothing
else but a tender Curd to the bottom; let it stand on the Coals half a quarter
of an hour.

181. To bake Chucks of Veal.
Parboyl 2 pound of Lean Flesh of a Leg of Veal, mince it as small as grated
Bread, with 4 pound of Beef Suet: then season it with Biscuit, Dates and
Carraways, and some Rose Water, Sugar, Raisins of the Sun, and Currants, Cloves,
Mace, Nutmegs and Cinnamon; mingle them altogether, fill your pyes, and bake
them.

182. How to show a Mallard.
Roast your Mallard half enough, then take it up and cut in little pieces, then
put it into a Dish with the Gravy, and a piece of fresh Butter, and a handful
of Parsley chopped small, with 2 or 3 Onions, and a Cabbage lettuce, let them
stew one hour, then season it with Pepper and Salt, and a little Verjuice, and
so serve it.

183. To stew a Rabbit.
Half Roast it, then take it off the Spit and cut it into little pieces, and
then put it into a Dish with the Gravy, and as much Liquor as will cover it,
then put in a piece of Butter, and some Powder of Ginger, Pepper and Salt, 2 or
3 Pippins minced small, let these stew and hour, and dish them upon Sippets,
and serve it.

184. To make a Pidgeon-Pye.
Truss your Pigeons to bake, and set them, and lard the one half of them with
Bacon, mince a few sweet Herbs and Parsley with a little Beef Suet, the Yolks
of hard Eggs, and an Onion or two, season it with Salt, beaten Pepper, Cloves,
Mace and Nutmeg, work it up with a piece of Butter, and for the Bellies of the
Pigeons, season them with Salt and Pepper as before: Take also as many
Lamb-stones, seasoned as before, with 6 Collops of Bacon, the Salt drawn out,
then make a round Coffin and put in your Pigeons, and if you will, put in
Lamb-stones and Sweet-breads, and some Artichoak bottoms, or other dry Meat to
soak up the Juice, because the Pie will be very sweet and full of it; then put
a little White Wind beaten up with the yolk of an Egg, when it comes out of the
Oven, and serve it.

184. To Roast a Hare.
When you Case your Hare, do not cut off his hinder Legs or Ears, but hack one
Leg through another, and so also cut a hole through one Ear, and put it through
the other, and so Roast him; make your Sauce with the Liver of the Hare boiled,
and minced small with a little Marjoram, Thyme and Winter-savory, and the yolks
of 3 or 4 hard Eggs, with a little Bacon and Beef Suet, boil this all up with
Water and Vinegar, and then grate a little Nutmeg, and put to it some sweet
Butter, and a little Sugar; dish your Hare, and serve it. This may also serve
for Rabbits.

185. A Rare Broth.
Take a couple of Cocks, and cut off their Wings and Legs, and wash them clean,
and parboyl them very well, till there rise no scum, then wash them again in
fair water, then put them in a pitcher with a pint of Rhenish-wine, and some
strong broth, as much as will cover them, together with a little China root, an
ounce or 2 of Hearts horn, with a few Cloves, Nutmeg, large Mace, Ginger shred,
and whole Pepper, and a little Salt, stop your Pitcher close, that no steam may
come out, boil the pitcher in a great pot of water about 6 hours, then pour out
the broth, and strain it into a Basin, and squeeze in it the juice of 2 or 3
Lemons, so eat it.

186. To bake Sweet Breads.
Boil your Sweet breads, and put to them the yolks of 2 Eggs new laid, grated
bread, with some parboyled Currants, and 3 or 4 Dates minced* and when you have
seasoned it sightly with Pepper, Sugar Nutmeg, and Salt, put to it the juice of
a Lemon; put up all these together into puff paste, and so bake it.

187. To make Pottage of French- Barley.
Pick your Barley very clean from dirt and dust, then boil some Milk, and put
it in while it boyls, when it is boiled, put in a little Salt, Sugar, large
Mace, and a little Cream; and when you have boiled it pretty thick, dish it,
and serve it up with Sugar scraped thereon.

188. To make a Florentine of Sweet-breads or Kidneys.
Take 3 or 4 Kidneys or Sweet-breads, and when they are parboyled, mince them
small; season it with a little Cinnamon and Nutmeg, sweeten it with Sugar and a
little grated Bread, with the Marrow of 2 or 3 Marrow-bones in good big pieces,
add to these about a quarter of a pound of Almond-paste, and about half a pint
of Malaga-Sack, 2 spoonfuls of Rose Water, Musk, and Ambergrease, of each a
grain, with a quarter of a pint of Cream, and 3 or 4 Eggs, mix all together,
and make it in puff-paste, then bake it; in 3 quarters of an hour it will be
enough.

189. To make Pottage of a Capon.
Take Beef and Mutton and cut it in pieces; then boil a large earthen pot of
Water, take out half the Water, put in your Meat and skim it, and when it boyls
season it with Pepper and Salt; when it has boiled about 2 hours, put in 4 or
5 Cloves, half an hour before you think it is enough, put in your Herbs,
Sorrel, Purslain, Burrage, Lettuce and Bugloss, or Green-pease, and in the
Winter, Parsley-roots, and white Endive, pour the broth upon light Bread
toasted, and stew it a while in the dish covered. If your Water consume in
boiling, fill it up with Water boiling hot. The less there is of the broth the
better it is, though it be but a Porringer full, for then it would be as stiff
as Jelly when cold.

190. To make a Pie with Pippins.
Pare your Pippins, and cut out the Cores, then make your Coffin of Crust, take
a good handful of Quinces sliced, and lay at the bottom, then lay your Pippins
a-top, and fill the holes where the Core was taken out with Syrup of Quinces
and put in every Pippin a piece of Orangado, then pour on the top Syrup of
Quinces, then put in Sugar, and so close it up, let it be very well baked, for
it will ask much soaking, especially the Quinces.

191. To make a Pie of Neats-tongues.
Parboyl a couple of Neats-tongues, then cut out the Meat at the Root-end as
far as you can, not breaking it out at the sides, take the Meat you cut out,
and mingle it with a little Suet, a little Parsley and a few sweet. Herbs, cut
all very small, and mingled together, season all this with Ginger, Cloves,
Mace, Pepper, Salt, and a little grated Bread, and as much Sugar, together with
the yolks of 3 or 4 Eggs; make this up together, and season your Tongues,
inside and outside, with your seasoning aforesaid, and wash them within with
the yolk of an Egg, and force them where you cut the Meat, and what remains
make into a forced; then make your paste into the fashion of a Neats-tongue,
and lay them in with Puddings, and little balls, then put to them Lemon and
Dates shred, butter on the top, and close it, when it is baked, put in a lear
of the Venison sauce, which is Claret Wine Vinegar, grated Bread, Cinnamon,
Ginger Sugar, boil it up thick that it may run like butter, and let it be sharp
and sweet, and so serve it.

192. To make a Sallet of Green-Pease.
Cut up as many Green-pease as you think will make a Sallet, when they are
newly come up about half a Foot high; then set your Liquor over the Fire, and
let it boil, and then put them in, when they are boiled tender, put them out
and drain them very well; then mince them, and put in some good sweet Butter,
Salt it, and stir it well together, and so serve it.

193. To make a Sallet of Fennel.
Cut your Fennel while it is young, and about 4 Fingers high, tie it up in
bunches like Asparagus, gather enough for your Sallet, and put it in when your
Water is boiling hot, boil it soft, drain it, dish it up with Butter as the
Green-pease.

194. To make a Tansie of Spinach.
Take a quart of Cream, and about 20 Eggs without the Whites, add to it Sugar
and grated Nutmeg, and color it Green with the Juice of Spinach, then put it
in your Dish, and squeeze a Lemon or two on it: Garnish it with slices of
Orange, then strew on Sugar, and so serve it.

195. To make a Hash of Ducks.
When your Ducks are Roasted, take all the Flesh from the Bones, and hash it
very thin, then put it into your stewing-pan with a little Gravy, strong Broth
and Claret Wine, put to it an Onion or two minced very small, and a little
small Pepper, let all this boil together with a little Salt, then put to them
about a pound of Sausages, when you think they are ready, stir them with a
little Butter drawn: Garnish it with Lemon, and serve it.

196. To make French Puffs with Green Herbs.
Take a quantity of Endive, Parsley and Spinach, and a little Winter-savory,
and when you have minced them exceeding small, season them with Sugar, Ginger
and Nutmeg; beat as many Eggs as you think will wet your Herbs, and so make it
up; then pare a Lemon and cut in thin slices, and to every slice of Lemon, put
a slice of your prepared stuff, then fry it in sweet Butter, and serve them in
Sippets, after you have put to them either a Glass of Canary or White wine.

197. To stew a Dish of Breams.
Take your Breams and dress them, and dry them well, and salt them; then make a
Charcoal Fire, and lay them on the Grid iron over the Fire being very hot; let
them be indifferent brown on both sides, then put a Glass of Claret into a
Pewter dish, and set it over the Fire to boil, put into it 2 or 3 Anchovies, as
many Onions, and about half a pint of Gravy, a pint of Oysters, with a little
Thyme minced small, when it has boiled a while put to it a little melted
Butter and Nutmeg: Then dish your Bream, and pour all this upon it, and then
set it again on the Fire, putting some yolks of Eggs over it.

198. To boil a Mullet.
Having scalded your Mullet, you must save their Livers and Roes, then put them
in Water boiling hot, put to them a Glass of Claret, a bundle of sweet Herbs
with a little Salt and Vinegar, 2 or 3 whole Onions, and a Lemon sliced, then
take some whole Nutmegs and quarter them, and some large Mace, and some Butter
drawn with Claret, whenrein dissolve 2 or 3 Anchovies; dish up your Fish, and
put on your sauce, being first seasoned with Salt. Garnish your dishes with
fried Oysters and Bay Leaves; and thus you may season your Liquor for boiling
most other Fish.

199. To Farce, of stuff a Fillet of Veal.
Take a large Leg of Veal, and cut off a couple of Fillets from it, then mince
a handful of sweet Herbs and Parsley, and the yolks of 2 or 3 hard Eggs, let
all these be minced very small, then season it with a couple of grated Nutmegs,
and a little Salt, and so farce or stuff your Veal with it, then lard it with
Bacon and Thyme very well, then let it be Roasted, and when it is almost
enough, take some of your stuffing about a handful, and as many Currants, and
put these to a little strong broth, a Glass of Claret, and a little Vinegar, a
little Sugar, and some Mace: When your Meat is almost ready, take it up and put
it into this, and let it slew, putting to it a little butter melted, put your
Meat in your dish, and pour your Sauce upon it, and so serve it.

200. To make Pudding of Rice.
Take a good handful of Rice beaten small, and put it into about 3 pints of
Milk, adding a little Mace and Cinnamon, then boil it, keeping it always
stirring, till it grow thick, then put a piece of butter into it, and let it
boil a quarter of an hour, then pour it out to cool, then put to it half a
dozen Dates minced, a little Sugar, a little beaten Cinnamon, and a couple of
handfuls of Currants, then beat about ten Eggs, throwing away 2 or 3 of the
Whites, put in some Salt, butter the bottom of your dish, pour in your Pudding,
let it bake half an hour, put on a little Rose Water and Sugar, and serve it.

201. To make excellent white Puddings.
Take the Humbles, of a Hog, and boil them very tender, then take the Heart,
the Lights, and all the Flesh about them, picking them clean from all the
sinewy Skins, and then chop the Meat as small as small as you can, then take
the Liver and boil it hard, and grate a little grated Nutmeg, Cinnamon, Cloves,
Mace, Sugar, and a few Carraway-seeds, with the yolks of 4 or 5 Eggs, and about
a pint of the best Cream, a Glass of Canary, and a little Rose Water, with a
good quantity of Hogs-suet and Salt, make all into Rouls, and let it lie about
an hour and half before you put it in the Guts, laying the Guts a steep in
Rose Water before, boil them, and have a care of breaking them.

202. To Stew Flounders.
Draw your Flounders and wash them and Scotch them on the White-side, being put
in a dish, put to them a little White Wind, a few Minced Oysters, some whole
Pepper, and sliced Ginger, a few sweet Herbs. 2 or 3 Onions quartered, and
Salt; put all these into your stewing Pan, covered close, and let them stew as
soon as you can, then dish them on Sippets; then take some of the Liquour they
were stewed in, put some Butter to it, and the Yolk of an Egg beaten, and pour
it on the Flounders; Garnish it with Lemon, and Ginger beaten on the brims of
the Dish.

203. To draw Butter for Sauce.
Cut your Butter into thin slices, put it into your dish, let it Melt leasurely
upon the Coal, being often stirred, and after it is Melted, put to it a little
Vinegar, or fair Water, which you will; beat it up till it be thick, if it keep
its color White, it is good, but if Yellow and turned, it is not to be used.

204. To Roast a Salmon whole.
Draw your Salmon at the Gills, and after it is scalled and washed and dried,
Lard it with pickled Herring, or a Fat Eel salted, then take about a pint of
Oysters parboyled, put to these a few sweet Herbs, some Grated bread, about
half a dozen hard Eggs, with 2 Onions, shred all these very small, and put to
it Ginger, Nutmeg, Salt, Pepper, clover, and Mace; Mix these together, and put
them all within the Salmon, at the Gills: Put them into the Oven in an Earthen
Pan, born up with pieces of Wood; in the bottom of the Dish, put claret wine,
and baste your Salmon very well over with Butter, before you put it into an
Oven, when it is drawn, make your sauce of the Liquor that is in the Pan, and
some of the spawn of the Salmon boiled, with some Melted Butter on the top,
stick him about with Tosts and Bayleaves fried, take out the Oysters from
within, and Garnish the Dish therewith,

204. To make excellent Sauce for Mutton, either Chines, Legs or Necks.
Take half a dozen Onions shred very small, a little strong Broth, and a Glass
of White Wind, boil all these well together; then take half a pint of Oysters,
and Mince them with a little Parsley, and 2 or 3 small bunches of Grapes, if in
season, with a Nutmeg sliced, and the Yolks of 2 or 3 Eggs, put in all these
together, with the former, and boil it, and pour it all over your Meat, and
then pour some Melted Butter on the Top, and strew on the Yolks of 2 or 3 hard
Eggs Minced small.

205. Another good Sauce for Mutton.
Take a handful of pickled Cucumbers, as many Capers, and as much Samphire, put
them into a little Verjuice, White Wind; and a little strong Broth, and a Lemon
cut in small pieces, and a little Nutmeg Grated; let them boil together, and
then beat them up thick, with a Ladleful of Butter Melted, and a couple of
Yolks of Eggs, and a little Sugar, Dish your Meat upon Sippets, pour on your
Sauce, and Garnish it with Samphire, Capers, and Barberries.

206. To make Sauce for Turkies or Capons.
Take a Two-penny White-loaf, and say it in soak in strong Broth, with Onions
sliced therein, then boil it in Gravy, together with a Lemon cut in small
pieces: A little Nutmeg sliced, and same Melted butter, put this under your
Turkey or Capon, and so serve it: You will find it excellent Sauce,

210. To Fry Salmon.
Take a Jole, Chine, or Rand, and Fry it in Clarified Butter, when it is stiff
and Crisp Fried, make Sauce thereof with a little Claret Wine, sweet Butter,
Grated Nutmeg, slices of Orange, and Oyster Liquor, stew them altogether, and
pour on the Sauce, and on that Parsley, ^lisumder, and Sage-leaves Fried in
Butter.

Because many Books of this Nature, have the Terms, of Carving added to them,
as being Necessary for the more Proper Nominating of things; I have thought
good also to add them: As also some Bills of Fare, both upon Ordinary and
Extraordinary Occasions.
Terms of Carving, both Fish, Fowl, and Flesh.
ALLAY a Pheasant. Barb a Lobster. Border a Pasty, Break a Deer or Egript.
Break a Sarcel or Teal. Chine a Salmon. Culpon a Trout. Mince that Plover. Rear
that Goose. Sauce a Capon or Tench. Cut up a Turkey or Bustard. Dismember that
Heron. Display that Crane. Disfigure that Peacock. Fin that Chevin. Leach that
Brawn. Lift that Swan, Timber the Fire, Tire an Egg. Tranch that Sturgeon.
Sauce Place or Flounders. Side that Haddock. Splay that Bream. Splat that Pike.
Unbrace a Mallard. Under-Tench a Porpuss. Un-joynt a Bittern. Unlace a Coney.
Untach that Curlew. Untanch that Brew. Spoil that Hen. String that Lamprey.
Tame a Crab. Thigh a Pidgeon, Woodcock, all manner of small Birds. Tanson that
Eel. Truss that Chicken, Tusk a Barbel.
Particular Directions how to Carve, according to the former Terms of Carving.
Unlace that Coney.
LAY your Coney on the back, and cut away the Vents, then raise the Wings and
the sides; and lay the Carcass and the sides together; then put to your Sauce,
with a little beaten Ginger and Vinegar.

Thigh a Wood-cook.
Raise the Legs and Wings of the Wood-cock, as you would do of a Hen, then take
out the Brains, and no other sauce but Salt.

Allay a Pheasant.
Raise the Legs and the Wings of a Pheasant, as of a Wood-cock, as also of a
Snipe, and a Plover, and only Salt.

Display a Crane.
Unfold the Legs of the Crane, and cut off his Wings by the Joints, then take
up his Wings and Legs, and make sauce of Mustard, Salt, Vinegar, and a little
beaten Ginger.

To cut up a Turkey.
Raise up the Leg very Fair, and open the Joint with the point of your Knife,
but cut not it off, then Lace down the Breast with the point of your Knife, and
open the Brest-pinion, but take it not off, then raise up the Merry thought
betwixt the breast Bone and the Top, then Lace down the Flesh on both sides the
breast bone, and raise up the Flesh called the brawn, and turn it outward upon
both sides, but break it not, nor cut it off, then cut of the Wing-pinions, at
the Joint next the body, and stick in each side the Pinion, in the place you
turned out the brawn; but cut off the sharp end of the Pinion, and take the
Middle-piece, and that will fit just in the place; you may cut up a Capon or
Pheasant the same way.

Break a Sarcel, Teal, or Egript.
Raise the Legs and Wings of the Teal, and no Sauce bu^ Salt.

Wing a Partridge or Quale.
Raise his Legs and Wings, as of a Hen, and if you Mince him, make Sace with a
little White Wind, and a little beaten Ginger, keeping him warm upon a Chafing
Dish of Coals, till you serve him.

To Vntauch a Curlew or Brew.
Take either of them, Raise the Legs, as before, and no sauce but Salt.

To Unbrace a Mallard.
Raise up the Pinion and Legs, but take them not off, and raise the Merry
thought from the breast, and Lace down each side with your Knife, Waving it too
and Fro.

To Sauce a Capon.
Lift up the right Leg of a Capon, and also the right Wing, and so lay it in
the Dish in the Posture of Flying, and so serve them; but Remember that Capons
and Chickens be only one Sauce, and Chickens must have Green Sauce or Verjuice.

Bills of Fare for all times of the Year; and also for Extraordinary Occasions.
A Bill of Fair for Spring Season.
8 A Collar of Brawn and Mustard. 2. A Neats-Tongue and Vdder. 3. Boiled
Chickens. 4. Green-Geese. ^. A Lumbard-Pye. 6. A Dish of Young Rabits.
Second Course.
^. A Haunch of Venison. ^. Veal Roasted. ^. A dish of soles or smelts. 4. A
dish of Asparagus. 5. Tansie. 6. Tarts and Custards.
A bill of Fair for Midsomer.
1. Neats-tongue and Colli-flowers. 2. A Fore-quater of Lamb. 3. A Chicken Pie.
4. Boiled Pidgeon. 5, A couple of stewed Rabits. 6. A Breast of Veal Roasted.
Second Course.
1, An A'rtichoak Pie. 2. A Vension-pasty. 3. Lobsters and Salmon. 4. A dish of
Pease. 5. A Goose-berry-tart. 6. A dish of Strawberries.
A Bill of Fare for Harvest.
1. A Capon and White-broth. 2. A Westphalia-ham with Pigeons. 3. A Grand
Sallet. 4. A Neats-tongue and Vdder Roasted. 5. A Powdered Goose. 6. A Turkey
Roasted.
Second Course.
1. A Potato or chicken-pye. 2. Roasted Partridges. 3. Larks and chickens. 4. A
Made dish. 5. A Warden-pye, or Tart. 6. Custards.
A Bill of Fair for Winter season.
1. A Collar of Brawn. 2. Lambs-head and White broth. 3. A Neats-tongue and
Vdder. Roasted. 4. A dish of Minc'd-pyes. 5. A Vension, or Lamb-pye. 6. A dish
of chickens.
Second Course.
1. A side of Lamb. 2. A dish of Wild-Ducks. 3. A Quince-tart. 4. Two Capons
Roasted. 5. A Turkey Roasted. 6: A Dish of custards.
A Bill of Fair upon Extraordinary Occasions.
1. A Collar of Brawn. 2. Two Pullets boiled. 3. A Bisk of Fish. 4. A Dish of
carps. 5. A Grand boiled Meat. 6. A Grand Sallet. 7. A Venison Pasty. 8. A
Roasted Turkey. 9. A Fat Pig. 10. A Powdered Goose. 11. A Hnunch of Vension
Roasted. 12. Neats-tongue and Vdder Roasted. 13. A West-phalia-Ham boiled. 14.
A Joll of Salmon. 15. Minced Pyes. 16. A Sir-loyn of Rost-beef. 17. Cold Baked
Meats. 18. A dish of custards.
Second Course.
1. Jellies of all sorts. 2. A Dish of Pheasants. 3. A Pike boiled. 4. An
Oyster Pie. 5. A Dish of Plovers. 6. A dish of Larks. 7. A Joll of sturgeon. 8.
A couple of Lobsters. 9. A Lumber-pye. 10. A couple of capons. 11. A dish of
Partridges. 12. A Fricacy of Fowls. 13. A dish of Wild ducks. 14. A dish of
crammed chickens. 15. A dish of stewed Oysters. 16. A Murch Pane. 17. A dish of
Fruits. 18. A dish of Tarts.
A Bill of Fare for Fish days.
1. A dish of Butter and Eggs. 2. A Barrel of Oysters. 3. A Pike boiled. 4. A
stewed carp. 5. An Eel Pie. 6. A Pole of Ling. 7. A dish of Green Fish Buttered
with Eggs. 8. A dish of stewed Oysters. 9. A spinach sallet boiled. 10. A dish
of soles. 11. A Joll of Fresh salmon. 12. A dish of smelts Fried.
Second course.
1. A couple of Lobsters. 2. A Roasted spitcheock. 3. A dish of Anchovies. 4.
Fresh Cod. 5. A Bream Roasted. 6. A dish of Trouts. 7. A dish of Place boiled.
8. A dish of Peaches. 9. A carp Farced. 10. A Potato Pie. 11. A dish of Prawns
buttered 12. Tenches with short broth. 13. A dish of Turbut. 14. A dish of
Eel-pouts. 15. A sturgeon with short broth. 16. A dish of Tarts and custards
A Bill of Fare for a Gentleman's House, about candlemas.
1. A Pottage with a Hen. 2, A catham Pudding. 3. A Fricacie of chickens. 4. A
Leg of Mutton with a Sallet. Garnish your dishes with Barberies.
Second course.
1. A chine of Mutton. 2. A chine of Veal. 3. A Lark Pie. 4. Two Pullets, 1
Larded. Garnished with slices of Orange.
Third course.
1. A dish of Wood-cocks. 2. A couple of Rabits. 3. A dish of Asparagus. 4. A
West-phalia-Gammon.
Last course.
1. Two Oringe-tarts, one with Herbs. 2. A Racon-tart. 3. An Apple-tart. 4. A
dish of bon Chriten-Pears. 5. A dish of Pippins. 6. A dish of Pear-Manes.
A Banquet for the same season.
1. A dish of Apricoks. 2. A dish of Marmalad of Pippins. 3. A Dish of
preserved Cherries. 4. A whole Red Quince. 5. A Dish of Dried Sweet-Meat.
A great FEAST made by Gerge Nevil, Chancellor of England, and Archbishop of
York, in the days of EDWARD the Fourth, 1468. And a Bill of Fare as it was
taken out of the Records of the Tower of London.
0300 QUARTERS of Wheat, 0300 Tun of Ale. 0100 Tun of Wine. 0001 Pipe of
Ipocras. 0104 Oxen. 0006 Wild Bulls. 1000 Muttons. 0304 Veals. 0304 Porks. 0400
Swines. 3000 Geese. 1000 Capons. 3000 Piggs. 0400 Plovers. 0100 Dozen of
Quails. 0200 Dozen of Fowls called Rees. 0400 Peacocks. 0400 Mallards and
Teals. 0234 Cranes. 0204 Kidds. 3000 Chickens. 4000 Pigeons. 4000 Coneys. 0200
Bullers. 9400 Heronshaws. 0200 Pheasants. 0500 Partridges. 0400 Woodcocks. 0100
Curlews. 1000 Egrites. 0304 Stags, Bucks, and Roes 0103 Venison Pasties cold
0508 Pikes and Breams. 6000 Dishes of Jelly. 0103 Cold Tarts. 3000 Cold
Custards. 1500 Hot Venison Pasties 3000 Hot Custards. 0013 Porresses and Seals.
Besides abundance of Sweetmeats
The Great Offices.
Earl of Warwick, Steward. E. of Northumb. Treasurer. Lord Hastings, Cup
bearer. Lord Willowby, Carver. Lord John of Buckingham, Controuler. Sir Rich.
Stanwig Surveyor. Sir William Worlly, Marshal of the Hall. Eight Knights of the
Hall. Eighty Esqs; of the Hall. Two other Surveyors of the Hall. Sir John
Malbury, Pantler. Two Esqs; Keepers of the Cubbard. Sir John Pracenock,
Supervisor of the Hall.
Estates sitting in the Hall. At the High-Table.
The Archbishop in his State, on his right hand, the Bishops of London,
Durham, and Elie. On his Left hand, the Duke of Suffolk, the Earls of Oxford
and Worcester.
At the second Table.
The Abbots of S. Mary's. The Doctors of Halls of Rivones. The Choristers of
Rivones. The Prownes of Durham, of Girgleu, and of Berlenton, of Gilerow, and
others, the number of eighteen.
At the third Table.
The Deans of York, the Lords of Cornwell, York, Durham, with 48 Knights.
At the fourth Table.
The Deans of Durham and of Saint Ambroses, all the Prebends of the Minster.
At the fifth Table.
The Mayors of York and Calice, and all the Aldermen.
At the Sixth Table.
The Judges of the Land, 4. Barons of Exchequer, and 26 Counselors.
At the last Table.
Sixty nine Knights, wearing the Kings Badges and his Arms. Estates sitting in
the Chief Chamber.
At the first Table.
The D. of Gloucester the Kings brother, and upon his right hand the Duke of
Suffolk, and upon his left hand the Countess of Westmorland and Northumberland,
and two of the E. of Warwicks daughters.
At the second Table.
The Barons of Greystock, with three other Barons.
At the third Table.
18 Gentlewomen of the the said Lands.
Estates sitting in the second Chamber. At the first table.
The elder Duchess of Suffolk, Countess of Warwick and Oxford, the Ladies
Hasting and Barwick.
At the second Table.
The Es. of Northumberland and Westmorland, and the Lds. of Fitshugh only with
2 Bar.
At the third Table.
14. Gentlemen and 14 Gentlewomen of Quality.
In the Low Hall.
412 of the Nobility with double service. In the Gallery. 200 Noblemens
servants. 1100 Inferior Officers with their servants. 1500 Other meaner
servants of all Offices. 62 Cooks.
In all 2162.

THE Lady's DIVERSION IN HER Garden.
CONTAINING A Handful of Choice and Novel Curiosities and Observations,
relating to PLANTS and FLOWERS. Together, With Brief Directions for the Nice
Adorning Balconies, Turrets, and Windows, with Flowers, or Greens, every Month
in the Year.
By Thomas Harris, Gardener, at Stockwel, in Surrey.
1. Of the Garden's Form and Situation.
HAving resolved upon a Garden, you must next pitch upon its Situation, which
must not be encompassed too close with High Buildings, but laid open to the
Air, and Sun, with a convenient warm Wall, or Fence, about it. As for the
Earth, or Soil, if it be Unnatural, it must be made Natural by Art. If the
Earth be Hot and Dry, then ought your Garden to lie upon a Level; If Cold and
Wet, then it must lie Taporing or Shelving, something like the Ridge of a
House. The Walks in your Garden are not to be Limited, but rather drawn out to
your Fancy, in some Shape or Figure. But be sure let there be a Fountain, Pump,
or Rivolet hard by, to furnish it with Water upon Occasion.

2. Plants, when good, and how to Choose them.
After your Garden is fixed, the borders and beds raised, the Walks rolled with
Gravel, (quite cross, from one bed to another, saving (...) foot with Turff,
next the side of each bed) adorn it with Painting, etc. which will not only
beautify it, but make it more durable and lasting: I say, after it is thus
Fitted, and completely Dung'd ready for Planting, you must consider what number
of Plants you shall want; then repair to the Nursery-Garden to choose your
Trees, (which is best to be done about the middle of September) and be sure you
fix upon none, but what appear to be very sound, and without Gum: Let 'em be of
a fair Bark; and see, that they have shot considerably that year. As for your
Dwarfs and Wall-Trees, let 'em be straight, with one Stem, and one Graft. Let
their buds be good, and seem to promise fair.

3. Their Diseases and Cures.
Trees, like Mortals, are subject to many Distempers, which sometimes prove
Deadly and Epidemical: But, as to Trees, the Distempers they are incident to,
are chiefly caused by Earthworms, Canker, Gum, Robines, Emmets, Green Fle^s,
Garden-Mice, Laires, Ear-Wiggs, Caterpillars, Snails, etc. The first whereof
lie at the Roots, and gnaw so violently the Stem, that sometimes a Tree Sickens
and Dies immediately. Now to prevent and Cure this Disease, you must be sure
(so soon as you perceive the Plant to droop) to uncover the foot thereof,
shorten the gnawed Roots thereof, search for, and pick carefully all the Worms
out, and lay fresh wholesome Mold thereto; which will in a little time help. --
But if your Tree has a Canker, draw your Knife, and with the point thereof,
cut it out clearly, and clap immediately some Cow Dung or Hogs-Dung, and wrap
it round with a Rag, and the Skin or Rhind will grow again. -- If Gum has
fastened to the Bud, Graft, or Stem of your Trees, it is incurable; but if it is
only fixed on the Branch, the Cure may be effected, by cutting it off 2 or 3
Inches below the aggrieved part. -- As for Caterpillars, Emmets, Robines, etc.
they must be picked and carefully brushed off. But if your Tree sickens by
reason it is Branches are too heavy, give it ease, by lowering the Top-branches,
or those disorderly ones in the middle, and it will again produce fine shoots.
Finally, the only way to prevent 'em from being gnawed or wounded, by
Garden-Mice, and Rats, is to set Traps and Snares to catch 'em.

4. Of Flowers.
To set down the particular Names of every Flower, would swell too big for my
intended Brevity, and be altogether insignificant to the design of this Manual.
I shall only give a Catalogue of the Names of the Chiefest of our English
Flowers; which may easily be had and sufficient for adorning private Garden.
And of the first, the

Rose.
The Damask and Cinnamon Rose, the Rose of the World, the English Red Rose, the
blush Belgic Rose, the double Musk Rose, the great Apple-Rose.

Tulip.
Florisante, Fair Ann, Superintendant, Aurora, General Essex, Susanna, Rich
Parrot, Royal Parrot, Eagle, Diana.

Gilliflowers.
K. Charles the Second, Q. Catherine, K. Solomon, a lovely Flower, Fair
Hellena, Mayor of London, Fair Rosanna, Paramour, the Emperor, the Empress,
Prince of Orange, Princess of Orange, Giant Clove, Birsha, Astragon, Double
Stock Gilliflowers, Double Stripped.

Lillies.
The Fiery red bulby Lilly, Yellow Lilly, a tall fine Flower, the White Lilly
of Constantinople, the Double White Lilly, the Persian Lilly.

Primroses and Cowslips.
The fair red Primrose, the Scarlet, the Red Primrose, Hose in Hose, the single
Yellow with the Hose divided, the Orange-colour'd Cowslip, the Twisted Cowslip,
Double Green Cowslip, Red Cowslip, or Oxslip.

Flower-de-Luce.
Rubente, or the great pale-red or peach-coloured, is a fine Flower, with
party-colored Spanish Flowerde-Luce.

Wall-Flower.
The Double Red, the pale Yellow, the great simple Wall-Flower.

Sweet-Williams.
Of these, the double Sweet-Johns, and the Velvet Sweet-Williams, are the best;
every slip of them set in the Spring, will grow, and flower in June.

Auriculaes.
Bears-Ears, the black Imperial, blazing-Star.

Saffron.
Crocus Verus, or the true Saffron, which is sold by Apothecaries, the
Meadow-Saffron.

5. Having given you the Names of several Eminent Flowers, to Complete your
Garden, I will Entertain you with a pretty Curiosity, which is,

To change the Colors of several Flowers whilst in the Blossom.
When you are disposed to show Visitants your Flowers; follow them, and after
they have passed by a Flower of a purple Color, take a Needle or Pencil dipped
in Spirit of Vitriol, and streak the Leaves therewith, and it shall immediately
turn to a rich Scarlet; to the Admiration of the beholders: but you may be
sure, those Leaves so streaked, will wither the next day.

6. The Method to be observed in making Hot-Beds.
As to this Particular I will enlarge a little thereon, as knowing it to be an
Art worthy of Observation. First then, it must be made in a place much exposed
to the Sun; where drive Stakes into the Earth, near 4 Foot distance, in breadth
at the Ends, and for the length take your own Fancy, fill up both ends and
sides, with Wooden Stakes, almost a Yard above Ground; let each stake be drawn
a foot Distance, and wound about with straw Ropes; then Fling in your
Horse-dung, and Wet Litter, till it rises 2 Foot upon a Level; then Tread it
down, and Raise it so much more, and Tread down again, till it is almost the
Height; next Nail some small Boards all round on the Top, to keep in the fine
sifted Earth, which must be 5 Inches deep: Stick Hazle-Rods Arching over it,
like an Arbor, strong enough to support Mats, or Hair-cloth, to make it Heat;
and observe so soon as the Extreme Heat is over (which you may observe by
feeling it bloodwarm) to sow your Seeds. Note, if you are afraid, your
Horse-dung wont Heat, fling it Light up, and Mix therein Sea-coal, and it will
Heat at your Pleasure.

Observe likewise in November, to stop all Crevises in your Green-houses, that
no cold may come in, to which end, lay straw Mats, etc; and if it should happen
to Freeze, set a Pan of Charcoal in the Middle. And if your Plants be very Dry,
and the Weather is not Extreme, water them Moderately; Mingling your Water in a
little Sheeps Dung, Cowdung, etc. But besure you Wet not the Leaves therewith;
lest the Cold Chill and strike to the Heart thereof.

Directions for Adorning Balconies, Turrets, and Windows with Flowers and
Greens ad the Year round.
1. Balconies.
FIrst measure the length of your Balcony, that is, what Room there is, each
sides the Doors, and if the breadth of your Balcony will allow of boxes, measure
'em out also, make your boxes 18 Inches deep; let the Corners be fastened with
Iron plates, to preserve 'em from Warping, or Opening, with Iron handles at
each end, to remove them upon Occasion: Which done, Paint 'em as you please,
and lay them in Oil, and clap your Mold therein, Now, I as for the Iron-work of
your Balcony, over which you lean, it may be set off with fine Gilded pots 2
foot distance; in the middle let there be an Image fixed, and at each end 2
larger pots, with Laurel, Juniper, or striped Phillerea. In the boxes next your
Balcony-doors, plant on each side a Cherry-tree, (or 2 Dwarfs) one to ripen in
May, and the other in June; and let the other Vacances be supplied with
Germander, Periwincle gilded and plain, Gilliflowers 2 pots, the best; and two
boxes of Roses, set opposite to each other; And to Complete the whole, if you
can any ways contrive over your Balcony-doors, to set a Creeper, etc. it will
not only beautify the Frontispiece of the House, but be very delightful and
pleasant to your Chamber-Windows.

Of Turrets, or Leads.
Your Turrets must be measured out as your Balcony, and at a Convenient Corner
for Air and prospect fix your Arbor. In the middle of your Leads fix an Image,
Sun-Dial, or large Tree. Boxes of 5 Foot length, will be long enough, and 2
Foot high; between each box set a Gilded pot; and at the Corners let there
stand Dwarfs; then fix your battlements with Summer and Winter-Greens as you
please, as Venus Cushion, Green-Lavender, Lavender-Spike, Stock-Gilliflowers,
Tulips, Violets, Sweet Williams, Crocus's, Sweet John's, Flower-de-Luce,
Cowslips, Auricula's, etc.

Of Sash-Windows.
Send for your Smith, and let him make Iron-work to hold as many pots as you
think fit; and put therein nothing but Winter-Greens, as either Lawrus Tinus,
Perecanthus Everlasting Thorn. Mezerion, Boxes, etc. In the Summer you may set
Mint, Bawm, etc. Cowslips, Primroses, etc. if you please, but those Greens
beforementioned are the best for Windows.

Notwithstanding all these Directions I have laid down, yet if your Gardens,
etc. are not duly Watered, it is all Labor in Vain; To prevent which, take
these few Observations, viz.

When you have a foresight of Drowth, begin to Water before the Earth is too
dry; but for Plants use not Well-water, for it is so strained thorough the
Earth, or rather barren Sands or Rocks, and for want of the Sun so chill and
cold, that having no Nourishment, rather the contrary, does more hurt than
good; Rivers that run quick and long on sharp Gravel are little better, but if
you are forced to use such, let it stand some time in Tubs in the Sun, mixed
with Dung. Let the quantity and quality of the Dung mixed with the Water, be
according to the Nature of your Plants; if your Plants be great growers and
require heat, then put Horse-dung in your Water: If your Water be bad, then put
Dung into it to help it; let it stand in the Sun and open Air uncovered: If
your Plants be fine and tender, then put Sheep or Cows dung, Deer or Asses dung
into the Water; the worse the Ground and more barren, be sure to put in the
more dung. Take care you Water no Plants with standing stinking Ditch-water,
nor no Water that stinketh; for sweet Water (not too clear) and fresh Mould
(not musty or tainted by Weeds) is as proper for tender Plants, as sweet and
good Food, warm and clean Lodging, for tender and fine bred Persons.

Rainwater is very good if not too long kept, but if your Vessel be large, the
oftener you stir it, the longer it will keep sweet.

Large and Navigable Rivers, that receive much Soil by washing Streets, and the
many sinks that run into it, and which, by its motion, does cleanse it self
from that which is Noxious, both to Man and Plants, is an excellent Water for
all sorts of Plants.

The larger the Ponds be, the better the Water is for Plants, the opener to the
Sun the better, the more motion they have, by Horses washing in them, or Geese
and Ducks swimming; it is so much the better.

Water all Seeds with the smallest or Rain-like drops you can, and not to much
at a time or too fiercely, lest you discover them.

For Flowers and Plants whose Leaves lie on the Ground, water them at some
distance, by making a hollow Circle about the Plant, and pouring Water into it,
by which means you avoid annoying the Leaves, by discoloring Water, or
chilling the Roots by too sudden Coldness.

In Summertime, or all warm Seasons* the Evening is best for watering, because
the Water will have time to sink in the Earth, and the Plant attract it, before
the Sun's heat exhales it: But in Winter or cold Weather, the Morning is the
most proper time, that the superfluous moisture may be evaporated 'ere the cold
Night overtake you, and Chill perhaps kill a tender Plant.

A drooping Plant, that you think Water will preserve, may be watered by
Filtration, i. e. set an earthen or wooden Vessel on a Brick, full of Water,
near your Plant, that all the Water may be higher than the Earth, wet a thick
woollen List, put one end, with a Stone or bit of Lead, into the Water, that it
may keep to the bottom; lay the other end on the Ground, near the Root of the
Plant, and the Water will distill out of the Bowl or Pot through the List.

Monthly Observations for January.
LAY bare the Roots of your Fruit trees, and if the weather open, l^y
well-digested Muck to them: transplant young Trees, prune the rest, and nail up
your Wall fruit; cut your Vines close, cleanse your Trees of Moss, by singing
it off with handfuls of bolting Wheat or Rye Straw held flaming to the boughs,
first gathering your Cions for Grafts: turn over your before-mucked Ground in
your Kitchin-Garden, also your heaps of mixed Earth and Cow Dung for
Flower-Garden: Set Beans and Pease in open Weather to have early; sow Lettuce,
Radish, Chervil, Spinach, and other Salading-plants in Hot beds.

Preserve your best Gilliflowers and Auricula's from too much Wet or Snow, by
laying down the pots they are planted in; or if in beds, by supported
coverings, at a distance a foot or more: and what Ranunculus or Anemonies are
appearing: but give them as often as you can in suitable Weather, airings, by
taking off their coverings, but when Sun sets, on with them again. Keep your
Conservatory close where the Greens and nice plants are housed: If it freeze
very hard, put some clear lighted Charcoal in the middle of the Room, a little
let into the ground: and if the Sun shine clear on the Windows or Doors
thereof, open them to let in his Noon-beams, but be sure to shut them close
again as soon as he declines the door.

Monthly Observations for February.
Cover the Roots of your Fruit Trees that were before bare, and yet plant those
Trees you could not the last Month; and still be cleansing Trees from Moss, and
the Webs of Caterpillars from the tops of twigs. Begin to graft Apples, some
Pears, Plums, Cherries, etc.

Sow and set Beans, Pease, Asparagus, Radish, Parsnips, Carrots, Onions,
Garlic. Plant Cabbage-plants, Potatoes, Parsley, Spinach, and other hardy
Pot Herbs. Transplant your Winter-Colliflowers, to have early, into rich Soil.
Now you may be making Hot-beds to sow your Musk-mellon-seeds, and Cucumbers, at
the full Moon in this Month, which must first be steeped in new Cows-Milk
twenty four hours; then place three in a hole; When they peep, which will be in
seven days, let in the Sunshine, or clear Air, but cover 'em again at Night.
Still keep close your Conservatory.

Sow Auricula-seeds into Mallow Earth, and sow the same but one thick; place
best Auricula in pots in the Sun; Secure your choice Flowers in Beds with
Tiles, if they appear above Ground, and plant some Anemonies, the Weather open,
for later Flowers; place your Boxes sown with choice Seed, free from sharp
winds, and secured from too much wet.

Monthly Observations for March.
BEstir your self now in grafting; and early on good Plum-stocks, graft
Apricocks, Nectorines, and Peaches; Many may miss, but never all yet with me:
Raise up Pots of Earth to convenient branches, which degg down therein, first
slitting the underside where you lay them, they shall by October following,
being often watered, put forth knobs or roots, and both grow when cut off, and
well set in rich Earth; and one Tree so taking, is worth ten others, because
each Sprout or Shoot from the Root is the same kind, when those of inoculated
or grafted, are only the Plumbs grafted or inoculated. Steak and bind up weak
Shrubs and Plants, slip and set Sage, Rosemary, Lavender, Thyme, (except
Mastick, being too early;) sow Endive, Succory, Leeks, Radish, Beets, Parsnips,
Skirits, Parsley, Sorrel, Bugloss, Burrage, Chervils, etc. Sow Lettuce, Onions,
Garlic, Purslain, Turnips, Pease, Carrots, Cabbages, Cresses, Fennel,
Marjoram, etc. Transplant Medicinal Plants, string your Strawberry-Beds; cover
your Musk-Millon-plants on your Hot-bed with Beer-glasses till you remove them.

Sow Auriculaseeds as directed, at Michaelmas; also Sweet-Williams,
Wall-Flower, Stock-July-Flowers, Venus Looking-glass, Candy-Tuffs, French
Hony-suckles, Primrose and Cowslip-seeds, Lark-spurs, Rose-Campions, Lichnis,
Campanula, Indian Scabious, etc. also Pinks, or rather July-flower-seeds; on
your Hot-beds sow Flora Africanus, or French Marigolds, Amaranths, Nasturtium
Indicum, or Indian Cresses, Marvel of the World, etc. Transplent July-Flowers,
Auriculaes, if occasion, and all other Fibrous rooted Plants; new earthing up
your unremoved July Flowers, Auriculaes, etc.

Monthly Observations for April.
In this Month you may Sow Scurvigrass, Carnations, Radish, Marjoram, Time,
Winter-Savoury, Purslain, Marigolds, Hysop, and Lettice; You may also set Slips
of Rosemary, Lavender, Time, A'rtichoaks, etc. Remove your tender Shrubs, and
Slip them after gentle Showers; and also set French Beans.

Fix Tiltings over your choicest Tulips. Open the Doors and Windows of your
Green Houses, and use the Inhabitants to the Air. Shelter your young Seedling
Auriculaes from the excessive Heat of the Sun; and continue Hot-beds for
Exoticks, and remove them into them, till the Earth is warm enough to preserve
them abroad.

Monthly Observations for May.
BEgin to Inoculate in this Month, according as you find Buds ready, which take
off the middle of your Sprouts. Fetch out your Greens, and transplant them into
Boxes filled with good Earth, mixed with one part of rotten Cow Dung, putting
Sticks, Brick-bats, Rubbish, and Shells, to make the Earth lie light, and so
make a Hole for the Water at the bottom; then set your Plants therein, but not
deep, Water 'em, and set 'em in the Sun. Gather Seeds of Anemonies, as the Dew
rises, or you will lose it by the Wind; sow hot and Aromatic Herbs, and in the
full Moon plant Stock-July-Flowers in Beds; and still keep Weeding your
Gardens, etc.

Monthly Observations for June,
WAter new planted Trees, and put rotten Fern about their Stems. Inoculate
Apples, Pears, and Wall Fruit, etc. Lop off needless Branches from your Vines,
and stop the Joint. Gather Herbs to keep in the full of the Moon; and Sow
Radish, Lettice, Chervil, etc.

Lay July Flowers, which will Root in Six Weeks, and what are now blown, of a
good sort, keep for Seed, allowing them but few Layers to give Nourishment to,
and but few Buds; you will find the Seed-pod to be filled with the fairer Seed.
Take up Anemonies, Ranunculus, keep them from Moulding:

Monthly Observations for July.
PRune Apricocks and Peaches, leaving the most likely Shoots well placed. Water
Young planted Tree and Layers; let Olatory Herbs run to Seed.

Clip Box out of Order, after Rain: Slip Stocks Plants and Flowers; Lay
Mirtles, Jasemines, and other Greens. At the end of this Month, sift your Beds
of Off-sets of Tulips, and for Anemonies, Ranunculus's, etc. Sow Anemonie
Seeds, in fine sifted rich Earth in Beds or Boxes.

Monthly Observations for August.
PRune off superfluous Branches and Shoots of the second Spring. Pluck up
Suckets. Inoculate early, if a tall, in this Month. Sow Colliflowers and
Cabbages for Winter-plants. Sow Corn-sallet, Mary-golds, Lettuce, Carrots,
Parsnips, Spinach, Onions, curled Endive, Angelica, Scurvygrass, Larks-heel,
Columbines, Iron colored Fox-gloves, Holihocks, and such Plants as endure
Winter. Transplant such Lettuce you would have abide all Winter; pull up ripe
Onions, Garlic, etc. gather Olitory-seeds; clip such Herbs before the
Full-moon, an handful high. Sow Purslain, Chervil, etc. Make Summer-syder, and
Perry. Gather seeds of Shrubs, being ripe.

Take Bulb roots of Lillies, etc. Bartholomew-tide, the only secure season for
removing and laying Perennial Greens, Oranges, Lemons, Mirtles, Phylareas,
Oleanders, Jasmine, Arbutus, and other rare Shrubs, as Pomegranates, Roses, and
whatever is most obnoxious to Frosts, taking the shoots and branches of the
last Spring, and pegging them down with a hook-stick, in very rich Earth and
Soil, perfectly consumed; Water them on all occasions in Summer; by this time
Twelvemonth they will be ready to remove into good Earth set in the shade,
kept moderately moist: Three Weeks past, set them in some more airy place, but
not in the Sun, till 15 Days more. Now put new Earth in your Pots of
Auricula's, transplant and divid their Roots into a light rich Earth: Also your
best Primroses and Oxlips: Also your Campions, or Lychnis Calcidonices.
Transplant seedling Anemonies; set Colchicums, Spiderworts*

Monthly Observations for September.
GAther your ripe Winter-fruit be sure in dry weather. You may yet sow Lettuce,
Raddish, Spinach, etc. and Winter-herbs. Transplant most part of eating, and
physical Herbs, Artichoaks, and Asparagusroots, and Strawberries, etc.

As the Weather directs, about Michaelmas, in fair Weather, be sure avoid a
foggy day, retire your choice Greens, and rarest Plants (being dry) into the
Conservatory; as Oranges, Lemons, Indian and Spanish Jasmines, Oleanders, Barba
Jovis, Amomum Plinii, Citisus Lunatus, Chamaelea Tricoccos, C'stus Ledan
Clusii, Dates, Aloes, Sedums, etc. ordering them with fresh Mould, as taught in
May, to nourish them all the Winter, leaving as yet the Doors and Windows open,
giving them much Air, so the Wind is not sharp nor the Weather foggy, till the
Weather's more cold and sharp; and as that increases, the more enclose them,
till wholly shut up, as the Weather gives occasion: Mirtles will endure abroad
near a Month longer. The cold coming on, set such Plants as will not endure the
House, into the Earth, the Pots 2 or 3 Inches lower than the surface of the
Earth, under a southern exposure, covering them with Glasses, clothed with
sweet and dry Moss; but upon all fair Days, and in sunny and sweet Showers,
take them off. Thus preserve your Marum Syriacum, Cystus's, Geranicum, Nocte
olens, Flos Cardina is, Maracoes, seedling Arburus, choice Ranunculus and
Anemonies, and thus covering them till April. Plant Tulips, and all bulbous
Roots, but your choice of each defer till the latter end of the next Month. Sow
Auricula's, Crocus, Primrose, and Cowslip-seeds, Frittary, and Tulip-seeds, etc.

Monthly Observations for October.
NOW is the time for setting Fruit-stores; which if the Fruit soon ripe, keep
them in Sand till now: set them 3 Inches deep, the sharp end uppermost, and
cover them with Fern or Straw to keep them warm in the Winter: but at the
Spring take if off. You may sow Lettuce, etc. for tender Salleting. Trench
Ground for both: plant or transplant all sorts of Fruittrees, having lost their
leaves: Wall-trees above a Years Grafting: lay bare the Roots of old
unthriving, or overhasty blooming Trees, their Fruit dry, the Moon decreasing.

Remove your best and nicest July-flowers to shelter from much Rain or Wet, and
where Snow may not be apt to fall on them, and brush it off gently, when fallen
on those that are not capable of shelter. And this Month trim them all up with
fresh Mould. Set your choice Tulips: you may now also sow their seeds. plant
some Anemonies and Ranunculus's in prepared Earth, as directed in the Vade
Mecum: but they must be covered, when they appear from the Frosts, that will
otherwise kill them all: Therefore your best, set not till December.

Monthly Observations for November.
TRench and fit Ground for A'rtichoaks, and plant Trees for Standards, or
Walls. Lay in your Cellars, Carrots, Turnips, Parsnips, Cabbages, and
Colliflowers, for Seed, to be Transplanted in the Spring. Furnish your Nursery
with Stocks for Grafting, and turn up your Melon ground, mixing with it your
richest Earth, and lay it in ridges in the Spring.

If the Weather require it, enclose your tender Plants and Perennial Greens,
Shrubs, etc. in your Conservatory, stopping all entrance of Cold, especially
sharp Winds. Give not your Sedums, or Aloes, one drop of Water all the Winter.
Sow Auricula Seeds, and cover peeping Ranunculus's, etc. Likewise plant Fibrous
Roots, Lilax, Syringaes, Peonies, Althea frutex, and Roses. If the Plants are
very Dry, and it don't Freeze, Refresh them Sparingly, with Water mingled with
Cow or Sheep's Dung.

Monthly Observations for December.
PRune Standard Trees, and prune and cut Wall-Fruit. Trench Ground, and Dung it
for Borders, planting Fruit Trees, Plant Vines, and Stocks for-Grafting; and
Set early Peace and Beans.

Now keep your Garden-house well secured against Cold; and preserve Anemonies,
Ranunculus's, and best July-Flowers, from great Rain, sharp Winds and Frost.

The Table to the Art of Preserving, Conserving, and Candying.
A
ALMOND Butter, 5 Almond Milk 7 Apricocks preserved ibid Aqua Mirabilis 8
Angellets to make 10 Angelical water 14 Angelica roots preserved 17 Aqua
Composita 20 Artificial Malmsey 21 Artificial Claret ibid Apricock cakes 25
A'rtichoaks preserved 28 Almond caudle 34 A'rtichoaks to pickle 44 A'rtichoak
bottoms to pickle 53
B
Barley Water 19 Balm water 20 Broom-buds pickled ibid Dr. Burges's
Plague-water 22 Burage-flowers to candy 23 Biscuit cakes to make 25 Banbury
cakes 28 Barberries candyed 37 Barberries preserved ibid Bragget to make 55
C
Conserve of barberries 3 Conserve of roses ibid Cinamon-water ibid ^^erries
preserved 4 Conserve of Oranges 4 Cucumbers to pickle 6 Cream of Quinces ibid
Cherry-wine 6 Currants preserved 9 Conserve of Quinces 12 Conserve of rosemary
13 Cherries to dry 14 Conserve of Damsons 16 Conserve to strengthen the back 20
Conserve of burrage-flowers 23 Conserve of Pruans 24 Christial jelly ibid
Conserve tarts for all the Year 26 Cordial of Virtue 32 Comfortable Syrup 34
Cherries to candy 34 Clove-gilly-flowers to pickle 35 Cinamon-sugar 46 Cream of
Apricocks 37 Cullice to make ibid Cucumbers green 38 Cakes of Lemons ibid Capon
water 39 China-broth 40 Cream of codlings 41 Cream tart 41 Cock-ale to make 34
Caraway-cake ibid Cordial-water of clove-gilly-flowers 44 Chips of Quinces 47
Conserve of bugloss-flowers 48 Comfits to make 50 Curran-wine to make 52
Conserve of Sage ibid Cornelians to pickle 54
D
Dr. Deodates drink for the Scurvy 19 Damask-water 30
E
Excellent broth 9 Excellent Hypocras 21
F
French-beans to pickle 7 French biscuit to make 16 Flomery caudle 46 Fruits
preserved all the Year ibid
G
Grapes to preserve 8 Goose-berry-cakes 9 Goose-berries preserved 17
Ginger-bread to make 29 Goose-berry-paste 48 Ginger to candy 25
H
Hypocras to make 5 Honey of Roses 12 Hydromel to make 45 Honey of Mulberries
49 Honey of Raisins ibid
I-J.
Jelly of Hartshorn 10 Italian-bisket to make 15 Jelly of Straw-berries 24
Imperial-water 31 Jumbals to make 32 Jelly of Apples 54 Jelly of Goose-berries
ibid
K
K. William's perfume 13 K. Edw. perfume ibid
L
Late Qn 's perfume 13 Leach to make 31 Leach Lombard 30 Leach of Almonds 35
Lozenges of Roses 47 Lemon and Orange-peel pickled 48
M
Mackroons to make 4 March-panes to make 7 Marmalade of Quinces 5 Marmalade of
Lemons and Oranges 14, 53 Metheglen brown 15 Muscadtne comfits 23 Manus christi
23 Musk balls to make 30 Marrigolds to candy 36 Mathiolus Bezoar's water 41
Marmalade of currants 42 Mead to make ibid Mint-water 44 Marmalade of cherries
46 Medlers to preserve 47 Musk-sugar to make 48
N
Naple-bisket to make 47
O
Oranges to preserve 6 Oil of Violets ibid Oil of sweet-almonds 11 Oranges and
Lemons candyed 15 Oranges preserved after the Portugal fashion ibid Oranges to
bake 1 Oraneg-water 32
P
Pear plumbs to preserve 7 Purslain to pickle 8 Pomatum to make 11 Pomander to
make 16 Peaches to preserve 17 Pippins to dry 26 Paste of Genua ibid Paste of
quince 29 Pome citron preserved 35 Paste of tender Plumbs 40 Poppy-water to
make 41 Plague-water to make 50 Paste of cherries 53 Paste of Apricots ibid
Quinces cakes 3 Quince preserved white 14 Quinces preserved red 6 Quidany of
cherries 14 Quidany of Quinces 27 Quince cakes thin 29 Quince cream 37 Quinces
to pickle 50 Quince cakes clear ibid
R
Raspices preserved 4 Rosemary-water 11 Rasberry-wine 21 Rose-Vinegar 39
Rasberry cream 45 Roses preserved whole 49
S
Symbals to make 5 ^yrup of Violet, ibid Dr. Stephen's water 8 ^yrup of
clove-gilly-flowers 5 ^yrup of Wormwood 11 ^yrup of Poppies 12 ^yrup of ^emons
ibid ^yrup of cowslips 14 spirit of wine 12 ^ugar plates to make 16 Syrup of
Maidenhair 13 Syrup of Licorish ibid Syrup of Quinces 17 Syrup of Hartshorn 18
Syrup of cinnamon ibid Spirit of Ambergreese 22 Syrup of citron-peels 18 Syrup
of Hysop 22 Sweet cakes without sugar 27 Spirit of Honey 28 Syrup for the Lungs
ibid Sweet-bags for Linen 27 Sugar Leach 31 Spirit of Roses 32 Syrup of Elder
32 Syrup for short-wind 36 Surfeit water 33, 44 Syrup comfortable 34 Syrup of
Roses 33 Syrup of sugar candy ibid Syrup against scurvy 33 Suckets of walnuts
29, 35 Syrup of saffron ibid Spots and stains out of clothes 38 Sugar-cakes
ibid Syrup of Vinegar 39 Syrup of Apples ibid Sugar of Roses 41 Syllabub to
make 42 Steppony 43 Syder to make ibid Strawberry wine ibid Snow-cream 45
Suckets of Lettice-stalks 48 Syrup of Purslain 48 Syrup of Mint ibid Sweet-meat
of Apples 52
T
Trisle to make 36 Treacle water 18
V. U.
Verjuice to make 31 Vsquebah to make 15
W
Wafers to make 8 Water against fits of the Mother 11 Walnut water 18 Water for
a consumption 19 Wormwood-wine 27 Wormwood-water 29 Wash-balls to make 30
Wipt-syllabub 45 White Mead 47
The Table to Physic and Surgery, Beautifying Waters, etc.
A
ACH or Pain 56 Agues to cure ibid Agues in Children 58 Ague in the Breast 68
Alom-water 71
B
Black Jaundice 57 Bite of a mad Dog 60 Bloody Flux to cure 67 Bleeding at the
Nose 68 Beautifying the Face 81 Breath to sweeten 86 Beautifying-water 88 Body
to cleanse 94 Breasts to make small ibid Bath for Ladies 94 Body to make Fat
ibid Belts to Embroider 97 Black sarsnets to wash ibid
C
Cramp to cure 58 Countess of Kent's powder iid Cancer to cure 60 Conception to
procure 62 Catholicon 61 Consumption to help 63 Children to go to stool 76
Cancer in a breft 63 Care of the infant 77 Chilblains to take away 88 Cloven
Nails to help 89 Colored silks to wash 90
D
DAFFY's Elixir Salutis to make right 55 Dry cough to help 59 Deafness to cure
6^ Dropsy to help 64 Dr. Tench's Julep for fits of the Mother 67 Dr.
Willoughby's Aqua Mirabilis 70 Drink that heals all worunds 74 Directions for
Nurses 76 Dentifrice for Teeth 86
E
Eye-water to make 72 Excellent wash 89 Excellent beautifier 93
F
Fevers in Children 57 Falling Sickness to help 59 Fits of the Mother 65
Fistula to heal ibid Fellon to Kill 68 Flowers to bring down 72 Flowers to stay
73 Falling off of Hair. 81 Face to make Fair ibid Freckles to take away 83 For
nails that fall off 90 For cloven nails ibid Face to make youthful 92 Face to
make Ruddy ibid Face to clear ibid
G
Gout to cure 56 Griping of the Guts ibid Green fikness to cure 60 Green
Oynmen^ 65 Gascoign Powder 68 Gold-lace to clean 95
H
Help for blasting 66 Hair to make fair 80 Hair to make grow ibid Hair to take
away 81 Holes or pits to clear 83 Heat in the Face 84 Hands to whiten 90 Heat
in the hands ibid Hair to curl 93 Hair to make black 93 Hair to increase ibid
I. J.
Infection of Plague 58 Imposthume to break 60 Itch to cure ibid Infants
troubled with Wind and Phlegm 79 Itch or breakings out 60, 73 Iuk-spots in
Linen 96
K
King's Evil to cure 60
L
Looseness to stop 62 Lac virginis to make 82 Lips chopped help 87 Lawns to starch
95
M
Medicine for the back 57 Medicine for aches 56 Miscarying to prevent 59
Medicine for agues 57, 58, 61 Medicine to teeth easy 66 Megrim in the head 69
My Lord Denies medicine for the Gout 70 Morphew to cleanse 84
N
Nails to make grow
O
Oil of Roses to make 73 Oil of St. John's wort 75 Oil of Fennel ibid Ointment
for an inflamed Face 84 Ointment to take away spots of the smallpox 91
Ointment for beautifying the Face 33 Ointment to illustrate the Face ibid.
P
Piles to destroy 59 Plague-water to make 64 Pain in the Ears 69 Piles after
childbirth 73 Powder for the Green Sickness 74 Pricking of a Thorn ibid
Pimples in the face 33 Pomatum for the skin 85 Pock-holes to take out 88
Pimples to take away 84 Point and Lace to clean 96 Points to wash 98
R
Remedy for sore eyes 61 Rickets in children 65 Rheumatick cough 67 Red-flux to
help 68 Redness of the face after the smallpox 83 Red face to prevent 84
Ring-worms in the face 93 Red face to cure 94
S
Stone and Gravel 56 Survey drink ibid ^^tica to cure 57 Sprain in the back 61
Scurvey to cure 62 Sore breast not broken and when broken 63 Scald head to heal
64 Shingles to cure 65 Spitting of blood 68 Swooning-fits to help 71 Scabs
after smallpox 72 Stitch in the side 73 Spleen to help 74 Skin to cleanse 81
Sun-burn to take away 82 Skin to whiten 62, 85 Skin to smooth ibid Spots in the
face to take away 85 Stinking breath to help 88, 86 Stink of the Nostrils 89
Stench of Armholes 91 Spots after smallpox 91 Scars in the face 92
Silver-plate to cleanse 95 Silk stockens to wash 96 Spot of greese out of sild,
stuff, or cloth ibid Stains in Linen, etc. ibid Sarsnet to wash 97
T
To make a Woman be soon delivered, the child dead or alive 65 Tympany to cure
67 Terms to provoke ibid To staunch bleeding 68 Tertian Ague to cure 74 Tyssick
to prevent 75 Teeth to make white 86, 87
U
Vnguentum Album 59
W
Worms in children 49 Whites to cure ibid Wens to cure 63 Wind to prevent 64
Women in Travail 65 White-flux to cure 68 Water for the eyes 69 Web in the eye
ibid What is to be given the child, forth first thing it takes 78 Waters for
the Face 81 Wash-balls to make 87 Warts to take away 91 Water to whiten the
skin and take Sunburn away 92 Wrinkles of the Face 94
Y
Yellow-Jaundice 91
The Table to the Complete Cook's Guide.
A'Rtichoak's fried 107 Apple-pyes fried 119 A made dish of Apples 126 Almond
water 135 Almond pudding 136 Asparagus to keep 106 Almond-tart 137
B
Bisket-bread to make 100 Black buddings ibid Barley broth to make 112
Beef-stewed 120 Baked Puddings 123 Brawn made Tender 126 Birds stewed the Lady
Butler's way 140 Breams to stew 150 Butter to draw 152
C
Cheese-cakes ta made 92 Carbanado Matton 100 Carbanado Hens 106 Cream of Eggs
108 Colleps of beef stewed 110 Capon boiled 113 ^arp to stew 114 Calves-feet to
roast 119 ^hine of beef Poudered 121 ^ods-head dressed 122 Capon boiled with
Asparagus 124 Capon boyld with sage, parsley Clouted cream 126 Citron Puddings
128 Cows Vdder Roasted 131 Codling-tart 132 Cherry tart 132 Carp Pie 135
Chicken pie ibid Calves-head baked 138 Cocks or Larks 142 Chuks of Veal baked
146
D
Dish of Marow 101 Damson Tart 110 Dutch Pudding 110 Double-tats 144
E
Eels to souce 105 Eggs buttered on toasts 111 Eets boiled 121 Eel-pye to make
^13 Eels to roast 141 English Pottage. 143
F
Furmety to make 102 Fricacy of Veal 105 Fine Pudding in dish 108 Fricacy of
chickens 111 Florentine to make 114 Fresh-cheese 116 Fine Custard 118 Fried
Pudding 123 Fool to make 129 ^lounders to boil ibid Fresh Sturgeon to Roast 135
Frica^y of Rabits 136 Fennel-s^llet 149 Fare'd Veal 151 Flownders stewed 199
G
Gr^^seberry-F^^l 105 Grand S^lle^ 113 Gamon of ^a^on 128 Gurnet boiled 155
G^oseberry ^^stard 139
H
Herring-pye 100 He^g-(...)-pudding 107 Haggess pudding 108 Hash of c^p^^ 121
H^tch-^et to make 138 H^reto Reast 147 ^^^sh of (...) 150
I
Italian pudding 130 F^rther to make 140
L
Lamb-pye to make 93 Le^^^^ caudde 140 Leg of Lamb stewed 107
M
Mince-pye of Eggs 98 Mine'd pies to make 133 Marrow spinach Pasties 140 Marrow
Puddings 115 Mallard to stew 146 Mullet to boil 150
N
Neats: foot Pie 102 Neats-tongue and Vder dressed 127
O
Orangado 'Pye 102 Oysters to battle up 137 Oysters to pickle 142 Oysters to
broyl ibid
P
Pheasant to stew 100 Pork-pye 105 Puff paste to make 112 Pig to bake ibid
Paste for Tarts 123 Pig to souce 126 Pear-pye to make 130 Pippin-tart 131 Pear
puddings 138 Pancakes 139 Peg baked court fasho^n 144 Pidgeon pie to make 146
Pottage of a capon 148 Pippin pie to make ibid Pudding of Rice 151 Polonian
sausages 126
Q
Quince Pie 105 Quaking Pudding 125
R
Rice Pudding 199 Rabbit Roasted with Oysters 110 Rabits baked to be eat cold
118 Rice Tart to make 132 Rare fricacy 136 Roast beef Pickled 143 Rabit stewed
146 Rare broth 147
S
Spanish Olio 101 Scollops boiled ^^^ Salmon to boil 111

