The new and admirable Art of setting of Corn: With all the necessary
Tools and other Circumstances belonging to the same: the particular titles
whereof, are set down in the Page following.

ADAMS TOOL REVIVED


Magnus Deus in minimis.


Imprinted at London by Peter Short, dwelling at the sign of the Star on
Bredstreet hill. 1600.

The Contents of this Book.
1 How this invention began. 2 The reason why Corn does shoot up into so many
ears rather by setting then sowing. 3 The manner of digging and laying of the
arable grounds in this new practice. 4 The several instruments for making the
holes for the grain, and covering them. 5 At what depth and distance your
corn must be set. 6 Whether it be good to fill the holes with common earth,
and to prepare the seed before it be set. 7 How to make choice of your seed
corn. 8 The difference of yield between the plough and the spade, with some
new addition to the plough.
The new found Art of setting of Corn.
CHAP. 1. How this invention began.
Here I may rather probably conjecture then certainly determine how this
new conceit in setting of grain began. Happily some silly wench having a few
corns of wheat, mixed with some other seed, and being careless of the work
she had in hand, might now and then in steed of a Raddish or Carret seed,
let fall a wheat corn into the ground, which after braunching it self into
many ears, and yielding so great increase, gave just occasion of some farther
trial. Peradventure the great and rich fertillitie that does usually happen in
the setting of beans and pease, might stir up some practicing wit or other
to make the like experience in wheat and barley. Or who knows whether that
Enigmatical marriage between Bacchus and Ceres so closely couched in such
figurative terms by Johan. Baptista Porta, in his Magia naturalis in the
perclose of his title, de nouis plantis producendis, might give some light unto
this new and late invention of ours. And lastly, I have been credibly informed
that this manner of pricking in of corn, has by the public impression of an
ancient writer (whose name I cannot yet obtain) even in plain and naked
terms been long since discovered and manifested to the view of each reader.
But it shall not greatly skill from whence this profitable devise had his first
beginning (although for the honor of my country, I could wish the same were
fronted with the name and title of an English Author) and that as it has
pleased the great God of heaven in his unspeakable mercy and love, and in
these times of dearth and penury, to offer a most plentiful increase of our
best nourishing, Manna unto us: so that we may in all dutiful manner, with
one heart and voice together, give all thanks, honor, and praise unto so
great and bountiful a benefactor, whose name is glorious in the heavens, and
whose mighty power extends it self over the face of the whole earth, cui
laus in saecula saeculorum. Amen.

CHAP. 2. The reason why Corn does shoot up into so many ears rather by
setting then sowing.
THe consideration hereof may well deserve to be handled in the second place,
in my opinion, both quia turpe est Philosopho quidquam sine ratione proferre,
as Tully holds: and also for that it is a principal motive to stir up a
number of drowsy wits to the practice hereof; who not as yet finding or
conceiting any sensible reason for the same, are rather content with the
fly-bitten and lean iades, to live or starve upon the bare common, then by
seeking out of better pasture, to gather more flesh upon their backs, and to
grow in better liking in the sight of all that shall behold them. Such winter
Corn then as is usually sown before or about Alhallownetide, in my poor
reason, must of necessity loose a great part of his generatiue virtue, and
radical humiditie, both by the extreme nipping of the cold Northren and
Easterly winds, and the bitter frosts and hayle, together with the great
abundance of the cold rayny showers, which in the VVinter season do so
plentifully attach and fall upon the Grain, lying then either naked and bare
to all weather, or very slenderly clothed with a poor and thin garment, not
able suffientlie to defend the inward and secret fire of nature, from such
outward and piercing enemies; yea, though it have taken root, and gotten some
head before this boisterous weather do happen, yet by reason that the root is
shallowe, and has taken so slender hold in the ground, either the inward
Balsamum is washed away with moisture, or nipped with extreme cold, that it
cannot possibly send forth so many spiring stalks and ears as naturally it
would; besides, the earth being full of clods, and not sufficiently broken
into a fine moulde with the Plough, the Corn cannot so easily and plentifully
by this attractiue nature draw for his own nourishment such store of that
vegetative salt from the earth, as it desires; the virtue and strength whereof
is more at large handled in my Book of husbandry, printed Anno 1594. and in
that learned discourse of M. Bernard Palissie, in his Book entitled, Des eaux
and Fonteines. But on the other side, when as the corns of wheat shall ly so
deep within their true and natural bed, even their own mothers belly, the
earth being made so hollow and open with the spade, whereby they may also draw
sufficient nourishment at their pleasure, then are all these outward and
injurious storms of hail and rain, so sufficiently defended by this armor
of proof, as that the corn having his true and natural putrefaction (being
not performed without the help of a kindly heat) does afterward in his due
season bring forth that infinite multiplication, whereof we have had so many
and rich experiments of late, far beyond all the hopes and haruests of all
our predecessors.

CHAP. 3. The manner of digging and laying of the arable grounds in this new
practice.
WHen and how to dig, weed, or trench your grounds with the spade, is a
matter so triuial and well known already to every country Coridon, as that I
hold it not a fit subject for a Scholars pen, and therefore here I must
refer you to those beaten paths, wherein every simple Gardener has walked
a long time: only the depth of digging, and true laying of the ground, seems
to be material in this our new kind of husbandry. Some in this late practice,
by their experience commend the breaking up of the ground a foot and a half
deep, and some two foot, and some but one foot; but in my opinion since
that, three, or four, or five inches at the most is a sufficient depth for the
corn to lie in, I see no reason but that eight or twelve inches more, is a
depth sufficient for the corn to root in. This being granted, then shall you
have this farther benefit ensuing, that at the next breaking up and digging of
your ground, you shall turn up such moulde, as has not spent his strength
in the former croppe, the fruit whereof you shall find in the next harvest.
And here I must of necessity acknowledge that M. Tauerner in his Book of
Experiments, concerning Fish and Fruit, being of this years date, has
bereaved me of one of my best observations in Orchard grounds, the ignorance
whereof I hold to be one of the special and principal causes that so many of
our English Orchards do never yield fruit answerable to our charge and
travel: the secret whereof is this briefly. Every ground has naturally an
upper crust of earth, which by the lively and viuifying heat of the Sun,
the comfortable nature of the Air, together with the congelatiue part of the
rain (for so M. Bernard Palissie terms it, being the first Author of a fifth
element) which often falls upon the ground, is made more rich and fruitful
than all the residue of the earth besides, which upper crust in some ground is
a foot, in some two, and in some three foot deep, and in some not above half
a foot. And under the same upper crust is either a hot chalk, a dry sand, a
barren gravel, or a cold lean claie or lome, or such like. It is therefore
requisite that you set your young trees in such sort, as that the roots may
run and spread within that upper crust: and if you set them deeper, they may
happily grow, but never bring forth fruit in any plentiful manner: nay, though
the earth should consist of one and the self same vein, and of one color and
nature in show, yet because the Sun does not give his impression nor digestion
unto the earth, but to a certain depth (which I guess not much to exceed two
foot) you shall find that all the rest of the mould under that depth will be
lean and hungry, not having any strength or fatnes in it. And this is the
reason why such earth as has been dug out of vaultes and Cellers, not
having received any life or comfort from the Sun beams, though of never so
black and rich moulde in outward appearance, if it be spread upon garden
grounds, does make them utterly barren and unfruitful. That which is here
spoken of Orchard grounds, I would have all wise and skillful husbandmen to
apply also to their Corn grounds, that in any case they never dig deeper
with the Spade, then the strength of the ground will bear, and so by their
ignorance discredit a work and practice of so great expectation. Now
concerning the laying of your grounds, either in ridges and furrows, or in a
declining level, whereby the rain may have a sufficient conueyance, after
they have once received their due moisture from the clouds: this rests in
the discretion of the husbandman, who best knows the moisture or dryness of
his own grounds, and accordingly may give such a current unto them, as may
best fit the several natures of each ground or soil. And here I may not omit
that ease and speed in breaking up of grounds, which some of our late
practisers have found out, by making the first entrance with a deep cutting
plough, and then pursuing the same with the spade, whereby much charge, labor,
and expense of time is avoided.

CHAP. 4. The several instruments for making the holes for the grain, and
covering them.
IT is an old saying, that hands were made before knives: and I doubt not,
but the same may as well be verified in tools. For to my rememberance, the
first man that ever attempted the setting of corn, made the first holes with
his finger. But this course being afterward found to be very long and tedious,
an instrument was devised, having many teeth or pinnes, like a rake, with a
staff fastened in the midst of the backside thereof, which being thrust into
the ground, did at one instant make twelve or twenty holes more or less,
according to the number of teeth or pinnes therein. Afterward this tool was
also disliked, as not making sufficient riddance of ground, and in place
thereof a board of three foot or thereabout in length, and twelve or ten
inches in breadth, was thought upon, having diverse holes boared therein,
according to such distance as every particular man best fansied, through each
of which holes a wodden dibber or pin was thrust into the ground, being of
the bigness of ones finger, and of three or four inches in length, having a
shoulder or hole with a cross pin, to keep one self same certainty in the
depth of each hole. The last devise that as yet has come to my view (but now
rejected, because in the drawing out of so many pinnes the holes do choke) is
a board of the same largenes with the former, driven full of round pinnes of
three or four inches deep within the board, and placed each from other in
equal distance by a true proportion, which at one impression makes so many
receptacles for the corn, as there be pinnes in the board. These boords are
directed by a Gardiners line, first strained to some reasonable length, or by
the eye, and thereby a straight course is kept in the setting. When each hole
has received a corn, then must you rake over the ground to fill up those
holes with earth again: and during all the time of setting and raking, you
must stand or kneel upon one of your boords, which you must remove from place
to place, as your setting and raking from time to time requires.

Here for the satisfaction of the simple, I have thought good also to set
down the length of your boordes, together with the true boaring of them
between each hole: and therefore if you have five inches distance, then may
you in a board of ten inches broad make two rows of holes, the first and last
hole being two inches and a half from each side, and if the length thereof be
two foot and eleven inches, then may it well contain two rows of holes,
having seven holes in every row, the first and last hole being distant from
each end two inches and a half: and when the ends or sides of two such boords
so bored, shall be laid together, they will make a true continuance of one
self same skantling and distance of five inches through all your works: if
you work upon four inches, then leave at each side and end of your board two
inches: and so in a board of three foot in length, and one foot in breadth,
you shall have nine holes in each row one way, and three holes the other way.

And it is to be remembered that every two workmen (whereof the one makes the
holes, and the other sets the grain) must have two boords to work upon: and
yet some be of opinion, that one man may perform both the works.

CHAP. 5. At what depth and distance your corn must be set.
I Have been informed that the observation of three inches deep, and three
inches distance, has brought forth 30. quarters of wheat upon one acre of
ground, and that four inches in depth, and four in distance has yielded but
twenty quarters: happily the ground or the seed corn might make the
difference. Some speak of five inches deep and five in distance, with
exceeding great increase: the true finding out of which proportions may easily
be obtained by several trials made at several depths and distances together,
at one time, and in one self same piece of ground. Only here I must remember
you of that which was spoken of before, in the title of digging, chap. 3. that
concerning the depth, you must have an especial care, that your seed may lie
within the rich crust of the earth, and that his bed wherein he lies, may also
be of the same goodness, or else the plough will discredit the spade.

CHAP. 6. Whether it be good to fill the holes with common earth, and to
prepare the seed before it be set.
IF the ground be a rich and kindly wheat ground, you shall find a sufficient
increase by filling them up with their own proper mould: for so have the
greatest and most usual trials been hitherto made already; yet some pregnant
wits, desirous to exault nature to the highest degree of perfection, have
attempted the filling up of those holes both with Pigeons dung, sheeps dung,
and cow dung, and such like, but with no good success at all, quaere if this
dung had been first rotted into perfect earth and then bestowed. Neither do I
see any reason in fat and lusty grounds, why any further increase should be
sought for then has been found already, for that the earth is not able to
carry a greater burden, then she has borne of late by these usual practices
which have been made. But in barren and spent grounds, it were greatly to be
wished, that by some artificial and cheap means, a plentiful croppe of
corn might be had and obtained. For the better furtherance whereof, I leave
these few conceits to the favorable consideration of those, whose farms are
greater then mine, and have had more familiar conference with nature then my
self, referring them also farther both unto the literal and secret sense of
my book of Husbandry before mentioned. And here I think it not amiss to
cite in the first place that learned and poetical Husbandman, who in his first
book of his Georgickes has these Hexamiters.

Semina vidi equidem multos medicare serentes
Et nitro prius, and nigra perfundere amurca:
Grandior vt foetus siliquis fallacibus esset,
Et quamuis igni exiguo Cito coquerentur.
properata maderent;
Vidi laeta diu and multo Probata.
spectata labor
Degenerare tamen: ni vis humana quotannis,
Maxima quaeque manu legeret, etc.
Here we see Salniter and the mother or Lees of oil commended: but whether
Virgill do mean a steeping or imbibition of the grain in the Lees of oil,
wherein there has been a solution of Niter, or the corn only sprinkled over
with them both in the setting; it is left to the consideration of the reader.
But howsoever he intend the same, our country does neither afforde store of
Niter, nor yet of Amurca, to perform many (if any) acres therewith; and though
it did, yet would it prove a work of greater charge and trouble (as I suppose)
then would be endured: unless it were in some small practice, and for the
trial of a magisterie, or upon some richer seed then wheat, which in less
quantity would prove more profitable then any ordinary grain, whereof there
are some few of English breed, if I be not deceived.

But now let us leave Virgill to his poetical vain, and let us come to that
glorious Neapolitaine Johan. Baptista Porta, who expects a general applause
of the whole world, for his last and learned book of Magia naturalis (as in
his preface to the reader, by a recapitulation of all his infinite readings,
charges, and conferences with the greatest clerks of his time, he would
intimate unto us) and washing our eyes first in Eyebright water, let us see
whether we are able to pierce and penetrate into these thick and foggie
clouds of skill, which he has in so many close and figurative terms (as
willing to vaunt of his own wit, but unwilling to benefit others) so strangely
delivered unto us. I find in the latter end of his third book, entitled de
nouis plantis producendis, and over the 21. chapter, this superscription.

Quomodo fruges satis amplo foenore exsatu colligamus, and e vineis vinum.
Whereupon he discourses in manner following: Vt luculentam, satisque exoptatam
coronidem huic nostro libro imponeremus, docebimus quomodo frumentacea, and
legumina satis amplo foenore e satu colligamus, and e vineis vinum. Res
profecto immensae vtilitatis, vt ex vno modio plus centuplo proueniat. Sed ne
quis, quod centuplum plus accipiet, dixerim, putet velim hunc exactum modiorum
numerum ex vno sato collecturum: nam anno, coelo, solo, and syderibus
renuentibus, minor erit collectio, sed non tam minor, quin quintuplo vsitatum
non superet; at his fauentibus, ex vno modio centeni quinquageni reddentur. Sed
pollicitatio haec nostra aliquibus paradoxum videbitur, sed si sanae mentis
essent, maximum profecto videri deberet paradoxum, cur ex sato semodio ducentos
modios non recipiamus, quum ex sato, and concepto acino, videamus radicem in
multiplices and numerosos culmos fructificare, plus minus quindecim, and in
spica sexaginta grana contineri? mitto Byzacij Africae solum Plinij, quod vno
grano quadringenta paucis minus germina miserit, misitque ex eo loco procurator
Neroni CCCXL. stipulas ex vno grano. Sed causam venemur, vnde id accidere
possit. Sunt qui dicant id euenire, quod pars mayor iacti frumenti ex
volucribus, talpis, vermibus, alijsque subterraneis animalibus deuoretur. Sed
id falsum arguitur, quod ex sato lupini modio non plus minus quindecim
recipiuntur, quin lupinum impune iaceat derelictum, ab omnibus animalibus sua
ingrata amaritudine tutum, and suis in thecis, vaginulisque plus minus centum
grana contineantur. Sunt alij, qui id eoelo ascribant, frigorum, calorumque
iniurijs, vel imbrium frequentijs, vt nunc torpeant gelu arua, nunc siti
infestentur, nunc in herbarum copiam luxurient, nunc macie intabescant; sed hoe
falsum congruit argumentum, quod exmaximo coelifauore, neque ex vno triceni
redduntur. Sed ne latius euagemur, dicimus non omnia spicae and vaginulae grana
nasci, nam alia Deus ad escam animalium, alia adsemen destinauit. Sunt in
spicis grana; quasi abortus and degeneres foetus, quae non foeticant sed
desciscunt in vitium. Sunt quae e glumis in spicis emicant habitiora, quae ad
propagationem producuntur. Praeterea nec debito tempore seruntur,
destituunturque debito agricolarum opere: vnde si his obuiabimus; omnia ex voto
succedent. Semina enim prolixioribus radicibus implexis, long lateque sub
tellure serpentibus, numerosiores culmos deproment, circumundique spicis
vallatis. Sponsa ergo suo viro ducatur, non ex primis vel vltimis natis sed e
medijs, quia imbecilles sunt, ac balneo secreta and vngue^tis delibuta and
pingui depasta caprarum veterum Vulcano, and Baccho associata cubile molle, and
optime stratum calefiat: viuifico enim calore in amicam naturam coeunt, and
dulcioribus amplexibus stringuntur and haerent. Sic animata viro semina, non
degenerem, sed legitimam prolem donent. Suo foecundo lumine Luna praesit, nam
ferax feracem reddit, id restat praemonendum, vxorem Baccho ducendam non
capillis destitutam, nam suo decore capite destituto spernitur a viro sponsa,
neque haberet, quo noxia purgarentur, sed solum cincinnis orbetur; sic enim
minus compta, plus suo placebit and viro. Which for the better understanding of
such as are no Latinists, I have thought good to translate into our natural
language, as follows.

How by setting and planting of Corn or vines; a great and plentiful increase
may be had.
That now at length, according to mine own desire, I may shut up this book of
plants with a most famous and renowned conclusion, I will here declare how
all kind of corn and pulse, together with the vines themselves shall
recompense all our labors with great increase. A matter without all question
of singular profit, to receive more then an hundred bushels for one. But least
I be mistaken in this great proportion, I would not have any man to think,
that I do here set down any exact number of bushels, from which nature can
at no time vary: for if the year, the heavens, and the ground it self,
together with the fatal influence of the stars, do all conspire together,
the number of our bushels will fall short, but never so short, but that they
will by five degrees exceed the accustomed yield. But if all these concur
and afford their several favors, then may we well expect 150. bushels of one.
But this proud promise of ours may happily seem a paradox unto some, unto
whom, if they were of any sound and sharp judgment, it should rather seem a
greater paradoxe, why half a bushel should not rather give 200. hundred
bushels again, when as we do often see, that one corn being set and well
rooted, does stem up into diverse stalks, yea sometimes to the number of
fifteen, more or less, each ear also containing threescore corns within it.
I do here omit to speak of Bizatium, that fruitful ground of Africa,
whereof Pliny makes mention, where out of one corn four hundred stalks did
branch: and the Governor of that place did also send to Nero 240. stemmes
arising from one grain. But let us seek out and hunt after the true reason
hereof. Some be of opinion, that the cause why the same fertility does not
happen in our usual and ordinary manner of sowing, is, for that a great part
of the seed which is sown, is devoured by the fowls of the air, by Moles,
worms and other creeping creatures within the ground. But this is manifestly
disproued in the sowing of Lupines, whereas seldom we do reap little more or
less then fifteen bushels for one, although the same be so bitter a kind of
pulse, that none of all these devouring creatures will once touch it, but lies
safe within his hose, each codde containing much about an hundred grains: some
attribute the same unto the heavens, and the injuries arising of heat, cold,
and continual showers of rain, that do often happen; so as sometimes the
grounds are benumbed with frosts, and sometimes parched with heat, sometime they
make a rich and fertile show, and sometimes they wither and waxt barren; but
all this is easily convinced. For that admitting that the heavens do afford
all their favorable influences at once, yet do we scarce obtain at any time
thirty for one. But now to come nearer to our purpose, we do affirm that
each corn that is found within the ear is not apt to grow, for God has
created some of them for the food of living creatures, and some for seed
corn. There be in every ear certain abortiue and bastardly corns, which
will never fructify, but become utterly unprofitable; and in some ears there
are corns which are more beautiful to behold then the rest, which nature has
ordained for propagation. Besides all this, the seed it self is not always
sown by the husbandman in his due time, neither has it all his due rites and
ceremonies performed. So that if we can meet with all these imperfections and
errors, then will all good success follow, according to our own hearts
desire. For the roots being large in spreading under the ground, and each
embracing other in their manifold wreathings, will thereby send forth a greater
number of stemmes, beset and garnished with ears on every side. For the
better accomplishment whereof let the bridegroom make choice of such a wife as
is of the middle sort, and not of the first or last borne, because they are of
a weaker constitution, let them both go into a warm bath, and there
anointing themselves with sweet ointment, and with the fat food of old
Goats, being mixed with Bacchus and Vulcan; let their soft and even laid bed
be gently warmed: for by that viuifying heat they will unite themselves in an
amiable manner, and be knit and joined together in most sweet and loving
imbracements: and the seed being thus quickened by the powerful heat of the
man, will in the end bring forth a kindly, and no bastardly issue: Let the
Moon be predominant with her prosperous light, for she being fruitful, will
also make the same to fructify the better. But yet I must admonish you of one
thing more, that such a wife as is fit for God Bacchus, must not be bald and
without hair, for so wanting the due ornament of her head, she might happily
be despised of her husband, neither should she have whereat to purge her own
excrements, only let all curlings and perriwigs be laid aside, that so being
the more retchlesse in her attire, she may seem more pleasing and acceptable
to her husband.

And what if all this mystical marriage between God Bacchus and the Goddess
Ceres (at the solemnization whereof only Vuloan and Luna were present, as
though neither Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus, nor Mercury, nor the rest of
that celestial crewe were neither worthy to dine nor dance at the Wedding)
what, I say, if all this great mystery or Magisterie of nature, as Baptista
Porta would have it to appear, be nothing else but a soking of corn in wine,
or in the new must thereof, before it be set? Might not this without the
profaning of Nature, or her sacred Maxims been safely and without offense in
plain terms delivered to the public view of the world? But let us examine
the particulars of this parable. The wife (he says) must neither be of the
first nor last, but taken out of the midst: and here, because he shall be
his own expositor, I refer you to his secret for enlarging of the Gourd,
page 137. where he cites these verses out of Columella,

Sieve globosi
Corporis atque vtero nimium quae vasta tumescit
Ventre legas medio, sobolem dabit illa capacem.
And this, says Porta, is not only to be observed in this plant, but in all
others likewise, for those seeds which are contained within the midst of the
bulk are more perfect themselves, and bring forth more perfect plants then
those weak and imperfect ones, which occupy the outtermost places; and so the
grain, he says, in the middle of the ear brings forth a larger corn then
those which grow in the top or bottom thereof.

Concerning the bath and ointment wherein Vulcan and Bacchus are used, I think
he means some fat temper made with cowdung or Goats dung, the older the
better, moistened with wine or new must, whereby Bacchus is signified, in whom
the secret fire and heat, which he holds, may also resemble Vulcan, under
whose name fire is sometimes signified, as in that saying of Paracelsus, In
Vulcano veritas: and in this compound, the goddess Ceres is lapped before she
be set into the ground; or else the ground and mixture are after watered with
wine, or else the corn is first steeped a certain time in wine before the
grain is bestowed in the earth: any of these constructions seem probable, and
to have some affinity with his figurative terms.

Her bed must be very soft, and delicately made, whereby he does manifestly
insinuate the very digging with the spade, which works the mould into a most
fine and subtle body: the warming of the bed, and those sweet collings and
clippings together are intended to be wrought with the moistning heat of
Bacchus. It seems also that he would have this setting performed in the
increase, or toward the full of the Moon. The corn he would have to be set
together with his chafe about it, which he terms the hair, whereby nature
purges the excrement of the head, but not with the beard of the ear, which
has a curled kind of grain upon it. Let this satisfy, that I have aimed at
the mark, the pin being so far off, and clean out of sight. But what
should we vex our spirits in beating out the sense of this mystical Latin,
when as without all other circumstance, we see that one corn pricked into the
ground, brings forth eight hundredth corns at once, whereas Porta speaks of
two hundred only at the most, even when heaven and earth do all join hand in
hand together to help his invention? And who knows whether he mistake the
reason of his own conceit, for happily the mellownes of the ground being
opened and broken with the spade, did of it self perform the great wonder
which he writes of, and then both Bacchus and Ceres, and Luna may have Jack
Drums entertainment.

Now if I were also disposed to attire and disguise a plain secret in his
figurative robes, what a deep and drunken riddle could I here set down of
steeping barley or wheat in new ale in corns (although I hold the wort, so it
be of the first rap, to be much better) for this does seem to be his own
natural bath, whereby it should receive a multiplying virtue in his own kind?
I fear to prosecute this secret any farther in such Philosophical terms,
least some nouice in Alcumie should suppose that I do go about to unfold and
disclose the sacred materials and working of the Philosophers stone, and yet to
speak in good sooth, I durst undertake to perform as much with ale or beer
as Bap. Porta shall do with his sack and sugar, or Claret wine and Limons,
let him make his choice.

And because Virgil has spoken of Niter, I have though good also, as a Parallel
to the same out of M. Bar. Googe his book of Husbandry, fol. 33. b. to sot
down the steeping of Beans in the water wherein Salt Peter has been
dissolved, and why not other grain and pulse, as well as Beans? And thus you
have Rome and Naples answered with Surrey and London, I pray God all may bring
forth one good conclusion for our commonwealth of England.

But why should we spend these costly liquors that are fitter for Tauernes and
Alehouses, then for rusticall imbibitions? when as with common water and the
dung of cattle, especially of Oxen, Kine, and Sheep, or Pigeons dung (whereof
more quantity, with a great deal less charge (being not much inferior in
effects) may so easily be had and obtained) Then hear me with patience, and if
I happen to slip, stay me with a friendly band, and so happily I may save some
of you from many a dangerous fall. There is a great opinion conceited, yea
publicly maintained by good Authors in their several books about imbibition of
corn in some fat and fructifying liquors; but neither the strength of the
liquors, the time of imbibition, nor the proportion between the liquor and
grain, has as yet bin thoroughly sounded, nay scarsely touched by any; which
three points I hold to be so material, ans that without the knowledge of them
al in some good measure, nothing else but clamors against the writers, and
errors in the practizers are like to ensue.

And first concerning the strength of your liquor upon your dung, you cannot
lightly err, so as you let the same rest upon a sufficient quantity thereof,
until it have gotten a deep color, and a strong smell and savor from his
ingredient: as suppose you put two parts water to one third part of dung,
suffering the same to infuse four or five days, and stirring the same once or
twice every day, till it have gotten out all the heart and strength of the dung,
or so much thereof as the water is able to receive; the^ after some settling,
strain this liquor through some course cloth, and if it will not run, then add
more water unto it, for here your special care must be, that your liquor do
not grow too thick: after all this, let the same repose 12. or 24. hours, and
then gently dreine away the clear from the grounds or feticall residence, and
so have you a liquor sufficiently prepared to steep your corn in: and for the
better performance hereof, you may boar a hole within an inch of the bottom
of the vessel, or half an inch, according as you shall see ye same to run
clear and not muddy into your receiving vessel.

And as for the time of imbibition, it is a rule in natural Philosophle, that
every thing has his stomach, which does never leave drawing and attracting
unto it self such matter as is apt for it, until it be glutted; and then as
being ouercharged, it loatheth and spueth out even that which otherwise it most
desires: as it does manifestly appear in the stomach of man, wherein by
ouergorging it self a Nausea does presently ensue. This is yet made more
manifest in the art of dying, where, if in your blewes and greenes you work
with Indico, or in Stammels, Crimsons, Carnations or Scarlets, you work with
Greine or Kutcheneele, the cloth when it has received his glut of color,
though never so often dipped after, will nothing at al exalt it self in beauty
or richnes of color; even so it fares with corn, after it has imbibed so
much liquor, as it can well bear and brook without breaking of the hull, the
is it time to dreine away the water: and yet we see, that Pease, though they
be steeped till they sprowt a little, that they will grow notwithstanding, I
leave the aduenturing of wheat and barlie so far unto them, that list by
often and manifold trial to search for the period of this practice.

Lastly, for the better finding out of a true proportion between the corn and
your liquor: first, put your corn in the vessel, and add so much of your fat
liquor unto it as will cover the same. And if the corn drink it up, then add
more liquor thereunto: and the only fear in this work, is least if you
ouercharge your corn with water, that the water will rather draw the strength
from the corn, then the corn draw strength from the water

And thus I have discovered the true use of all imbibitions: which have
hitherto been confirmed by some, and condemned by others, each several man
reporting according to his own experience. But the errors may from henceforth
be easily prevented by a careful observation of these few rules already
delivered in as plain and simple a manner (as respecting the general good,
which was the primum mobile of this Discourse) I could possibly devise or
publish.

Here I think it not impertinent to our purpose to set down several means
for the enriching of ground, the trials whereof, by way of imbibition, I
refer to each man's patticular experience.

Sea Kilpes and sea Tangle, and other sea weeds are found by experience to
enrich both arable and pasture grounds exceedingly. Shreds of woollen cloth
strewed upon pasture ground will bring forth grass abundantly.

The dregs of beer and ale applied to the roots of trees, and other smaller
plants, will make them flourish and prosper mightily, Seeds steeped in brine,
proportioned according to Sea water, which consists of one part salt, and
eyghteene or twenty parts water, will in diverse grounds procure a good increase.

The Soote of Chimnies, both engendered by Sea-coale, as also by wood and
charcoale in a very small quantity, works great effects this way.

There is a salt which the Petermen upon the refining of their Peter, do
separate from the Peter, this salt (if I be not deceived) is the salt
purchased from the ashes, upon which the Petermen power their foggie liquors to
clear them; one work (unless it be a great one) does not yield much above a
bushel thereof weekly: this salt I take to be a true vegetable salt, and
therefore exceeding profitable, either to be strewed upon grounds to be mixed
amongst the seed corn, or for imbibition.

Shauings of horn, upon mine own experience, I must of necessity commend, by
the means whereof, I obtained a most flourishing garden at Bishops hall, in a
most barren and unfruitful plot of ground, which none of my Predecessors could
ever grace or beautify either with knots or flowers.

I have had the like experience with singular good success by strewing the
waste soap ashes upon a border of summer Barlie, whereof three ears would have
counterpeized any five that ever came to my sight: you may see a plentiful
discourse of these soap ashes in my book of husbandry.

Some commend greatly the watering of ground presently after it is sown, with
an artificial Brine, consisting of an eyghteenth or twentieth part of salt:
this is performed by a hogshed or some other such like vessel drawn upon a
sled, having one of the heads boared full of small hoales like a watring pot.

The residence or grounds of the Oad fat, serve also to enrich ground with.

Malte dust may here also challenge his place: for four or five quarters
thereof, are sufficient for an acre of ground.

The hulles which are divided from the Oats, in the making of Oatmeale, either
in their own present nature, or being burnt to ashes, make an excellent
substance for enriching of ground. Fearne either rotted to dung by a mixture of
earth amongst it, or consumed with fire into ashes, makes a singular soil to
lay upon barren and hungry grounds.

When the Iron stone or oar is burnt, those fine ashes that are sifted from
the same, do prove a most excellent substance for the enriching of wet
meadows, or Marish grounds, especially such as are rushie, slaggie, or
sedgie, and will bring the same to a fine sweet grass: you shall find the
ground every year better than other, with a manifest and apparent difference
between that parcel of your ground which you have enriched therewith, and all
the rest of the same field, both by the glorious green color which it
carries, and also by the delight of the cattle continually feeding thereon,
and refusing the other till that be spent. There is plenty of this matter to
be had in Sussex, Essex, Wales, and such other shires wherein there has been
any long continuance of iron works, and those hills which consist of this
matter are worth the breaking up, though they be ancient and have lien long
uncovered; but the best and hartiest, is that which has been kept always
covered and defended from the rain: this kind of soil is also good for
wheat ground, and three loades thereof are a sufficient proportion for one
acre: and if you intend the same for grass, you must spread it upon the ground
about alhallountide. The light of this secret I received from a Yorkshire
Gentleman, a man both of great gifts and great possessions, who assured me of
three years trial made by himself with very good success, whose opinion is,
that three loads thereof will enrich one acre of ground for seven years at the
least.

Sal Armoniake being a volatile salt, first incorporated and rotted in common
earth, is thought to be a rich molde to plant or set in ( quaere of steeping
grain in water, having a true proportion thereof first dissolved in it) but he
that can prove so fortunate as to find out the true Sal Armoniake of metal,
shall be able with small quantity to work great wonders in this kind.

Dogs and Cats, and other beasts, and generally all carrion buried under the
roots of Trees, in a due time will make them flourish and bring forth fruit
in great abundance.

Here I cannot omit a strange secret delivered by a Gentleman of good worth
unto me, even before this work was fully perfected, which I have reserved
for the conclusion of this title. He assured me of a gentleman, at this
present dwelling in Cornwall, who being very industrious, and searching into
the works of Nature, would needs attempt the sowing of Wheat in his arable
grounds, being of such kind, nature and quality, as was merely repugnant
and unfit for that grain, as the experience sell drawn upon a sled, having
one of the heads boared full of small hoales like a watring pot.

The residence or grounds of the Oad fat, serve also to enrich ground with.

Malte dust may here also challenge his place: for four or five quarters
thereof, are sufficient for an acre of ground.

The hulles which are divided from the Oats, in the making of Oatmeale, either
in their own present nature, or being burnt to ashes, make an excellent
substance for enriching of ground. Fearne either rotted to dung by a mixture of
earth amongst it, or consumed with fire into ashes, makes a singular soil to
lay upon barren and hungry grounds.

When the Iron stone or oar is burnt, those fine ashes that are sifted from
the same, do prove a most excellent substance for the enriching of wet
meadows, or Marish grounds, especially such as are rushie, slaggie, or
sedgie, and will bring the same to a fine sweet grass: you shall find the
ground every year better than other, with a manifest and apparent difference
between that parcel of your ground which you have enriched therewith, and all
the rest of the same field, both by the glorious green color which it
carries, and also by the delight of the cattle continually feeding thereon,
and refusing the other till that be spent. There is plenty of this matter to
be had in Sussex, Essex, Wales, and such other shires wherein there has been
any long continuance of iron works, and those hills which consist of this
matter are worth the breaking up, though they be ancient and have lien long
uncovered; but the best and hartiest, is that which has been kept always
covered and defended from the rain: this kind of soil is also good for
wheat ground, and three loades thereof are a sufficient proportion for one
acre: and if you intend the same for grass, you must spread it upon the ground
about alhallountide. The light of this secret I received from a Yorkshire
Gentleman, a man both of great gifts and great possessions, who assured me of
three years trial made by himself with very good success, whose opinion is,
that three loads thereof will enrich one acre of ground for seven years at the
least.

Sal Armoniake being a volatile salt, first incorporated and rotted in common
earth, is thought to be a rich molde to plant or set in ( quaere of steeping
grain in water, having a true proportion thereof first dissolved in it) but he
that can prove so fortunate as to find out the true Sal Armoniake of metal,
shall be able with small quantity to work great wonders in this kind.

Dogs and Cats, and other beasts, and generally all carrion buried under the
roots of Trees, in a due time will make them flourish and bring forth fruit
in great abundance.

Here I cannot omit a strange secret delivered by a Gentleman of good worth
unto me, even before this work was fully perfected, which I have reserved
for the conclusion of this title. He assured me of a gentleman, at this
present dwelling in Cornwall, who being very industrious, and searching into
the works of Nature, would needs attempt the sowing of Wheat in his arable
grounds, being of such kind, nature and quality, as was merely repugnant
and unfit for that grain, as the experience of the greatest part of the
Country round about him did manifestly declare. And this he performed only by
infusing his seed corn four and twenty hours in a strong liquor, that had
descended from his muck-heape into a receptacle of brick: but he never infused
his corn (as I am informed) till the liquor had been of two years date, and
he always dried his corn before he sowed it: quaere if in less time and
without drying, the same effects will not follow.

CHAP. 7. How to make choice of your seed corn.
SVch corn as is rubbed between ones hands out of the middle of the ear, the
upper and nether part thereof being first divided, I hold (with Bap. Porta) to
be the most fruitful seed of all the rest, and that the hand, though it be a
more labour-some work, does perform this better than the flaile, which makes
no division of the grain, and yet bruiseth a great part thereof by the
violence of the stroke. But if your threshed wheat content you, then is it best
either to pick each corn by it self, and so to divide the good from the bad
(which is a fit work for children, and may the rather be endured, for that so
small a proportion of seed will serve to set an acre, viz. 12. pintes thereof,
if each grain be at sieve inches distance, as some have observed) or else to
power your corn into a tubbe of water, stirring it up and down, whereby the
best and heauiest corns will sink to the bottom, and the lightest grain
will fleet and flote in the top, which may easily be severed. I know no
other means serving for the choice of your seed corn, saving those which are
so usual and common; as that they deserve no place amongst new inventions, and
therefore I do here advisedly omit to touch or name them.

CHAP. 8. The difference of yield between the plough and the spade, with some
new addition to the plough.
HE that reapeth four quarters of wheat out of one acre by his plough, does
hold himself well contented, as with a rich croppe, which is eight at the
least for one. I know the greatest number do scarcely attain seven for one,
and many but six for one: but if he have ten or twelve for one, then he
acknowledges himself to have received an extraordinary favor and blessing
from the heavens: yet (because both happily, and by credible report it is come
to my hands) I will here set down one rare experiment performed this last
year with the plough, wherein no doubt the Actor did strive even in the
strength of his wit and spirit to make the best imitation which he could of the
spade. The ground having a natural declining or descent by his own
situation, was first cross ploughed with a very deep cutting plough, and
then ploughed over the third time with a shallow plough, that made very close
and narrow furrows; then was the seed sown by a skillful sower, and then
harrowed over; and by this new practice the owner obtained 15. quarters (I
dare not say 20.) upon each acre which he sowed. I do not cite this strange
and admirable experiment, either to overthrow the whole frame of my former
work, by undermining the foundation thereof, or to hinder the labors of so
many thousands of poor and distressed people, which by digging and setting are
like to be profitably employed in this land by means of the spade (whose
estates with all Christian commiseration I do pity, and am willing to
relieve) but professing all the good I can, and by all the means that I may,
to advance the common good of the whole realm, and knowing that if this new
practice of digging by good success thereof do happen to become general in
and over the whole land, notwithstanding the realm be populous, and surcharged
with infinite numbers of poor men, women, and children, and maimed soldiers,
that yet there will scarcely be found workmen enough for the tenth acre of
land: I say, for the better increase of all such grounds where the plough must
of necessity be used, I was bold to insert this inuentition, to supply the
defect of laborers, which otherwise of necessity would ensue. And yet if I
may believe those infinite reports, which are now with open trumpet sounded
into each man's ear, in commendation of the spade, there will be no comparison
between the plough and it, though all men would join all their wits together
for the better furtherance thereof; out of many of which reports, I will only
remember these few.

A Justice of Peace and Quorum of my acquaintance, dwelling in Essex, and
desirous to make a trial of that wonderful experience, so commended at the
Court of Requests bar by a Counselor, who had seen the same the summer
before, would needs set a parcel of ground with his own hands, as soon as he
came from Michaelmasse term last to his house: in April the same began to
show very green and full of blade, and in harvest time each corn brought
forth at the least 27. ears, some 30. and some 32. with forty grains in each
ear, whose proportion is at the least a thousand for one. For the truth of
which report, I dare gage my credit, I know the Gentleman to be so temperate
and well advised of his speech.

I do hear of another Gentleman dwelling in Surrey, who has reaped 16
bushels out of one pint of wheat which he set, and that some corns brought
forth 40. and some 48. ears having 66.68. and 72. corns in each ear, I could
name the Gent. dwelling, and place of the trial, but this which I speak I
dare warrant to be true, having good ground of credit for the same.

In Northamptonshire there grew barlie this last summer, amongst the which
there was found some roots having 120. ears upon one root, with thirty
grains at the least in each ear.

I have also heard by sundry reports of 20.30. and 32. quarters of wheat upon
an acre, and of 15. quarters of barley upon an acre; yea there have been some
which have reported, that they have had 15. quarters of wheat upon one acre by
this manner of setting, the ground being spent and out of heart by often plowing
before.

And if I should report all the several trials that have been made by several
persons, as well of the Nobility as others, within these two last years, I
should both weary my self with recording, and you with reading such infinite
numbers of practices as I could produce, sed ex his reliqua.

I will here either borrow leave, or commend without leave, a new, light and
portable Pumpe, being of late graced with her Majesty's most favorable
privilege, which I am bold to publish, together with this artificial
husba^dry, because I know no better means to give a public notice thereof unto
all my country men then by this pamphlet, which taking the wings of fame unto
it, is like to disperse both it self and his companion abroad in a most speedy
and sudden manner through all this little Island. This Pump is of wood, and
moveable from place to place by one man's labor: it is kept with very small
charge in good reparations: it is cheap, and delivers great store of water
in a little time by his double stroke to a reasonable height; it occupies
small room; it serves to empty Cellers and ponds; it is very necessary for
all merchants ships, and other ships of war, whereby all superfluous water
may be safely conveyed out at the nether port-holes in agreat leake happening
by fight, or otherwise. But the most general, use thereof (as I take it) will
be for all those stately houses and buildings which border upon the river of
Thames, or any other river, whereby they may receive sufficient store of water
to serve all their offices and gardens belonging to the same. You may hear
farther of the Author of this Invention by the Printer hereof.

H. PLAT Esquire.


