A Philosophical Treatise concerning the quietness of the mind.

Taken out of the Moral works written in Greek, by the most Famous
Philosopher, and Historiographer, Plutarch of Cherronea, Counselor to Tra^^^
the Emperor.

And translated out of Greek into French by James Amyor Bishop of Auxerre, and
great Almoner to the most Christian King of France Charles the ninth.

And now turned out of French into English by John Clapham.

Printed by Robert Robinson for Thomas Newman. 1589.

To my very good Father Master Luke Clapham contentment of mind in this life,
and continuance of joy in the life to come.
SIR, after I had finished the translation of this Philosophical Treatise,
(which was my chief work these long Winter nights:) I purposed to send the
written copy unto you, not minding then to publish it. Howbeit being since
persuaded that it might be beneficial to others (considering the necessity of
the argument) I have now made that common to al which at the first was intended
only to you, wherein whatsoever my intention was, I can hardly excuse my
self of rashness in publishing it to the view and censure of the learned, and
skillful in the French tongue (whereof my self have but a taste) who will
easily perceive my wants, and errors in the translation. And yet seeing
oftentimes that endeavor supplieth default of sufficiency, and a good meaning
counteruaileth a bad performance: J have at all adventures (as you see)
stripped this moral treatise out of a rich French attire into a poor English
weed, (I would be loath that some French man should take it as an injury)
thrusting it out to the eye of the world under your patronage, being the first
fruits of my labor in this kind, not doubting of your favorable acceptance
thereof, as proceeding from him, that in nature and duty is most bownd unto
you, and to whom he owes himself and all that he has.

If the pains I have taken herein may either please or profit the Reader, I
shall be glad: if both, I require no more. Jf neither, yet for the first time,
Sit voluisse satis.

And thus in my hearty prayers I commend you with my good Mother to the
protection of the Almighty, whom J beseech to send ye many happy years to
your joy and contentment in this world, and everlasting peace to your endless
comfort in his Kingdom. From the Court at Richmond, the 2. of January. 1589.

Your humble and obedient son. John Clapham.

Translator ad Libellum.
Si quis (parue liber) quum primum viderit hospes
Forte rogat quiduis? cuius es? vnde venis?
Jgnotus (dic tu) Dominus me protulit, atqui
Cum nequeat quod vult, sit been velle satis.
Interea faueatque tibi, Dominoque precare
Qui me lior a volet, cum meliora valet.
A Philosophical treatise, concerning the quietness of the mind.
Plutarch to Paccius health, etc.

I Received your letter very lately, wherein you desire me to write some thing
unto you cocerning the quietness of the mind, and with all, touching certain
places of Platoes Timaeus, which seem needful of a most diligent exposition.
It chanced at the same time, that Eros our familiar friend had occasion to
sail with speed toward Rome, about certain letters which he had received
of the most virtuous gentleman Fundanus: who therein was very earnest to have
him depart forth with, and to come unto him. So wanting sufficient time to
emploie in the matter, which you desired, and unwilling, that he departing from
me, should come unto you with empty hands: I have drawn together summarily
out of notes, and remembrances (which I had long since collected for mine own
private use) certain sentences touching the tranquillity of the mind,
persuading my self that you have not required this discourse, to the end that
you might take pleasure in reading a treatise well and eloquently written, but
only to serve you at need, knowing very well, that to get the favor of great
men, and to be reported a good speaker, and as eloquent a pleader of causes in
the Palace, as any one in Rome: you do not for all this, as Merops the
Tragedian, who wearieth and consumes himself with vainglorie to please the
humor of the popular sort (which therefore worthily account you happy:) but I
doubt not that you keep well in memoric the speech which you have often times
heard me use, that neither a noblemans shoe heals the gout in the foot, nor a
precious ring, the crampe in the finger, nor a Diadem, the pain in the head.
For how serves store of wealth, great honors, or credit in Court, to free the
mind from trouble, and to make a man's life peaceable, if ( That) be not
within, which can Reason.
use it virtuously, and if it be not always accompanied with contentment,
which never wishes that it has not. And what other thing is That, but only
reason, accustomed and exercised in bridling straightwaies the unreasonable
part of the mind, which easily, and often times passes her bowndes, so that it
cannot wander abroad at her own pleasure, nor be carried about after her own
appetites. Wherefore as Xenophon does warn men to be mindful of the gods, and
to worship them, especially when they are in prosperity, to the end, that in
time of necessity they may be more assured to reclaim them, as having bin
long before favorable and friendly unto them: So ought wise, and discreet men
to make provision of reasons, which may serve to defend them against passions,
so that having them prepared before hand, they may be more available, when
need requires. For even as dogs which are fierce by nature do grin and bark
at every strange noise they hear, and are not appeased, but with the sownd
of that voice which is familiar unto them, and with which they are acquainted:
So is it not an easy matter, to bring back to reason, the wild wandering
passions of the mind, unless we have a fit, and familiar bridle at hand, that
may check them, as soon as they begin to stir.

As for them, which say, that if we would live quietly, we should not deal
with many matters either private, or public: First I say that they would sell
us this tranquillity too deerlie, which will Idleness.
have us buy it with the price of idleness, which is as much, as if they should
warn every man, as being sick, even as Electra does her brother Orestes.

Continue quiet, wretched in thy bed.
But this were an ill medicine for the body, which to case the pain thereof
must take away the feeling: neither is he a better Physician for the mind, who
to take all disquiet from it, would make it idle, effeminate, forgetful of all
duty toward friends, kindred and country.

We see then it is untrue that their minds are settled, and quiet, which
entermedle not with many matters. For if it were so, then must we say, that
women live more contented, and less troubled than men, considering that for
the most part they stir not out of the house. But very true it is, as the
Poet Hesiodus says.

The percing wind, that from the North does pass.
Hurtes not the body of the tender Less:
But greefes, cares, vexations, and discontentments, be it through
iealousysuperstition, ambition, or proceeding from vain opinions, and
conceits, that 3 especial causes of women's coffeehouse.
are almost innumerable, do easily rush even into Ladies closets, and
bedchambers. And Laertes, which lived solitarilie in the country for the space
of twenty years.

Alone with one old woman that he had.
To dress his meat he lived pensive and sad.
Albeit he separated himself far from his country, from his house, and
kingdom, yet he always carried grief, and sadness in his heart, which are ever
accompanied with idle coffeehouse, and pensive silence.

Moreover there are some which say, that not to be employed in affairs is often
times cause of displeasure, and the disquiet of a man's mind, As appears by
the discontented Greek, whom Homer describes.

But stout Achilles sprung of Peleus race
Being light of foot, and full of divine grace,
Had no delight once from his ships to move,
Or march in battle as did him be houe
Amidst the Greeks, or else among the wise
To sit in counsel, or to enterprise
Some brave attempt, beseeming his estate,
But all alone possessed with spite, and hate
He did consume himself from country far,
Although he loved nothing more than war.
Whereupon himself being passionate and vexed in mind says a little after that.

Hard by my ships, where doing naught I stood,
A lump of Earth unfit for any good.
In so much that Epicurus himself is of opinion that a man ought not to
continue still, doing nothing, but that every man should follow the
inclination of his own nature, as the ambitious, and desirous of Honor to
deal with public affairs, and to entermeddle with the government of the
common wealth, saying that otherwise in doing nothing they should be more
troubled, and disquieted, because they could not obtain that which they
desired. But herein he is of a bad judgment in calling to the government of
the state, not those men, which are most fit for the place, but such as can
least give themselves to case, and rest. Howbeit we ought not to measure or
determine the quiet or disquiet of the mind by the great or small number of
matters, but by the good or bad handling of them. For (as we have already
said) it is no less troblesome, nor less offensive to the mind, to omit that
which is good, then commit that which is ill. And as for them which think that
there is assuredly a certain special kind of life without any
coffeehouse, as some hold the life of laboring me, to be some, the life of
young men to be married, and some the life of Kings: Menander answers them
sufficiently in these verses.

O Phania I thought, that men of power,
Which have great store of wealth at every hour.
So that they need not upon usury:
To borrow, as men do in penury.
Had from all care, and thought been freed clean:
And had not known what grief, and pain does mean.
Or all nights groaning, sighing, and unrest:
Turning from side to side, as men oppressed.
To cry alas, and wish it were their hap:
To close their eyes, or take one slumbring nappe.
But afterward, looking nearer into their state, and perceauing that the rich
lived as much discontented as the poor he says.

Thus coffeehouse, in all states being rife: No state, or kind of life free
from trouble, and disquiet.

The sister german, of this human life.
Participates with nobles, in the Court:
With men of power, of wealth, of every sort.
The silly soul, by her does pine away:
And every where, she bears no little sway.
But this is, even as those that are fearful, The cause of discontentmet in
our selves.
and sick upon the seas, which think to ease, and cure them selves in passing,
out of a Bark into a Brigandine, and out of a Brigandine into a Galley: And
yet they gain nothing thereby, for so much as they always carry with them
the humor, and fear, which causes their sickness: Even so alteration in the
kinds of life does not take away the greefes and vexations, that trouble the
quiet of mind; which greefes proceed partly of want of experience in matters,
partly of lack of good conference, and advise, and partly of default of
knowledge; and discretion to apply our selves to our present estate. This is it,
which disquieteth as well the rich, as the poor. This is it, which troubles
as well the married, as the unmarried. This is the cause, that many do fly
the palace, and please please in courts. And yet for all this, they cannot
brook quietness, or give themselves to rest, by reason they desire, and seek
to be a duanced, and to have great places in Princes courts, which when they
have once obtained suddenly they become weary of them.

Hard is it to content the man that is sick. The mind never con tented.
So says Ion the Poet: for his wife displeases him. He accuses the
Physician. He is angry with his bed, some one of his friends offends him,
because he comes to visit him, another because he comes not, or being
come for that he will needs depart. But afterward when the disease
decreaseth, and that there comes an other temperature, and disposition of
body: then health returns again, which makes all things pleasing, and
delightful. So that he, which of late, nay, but yesterdaie refused with
loathing, and abhorred eggs, fine cheat, and the whitest manchet that might be
got: this day falls to brown household bred, with olives, and water cresses,
even sauourly, and with a good stomach. Even Reason changes affections
so the judgment of reason coming to form it self in man's understanding,
brings with it the like facility, and the very same change in every kind of
life. They say, that Alexander having heard Alexanders ambition.
Anaxarchus the Philosopher dispute and maintain in argument, that there were
innumerable worlds, began to weep: And being asked what reason he had so to
do, answered saying: have I not great cause, to weep, if the number of worlds
be infinite, seeing that I cannot yet make my self lord of one alone? Crates
co^tentment.
Whereas Crates having for all his wealth but one old ill-fauored, ragged
cloak, and a patched scrippe did nothing al his life long but sport, and
laugh, as if he had always been at a feast. Contrariwise, Agamemnon
complained for that he had Agamemnons complaint.
such a great world to command.

Lo Agamemnon, son to Atreus:
Upon whose neck, Jupiter caused to bide:
The heavy weight, for all the world beside.
Whereas Diogenes, when they sold him for a slave lying all along upon the
Diogenes carelesnes
ground, mocked the crier that sold him, and would not rise up, when he
commanded him, but sported and iested with him saying. And if thou should
sell Socrates patience.
a fish would thou make it rise up? And Socrates being in prison used
familiar conference in discoursing of matters of ^^ilosophie: whereas Phaeton
being mounted up to heaven yet wept for despite, that they would not let him
rule, and govern the horses, and Chariot of the Phaetons impacience.
Sun his father. Even as the shoe becomes crooked according to the deformity
of the foot, and not otherwise.

: So is it the humors of men, which make their lives alike, and conformable to
their dispositio^s. For it is not custom (as one would have it) which makes a
good life pleasant to them, which have Wisdom, and Temperance causes a good
and pleasant life.
chosen it: but wisdom, and temperance are the things, which make our life
good and pleasant withal. And therefore since the spring head of all quietness
of mind rests in our selves, let us look unto it, and diligently cleanse
it, to the end, that those chances, which shall befall us in outward things,
may seem pleasing, and familiar unto us, when we are well acquainted with
them and can make use of them.

Be not offended, whatsoever chances:
For at our anger, fortune sports, and daunceth.
But he that for all happes, his mind can frame:
Undoubtedly deser^es, a wise man's name.
For Plato compares our life to Table Our life is compared by Plato to Table
play.
play, where the Dye must show the cast and the gamster must content himself
with his chance. Now touching these two points, the event, and hazard of the
Dye are not in our power, but patiently, and moderately to take in good part,
whatsoever it shall please fortune to send, and to dispose every thing in such
place, as it may help much, if it be good, or hurt little if it be bad, this is
in ourpower to do, and this we ought to do, if we be wise. For fools, that are
slaves Foolish men know not how to use either prosperity or adversity.
to their affections, which know not how to behave themselves in this human
life do presumptuously rush out of their bounds in prosperity, and timerously
mure up themselves in adversity. So that they are troubled with both
extremities, or (to say more truly) with Goods
themselves in both extremities, and principally in that which they call Goods,
as Theodorus.
those men who being sick are unable to endure either heat or cold. Theodorus
that for the il opinions he held, was surnamed Atheos, which is without God or
(godless) used to say that he delivered his discourses to his Auditors with
the right hand, but that they received them with the left; even so simple, and
ignorant men which know not how to live, entertaining oftimes with the left
hand, the fortune, which comes to Error in mistaking fortune.
them on the right, commit thereby many gross, and absurd enormities. But on
the contrary part wise men like Bees that suck hunnie out of Time a rough, and
dry herb do draw some good, and profitable thing for themselves even out of the
worst, and most troblesome accidents that befall them. This then is the first
point wherein we must be trained and exercised: as he which aiming to hit a
Dog with a stone misseth the Dog, and strikes his stepmother; and yet Fortune
to be applied by will to every accident.
says, it falls not out ill: (even so may we transfer our fortune by our
will, and apply it to that, which she brings unto us. Diogenes was driven out
of his country into exile, yet went it not ill with him, for that his
banishment was the first beginning of his study in Philosophy: Zeno the Citiei
an had once a Zeno.
merchants ship, and having news, that it was cast awaic, and that the
merchandise, and all were sunck into the bottom of the sea: Fortune (quoth he)
thou do well to make me fit for the long plain robe, and the study of
Philosophy. What lets us to follow the^ herin? Thou have bin deposed from
some public office, or place of authority, which thou had in charge. Well,
be it so: Thou shall live privately in the country upon that, which thou have.
Thou did dest make suite to be entertained into the house and service of some
Prince or noble man. Thou have had the repulse, well, thou shall live at home
with thy self, and that with less pain, and less danger.

Contrariwise thou art entered into dealings with matters of state, wherein is
much pain, and great care. The hot water of the bath does not so much com fort
the wearied lims as Pindarus says.

The hot bath does not yield so much delight.
Unto the wearied lims of any wight.
As hope of glory, others to surmount,
To live in wealth, in credit and account.
Does make all travail, sweet unto the mind.
Tendure such pains, as Honor has assind.
Art thou fallen into disgrace? or have thou received some privy back blow by
envy, or ill report? This is a good wind in the Poupe of thy ship to turn
thee strait to the study of learning, and philosophy, as Plato was, when he
had made Plato
shipwreck of the good favor of Dyonisius the tyrant.

And now it is a mean of no small importance The state of great men to be
considered by the meaner sort.
for the settling of the mind in quiet, to consider the state of great men, and
to see if they be moved, and troubled with the like accidents. As for example.
The cause of thy coffeehouse, is, for that thou can have no children by
thy wife. Look how many Roman Emperors there have been, whereof not one left
the Empire to his son. Art thou grieved because thou art pore? And which of
the Thebans would thou wish to resemble rather, then Epaminondas? or of the
Romans, then Fabritius? Has one defiled thy wife? Have thou not red the
inscription, which is set up in the Temple of Apollo at Delphos, upon an
offering, which was there presented?

Agis a crowned King by sea, and land
Has placed me in this Temple, where I stand.
And have you not heard how Alcibiades Agis honor not empared by his wives
adultery.
corrupted Timoea his wife, and how she her self amongst her women called
softelie the child which she had by him, Alcibiades? But for all this her
lewdness was no let, that Agis became not the greatest, and most famous man of
all Greece in his time. Neither in like manner was the incontinencie of
Stilpoes daughter an occasion that he lived not as joyfully, as any other
Philosopher of his time. So that when Metrocles the Cynick cast it in his
teeth, he said unto him, is this my fault or hers? Metrocles answered: the
fault is hers, Stilpo not disquieted with his daughters incontine^cy.
and the misfortune thine. Stilpo replied again, how so? Are not faults
unhappy casualties? Yea surely (quoth the other.) Then Stilpo goes forward.
And are not such casualties ill euentes? The other confessed it. And are not
ill euentes misfortunes to them, on who^ they chance to fall? By this sweet,
and Philosophical progression from point to point, he showed, and proved
that all his reproach, and malicious speech was nothing else, but a dogs barking.

Again on the other side the most part of men are troubled, and disquieted
Most part of men troubled with their enemies vices.
not only with the vices of their friends, acquaintance, and kindred, but
also with their very enemies misbehauiour. For ill company, contention, envy
emulation, and jealousy accompanied with hate and disdain, defile the minds of
those men, which are possessed with these passions, notwithstanding they often
times vex, and offend the vnwife: as the sudden falling out of neighbors, the
troublesome conversation of familiars, the lewdnes of servants in those things
which are co^mited to their charge, with which thing you seem to be moved, and
trobled as much, as with any other matter, doing therein as the physicians,
who^ Sophocles describes.

Washing the choler with like juice ywis
Of quality, such as the humor is.
Fretting, and disquieting your self with their passions, and imperfections to
small purpose in my opinion, for that those matters, whereof the government is
committed to your trust, are not ordinarily handled by intercourse of persons
of simple and good behavior as by fit, and pliable instruments but oftentimes
by rough and crooked tools: Now No striving against nature.
think not that it is your duty or a thing easy to be done by altering the
form to amend them, but if in using them, as being borne such as you find
them, even as Surgeons do, their hooked instruments, wherewith they close the
gaping of wounds, you show your self gracious and tractable, as the case
requires, surely you shall reap not so much displeasure, and coffeehouse
at their lewdnes, as pleasure, and contentment at your own disposition. And
thinking that such substitutes, and servants do that which is their property
and nature as Dogs, when they bark, you shall keep your self from heaping up
more greefes, and vexations, which use to distill into the minds of pulling,
and faintharted men, as into a pit (or low place) that is filled up with an
other man's inconvenience and mishap. For seeing that their are certain
Philosophers, Miserable men to be helped, not lamen ted for.
which reprove the pity and compassion, which some take of miserable, and
distressed men, as being a very good thing to help them in their misery, and
calamity, but not to grieve, or suffer with the^, or once to be moved with
the^: And (more then this) seeing that the same Philosophers would not that we
should be sorry, or disquieted, if we perceive our selves to offend, or to be
given to any vice but that we should correct, and amend it, without greeuing
or troubling our selves otherwise, considering what small reason there is to be
sorry, or discontented, for that all those, which have to do with us, and
which keep company with us are not so honest and virtuous, as they ought to
be. But let us take heed (friend Paccius) that this proceed not so much of
the hate of vice in general, as of the love of our selves in particular, which
makes us fear, and dislike the ill dealing of those men, with whom we are
conversant. For sometimes affecting too much the state of government and
public affairs desiring and haunting after them more hotely then is fit, or
contrary wise having at all no taste of them, or making no account of them this
engenders in us suspicion, both of impatience and coffeehouse against those
persons, which make us misconceiue and imagine that they have deprived us of
this commodity or made us fall into that inconvenience. But he that is
accustomed to behave himself temperatelie, and indifferently in common
affairs, is thereby more gracious, fit and conformable to deal with men in
the world. And therefore let us again find fault, and blame these dealings in
matters, and business? For even as he that is sick of a fever finds all
things that he takes displeasing to his taste, and bitter, but when we see
others which tasting thereof find the^ nothing unsavory, or vnpleasa^t, then we
blame no more either the broth or the meat, but only the disease: Even so
shall we cease to accuse, and take these matters greeuouslie, or impatiently,
when we shall see other men taking them in hand cheerefullie, and joyfully.
Wherefore when any cross accident shall befall us against our will it shall be
good for the The remembrance of our good fortune past must coun teruaile our
present mishap.
surer seating of the mind in quiet not to cast behind us our good, and
fortunate chances, but te^pering the one with the other to deface and darken
our ill haps, by comparing them with our good. But in opposing the one against
the other let us refresh and comfort our eyes, being offended with the sight
of too lively, and glittering colors, by casting them upon natural flowers
and the green grass.

And let us employ our imagination to matters of grief, and trouble, enforcing
it to rest and continue in the meditation of our adverse and sorrowful chances,
pulling it up forcibly by the roots (as I may say) from the remembrance of our
good and prosperous haps, whereunto you may very fitly transfer the
discourse which in another place was made against the Curious man what is
Another treatise written by Plutarch in his Moralls.
the cause, O most envious man, that thine eyes are so bright and percing in
vewing other men's evils (and so dull, and darkened in beholding, thine own?
And wherefore is it good Sir, that thou look so steadfastly upon thy mishaps
in making them always manifest, and fresh in memory, and never applyest thy
thoughts to the good things which thou presetly enioyest, but even as the
Cupping, and scarifying instruments which chirurgions use, do draw unto the^
the corruption, that is in the flesh: even so do thou heap up against thy
self all the worst that is in thy self very fitly resembling the merchant of
Chium, who selling to other men great store of good wine, went every where
seeking and tasting to get viniger for his own dinner. So there was a servant,
who being asked what he left his Master doing, answered; having much good he
seeks that which is ill. Even so the most part of men superficially passing
over the good and profitable things, which they have, do tie themselves to
things troblesome, and offensive. But Aristippus did not so: Aristippus
disposition
for he was always disposed to cheer himself and to allege reasons to that
end, whenever any unlooked for mishap did befall him, placing himself in
that balance, which was carried upward so that one day by casualtie having bin
dispossessed of a good piece of ground, he went to one of his familiar friends,
who seemed to make most show to be grieved and to be sorry for him, and said
have not thou only one little farm? and have not I three other goodly plots of
ground? The other affirmed that it was so, wherefore then is it not reason to
be sorry with thee rather then with me. For it is a madness to grieve for that
which we have not, and not to rejoice for that which we have, but to do, as
little children use, from who^ if a man take but one of their little toys,
that they play withal, though they have never so many: yet in anger and dispite
they cast away and break all the rest, and then howl, and cry a maine. In like
case if fortune trouble us in any one thing, we make all the favors that she
does us in other matters vain, and unprofitable, by reason of our complaining,
and tormenting our selves. Some man will say unto me, what have we? Nay, we
ought rather to say, what Every man has some thing for which he ought to be
thankful.
have we not? One man has honor, another, a fair house, this man a virtuous
wife, and that, a faithful friend. Antipater the Philosopher, borne in the
town of Tharsus drawing near his end, and calling to remembrance the good,
and happy turns, that had chanced to him in his life, forgot not to place and
count amongst the rest, his fortunate voyage in coming from Cilicia to Athens.
And yet we ought not to omit, or let pass even those things which are common
to us with most, or all men, but to esteem and make some account of them, as
to rejoice for that we live, that we are healthful, and well disposed, that
we see the Sun, that there is no war, that there Common benefits not to be
neglected.
is no sedition, but that the earth yields to the plough, that the sea is
nauigable without danger to him that will pass, that it is lawful to speak,
and to be silent, to deal in matters, The want of good things makes them
more esteemed and desired.
and to give our selves to rest. And hereby we shall enioie the contentment of
mind more assured, if having those common benefits above recited, we imagine
that we have them not, remembering oftentimes how much health is lamented, and
wished for of those that are sick, and peace of them that are afflicted with
wars, and what a happy thing to be desired it is, for a stranger unknown
in such a town to get so great authority, and such friends, and contrariwise
what a grief it is to loose them, after a man has got them. Whereby we see
that a thing cannot be of great price when we loose it, and of no valewe when
we enjoy it. For the want of it increases neither the price nor valewe.
Neither should we possess these things, as matters of great weight in
trembling always for fear to loose them, and to be deprived of them, The
fear of loosing them takes away the pleasure of enjoying the^.
and in the mean while, when we have them at will, to forget and set naught
by them, as things of small importance: but to use them, while we have them,
and to take pleasure in enjoying them, to the end that if we chance to loose
them, we may take the loss more patiently. But the greatest number of men are
of opinion, as Arcesilaus said, that we ought to follow with our eye, and
thoroughlie peruse the poems, tables, pictures, and images of other men, to
behold, and suruaie them particularly from point to point, from one end to
another; but as for their lives, and behauior wherein there are many
deformities to be seen we glaunce the^ over in regarding only the outward show
of honors, advancement, and other mensfortunes, as adulterers do upon other
men's wives in setting naught by their own. And now it is a point of great
importance for the quiet, and contentment of our minds, that every man should
The consideration of a man's own self and estate very neces sary.
consider principally himself, his estate, and condition, or at least to
behold them that are above him, not as many men do that compare themselves with
their superiors, as for example the slaves, that are bound, account the^ happy
that are vnbou^d the unbound, the freemen: the freemen, the citizens: the mean
citizens: the rich burgesses, the rich burgesses, the great Lords, and
Princes: the Princes, the Kings the Kings, finally the Gods, desiring (in The
desire of that we have not takes away the pleasure of the enjoying that we
have.
a manner) that they were able to thunder, and lighten. And by this mean being
always needy, and desirous of that which is above them, they never enioie the
pleasure of that, which is in them ( which they have inpossession.)

I care not for the store of wealth,
Which Gyges once possessed:
My heart was not at any time,
With blind de sire oppressed.
Nor do I envy any man,
Sweet fortunes golden showers:
Nor do I seek to match my self,
With the immortal powers.
Nor yet do I affect the Pomp
Of Kings, and glory bright:
Mine eyes alas imperfect are,
Once to behold that light.
It was a Thrasian woman that said this. But some other either of Chium,
Galatia, or Bythinia, will not content himself with his allotted part, and
portion of honor, credit, and authority in his Country amongst his Countrymen,
but will whine and mourn if he bear not the habit of a Senator or one of the
Nobility, and if he be by election advanced thereunto: then if he be not a
Roman Prator, and if he be once a Praetor, then forsooth if he be not Consul,
and if he be Consul, then if Defire of advancement makes men discontented.
he were not the first proclaimed. And what other thing is this but to heap
up affected and desired occasions of ingratitude against fortune to our own
sorrow, punishment, and affliction. But a wise, sensible, and discrete man if
there be one amongst so many millions of men which see the Sun.

And which live by the fruits the earth does yield,
That is, either more Honorable, or more wealthy then himself, he does not
therefore strait ways withdraw himself from company, weeping, lamenting, and
giving over all, but keeps on his way blessing and thanking Fortune, in that
he lives more honorably, and more at ease then millions of others. For true
it is that at the solemn assembly for the games of Olympus, the gamesters do
not of purpose choose those men to encounter with, of whom they may be assured
to win the prise; but in the life of man the affairs thereof are so ordered
that they give us occasion to boast and vaunt our selves, to be above many men,
and to be envied, rather than to envy others, unless peradventure some one
be so presumptuous to make himself a Paragon, for a Briareus, or a Hercules.
When therefore thou shall have much esteemed as a great Lord some man whom
thou shall see carried to his palace in a litter between men's arms, cast
down thine eyes a little, and behold the same man carried upon men's shoulders
to his long home. And after thou have admired the happiness of the great king
Xerxes for passing the strait of Hellespont upon a bridge of ships, consider
also those men which were forced with blows and stripes to cut and make the
mount Athos hollow, and those men whose ears and noses were cut off, when the
tempest had scattered and broken the said bridge of ships. And withal
imagine in thy selse what they think and how blessed they account thy life,
and condition in respect of theirs? Socrates (hearing a familiar friend of his
say. This town is marvelously dear: The wine of Chium costeth ten crowns,
purple cloth thirty, a measure of honnie five groates) takes him and leads
him to the shoppes, where Things necessary easily gotten.
they sold half a pecke of meal for a halfepenie (good cheap:) and then to
the place where olives were sold, a peck for three farthings, (good cheap:)
after that to the Drapery, where they sold apparel, (a Coat for ten groates)
good cheap. You see then (says he) something good cheap in the town. Even
so when we shall hear some one say, that our estate is mean and our fortune
base for that we are not Consuls or Presidents of Provinces: We may answer,
but by your leave Sir, our estate is honorable and our life happy in that we
beg no alms, nor carry burdens, nor get our living by flattery. But
notwithstanding, since for the most part we are become so foolish that we use
to live to others, rather than to our selves, and that our nature is corrupted
with such a puling Error of conceit by reason of the outward show makes men
think others estate better then their own.
jealousy, and infected with so great envy, that it does not so much rejoice
at her own good, as it repineth at other men's: let us not only behold, and
mark that which is glorious, glittering and renowned in those whom we wonder
at, and whom we esteem so fortunate: but abasing our selves, vnderpeering and
discovering a little the counterfeit curtain, and shadowed veil of appearance,
and opinion which is spread over them, let us enter into them, and there
doubtless shall we find great toil, many griefs, and much vexation. By reason
whereof Pittacus pa^ience.
Pittacus that man so famous, and renowned for his valor, wisdom, and
justice, feasting one day certain of his friends being strangers: his wife
comes in about the midst of the feast, and being displeased A part of a
cursed, and madbrain shrew.
therewith, ouerturned the table and all that was upon it. The strangers were
all ashamed and abashed thereat; himself made no other matter of it but only
said. There is none of us, that has not in himself some default: But as for
me I have but this only point ( my wives headstrong humor) which lets me
from being in all things entirely most happy.

He seems in show a happy man to be,
Whose gate stands open, himself from care not free.
Within sits musing all alone, his wife
Must master be, or else there will be strife.
From noone to night, from night tomorrow still.
Her tongue runs post, and she must have her will.
And yet more crosses fall unto his share,
Poor silly man oppressed with grief and care.
Many such harsh and bitter discontentments are there hid in the hearts of
those that are rich, and placed in authority, The pomp of Princes hides their
trobles from the sight of private men.
yea even in the minds of kings, which the common sort knows not, for so
much as the pomp and outward show covers them.

Lo Atreus son happy without annoy
Fulfild with goods, and Fortunes lovely boy.
All this is but a recital of his outward happiness, by reason of the armor,
horses, and soldiers, that he had about him. But the lamcntable voice of his
passions proceeding from within, does falsify that vain opinion when he
says, For this my life full fraught with misery
Jove has reserved a wretched destiny.
And this other saying: O happy old man blessed for thy degree,
In mine opinion whosoere thou be,
That being borne of mean and base estate
Liu'dst uncouth void of danger, and debate,
And free from thoughts aspiring worldly praise,
Have finished here thy transitory days.


By such like meditations we may qualify, and draw somewhat from our continual
cries and complaints against Fortune, whereby we debase and condemn our own
condition, in praising and commending the state of other men. But there is
another matter which hinders the quiet of the mind, as much as any thing
else, which is, when the pricks and spurs of will, and desire in men are
unmeasurable, and disproportionable to Will
their power, as when men set up greater Men's folly to be blamed rather then
their fortune in desiring things above their reach and attempting things
imposible.
sails than their ships will bear, promising themselves in their reasonles
desires, and vain hopes more, than they ought. And in the end when they see,
that they cannot compass them, then they blame Fortune, and accuse their
destiny and not their folly; For neither he which cannot draw an arrow with a
plough or course a Hare with an Ox may therefore term himself unhappy. nor
he that would take a heart with a small fish hook can therefore complain of his
bad fortune as being therein contrary and against him, but well and worthily
should he condemn his own rashness and folly, that would attempt things
impossible. The principal cause of which error, is the foolish, and blind love
of Self love.
our selves, which makes men desire, the first, and highest places, and to be
wilful in opinion, and immeasurable wishing all things for themselves, being
never satisfied, nor contented. For they would be not only rich, and
learned, strong, and lusty, pleasant conceited, and minions of Kings, and
governors of towns; but also if they have not the best Hownds, the swiftest
Horses, the daintiest quails, the most coragious cocks for the game that may
be had, they cannot be pleased. Dionysius the elder was not Dionysius.
content to be the greatest, and most mighty Monarch of his time, but for that
he was not a better poet, then Philoxenus, and could not discourse so well as
Plato: he so disdained thereat, and was so fiercely moved against them, that he
caused the one to be cast into the Quarries, where offenders, and bondmen were
punished, and sent the other to be sold, as a slave in the I Will of Aegina.
Alexander the great was not of that mind, for being told that Brisson his
horse courser, with whom he ran a race to see who should get the price of
swiftnes, was faint, and failed in his course, he was greeuoustie offended with
him. And Non omnia possumus omnes.
therefore Homer speaking of Achilles does wisely in saying, None of the
Greeks could be his paragon.


When he adioyneth straight after.

In martial feats, but as for eloquence
Many there are of greater excellence.
Megabysus a great Prince of Persia Megabysus
went one day into Apellos shop, where he painted. And when he began to fall in
talk of the art of painting, Apelles with his right hand closed his mouth,
saying to him. So long as thou heldest thy peace, thou did seem to be some
goodly great thing, by reason of thy gold chains, and karkynets, and thy
purple robe, but now there is not the least boy in my shop, that grindeth my
colors which does not mock thee, and laugh at thee hearing thee say thou
know not what. And notwithstanding some of them think that the Stoicke
Philosophers do but sport, and mock when they hear their saying (which is)
that a The stoics opinion of a wise man
wise man in their opinion is not only prudent, just and valiant, but also
(as they call him an Orator, a Captain, a Poet, a rich man, and (more) a
king. And they forsooth would feign have all those qualities, the want of which
makes them pensive and discontented. And yet amongst the gods one has power in
one thing, and another in another, and therefore one is surnamed Enyalius that
is to say Martial, another Mantous, that is to say Prophetical, another
Cerdous, that is to say Gaining by traffic. And Jupiter sends Venus to beds,
and bride chambers, not to the field, as being very unfit for her to deal
with edge tools. Besides there are some of those qualities which they affect
and desire that cannot meet together (in one Subject) as the study, and
practice of Eloquence and the Mathematical sciences require liberty of mind
and leisure. Contrariwise credit and authority in the common wealth, and the
favor of Princes are not to be obtained without trouble and dealing in
public affairs, and continual following the Court: even as much eating of
flesh, and great drinking of wine makes the body strong and lusty, and the
mind faint and feeble, and as daily care to heap up riches, and to keep them
together does increase our wealth, and contrariwise, the small account and
contempt of them is a great mean to draw us to the study of Philosophy, and
practice of All things not fit for all men.
moral virtue. And therefore all things are not fit and convenient for all
men, but we ought following the sentence of A man must first learn to know
himself. Nature not to be forced.
Apollo Pythius, to learn first to know our selves, and then to use our
selves, by applying our selves to that whereunto we are borne, and not to force
Nature, dragging it by the hairs as I may say, now to one imitation of life,
anon to another.

The horse is made, for service in the field:
The Ox to plough the earth, which fruit does yield.
The Dolphin midst the maine, does leap, and skip:
Sporting himself, in swimming by the ship.
The fierce wild bore, which threatens naught but death.
The hardy bound, pursues on the heath.
But he that is disquieted, and troubled, for that he is not at one time both a
great Lion of the mountain to trust in his strenght, and a little Dog of Maltha
to be dandled in some rich widows lap, doubtless is a mad and senceles fool.
And even as wise is he, that would resemble Empedocles, Plato, or Democritus,
writing of the nature of the world, and of the truth of things, and
straitewaies fall a courting, and then creep to some old rich woman's bed, as
Euphorion did: or quaffe, and carouse with Alexander the great, as Medius did:
and he that is grieved, and discontented because he is not so much esteemed
for his wealth as Ismenias: or for his virtue, as Epaminondas. But the Runners
are not displeased because they have not the Wrestlers crouns but are contented
and glad of their own. Sparta is fallen unto thee, take pain to adorn Make
much of thine own.
it, as the common proverb says, following the saying of, Solon.

We would not chaung our good yet nerethelesse,
For all the ill (the muck, that they possess)
Virtue continues firm and of great power,
Riches uncertain cha^ging every power.
Straton the natural Philosopher understanding that his neighbor Menedemus had
more auditors and scholars the^ he what marvel is that says he? since there
are more that would be washed with The most part of men prefer pleasur and
ease before pro fit, and honesty.
water, then rubbed with oil, that is which love to live loselie and
delicately at there own pleasure, then hardly, and austerely, as I instrust
them. And Aristotle writing to Antipater says, that Alexander alone, should
glory not only in that he commanded so great a number of men, but also, and
nothing less in that he commanded such men, as had a right belefe, and
opinion of the Gods, as they ought to have. They which in this manner exalte
their own estate, shall never envy the condition of other men. And now we
require not that the vine should bring forth figs, or the Olive tree grapes;
How be it if we our selves have not all the commodities, and advantages
together, but of rich and learned men, Soldiers and Philosophers parasites,
and iesters, free men, and citizens, spenders, and sparers, then we cavil,
repine, and become unthankful to our selves, and contemn our life as needy,
and wanting all things necessary. But further we se, that herein Nature her
Natures provision.
self does warn and teach us. For as she has provided for brute beasts
diverse kinds of food, and nourishment and has not ordained that all should
devour flesh, or all live by grains, and seeds, or that all should eat
herbs, and roots: So has she appointed for men diverse kinds of living, as for
some to live by their Cattle, some by tillage of the ground, some by fowling,
and some by fishing. And therefore every man should That kind of life is to be
chosen, which is most agreeable to our nature.
choose that kind of life which is most sortable and agreeable to his nature,
and let him practice and follow it, and not convince the Poet Hesiodus of
error or insufficiency in saying, The Potter to the Potter envy bears,
The Mason to the Mason.


For we do not only envy those men, which be of the same estate, and
behavior of which we are: but also there is a certain jealousy between the
rich and the learned, the Citizen and the Nobleman, the Advocate and the
Rhetorician, in such sort, that you shall see sometimes, even Free men nobly
borne envy a Plaier of Comedies, whom they see rewarded with a pleasant
Plaudite in the Theater, or dancers, iesters, and base fellows, whom they know
to be welcome, and in great credit in kings and Princes Courts, admiring them
so long, that they become even senseless, and breathless, in woondering at
them and disquieting themselves. But admit it were so, that every one of us had
in himself the treasures of contentment, and coffeehouse and that the tuns
of good and evil were not placed upon the thresholde of Jupiters door (as
Homer says) but in the mind of every man: yet the diverse and variable passions
that are in us would make this matter sufficiently known, and manifest: For
fools, and ill advised men do neglect and pass over the present goods Care
for the time to come deuoureth the pleasure of the time present.
and benefits (which they hold in possession) having neither discretion to
use them, nor contentment to enjoy them, by reason their minds are so busied
and combred with care for the time to come. But wise men do so firmly retain
the remembrance of things already past, Wise men delighted with the
remembrance of good turns past.
that they make them fresh in memoric, and rejoice thereat, as if they were
now present. For the present time suffering it self to be apprehended of us,
but only by a moment seems to fools not to be ours, and not to pertain
unto us. And even as the Cordmaker that is painted in the description of hell,
wasting and consuming as much green broom cord, as he can wreath and work,
upon an Ass that stands by him: so the thankelesse and senseless
forgetfulness of many men gathering together, devouring, Forgetfulness cause
of coffeehouse.
and burying in coffeehouse all good actions, all practice of virtue, all
delightful pastime, all familiar discourse and friendly conversation, does not
suffer our life to be uniform and alike (the time past being linked to the
time present) but conferring and comparing those things that were done
yesterday, with things done this day, and things done this day with things
to be done to morrow, puts together all that has been, with that which
yet never was, and drowneth it in perpetual oblivion. They which take out of
Philosophers schools, and disputations all kinds of Analysis, saying that the
substance continually ministers matter, as the spring does water will make us
at all times believe by their Arguments that we are not the same we are
indeed, or that we are not the same this day, which we were yesterday. But
these men through default in that they are not able to keep in memory things
past or to comprehend them and rest upon them, but letting them always run
out at large do make themselves truly and in effect vain, void, and empty
every present day, depending ever of the day following, as though that which
they had or did the year passed, or lately, and but yesterday appertained
nothing unto them, or never had befallen them. This then is one of those
matters which troubles the equanimitie, and quietness of the mind, and another
thing yet more (which is) that as flies cannot stand and fasten themselves
upon looking glasses that are smooth and slipperie, and contrariwise do
settle themselves upon such as are rough, vnplaine and engraven: even so men
flying upon their smooth, joyful, and profperous adventures do rest
themselves upon their hard, displeasant, and adverse mishappes. Or rather as
it is reported in the territory of the town of Olynthus touching a place
mortal, and deadly to Beetels, whereupon it is also called Cantharolethron,
for so much as when the Beetels, are Cantharolethron.
once entered therein, they can never come forth again, but wind and turn
about so long, till they be both windlesse, and breathless: even so these men
being entered into the remembrance The remembrance of mishaps engraven in the
hearts of men.
of their forepassed mishaps, will never come forth thereof, or give
themselves a breathing time, but wast and consume themselves even to death.
Howbeit contrariwise we ought to do as he that painteth a table, wherein he
lays the dark, and sad colors underneath, and the fresh and lively colors
upon them; for utterly to blot out al mischaunces in life, and wholly to
deliver and free our selves from them, it is impossible, for so much as the
harmony The world compounded of con traries.
of the world is compounded of contraries, and things diverse, even (as I may
say) of a Bow, and a Harp. And there is nothing in this humane estate, which
is altogether pure, and clean, but as in Music there are diverse voices,
Nothing pure in this life.
whereof some be loud, and shril, some low, and base; and in Grammar there be
some letters called vowels, and some mutes, and he is neither a Grammarian,
nor a Musician which neglects the knowledge of the one, and follows the
practice of the other, but he which can make use of them al, and te^per them
together according to his art: even so are the affairs, and state of men
having counterquarters one with an other, for as much as Euripides says.

The good is never severed from the ill.
But there is (I know not how) a certain mixture, to the end that all things
being well disposed may prosper, and continue in good order to the general
benefit of life; neither ought we for some one accident to be utterly
discouraged and become careless of all, but resembling Musicians in depressing
the point of our adverse haps, by calling to mind our prosperous adventures,
and embracing always our good fortune with our ill to make a formal
composition of life fit, and agreeable to every man's nature. For it is not as
Menander says, That every man throughout the world so wide.
Has one good Angel which his life does guide.


But rather as Empedocles says, as soon as ever we are come into the world,
two devils, or destinies lay hands on us, and direct us.

First Clothania is the earthly destiny,
Heliope viewes the Sun in majesty.
Eris that ever enui'de humane good
Delites to have her hands painted with blood.
Harmonia with her sweet and smiling face,
Calisto fair, Aeschra with her ill grace.
Thoosa swift, Dinaea, which will make
The action good that she does undertake.
Nemertes fair, and white as any snow:
Asaphia foul, and black as any crow.
So that our nativity receiving the seeds of all these passions mixed and
confused together, and by this mean our life being unequal, and not always a
like, those men that be wise, and of good judgment should wish and desire the
gods to bestow the best upon them, and yet dispose themselves to expect the
worst, and to make use of all, taking from every one, that which therein is
Riches, glory, authority do most delight them, who least fear poverty, misery,
and disgrace.
needless, or superfluous. For he which is least careful for to morrow, shall
not only more joyfully come thereunto, (as Epicurus used to say:) but also
riches, glory, authority, and credit do most delight and content them, which
least doubt and fear their contraries. For the too ardent desire that men have
of these things, impressing in them a too vehement fear to loose them, makes
the pleasure of enjoying them feeble and uncertain, even as a flame shaked,
and carried every way with the wind. But he whom reason fortifieth, and
strengthens so that he is able without fear, or trembling to say unto fortune.

Some pleasure may thou take, from me I wot:
But not displease me: for I fear thee not.
This is the man which most pleasantly, and contentedly enjoys his present
goods in assurance, not fearing the loss of them as though it were a thing
intolerable. And, herein we may not only commend, but also imitate the
virtuous disposition of Anaxagoras, Anaxagoras.
who understanding his son was dead, said. I knew well that Ibegat him a
mortal man: and so may we say when any chance, or casual mishappes befall
us; I knew well that I had riches; but transitory, not everlasting; I knew
well that that they which bestowed this honor upon me could take it from me
again; I knew well that I had a virtuous wife, and yet but a woman; and a
friend, that was a man, which is (as Plato defines it) a living creature by
nature mutable. Such preparatiues, and dispositions of the mind provided
before hand, if peradventure any accident shall touch us contrary to our
will, and not aunswerable to our attempt, The mind must always be prepared for
all misfortunes.
do soon take away all greefes, and passions, which cause us to sighe, and
say. I would never have thought it. I looked for another matter. I would never
have imagined that such a thing could have happened. Which are even like the
breaking of the heart, and beating of the pulses, whereby the vital spirits
are distempered, these preparatiues (I say) do easily qualify and stay
every furious motion and violent perturbation of impatiencie. Whereupon
Carneades, used often times to say that in great matters what soever happened
contrary to hope and attempt was easily turned into grief, and despair. The
kingdom of Macedonia was but a small part of the Roman empire; But king Perseus
having lost it, bewailed greatly his fortune, and all the world therefore
accounted him most miserable and unhappy, Contrariwise Paulus AEmilius that
had overcome him, having resigned over his mighty army commanding sea, and
land, to the charge, and conduct of another was crowned with garlands of
flowers, in honor of his victory and sacrificed to the Gods, being generally
and not unworthily esteemed the happy man of the world, for as much as the one
knew well, that he had received a power of men, which he was to yield up
again at the end of his term, the other had lost one, which he looked never
to loose again. Homer the Poet shows us, what that is, which befalls
contrary to hope, and attempt in making Ulysses weep for the death of his dog,
and notwithstanding being come home, and sitting by his wife that wept, he
lamented not, for so much as he was Reason tameth affection.
come thither; having long before tamed and cut off his affection with the
judgment of reason. And contrariwise we see how suddenly, and unawares
against his attempt he failed in the other accident. But in sum concerning
those things, which befall us contrary to our Some things offensive by Natura
C^^cell
will, some of them grieve, and offend us by nature, other some, and the most
part by conceit, and ill custom do vex, and trouble us, being occasions of
disco^tentment, which we nourishe in our selves. And therefore it were not
amiss to have always in readiness this sentence of Menander.

There is no harm, at all befallen thee:
Unless thy self, feign a mishap to be.
For (says he) how can it pertain unto thee if it concern neither thy
body, Conceit
nor thy mind? As for example, the base estate of thy father, thy wives
adultery, loss of honor, or preferment: all which inconveniences may befai a
man, and yet neither his mind, nor his body be thereby any thing the worse,
but both very well disposed. Now against those things which naturally
grieve us, as sickness, travails, the death, and loss of friends, or
children, we must oppose Nature.
another saying of the Poet Euripides.

Alas, but what? alas, these mishaps then
Are things of course, and common to all men.
For neither can reason, nor demonstration keep in Sensuality, or restrain it
so much, when it slideth away, and is carried about after her own affections,
The common necessity of nature more forcible then Reason. etc.
as the meditation and remembrance of our common, and natural necessity,
whereby man as touching his body being a substance mixed, and compounded is
laid open to fortune, and turned upward, as the only handle of which she can
take hold: in the rest being always Man in his body subject to fortune.
certain and assured; (I mean) in that which is the most principal, the
noblest, and greatest part in him. Demetrius having taken the town of Megara
asked Stilpo the Philosopher, if any thing of his had been spoiled, or rifled
from him? Stilpo answered, I saw no man which took away any thing that was
The mind the best part of man is above fortunes reach.
mine. Even so when fortune has ransacked, and robbed us of all the rest: yet
in despite of her we have some thing in our selves.

Whereof we can be neither robbed, nor spoild,
And therefore we ought not so greedily to devour, and so injuriously to
depresse the nature of man, as though it had nothing in it firm, stable, and
of continuance, but contrariwise knowing that part whereby we are subject to
fortune to be the least worst, being frail and wormeeaten and that in the
better and more worthy part we are Lords, and Masters (in that part I mean)
wherein the best qualities that be in us are seated and grounded, is sound
judgment, arts, and sciences, matters of discourse tending to virtue, which
are of an incorruptible substance, that cannot be stolen from us: we ought (I
say) to be resolved and to show our selves invincible hereafter saying,
against fortune as Socrates did against his accusers, in speaking to the
Judges. Amstus and Melitus may cause me to be put to death but they cannot
hurt me: so fortune may afflict me with sickness, take away my goods, bring me
in disgrace with the Prince and people. But she cannot make a virtuous,
valiant and courragious man, vicious, cowardlike, baseminded, or envious, not
take from him his disposition, being grounded Fortune cannot alter the mind.
upon prudence and discretion, of whose aid and presence, the life of man
has always more need then the ship on the sea of a Pilot. For the Pilot
cannot when he will assuage the tempest, and appease the violence of the
winds, nor get the haven at all times, when it were needeful, nor stoutly
without trembling expect what may happen: howbeit, he gives not over all
dispairing of ability to use his art, but He labors still, the sail being
pulled down
The mast, while nothing may the winds appease,
Is scarcely seen about the troubled Seas.


This done, he sits trembling and shaking for fear. But the disposition of
a Continency, sober diet, exercise preserve health.
discrete man, besides that it brings lightsomnes, health and quiet to the
body in preventing for the most the preparatiues of diseases by continency,
sober diet, exercise and moderate labor: if yet in outward accidents there
should be some indisposition caused by fortune it fleeteth over it with a
light, and swift vessel (as Asclepiades says) like a ship passing over a
Rock that is hidden with the water. But if peradventure some great
inconvenience past all hope shall befall us, in such sort that the power of man
can not compass or sustain it; the haven is at hand, and we may save The
body is a rotten boat wherein the mind saileth.
ourselves by swimming out of the body as out of a rotten boat, that
continually leaketh and takes water. For it is not desire of life, but fear
of death which holds fools so fast tied, and bound to the body, which they
embrace so straightly as Ulysses in Homer does the wild fig tree for fear of
falling into the gulf Charybdis that was underneath him, Whereas the wind would
neither let him stay,
Nor suffer him from thence to sail away, The nature of the Soul to be
known and considered.

being maruellouslie displeased for the one, and astonished with fear of the
other. But he which has albeit but a little knowledge of the nature of the
soul, reasoning and considering in himself, that by death this life is
changed into a better, or at least not into a worse: surely this resolution
avails much to the peace and quiet of the mind, and banisheth all fear of
death from it. For he which can behave himself joyfully, while virtue the
princely and proper part of man is in greatest power and force: and again
courageously and stoutly forsake the world, when the adverse enemy of nature
prevails and has the upper hand, saying.

When my self will, God will deliver me.
What can we imagine that may grieve, trouble, and offend him, that is thus
affected, and resolved. For he which can say, Fortune I have prevented thee. I
have withstood thy coming, I have stopped thine entrance, this man trusts
not, or planteth his assurance upon Philosophy is the fortress of good minds.
bars, or boltes, or gates locked with keys, or walls fortifyed with
munition, but upon the sweet sentences of philosophy, and the sownde
persuasions of reason, (whereof all men that will are capable) which we ought
not to doubt, or distrust, but rather with admiration to love and esteem even
with the rauishment of spirit through affection, proouing, and making trial of
our selves first in small matters, that we may the better compass greater,
and not resusing, or casting behind us the due care and diligence, that are
requisite for the good order, and exercise of The mind to be exercised.
the mind. And in so doing men shall not find so much difficulty herein, as
they ween. For the wanton nicenes of the mind betaking it self naturally to
ease and pleasure, flying back straight in imagination from troble and sorrow
to rest and delight, makes it tender and unexercised against delicacie, and
grief. But the mind which is taught by reason, and envied by custom to endure
a conceit of ficknes, banishment, or any other kind of adversity, and
enforces it self with reason to fight against these, and such like accidents,
shall find by experience, that there is much deceit, vanitic, and weakness in
those things, which through error of opinion seem painful, grievous, and
fearful. So that reason shows this plainly to him that will think hereof,
and particularly consider of every one of these. And notwithstanding there
are many which greatly fear this saying of Menander, No man can truly say,
what ere he be
This chance could never have befallen me.


Not knowing how much this practice avails to the quiet, and contentment of
the mind, whereby we may be able with open eyes firmlie to look against
Fortune, making our conceits and imaginations, not idle, or effeminat in
themselves, as being nourished only by a shadow, under such kind of hope, as
yields, and bends, when they are pressed down by their contraries, and
never standing stiff or unflexible against any one of them. But we may also
object and say against Menander, It is true, that no man living can say. This
shall never happen to me. And yet I may say; As long as I live I will never do
this, I will never tell untruth, I will never deceive, I will never falsify my
faith, I will never surprise any man. For this being in our power is no small
mean, but a great help to the quietness of the mind. As contrariwise the
remorse of conscience ( I know that I have committed such a heinous Remorse of
conscience works repentance.
offense) does leave repentance in the soul, which grateth, tormenteth, and
bloodieth it self, even as a wound in the flesh. For reason taking away, and
wiping out all other greefes, sorrows, and anguishes does engender this
repentance, which with shame nippeth and byteth, and with horror afflicts and
punishes it self continually. Even as they who being sick of an ague do
either shake for cold or burn with heat, are more grieved and tormented, then
they which endure the same passions by outward causes of winters cold, or
Summers heat: so casual and accidental mishaps make our griefs more easy,
and tolerable, as proceeding from external causes, and from without us. But
when one says, None other is to be blamed for this, my self alone am the
cause hereof. This is a custom, and kind of sorrow, and lamentation coming
from the bottom of the heart, when we know our selves guilty of some public
crime, whereby the grief is so much the greater, in that it is conioined with
shame, and infamy. And therefore there is neither house nor lands, nor great
store of gold and silver, nor honor and noblenes of blood, nor greatness of
office, and estate, nor the grace and vehemency of speech, which does so much
lighten, and so sweetly becalme the life of man, as an undefiled A pure mind
makes a sweet contented life.
conscience, to have the mind pure, neat, and clean of all lewd deeds,
motions, and devises, and our names which are the spring from whence al
virtuous, and commendable actions do follow, to be honest, and impolluted, not
troubled, or infected with any vice. This is it, which gives a cheerful
force, and vigor, as it were divinely inspired with a greatness and constancy
of courage, and with a more joyful and assured remembrance, then the hope
which Pindarus describethto be the nurse of old age. For even as the bottels
wherein there has been frankencense put (as says Carneades) albeit they be
empty yet keep the sweet savor thereof long after, so good and virtuous
actions proceeding from the mind of a wise man, do always leave behind a
pleasing and fresh remembrance whereby his joy and delight being watered does
flourish and increase, and himself contemns those who bemone and diffame this
life, as if it were a hell or place of torments and of continual aboade, where
wretched and miserable souls are to be chained and tortured. And herein I
cannot but greatly commend the saying of Diogenes, who upon a time seeing a
certain stranger in Lacedemon that decked and trimmed himself against a feast
day, what? (says he) does not an honest man think, that al days are
feast-daies for him? yea surely and a great and solemn feast, if he be wise.

For this world is a most sacred, and What the world is.
religious temple, whereinto Man is brought at his birth to behold therein the
portratures, and images, not wrought and carved with men's hands, but those
forms, and figures, which the Divine mouer has made sensible to represent
unto us the forms intelligible, (as Plato faith) having in the^ the principal
impressions of life, and motie^, (that is is say.) the Sun, the Moon, the
Stars, the running streams, casting sweet fresh water out of the body of
the earth, which continually like a kind mother, yields and provides
nourishment for living creatures, and plants. So we ought to esteem this
life as a profession, and entrance into a most perfect and united religion.
And therefore it were convenient, that it should be replenished with great
tranquitlity and never ending joy not as the common sort do at this day, in
solemnising the feast of Saturn, Bacchus, or Minerna to delight, and sport
themselves with laughter bought with money, which they give to dauncers,
counterfeites, and stage plaiers, that enforce them to laugh. And now at these
feasts we sit very mannerly and orderly, not being troubled or disquieted with
any thing. For there is no man, that sorroweth, when he comes to a meeting
of good fellows, or that lamenteth in beholding the games of Apollo, Pythius,
or that fasteth at Saturnes feasts; And notwithstanding we deface the feasts,
which God himself has appointed, and commanded, in weeping, sighing, and
bewailing, or at least wise in painful cares and continual discontentmentes.
We take pleasure in hearing musical instrmentes, whose sound pleases the
ear, and we delight in birds, that sing sweetly, and willingly behold other
living creatures pretely sporting, skipping and frisking with iolitie of heart,
and contrariwise we dislike them which houle, whine, and groan, and which look
heavily, ougly, and fearfully; How be it, seeing the whole course of our
own life to be sorrowful, pensive, painful, oppressed with most grievous
passions, most laborious business, and ever endless cares and thoughts we will
not give our selves any rest, comfort, or time of breathing, but (that which is
worse) we are unwilling to receive the good counsel, and advise of our
friends, and kindred, that warn, and exhort us hereunto, which if we would
with patience hear, and in practice follow, we might behave our selves
blameless for the time present, with joy, and pleasure recount the time
passed, and boldly without distrust in cheereful and lively hope attend the
time to come.

FINIS.

