Ane answer made the fourth day of septembre a thousand five hundredth syxtie
and one, by master Theodore de Besza minister of the holy Euangile, in the
presence of the Queen mother, the King and Queen of Navarre, the Princes of the
blood royal, and of the privy counseil, unto that which the Cardinal of
Lorraine had replied against that which was propounded in the first journey of
their talking together, by the said de Besza in the name of the reformed
Churches.

Together with an other short answer made by the said de Besza the 26 day of
the said month unto certain articles of reply set forth by the said Cardinal.

Imprinted at Edinburgh, by Robert Lekprewik.

Cum priuilegio. 1562.

John Baron to the reader. w^he^ grace mercy and peace etc.
WHen as thies two orations of that great learned and right godly minister of
gods word Theoder De Besza were brought unto me, to be translated out of
french into english, gentle, Reader for that of certain years before I knew ye
man to be of so great knowledge and specially so greatly fearing God, I was
driven with a great desire to read them, and after that I had read them, with
a more fervent desire, was I rapt (whatsoever other busynes I had to do being
laid aside) to translate them. Not only for that they flowed from such a
notable instrument of God, but also specially because that in the name and by
advise and assent of so many excellent, and godly learned ministeres, they
were pronounced, and that in such a famous and most honorable audience. The
matters contained in the same orations, be matters of our religion and such as
at this present be in controversy, and therefore most needful to be known
unto the faithful of our cuntrie, the faithful I mean that be but of simple
knowledge and yet be desirous to learn. As Well because thereby they may by
virtue of gods word establish their consciences in the treuth of these matters,
as also for that they may there summarelie have in a redynes, out of ye holy
Scriptures, good and sufficient auctorities, to defend them selves in the same,
against the malicious soldiors of Satan the Papists and likewise to confound
them with all their sophistical and unreasonable reasons: which have not
only of a long season most craftily seduced many, but also most crewelly
suppressed and destroyed many of the faithful with the name and authority of
the Church which they most wrongfully and injuriously arrogated to them
selves, when as in very deed they were, and be no thing else but the horrible
and filthy Synagoge of ye devil, as by their stinking and detestable manners
and their blasphemous and most pestilent doctrine (which be their fruits)
may most evidently appear unto all them which have any knowledge in ye word
of God. For without any lawful calling, by diverse unlawful means boeth
against Gods law and man's law, have they intruded them selves, into the Church
of God, and instead of the lively word of God they have taught their own
doctrine and dreams: and the holy Sacraments, with their away taking, that
which the Lord Jesus instituted, and commanded, and with their to putting,
many things which the Lord Jesus never commanded, they have altogether
altered and contamined. So that instead to have God honored, and the people of
God edified taught strengthened and comforted, they have dishonored and
blasphemed the Majesty of God and to their vtermoste discouraged and destroyed
his people. But the chief matters herein contened, be thies. The Church and
what it is, the marcks of the true Church, what authority it haeth, and
whether it may err. If it please thee gentle Reader with judgment of a
sincere heart to consider thies orations, thou shall find the same boeth
godly and learnedly declared to the praise of God, and edefieng of his
faithful people.

An answer made the twenty four day of Septembre a thousand five hundredth
sixty and one
Being arrived at Poissy twelve ministers of the word of God i^ an hall, where
were present, the Queen mother, the King and Queen of Navarre, the princes of
the blood royal and all the Lords of Counsel, and other Lords, of the one
part: and on the other part, five Cardinals with many busshops and
Theologues of all sorts.

The Lord Cardinal of Lorrane declared in few words, that this assembly was
made, to hear, what that we had to say unto that, which he had propounded,
eight days before, whereunto Theodore de Besza rising up, in the name of the
said 12 ministers, for all the french Churches reformed, answered as
follows, having an very good audience and attention of all the assembly.

Madame, first calling upon the name of our Lord God, ^
that it may please him to assist us with his especial grace in an matter of so
great consequence, that we may be utterly void of all particular opinions and
passions, and that their might be planted in to our hearts instead thereof a
right knowledge of his verity with an earnest desire to set it forth to the
honor of his holy name, and to the auancement of your majesty and to the
quietness of all Christendom, and namely of this realm, we shall briefly
answer unto that, which it haeth plesed the Lord Cardinal to declare unto
us, upon two points only of our confession, which haeth been three times
presented unto your majesty: to wit, ^
upon that which concerns the Church, and the authority thereof, and upon
the holy supper of our Lord Jesus Christ.

True it is, that if we might have had the fauore to have made answer
immediately when as we had a fresh remembrance of that, that we had heard, or
else that we might have had in our hands, the said oration to consider it, we
might have answered more destinctly point by point, and perhaps more
properly. But how soever it be, we shall speak thereof, that wc God will give
unto us, so that men may understand wherein, we may alredie be accorded, and
likwyse the points, wherein as yet we vary and be different, whereof we
humbly pray our God, that according to his great mercies, it may please him
to aggree us.

^
So now as touching ye first point of the Church, we shall treat it in three
parts. The first, what is the Church. The second, what be the marks of it.
The third what is the authority thereof.

^
It is most certain that this name of the Church is taken and drawn out of a
greek word, which signifies as much, ^
as to call from one place to an other. But we find in the Scripture, that
there is two manner of callinges, the one is ^oyned with the efficacy of the
holy Spririt, of the which is spoken in ye right chapitre of the Epistle to
the Romans, where it is said, Rom* 30
that God ^ustifieth them, that he calls: ^
the other, although it be the self same outwardly, as the first is, yet is it
of no value unto salvation, not that the fault thereof comes of God, but of
the men that will be deaf, following yt which is co^monlie said, that there is
none deafer, Mat^ 20.^^ 22.
then he yt will not understand.

And of this calling haeth the Lord spoken, when he said, ^
there be many called and few chosen.

Behold therefore consequently it behooves that this name of the Church
signifieng the company of them that are gathered together, by the voice of God,
which haeth called them, is taken two ways.

For being taken generally for al^ them which make outward profession to
answer unto God, which calls them, there is no dout bu^ there be many
hypocrites and reprobat comprehended therein.

And for our part my Lord Cardinal, never (God be praised) have we spoken
nor written otherwise, seeing it is a thing whereof we never had debate,
because it is most clerelie expressed in the Scriptures and confirmed by a
continual experience.

But if need be to take this name of the Church more properly, and more
streitlie, as often times it must needs be taken, then say we, that it does not
comprehend any, but the assembly of the elect and predestinate of God.

And to the intent that ye may understand, yt we have not forged this manner of
speaking, and yet les this ^inde of doctrine, seeing it is said that ^he Church
is the body of the Lord ^one of his bones and flesh of his flesh ^ea specially
to attribute unto it the proper name of Christ, 1. Co^^ 12.27
Ehes. ^^.
in joining together the head and the members ^s does ye Apostle writing unto
the Corinthians: Cor. 12.
how then be the repro^ate comprehended in this nom^re, seeing they be ye
members of the Devil? For it is a thing impossible ^o be of the members of
Christ and of ^he Devil at ones. This is it which S. Augustine wonderfully
well haeth noted i^ his second book ^he 12 chaptre against Cresconius. The
same distinction of ye name of ^ Church the self same author used writing
upon 64 Psalm, where ^e says yt the Church, which (...) signified by
Jerusalem begone at Abell, and Babylon by Cain. And yet this notwithstanding
in h^^ first book of Baptism against the Donatistes, the 16 chaptre taking
the Church in a more general significa^tion, he says that the same, which
did engendre Abell, Enoch. Noe Ab^raham and the Prophets, haeth als^ engendered
Cain, Ismaell and other^ like. For conclusion therefore w^ will take that which
the same S^ Agustine haeth written thereof in ^ same treatise in the 17 book
57 cha^ptre: the which is also rehearsed in the 24 question the first chaptre
omnibus considerates. etc.

where is said that there be two manner of men touching the Church.

^
For he says the one be members of Christ, and the right Church, ^ so of the
house of God, that they be ye self same house.

The other are truly in the house of God, and yet be they none of the same:
The r^^^proba^^^^ be often in the house (...) God yet be they none o^ the
ho^^se.
for they be as the chafe with the wheat, until yt they go out.

Now by this means grows there a question, to wit whether the Church be
invisible, the wc seems that so it must be concluded, seeing yt God only may
know his elect and predestinate: and also that we say, yt we believe the holy
Church, and that which is believed, is not seen. That which is believed is not
sen


But hereof there follows a great inconuinient, if simply and barely we
speak so of it. For if it be so, unto what company may a man ioyn him self, and
what means shall we use to have salvation if we know not ye Church whereunto
we may ioyn our selfs considering that upon the Church only, Jesus Christ
powers out his virtue and force, to save mankind?

True it is (my Lord Cardinal) if I remember well, that ye alleged yet an
other inconvenient, whereof we be not satisfied to wit, ^
that if the Church were invisible, that then we should not somuche as know
our King: yt which thing we could not, understand.

For the Scripture teaches us to know our superiors, and to obey them in all
things (saving ye honor that we owe unto God only) yea although they be
infideles in deed. ^om. 13 5* 6.
But let this be spoken as by the way. I return to my purpose. We say
therefore yt although the true Church be invisible in respect of that, that we
have said: nevertheless when there is question unto what company we oght to
associat, and ioyn our selves, we have certain marks, The certain marcke of the
true Church
to wit, the pure word of God, and the sincere administration of his
Sacraments, the which marks be evident and perceiuable in such sort, yt
where they be we oght not to doubt, that there is the true Church of God.

And we must according to the ruell of charity, hold all for faithful, that
make profession of ye pure religion, except that God discover their
dissimulation and feynednes. And of this saint Paul gives us a good example,
where he calls the Corinthiens and Galathiens, saints, and faithful, and
does attribute unto them ye name of the Church, although there was amongst
them great fautes as well in the ignorance of doctrine, as in their living.

This is it which also he haeth declared, in an other place, that all they wc
keep ye foundation buyld not always thereon gold, silver, or precious stones,
but also hay and chafe.

Se now how we speak of the Church, without making thereof an imagined and a
fantastical thing, and without giving occasion as I suppose, ^
to count us among ye nombre of such frensi^k persons as heretofore were the
Catharie^s and Donatistes, and as again now in our time be these furious
Anabaptists against whom this matter haeth so often been debated, by them that
are of our part.

I come now unto the marckes and witnessinges of the Church, the which is
very needful to be marcked and marcked again, seeing that without the same,
there is no salvation, Ther^ is no (...) without the Church
and that there is no thing yt Satan our ancient enemy, more enforces him
self to dissaguyse.

I have said that it haeth two certain infallible marckes that is to say the
preaching of the word of God and the sincere administration of the
Sacraments. Some join thereunto the discipline of the Church and ye fruits
of the preaching of the Euangile, as of a truth it behooves that every
assembly, Our sins be the cause that d^^^cipline (...) and (...) the (...)
the (...). 8.
for to maintene them selves, have a policy under some superior, whom they
must obey.

But forsomuche as our sins be often times the cause that thies two points
in no wise appear unto men: therefore we will content our selves with the two
first.

As touching the word that it is a sure marcke of the Church it appears by
this that the same word is compared unto a sede both by Jesus Christ and by
saint Peter.

^etr. ^ 25.
By reason whereof also saint Paul haeth said, yt he haeth begotten the
Corinthiens in ye Lord to wit by the preaching of ye word. (...). 4.15.


And for this cause in so many places is it named food and nooriture according
to that which ye Lord haeth said, yt his sheep will hear his voice and not
the voice of a stranger. (...). 10.
I add the Sacraments, for as much as the Lord haeth not willed us, ^
not only to be taught by our ears, but also by our eyes and other senses
of our bodies and therefore haeth he willed that the Sacraments should be
sure and visible witnesses and sealles of the union or knitting together of his
children, first with him self, and then after amongst them selves. Ye may see
now why it was said in the old law, Why c^^^cumcisi^on is c^^mande^ so
strai^^lie. Genes* 17.14
yt the vncyrcumcised should be destroyed from among the people of God. And
for this cause also it behooved that all the heads of every familly should
compere three times a year at least in Jerusalem, Deuteronomy. 16.
for to witness by the same sacrifices their unity of faith and religion.

And afterward when the wall between the two was broken, the Gentiles and the
Israelites were brought into one body, not only by the preaching, but also by
Baptism, and by the holy Sacrament of the body and blood of our Lord
according to that which Jesus Christ said, ^ath. ^.19.
unto his Apostles. Go and teach all nations, baptising them in the Name of
the Father, the Son and of the holy Spirit: whereunto we must ioyn that
which Saint Paul says, Cor. 23.
that he has given touching the Supper, ^
yt which he had received of the Lord.

This is also that which in an other place he says that the Church is
founded upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles that is to say upon
Jesus Christ which is the substance of the doctrine of the Prophets and
Apostles. ^phes. 2 ^*
^


Likewise must we understand an other place of the same Apostle wherein he
says yt the Church is the prop and pillar of the verity, ^imo^e. 3.15
that is to say, that ye word of God, which is the verity, as it is written
in S. John, Ioh 17.
susteyneth and vpholdeth the Church, or else is placed in the Church as in a
sure hie place, forasmuch as i^ it, God shows his puissance unto salvation
to all beleuers, as S. Paul declares unto the Romans in the first chaptre.
Rom 16.
Behold therefore the right and visible marckes of the Church which is
called for this cause, the mother of the faithful, Gala^ 4.2^
begotten and noorished in the same with the true and incorruptible food.

Now if there be preaching of ye word and administration of the Sacraments,
Ther^ must (...) docto^^ and p^^^acher^ in the Chur^^
it must of force be concluded that there be pastors and doctors, unto whom
this charge must be committed, according to that which the Scripture thereof
witnesses every where, and namely in yt wc is written unto the Corinthie^s
and to ye Ephesiens. (...). 12
Therefore may ye se why ye some putt to ye third marcke that is to say ye
ordinary succession from ye time of the Apostles: (...). 4.
^
whereunto we answer yt such a succession is greatly to be praised, provided
always that it be well considered and applied as some have often times
therewith strengthened them selves against the newnes of heretics, as appears
in Tertullian, Irenee, and S. Augustine against the Manicheens and Donatistes.

But forasmuch as there is a buckler hereof made against us, as if we were
inuenters of new things, or that we pretended thereby to have help, ^
it is more then needful, that it should be known, what estimation we have of
this succession we say that there is a succession of doctrine, and a succession
of persons.

As touching the succession of doctrine we auowe it, as an infallible marcke of
the true Church, according to ye which we have already spoken. For
notwithstanding that the doctrine af the Euangile is more then credible,
without having authority of ancientie, and that it comes often to pass
through our iniquities, and by the just vengeance of God, that it is as new
unto men, as that it oght to be unto them familiare and accustumed: yet this
notwithstanding the witness of an ancient and continual succession serves much
unto men, to make them the more inexcusable.

And as touching the succession of persons we auowe it also, but under
condition and provided that it be conjoined with the succession of the doctrine
of the Prophets and Apostles, ^
at the least in the points of the substance and ground thereof, and none
otherwise.

And marck if it please you my Lords, that I speak notably of ye doctrine
and not of manners, for although it be requesit for a good and true pastor to be
perfyte in doctrine and in living: yet because of ignorance or for some
diversity of opinions of the doctrine, which be not of the substance and
ground thereof, and also for his manners, we will not stik to suffer him being
a pastor to be still a pastor provided always yt he keep the foundation of the
doctrine, we be taught thus to speak by the words of our Lord Jesus Christ,
(...). ^3.^.3.
yt which said: forasmuch as ye Scribes and Pharisees were set in Moisis
chair, yt it behooved to do as they taught, and not that which they did. Of
(...) in (...) chair who^ oght (...) be vn^^^^stand


The which place S. Augustine writing on S. John in his 46 treatise declares
that it oght to be understand of hyrelingis which faill not to have this
doctrine, and not of falls Prophets, of whom Christ haeth contrarywyse spoken.

Be ye ware of the leuain of the Pharisees. Mat^ 6* 11^
Being says S. Augustine set in ye Chair of Moises they teach the law of God,
and therefore God teaches by them.

But if they will teach their own doctrines, nether hear ye them nor do ye
those things that they speak. The which thing ye same authoure expounds
yet more at large in his 49 Sermon. De verbis domini. So therefore my Lords to
return again to the point, because tha^ the false Prophets may succeed unto
the trow, ^
and w^^es unto the right shepherdes, behold a (...) peremptory for the wc we
esteem a personal succession nor only to be received, but altogether to be
condemned as giving occassion unto falset, except that the succession of the
doctrine be joined thereunto for the foundation.

Furthermore if this personal succession were simply holden for an infallible
marcke of the Church, it behooved then to show us some promise of God by wc he
haeth (...) and bound his grace unto certain seats or regions, yt which thing
we suppose can not be found in the new Testament.

But right well know we that there is always a Catholic Church, that is an
universal Church, ^orasmuche as the particular members thereof be scattered
here and there, Of (...) Catho^^^que Church and of their d^^^persio^ i^ diue^^
parts
throughout the hole world, according, as it pleases God to exercise his
judgments upon some of them that he haeth either altogether cut of, or else
that he haeth chastened for a time, and his mercies upon other some of them yt
he interteyneth from good to better, or that he calls of new unto his
knowledge. For in some points the Lord using his just vengeance, he seems
altogether to root up till yt he leave not one trase of ye Church, as it is
come to pas in ye contrie of the Barbariens and in the orient. And in other
cuntries he haeth left as yet some trace of ye Church as we see in the
Churches of Grecia, and yet more nerer unto us. On the other part the Lord
between hands some tyme^ out of this personal succession of pa^^tours, as it
chanced in Antioche, i^ the time of Samosatenus, and in Alexandrie the time of
the banishe^ment of Athanasius, and in many other Churches in the time that
heresies had there furious rage, and specially without seking things any
furde^ at this time there haeth been interruption in the personalle succession
of the Romish seat at least in ye time that Honorius the first held the seat
about the year syx hundredth three and twenty, ^
was condemned for the execrable heresy of Eut^ches about the year syx
hundredth and four score. And in the time of Pope John the twenty and two was
condemned for an heretic about the year a thousand three hundredth thirty and
two.

Except they would say, that notable heretics were the heads of the Church,
besides this wc happened in the time of the she pope Ioha^ about the year
eight hundredth fifty and four, and during so many schisms of contrary popes
as be read in histories.

By these reasons I conclude, yt with out stayeng at any personal succession,
for to know the Church well, we must alweyes come to the purite of the
doctrine, No (...) with the (...) preac^ of Go^^ word^ the (...) ad^^^nister^
of (...)
and to the sincere administration of the Sacraments. In such sort that they
which oght to be compted the right successors of the Apostles, the which
being lawfully called, build upon their fou^datio^, whether there be a
^ontinuall succession of persons, or that, that succession some times be
interrupted, yea even of them ye first preached the Euangile in any place..

Like as contrarywyse, they that preach not at all: or that in stead of the
doctrine of the Apostles preach their own doctrine although they allege a
thousand predecessors following one an other, they oght not to be heard as
pastors, but to be fled from, as wolves, by the expres commandment of Jesus
Christ, (...). 7.
and of his Apostles.

But some may say, is this said because yt it is lefull, to every body to
preach the Euangile, and to minister the Sacraments?

^
No surely for it behooves yt every thing be done by good order in the house of
God, as the Apostle says, Who be then the right pastors? ^or. 14 ^.
They which be lawfully called. There rests then to know what is lawful
vocation and to understand this point we say, that there is a manner of
ordinary vocation and an other extraordinary. ^
That is the ordinary vocation in the which the order is kept that God haeth
established in the Church. And in this order first of all there is examination
of the doctrine and of the life, then after there is lawful election and
finaly there is imposition of hands. ^


These may ye see in many places of the Scripture to be put and conjoined
together, as in the election of Saint Matthias and of the vij deacons in the
Acts of the Apostles and also in that which is written in S. Paul's Epistles
unto Timothee and to Tite. Act. 5.6.


This now is the ordanarie vocation, whereby it may be easily considered what
is the extraordinary vocation: ^
in the which notwithstanding yt one of these two things or two of them, yea
or all the three be wanting, yet is it laufull by the authority of God. That
our Lord haeth often times used such extraordinary vocations, it appears
through out the Scriptures. ^
For who laid hands upon Moses that he might consecrate Aaron? And who
anointed in the degree of a Prophet Isaie, Daniel, Amos, and many others? And
when came that to pass? Then as they that had the order in their hands abused
the same, ^
then say I, it behooved that God should extraordinarely put hand to his work,
not for to bring confusion into his house but to correct them which under the
shaddowe of ordinary succession had had ouerturned and perverted all.

And that it is so, I refer me to the writings of the Prophets wc specially
speak against the priests.

But if herein it be replied yt such persons nevertheless have had miraculously
and from heaven an outward witnessing of their calling: Answe^ to a lie
I answer that this is very true in some, but not in all: except that ye will
divine that to be which in no wise is evident by any witness, yea I can not
well tell if there be many of the true Prophets of the raze of Aaron who have
had the imposition or laying on of hands after the ordinary manner. But if
they will allege that the fore said Prophets were content to rebuke and to
reprove without having any thing to do with the sacrifices. First of all I
answer that, that is not true every where: ^
for Samuel wc was not of the raze of Aaron, but only of Chore, did sacrifice
i^ Mispa as it is written in the first book of Samuel in the vij chaptre.
(...). 1
And Elie the Galaadite did sacrifice in Carmell as it is written in the first
book of kings ye eightene chaptre.

Secondly it is no meruell if the Prophets i^ that time stretched not out
their comissio^n extraordinary so far as to circumcise and sacrifice, seeing
that this charge was appointed heretably unto the raze of Leuy, the which
thing at this day haeth no place.

Consider now my Lords, what we call the Church and what we esteem of the
marckes of it, and of the vocation of pastors, of which things if ye will make
application unto our Churches or unto our selves, we hope with the help of
God to show so good tokens, that none shall have just occasion to doubt
thereof following the word of God, and that which thereof is truly written,
as we think in a treatise that is found amongst ye works of S. Augustine
entitled, a dialogue of 66 questions in the last question.

Now let us come to speak of the authority of ye Church. The (...) of the
(...)
It appears by these things that we have before spoken, that we do not
derogate in any point the preciouse and hye titles the which the holy Ghost
attributes unto it.

But we say that it is so the body of our Lord that in a part it is in their
pilgrimage, Wha^ (...) faith give the (...)
awaiting for the full enioyeng of their head: it is the house of God, but that
which is yet a buylding and grows day by day, and that it is governed by the
Spirit of God, (...). 5.
but as yet fighting against the flesh: it is purified, but in such sort as
to be brought by little and little unto this perfection of beawtie, (...). 13
where there shall be neither spot nor wrinckle: it knows God, ^
but it is in a part. When I speak thus, I believe yt ye know the Apostles
own words. For to be brief I confess that without ye Church there is no
salvation: because there is no life but in Jesus Christ, and Jesus Christ
imployeth not his lively virtue no where else, but amongst his members, ^
the union and assembly whereof, is called the Church.

But the question is to know whether that in this world the Church may err, ^
and whether it be above the Scripture or else altogether subject unto the same?

Hereunto, do I answer that it is a thing without all doubt that the
particular members of the Church may err, and do err daily both in
doctrine and manners, according unto that, which S. Paul says that we know
in a part, 1. Co^^ 9. 1. Io^^ 18.
and S. John that if we say yt we have no sin we deceive our selves. But if
any body will except out of this nombre the ancient doctors, he shall perdonne
us if we believe him not. (...) of the ancie^^ docto^^ be (...) without faute^


For it were easy for us to gather many witnesses of fautes, yt be found in
the greatest and most ancient of them: let this be spoken, saving the
reverence due unto their godliness and learning.

But we will not stay our selves so much here, for the honor that we hear
unto them (and yt not without good cause) as also because if I have well
understand the saying of my Lord Cardinal that he is no more of that mind
then we to deceive them without exception.

This is it, that we understand of the members of the Church, in
particularitie, the imperfection whereof does not stop but yt the Church is
formed and made thereof.

For by little and little do they go forward as well in the knowledge of God, as
in the amendment of life. But if the members of the Church be generally
considered, as it is distributed in diverse diocese and provinces shall we say
that it may ^rre? Again if I remember well my Lord Cardinal was lately of
that (...) specially the particular It is (...) and (...) ha^^ often erred.
Churches and provincial Councelles may err: and have often erred, and surely
that is ratified by so long an experience that no man of judgment as I suppose
can doubt thereof.

There rests therefore to consider the hole Church in an universality but
in what sort? For considering it in the estimation of an universal Council,
first of all there is no great apperance to judge that all the virtue that the
holy Ghost, employeth upon ye Church is restreyned to an certain nombre of
Prelates the which be not alweys ye most learned nor ye best, yea although they
represent the hole multitude that se^deth them. For how often times will it
come to pass that a simple man, shall have more understanding at an instant
then the most wise of an hole company? And therefore was it said by Gerson yt
more credit oght to be given to one private, faithful man, then to an hole
Counsel and to the Pope, ^
if he have better authority or reason. And namely in ye great Council of
Nece by whom was it stopped that the law of single life, which afterward,
haeth brought so great filthynes into the Church, was not then established? By
one Paphnutius only, as says the history. And moreover, when was there ever
assembled a Council so general but that a great part, not only of the
most wise and most holy men, but also of the Prelates have remained be
hind. And who may than assure, but that they that were absent some times, had
greater revelation then they that were present.

And besides all this my Lords, how long is it a go, that there reigned so
horrible a co^fusio^ in ye Church and principally in the great estates and
dignities of Prelates, in such sort that the greatest desolation of the house
of God is in that part where it oght to be most entier and best decked. At
the least it is a long time past that the exemples hereof have appeared and that
ye good Busshops have sobbed and sighed so grievously therefore, Go^^
Bussh^^pes (...) sobbed (...) sighed see th^^ wick^^ (...) be in the prela^^^
of the Chur^^
and so evidently that we hear them at this day.

And that which S. Barnard writes of this matter in his book of consideration,
and in the 33 sermon on the Canticles, and also in the sermon of the conversion
of S. Paul, is noles notoriouse the^ true: Allas Lord says he, they whche
be seen to love the first and chief places i^ thy Church and their to have ye
superiority be first in a redynes to persecute thee. They have taken the Ark
of Sion, they have vio^lently possessed the Castle, and by power, have set
fire on the hole City. Let this be spoken m^ Lords, not to injury any body
bi^ to show that the chief vocations i^ the Church being of so long a tym^ so
confused and misreuled, that it i^ impossible to conclude in any wys^ that the
universal Councelles tha^ have been now of a long time ga^thered together of a
multitude so e^^ qualified, have been so guyded by (...) holy Spirit that they
could no^ err.

An ancient Priest of whom I would make no mention in this company, if it were
not, that they alledg^ his example in this matter, (...). 11.
did prophecy well although he was no thing worth. But we read none otherwise
but he erred yea both yt he and his company in condemning Jesus Christ, for it
was the holy Ghost yt propheseid in this behalf, and not he which knew not
what he said nor what he spoke, being moved with a Spirit very contrarious, that
is to say a deuilish Spirit because of malice he concluded, to sic a Jesus
Christ the Son of God. ^
And further if a general Council haeth received this privilege that they
can not err in ye rewle of their doctrine nor in ye form of their manners: we
demand what time was this privilege dated. For there was never but one God,
one Faith, ^
and one Church. Now that there was error in the Church in the time of the
old Testament the Prophets openly bear witness, and ye histories show good
proof thereof. ^


^^ai. 56.
All ye wache men says Esaias 56* chaptre, be blind, they know no thing they are
all domme dogs* And Ierem 6 chaptre. ^^rem. ^
From the Prophet to the priest they work all untruth.

And to the intent yt this might not be restreyned unto the life of particular
persons, it is said in the 14 chaptre of the same Prophet: ^^rem. ^.14.
they prophecy falls things, and a lieng vision. And in Isay the 29 chaptre.
The wisdom of the wise shall perish and the understanding of ye prudent shall
vanishe away. ^^ai. 29.
God shall shut up the eyes of the Prophets and of ye principalles. And in
Ezechiell the 7 chaptre. ^^ech. 7
The law shall perish from the Priest. And to say the truth, who condemned
ye Prophets, as Ieremias, Micheas, yea and the Son of God him self, and
after him the Apostles, but the assemblies of the Prelates of Israel? If
hereunto it be answered, that these things happened in the time of the old
Testament. I answer that it is not enough spoken nor derectly answered. For the
conclusion will alweys be ferme and sure that the assembly of Prelates of the
Church how general soever that it was, have often times been governed by the
Spirit of error rather then by the holy Ghost.

Secondly if we come to the new Testament, S. Paul haeth not he expressly
warned the Ephesiens in ye name of all the Church, Act. 29.
that there should wolves come out from amongst the mids of the Pastors and
that the son of perdition should sit in the temple of God? 2. (...) 2.4*
And in very deed in conferring the Councelles one with an other, there will
appear so many contrarieties amongst them selves, ^
that of very force ye must confess that the holy Ghost haeth not alweys there
had audience, but that Satan for a long time past haeth transfigured him self
into the light of general Councelles for to disguise and hyde his falshode.

There is a place in S. Augustine yt expresses this in his second book of
Baptism, against the Donatistes 3 chaptre the which I have alleged in the
first oration and now for a cause will allege it again, there it is expressly
said, that the Epistles of the particular Busshops be corrected by the
provincial Councelles, and the provincial Councelles, by the general
Councelles, and the first general Councelles adnulled by the last, when as by
experience of things that which was close is opened and that which was hid
is made evident.

Unto this my Lord Cardinal answered i^ his oration yt this was to be
understand of exterior or outward things which might and oght to vary
according as need requires. But considering the hole matter nerer it is found
that this word Emendari presupposes that there was a fault committed and
after corrected, also if this answer should be received, ye must say likewise
of the particular Epistles of the busshops and provincial Councelles the
which is directly against the intention of Saint Augustine, which reasons
there of this point and not of any exterior policy, but of one point of
doctrine, to wit of the opinion of Saint Cyprian, and of the Council of
Affricke touching rebaptisation. If there be also alleged an other argument
which they use, to wit, if our Lord haeth promised to be in ye mids of two
or three gathered to gether in his name, ^
now by greater reason will he be in an assembly universal: we grant that so
it may be presumed, but there is a difference betuene a presumption and a
necessary conclusion. For ye malice of man comes often times unto this point
to abuse the name of God, ^
to establishe their lesings that such may have God in their mouth which
have his enemy in their heart. The weakness of man is so great yt there is
comonlie in him an infinite nombre of dissordinate affections which blind our
eyes, so that we say that he which haeth none other foundation then the advise
of men and the outward apperance of a Counsel, is rather in danger to be
deceived the^ otherwys. What then? Would we yt the doctrine of ye Church should
be uncertain seeing it may err? No thing les. For we confess that as yet, we
know in a part, 1. (...) 9.
as Saint Paul says, and in this respect there is alweys error mingled with
the verity, and yet nevertheless God suffers not that the verity in ye
substanciall points of our salvation be ever so buried in all his Church, yt
there is not alweys some nombre now more now less yt understands yt which
they oght to understand, and do follow that which they oght to follow. Thus we
see that it came pass in Israel in the time of Elias and in the time of the
captivity of Babylon and in the time of the cu^ming of Jesus Christ, when as
scarsely was there found a Zachary an Elizabeth, a Joseph, a Uirgin Marie, a
Simeon, and an Anna the Prophetess, ^
which had a understanding of the fulfilling of the Prophets, amongst so
great corruptions of Scrybes, Pharisees and Sadduces. Such interruptions
therefore in the Church of God proceeding and coming of the iniquity of men,
be as a storm or cloudy wether, which afterward he causes to vanishe away
with ye brightness of his word as it pleases him, and according as he
distributeth the secrets of his judgments and of mercies. Are we willing
likewise thus to condemn the ancient Councelles? God forbid. For as ye your
selves know right well yt if it were in question to be reuled by them ye should
change mo things then we: ye have traveled therein these days past, but we
require yt the Scripture be the touch stone for to examyn all that is done and
said in the Church. If this seem strange I pray you my Lords to consider this
most renouned place of Saint Augustine writing unto Maximin Arian in the
second book. chaptre 14 Is there any general Counsel more authorized then
the first, called the Council of Nece? ^
And what is ye Council of Arimin? A Council rejected and condemned and that
worthily. And whereof disputes S. Augustine? Even of a principal article of
the belief, yt which had been before that often times fully resolved, to wit of
the Co^substancialitie of the Son of God. in this mean season ye may see that
S. Augustine witnesses that for his part he is not astricted nether to ye
Counsel of Nece nor yet to the Counsel of Arimin: ^
but that he will fight with the Scriptures, which be, says he, common
witnesses unto both parties. If any body will against this allege the
obscurity of the Scriptures, we must needs confess that which S. Paul
says: that ye natural man knows not those things that be of God, ^or. 2
and that which Saint Peter says: yt the Scriptures be not of any private
interpretation. ^et. 1
Well then, if this obscurity be so great, that the Scriptures can not be
exponded by them selves whence comes this that Christ se^deth us no where
else, when he says search the Scriptures? (...). 5.
(...). 16 ^1.
And how comes it to pas yt Abraham being required by the unhappy rich man
to send some of the other world to admonish them of this world, they have
says he, Moses and the Prophets, if they believe not them no more will they
believe when any shall rise again from the dead. And moreover in what case had
they been in then that had no thing but ye scriptures of the Apostles, before
yt ever there was any commentaries written by the Ancients? And yet further I
remember my Lord Cardinal yt in your oration, your advise was to receive
for sure interpretation and Apostolycall tradition, that which haeth been
alweys received in the Church euerywhere, and of all men. ^
But who may assure us of these three points? Certainly no man as I suppose. For
the diversity is infinite yt is found in the books of the Ancients, yea and
that in the articles of the faith.

Furthermore if we must come unto these words, always and of all, at what
time shall we begin except at the Apostolical Church? And who shall be the
first in ye count but the Apostles of whom ye history was faithfully written
by Saint Luke and that which may be known by their own writings. So
therefore my Lords to conclude, forasmuch as all truth comes of God, who
haeth taken for his trushmen in that, that concerns our salvation, the
Prophets and Apostles, we return always unto this foundation of the
Scriptures, and yet will we receive the advice of cou^celles and of fathers,
but that shall be so far as they confirm their sayings by the evident
witnessinges of the Scriptures, the which as treulie says Saint Augustine in
his books of Christian doctrine, be so tempered with the holy Spirit, yt that
which is darkly spoken in one place is most clearelie spoken in an other
place, with diverse other means to understand well the Scripture, which be
contained in ye said books of Saint Augustine and of otheres which have
entreated of this matter.

And there remains as yet one difficulty to be resolved, ^
which lies in this that many have thought that the will of God touching all
yt is requisite unto our salvation was not fully written by the Evangelists
and Apostles. But if this might take place, I pray you my Lords, what a door
should there be opened to set forth all manner of dreams and rauinges, that men
list? And in very deed we see that this haeth been the passage by which Satan
haeth entered in, to waste the vine yard of the Lord, and yet deny we not, ^
but yt before Moses time, God governed his Church, by visions and
revelations, and that the Apostles first planted the Churches with a lively
voice before that their doctrine was written. But where fore is it yt whiles, ^
men grew greater in malice and mo in nombre, and contrary wise their lives
growing shorter, that the Lord haeth willed that this doctrine should be
enregistred in a common language to be understand of all? Haeth this been to
encountre them that decore and deck their rauinges and dreams with ye title of
traditions, revelations or of custom? Now if this doctrine be not written but
in part, wherefore should this remedy serve then? John 31.
Surely Saint John speaks not so of the Scriptures, where he says that the
things yt he haeth written be written to the end, that in believing that Jesus
is the Christ, the Son of God, ye might have life, the which thing should
be falls, if there should be left out any doctrine necessary unto salvation.
Saint Paul also declari^g the use of the Scripture, where he would teach all
the ministers of the Church of God, in the person of his faithful disciple
Timothee, 2. (...) 3.1^
had not said that it makes the man of God, that is to say the ministers of
the word of God, or in especial if ye list, every faithful man to be in all
points perfyte, if it had been, needful to have added any thing that as yet
was not written. And yet we doubt not but alweys there might have been of the
Apostles traditions unwritten. But what were they? Perteining unto order and to
policy. But because this name haeth been abused a long time, it behooves to
show which be ye Apostolical traditions, the wc will not be hard to be done,
if two points be propounded whereby they may be judged, ^
that is to say if they be comfortable to the doctrine, and mete to
edification, for it is a thing most assured that the Apostles never appointed
any manner of doing, that might be directly or indirectly contrary to the
doctrine, which they taught, nor also that might turn away men how little
soever it be, fro^e the spiritual service, seeing all their writings bear
witness thereof. When therefore, this ruell shall be kept, then shall it be easy
to discern the doctrine from the tradicions, and the false tradicions from ye
right traditions. And to this may be added that, that which the Apostles them
selves have done, in this behalf, is not alweys perpetual. Not but that they
are witness without reproach, but for this cause, that according to the reule of
charity did they bear some thing with the infirmity of the Jews, Act. 29.
and so must be judged of that which they ordained of things strangled and
to eat no blood. And of that which S. Paul haeth taught and practiced in
Timothee and on his person, the wc things now might have no place, except in
following ye general reule to co^modate our selves to our neighbors in
things indifferent, ^
and such things may also be gathered of other manner of doi^ges which they
have appropried unto their times, as where it is spoken of kissing and to have
their head uncovered or bare in sign of authority, ^ Cor. 11
the which at this day be contrary manner of doings or fashions amongst many
nations, amongst whom it should be found very strange yt men should kiss
one an other or that one man should kiss an other man's wife, as also at this
time, to speak bear headed, is a sign of inferrior or low condition.

All these things therefore oght to be considered before yt we should ground
a doctrine as Apostolical for to abuse the authority or custom of ye
Apostles, to trooble the Churches with, like as we see that it haeth come to
pass shortly after the time of the Apostles: for the feast of Easter, and
specially in their time touching them which abused the authority of the
Church of Jerusalem, for to mingle the Iudaisme with the Christianisme
according as it is written in the history of the Acts of the Apostles. (...)
29.
There was it ordained that no man's conscience should he charged with any yoke.
^
How the^ may we esteem that ye Apostles have invented so many and so many
ceremo^es (unto which afterward haeth been attributed both remission of
sins and merits) seeing yt they have made such an express protestation to
the contrary, yea and would not give place unto the Mosaicall ceremonies, of
which God him self was author? It is a long time since that Saint Augusti^e
co^playned hereof, when he wrote to Ianuarius, but there is no doubt if he had
been in the like time as ours is, he would have been more astonished at them. In a
sum therefore, we do require that the Scripture, which is clear in this
behalf, may discern betuixt the traditions that be good and the^ yt be evil,
betuixt them that be holy and them that be profaine, betuixt them that be
profitable and them that be noisome, and betuixt them that be needful and them
that are superfluouse.

These points being resolved, it is easy to decyde this question, if the
Church be above the Scripture, the which seems to me to be so foolish a
question as if one asked whether the infant or child were above his father, ^
the woman, above her husband, yea the man above God. And in very deed the true
Church will never strive against God in such a quarrel nor none other, but
will escaip condemnation. And it serves to no purpose to say that the Church
was before the Scripture. For although that so it be, yet it is so that this
word that afterward haeth been written is alweys more ancient saying that by
the same the Church has been conceived, ^
engendered, and nourished, as it haeth been said. The saying of S. Augustine is
alleged in this behalf, I would not believe the Scripture if ye authority of
the Church moved me not thereunto. But here must ye consider that Saint
Augustine speaks of him self as a Manicheen. ^
When therefore two parties will debate or strive for the treuth of an
instrument, unto whom shall they have recourse but unto nota^ies wc keep the
registre thereof? And yet notwithstanding it can not be said that the register
is founded vpone ye witnessinges of notaries the which should not faill to be
true although no man living bare witness thereof. Even so much hereof must we
answer unto them that think that the authority of the canonical books is not
founded upon that which the Church haeth determined thereof, as if it were
so, that there were found determinations of Councelles altogether diverse in
this point yt which may be more at large declared in a mutual conference. It
shall suffice me to allege besides yt which I have before spoken, one only
reason accompanied with the authority of some of the ancientes that be well
approved.

The reason is this that Jesus Christ him self haeth so much honored ye
doctrine of the Prophets, ^
that he ratified and proved his doctrine by ye witnessing of them. S. Paul
suffered that they of Tessalonique should do the like, as it is written in the
17 chaptre of ye Acts. ^wors^ 11.^ 2. (...) 2.
Saint Petre haeth expressly allowed this manner of doing. Then must not they,
that say that they be the vicares of Jesus Christ and successors of Saint
Petre and S. Paul refuse the like condition.

And further consider what S. Jerome says in the 9 chaptre of his second
book vpone Ieromie, ^
yt men must nether follow the error of their fathers nor of their ancitors but
the authority of the Scriptures. And Saint Chrysostom vpone the 24 of Saint
Matthew in the 49 homely. The same man, says he, that would know which is ye
true Church of Jesus Christ, how shall he know it in so great a confusion of
such semblance or liknes: also why is it that in ye time then, ^
all the Christians oght to retire and draw them selves to the Scriptures?
Forasmuch as that after that time, that heresy had obtained and occupied the
Churches, there might be no certain probation had of the true Christianity nor
other refuge unto Christians willing to know the treuth of the faith but the
holy Scriptures. Likewise our Lord knowing so great confusion to come in the
latter days, co^ma^deth that the Christians which be in the Christianity wc
would have a true and firm faith, should have none other refuge but to ye
Scriptures: or else if they regarded other things they should be offended and
perish, not knowinge what were the true Church, and by that means they
should fall in to the abomination of desolation yt which is set in the holy
place of the Church.

Saint Basil also in his moralles the 12 chaptre of the 9 sum, writes thus,
if all thing that is without faith is sin, as the Apostle says and faith is
by hearing, Ro^ 23. Ro^ 17.
and hearing is of the word of God, all that is without the Scripture which
is inspired of God, is sin, Likewise the same author in his sermon of the
confession of the faith. ^
If the Lord be faithful in all his words and all his co^mandementes be sure
for ever, done in verity and righteousness: It is manifestly to turn from the
faith and a crime of pride to reiecte any thing of that, that is written, or to
introduce any thing more that haeth not been written, seeing that our Lord
Jesus Christ haeth said, my sheep hear my voice and follow not a stranger but
fly from him because they know not his word. (...) 10.


Hitherto Madame I have answered according to the measure of the knowledge that
God haeth given us, unto ye first point of the last oration of my Lords the
Prelates concerning the estate and authority of ye Church of our Lord.
Where of as yet we are ready to understand all that shall be showed unto us, by
the pure word of God. There rests the article of the Supper the wc I will
leaf of, if it please your Majesty, as well because ye are to long holden and
all the present assistance, as also because of the desire that we have that
this conference should be begone after a better order: because all that in
speaking so^marelie of a matter yt hitherto haeth been wrapped up in so great
obscurity, it should be very hard, but that many words should escape, how
true soever they were that should offend the hearts of them that should hear
them. Nevertheless if it pleases your Majesty that we go forward, we are
ready to speak thereof that which the Lord will give us to understand.
Submitting alweys our selves unto that which shall be showed by the holy
Scriptures. And make humble supplication unto your majesty to be persuaded
that next to ye glory of God, there is no thing that we seek with so great
desire as the rest and quietness of your Majesty and of all this Realm.

Ane answer the xxvj day of septembre, the year a thousand five hundredth sixty
and one*
Being arrived at Poyssy twelve ministers of the word of God, with twelve
deputies of Churches in an hall, ^
where was the Queen mother, the King and Queen of Navarre, the princes of the
blood royal and all the Lords of Council and other Lords of the one side:
and of the other part 5 Cardinals with many bus^hops and Theologiens of all
sorts.

^he lord ^ardin^^^
My Lord Cardinal of Lorrain declared in few words that this assemble was
made to hear what ye said ministers had to say unto that, which he had
proponded two days before, whereat Theodore raze up in the name of the said xij
ministers for all the Churches of France that be reformed and answered as
follows.

Madame the last time yt it pleased you to give us audience we made declaration
according to ye grace, that our Lord gave us, of the article yt was propounded
touching the Church, the marckes, and authority of the same. Wherein we have
so followed ye word of God that every one as we judge had occasion to be
contented with our answer. But instead to approve that which was spoken by
us, we have been demanded by what power we minister ye word of God and the
holy Sacraments, and besides all that there was no thing spared that might
make our cause more odiouse. ^
We can not tell for what purpose this was set forward. For first of all we
came not hither to minister the word of God nor the Sacraments. Wherefore
there was no need to ask us by what authority we would do it. If it should be
said that it is to cause us render a reason of that which we have done
heretofore. ^
Ye must consider that our company is of two manner of people, the one serve
for ministers without this realm, i^ places where their vocation is received,
of them it may not be demanded why they be ministers. There is others that
preach within this realm whom ye have not called, to cause them give an
account of that wc is past, as touching their vocation, but only to confer
with their doctrine: or else it should be a beginning to make process against
them, the which thing Madame we are sure that ye have not minded. If it be
after a sort, to confer under correction, there should be therein no great
purpose and yt could not serve but to cause us enter into this matter, out of
the wc we could not depart without offending and angring my Lords ye Prelates.
The which we have not minded, nether will we give occasion unto any body to
interrupt this holy work that is begone. And that it may be known yt we
speak not without great cause: A simi^^tude.
alweys as two parties mete to enter into conference: if the one ask the other
by what virtue do you this? The other will demand the like: and so it will be
very hard but of these reciproque demandes there will arise some dissension.
Therefore now leaving a part my Lords the Prelates of this realm whom we
will not offend, let us imagine unto us a busshop that demands of us by what
title preach ye, and minister ye the Sacrament? We will demand of him if he
him self was chosen by the ancientes or elders of the Church unto the which
he is appointed to be busshop, ^
if he was required by the people, if there was informatio^ before that, taken
of his life and doctrine, he would say yea. But the contrary is well known,
and we remitte oureselues unto the conscience of them that hear us, wc know
how this goes. And if he would say unto us, ye are not ministers because ye
have not the imposition of hands, we might answer him ye are no minister
because that in your institution or ordeini^g were omitted the substanciall
points and that commanded by Gods law, The P^^pistes want (...) of the
vocati^^
the which may not be dispensed with. And if ye disputation grew more hot we
should go further and may use such words, ye have but one of the three points
requisite in the institution or ordeyning which is the imposition of hands, if
the wanting of that as ye esteem does deprive us that we can not be ministers,
for want of the other two much less ye shall be ministers then we. The
Council of Calcidome, The (...)
which is one of the 4 general Cou^celles ordained that that the institution
of a priest should be void, which haeth not been deputed spicially unto ye
service of so^e Church, irrita says he, in iniuriam ordinantis. With more
strong reason may we say the same to the Busshop yt should dispute with us,
when he wa^teth ye two substa^ciall poi^^es contrary to the ordinance of ye
Apostle. ^ite. 2.
Yet se an other point which greueth us greatly to speak, and yet nevertheless
be we constreyned thereunto that we may show to all this company that if this
disputation of the vocation were ones opened it should be greatly dangerouse if
we should ask him who gave him this imposition of hands he would say that it
was the Busshops by the authority yt was given unto them. ^
And if we should ask him, for how much he boght that authority, he will say
that he haeth not boght it, but that he haeth given so many thousand crounes,
that is to say I have not boght the bread but the corn. So that if ye were
willi^g to decide this question by the Councelles or canons of the Church,
there should an infinite nombre of Busshoppes and curates have red faces. ^
And therefore Madame we are not willi^g to e^tre therein, for fear to offend
any body, nor to make any revenge, but only to show you Madame yt if we should
briefly answer, this is the desire that we have, not to offend any body. And as
touchi^g the article of ye holy Supper of our Lord, we would not of late speak
any further of it, but having a respect to many of this company, which have
not been accustomed, to hear speak thereof any thing so forwardly, but yt they
will be easily offended, when they hear any thing that seems new unto them. And
therefore we had rather that they should hear the sayings of the an^ient
doctors of the Church, the ours: considering yt my Lord Cardinal of Lorrain
haeth bound him self by his promise openly to i^struct us in this article with
the words of the doctors, ^
that wrote the first fyve hundredth years, so yt we were prepared to receive
the light, if it had been showed unto us that which hitherto haeth been hid
from us. Now to saitisfie us and also a great part of Christendom in that,
that we desired and looked for, there was propounded to us the article of the
holy Sacrament cut of, and mingled, ^
i^ the principale and most necessary points, and therewith it was said unto
us, sign this, if not, we will go no further. And if we were presented
prisoners unto you to be accused, yet should ye not say, sign this, if not, I
condemn you, your estate binds you to speak otherwise, and commands you
to show us, our errors, if we had any, and wills that ye should be
sufficient to exhort in wholesome doctrine, them that have need of doctrine, and
that be ready to render a reasone of their faith by the Scriptures. And although
the manner to condemn us is new, yet the means which have been therein used
be more strange as I shall shortly show.

Madame we are here present for two pri^cipale ends, ^
the one is to re^dre a reasone to God, and to you, and to all the world of
our faith, the other is to do service to God and to the King, and to you in
all possible means to appese and mittigate the troobles that be risen in the
cause of religion. If ye send us away again without giving us some, with wh^^e
we might charitably confer there shall be no thing done unto us, wc shall not
be published and made known throughout all Christendom. This will not be the
means to appease ye troobles which they know well enough, that are the makers
thereof. If ye had no more a do, but with us, that be here present, there
should be no great danger as touching the world, to do with us even as ye
would. But if it please you, we be here but a part of a thousand thousands of
persons, which be in this realm, Suysse, in Polonia, in Almayne, in England,
and Scotland, wc altogether look for some good resolution of this assembly:
and they shall understand that instead to confer as it was promised, ^
there was given unto us ye tenth part of an article and there was said unto us
sign this, or else we will go no further. And if we should have signed, what
should ye gain or win thereby? They that sent us hither would have
knowledge, whither we were constreyned thereunto by force and violence: or else
vainquished by good and certain arguments. Wherefore we make humble request
unto you Madame that ye would not i^terrupt this good work, but yt ye would give
us some yt would make no conscience to co^ confer with us. Or else ye may judge
your self, how much sclander this kind of proceeding yt is now used shall
bring. And yet nevertheless, because yt ye should not remain wihout answer, unto
that which was propounded unto us, ^
we declare that we approve all that was spoken by Mou^sieure Despence in the
book which he gave unto us without any other consideration thereof.

And as touching the article that (...) Cardinal haeth given us (...) that it
is no thing but an (...) of ye confession of Ausbourgh. (...) be many things
to be co^^^dered to wit, ye hole confession must be communicated unto us. For
it should be unreasonable to present unto us a line of an article and to leave
out all the rest. ^
Further it must be known if my Lord Cardinal of him self (the which
nevertheless we will not presume, but desire that we may have witnessing
thereof) or else of the authority of my Lords the Prelates, haeth propounded
here ye confession of Ausburgh, and to give us thereof such assurance that we
may freely confer together. ^
For thereby at least, we might give hearty thanks to God for that my Lord
Cardinal and the others, should condemn transsubstantiation the wc is
rejected, by the co^moun accord of all the reformed Curches as well in Almaigne
as else where. And if they will that we sign any thing it is reason Madame that
my Lord Cardinal sign also that which h^ in the name of his company
presents unto us, that our Churches which have sent us hither may see and
know, yt here we confer not in the air that is in vain. And if my Lord
Cardia^ll continue i^ this mind to approach and come nere unto the confession
of the Almains in all points, I hope that God will make us come nerer and
join us in such a sort together, that ye shall be well content thereof, and
that his name shall be glorified thereby throughoute the hole world.

And in the mean season, Madame, we say unto you yt our Lord Jesus Christ is
in ye use of the holy Supper in the which he presents, ^
gives and exhibiteth verily unto us his body and his blood by the operation
of his holy Spirit, and that we receive and eat spiritually, and by faith his
own body wc dyed for us, for to be bones of his bones and flesh of his flesh
that we may thereby be quickened and receive all that which is necessary for
our salvation. And if this do not content you Madame, and that there be need
of an greater declaration (as surely it is a dangerous and a hard thing to
speak of so great a mystery in few words) if it please my Lord Cardia^ll to
hold yt which he haeth promised, which is to visit altogether the holy
Scripture and the ancient doctors of the Church so far as they shall be
conformable unto the same. And if it (...)


