THE WHOLE SERMONS OF That Eloquent DIVINE, of Famous Memory; THOMAS PLAYFERE,
Doctor in Divinity.

GATHERED INTO one vollume, the Titles thereof are named in the next PAGE.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Matthew Law, and are to be sold at his shop in
Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Fox, near Saint Augustines Gate, 1623.

The names of the Sermons contained in this Book.
1 THe Mean in Mourning. 2 The Pathway to Perf^^^ion. 3 Hearts Delight. 4 The
Power of Prayer. 5 The Sicke-mans Couch. 6 Gods Blessing is enough. 7 Glory
waighes down the Cross. 8 God be with you. 9 Christ's wounds our health. 10
Say well, do well. 11 The Kings Crown. 12 Good Ground. 13 Felicity of the
Faithful. 14 Difference between the Law (...) Gospel.
TO THE HONORABLE AND MOST VIRTUOUS LADY, THE LADY ELIZABETH CAREY, wife to the
thrice noble, Sir GEORGE CAREY, Knight Marshall, etc. all prosperity and
happiness.
MAdame, it is reported, that Demonax having his head broken with a stone, and
being advised to complain to the Proconsull of that injury, answered, that he
had more need to go to a Chyrurgian to heal his head, then to a Magistrate to
redress his wrong. I must also confess, I had rather have had my head broken,
then my Sermon so mangled. For this Sermon has been twice printed already
without my procurement or priuitie any manner of way; Yea, to my very great
grief and trouble. Nevertheless, I have thought good to complain of no man:
For in whom the fault rests, I cannot learn certainly; This I am sure, n^^
any whit in my self. Clinius a Historiographer, having written the story of
Virginius, and meeting with him upon a time, said; If you find anything amiss^
in your story, I pray you pardon it. To whom Virginius answered; what Clinius,
do thou not know I have done as I did, that such fellows as thou art might
write as you would? And so, it was my part to take such pains as conveniently
I could, in furnish^ng and providing this Sermon against the appointed time.
But afterward, what others, either by reporting, or printing, would make of it,
that was not my fault, that was not in me either to help or hinder. Therefore
I have not gone unto any Magistrate to complain; but though it be one of the
greatest injuries that ever was offered me, yet because I know not what secret
purpose the Lord had in laying this affliction upon me, I do most willingly
pardon it. Yea even as Moses, when the first Tables were broken, was content to
make a new; in like manner, finding in the first Editions so many broken-ended
sentences, I have, as it were, gone to a Chirurgian, or rather indeed I have
played the Chirurgian my self, and by setting out the Sermon anew, have salued
the matter as well as I could.

Diogenes seeing the City of Myndus very little and poor, but the gate thereof
very large and stately, said, You of Myndus, shut your gate, and keep in your
City, that it run not away. After the same sort, the gate (as I may say) and
the first entrance into this Sermon, was before very lofty and stately, the
Sermon it self very simple and poor. Such a stir they kept in terming it,
very vainly, and most fondly, A most Excellent Sermon, as if they would have
cast the house out of the window, or the City out of the gate: wherefore I
have made the gate lesser, and the City greater: the gate lesser, by
entituling it, The Mean in Mourning, which is the very drift indeed, and the
right scope of the whole Sermon: and the City greater, by adding diverse notes
in sundry places of the Sermon, as I have since thought best. So that if any
which heard it preached, be disposed to read it, he shall not, I hope,
altogether loose his labor. For though he have all here which he heard then,
yet he heard not all then, which he has here. But how it will please God to
affect others, I know not; This I w^t well, that many a time and often I have
been much moved my self with the meditation of some points in this Sermon.
And now of late, next to God, and to his holy word, I could take comfort in
nothing so much, as in reading that which I have written in the seventh part,
the first Section thereof. Occasioned thereto by the certain report of the
death of my most dear Father, who was well known for his place and calling to
be as good a man, and as sincere a Christian, as any has lived in this age.
But for conclusion, I humbly desire your Ladishippe, that as I have dedicated
the Pathway to Perfection to my very Honorable good Patron, Sir George Carey:
so it would please your Ladishippe, to let this Sermon pass under the
countenance and credit of your name. For if your Ladishippe will deigne to
read it over, then I doubt not but diverse other Ladies and Gentlewomen which
have virtuous and noble minds, will vouchsafe also to learn thereby, how they
ought (with the daughters of Jerusalem) not to weep for Christ, but to weep
for themselves, especially having such a singular example before their eyes as
your Ladishippe is, whom God has endewed with all ornaments and gifts both of
Nature and Grace. From Saint John's College in Cambridge the first day of
February. 1595.

Your Ladyships ever to be commanded Thomas Playfere.

THE MEAN IN MOVRNING. The Text.
Weep not for me, but weep for your selves.

Luke 23.28.
RIGHT Honorable, right Worshipful, and most Christian brethren; four sorts
of people were about Christ, when Christ was about his passion. Of the first
sort were executioners, which tormented him. Of the second sort were Jews,
which mocked him. Of the third sort were lookers on, which marked him. Of the
fourth sort were wel-willers, which lamented him. Now although it be very
likely, that among these his welwillers, diverse godly men wept for him, as S.
John the Evangelist, Joseph of Arimathea, Gamaliel, Nicodemus, and such like,
yet it is certain, both that more women wept then men, and that the women more
wept then the men. More women: more weeping. More women wept then men, partly
by the permission of men, who though that the women's weeping came rather from
weakness in themselves, then from kindness toward Christ: partly by the
providence of God, who suffered more women to weep then men, that the women
which bewailed Christ's death, might condemn the men which procured it. Now the
women also more wept the^ the men, either of a natural affection, or else a
voluntary disposition. Naturally (says S. Peter) the woman is the weaker
vessel, (...). Theophylact. in Joan. 6.20. page 571.
soon moved to weep, and subject to many, either affectionate passions, or
else passionate affections. But touching these women, that which was otherwise
natural to them, was here voluntary in them. For the sin of a woman was the
ruin of man: Therefore these women willingly wept the more: That though a
women did most in the second death of the first Adam; yet these might do least
in the first death of the second Adam. For it was Eve, a woman, which betrayed
the first Adam with an apple, and caused him to sin; but it was Judas a man
which betrayed the second Adam with a kiss, and caused him to die. And indeed
you shall generally observe, that notwithstanding at the first, the woman went
before the man in transgression and disobedience; nevertheless since, to make
amends for that faul^, the blessed virgin Mary, and diverse other women have
far excelled all men, or at the leastwise, most men, in true devotion and
godliness. Wherefore principally Christ here speaks to the women, because
both more women wept then men, and the women also more wept then the men; More
women, more weeping; but yet in them he speaks (as well as unto them)
indifferently to al his dear friends, both men and women, weep not for me,
but weep for your selves.

In which sentence we may observe, as many words, so many parts. Eight words,
eight parts. The first, Weep not: The second, But weep: The third, Weep not,
But weep. The fourth, For Me: The fifth, For your selves. The sixth, For me,
For your selves. The seventh, Weep not for me: The eighth, But weep for your
selves. God grant all our hearts may be so affected with the consideration of
these excellent matters, as may make most for the increase of our comfort in
him, and his glory in us. And I humbly beseech you also most christian
brethren, to do God this honor, and me this favor: First that you would not
prescribe me any method or order, how I should handle this Text, but that you
would give me leave to follow mine own method and order; wherein I persuade
my self, and I hope also truly, I have been directed by the spirit of God.
Secondly, that you would not run before me, in your swift conceit, and earnest
expectation; but that it would please you to go on along easily all the way
with me, till happily at the length, by Gods gracious assistance, and your
gentle accepta^ce, I come to the end of my Sermon. And then if I have omitted
any thing which you would have had me said, spare me not, but blame me hardly
for it, as you shall think best.

WEEP NOT FOR ME, BUT WEEP FOR YOUR SELVES. THE first part is, Weep not.
When Iairus, the Ruler of the Synagogue, wept bitterly for the death of his
daughter, Christ said unto him, Luke. 8.52.
Weep not. When Rachel wept, and would not be comforted, seeing neither her
son Benjamin, nor almost any true Beniamite left alive, God said unto her,
Ier. 31.16.
Weep not. When a poor vvidow wept sore for the death of her only son,
Christ said unto her, Luke 7.13.
weep not. And so here, Christ seeing many Iairusses, many Rachels, many
widows, weep for the death of the only son of God, says unto them,
weep not. Forbidding thereby immoderate weeping, which is condemned in
nature; in reason; in religion. In nature, the earth when it rejoices, as in
Summer time, then it is covered with corn, Psa. 65.12.
but when it has too too forlorn and sorrowful a countenance, as in the
Winter time, then it is fruitless and barren. The water when it is quiet and
calm, brings in all manner of Merchandise, but when the sea storms and
roares too much then the very ships do howl and cry Esaias. 23.1.
. The air looking clearly and cheerfully, refreshes all things, but weeping
too much, that is, rayning too much, as in Noah's flood, it drowns the whole
world. The fire being but a little sprinkled with water, burns more brightly;
but being too much overwhelmed, it gives neither heat nor light. The eye it
self (as Anatomists write) Vide Vesalum, lib. t. cap. 14. and Toletum in ^b.
secund. Aristotelis de anima.
has twice as many dry skins, like sluices, to damme up the course of the
tears, as it has moist humors, like channels, to let the^ flow forth. For it
has six of them, and but three of these. If all the body were an eye, and
there were no ears in it, where were then the hearing? If all the eye were a
moist humor, and there were no dry skins in it, where were then the seeing?
Seeing then too much weeping is, in the earth barrenness; in the water
shipwreck; in the air an inundation; in the fire coldness; in the eye blindness;
certainly, if the earth, the water, the air, the fire, the eye could speak,
they would altogether with one consent sing a joyful song of five parts, and
every one severally say unto us, That we must not weep too much.

Now reason sees yet more, Ne quid nimis.
That too much of a thing is naught; Etiam mel. si nimium, ingratum: Which is
translated thus: Pro. 2.5.27.
It is not good to eat too much honey. If it be not good eating too much honey;
then sure it is not good eating too much wormwood. The Egyptians when they
would describe tears, they paint those gems which we call unions: whereupon
Suidas says, (...).
Unions hieroglyphically do signify the sheding of tears. For as Unions have
their name in latin, because they are found one by one, and never more at
once: so tears must be shed easily one by one, and never be powered out all at
once. Seneca says, that which we must do daily, we must do moderately.
Therefore though we cannot quite stop the bloody issue of our tears, at the
least wise we must be sparing, and weep so to day, as we may weep to morrow,
and keep some tears always in store, referring Si non finire lachrymas, at
certe reseruare debemus, l^de consolatio, ad Polybium, cap. 13.
them to another occasion afterward. For we read that Heraclitus, when he had
soakt and sowst himself in sorrow all his life long, at length died of a
dropsy, and so (as I may say) drowned himself in his own tears. Yea, Niobe
by overmuch weeping was turned into a stone; even as Lots wife by looking
back, was turned into salt. It was one of Pythagoras poesies, (...).
not to eat the heart; which is expounded thus: Pro. 25.20.
As a moth fretteth the garment, and a worm eats the wood; so heaviness
hurts man's heart. Now if we may not tear the heart of any other thing with
our teeth, the^ much less may we tear our own heart with our tears. So that
even blind reason, such as the heathen have had, does yet plainly see this;
That we must not weep too much.

But religion goes yet further: For when God at the first placed man in the
garden of Eden, which is the garden of pleasure, he did indeed there provide
all things for him, which might pleasure him. His wife which was equal to him:
all other creatures that were inferior to him: the herbs which he did eat:
the flowers that he did smell: the pearls which he did look upon: the gold
that he did tread upon: all these served for his delight and joy. Afterward
when sentence had proceeded against the man, that he should have sorrow about
the fruit of the earth: against the woman, that she should have sorrow about
the fruit of her womb: yet it pleased God to assuage and sweeten these our
sorrows with diverse singular comforts: as first, we have the holy spirit, who
is the only comforter: Next a good conscience, which is a continual feast:
Then the holy scripture, which is (as it were) another paradise: Lastly, an
vnfalued faith, by which we have peace with GOD. Therefore Athenagoras (...).
t. de Resur mor.
saye^ well, I count that they have no spirit, no conscience, no scripture, no
faith in them which yield to too much grief. And Hierome yet more vehemently,
Detestande sunt istae lachrymae quae non habent modum.
I do from my heart detest all excessive sorrow, seeing it is a very hell upon
earth, and an entrance even in this life into that woeful place where there is
nothing but weeping and gnashing of teeth. Wherefore immoderate weeping is
condemned, in nature, which teaches all things; in reason, which teaches all
men: in religion, which teaches all Christians; That we must not weep too
much. Thus much of weeping too much, which is the first part, WEEP NOT. WEEP
NOT FOR ME, BUT WEEP. FOR YOUR SELVES.

NOW a little of weeping too little, which is the second part. But weep. They
to whom Christ here speaks, offended in the excess. Therefore he begins
thus, weep not. But I may well shift the words, and begin thus; But weep. For
we offend commonly in the want of weeping, seldom in the excess. The reason
is, because we lack love, which being three, fold, toward our selves, toward
our neighbor, toward God: the greatest work of love toward our selves, is
Repentance: toward our neighbor, is Preaching: toward God, is Prayer; And
all these require some tears. So that it we weep so little, as that we weep
not at all, we weep too little: Which we must not do. For first, touching
Repentance one says truly, Hoc ipso sunt maiores tumores, quo minores dolores.
The lesser our sorrows are, the greater are our sins. But on the other side,
the heads of dragons are broken in the waters; Psa 74.13.
that is, very strong, and vile sins are weakened and washed away with tears.
That obligation which was against us Coloss. 2.14.
, before it had been fastened to the cross of Christ, was engrossed in
parchme^t. Now it is but scribled in paper. So that if we blur it daily with
weeping upon it, our tears will be like aqua fortis to take out the
handwriting quite and clean, that God shall neither read nor see our sins.
When Alexander had read a long and tedious Epistle written to him by
Antipater, wherein were diverse accusations against his mother Olympias, What,
says he, me thinks Antipater knows not, that one little tear of a mother
will easily blot out many Epistles. Ignorare videtur Antipater quod vna matri^
lachryma multas delebit ^^istolas.
And certainly the tears not only of Gods mother, but even of every child of
God, will much more easily blot out the memory of many sins, though they were
before like the sins of Judah, written with a pen of iron, and graven with the
point of a Diamond. Ierem. 17.1.
Therefore says Alcuinus, Lauandum est cor poenitentia lachrymis.
we must wash our hearts in the troubled poole of Bethesda, John. 5.2.
in the troubled tears of repentance. For as in a well, except there be some
water in it, we cannot easily see the baggage that lies in the bottom: so in
the depth of the heart without tears we cannot see our sins. Tears make our
sins not seen, and seen. Not seen to God, and seen to us. God not seeing
them, forgiues them; and we seeing them, amend them. Pliny vvriteth, that the
tears of vine-branches do cure the leprosy. l. 23. initio.
And so the tears of those vine-branches which are grafted into the true
vine, do cure the leprosy of sin. S. Austin witnesses that the Eagle
feeling his vvings heavy, plungeth them in a fountain, and so renews his
strength: Commen. in Psalm. 103.
After the same sort a Christian feeling the heavy burden of his sins, batheth
himself in a fountain of tears, and so washing off the old man, which is
the body of sin, is made young again, and lusty as an Eagle. That sinful
woman, Luke. 7.44.
because she loved much, therefore she vvashed Christ's feet with her
teare^. A strange sight. I have oftentimes seen the heaven vvash the earth;
but I never before saw the earth vvash the heaven; yet here I see it: An
earthly and a sinful woman washes the heavenly feet of Christ. But because
she washed Christ's feet with her tears, therefore Christ crowned her head
with his mercies. The prodigal child had no sooner returned home by weeping
cross (as we say) and cried peccani, but straight-wayes he was received. Lo
ye what force there is in three syllable. Quantum valent tres syllabae?
Ambrosius.
For God hearing a sinner in true contrition utter but this one word of three
syllables peccani, I have sinned, (...) Chrysostom. Hom. (...).
is so in a manner charmed and inchaunted with it, that he has no power over
himself, he cannot but grant remission. Saint Peter likewise though he were an
old man in years, yet he was a very child, and a prodigal child in weeping.
And as his faith was so great that he lept into a sea of waters, to come to
Christ; so his repentance was so great that he lept into a sea of tears when
he went from Christ. He wept so bitterly (as Clemens Romanus testifies) that
there were gutters and furrows in his face, made with those tears which
trickled down his cheeks. And therefore says Cyril, Locum flend^ recepit
quem negando perdiderat. in Leuiticum. lib. 16.
he recovered that place by bevvailing his offense, which he had lost by
denying his master. For says Nazianzen, (...).
God is more merciful then man can be sinnfull if he will be sorrowful.
Wherefore we may see by these examples of the sinful woman; of the prodigal
child: of S. Peter, that weeping does especially recommend our repentance, that
we may purchase our pardon.

Touching Preaching, the voice of a Preacher ought to be the voice of a crier,
which should not pipe to make the people dance, but mourn to make them weep.
Hence it is, that in the old law Leuit. 21.20.
none that was blind, or had any blemish in his eye, might serve at the Altar.
There are many reasons of this law: Among many, this may be one, because for
that impediment in his eye, he could not well show his inward sorrowing by his
outward weeping. And when they offered up to the Lord their first borne, who
was ordinarily in every family their Priest or their Preacher, they offered
also with him, a pair of Turtle doves, or two young Pigeons; That pair of
turtle doves did signify a pair of mournful eyes; These two young Pigeons
did signify like wise two weeping eyes. And at that offering they prayed for
their first born, that afterward he might have such eyes himself. For as
Pigeons fly to their windows, Esaias. 60.8.
so the sincere Preacher has no other refuge to fly unto, but only to his
windows, that is to his eyes, which are glazed with tears, when they weep
for the sins of the people. Christ Jesus is much delighted in such kind of
eyes, saying so often to his Spouse, Thine eyes are Pigeons eyes. The holy
Ghost also descending himself in the form of a dove. And the Prophets like
doves upon the waters which are washed with milk, and remain by the full
vessels Cant. 5.12.
usually received their prophesies besides rivers. As Ezekiel beside the river
Cobar, Daniel beside the river Tygris, the Baptist beside the river Jordan. Yea
also they preached their prophesies, not so much with words, as with rivers of
tears. The Prophet David was so valiant, that he overcame a mighty huge
Giant, and tare a Bear in pieces, as easily as if it had been a Kid, and slew
a fierce Lion with no other weapon, but only with his naked hands, and diverse
other times like a violent whirlwinde bare down all before him: Yet when he
came to preach, he was so soft-hearted, and so tender-eyed, that he said, Mine
eyes gush out rivers of water, because men keep not thy law. O that my head
were full of water, says Jeremy, and mine eyes a fountain of tears. I
protest (says Paul, that for these three years I have not ceased to warn
every one of you with tears day and night. For indeed, as Austin witnesses,
there is more good to be done with sighing, then with speaking; with
weeping then with words. Plus gemitibus, quam sermonibus, plus fletu, quam
affatu^.
And Prosper says, That a Preacher must seek not his own praise, but the
peoples profit, in sorrowing for their sins. And Jerome says, Non plausum
sed planctum.
That the Preacher is most highly commended, not when the people clap Sint
eorum lachrymae tuae lands.
their hands, but when they knock their breasts. Wherefore as it is an Idol, and
no God, which has eyes and sees not: so he his rather an Idol shepherd,
then a godly pastor, which has eyes and weepeth not more or less, one time
or other in preaching to the people.

Touching Prayer, Saint James says, The prayer of a just man prevails much,
if it be fervent, For a fervent prayer comes from a fervent spirit, which is
wholly inspired with that holy spirit who makes request in us, and for us, with
sighs and groans which cannot be expressed. As it is in one of the Psalms,
Psalm. 147.18.
He sends forth his word and melts them, he breaths forth his spirit,
and the waters flow. He sends forth his word, and breaths forth his
spirit, when the Holy Ghost moves us to pray. He melts them, and the waters
flow, when tears trickle down from our eyes. For as a seething pot runs
over: so says a holy heart (seething as it were) like a pot, and boiling in
fervent prayer, Psalm. 42.4.
I pour out my soul within me. According to that of Austin, Quo quisque
sanctior, eo eius in orando ^ictu: vberio^.
The more holy and devout a man is, the more will he be sure to weep in his
prayer. And no marvel that he does weep in praying, which does pray for
weeping. Grant, O Lord, says the same Father, that I may have a fountain of
tears then especially when I offer up to thee my prayers and supplications. Da
mihi lachrymarum fontem, tum praecipue, cum preces and orationes tibi affero.
Manualis cap. 11.
For the Olive tree is most abundant in fruit when it distilleth. And so a
Christian is most plentiful and powerful in prayer when he weepeth. Hereupon
King David says, I am as a green Olive tree in the house of the Lord. And our
Savior himself went often to the mount of Olives, where he offered up prayers
and supplications, with strong crying and tears. And therefore he wills us
also, to have faith as a grain of mustard seed. Now mustard-seede has his
name in Greek, (...).
because it makes the eyes weep. So that he which in prayer has faith as a
grain of mustard seed, has such a faith as makes his eyes weep. And then
Christ says to him, Thou have wounded my heart with one of thine eyes: If with
one then much more with both. For as Synesius testifies, weeping is more
piercing, and more forcible to persuade God, and even to wound his heart, then
all the eloquence, then all the rethorick in the world. (...).
And Cyprian says, When the spirit of man sends out sighs in prayer, then
the spirit of God gives grace. And Cum spiritus hominis suspirat, spiritus D^i
aspirat.
Ambrose, God looks when we pray, that we should pour out our tears, that
he might pour out his mercies Expectat lachrymas nostras vt profundat
pietatem suam. De poenit l. c. 4.
. As for example* Anna, Samuels mother, in the bitterness of her soul wept
sore when she prayed. Look how salt vapors arise out of the sea, which
afterward are turned into pleasant shows: so out of the sea of her sorrowful
soul did arise sobs and sighs, like salt vapors, which immediately were
turned into a sweet shower of tears. Therefore God heard her prayer, and sent
her a son. The rather, because this weeping, the more bitter it was to her,
the more sweet it was to God. So Jacob wrastled with God, and prevailed against
God Genesis 32.28.
. But the Prophet Ose shows, that his wrestling was by weeping, and his
prevailing was by praying Osee 12.4.
. So Ezechias being sick, prayed; praying, turned him toward the wall and
wept; and then with weeping, as with gunshot, he battered down that partition
wall of his sins, which kept Gods loving countenance from him. Therefore
says the Lord to him, I have heard thy Prayer, and thy tears. A strange
speech: I have heard thy prayers, that I understand well enough* But, I have
heard thy tears. What should be the meaning of this, trow you? Have tears
tongues, I marvel, or can they speak, that they may be heard? yea surely I
dare be bold to say it. The cloud-cleauing thunder of the Almighty cannot make
such a rattling sound, and such a roaring noise in the ears of man, as our
tears do in the ears of God. Therefore David both before he had prayed,
Psalm. 141.1.
desiteth God to hear the voice of his crying, and also after he had prayed,
Psalm. 6.8.
thanketh God because he had heard the voice of his weeping. For indeed he
himself also says of himself, Psalm. 102.10.
I mingled my drink with weeping. And where was this drink of his, but in
that cup of which he says in another place. Psalm. 116.13.
I will take the cup of salvation (or of prayer and thanksgiving) and call upon
the name of the Lord. So that David mingling his drink with weeping* mingled
his prayer with weeping. Wherefore as Elizeus did cast salt into the waters of
Jericho, to make them sweet: so must we salt and season our prayers with
tears, to make them sauorie and delightsome to God. A man can never love
himself aright, that does not sometimes weep in repentance: nor his neighbor
(if he be a Preacher) that does not sometimes weep in repentance: nor God,
that does not sometimes weep in Prayer. So that we must not be like the
Stoics, which were never at all moved. Then we shall weep to little, as is
proved in this second part. BUT WEEP. WEEP NOT FOR ME, BUT WEEP FOR YOUR SELVES.

THE third part is next, Weep not. But weep. Which notes, seeing both the
excess and the want are to be eschewed, that therefore the true mean, which
we must keep in weeping, consists in an equal intermingling of these two
extremities. Weep not, But weep both together, Weep not, says he. Too much
is contrary to nature. But weep, too little, is contrary to repentance. Weep
not, too much is contrary to reason. But weep, too little is contrary to
Preaching. Weep not, too much is contrary to religion. But weep, too little
is contrary to prayer. Saint Paul charge Timothy to be instant in season and
out of season. First in reason, then out of season. Teaching thereby, that
unseasonable opportunity is better then seasonable importunity. Yet to keep
a mean in exhorting, that we must as well use importunity sometimes, so it
be in season, as take an opportunity always, though it be out of season.
Even so says our Savior here weep not, but weep. First weep not: then, but
weep. Teaching thereby, that not to weep, is better then to weep; yet to
keep a mean in weeping, that we must, as well sometimes in not weeping,
weep, as always in weeping not weep. For the Apostle says, That they which
rejoice, must be as though they rejoiced not, and they which weep must be as
though they wept not. They which rejoice, must be as though they rejoiced not;
because says Gregory, G^^undium huius vitae, vna acerba. In. c. 28. Iobi.
All the joy the godly have in this life, is as a sour grape gathered out of
time. And Ambrose, Non solum dolor, sed and laetitia habet suas lachrymas.
The children of God, not only in sorrow, but even in joy also sometimes shed
tears. They rejoice as though they rejoiced not. And they which weep must be
as though they wept not, because, says Macatius, (...), Homil. 1.
Even tears are a comfort to the righteous. And Ambrose again, Est pijs
affec. ib. quaedam etiam flendi voluptas. De obitu Valentiani p. 449.
To them that are well affected weeping is a very great delight: They weep as
though they wept not. Wherefore as certain apples have a sowrish sweetness,
and some old wines have a sweetish sowrnesse: so both our sorrow must be
joyful, and our joy must be sorrowful. Our sorrow must be joyful; as Christ
did weep upon Palme-sunday. Christ did weep; There is sorrow. Upon
Palm Sunday; There is joy. And our joy must be sorrowful; as the Israelites
did eat the sweet Easter lamb with sour herbs. The sweet Easter lamb;
There is joy: Weep not. With sour herbs; There is sorrow. But weep. Weep
not. This is a fiery speech, as when S. John says, that Christ's eyes are as a
flame of fire, Revel. 19.12.
that is, subject now to no weeping. But weep. This is a watery speech, as when
David says, I water my couch with my tears. So that if we would reconcile
these speeches together, we must reconcile fire and water together. Gregory
observes, that in the rainbow there are two colors, red which resembles
fire, and blew which resembles water. In arcu eodem color ignis and aquae
simul ostenditur: quia ex part caeruleus, ex part rubicundus: vt vtriusquae
indicij testis sit, vnius videlicet faciendi, and alterius facti. Homil. 8. in
Eze.
Read, that we might not weep, beholding the fire which shall burn when
Christ shall judge the world: and blew, that we might weep, beholding the
water which did flow when God did drown the world. Therefore as there be two
colors, red and blew in one Rainbow: So there must be two affections, joy
and sorrow in one heart. This the wisdom of our Ancestors seems to
insinuate, even in the apparel which they have appointed to be worn at this
solemnity. For the chief Magistrates of the City this day, wear scarlet
gowns, which is a kind of red like fire; but to morrow they wear violet-gowns,
which is a kind of blew, like water. Wherefore the colors of the rainebow
which we see in your attire, do admonish you and us all, that joy and sorrow
have such an intercourse in this life, that though this day we weep not, yet
to morrow perhaps we cannot but weep. This day we read Salomons Songs, to
morrow peradventure we may read leremies Lamentations. Now in Elias his
sacrifice, there were not only the colors of fire and water, but even fire and
water indeed 1 Reg. 18.38.
. Insomuch as the fire of the Lord consumed and licked up the water of the
Altar. And assuredly our sorrowful soul will be a most acceptable sacrifice
to God, as Elias his sacrifice was, if we have both the fire of Aetna, and the
water of Nylus, so as the ardent fire of faith well nie consume, and almost burn
up the flowing stream of love. In Epiro sac^^ fons est frigidus vltra omnes
aquas, and spectatae diuersitatis. Nam si in eum ardentem demergas facem,
extinguit, si procul ac sine igne admou^as, suopte ingenio inflammat. Solinus
Poly. c. 12.
Austin reports, that there is a fountain in Epirus which not only puts
out torches that are lighted, but also lights torches that are put out. De
Ciuitate Dei. lib. 25. c. 3.
Fulgosus likewise reports, Mirum fontem dicere debemus, apud Gratianopolin
Gallicam vrbem. Nam quamuis caletes aquas non habeat, tamen simul cum ipsis
aquas flammas persaepeemittit. Fulgosus lib. 1. non long a fine.
that there is another fountain near Grenoble, a City in France, which
although it have not hot waters, as a Bath, yet oftentimes together with
bubbles of water, it casts up flames of fire. The fountain of tears that is
in our eyes must be like these two fountains. As the Psalmist witnesses. When
my sorrow was stirred (says he) my heart was hot within me, and while I was
musing, the fire kindled. Psalm. 30.3.
When my sorrow was stirred. There is the first fountain, My heart was hot
within me. There is the Torch lighted. And while I was musing. There is the
other fountain. The fire kindled. There is the flame burning. Whereupon one
says fitly. Our eyes must neither be drowned, nor dry Nec fluant oculi, nec
^icci sint. Seneca.
. If they want fire, they will be drowned. If they want water, they will be
dry. Wherefore, both weep not, and but weep; both fire and water must go
together, that our eyes be neither drowned nor dry. And this is the right
moderation we must keep in weeping, as appears in this third part, WEEP
NOT, BUT WEEP both together. Weep not for me, but weep for your selves.

THe fourth part follows, For Me. Weep not too much for my death. For the
death of Christ is the death of Death: the death of the Devil: the life of
Himself: the life of Man. The reason of all this is his innocence and
righteousness, which makes first, that as the life of Christ is the life of
Life, so the death of Christ is the death of Death. Put the case how you
please, this is a most certain truth, that the gate of life had never bin
opened unto us, if Christ who is the death of Death, had not by his death
overcome death. Mors mortis morti mortem nisi morte dedisset, coelestis vitae
i^nus ^lausa foret.
Therefore both before his death he threatens and challenges death, saying,
Osee 13.14.
O death, I will be thy death: and also after his death, he derideth and
scorneth death, saying, 1 Cor. 15.15.
O death thou art but a drone, where is now thy sting? Sic Johannes Pistorius
Erasmi Roterodami affinis, igni cremandus dixit, O mors vbi est tua victoria?
Ask death any of you (I pray) and say, Death, how have thou lost thy sting?
how have thou lost thy strength? What is the matter that virgins and very
children do now contemn thee, whereas Kings and even tyrants did before fear
thee? Death (I warrant) will answer you, that the only cause of this is the
death of Christ. Even as a Be stinging a dead body, takes no hurt, but
stinging a live body many times loses both sting and life together; in like
manner, death so long as it stung mortal men only, which were dead in sin, was
never a whit the worse: but when it stung Christ once, who is life it self, by
and by it lost both sting and strength. Therefore as the brazen serpent was so
far from hurting the Israelites, that contrariwise it healed them: after the
same sort, death is now so far from hurting any true Israelite, that on the
other side, if affliction, as a fiery serpent, sting us, or if any thing else
hurt us, presently it is helped and redressed by death. Those which will needs
play the hob-goblins, or the night-walking spirits (as we call them) all the
while they speak under a hollow vault, or leap forth with an ugly vizard upon
their faces, they are so terrible, that he which thinks himself no small man,
may perhaps be affrighted with them: But if some lusty fellow chance to step
into one of these, and cudgel him wel-fauouredly, and pull the vizard from his
face, then every boy laughes him to scorn. So is it in this matter. Death was
a terrible bulbeggar; and made every man afraid of him a great while; but
Christ dying, buckled with this bulbeggar, and coniured him (as I may say) out
of his hollow vault, when as the dead coming out of the graves, were seen in
Jerusalem, and pulled the vizard from his face, when as he himself rising, left
the linen clothes which were the vizard of death, behind him. Therefore as
that Ass called Cumanus Asin^s, ietting up and down in a Lions skin, did
for a time terrify his master; but afterward being descried, did benefit him
very much; Semblably death stands now like a silly Ass, having his Lions skin
pulled over his ears, and is so far from terrifying any, that it benefits
all true Christians, because by it they rest from their labor, and if they be
oppressed with troubles or cares, when they come to death they are discharged;
death as an Ass does bear these burdens for them. O blessed, blessed be our
Lord, which has so disarmed death that it cannot do us any hurt, no more then
a Be can which has no sting; nay rather it does us much good, as the brazen
serpent did the Israelites: which has so dismasked death, that it cannot make
us afraid, no more than a scar-bug can which has no vizard; nay rather as an
Ass bears his masters burdens, so death eases and refreshes us. This has
Christ done by his death. He that felleth a tree upon which the Sun shines,
may well cut the tree, but cannot hurt the Sun. He that pours water upon
Iron which is red hot, may well quench the heat, but he cannot hurt the Iron.
And so Christ the Sun of righteousness did drive away the shadow of death: and
as glowing Iron was too hot and too hard a morsel for death to digest. All
the while Adam did eat any other fruit which God gave him leave to eat, he
was nourished by it: but when he had tasted of the forbidden tree, he perished.
Right so, death had free leave to devour any other man, Christ only excepted,
but when it went about to destroy Christ, then it was destroyed it self. Those
barbarous people called Cannibals, which feed only upon raw flesh, especially
of men, if they happen to eat a piece of roasted meat, commonly they surfe^ of
it, and die. Even so the right Canniball, the only deuourer of all mankind,
Death I mean, tasting of Christ's flesh, and finding it not to be raw (such as
it was used to eat) but wholesome and heavenly meat indeed, presently took a
surfeit of it, and within three days died. For even as when Judas had received
a sop at Christ's hand, anon after his bowels gushed out. In like sort, death
being so saucie as to snatch a sop (as it were) of Christ's flesh, and a little
bit of his body, was by and by, like Judas, choked and strangled with it, and
feign to yield it up again, when Christ on Easter day revived. Death I wisse,
had not been brought up so daintily before, nor used to such manner of meat,
but always had rauined either with Mithridates daughters upon the poison of
sin, or else with Noah's Crow upon the carrion of corruption. Wherefore now,
says Fulgentius, Mors Christum gusta^it, sed non deglutiuit.
death did indeed taste of Christ, but could not swallow him up, nor digest
him. Contrariwise Christ as soon as ever he had but a little tasted of death,
Heb. 2.9.
est-soones he did devour death, he did swallovv up death in victory: And so
the death of Christ by reason of his righteousness is the death of Death.

It is also the death of the Devil. As the Apostle says, that by his death he
did overcome not only death, but him also which had the power of death, the
devil. It is reported that the Libard uses a strange kind of policy to kill
the Ape. He lies down upon the ground, as though he were stark dead; which
the Apes seeing, come al together, and in despite skip up upon him. This the
Libard bears patiently, till he thinks they have wearied themselves with
their sporting: then suddenly he likewise leapes up, and catches one in his
mouth, and in each foot one, which immediately he kills and deuoureth.
Conculcant insultantes ludibrij causa don ec perdalis sentiens illas iam
saltando defagitates derepente reuiuiscens aliam dentib. aliam vng^ab.
corripit. Eras. Prou. Pardi morten ad simulat.
This was Christ's policy. He was laid in the dust for dead. The devil then
insulted over him, and trampled upon him. But he like a lively Libard,
starting up on Easter day, astonished the soldiers set to keep him, which
were the devils apes, and made them lie like dead men: Math. cap. 28. verse 7.
Even as he told them before by his Prophet, saying; I will be to them as a
very Lion, and as a Lybard in the way of Ashur. Osec 13.17.
For as blind Sampson by his death killed the Philistims, when they were
playing the apes in mocking and mowing at him Jude 16.25.
; so Christ by his death destroyed the Devil. Scalagor writes, that the
Camelion when he espies a serpent taking shade under a tree, climbes up into
that tree, and lets down a thread, breathed out of his mouth as small as a
spiders thread, at the end whereof there is a little drop as clear as any
pearl, which falling upon the serpents head, kills him. Exore filum demittit
araneorum more: in cuius fili extremo, guttula est margaritae splend^re, ea
tactus in vertice serpens morit^^ ex 196.
Christ is this Camelion: he climbes up into the tree of his cross, and lets
down a thread of blood issuing out of his side, like Rahabs red thread hanging
out of her window Signa fidei atque vexilla dominica passionis attollens cocc^^
in ^enestra legaun. Ambr. de fide lib. 5. c. 5. and Paulinus Natili. 8. Pu^i^to
proprium signauit vellere tectum.
, the least drop whereof being so precious and so peerlesse, falling upon the
serpents head, kills him. The wild Bull, of all things cannot abide any red
color. Therefore the hunter for the nonce, standing before a tree, puts on a
red garment: whom when the Bull sees, he runs at him as hard as he can
drive. But the Hunter slipping aside, the Bulls horns stick fast in the tree.
As when David slipped aside, Saul's spear stuck fast in the wall. 1 Samuel 19.10
Such a hunter is Christ. Christ standing before the tree of his cross, puts
on a red garment dipped and died in his own blood, as one that comes with
read garments from Bozra Esa. 63.1.
: Therefore the Devil and his Angels, like wild Bulls of Bazan, Psalm. 22.12.
run at him. But he shifting for himself, their horns stick fast in his
cross. As Abraham's Ram by his horns stuck fast in the briers Genesis 22.13.
. Thus is the Devil caught and killed. A dragon indeed kills an Elephant; yet
so as the Elephant falling down, kills the dragon with him. An Elephant kills
Eleazar: yet so as Eleazar falling down kills the Elephant with him 1. Match. 6.46
. And accordingly to this, the Devil killing Christ, was killed by Christ. Yea
as an Elephant is stronger then the dragon, and Eleazar is stronger then the
Elephant: so Christ is stronger then them both: For the Elephant does not live
after he has killed the Dragon, neither does Eleazar live after he has killed
the Elephant: but Christ lives after he has destroyed the Devil. Leaving the
Devil dead, he is now risen himself from the dead: Wherefore as a Lybard
kills the Ape: and a Chamelion the serpent: and a Hunter the Bull: and an
Elephant the dragon: and Eleazar the Elephant himself: so Christ the true
Eleazar, which signifies the helper of God, has by his death killed that
mischievous Ape the devil, that old Serpent the devil* that wild bull the
devil, that great dragon the devil, that raging Elephant the Devil. When
Mahomet the second of that name besieged Belgrade in Sernia, one of his
Captains at length got up upon the wall of the City, with banner displaied. A
noble Bohemian espying this, ran to the Captain, and clapsing him fast about
the middle, asked one Capistranus standing beneath, whether it would be any
danger of damnation to his soul if he should cast himself down headlong with
that dog (so he termed the Turk) to be slain with him? Capistranus
answering, that is was no danger at all to his soul, the Bohemian forthwith
tumbled himself down with the Turk in his arms, and so by his own death
only saved the life of all the City. Zieglerus, l. de illustribus viris
Germaniae. cap. 98.
Such an exploit was this of Christ. The Devil like the great Turk, besieged
not only one City, but even all mankind, Christ alone, like this noble
Bohemian, encountered with him. And seeing the case was so, that this dog the
Devil could not be killed stark dead, except Christ died also: therefore he made
no reckoning of his life, but gave himself to death for us, that he only
dying for all the people, by his death our deadly enemy might for ever be
destroyed. For so Origin testifies, that there were 2. crucified upon the
cross of Christ: Christ himself visibly, with his will, and for a time: The
Devil invisibly, against his will, and for ever. Homil. 8. in Joshua.
Therefore the cross is that victorious Chariot in the upper part whereof
Christ sits as a triumpha^t conqueror, and in the lower part of it the
devil is drawn as a captive, and is made an open spectacle of ignomie, and
reproach. D^uers ancient Fathers note the virgin Marie was married, that the
devil might be deceived. For he knew well enough Christ should be borne of a
virgin; but he never suspected blessed Mary was a virgin, considering she was
wedded to Joseph. Therefore he did not lie in wait to destroy the seed of the
woman so circumspectly as otherwise he would if he had been aware, or wist
any such things. So that the birth of Christ did cosen the devil; but the
death of Christ did conquer the Devil: And that much more gloriously when the
temple of his body was upon the pinnacle of the cross, then when the body of
his cross was upon the pinnacle of the Temple. For when he was upon the
temple, his breath spoke better things then Satan: but when he was upon the
cross, his blood spoke better things then Abel: and there his breath came from
his lungs out of his mouth; but here his blood came from his heart out of his
side: and there he fought, standing stoutly to it, and withstanding Satan he
would not in any wise throw down himself, but here he skirmished, yielding
and humbling himself to the death of the Cross: and there the Devil ascended
up to him unto the top of an high mountain, and so (as I may say) bad him
base at his own goal, but here he himself descended down to the devil into
the neathermost hell, and so spoiled principalities and powers, and slew the
great Leuiathan in the very bottom of his own bottomless pit. For the Devil,
like a greedy ravenous fish, snatching at the bait of Christ's body (as
Damascene speaks) was peirced through, and twitcht up with the hook of his
Deity. (...).
Therefore both before Christ's passion, Peter took money out of a fishes mouth
to pay his tribute: and also after Christ's passion, the Disciples broiled a
fish for him to feed upon. Whereby we see that Christ, who made a fish pay
tribute to Caesar for him, made the Devil also pay tribute to Death for him:
and on the other side, that the Devil while he went about to catch this good
fish, which is Jesus Christ, Gods son the Savior (as Methodius and Sibylla
prove the letters of (...) (...).
severally signify) was himself caught, yea also killed by Christ. So that
all the while Christ was buried in the grave, the devil was broyled in hell.
Wherefore a^ it was bootlesse for Goliath to brandish his spear against David:
so it little auailed the Devil to shake his spear likewise in the hand of the
soldier against the heart of Christ. For as David having heard Goliath prate
and talk his pleasure, when they came to the point, at the first stroke
overthrew him: so Christ with that very selfsame spear which gave him a
little venny in comparison, or (if it be lawful for me so to speak) but a
phillip on the side, which was soon after recured, gave the devil a deadly
wound in the forehead which with all his paws he shall never be able to claw
off. And again, as David only with his sling wrought this feate; so Christ
only by his death, and by the power of his cross, which is the sling of
David, Seen crux ipsa funda est qua David Goliath borrenoum armis and
formidabile visu prostrauit humi. Cyr. Ioh. l. 8.17.
did conquer and subdue the devil. And so the death of Christ, by reason of his
righteousness, is the death of the Devil. It is on the other side, the life of
himself. That which was prophesied in the Psalm is here fulfilled in Christ.
Psa. 92.12.
The just shall flourish as the Palm Tree. In the Hebrew it is Tamar, which
signifies only a palm tree. But in the Greek it is Phoinix, which signifies
not only a palm tree, but also a Phoenix. Which translation proves two
things. First, that Jesus the just one, did most flourish, when he was most
afflicted* For the just shall flourish as the palm tree. Chattamar.
Now the palm tree, though it have many weights at the top, and many snakes at
the root, yet still it says, I am neither oppressed with the weights, nor
distressed with the snakes. Nec premor, nec perimor.
And so Christ the true palm tree, though all the judgments of God, and all
the sins of the world, like unsupportable weights, were laid upon him: yea
though the cursed Jews stood beneath like venomous snakes, hissing and biting
at him, yet he was neither so oppressed with them, nor so distressed with
these, but that even upon his cross he did most flourish, when he was most
afflicted: As peny-royal being hung up in the larder-house, yet buds his yellow
flower: and Noah's olive tree being drowned under the water, yet keeps his
green branch: and Aarons rod being clung and dry, yet brings forth ripe
almonds: and Moses bramble-bush being set on fire, yet shines, and is not
consumed. Secondly, that Jesus the just one did most live, when he seemed most
to be dead: For the just shall flourish as the Phoenix. (...).
Now the Phoenix though sitting in his nest among the hot spices of Arabia he
be burnt to ashes, yet still he says I die not, but old age dies in me.
Moritur me non moriente sen^ctus.
And so Christ the true Phoenix, though lying in his grave among the hot spices
wherewith Nichodemus emblame him, he was never like to rise from death to life
again; yet he died not, but mortality died in him, and immortality so lived
in him, that even in his sepulcher he did most live when he seemed most to be
dead. As the Laurel is greenest in the foulest Winter, and the lime is hottest
in the coldest water: and the glow-worme shines brightest when the night is
darkest: and the swan sings sweetest when his death is nearest. Cantator
cygnus funeris ipse sui. Martialis lib. 13. Epigr.
Epaminondas being sore wounded in fight, demanded of his soldiers standing
by, whether his enemies were overthrown or no: They answered, yea. Then
whether his bucklet were whole or no: They answrered also, I. Nay then (says
he) all is well: This is not the end of my life, but the beginning of my
glory. For now your dear Epaminondas dying thus gloriously, shall rather be
borne again then buried Nunc enim vester Epaminondas nascitur, quia sic
moritur.
. Christ likewise was sore wounded: but his enemies, Death and the Devil, were
overthrown and spoiled. His buckler, which was his Godhead, was whole and
untouched: therefore there was no harm done. His death was no death; but an
exaltation unto greater glory. Ego si exaltatus fuero. John. 12.32.
That noble Eunuch riding in his coach, read in Esaias, that Christ was silent
before his death, as a lamb before his shearer. He says, not before the
Butcher; but, before the shearer. Insinuating, that death did not kill Christ,
but only sheare him a little: Neither yet had death Christ's fleece when he was
shorn. For Christ taking to himself aspunge full of vinegar, Ioh. 19.29.
that is, full of our sharp and sour sins, did give us for it, purple wool
full of blood, Heb. 9.19.
that is, full of his pure and perfect justice. And indeed the only livery
which Christ our Lord and Master gives us all that are his faithful servants,
is a coat made of this purple wool. The Psalmist says, that God gives his
snow like wool: But here we may turn the sentence, and say, that Christ
gives his wool like snow. For as show covers the ground when it is ragged
and deformed; so Christ's wool, which is his coat without seame, covers our
sins, and though they were as crimson, yet makes them white as snow. And as
Gideons fleece when it was moist, the earth was dry; but when it was dry, the
earth was moist: so when Christ's fleece was moist, as a green tree, then were
all we dry, like rotten sticks; but when his fleece was dry, all the blood
and water being wrung out of his precious side, then were we moistened with his
grace. Wherefore seeing death had not Christ's fleece when he was shorn, but we
have it which believe in him, it follows that neither death was the better,
nor Christ the worse. But as a lamb is much more nimble and lively for
shearing; so this shearing of death was a kind of quickening to the lamb of
God, and only a trimming to him before he ascended to his Father, as Joseph
was trimmed and powled before he appeared to Pharaoh. For look how Adam slept;
so Christ died. Dormit Adam, moritur Christus. Prosper.
When Adam slept, his side was opened: when Christ died, his side was opened.
Adams side being opened, flesh and bone were taken out: Christ's side being
opened, water and blood were taken out. Of Adams flesh and bone the woman was
built: of Christ's water and blood the Church is built: So that the death of
Christ is nothing else but the sleep of Adam. For (...) he said of the Damsels
death. The Damsel is not dead, but sleeps; so he says of his own death, I
laid me down and slept, and rose up again, for the Lord sustained me. And in
another place, when God the Father says to his Son, Awake my glory, awake my
Lute and Harp: God the Son answers to his Father, I will awake right early.
That vessel which Peter saw in a trance, which came down from heaven to the
earth, and was knit at the four corners, and had all manner of beasts in it,
did betoken Christ, Christ came down from heaven to the earth, and his story
was knit up by the four Evangelists; and he has made Jews and Gentiles, yea
all Nations, though they were as bad as beasts before, yet he has made them
all, I say, one in himself. Now (says Cassianus) it is worth the noting, that
the Holy Ghost says not, this vessel was a sheet, but was like a sheet.
Pulchre ^it, Non sint^um, sed Quasi^inteum.
A sheet may signify either sleep or death: Because there is both a sleeping
sheet, and a winding sheet; But neither was Peter's vessel a sleep, though
it were like a sheet: neither was Christ's body dead, though it were lapt in a
sheet. For we our selves cannot so properly be said to live in our first
birth, as in our second birth: and Christ's life when he lay in that new womb,
in which never any other was conceived, is nothing to his life, when he lay in
that new tomb; in which never any other was buried. Wherefore as Jacob
traveling toward Haram, when he had laid an heap of stones under his head,
and taken a nap by the way, was much revived with it after his tedious journey:
so Christ traveling toward heaven, when he had slept a little in that stony
sepulcher which was hewn out of a rock, lived then most princely after his
painful passion. Tell me, when did Jonas live? In the hatches of the ship, or
in the belly of the whale? In the hatches of the ship? Why? I am sure you
will not say so. That was nothing. But to live in the belly of the Whale when
the mariners were in extreme ieopardy and danger upon the water, and yet Jonas
most safe and secure under the water, this indeed was somewhat: who ever saw
such a wonder? The waters were one while hoisted up to the highest clouds,
another while hur^ed down to the nethermost depth, Jonas himself being all
this while in the very gulf of destruction, and yet not one hair the worse.
Christ's case was the same. As Jonas was in the belly of the Whale three days
and three nights: so and so long was the son of man in the bowels of the
earth: Yet he had no more hurt then Jonas had; but lived better under the earth
then we can upon the earth, better in death then we can in life. Tell me when
did Daniel live? in the Kings court, or in the Lions den? In the Kings court?
why? there is no great reason for that. Any man might have lived there. But to
live in the Lions den, when the mouth of the den was shut, and the mouths of
the Lions open, this indeed was the life of an Angel, and no man. What King
could ever make Lions attend and wait upon him? Yet here you might have seen
worthy Daniel sitting in the midst of many hungry Lions, when as the Lions lay
down at his feet couching and crouching before him, and adored their own prey
cast unto them, which otherwise they would have vvorried, and being beasts,
became men in humanity toward this Saint, seeing men became beasts in cruelty
against him. The sa^^e reason was in Christ. His sepulcher was sealed as well
as Daniels den: And he says also of himself in the Psalms, My soul is
among Lions. These Lions were the terrors of death, and the horrors of hell.
Yet he took no more hurt then Daniel did. But brake the chains of death into
fitters, and the gates of hell into shiuers, and then most gloriously
triumphed. And so the death of Christ, by reason of his righteousness, is the
life of himself.

It is lastly the life of man. When Christ's spear had opened that way of life
which the Cherubins sword had stopped up; Then said our savior to the Thief,
This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Adam and Eve both in one day were
expelled out of Paradise; Christ and the thief both in one day were received
into Paradise; yea, both in one hour of the day: For about Noone, when the
wind blew, Adam and Eve were expelled; and so about the sixth hour, that is,
about twelve of clock in the day time, Christ and the Thief were received.
Christ saying to the Thief while he did draw him up to Paradise, Ose. cap. 11.
I do draw thee with the cords of a man, even with bands of love. But the
Septuagint translate the Hebrew words Bechauele Adam.
which signify, with the cords of a man, into those Greek words (...).
, which signify, with the destruction of a man. As if CHRIST should say thus
to the Thief: I do so dearly love thee, that I am content my self to be
destroyed, that thou may be saved; my self to die, that thou may live.
I do draw thee with the destruction of a man, even with bands of love. So that
the Thief who saw his own wounds, and death in Christ's body, did see also
Christ's saving health and life in his own body. As Alcuinus says, writing
upon the sixth of John; Assumpsit vitae mortem, vt mors acciperet vitam.
When ^he living Lord died, then the dying ^heefe lived. Notably says the
Prophet, Lam. 4.21.
The breath of our nostrils, Christ the Lord, is taken in our sins, to whom
we said, we shall live in thy shadow. If Christ be the breath of our nostrils,
then he is our life: And again, if we live in his shadow, then we live in
his death; For where there is breath in a shadow; there there is life in death.
Now as the ouer-shadowing of the holy Ghost was the life of Christ: so the
ouer-shadowing of Christ, is the life of man. And as Peter's shadow gave health
to the sick: so Christ's shadow gives life to the dead: yea a thousand times
rather Christ's than Peter's. For as Elias his spirit was double^ upon Elizeus,
because Elias being alive restored some to life: but Elizeus, as Jerome says;
being dead, raised up one from the dead: Mortuus mortuum suscitauit.
so Peter's spirit was doubled upon Christ, because Peter being alive, was a
physician to the living: but Christ, as Chrysostom says, being dead, was a
Physician to the dead. (...).
Or rather indeed in this comparison there is no comparison. But as Peter's
spirit was a shadow to Christ's spirit, so Peter's shadow was nothing to Christ's
death. Ezekias seeing the shadow of the Sun go ten degrees back in the
Dial, was assured by this sign, that he should recover of his sickness. Esa.
38.8.
Sick Ezechias may signify all mankind, which is sick by reason of sin.
But this is an infallible sign we shall recover, because the Sun has gone
ten degrees back in the dial. The Sun of righteousness Jesus Christ has for
our sake made himself lower by ma^y degrees in the earth. My father is greater
then ^. There he is gone back ten degrees below his Father. Thou have made
him lower then the Angels. There he is gone back ten degrees below the
Angels. I am a worm, and no man. There he is gone back ten degrees below men.
A live dog is better then a dead Lion Eccle. 9.4.
. There he is gone back ten degrees below worms. For he was not counted so
good as a live worm, but was buried in the earth as a dead Lion to be meat
for the worms, if it had bin possible for this holy one to see corruption. But
blessed, O blessed be our Lord: Christ being in the form of God, was buried in
the grave, and so was made lower then his Father, nay lower then Angels, nay
lower then Men, nay lower then worms, that we being now no better then worms,
might be crowned in heaven, and so might be made higher then worms, yea higher
then men, yea higher then Angels, yea partakers of the same life and kingdom
with Christ. Pliny reports, L. 36. c. 10.
that there was a Dial set in Campus Martius, to note the shadows of the sun,
which agreeing very well at the first, afterward for thirty years together
did not agree with the sun. All the time of those thirty, yea three and thirty
years that Christ lived in his humiliation here upon earth, you might have
seen such a Dial: In which time the shadow of the Dial did not agree with
the shining of the Sun. But thanks be to God, all the better for us. When the
Sun went backward ten degrees in the dial, then Ezechias went forward
fifteen degrees in his life. He lived fifteen years longer. And so the going
of this Sun Jesus Christ ten degrees backward, has healed all our
sickness, and set us a thousand degrees forward, and infinitely advanced us by
his death to everlasting life. For Christ is that loving Rachel, which dies her
self in Childe-birth to bring forth her son Benjamin alive; Christ is that
righteous Adam which by the bloody sweat of his brows has earned for us the
bread of life; Christ is that just Noah, which shutting up himself in his
Arc, as in a sepulcher, saves all that come to him alive: Christ is that
tender Pelican, which wounding his own breast, does with his blood restore
again his young ones to life. And even as when many birds are caught in a net,
if a Pelican, or any other great bird that is among them, get out, all the
rest that are little ones follow after: semblably Christ as a great bird,
having broken through the net of death, all we escape with him: So that we may
say with the Psalmist, Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the
fowler, the snare is broken, and we are delivered. Arnobius upon these words in
the Psalm, Psalm. 138.
Despise not the work of thine own hands, writes thus, We are the work of
thine own hands, seeing we are thy workemanshippe. Ephesians. 2.10. Ipsius summus
sactura conditi in Christo. Quantum ad substantiam fecit quantum ad gratiam
condidit. Tertul. aduer. Mar l. 5. non long a fine.
Now because the work of thy hands was destroyed by the work of our hands,
therefore were thy hands nailed to the cross for our sins. That those hands
of thine might repair again the work of thy hands by the tree of the cross,
which was destroyed by the tree of concupiscence. Thus far Arnobius. Whereby
we may gather, that the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, is
evil, that is death, but the fruit of the tree of life, that is of the cross
of Christ, is life. When Alexander had thrown down the walls of Thebes,
Phryne a harlot promised that she would at her own charges repair them
again, so that the Citizens would suffer this title to be graven upon the
gate, Alexander has thrown them down, but Phryne has raised them up (...).
Plutar.
. The case is quite contrary here: Eve has overthrown not only Thebes, but
even all mankind; Christ has at his own cost and charges repaired and built
us up again. Therefore we must grave this title upon the Cross of Christ,
Eve has thrown us down, but Christ has raised us up. Eues tree of knowledge
of good and evil has thrown us down, but Christ's tree of life has raised
us up. Nay, I will be bold to say yet more. What is that? Marry this. That as
far as the tree of life excels the tree of knowledge of good and evil, so
far the cross of Christ excels the tree of life. I know well many will
muse and marvel much what I mean to say so. And some perhaps will scarce
believe it is true which I say: Nevertheless, most Christian and blessed
brethren, make you no doubt of it. For it is not my opinion, or my speech only.
They are the very words of our Savior, I came, says he, that men might have
life, John 10.10.
and that they might have it more abundantly. More abundantly? What is that?
That abundantly we might have more life by the Cross of Christ, then ever
we could have by the tree of life: that abundantly we might gain more by the
obedience of Christ in his death, then ever we lost, or could loose by the
disobedience of Adam in his life. And therefore though that sin of Adam was
so heinous and so horrible: that it cast the Image of God out of Paradise; that
it polluted all the race of mankind; that it condemned the whole world; that
it defaced the very frame of heaven it self; yet considering the sequel, how
not only the guilt of this sin, but even the very memory of it is now
utterly abolished by the blood of Christ, S. Gregory is not afraid to say, O
happy, happy, happy man was Adam, that ever he so sinned and transgressed
against GOD O foelix culpa quae talem ac tantum meruit habere redemptorem.
: Because by this means both he, and all we have found such plentiful
redemption, such inestimable mercy, such superabundant grace; such felicity,
such eternity, such life by Christ's death. For as honey being found in a dead
Lion, the death of the Lion was the sustenance of Sampson: so Christ's gall is
our honey, Christi fell nostrum mel.
and the bitter death of Christ, by reason of his righteousness, is the sweet
life of man. Thus you see that the death of Christ is the death of Death, the
death of the Devil, the life of Himself, the life of Man. And therefore he
says in this fourth part, weep not too much for my death, For me, Weep not
for me, but weep for your selves.

I Perceive beloved, I have been somewhat long in this part. Therefore I will
make more have in the rest, and do what I can devise, that I may not seem
tedious unto you. Now then to the fifth part. For your selves. Weep not too
little for your own life: For the life of man is quite contrary. The life of
man is the life of Death, the life of the Devil, the death of himself, the
death of Christ. The reason of all this is his iniquity and sin. Which even
in Gods dear children, says Bernard, is cast down, but not cast out. De
iectum non eiectum.
Therefore though sin cannot sometimes rule over us, because it is cast down,
yet it will always dwell in us, because it is not cast out: For it is so bred
in the bone, that till our bones be with Joseph's bones carried out of Egypt,
that is, out of the world, sin cannot be carried out of our bones. The Irish
history tells us, that the City of Waterford gives this poesy, Intacta
manet, It continues untouched.
Because since it was first conquered by King Henry the second, it was never
yet attainted, no not so much as touched with treason: Also that the Isle of
Arren in that country has such a pure air, that it was never yet infected
with the plague. We cannot say thus of the nature of man; that it is either so
clear from treason as that City, or else that it is so clear from infection
as that Island is. Nay, our very reason is treason, and our best affection it
is no better then an infection, if it be well sifted in the sight of God.
Euagrius records, Li. 5. ca. 15.
that the Romans got such a victory over Chosroes, one of the Persian Kings,
that this Chosroes made a law, that never after any King of Persia should move
war against the Romans. We cannot possibly subdue sin in such sort as the
Romans did this Persian King. But do we what we can do, sin will always
be a Iebuzite, a false borderer, yea, a rank traitor, rebelling against the
spirit. Which makes the life of man, first to be, says Chrysostom, a debt (as
it were) own and due to death (...)
. For the devil is the father of sin, and sin is the mother of death. Hereupon
Saint James says, that sin being finished, traveling in childbirth like a
mother brings forth death. And David in the ninth Psalm calls sin the gate
of death: Because as a man comes into a house by the gate; so death came into
the world by sin. The corruption of our flesh did not make the soul sinful;
but the sin of our soul did make the flesh corruptible. Whereupon Lactantius
calls sin the relief or the food of death Pabulian mortis.
. As a fire goes out when all the fuel is spent, but burns as long as that
lasts: so death dies when sin cease, but where sin eboundeth, there death
rages. The Prophet Abacucke sinning not, death was so far from him, that he
was able to fly without wings: But King Asa sinning, death was so near to
him, that he was not able to stand upon his feet. Nay, we may see this in one
and the selfsame man. Moses sinning not, death could not meet with him in the
bottom of the red sea; but sinning, death did seize upon him in the top of
mount Nebo. So that the life of man by reason of his sin, is the life of
death.

It is also the life of the devil: As Emisenus says, Each one has in him as
many devils, a^ evils Tot daemonia quot crimina.
: every several sin being sufficient to maintain a several Devil. The
godly finding no joy in the earth, have their conversation in heaven; But Satan
finding no joy in hell, has his conversation in the earth. So that the earth
is a hell to us, but a heaven to him. Here he has his living; as it was said
at the first, Thou shall eat the dust of the earth all the days of thy life.
This dust, says Macarius, is the devils diet (...).
. And therefore as a scald Cur waits for a bone, so he that goes about seeking
whom he may deuou^e, watches continually til the godly shake off the dust from
their feet, that is, shake off some sin which they have gotten by walking in
the world, that then he may lick it up as one of those Dogs which did lick
up Iezabels blood. This is meat and drink to him. Dulce diabola peccare not.
Hila. Enarra. in p. 118.
He loves it alife to see us sin, even as cursed Cham did to see No^hs
nakedness. And as flies are always busy about a sore place, so says
Theophylact, (...). In cap. Luc. 16. p. 320.
That is a sport or pleasure to Satan, which is a sore or a pain to a man;
especially if he be a godly m^n. For this Behemoth, the Devil, eats grass
as an ox Job 40.10.
. Whereupon Gregory notes, that a sheep, or any such other beast will eat
any manner of grass, though it be trampled and stained never so much: but an
ox will eat no kind of grass but that which is green and fresh. And so the
Devil will be sure to have his feed of the very finest and best Esca eius
electa. Abacuc. 1.16.
: For the Angel of the Lord rejoices most when one that is a sinner
conuerteth. He eats grass as a sheep. But the Angel of Satan reioiceth
most when one that is a convert sins. He eats grass as an Ox. If the
Devil cannot keep a man from living long, then he will hinder him from
living well. Aut Imperat mortes, aut impetit mores. Leo.
If he cannot kill him, then he will corrupt him. And indeed he takes
greater pleasure in corrupting one godly man, that in killing a hundred wicked.
He was more delighted when David slew but Vrias, then when Saul slew himself:
when Peter did but deny Christ then when Judas betrayed him. So that the life
of man, by reason of his sin, is the delight, yea it is the very life of the
Devil.

It is on the other side the death of himself. O miserable wretch that I am
(says one) who shall deliver me from this body of death? The life of the godly
is a very body of death. But their death is only a shadow of death. Thales a
Philosopher being demanded what difference there is between life and death,
answered, They are all one. Then being asked again, if he had not rather live
then die, No says he as before, for they are al one. But Jerome says far
more excellently, They are not all one. That is not true. For it is one thing
to live in continual danger of death; another thing to die in continual
assurance of life. Aliud viuere moriturum, aliud mori victurum.
Therefore Ecclesiastes says, That the day of our death is better then the day
of our birth: For when we are borne, we are mortal; but when we are dead, we
are immortal; And we are alive in the womb to die in the world; but we are
dead in the grave to live in heaven. Hence it is that the wicked are merry at
their birthday, as Pharaoh made a feast at his birthday, when his chief
Baker was hanged Genesis 40.20.
: and Herod likewise made a feast at his birthday, when John Baptist was
beheaded: but they are sorry at their dying day, as Judas was sorry when he
went about to hang himself: and Caine was afraid every one would kill him that
met him. Contrariwise, the godly are sorry at their birthday, as Job, Let the
day perish wherein I was borne: and Jeremy, Let not the day wherein my mother
bare me, be blessed Ier. 20.14.
: But they are merry at their dying day, as Simeon, Lord, now let thou thy
servant depart in peace: and Paul, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ. Therefore we also keep holy days, and celebrate the memory of the
Saints, not upon their birth-daies, but upon their death-dayes, to show that
these two are not all one, but that the day of our death is better then the day
of our birth. For whereas there are 2. ways, the one having in it, first a
transitory life, and then an eternal death, the other having in it first a
transitory death, and then an eternal life: the wicked choose to live here for
a time, though they die for it hereafter eternally; but the godly choose to have
their life hid with Christ here, that they may live with Christ eternally
hereafter. Therefore the wicked never think of death, but the godly think of
nothing else. As Alexander the Monarch of the world had all other things save
only a sepulcher to bury him in when he was dead; he never thought of that: But
Abraham, the heir of the world, had no other possession of his own but only a
field which he bought to bury his dead in; he thought of nothing else. We read
that Daniel strowed ashes in the temple to descry the footsteps of Bells
Priests, which did eat up the meat: So did Abraham strew ashes in his memory,
saying; I will speak unto my Lord, though I be but dust and ashes. So do all
the faithful, remembering they shall one day be turned to dust and ashes. That
so seeing and marking the footsteps of death, how it continually comes and
steals away their strength (as Bells priests did the meat) how it daily eats
up and wastes and consumes their life, they may be always prepared for it.
Our first parents made them garments of figge-leaues: But God misliking that,
gave them garments of skins. Therefore Christ in the Gospel cursed the
fig tree which did bear only fig leaves to cover our sin: but commended
the Baptist which did wear skins to discover our mortality. For not only as
Austin says, Our whole life is a disease Vita morbus.
: but also as Bernard says, our whole life is a death Vita mors.
. The life of man, by reason of his sin is a continual disease, yea, it is the
very death of himself.

It is lastly, the death of Christ. The Prophet Esaias calls Christ a sin, or
a sacrifice for sin, Asham. Esaias. 53.10.
prefigured by all those sin offerings of the old law. Because indeed, when
Christ was crucified at the first, he was broken for our sins. According to
that of Tert^llian, Propter pec^atum mori ^ecesse habuit Filius Dei. V^de etiam
Aug. Medita. ca. 7. vbi doce^ h^minem esse causam passionis.
Sin it was which brought the son of God to his death. The Jews were only
instruments and accessaries to it: sin was the setter and the principal.
They cried, Crucify him in the court of Pilate: but our sins cried, Crucify
him in the court of heaven. Now as the death of Christ was not efficient to
save the wicked: so the sin of the wicked was not sufficient to condemn
Christ. But the Scripture says of them which either are, or at leastwise seem
to be godly. They say they know God, but by their works they deny him: and
Saul, Saul, why do thou persecute me? And, They crucify again unto
themselves the son of God, Zachary prophesies of Christ, Zacha. 13.6.
That when one shall say unto him, What are these wounds in thy hands? Then he
shall answer, Thus was I wounded in the house of my friends, that is, in the
house of them which ought to have bin my friends. So that our sins did wound
Christ's hand^ at the first. And now also, not the wicked, which are no part of
his body, but we which are mystical members of his body, and therefore should
by good reason be his friends, we I say, do yet oftentimes by our sins deny
Christ with Peter: nay we persecute Christ with Paul: nay we crucify Christ
with the Jews: Yea (if it will please you to hear me) I will say yet more,
we crucify Christ far more cruelly then the Jews did. Then his body was
passible and mortal, now it is glorified and immorall: they knew not what they
did: we do ill enough, yet we know what we do well enough: they pierced him
with a spear, we pearce him with reproaches: they buried him in the earth, we
bury him in oblivion: then he rose again the third day; but we so bury
Christ, that not once in three days, no not once in three weeks he arises or
shines in our hearts. Nay, that which I am ashamed to speak, though some are
not ashamed to do it, there are in the world which have no time, not once in
three months, not once in three years, no not once scarce in their whole life
to think of Christ, but bury him in the perpetual forgetfulness of their
careless conscience, as in a barren land, where all good things are forgotten.
Wherefore let every one as soon as he is tempted to any sin, think
straight-waies that he sees Christ coming toward him, wrapped up in white
linen clothes, as he was buried, with a kercher bound about his head, and
crying after a ghastly and fearful sort, Beware, Take heed what you do,
Detest sin, abhor sin: Fie upon it, A shame light on it It: did once most
vilely and villanously murder me: but now seeing my wounds are whole again,
do not (I beseech you) do not rub and revive them with your sins to make
them bleed afresh: now seeing the scepter of the kingdom of heaven is put into
my hand, do not offer me a reed again to mock me, now seeing my head is
crowned with the pure gold of eternal glory, do not set a crown of thorns
upon it again: now seeing I my self am enstalled in the Throne of the right
hand of Majesty, do not pull me out of my throne, and throw me into the
grave again, and with your sins seal a mighty great stone upon me, to
stifle me, and press me, and hold me down in death. O beloved, good
beloved, at his instance be persuaded, by whose blood you are redeemed. Have
pity, have pity upon me poor Jesus. Once he voluntarily, yea, even joyfully
dyed for us, and if that one death had not been sufficient, he would have been
content then to have dyed a thousand deaths more. Now he protests that the
least sin of any one Christian, does more vex him even at the very heart,
then all his dolorous pains upon the Cross. Our sins are those Soldiers
which take him, those tormentors which whippe him, those thorns which gore his
head, those nails which pierce his feet, that spear which sheds his blood,
that cross which takes away his life. And yet if to grieve him thus
continually would do us any good, then he would be most glad to prefer our
good, though never so little, before his own grief, though never so great.
But it is not so. That one death which he willingly suffered, was for our
salvation. These diverse deaths which we with our sins so often put him to
against his will, do make for our greater damnation. Therefore he beseeches us,
and I also being prostrate at the very feet of every one of you heartily in his
name exhort you, if we will have no pity on him, yet for the tender love we
bear to our own dear souls, that we would not always keep him upon the
rack, and every day vex the just Lot with our unlawful deeds, that we would
not any more shed his precious blood, and tread it and trample it under our
feet. This I assure you (blessed Christians) will be a most forcible means,
not only to terrify and fray us from sin which we may commit hereafter,
but also to mollify and melt our hearts for sin which we have committed
heretofore, if we consider that the life of man, by reason of his sin, is
the death of Christ. Thus you see that the life of man is the life of Death,
the life of the Devil, the death of himself, the death of Christ. And
therefore he says in this fifth part. Weep not too little for your own
life. For your selves, Weep not for me, but weep for your selves.

THE sixth part is next, For me, for your selves. Which notes, seeing both
the excess and the want are to be eschewed, that therefore the true mea^e
which we must keep between Christ and our selves, consists in a certain
qualification of these two extremities. For me, for your selves, both
together. Weep not too much, says he^, for my death, which is the death of
Death: Weep not too little for your own life, which is the life of Death. Not
too much for my death, which is the death of the devil: not too little for
your own life, which is the life of the Devil. Not too much for my death,
which is my life: not too little for your own life, which is your death. Not
to much for my death, which is the life of Man: not too little for your own
life, which is the death of Christ. Saint Paul wills the Corinthians to
approve themselves by honor and dishonor. First, by honor, then by
dishonor. Teaching thereby that dishonorable honor, is better then
honorable dishonor. Yet to keep a mean in this matter, that we must as well
count it an honor to be sometimes dishonored with Christ, as a dishonor to
be always honored without Christ. Even so says our Savior here, For me,
for your selves. First, For me: then for your selves. Teaching thereby, that
to rejoice for Christ, is better then to weep for our selves. Yea; to keep a
mean betwixt both, that we must as well sometimes descend out of Christ into
our selves to weep, as always ascend out of our selves into Christ to
rejoice* For the Apostle says, that we must rejoice with them that rejoice,
and weep with them that weep. If my friend be always sorrowful, and never
joyful, he has no pleasure by me; if he be always joyful, and never
sorrowful, I have no proof of him; but he is my dearest friend, most
delighted in me, best approved by me, that takes such part as I do, sometimes
rejoicing, and sometimes weeping, rejoicing when I rejoice, and weeping when I
weep. The like is to be seen in this place; For me, for your selves. If a
Christian always think of his own misery, and never of Christ's mercy, he
will despair: if he always think of Christ's mercy, and never of his own
misery, he will presume. But he is the best Christian, so hie, that he cannot
despair, so low, that he cannot presume, which inclines as well to the one, as
the other, sometimes rejoicing, and sometimes weeping; rejoicing for Christ,
and weeping for himself. A man cannot weep too little for Christ, if he
presume not: a man cannot weep too much for himself, if he despair not. But
he may easily despair that weeps too much for Christ: and he may easily
presume, that weeps too little for himself. Wherefore as in a balance, if
there be any ods in the s^ales, we take out of that which is the heavier, and
put it into that which is the lighter, till there be no difference betwixt
them: So here we must wey these matters well, that we our selves* may be just
weight, neither too heavy for our own misery, not too light for Christ's mercy,
Thus did David when he said to God, Hide me under the shadow of thy wings.
What are Gods wings? His Mercy and his Justice. What are the shadow of his
wings? Our love and our fear. Our love is the shadow of his mercy, which is
his right wing: Our fear is the shadow of his Justice, which is his left wing.
Now seeing he that is hid under the right wing only, may presume because he
has no fear, and he that is hid under the left wing only, may despair,
because he has no love: therefore says David, Hide me, O Lord, under the
shadow, not of one wing, but of both thy wings. That I may never despair while
I always love thy mercy, and rejoice for Christ; that I may never presume
while I always fear thy justice, and weep for my self. A Quail, the very
same Bird which was the Israelites meat in the wilderness, as he flies over
the sea, feeling himself begin to be weary, lights by the way into the sea.
Then lying at one side, he lays down one wing upon the water, and holds up
the other wing toward heaven. Lest he should presume to take too long a
flight at the first, he we^s one wing: Lest he should despair of taking a
new flight afterward, he keeps the other wing dry. Thus must a Christian
man do. When he lays down the wing of fear upon the water to weep for
himself, then he must hold up the wing of love toward heaven to rejoice for
Christ. That his two wings may be answerable to Gods two wings. That as God
has two wings, the one of Mercy, the other of Justice: so he may have two
wings, the one of joy for Christ, the other of sorrow for himself. Sem and
I^pheth, Noah's godly and dutiful children, when they saw their father
otherwise then he should be, went backward and covered him: They went
backward, that they might not see him themselves; they covered him, that
others might not see him. Christ hanging naked upon the Cross, was the shame
of men, and the outcast of the people. Therefore we that are the children of
God, must go backward, by abhorring them that crucified Christ; and yet we
must cover him and hide him, even in our very hearts, by remembering and
honoring his death and resurrection. Lest we should presume, we must go
backward for fear: and yet lest we should despair, we must cover him for
love. That as God hides us under the shadow of his wings, which are love and
fear, love the shadow of his mercy, and fear the shadow of his justice: so we
may hide God under the shadow of our wings, which are joy and sorrow, joy, the
shadow of our love, and sorrow, the shadow of our fear, joy for Christ, and
sorrow for our selves. To this strange kind of going backward, the Psalmist
alludeth when he says to God, Thou have made my feet like Hindes feet. A
Hind goes not still forward in one way, but as an ancient father speaks,
he iumpes cross out of one way into another Saltum habet transuersum.
. Right so a Christians feet must be like Hindes feet. He must iumpe cross,
from himself to Christ, and then back again from Christ to himself. Would
you see such a Hind? Then mark how Job footes it. That he might not despair,
he iumpes cross from himself to Christ, and says, Chap. 33.9.
I am clean without sin, I am Innocent, and there is none iniquity in me.
Here is the mercy of Christ. But that he might not presume, he iumpes back
again from Christ to himself, and says, Chap. 6.2.
O that my grief were well weighed, and that my miseries were laid together in
the balance! Here is the misery of man. Thus must we weigh the mercy of
Christ, and the misery of man together in the balance, and besure (as I said
before) we make the scales even, and when we weigh the reasons why we should
not weep for Christ, then we must weigh the reasons also why we should weep
for our selves. So we shall find, for great cause of joy in Christ, great
cause of sorrow in our selves: for greater cause of joy in Christ, greater
cause of sorrow in our selves: for greatest cause of joy in Christ, greatest
cause of sorrow in our selves: for that which is more then all, to make us
joyful in Christ, that which is more then all, to make us sorrowful in our
selves. The righteousness of Christ is the death of Death. Great cause of joy
in Christ. If Debora rejoiced when Barack put Sisera to flight, have not we as
great cause to rejoice, seeing Christ has put death to flight? The sin of
man is the life of death. Great cause of sorrow in our selves. If Anna wept for
her barrenness, have not we as great cause to weep, seeing we can conceive
nothing but sorrow, and bring forth iniquity unto death? The righteousness of
Christ is the death of the Devil. Great cause of joy in Christ. If Judith
rejoiced when she did cut off the head of Holofernes, have not we great cause
to rejoice, seeing Christ has cut off the head of the Devil? The sin of man
is the life of the devil. Greater cause of sorrow in our selves. If Thamar
wept, being defloured by her brother, have not we greater cause to weep;
seeing we commit spiritual incest and adultery daily with the devil? The
righteousness of Christ is the life of himself. Greatest cause of joy in
Christ. If Sara laughed when she heard she should have a quick child in her
dead womb, is not this the greatest cause of laughter which can be unto us,
that Christ lived in death, and was most free among the dead, and could not see
corruption in the grave? The sin of man is the death of himself. Greatest
cause of sorrow in our selves. If Agar wept being turned out of Abraham's house,
is not this the greatest cause of weeping which can be unto us, that our life
is no life, because we never cease from sinning, while we are here pilgrims
and strangers, exiled and banished out of our fathers house in heaven? The
righteousness of Christ is the life of man. This is more then all to make us
joyful in Christ. If Queen Ester did rejoice, as King James does at this day
(whom God for his mercies sake ever save and preserve, and let all the people
say Amen) because he delivered his people from thraldom and destruction, can
any thing in the world then make us more joyful then this, that we being
cursed in our selves, are blessed in Christ; being embased in our selves, are
exalted in Christ; being condemned in our selves are justified in Christ, being
dead in our selves, are alive in Christ? The sin of Man is the death of
Christ. This is more then all to make us sorrowful in our selves. If the
Virgin Mary wept so sore for the death of her Son Jesus, as though her tender
heart had been stabbed and pierst through with a sharp sword (as Simeon
speaks.) Can any thing in the world then, make us more sorrowful then this,
that Christ being blessed in himself, was cursed for us; being exalted in
himself, was embased for us; being justified in himself, was condemned for
us; being alive in himself, was dead for us? O dear brother, blessed
Christian, whosoever thou art, if thou be too sorrowful at any time, remember
what Christ has done for thee; how lovingly, how kindly, he has dealt with
thee, and thou will soon be glad: if thou be too joyful at any time*
remember what thou have done against Christ, how ungratefully, how wretchedly
thou have dealt with him, and thou will soon be sorry. So shall we never
suffer shipwreck of faith, either by too much sorrow, as Esau did, who sought
the blessing with tears, weeping for himself, not rejoicing for Christ: or
else by too much joy, as Herod did, who heard the Baptist gladly, rejoicing for
Christ, not weeping for himself. But even as a ship, being neither too heavily
burdened, nor too lightly balanced, fears neither waves nor winds, but
saileth safely to the haven: so we being neither too heavy for our own misery,
nor too light for Christ's mercy, but joining for me, for your selves both
together, shall neither be drowned with the waves of desperation, nor puffed up
with the winds of presumption, but we shall sail safely in the Arc of Noah,
upon the Sea of this world, till we arrive at the Haven of all happiness in
Heaven. And this is the right moderation we must keep between Christ and our
selves, as appears in this sixth part, For me, for your selves, both
together. Weep not for me, weep for your selves.

THe seventh part follows. Weep not for me. Wherein we must conside^ three
virtues that were in Christ. Wisdom, Benignity, Magnanimity. For Wisdom
he says, Weep not. For Benignity, Not you. For Magnanimity, Not for me.
Not weep: Not you: Not for me. Weept not for me. First for Wisdom, he
says, Weep not. Saint Austin has a very excellent sentence, and it is this;
Crux Christi pendentis, Cathedra fuit d^centis.
Christ upon his Cross did read us a Lecture, like a Doctor in his chair.
Indeed in that learned lecture of his, he delivered unto us many notable points
of wisdom. And one especially we have here, whereby we are instructed how we
should be affected toward the dead. For if we must not weep immoderately for
the death of Christ, then we must not grieve our selves greatly for the death
of any Christian. The ancient Italians used to mourn for their dead ten
months: the Egyptians seauentie two days; the Ethiopians forty days; the
ancient Germans, thirty da^es; the Lacedaemonians, eleven days Johannes
Bo^emus de morib. Genesis
. But the Athenians and the Romans, which were in their time counted the
wisest men in the world, were much more moderate. For the Athenians had a law
given them by Solon their law giver, which did forbid mourning at burials. The
Romans likewise had a law in their twelve tables which did forbid to make any
exclamations or outcries at funerals Lessum habere funeris ergo.
. Yea, the third Council holden at Toledo in Spain, the one and twentieth
Canon of the Council, flatly decrees, that Christians should be brought to
their graves only with singing and rejoicing Cum cantisis solummado and
Psallentium vocib.
. Because, quoth the Council, the Apostle to the Thessalonians, says; I will
not have you ignorant brethren, concerning them which are asleep, that you
sorrow not, even as others which have no hope. Therefore Cutbertus who was
Archbishop of Canterbury, long before the Conquest Floruit regnauit Egberto.
An. Dom. 747.
, at his death, charged that no lamentation should be made for him. And Jerome
writes, that when the dead body of Paul the Eremite was brought forth, holy
Anthony did sing Hymns and Psalms, according to the Christian Prolato for as
corpore Hymnos and Psalmos de Christiana traditione decantabat. In vita Pauli
Ere^i.
tradition. And that when Paula a devout widow was Pontifices choros
Psallentium ducebant. In Epitaphio Paula
buried, the Bishops did bring her forth with singing. And that when Fabiola
was buried, Psalms were sung, and Haleluiah was chanted out so loud, that it
did shake the seeling of the Church. Sonabant Psalmi and aurata templorum
roboans in sublime quatiebat Haleluia. In Epitaphio Fabiolae. Vide praeterea
Sulp^tium ^a vita Martini Areopag. Et Eub. Hie^ar. Eccles. c. 7.
I grant indeed we may sorrow and weep for the wicked, not only when they
are dead, but even when they are alive: But we must sing and rejoice for the
godly, not only when they are alive, but even when they are dead. And why?
Because they being alive, are dead: but these being dead, are alive. According
to that saying of the Hebrew Rabbis, Tsaddikim bemotham caym, etc.
The godly even in their death are alive: but the wicked even in their life are
dead. Therefore David when his son Absolon died, whom he knew to be a wicked
man, wept for him, saying, Absolon my son, O my son Absolon, would to God I
had died for thee. But when his young son died, whom he knew to be an innocent
babe, he was well apaid, and arose from the ground, and anointed his face,
and looked cheerfully, and said, I shall go to him, he cannot return to me:
Whereby he warranteth that of Fulgentius, who says, That the godly deceased
are not lost for ever, but left for a time Non amissi, sed praemissi.
, not gone away from us, but sent to God before us. For if that be true which
Ignatius says, That life without Christ is death, (...)
then this is true also which I shall say, That death, with, and in Chirst, is
life. The deaths of the Saints are no funerals, but triumphs Exercitia sunt
ista non funera. Cypr.
: So that in respect of us which are alive, it is a very charitable custom,
yea it is a very honorable custom to give mourning cloakes and gowns; but in
respect of them that are dead, it is altogether needless. For what need we
wear black mourning cloakes in sign of sorrow, seeing (as it is in the
Revelation) they wear white long robes in token of triumph? Therefore
Chrysostom says (...).
, It becomes us that are Christians, at the death of Christians rather to
rejoice as at a triumph, then to weep as at a tragedy. For, says Jerome
Desidera^di sunt vt absentes, non deplorandi vt mo^tui.
, We may indeed wish for them, because they are not with us; but we must not
weep for them because they are with God. Love! grant commands us. Well, be it
so. What then? But yet faith forbids us to weep for the dead Pietas plorare
iubet, fides pro defunctis lugere vetat. Isidorus.
: And therefore Paulinus says Salua fide pietatis officia pendamus, salua
pietate f^dei gaudia praeferamus.
, Though we may, notwithstanding our faith, perform to the dead the duties of
love, yet we must first, notwithstanding our love, afford to ourselves the
comforts of faith. So, if we shed some few tears, which run softly like the
waters of Silo, no force says. Ambrose Erunt non doloris illices, sod indices
pietatis.
, They will not bewary in us any want of faith, but only testify an
abundance of love. Thus and no otherwise did Abraham weep for Sara his wife;
Eleazar for Aaron his father; Rebecca for Debora her nurse: Joseph for Jacob
his father: Bethsheba for Vrias her husband: Christ for Lazarus his friend. And
here in wonderful wisdom he teaches us how sparing we ought to be in
weeping for the death of our godly friends, considering our good hope that are
alive, and their good hap that are dead. As if the very dead body whom some
of you perhaps even at this present so seriously think of, and so much lament
for, should now suddenly arise out of the grave, and step into the Pulpit and
preach, and say unto you, Weep not for me, but weep for your selves. You
indeed as yet remain in this vale of misery, where you sin daily and hourly
against God, where continually you feel afflictions and punishments due to
your sins: where lastly you are deprived of the glory of God, of the society of
the Saints, of the joys of heaven. Therefore (if you will) weep for your
selves, but weep not for me. I am in that state of perfection where I never
sin, but always praise and laud the Lord: I am out of the compass of all
calamities, not to be touched with any trouble: I evermore behold the amiable
and the loving countenance of Christ: and though I come not very near him, yet
so far forth I see him, as this sight alone is sufficient to make me every
way a happy man. Thus would the very dead, if they should rise again, speak
unto us. But we will not any longer disquiet the dead, or disturb them which
so sweetly sleep in Christ. Certainly, either this that has been spoken will
persuade us, o^ else (as our Savior says) though one should rise from the
dead, we would not believe: For if these ancient and holy Fathers,
Fulgentius, Ignatius, Cyprian, Chrysostom, Jerome, Isidore, Paulinus,
Ambrosius, should now all arise, they would (I assure you) say no other thing,
but even as you have heard them speak already in those sentences and
allegations which I have quoted and cited out of them. The sum of al which is
this, That it is great folly and childishness to weep immoderately for the
dead, and that it is on the other side a hie point of wisdom to be moderate in
this matter; considering our Lord going here to his death, teaches his friends
not to weep for him, in that he says, weep not, weep not for me. Thus much
for his Wisdom.

Now for Benignity he says, Not you. For though the person be not expressed
in the English, yet in the Greek verb it is implied. Weep not, as if it
were, Weep not you. Which Benignity appeared, in that among all his
intolerable troubles, nothing troubled him so much. as that his friends were
troubled for his troubles. And yet (as it should seem) they of all other had
greatest cause thus to be grieved. All the people wept for Moses death: All
Egypt for Joseph's death: all Israel for Ios^as his death: all the Church for
Stephens death. But a million of Mosesses, of Joseph's, of Iosiasses, of
Stephens, are not comparable to Christ. The women of Troy wept for the death of
worthy Hector their valiant Captain, making this the foot of their doleful
ditty, we weep for Hector Hectora flemus. Seneca in Troade, actu primo.
. How much more then ought these women of Jerusalem to weep for the death of
their captain Christ? All the widows lamented the death of Dorcas, because in
her life time she made them coats and garments: And had not these women then
far greater reason to lament the death of Christ, who made every one of them a
wedding garment, wherein he did marry them to himself? Ye daughters of
Israel, says David, weep for Saul, who clothed you with Scarlet. How much
more then ought these daughters of Jerusalem to weep for Christ, who clothed
every one of them with Scarlet, and with the royal robe of his righteousness,
yea and gave his own dear self unto them, that they might put on the Lord
Jesus? When Christ was borne the night was turned into day, as it was
prophesied Psa. 139.12.
, Then shall the night shine as the day: But when Christ was crucified, the day
was turned into night, as it was prophesied Amos. 8.9.
, Then shall the Sun go down at noone day. The Sun therefore wept for
Christ. As Hamons face was covered when he was condemned to die; so the suns
face was covered when Christ was condemned to die. The temple also wept for
Christ. As David rent his garment when he heard of Ionathans death: so the
temple rent his veil when it heard of Christ's death. The graves likewise wept
for Christ. As the King of Niniue threw up dust upon his head when he and his
subjects were appointed to die: so the graves opened, and threw up dust upon
their heads when Christ was appointed to die. The stones lastly wept for
Christ. As Job cut his hair when he heard of his childrens death: so the
stones were cut in pieces, and cloven asunder when they heard of Christ's death.
As Ass carrying Christ into Jerusalem, the children sung most merrily; Christ
carrying his cross out of Jerusalem, the women wept most mournfully. If those
children had held their peace, and not sung (as our Savior their protests)
the very stones would have s^ng out the praise of Christ. If these women had
held their peace, and not cried, the very stones would have cried for the death
of Christ; Or rather indeed as soon as ever these women left weeping, because
Christ bad them, straight ways the stones fell a weeping before Christ bad
them. And what heart of man then could here have refrained from weeping, though
it had been harder then any stone, seeing the hard stones before his eyes thus
dissolved and distilled into tears? Yet behold the benignity and loving
kindness of Christ, Christ died, not for the Sun: not for the Temple: not for
the Graves: not for the stones: but for us men, and for our salvation he died.
Yet he suffers these senseles creatures to weep, and to have a lively feeling
of his death, though they had no benefit by his death. But being content
himself to shed his dearest, and his best blood for us, yet will not suffer us
in recompense to shed so much as one little tear for him. No, no, says he, I
will bear all the sorrow, you shall have only joy: and though I die and shed
my very heart blood for you, yet you shall not so much as weep, or shed the
least tear for me. Not you, weep not for me. Thus much for his Benignity.

Lastly, for Magnanimity he says, Not for me. Strange stoutnesse and
courage: Especially in him that was otherwise so mild, and so meek a lamb.
But here the cause and quarrel being ours, and he fighting for the salvation
for our souls, there is no rule with him, he plays he Lion wheresoever he
goes. For holding now in his hand the cup of trembling, and being ready to
drink up the very dregs of it, yet neither his hand nor his heart trembles.
Ennius the Poet, as Tullie testifies, could say thus much; Let no man weep
for my death Nemome lachrymis decoret.
. And Saint Laurence the Martyr, as Prudentius witnesses, Do not weep for my
departure Desi^^e discessu meo stetum dolentur sundere.
. But as Ennius or any other Pagan could never come near Christians in true
magnanimity: So S. Laurence, or any other Christian could never come near
Christ. The blessed Apostle S. Paul of any that ever I heard of, comes
nearest to him: going toward Jerusalem, what do you says he, weeping and
breaking my heart, for I am ready not only to be bound, but even to die also
for the name of the Lord Jesus? Even so says Christ here, or rather indeed not
so, but a thousand times more courageously, going out of Jerusalem; What do
you (says he) weeping and breaking my heart; for I am ready, not only to be
bound, but even to die also for the salvation of man? He knew well enough his
passion would be a new kind of transfiguration unto him: For at his
transfiguration he was accompanied with his dear Disciples, Peter, James, and
John: but at his passion Peter denied him, James and John forsook him. And
there he was upon mount Tabor, which smelled sweetly of herbs and flowers: but
here he was upon mount Caluery, which smelled loathsomly of bones and dead men's
sculs. And there his face did shine as the Sun: but here his face was covered,
nay it was buffeted and spit upon. And there his garments were white as the
light: but here his garments were parted, nay they were like Joseph's coat, all
embrewed in blood, and he himself stripped stark naked. And there he was
between two famous Prophets, Moses and Elias; but here when they thought he
called for Elias to help him, Elias would not come, nay he was between two
thieves, the one at his right hand, the other at his left. And there his Father
spoke most joyfully to him from heaven* This is my beloved Son, in whom only
I am pleased; but here he screeched most lamentably to his Father from the
Cross, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Yet behold, behold, the
Magnanimity of Christ. Christ knew well enough, before hand, of all this
fearful and horrible passion prepared for him, wherein he was not
transfigured, as before, but disfigured, so as never was any man. Yet nothing
could move him. This cowardlinesse of his Disciples, this noisomnesse of the
place, these devilish buffets upon his bare face, these bloody wounds upon his
naked body, these vile thieves, these hideous screeches, could not one whit
daunt his heroical heart. But even as a noble Champion having already had a
leg and an arm slasht off, when all the stage in admiration of his valor
and manhood, cries, Save the Man, save the man, yet puts out himself, and
standing upon one leg; and striking with one arm, fights still as stoutly as
if he had never been hurt at all: so Christ having bin scorned and scourged
already, when the whole theater of heaven and earth wept for him, yea when the
powers above the heaven came down, and the dead under the earth rose up to
moan and pity him, only he himself would neither ask any favor of others,
nor yet show any favor to himself, but was very angry, and called him Satan
that gave him such counsel; Yea though all the Saints in heaven and earth did
bleed at the very heart Coelum and terra compatiuntur ci. Anselmus inspeculo
Euangel. sermon. cap. 13.
in a manner as much as he himself did upon the cross, to see so good a man
so shamefully despighted, yet nothing could stay him, but still he went on
forward as pleasantly and as cheerfully as to any banquet or feast, to this
most rufull and dreadful death. O sweet Jesus, O my dear Lord, forgive me, I
humbly beseech thee for thy mercy sake, forgive me this one fault: Thou will
neither weep thy self, nor yet suffer me to weep for thy death, But I am
contrariwise affected; Though I do not see thee at this present led as a Lamb
to the slaughter, yet only meditating of thy death so many hundred years
after, I cannot possibly refrain from weeping. Yea by so much the more do I
lament and mourn, by how much the more I see th^e joyful and glad. Come forth
ye daughters of Sion, says he Cant. 3.11.
, and behold King Solomon with the crown wherewith his mother crowned him in
the day of his marriage, and in the day of the gladness of his heart. As if he
should have said, Come forth ye daughters of Jerusalem, and behold Jesus
Christ with the crown of thorns, wherewith the Synagogue of the Jews crowned
him in the day of his passion, and in the day of his death upon the Cross. He
calls the day of his passion the day of his marriage, and the day of his
death upon the cross, the day of the gladness of his heart. Thus you see in
this seventh part, the Wisdom, the Benignity, the Magnanimity of Christ, in
that he says, Not weep, Not you, Not for me. Weep not for me. Weep not for
me, but weep for your selves.

THE eighth part, which is the last, now only remains; But weep for your
selves: Wherein we must consider likewise three virtues that ought to be in
us: Devotion, Compunction; Compassion. For Devotion he says, But weep: For
Compunction, But you: For compassion, But for your selves. But weep; But you;
But for your selves. But weep for your selves. First for Devotion, he says,
But weep. Devotion generally is a supernatural dexterity, wrought by the
Holy Ghost, in the heart of a devout man, whereby he is made prompt and ready
to perform all those duties which appertain to the service of God. As a man
may be said to be devout in Preaching, devout in hearing, devout in making
prayers, devout in giving Alms. But here especially by Devotion; I understand
a certain softness and tenderness of the heart, which oftentimes is resolved
into tears, considering the mischiefs and miseries of this world. For if
Christ in this place wishes them of Jerusalem to weep for themselves, and did
himself elsewhere weep for Jerusalem, saying, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how
often would I, but you would not? How much more then ought we to weep for the
wretchedness of this world? They of Jerusalem were carried captive into
Babylon; That captivity of Babylon endured seventy years, or threescore and
ten years. Now just so long lasts our life. As the Psalmist says; The days
of our life are threescore years and ten. So, that by this account, our whole
time in this world, is nothing else but the captivity of Babylon. Therefore we
may well say, By the waters of Babylon we sat down and wept, when we
remembered thee, O Sion. And, My tears have been my meat day and night, while
they said unto me, Where is now thy God? And, Woe is me that I am constrained
to dwell in Meshek, and to have my habitation among the tents of Kedar. We
read that King Edward the third, having the King of Scots and the French King
his prisoners here in England both together at one time, held royal iusts in
Smithfield: The iusts being ended, he feasted both the Kings most sumptuously
at supper: After supper perceiving the French King to be sad and pensive, he
desired him to be merry, as others were. To whom the French King answered,
Quom^do cantabim is canticain terra aliena?
How shall we sing songs in a strange land? If the French King after all this
princely pastime, and stately entertainment, took it so heavily to heart, that
he was kept prisoner out of his own country; how much more then ought we to
mourn for our captivity? Especially seeeing neither we have such welcome in
the world as he had in England, neither yet is England so far from France,
as Heaven is distant from them both. Jerusalem was once finally sacked by Titus
and Vespasian, whereas besides an infinite number which were otherwise spoiled,
ten hundred thousand men, ten hundred thousand men (I say) were slain
downright altogether, as Josephus a Greek, Writer, and Iosippus an Hebrew
Author testify. But that which happened once to them, happens every day to
us. We die daily 1 Cor. 15.31.
. Our whole life is nothing else but such a spoil and sackage. And among all
the miseries of this life, nothing is more miserable then this life it self.
For even those things which might be most comfortable unto us, as we use them,
do breed us much sorrow. Learning and knowledge, a great delight: Yet Solomon
says, He that adds knowledge, adds sorrow. Wealth and riches, a good
complement: Yet Saint James says, Go to now you rich men, weep and howl for
the miseries which shall come upon you. So that the only happiness we can
have in this life, is a devout and a godly bewailing of our unhappiness. Which
made our Savior say, Woe be to you that laugh now, for you shall wail and
weep. But on the other side, Blessed are they that mourn now, for they shall
be comforted. Therefore holy Job desires God to spare him a little, and let
him live a while longer. Wherefore? That he might laugh? That he might be
merry? No, Vi plangam dolorem meum.
but says he, that I may weep for my woe and grief. He thought a man could
not have time enough in this life, though it were never so long, to lament and
rue the miseries of this life, though it were never so short. For if every
creature do sigh and groan in it self Romans 8.22.
; if the very earth which we tread under our feet, do mourn and pine away in
sorrow, for the heavy burden of our sins, wherewith it is almost weighed and
pressed down to hell: how much more then ought we, having the first fruits of
the spirit, to have also true devotion in weeping for our miserable estate in
this world* according to this, But weep, but weep for your selves? Thus much
for our Devotion.

Now for Compunction he says, But you. The person is implied in the Greek
word, which signifies to weep as they do which have a broken and a contrite
heart (...) frango.
. Which weeping at the very heart is commanded in the fourth Psalm. For
whereas we commonly read it, be still in your chambers, the Septuagint
interpret it, have compunction in your ahambers. Now the hebrew word which
they translate, have compunction, does signify to be pricked to the quick,
till the blood follow again Dommu a Damsanguis.
; And by Chambers our Hearts are meant. As when thou praiest, enter into thy
chamber, that is, into the silence and secrecy of thine heart. So that Have
compunction in your chambers, is as much as if he should have said, Bleed you
inwardly at the heart; Our tears must not be Crocodiles tears: For as is
praying from the teeth outward; so is weeping from the eyes outward. But says
Bernard, we must be let blood, and have a vein opened with the lance of
compunction Sci^dat^^ and aperitur vena far compunctionis. Ber. in sermon. p.
123.
. And this vein also must not be the liver vein, or any other vein, but the
heart vein only Non co^poris, sed cordis. Fulgen.
. Whereupon David says, I roared for the very grief of my heart Psalm. 38.8.
. And again, My heart droppeth for heaviness Psalm. 119.28.
. Not that his heart dropped indeed: But because the tears which he shed were
not drops of water, running from the eyes which may be soon forced with onions
or such like, but drops of blood issuing from the heart, such as Christ did
sweats in the Garden. For these (no doubt) are true tears, which are the blood
of a woundead heart Sanguis vulnerati cordis. Aug. Epist. 199.
. So that the heart must first be rent, and deeply wounded, before the eye
can unfeignedly weep. But in case our sins fall upon us like thieves, and wound
us at the very heart, and leave us half dead; and make us power out the blood
of true tears, then by and by will Christ power in the wine and oil of
gladness. Therefore says a good Father, Malo sentire compunctionem ^uam ^^ire
definitionem.
I had rather feel the touch of Compunction, then know the truth of a
definition. For the heart of a Christian being a while cast down in sorrow, is
soon after raised up in joy; and takes his former compunction not as a
punishment, but as a preferment, and is right glad to be afflicted, because he
sees, that as the more the waters did rise, the higher the Arc was lifted up;
after the same sore the more his sorrows increase, the higher his heart is
lifted up to God Cum per fletum men's ad summa rapitur, compunctionis sua p^^n^m
gaudens miratur, and ^ibet affligi, quia afflictione sua conspicit se ad alta
subleuari.
. Whereupon Jerome affirms, that this compunction does supple and soften our
hearts, when it pierces and afflicts them Dum pungit vngit.
: which we may see plainly in Saint Paul^ All the while his heart was hardened
and scared with a hot Iron, he played the wild colt (as I may say) without any
remorse or grief, kicking against the pricks. But when it pleased God to take
out of his breast that heart of stone (to use the Prophets word) and to give
him a heart of flesh for it, then he did not any more kick against the pricks,
but only one stimulus carnis, the angel of Satan was sufficient to bridle
him, and tame him, and rule him aright. For even as a bladder if it be pricked
all the wind and emptiness voideth out of it: ^emblably S. Paul's holy heart
being pricked, and bleeding inwardly for his sins, was freed of all vanity
and pride, of all conceitednesse and folly. Wherefore as the men of Judea and
Jerusalem were pricked in their hearts Acts. 2.37.
: so must we have true compunction in bleeding and weeping at the heart,
according to this, But you, But weep for your selves. Thus much for your
Compunction.

Lastly, for Compassion, he says, But for your selves. It is good to pity
others, and to wipe away the very tears from their eyes with the sponge of
Compassion (...) Chrysostom.
. So says Job Job. 30.25.
, Did I not weep with him that was in trouble? And was not mine heart in
heaviness for the poor? But yet the greatest Compassion is to show pity
toward thy self. As Ecclesiasticus says Miserere animae tuae placens Deo.
ca. 30. v. 23
, Have compassion on thine own soul, if thou mind to please God. Thus did
the Publican. Being most desirous to please God, when he did pray to God, he
said, Lord be merciful unto me a sinner. The Pharisee was very sorry for the
Publican, and said, Lord, I thank thee, I am not as this Publican. But the
Publican was sorry for himself. Even as the high Priest in the law did offer
first for his own sins, and then for the sins of the people Heb. 5.3.
: after the same fashion this Publican did first offer the sacrifice of prayer
for his own sins, and then afterward he prayed for others. Therefore he that
durst not lift up his eyes to heaven, did yet draw down heaven to his eyes:
and did enforce God also to have compassion on him, because he had first
compassion on himself For look how Peter's cock did clap his own sides with
his wings, and wakened himself before he wakened Peter: in like manner thou
must smite thine own breast with the Publican, and clap thine own sides with
the cock, before thou cry or crow to others. Abraham's servant did drink
himself before he gave his Camels drink Genesis 24.19.
: right so the wise man advises thee Prou. 5.15.
, first for thy self: To drink the waters of thy cisterne, and the rivers in
the midst of thine own well: then for thy Camels, To let thy fountains flow
forth, and thy rivers of water in the streets: Thou must first pledge Christ in
his cup, and drink one hearty draught of tears for thy self, and then thou
may drink to others afterward. For if thine eye be single, all thy body is
full of light. But if thou have a beam in thine own eye, and yet would
take a more out of thy brothers eye; all thy body is full of darkness. Whereas
the way were first to weep out, and vvash out that great beam which is in
thine own eye, that so thine eye being more single, thou may see clearly
to take a little more out of thy brothers eye. Otherwise thou shall be like
those Hagges or Faryes (called in latin La^^ia) which we have heard of in old
time, who (as they say) could see well enough abroad, but when they came home,
used to put up their eyes in a box. And then Christ will say to thee as he did
to one elsewhere, Go to thine own house Abi in domumtuam. Mar. 5.
. Do not pry into other men's faults abroad, and put up thine eyes in a box
when thou art at home; but rather shut thine eyes abroad, and open them at
home. Be not like Crate^ Thebanus, who was called a Door opener (...) Laerti
is.
, because he used to rush into every other man's house, and there to find fault
with whatsoever was a miss: but rather look to thine own house, look to
thine own heart, weep for thine own life, weep for thine own self. Many do
turn Christ's, sed vos pro vobis, into Virgils sic vos non vobis. They can
stumble at a straw and leap over a block: They can swallow a Camel, and
strain a gnat. Though their own backs be surcharged, and ouerloaden with
ill-fauoured lumpes of sin, like Camels bunches, yet their backs are broad
enough to bear all that, they never feel it, they make no bones of it, they
can swallow it down very well without any drink of tears. But if they see
no more then a little gnat sitting upon their brothers coat, by and by they
find a hole in his coat, they must need^ (forsooth) weep for it, and always
urge it, and press it very sore, and strain it through their tears. Such are
the wicked ignorant Brownists, and other like factious Nouices of this age:
They tell us they weep daily for the ruin of Sion, and for the desolation of
our Church: But our Church answers them, as she has heard her spouse Jesus
Christ say in a like case, Weep not for me, but weep for your selves. I,
says our Church, was never more glorious in this Realm of England
heretofore, Foxus in prima consideratione ad Protestants praefixa Acti^, and
in prima persecutione primitiu^ ecclesia. p. 32.
never am like to be hereafter, then I am at this day. And there is no one
point of Doctrine, or Discipline which I maintain, that has not been within
this forty years confirmed, and besprinkled, and even enamuled with the very
blood of as blessed Saints, our own dear Countrymen, as holy Martyrs as ever
did hold up innocent hands to God. Therefore Weep not for me, but weep for
your selves. You indeed have departed not only from this Church, of which
you make so slight: but also from the Primitive Church* of which you talk so
much. The order of the Primitive Church is set down in the Acts Actorum ca. v.
46.
. They continued daily with one accord in the temple, and breaking bread at
home, did eat their meat together with gladness and singleness of heart. So
then in the Primitive Church they continued daily with one accord in the
temple: you run out of the temple, and refuse to pray with us. In the
Primitive Church they did break bread at home: you break peace abroad. In the
Primitive Church they did eat their meat together with gladness and
singleness of heart ^ you have turned all singleness into singularity. You
(says our Church to the Brownistes) You are those Donatists of whom Saint
Austen speaks Qui nobis etiam orationem dominicam impijs dispretationibus
conantur aufert c. epist. 92. ad lanuarium.
, who by their impious arguments would take away from us even the Lords prayer.
So would the Brownists. You are those Nestorians of whom Cassianus speaks,
Qui quia esse nolunt quod omnes sunt, cupiunt omnes esse quod ipsi volunt. De
incarnatione, l. 6. c. 4.
who because they will not be as all men are, therefore would have all men be
as they are. So would the Brownists. You are those Sectaries of whom Nazianz^^^
speaks (...), Apol. p. 28
, who make a stir about matters of no importance, very unlearnedly, and yet
very imprudently. So do the Brownists. You are those Schismatikes of whom
Irenaeus speaks Qui propter medicas and quaslibet causas magnum and gloriosum
Christi corpus conscindunt. l. 4. c. 62.
, who for light and trifling quarrels, rent and tear the great and glorious
body of Christ. So do the Brownists. You are those Luciferans of whom Saint
Jerome speaks Quibus familiare est dicere factum de Ecclesia lupanar. Dialo
contra Luciferanos, prope initium.
, who make it a common word in their mouths, to say, That the Church is now
become a Stews. So say the Brownists. You are those heretics of whom Bernard
speaks Qui omnes qui de Ecclesia sunt, canes censent and porcos* Epist. 65.
, who say, That all we, or at the least wise the most part of us, which are
of the Church, are no better then dogs, or hogs. So say the Brownists. You
are those Audian^ of whom Epiph^^ius speaks (...). Anchor. p. 475.
, who being busybodies themselves, and Bishops in other men's diocesses, yet
think much that reverend and learned Bishops should bear rule in their own
diocese. So do the Brownists. You are those murmurers against Moses, of whom
Optatus speaks, Qui ante funt sepulti quam m^rtui. Contra (...). l. 1.
who were buried before they were dead, because they wept for others before
they wept for themselves. So do the Brownists. But to leave these now, as
they leave the Church, and to return to our selves again: we that are CHRIST'S
loving friends, and loving friends also to his holy Church, must weep for
none other so much as for our selves. That so we may continually practice true
Devotion, true Compunction, true Compassion, according to this, But weep, but
you, but for your selves. But weep for your selves. Weep not for me, but
weep for your selves.

THus have I gone over all the eight parts of this text. Now if I were as happy
as Solomon was, that I might have whatsoever I would ask, I would, I assure
you (beloved) desire no greater gift of God at this time, then that we might
so meditate of that which has bin spoken, as our whole life, and all our
affections, especially these affections of joy and sorrow, which rule all the
rest, might thereby be ordered and directed aright. For weeping, or not
weeping, are things indifferent, simply of themselves neither good nor bad, but
thereafter as according to circumstances, and occurrences, they are either
well or ill used. Even as glorying, or laboring, or fearing, or loving. For
glorying it is said, Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, but let him
that glories, glory in this, that he knows the Lord. For laboring it is
said, Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for the meat which abides
for ever. For fearing, it is said, Fear not him that can kill the body only,
but fear him who is able to destroy both body and soul. For loving it is
said, Love not the world, nor the things of this world. If any man love the
world, the love of God is not in him. Now then, glory not, but glory, Not in
the wisdom of the world, but in the knowledge of God. Labor not, but labor;
Not for the meat which perishes, but for the meat which abides for ever.
Fear not, but fear; Not him that can kill the body only, but him that can
destroy both body and soul. Love not, but love: Not the World, but God. And so
here, weep not, but weep. Not for me, but for your selves. Weep not for me,
but weep for your selves. To weep is lawful; to weep without not weeping, is
unlawful. Not to weep is lawful: not to weep without weeping, is unlawful.
Again, To weep for your selves is lawful: to weep immoderately for Christ is
unlawful. Not to weep for Christ is lawful: not to weep moderately for your
selves, is unlawful. Whereas without any unlawfulness in either, both weeping
and not weeping will be lawful. If your weeping be always joined with not
weeping, and your not weeping be sometimes joined with weeping: If your
weeping be for your selves, not for Christ, and your not weeping be for
Christ, not for your selves. Therefore we must mark well what our Savior
says; He says not thus, weep not for me, and weep not for your selves;
That is too much joy, and too little sorrow. Neither thus; weep for me, and
weep for your selves; That is too much sorrow, and too little joy. Neither
thus, weep not for your selves, but weep for ^ee. That is presumptuous
desperation. Neither thus; weep for me, but weep for your selves. That is
desperate presumption. Only he says thus, Weep not for me, but weep for
your selves. As if he should have said, Weep not too much, weep not too much
for my death: weep not too much for my death. Nay, weep little for my death:
considering my wisdom, my benignity, my magnanimity; weep little for my
death. But weep not too little: but weep not too little for your own life:
but weep not little for your own life. Nay weep much for your own life:
considering your devotion, your compunction, your compassion: weep much for
your own life. Weep little for my death, but weep much for your own life.
Weep not for me, but weep for your selves.

Wherefore holy brethren, if we have any tears, now let us shed them, if we
have any Psalms, now let us sing them. The whole Gospel is nothing else but
joyful news, the sum whereof is comprised in that Evangelical and Angelical
message to the shepherds; I bring you glad tidings of great joy, which shall
be to all people. But then Christ was borne in his mothers arms; Now he
holds up the Angels, that they fall not, and lists up men which are fallen,
with his own arms stretched out upon the cross. This cross is the
kingdom, that he carries upon his shoulder Esa. 9.6.
, which is a greater glory and credit to Christ, then was the creation of the
whole world (...) ^ecume. in. c. 2. ad Heb.
. For if God had created a thousand world, man had defaced them every one with
his sin. But to save, if it be but one poor soul, and to redeem it from the
pit of hell: this indeed is the omnipotent power of the cross of Christ. Sweet
Savior, I humbly embrace and kiss the wounds of thy hands and feet: I esteem
more of thine Hysope, thy Reed, thy Sponge, thy Spear, then of any Princely
Diadem: I boast my self, and am more proud of thy thorns and nails, then of
all pearls and jewels: I account thy cross more splendent and glorious then
any royal crown: tush, what talk I of a crown? then the very golden
sunbeams in their greatest beauty and brightness. This is that triumph
whereby Christ caused us to triumph in himself, and to be more then
Conquerours, 2 Cor. 2.4.
when as the goodness and the sweetness of Christ, did triumph over all
impiety and malice Cum de impietate and malitia suauitas pi^asque triumphauit.
Cyp.
. And therefore if the women met David playing and singing, Saul has slain his
thousand, and David his ten thousand; how much more then ought all the son^ and
daughters of Jerusalem, all Christian men and women, to meet Christ playing
upon the harp, and singing that new song to the lamb with the four and
twenty elders, Thou art worthy to receive glory, and honor, and power, because
thou wast killed, and yet thou have killed, and slain not only a thousand, or
ten thousand, but even all thine and our enemies, and have redeemed us thy
friends to God by thy blood? There is a time to weep, and a time to laugh, a
time to mourn, and a time to dance Eccle. 3. v. 4.
. Why art thou then so heavy, O my soul, and why art thou so disquieted
within me? What man? pluck up a good heart, trust in God, think upon the
honorable passion and gladsome resurrection of Christ: And then though thou
were never so much afflicted, yet even in the fiery furnace of affliction,
rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious. Dance now, not as Herodias did, but
as David did. Leap up in affection as high as heaven, where thou shall hear
one rapt up to the third heaven, saying to himself, God forbid that I should
rejoice, rejoice in any thing but in the cross of Christ: and to us, Rejoice
in the Lord always, and again, I say, rejoice. And again, and again, I say,
rejoice, and rejoice always in the Lord. Especially at this time. For if, when
the matter was in doubt, and no man almost knew to what pass these troubles
would sort in the end, and very few in the Church, no not the Apostles, but
only the Virgin Mary did understand and believe the resurrection of Christ, yet
then our Savior said, Weep not for me: how much more now ought we not to
weep, but to rejoice, seeing our Lord has so mightily declared himself to
be the son of God Romans 1.4:
, by raising up his own self from the dead? And if we might not weep when
Jacob went over Jordan with nothing but his staff in his hand Genesis 31.18.
, then much more now ought we to lift up our hearts in great joy to God, and
say; O Lord we are not worthy of the least of all thy mercies: for our blessed
Redeemer went over Jordan with nothing but his cross, which is his Jacobs
staff, (...). Damascen. l. 4. cap. 88.
upon his shoulder, but now he is returned again with two great troops. O
what a great troop, what a goodly flock is here! We with all the Militant
Church are one flock of Christ: And the other flock is the triumphant Church
in Heaven; with whom we must continually rejoice for the victory and the
salvation which Christ has showed us this day: For though on Good Friday
toward evening the sky was read all over colored and distained with the
blood of Christ Math. 16.2.
, yet lauds be to our Lord, O praised be GOD, that was a good sign: this
day it is fair weather: The winter is now past: the rain is changed and gone:
the flowers appear in the earth: the time of the singing of birds is come: and
the voice of the Turtle is heard in our Land Cant. 2.11.
. And what says the Turtle? Even as it is here, Weep not for me. Weep not
for me, but weep for your selves: but weep for your selves. Pindarus
reports, there was an opinion of the City of Rhodes, that gold rained down
upon it (...). Ode. T.
. If ever gold did rain down from heaven upon any City, I think it is
rather this City then Rhodes: not only for abundance of gold and worldly
riches, wherewith it is replenished, but also much more for infinite spiritual
gifts, and golden grace^ of God. O London, London, excellent things are spoken
of thee, O thou City of God! It is spoken of thee, that thou employest a great
part of thy wealth to the relief of poor Orphans, of poor Soldiers, of
poor Scholars. It is spoken of thee, that thou do reverence religion, and
love the truth more then any part of this Realm does besides. It is spoken of
thee, that none are more obedient, none more ready then thou art, both with
body and goods to defend the state. It is spoken of thee, that thou art so
famous in all foreign ^ountries, that as Athens was called the Greece of
Greece (...) Athenaeus. l. 5.
, so London is called the England of England. And we may almost as well say,
that all England is in London, as that all London is in England. These are
excellent things I assure you beloved, excellent things indeed. Wherefore we
which have received so many singular graces of God, should above all other be
thankful for them. And not only one, or some few, but even all of us, should
bring forth good fruits, answerable to such great mercies. Well, would to God
it were so. But certainly it is not so. Certainly all among us, all are not
pure corn, there are many tares: all are not good fishes, there are many bad:
all are not wise virgins, there are many foolish: all are not sheep, there are
many goats. Yet to inueigh particularly against the sins of, this city,
which should make us weep for our selves, I think it not greatly convenient at
this time. Only I beseech you that we may try and examine our selves: that
we may enter into our own consciences; every one of us humbly bowing the
knees of his heart, and saying in this sort, O Lord Jesus, how have I bestowed
all those talents of gold which thou have given me? how have I required thee
for all thy kindness toward me? what has my whole life been else but a
continual warting against thee? what has it been else but a daily renewing of
all thy bloody torments, and of thy whole passion? Ah vile wretch that I am,
how often have I like Judas himself, betrayed thee, and sold thee for a little
worldly pleasure, or for a little lucre and gain? how often have I bound thy
hands, and even most despightfully spit in thy face, by refusing those gifts
which thou would have given me, and by killing the comforts of thy spirit?
Woe is me, alack for pity, I am that cursed Caine which have murdered
innocent Abel my brother, whose blood does now cry out for vengeance against
me, because that blood by my sins only is polluted, by which the sins of
all the world besides are purged. For this I will weep day and night, yea
though I had as many eyes in my head, as there are stars in the sky, yet I
would weep them out every one In f^ntem scontem atque in fium malumina ^ertam.
, to think that I should be such an unworthy wretch, as by my sins to
crucify Christ so often, and to put him to so many deaths, who has been unto
me so kind and so loving a Lord. O dear Abel, dear Abel! O my good brethren,
that I could possibly devise what to say, or what to do, to obtain thus much
of you, or rather of God for you, that you would weep, though it were never so
little, for your sins. But alas, I can do no more now, but commit and
commend all that has been spoken to the effectual working of the Holy Ghost in
you, and to the faithful obedience of your good hearts to God. Blessed be God:
I am yet very much revived (being otherwise almost quite spent with speaking so
long) when I look about me, and behold every one that is present. For I see no
place in this great Auditory, where there are not very many ready to weep, the
water standing in their eyes, and some already weeping right-out, in true
remorse and sorrow for their sins. You make me remember that which we read in
the book of Judges, when the Angel of the Lord found fault with the
Israelites for their disobedience, they lifted up their voices and wept, and
called the name of that place Bochim, and offered up sacrifices there unto the
Lord Judge. 2.5.
. This place also may be now called Bochim, that is, the place of weeping,
wherein you have offered up as many Sacrifices to the Lord, as you have shed
tears for your selves. O what an acceptable Sacrifice to God is this your
sorrowful spirit? I warrant you you shall never repent you of this repentance:
you shall never be sorry for this sorrow. This sorrowful spirit of yours makes
God have a joyful spirit, and greatly pleases and delights the holy Ghost.
Wherefore now that we have once made the good spirit of God rejoice and take
pleasure in us, let us not in any case hereafter, let us not hereafter grieve
the same spirit of God, whereby we are now sealed up to the day of redemption.
The Holy Ghost is grieved when we are not grieved, but if we be thus grieved
for our sins, then is the Holy Ghost delighted. Yes such grief and sorrow
will not only be to the Holy Ghost a great pleasure and delight, but also it
will be to us the very seed or the interest and loan of everlasting life c.
For look how a Father pittieth his own child, and if he see him cry, does
what he can to still him, and takes out his handkercher, and wipes the infants
eyes himself; after the same fashion God our heavenly Father will with his
own holy finger wipe away all tears from our eyes, and take us most lovingly
by the hand, and lead us out of the house of mourning into the house of mirth.
Then though we have sown in tears, yet we shall reap in joy Tum breuibus
lachrymis gaudia longa metam. Paulinus.
. Yea though we have sown but a very few tears, which God has in a small
bottle, yet we shall reap all the infinite joys which God has in heaven.
Then though we have wanted wine a little while, yet in the end Christ shall
turn all our water into wine, all our sadness into gladness, all our musing
into music, all our sighing into singing. Then though we have been a long
time married to weeping blear-eyed Leah, yet at length we shall enjoy the love
of cheerful and beautiful Rachel. Then shall Abraham that good mower bind us
up into sheaues as pure corn, and fill his bosom full with us, and carry us
into the Lords barn to make a joyful harvest in heaven. Then shall we with
the wise virgins having store of tears in our eyes, which are as oil in our
lamps, go out of this vale of tears, which flows with woe and weeping, and
enter into the celestial Canaan which flows with milk and honey. Then shall
Christ say unto us, not as it is here, Weep not for me, but weep for your
selves: But he shall say; Weep not for me, and weep not for your selves.
For that which would be too much joy in this life, shall not be joy enough in
the life to come. Therefore he shall not only say unto us, Weep not for me,
and weep not for your selves, but he shall also say, Rejoice for me, and
rejoice for your selves. Rejoice for me, because I was once lower then the
Angels, but now I am crowned with honor and glory: and rejoice for your
selves, because you were once as sheep going astray, but now you are returned
to the shepherd and Bishop of your soul. Rejoice for me, because I am your
brother Joseph, whom once you sold into Egypt, but now all power is given me in
heaven and in earth: and rejoice for your selves, because you are the true
children of Israel, which once dwelt in a land of famine, but now you are
brought by triumphant fiery chariots into the land of Goshen, which is the
kingdom of glory. To the which kingdom of glory, and joy of all hands, joy
for Christ, joy for our selves, we beseech thee, O good Lord, to bring us,
after the miseries of this woeful and wretched world, not for our own deserts
or merits, but for the most glorious passion, and most joyful resurrection of
Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all honor and
glory, power and praise, dignity and dominion now and evermore, Amen.

THE PATH-VVAY To Perfection.

A SERMON Preached at Saint MARY'S Spittle in London on Wednesday in
Easter-weeke, 1593.

By THOMAS PLAYFERE, Doctor of Divinity.

LONDON: Printed by Thomas Snodham for Matthew Law, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's Churchyard, 1623.

TO THE MOST NOBLE AND WORTHY KNIGHT, MY HONORABLE good Patron, Sir GEORGE
CARPY, Knight Marshall of her Majesty's most honorable Household, and Governor
of her I Will of Wight; all joys, external, internal, eternal.
SIR, as soon as I had preached this Sermon, it pleased the Lord Bishop of
London last deceased, both by his Letter, and by word of mouth, to request a
Copy of it for the Press. The like did diverse others also. But in truth I had
been hitherto continued. And so craving your honorable acceptance of my
faithful endeauours, I humbly take my leave, from Saint John's College in
Cambridge the first day of February, 1595.

Your Worships ever, and in all duty, most bounden, Thomas Playfere.

To the Reader.
GEntle Reader, the sentences are so framed, as thou may read them without
any regard of the Marginall notes, as though they were not set down at all.
Do therefore herein as thou shall think best. The quotations which are marked
without a Parenthesis, as thus, a b c, were all uttered when the Sermon was
preached. The rest which are marked with a Parenthesis, as thus, (a) (b) (c)
were thought convenient to be printed, though not the quotations themselves,
but only the matter contained in them was preached. Farewell.

THE PATHVVAY To Perfection. The Text.
But one thing, I forget that which is behind, and endeavor my self to that
which is before, and follow hard toward the mark, for the prize of the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus.

Philip. 3.14.
RIght Honorable, right worshipful, and most Christian and blessed brethren;
perfection is all in all. The only thing in every thing. But that which is
imperfect, is like either the untimely birth of a woman, or else the untimely
fruit of a tree; the one dying before it be borne, the other rotting before it
be ripe. Therefore it is said of the law, Heb. 7.19.
That it made nothing perfect: but of the Gospel, Ioh. 19.13.
that it is most perfect in it self. And of the tower of Babel, Luke 14.30.
these men began well to build, yet could not perfect it: but of the frame of
the world, Genesis 2.1.
thus the heaven and the earth were perfectly finished; yea so perfectly, that
every thing since, which has had any little resemblance of this perfection, is
said to be as perfect as God made the world. Now of all things in the world;
man especially is borne, not to die, as an untimely birth, but to live: and man
lives not to rot away as untimely fruit but to flourish for ever. Therefore we
that do not die under the law, but live under grace, Romans 6.14.
must not be like the law, but like the Gospel? and we which shall not rot
away as the Tower of Babel, but flourish for ever, as the building of God, 1
Cor. 3.9.
must not be like the tower of Babel, but like the frame of the world,
laboring continually to be perfect, as our heavenly Father is perfect Mat.
5.48.
. Labor (I say) we must. For as nothing is excellent and easy both together;
in like sort perfection, though it be so excellent a thing, that it ought to be
much desired, yet it is not so easy a thing, that it can be soon attained:
Therefore says the Apostle in the former verse, I do not think that I have
yet attained to it. For, says Bernard Quomodo proficis, si iam tibi sufficis?
, How can thou possibly be a proficient, if thou think thy self already
sufficient? The Arc of the Covenant was but a Cubite and a half high Exodus
21.10.
. So likewise the wheels of the Cauldron were but a Cubite and a half high. 1
King. 7.32.
Now we know that a Cubite and a half is an imperfect measure: which shows
that none in this life are perfectly perfect. The very highest are as the Arc
in Moses Tabernacle or as the wheels in Salomons temple, but a Cubite and a
half high (...).
: Perfectly imperfect when they begin: imperfectly perfect when they end.
Benaiah was honorable among thirty, but he attained not to the first three:
2 Samuel 23.23.
And so some one man may be as perfect as thirty, yea as a thousand other men,
and yet not attain to the perfection of the blessed Trinity, which is the
first three. Nay when we have done the best we can, we are but unprofitable
servants Luke 17.10.
All our righteousness is as a stained cloth Esaias. 64.5.
. Our greatest strength is confirmed in weakness 2 Cor. 12.9
. We know but in part, not as we are known 1 Cor. 13.12
. We walk by faith, not by sight 2 Cor. 5.7.
. We behold as in a Glass darkely, not face to face 1 Cor. 13.12
. So that the most perfect perfection we can attain to in this life, is an
humble acknowledging of that imperfection which we have, Est quaedam
imperfecta perfectio, vt sciat homo se non esse perfectum in hac vita.
Primasius in Col. c 1. in fine.
and an earnest laboring for that perfection which we have not (...).
Nyssenus (...) in fine.
. We live here in that we hope for life Spes vitae immortalis est vita vitae
mortalis. Aug in. p. ^03
: and we are perfect here in that we labor for perfection (...). Oecum. in
He. c. 6.
. Whereofre as Solomon went up six steps to come to his great-throne of Iuorie
1 Reg. 10.19.
, so must we ascend six degrees to come to this high top of perfection. The
first, (Not many things) BUT ONE THING. The second, (I do not remember, but) I
FORGET THAT WHICH IS BEHIND. The third, (I stand not still but) I ENDEVOVR MY
SELF TO THAT WHICH IS BEFORE. The fourth, (I run not amiss, but) I FOLLOVV
HARD. The fifth, (not beside the mark, but) TOVVARD THE MARK. The sixth, (Not
for any other prize, but) FOR THE PRIZE OF THE HIGH CALLING OF GOD IN CHRIST
JESUS.

Touching the first he says (Not many things) BUT ONE THING. Gregory has
this sentence Cum animus diuiditur ad multa, fit minor ad singula.
: The mind of a man is like the stone Tirrhenus. That stone, so long as it is
whole swimmeth, but being once broken, sinketh. And so the heart of man being
once broken, it soon sinketh, and being diversely distracted, it is easily
ouer-whelmed. Zedekias Ier. 39.5.
did well enough so long as he stayed in Jerusalem, signifying the vision of
peace, which is one thing: but when he was carried to Riblah, signifying a
multitude which is many things, then were his eyes put out. What so near one
as two? And yet we must not go so far from one as two: Seeing it is a very
hard matter, and almost impossible, that one mind should well heed to diverse
things. Vtres oppositas men's ferat vna duas. Cor. Gallus.
Hercules himself could not cope with two adversaries at once. So that Peter
was unwise to wear two swords, at once Luke. 22.38
. Alexander said, the whole world could not hold two Suns at once. So that
Issacar was an ass to bear two burdens at once Genesis 49.14.
. No man sits upon two seats together. No man writes with two pens
together. No man hunteth two games together. No man iusteth with two spears
together. He that has two hearts, if he have a true heart of the one, he will
have a false heart of the other. Therefore says Saint I^^es Iam. 1.8.
, A double-hearted man is unconstant in all his ways. He that has two
tongues, if he tell truth with the one, he will lie with the other: Therefore
says Saint Paul Tim. 3.8.
: Deacons, must not be double-tongued. He that serves two masters, if he
please the one, he will displease the other: therefore says our Savior Luke
10.13.
; No man can serve two masters. He that walks two ways, if he go well in
the one, he will stumble in the other. Therefore says Ecclesiasticus: Eccles.
2.13.
Woe be to the sinner, which walks two manner of ways. Wherefore we must
not be like the Philistines, which had two hearts, 1 Samuel 5.2.
one heart that cleaued to God, another that cleaued to Dagon: We must not be
like the Jews, which had two tongues Sopho. 2.1.
, one tongue that swear by the Lord, another that swear by Malcham: We must
not be like the Israelites, which served two masters, 1 King. 11.5.
they halted betwixt two opinions, serving sometimes God, sometimes Baal: We
must not be like Solomon, which walked two ways 1 King. 11:1.
, his heart was not perfect with God, but sometimes he walked the way of the
Lord, sometimes the way of Ashteroth. We must not do so, I say; we must not
follow God and Dagon, God and Malcham, God and Baal, God and Ashteroth, If we
would be perfect indeed, we must follow (Not many things, no not so much as two
things,) BUT ONE THING.

For this ONE thing is the very band of Perfection Col. 3.4. (...).

Theodor et. grae. Affect. cur. 2.


. Hereupon Christ speaking to his Spouse, says thus Cant. 4.9.
; Thou have wounded my heart with one of thine eyes, and with one chain of
thy neck. The Church, I grant, has many eyes. But because as the eyes of a
maiden look unto the hand of her mistress Psa. 123.2.
* so all these eyes wait only on the Lord, look only one way, and so (in a
sort) make only one eye, therefore he says, with one of thine eyes. So
likewise the Church has many chains; but because these chains are so linked
and intorteled together, that they all make (in a manner) but one golden chain
of Christian virtues, which is the band of Perfection, and binds the Church
to Christ, as the neck joins the body to the head: therefore he says, with
ONE chain of the neck. This one eye it is, this one chain it is, which makes
Christ in love with his Church, which ouercomes him, and wounds his heart.
Thou have wounded my heart, says he, with one of thine eyes, and with one
chain of thy neck. The Spouse of Christ must have but ONE chain about her
neck. The disciple of Christ must have but one coat upon his back Luke 9.3.
. He must not be a turne-coate, much less a change-coate. Seeing indeed that
which Cyprian speaks of Christ's coat, may be as truly said of every
Christians coat; That either it must be Vnica, or else it cannot be Tunica,
either it must be one, or none. For as Rebeccaes two twins did struggle and
vvrastle before they were borne, for hatred and malice, but Elizabeth's one
child did spring and skippe before he was borne, for joy and gladness; so he
that busies himself about more things then one; shall never prove singular in
any thing (...). Plato de rep. l. 3.
, nay he shall find that strife and resistance in his head, which Rebecca did
in her womb, but he that labors and travails only about one thing, shall
bring it to good perfection, and be as well delivered of it, as Elizabeth was
of John Baptist. Hence it is that we are exhorted, for our heart, Acts. 4.32.
to have one heart, and one soul: for our tongue 1 Cor. 1.10.
, to speak one and the self same thing: for our master, Mat. 13.8.
to serve one master in Heaven: for our way, Phil. 3.16.
to walk after one and the self same rule. According to that most wise and
worthy word: Cor vnum via vna. My L. Treasurer his word.
One heart, one way, Which is also agreeable to the word of God, who says, I
will give them one heart, and one way, that they may fear me for ever, for
the wealth of them and of their children after them Ier. 32.39.
. Wherefore let us not have many minds, or trouble our selves about many
things, but with Mary Heb. 10.41.
, mind only one thing, which is necessary: let us not have many tongues, or
desire many things, but every one of us say with David Psalm. 18.1.
, One thing only I have desired of the Lord: let us not serve many masters or
by many masters our selves, but as Sophony speaks Soph. 3.9.
, with one shoulder serve the Lord our God, and only worship him: let us not
walk many ways, or kick against many pricks Acts. 9.5.
, or shoot at rouers (as I may say) but with S. Paul in this place, aim only
at one mark, and follow But one thing. This is the first degree to perfection.

Touching the second, he says, (I do not remember, but) I FORGET THAT WHICH
IS BEHIND. Truth it is, we may remember, both that we have done ill, to amend
it, and also that we have done well, to continue it. For the first, Chrysostom
says, (...).
Nothing does so well help us forward in a good course, as the often
remembrance of our sins. Whereas in the bitterness of our souls we call to
remembrance the days of old, which we have passed away in sin. Whereupon the
Psalmist particularly intituleth the eight and thirtieth Psalm a Memorandum,
or a Remembrance, because he made it when he called to remembrance his sin,
which he had in former time committed Cum commissa olim a se delicta memoria
repeteret. Euthymius ibidem.
. And generally Baruch says to us in this sort; Remember well what you have
done, and as it came in your hearts to turn away from God, so now strive with
your selves ten times more to turn again unto him (...). Bar. 4.28.
. Thus did Paul, remembering he had once been a persecutor or, 1 Timothy 1.13.
he did repent him of it, and made amends for it, and was afterward ten times
more zealous to save the wicked, then before he had been to destroy the godly.
For the second, another says; Quam immensa est latitia de recordatione
transactae virtutis? etc. Ber. in festo omnium Sanc. ser. 2.
O what heavenly comfort do they inwardly feel, which are delighted with the
remembrance of virtue past, with the fruition of joy present, with the
expectation of felicity to come? This threefold cord of comfort, as it can
never be broken, so it must always be drawn forth at length, that Reu. 22.11.
he which is just, may be still more just; that he which is strong, may be
still more strong. Thus did David 1 Samuel 17.36
, remembering he had once slain a Bear, he did not repent him of it, but
gathered strength and courage by it, and was afterward more bold to combat
with a mighty Giant, then before he had been to deal with an eluish Bear.
Therefore as they which leap, the further they go backward to fetch their
run, they further the leap forward, when they have run: so here we may
look back a little, and remember both what we have done il, to amend it, and
also what we have done well to continue it. Otherwise, the remembrance either
of vices or virtues, is so far from putting us any white forward, that it
casts us quite backward. For as Mark the Eremite witnesses, (...).
The remembrance of former sins is enough to cast him down altogether, who
otherwise might have had some good hope. Our sins and Elies sons are alike:
Elie hearing his sons were slain, whom he himself had not chastised and
corrected as he ought, fell down backwards, and brake his neck 1 Samuel 4.17.
: And so all they that remember and hearken after their former sins, which
they should have mortified and killed, fall down backward, and turn away from
God. For this is the difference between the godly and the wicked: Both fall;
But the godly fall forward upon their faces, as Abraham did when he talked
with God: the wicked fall backward upon the ground, as the Jews did when
they apprehended Christ. He that remembers his sins, to be sorry for them,
as Abraham did, falls forward upon his face: but he that remembers his sins,
to rejoice in them, as the Jews did, falls backward upon the ground. Wherefore
if thou be upon a mountain, look not backward again unto Sodom, as Lots
wife did Genesis 19.27.
: if thou be within the Arc, fly not out again into the world, as Noah's Crow
did Genesis 8.7.
: If thou be well vvashed, return not again to the mire, as the Hog does 2
Pet. 2.22.
: if thou be clean purged, run not again to thy filth, as the Dog does
Pro. 26.11.
: If thou be going toward the land of Canaan, think not of the Fleshpots of
Egypt Exodus 16.3.
: If thou be marching against the host of Midian, drink not of the waters of
Harod Iud. 7.6.
: If thou be upon the house top, come not down Mar. 13.11.
: If thou have set thy hand to the plough, look not behind thee Luke. 9.62.
; remember not those vices which are behind thee. No, nor those virtues
neither. For as Gregory vvriteth Memoria virtutis fouea mentis.

De cura pastorali. par. 4. c. 1.


; The remembrance of former virtues does many times so besot and inueigle a
man, that it makes him like a blind Ass fall down into a ditch. When Orpheus
went to fetch his wife Eurydice out of hell, he had her granted to him, upon
condition that he should not turn back his eyes to look upon her, till he
had brought her into heaven. Yet having brought her forward a great way, at
length his love was so excessive, that he could not contain any longer, but
would neede^ have a sight of her. Whereupon forth wi^h be lost both her sight
and her self, she suddenly again vanishing away from him, Flexit amans
oculos, and protinus illa relapsa est. Ovid. Met. l. 10. Fab. 1. Memini^ and
Virgilius Geor. l. 4. in fine.
This is a Poetical fiction; nevertheless it serves very fitly to this
purpose, to admonish us, that if we have any virtue which is to be loved, as a
man is to love his wife, yet we must not be so blind in affection, as to dote
too much upon it, or to fall in admiration of our selves for it, or to be
always gazing and wondering at it, lest by too much looking upon it, and by too
well liking of it, and by too often remembering it, we loose it; because indeed
he that remembers his virtues, has no virtues to remember. Seeing he wants
humility, which is the mother-vertue of all virtues. For this is the
difference between the godly and the wicked: Both remember virtues. But the
godly remember other men's virtues, the wicked remember their own virtues. The
remembering their own virtues; make them ensamples to imitate: these remembering
their own virtues, make them miracles to wonder at: therefore the godly
remembering they have some one or other little vice in them, are humbled, though
they have very many great virtues: But the wicked remembering they have some one
or other little virtue in them are proud, though they have very many great
vices. Wherefore though thou have conquered Kingdoms, yet crake not of it, as
Senacharib did Esaias. 37.13.
: though thou have built Babel, yet brag not of it, as Nebuchodonozer did Dan.
4.27.
: though thou have a great people, yet number them not, as David did 2 Samuel*
14.2.
: though thou have rich treasure, yet show them not, as Ezechias did 2 Reg.
20.13.
: though thou have slain a thousand Philistines, yet glory not in it, as
Sampson did Judge. 15.16:
: though thou have built seven altars, yet vaunt not of it, as Balack did Number.
23.1.
: though thou give alms, yet blow not a trumpet Math. 6.1.
: though thou fast twice a week, yet make no words of it Luke 18.12.
, (remember it not but) Forget that which is behind.

If thou will be Perfect, Mat. 1^.22.
sell all that thou have, and follow me, says our Savior. Sell all that thou
have. Or if no man will buy it, give it. Or if no man will take it, Forget it.
Themistocles said, he had rather learn the Art of forgetfulness, then of
memory. That is, as I understand it, rather Divinity, then Philosophy. For
Philosophy is an Art of memory, but Divinity is an Art of forgetfulness.
Therefore the first lesson that Socrates taught his Scholar was, Remember
Reminiscere.
. For he thought that knowledge is nothing else but a calling of those things
to remembrance which the mind knew, before it knew the body. But the first
lesson that Christ teaches his Scholar is, Forget. Obliuiscere.
Hearken O daughter (says he) and see, Forget thine own country, and thy
fathers house. So that faith is that fair. Helena, which drinks to us in a
cup of Neponthes, and faith Reu. 21.4.
, Be of good cheer there shall be no more sorrow, neither crying, neither
death, neither pain, for the first things are past. And the water of the word
of God is that fountain Lethe, which when we come to drink of it, speaks to
us (as it were) in this sort Esaias. 43.18.
: Remember not the former things, neither regard the things of old. For as they
which die cloth, do not immediately change one contrary into another, but
first turn a white into an azure, and then make a puke of it: So we can never
hold color, as a good puke, except first our white be turned into an azure:
that is, as Lyrinensis says Donec dediscimus been quod didicimus non been. c.
15.
, except first we do well to Forget, that which we did ill to get, except
first we do happily unlearn, that which we did unhappily learn. And like as
they which work in wax, cannot frame any new impression in it, till the old be
defaced (...).

Bas. E. 1. p. 208.


: so the image of Caesar, the Prince of this world, the devil, must first be
defaced, before the image of Christ can be formed in us. For this image of
Christ (as Clemens testifies) (...).

Prot. p. 5.


is seen only in them, which Forget the hill of Helicon, and dwell in mount
Syon. Wherefore though thou have had a bloody issue twelve years, yet thine
issue being now stopped, Forget all bloudinesse Mark. 5.25.
: though thou have had a crooked body eighteen years, yet thy body being now
straightned, forget all crookedness Luke 13.11.
: though thou have had blind eyes, yet thine eyes being now cleared, forget all
blindness in seeing the truth Mark. 10.5.
: though thou have had deaf ears, yet thine cares being now opened, forget
all deafness in hearing the word: Mark. 7.34.
though thou have had a dry hand, yet thy hand being now restored, forget all
dryness and niggardliness with men Mat. 12.10.
: though thou have had a lame foot, yet thy foot being now recured, forget
all limping and haulting with GOD Act. 14.8.
: though thou have been dead and buried in the grave four days, as Lazarus
was, yet being now received, forget all deadness in sin John. 11.39.
: though thou have been possessed and tormented with seven devils, as Mary
Magdalen was, yet being now delivered, renounce the devil and all his works
Luke. 8.2.
: and forget all thy wicked works which are behind thee (...).

(...), vide, Nas. (...).


: Yea and all thy good works also. For if thee forget them, then will God
remember them. The Patriark Abraham was content for Gods pleasure to sacrifice
his son Isaac Genesis 22.16.
: But as soon as he had done, he forgets it. Therefore God remembers it, and
sets down every several circumstance of it. By mine own self have I sworn
(says the Lord) because thou have don this thing; There is the general. But
what thing? The particular follows; And have not spared; yea, not thy servant,
but thy son; nay, not only thy son, but thine only son: and have not
spared thine only son; therefore I will surely bless thee. That good woman
Luke 7.42.
gave Christ loving and friendly entertainment. But as soon as she had done
she forgets it. Therefore Christ remembers it, and amplifies it from point to
point. He turned to the woman and said to Simon. See thou this woman? when I
came to thy house, thou gave me no water for my feet: but she has washed
my feet with the tears of her eyes, and wiped them with the hairs of her
head. Thou gave me no kiss: but she since the time I came in has not
ceased to kiss my feet. My head with oil thou did not anoint, but she
has anointed my feet with ointment. Lo ye how true it is which I said
before, that if we remember our good works, then God will forget them; but if
we forget them, then God will remember them; yea, and he will reward them when
we have forgotten them. If we wage war with God, Luke. 14.31.
and think to overcome him with ten thousand of our good deeds, then will he
like a puissant Prince, bring forth into the field a huge Army of our sins,
twenty thousand of our sins against us, and with twenty thousand of our sins
will easily overthrow ten thousand of our good deeds, and so finally confound
us. But if on the other side we can be content to forget all our good works,
and to strew our best garments, and our most flourishing branches at Christ's
feet Math. 21.8.
; and to cast down our very crowns before the throne of the Lamb Reu. 4.10.
, then he will be a right Lamb indeed, he will not fight with us, but he will
crown us with honor and glory. Almighty God appointed his people not to
sheare the first borne of the sheep Deuteronomy. 15.19.
. The first born of the sheep are the best of our good works; These we must
not sheare, nor lay naked and open to the view and knowledge of all men, but
forget them, and hide them under the fleece of silence, and keep them secret
to our selves. So Joseph, whom God did lead as a sheep Psalm. 80.2.
, having a first borne, did not sheare this first borne of the sheep, but
called him Manasses, that is, forgetfulness of those things which were
behind, when God had now answered the desires of his heart Eccles. 5.19.
. The faithful speaking to Christ say thus, we will make for thee borders of
gold guilt with silver Musenulas aureas vermiculatas argento. Can. 1.10.
: This is quite contrary to the fashion of the world. The fashion of the world
is to guild silver with gold, and to put the best side outward. But the
faithful guild gold with silver, and put the best side inward. So Moses having
a glorious countenance, did not set it out to the show, but did forget it, and
covered it with a veil Exodus 34.33.
. Now a glorious countenance covered with a veil, what is it else but a border
of gold guilt with silver? but we, we alas, for the most part, have such base
minds, that we are scarce worth the ground we go upon: We do not guild our
borders of gold with silver, but we sheare the first borne of our sheep. We
do not cast down our garments and our branches, and our crowns, before the
throne of the Lamb, but we war against God with ten thousand of our good
works. Or rather indeed, which of us all can muster together so many good
works to fight for him? Nay if we have done one thing well, or one time well,
we think all is well, we (...) do no more, we have done good enough, and often
enough. Yea, if others do not commend us also, we do so wonderfully please
our selves in it, that we are ready presently to praise our selves for it. But
here we may all of us learn true humility Humilitas animis sublimitas
Christiani. L^o.
, which is true magnanimity, of S. Paul. Paul had a most noble and most stately
heart, higher then the very poles of heaven it self. All that ever he had
done hitherto, or could do, he thinks too little, nay, he counts it nothing.
He was not a whit inferior to the very chiefest Apostles 2 Cor. 12.11.
, yet he forgets it. He labored more then they all 1 Cor. 15.10.
, yet he forgets it. He spoke with tongues more then they all 1 Cor. 14 18.
, yet he forgets it. He had care of all the Churches 2 Cor. 11.28.
, yet he forgets it. He fought with beasts at Ephesus 1 Cor. 15.32.
, yet he forgets it. He troad satan, that vile beast, under his feet Romans
16.20.
yet he forgets it. He spoke wisdom among them that are perfect 1 Cor. 2.6.
yet he forgets it. He was rapt up to Paradise into the third heaven, where he
first learned that among the Angels, which afterward he taught amongst men 2
Cor. 12.4.
, yet he forgets it. All this is nothing with him. All this (...) forgets, and
says, I FORGET THAT WHICH IS BEHIND. This is the second degree to perfection.

TOuching the third, he says (I stand not still) but I ENDEVOVR MY SELF TO
THAT WHICH IS BEFORE. S. Bernard writing to Haimericus Chancellor of Rome, in
his very first salutation, wishes him Quae retro sunt obliuisci, and ad ea
quae ante sunt Apostolum sequi. Ep. 15.
to forget those things which are behind, and to follow the Apostle to those
things which are before. Which no man can do, that either stands still, or is
idle. Wherefore Hermes says generally, Nothing in the whole world is
altogether idle (...), Dial. 11.
: The wise man has allowed a time for every thing else, but for idleness he
has allowed no time. Moses Arc had rings, and bars within the rings Exodus
24.14.
, to signify that it was not made to stand still, but to be removed from
place to place. Iacob^ ladder had staves Genesis 28.12.
, upon which he saw none standing still, but all either ascending or else
descending by it. Asend you likewise to the top of the ladder, to heaven, and
there you shall hear one say, My Father does now work, and I work also.
Whereupon Basil notes, that king David having first said, Lord who shall dwell
in thy tabernable? adds then Psalm. 15.2. (...).
, Not he that has wrought righteousness heretofore, but he that does now
work righteousness; even as Christ says, My father does now work, and I
work also. Descend you likewise to the foot of the ladder, to the earth, and
there you shall hear that fig tree accursed which did bear leaves and no
fruit. Whereupon Theophylact notes, that John Baptist having first said, The
axe is laid to the root of the Tree, adds then Mar. 3.11. (...).
, Not every tree that has not brought forth goodfruit heretofore, but every
tree that does not now bring forth good fruit, shall be cut down, even as that
fruitless fig tree was cut down, and cast into the fire. Therefore we must so
walk, as God seeing our continual fruitfulnes may say of us, I see men walking
like trees Mark. ^.24
: Men walk like trees, when as men are never idle, but always abounding in
the work of the Lord 1 Cor. 15.58
: As the tree of life every month brings forth twelve manner of fruits Reu.
22.2.
. For so Christ said unto him whom he healed Mark. 2.10.
, Take up thy bed and walk. He says not, Take up thy bed, and stand still,
like a stone, but take up thy bed and walk, like a tree. Otherwise to them
whom he found standing still, he said in his wrath, and in his sore
displeasure, why stand ye still all the day idle? why are ye like Moab settled
upon your l^es Ier. 48.11.
, and not powered from vessel to vessel? we must make account to give account
for every idle word we speak Mat 12.36.
: And much more then for every idle hour we spend. He has called the time
against me, says Jerusalem Lam. 1.15.
: So that for the very time which we have contemned, we shall be condemned:
and for every day, which we have spent idely, we shall be shent severely. The
Israelites were commanded, not once in a week, or once in a month, but every
day to gather Manna, except only the sabbath day, Exodus 16.26.
To teach them and all us, that till we come to the Sabbath of our everlasting
rest in heaven, we must never stand still, but every day be doing somewhat.
Wherefore Apollos posey was this, Let no day pass without a line Nulla dies
s^. n^ linea.
: Be sure every day thou do some good, then draw one line at the least.
According to that Esaias. 28.10.
, Line upon line, line upon line. And Pythagoras posey was this Chaeneci ne
insideas.
, Sit not still upon the measure of corn. Do not look to eat, except thou
swear for it. According to that 2 These. 3.10.
, He which will not work, let him not eat. In my Fathers house, says Christ,
are many mansions Ioh. 14.3.
. So that no man may sing his soul a sweet requiem, saying with that cormorant
in the Gospel: Soul take thy rest. For in heaven only, which is in our
Fathers house, there are many mansions to rest in. In this world, which is out
of our fathers house, there are not many mansions, no not any mansions to rest
in, but only vineyards to work in. We are come, says the Author to the
Hebrews Heb. 12.13.
, to the spirits of just and perfect men in heaven. So that no man may sue out
for himself a Quietus est, saying with the Church of Laodicea, I am rich and
have enough; For in heaven only, are the spirits of just and perfect men,
which are rich and have enough. In this world we must never think we are
rich, but we must always be poor in spirit: we must never think we have
enough, but we must always hunger and thirst after righteousness. Wherefore if
thou have a talent Luke. 19.20.
, put it not into a napkin, but into the bancke: if thou light a candle, Mark.
4.21.
set it not under a bushel, but upon a candlestick: If thou build a city Math.
5.14.
, place it not under a dale, but upon a hill: if thou seek Christ, Can. 3.1.
seek him not in thy bed, but in the garden. Lie not still, Sit not still:
(stand not still) but endeavor thy self to that which is before.

Walk before me and be perfect says God to Abraham Genesis 17.1.
. As if he should say, if thou will be perfect, then walk before me, and
endeavor thy self to that which is before thee. For the Apostle in the other
part, speaking of those things which are behind, says that he does not only
not bear them in body, but not so much as bear them in mind. Here
contrariwise, speaking of those things which are before, he says that he does
not only intend his mind to them, but also extend his very body toward them.
So that as they which run in a race, bend forward their breasts, and stretch
out their arms, to show that they have a desire to run faster then possibly
their feet can follow them: After the same sort, we which run in this course of
Christianity, must cast away every thing that presses down, and sin which
cleaves so fast Heb. 12.1.
, that we may Endeavor our selves, or (as the Greek word (...).
here signifies) stretch our selves to those things which are before. And like
as ^^^lus let all the other winds, which might have bin a troble to him with
his friend Ulysses, to be packt up in a male, and kept only the western wind
for his own use, to bring him home into his Country: so we must reject all
other things, which may be as contrary winds to drive us from the shore of
salvation, and retain only that western wind of the Spirit of God, whereby
we may endeavor our selves to that which is before, and stretch out our sails,
and so come safely to the haven of heaven. Every thing, as Austen testifies,
is either a hinderance, or a furtherance Aut vinculum aut vehiculum. De ciui.
Dei. lib. 9. c. 5.
: if it be a hinderance, cast it away; if it be a furtherance, then keep it.
For even as the silke-worme keeps her body spare and empty, and uses to fast
two or three days together, that she may stretch out her self the better, and
spin her third the finer: so we must endeavor to bring under our bodies 1 Cor.
9.27.
, and (as I may say) diet them for the nonce, that we may not any longer weaue
the spiders web Esaias. 59.5.
, but with the silkworm spin a new third. The spiders web is vinculum, the
silke-wormes third vehiculum. And like as the viper perceiving her old skin to
be so stiff that she cannot easily stretch out her self in it, strips it
quite off: After the same sort we which are by nature a generation of vipers,
must strip off our old skin Coloss. 3.9.
, and perceiving we cannot well do our endeavor, and stir our selves in the
armor of Saul, we must with David put it off, and put on the armor of light.
When long war had been between the two houses of Saul and David, at length the
house of Saul waxed weaker and weaker, and the house of David waxed stronger
and stronger 2 Samuel 3.1.
. In like manner, the Spirit must always endeavor it self to that which is
before, and never leave fighting with the flesh, til the house of Saul, who was
a limb of the devil, that is, the flesh, wax weaker and weaker, and the house
of David, who was a figure of Christ, that is, the spirit, wax stronger and
stronger. Thus the Baptist being (...) a child, waxed stronger and stronger in
Spirit. And yet speaking of Christ and himself, he says thus John. 3.30.
; He must increase, I must decrease. But the Baptist was borne of old
Elizabeth: Christ was borne of young Mary. Whereby we see, that that which is
borne of the old man, which is the flesh, must daily decrease in us, and grow
downward: but that which is born of the new man, which is the spirit, must
daily increase in us, and grow upward. For so indeed Christ in the beginning of
the new world increased in wisdom for his mind, and stature for his body
Luke. 2.52.
. To teach us, that if we be lively members of the same body, then we must in
like sort endeavor our selves to that which is before, and increase and
multiply Crescite and multiplicamini, non solum ad corpus, sed etiam ad animum
refertur, (...).
and grow up into him who is the head, til we all come to the measure of the
age of the fullness of Christ: The holy Ghost also in the beginning of the old
world, who moved upon the waters Genesis 1.2.
. To teach us that if we be inspired and moved by the same spirit, then we must
in like sort be moved upon the waters, and pass apace over the red sea of this
world, that we may quickly come to the celestial Canaan, which is the
kingdom of God. We pray indeed that the kingdom of God may come. But the
kingdom of God comes not by observation Luke 17.20.
, if we stand still gazing and gaping for it Acts 1.11. Non dormientibus
prouenit regnum coelorum, nec oti^ disidiaque torpentibus beatitudo
aeternitatis ingeritur. Leo de Epiph. ser. 5.
. Therefore as Abraham did run from the door of his Tent, to meet the Angels
Genesis 18.2.
: So must we endeavor to run forward, not only looking for, but also
hasting unto, the coming of the day of God 2 Pet. 3.11. (...).
, that we may (if it be possible) meet the Lord in the air 2 These. 4.17.
(...).
, with all his holy Angels, if we would have his kingdom come. We pray also
that the will of God may be done in earth as it is in heaven. But the will of
God will not be done if we will do nothing. Therefore as the Cherubins spread
out their wings on high, and cover the mercy seat Exodus 37.9.
: So must we spread out our wings, and stretch out, or endeavor our selves,
and be always pressed and ready to fly, as it were, to do the will of God
Eze. 1.11. Non solum aquila, sed and bos and leo, and homo volant.
, if we would have his will done in the earth, as it is in heaven. When God at
the first had made a Paradise upon earth, he took the man and put him into it,
to dress it and keep it Genesis 2.15. Vt operaretur and custodiret illum.
Vulgata.
. Adam was not enjoined to bestow any bodily labor in dressing it at that
time: For this was a part of his punishment afterward: Neither yet had he need
to keep it from wild beasts; For all these were then subject and obedient unto
him. So that he dressed and kept it, by keeping those graces which God had
given him, yea, and endeavoring himself to increase them continually Quamuis
paradisus operib. ruralibus non egeret, tamen quia primus homo lex posteritatis
futurus erat, legitimi etiam in paradiso speciem suscepit laboris. Ambro. de
Parod. cap. 4.
. Therefore the Apostle beseeches us also, that we receive not the grace of
God in vain, but that in all things we approve our selves, as the servants of
God, in much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, and so
forth 2 Cor. 6.1.
. See ye how many posts and props he puts under us, that we may be stayed
up and confirmed in the grace of God. How many tools, as it were, and
implements he gives us, that we may not receive the graces of God in vain,
but that as they are received and kept in us, so they may be daily dressed and
bettered by us. For as Saint Peter witnesses 2 Pet. 1.8.
, if these things be and abound, we shall neither be idle nor unfruitful in
the knowledge of Christ. Whereupon Oecumenius observes, that the graces of
God, as the flowers of a garden, must not only be kept, but also be dressed,
that they may have, not only a being, but also an abounding (...).
. Because a man may have great good things being in him, and yet he himself
like a garden, that is kept indeed, but not dressed, altogether idle and
unfruitful: But if they be both being and abounding in him; if he endeavor
himself to go on further every day then other, then surely he is neither
idle nor unfruitful in the knowledge of Christ. Hereupon Charles the 5. gave
this Emblem Vlterius.
, Stand not still, but go on further; Vlterius, as God says to his guest.
Superius Luke 14.10.
. Sit not still, but sit up higher. So the water rises up higher and higher,
which Exechiel speaks of Ezekiel. 47.4.
. First to the ankles, then to the knees, the^ to the loins, lastly to the
head. So the wheat grows up riper and riper, which Christ speaks of Mark.
4.28.
. First there is the blade, then the ear, then the full corn, lastly comes
the harvest. So must we with the water, rise up higher and higher, till we come
to the head, which is the Son of God, and with the wheat grow up riper and
riper, till we come to the harvest, which is the end of the world. Always
endeavoring our selves to that which is before, and continually singing one of
the songs of Zion, that is, one of the Psalms of degrees Nomine graduum,
significatur ascensio, qua proficientes quique a temporalibus ad aeterna, a
terrenis ad coelestia prouchuntur. Prosper. in ti^ulum. Psalm. 120
, till we see the Lord in Zion, till we see the head in the harvest, the Son
of God, in the end of the world. Even as he did, who says here, I ENDEVOVR MY
SELF TO THAT WHICH IS BEFORE. This is the third degree of perfection.

TOuching the fourth he says, (I run not amiss) but. I FOLLOVV HARD. A man
may run amiss, otherwise then he should, by running either too slowly* or too
fast. Now for overmuch slownesse, Rusticus Diaconus says, Turpe est contra
ardenter peruersa asserentes, nos pro veritate frig^dio^es inueniri. li.
aduersus Acephalos.
It is a stark shame for us to be cold in maintaining a truth, seeing our
adversaries are so hot in defending a falsehood. When the adversary had sown
tares among the good corn, the Master said to his servants; Let both grow
together: He says not, Let the tares grow, and the good corn not grow: but,
Let both grow together. If the tares grow so fa^^ for the fire, then let the
good corn grow as fast for the barn. If the wicked run so fast to
damnation, then let the godly run so fast to salvation. Yet the Prophets have
ever complained, that the children of this world are much more forward in their
kind then the children of light. David speaking of the children of this world,
says, They encourage themselves in an ill purpose. But Esaias speaking of the
children of light, says Esaias 59.4.
No man calls for justice, no man contendeth for the truth. When the time
drew near that our Savior should be taken, and carried away to be crucified,
only Judas that vile Traitor was vigilant and watchful to bring his
mischievous purpose to pass, but all the other Disciples were fast asleep.
Therefore as Jerusalem said to her eye Lam. 3.51.
, Mine eye has spoiled my soul: So might these drowsy Disciples have said of
their eye, Our eye has spoiled our soul. And as the Centurion said of his
servant Matthew. 8.6.
, My servant lies at home sick of the palsy, and is ill troubled: So might
Christ have said of these his sleepy disciples, My disciples lie at home sick
of the palsy, and are ill troubled. Well said, ill troubled: For (...) that is
diligent to discharge his duty, and takes pains in his calling as he ought^
^s well troubled Been torquetur.
: But he that has the palsy, and is dissolute and negligent, and lies at home
sick of the lazy disease, is ill troubled Male tarqu^tur.
. Ill troubled, with an evil spirit, with the spirit of slumber; which, as Io^
testifies Job. 40.6.
, lies in the covert of the reeds. They that are lazy and lither fellow^^,
and have nothing in them, are here called reeds, in whom the Devil himself
lies and sleeps securely. But though he be well quieted in them, yet (a^ I
said before) they are ill troubled with him. Ill troubled with him, as those
seventy kings were ill troubled with Ad^nibezec, when he did cut off the
thumbs of their hands and feet. For he that has the thumbs of his hands cut
off, may perhaps do something; but he is so long about a little, that he were
better sit still and do nothing, then be so long pidling about nothing: So he
that has the thumbs of his feet cut off, may peradventure go forward, but it
is Testudineus gradus. Plaut.
such a snailes pace which he goes, that he were better stand still and not
go at all forward, then go so slowly forward. Wherefore we must not go so
slowly forward, as though the thumbs of our hands and feet were cut off, but
rather we must run as fast as it is to be supposed that mighty man could 2 Samuel 21.10.
, which had upon every hand six fingers, and upon every foot six toes. But
yet says Bernard Et feruor discretionem erigat, and discretio feruorem dirigat.
, As zeal must direct our discretion, that we run not too slowly, so
discretion must direct our zeal, that we run not too fast. That wise woman,
by whom is meant the Church of Christ, labors with the counsel of her hands
Consilio ma^^uum. Pro. 31.13.
. Her hands are full of eyes Oculatae manus. Plautus.
: she has more foresight and wisdom even in her little finger, then many a
man has in his whole head. She labors with her hands: there is zeal. She
labors with the counsel of her hands: there is discretion as well as zeal.
In Leuiticus they are forbidden to bring any blind offering to GOD Leuit.
22.22.
. All zeal without discretion, is an offering without an eye. All blind zeal,
is a blind offering. Which God will never accept. So that as Minerua is said
to put a golden bridle upon Pegasus, that he should not fly too fast: in like
sort our Minerua, that is, our Christian discretion, must put a golden bridle
upon Pegasus, that is, our earnest zeal James 3.3.
, lest if our zeal be unbridled, it makes us follow too fast. Therefore
Octauian the Emperor did bear in his Escucheon, a Crabfish and a Butterfly,
with this Motto, Festina lent.
Soft pace goes far. A Crabfish creepes; That is, soft pace. A Butterfly
flies; That goes far. A Crabfish, a Butterfly, Soft pace goes far. And
Vespatian the Emperor did stamp in his coin, a Dolphin and an anchor, with
this Impresa Sat cito, si sat been.
, Soon enough, if well enough: A Dolphin out-strippes the ship; That Is soon
enough: An Anchor stays the ship* That Is well enough: A Dolphin and an
anchor, Soon enough, if well enough. For as if the lower spheres in the heaven
should not be staid with the contrary course of the highest sphere in the
firmament, they would soon set the whole world on a light fire: so the
inferior affections of the mind, if they be not stayed with the contrary
course of reason, and with the mild motion of the spirit of God, they will
soon ouer-heat thee, and overthrow all thou go about. Therefore Chilo
gives us this precept, not to ouer-heate Jacobs sheep by driving them too
fast Genesis 33.13.
, nor to make overmuch have in the way. According to that in the Prophet Esaias,
where it is said Qui crediderit non festinabit. cap. 28. ver. 16.
, He which bel^oueth, shall not make haste. The string of an Instrument may
be as well too high, as too low. If it be too low it ^arres, if it be too high
it breaks. So the mind of man may be as well too intent, as too remiss. If
it be too remiss, it runs too slowly: if it be too intent, it runs too fast.
Wherefore Clemens gives us this precept; that we should not be strained and
wrested too high, but set and tuned aright Non (...), sed (...). P^^ag. lib. 1.
cap. 12.
. According to that in the second to the Corinths Non (...), s^d (...). 2 Cor.
10.14.
, where it is said, that we must not ouer-stretch our selves, but stretch out
our selves, not run amiss, (either too slowly or too fast) but follow hard.

For the way of the righteous Prou. 4.1^.
, it glittereth as the light, which shines more and more unto the perfect day.
It glittereth as the Sun, which comes forth as a Bridegroom out of his
chamber, and rejoices as a Giant to run his course. Indeed the wicked are like
a wheel: O my God, make them like a wheel, says David Psalm. 82.13.
. A wheel tilts up behind, and shoots down before. So the wicked are forward
to all badnesse, and backward to all goodness. But the godly are like a Panther.
A panther has four claws and no more on each hind-foot; but five claws and
no less on each fore-foote: so the godly, though they be weak to the
world-ward, yet they are strong to Godward. And setting the better foot before
(as we say) they follow hard, and run with might and maine most violently to
lay hold on the hope which is set before them (...) Cursum corripiunt. Beza.
Heb. 6.18.
. For there are two sorts of violent men; Of the first sort the Apostle says 1
Cor. 6.10.
, No extortioners, or violent men shall inherit the kingdom of Heaven. Of the
second sort our Savior says Matthew. 11.12.
, The kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and violent men lay hold on it.
Both are violent men: but both are not violent to men. For they offer violence
to men these offer violence to God: therefore they do not enter: but these do
enter into the kingdom of heaven. For though God be not content that we should
offer violence to men, yet he is well content that we should offer violence to
himself Bona ^iol^ntia qua acquiritur regnum Dei. Vis intrare in regnum
coelorum? Esto violentus and improbus. Em. Dominica 3. Aduent. (...).
. And that we should follow hard, and as Pirates or thieves set upon him (if it
be lawful for me so to speak) and by the force of faith spoil him, and rob
him of all his eternal treasures More latr^num fuis eum spoliare nitimur,
cupimus illi auf^^re regnum, thesauros and vitam. Amb. Par. sect. 15.
. Therefore calling his Church, he says Can. 2.13.
, Arise my love, my fair one, make haste and come away. He that does make
account to come to God, must make haste to come to God. He must use violence,
and follow hard, and come down quickly with Zacheus, and for speediness he
must be like a Do, or a Roe upon the mountains of Bether* Even as those beasts
in Ezekiel Ezec. 1.14.
, did run and return as lightning: so must every one who is enlightened with
the spirit of God, follow as swiftly as lightning, which does no sooner flash
down from heaven to the earth, then he must in affection mount up from the
earth to heaven. And like as the Israelites were commanded to ^ate the
Passover in haste Exodus 1^.1^.
: semblably all (...) which are true Israelites, must gird up the loins of our
minds, and follow hard, and run apace, and redeem the time, that both the
wrath of God may pass over us, and also the mercy of God may abide with us.
For God among other arguments of his mercy, says thus Job 39.16.
, Who has given wings to the Ostridge? The ostridge never flies with his wing,
but only a little lifts up his body with them when he runs; and in the pinion
of each wing he has a sharp (...) wherewith he pricks his own self, that he
may run the faster. So that God has given wings to the Ostridge, not for the
Ostridge, but for us; that we might thereby learn, how we ought by all good
means to quicken our dull dispositions, that we may follow hard, even as we
see the Ostridge eggeth his own self forward with the flapping of his wings.
For they that wait upon the Lord, shall change their strength, they shall lift
up their wings (not only as the Ostridge, but also as the Eagle: They shall (I
say) lift up their wings as the Eagle Esaias 40.31.
. they shall run and not be faint, they shall walk and not (...) weary. Even
as Pindarus writes, that king Th^rous coursers were such as would never be
weary of going (...).
: so shall these follow still, and never be weary of well doing. But the most
especial thing to be considered here, is this, that the Prophet says, They
which wait upon the Lord shall change their strength Mutabun^ fortitudinem.
. He says not, they shall loose their strength, that whereas before they were
strong, now they shall be weak: but, they shall change their strength) namely,
(the use of their strength) that whereas before they were strong, and did
follow hard to serve sin, now they shall be as strong, and shall follow as hard
to serve God. Romans 6.19.
For God only it is, which can melt brass out of a stone Job. 28.2.
. I wot well there is a stone called Almacrasia, which being molten becomes
brass. But these words have a far more hidden meaning: to wit, that God does
melt brass out of a stone, when he takes the heart of a sinner, which is as
hard as a stone, and melting it with the holy Ghost, and with fire, does
afterward make it as tough as brass. This was seen in the conversion of Paul.
For when Paul was made an Apostate, then a stone was made brass. He was as
hard as any stone, before his conversion, when he stoned Stephen Acts 7.58.
. He was as tough as any brass after his conversion, when he did follow so
hard, that no affliction could separate him from the love of Christ Romans 8.35.
. Which thing was prophesied of long before Genesis 49.27.
. When the Patriarch Jacob said, Benjamin shall be as a ravening wolf; in the
morning he shall devour the prey, in the evening he shall divide the spoil:
Paul was this Benjamin, because he was of the Tribe of Benjamin Phil. 3.5.
. Paul was this ravening wolf, because he breathed out threatening and
slaughter against the Disciples, and was even mad upon them as a ravening wolf
Act. 9.5.
. Paul in the morning devoured the prey, because in the beginning of his days
he wasted and devoured the Church of God as a prey Gal. 1.13.
. Paul in the evening divided the spoil, because in the latter end of his
days he did follow his calling hard, and divided the Word of God aright 2 Timothy 2.15.
, of which the Psalmist says, I rejoice in thy Word more then they which have
found a great spoil. So that this is no loss of strength, but only a change
of strength. O blessed Benjamin! O holy Apostle! Thou have now changed thy
strength: Yea by changing it thou have much increased it; for thou were nothing
so strong before, as thou art now. Nothing so strong before, being a stone, as
thou art now, being brass. Nothing so strong before, being a ravening wolf,
as thou art now, being a meek lamb. Nothing so strong before in the morning,
as thou art now in the evening. Nothing so strong before when thou did
devour the prey, as thou art now, when thou do divide the spoil. When no
impediments, no stumbling blocks can stay thee, but thou will needs compass
sea and land, but thou will needs follow hard, and run over the whole world,
to divide the spoil, among all nations to preach the Gospel, unto all people.
So likewise Baruch was inflamed, as the Hebrew word signifies Hekerah. Neh.
3.20.
, he was (I say) inflamed to fortify the wall of Jerusalem. In man's body the
Arteries running along the veins, and beating upon them, stir up the blood,
and keep it warm, least otherwise by standing still, it should congeale and
wax cold Vide Theodor. (...), lib. 1.
. After the same manner in Baruch his heart, there were lively and quick
motions of the holy Ghost, which did blow the coals, and stir up the gift of
God in him 2 Timothy 1.6.
which did warm his blood, and make him follow the matter hard, being wholly
inflamed with a burning desire to see the City of God restored again to her
former glory. So Abraham when the Angels came to him Genesis 18.7.
, made haste to run to his tent; and his wife made haste to kneade three
measures of fine meal; and his boy made haste to (...) and dress a good and
tender calfe. Let ye how all are employed in a godly man's house. Abraham and
his wife, man and woman; Abraham and his Boy, old and young: all make haste, and
follow hard. So David did run the way of Gods commandments. Nay, no ordinary
pace would serve him, but he must needs dance before the Arc. Yea, his feet
could not hold him, but he must needs have wings as a dove: O that I had
wings as a Dove, says he, then would I fly and be at rest Psalm. 55.4.
. He wishes for wings, not that he might first be at rest, and afterward fly,
but that he might first fly, and afterward be at rest. That he might first
follow hard, and fly up with the wings of faith into the heavenly paradise,
and afterward be at rest, and settle there, in the tree of eternal life. O
that I had wings, that I had wings as a dove (says he) then would I fly,
would I fly, and be at rest. And so must we after the example of David, of
Abraham, of Baruch, of Paul, fight for the faith which we have received Judge.
1.3.
: and strive to enter in at the straight gate Luke 13.24.
: and labor for the meat which perishes not John. 6.27.
: and study to enter into rest Heb. 4.11.
. We must I say study: and labor; and strive; and fight; and follow hard. This
is the fourth degree to perfection.

Touching the fifth he says (not beside the mark, but) toward the Mark.
Austin holds, that a man were better run either too slowly, or too fast in
the way, then follow hard out of the way. For the harder thou followest out of
the way the further thou runnest from the Mark. Hereupon the Apostle, after
Following hard, adds immediately, toward the Mark. Insinuating thereby, that
to follow is nothing, but the Mark is the matter. And consequently that he
which is not a skillful Mark, man, can never be a faithful follower.
Therefore we must mark well what MARK is. (...) Laert. in Dioge. Quod ille
ioco id nos serio dicannis.
. In one word, it is the cross of Christ. For Christ has set up his cross as
a spell Hinc dicitur Gospel, quasi Gods spell.
or as a mark, for us to aim at, as a pattern of all perfection, as an
everlasting sign which shall not be taken away Esaias. 55.13.
. Hence it is that speaking of one who should be his Disciple, he says Mar.
8.34. (...). Basil de spiritu S. cap. 8.
; He that would come after (...), let him take up his cross and follow (...)
Let him take up his cross, that he may come the nearer to my cross; and
follow me, that he may be directed all the way by me. For thou can never
err, or go beside the mark, so long as thou walk in this way (...).
Centu. 2.^.
. Therefore Maximus says, If thou would find the way which brings unto
life, then seek it in that way which says, I am the way the truth, and the
life. (x) The way, to them that begin; the truth, to them that proceed; the
life, to them that are perfect Via est incipientibus: veritas profici^ntibus:
and vita perfectis. Tho a campis in soliloquio animae. cap. 12.
. Now the way to this way is the Word; Which S. Peter confirms saying 2 Pet.
1.25.
, The word of the Lord endures for ever, and this is the word which is
preached among you. He avoucheth that the eternal word, is the preached word:
meaning thereby that the only way to the begotten word is the written word.
According to that of the Psalmist Psa. 119.1.
, Blessed are they which are upright in the way, and walk in the law of the
Lord. So that if thou would be upright in the way, which is the word of
Christ, then thou must walk in the law of the Lord, which is the word of
Christ. For the holy scripture is given by the inspiration of God, to be a
lantern unto our steps, and a light unto our paths, that the man of God may
be absolute, being made perfect unto all good works 2 Timothy 3.17
. Wherefore (to define this whole matter in few words) we shall in mine opinion
follow hard toward the mark, if we labor earnestly in our several vocations
to express the virtues of Christ our good Lord (...). Basil. page 555.
which he showed forth in all the course of his life, and especia^ly in his
death upon the cross for us to imitate and follow, by walking faithfully in
the way of his Commandments, and squaring all our actions, speeches and
thoughts, according to the rule of his word. Even as on the contrary part, it
is very evident, that all they run beside the mark, which do not propound to
themselves to follow the example of Christ, but either in their doctrine, or in
their life, either in their opinions, or in their actions, continually swerve
from him. Such (...) all Atheists, Temporizers, Newters, and ^^^^rists. For
Atheists run beside ^^e mark by going too much on the left hand. They do not
make Christ a mark to aim at, that they may follow him, but a sign to shoot
at that they may blaspheme him Luke. 2.34.
. They bend their tongues as bows, and shoot out their arrowe even bitter
words Psalm. 64.3.
. They corrupt others, and speak of wicked blasphemy, their talking is against
the most high Psalm. 73.8.
. They say unto God depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy
ways Job. 21.14. Excede pietas si modo in nostra domo vnquam fuisti. Atreus
apud Senecum in Thyeste. Actu. 2.
. And no marvel that they speak so impiously which live so ungodly. Running
altogether upon the left hand, in the broad way of the world, of the flesh, of
the devil. For the world has a kind of course (...) Ephesians. 2.2.
, which Athists follow, being past feeling, (...). Ephesians. 6.11.
and even stark dead in their trespasses and sins. Part sinistra Centifidum
confindititer. Prud. con. Sym. lib. 1.
The flesh also has a bypath (...). Heb. 3.3.
, whereby they are seduced and deceived. Lastly, the devil has a method^ which
is without any method, and an order which is contrary to all good order, and a
left handed direction, which brings them to final confusion. Now Temporizers
also run beside the mark by going a bout in a circle. They go about many
things, but bring about nothing These. 3.11.
. They do all things for the time, but nothing for the truth Omnia prae
tempore, nihil pre veritate. Optatus lib. 1. (...). Chryso.
. They make many a period, but never a full pointm. They are always lerning,
but never come to knowledge 2 Timothy 3.7.
. The hedge hog has two holes in his siege, one toward the south, another
toward the North. Now when the Southern wind blows, he stops up that hole,
and turns him northward, When the Northern wind blows, he stops up that
hole likewise, and turns him again southward. Such vrchin^ are all
Temporizers. They believe for a time, as long as the warm sun shines upon
them. But as soon as any storm of persecution arises, by and by they have a
starting hole to hide themselves in, they change their Religion, and turn
about with the time. For the hearts of such men are as a cart-wheele, and their
thoughts are like a rolling axeltree Eccle. 33.5.
. Or as a top which always runs round, and never goes forward unless it be
whipped (...). Hesy: verbo (...).
. Or like a mill-horse, which making many steps, turns about, and is
continually found in the same place (...) Bas. page 563.
. Or as a dote, which riding upon his hinges all day long, is never a white
nearer at night. So likewise Newters run beside the mark, by going forward and
backward in a maze. These do not ask of their Father an egg, Pro. 26.14.
but a Scorpion. For an egg would teach them to go only forward, but a
Scorpion does teach them to go both forward and backward Augustine. Ep. 121.
cap. 5. and Basil in Ps. 32. initio.
. Like the Barnacles, which are both flesh and fish Auibus istis tanquam non
carneis viri religiosi ieiuniorum tempore vesci sole^^^ Giral. Came. App. cap. 8.
. Or the Israelites which speak both Ashdod and Hebrew Nehem. 13.24.
: Or Ianus, which sees both before and behind Ianus bifrons exprimitur, quod in
medio constitutus annum incipientem pariter and excedentem spectare videatur.
Cyp. lib. de Idol. vanit.
: Or Balaan, which does both bless and curse Number. 23.25.
: Such a Newter among the Romans was Tullie, who could not resolve, whether he
should take Caesar's or Pompeyes part Quem fugiam scio, quem sequar nescio.
* Among the Grecians was Thytides, who could not determine whether he should
join himself with Achilles or Hector (...), Homer Ilia. 5.
. Among the Jews was the Tribe of Ephraim, which was a cake upon the harth not
turned Ose. 7.8.
, baked on the one side, and raw on the other side. Among the Gentiles was the
Church of Lao^icea, which was neither hot nor cold Revel. 3.15.
: neither hot, because it was raw on the one side, nor cold, because it was
baked on the other side. So it is with all Newters. Their cake is dough, as we
say, and they hold of both sides: as Ambidexters with Ehud Judge. 3.15.
, they play with both hands Malefaciunt ambabua manibus benefaciendo. Micheas.
7.3.
: and as the Sun in Ezakias time, they go both forward and backward Esaias.
38.8.
. Running up and down; in, and out; and yet indeed are neither above, nor
beneath, neither within, nor without (...), Irenae. l. 1. c. 9.
. Panarches riddle was this, how a man and no man, can with a stone and no
stone, kill a bird and no bird, sitting upon a tree and no tree? Athenaeus
makes the answer (...). Conuiualium lib. 10.
, That an Eunuch is the man, and a Pumeise is the stone, a Batte is the bird,
fennel is the tree. After the same sort a Newter is a very hard riddle. You
cannot tell what to make of him. For going forward and backward, he is a
Christian and no Christian. Like an Eunuch, which is a man and no man; or a
Pumeise, which is a stone and no stone; or a Batte, which is a bird and no
bird* or Fennel, which is a tree and no tree. Now Humorists also run beside
the mark, by going too much on the right hand. Therefore David could wish his
utter enemy no greater harm, than that satan might stand at his right hand
Psalm. 109.6.
. Satan stands at a man's left hand, when he draws him by the arm into the
old way of Atheism. At a man's right hand, when he pulls him by the elbow
into the newfound way of Puritanisme. For so blessed Cranmer says, Initio
prologi sui ante magna Biblia.
Some lo^^ their game by short shooting, some by euer-shooting; some walk too
much on the left hand, some too much on the right hand. The first, which shoot
short and walk too much on the left hand, are Atheists: these latter, which
ouer-shoote themselves, and walk too much on the right hand, are Humorists. Of
both which S. Austin writes this Cauenda pernities, vel Zizaniorum. pracisorum
de vite Domini sarmentorum, Epist. 203.
: We must in any case beware and take heed, says he, of the mischievous
infection, not only of ^ares, (which are Atheists) but also of those branches
that have cut themselves from the Lords vine, which are Humorists. For as
Atalanta ranging out on the right hand to gather those golden Apples which
Hippomanes for the nonce threw forth before her, did lose the wager she ran
for (...). Arabius apud N^tatem Comitem Myth. lib. 7. cap. 8.
: no otherwise they which are not thankful to God for the glorious peace and
prosperity of his Church, but run after every strange devised discipline, and
take up all pretty novelties as golden Apples, which every man lets fall, shall
without question miss the mark, and lose the garland of glory. Wherefore we
must run, not too much on the left hand, as Atheists do: not round about the
circle, as Temporizers do: not forward and backward in a maze, as Newters do:
not too much on the right hand, as Humorists do: (not any other way beside the
mark) but toward the mark.

John Baptist did go before Christ to make ready a perfect people for the Lord
Parare domino pleb^^ perfectam. Luke 1.17.
. Now the sum of John's preaching was this, Prepare the way of the Lord, and
make his path straight. So that they which walk in a straight path directly
toward Christ, are a perfect people for the Lord. Therefore we which would
run toward the mark, must leave all Atheism, all Gentilisme, al
prophanenes, all lewdness on the left hand, as Paul did leave Cyprus on the
left hand, when he sailed toward Syria Acts. 27*
. For thus touching the world, S. Basil tells us that we must forsake all
those worldly affections, which may draw us any way beside the mark of true
godliness (...), page 448.
. Touching the flesh, Maximus tells us, (...). Centuria prima.
that when our mind is perfectly freed from fleshly desires, then it goes on
straight without any declining from the mark. Touching the devil, Macarius
tells us, That we cannot avoid that gaping gulf wherein the powers of
darkness are overwhelmed, except the spirit of Christ be our Pilot, and guide
us in a straight course toward the mark, and in a right line, as it were, to
the haven of rest (...). Homil. 44.
. For indeed Hymeneus and Alexander wanting this guide, made shipwreck of
their faith, and were overwhelmed in the gulf of damnation, being delivered to
the Devil, that they might learn not to blaspheme 1 Timothy 1.20.
. Whereupon Oecumenus says, That it asks good Art, and is a point of great
cunning for a man to keep the scope of Christianity, and to go right toward
the mark of truth (...). in v. 6.
. And therefore as Gunners wink with their left eye, that they may level more
truly: in semblable sort we must not behold any ungodliness or sinister
dealing with our eyes, but we must aim directly toward Christ, and either, if
it be possible, hit the mark, or at the leastwise with those left handed
Beniamites, come within a hairs breadth of it Judge. 20.16
. When Diogenes saw a bungling Archer shoot, he ran as fast as he could to
the mark. The lookers on demanded what he meant in so doing? He answered, to
make sure that he might not be hit. For this fellow (says he) means never to
come near the mark. Thus must we do: When we see profane straglers,
starting aside like a broken bow, and roauing a great way wide on the left
hand, we must presently run to the mark, that not only we may keep our
selves safe from the danger of their ill ensample, but also we may give aim
(as it were) to others, by our good ensample, and direct them, that they be
neither wide nor short of the mark Paulus dicit se instar sagittarij ad
propositum, and ad signum i^cula dirigere; ne sagitta ad partem declinans
alteram, imperitum ostenda^ sagittarium: Hiero. aduer. P. l. ^. initio.
. Now for Temporizers, we know that Joseph's brethren stood so long dallying
and delaying, and trifling out the time, that having a journey to buy corn,
they might have returned twice, before they would go once Genesis 43.10.
. Also that Elizeus when Elias called him, went about the bush (as we say) and
would needs go bid his father and his mother farewell, before he would follow
the Prophet 1 Kin. 19.20.
. Paul did not so, Being called of God* he did not stand temporizing, and
circling* and consulting with flesh and blood Gal. 1.16.
, before he would follow toward the Mark* neither did he fetch a compass, as
he was constrained to do when he arrived at Regium Act. 21.1.
, but as he came with a straight course to Ceus Act. 21.1.
, so here straight ways he came to Christ. There is but one place in the whole
Scripture, which may seem to serve them which serve the time: and that is,
where the Apostle exhorts us, not to be sloathfull in service, but fervent in
spirit, serving the time Romans 12.11 (...).
. They that by serving the time, understand, taking all opportunities to do
good, expound it nevertheless thus, That we must apply our selves to the
time, yet so, as in every inclination, and turning, we keep a straight course
Sic tamen, vt in qualibet inclinatione rectum cursum teneamus. Calui^. ibid.
. But all the Fathers, Origin only excepted, do read the place otherwise
Jerome by name, says most peremptorily Illi legant Tempori seruientes, nos
legamus, Domino seruientes, Epistola ad Marcel.
, Let others read, serving the time, I for my part will read, serving the
Lord. And this reading indeed is much more agreeable to the Text. So that here
is nothing said in defense of time-seruers. For they that are such, serve not
the Lord Jesus Christ, they are not Christ-seruers, but they serve their own
bellies, and with their glauering and flattering, they seduce the hearts of the
simple, and lead them beside the Mark Romans 16.18. (...).
. Therefore as Fletchers to make their shafts fly steddily, piece them with
sugarchest, or hollie, or such like heavy wood; so we must adioine to that aspe
or service tree, or such other light matter which we are all made of, the sweet
sugarchest of the holy Ghost, that we may not be unsteady as arrows of aspe,
nor yet slothful in service, but fervent in spirit, serving the Lord. Saint
Ambrose reports, that the Be being to fly home to her hiue, and fearing
lest if she should be taken by the way with the wind, she might perhaps be
blown about in the air, counterpoizers her self with a little stone, and so
flies straight home Apis cum aeris motus susp^ctos habet sapil^s saepe in
sublat^ per (...) se lirrat nubila, n^^^eus alirum remeg^um praec^pitent fla^ra
ventorum. De virg. prop. fol. 3.
. This may teach us also what we ought to do. We must not be wavering, and
carried about with every blast of doctrine Ephesians. 4.14.
like a reed shaken in the wind Vide Foxu^ in praefatione ante Pandectas
locorium communium.
: but as the Be is balanced with a little stone, so we must be built upon
the chief corner stone Ephesians. 4.20.
and grounded upon a rock Luke 6.24.
, and established with grace Heb. 13.9.
, that howsoever the rain fall, or the floods arise, or the winds blow Mat.
7.25.
, or what times soever come, yet we may stand fast in the street which is
called straight Acts. 9.11.
, always following Christ directly toward the mark. To come now to Newters,
they may be compared to a weauers shuttle Job. 7.6.
, which if it go forward one way, presently goes backward again as much
another way^. Or to a Weauer himself, such an one as Penelope was, who would
do, and undo, weauing that in the day time, which she did unweave in the
night. But contrariwise says our Apostle Gal. 2.16.
, If I build again the things that I have destroyed, I make my-selfe a
transgressor. As if he should say, If I weaue and unweave, if I build and
destroy, I make my self a newter, and so consequently run beside the mark.
For no man does more transgress, then he that is doubtful and uncertain in
religion, one while putting his foot forward, another while pulling it backward
again Nihil ^urpius dubio and incerto, pedem modo producente. Seneca. ep. 96.
. God says to his people which come to worship him in his temple, That he
which enters in by the way of the North-gate, shall go out by the way of the
South-gate, and he that enters by the way of the South-gate, shall go forth
by the way of the North-gate, he shall not return by the way of the gate
whereby he came, but they shall go forth over against it Ezech. 46*9.
. Thus the wise men which came to worship Christ returned not home the same way
they came, but returned home another way Mat. 2.12.
. For it was behooufull that believing now in Christ, they should not walk any
more in the ways of their old conversation, but that taking a new course, they
should leave all their former errors, and go^ forward continually toward the
Mark Oportebat enim vt iam in Christum credentes, non per antiquas
conuersationis semitas ambularent, sed nouam ingressi viam, a relectis
erroribus abstinerent. Leo de Epiphania. ser. 3.
. Among those fowls which are counted abominable, the Sea-m^w, or the Gull is
one Leuit. 11.16.
. Now this is unclean, because it lives in both elements, both in the water,
and in the earth, swimming as a fish, and yet flying as a bird Lerus quimal est
in v^r^ quae viuens, id est aqua and terra, qui sicutauis quidem volat, vt
aquatile autem natat. Cui non mal^ comparantur hi qui circumcisionem venerantur
and Baptisma, ad quos Paulus dicit, si circumcida^ini, Christus vobis nihil
prodest. Isychius in Leu. Lib. 3.
. And certainly those wise men should have been such fools, and such guls as
these are, if they had worshipped both circumcision, which is an earthly
rudiment, and also Baptism, which is administered by water, and by the holy
Ghost. For the Holy Ghost says, if you be circumcised Christ shall profit you
nothing. As if he should say, If you go backward again to the circumcision of
Herod, having gone thus far forward to the Baptism of Christ, you make your
selves Newters, and shall never come to the Mark. The Jews were charged not
to wear a garment of diverse sorts, as of linen and woollen together Deuteronomy.
22.11.
. Has God care of oxen, and has he not much more care of Preachers 1 Cor.
9.9.
? Has God care of those garments, wherewith our bodies are covered, and has
he not much more care of those virtues wherewith our minds are adorned 1 Pet.
3.3. (...)* 1 Pet. 5.5. (...).
? Yes verily, we must so understand it, that by this Jewish Law, we are all
charged, not to run with old clouted shoes upon our feet Judge. 95.
, when our feet should be new shod with the preparation of the Gospel of
peace Ephesians. 6.15.
not to sow a piece of new cloth into an old garment Mark. 2.21.
, when old things are now past, and all things are become new 1 Cor. 5.17
. In one word, not to have a linsie-woolsie Religion, or a patcht moath-eaten
conscience, but to wear such a fair Cognizance of certainty and constancy
upon our coat, as al men may see, that without any neutralitie, or hypocrisy,
we follow hard toward the mark, and sincerely serve God. Therefore as Theseus
being guided by Ariadnes thread, which she tied at the entrance into Dedalus
labyrinth, escaped all the danger and error of it: even so we must make
Christ the door; by which we must enter into the labyrinth of all our
affairs, and tie Rahabs thread Iosu. 2.14.
at his entrance, and follow it all the way, that so we may be safe, and go
in, and out, and find pasture John 10.9.
. For to go in and out after this sort, is not to go forward and backward, but
to go only forward. Seeing whether we go in by remembrance of Christ's
mercies, or go out by consideration of our own miseries, whether we go in by
faith, or go out by good works, whether we go in by life, or go out by
death, always we find pasture, that is, heavenly comfort in Christ, always
we go forward, always we follow toward the mark. Now for Hum^rists, Saint
Paul advises us to put on the Armor of righteousness on the right hand, and on
the left 2 Cor. 6.7.
. Marcus Caelius was said to have a good right hand, but an ill left hand,
because he could plead against a man better then for him. But here it is
contrary: for these are armed well enough on the left hand, but they lie open
to the Devil on the right hand. Who like a cunning fencer, does strike a great
deal more fiercely at the right hand then at the left Ampliori solicitudine
vulnerare in nobi^ dextram satagit quam sinistram. Ber. qui hab. ser. 7.
. Therefore David says. The Lord upon the right hand shall wound even Kings in
the day of his wrath Psalm. 110.5.
. If Satan stand at thy right hand, he shall wound thee: but if the Lord
stand at thy right hand, thou shall wound him, and bruise his head, and break
the hairy scalpe of all the Kings and Princes of darkness Ephesians. 6.12.
. Wherefore every Christian must say with the Psalmist Psalm. 19.9.
, I have set God always before me, (there is the mark) for he is at my right
hand, so that I shall not fall. And again Psalm. 73.23.
, Thou have holden me up by my right hand, thou shall guide me with thy
counsel, (there is toward the mark,) and after that receive me into glory. S.
Bernard writing to one Guido, a Cardinal of Rome, in his very first
salutation, wishes him no greater gift of God, then that he might have grace
to turn neither to the right hand, nor to the left Guidoni Bernardus, Non
declinare ad dextram nec ad sinistram, Epist. 192.
. And a little after in the same Epistle, he requesteth him that he would
learn to know himself and not to go beyond his own mediocrity, but be wise
unto sobriety Seipsum cognosceret, nec egrederetur mensuram suam* sed saperet
ad sobrietatem. ib.
. This lesson the wisest that ever was t^acheth v^ Eccles. 7.18.
, not to be over much just, neither to make our selves overmuch wise Quisquis
plus iusto non sapit ille sapit. Martial. l. 16.
. For that which is too good, is stark naught: and he that is too wise, is a
stark fool; because he is never contented with the time present, but needs
he must have a praeter: And yet no praeter will content him neither, nor an
imperfect, no not a perfect, but only that which is more the^ perfect. Now h^e
which will needs be more then perfect shall whether he will or no, be less
then imperfect. He that seeks to be more wise then he can be, shall be found
to be less wise then he should be. And he that thinks himself seen in
all things, shall soon show himself ouer-seene in most things. Because a
self-conceit of surmised wisdom, will not let him come to happy increase of
true wisdom (...). Marc.
. And certain it is, that God will not reveal wisdom, but only to such as
walk conti^nually in the way of peace, and do not at any time, like scattered
sheep, run too much on the right hand, out of the way of peace, into the way
of preciseness In via pacis tantum ambulantibus reuelabit, and in nullam
praecisionem deuiantibus. Aug. lib. 2. de Bap. contr. Donat. c. 8. and citatur
a Bruno d^^b^reticis. li. 4. cap. 4.
. Wherefore though it be thy right eye, yet if it offend thee, or cause thee to
offend the Church of God by thy running beside the mark, pluck it out hardly,
and cast it from thee Mat. 5.30.
. For thou know that he which would needs forsooth in all the haste call
for fire from heaven Luke 9.14.
had too hot a spirit, and at that time went too much on the right hand, and
therefore not with a right foot to the Gospel Galat. 2.4.
. But he that did shave his head in Cenchrea Acts 18.18. Paulus Timo^heum
circumc^dit, hostias in temp^ immolauit cum Aquila and Priscill^ caput Corinthi
totondit. Wilf^idus apud Bedam histor. l. 5. c. 25.
, and yielded to many other ceremonies for peace sake, which otherwise perhaps
he did not greatly allow and like of, as he exhorts others to do, so he
did himself, make ^raight steps for his feet Heb. 12.13.
, and went directly toward the mark. To return ^hen now at the length to that
which ^re-while I was about to say, it has bin thought in former time that
none could ^e perfect but they which led a solitary life. Hence it is that so
many Writers both old and new have so largely discoursed of the perfection of
that life Venire ad ^remum summa perfectio est, Caesar Arelatensis, h. 23. p.
143. Vide praeter alios, Laurentium Iustinianum de disciplina, and perfectione
monasticae conuersationis, page 118.
. Yea diverse, not only inferiors, but even Princes, and not only of other
countries, but even of this Realm of England Kynigilsus, Ceolulsus, Eadbertus,
Ethelredus, Kenredus, Sigibertus, Offa, Sebbi, Iue.
, have voluntarily relinquished their Crown, their Scepter, and all their
royal roabes, and cloistered up themselves in Monasteries, that they might
live, as they thought, in a more perfect state. And certes I will not deny, but
that such as can well away with this kind of life, have many opportunities to
serve God, which we have not Nihil aliud quicquam erat olim monachi professio,
quam priscae liberaeque vitae meditatio ac piere Christian. Erasmus in
praefation^^nte Hier. Ep.
, and have not many imperfections of the world which we have Cellae and Coeli
habitatio cogna taesunt. Ber. de vita solit^r.
. Yet this is not the only perfect estate, which tends toward the mark. But
as diverse have lived very badly in Monasteries: so many have lived very
blessedly without them. Yea, there is no calling so mean, but if a man follow
Christ in it, he may well enough according to the measure of grace which it
shall please God to give him, become a perfect man. Let Joseph be an example
for servants; Jacob for shepherds; Amos for cottagers; Matthew for Farmers;
Peter for Fishers; Paul for T^nt-makers; and so forth of the rest Vide Theod.
(...) l. 7. in fine. Et Philo Iudeum (...), p. 593.
. For if a man have the right Mark always before his eyes, he may live as
well in a City, as in a sanctuary Morae (...). Chrysostom. ad pop. Antioch. 17.
(...) vbi supra, hom. 12.
, as well in a shop as in a cell i, So that no one calling simply of it self,
does make a man perfect, but the answer of a good conscience to God 1 Pet 3.21.
, that is it which makes a man perfect. Briefly the point is this. What
lawful calling, state, or condition soever thou art in, if over and besides
the plying of thy worldly business, thou have a conscionable care every day to
increase spiritually also, in such a faith as works by charity Galath. 5.6.
, I warrant thee, fear nothing, thou art right enough, and do go straight
toward the Mark. The superstitious Pagans thought that an Idol which they
termed Vibilia, kept them from erring out of their way Ab erronibus viarum dea
Vibilia liberat. Arnob. aduers. gent. l 4. initio.
. But faith is our Vibilia, which will not suffer us to wander out of the way,
so long as we do all things according to that pattern which was showed us in
the mount Exo. 25.10.
. For Christ with his cross in mount Caluarie has gone before us, and broken
the ice already for us, and left us an example, that by faith we might follow
his steps 1 Pet. 2.21.
, every one of us saying unto him, with holy Job, My foot has followed thy
steps, thy way have I kept, and have not declined Job 23.11.
. This we shall do if we walk in the Kings hie-way of charity Number. 21.22
(...), Nazianzen p. 19. (...), Bas. page 129.
, and keep the royal way of love ^am. 2.8.
. For we that are Christians go toward the mark, not by living, but by
loving: not with our feet, but with our affections. Neither is there any thing
which makes a good or bad life, but a good or a bad love Imus enim, non
ambulando: non pedibus, sed moribus. Nec faciunt bon^s vel malos mores nisi
boni vel mali amores. Aug. Epist. 52.
. Therefore he that would be perfect, must be rich in good works, and
according to the rule of Evangelical perfection, he must love, not only his
friends in God, but also his foes for God Amico, in deo, and inimicos propter
deum. Prosper. in l. sententiar^m.
. Because as that is the hottest fire which warmeth them that are furthest off:
so that is the most fervent and perfect love which forsakes none though they
be never so far off, neither friend nor foe* that may be loved, but embraces
all in him who never does forsake, unless he be forsaken. Now this charity of
ou^s ought to be scarlet twice dyed Coccus bis tinctus. Exodus 28.6.
, I mean extended not only toward men, but also toward God. Which love of
God must make us contemn the world, and loath our own selves Duo amores duas
constituunt civitates, amor Dei crescens vsque ad contemptum sui, ciuitate Dei.
Amor sui vsque ad contemptum Dei, ciuitatem diaboli. Aug.
, and mortify all our inordinate desires, and keep no propriety in any thing
we have, but renounce and resign our whole will and our whole soul, to the
good will and pleasure of God. For indeed so many times we step out of the way
as we desire any thing which is not finally referred to the love of the Lord
Tot gressus extra viam ponimus, quot peruersis desiderijs a coelestis vitae
meditatione separamur. Greg. Mag.
. And therefore as a cunning archer will hit, not only the white, but even that
very black in the midst of the mark, which is commonly made in the form of
a heart Cambyses c^^ sily Prexaspis, cor ipsum sua sagitta traiecisset, Dicito
mihi, inquit Prexaspes, quemnam noris mortali^^n ita ad destinatum emittere
sagittas? Herodotus lib. 3. initio.
* semblably a sincere lover of God, must never leave darting and shooting up to
God his most passionate and piercing desires Iaculatoria desideria. Aug.
, till he has hit the mark (...). Igna. Epist. 13.
, and with his wounded heart also wounded Gods heart, that the Lord may
mercifully, and lovingly confess unto him and say, Thou have wounded my heart,
my sister, my spouse Cant. 4.9.
. But now as in our charity to men we must love not only our friends, but
also our foes; so in our charity to God, we must love the Lord, not only when
he shows sensible signs of familiarity and favor toward us, but also when
he seems to frown as it were, and to be offended with us. David says in
one Psalm Psalm. 119.143.
, trouble and heaviness has found me: but in another Psalm Psalm. 116.3.
, I have found trouble and heaviness: Between these two speeches there is a
great difference; For trouble and heaviness may find him which runs into a
corner and hides himself, and would not be found by affliction; But he
finds trouble and heaviness, who when it is in his own free choice whether
he will be afflicted or no, willingly with Moses chooses to suffer affliction
Heb. 11.25.
, and loves the Lord most of all, when he lays some fatherly chastisement
and correction upon him; knowing that as Christ was consecrated and perfected
by afflictions Heb. 2.10. and cap. 5.9.
: so nothing does more perfect a Christian, and make him fine gold indeed (as
S. Paul also in the very next verse almost before my text declares) then the
fellowship of his afflictions, and to be made conformable unto his death (...)
. For the sweet Lamb of God was in such an extreme agony and anguish, and
distress, and desolation of spirit, that his blessed body was bathed all over
in a sweat of blood. To teach us, that though we have suffered very much
already for the love of Christ, yet if we be not content to suffer a thousand
times more, and even to endure martyrdom, and to sweat a bloody sweat for his
sake, we are not of his body Haec pugna Saluatoris nostri martyrum agones, and
cortamina significabat. Ille sud^r sanguineus eorum sanguinem de toto eius
corpore (quod est ^^clesia) vtique fundendum manifestebat. Emisse feria 4. post
Dom. in palmis. p. 116.
. But on the other side, that this is the highest perfection that can be in
this life, not only in prosperity, but also in the greatest adversity to
bless God, and if it please him, for our further trial, to take away from us
al comforts both outward and inward, yea, and to bring us in a manner to the
very point of desperation, yea even then, then also to show an invincible
faith, and only for the pure and perfect love which we bear toward his
Majesty, to wrestle with the whole world, and to fight manfully against the
powers of hell it self, and to brave it out, and triumph over all
tribulations, each one of us saying with Job Job 13.15.
, Though he kill me, though he kill me, yet will I ^oue him, and but my trust
in him: and with Christ Mat. 26.
, Father, Father, O my loving father, if it be possible, let this cup pa^^e
from me; nevertheless not my will, not my will, but thy will be fulfilled. This
is indeed to follow hard toward the Mark. This is the fifth degree to
perfection.

Touching the sixth he says (not for any other prize, but) FOR THE PRIZE OF
THE HIGH CALLING OF GOD IN CHRIST JESUS. A man were as good shoot at no mark
(...). Erasm. in prouerbio, Nullo scopo iaculari.
, as at a wrong mark. And a man were as good venture for no Prize (...),
Marcus Eremita.
as for a wrong Prize. For he that suffers martyrdom, (which, as I said
even now, is the highest top of perfection that any mortal creature can reach
to in this life), he, I say, that suffers martyrdom to this intent, to have
his relikes honored of all men, or is willing any other way to have his blood
shed, to this end, to make himself famous in the world, follows hard (I
grant) toward the mark, yet he follows not for this perfect Prize, but for
popular praise Si ita martyrium fecerimus quod nostras ab omnibus velimus
honorari reliquias and si opinionem vulgi sectantes intrepide sanguinem
fuderimus, huic operi non tam pramium quam poena debetur, and perfidie magis
tormenta sunt, quam corona victoriae. Amb.
. And therefore all that he suffers, does rather torment him for his
hypocrisy, then crown him for his victory. Wherefore it will not be amiss to
consider, what ought to be the chiefest end of all our actions, and what is the
greatest felicity that man may attain by following hard toward the mark,
which the Apostle here calls THE PRIZE OF THE HIGH CALLING OF GOD IN CHRIST
JESUS. Varro reports, that the ancie^^ Philosophers have held and maintained
two hundred threescore and eight several opinions concerning felicity Libro
de philosophia apud Aug. de ciuit. dei. l. 19. c. 1.
. No marvel then though Athens and Rome, and all the brave and gallant wits
in the world, could never attain to the true knowledge of perfect
blessedness. For following so many, they could never find any, but vanishing
away in their own smoakie conceits, when they thought themselves wise men, they
proved in the end to be very fools Romans 1.22.
. Seeing this is the greatest folly that can be, and a misery of all miseries,
for a man but once to dream of so diverse and so contrary felicities; I will
touch but a few of them at this time. And that very briefly. Some therefore
define perfect happiness to be an action of the mind, according to virtue, in
a perfect life, But by this perfect life they understand this present life.
Whereas the Apostle avouches, that the servants of God have their fruit in
righteousness, and their end everlasting life Romans 6.22.
. Therefore as everlasting death is the greatest misery, so everlasting life is
the greatest felicity. Which everlasting life, being the perfect life, is not
this present life, nor in this present life, but the life to come, and in the
life to come. This is and then is, everlasting life. Others esteem worldly
honor to be perfect happiness. But Hilary contrariwise affirms Omnis feculi
honor diatoli est negotium. Canone 3. in Matthew.
, That all the honor of the world is the merchandise of the devil, not the
prize of perfection. And Eucherius also says, That the honors of the world
are the waves of the world Honores mundi, tumores mundi. Epist. paraene.
aecon^^mp m^nd.
, which Christ did teach us to contemn, and tread under our feet, when he
himself did walk upon the water Mark. 6.48.
. For so the very heathenish Romans did. They had for the difference of their
nobility, a little ornament in the form of a Moon, which they did wear upon
the shoes Isidorus calceos lunatos sonatorum vocat, additque Romulum calceos
patricios reperisse, ^ssuta luna. Sigonius de Iudi. l. 2. cap. 20.
. What did they but think all worldly honor very murable, when they did
represent it in the form of a Moon? And what did they but tread it under
their feet, when they did wear it upon their shoes? Now we that are
Christians see, and ought to see our calling better then they. How that not
many wise men, according to the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are
called: but that we must as well by dishonor 2 Cor. 6.13.
, as by honor, enter into eternal glory. Some others imagine, that carnal
pleasure is perfect happiness. But what says the Apostle? Meats for the
belly, and the belly for meats; but God will destroy both it and them 1 Cor.
6.8.
. Meats for the belly. That is true. We do eat to live. And the belly for
meats. That is false. We do not live to eat. Therefore God will destroy both
it and them. Both the belly and the meats of all Epicures, because they think
their belly is made for meats Machometus credidit beatitudinem consistere in
cibo, potu, delectationibus corporalibus. Johannes Galensis Anglus. l. de orig.
Match. c. 5.
, whereas indeed only meats are made for their belly. Because they think
they may live to eat Nihil aliud putant esse vitam nisi vescendi and potandi
licentiam. Firmicus in lib. de errore profa. resig.
, whereas indeed only they may eat to live. For the prize of our high calling
is not meat or drink (or any carnal pleasure) but righteousness and peace,
and joy in the Holy Ghost. Others account transitory riches to be perfect
happiness. And certainly, if we use our riches well, as diverse worthy
Citizens of this City have done, to the maintenance of learning, to the
building of Hospitals, and to other such good purposes, then riches (I grant)
are a great help to a virtuous mind, and a special furtherance to felicity.
Otherwise that complaint of Saluianus may take place even in these our times
Tanta est miseria huius temporis, vt nullus habeat^^ magis foelix quam qui est
plurimum dives. De guber. lib. 3.
. Our times are so miserable (says he) that now adays no man is thought to
be more happy then he that is known to be most wealthy. And that also of
Innocentius Proh pudor, secundum fortunam aestimatur persona quum potius
secundum personam aestimanda sit fort^na. Tam honus reputatur quam dives, tam
malus quam pauper, cum potius am dives sit reputandus quam ^onus, tam pau^er,
quam malus. ^e contem. ^^und. l. 1. c. 16.
. Fie for shame (says he) now adays man is esteemed according to his money,
whereas rather the money should be esteemed according to the man. Every one is
reputed worthy, if he be wealthy, and naught if he be needy; whereas rather
every one should be reputed wealthy if he be worthy, and needy if he be
naught. For questionless riches of themselves do encumber and entangle the
mind, even as an Ape is tied and teddered to his clogge. We read according
to the Greek translation, that Abraham was very rich. But there is a latin
translation which says, that Abraham was very heavy. And the original Hebrew
Genesis 13.2. Chauedb.
indifferently bears both, which proves that riches are a heavy burden, and
do many times hinder them very much, which would attain to blessedness. Yea,
if thou set thy heart upon them, they will likewise set themselves too upon thy
heart, and lie so heavily upon thy heart, that they will press, and wey thee
down with thy heart into hell. Therefore diverse holy men and women heretofore
have voluntarily abandoned their wealth, and preferred poverty before it, that
they might the sooner and the easier come to perfection. For as it is hard for
a periwinkle in the sea to swim, or for a snaile upon the land to creep,
while they bear their houses upon their backs D^n. p^rta.
: even so it is hard for a rich man, that trusts in his riches, with all his
big bunches of wealth upon his back, to go through the needles eye Mar.
10.25.
, and to enter into the Kingdom of heaven. Wherefore we must follow hard
toward the mark; (not for any action in this life, but) for everlasting life:
(not for any worldly honor, but) for eternal glory: (not for any carnal
pleasure, but) for joy in the holy Ghost: (not for any transitory treasure,
but) for the kingdom of heaven: (not for any other prize, but) for the prize
of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.

This everlasting life, is the only perfect life, because it is the Prize:
this eternal glory is the only high honor, because it is of the high
Calling: this joy in the holy Ghost, is the only godly pleasure, because it is
of God: This Kingdom of heaven, is the only Christian* treasure, because it
is in Christ Jesus. This (I say) this everlasting life, is the only perfect
life, because it is the prize: Which makes the Marchant-venturer that gets it
most absolutely blessed. As the Psalmist says Psa. 127.1.
speaking of another; blessed art thou that fear God, and walk in his
ways; For thou shall ear the labor of thy hand; O well art thou, and happy
shall thou be O well art thou: For thou have feared God, and walked in his
ways; for thou have followed hard toward the mark; And happy shall thou be:
For thou shall eat the labor of thy hands; for thou shall have, by the
gracious gift of GOD Romans 6.23.
, everlasting life, the only perfect life, The prize of the high calling of
God in CHRIST JESUS. As the Apostle says 2 Timothy 4.8.
speaking of himself, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith; there
is henceforth laid up for me a crown of righteousness. O well art thou, and
happy shall thou be! O well art thou! For thou have finished thy course, and
kept the faith; for thou have followed hard toward the mark. And happy shall
thou be: For there is henceforth laid up for thee the crown of righteousness;
for there is henceforth laid up for thee everlasting life, the only perfect
life, The prize of the high calling of God in CHRIST JESUS. This eternal glory
is the only high honor, because it is Of the high calling: For all of the
visible Church have a calling. Seeing the Church is nothing else but the
company of them which are called (...), Cyril. Hier. suly. (...). 18.
. Yet all that are called, are not worthy of this calling. Seeing many make
excuses, and will not come when they are called Luke 14.8.
. Therefore Saint Peter prays for the dispersed Jews 1 Pet. 1.10.
, that the God of all grace, which has called them to his Eternal Glory,
would make them perfect, confirm, strengthen and establish them therein. And S.
Paul likewise prays for the Thessalonians 2 These. 1.11.
, that God would make them worthy of his calling (to eternal Glory) and
perfect all the good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of faith in them.
Whereby we see that they are the only worthies of the world which are so happy
as to have this High honor, and dignity (...) Dignitatem. Beza. Ioh. 1.12.
given them, to be called the sons of God. Which was prefigured in the feeling
of the Temple. Where were graven Palme-trees and Chains 2 Chro. 3.5.
: The Palm Tree is High, the Chain is Calling. The Palm Tree chain, the High
Calling. For God the Father by his effectual calling, as by a strong chain
John. 6.44.
, does draw his children to Christ. And then standing before the Lamb, they
hold Palms in their hands Revel. 7.9.
, which are the ensigns of their honor. So that being drawn up to the High
Palm Tree by the Calling chain, they are made partakers of eternal glory,
the only high honor, THE PRIZE OF THE HIGH CALLING OF GOD IN CHRIST JESUS.
This joy in the holy Ghost is the only godly pleasure, because it is of God.
Indeed sometimes even in this life we have a taste Cant. 8.2.
(as it were) of this joy. As the Israelites had a taste of the grapes and other
pleasures of Canaan before they came thither Number. 13.14.
. But we cannot enjoy the full fruition of it until we come to the presence
of GOD, therefore David says Psalm. 36.12.
, in thy presence is the fulness of joy, and at thy right hand are pleasures for
evermore. And again, they shall be satisfied with the fatness of thy house,
and thou shall give them drink out of the river of thy pleasures Psalm. 36.8.
. For this fatness of the house of God is that meat, and this river of the
pleasures of God is that drink, which shall perfectly sati^fie, and fill our
hearts with joy in the holy Ghost. When the Lord shall say to every one of us,
Enter thou into thy Lords joy Math. 25.23.
. Not, let thy Lords joy enter into thee: For it is so great, that it cannot
enter into thee, thy heart cannot hold it Non ergo totum illud gaudium intrahit
in gaudentes, sed toti gaudentes intrahunt in gaudium Domini sui. Aug. Manua.
c. 36.
, But, Enter thou into thy Lords joy. For thou shall even bath thy self in
blessedness, and swim in the bottomless stream of the sweet pleasure of
God, as a little fish takes his pastime in the hugh Ocean sea. And look how
he that has once tasted of the fountain named Clitorius fons, will never
afterward drink any wine Clitorio quicunque sitim defonte leua^ic, Vina fugit,
gaudetque meris abstemius vndis. Ovid. Met. 15. In Arcadia. Ciuitas est, non
ignota Clitori, in cuius agri^ est spelunca profluens aquae, quam qui biberint,
fiunt abstemij. Vitruuius l. 8. c. 3.
in like sort when thou have once tasted this pure crystal water of life,
thou shall never any more relish the wine of the world, but be perfectly
delighted with joy in the holy Ghost, the only godly pleasure, The prize of
the high calling of God in CHRIST JESUS. This kingdom of heaven is the only
Christian treasure, because it is in Christ Jesus. For all treasures which are
laid up in earth may be stolen with thieves, or corrupted with cankers Math.
6.19.
; But this treasure is an enduring substance Heb. 10.34.
, hoorded up in heaven, where neither thief steals, nor canker corrupts
Veras diuitias illam prorsus immortalem gloriam supernorumque bonorum
retributionem esse existimamus. Cyp. in Genesis li. 5. in fine
. Therefore the kingdom of heaven is likened to a treasure hidden in the field
Mat. 13.44.
. And the field is CHRIST JESUS Thesaurus in agro, absconditus Deus est lateus
in carne sua. Vigil. co^. Eutyc. l. 3. c. 3.
, in whom are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge (...).
Theophy. in ca. 17. Lucae. page 322.
. O blessed then, O blessed is the man that finds this wisdom, and the man
that gets this knowledge Pro. 3.13.
. Because the merchandise thereof is better then silver, and the gain thereof
is better then gold. It is more precious then pearls, and all things that thou
can desire, are not to be compared unto it. Yea doubtless (says one) I
think all things but loss for the excellent knowledge sake of Christ Jesus my
Lord. O wise, O worthy, O holy, O heavenly merchant! Here is a frank chapman
indeed, which prizeth the kingdom of heaven accoding to the right worth, and
true value of it. Knowing that this Christian treasure was bought and purchased
for him, not with corruptible things, as silver or gold, or such like, but with
the most dear and precious blood of Christ 1 Pet. 1.18.
. For whom (says he) I have counted all things loss, and do judge the^ to be
dung, that I may gain Christ Philip. 3.8.
For Christ Jesus only is the wisdom of his Father; and by him only we come
to the knowledge of God. He is the wisdom of his Father, because he does give
us grace in this life, that we may be wise unto salvation, and see the Father
by faith, and receive the earnest of our inheritance Ephesians. 1.14.
. By him we come to the knowledge of God, because he will give us glory in the
life to come, that we may know as we are known, and behold God face to face,
and receive not only the earnest-peny, or the pledge-peny, but also the
prize-peny, or the possession^Peny of perfection Math. 20.10.
: So that Christ Jesus is the Alpha and the Omega, Denarius perfectionem
significat. Beda. quaest. super Exodus c. 37
the beginner and the ender of of our perfection Reu. 1.8.
, the author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set before
him, endured the cross, and despised the shame, and is set at the right hand
of the throne of God Heb. 12.2.
: He is the author and finisher of our faith, that is, our forerunner Heb.
6.20.
, and mark, who, for the joy which was set before him,, that is, for the
kingdom of heaven, the only Christian treasure, THE PRIZE OF THE HIGH CALLING
OF GOD IN CHRIST JESUS: endured the Cross, and despised the shame; that is
again, followed hard toward the mark: and is set at the right hand of the
throne of God; that is again, and is now possessed of the kingdom of heaven,
the only Christian treasure, THE PRIZE OF THE HIGH CALLING OF GOD IN CHRIST
JESUS. Lo ye, lo ye, whither we are now come. So hie that we can go no hier.
Namely, to the right hand of the throne of God, Which is, Everlasting life,
Eternal glory: joy in the Holy Ghost: the kingdom of Heaven. The prize of
the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. For this rich throne of GOD, is that
Iuory throne of Solomon, whereof I spoke in the beginning: Which is the only
perfect life: the only high Honor, the only godly Pleasure, the only
Christian Treasure, The prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. This
is the sixth and last degree to perfection.

Now then my dear brethren, let us here (if it please you) pause a while, and
seriously consider how Christ prayed for his chosen, that they might be made
perfectin one Ioh. 17.23.
. That they might bend the whole force of all their actions and affections to
this one thing, namely, to the attaining of perfect blessedness, or (if you had
rather so call it) of blessed perfection. And therefore forgetting that which is
behind, and leaving the doctrine of the beginning of Christ Heb. 6.1.
, let us endeavor our selves to that which is before, and be led on forward
unto perfection. Yea, let us follow hard, and run with patience the race that
is set before us, Heb. 12.1.
looking unto Jesus, who is our mark, and has given us an example Ioh. 13.15.
, That every one of us might say unto him with good David, I have applied my
heart to fulfill thy statutes Psa. 119.112.
, for the eternal recompense of reward; For the prize of the high calling of
God in Christ Jesus. Legho^am ghecheb^. Heb. (...) Septuagint. Propter aeternam
retributionem. vulgar.
Tell me (beloved) I beseech you, if it will be no great trouble to you, as I
trust it will not, tell me, I pray you, wherefore says the same David Psalm.
86.11. Iached leuaui. Chald. Vnicum fac cor meum. Hier.
, speaking to God, O knit my heart unto thee that I may fear thy name, but
only to teach us, that But one thing is the first degree to perfection? For
whereas we usually read it* O knit my heart unto thee, that I may fear thy
name, the Chaldee Paraphrast, and S. Jerome translate it, O make my heart, but
only one heart, that I may fear thy name. So that a man cannot any way, so
much as enter into the fear of Gods name, which is the beginning of all
perfection, except first his heart be made one in it self, and one in God,
that he may principally mind but one thing. Almighty God concerning the
Eastgate of the Temple says thus, This gate shall be shut, and shall not be
opened, and no man shall enter by it, because the Lord God of Israel has
entered by it Ezech. 44.^.
: Here-through signifying, that although the heart of a Christian, which is the
Temple of the Holy Ghost, may let many things enter into it at other gates yet
it must keep the Eastgate, the most illuminat and highest power and part of
it, continually shut against al men, yea against all the world, and opened only
to one thing, I mean to God, who has already entered into it, and enlightened
it with his spirit. That as at the window of Noah's Arc there entered in no
mist, no water, nothing else but one thing only, which is light Genesis 6.16.
^enestra dicitur Zobar, quia non aliud quam m^ridianam lucem recipit. Et. Esaias.
54.12. Sh^moshah, quia solum Solemn intromittit.
: so at the Eastgate, no mist of human errors, no water of worldly cares may
enter in, but only the light of heaven, and a sanctified desire to be fast
knit, and perfectly united by faith and love to God. Hence it is, that Moses
coming to talk with God upon the mountain, was commanded to bring no man
with him, but to come up himself alone Exodus 24.18.
: Nay moreover, being upon the mountain alone, he was covered and compassed
about with a thick cloud, which made him fear the name of the Lord, and
hooded him, as I may say, in such sort, that he could see nothing but one
thing, which was God: And therefore the Psalm says, O make my heart like Moses
heart when he was upon the mountain. O make my heart like the window of Noah's
Ark, and the Eastgate of the Temple: O make my heart but only one heart, one
in it self, and one in thee: O knit my heart unto thee, that I may fear thy
name. Tell me, wherefore says Christ Cant. 7.4.
, speaking to his Spouse, Thy nose is like the tower of Lebanon, but only to
teach us that, I forget that which behind, is the second degree to perfection?
For seeing Christ is now risen again, and ascended up into heaven, which is
the high tower of Lebanon, therefore we which are the Saints of God, must not
be like the Idols of the heathen, which have noses and smell not; but we must
have noses like the Tower of Lebanon Si verborum faciem consideremus, quid
poterit magis dici ridiculum? Ergo spiritualem requirunt intelligentiam.
Titelmanus in hunc locum.
, which forgeting all earthly things, and leaving them behind, must smell and
seek those things which are above. God appointed Gedeon to dismiss all those
of his army which bowed down their knees to drink, and to retain only those
which lapped water out of their hands, as a dog lappeth Judge. 7.5.
: Because he which drinks upon his knees like an Ox, cannot possibly go
forward while he drinks. But he which with some of the Polonians (...). Clem
Alexan. Stro. lib. 1. page 110.
, or with that dog Diogenes, lappeth water out of his hands, may
nevertheless go forward while he lappeth, as an Egyptian dog does, while
he lappeth the water of Nilus Aegyptij ca^es e Nilo nunquam nisi currentes
lambitant. Solinus. Polyhist. c. 20.
. And like as a lusty hound, of a good kind, orders his going so well Pro.
38.31.
that though he have run over very many fields, and through a thousand thickets
already, yet he never remembers any labor which is behind, but forgets
it: and if he chance to lap water in some brook by the way Psa. 110. De
torrente in via bibet.
yet even while he lappeth he lifts up his head, and still goes on, and
plyeth him forward to his game; so must we do in this pursuit of perfection.
Seeing Christ has now sprinkled all the way between heaven and earth with his
blood, and so has made it a fresh and a living way Heb. 10.20. (...).
, therefore we which have noses, like the tower of Lebanon, must as
bloud-hounds trace him by the foot, and run after him in the smell of his
ointments Cant. 14. (...). Septuagint.
, and hunt hotly upon this fresh and living way, with a fresh and lively faith,
and though we have gone very far, and done a thousand good deeds already, yet
we must always forget that which is behind, till we have gotten* if not the
childrens bread, yet at the leastwise some little crum of mercy, that falls from
our Masters Table, some little drop of blood, that falls from our Lords side,
which shall, I assure you, be sufficient to make us perfect men in Christ.
Tell me, wh^refore was the Altar of Perfume set within the Sanctuary Exodus 36.6.
, but only to teach us, that and endeavor my self to that which is before, is
the third degree to perfection? For even as that Altar of perfume was placed,
not in any common room, nor any odd corner of the tabernacle, but in the
Sanctuary it self, somewhat beyond the veil, close to the golden censer Heb
9.4.
, very near the mercy-seat: so a Christian heart, which is a spiritual altar
of perfume, and of a sweet sauo^r to God 2 Cor 2.15.
must daily endeavor it self to that which is before, and still more and more
aspire to heavenly things Beda de tabernaculo l 3. ca. 11.
, and always nearer and nearer opproach unto the throne of grace, and
continually hier and hier advance it self to him that is the highest and
holiest of all. Tell me wherefore did the Israelites, when they had pitched in
Mithkah, remove their tents from thence, and pitch in Cashmonah Number. 33.29.
, but only to teach us, that And follow hard is the fourth degree of
perfection? For even as they, as soon as they had pitched in Mithkah, which
signifies sweetness, by and by removed their tents from thence, and pitched in
Cashmonah, which signifies swiftness: so we must tioine Mithkah and Cashmonah,
sweetness and swiftness both together Hieron. Epist. ad Fabiolam, Mansionc.
26.
and as soon as we have pitched in Mithkah, as soon as we have tasted and
seen how sweet the Lord is, presently we must remove our tents from thence,
and pitch in Cashmonah, presently we must follow hard, and run not only
sweetly, but also swiftly in this way of peace, which leads unto life. Tell
me wherefore says Christ again Cant. 4.13.
, speaking of the praise of his spouse, Thy plants are as an orchard of
pomegranats, but only to teach us, that toward the mark is the fifth degree
of perfection? For a Pomegranat has many grains within him in his case, and a
little round circle or a crown without him upon his head. Now these grains
being sweet in taste, and red in color, are orderly set one by another, and
point up, or as it were, look up altogether to the crown. To intimate thus
much, that we which are plants of the Church, as an Orchard of Pomegranates,
must grow and go on still toward the ma^k, not only when we enjoy the sweet
taste of pleasant prosperity, but also when we bear the red color of bloody
persecution Meminit malogranatorum quod rubore granatorum oblectent, and
suauitate grat^, sint. Quod ad colorem, ad ardentem ecclesiae charitatem
referri potest. Mercerus: Mal^ pu^^a sanguineorubent color, scilicet Martyrs.
Halgr^nus in cant. l. 7. Idem Beda, and Haim^ habent in com. in hunc locum.
: and consenting in a kind of conformity and perfect peace and unity one with
another, we must point up altogether with the finger of faith to Christ, and
look up continually with the eye of love to our head, who by being first
crossed, is now come to be crowned with honor and glory. In the arc of the
covenant there was the golden pot that had Manna, and Aarons rod that had
budded, and the Tables of the testament^ and the propitiatory or covering, and
a crown of gold round about it Heb 9.4. Exodus 25.11.
: O how notably and maruellously do these things sort and agree together! the
Pomegranate and the Arc: the sweet taste, and the pot of Manna: the red
color, and the rod of Aaron: the order of the grains, and the tables of the
testament: the head of the pomegranate, and the covering of the Ark, the crown
upon that head, and the crown about this covering. To insinuate thus much, that
we which are like an orchard of Pomegranates, must also be like the Arc of
the covenant, being builded and reared up still toward the mark, not only when
our Lord feeds us with the sweet Manna of his mercy, but also when he
afflicts us with the sharp rod of his correctiona^e always keeping the
tables of the testament, which are the commandments of perfect love to God and
to our neighbor Gnull^maije malion peccud^aia hak^ri^. monin. Targu. Iuumes
tur pleni praeceptis sicut malogranata. Montanus.
, that by faith in Christ, who is the covering and the propitiation for our
sins, we may obtain the golden crown of life. K. Darius upon a time by chance
opening a great pomegranate, and being demanded of what he would wish to have as
many as there were grains in that pomegranate? answered in one word, of
Zopyrusses (...). Plut. (...) Apoth Regum.
. Now Zopyrus was a right noble and a valiant Knight, who seein^ the king his
Master could hardly surpriz^ Babylon, where the traitero^ Assyrians were
entrenched, bethought himself of a wonderful strange practice. He went home
to his own house, and caused his servants to rent his whole body all over with
scourging him, and to cut off his nose, his lips, and his ears Domi se
verberibus laceraritoto c^rpore iubet, nas^m and labia, and aures sibi
praecidi. Justin. lib. 1. in fine.
. Then straight ways running to Babylon, he made the Assyrians believe that
Darius had mis-used him in this sort, because he had spoken in their behalf,
counselling him to break up his siege, and to remove his Army from assaulting
their City. They hearing this tale, and the rather thinking it to be true,
because they saw him so shamefully disfigured in his body, were persuaded to
make him their chief captain. By which means he betrayed them all, and
surrendered both them and their city into his masters hands. O most faithful
loving subject! O most worthy and courageous heart! One Pomegranet full of such
grains, yea even one grain full of such valor and virtue, is sufficient for
a whole country, either to recover it if it be lost, or to keep it that it be
not lost. O that I could tell where to find such a man! O that I could tell
where to see but one such amongst us all! I would I assure you, honor the very
ground he goes upon, and kiss even the shadow of his feet. Well (beloved) I
pray God, I pray God with all my heart, that his sacred majesty, whom the Lord
for his glory sake, always shield and defend, that his sacred majesty I say,
may find very many, yea may see us all as true to God and him, and to our
country, as Zopyrus was to his Prince. That if any time of trial should come,
we may have so much good will and holy manhood in us, as to pull our selves upon
the pikes, and ieopard a joint, yea venture the martyring and mangling of our
whole body, and even the losing our lives, rather then either foreign
enemies, or homebred rebels should have their wills of us: knowing that our life
is frail and mortal, and we may die every moment; but for a man to do some
notable piece of service before he die, and to sheath his sword in the sides
of his enemies, and to kill if it be but one that is a sworn rebel, to his
God, to his prince, and to his country, this indeed is a most honorable, and a
most glorious thing: this is it which shall be chronicled, and registered, and
remembered, yea and rewarded for ever. But to return to the mark again. We
which are plants of the Church, like an orchard of Pomegranets, and like the
Arc of the covenant, must love, not only the head of the Pomegranet, and the
covering of the arc; but also the order of the grains, and the tables of the
testament: not only the sweet taste and the pot of Manna; but also the red
color, and the rod of Aaron. It is a miracle, and would amaze any man to
consider, how zealous the Christians were in the Primitive church, how
unsatiably they thirsted after the crown of martyrdom; what rods with
Zopyrus? what rackings? what wild beasts? what broilings they endured? How in
a manner, if I durst say so, they suffered almost as horrible torments when
they died for Christ, as Christ did when he died for the^. Well, well, so
great, and so absolute, and so excellent, and so admirable perfection, is not
now required at our hands. Yet this by your good leave and favor I will be bold
to say, that we can never be perfect Christians indeed, and run toward the
mark aright, except at the least wise we have that in resolution, which they
did put in execution. Except, if need require 1 P^^ 1.6.
, we that are faithful, can find in our hearts to do that, and to suffer
that, for hatred of the spiritual Babylon, and for love of our heavenly Lord,
which Zopyrus an infidel did and suffered, for hatred of the earthly Babylon,
and for love of a mortal king. Except we can be content not only to be white
lillies, by living purely and patiently in those afflictions and crosses
whereof our miserable life is full, which is in some sort a kind of martyrdom
Est quaedam sanguinis effusio, afflictio. Bernard. Non putemus effusionem
sanguinis tantum esse Martyriam: Semper martyrium est Caesarius Arelatensis
(...). 21. Sine f^rro Martyrs esse possumus, ^i patientiam in animo veraciter
consernemus. Gregor. Omnis piorum vita testimonium reddi^ Deo. Cypr. de dupl.
martyri^, ^initio vide loc.
; but also to be red roses, by dying constantly and joyfully for the truth, if
the good pleasure of God should so appoint it 1 Pet. 3.17.
and by making our garments red in the blood of grapes Genesis 49.11.
, which is the most perfect martyrdom, and comes nearest of all to the Mark
Duplex est species Martyrij vna quando quis pro Christo ^cciditur: alia quando
caro pro deo maceratur. Primo dabitur corona de rosis, secunda de lilijs. Hier.
Erat an^e ecclesia operibus fratrum candida: nunc facta est in Martyrum cru^re
purpurea. Cypr. l. 2. Epist. 6. page 44.
, that so Christ may rightly say to his Church here amongst us: Thy plants are
as an orchard of Pomegranets. Tell me wherefore says David again, speaking of
the oath of God Psalm. 105.10.
, He appointed the same unto Jacob for a law, and unto Israel for an
everlasting testament, but only to teach us, that for the prize of the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus, is the sixth and last degree to perfection: for
Jacob and Israel are two several names, and yet they signify but one singular
man. Nevertheless in a diverse respect; because Jacob is he that supplanteth,
or wrast^eth, Israel is he that sees or beholds God (...), Philo, (...)
initio.
. Now Jacob supplanting, or wrestling, is a subject or servant: Israel seeing,
or beholding God, is a friend, or a son. This is confirmed by Buruch, Baruch.
3.36
saying, GOD has found out the way of knowledge, and has given it unto Jacob
his servant, and unto Israel his beloved. So that Jacob is only a faithful
servant: but Israel is a beloved son. Therefore there is appointed unto Jacob a
law: but unto Israel an everlasting testament. Seeing a law Lex Vulg.
, or a statute K^ab. He.
, or a decree G^ezarah, Caldaic.
, or a precept (...), Septuagint.
, properly belongs to Jacob, as subject or a servant; but a testament (...),
Septuagint.
, or a covenant Berith. He.
, or an agreement ^^iam. Ca.
, or an accord Pactium Vulgata.
, properly belongs to Israel, a friend or a son. For as long as Jacob
wrastleth with many great imperfections and spiritual adversaries of this
life, he must as a faithful subject or servant of God, keep the law of
wrestling appointed unto him: to wit, that he mind but one thing: and Forget
that which is behind, and endeavor himself to that which is before; and
follow hard toward the mark: but when Israel has once overcome all his
worldly and ghostly enemies, 2 Timothy 2.5.
and is become a perfect man in Christ, and sees the Lord in the life to come;
then he shall, as a beloved friend, or child of God, possess that inheritance
which the father has by his everlasting testament written with the blood of
Jesus Christ Heb. 13.20.
, appointed unto him, to wit, everlasting life, eternal glory, joy in the holy
Ghost, the kingdom of heaven; The Prize of the high calling God in Christ
Jesus. O happy, happy man art thou, and thrice happy man art thou, who
whosoever thou art, which with Jacob do wrestle and keep the law as a
faithful servant, for no other end but only this, that with Israel thou
may see and enjoy the everlasting testament, as a beloved son. For when we
shall see God, we shall see; and what shall we see? That which no mortal eye
has seen, that we shall see. We shall see our own selves sitting and
shining at the right hand of the throne of majesty. We shall see all our dear
friends which we have not seen this many a day, embracing ^^, and welcomming
us into Christ's kingdom. We shall see all the noble army of Martyrs, of
Apostles, of Prophets, of Patriarks, shouting day and night, and singing out
the praises of the Lord. We shall see all the invincible host of Angels, of
Archangels, of Principalities, of Dominations, reverently attending upon the
King of glory. We shall see the King himself Christ Jesus, disparkling and
displaying those beams of beauty, which are the heavens wonder, and all the
Angels bliss. If there were now amongst us one as fair as ever Absalom was,
who would not be glad to behold him? But suppose some one were ten times as
fair as Absalom, how then would men look and gaze upon him? I, but if another
were a hundred times as fair as Absalom, what a matter of admiration would
that make? Put the case then some one should now step forth, and show himself
a thousand times fairer then ever Absalom was, what wondering, what maruelling
would there be amongst us? how would our eyes be dazzled, how would our very
minds be amazed at this sight! Well, all this is but a counterfeit, but a
shadow, in respect of the bright blazing beauty of our spiritual spouse. For
Christ Jesus is ten times fairer, yea a hundred times fairer, yea a thousand
times fairer, yea ten hundred thousand times fairer then all the children of
men. So that if the whole beauty not only of all men, but even of all this
inferior globe, were put together in one, yet it would not be any way
comparable not only to Christ's glory, but not so much as to the least
glorified body in heaven. And yet all this is but the outside of heaven: all this
we shall see with our bodily eye. The inside and the insight is much more
glorious. For the best glorified body seeing innumerable Saints and Angels more
highly exalted then he is, has his joy doubled and trebled, and beyond all
measure multiplied, when he considers that he is loved unspeakably more by
all of them, yea by every one of the^, than he can be by himself. And therefore
again seeing himself so dear unto them, he for his part likewise as a hot
burning cole is set on fire and inflamed with love, and the more he sees any
other excel him in glory, the more does he rejoice, and is gladder of his
glory then his own. But now when he lifts up his eyes to the glorious
Trinity, and sees how the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost do eternally
and perfectly love and like and enjoy one another in surpassing sweetness and
content, then all his affections are swallowed up in love, all his spirits are
ravished in delight, all his desires are imparadized in pleasure. Insomuch, as
if on the one side were laid the love of Christ as he is man, and of all the
Saints and Angels among themselves, and on the other side, the love which the
least glorified body in heaven beholding the blessed Trinity, breaths out to
God, this love would without all comparison excel and exceed that as far as
light does darkness, or as heaven does the earth. Wherefore for man to see God,
for Jacob to be called Israel; for him that has been a servant to become a
son; for him that has kept the law, to enjoy the testament, is the highest
degree to perfection, yea it is the very perfection of perfection it self. The
only perfect life, the only high honor: the only godly pleasure; the only
Christian treasure. The prize of the high calling of God in CHRIST JESUS.
Seeing then blessed brethren, seeing we fight not as they that beat the air
^ Cor. 9.26.
, but our reward is so great, so exceeding great in heaven Mat. 5.12.
, therefore as Jacob wrestled all the night long, and never gave over till
about the breaking of the day, he was called Israel Genesis 32.24.
: so let us wrestle all the night long of this life Mat. 13.35.
, and never give over till the day break, and the shadows fly away Cant. 4.6.
and we come to the marvelous light and sight of God. And like as the same
Jacob said to the Angel, I will not let thee go, except thou bless me Genesis
32.26.
: even so let every true Israelite say to Christ, I took hold of him, and left
him not Cant. 3.4.
. O Lord Jesus, who would leave thee? or who would let thee go? Or rather who
would not hold thee fast? which strengthenest him that holds thee fast, and
make him persevere that is strengthened; and crownest him that perseuereth,
and make him perfect that is crowned. Therefore I will hold thee fast, and
will not let thee go, except thou bless me, that is, indeed I will never let
thee go, because thou do never bless but only those that always hold thee
fast. Hold fast then, and stand fast, good beloved, once again I say, Hold
fast that which you have, that no man take your crown from you Reu. 3.11.
. Stand fast in that liberty whereby Christ has made you free, and be not any
more entangled with the yoke of bondage Gal. 5.2.
. But so run, so run, as ye may attain 1 Cor. 9.24.
. As ye may attain? How (...). Nilus in Parane circa med.
is that? Mary faithfully, patiently, constantly unto the end. A shame it would
be, and a vile shame for us, if it should be said of us, not, you do run
well, but, you did run well Gal. 5.7.
. F^e upon it. Having been hitherto brought up in skarlet, shall we now
embrace the dung Lam. 4.5.
? Shall we be like those antikes or monsters, which are half men and half
beasts (...), Nyssenus l. (...) Illa actio Chimara est qua initium habet a
ratione, finem a sensualitate. Cum igitur s^e agitur, humano capiti ceruicem
pictor depingit equinam. Innocen. de (...). c. 6. Operare igitur perseueranter
ne (vt Horatius ai^) Desinat in piscem mulier formosa sup^rne. Nebrissensis.
Hom. 2. in fine.
? Shall we be like Nabuchadnezzars image, which had a head of gold, and feet
of clay Dan. 3.33.
? Shall we begin in the Spirit, and end in the flesh Gal. 3.3.
? God forbid. God for his mercy sake keep us from such fearful falling from
him. Nay rather let us remember, that Joseph signifies increasing, and
Arimathea signifies getting the reward (...). Theop. in c. 15. Mar.
. To teach us, that if we would be like to Joseph of Arimathea, we must
always increase and go on till we get the reward. The other Joseph also had
a coat reaching down to his feet Aquila inter pretatus est, (...), id est
tunicam talarem: Hier. in Quest. Heb. in Genesin. Joseph. tyrum ecclesiae
praetendens, vesti^ suae habitu pers^uerentiam certaminis habere n^s admonet,
(...) longitudo vsque ad talos eui^ peruenit. Tanquam diceretur, Antequam iter
perficias, noli in vita lacescere. Ausberius in cap. 2. Apocal.
: to teach us that we must not have scarlet about our head, and dung about our
feet, not gold about our head, and clay about our feet, but that when we put
on the Lord Jesus, we must put on such a scarlet robe of righteousness, such a
golden garment of grace, such a vesture of a godly and virtuous life, such a
coat of holy and heavenly conversation, as may reach to the feet, as may
continue to the end: considering our Savior has said, he that perseuereth
unto the end, shall be saved. And again, be faithful unto death, and I will
give thee the crown of life. This crown of life is promised to al those which
make a good beginning, but performed only to those which make a good ending
Non campo capitur, sed fine corona. Pro Sapientia in exitu canitur; Quia
laudari penitus ante-actae vitae prudentia non merebitur, nisi bono fine
claudatur Saluia. ad eccles. lib. 4.
. And they which run in a race, run all, yet one only, that is, he which
holds out to the end, receives the prize 1 Cor. 9.24
. And none are saved, but such as are marked in their foreheads with the
letter (...), which is the note of perseverance, and perfection Eze. 9.6.
. And if we would be conformable to the cross of Christ, the lively picture of
all perfection, we must be like unto it, not only in the depth of faith, and in
the height of hope, and in the breadth of charity, but also in the length of
perseverance Ephesians. 3.18.
: because all the depth, height, and breadth of the cross, is nothing without
the length: and so all the faith, hope, and charity of a Christian, is to no
purpose, without continuance in them even unto the end. Wherefore (my good
brethren) yet once again I will say, and then I will say no more. Let us draw
near unto God with a true heart in assurance of faith Heb. 10.22.
: and let us keep the profession of our hope without wavering Verse 23.
: and let us consider one another to provoke unto charity and to good works
Verse 24.
and so much the more, because we see the breaking of the day draws near
Verse 25.
, and the kingdom of heaven is at hand. There is a Greek word signifying the
end of a race, which is derived of another Greek word signifiing to spur or
prick on forward (...), Hesech. verbo (...), Id^m habet Pollux. l. 3. c. 30.
and Theodoret. de Proui. l. 9. circa initium, vbi hunc textum recitat.
: which proves, that as they which run their horse^ for a wager, spur
hardest at the races end (...) Chrysostom.
: so seeing our salvation is nearer now then ever it was Romans 13.11.
, therefore we must run faster now then ever we did (...) Laert. in Dio.
, especially because the very horse and mule and diverse other brute beasts
which have now understanding, though they have been never so much wearied and
tired before, yet when they come near home, they will mend their pace
Pecoribus fatigatis quoque velocior domum gradus est. Seneca de tranquil. vit.
lib. 1. cap. 1.
. And therefore the more to blame should we be, if having traveled thus far
already in the way to perfection, and being come by this time almost to our
iournies end, we should now go no faster, when indeed we ought if it be
possible, to run much faster to our everlasting home in heaven. O beloved,
all the Saints in heaven think long, yea they think of us, and they long for us
Ergo quia omnis coelestis curia expectat nos, and desiderat, desideremus eam
quanto possumus desiderio. Vide quaeso Bernar. medit. cap. 6.
, and they earnestly desire to be perfected with us, because they certainly
know they cannot be perfected without us Heb. 11.40.
: The holy Angels also as they blush, and hold down their heads when they see
us stumble or trip never so little: so on the other side they shout and clap
their hands when they see us run cheerfully in a good course, and come away
apac^ to perfection. Lastly, Christ himself does stand waiting for us, and
beckoning to us, and hartning us on all the way, being ready to receive us, and
to embrace us in the arms of his loving mercy, as soon as ever we come to the
end of our race. For even as a royal king, when one of his Nobles returns
home, which has in a foreign country by chivalry, or feats of Arms, or
other like excellent parts, achieved great renown to his realm, presently
sends for him to the court, and in open audience gives him words of grace,
and aduanceth him to high preferments and honors; so Christ our most
magnificent King, immediately upon our arrival into heaven, out of the
foreign country of this world, will reach forth unto us his holy hand,
conducting us to the eternal tabernacles of rest: and as for all the prayers
that we have made, all the tears that we have shed, all the alms that we
have given, all the other exercises of a Christian life that we have
performed, though never so secretly in this pursuit of perfection, he will
openly reward them, and most gloriously crown them; when as all the host of
Angels shall triumph for our coronation, and the blessed Saints shall think
themselves more perfect for our perfection, and all the Court of heaven shall
applaud our praises, and God himself shall say Amen to our felicities. Which
that it may so happily come to pass, and that every one of us, which now with
Jacob wrestleth unto the breaking of the day, and constantly keeps the law
appointed unto him, may in the end with Israel see God, and have the full
fruition of his glory, and enjoy the everlasting testament, which is the prize
of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus, grant we beseech thee: O dear
Lord, grant it to us I say, not for our own deserts or merits; but for the
tender mercies of the same, our sweet Savior Christ Jesus, to whom with the
Father, and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, power and praise, dignity
and dominion, now and evermore, Amen.

FINIS.
HEARTS DELIGHT.

A SERMON PREACHED at Paul's Cross in London in Easter Term. 1593.

BY THOMAS PLAYFERE Professor of Divinity for the Lady MARGARET in Cambridge.

Printed at London by John Legatt, Printer to the University of Cambridge.
1617.

And are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard at the Sign of the Fox by Matthew
Law.

To the most Victorious, virtuous, and puissant Prince, King JAMES, King of
England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, defender of the faith, all earthly and
heavenly happiness.
GLorious, Gracious; It is our Crown and the highest joy of our heart, that
the Crown of this kingdom is to be set upon your royal head. Otherwise,
nothing in the world could have counteruailed the excese fine sorrow, that her
late Majesty departing hence left behind her, but the incomparable joy and
triumph which your expectation sent before you, Reg. 1.40.
and now your princely presence brings with you. When Solomon, after his
father David, was anointed King, they blewe the trumpet, and all the people
said, God save King Solomon, and rejoiced with great joy, so that the earth
rang with the sounds of them. We have thought, no trumpets, no proclamations,
no bone fires, no bells sufficient, neither have we heard the earth only ring
out, but also the heavens redouble and ec^ho back again the acclamations and
applauses of all men, which have showted and said, God save King James. Now
also, when your High^es approaches nearer, the straight charge which has b^^
publicly given to the contrary, cannot restrain your people, but that out of
all countries and shires, they run and flock together, to behold and attend
your Majesty, Tanquam clarum ac beneficium sydus. Sen. de Clemen l. 1. cap. 3.
(...) some bright and beautiful star, which by his divine sweet influence
works a general prosperity and peace. For what loyal subject does not bless
God, and bless himself that he lives to see this happy time, which was
feared would prove full of great disorder and trouble, so wisely and
wonderfully carried, (God as it were from heaven stretched out his holy hand,
and holding the minds of all men in awe and obedience) as that in it the
peaceable uniting of two mighty kingdoms, makes us (...) against all our
enemies, and all our (...) c^^temptible to us? Wherefore at this ti^^, (...)
all your liege people strive to show the gladness of their hearts, by tendering
such services, as are suitable to their possibility and performance, I also
among the rest have taken occasion humbly to dedicate unto your Majesty such a
poor present as I had in a readiness. Assuring myself that as none are more
familiar with God, then godly Kings: so no tre^tises can be more welcome to
godly Kings, then such as may draw them into greatest familiarity with God.
And I doubt not but that your Highness having hitherto had your hearts desires
given you, because you have delighted in the Lord, will hereafter if it be
possible, much more delight in the Lord, that he may yet give you more desires
of your heart. Nay, I am so far from doubting of this, that I dare be bold to
conclude with the Psalmist,

The King shall rejoice in thy strength, Psalm. 21.11.
O Lord: exceeding glad shall he be of thy salvation.

Thou have given him his hearts desire: and have not denied him the request of
his lips.

For thou shall prevent him with the blessings of goodness* and shall set a
crown of pure gold upon his head.

His honor is great in thy salvation: glory and great worship shall thou lay
upon him.

For thou shall give him everlasting felicity: and make him glad with the joy
of thy countenance.

And why? because the King puts his trust in the Lord: and in the mercy of
the most high he shall not miscarie.

Your Majesty's most humble devoted, and obedient subject. THOMAS PLAYFERE.

THE TEXT.
Delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of the heart.

PSALM. 37. VER. 4.
SAint John says in one place, Love not the World, nor the things of this
World, if any man love the World, the love of God is not in him. So may I say,
delight not in the world, nor in the things of this world: if any man delight
himself in the world, he cannot delight himself in the Lord, Therefore says
Martial an ancient Bishop, Quid ad nos delectatio mund^^ Epist ad Tolos. c. 18.
What have we to do with the delight of the World? You may call it as you
will: pleasure, if you will: pastime, if you will: mirth, if you will,
gladness if you will: joy, if you will: but in Gods Dictionarie it has no such
name. In the holy Scripture, it in other wise called. It is called Adams goodly
apple, which being eaten deprived him of Paradise: Esaus red broth, which being
supt up, bereaved him of his birthright: Ionathans sweet honey comb, which
being but tasted, was like to cost him his life: the whore of Babylons golden
cup, which filled her full of all abominations: the traitor Judas sugared sop,
which made a way for the devil to enter into him: the prodigal child's wash of
(...), which he most miserably swilled up with the swine. This is all the
delight of the world called in Gods dictionarie, which is the holy Scripture.
It is called Adams apple, Esaus broth, Ionathans comb; Babylons cup, Iuda^s
sop, the prodigal child's swill. So that all this delight is no delight. Or
suppose it were: yet cert^^^ly it shall not give thee the desires of thy heart.
Nay, it shall be so far from ^^^^^ding thee those joys, which thy (...)
most desires, that it shall bring th^e those torments which thy heart most
abho^^reth. It may, says Chrysostom, Voluptate ad tempus fruere affligere in
eternum.
delight thee perhaps for a while, but (...) torment thee for ever. As any
solid body, though it have never so fair a color (as crimson, or carnation,
or purple, or skarlet, or violet, or such like) yet always the shadow of it is
black: so any earthly thing, though it have never so fair a show, yet always
the shadow of it is black and the delight thou take in it, shall prove to be
grievous in the end. Therefore Philo calls it a sweet bitter thing. As that
little book in the Revelation, was sweet in the mouth, but bitter in the
belly: so all worldly delight, is a sweet bitter thing, sweet in the
beginning, but bitter in the ending. Which they of Jerusalem had experience of.
For being given to transitory pleasure, they are Lame^. 3.15
said to be made drunken with wormwood. Now we know that drunkenness is
sweet, but wormwood is bitter. And such a sweet bitter thing, such a
drunkenness of wormwood, is all the drunken delight of the world. So that as
one said, Ruth 1.10.
Call me not Naomie, but call me Mara, call me not sweet, but call me bitter:
so must we call worldly delight not Naomie, but Mara, because it is nothing so
much Naomie, sweet and pleasant at the first, as it is Mara and Amara, bitter
and loathsome at the last. Like to a song of the Syren^, which are mentioned in
the Prophecy of Chap. 13. v. 22.
Esaias. A Siren is a monster of the sea, the head whereof resembl^^^ a virgin,
but the feet a fish, And such a monster is all worldly delight, the (...)
whereof, the beginning^ allureth (...) amiable virgin, but the feet, the (...)
deuooreth us as a ravenous fish. T^^^fore a^ Ulysses s^oo^ his ears, and (...)
himself to the most of the ship, (...) might not hear the Sirens song: (...)
we stop our ears, and (...) the voice of these charming (...) charm they and
sing they never (...)ly; yea, we must bind our sell(...) mast of the ship,
that is, to the (...) of Christ, Side Vlysse illo refert fabula quod cum
arboris religatio de periculo liberauit quanto magis crutis arbor? etc.

Ambr sermon. 55.


every one of us saying (...) our heavenly Ulysses, God forbid that I should
delight in any thing, but is the cross of Christ, by which the (...) crucified
unto me, and I unto the (...) For the world and all worldly (...) likened to a
hedgehogge. Esa. 14.23.
A (...) hog seems to be but a poor (...)ture, not likely to do any (...)
yet endued it is full of bristles or prick^^^ whereby it may annoy a man very
(...). So worldly delight seem to be little or nothing dangerous at the
first, yet afterward as with bristles or pricks, it peaceth through the very
conscience with intolerable pains. Therefore we must deal with this
delight, as a man would handle a hedge hog. The safest way to handle a hedge
hog is to take him by the heel. So must we deal with this delight. As Jacob
took Esau that rough hedge hog by the hele: in like sort we must take
worldly delights not by the head, but by the heel, considering not the
beginning, but the ending of it, that so we may never be deceived by it. For
though it have a fair show at the first, yet it has a black shadow at the
last: though it be sweet at the first, yet it is bitter at the last: though it
be drunkenness at the first, yet it is worm wood at the last: though it be
Naomie at the first, yet it is Mara at the last: though it be a song at the
first, yet it is a Syre^ at the last: though it be a silly hedge hog at the
first, yet it is a sharp prickle at the last. Wherefore delight not thy self
in the world, for it shall not give thee the desires of thy heart: but Delight
thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of thy heart.

Here is a precept: here is a (...). A precept in these words^ Delight thy
(...) in the Lord. First, delight, then (...)ly, in the Lord. A promise in
these (...) And he shall give thee, the desires of thy (...). First, And he
shall give thee, then the (...) lastly, of the heart. Delight thy self (...)
Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of thy heart.

First, Delight. Well says (...), Spiritus est hilaris et exhi^ararat
participes sui.
The spirit of God, as it is a cheere^^^^ thing it self, so it makes all
them* ^^^^full which are partakers of it. Inde^d^ the wicked continually mourn
and (...). There was a great (...) in Egypt (...) in every house among them,
the^^ wa^ some one or other of their first (...) dead. But the voice of joy and
glad^^sse is in the tabernacles of the righteo^^. Psalm. 118.^5
They evermore delight in the Lord* I reach Aelianus in. varia histo. l. 3.
cap. 14.
of one Leonides a captain, who perceiving his soldiers left their (...) upon
the city wall^^, and did nothing all the day long but ^^affe and (...) houses
near adjoining (...) that the alehouses should (...) from that place where
they shood (...) up close by the walls. That seeing the soldiers would never
keep out of them, at the least wise that they might watch as well as drink in
them. So because pleasure we must needs have, and we cannot be kept from it,
God has appointed that we should take Delight enough, and yet serve him never
a whit the less. For it is no part of Gods meaning, when thou enterest into
his sweet service, that thou should abandon all delight, but only that
thou should change the cause of thy delight. That whereas before thou
did delight in the service of sin, now thou shouldes^ delight as much, or
rather indeed a thousand times moer, in the service of the Lord. It was not
Gods will that Isaak should be sacrificed, but only the ram. And so God
would have us sacrifice only the ram, that is, all rammish and rank
delight of the world. But as for Isaac, he must be preserved still, and kept
alive: Isaac in whom Abraham did see the day of Christ and rejoiced: Isaac,
that is all spiritual laughter, all ghostly joy, all heavenly delight. For as
no man might come into the court of Ashuerus, which was clothed in sackecloath:
Ester. 4 2.
so no man may come in to the court of our king, which is clothed in
sackecloth, and has not on the wedding garment of joy and delight in the Lord.
Which is the cause why Christ calls the assemblies of the faithful, Quires of
Camdes Choros castrorum. Can. 6.12.
A quire singes; a Camp fights. How then may these two agree together? Very
well in the godly. For the godly, when they fight most stoutly against the
enemy, then they sing most merrily unto the Lord. Whereupon Gregory says,
David salcantem plus s^upco quam pugnautem. Moral. l. 27. c. 27.
I admire king David a great deal more, when I see him in the quire, then when
I see him in the camp: when I see him singing as the sweet singer of Israel,
the^ when I see him fighting as the worthy warrior of Israel. For fighting
with others, he did overcome all others, but singing, and delighting himself,
he did overcome himself. Even as his son Solomon says for him, speaking to
Christ. Turn away thine eyes from me, for they do overcome me, for they
wound my heart: they make me sick for love Can. 4.6.
When David fought with others, he overcame others; he wounded others; he made
others sick, but when he daunced before the Arc, and delighted himself, he
was overcome himself, he was wounded himself, he was sick himself. But
fear you nothing. I warrant you this sickness will do him no harm. I will
play still (says he) that others may still play upon me Ludam, inquit vt illud
21 Bonus ludus quo Michol irascitur, and deus delectatur Greg. Mag.
. For it is a good sport when God is delighted, though Michol be displeased. So
that of David's sickness we may say, as Christ said of Lazarus sickness. This
sickness is not unto death* but for the glory of God Ioh. 41.4.
. And therefore it is for the glory of God, because it is for the love of God.
For David is sick no otherwise for love of the son of God, then God is sick
himself, for love of the son of David. This is my beloved so^^e (says he)
in whom I am delighted. Math. 17.5.
This is my beloved son: there he is in love. In whom I am delighted: there
he is sick for love. Which is the cause, why he commands us also to be
delighted in his love Prou. 5.19.
. For as a double desire is loves so a double love is delight. And therefore he
says not simply, love him; but be delighted in his love. Delight thy self in
the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of thy heart. Delight.

Then, Thy self, I would hate mine own soul (says Bernard) if I found it
any where else then in the Lord, and in his love Anima^ meam odio haberem, si
eam alibi, quam in domino, and in cius amore inuenirem. De amore dei, c. 3.
, So that it is not enough for thee to delight, but thou must delight thy
self, that is thy soul. Saying with the blessed Virgin, My soul does
magnify the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior. Otherwise, as
Dives did see Lazarus a far off lying in Abraham's bosom, being himself all
the while tormented in hell, and having not so much as one drop of water to
cool his tongue: so, even in laughing the soul may be sorrowful Prou. 14 13
. The wretched soul of a sinner may see the face a far off laughing, and
lying (as I may say) in Abraham's bosom, being it self all the while
tormented (as it were) in hell, and having not so much as one drop of delight
to assuage the sorrows of it. And like as Sampsons lion had great store of
honey in him, but tasted no sweetness of it: even so, if thou rejoice in the
face, and not in the heart, 2. Cor. 5.12
thou may well perhaps have great store of honey in thee to delight others*
but thou can never taste the sweetness of it to delight thy self. Therefore
says the princely Prophet, O taste and see how sweet the Lord is. It is not
enough for thee, to see it a far off, and not have it, as Dives did; or, to
have it in thee, and not to taste it, as the lion did: but thou must as well
have it as see it, and as well taste it as have it. O taste and see (says he)
how sweet the Lord is. For so indeed Christ gives his Church, not only a
sight but also a taste of his sweetness. A sight is where he says thus, 2.
Can. 7.12.
We will rise up early, and go into the vineyard, and see whether the vine
have budded forth the small grapes, and whether the Pomegrannets flourish.
There is a sight of the vine. A taste, is where he says thus, 1. Can. 8.2.
I will bring thee into the wineseller, and cause thee to drink spiced wine,
and new wine of the Pomegrannets. There is a taste of the wine. The Church, not
only goes into the vineyard, and sees the wine, but also goes into the
wineseller and tastes the wine. But yet thou must go further then this, before
that thou can come to thy self. For there are diverse degrees of tastes. Orus
Apollo.
The Egyptians in their Hyroglyphickes, when they would describe an imperfect
taste, paint meat in the teeth, when a more perfect taste, the beginning of
the throat. Such an imperfect taste had the Israelites of the sweetness of God.
God was most sweet unto them, when he gave them quails to eat. Yet while the
meat was but in their teeth, the wrath of God was kindled against them Number.
11.33.
. There is the meat in the teeth: an imperfect taste. But the spouse of Christ
has a more perfect taste of the sweetness of God. For likening him to an
apple tree, she says, I delight to sit under his shadow, and his fruit is
sweet unto my throat. Can. 2.3.
There is the beginning of the throat: a more perfect taste. But notwithstanding
all this, thou art not yet come to thy self. Therefore this taste must not
content thee: because this taste cannot delight thee. For thy delight must not
stick in thy teeth, or in thy throat, Non est strepitus oris, sed iubilus
cordis non sonuS labiorum, sed motuS gaudiorum, concordia voluntatu^ non
consonantia vocum.
but as a cordial thing, it must go down to thy very heart. That thou may
say with the Psalmist. My heart and my flesh (not my flesh only, but my heart
and my flesh) rejoice in the living God Psalm. 84.3.^
. And again, Praise the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me, praise
his holy name Psalm. 103.11
. Now thou art come to thy self. For that which is within thee, is thy self,
and all that is within thee, is all thy self. So that thy self, and all thy
self, is delighted in the Lord, when as that which is within thee, and all
that is within thee, praise his holy name. O how happy art thou when thou
know this Iubile, this ioyfulnesse Cum scis iubilationem. Psalm. 89 15
: when thou have a secret sense, and an inward feeling of it: when every motion
of thy mind, is an influence of Gods spirit: when thy will and his wo^dplay
together, as Isaac and Rebecca did. For then surely thou do build to thy
self desolate places Greg. Moral. Job. 3.14.
. Desolate places, I say, that all other things may be silent to thy soul: nay
that thy very soul may be silent to it self: yea that there may be silence in
heaven Reu. 8.1.
answerable to the silence of thy soul, when thou do delight thy self in
the Lord. Delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of
thy heart. Thy self.

Lastly, In the Lord. Gregory says thus, Gustu incircumscripti luminis anima
pascitur, and supra se elata ad seipsam relabi dedignitur
The mind of man is fed with the infinite light and love of God, and so being
lifted up far above it self, does now disdain to stoop down so low as to it
self. And therefore does not delight it self in it self. but delights it self
in the Lord. Herupon a father says, O lord grant that I may know Nouerim me
nouerim te.
my self, and know thee. That knowing my self and thee, I may loath my self
in my self, and delight my self only in thee. Truth indeed. O man, so thou
ought to do, says God. For if thou did know thy self and me, then thou
would displease thy self, and please me, But because thou know neither
thy self, nor me, therefore thou do please thy self, and displease me. But
the time shall come, when thou shall neither please thy self nor me. Not me,
because thou have sinned: not thy self, because thou shall be burned. So that
then thou shall please none, but the Devil: both because thou have sinned, as
he did in heaven, and also because thou shall be burned as he is in hell.
Therefore he that delights himself in himself, delights not himself, but
only the Devil in himself. Whereas on the other side, he only delights
himself, which not only delights himself, but adds also, In the Lord. and
so delights himself in virtue, delights himself in godliness, delights
himself in God himself, This Christ signifies, when speaking of his Spouse
he says Deliciis affluens. innixa super dilectum suum. Can. 8.2.
Who is she which comes out of the wilderness, abounding in delights,
leaning upon her well-beloved? He that leanes upon himself, can never abound in
delights: but he alone abounds in delights, which leans upon his
well-beloved. So did S. Paul: I have labored more then they all, says he.
There he abounds in delights. Yet not I, but the grace of God which is in me.
There he leans upon his well-beloved. And again, I can do all things, says
he. There he abounds in delights. In him that strengthens me. There he
leans upon his well-beloved. In one word, when as he says. He that would
rejoice and glory, let him rejoice and glory in the Lord: It is all one, as
if he should have said. He that would abound in delights, let him lean upon
his well-beloved, Let him delight himself in the Lord. Let the Saints In latitia
letentur. Psalm. 68.3.
rejoice in joy. let them delight in delight. He that delights in an earthly
thing, delights in vanity, he delights not in delight. But he only delights in
delight, which makes God only the ground of his delight. According to that of
Prosper, Aeterna exultatio est, quae bon: laetatur aterno.
That alone is eternal delight, which is grounded upon the eternal good. Upon
him that is only good, and says to Moses, Exodus 33.19.
I will in my self show thee all good. Every thing that is honest, every thing
that is profitable, every thing that is pleasant, is only to be found Quare
vnum bonum in quo sunt omnia bona and sufficit. Aug. Med.
in the Lord. As that Manna Sap. 16.20.
had all manner of good tastes in it: so the Lord only, has all manner of good
things, al manner of true delights in him Therefore the Church, having first
bestowed the greatest part of Salomons song, altogether in commendation of the
beauty and comeliness of Christ, at length concludes thus: Thy mouth is as
sweet things, and thou art wholly delectable: how fair art thou, and how
pleasant art thou, O my love in pleasures! So that when I seek my love, my
Lord, then I seek a delight, and a light that passes all lights, which no eye
has seen: I seek a sound and an harmony that passes al harmonies, which no
ear has heard: I seek a sent and asauour that passes all savors, which
nosense has smelt: I seek a relish and a taste, that passes al taste* which
no tongue has tasted: I seek a contentment and a pleasure, that passes all
pleasures, which no body has felt. Nay, I cannot hold my heart, for my joy;
yea, I cannnot hold my joy, for my heart; to think that he which is my Lord, is
now become my father, and so that he which was offended with me, for my sins
sake, is now reconciled to me, for his sons sake. To think, that the high
Majesty of God, will one day raise me out of the do, and so that I, which am
now a poor worm upon earth, shall hereafter be a glorious Saint in heaven.
This, this makes me delight my self in the Lord, saying, O thou that art the
delight of my delight; the life of my life; the soul of my soul; I delight my
self in thee, I live only for thee, I offer my self unto thee, wholly to the
wholly* one to thee one: only to thee Totum toti, vnum vni, vnicum vnico.
only. For suppose now as S. John speaks, the whole world were full of
books: and all the creatures in the world were writers: and all the grass
piles upon the earth were pens: and all the waters in the sea were yoke; yet,
I assure you faithfully, all these books, all these writers, all these pens,
all this yoke, would not be sufficient to describe the very least pert, either
of the goodness of the Lord in himself: or of the loving kindness of the Lord,
toward thee. Wherefore, Delight thy self in the Lord; and he shall give thee
the desires of the heart. Thus much for the precept, in these words, Delight
thy self in the Lord.

The promise follows. First, And he shall give thee. Well says Leo, Love is
the greatest reward of love, that either can be, or can be desired Dilectionis
nulla mayor expetenda est remuncratio quam ipsa dilectio. Ser. 7. de ieiu.
So that though there were no other reward promised thee, for delighting in the
Lord, but only the delight it self, it were sufficient. For the benefit is
not Gods, but wholly thine God is never a whit the better, for thy delighting
thy self in him. If thou be righteous, what do thou give him; what does be
receive at thy hands Job. 32.7.
? Thy delight may perhaps reach to the saints, which are in the earth but it
can never reach to the Saints which are in heaven: and much less can it reach
to God, which is the Lord of heaven Psalm. 16.2.
. Nay, I will say more* If thou should give God whole rivers full of oil,
and whole houses full of gold, for never so little a drop of this delight, it
would be nothing. Thy gift would be nothing to his gift: thy oil and gold
would be nothing to his oil and gladness: yet behold the bountifulness, and
liberality of the Lord. He ^ires thee, and gives thee wages, not to do
himself good, but to do thy self good. And here he promises to reward his
own mercies. as if they were thine own merits. And as though the benefit were
not thine, but wholly his: so he changes the words, and for, thou shall give
him, says, He shall give thee. But this he does, as Augustine testifies, Non
erroris amoris, sed amoris errore. De ciuit dei. lib. 22. cap. 6.
Not by the love of error, but by the error of love. For the love of error,
is man's Rhetoric, it is a figure, which man often uses, H^manum est errare
It is man's property to err.
But the error of love, is Gods Rhetoric, it is a figure which God often
uses, Diuinum est amare It is Gods property to love.
Especially it is a divine thing, to love so dearly, as God loves us. Who,
though he do not love to err, yet he does err for love. Counting and calling,
that which is only our commodity, his own commodity. So, Christ is said Can.
2.16.
to be fed amongst the lylies. The lylies of the fields, are the milions of the
angels Lilia agroru^ millia angelorum.
; or of al those which lead a pure and an angelical life. These indeed Christ
feeds. He feeds them on the green pastures, and leads them forth, by the
waters of comfort. Yea, not only be feeds them, but also by this figure, the
error of love, he is said to be fed with them. Because though he for his part,
have little need, I wis, to be feed, yet it is as great a pleasure to him, to
feed them, as if he were fed himself among them Si vidisti quod pasci illi
sit pascere, vide esiam nu^c ne forte e conuerso nascere sit ei pasci. Barnard.
Cant. sermon. 71
So likewise he says, If any man open the door, I will suppe with him, and be
with me Reu. 3.20.
. We indeed suppe with Christ. Generally, whenever he gives us grace to
feel in our affections, the rauishing joys of the spirit. And when he says,
I have eaten my bonie comb, with my honey, I have drunken my wine, with my
milk: eat you also, O my friends, drink and make you merry, O my well
beloved. But more especially we suppe with Christ, when he calls us to the
holy Communion, and biddes us to the Lords Supper. For then he stays us with
flagons, and comforts us with Cant. 3.20.
apples: with apples and flagons: with bread and wine: with his own dear
body, and his own precious blood. Thus do we sup with Christ. B^t how does
Christ suppe with us? Is it possible? possible, that he which shall never
hunger or thirst any more? possible that be which is fullness it self, in whom
all the fullness of the Godhead bodily dwells? Is it possible (I say) that
he should stand without, knocking at the door, as a beggar, to get a meals
meat of us? Yea sure, doubt you not. It is possible enough. By a certain
Figure, (I ween) you call it the error of love: that is it: by this figure,
the error of love) it is a very possible thing: nay, it is a very easy thing
to do, yea it is a very great pleasure to him to do it. Behold (says he) I
stand at the d^re and knock: if any man bear my voice and open the door, I
will come in unto him, and will suppe with him, and he with me. Well then, how
does Christ suppe with us? Christ suppes with us when we entertain him, as
Marie did with the salt tears of repentance and grief, and as Lot did with
the sweet bread of syncerity and truth. For the salt tears of our repentance,
are the only drink which Christ will drink with us. And the sweet bread of
our syncerity, is the only bread, which Christ will eat with us. But what
meat has he to his bread? I have a meat (says he) which you know not of.
My meat is to do the will of him that sent me. In the volume of thy book it
is written of me, that I should do thy will, O my God, it is my delight, it
is meat and drink to me, to do it. And as it is meat to him, to do it
himself, so is it meat to him, to see us do it. Then does he suppe with us.
And this is the first service. But what has he for a second course? A dish of
apples, gathered of the tree of life. For toward the latter end of the supper,
when they come to their fruit, a Christian says to Christ, Can. 7.13. Omnia
poma vetera and noua Vulgata trans.
O my Well-beloved, I have kept for thee, all manner of apples, both old and new,
Contrition, humiliation, denying of thy self, mortification of the old man:
these are old apples, Sobriety, innocence, holiness of life, vivification of
the new man: these are new apples. And when a Christian feasts, and feeds
Christ with such diverse and dainty fruits of righteousness, then he says to
him, O my well-beloved, I have kept for thee all manner of apples, both old and
new. But what music has he now? We must needs have some music. Christ
cannot sup without music. Drink and bread, and meat, and apples, will make
him but a slender supper, except we mend it all the better with music. This
must be the very best part of the supper. For a consort of musicians at a
banquet, is as a signet of Carbuncle set in gold, and as the signet of an
E^rod, well trimmed with gold: so is the melody of ^usicke in a pleasant
Ecclesiasticus cap. 32. verse. 5.
banquet. Therefore when Christ suppes with us, we must be sure he have
music. We must welcome him, and cheer him up, with Psalms, and hymns, and
spiritual songs, singing with a grace, and making melody in our hearts to
God. Thus does Christ sup with us. Col. 3.16.
But now to return to the main point again, from which we have a little
digressed, a^ elsewhere, by the error of love Christ is said to be fed among
the lylies, whereas indeed only he feeds the lylies, and to sup with us,
whereas indeed only we sup with him: so here, by the same figure, he is said to
reap commodity by thy delight, whereas indeed only the commodity is thine, all
the commodity, all the benefit, is only thine. Yet (to see the admirable love
of God) he says not, Thou shall give him, but, He shall give thee. Delight thy
self in the Lord and he shall give thee desires of the heart, and he shall
give thee.

Then. The desires. He that loves to desire God, Qui amas de^iderare, desiderat
amare. De amore Dei* c, 3. vide Gregorium. Moral l. 18. c. 28.
(says Bernard) must also desire to love God, Then he shall have neither
saciety, nor yet anxiety. Neither saciety, because he loves to desire: nor yet
anxiety, because he desires to love. Thus does the Church. Let him kiss me
(says she) Cant. 1.1.
with the kisses of his mouth. Let him not smite me but kiss me: not once, but
often: not with the kisses of his feet, but of his mouth: not of any of his
Prophets mouths, but of his own mouth: Let him kiss me with the kisses of his
mouth. Here are many desires. Here indeed she loves to desire Psa. 119.20
Concupiuit defiderare. Ps. 119.20
. But it follows, For thy love, is better then wine. The person is suddenly
changed. Before, it was more strangely in the third person, Let him, and, his
mouth. Now it is more familiarly, in the second person, For thy love. For thy
love is better then wine: Here is but one love. Here only she desires to love.
For as the curtains of the tabernacle were coupled and tied together with
taches and strings, so that one curtain did draw another, and all the
curtains did draw together, to cover nothing else, but the tabernacle Exodus
26.6.
: after the same sort, the desires of the godly, are coupled and tied together,
so that one desire draws another, and all their desires draw together, to make
them covet nothing else, but God. And even as Jacob when he held the Angel in
his arms, stood upon one foot, and halted upon the other foot: Genesis 32.31
so he that embraces God, can do nothing with that halting foot, which
before carried him to the desire of the world, but stands only upon that
sound foot, which now carries him wholly to the desire of God. And like as
all the streets of Jerusalem sing Halleluiah: Tob. 13.18.
so all the desires of them that are delighted in God, are referred to God.
There are many streets in Jerusalem; yet there is but one Halleluia, which is
sung in all those streets. In like sort, there are many desires in a godly
man; yet there is but one thing, God only, which is desired in all these
desires. For, these desires, as the kisses of Christ, come all from one love:
these desires, as the curtains of the tabernable, are all tied together with
one string: these desires, as the goings of Jacob, stand all upon one foot:
these desires, as the streets of Jerusalem, sing all one Halleluia. So that if
thou look into his desires, that delights in the Lord, thou shall see no
iniquity, no contradiction in them. But if thou look into his desires, that
delights in sin, thou shall say with the Psalmist, I see iniquity, Psalm.
55.10.
and contradiction in the city. For as Manasses was against Ephraim, and
Ephraim, against Manasses, and both of them against Esa. 9.21.
Judah: so the desires of the wicked, are contrary to God, and to themselves.
All their desires are contrary to all Gods desires. Manasses and Ephraim, are
both against Judah. There Is iniquity. Some of their desires, are contrary to
other some of their desires. Manasses is against Ephraim, and Ephraim is
against Manasses. There Is contradiction. Therefore the desires of the wicked,
being so contrary to God, and to themselves, their desires are not given to
them, but they are given to their desires Romans 1.24.
Because, though they love to desire God, yet they do not desire to love God.
Though they care not how much God does for them: yet they care not how little
they do for God. But as for the godly, they are not given to their desires, but
their desires are given to them. Because not only, they love to desire God,
but also, they desire to love God, And so all their desires, being as it were,
but one desire, all agreeing in one God, when they have God, they have all
their desires given the^ in God Domine, ante ^^omne deside rium meum. Psalm.
38..10 Nam vltima perfectio ipsius anima deus est, and centrum locusque
naturalis omnium desideriorum eius.
. So the three children, being me^ of desires, Viri desideriorum Dan. 9 23.
had their desires given them. They desired to be delivered from the furnace.
This desire was given them, when as God walked with them in the fiery furnace
Dan. 3.25.
So Moses being a man of God, had his desires given him. He desired to see Gods
face, This desire was given him, when as Christ talked with him, face to face
Mark. 9.4.
. So John being a friend of God, had his desires given him. He desired to see
Christ's glory. This desire was given him, when as Christ said, He that loves
me, shall be loved of me, and I will manifestly show mine own self unto him Ioh
14.21.
, (so Lazarus being Gods little beggar M^ndicus. dei. Greg.
, (as I may say) had his desires given him. He desired to be relieved, not so
much with the meat of the earthly Dives, as with the mercy of that heavenly
Dives, which is so rich in mercy. This desire was given him, when as the
Patriarch speaking of him to the glutton said. Now is he comforted, and thou
art tormented Luke 16.25.
And so, whosoever thou art: if thou be a man of desires, as the three children
were: if thou be a man of God, as Moses was: if thou be a friend of God, as
John was: if thou be a beggar of God, as Lazarus was, he shall give thee all
that thou can beg, or desire. For, to speak no more of those three children,
these three men, which I named last unto you; Moses, the man of God: John the
friend of God: Lazarus, the beggar of God: did lie in three bosoms. In Moses
bosom: in Christ's bosom: in Abraham's bosom. Moses hand, did lie in Moses
bosom Exodus 4.6.
Saint John did lie in Christ's bosom: Lazarus, did lie in Abraham's bosom:
Moses bosom, is law. Christ's bosom, is Gospel: Abraham's bosom, is glory.
Therefore, fear must drive thee out of Moses bosom: faith must keep thee in
Christ's bosom: felicity must bring thee to Abraham's bosom. For first, thou
must with Moses, put thy hand into Moses bosom, and there seeing how full of
leprosy thy hand is, and how wicked all thine own handy works are, thou must
abhor thy self, in thy self. Afterward, thou must with John co^^ey not thy
hand only, but thy whole body, and thy soul also, into Christ's bosom, and
there seeing how thou art cleansed from the leprosy of thy sin, and freely
justified by faith in Christ, thou must delight thy self in the Lord. Then,
thou must be carried into Abraham's bosom. and there, both loving to desire
God, and desiring to love God, he shall give thee thy desires. First, I say,
lie in Moses bosom, and abhor thy self in thy self: afterward, lie in
Christ's bosom, and delight thy self in the Lord: then thou shall lie in
Abraham's bosom, (O blessed bosom! O sweet bosom.) And he shall give thee,
thy desires. Delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires
of thy heart. The desires.

Lastly, Of thy heart. Thy heart here, is all one with thy self before. As if
the words had stood thus, Delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee
the desires of thy self: or else thus, Delight thy heart in the Lord, and he
shall give thee the desires of thy heart. To the point then, Augustine says
thus, Fecistinos domine ad te and ideo inquietum est cor nostrum, donec (...)
veniamus ad te
O Lord, thou have made us for thine own self, and therefore our heart is
ever unquiet, while it is from thee, never at quiet, until it come to thee. A
Bull which is bayted at the ring, as soon as ever he gets any little breathing,
turns him straitwayes toward that place, by which he was brought in*
imagining, that by how much the more he is nearer to the stall, by so much the
more he shall be further from the stake. In like manner, a faithful heart
being baited and towsed in this world with many dogs Psalm. 22.16.
which come about it, always has an eye to that place, from which it came,
and is never quiet till it return to him from whom it was fet at the Querula
penitus and errabunda est, donec ad cum, a quo originaliter exi^t triumphali
virtute reuertatur
first. He that lets down a bucket to draw water out of a Well, as long as the
bucket is under the water, though it be never so full he may get it up easily;
but when he begins to draw the bucket clear out of the water, then with all
his strength he can scarce get it up; yea, many times the bucket when it is at
the very highest, breaks the iron chain, and violently falls back again.
After the same sort, a Christian heart so long as it is in him who is a Well
of life, is filled with delight, and with great joy drinks in the water of
comfort, out of the fountain of Esa. 12.3.
salvation; but being once haled and pulled from God, it draws back, and as
much as it can possibly resists, and is never quiet, till it be in him
again, who is the center of the Via moris i^ deum tanquam in ce^^t^m proprium
mouetur, vt in i^so sum deletur.
soul. For as the needles point in the mari^ers compass, never stands still,
till it come right against the north pole: so the heart of the wise men, never
stood still, till they come right against the star which appeared in the
Math. 2.9.
East; and the very star it self, never stood still, till it came right
against the other star, which shined more brightly in the manger, then the
Sun did in heaven. Wherefore our hearts do always err, they are Planets
St^lle^erraticae. ude 13.
, and wandering stars, before they come to Christ; but the^ only they are
stars of the firmament, the true seed of Abraham, when they are firmly Psalm.
57.8
fixed, and settled in God. The Prophet Jonas, all the while he fled from God,
in what a case was he? one while he was turmoiled in the storms of the tempest:
another while he was sowsed in the waves of the Sea: another while he was
boiled in the bowels of the Whale. But as soon as he returned to God, by and
by he was cast up safe upon the sea shore: and then he said to his soul, My
soul return unto thy rest, because the Lord has restored thy self unto thee
Quia dominus reddidit te tibi. Psalm. 119.7
. Because whereas before, thou had lost thy self: lost thy self in the
tempest: lost thy self in the sea: lost thy self in the Whale: now the Lord
has restored thy unto thee. Wherefore the heart of man has lost all rest:
nay, it has lost it self, before it be cast upon the Sea shore; before it be
cast upon God: but when once it delights in the Lord, when once it finds
God, then it finds it self, then it returns unto rest. Nicaula Queen of
Saba, could never be quiet in her own country, till she came to Solomon: but
when she saw his glory, and heard his wisdom, then her heart failed her, she
had enough, she could desire to see and hear no more. And so the heart of a
Christian, can never be quiet in the strange Country of this world, till it
come to Christ, which is the true Solomon, the Prince of Peace: when it comes
once to Christ, then it says thus to God, Lord now let thou thy servant
depart in peace, because mine eyes have seen the prince, because mine eyes
have seen thy salvation. Even as one good heart says for all, O Lord, how
amiable are thy dwellings? Solomon had goodly buildings, but they were nothing
to thy dwellings. My soul faints, and fails for them Concupis^it, deficit.
Psalm. 84.2.
. It faints before I see them: and it fails when I have seen them; then I
am quiet enough, then I can desire to see no more. For like as Noah's dove could
find no rest for the sole of her foot, all the while she was flickering over
the flood, till she returned to the arc with an olive branch in her mouth: so
the heart of a christian, which is the turtle dove of Christ, can find no rest
all the while it is houering over the waters of this world, till it have silver
wings as a dove, and with the olive branch of faith, fly to the true Noah,
which signifies rest, till Jesus Christ put forth his holy hand out of the
arc, and taking this heart into his hand, receive it to himself. Even as one
good heart says for all, I will not climb up into my bed, nor suffer mine
eyes to sleep, nor mine eieliddes to slumber, nor the temples of my head to
take their rest, until I find a tabernacle for the Lord, an habitation for
the mighty God of Psalm. 132.4.
Jacob. Until I find, that my heart is not in mine owne-hand, but in Gods
hand: until I find, that God dwells in me, and I in him: until I find,
that my soul is a tabernacle for the Lord, and my heart is an habitation for
the God of Jacob, I cannot rest, says he. But when I find this once: when I
come to Noah in the arc: when I delight my self in the Lord; then will I
climb up into my bed, and suffer mine eyes to sleep, and mine eyelids to
slumber, and the temples of my head to take their rest. But what is the reason of
all this? I am somewhat bold to ask, because I would be glad to know: what is the
reason I say, that the bull can never be quiet, till he come to the staule;
that the bucket can never be quiet, till it come to the water; that the needle
can never be quiet, till it come to the north pole; that Jonas can never be
quiet, till he come to the sea shore; that Nicaula can never be quiet, till
she come to Solomon; that Noah's dove, can never be quiet, till it come to the
arc; that man's heart, can never be quiet, til it come to God? The reason of it
is this. When God created heaven and earth, he rested not in the heaven, or in
any heavenly thing, not in the earth, or in any earthly thing, but only in
man, which is both. A heavenly thing for his soul, and an earthly thing for
his body. As soon as he had made man, he kept a sabbath, and rested. Even so
the heart of man, res^eth not in the earth, or in any earthly thing, not in the
heaven, or in any heavenly thing, but only in God, which is Lord of both. Lord
of heaven and earth: Lord of soul and body. As soon as it comes to God, and
delights in him, it keeps holy day, and rests. Gods heart never rests
till it come to man: man's heart never rests til it come to God. For as God
says to man, My son give me thy heart Prou. 23, 26
: so man says to God, my Lord give me thy self. For even as the heart desires
the water-brookes: so longs my heart, my soul, after thee, o God. Therefore,
o God, give me thy self. Show me thy self, and it suffices Ioh. 14.8.
me. For thou only, O Lord, art indeed, as thou art called in Hebrew Shaddai,
all-sufficient, yea, more then sufficient. Thy very grace is sufficient for 2.
Cor. 12.9
me. But thou, O Lord, do give both grace and Psalm. 84.12.
glory. Therefore whom have I in heaven, but thee? and whom have I in earth,
but Psalm. 73.24.
thee? Thou only give grace in earth: so that I have none in earth but thee,
And thou only give glory in heaven: so that I have none in heaven but thee.
O what a sweet friend is this? What a sweet friend is God, our good friend,
which only feeds and fills the Dulcis ille amicus qui animam nutrit. Nilus.
heart? He only feeds it in earth, and fills it in heaven: feeds it
with grace, and fills it Satiabor cum apparuerit gloria tua. Psalm. ^7.16,
glory. For every thing has a kind of food proper unto it. Offer a Lion
grass, he will never eat it: offer him flesh, he will eat it. Why so?
Because that is unnatural, that is natural to him. So offer the heart of a
Christian, which is courageous and bold as a Prou. 18.1
lion, offer it all the glory of the world; which is as the flower of Esa.
40.6.
grass, it is never a whit the better. Offer it Christ, who says, My flesh is
meat indeed, then it is satisfied. Therefore one says, The Lions want and
suffer hunger, but they that fear the Lord, want no manner of thing that is
good. The Lions: such Lions as have no grace, but grass only to feed upon,
they want and suffer hunger. Hungry and thirsty, their soul faints in Psalm.
107.5.
them. But they that fear the Lord: such Lions as by faith feed upon the flesh
of Christ, delight in the Lord, feed upon God, they are fat and well liking,
they want no manner of thing that is good. For as the people sitting upon the
grass, and feeding upon the bread, were all Mark. 6.39.
satisfied: so these Lions are all satisfied, because sitting upon the grass
of the world, yea not only sitting upon it, but also treading upon it, and
trampling it under their feet, they feed only upon the bread of life. For
these Lions can easily conceive that if at that time five loaves being blessed
by our Lord, did satisfy five thousand, then much more our blessed Lord
himself, can satisfy every heart. which hungreth and thirsts for him.
Therefore these Lions save the very fragments of this feast, and keep them in
their hearts as in baskets, knowing that all the grass of the world, cannot
do them half so much good, as the very least crumme of Christ's comfort. For
so only on says among the rest; My soul refuses, comfort: But when I
remember God, I am Psalm. 77.4. Memor fu^ Dei, and delectatus sum.
delighted. As if he should say, I have a Lions heart in me; my soul refuses
to feed upon the grass of the world; it goes against my stomach: I cannot
brook it, I cannot digest it, that's but a cold comfort My soul refuses all
such comfort. But when I remember God I am delighted. Though I cannot see
presently before me; yet if I do but remember him; if I do but meditate of
him; if I do but think of him, if I do but dream of him; I am Annon toties
comfortaris quoties recordaris Aug.
delighted: though I cannot have a whole loaf* yet I can get but a fragme^t:
if I ca^ get but a shine* if I can get but a morsel: If I can get but any
little crum of comfort, that falls from the table of the Lord; my heart is
sufficiently refreshed and fed. But as God only feeds the heart: so God only
fills the heart. For the heart of man, as for the manner of diet, it is like
the heart of a lion: so for the bigness of it, it is like the heart of the Ibus.
Oris Apollo writes, that the Egyptians, when they would describe the heart,
paint that bird, which they call Ibis. Because they think that no creature, for
proportion of the body, has so great a heart, as the Ibis has. But me
thinks, they might better paint a man. Because no creature, no not the Ibis it
self has so great a heart as a man has. For the eye is never filled with
seeing, nor the ear with hearing, and much less, the heart with desiring. But
even as the Poets fain, that the fifty daughters of king Da^^^^ killing their
husbands, are enjoined for their punishment in hell, to fill a tun with water,
that is boared full of holes, which though they labor never so much about it,
yet they can never bring to pass Vide prouerbium, Danaidum dolium apud Erasm.
: semblably, Eccles. 1.8
he that would go about to fill his heart, with worldly delights, were as good
p^ure water into a sine, as we say, for any pleasure he shall have, after all
his labor and pains. Solomon having had a long time trial of all transitory
pleasures, at length frankly confessed, that they were so far from being a
contentation to his heart, that they were a very great vexation to his spirit.
Nay Alexander, though he had conquered the whole world, yet still he said with
the King of Spain, Non suffic^^ orbis: All the whole world is not enough for
me.
yea in the end, he grew to be very male content, and found himself greatly
grieved, because there were not for sooth, many more worlds for him to
conquer. By which example of Solomon and Alexander,) though otherwise a
heathen.) it does plainly appear, that if it had pleased God to have created
as many worlds, as there are creatures in this one world, (which he might have
don with the least word of his mouth) yet this infinite number of worlds,
which should have been created, could not have filled the very least heart,
of any one man, without the Creator himself. This Orontius an excellent
Mathematitian shows, who describing the whole world in the form of an heart,
leaves many void spaces in his heart, which he cannot fill up with the world.
For as a circle, can never fill a triangle, but always there will be three
empty corners in the Triangle vnfilled, if there be nothing else to fill it,
but the circle: so the round world, which is a circle can never fill the heart
of man, which is a triangle, made according to the image of the Trinity, but
always there will be some e^pty corners, in the triangle of the heart vnfilled,
if there be nothing else to fill it: but the circle of the World* Only the
glorious trinity, fills the triangle of the heart, and fills every corner
of it, and fills every corner of it fuller, then it can possibly Anima
nostrae ita facta est capax maiestatis tuae, quod a te solo and a nullo alio
possit impleri Cum autem habet te, plenum est desiderium eius, and iam nihil
aliud quod desideret vlte, ius restat. August. l. Soliloq. cap. 30.
hold. For, suppose al mighty God should now work a miracle, and give some
one man a heart, as large, and as huge, not only as all the hearts of all the
men, that ever were, are, or shall be, but also as all the affections of all
the angels, and heavenly powers above; yea I will say that, which shall be yet
much more marvelous, if this one heart were so great, that it could at one
instant. actually contain in it, more corporal and spiritual things, then
are in all the deepes beneath, in the valleys, in the mountains, and in all
the heavens above: yet as true as God is in heaven, this so large, and so huge
a heart, could not be able to hold the very least part of the perfection of
God; but if one drop of his deity and glory, were powered into it by and by
it would burst in a hundredth pieces, and fly a sunder, as an old vessel,
filled with new Behold the heavens and the heavens of heavens are not able to
contai^e thee. 1. Reg. 8.27.
wine. O what a wonderful strange thing is this? what shall we devise to say of
it? Ten thousand worlds, cannot fill one heart: and yet ten thousand
hearts, cannot hold one God. Therefore, as much as one heart, is too good and
too great, for ten thousand worlds: so much is one God, too good and too great,
for ten thousand Deus mayor est cord nostro. 1 Ioh. 3.30.
hearts. So fully does the Lord, and nothing but the Lord, feed, and fill thy
soul, and give thee all, nay more then all, thy heart can desire. Wherefore,
Delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of thy
heart. Thus much for the promise, in these words, And he shall give thee the
desires of thy heart,

Now then, dear brother, Delight: and not delight only; but Thy self, also:
and not thy self only; but, In the Lord, also: Delight thy self in the Lord:
and again I say, Delight: and again I say, Thy self: and again I say, In
the Lord. Delight thy self in the Lord. O remember, for the love of God,
remember this worthy sentence of an ancient father, Omnis creatura vil^scat.
vt creator in cord dulcescat
Let all creatures seem vile unto thee, says he, that only thy creator may
seem sweet unto thee. Armenia, a noble lady, being bidden to king Cyrus
wedding, went thither with her husband. At night, when they were returned home,
her husband asked her, how she liked the Bridegroom, whether she thought him
to be a fair and beautiful prince or no? Truth, says she, I know not. For
all the while I was forth, I cast mine eyes upon none other, but upon thy
self* So basely did this noble lady esteem of king Cyrus beauty, who was the
Monarch of the world* in respect of that entire good will and affection, she
bare to her husband, which was so great, that her eyes could never be from him.
And so must we set God always before our eyes, and n^^ once look aside, or
be enamoured with any gaud of worldly glory, but despise every blaze of beauty
whatsoever, that may draw us from beholding our heavenly husband, and
delighting only in him, which is fayrer then the children of men. Saint Paul
being rapt up to the third heaven knows not, whether it were with the body, or
without the body. And because we should mark it well once, he (...) it down
twice. That he was rapt up to the third Heaven, he is sure, that he ^eard
words which no man can utter, he (...) sure, that he was exceeding delighted
in the Lord, he is sore. But whither his body were with him or no, he knows
not. So much did he forget and neglect, even his own body, which is so near,
and so dear a thing, in comparison of that incomparable delight, which then he
took in the Lord. S. Peter, seeing but a glimpse of Christ's glory upon Mount
Tabor, stood so astonished and amazed with it, that he was in a sort besides
himself, when he was at that time beside Christ. Master, says he, i(...)ood
for us to be here. As if he should (...)e said, Now farewell Galilie, and all
my goods: farewell fellow Disciples, and all my friends, farewell wife, and all the world: so I may enjoy this heavenly sight, and be continually thus
delighted in the Lord. Holy Ignati^^, going to his Martyrdom, was so strangely
ravished with this delight, that he burst out into these words. Nay, come
fires, come beasts, come breaking of all my bones, come racking of my whole
body, come all the torments of the Devil together upon me: come what can come,
in the whole earth, or in hell, either, so that I may enjoy Jesus Christ, and
may be continually delighted in the Lord. And so must thou (dear brother)
insult over all creatures, and exsult only in thy (...). Thou must contemn all
beauty, as Armenta did: yea thine own body, as Paul did: yea all the world
as Peter did: yea thy very life, as Ignatius did: and be content to do any
thing, though it were to be torn and pulled in a thousand pieces: or for a
time, if it were possible, to suffer all the pains which the fiends and furies
of hell can inflict upon thee, so as in the end, thou may delight ^^ther the
Lord in thy self, or thy self (...) Lord. Then, then He shall give thee: and
not; He shall give thee only, but The desires also: and not The desires only,
but Of thy heart, also. Then he shall give thee the desires of thy heart. And
again I say, He shall give thee: and again I say, The desires: and again I
say, Of thy heart. Then he shall give thee the desires of thy heart. Then,
though thou have a long time played the unthrift, and wasted all the goods in
the world: yet if with the lost child, thou return home again, to thy
fathers house, he shall grant the^ thy hearts desire, and receive thee with
minstrelsie and dancing, and all manner of festival joy, and that plenty of
bread, which nourishes every hired servant in his house, shall much more feed
thee, which art his loving child, unto everlasting life. Then, though all the
leekes and onyons of Egypt, which is the world, have failed thee: yet, if with
Israel, thou depend only upon God, he shall distill the dew of his grace,
into thy heart, and lay aside a chosen rain for thee, and cause thee to drink
of the sweet crystal streams of his pleasure, and give thee to eat of that
hidden and heavenly Manna, which no man knows, but he that receives it.
Then, though all the clothes and couerings in the world, cannot keep thee
warm; yet, if with David, thou be a man according to Gods own heart, he shall
send thee that mystical Abishag, which shall comfort thy heart, and make thee
hot and fervent in spirit, which shall renew thy strength and make thee young
again, and lus^y as an Eagle. Then, though thou have a long time lost thy
labor, in serving Laban, which is the world: yet if with Jacob thou return
home again to thy fathers house, God shall meet the by the way, and as the
Prophet Osey speaks, he shall allure thee as thy paramour, and lead thee
into the wilderness, and there speak according to thine own heart, friendly,
and lovingly unto thee. And even as lovers, are oftentimes disposed for the
nonce, to take a fall one of another, the stronger of the weaker: so God shall
wrestle a fall with thee, as he did with Jacob, and yield so much in love to
thee, as that he shall suffer thee to give him the fall: and to prevail against
him. Jesus: what exceeding love is this? why we are not even now, in the name
of God, inflamed with the love of God: and wholly ravished with delight in the
Lord? At least wise I marvel, what a mischief many base minded worldlings
mean, that they had rather feed upon the husks of hogs, then the bread of
man? that they had rather eat, the onyons of Egypt, then the Manna of heaven?
that they had rather lie a cold, frozzen and shiuring in sin, then be revived
and cherished by Abishag: that they had rather take unsupportable pain, to
serve Laban, then take unspeakable pleasure, to serve God? By upon it: what a
vile folly is this? what a stark madness is this? what is this else, but to be
even bodily tormented, whereas they might be most spiritually delighted? what is
this else, both to go out of one hell, into another hell, whereas they might go
out of one heaven into another heaven? For why do you (beloved) why do you
tell me so much, of I know not what? of a worm, that never dies? of a fire,
that never is quenched? of a lake, that burns with Brimstone? of weeping, and
gnashing of teeth? Thus I tell you (good christians) and I tell you truly, and
God in heaven hears what I say, though you hear me not; I tell you as loud as
ever I can; that, to serve sin so slauishly: to please the devil so
wretchedly: to delight in the world so brutishly, as many men do: this is
worse then all worms: worse then all fires: worse then all lakes: worse then
all weeping: worse then hell it self. Whereas, on the other side, to serve
God, to please God, to delight in God, to rejoice and solace thy soul in the
Lord, which has always given thee, and will always give thee, the desires of
thy heart; this is better then all treasures: better thed all crowns: better
then all kingdoms: better then al immortality: better then heaven it self.
This, this it is, which shall bring thee, out of one paradise, into another
paradise. Out of one paradise in this life, where thou do joyfully, and
cheerfully serve God, into another paradise in the life to come, where thou
shall be honorably and royally served of God. Out of one paradise in this
life, where thou do comfort thy heart, and delight thy self i^ the Lord,
into another paradise in the life to come, where he shall bless thee, and he
shall give thee the desires of thy heart; Through the tender mercies of Jesus
Christ, to whom with the father, and the holy Ghost, be all honor and
glory, power and praise, dignity and dominion, now and evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
THE POWER OF PRAYER.

A SERMON PREACHED in the Cathedral Church of Exeter in August, 1596. BY
THOMAS PLAYFERE Professor of Divinity for the Lady MARGARET in Cambridge.

Printed at London by John Legatt, Printer to the University of Cambridge.
1617.

To the Queens most Excellent Majesty.
REligion, dread and dear Sovereign, Gloriosa in deum pietas honorihus regiis
immobile est fundamentum Cyrillus ad Theodos. derecta fide.
is an immovable foundation of highest authority and honor. O then how
blessed are all we? how sure and immovable is our peace and joy? God having
blessed us with a King, who in religion and learning excels all alive, and
his Majesty with a Queen in due proportion answerable to himself. Wherefore
as it is our duty to join both in our daily prayers: so neither would I
separate you in my humble endeauours. For the present felicity and glory of
this Realm, rests wholly in his Majesty, but the future hope to have these
infinite blessings continued upon us and all our posterity, even unto the
worlds end, arises from you both, in respect of that most happy royal issue
you have had already, and which if it please God you may hereafter. Which as it
will be our greatest security and comfort: so that it may be no danger to
your Majesty's health, especially that which your Highness now goes withal,
we shall continually and importunately pray and beseech at Gods hands. And what
the power of Prayer is, this short sermon which I presume to offer vnot your
sacred Majesty, does in some sort show.

Your Majesty's most devoted, and obedient subject, Thomas Playfere.

THE POWER OF Prayer. THE TEXT.
Ask, and it shall be given you: seek, and you shall find: knock, and it
shall be opened unto you.

Math. 7.7.
BEfore I come to the particular entreaty of this text, it will not be amiss,
as I take it, generally to observe some few things. Our Savior, says not
here, as to one Ask thou, seek thou, knock thou: but as to many, Ask,
Se^ke, knock. For it is, Our father; though it be, I believe. A spark of
fire, in the fire, keeps fire; by it self, of it self goes out. A drop of
water in the sea, is safe; being alone, is soon dried up. Even so, in private
prayer, that small spark of zeal which is in us, may quickly be put out,
and that little drop of devotion, which is in us, may quickly be dried up:
but in public prayer, it is not so. Whereupon Daniel 2.17.
requesteth his Companions, Sidrach, Misach and Abednago, to pray with him.
Yea, Joel 1.14.
advises them, to gather a solemn assembly, and to call the elders, and all
the inhabitants of the land, into the house of the Lord, to offer up prayers
unto God. A threefold cord, is not easily broken Eccles. 4.12
. Now what is prayer else, but a cord, wherewith we bind Gods hands, when he is
ready to smite us for our sins? Even as Esaias complaining to God, 64.7.
There is none that calls upon thy name, none that rises up to take hold of
thee, to hold thy hands, and bind them fast with the cord of prayer. But if a
twofold cord, or a threefold cord, cannot easily be broken, whereas two or
three of Daniels companions are gathered together in the name of Christ, then
much more a hundred fold cord, or a thousand-fold cord, cannot easily be
broken, when as not only two or three of us, have agreed upon a petition in
earth, but even Ioels solemn assembly, such a solemn assembly as here is,
many hundreds, yea many thousands of the faithful, are gathered together in
the house of the Lord, to offer up prayer unto God. Such a strong cord of
prayer, as this is, so well twisted by so many, must needs most forcibly draw
down from heaven, infinite graces for us. And therefore our Savior says here,
not as to one, but as to many, Ask, seek, knock. So likewise it is not said
here* as in the time present, that by and by we obtain the thing we pray for;
but as in the time to come. And it shall be given you, and you shall find,
and it shall be opened unto you. For as Laban kept Jacob a long while from his
youngest daughter, whom he loved best, that his love might be more increased
continually: so God oftentimes holds us a while in suspe^ce, that he may the
more sharpen our appetite, and inflame our Vt accendantur desideria. Martial
Epist. ad Tol^st. Quo anobis auidius, desideratur eo de nobis suauius laetatur.
desire. Because, says Gregory. The more earnestly he is desired of us, the
more sweetly he is delighted in^^ us. Wherefore, as a merchant being about to
put money into a bag, and perceiving the bag will scarce hold all the
money, first stretches out the bag, before he put in the money: after the same
sort, in this case, deals God with us. God knowing that those blessings,
wherewith upon our prayers he purposes to enrich us, are so great, that our
hearts as yet are not capable of them, stays a while, till afterward when our
hearts are more enlarged, and stretched out like a wide bag, we may then
receive them, when we are fitter for them. Whereupon the princely Prophet
says, Lord, I cry unto thee in the day of time, and thou hear not, also in
the night time, and yet this is not to be thought folly in Psalm. 22.2. Ita
Septuagint. interpretantur.
me, Some perhaps would think it a great point of folly, for a man to call and
cry unto him, who stops his ears, and seems not to hear. Nevertheless, this
folly of the faithful, is wiser then all the wisdom of the world. For we
know well enough, that howsoever God seem at the first, not to hear, yet. The
Lord is a sure refuge in due time, in Psalm. 9.9.
affliction. First, in due time* then in affliction. Because, for the most
part, in helping us, God rather respects the due time, then the affliction. So
that although, as soon as we pray, he do not always presently free us from
affliction, yet if we can be content to wait a while. tarry the Lords leisure,
in his due time, he will surely relieve us, And therefore it is said here, not
as in the time present but as in the time to come, And it shall be given you,
and you shall find, and it shall be opened unto you.

Now then in this whole sentence, two principal parts would be considered. The
first, what we in our prayer must perform to God. The second, what God for our
prayer will perform to us. What we in our prayer must perform to God, is in
these words, Ask, seek, knock. Ask, with the mouth, seek with the heart,
knock with the hand. What God for our prayer will perform to us, is in these
words, And it shall be given you, and you shall find, and it shall be opened
unto you, And it shall be given you, that is for temporal things: and you
shall find, that is for spiritual things: and it shall be opened unto you, that
is for eternal things, Ask, seek, knock, and it shall be given you, and you
shall find, and it shall be opened unto you. First we must ask with the
mouth^ Ioakim the virgin Mary's father, going to the wilderness to pray, said
thus. Prayer shall be my meat and Cibus pohisque mihi erit oration
drink. Whereby it is evident, that as meat and drink, the natural food of
the body, must go in at the mouth: so on the other side, prayer, the
spiritual food of the soul, must go out of the mouth. Which is the reason,
why Pythagoras willed his scholars to pray aloud Sonora v^^^^ pret ari.
. Not that he thought that God could not otherwise hear, but to teach us, as
Clemens notes Strol. 4.
that as our dealing with men must be as in the sight of God: so our prayer to
God, must be as in the hearing of men. Ezechias king of the Jews, witnesses
of himself, that praying in his sickness, he chattered like a young swallow
Esa 38.14.
. Now we know by that proverb, which forbids to keep swallows under the
same roof where we keep our selves, that no bird is so troublsome for
chattering, as the swallow is. His meaning then was this: that as a young
swallow opens her mouth, and never leaves yawning unto the dam, til she be
satisfied, so he opened his mouth, and as the Prophet Esaias says 62.6.
kept no silence, never left asking, gave the Lord no rest, until he had mercy
upon him. Bala^ck king of the Moabites, speaks thus Number. 22.4
Shall this multitude lick up all that are round about us, as a calfe licketh
up the grass of the field? Now we know that a calfe licketh up the grass of
the field with his mouth. The thing the^ which he feared, was this: least the
Israelites should lick up, that is, overcome and destroy him* and all his,
with the asking of their mouths, with their prayers to God, which are called
Osc. 14.2
the calves of the lips, even as a calfe licketh up the grass of the field.
The Church wishes the southern wind would blow, that her spices might flow
forth Cant. 4.16.
. The southern wind, is the mild and comfortable spirit of God. The spices
are the prayers, the sweet odours of the Saints. So that we wish the Southern
wind would blow upon us that our spices may flow forth, when as we wish the
holy Ghost would work upon us, that our prayers might flow forth. That as God
breaths in his Spirit into us, by the inspiration of grace: so we might
breath out our spirit unto God, by the inspiration of prayer. According to that
of the Prophet, Ps. 119.131
I opened my mouth and drew in breath, I drew in breath, there is inspiration, I
opened my mouth, there is respiration. So that they which never open their
mouths to ask, are dumb fishes, which have lives, and breath not, or else
dead Idols, which have mouths and speak not, Whereas in truth, every one that
has an ear to hear, ought to ^eare, and so every one that has a mouth to
speak ought to speak. Speak unto the rock, says God to Moses Number. 20.8.
, when the children of Israel wanted water in the wilderness, And after the
same manner, when we want the water of comfort in the wilderness of this
world, we must ask it of God, we must speak for it unto the rock Christ
Jesus. For it was his only request he made to his Spouse, when ^e took his
very last farewell of her upon earth. Let me hear thy voice Can. 8.13.
. As if Christ should say thus to his church: my dearest, now I am ready to
ascend up unto my Father. Howbeit in the mean while, I will not leave you
comfortless. But though I shall be absent from you in body, yet I will be
present with you in spirit, always beholding your order of service and hearing
your prayer unto me. Therefore let us not hereafter be strange one to another,
but let tokens of loving kindness pass continually betwixt us, I will send
down to you my spirit like tongues of fire. Send you up to me your prayer,
like pillars of smoke. And in case you want any thing at any time, do no more,
but let me hear your voice, let me by a prayer, as by a letter from you
understand it, and ^ou shall have it. Ask, and it shall be given you.

Yet it is not enough for us, to ask with the mouth: we must also seek with
the heart. For seeking with the heart, has oftentimes prevailed, without the
asking of the mouth. But asking with the mouth, could never yet obtain any
thing of God, without the seeking of the heart. Therefore Hierom finds
himself greatly grieved, that now and then in prayer time his mouth and his
mind went not both together, My mind, says he Aut per porticus deambulo, aut
do fanor^ cogito. In dialog. aduersus Lucifer.

Ipso intempore, quo ^leuare mentem paramus inserris manibus, cogitation^ bus
ad terrena plerum que dei^cn^^ur Amb de ^uga ^icuti c. 1. citante August.
contra Sul. l. 2.


is wa^dring or walking in this or that galery, or else telling or counting
this or that sum of money, or diverse other ways misled and s^duced. This is
sata^s subtilty, to be then most busy in tempting of us when we are most busy
in praying to God. As when two go to law one with another, the plantife will
do what he can to hinder the defendant, that the Judge may not hear what he
is able to say in his own cause: in like sort the Devil, the common plantife,
the common accuser of (...) mankind, when he sees us upon our knees, pleading
for our selves by prayer, and seeking favor and pity of God, the judge of
all, then does he most interrupt and disturb us. And even as the Furies are
described to have snakes and serpents upon their heads, instead of hair: so
Satan distracts (...) minds, and makes us like furies, putting pestilent and
noisome cogitations into our heads, in stead of devout and holy affections.
Which is the cause why Job Job. 1.20
before he fell down upon the ground to pray, did shave his head, did shave and
cut off al idle and earthly thoughts, which are nothing else but snakes and
serpents, suggested by that old Serpent the Devil. For blessed Job knew right
well, it was impossible God should hear him, if he heard not himself. No,
no, says God, I will never hear such a people, because this people draws
near to me with their mouths, and honor me with their lips, but their
hearts are far from Esa. 29.13.
me. What then says the Apostle? I will pray with my breath, or with my
mouth: yea, and I will pray also with my understanding, or with my 1. Cor. 14.15
heart. Seeing indeed fi^e words, thoug^ they were no more, coming from a
well disposed and a faithful heart, are a thousand times better, then ten
thousand words, which are never at all uttered, but muttered only and mumbled
up in the mouth. Gods promise to his people is this, You Deuteronomy. 4.29.
shall seek me, and you shall find me, because you shall seek me with your
whole ^eart. Gods performance of his promise is this, Iere. 29.13.
You have sought me, and you have found me, because you have sought me with
your whole heart. Therefore when thou seek, se^ke with thy heart; when thou
praiest enter into thy chamber. Thy lips are but the chamber door. So that,
when thou have opened the door of thy lips, then thou must enter into the very
chamber of thy heart. That thy prayer may not be an empty or a windy prayer,
puffed or blown from the lungs, or from the lips: but a hearty and a pithy
prayer, a sacrifice which has marrow and Medullatum sacricifium. Psalm. 66.15
fatnes such a Sacrifice as David offered, when as having first said, My heart
has sailed Psalm. 4.
me. I have lost my heart: anon after he says, I have now, O Lord, found my
heart again to pray unto thee (...) cormicum. 1. Sam 7.27.
. Solomon decked and garnished his temple, before he prayed in it: and so before
thou praiest, prepare thy Ecclesiasticus, 18.21
heart. Be sure thou find and furnish thy heart, which is the true temple of
him, who is greater then Solomon. And as that woman that sought her groat,
swept over all the whole house; so when thou seek any thing of God, sweep
over the whole house of thy Psalm. 11.1.
heart* say with Mana^^es, O Lord, I bow unto thee, the knees of my heart:
seeing thou have said, Seek ye my face, thy face, O Lord, do I seek: yea, I
do seek thee with my whole, heart, seeing thou have said, seek, and you shall
find.

Yet it is not enough for us to s^ek with the heart: we must also knock with
the hand. For he that was borne blind, could notwithstanding both see and say,
that God hears not sinners; but that every one which calls upon the name of
the Lord, must depart from iniquity. So that it is to little purpose, for a man
to seek, though with never so faithful a heart, except also he knock with a
righteous hand. The Heretics called Euchitae, professed to do nothing else
but pray. Because the Apostle exhorts us to pray continually. But they did
not consider that to pray always, is to serve God always. And that a godly
life knocks aloud, and is a perpetual prayer to God. So that professing to
pray, and to do nothing else, in effect they did nothing less. Seeing as
Theodoret reports of them. They did Vt plurim^^ dormiunt.
nothing for the most part, but sleep. Whereas in Basils judgment, a prayer
should be filled, Non syllabis sed factis and operibus.
not with syllables, or good words, so much, as with good works Which none can
do: who either with these Heretics, do nothing at all, or else no good thing
at al, but only that which is ill with others. When you shall multiply your
prayers unto me, says, God Esa. 1.15.
, I will not hear you, because your hands are full of blood. If a subject
should offer up a supplication, having his hands im^r^ed in the blood of the
Kings son, tell me, I pray you, what think you? how would the King take it?
would he grant him his request, trow you? or rather would he not be most
wrathfully incensed, and enraged against him? And even so does God take it at
our hands* when we knock^ with bloody and unclean hands, presuming still to
pray, and yet continually crucifying the son of God by our sins. Therefore say
the godly, Let us lift up our hearts with our hands Lam. 3.41.
. They say not Let us lift up our hearts alone: but let us lift up our hearts
with our hands. Let us not only seek with our hearts, but also knock with our
hands: yea even with innocent hands. And another: Psalm. 141.3
Let my prayer be directed unto thee as incense: and let the lifting up of my
hands, be an evening sacrifice unto thee. And yet another: I will that men pray
every where, lifting up pure hands 1. Tim. 2.8.
. For as the precious stone diacletes, though it have very many excellent
soueraignties in it, yet it loses them all, if it be put in a dead man's
mouth, so prayer, which is the only pearl and jewel of a Christian, though it
have very many rare virtues in it, yet it loses them every one, if it be put
into a man's mouth, or into a man's heart either, that is dead in sin, and does
not knock with a pure hand. Hence it is that the Church is said to be perfumed
with frankincense and myrre. Cant. 3.6.
By frankincense is meant a burning feruency of affection, when as an enflamed
heart seeks. By myrre is meant, mortification and dying unto sin, when as an
undefiled hand knocks. As when the Church says, Cant. 5.5.
My hands drop down myrre, and my fingers pure myrr ^e upon the handles of
the bar. This is that holy perfume of the tabernacle which God appointed to
be made of pure myrre and frankincense, of each like weight. Exodus 30.34
Note that, Of each like weight. But we for the most part mar it in the
making. For we put into this perfume of prayer whole pounds of frankincense,
but not a dram, nay scarce so much as one grain of myrre. We put into it
much frankincense, much pretense of faith, much show of seeking with the heart,
but little myrre, little true mortification, little holiness of life, little
sound knocking with the hand. Nay, that which is most lamentable, or rather
most detestable of all. some are not ashamed in stead of this pure myrre,: to
put in the very drugges, and the dregs of their vile sins: which is the
cause why many a man's prayer is so loathsome, and so odious to God. Whereas if
we would make this perfume, as it should be made, according to Gods
prescription, and put in as much of the myrre as of the frankincense, of each
like weight, then I assure you, no pomander which is made of Amber and Musk,
would be so pleasant in the ^^osthrils of God, as this Perfume of Prayer.
wherewith the Church it perfumed, which is made of Frankincense and Myrre. Of
frankincense, is a heart that seeks, and myrre, in a hand that knocks. When
Moses prayed in mount Oreb, Exodus 17.5.
his hands were holden up by Vr and Aaron. Yea they did not only hold up his
hands, but also they held his rod in his hands. Now the rod of Moses was a
figure of the cross of Christ. Whereby we are taught, that we must not knock
with our own hands, but with Moses rod in our hands, not trusting to be
heard for the works of our own hands, for our own merits, but for Christ's
mercies. For this rod of Moses is the cross of Christ, the key of David, the
key wherewith Elias Iam. 5.17
knocked, or rather indeed he stood not without, knocking like a stranger, but
with this key of prayer, he locked and unlocked heaven at his pleasure. Among
them that have been borne of women, there has not risen up a greater then
John Baptist. Not a greater. True, Only the first John Baptist, Elias was as
great, as the second Elias John Baptist. For both of them came in one and the
self same spirit, in one and the self same power. No marvel then though
Elias, being such a holy man, one while by turning the key one way, did lock up
the whole heaven, another while by turning the same key of prayer as much
another way, in the turning of a hand, did unlock all the doors and windows
of heaven, and set them wide open. Why do ye marvel at this? Even we, we our
selves I say, shall be able to do as much as ever Elias did, if we come in
the spirit and power of Elias, as John Baptist did. If we have such a spirit
in our heart to seek and such a power in our hand to knock it shall likewise
be opened unto us. For Christ has said here, Knock, and it shall be opened
unto you. Thus much for the first part, what we in our prayers must perform
to God, in these words, Ask, seek, knock.

The second part follows, what God for our prayer will perform to us, And it
shall be given you. That Is for temporal things. In another place it is said,
Give, and it shall be given you. Here, Ask, and it shall be given you, So that
it is all one with God. We may get as much of him by asking, as by giving. By
asking, that which we have not, as by giving that which we have. Yet S. James
says, 4.3.
you ask, and it is not given you. But the reason follows, Because you ask
amiss: For you ask temporal things to consume them upon your lusts. Now
though this be the end which thou intendest, yet thou dare not confess so
much with thy mouth. Therefore then perhaps, thou may ask and miss, when
at thoudest ask amiss. When as, says Barnard, Aut prater verbum petis aut
propter verbum non petis.
either thou do ask from the written word, or else thou do not ask for
the begotten word. Seeing every thing which we ask, as it must be assured and
warranted to us by the Scripture, which is the written word; so it must be
countenanced and commended to God by Christ, which is the begotten word. Now
both these words, written and begotten, presuppose a mouth. Which if they be
in thy mouth, then Gods promise is plain, Open thy mouth, and I will fill it.
Ask of me, and I will give thee, the heathen for thine inheritance. For the
eyes of the Lord, are upon the righteous, and his ears are in their Aures eius
in precibus eorum. Ps. 34 ^6.
prayers. He says not, their prayers are in his ears, but his ears are in
their prayers, To signify, that though our prayers be so weak, that they
cannot pierce through the clouds, and much less enter into the ears of the
Lord of Hoastes, yet that he will bow down, and incline his ears unto our
prayers. So that though our prayers cannot be in his ears, yet his ears
shall be in our prayers. A captain of the host of Israel being cut off by
the time, before he could cut off all his enemies, spoke to the son, saying,
Sun, stand thou still. This was a temporal thing, even time it self which
he prayed for. But there was never seen such a day, neither before nor since
wherein the Lord obeyed the voice of a man Ios. 10.14.
His prayers were not in the ears of the Lord. They went up to the sun, and
no further. Yet the ears of the Lord were in his prayers. For the Scripture
says not that the sun obeyed, but that the Lord obeyed the voice of a man.
To signify, that not only God himself will yield unto us, but also if the
sun, or any other of his creatures, should refuse to give us our asking, yet
that he will command and compel them also, with himself to serve us. And
what man then will not obey the voice of the Lord, seeing the Lord will obey
the voice of a man? Pharaoh, being plagued with frogs, got the man of God to
pray for him, And the Lord did according to the word of Moses Exodus 8.13.
And the Lord obeyed the voice of a man. Moses did according to the word of the
Lord. That is plain. The Lord did according to the word of Moses. That is
strange. Yet thus it is. And this it shows; that if Moses will do according
to the word of the Lord, the Lord will do according to the word of Moses. If
we will keep his precepts, he will fulfill our prayers. He will fulfill the
desires of them that fear him, he also will hear their cry, and will help
them. I have cried, says the Psalmist, because thou have heard me Psalm. 17.6.
. One would think he should have said contrariwise. Thou have heard me, because
I have cried. Yet he says, I have cried, because thou have heard me. To show,
that crying, does not always go before hearing, with God, as it does with us:
but that God will not only hear our cry, but also hear us before we cry,
and will help us. And that which is most admirable of all, though it were a
thing which once he purposed never to give us, yet if we ask it, he will
reuerse and repeal his own sentence to pleasure us. God once repented him,
that he had made man, and said, I will destroy man whom I have made, from the
face of the earth, yet when Noah had built an altar and prayed to God Genesis 8.22.
The Lord smelled a favor of rest, and said in his heart, I will not
henceforth curse the earth any more for man's cause. God once was so displeased
with his people, that he said flatly No^ addam vltra vt liberim vos.
I tell you truly I will deliver you no more. Yet when they asked a deliverer of
him, his very soul was grieved within him, for the misery of Israel, and he
gave them Iephte to deliver them from their enemies Judge. 10.16.
. God once sent Nathan with this message to David. As the Lord lives, the man
that has done this thing shall surely die, yet when David had asked
forgiveness, and said Have mercy upon me, O Lord, after thy great goodness
and according to the multitude of thy mercies, do away mine offenses; God sent
the same prophet with a contrary message 2. Sam. 12.13.
. The Lord has taken away thy sin, and thou shall not die. God once sent
Esaias with this message to Ezechias, Set thy house in order, for thou shall die,
and not live, yet when Ezechias had turned him toward the wall, and wept, and
prayed, and said, O Lord remember how I have walked before thee in truth, and
with a perfect heart; God sent the same prophet with a contrary message, 2.
Reg. 20^6.
Thus says the Lord, I have heard thy prayers and thy te^^^^ and now behold
thou shall live and not die. Then did the king reioy^ in thy strength O Lord,
exceeding glad was he of thy salvation. For thou did grant him his own
desire, and did not deny him the request of his lips. He asked life of thee,
and thou gave him a longer life, even fifteen years longer. As also here
thou do promise us, both for this life, and for all temporal things
concerning this, yea though it be a thing, which once thou had purposed
never to give us, Ask, and it shall be given you.

Yea, not only God will give you temporal things, but also you shall find
spiritual things. Yet the Church says, Can. 3.1.
I sought him whom my soul loved: I sought him, and I found him not. But the
reason goes before, because she fought him in her bed: she sought him not with
her heart. My soul looeth him, says she: yet at that time her heart loved her
bed better. Therefore says Augustine Quarite quod quaritis, sed non vbi
quaritis.
Seeks what you seek, but seek not where you seek. Seek Christ: that's a
good what. Seek what you seek. But seek him not in bed. That is an il where.
But seek not where you seek. Moses found Christ, not in a soft bed, but in a
bramble bush. So that the bed is no fit place to find him in, who had not
where to rest himself. But go into the garden among the humble bushes, and
there you shall find him not sleeping, but sweating drops of blood for your
redemption, and calling you to him, Math. 11.29.
Come unto me all you that labor, (not you that lie a bed, and are secure,
but you that labor) and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you. Take my yoke
upon you, and you shall find rest for your souls. If you seek rest with your
hearts, with your souls, you shall find rest for your souls, and that rest
also, which is not to be found in the bed of pleasure, but in the yoke of
Christ. If thou seek for this spiritual rest, as for silver, and search for
it, as for treasures, Prou. 2.5.
then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of
God. Therefore seek the Lord, not in the bed of sensuality, but where he may
be found. And seek the Lord while he may be found Esaias. 55.6.
Or rather indeed, though not in what place soever, yet at what time so ever
we sinners seek, we shall be sure to find him, that says, I am found of
them that sought me not Esa. 65.1.
. So that no (...) seeking God, shall return with a Non o^t inuentus: but we
that have erred and (...)ed like lost sheep, shall find him, or ^^^ther we
shall be found of him before we seek him. And that which is most wonderful
of all, we shall not only find oftentimes before we seek, but also we shall
find much more then we seek. That good Centurion Math. 8.8.
sought only one word, Dis verbu(...), says he, but he found more. Christ
uttered not only one word whereby his servant was healed. But also very many
words, wherein he gave him self a most singular praise and commendation for
his faith. Dymas the thief on the right hand Luke 23.42.
sought only to be re^^mb^ed when Christ should come into his kingdom, but
he found more. What take thou of being remembered, says Christ, as though
thou should be far ^^mme out of my sight? Tush man, I will do more for
the^ then so? Thou have not only be remembered, but thou shall be with me. And
why says thou when I come into my kingdom? as though it would be a long while
first? This very day shall thou be with me in my kingdom: this day thou shall
be with me in Paradise. That needy man in the Gospel Luke 11 19
sought only to borrow three loaves, but he found more. God his good friend,
bad him welcome at midnight, and did not only lend him, but frankely and freely
give him, not only three loaves, but as many as he needed, He gave him as
many as he needed. (...) 2. Cro. 1.1.
sought only wisdom, but he found more. Seeing he sought first the kingdom
of God, and the righteousness thereof, all other things besides, were added
unto him. Wherefore if any man want wisdom, or any such spiritual thing, let
him with S^lomon seek it for God, and he shall find it. Yea we shall find
infinitely about measure, more then we seek, or can devise to seek of him
that says, Seek, and ye shall find.

Yea, not only you shall find spiritual things, but also it shall be opened
unto you, that^ for eternal things* yet we read that some began to knock,
saying, Luc. 12.24
Lord, Lord, open unto us, and it was not opened unto them. But the reason is
evident elsewhere. Because they did not knock with their hands. They had, I
grant Lamps in their hands, but they had not oil, in their lamps. So that
all their knocking (...) but as a sounding brass, or as a tinckling cimball.
Whereas if we would knocke^ purpose indeed, the way were, as Christ teaches
us elsewhere, not to cry, Lo^d, Lord, but by setting to our hands, to do and
work the will of our heavenly father. Lo yea, says Chrysologus, En quam
negare nollet, qui sibi etiam neganti, qualiter extorqueretur ostendit.
how loath our good Lord is to deny us any thing, seeing though he were never
so much disposed to keep us out, yet here he teaches us away, how we may
break open the doors, and press in upon him, and get the kingdom of heaven
whether he will or no, by the violence and force of faith from him. For there
is a great difference between Di^es and God, though there be a great agreement
between Lazarus and us. Lazarus Luke 16 20.
was a beggar full of sores: so are we all by nature beggars, standing without,
and knocking at the door. Yea, his body was not so full of sores, as our soul
is of sins. Lazarus desired to be relieved with the crummes of bread, which
fell from the rich man's board: so have we all needs, God wot, to be refreshed
with the crumbs of mercy, which fall from our masters table, yet in one respect
we are better then Lazarus. Is that it was his hard hap, to knock it the
door of a cruel, a wretched, a miserable caitiffe, who could see no time to
(...) unto him. But we knock at the door of a most kind, a most liberal, a
most merciful father, who as soon as he hears, us rapping with a lively
faith, which works by charity, has no power to keep us out any longer: but
presently he opens unto us. And even a^ S. Peter, Act. 3.2.
when he saw that lame cripple lying upon the ground, craving an alms at the
beautiful gate of the temple, said unto him, Silver and gold have none, but
such as I have, health, and recovery I give thee: so Christ, when he sees us
lying prostrate, groueling on the ground before him, and knocking for an alms
at the beautiful gate of his holy temple, by and by opens unto us, and gives
us not silver or gold, or any such corruptible thing, but health and salvation
to our souls and all the inestimable riches of his glory* and all the
eternal treasures of his kingdom. O that some of you would a little ^rie
whether this be true which I say or no! that you would bou^ce as hard as ever
you can at this beautiful gate, and say with the Psalmist Psalm. 44.23.
Arise, arise, O Lord, why sleep thou? I warrant you, you should hear him
answer you in another Psalm. Psalm. 12.5.
Now for the pitiful complaint of the pore, I will arise* says the Lord; I
will sleep no longer, I will arise and open unto them. So it was opened to the
poor Luke 18.13.
Publican. He went up to the temple to pray, and when he came thither, he
knocked his breast and said, Lord, be merciful unto me a sinner. Therefore the
door of mercy was opened unto him, and he went home, even into heaven his long
home, more justified in the sight of God, then that other which justified
himself. So was it opened to S. Steven Act. 7.56.
He was brought out to be stoned. But when he came forth, the very stones
could not knock him so hard, as his prayer knocked heaven gate, when as he
said, Lord Jesus let me in, Lord Jesus receive my spirit. Therefore the gate
was opened unto him. He saw the heaven opened, and Jesus standing at the right
hand of God, where he within a while after, should sit himself. So was it
opened to King Psalm. 118.19.
David. He knocked very imperiously, not like a petitioner, but like a
co^mander. Lift up your heads, o ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting
doors, that the King of glory may come in. Open unto me the gate of the
righteous, that I may enter in and praise the Lord. And when the gate was
opened, as he was entering in, he pointed to it, and said, This is the gate of
the righteous, the lust shall enter unto it. So it was opened to S. Paul: Act.
16.26.
He was cast down into the very lowest dungeon. All the chains of darkness,
and even hell it self, could not have held him faster, then that dungeon did,
yet at midnight, when he prayed and knocked, suddenly all the prison doors flew
open* yea all the doors of the heaven likewise stood open, and that which is
most marvelous of all, they stood so wide open, that not only S. Paul
himself went in, but also Stephana^ the iayler, and his whole household, whom
he at that time converted and baptized, did enter in with him, So that all,
all eternal things are ours, and nothing nothing can prevail against us, if
we knock as we ought. Not the brazen gates of hell to shut us in, nor the
golden gates of heaven to shut us out. For Christ has said here, Knock, and
it shall be opened unto you. Thus much for the second part, what God for one
prayer will perform to us in these words, And it shall be given you, and you
shall find, and it shall be opened unto you,

Now then my dear brethren, give me leave, I beseech you, to speak unto you,
me, I say, that am the servant of God, and your servant for God, as Naaman the
Sytians servants said unto him. Father, say they, if the Prophet had
commands thee a great thing, would thou not have done it? how much more,
then when he says unto thee, Wash and be clean? Brethren, I say, if he
that is more then a Prophet, had commanded you a great thing, would you not
have done it? how much more then when he says unto you, Wash and be clean,
Ask, and it shall be given you? He desires to be des^^ed. And he has not
his own will, except we have ours. But we may have what we will for asking,
God does ask no more of us, but only that we would vouchsafe to ask him. Do
no more says he, but ask and have: Do no more bu^ seek, and find: Do no
more but knock, and enter in. O how easily, and yet how powerfully does prayer
work? It over comes all Beasts, The Leuiathan. the strength of all Gods
creatures, was so subdued by prayer, that whereas otherwise he might have been
a gulf to swallowe up Jonas quick, and for ever to deuo^^ him, he (...)
ship to save him. It overcomes all men* Jacob gives Joseph one portion
above hi^ brethren, which (...) of the (...), by his sword and by his bow, but
the Chalde^ Paraphrast translates it. By (...), and by my supplica^^^^. Which
translati^^ proves, that prayer is the sword, and supplication is (...) bow
of a Christian, wherewith he subdueth all his enemies. It overcomes the
Devil himself. Prayer and fasting are the chiefest (...) to cast him out: If
we resist him by prayer, he will fly from us. Yea the most silly beast in all
the forest, is not so much affrighted and amazed, when a lion ro^reth, as this
cowardly beast the devil is diu^t^d and terrified, when a Christian prays.
What shall I say more? It overcomes him that cannot be overcome, making the
Virgins son stoop down, and c^ndiscend unto us. I pray thee let me go
says he, to one that wrastled with him all the night long by prayer. If thou will be a suter to God, God will be ^ suter to thee. If thou will pray unto God
God will pray unto thee. I pray thee says he, let me go. But what does
Israel answer? I will not let thee go, except thou bless me. No will? It is
not belike now as God will, but as man will. God is taken captive by prayer, and
become a prisoner to man, and stands at his courtesy, who says, I will not let
thee go, except thou bless me. And that which is more then all this, if more
may be, prayer overcomes God; not only being well pleased* as he was with
Israel, when any child may deal with him, but also being displeased as he was
with the Israelites, when no man may come near him, when his wrath burns as
fire, ween he thunders from heaven and tears the clouds in pieces, and
cleanes the rocks asunder, and shakes s^^d and sea together, and makes the
whole earth in a trembling fit of fear, fly away from him. Yet if some
Moses do but stand up in the gap and pray, all this omnipotent power shall
come to nothing: God shall not be able though he be never so angry, to enter
upon the breach, but prayer shall have the victory, and get the conquest of
him. Wherefore beloved, once again I say, let us always entrench our selves
within this invincible bulwark of prayer. Our whole life alas, as we have
made it by sin, is most miserable. There is no man alive, if he had known
before he was borne, what miseries would have befallen him in this life, but
would have wished I warrant you, with all his heart, that which was the Womb
of his birth, had been the tomb for his burial. But in all the calamities of
this life, our only comfort is prayer. In al^ the afflictions of this life,
our only fortress is prayer. Prayer, whereby we (...) oftentimes in spirit
with the Apostle, rapt up into the third heaven, where we that are otherwise
but Worms, walk with the Angels, and even continually talk with God. Hence
it is, that holy men and women in former times, could never have enough of
thi^ exercise. Nazianzene in his Epitaph for his sister Gorgonia writes, that
she was so given to prayer, Vt genua terre contreuerint
that her knees seemed to cleave to the earth, and to grow to the very ground,
by reason of continuance in prayer. Gregory in his Dialogues writes, that his
aunt Trasilla being dead, was found to have her elbowes as hard as horn.
Which hardness she got by leaning to a deske, at which she used to pray,
Eusebius in his history writes, that laws the brother of our Lord, had knees
as hard as camels knees, benumbed and bereaved of all sense and feeling, by
reason of continual kneeling in prayer. Hierom in the life of Paul the
Eremite, writes, that he was found dead, kneeling upon his knees, holding up
his hands, lifting up his eyes Etiam cadauer mortui officioso gestu precabatur.
. So that the very dead corpse seemed yet to live and by a kind of religious
gesture to pray still unto God. O how happy and how blessed, was that soul
without the body, when as that body without the soul was so devout. O that we
may be, that we may be likewise, so happy and so blessed as this holy man
was, that we may depart hence, in such sort as he did, that is, in such sort
as Christ did, who died in prayer, saying, Father, into thy hands I commend my
spirit, that our Lord when he comes, may find us so doing, that when we
shall lie upon our deathbed, gasping for breath, ready to give up the ghost,
then the precious soul of every one of us, redeemed with the precious blood of
Christ, may pass away in a prayer, in a secret and sweet prayer, may pass I
say, out of Adams body, into Abraham's, bosom; Through the tender mercies of
Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all honor and
glory, power and praise, dignity and dominion, now and evermore. Amen.

THE SICK-MANS COVCH.

A SERMON PREACHED before the most noble Prince HENRY at Greenewich, Mar. 12.
An. 1604.

BY THOMAS PLAYFERE Professor of Divinity for the Lady MARGARET in Cambridge.

Printed at London by John Legatt, Printer to the University of Cambridge.
1617.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable my very good Lord, Sir Edward Denny, Knight Baron of
Waltham, grace and peace.
RIght Honorable, being appointed to preach the last La^^, I delivered so
much as filled up the ordinary time of an hour: but that was scarce half this
Sermon. I uttered no more, to avoid the offense of the hearer; I write ^^
less, to procure the profit of the reader. For as tediousnes without regard of
due time, especially in so high a presence, soonest offends: so f^l^es, where
the reader may peruse more or less at his pleasure and leisure, best of all
edifieth. Therefore I thought good in publishing this Sermon rather to enlarge
it to the comprehension I had conceived and meditated in my mind, then to
scans it according to that strict compass of time which I was ^^ed to in the
pulpit. For by this means all that will vouchsafe to look into it, may make
their profit thereby. They fi^^^h were present by uttering the whole, whereas
they heard but half: they which were absent, by having the preachers meaning,
though they be unacquainted with his affection. And yet perhaps it may please
God to bless this poor exercise to diverse heavenly minded men in such sort,
as they may take occasion by some things here inti^^^ted, not only to conceive
^ore then they find di^rectly specified, but also to ^e ^ore di^^^^ely inspired
and sweetly affected, the^ it pleased God in vouchsafe (...) of his grace
either at the preaching or (...) of us. Howsoever, seeing this discourse
exhorts principally to repen^^^nts and patience in the time of sickness, and
to a preparation of our selves by a good life unto a happy death, which is a
doctrine most necessary in this great mortality, that has lately bin, and is
yet feared: especially also for that the great^^ part of it. I never preached
any where, but only penned in my study, I thought my self so far bound in
duty to this blessed Church wherein we live, as not to hide it in a napkin,
but according to the Apostles rule, if I have found comfort my self by some
medita^tions here opened, then to comfort them that are afflicted by the same
comfort wherewith (...) our selves have bin comforted of God. And bethinking
we of one under whose protection it might pass in public, I thought best to
make bold with your Lordship. For though all sorts peradventure may be fitted
with some thing or other in this pla^^^ sermon, which they may make use of, yet
those I am sure will conne me most thank for my well meaning endeavor, which
have had most experience and trial of Gods loving mercies in this kind. Now
your good Lordship having bin delivered more then once or twice from dangerous
sickness, (...) learned such patience, such meekness, such unfeigned
repentance, such true mortification: such assurance of Gods love, such
confidence in Christ, such other good virtues of a right sanctified spirit, by
this fatherly visitation of the Lord which is not wanting, even oftentimes to
his dearest children, as you could never have learned, at least wise in the
same measure, in health. Besides, I have bin so especially beholding to your
honor, even since you were first of S. John's college, that I could not
satisfy my self with the inward duty and thankfulness toward you which I
have ever faithfully laid up in my breast, except I also showed the same by
some such outward testimony, as might clear me to you and the world of
ungratefulness. Wherefore I do so presume to dedicate this small labor to your
good acceptance, as withal I heartily desire all those that shall receive
edification thereby, to pray together with me for the continuance of your
Lordships good health and well s^^^, that long you may even in this world enjoy
this your (...) honorable addition, and all ^^her good gifts of God, and
favors of our gracious Soueraign^ to the benefit of this Church, and
(...)wealth.

From Cambridge the 28. of (...), 1605. Your Lordships ever to command, Thomas
Playfore.


The quotations in the margent with figures, were, or should have bin,
delivered at the preaching: the rest with letters, are only for the printing.

THE SICK Man's Couch.
PSALM. 6. VER. 6. I water my Couch with my tears.


NOthing is more delightsome then the service of God, and love of Virtue:
nothing more full of grief and sorrow, then sin, Gods commandments are not
heavy 1. Ioh. 5.3
yea, his yoke is easy, and his burden light Mat. 11.30.
. On the other side, how deeply sin wounds the very conscience, the
Heathen Orator confesses, saying, I will not buy repentance so dear Non emam
tanti paenitere Demosth.
. Agreeable to that of the Apostle, What fruit have you of those things,
whereof you are now ashamed? For the end of those things is death Romans 6.21
. Look how the Israelites ^^ried themselves in clay and brick, without any
profit or reward, nay when they had done their very best, they were by Pharaos
Taskemasters well beaten for their pains Exodus 5.14.
* E^^^ so the world, the flesh, the devil, as rigorous taskemasters incite men
to sin, but all the reward they yield them, is only mortal and immortal
grief. And as the sea roareth and foameth, and never is at rest Esa. 57.20
, after the same sort, the wicked are like the raging sea, foaming out their
(...) shame Epist. Iud. 13
, and never rest, till having made shipwreck of faith 1 Timothy 6.9.
, they be drowned in perdition and destruction. They which worship the beast,
have no rest day nor night Reu. 14.11.
. Now what beast so cruel as sin? which not only kills the body, as a beast
does but slays the soul Sap. 1.11.
, yea, it destroys both body and soul in hell Math. 10.20
. Therefore this indeed is the beast, which depriueth all those that serve it*
of liberty and rest. Of whom the Prophet Jeremy writes thus; Ier. 9.5.
They have taught their tongues to speak lies, and they take great pains so
do wickedly.

This, holy King David had good experience of. Namely, that in sin, there is
nothing but sorrows and pains, For lying here sick in his bed Hereupon I
entitle this Sermon. The sick man's Couch.
, and feeling this same sickness to be a stroke of gods heavy hand for his
offense, he cries God heartily mercy and says. Have mercy upon me, O Lord,
for I am weak: O Lord heal me, for my bones are vexed. My soul also is sore
troubled, but Lord how long will thou delay? Now that his soul is sore
troubled, he proves in this present verse; I am weary of my groanings, every
night I wash my bed, and water my couch with my tears. The soul must needs
be sore troubled, which is so grievously tormented. Especially in the words of
my Text, by three notable amplifications, he shows how serious and sincere
his repentance is. First, says he, Not only I wash, but also I water:
secondly, Not only my bed, but also my Couch: thirdly, not only with my
groanings, but also with my tears. I water my couch with my tears.

These will be very godly and ghostly meditations. The rather, in this time of
Lent. Only the worst, I doubt, will be mine. For that having discoursed at
large of this doctrine elsewhere In the sermon entitled The mean in mourning.
, I can not now cull out the choicest matter, (...) must be feign to gather
together such fragments as were then left. I water my couch with my tears.

The first amplification is in this word, I water. Not only I wash, but also I
water. The faithful sheep of the great Shepherd, go up from the washing
place every one bringing forth twins, and (...) barren among them Cant. 4.2.
. For so I (...) sheep having conceived at the watering troughes, brought
forth strong and (...) colored lambs Genesis 30.38.
. David likewise who before had erred and strayed like a lost sheep Ps. 119.
vlt.
, making here his bed a washing place, by so much the less is barren in
obedience, by how much the more he is fruitful in repentance. In Salo^^^
temple stood ten Caldrons of brass to wash the flesh of those beasts which
were to be sacrificed on the Altar 1. Reg. 7.38
. Sal^^^^s Father, makes a water of his tears, a caldron of his bed, an Altar
of his heart, a sacrifice, not of the flesh of unreasonable beasts, but of his
own body, a living sacrifice, which is his reasonable serving of God Romans 12.1.
. Now the Hebrew word Askeh.
here used, signifies properly, To cause to swim, which is more, then simply
to wash. And thus the Geneua translation reads it, I cause my bed every
night to swim. So that as the Priests used to swim in the molten Sea 1.
Reg. 7.27.
, that they might be pure and clean, against they performed the holy rites
and services of the temple: in like manner the princely prophet washes his
bed, yea he swimmeth in his bed, or rather he causes his bed to swim
in tears, as in a sea of grief and penitent sorrow, for his sin. Neither were
this so much to be wondered at, but that he frames the amplification thus; Not
only I wash, but also I water. Watering in Scripture is attributed to sundry
things. The holy Ghost waters. Except a man be borne again of water, and of
the holy Ghost John 3.5.
because the holy Ghost purges and cleanses like water. The word waters.
Paul planteth, Apollo waters, but God gives the increase 1. Cor. 3.6.
. Baptism waters. Which was prefigured in the water of Noah's flood 1. Pet.
3.21.
, and more plainly in the water that came out of Christ's side Ioh. 19.34.
Repentance waters. As in this place, I water my couch with my tears* Out of
Eden went a river to water the garden Genesis 2.10.
but David's eyes gush out many rivers of water Ps. 119.130
, to water his couch with his tears. As in Sicilia there is a fountain called
Fons Solis, out of which at mid day when the sun is nearest, flows cold
water, at midnight when the Sun is farthest of, flows hot water Pomponius
Mela.
: so the Patriarch David's head is full of water Ierem. 9.7.
and his eyes a fountain of tears, who when he enioied his health, as the
warm sun shine, was cold in confessing his sins, but being now visited with
sickness, his reins chastising him in the night season Psalm. 16.7.
, is so sore troubled and withal so hot and so fervent, that every night he
washes his bed, and waters, nay even melts his couch with tears. For
this Hebrewe word Amseh
, is diuersely translated also as well as the other. The best learned
interpretors Bucerus Tremellius, and alii
translate it Liquefacio, I melt. And then the meaning is, I water my Couch so
thoroughly, that I make it melt with my tears. We see ye and snow swim a
while in the water, but anon after they melt away: right so the holy kings
heart in midst of his breast is even as melting wax Psalm. 22.14.
, yea his very couch being rensed and steeped in tears, melts away as snow
before the sun. Neither yet does he think himself clean enough for all
this, but still bewailing his offense, he says with blessed Job, Job. 9.30.
Though I wash my self with snow water, and purge my hands most clean, yet
shall thou pl^^ge me in the pit, and mine own ^^o^ths shall make me filthy.

Hence we may learn two special points for our instruction. One is, that our
repentance must be continual. For the Psalmist having said before, Laboraui
in gemitu meo
I have been weary of my gronings, adds hereat the last, Stratum meum rigabo
vulg.
I will water my couch with my tears. I have bin weary; and, I will be weary.
or, I have watered, and I will water: implies a perpetuity of repentance. We
read it commonly in the Psalm thus: The mouth of all wickedness shall be
stopped Psalm. 107 42.
. Which is true, first in this life: where seeing before their eyes so many
examples of Gods providence and protection over his children, if they will not
praise him, yet they shall be forced will they nill they, at least wise to hold
their peace, and not blaspheme him. Then at the day of judgment. For that
guest, who when the king asked him, why he wanted a wedding garment, was
altogether speachles Mat. 22.12.
, though he be (...) one, yet is a pattern of all, and shows what a
pitiful case all the wicked shall be in at that day, when their mouths shall
be stopped, having not a word to say for themselves. But it might as well out of
the original be translated thus; Kaphcizah. Hebr. ^heassemath. Chald. Omnis
iniquitas contrahitos. suum Muscul. Oppilabit: in margin, Oppilauit Vulg.
. The mouth of all wickedness is stopped. For foolish men are plagued for their
offenses, and because of their iniquities Verse. 17.
. Because they rebel against the words of the Lord, and lightly regard the
council of the most high Verse. 11.
. Therefore many times their fruitful land makes he barren for the wickedness
of them that dwell therein. Verse. 34.
Yet so foolish are they, that they will not once open their mouth to confess,
either their own wickedness, or Gods goodness. Their mouths are so stopped,
that they will neither cry to the Lord in their trouble, that so they may be
delivered from their distress, nor yet when they are delivered, praise the
Lord for his goodness, and declare the wonders that he does for the children
of men. The stopping of their mouth then, is a double, both sin in them, and
punishment to them. A double sin, because they open it not, to cry unto the
Lord for deliverance, or to rejoice in the Lord, and to praise him after
deliverance. A double punishment, because for their not praising God, their
mouths shall be so stopped that yet they shall not blaspheme him, and for their
not dispraysing themselves, and confessing their sins, and repenting, and
crying to God for pardon, they shall have nothing, though they would never so
feign, at the last to say for themselves. Whereby we see that wicked men's
mouths shall be stopped, because they have bin stopped. Seeing if they had bin
open in this life to accuse their own selves for their sins, then they
should be open also at the day of judgment, being excused by the Lord. But,
because they have bin stopped here to cover their sin, therefore they shall be
stopped hereafter to discover their shame. Now if the wicked shall have hard
hap hereafter, when their mouths shall be stopped, because they have hard
hearts here, where their mouths have been stopped: then consequently the godly
must at no time stop, either their mouths from confessing, or their eyes from
bewailing their sins, Tertullian Dr Poeni. tentea^. In fine
says of himself that he is Omnium notarum peccator
a notorious sinner Et nulli rei nisi poenitentiae natus.
and borne for nothing but for repentance, he that is Omnium notarum peccatur,
soyled with every sin, must be O(...)rum poenitens, assoyled every hour of
his sin. And he that is borne for nothing but for repentance, must practice
repentance as long as he lives in this world, into which he is borne. Not says
Hilary, In Psa. 135. Quod peccandum semper sit, confitendum.
, as though we should continually sin, that we might continually repent Sed
quia peccati veteris and antiqui vtilis sit inde fessa confessio.
, but because it is very behoofefull for us, that that sin, which we know
well is already released by the Lord, should yet still be confessed by us. For
by this means, the merits of Christ are continually imputed unto us, which
we by our sins had justly deserved to be deprived of: and moreover, though in
some sort we be sure of pardon already, yet the daily exercise of true
repentance makes our vocation and election more and more sure unto us 2. Pet.
1.10,
. In this sense the Psalmist says again Psalm. 22.5. Notu^ faciam non absc^^di.
, I will acknowledge my sin, and mine iniquity. I have not hid, I have not
stopped my mouth, and I will not stop my mouth: I have not hid mine iniquity,
and I will not hide mine iniquity; a continual repentance. As it is here also,
I have bin weary, and I will be weary, I have watered, and I will water: I
water my couch with my tears.

The other point which we may hence learn, is this, That our repentance must
always be joined with a purpose of new obedience. I have him weary of my
groanings, says he, that he is sure of, and that that is past. But though he
have bin weary, yet indeed he is not weary, seeing he purposes twice as much
as he has performed. For, for one performance Laborans, that is past, here
are two purposes. Lanab^, and Rigab^, that are to come. I have done it already,
says he, so, so, but if I live longer, I will do it oftener, and better. I
will wash my bed, and I will water my couch with my tears. So that the
greatest righteousness of the saints in this life, consists rather in a
daily deploring of their sins, and in a faithful purpose to amend, then in
any eminent and absolute perfection Nostrae iustitia tanta est in hac vita, vt
potius Peccatoru^ remissione constet, quam perfectione virtutum, August. de
Ciuit Dei. l. 19. c. 27.
. Not that we ought to serve God by halfes as it were, with purposes and
intents, but that hereby the vnperfitnes of our obedience may appear, which
though it be as much as we can do, considering the weakness of our ability,
yet it is not half so much as we ought to do, considering the excellency of
Gods law. Wherefore I show now, not what should be, but what is, because the
best obedience of ours that is, is not so much as the least part of that which
should be. Harken I pray you attentively to that which S. Paul writes Romans 7.19
* To will is present with me: but I find no means to perform that which is
good. For the good which I would do, that do I not: but the evil which I
would not do, that do I. Now if I do that I would not, it is no more I that
do it, but sin that dwells in me. Where the Apostle plainly
distinguishes between these two, to will good, and to perform good. And the
one he says is present with him but the other he can no where find. Now if so
chosen a vessel Act. 9.15
, will much more good, then he can perform, than questionless we that are
far inferior, please God, rather by a willing purpose to do good, then by
any full performance of that which we purpose. Again, whereas he says* If I
do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in
me; he means not to excuse or extenuat his fault any way, but to show that
the principal scope and intent of his heart is to serve the law of God,
howsoever contrary to his intent by the violence of his flesh, he be drawn
to serve sin. And therefore he says, The good which I would, that do I not:
but the evil which I would not, that do I. Insinuating hereby, that the
regenerate man being not wholly flesh, nor wholly spirit, but partly flesh, and
partly spirit, as he is spirit would do that good, which as he is flesh he
does not, and as he is flesh does that evil, which as he is spirit, he would
not. Which makes him also say Act. 24.16
Studee, I study, or I endeavor my self to have always a clear conscience,
toward God and man. He speaks not of his Apostleship* in which he was
immediately inspired, and continually directed by the spirit. For touching that
he says elsewhere Nihil mihi conscius su^.
. I am guilty to my self of nothing 1. Cor. 44.
. But out of the compass of his Apostolical calling, he dares not warrant
that he has a clear conscience every manner of way, but only that he
studieth or endeavors to have a clear conscience, So his fellow Disciple
Ba^nabas exhorts them of Antioch, that with purpose of heart, they would
cleave unto the Lord Act. 11.23
. For as long as we live in this Tabernacle, sin cleaves so fast to us Heb.
12.1
, that we can not constantly cleave unto the Lord 1 Cor. 7.35
. Notwithstanding at least wise in purpose of heart it is good for us to shake
off all sin, and only to hold us fast unto God Psalm. 73.28
. But this our Prophet, even in one Psalms, to wit, the hundred and nineteenth,
affoordeth us many pregnant Testimonies to this truth. Verse 112
I have applied my heart to fulfill thy statutes always, even unto the end.
Though he cannot fulfill Gods law as well as he would, yet as hard as he
possibly can he plies it, and applies his heart to it Verse 57.
. O Lord thou art my portion, I have determined to keep thy words. Mark ye
this. He cannot say, he has ever kept the word of God in deed, but yet
because his hearts desire is earnestly bent that way, he says; I have
determined to keep thy words. 106. ver*
I have sworn and am steadfastly resolved, to keep thy righteous judgments.
O loving heart to God. O loathing heart to his sins. O zealous, O fiery
words. I have sworn, and am steadfastly resolved to keep thy righteous
judgments. Iuraus and Sta^^^. This iuror having sworn himself to Gods
statutes to keep them, yet is the fore man of the quest to give in a verdit
against his own self, that he has not kept them. So that David's Statu^ is
all one with Paul's stude^, and therefore though we may perhaps, and alas, do
daily (God forgive us) transgress these righteous judgments, yet our holy
oath, our solemn vow, our assured promise, our steadfast resolution, is, I
hope, I am sure ought to be, to the contrary. For after our first conversion
and unfeigned repentance, as we can never satisfy God, so we must never
satisfy our selves. Seeing the best thing that is in us, is no great
performance of any good, God wot, but only a ready will to do good: a studious
endeavor to have a clear conscience: a purpose of the heart to cleave unto
the Lord: an applying of the heart, to fulfill Gods statutes: a settled
determination to keep Gods words: a steadfast resolution to keep* Gods
righteous judgments. As we may see in this place. Lab^r^^is, I have bin weary
of my groanings. That is true. I but I purpose to do much more hereafter.
Lauabo and Rigab^. I will wash my bed, and I will water my couch. I water my
couch with my tears.

The second amplification is in this word, my couch. Not only my bed, but also
my couch. The bed is a place of rest. Especially that flourishing bed Floridus
lectulus. Cant. 1.15.
, where in the heavenly husband gives his well-beloued sleep Psalm. 12.7.3
Yet as the darkness is no darkness to God, but day and night are both alike
to him Psalm. 137.12
so the bed is no bed to David, but it and out of it, to him are all one.
Therefore he may well complain with poor afflicted Job Job. 7.15
; when I say, my couch shall relieve me, and my bed shall bring comfort in
my meditation, then fearedst thou me with dreams, and astonished me with
visions. Now the fearefullest vision of all, which most astonishes him, and
holds his eyes waking Psalm. 88.9.
, and enforce him to wash his bed with his tears, is the horrible sight and
grievous remembrance of his sins. Nevertheless the amplification is much
enlarged by that he says, not only my bed, but also my couch. For there is as
I take it, a double difference between these two. First, a bed to sleep in
by night: a couch is to sleep upon in the day time. As Mephihosheth at noone
in the heat of the day slept upon a couch, 2. Sam. 4.5.
And David in the afternone rose from sleeping on his couch 2. Sam. 12.2
, when he first saw V^^ahs wife. Then again, a bed is standing and higher: a
Couch is like a pallet, either upon the bare flower, or else very near it. As
in Salomons bed chamber, Cant. 3.10.
the bed was of gold, the couch whereby he stepped up to his bed, of purple,
Reclinatorium aureum, Ascensus purpureus.
David also says, Psalm. 132.
I will not climb up into the bed of my couch Non ascendam in lectum strati mei
as much to say as, into that bed, to which I ascend by a pallet or couch. So
that his soul no question was sore troubled, whenas lying sick in bed he wept
so abundantly, that with his tears, not only he wash his bed wherein he
himself lay, but watered his couch also, which couch lay beneath or beside his
bed. That precious ointment was sure very liquid, which did run down from
Aarons head to the skirts of his garments. Psalm. 133.2.
That current of tears was very swift, which streaming from Marie Magdalens
face, was sufficient to wash Christ's feet Luke 7 38
. That bloody sweat was very painful, Luke 22.44.
which bathed our Lords body all over, and besides trickled down Descendentes
in terram.
to the ground. Axa requested her father Caleb to give her a blessing. For
says she, thou have given me the south country, give me also springs of
water. And he gave her Ios. 15.19 Irriguum sup^rius, and irriguum inferius.
the springs above, and the springs beneath. This same blessing and gift David
likewise had here obtained of God. For his washed bed was a spring above, and
his watered couch a spring beneath. Even as the ointment, upon Aarons head was a
spring above, upon the skirts of his garments a spring beneath: and the tears,
upon Mary's fact were a spring above, upon Christ's (...) a spring beneath: and
the sweat, upon our Lords body was a spring above, upon the ground a spring
beneath. So here, I say, is, irriguum supirius, and irriguum inferius, a spring
above, and a spring beneath: I wash my bed, and water my couch with my tears.

Hence we may learn one very excellent good lesson. That we ought in the same
kind and sort as we have sinned, if it be possible, to make some part of
amends for our sin. David had hainously transgressed against God upon his
couch, where he committed adultery. Therefore that in the self same place,
where before he had bin overcome by the devil, he might erect an eternal
monument of his victory and triumph over the diuill, he says here; I water my
couch with my tears. In the very same couch God is as highly now honored, as
he was before offended. Because David did before pollute it by adultery, but
now he does sanctify it by repentance. So the Israelites Exodus 35, 23.
), once plucked off their earings to make a golden calfe; but anon after,
repenting them, they offered their earings to the building of the temple. And
so with the same Jewels, wherewith they did erect Idolatry, now they maintain
Gods service. Zacheus Luk 19.8
being a Publican, no doubt got much of his goods by plain bribery and
extortion: but long after, here stored all again fourefold, and sp^nt of his
wealth very frankly and boun^ifully, to give Christ a friendly welcome, and
kind entertainment in his house. That sinful woman Luke 7.38.
of whom I spoke even now, never took half so much delight in entising her
lovers with her beautiful locks, as now she is glad with all her heart to
wipe the very (...) of our Savior with them. A worthy example of this we have
in (...). Archbishop Cranmer See Master Fox his book of Martyrs.
of blessed memory, could never satisfy his conscience after his recantation,
till he had (...) that hand to ashe^ which subscribed. And so he took a holy
revenge of himself, as Saint Paul wills us 2. Cor. 7.11
by suffering i^ a manner two martyrdomes, one after the other. One, which he
put himself to, by burning first his right hand: the other, which the Papists
put him to, by burning afterward his whole body. And so that constant and
faithful right hand of his never so much dishonored God by his subscription
with ink to the bil, as he did honor God by his inscription with blood in the
fire. The Apostles words are general, Romans 6.10.
As you have given your members servants to uncleanness to commit iniquity, so
now give your members servants unto righteousness in holiness. Even as the
Israelites gave their Jewels, and Zacheus gave his goods, and Marie gave her
hair: and Cranmer gave his hand. Yet we read Eusebius. histo. Eccles. 6. c. 8.
that Origin made himself an Eunuch: Democrites put out his own eyes: Crates
cast his money into the sea: Thracius cut down all his vines. David did not
so. He kept the same Couch still, and only changde his mind. As for Origin,
strange it is, that perverting so many other places by Allegories, only he
should pervert one place, by not admitting an Allegory. For our Lord
commanding to cut off the foot, or any part of the body which offends us
Mark 9.47
, does not mean we should cut it off with a knife, but with a holy and a
mortified life. Therefore Origin was justly punished by using too little
diligence, where there was great need, because he used too great diligence
where there was little need Ita eu^uit, vt cum aliquid vbi non oporte^ ad
hibetur, illi^ vbi oportet neg ligatur. Tertul. libro de Poenniten initio.
. How much better did Joseph, Genesis 39.10.
who being assaulted by Putiphars wife, did not any way maime himself, but
still kept his body undefiled as the temple of the holy ghost: And so pleased
God, as well then in chaste single life, as in chaste matrimony afterward. What
should I say of Democritus, who was blinded before he was blind? Tertullian
writes thus of him, In Apolog c. 45. Democritus excoecando seipsum
incontinentiam eme^datione profitetur.
Democritus putting out his own eyes, does by that very remedy which he
uses against incontinencie, profess the greatest incontinencie of all. At
Christianus saluis oculis famina^ videt, animo aduersus libidi nes coecus est.
But a Christian need not put out his eyes for fear of seeing a woman: for
howsoever his bodily eye see, yet still his heart is blind against all
unlawful desires. Here Tertullian uses two very pithie and grave reasons. One
is this; The putting out of the eyes is not a bridle to restrain
incontinencie, but rather to mark to descrie it. For he that does so, in a
manner openly confesses, concupiscence so reigns in him Romans 6.12.
that he can by no kind of means resist it, but by a violent boaring out of
his own eyes. The other is this, The fault is not in the eye, but in the
heart. Therefore to put out the eye, is to make clean but the outside of the
platter Luke 11*39.
. For if the affection of the heart be well ordered, the sight of the eye need
not be feared. Just Let every day seeing the unlawful deeds of the Sodomites
2. Pet. 2.8
was grieved with it, but not endaungered by it. For he said no doubt with holy
Job, Job. 31.1.
I have made a covenant with mine eyes, not to look upon a maid. Now Crates
T^ebanu^ was not well advised neither, who did cast his money into the sea,
saying, Ego merga vos, ne ipse mergar a vobis
Nay sore I will drown you first in the sea, rather then you should drown me
in covetousness and care. Lactantius reasons with him thus, Institut. l. 3.
c. 23. Si tantus pecuni^ contemptus est, fac illam beneficium, fac humanitatem,
largire pauperibus.
If thou contemn money so much, then do good with it, show thy liberality by
it, bestow it on the poor. Potest hoc quod perditurus es multi, succurrere,
nefame, aut sut, aut auditate moriantur.
This money that thou art rea^e to cast into the sea, might relieve a great
many, that they perish not, by hunger or thirst, or nakedness. The sum of his
argument is this: Fuery Crates must not look to be Polyc^ates. Or so happily
to get his money again, as he got his ring again. Therefore, that man cares not
for money, not which flinges it away, but which spendes it well: not which
imploies it to no use, but which imploies it to a good use: not which casts it
into the waters, where he is never to see it again, but which casts it unto
the waters Super aquas. Eccles. 11.1.
, where the poor shall find it. For so Abraham being very rich, laid out his
substance for the most part in hospitality. He used to sit at his tent
door under the oak of Mambre, just about dinner time Genes. 18.1.
, to see what strangers passed by, that he might bring them in with him to his
table. Thus must we (most Honorable, and blessed Christian brethren) thus must
we, I say, make us friends of the unrighteous Mam^^^, Luke 16.9.
that every way we may glori^^^ God, with our souls, with our bodies, with
our substance, and goods. Lastly, Thracius, of whom Aulus Gellius writes,
Noctium Attico, l. 19 c. 13. Homo miser vites suas sibi omnes detruncat.
was for any thing that I can see, even at that time most of all drunken, when
he cut down all his Vines, least he should be drunken. For he that so
foolishly did cut down all his own vines, by the same reason, if all the
Vines in the World had bin his own, would have cut them all down. Howbeit, if
every thing must be taken away that may be abused, then away with the name of
God, away with the word of God, away with all good things that are. Therefore
we can not allow this devise of Thracius, but we must disallow S. Paul's advice
to Timothy 1 Timothy 6.23 Modico vino vtere Vulg.
, Use a little wine for thy stomachs sake, and thine often infirmities. For if
all vines were cut down, where should Timothy get a little ^ined. Wherefore
he holds a good mean between two extremities. To be drunken is one
extremity: to cut down all the vines, is another extremity. But T^^^^hie
keeping the right mean, uses vine, least all the vines should be cut^ d^^ne,
and yet but a little wine, lest he ^^^uld be drunken. He uses wine to help
his infirmity, and yet but a little ^ine to anoide super fluitie. And he put a
^^dicum before the vi^^m, the little before the wine, as S. Barnard notes
Omnes nimirum ex quo monachi sumus, infirmum stomachum habemus, and iam
necessarium Apostoli de vtendo vino consilium merito non neglegimus: modico
tame^ quod ille praemisit nescio cur praetermisso. In Apologia ad Guliclmum
Abbatem, versus finem. Acfi diceret, v^^^m Apostolus admittit, monaechus
immittit: modicum, Apostolus pramittit, mona^bus pratermittit.
. Because of two extremities, drunkenness and drynes, that he knows to be the
greater; this to be the lesser. Therefore he is not so desirous to drink
wine, that his stomach may be strengthened, as he is careful to drink but a
little wine, least his head should be weakened. To conclude then David
deals not so with his Couch, as Origin did with his body: as Democritus did
with his eyes: as Crates did with his money, as Thracius did with his vi^era^^
such matter, but contrariwise: Even as Joseph with that same body did raise up
himself a holy seed, wherewith other^ commit uncleanness: and Let, with th^se
same eyes did lament the sins of his people, wherewith others allure, and
(...) allured to lightness: and (...) that same money did entertain stranger,
wherewith others are cast away, when they have cast it away about (...) and
Timothy with those same (...) help his disgestion, wherewith (...) ouerwhelm
their nature: so David in the very same couch, wherein many commit folly, and
wherein once he himself also had bin as much ouerseene as any other, does now
offer up the sacrifice of his sorrowful soul, and contrite spirit to God so
that he cuts not off any member from his body, but prays that he himself (a^
he had well deserved) might not be cut off, as a dead member from the body of
Christ: he puts not out his own eyes, (...) almost weeps them out: he drow^^^
his couch in the sea, but in his tears: he auoides drunkenness, not by
cutting down all his vines, but by taking the (...) of salvation, and calling
upon the name of the Lord Psalm. 16.13.
and drinking up this cup full of Vinum Angelorum rest lachryma pingue hoiocau
stum, virtutum matter culparu^ lauacrum, Angelorum vinu^ Ioba. Climacus.
, the tears of which he says here, I water my couch with my tears.

The third and last amplification is in the last word, with my tears. Not
only with my gronings, but also with my tears. The Church militant here on
earth is resembled, to a turtle. The voice of the turtle is heard in our land.
Cantic. 2.12.
Because Turtur gemit, non canit.
the voice of the turtle is nor cheerful or merry, but groaning or mourning,
Now in sacryficing the turtle Leuit. 1.15
, among many other ceremonies, the Priest was appointed to wring the head of
it backward. David also, cleapeth himself a turtle when he says. O deliver
not the soul of thy turtle dove into the hands of the enemies. And he is
sacrificed by having his head wrung backward as it were, when as looking
backward to his former sins, he groaneth, and is weary of his groanings. But
yet the amplification r^nnes in a far higher style, for that he says. Not
only with my groanings, but also with my tears. Augustus Caesar was much
delighted in the company of learned men. Especially of two famous Poets which
lived in his time. Virgil and Horace. Of the which, Virgil was so much given to
groaning and sighing, that commonly he was called Suspirabund^^: and Horace
was borne bleare eyed. Therefore upon a time Augustus sitting in the midst
between Virgil and Horace, and one that might be bold asking him what he
did: marie says he, Sedeo inter suspiria and lachrymas.
I sit here between groanings and tears. Our Augustus, King David I mean
sits not between groanings and tears, but lies sick in his bed, very
(...) troubled and even almost overwhelmed with them both. For as that little
cloud like a man's hand, which Eliz^us saw, brought with it at length a great
shower 1 Reg. 18, 44.
: insemblable wise, those groanings of his, as a cloud, or as a thunder, did
give warning in a manner, that anon after would follow a dreery shower of
tears. And as the sea sends forth floods which water the whole earth Eccles.
1.7.
: so the swee^^ singer of Israel otherwise, but here also the pitifulst weeper
in the world, his contrition being great like the sea Lam. 2.13.
, makes a floode as I may say, and (...) his couch with his tears. Saint
Austin Conf^ss. l. 8. cap. 12.
warranteth both these comparisons of a shower of tears, and of a stoude of
tears. The first in these words; Vbi alta consideratio congessit totam
miseriam meam in conspectu cordis mei,
When I deeply considered with my self the miserable estate wherein I stood,
Ob^iria est procella ingens fercus ingentem imbrem lachrymarum,
there arose in my heart a tempestuous storm, bringing with it a mighty shower
of tears. There is a shower of (...). The second in these words, Egosub
quadam firi arbore straui me, and dimisi habenas lachrymis.
Then I laid me down flat groueling upon the ground under a certain fig
tree and did let mine eyes weep, and sparenot, even their f^^, as much as they
would Et prortiperunt flumina oculorum meorum.
and presently gushed forth whole flood^ of tears. Here is a flood of tears.
Perque sin^^ lachryma fluminis instar eunt.


Hence we may gather two very profitable notes, worthy of our remembrance. The
first is, That every new act of sin must be bewailed by a new act of
repentance. Not that it is possible for us to reckon up, or even so much as to
remember all and every of our sins, but that having heartily repented of
those or of that sin which most daungerously has wasted and almost destroyed
our conscience, then we ought at the last to say with the Psalmist, Psalm. 29.12.
Who can tell how often he offends? O cleanse thou me from my secret sins.
This same holy Prophet, even when he was in the state of grace, defiled
himself with an other man's wife. Yet he slept not over long in this sin, but
being awaked by the Prophet Nathan, and more thoroughly by this sickness which
was Gods messenger unto him, he renewed his repentance, and watered his couch
with his tears. So (...) we. For it is nothing but a slander which the Church
of Rome casts upon (...), that forsooth we should teach a man whose person
is justified by faith in Christ committing some foul act, is never a whit the
worse for it. Nay, our doctrine is this, That such an one has hurt himself
two ways. In respect of his own guiltiness and in respect of Gods
righteousness. For the first; though God for his part do not break off the
purpose of adoption, and adiudge him to wrath, and therefore he is not guilty
of condemnation for sin; yet he is simply guilty of sin, and has
grieuouslie wounded his own conscience. For the second, though God again has
pardoned all the sins of his elect, even those that are to come, by his decree
by his promise, by the value and price of his sons merits, yet absolutely
and actually he does not apply this pardon to the apprehension and feeling of
the sinners faith, till he recover himself, and renew his repentance. Many
this we teach, that God (...) his chosen children so by Faith and Repentance,
that it is ^^possible any of them should die in final impenitencie. But that
sweet sanctifying Spirit^ which dwells in them, is still busy like a be as
we say, and neue^ lea^eth ^^inging them, and stirring them up to repentance,
and working them like wax (as it were) till (...) much as it was before
grieved (...) they^r ^^ersion by sin, so much (...) ^ee after delighted for
their conversion by amendment of life. Therefore as they all need not to
doubt a whit of their salvation, who after they have fallen a sleep in sin,
awake betimes, and water their couch with their tears: so I assure you (Holy
Brethren) their case is dangerous and desperate, nay, they are in a cursed
case, which will not be awaked, but lie still sleeping and snoring in sin. Seeing
no pardon can be procured, but where repentance is renewed. For God does not
give us rules to keep, and break them himself. Now his rule is this, Luke
17.4.
Though thy brother sin against thee seven times in a day, and seven times in
a day turn again to thee, saying, It repents (...), tho^ (...) forgive him.
Therefore as I am bo^^d^ to forgive my brother in de^d, though he do^ not ^^ke
me forgiveness, but I am not bound to go to him, and tell him, I forgive him,
except he first come to (...) and tell me. He repents; but if he do (...) then
am I bo^nd also to tell him I forgive him: so the Lord though in the gracious
degree of his fatherly adoption he have sealed up the remission of all our
sins, yet he does not open the bag and shew^ the treasures of his mercy
(...)ward in it till he see us become new (...). For then he has bound
himself by his lo^ing promise, and has given us his word, that he will
forgive us our sin. At what time soever a sinner repents says ^e, Ezec.
18.21
, and waters his Couch with his tears, I will remember his iniquities no
more. Naaman the Syrian was willed (...) wash himself seven times in (...),
2. Reg. 5.10.
. Why seven times? was not (...) time enough? Yes surely. For him it was
enough, but not for us. For that was done rather for our example, then for his
benefit. Seeing his malady was only a leprosy: but our soul is leprous with
sin. And therefore if he for one leprosy washed himself seven times, how
much more ought we every time we sin to be sorry for it, and if we do not
wash our selves seven times for one sin, yet at the least wise to wash our
selves seven times for seven sins, seeing the most just of us all, as
Solomon witnesses Prou. 24.16
may seven times fall in one day? Or rather many men in the world have not
only seven deadly sins, but even seven devils in them Luke 8.2.
which they can no ways wash out, but by bitter weeping and watering their
couch with their tears. To the angel of Ephesus thus^ says the spirit Reu.
2.5.
, Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first works,
or else I will remove thy candle stick out of his place. So that if we let
our sin stand still, our candle-sticke shall be removed: but if we would have
our candle stick stand still, our sin must be removed. We must repent and
do the first works, not those which we must repent of, but those which we
are fallen from. Wonderful are the words of the Apostle; God has committed
the word of reconciliation unto us, therefore we are Christ's embassado^rs,
and God entreating you as it were by us, we beseech you in the name of Christ,
that you would be reconciled to God 2 Cor. 5.20.
What, may some man say, were not the Corinthians reconciled already?
wherefore then is the Apostle so earnest about nothing? I but they do not
understand the Apostle which make this objection. He knew well enough they were
reconciled before. But he knew as well, the best of us all can not stand in
Gods favor one minute of an hour without a good mediator. For since our
first reconciliation to God, we have so often offended his majesty, that if
we do not plie him with humble supplications, and daily petitions, and hearty
repentance, and unfeigned tears, he and we cannot possibly be friends. And
therefore the Apostle calls upon the Corinthians so earnestly, and cries to
them, and says, Take heed, Fear God, Offend him not, Ye can get nothing
by falling out with him. But in case you have been overtaken with any sin
Gal. 6.1.
, ye have an advocate with the father 1 Ioh. 2.1
, Fly unto him for succor, If you be wise, be reconciled to God as soon as
you can, God entreats you: (O merciful Lord, do thou sue and seek to us?
and is there any thing in the world that we can pleasure thee in? can our
goodness reach unto thee Psalm. 16.2.
? and do thou entreat us? ye says he,) God entreats you, and we his
ambassadors in the name of Jesus Christ beseech you, that you would be
reconciled to God. Be reconciled ^o God, and though you have offended him never
so much, he will be reconciled to you. Assure your selves, you may lay your
life of it, he will presently turn unto you, if you in true repentance will
turn unto him, and water your couch with your tears. For so this our Prophet
did no sooner confess his fault, but Nathan proclaimed his pardon 2. Sam. 12
13.
. Whereupon he himself also has these words Psalm. 32.5.
, I said I will confess my wickedness unto the Lord, and thou forgauest the
iniquity of my sin, As the Lioness having bin false to the Lion, by going to a
Libard; and the Storke co^forting with any other besides her own mate, wash
themselves before they dare returne^ home* in like manner the prophet here,
before he can be reconciled to God, after this great breach by adultery and
murder 2 Samuel 11.4. and 15.
, is feign to wash his bed, and to water his couch with his tears. But here a
question may arise: If the faithful be subject, neither to eternal
condemnation when they do sin, not yet to final impenetency when they have
sinned, what need they at all, either avoid sin, for which they shall not
be condemned, or else hasten their repentance, of which they shall not be
deprived? This question consists of two parts. The one touching condemnation:
the other touching impenitency. To the former part I say as before. Though
there be sin in them, yet there is no condemnation to them, which are in Christ
Jesus. Rom 8.1.
But how? this is no thanks to them that sin, thereby making themselves guilty
of sin, and as much as in them lies subject also to condemnation for the same:
but only to God, who wrappeth up all the sins of his children in the bowels
of his dear son, that they appear not in his sight to condemn them, either
in this world, or in the world to come. As Show went backwarde, and covered his
fathers nakedness Genesis 9.23
so God casts our sins behind his back, and does not impute them to us.
Howbeit though condemnation need not be feared, yet there are reasons enough
besides to persuade all those to hate sin, that love God, One is, because God
does usually withdraw the outward signs of his ^^^our from them which forget
their duty toward him. The whole book of Job is proof sufficient.
Especially, in one place Job. 7.20.
he says, I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men?
why have thou set me as a mark against thee, so that I am a burden to my
self? And David Psalm. 44.24.
. Why stand thou so far off, O Lord, and hidest thy self in the needful
time of trouble? For as Joseph made himself strange to his Brethren, and spoke
unto them roughly Genesis 42.7.3
, though he loved them well enough: even so the Lord, though he take not his
mercy from his children, yet he chastises their iniquities with rods, and
their sins with scourges Psalm. 89.33
. An other is, because the faithful sinning loose the inward feeling of Gods
favor. As Job testifies in these words; Thou writest bitter things against
me, and thou will consume me with the sins of my youth Job. 13, 26
And David, O give me the comfort of thy help ag^ine, and establish me with
thy free spirit Psalm. 51.12,
. He wanted not Gods help nor his spirit, but yet he was so discouraged and
cast down in his own conscience, that he felt not the comfortable taste of
Gods help, nor the blessed freedom of his spirit. And even so generally, the
godly sinning, though they quench not the Spirit altogether 1 These. 5 19
yet by grieuing it, they felt such a desolation in their souls, as if they
were quite cast out of favor with God. To the latter part of this question I
answer, that the sins of the godly are therefore with repentance, because
the graces of God are without repentance Romans 11.29
. And as it is impossible that they which sin* in despite of the spirit,
should be renewed by repentance Heb. 6.6.
, so it is impossible that they should not be renewed by repentance which
sin of infirmity, as all the faithful do. For though the flesh have the
upper hand, one while enforcing the^ to sin, yet the spirit will get the
masterie another while, making them heartily sorry for their sin.
Nevertheless, great reason is it they should not abuse the patience of God,
moving them to repentance Romans 2.4.
, but rather that they should ins^antly stir up this gift of God in them 2 Timothy
1.6.
to which they are sure at length the course and motion of Gods spirit will
bring them. For first, what a horrible thing is it, either for God to withdraw
his fatherly and favorable countenance from us, or for us, to have a hell as
it were in our own consciences, both which as I have already showed, do
necessarily follow sin? Besides, seeing all the good we get by sin, is
repentance and grief, far better it is to begin by times to repent, and so
forthwith to enjoy the comfortable feeling of Gods merciful pardon, then by
deferring our repentance, still to be tormented with the horror of our
guilty conscience. Moreover, the end is not a bar against the means, but
rather a great furtherer, and setter of them on forward. We being therefore
sure we shall repent at the last, ought never a whit the less to use the
means as soon as we can by ceasing to do ill, and learning to do well Esa.
1.17
. Even as S. Paul though he knew certainly he should not perish in that
shipwreck, yet he used the best means he could to save his life Acts 27.44.
. Lastly, this is one maine difference between the wicked and the godly, that
they having their consciences feared with a (...) iron 1. Tim. 4.2.
, and being past feeling Ephesians 4.19.
g^^ on still in sinning without any sen^^ of sin C^nsuetudo peccandi tollit
sensum peccati. Aug.
: but these, having their senses exercised to discern between good and evil
Heb. 5.14.
, never rest if they be hurt with the sting of sin, till they be estsoone^
salued and healed by Gods mercy. For as the Swallow perceiving himself almost
blind, presently seeks out the herb Chelidonia Celandine.
and the Heart feeling himself shot with an arrow sticking in him, forthwith
runs to the herb Dictamus Dittany.
: right so do the godly. Take Ezechias for an example of a Swallowe. All that
is in mine house have they seen, there is nothing among my treasures that I
have not showed them 2. Reg. 20.15.
. There he is blind. For the more treasures the King of Babels ambassadors
saw, the more was Ezechias blinded with ambition in showing them. Like a Crane
or a Swallowe, so did I chatter, I did mourn as a done. I shall walk weakly
all my years in the bitterness of my soul Esa. 38. i 4. i 5
. Here is the Chelidonia. For this bitterness of his soul, does cure the
blindness of his soul. Take Job for an example of a Heart. The arrows of the
almighty are in me, the venom whereof does drink up my spirit, and the
terrors of God fight against me Job. 6.4.
. There he is shot. For if he had not bin stricken before with the arrows of
his own wickedness, he should never have binne stricken thus with the arrows of
Gods correction, I abhor my self and repent in dust and ashes Job. 42.6.
. Here is the Dictamus. For this abhorring of himself is a recovering of
himself: and the sooner he repents in dust and ashes, the sooner is he freed
from all his sins, and from all the punishments due to the same. But now some
man may further object and say. He is not yet fully satisfied for this latter
part, because talk as long as we will, all these inconveniences which come,
as has bin declared, by perseuering in sin, are either no bridle at all, or
else not so strong a bridle to restrain men from sin, as if they be
persuaded, they may by sinning quite and clean loose all justifying grace, and
so may be finally impenitent when they die. But he which will put forth this
doubt must remember that the children of God are led by the spirit of God Romans
8.14.
. And the spirit though not in the same degree, yet in the same sort works in
all those that have been, are, or shall be sanctified 2. Cor. 4.13. Euudem
spiritum.
. Who as they serve God not for any se^uile fear of loosing their faith, or of
dying in impenitency, or such like, but only for pure love of his majesty: so
they can neither will nor choose, but being bitten with sin, they must needs
in their souls and consciences feel the smart of it. Therefore S. Paul says,
The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and
these are contrary one to the other, so that ye cannot do the same things
that ye would Gal. 5.17.
. For if the faithful would do Gods will in earth as it is in heaven, and
serve him as obediently, and as perfectly as the good angels do, they can not,
because still in them the flesh lus^eth against the spirit: and so again, if
they would sin with full consent, or with an obstinate purpose to continue in
sin, as the evil angel^ do, they cannot do this neither, because still in
them the spirit lusts against the flesh. Which spirit though it may for a
time be shut up as it were, yet it will find means well enough at length
to show it self. Thus Elibu says. The spirit within me compels me. Behold
my bellieis as wine which has no vent, and like the new bottles that burst.
Therefore will I speak, that I may take breath Job. 3^.19.
As Elibu then kept silence some while even from good words, though it were
pain and grief to him: but at the last the fire kindling and his heart being
hot within him, spoke with his tongue Psalm. 39.3.
: so the spirit of God in all the elect of God, is like wine put into a bottle,
which will have a vent to spurge out, or else it will burst the bottle, or like
fire rakte up in embers, which will have a passage to burn out, or else it will
consume the whole house 1. Ioh. 2.9.
. And therefore Saint John likewise says; Whosoever is borne of God does not
sin: for his seed remains in him, neither can he sin, because he is
borne of God. Mark ye this well. The Apostle thinks it not enough to say,
He does not sin: but adds moreover, He cannot sin. What is that? To
wit, presumptuously without fear, he does not sin: and desperately
without remorse he can not sin, He can not sin, I say, presumptuously, as
Pharaoh did desperately, as Caine did, maliciously, as Judas did blasphemously,
as Judas did. He cannot, he cannot sin thus. Why so, Because the seed of
God remains still in him. And what is the seed of God? It is the spirit of
God, of which S. Paul said even now. The spirit lusts against the flesh, and
these are contrary one to the other, so that ye cannot do the same thing that
ye would. Ye do not sin, nay ye cannot sin as the flesh would have you,
ye cannot do the same things that ye would: but ye do, nay ye can not choose
but do many times as the seed of God remaining in you, and as the spirit of
God lusting in you, would have you. So that this is a legal kind of preaching
to say. Take heed you sin not: ye may happen so to loose your faith: to
loose all the justifying grace which God has given us* to be for ever excluded
out of the Kingdom of heaven. This is to be said to vassals, to drudges, to
slaves, not to sons. To sons this may be better said Heb. 12.5 vobis vt
filijs
Take heed ye sin not: God has adopted you and given you the earnest of his
spirit 2 Cor. 5.5,
: Therefore grieve not this sweet spirit, whereby ye are sealed up to the
day of redemption Ephesians. 4.30
. If ye be loving children indeed, though there were no hell to fear, no
heaven to hope for, no torments to dread, no rewards to expect, yet we will
obey your good father, and be the sorrow-fullest Creatures in the world if you
have but once displeased him, only for the mere love ye beat toward him,
and for the unspeakable love he has showed toward you Diligenti deu^
sufficit ei placere quem diligit, quam nulla mayor expeteuda est rem^^etatio
quom ipsa dilectio. Leo Magnus Sermon. 7 de Ieiunio.
. For if he gave his only begotten son to die for you when ye were his
enemies Romans 5.10
, now you are sons and such dear sons in his dearest Son Ephesians. 1.6.
, what duty will you deny him? what loyalty will you grudge him? what hearty
thankfulness, and good will is there which you will not afford him? what
faithful honor and service is there which you will not yield him? In one word,
(ye holy ones of God, I speak now to you all, beloved) he which stands much
upon this objection, has no faith, no repentance, no justifying grace at all,
in him. For the faithful will never make that liberty which Christ has
purchased for them with his precious blood, a cloak to cover their wickedness
1. Pet. 2.19
, but rather a spur to incite them to godliness Luke 1.74 Liberamur, vt
seruiam^s ei.
, Neither will they at any time reason thus Romans 6.15.
, We will sin, because we are not under the Law, but under grace: nor yet
thus, Romans 6.2.
We will continue in sin, that grace may abound: but always thus; Romans 6.11.
By that we are dead to sin, we gather that we are alive to God: or else
thus; Tit. 2.11.
The grace of God has appeared, teaching us to deny, ungodliness and worldly
lusts. Thus you see then how the regenerate man, every new act of sin must
be bewailed by a new act of Repentance. For God will not forgive me, except I
repeut, no more then I am bound to tell my brother, I forgive him, except he
tell me. He repents. Naaman must wash himself seven times, before he can be
clean: the Angel of Ephesus must rise from his fall, and do the first
works, or else his Candlestick shall be removed: the Church of Corinth
though it be never so Holy, yet by sin violating Gods love must oftentimes
be reconciled anew: even king David in this place, though he were a man
according to Gods own heart, yet before Nathan would absolve him, he was feign
to cry Pecc^^^, and before God would forgive him, he was feign to confess his
wickedness, and to water his couch with his tears.

The second note is, That a great act of sin must be bewailed with a great
act of Repentance. I mean not, that any pain or grief of ours, can make
satisfaction for the least of our sins, or that one contrition can be any
cause of remission, but only that where sin has abounded, there sorrow
shol^d abound also, that Grace may superabound at the last 5. Romans 10.
The Schoolmen show here, that great grief may be considered two ways.
According to a* man's appretiation, and according to his intension Vide Bellar.
de P^^itentia libro. 2* ^.11.
As the Patriarch Jacob in his intension did lament his son Joseph, whom he
thought to be dead, more pitifully, then he did any sin that we read of Genesis
37.34.
, but in the appretiation or estimation which he had of the ^aynousnesse of
sin, certainly he would rather have lost ten sons, then once have sinned
against God. Therefore, howsoever in intention sorrow for sin be none of the
greatest, yet in appretiation they would ever have it excessive. But we need
not borrow such uncouth words of the Schoolmen to express our meaning, if we
can tell how to use those words which we have of our own. For if we look
narrowly into this place, we shall see that the Prophet David is both ways in
the highest degree sorrowful. First, by how much the more dearly he esteemed
Gods love and friendship, then the health of his body, by so much the more is
he grieved, that that is violated then that this is endangered. And yet
again, how intensiuelie and bitterly he bewaileth not so much the sickness
of his body, as the cause thereof the sin of his soul, appears in that he
tris^eth not, but washes his bed, and water^^^ his couch with his tears. We
read of three that Christ raised from death, ^a^rus daughter: the widows
son and Lazarus De tota hanc Alegoria, vide Aug. ser. 44 de Verbis Domini and
Tract. 49. in Iohannem. Erasm^m etiam in concion^ de Miserecordia dei and
Fe^rum in Johan c 11. Hanc approbat and Call vinus in Luc, verse 11. his verbis
Scimus inu^uem (...) quem Christus a morte suscitauit, speciem esse spiritualis
vita quam nobis restituit.
. For raising up of Iairus daughter Mat. 38. and deinceps
many weeping and wailing greatly for her, he came to the house, and went in
where she lay: and suffered but a very few to go in with him, and took her
by the hand: and said unto her Maiden arise: and straight way she arose and
walked: and charge was given, that this should not be told abro^de. Fos
raising up the widows son Ioh. 11.33 et deincep.
, much people of the city weeping with his mother for him, who was now carried
out of the gate to be buried* he went and touched the coffin: and said, Young
man arise: and he that was dead sat up, and began to speak, and he delivered
him to his mother, and the rumor hereof went forth through out all Judea. For
raising up Lazarus Luc 7.12 et deincep.
, when he saw M^ry weep, and the Jews also weep which came with her, he
groaned in the spirit: he was troubled in himself, he, understanding he had
bin dead and buried four days, wept for him, he groned again, he came to
the grave, he caused the grave stone to be taken away, he lifted up his eyes
to his father, he prayed very fervently: he cried with a lowed voice,
Lazarus, come forth: then he that was dead came forth, bound hand and foot
with hands, and his face was bound with a napkin and Jesus said unto them,
Loose him and let him go. Now these three sorts of corses, are three sorts of
sinners Ista tria genera mortu^rum sunt tria genera peccatorum ^ug. ser.
, Iayrus daughter, lying dead in her fathers house resembles them that sin
by inward consent: the widows son, being carried out of the gate of the
city, them that sin by outward act: de verbis Domini.
Lazarus, having been dead and buried four days, them that sin by
continual custom Resuscitauit filium. Archisy ^agogi ad huc in domo iacentem
resuscitauit iuuen^m filium viduae extra portam ciuitatis elatu^ res^scitauit
Lazarum sepultum quatri duanum Au. Tractatu. 49. in Johan,
. The first, was dead but one hours the second, but one day* the third four
days; The young maiden lay in a bed: the young man, in a coffin^ Lazarus, in a
grave. For the first, Christ touched her hand: for the second, he touched the
coffin: for the third, he touched nothing. Before their raising up; because the
maiden figured those that sin, not so much in act as in consent, he touched
her hand which had been (...) great instrument of any act: because the young
man had sin in a^^, but not in custom, into which he might have fallen if he
had lived longer, he touched the coffin which kept him from custom: because
Lazarus smelled having been dead now four days, the, first day by conceiving
sin, the second by consenting to sin, the third by acting sin, the fourth
by continuing in sin Prima est quasi (...) delec^ati^^is (...) Aug. sermon. 44.
, Christ touched him not at all. At the raising of the first, few were present,
and they were charged also to make no words of it, that the maiden might be
less shamed, which had sinned for the most part but in consent: at the raising
of the second, much people of the city were present, and the thing was noised
abroad far and near, that the young man might be more ashamed, which had
sinned also in act at the raising of the third a huge number of Jews were
present, which saw his face bound with a napkin, to testify the extreme
confusion and shame that covered his face, and they (...) him themselves and
let him (...), being eyewitnesses of his servitude and slavery which had
sinned so (...) by custom. After their raising up: (...) daughter strait-way
arose and walked because for her that had stepped aside but by consenting to
sin, it was easy to recover and to arise, and forthwith to walk in the way
of Gods commandments: the widows son sat up, began to sp^^^e, was delivered
to his mother, because for him that had actually committed sin, it was a
harder matter to recover; and therefore by little and little he came to it
Residet enim qui peccare des^^e^^ ^rigit se ad (...)lioris: (...), qui (...)
suam (...) dei misericordiam (...) tri qui p^eactis remediis restituitur
Ecclesiae Ecommunioni. raze. vbi supra
; first sitting up, by raising up himself to a purpose of amendment, (...)
beginning to speak, by confessing his own misery and acknowledging Gods
mercy* Lastly, being delivered to his mother, by returning to the bosom of the
holy Church, and enjoying the remission of his sins: Lazarus came forth
bound hand and foot with b^^d^^, because for him that had a stone laid upon
him Moles illaimposita sepulchro, ipsa est vis dura consu etudinis, quam
premitur anima nec resurge re, nec respirare permittur. Aug ser. 44.
, and had made his heart as hard a grave stone, or as a nether millstone by
making a custom, and as it were a trade of sin, it was a matter impossible
to (...) thinking to recover only the omnipotent power of Christ could bring
(...) forth bound hand and foot, and break these hands asunder, and restore
(...) again to the liberty of the so^^^^ of God. For you must know Ex
Epiphanio Catalogo dogmatum Manuhai.
that thirty years old he was when he was raised up, and thirty years more
he lived after he had been raised up: So that half his life he spent in
sin. the other half in repentance of sin. But I have a little forgot
myself. Yet it will be no great fault (Right Honorable, and beloved in our
Lord,) if it will please you to pardon it. I should have observed to you in the
first place; how Christ was earnestly requested to raise up the first Mark.
5.23.
, but raised up the two last of his own accord Luke 7.13. Ioh. 11.11.
, and contrariwise, how for the two first their friends only wept Mar. 5.38.
and Luke 7.13.
, but for the last, besides his sisters and friends, Christ also wept
exceedingly Ioh. 11.35.
. These are very important matters, and properly belonging to the point in
hand. For seeing the young maiden by sinning in consent had less offended
Christ, he would not have troubled himself about her, but upon entreaty of
others: but the two last the one an actual, the other a customable sinner,
which were in a more dangerous estate, he came to, being brought by the ^owel^
only of his own mercy, and raised them up: on the other side, the two first
having sinned, the one in thought, the other in deed, did not so much m^^e
Christ as Lazarus, which was grown to a custom in sinning both ways, and
therefore for them he was content their friends only should weep, but for
this last he wept and troubled his own self very much. So that the first h^^
neither restored of his own accord, nor yet wept for her: the second, he
restored of his own accord, but wept not for him: the third (...) both
restored of his (...) accord, and also wept for him. Why (...) The reason is
this: The young (...) sin, the less it hazarded her own soul, the less it
grieved Christ^ So^le, and so the less he had (...), either to cure it, or to
rue it; the young (...) sin being neither so small as the Mayd^^, nor so
great as Lazaruses, Christ raised him up of his own accord, because he was
more then a sinner in thought, and yet wept not for him because he was less
then a sinner in custom: Lazarus (...), the more rank and deadly it was, the
more did it require the skill and love of (...) Physician, as by his passion
could (...) it, and by his compassion would mo^^^ it. Where we must observe
with Saint Augustine, that our blessed Savior did not take on thus grievously
for himself so much, or for Lazarus, as for us. He groaned in the spirit, he
was troubled in himself, he wept, he groaned again. he lifted up his eyes,
he prayed fervently, he cried with a loud voyece. So that here be might well
have said with David; I am weary of my groanings: and I water my Couch with my
tears. But wherefore did he groan thus, weep thus, cry thus, pray thus, lift
up his eyes thus, lift up his voice thus? Saint Augustine tells us Quare
fleuit Christus, nisi qui^ flere hominem docuit? Aug. Tr. 49.
Wherefore, saye^ he, did Christ weep, but to teach us to weep Quare fremuit,
and turba uit seipsum, nisi quia fides h^minis sibi merito displicentis fre^ere
quodammodo debetin accusatine maloru^ operum, vt vi^lenti^ poe^it^udi cedat
consuetudo peccandi, Aug. ibid.
? Wherefore did he groan and trouble himself, but because* he faith of a
Christian displeasing himself in his sins, should after a sort groan in
accusing himself for his sins, and so at length the obstinate custom of his
sinning, might yield and give place to the violent force of his repenting? and
a little before; What is the cause, says he, that Christ troubled himself
Quid est turbat seipsum Christus nisi vt signific^t tibi qu^^odo turbaritu
debeas, cum tantam m^le peccatigra^aris and premeris.
, but to signify unto thee, how thou ought to be troubled when thou art
pressed and oppressed with a dead weight of sins Attendist^ enim te vidisti
te reum compu tasti tibi, illud feci and pepercit mihideus, illud commisi and
distulit me, eua^gelium audiui and contempsi, baptizatus su^ and iterum ad
cadem reuolutus sum, quid facio, quo co, vnde cuado? Quum ista dicis, iam
fremit Christus, quia fides fremit. In voce frementis appar^t spes resurgentis,
Si ipsa fides est ^itus, ibi est Christus fremens. Si fides in nobis Christus
in nobis.
? For thou have examined thy self, thou have found thy self guilty thou have
reasoned thus with thy self, I have done such or such a thing, and God has
all this while spared me, I have committed such or such a sin, and he has
still borne with me; I have heard the word of God, and yet I have carelessly
contemned it; I have been baptized and had my sins washed away, and yet I
have returned to them again: what d^el^ whether goe^? what will be the end of
this? when thou say thus, then Christ groaneth, because thy faith gro^eth.
By the voice of thy groaning may be gathe^red good hope of thy rising. If this
faith be in thee, Christ groaneth in thee. If says be in us, Christ is in us.
Thus far S. Augustine. In conclusion then, If Christ winking at lesser
sins. or at least not so much lame^ting them, did out of al measure bewail
Lazarus case, betokening those that have been long dead in trespasses and
sins, though it pertayned not directly to himself: how much more good Lord,
ought I, which am a far more heinous sinner then ever Lazarus was, (...) my
sins, mine own sins I say, for number are more then the hayres of my head
Psalm. 40.30
, and for greatness have reached up to heaven Ezra. 9.6.
, so never to leave groa^ing, and weeping, and crying, and praying for the
pardon of them, that I may truly say with the Psalmist, I am weary of my
groaning^: and, I water my couch with my tears. The old testament does show
this as plainly as the new. For in the law, the greatness of the sin was
estima^ed according to the condition of the ^^^^er. The private man's sin was
little: (...) princes sin great: all the peoples (...) greater: the priests
sin greatest of all. Therefore for each of these was ordained a several
sacrifice Leuit. 4.
. For the private man and the prince, a goat. But for him a she goat Verse.
28.
: for this is a hee-goate Verse. 23
. Now the male is compted a greater sacrifice, considering the perfection of
the sex. For all the people, and the priest, a young bullock, But for all the
people, the elders only did put their hands upon the head of the bullock
Verse. 15.
: the priest did put his own hand upon (...) Verse. 4
, Now as a young bullock is a greater sacrifice then a goat: so the priest
does undergo a greater penance and more open shame then all the people.
Besides, of al these, their offense that (...) ignorantly, was accounted not so
(...) theirs that sinned wilfully. And there^^^ they were to offer a ram worth.
2 (...) Leu. 5.15.
; but these a ram of what price the (...) would appoi^t Leu. 27.12.
, according to the measure and estimation of the sin Leu. 6.6. Iuxt^ astimati
^^em mensuramque peccati
, (...) then, though Leuiticall priests and (...) are ceased, yet we that are
made (...) priests and kings with Christ Revel. 5.1.
, (...) it were, enioine our own selves (...), and according to the quality of
our (...) measure the sacrifice of our bro^e^ and (...) trite heart which we
offer unto God. If we had never sinned but of ignorance, (...) every one of us
should be bound to (...) a ram of 2. sh^^^ls. And what is this (...) 2.
shekels? It is (...) mine own self, a po^^^ sinner Non habeo nisi mi^utaduo im^
minutissima, corpus and animam, vel p^tius vnum minutu^^ voluntatem me^^^ and
(...) dabo ill^^ ad volu^tatem, illius qui tantus tantillum tantis beneficiis
praeu^ni^, qui t^t^ se totum me compara^it? Ber^ sermon. de Quadruplici Debito.
p. 100.
, that having nothing to offer but the widows. ^. mites, nay a great (...) les
then 2. mites, I mean my body and my soul: or rather I have but only one
(...) to offer, only my good will, which I (...) henceforth conform to his will,
wh^ being rich, bec^me poor for me, and (...) his body and soul to redeem my
body and soul from death. But now seeing (...) almost as often sinned
wilfully, as either of ignorance or infirmity, what manner of men ought we to
be in humbling our selves under Gods mighty hand 1. Pet. 5.6.
, in judging and condemning our selves 1 Cor. 11.31
, in repenting as heartily as we sinned haynously, in washing our bed, and
watring our couch wi^h our tears? Even this our Prophet shows also very good
evidence for this same doctrine else where. Have mercy upon me, O Lord, says
he, after thy great goodness, and according to the multitude of thy mercies do
away mine offenses. Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my
sin Psalm. 52.2.
. The goodness of God is always like it self, neither great nor little but
absolutely infinite. Therefore it is never a whitthe greater for our cou^ting it
not little nor never a whit the less for our cou^ting is not great: but though
we count it great yet it is still as little as it should be, and though we count
it little yet it is still as great as it can be. So that the Psalmist in
tearming Gods goodness great, sets forth the greatness, rather of his own
badnes, then of Gods goodness confessing his own sin indeed to be great,
and so consequently Gods goodness likewise to be great, but yet in this
respect only, not because it can take any increase of greatness into it self;
but because it can give increase of gladness to him, who for a great sin, is
almost overwhelmed with as great a grief. The same may be said of Gods
mercies that they are neither many nor few, but as his goodness is
inco^prehensible, so his mercies are innumerable. Nevertheless the Prophet
sticks not to say; According to the multitude of thy mercies, do away mine
offenses. As if he should have said, According to thy mercies, do away the
multitude of mine offenses. The multitude then, to speak properly, is not of
Gods mercies, but of mine offenses, and yet seeing the mercies of God are as
many as all mine offenses, nay a great many mo^e then all the offenses of all the world, therefore he mentions a multitude of Gods mercies. Because nothing
can assuage the multitude of sorrows which arise in my heart Psalm. 94.19.
, for the multitude of my offenses, but the multitude of Gods mercies. The
multitude of mine offenses (...) king indeed, as on Gods behalf a multitude
of mercies, so on my behalf multitude of tears. And therefore he (...) wash me
thoroughly, or as it is in the latin translation Amplius laua me.
, wash me yet more. Wash me and wash me: and yet more, again and again, wash
me thoroughly from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my sin. For even as a
vessel that has bin tainted with poison or some infections liquor, will not be
clean with once washing, but must be often scalded, and thoroughly washed,
before it will be sweet, so having heretofore possessed my vessel in impuritie
1 These. 4.4.
though I now wash me with niter, and take m^e much I soap, yet mine own
uncleanness is ^^ill marked before thee Ier. 2.22.
, only thou O Lord can wash me thoroughly, who ^n grieved thoroughly,
because I have been thoroughly defiled. And indeed though I cannot wash my
self thoroughly, yet I am sure thou have washed me thoroughlie, because I have
repented me thoroughlie. I have mingled my drink with weeping Psalm. 102.10
, and my tears have bin my meat day and night Psalm. 42.4.
; nay Every night I wash my bed, and water my Couch with my tears. It is a
clear case then, that a great act of sin must be bewailed with a great act of
repentance. For the raising of Laza^^s, which has been dead four days
requires the greatest growing and ^^^ping the greater sin, as of the Priest
or volu^tary, or such like, requires the greater sacrifice: if I have
committed great wickedness* except I show great repentance I cannot obtain
great mercy if I have bin thoroughly defiled, except I be thoroughly washed, I
cannot be thoroughly (...), And therefore the holy Prophet, that ^e may obtain
great mercy, and that he ^ay be thoroughly washed, says here; E^^rie night I
wash my bed, and water my co^ch with my tears,

To return then where I left, and so (...) make an end, S. Austins two
comp^risons of (...) of tears, and of a floude of tears, may seem to some
very incredible* and much more these three amplifications of the Prophet
David. Especially if we read these words, as I have noted they are in the
Hebrew; Every night I cause my bed to swim, and I melt my couch with my
tears. But howsoever they may seem to be, they are I grant very
hyperbolicall: yet so as the meaning of them is plain ^^ough. As if he should
have said, I do^ (...) indeed cause my bed to swim in show^^^ of tears,
neither do I melt my Couch with floudes of tears: but yet if ever any man
had done so, or if it were possible any man could do so; then my repentance is
so great, and my tears so abundant, (...) I think verily whosoever is one, I
(...) be an other, which should cause my b^d to swim, and my couch to melt
seeing ^ Eue^i^ night I wash my bed, and water my couch with my tears.
Therefore they which can gather no good mea^ing out of these words, do
consider, neither how ^^^^efull the wrath and indignation of God is, (...) how
horrible is the sense of sin. (...) Relata adse magnitudine a^is alicui qua^
quidam^ eques Romanus dum vixit celauerat culcitram emi cubicularem in cius
anxime sic hi iussit.
, of whom I spoke before, hearing of them talk in hi^ court what a huge sum of
money a certain Knight in (...) owed at his death, (...) that all his good^
were to be sold to make payment^ of his debts, commanded the master of (...)
wardrobe to buy for him that ^ed, wherein this knight used to lie. For (sais he
Et praeceptum mura^tibus hanc rationem reddidit, Habenda est ad s^mmum
culcitra, in qua, ille cum ca^^um deberes, dormire p^tuit. Macrob. Satur. l. 2.
c. 4
if I cannot sleep soundly in that bed wherein he could sleep that owed so
much, the^ surely I shall sleep in none. If this famous Emperor thought it a
matter almost impossible for him to sleep quietly in his bed which was so
deeply in debt, what would he have said, If Christ who was born in his time,
had bin bred in his heart, Gal. 4.19.
I mean, if he had seen by the light of God^ word, that no debts are
comparable to sins? And therefore if that po^^ Knight could hardly sleep in
his b^dde, then that servant which o^eth his m^ste^ ten thousand (...) Math.
18.24.
(as alas which of us all, beloved, if we remember our (...) well, is not
guilty of so many sins?) ca^ hardly take any rest. This, if the Emperor had
known, he would rather (...) bought David's couch, that he might (...) have
slept for bewailing his sins, then this banckrupts bed that he might have
slept, notwithstanding all his ca^es. For these, these, even our sins, these
are the debts which so trouble and to^m^^ the soul, that a man (...) better
have (...) common wealths in his head, ye^: the ca^es of all the wo^ld in his
head, th^^ (...) disquieted and distracted with the (...) Christians, if we be
in good health. Let us be thankful to God (...) it, and let us account it a
special blessing with out which all worldly blessings are (...) thing, and let
us use it as all other good (...) of God to his glory, and the good of (...)
other. If contrariwise it please the Lord (...) any time to visit us with
sickness, (...) not in this case despair neither. But (...) whatsoever other
causes we may coceine let us inge^iouslie acknowledge one cause of our sickness
to be our sins. For if we would prevent the judgments of god by timely
repentance, and judge our selves, we should not be judged of the Lord. But
because men will not when they are in health think of him that gives health,
therefore oftentimes they are sick, and now and then also fall asleep 1. Cor.
11.30
. For even as ma^^facters which will not by gentle means confess their heinous
crimes, are by racking or such like tortures enforced to confess: so when
grievous sinners can see no time to repent, God in his justice, or rather
indeed in his great mercy, does as it were rack them, upon their couch with
sickness, and bodily pains, that they may be constrained to confess their
sins, and so, may be freede of two sickenesses, their bodies sickness, and
their souls sickness both at once. O happy, happy men are they, which when
they are young, remember their Creator before they be old Eccles. 12.1
: and when they are in health confess their sins, and forsake the^ before they
be sick Prou. 28.13.
. And yet, good loving brother, if thou happen to be sick, be not in any case,
as I said before, be not altogether discouraged by it. But in the next place,
remember that thy sickness is nothing else, but Gods fatherly visitation to do
thee good, and especially to move thee to repentance. Listen a little Harken I
say. Do thou not hear him rapping aloud, and knocking hard at the door of
thy hard heart, and saying to thee, whosoever thou art, Maiden arise; Young man
arise; Lazarus arise and come forth. Awake therefore, awake, thou that sleep
Ephesians. 5.14.
, and stand up from death, and Christ shall give thee life. Say with the
spiritual spouse: In my bed by night sought him whom my soul loves Cant 3.1.
* Say with this our Prophet; Did I not remember thee upon my bed, and meditate
of thee in the night season Psalm. 63.7,
* Look not still to have pillowes sowed under (...) elbowes, neither bolster
up thy self an^^ longer in thy sins Ezec. 13.18
. Lie not upon thy beds of ^^orie, neither stretch thy self upon thy couch
Amos. 6.4.
: but every night (...) thy bed, and water thy couch with thy teares^* Behold,
says thy heavenly husband Revel. 3.20.
I stand at the door and knock, if any (...) hear my voice and open the
door, (...) come in unto him, and will s^p with (...) and be with me. And again
Cant. 2.5.
, Open (...) my sister, my love* my dove, mine undefiled, for my head is full
of dew, and my locks with the drops of the night. Wherefore seeing Christ
knockes so loud at the door of my heart for repentance, knock thou as loud at
the door of his mercy for pardon: seeing he would so fain have thee turn unto
him and hear his voice, be thou as willing to call upon his name that he may
hear thy voice: seeing he is so forward to sup with thee by receiving thy
prayers, be thou as desirous to sup with him by obtaining the benefit of his
passion, even the remission of thy sins. And as he says to thy soul; Open
unto me, my sister, my love, my dove, mine undefiled: so be thou bold by faith
to turn the same words upon him again, and say, Open unto me my brother, my
love, my dove, mine undefiled, for my head i^ful of de^, and my locks with the
drops of the night. And why is my head f^ll of dew, and my locks with the
drop^ of the night? Because every night, I wash my bed, and water my couch etc.
Then, dear christian brother, then thy sickness shall not be unto death, but
for the glory of god Job. 11.4.
For God will turn all thy bed in thy sickness Psalm. 41.3.
. And so whereas before it was a bed of sickness, he will turn it into a bed
of health: whereas a bed of pain and grief, into a bed of rest and comfort:
whereas a bed of tears and repe^ntance, into a bed of ioifull deliverance.
Remember thy self well. At least wise as well as thou can, and well enough,
what happened to Job, who was sick, and sore all his body over, and had not ^
couch neither to lie on, but was ^ain to lie on a dunghill? Did not all this
turn to his great good, when as the Lord did bless his latter end much more
then his beginning Job. 42.10.
? What happened to Ez^chi^^, who had sentence of death gone out against him^ Did
not he lying sick in his bed turn him toward the wall and weep, and got the
se^te^ce of death reuersed, and 15 years more added to his life Esa. 38.6.
What happened to the man sick of a palsy, who was let down through the ^yling
bed and al in the midst (...) Jesus? Did not Christ with one (...) instant
heal him, so that he took up his bed and departed to his own house praising
god Luke 5.25.
? what happened to the man which had bin sick 38. years and was not able to
step down into the poole? Did not Christ saying but; Rise, take up thy bed,
and walk; cure him so, that presently he was made whole, and took up his bed,
and walked Ioh. 58 and 9
? What happened to E^c^s, who was sick of the palsy, as one of these two that
that I spoke of last, and had kept his bed S. years, as the other of them? Did
not S. Peter saying but thus unto him, Eneas, Jesus Christ makes thee whole,
arise and trusse up thy couch, so restores him, that immediately he arose Act.
9.33.34
? What happened to S. Paul who was pressed out of measure passing strength, so
that he altogether doubted even of life? Did not the Lord when he had received
the sentence of death in himself, deliver him from this great danger 2 Cor.
^.8.9
? What happened to S. Paul's fellow-souldier Epaphroditus, who was sick, and no
doubt sick very near unto death? Did not the Lord show mercy on him, and give
him health again, to the great joy of the Philippians, and general good of
all the Church? Phil. 2.27
what happened to holy David in this place, who says of himself; O Lord, I am
weak, my bones are vexed, my soul also is sore troubled, I am weary of my
groanings, every night I wash my bed, and water my couch with my tears? Did
not the Lord finding him in this miserable pickle and plight, deliver his soul
from death, his eyes from tears, and his feet from falling Psalm. 116.^.
? So that in thankful and ioifull manner he triumphs and says, the Lord
has heard the voice of my weeping: the Lord has heard my petition: the Lord
will receive my prayer. Even as S. Paul says; He has delivered us from so
great a death^ and does deliver us: in whom also we trust that yet he will
deliver us 2. Cor. 1.10
, O faithful, and dear loving Lord? He has delivered, he does deliver, he
will deliver. He never yet has forsaken, he never does forsake, he never will
forsake, those that put their trust in him. For tell me, my good brother, if
thou can tell any thing, tell me, did Christ so miraculously restore Job,
restore Ezachas, restore the man sick of the palsy, restore the bedred man,
restore E^^as, restore S. Paul, restore Epaphroditus, restore king David to
their former health and can he not restore thee? Did he restore the most of
these, when he was crucified upon earth, and can he not restore thee now ^e is
crowned in heaven: Is his arm now shorter, and his power lesser, then it was
then? where I marvel, where is the Centurio^s faith? Christ said then, I have
not found so great faith in all Israel Math. 8.10.
* now if he were among us, he might say* I have not found so great faith in all
the world. The Centurion believed though Christ came not under the roof of his
house, but spoke the word only, his servant might be healed well enough: and
do thou think Christ cannot heal thee, except he come in person, and stand
by thy bed side, and take thee by the hand, and raise thee up? For shame away
with such infidelity. This is a thousand times worse then all the sickness of
thy body. Nay rather assure thy self, if God say but the word, thou shall soon
recover and have thy health better then ever thou h^dst, and live many happy
and joyful days after. Therefore mind thou only that which belongs to
thee: that which belongs to God, meddle not with it, but leave it wholly unto
him. It is thy part to bewail thy former sins, and in bewayling them, to water
thy couch with thy tears, to cry to the Lord for mercy and forgiveness to
resolve with thy self steadfastly hereafter, if it please God to give thee thy
health again, to lead a new life, This belongs to thee, and therefore this thou
must meditate of, and employ thy self about day and night: but whether thou
shall recover or not recover, that belongs to God. That rests altogether in
Gods pleasur and will. if thou do recover thou have thy desire. Or rather
perhaps not thy desire. Seeing the holiest and best men of all incline neither
this way not that way, but wholly resign themselves, as in all other things, so
especially in this case to Gods will Non mea, sed tua voluntas fiat.
. Or if they determinately desire any thing, it is for the most part to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ Phil. 1.^2 30
, but suppose thou des^^e to recover, and recover indeed. Then as thou
obtainest thy desire: so the^ must perform thy promise, the promise thou
made when thy body was grieved with sickness and pain, when thy soul was
oppressed with heaviness, when thou (...) redst thy couch with thy tears. And
what was that promise? Namely, as I said before, that if it pleased God to
give thee health again, thou would love him more sincerely, serve him more
obedientlie, tender his glory more dearly, follow thy calling more
faithfully, then thou have done. If thou have offended him with pride, to
humble thy self hereafter: if with dissolutenes to be sober hereafter: if with
covetousness, to be liberal hereafter: if with conuersing with the ungodly,
to abando^ their company hereafter, and to say as it is in the Psalm: Depart
from me ye workers of iniquity, for the Lord has heard the voice of my
weeping. This if thou conscionablie and co^stantlie perform then in a good
hour (as we say) and in a happy time thou did recover. But suppose thou
desire to recover, and yet, neither thy self see any likelihood, nor God se^
it good thou should recover. The^ hearty repentance and watering thy couch
with thy tears is most of all necessary. That the fear of death may not
affright thee, but being truly penitent at thy departure, thou may be sure
to depart in peace Luke 2.29.
And so God granting not thy will, but his will, may indeed grant both thy will,
and his will. Thy will, which is not simply to recover, but co^ditionally if God
will: and his will which is not to have thee lie languishing any longer in this
warfare, but to triumph for ever in heaven. Aliquando sancti non recipiendo
quod petunt magis exaudiuntur, quam exandirentur si illud reciperent. Plus enim
n^^ recipiendo beatus Paulus exa^ditus est, quam si illud recepisset pro quo
(sicut ipse ais) ter do minum rogaue rat. Exauditus est igitur, ne exaudiretur.
Non enim nisi bonum Apostolus quarebat, quamuis illud non bonum sibi esse non
intellig^bat Extuditus est igi^ur recipiendo ^^num ne exa^diretur recipiendo
non bonu^. Qui enim sibi bonu^ non quarit dum se sib* bonum quarere ^utat si id
recipiat quod qua^it, non exauditur: si non recipit, exauditur. Deus igitur qui
non aliud nisi quaretis affectu^ considerat, bonu^ eicreddit quissebonum
quarere credit, etiam si sibi non sit bonum quod quarit, Emisse hom inlilanqs
maioribus. p. 138.
O blessed tears are these, which are recompensed with such high happiness, and
such inestimable commodities. As namely, freedom from all sins, past, present,
and to come: deliverance from all the miseries and trouble of this woeful
world: consu^mation of holiness, of humblenes, of purity, of devotion, of al
o^ther christian virtues, which were but be^gun and imperfect in this life:
putting away of all corruption and mortality, and putting on the royal robe of
immortality and bliss. For that which happened to Christ shall happen to thee
also, because by faith thou art not only in soul, but eue^ in body unseparably
united and joined unto him, being by virtue of this mystical union made bone
of his bone, and flesh of his flesh. Therefore as he, from that agony, wherein
he prayed with strong crying and tears, from that cross wherein he commended
his spirit into his fathers hands, from that grave wherein death for a time
seemed to insult and to trample upon him rose up again, and ascended far
above all heavens, and now sits at the right hand of glory, so thy soul
shall certainly be in the hand of God, and thy very body also, after it has a
while rested from watering thy couch with thy tears, and from all other labors
of this life shall be raised up again, and caught up in the clouds and shall
together with thy soul for ever reign with Christ in the life to come. Which
God grant to us al for the same our blessed Savior Jesus Christ's sake, to whom
with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, power and praise,
dignity and dominion, now and evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
NINE SERMONS PREACHED By that eloquent Divine of famous memory, TH. PLAYFERE
Doctor in DIVINITY.

PROVE. 10.7. The memorial of the just shall be blessed: but the name of the
wicked shall rotte.

Printed by CANTRELL LEG, Printer to the University of CAMBRIDGE. 1621.

To Sir REYNALD ARGAL Knight.
RIGHT Worshipful and my especial good friend: How desirous I have been to
answer some part of your worthy courtesies, at least by laying them open to the
world, this small remembrance may testify for me: and how unable I am to
equal deseruings, the same remembrance testifies against me, whether I will
or no; being borrowed from the monuments of a dead man, the only glory of
his times while he lived. But it was fit that a far greater gift then mine
own should aspire to be the instrument of your honor: and the testimony of
the dead, I took to be meeter even in this regard, because that is as
unsuspected, a^ your kindness toward my (...) been (...) no further
disturbing the harmony of your best thoughts, as you are wont to account it,
diminishing the reward which is laid up for you in heaven, by untimely blazing
merits upon earth, I commit this depositum to your savor and Patronage, my
self also, and my endeavors: resting always at

Your Worships disposition. D. C.

To the Reader.
WHAT a loss the Church of God had by the death of D. Playfere, I had rather
the opinion of the world should determine, then my slender pen attempt to
express. If ever those combinations of Virtue and Learning, of Knowledge and
Utterance, of Wit and Memory, of Reading and Use, of Wholesome and delightful,
of School and Pulpit, of Old and New, or in one word to say, of Nature and
Industry, of humane felicity and heavenly grace, concurred to make a Scribe
perfect and absolute to the kingdom of God, we may not be so much our own
back-friends (though we detract not from the fortune of places further off)
nay we may not so impeach the honor of the giver, nor disparage the worth of
our friend departed, as to doubt but this was principally manifested in M.
Playfere.

Who because he was but lent the world for a time, nay because he was
redemanded sooner then his time, (if it were lawful to control the heavenly
wisdom with that word Sooner, Phil. 1.^4.
but I mean in regard of the Churches use, and that same propter vo^, which
made the Apostle to demurre) I say since he was to be returned back again to
his Maker, and ouer-ripe perfection not to conti^^^ ouerlong, it had bin to be
wished, he had left behind him some more monuments of his travails, as well
comfortable to the suruiuers, as honorable to himself. Which whether he in
his discretion, and because he had so resolved, was nice to do, after the
example of them that would write nothing, though very able, or was then a doing
most wh^^ God called him, I cannot say. This which the good Reader will be loath
perhaps to hear, I may not conceal, that these are the lost of all his
labors which are like to be divulged. Into so small a compass is that spirit
(...) ranged, Cornel. apud Propet. l. 4. ^leg. 12.
as to be as she says, En sum quod digit is quinque leuatur (...),
or indeed not so much as a just handful, which lately was not confinable
within bounds too great for me to speak of.

But the sum is this: (For I lift not to defend his method of preaching
against the Methods masters of our age, who me thinks should know either that
of the Apostle, Diuersitas donorum est, sed vnus spiritus: or that of the
Prophet, Laudate eum in ^uba, laudate in cithara; or if nothing will please
them but what they do themselves, we must be feign to say as Crassus did to
Scevola, Omnium igitur conciones tu conficies vnus, omnes ad te sub tempus
veniemus, etc.) I say the sum is this: that is the Sunne-light is pleasantest
toward the set, and the skillful ear finds most store of music in the close:
so this Sun, this Swan, this sweet singer of Israel, (for what lesser terms
can our love affoard him? if any bring were we will not refuse them) his last
monuments, and his last labors, that the world may ever hope for, shall find
we trust the dearer intertainement.

A SERMON PREACHED at Winsor before the Kings Majesty, the 11. day of Septem.
1604.
MATTHEW. 4.4. Man lives not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds
out of the mouth of God.


CHRIST our SAVIOVR came into the world, to dissolve the works of the Devil.
Now how thoroughly he would afterward destroy the devil, and all his works,
he gave a cast, as it were, in this his first encounter. Wherein we may note,
what great difference there is between the first Adam, and the second. The
first Adam was in Paradise, a place of all abundance and pleasure: the second
Adam in the desert, a place of all scarcity and want. The first was full, and
so the less needed to eat the forbidden fruit: the second fasting, and so the
easilier drawn to make himself meat. Yet the first, though he were in
Paradise, and full, when his wife intised him to eat the apple, took it, and
ate it: but the second, though he were in the desert, and fasting a long time,
when the devil enticed him to turn stones into bread, would not yield to him,
but said, Man lives not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out
of the mouth of God.

Howbeit as Christ herein was contrary to Adam; so he agrees very well with
Job. Holy Job was upon a dunghill: Christ was in the desert. Job had fasted
seven days, and seven nights: Christ had fasted forty days and forty
nights. Job when his wife enticed him to curse God and die, would not* but
said; Thou speak like a (...) woman: Christ when the tempter enticed him,
not to curse God and die, but to distrust God rather then he should die, would
not, but said, Man lives not by bread only, but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God.

Where, before we go any further, it will not be amiss to assoyle one
question, Why our blessed Savior at his mothers request turned water into
wine, and yet at the devils request would not turn stones into bread? But the
answer is easy enough. This beginning of miracles, says S. John, did Jesus at
Cana in Galile, and his Disciples believed in him. Two ends therefore did he
propound to himself in working that miracle. The increase of his own glory,
and his disciples faith. Now here, neither of these two ends could be attained:
For how should he not have disgraced his glory, if he had showed any vain
glory? If thou be the Son of God, says the Tempter, command that these
stones be made bread. So that his temptation tended only to this end, to make
the Son of God vainglorious. Again, how could we have been persuaded by
him, if he had been persuaded by the devil? For he might have seemed to have
done this miracle not only by the devils appointment, but by his power. The
sum is this therefore, To convert any poor soul unto God, or to make a
son of God, he would have done it; vaine-gloriously to show himself the
Son of God, he would not do it; but said, Man lives not by bread only, but
by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.

The word man is very material: As if he should have said Any ordinary man
lives not by the bread; but by the power, and strength, and as the Prophet
calls it, the staff of bread, which God gives it. Now if he that is but a
bare man, lives rather by the blessing of God, then by the bread; much less
need I presume upon unlawful means, that am both man and God. Again, we
must observe, that by The word which proceeds out of the mouth of God, we are
not to understand the written will or word of God, but the secret counsel and
decree of God, in preserving and sustaining his creatures: For example, if the
word have gone out of Gods mouth, and if God have set it down, and said it,
that I shall live as well without bread, as with bread, so it shall be. Or if
God in his providence have provided, that a stone shall nourish me as well as
bread, then I shall not need to distrust his goodness, or to use unlawful
means for my releife. For, Man lives not by bread only, but by every word
that proceeds out of the mouth of God.

There are two places of Scripture, which are fit Commentaries upon this text.
cap 9. v. 2^.
The first is written in Ecclesiastes: I returned, says Solomon, and I saw
under the sun, that the race is not to the swift: not the battle to the
strong: nor yet bread to the wise: nor also riches to men of understanding:
neither yet favor to men of knowledge.

First, says the Preacher, The race is not to the swift. 2. Sam. 2.1^.
Asahel was a^ swift of foot as a roebuck, yet Abner met with him, smote him
under the fifth rib, and slew him. So that the swiftest that is, may sometimes
be overtaken. It is not in him that wills, Rom 9.16.
or in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy, Nec currentis, Nec
volentis, says S. Paul: but a noble man gives it for his word, Nec vol^^tis,
nec volantis: It is not in him that wills, or in him that runs, yea though
he can run as fast as a bird can fly; but in God that shows mercy.
Therefore man gets not the race by swiftnes only, but by the mercy of God:
Man lives not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of God.

Secondly, says the Preacher, The battle is not to the strong. Golia^ (...) a
mighty strong giant: His height w^^ six cubits, 1. Sam. 17.5.
and a hand breadth: he had an helmet of brass upon his head, and a brigandine
upon his body: and the weight of his brigandine was five thousand shekels of
brass. He had boots of brass upon his legs: and a shield of brass upon his
shoulders. And the shaft of his spear was like a weauers beam: and his spear
head weighed six hundred shekels of iron: and one bearing a she^^^ went before
him. Wherefore (...) you is all this furniture so particularly set down?
Wherefore, say you? Many to show, how great strength, the Lord if the word have
proceeded out of his mouth, can overcome with weakness. For so little David
confesses; ver. 45.
Thou come to me, says he, with a sword, and with a spear, and with a
shield, but I come to thee in the name of the Lord of hosts. This name of the
Lord of hosts, this mighty word proceeding out of Gods mouth, stroke the
stroke. Even as holy David humbly confesses, saying, We got not the victory
by our own sword, Psalm. 4^.9.
neither was it our arm that did save us: but thy right hand, O Lord, and
thine arm, and the light of thy countenance, because thou had a favor unto
us. So that man gets not the battle by strength only, but by the favor of
God: Man lives not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of
the mouth of God.

Thirdly, says the Preacher, Bread is not to the wise. One would think him
but a simple wise man, that cannot by his wisdom provide himself bread, that
is, sufficient maintenance for his estate. Yet thus is falls out oftentimes.
The prodigal child was wise enough: Luke 15.17.
Being but the younger brother, he handled the matter so, as that he got of his
father an equal portion of goods with the elder brother. But what came all his
wisdom to in the end? Forsooth as length he was driven to such shifts, that
for want of bread he was feign to eat husks with the hogs. And then he
said, How many hired servants in my fathers house have bread enough, and I
starve here for hunger? Thus falls it out many times with the^, that are wise
to follow their own pleasures, and not to serve God. But with the servants of
God it is not so. Therefore says the Princely Prophet, I have been young, and
now am old: yet did I never see the righteous forsaken, nor their seed begging
their bread. So that man gets not bread by wisdom only, and when he has
gotten bread, Man lives not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds
out of the mouth of God.

Fourthly, says the preacher, Riches are not to men of understanding. That
rich man in the Gospel wanted (...) greatly any understanding. Wh^^ (...) had
so much riches, Luke 12.10.
that he could not tell what to do with them, he resolved to pull down his
old barnes which were too little, and to build bigger. But what said the
answer of God? Thou fool, this night shall they take away thy foul from thee,
and then, whose shall thy goods be? Wherefore be that thought himself of great
understanding before, is here declared to be fool, and a poor fool also,
having not so much as his soul left to help him. The loss whereof can not be
recompensed and counteruailed with winning the whole world. A man's life then
does not consist in the abundance of those things which he possesses. But the
loving kindness of the Lord is better then riches, Psalm. 63.4. Prou. 10.
better then living, yea better then life it self. For in God only we live:
And only the blessing of God makes a man rich. Whereupon we may conclude, that
man gets not riches by understanding only, but by the blessing of God: Man
lives not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth
of God.

Lastly, says the Preacher, Favor is not to men of knowledge. It seems that
a man of knowledge and learning should obtain favor and acceptance,
wheresoever he becomes. But it is not so. Oftentimes, either he gets none,
or else he loses that which he has gotten. Haman a man of great knowledge,
Ester 7.10.
and authority, and favor with his Prince. Yet because he abused this favor
to the oppression of Gods people, and of true religion, therefore he lost it.
And that mischeife which he imagined against others, lighted upon his own
pate. Indeed when God has appointed any one to be a notable instrument of his
glory, either in Church or Commonwealth, then suddenly the Lord gives him
extraordinary favor. So he gave Joseph favor with King Pharao: so he gaue^
Mardocheus favor with King Assuerus. For favor and promotion comes neither
from the East, nor from the West, nor from the North, nor from the South, but
God i^ is which sets up one, and casts down an other. He, as the blessed
Virgin sings in her Magnificat, Luk 52.
casts down the mighty from their se^^s, and exalts the humble and meek.
Wherefore man gets not favor by knowledge only, but by the favor of God.
Man lives not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of God.

This doctrine teaches us, that if we have gotten the race, gotten the battle,
gotten bread, gotten riches, gotten favor, we should not ascribe these things
to our own sacrifices, to our own strength, to our own wisdom, to our own
understanding, to our own knowledge, but to the grace of God, and the blessed
word proceeding out of his mouth. Thus the Prophet exhorts, saying, Let not
he wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man in his strength, but let
him that gloried glory in this, that he knows the Lord. Now no man knows
the Lord, but he which knows that all good success he has in any thing,
comes of the Lord. And thus much for the first place of Scripture, which is a
commentary upon this text. Man lives not by bread only, but by every word
that proceeds out of the mouth of God.

The second place of Scripture is written in the Prophet Hagge. cap. 1.6.
Ye have so wen much, and bring in little: ye eat, but you have not enough: ye
drink, but ye are not filled: ye cloth you, but ye are not warm: and he that
earneth wages, puts the wages into a broken bag.

First, says the Prophet, Ye have sowed much, and bring in little. Almighty
God for the sin of the people makes many times the heavens brass, and the
earth iron. So that neither the heavens droppeth down seasonable showers,
neither does the earth bring forth her increase. When one came to a ^e^^e of
twenty measures, there were but te^, says this our Prophet: cap. 2.17.
when one came to the winepresse for to draw out fifty vessels out of the
press, there were but twenty. This is to sow much, and bring in little, to
look for twenty measures, and find but ten: to look for fifty vessels, and
find but twenty. On the other side, holy Isaac sowing in the land of King
Abimeleck, Genesis 26.12.
gained every year an hundred fold: so mightily sait^ the Scripture, did the
Lord bless (...). For except the Lord build the (...), they labor but in
vain that build it: and except the Lord till the field and sow the seed, they
labor but in vain that sow it. Paul planteth, Apollo waters, but God
gives the increase: which is true not only in the spiritual watering of the
word, but also in natural planting and sowing seed. So that man brings not
much in by sowing only, but by the increase which God gives. Man lives not
by bread only, but by every word which proceeds out of the mouth of God.

Secondly, says the Prophet, Ye eat, but ye have not enough. Many there are
which want for no eating* but like that rich glutton fare deliciously every
day: yet it is smally seen by them. But as those seven lean kine having
devoured the seven far, Genesis 42.21.
were never a whit the fuller; so these. Whereas holy Daniel having nothing to
eat but poor pulse, nothing to drink but cold water, looked more cheerfully
and beautifully, then any of the children which did eat of the portion of the
kings meat. And that the Eunuch saw well enough, Dan. 1.15.
and confessed at the ten days ends. Therefore a little thing which the
righteous inioyeth, Psalm. 37.^6.
is better then great riches of the wicked. Prou. 15.16.
Better is a little with the fear of the Lord, then great treasure and trouble
therewith. Prou. 17.1.
Better is a dry morsel if peace be with it, then a house full of sacrifices
with si^ife. Better is a dinner of green herbs where love is, Prou. 15.17.
then a stawled ox and hatred therewith. In conclusion then, Man has not
enough by eating only, but by the peace and love of God. Man lives not by
bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.

Thirdly says the Prophet, Ye drink* but ye are not filled. Many consume, and
as we say, drink down their whole patrimony. Like the horseleach they ever
say, Give, give: like the man in the Gospel, that had the dropsy, they drink
still, and the more they drink the more they list. Committing in the mean
season two sins, forsaking God the fountain of living waters, and digging to
themselves pittes that can hold no waters. Ier. 2.13.
On the other side, Elias, when as the Angel brought him a cake ba^^ on the
harth, and a pot of water, was so fully satisfied with these, that he went in
the strength of this meat and drink forty days unto Oreb the mount of God.
1. Reg. 19.6.
Could such a small pittance of bread and water of it self sustain him so
long? No marry. What was the matter then? The word that proceeded out of Gods
mouth had appointed so, that one cruse of water should suffice him all that
time. Whereby we see, that man is not filled with drinking only: Man lives
not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.

Fourthly, Commentar. in c. Reg. 1.
says the Prophet, Yea cloth you, but you are not warm. Peter Martyr shows,
that clothing does keep the body warm two ways: By keeping in the natural
heat of the body: and by keeping out the accidental cold of the air. Now
though this be the property of clothing, yet God as it pleases him, can
suspend the effect of it. Whereupon he says, I will take a way my corn in the
time thereof, and my wine in the season thereof, Hos. 2.9.
and I will deliver my wool and my flax. Signifying, that even when the corn
is come to the ripeness, and the wine now ready to be drunken, God will
deprive them of it. But especially we must mark that he sai's, I will deli^es
my wool and my flax: Liberabo lanam meam, etc linum meum.
whereby (...) teaches us, that God has as it we^^ if I may so say, bound all
his creat^^^^ prentises to us, to preserve us, and serve us, if we serve him.
But in case we serve him not, then the creatures are delivered, and are bound
no more to serve us. The wool and the flax contrary to their nature will not
serve our turn, if we contrary to grace rebel against God. Whereas John
Baptist having a garment of Camels hair, and a girdle of leather about his
loins, was well enough. This leather served him to as good use as flax, and
the Camels hair kept him as warm as wool. Man therefore is not warm by
clothing only, but by virtue of God annexed to the clothing. Man lives not
by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.

Lastly, says the Prophet, He that earneth wages, puts the wages (...) a
broken bag. We see in the world many men have great fees, great offices,
great revenues, and yet can scarce keep themselves out of debt. Other some,
have but very small wages, and yet ^aintaine themselves well enough, and ^elpe
their poor friends also. Only the word that proceeds out of Gods mouth,
makes this difference. As we may see in Judas. Who indeed earned wages, but
seeing it was the wages of unrighteousness, therefore it run out of the bag
as fast as it was put in: For first, when he had it he could not hold it in his
hands, but brought it back again, saying, Matthew. 27.5.
I have sinned in betraying innocent blood. Then himself went and made away
himself, and that which is fearful but once to name or mention, all his
bowels gushed out: There is a broken bag. But the Patriarch Jacob, earning
wages very hardly, to wit, serving fourteen years for his uncles daughters,
and six years for his lambs, in all twenty years, in the end filled his
bag full. And though Laban changed his wages ten times, yet he could not one
time change that blessing of god, which was always upon him. And though he
allotted his nephew only the spotted lambs, which commonly were very few to
his wages, yet the word proceeding so out of Gods mouth, this proved an
infinite gain unto him. Whereupon the blessed Patriarch humbles himself in
tru^ humility and thankfulness to God, Genesis 3^.10.
and says, O Lord, I am not worthy of the least of al thy mercies: for with
my staff came I over this Jordan, but now do I return with two troops. O
that we had such good souls, such thankful hearts in us, as that every one
of us would in like sort confess and acknowledge his own unworthiness, and
the wonderful worth and wealth of Gods mercy. O Lord, sai's he, I am not
worthy of the least, or I am lesser then the least of all thy mercies. He makes
no mention of his own pains and travails, though they had been very great
in that long service, but only of the mercies of God. These were the only
cause that his bag was so full. Wherefore man fills not his bag by
earning wages only, but by the mercies of God, Man lives not by bread only,
but by every word which proceeds out of the mouth of God.

This teaches us, that whether we sow, or eat, or drink, or cloth us, or
earne wages, we must do all to the glo^ie of God. And all we do to the glory
of God, when we refer the glory of all we do to God. Not sacrificing to our
own yarne, as the Prophet speaks, or kissing our own hand: but kissing the
son, and offering up to him only the sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving at
whose hand we receive all good things. For it is not our painful sowing that
gives us a plentiful crop: not our eating that feeds us: not our drinking
that satisfies us: not our clothes that warm us: not our earning wages that
fills our bag: but the good word that proceeds out of Gods mouth, which
blessed all these things unto us. Therefore as we must not begin any of these
without gracesaying, so must we not end any of them without thanksgiving. And
thus much for the second place of Scripture, which is a commentary upon the
text: Man lives not by bread only, but by every word which proceeds out of
the mouth of God.

To make good use then of all that has been spoken, I shall desire you to
observe four points. First, that God can work great matters with small
means. Thus says our Lord; When I brake the five lo^^es among five thousands,
Mat. ^.^^.
how many baskets full of broken meat took ye up? they said unto him, Twelve.
And when I brake seven among four thousand, how many baskets of the leauings
of broken meat took ye up? and they said, Seven. Certainly there is no
reason in the world that seven loaves should satisfy four thousand; and much
less, that five loaves five thousand. But Christ having given thanks and
blessed the bread, did that by the might of the word proceeding out of his
mouth, which by the natural power and condition of the bread could never have
been done. Therefore also he repeateth it, and questioneth with his disciples
about it. That by their confession and report, all the Church afterward might
bele^^e, that God can work great matters with small means, and that Man lives
not by bread only, but by every word which proceeds out of the mouth of God.

Secondly, that God can work strong matters with weak means. What a strong
violent matter is it, to pull the soul of any one sinner out of the bottom of
hell, and out of the ^awes of destruction? yet this God does. But how does he
it? This strong matter, how does he work it? By the weakest means that may
be. We have this treasure, says the Apostle, 2. Cor 6.7.
in earthen vessels, that the excellency of that power might be of God, and
not of us. O marvelous words, That the excellency of that power might be of
God, and not of us. For if Angels were sent to preach unto us, it might be
thought, that the conversion of sinners consisted in the excellency of the
Angels ministry, not in the power of Gods word. Now simple and sinful men,
such as our selves are, no better then earthen vessels, bringing such a
treasure unto us, the excellency of this work must needs be wholly ascribed
to God. And as it is in spiritual food, so it is in corporal. It is not the
teacher, but the doctrine taught: or rather not the doctrine ^ar^ly taught
neither, but the divine operation of Gods spirit working with the word which
co^uerteth the soul. And so it is not the bread only, but the blessing of
Gods grace upon the bread which sustaineth our life. Thus God can work strong
matters with weak means; and Man lives not by bread only, but by every word
that proceeds out of the mouth of God.

Thirdly, that God can work some matters with no means. When King Asa saw
himself over pressed with the multitude of his enemies, 2. Chr. 14.11.
he prayed th^^ to God: O Lord, it is all one with thee, to save with many, or
with no power. If he had said with many, or with a small power, it would have
been plain. But with many, or with no power, is very wonderful. Or rather
it is no wonder at all, seeing it is spoken of God, with whom it is a very
ordinary matter to save, not only as well with a small or a weak power, as
with a great or a strong power, but also as well with no power, as with some
power. It is a good carpenter, who having crooked and rough timber put into his
hands, can hew it and make it fit for the building. Only the creator of all it
is which can work, having no matter at all to work upon. The ordinary means
for plants and herbs to grow by, is rain: Yet God provided for Adam plants
and herbs before ever it had rained. Genesis 2.5.
The usual means for light is the sun. Howbeit God created light before he
made the sun. Genesis 1.3.
Light the first day, the sun the fourth day. We see then that God is tied to
no means. God can save with no power, as well as with some power: God can give
us herbs with no rain, as well as with some rain: God can give us light
without any sun, as well as with the sun: God can feed us if it please
him, as well with no bread as with bread. Therefore God can work some matters
with no means; and so Man lives not by bread only, but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God.

Fourthly, that God can work othersome matters with contrary means. He can
not only show us light without any sun, 1. Cor. 4.6.
but also bring light out of darkness. So our Savior, when he went about to
cure him that was borne blind, John 9.6.
tempered spittle and clay, and put it upon his eyes. This plaster seems more
likely to put out his eyes which sees, then to cure his eyes who is blind. Yet
this is the power of the word proceeding out of Gods mouth. So the Prophet
Elizeus, 2. Reg. 4.40.
when colloquintida was put into the pot, by casting in a little meal into it,
made of tanke poison a wholesome broth. So, when the Israelites wanted bread in
the desert, God sent them Manna from heaven; and Moses said unto them, This is
the bread which the Lord has given you to eat. Exodus 16.25.
Many things here were contrary to nature. One thing especially, that the dew
which made the manna, fell in the morning, whereas other dew uses to fall in
the evening, and ascend in the morning. Therefore Moses puts Israel in mind
of this strange miracle afterward; Deuteronomy. 8.3.
God made thee hungry, and fed thee with Mann^, says he, which thou knew
not, neither did thy fathers know it, that he might teach them that man
lives not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth
of the Lord, does a man live. Christ's answer then to the tempter is, as if he
should have said; I want now bread in the desert, as long ago the Israelites
wanted it. But God by his word provided for them. Therefore I need not incroach
upon unlawful means, but depending still upon his providence, I shall never
want. For God can work great matters with small means, strong matters with
weak means, many matters with no means, and some matters with contrary
means. So that Man lives not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds
out of the mouth of God.

And yet this is no doctrine of idleness and security neither. As we must not
by diffidence or distrust in God, use unlawful means: so we must not by
presuming upon God, neglect lawful means. That we be not too distrustful we
are sent to the lilly; and yet that we be not too negligent, we are sent to
the ant. S. Paul knew right well, Act. ^7.
neither he nor any of his company should be cast away in that shipwreck; yet
for all that, he did not lay him down upon a pillowe and sleep, but he used
all good means for the safety of the company. He cast out the wheat and the
tackling of the ship: he loosed the r^dder bands, and hoysed up the main sail.
And when the ship was splitted, he persuaded some by bords, and other by other
pieces of the ship to swim safe to land. Then was a fire in Winsor town.
The more to blame were they yesternight, which when they might ^^^e done good,
stood by still and looked on. As though it were a disparagement, or rather it
were not a very honorable part for any to help in a common danger? Or as
though the fire which was kindled by negligence, should have been extinguished
with negligence also. Yea, rather the Lord did by this fire, chastise the
negligence of some, that he might stir up the diligence of all. No less
blame worthy was the whole town, which standing so near the royal presence
of the Kings Majesty and the Queens Majesty, yet was utterly unprovided of
all help in this case. No buckets, no hooks, no ladders, no axes, could be
gotten; ^o carpenters could be heard of, which might have done most good at
such a time. So that if the mighty and merciful word proceeding out of the
mouth of God, had not helped in necessity and time of need, suddenly caulming
and stilling the wind, even at that very instant, which had been busy all the
day before, no question it had grown to a far greater damage and danger.
But I am ill advised to meddle with these things. I make no doubt but order
will be taken, though I hold my peace, that hereafter the town for all such
casualties be better provided. Therefore here I end. God for his mercy sake
grant, that neither by too much presuming confidence we may neglect the lawful
means; nor yet by too much distrusting diffidence we may use unlawful
means; but that depending upon thy providence, O Lord, we may diligently
follow the works of our calling, and so continually receive a blessing from
thee thorough Jesus Christ: to whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost, be
all praise, and glory, now and evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
A SERMON PREACHED at Hampton Court before the Kings Majesty, the 23. day of
Septem. 1604.
2. COR. 4.17. The momentarie lightness of our affliction, works us a
surpassing exceeding eternal weight of glory.


2. Pet. 3.
SAint Peter foretells that some should peruer^ S. Paul's Epistles to their
own d^^na^ion. Such are they of the Church of Rome. Among other places of S.
Paul's Epistles, they do notably pervert this. For out of that the Apostle
says, Affliction works glory; they endeavor to conclude, that the patience
of the Saints, and other their virtues, merit everlasting life. But first the
word, To work, is very general, and signifies not only causes properly so
named, but also any antecedent, though it be but an adiunct, or an accident.
Again, the Apostles words elsewhere are these: Romans 8.18.
I suppose that the afflictions of this life, are not worthy of the glory
which shall be revealed. Wherefore they might have done well, to choose some
indifferent construction which would have reconciled both these places
together, rather then to embrace such an exposition of the one, as does iustle,
nay quite thrust out the other. S. Bernard does thus, saying, Via regni. non
causa regnandi.
that good works, are not any cause meriting a kingdom, but only a way
directing to a kingdom. For seeing they are no cause, neither have any
correspondence, or proportion in them in respect of the glory to come,
therefore the Apostle says, The afflictions of this life are not worthy the
glory that will be revealed. And yet again, because the possessing of our
souls in patience, is a way directly tending to the salvation both of our
souls and bodies, therefore he says, The momentarie lightness of our
afflicton works us a surpassing exceeding eternal weight of glory. To which
our Savior subscribeth in these words, The gate is straight, and the way
narrow which leads unto life. This straightness therefore and narrowness
of affliction, is not a cause which deserves, but a gate or a way which
leads unto l^^e. So in an other place we have, that by many tribulations we
must enter into the kingdom of heaven. Not by many tribulations, no nor by any
tribulations, we must merit heaven, but by many tribulations as by a gate or
way, we must enter into the kingdom of heaven. And in this sense S. Paul
says, The momentarie lightness of our affliction works us a surpassing
exceeding eternal weight of glory.

But now though this sentence do not confirm any Popish error, yet it does
excellently comfort any distressed and afflicted. For it exhorts us to be
patient in all afflictions, and that for four reasons. The two first drawn
from the nature of our affliction, the two last from the nature of that glory
which shall be the reward of our affliction. The first is, because our
affliction is momentarie: the second because our affliction is light: the
third, because our glory shall be eternal, yea surpassing eternal: the
fourth, because our glory shall be weighty, exceeding weighty. And
therefore he says, The momentarie lightness of our affliction, works us a
surpassing exceeding eternal weight of glory.

I need not here make any Apology for my self, not yet render any reason, why
I discourse of poverty, before the rich; of affliction, before those that are
every way flourishing. Mv L. Almner, Bishop Wa^^on upon these words; The poor
man^ days are always evil. Prou. 1^.15.
This point was cleared so reverently and so learnedly of late in this high
presence, that I am sure it must needs be yet well remembered. Certainly
though ye have not been afflicted heretofore, neither are at this time, yet
being men, yet may be hereafter. Wherefore it is not amiss, that we all
learn the doctrine of patience in tribulation. Partly that we may be more
thankful to God, if hitherto we have not been afflicted and plagued like
other men: Partly that if any time of affliction happen hereafter, as any
grief, any loss, any sickness, or such like, we may be prepared aforehand, and
as it were armed with patience to endure it. For the momentarie lightness of
our affliction, works us a surpassing exceeding eternal w^ight of glory.

First, our affliction is momentary (...) sai's Eucherius. Nihil est magnum re,
quod breue tempore
Nothing is of great ^mportance, which is of small continuance. Now our whole
life is very short. What is our life, Iam 4.14.
says S. James? It is a vapor which for a time appears, but anon after
vanishes away. Therefore says the Prophet, Psalm. 56.^.
O Lord, thou know my life, as it is in the Septuagint: but as it is in the
Hebrewe, Thou know my flitting. And therefore seeing our whole life is but a
vapor, or a flitting, certainly our afflictions which are all comprised within
the compass of this life, must needs be much more momentary. All affliction,
as the Apostle writes, Heb. 12.11.
for the present seems not to be joyous but greiuous; but afterward it
brings forth the quiet fruits of righteousness to them that are exercised
thereby. He says not that affliction is, but that it seems to be. So that
affliction seems to be one thing, and is indeed an other. It seems to be
greiuous, it is indeed joyous: it seems to be troublesome, it is indeed
comfortable: it seems to be long and tedious, it is indeed momentary and
short. Even as God himself determines this matter; for a moment, Esa 54 8.
says he, in mine anger, for a little season have I hid my face from you; but
in everlasting mercy will I turn unto you again. That we should not doubt of
this doctrine, he redoubles the promise, for a moment, for little season. Psalm.
30.6.
Therefore the Princely Prophet says plainly. Heaviness may endure for a night,
but joy comes in the morning. As the two Angels then that came to Lot log'd
with him for a night, Genesis 19.2.
and when they had dispatched their errand, went away in the morning: so
afflictions, which are the Angels or the messengers of God. God sends
afflictions to do an errand unto us, to tell us, we forget God, we forget our
selves, we are too proud, too self conceited, and such like: and when they
have said as they were bod, then presently they are gone. Whereupon we read,
that the spirit of life returned into the two witnesses which had been slain
by the beast, Reu 11.11.
after three days and an half. Why after three days and an half? To teach
us, that affliction and persecution may perhaps tyranize over us three days
and an half, but they shall not fill up the whole sour days. Matthew. 24.22.
For the elects sake those days shall be shortened. Agreeable to that which
John Baptist begun his preaching with, Repent; for the kingdom of heaven is
at hand. Matthew. 3.2.
Repent, that is a matter of mortification and ^ffliction to the flesh. For the
kingdom of heaven is at hand, That Is a matter of comfort and joy. Revel. 22.^2.
So our Savior, Behold I come quickly, and my reward with me: if Christ will
come quickly, then affliction will be gone quickly. Thus momentarie is our
affliction: For our whole life is short, much more then the afflictions of this
life: affliction is greiuous but for the present: heaviness endures but for a
night: persecution lasts but three days and an half: the kingdom of heaven
is at hand, therefore deliverance is at hand: Christ will o^ the quickly,
therefore affliction will be gone quickly. Wherefore seeing our affliction is
so momentarie, let us be patient in affliction: For the momentarie lightness
of our affliction works us a surpassing exceeding eternal weight of glory.

Secondly, our affliction is light. Almighty God setting forth his own
excellency, says, Who has measured the heavens with his span, Esa. 40.12.
and the waters with his fist? By the heavens are meant the divine blessings of
God; by the waters, afflictions and woes. Those he measures with his span,
which is a longer measure: these with his fist, which is a shorter measure. So
that the Lord is as I may say a rhetoritian, very plentiful and copious in
his blessings; he measures them with his spanne: But he is a logitian, more
short and sparing in his afflictions, Psalm. 75.9.
these he measures with his fist. For in the hand of the Lord there is a
cup, the wine is read, and full mixed, he powers out of the same: as for the
dregs thereof, the wicked of the earth do drink them up. First, we drink
not this cup only full of red wine, that (...) of the wrath and indignation
of God, but mixed with diners comforts otherwise. Then besides we meddle not
with the dregs. Upon the ungodly he shall reign snares, fire, and brimstone,
storm, and tempest, this shall be their portion to drink. We drink only a
little of the uppermost. And therefore he says, God powers out of the same.
That after we have suffered a ^^dicum, as S. Peter speaks, 1. Pet. 5.20.
we may then enter into glory. According to King David his prayer, Comfort us,
O Lord, now for the time wherein thou have afflicted us, and for the days
wherein we have seen evil. Hierome notes, that having first said wherein thou
have afflicted us; he expounds it after by these words, Psalm. 90.15.
wherein we have seen evil. Therefore that which Acteon wished, Velle^que
videre, non etia^ sentire. Ovid.
that he might see only his ^ounds hunting, and not feel it, that happens
indeed to us. Our affliction is, not a feeling of evil near at hand, but
only a feeling of it a far off. A^ the Persian Kings children in their
minority, if they had committed a fault, were not corrected themselves, but
only saw some of meaner birth chastised before them: so God teaches us to
take heed, rather by other men's, then by our own harms. And look how Abraham
laid nothing but wood upon his son Isaac, carrying the knife and the fire
himself: after the same sort deals our heavenly father with us. He lays
upon us wood without a knife. The Physician says, that is the best exercise
which is ad ruborem, non ad sudor^m, refreshing the spirits and stirring up the
blood a little, but not putting a man into any great sweat. But the Divine may
say, that is the best affliction, which is ad sudorem, non ad sanguinem.
Therefore God lays upon us wood ad sudore^, to make us sweat, Genesis 3.19.
In the sweat of thy brows shall thou eat thy bread; not a knife ad sanguinem,
Heb. 12.4.
to make us bleed, Ye have not yet resisted unto blood. God lays upon us wood
without fire. Now wood without fire, is not greatly dangerous. Or say he lay
upon us both wood and fire: yet the voice of the Lord deuideth the flame of
fire. For in the flame of fire naturally there is heat and light. But
notwithstanding the omnipotent voice of the Lord deuideth these, one from the
other. As the cursed in hell show, and the elect upon earth. I am tormented in
the flame, says Dives. There Is heat but no light. Contrariwise the three
children in the furnace shined as Angels for light, but were so far from
heat, that no one hair of their ^ead, or of their apparel perished. When
Moses saw a bush burning and not consumed, he said, I will go, and see this
great vision. A great vision indeed. There was a flame of fire. Else how was
the bush burning? There was light. Else how did Moses see it? There was no heat.
Exodus 3.2.
Else how was not the bush consumed? Yet in every faithful one afflicted you
may see this great vision. The voice of the Lord in his affliction, as in the
flame of fire, Psalm. 97.11.
divides the heat from the light. So that he is not consumed by the heat, (nay
rather his infirmities and carnal concupiscences are consumed thereby) but
only illuminated by the light. According to that, Only vexation gives
understanding. And in an other place, Light is sprung up to the righteous, and
joy to them that are true of heart. Thus ye see how tenderly our dear father
deals with us, He lays either no fire at all upon us, or else no burning
fire for heat, but only a blasing fire for light. To make short. Many hands
(as we say) make light work. Now we have many comparteners and fellows which
make the labor of our affliction light. First, all creatures sigh and groan
with us; Rom 8.22.
Then, all the faithful bear one an others burdens, Gal. 6.
and so fulfill the law of God. Thirdly, the good Angels have a charge given
them of us, Psalm. 91.11.
that we hurt not our foot at any time against a stone. Next, Psalm. 55.23.
God the father bids us cast our burden upon him, and promises to nourish
us. Fifthly, the holy Ghost helps our infirmities, Romans 8.19.
and helps them even when we are ready to be oppressed by them. Lastly, God
the son sets to his hand likewise, and says, Matthew. 11.10.
Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you:
take my yoke upon you; for my yoke is easy, and my burden is light. As if
he should have said, To draw in the yoke without me, would be a hard matter;
and to bear the burden without me, would be above our strength: but if you
come to me, if you draw and bear with me, I will refresh you; For my yoke is
easy, and my burden is light. Thus light is our affliction. For God measures
to us the water with his fist, which is the shorter measure: he causes us to
drink of the cup on otherwise but as it is mixed with many comforts: he makes
us not swallow up the lees of it, but only a little modicum of the uppermost:
he lays affliction upon us, which is rather a seeing, then a feeling of
evil: he lays wood upon us to exercise us, but neither a knife to cut us not
yet fire to burn us. Lastly, we have many fellows in our affliction which
make it light. All creatures: all the faithful: all the good angels: God the
father: God the holy Ghost: God the Son, who says, My yoke is easy* and my
burden is light. Wherefore seeing our affliction is so many ways light, we
must be patient in all affliction; For the momentarie lightness of our
affliction works us a surpassing exceeding eternal weight of glory.

Thirdly, our glory is eternal, yea, surpassing eternal. The glory we look
for is called a kingdom. Of which the Princely Prophet says thus; Psalm.
145.13.
Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion endures throughout
all ages. Origin in Can 42.
Whereupon Origin notes, that as there is a holy, and a holy of holyes; as a
saboth, and a saboth of saboths; as a heaven, and a heaven of heavens; as a
song, and a song of songs: so there is an age, and an age of ages. And again,
as that which is not only a holy, but also a holy of holies, is the holiest
place of all; as that which is not only a saboth, but also a saboth of
saboths, is the perfectest rest of all; as that which is not only a heaven,
but also a heaven of heavens, is the highest heaven of all; as that which is
not only a song, but also a song of songs, is the excellentest song of all: so
that which is not only an age, but also an age of ages, and especially, as the
Psalmist speaks, an age of all ages, is the most infinite eternity of all.
Which seeing it is attributed to the kingdom of Christ, being likewise the
kingdom of all true Christians, it follows that our glory is surpassing
eternal. Whereupon Prosper notes, that that which Virgil writes of Augustus
Caesar, De promiss and praedict.
He has given us an Empire without end; Imperium ^ine fine dedit.
may much more fitly be applied to Christ. For though Augustus reigned very
long, above fifty years, yet at length his government as all other earthly
kingdoms, was determined. But of our heavenly King only the angel Gabriel said
most truly, Of his kingdom there shall be no end. Luke 1.53.
Of his kingdom there shall be no end. Now this glory is as well called a
crown, as a kingdom. And this crown, 2. Pet. 1.14.
as S. Peter says, is undefiled, which never fades away. The Greek words
which S. Peter uses, (...).
are Latin words also: and they are not only appellatiues, being the
epithites of th^^ crown, but also propers, the one the proper name of a stone,
the other of a flower. Isidorus Etimolog. l. 16. c. 4.
For Isidore writes there is a precious stone called Amiantus, which though it
be never so much soyled, yet it can never at all be blemished. And being cast
into the fire, it is taken out still more bright and clean. Also Clemens
writes, that there is a flower called Amarantus, Alexandrin. Pedagog. l. 1. c.
8.
which being a long time hung up in the house, yet still is fresh and green.
To both which, the stone and the flower, the Apostle, as I am verily persuaded,
alludeth in this place. As if he should have said, The crown which ye shall
receive, shall be studded with the stone Amiantus, which cannot be defiled; and
it shall be garnished with the flower Amarantus, which always is fresh and
never fades away: ye shall receive a crown undefiled, and that never fades
away. Which as Beda notes, was in^inuated in the crown round about the Arc
of the Testament. For in a circle there is neither beginning nor ending. Or
rather every where there is a beginning, every where an ending; and so no where
any beginning or ending. To show that the patient also shall have a crown set
upon their head per circuitum, running round in a circle, and never coming to
any end of eternity. Well, our glory is called also a treasure. Three kind of
treasures there are: A treasure in hell: a treasure in earth: a treasure in
heaven. That in hell is a treasure of torments: that in earth is a treasure of
snow: that in heaven is a treasure of eternity. For the first, Iam. 51.3.
S. James says; Go to now you rich men, weep and howl for the miseries that
shall come upon you; your riches are corrupt, and your garments are
moath-eaten: your gold and silver is cankred, and the rust of them shall be a
witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire: Ye have
heaped up treasure for the last days. Here Is a treasure in hell. Which to be a
treasure of torments the Apostle proves, saying, Romans 2.5.
Thou after thy hardness, and heart that cannot repent, treasurest unto thy
self wrath against the day of wrath. A treasure of wrath and of torments. From
which God for the dear blood of his Son sake deliver us every one. The
second is a treasure in earth. Of which our Savior says; Matthew. 6.19.
Lay not up treasures for your selves upon earth, where the moath and canker
corrupt, and where thieves dig through and steal. And this is a treasure of
snow. For S. Gregory upon those words of Job; Qui ingreditur in thesauros
ninis.
Who enters into the treasures of snow; she weth that earthly treasures are
treasures of snow. You see little children what pains they take to rake and
scrape snow together to make a snowe-ball: right so, they that scrape together
the treasure of this world, have but a snowe-ball of it; as soon as the sun
shines, and God breaths upon it, and so enters into it, by and by it comes
to nothing. The third, is a treasure in heaven. Concerning which our Savior
says, Mark. 10.20.
Lay up for your selves treasures in heaven, where are bags that never wax
old. Now this is a treasure of eternity. And therefore the Christians of the
Primitive Church, suffered with joy the spoiling of their goods, Heb 10.24.
knowing that they had in heaven a better, and a more enduring substance. They
contemned all treasures of snow in respect of this substance. For they have no
substance, neither are simply good, though they be called goods, but melt away
as snow: this is a better, and a more enduring substance; yea most enduring, a
surpassing eternal weight of glory. Thus ye see how eternal our glory is.
It is a kingdom: a crown: a treasure. And this kingdom is an everlasting
kingdom: this crown is an incorruptible crown: this treasure is an eternal
treasure. And therefore seeing our glory is so surpassing eternal, we must be
patient in all affliction. For the momentarie lightness of our affliction,
works us a surpassing exceeding eternal weight of glory.

Fourthly, our glory is weighty, yea exceeding weighty. The glory to come,
by some resemblances is showed to be eternal, by other to be weighty. First,
to this purpose it is compared to wine. Touching which our Savior says, Mark.
14.15.
Hereafter will I not drink with you of the fruit of the vine, till I drink
it new with you in my fathers kingdom. Now how weighty this wine shall be,
appears in that the spies bringing clusters of grapes out of Canaan, carried
them upon a poale on their shoulders. Numb. 13.24.
To show, in the celestial Canaan what weighty glory there shall be. So
when our Lord turned water into wine, he commanded to fill the vessels to the
top. These vessels topfull of wine, Ioh 27.
do signify at the marriage of the Lamb, that the patient shall have a full
reward: 1 Ioh. 8.
pressed down, shaken together, running over. So that every one of them may
say, My cup does ouerflowe. Psalm. 13.
Again our glory is compared to a penny. Now in a penny we consider four
things. The image: the superscription: the sound: the weight. So our Savior
when they showed him a penny, asked whose image and superscription it was.
First, then for the image, Christ shall change our vile bodies, Phil. 3.21.
that they may be like the glorious body of his Son: that as we have borne
the image of the earthly, so we may bear the image of the heavenly. For the
superscriptio^, our Savior says; To him that overcomes will I give a white
stone, Revel. 2.17.
and in it a name written, which no man knows but he that receives it. As a
Prince seeing his name upon a piece of coin, knows it is of his own mint:
so every patient Christian seeing his own name in this white stone, which is a
token of honor, knows it properly belongs to himself. For the sound, the
Psal^ist says, Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, they shall always
praise thee. This shall be the sound of the penny continually, the praise of God.
As the four and twenty Elders, never ceased day, nor night, Revel. 1.8.
to sing, Holy, holy, holy, to him that is, and was, and is to come. Fourthly,
for the weight, the shekel of the Sanctuary was twice as weighty as the common
shekel: in like manner our glory shall be as the shekel of the Sanctuary,
exceeding massy and weighty. But what speak I of wine? What of a penny? God
himself shall be our glory. According to that; Psalm. 3.3.
Thou art my glory and the lifter up of my head. As if he should have said,
Affliction would make me cast down my countenance, and hold down my head like
a bulrush ^^ but the remembrance of this that tho^ art my glory, makes me lift
up my head. So says God to Abraham; Genesis 15.1.
Fear not Abraham, I am thy buckler, and thy exceeding great reward. I am thy
burkler to latch those blows which affliction would lay upon thee: and thy
exceeding great reward, blessing thee with exceeding weighty glory. For they
that shall enjoy this glory, shall see God. Agreeable to that of our Lord;
Matthew. 5.8.
Blessed are the pure in spirit, for they shall see God. And how shall they see
God? Not standing behind the lattisse, or looking out of a window, 2. Cor.
13.12.
that is darkly and obscurely, but face to face, talking with him familiarly as
one friend does to an other. O joy above all joys! O glory that passes all
understanding! when we see the amiable and gracious countenance of our Lord
reconciled to us by Christ. Doubtless if the Queen of Saba thought her self
happy, for hearing the wisdom of Solomon, and seeing the riches of his
house, and the order of his servants: then much more shall we be happy, when we
shall see the glory, and hear the wisdom of the Father, not as the preachers
show it out of the word, but as our own eyes shall behold it in heaven. O how
blessed shall we think our selves then, that by any pains, by any afflictions
we have at length attained to such weighty glory. For this glory is wine
r^^^ing over; is a pony weighty according to the shekell of the Sanctuary; is
the blessed sight and fruition of God himself. Wherefore considering how
weighty our glory is, we must be patient in all affliction. For the
momentarie lightness of our affliction, works us a surpassing exceeding
eternal weight of glory.

Compare then the affliction on the one side, with the glory on the other side:
the shortness of the affliction, with the eternity of the glory, the lightness of
the affliction, with the waightinesse of the glory. And then be content for an
eternal glory to suffer momentarie affliction: for weighty glory to suffer
light affliction. The Stoics if their grief were either momentary or light,
cared for no more: for if it were short, they cared not how heavy it were:
again, if it were light, they cared not how long it were. Our affliction is
both momentarie and light. One help was sufficient for them: we have two for
^ayling. A stark shame ^hereless^ would be for us, if heathens and pagans,
having fewer means then we have, should show greater patience then we show.
But the Scriptures affoard us yet more forceable inducements. Jacob being in
love with Rachell, served for her first seven years, and afterward seven
years more, in all fourteen; and these many years seemed to him but a few
days. O dear Lord, that we had thy grace to love thy eternal weighty
glory, but as well as many a man has done a mortal earthly creature. Then ^o
doubt many years of affliction would seem to us but a few days: heavy
burdens of affliction would seem to us very sweet and light. Christ Jesus for
the joy that was set before him, endured the cross, and despised the shame,
and now sits at the right hand of the throne of God. Questionless, beloved,
the cross of Christ was tedious and long; the shame that he suffered was heavy
and intolerable. Yet this cross seemed but momentarie to him, and this shame
seemed but light unto him, in comparison of the joy that was set before him,
and of the eternal weighty glory which he has now attained sitting at the
right hand of the throne of God. To the which plate of honor and worship, we
beseech thee* O loving Lord, to bring us, after all the afflictions of this
wretched world; not for our own deserts of merits, but for the merit of that
cross which Christ endured, of that shame which Christ despised. To whom for
his cross, be all praise, for his shame, be all glory; together with the
Father, and the holy Ghost, now and evermore, Amen.

FINIS.
A SERMON PREACHED before the KINGS Majesty lying at the Lord SAYS house,
called Broughton, besides Banb^ris, the 2* day of Septem. 1604.
ROMANS 8.31. If God be with us, who can be against us?


THese words contain a most magnificent and triumphant conclusion arising out
of the former discourse. For the Apostle having before proved, that man is
justified only by the free grace and mercy of Christ without any merit and
desert of good workers, at length concludes in the beginning of this chapter,
Therefore there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus: and so
likewise here, If God be with us, who can be against us?

Maximilian the Emperor ^o admired this sentence, Nathan Citraeus in Iteneratio
that he caused it to be set in letters of checker work upon a table at which
he used to dine and (...), that having it so often in his eye, he might
always have it in mind also: ^ Deus pro nobis, quis contranos? If God be with
us, who can be against us?

The truth of it is so apparent, that it has bin made a common watchword, not
of Christians only, but even of heathenish soldiers. Out word is Immanuel,
that is, Esa. 8.3.
by interpretation, God with us. And some of the ancient Romans used likewise
in their wartes this watchword, Vegetius l. 3. c. 3
Nobis^um Deus, God with us. For indeed, if we be of the college and society
of Immanuel, and if God be on our side, we shall be sure to prevail. If God be
with us, who can be against us?

Damascene says well according to the Scripture, (...). Dama^c^n. (...) Cyril.
Mierosol.
Our God is above all Gods. And so likewise Cyrill, The power of our God is
above all power. Therefore, if that power be on our side which is above all
power, and that God which is above all Gods, nothing can hurt us; If God be
with us, who can be against us?

S. Austin shows out of the verse immediately going before, De verbis
Apostoli Ser. 16 Deus pro nobis ve praedestinaret no^.
that four especial ways God is with us. God is with us, in that he has
predestined us: God is with us, in that he has called us: God is with us, in
that he has justified us: God is with us, in that he has glorified us.
Innocentius the third, In eo m^^^n. Apostolerunt, serm^. Hostis conta nos
inferior homo.
shows out of the words consequently following after, that four special
enemies are against us. The inferior enemy against us, is man: the exterior
enemy against us, is the world; the interior enemy against us, is the flesh:
the superior enemy against us is the Devil. So that whereas the Apostle sai's
here, If God be with us, who can be against us? It is all one, as if he should
have said; If God have predestined us, what can man do against us? If God
have called us, what can the world do against us? If God have justified us,
what can the flesh do against us? If God have glorified us, what can the
devil do against us? If God be with us, who can be against us?

The first enemy against us, is man. Homo homidi lupus. Aut deus, aut damon.
And an other proverb says, Either a god or a devil. For to say nothing,
that no time is freed, so place privileged, no degree secured, no torment
unpracticed, only this I will touch, that no age is exempted. But the cruelty
of man rages, not only upon the old after they are buried, but also upon the
young before they are borne. Thus says the Lord, For three transgressions and
for four, I will not turn unto Moab, because they dug up the bones of the
king of Edom, and burnt them to lime. The king of Edom was a wicked man, yet
God detested so this unnatural and barbarous cruelty of the Moabits toward the
dead, that for this especially he would not be reconciled to them. The like
ensamples have not wanted in our land, and almost in our time. Tracie two
years, and Wickliffe two and forty years after he was buried, was dug
up. So even of late they used Martin Bucer, and Paulus Phagius in Cambridge,
and Peter Martyrs wife in Oxford. Such cruel m^n, if they had as great power
over these holy Martyrs souls, as they had over their bodies, doubtless they
would have pulled them out of heaven. For as long as they had a finger, or a
fobre, or a bone, or a piece of a bone is the grave, they never left mining and
digging, till they had rooted it out. So that at the least wise we may say of
them with the Psalmist, The dead bodies of thy servants, Psalm. 79.2.
O Lord, have they given to be meat to the fowls of the air, and the flesh
of thy Saints to the beasts of the field. Now the cruelty of man against man,
as it ends not when life ends: so it begins before life begins. For
not only Esau that cruel and cursed reprobate, strugled and wraf^led with his
brother Jacob in their mothers womb: but also ^^e Ammonites ripped up the women
of ^^^lead being great with child, Amos 1.13. Lamen ^.20.
and the Babylonians caused the wom^n of Jerusalem to eat their own fruit,
and their children of a span long. And not long ago in the Isle of Garnsey,
when a faithful woman (whose name need not here to be rehearsed) while she was
burning at the stake, Perotine Massy
was delivered of a goodly man-child, some were so hard-hearted, to fling him
back again into the fire, there to be ^^rthered, as they meant it, but in
deed martyred with his mother. O blessed babe! Because there is no room for
him so the inn, as soon as he is borne, he is laid in a maunger. Nay,
because there is no room for him in any one corner of all the world, by and by
he is baptized with the holy Ghost, and with fire. O blessed, I say again,
blessed babe! Before thou art lapped in swaddling clothes, thou art crowned with
martyrdom: and before thou fully breathest in the breath of life, thou happily
breathest out thine innocent soul ^^ God. But ^ie upon such beastly and cruel
murders. Out upon such deuillish and fiendish tormentors. These Saints? these
Catholics? who are Soythians, if these be Saints? who are Canibals, if these
be Catholikse? which holding it as an article of their faith, that all children
dying without baptism, are damned, yet wittingly did put this innocent child
to death before he was baptized. And therefore as they made the mother suffer
the most intolerable pains of childbirth and martyrdom both together's so,
they verily thought and believed, they flung the infant also body and soul
into an earthly fire, and into hell fire all at once. This is the cruelty of
man. He would, if he could, pull some out of heaven after they are buried, and
thrust some into hell before they are borne.

But God has predestined us. And not only before we were borne, Ephesians. 1.4.
but also before the world was created, has chosen us in Christ. Even as
Christ shall say at the last day, Come ye blessed of my Father, Matthew. 25.34.
inherit the kingdom of heaven prepared for you before the foundations of the
world. For look how carefully parents provide for their children, Prim^sius in
a Tim. ^. 1. in illa Ante tempora secularia. Arator. Do^^ prius tempora dedit.
and put them in their will before they are borne: so God gives us the grace to
live with him, before he give us time to live here. Even as the Son says,
Fear not little ^^ock: for it is your Fathers will to give you a kingdom. And
the father himself, I even I am he that comfort you: who (...) thou then that
fear a mortal man, who fades away as grass? Therefore every courageous
Christian may comfort his heart in God, and say with the Pr^^^^y Prophet, The
Lord is my light and my salvation, whom then shall I fear? the Lord is the
strength of my life, of who^ then shall I be afraid? when the wicked even mine
enemies and my foes, come upon me to eat up my flesh, they stumbled and fell.
Though an host of men were laid against me, yet shall not my heart be afraid,
and though there rose up war against me, yet will I put my (...) in him. I
will not be afraid of ten thousand of the people, that have set themselves
against me round about. Yea, though I walk thorough the valley of the shadow
of death, yet will I fear no evil: ^or thou, O Lord, art with me, thy rod and
thy staff they comfort me. So that I may boldly say, The Lord is my helper;
neither will I fear what (...) can do unto me. The Lord of hoaste with us,
the God of Jacob is our refuge. And if the Lord of hosts have predestined us
unto life, what can man do against us? what before we live? what while we
live? what after we live? If God be with us, who can be against us?

The second enemy against us is the world. Which assaileth us as well by
adversity, Qusd est mundus, nisi agon plenus cetraminum?
as by prosperity. What is the world, says S. Ambrose, but a race or a course
full of trials and troubles? It is a field, wherein is little corn, but much
cockle. It is a garden, wherein are few roses, but many thorns. Yet these
thorns of adversity do not so much oftentimes endanger us, as the baits of
prosperity. Mundus peririculosior est blandus quam mol^stu^, and magis
cauendus, eunse ^lli^^t diligi, qa^m cum ad monet cogitque ^ontemni. Epist. 144.
The world is more dangerous, says S. Austin, when it flattereth, then when it
threateneth: and is more to be feared, when it allureth us to love it, then
when it enforces us to contemn it. For even as Judas by a kiss betrayed his
master: so the world is a very Judas. It means most falsely, when it embraces
most friendly. Wherefore the Apostle says thus of Demas; Demas has forsaken
us, and embraced this present world. So that the immoderate embracing of this
world, is a flat forsaking of Christ and his Gospel. Unskillful swimmers, when
they begin to sink, if they catch hold of weeds in the bottom. Qui mundum
amploctuntur similes sunt illis, qui submerguntur in aquis. Bern. de Adnent,
setm. 1.
the faster they hold, the surer they are drowned: and in like sort they that
shake hands with the world, and embrace the pleasures and prosperity thereof
most greedily, plunge themselves most deeply into destruction.

But God has called us. And therefore neither adversity nor prosperity can
hurt us. Marvel not, says our Sa^iour, though the world hate you. It hated me
before it hated you. If you were of the world, the world would love you, but
because you are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world,
therefore does the world hate you. Well, as the world hates us* so we^ must
hate it again. As it contemns us, so we must contemn it again. According
to that of S. Paul, The world is crucified to me, and I unto the world. I am
crucified to the world, that is, The world contemnes me: the world is crucified
to me, that is, I contemn the world. The world contemnes me, (...) I contemn
it. Moral. senn. 10. c. 2. Qui nihil habet in mundo quod appetat, nihil est
quod de mundo pertimesent Cyprian. Quis ei de secullo metus est, cui in seculo
deus tutor est*
For as Gregory says, He that has nothing that he loves in the world, has
nothing to fear of the world. And Cyprian, What need he to fear the world,
who has God his protector, his tutor, his defendour in the world? He that is
of God overcomes the world. And this is our victory whereby we overcome the
world, even our faith. Whereupon our Savior says, Be of good comfort, I have
overcome the world: and behold I am with you even unto the end of the world.
So that the world, and the trouble we shall have in the world, shall have an
end: but the comfort we have in God, shall have no end: Behold, I am with you,
says he. And if God be with us, and have called us out of the world, what can
the world do against us? If God be with us, who can be against us?

The third enemy against us, is the flesh. Prou. 30.22.
Solomon says, this is one thing which makes the earth even tremble, when a
servant begins to bear rule. The flesh is, and ought to be a servant. Yet
it bears rule in the unregenerate. Yea it strives to bear rule, and
begins to bear rule, even in the godly. A man's enemies are they of his own
house. It is mine own familiar, friend, that lifts up his heel against me.
This familiar friend was Paul much troubled withal, when be said; I see an
other law in my members, Romans 7.
rebelling against my mind, and leading me captive unto death. And Lot, who
being a just man, that could not be overcome with all the sins of Sodom, by
immoderate drinking of wine fell to folly. And Samson, who otherwise
impregnable, yet yielded to Dalila. Therefore in the (...) it lies, which
strives to lay our honor in the dust.

But God has justified us. And having justified us, in some measure also has
begun to sanctify us. So that the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the
spirit against the flesh, in so much as we cannot do as we would. Not only
the flesh against the spirit: but also the spirit against the flesh. So that we
cannot do as we would. For if we would serve god so holily as the angels, we
can not, because the flesh insteth against the spirit: again, if we would
sin with full consent of will so brutishly as the wicked do, we cannot,
because the spirit lusts against the flesh. But even as Cast^r and Pollux
live by turns, one one day, an other an other, so the flesh and the spirit
prevailing. sometimes one, sometimes an other, make mixed actions. So that
neither can our good actions justify us, because in them the flesh lusts
against the spirit: nor yet can our ill actions condemn us, because in the^ the
spirit lusts against the flesh. For now that Sara is mortified, her womb is
dead, and it cease to be with her after the manner of women. Now that Jacob
has wrestled with God, his thigh is shrunk up. Now that Paul is converted, he
chastises his body, and brings it into subjection. Now that the blessed
virgin is freely beloved, she keeps her self within, and knows no man. And
therefore sai'^ the Angel, Hail Mary, freely beloved, the Lord is with thee.
But the blessed Virgin fearing, the Angel added; Fear not Mary, for thou have
found ^^^our with God. As if he should have said, Fear not the Angel of the
Lord, seeing the Lord of the Angel is with thee. Thou have found favor with
God, to have the fruit of thy flesh, the Savior of thy soul. So that if God
have a favor unto us, and have justified us in Christ, what can the flesh do
against us? The spirit will not let it do as it would. For if God be with us,
who can be against us?

The fourth enemy against us is the devil. And he is the worst enemy of all.
Therefore sai's the Apostle, we have not to fight with flesh and blood, but
with principalities and powers, and with the Prince of darkness that rule^^ in
the air. This Prince warreth against us two ways. By persecutions, and
persuasions. For the first, he is described in the Revelation to ride upon a
black and a red horse. The blacknes of the horse shows how terrible the
Devil is, the reddenesse, how bloody. Neither does he come single, but seven
of them at once possess Mary Magdalen. Luke 8.^.
Neither do they only fight against us being alive, but the Devil fought
with Michel the Arkeangel for the ^^cie of Moses when he was dead. Jude.
Neither do they terribly set upon us to get our bodies only, but our souls
also. Especially, they do this at the day of death, and will do more
dilligently at the day of judgment. Now their persuasions are yet more
dangerous then their threatenings. When they come to us in the shape not of an
unclean spirit, but of an angel of light. Thus Satan did set upon the first
Adam, Genesis 3.
Has God indeed commanded you not to eat of the tree? He makes a question of
it. And, if ye eat, you shall be as Gods knowing good and evil. A fair
promise, but a contrary performance. So he did set upon the second Adam;
Matthew. 4.
All these things will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me. He
would hire Christ, and give him good wages to serve him: which would have
deprived our Savior of his eternal glory.

But God has glorified us. It is not now to be doubted whether Satan shall
prevail against us or not, but it is most sure he shall not. He has glorified
us, says S. Paul. Though the possession of it be to come, yet the assurance of
it is past. Even as our Lord avouches in an other place, He that believes in
me, has passed from death to life. Not shall pass, but has passed. So S.
Paul, He has made us sit with himself in heavenly places above. Not he will
make, but he has. Therefore Chrysostom writes very resolutely, Only in one
point I am proud, (...).
and very proud, namely in renouncing, and denying the devil. He is indeed a
strong man. But yet a stronger then he has thrust him out, and spoiled him of
all his goods. He is a roaring lion. But the lion of the tribe of Judah, has
overcome him. He is an old serpent, almost of six thousand years standing
and experience. But Christ the new serpent, prefigured in the brazen serpent,
has been too cunning for him. Therefore though he seek to winnow Peter as
come i^ sifted, yet no danger; Christ has prayed for Peter, that his faith
should not fail. Where by the way, we may mark the difference between Christ
and the tempter. Christ has his fan in his hand and fanneth us; the tempter
has his sieve in his hand, and sifteth us. Now a fan casts out the worst,
and keeps in the best: a fine keeps in the worst, and casts out the best.
Right so Christ in his trialls purges chafe and corruption out of us,
nourishes and increases his graces in us. Contrariwise the devil, if there
be any il thing in us, that he confirms, if faith or any good thing else,
that he weakeneth. But Christ has prayed for us, yea does still at the right
hand of the father make intercession and request for us, that our faith should
not fail. So that all Satan's power, yea the gates of hell shall never
prevail against us. In like manner, S. Paul being buffered by the angel of
Satan, prayed that he might be delivered. The answer of God was, My grace is
sufficient for thee. Whether Satan buffet us, or not buffet us, still the grace
of God shall suffice us, Much more his glory who has glorified us. For God does
give both grace and glory, and no good thing will he withold from them that live
a godly life. Pone me iuxtatr, and cuius^ is manus pugnet contra me.
Therefore every child of God may triumph with Job, saying Stand thou beside
me, and let any man's hand fight against me. For if God be on our side, what can
the Devil do against us? If God be with us, who can be against us?

Nazianzen makes a good conclusion, This only is a fearful thing to fear any
thing more then God, Fear God, and fear nothing else: (...)
fear not God, and fear every thing. For in the fear of the Lord is the
confidence of courage. Because sai's Gregoria, be that in a chaste and filial
fear, Quitimore castro Deo subije^tur, etc. Gregor.
is subjected to God, by a hopeful kind of boldness is above all save God.
But he that fears not the Lord may be annoyed by any thing. Mice were too
strong for the Philistims, and lice for the Egyptians. So that if God be
against us, who can be with us? But if God be with us, who can be against us?
Now certainly God is with us. Do you doubt of this? Then consider how that all
great pot^^rates of the world, who of late were some of them scarce our good
friends, do now earnestly desire to be made partakers of our peace. What do
I speak of men? The very heaven, and the elements, and this so seasonable
harvest, An. 1604.
such as has not been known, if one may take any guess by these outward
things, do plainly declare that God is now with us, and purposes to power
out his blessings and benefits most abundantly upon us. Nothing then remains,
but that as God is with us, so we labor to be with God. And as S. Peter
admonishes us, make our election sure by faith and good works, living
soberly, uprightly, and godly in this present world. That so we may fear no
cruelty of man, no misery of the world, no entisements, of the flesh, no
terrors of the devil, but in all these things may be more then conquerours,
assuring our selves, that if God be with us, nothing can be against us. Which
that it may be so, God grant for Jesus Christ's sake, to whom with the Father,
and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, now and evermore, Amen.

Blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep it.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Jove of God, and the fellowship of
the holy Ghost, be with us, that nothing may be against us, this day and
evermore, Amen.

FINIS.
A SERMON PREACHED at the Court at Whitehall. March 10. 1598.
JOHN 20.27. After said he to Thomas, Put thy finger here, and see my hands,
and put forth thy hand, and put it into my side, and be not faithless, but
faithful.


Our blessed Savior Jesus Christ has his wounds yet to be seen in his body
for four causes. First, to approve his resurrection: secondly, to appease his
Father: thirdly, to confound his enemies: fourthly, to comfort his friends.
After said he to Thomas, Put thy finger here, and see my hands, and put forth
thy hand, and put it into my side, and be not faithles, but faithful.

The first cause why Christ has his wounds yet to be seen in his body, is to
approve his resurrection. When Jacobs children told him, saying, Joseph is yet
alive, his heart failed, and he believed them not, but as soon as he saw the
chariots, which were sent for him, by and by his spirit revived, and he said, I
have enough, Genesis 4^.28.
Joseph my son is yet alive. In like manner, when the Disciples said to
Thomas, we have seen the Lord, he believed them not; but now that he
beholds Christ's glorious wounds, the triumphant tokens of his victory, and
the chariots, as I may say, whereby we are with Elias carried up into heaven,
he confesses indeed that Christ is risen again; and that the true Joseph is
yet alive. Io^. 11.4.
Even as Anna seeing that spaniell coming homeward, which went forth with her
son at the first, knew certainly that her son Tobias himself was not
far off, but followed immediately after: so Thomas, seeing those wounds in
Christ which accompanied him to his grave, knew assuredly, that no other body
was risen again, but only the very self same body of Christ, which was
buried. S. Peter, being brought out of prison by an Angel, went forth with to
the house of Marie, Act. 12.14.
where knocking and calling to get in, a maiden named Rhode, before ever she
saw him* knew him by his voice. And although they that were within told her
she wist not what she said, yet she still constantly affirmed it was none
other but he. Christ's rising out of the grave was as strange, as Peter's
deliverance out of prison: the rolling away of the stone as strange, as the
opening of the iron gate. And ^lbeit Thomas was not so forward as Rhode to know
Christ by his voice, when he said, Peace be unto you, yet as soon as Christ
took him by the hand, and showed hi^^ his side, he made no more doubts, but
presently believed. For if Pr^tog^^^s seeing but a little line drawn in ^
table, k^ewe straightwaies it was Ap^lles doing whom he had never seen: Plin.
lib. 35. c. 10
how much more easily then might Thomas know Christ, seeing not only one line,
but very many lines, yea whole pictures of his passion, and of his
r^surrection, in his head, in his hands, in his side, in his feet? When King
Arthurs body was taken up somewhat more then six hundred years after his
death, Stow page 61.
it was known to be his by nothing so much, as by the prints of ^enne several
wounds which appeared in his sk^ll. Christ our King, who did overcome death,
could likewise, if it had pleased him, have quite and clean defaced and
abolished all the marks of death. Nevertheless as at his transfiguration he
showed Peter, James, and John, the signs of immortality in his body, which
was then mortal; so here contrariwise at his resurrection; he shows Thomas
the signs of mortality in his body, which is now immortal. That he and all
we might undoubtedly confess, that though they perhaps might be deceived in
King Arthurs body, yet we can never be deceived, so long as we believe, that
the very same body of Christ, which in Golgotha the place of dead men's skuls
was wounded from top to toe, and put to death for us, is now risen again from
death to life. Even as King Alexanders stagges were known a hundred years
together, Plin. l. 8. c. 32.
by those golden collars which by the kings commandment were put about their
necks; so much more might Thomas know Christ by his wounds, which were as a
comely ornament to his head, and as chains unto his neck, we also when we
preach the resurrection of Christ, preach no other thing, but that which we
have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and
our hands have handled of the word of life. Socrates in his Ecclesiastical
history writes, that Athanasius being accused by one Ian^^^ to have killed
Arsenius, and after to have cut off his hand, that he might use it to magic
and sorcerie, cleared himself notably of this slander. Having by good hap
found out Arsenius, who lay hid for the nonce, he brought him before the
Co^ncel of Tyrus, and there asked his accuser, whether he ever knew Arsenius
or no? He answered, yes. Then Athanasius called him forth, with his hands
covered under his cloak, and turning up the one side of his cloak^* showed
them one of his hands. And when most men surmised, lib. 1. c. ^1.
that the other hand at least wise was cut off, Athanasius without any more ado
casts up the other side of his cloak, and shows the second hand, saying,
You see Arsenius has two hands, now let mine accuser show you the place where
the third hand was cut off. Christ's case was even almost the same. He was
thought by some to be quite dead and gone. But Thomas seeing those very hands
of his which were nailed to the cross, acknowledges, that this our brother
was dead, and is alive again, was lost, and is found. Ios. 2.18.
For if the spies that were sent to view Jericho, knew Rahabs house from all
the rest, by a red thread, which hung out of the window: how much more easily
then might Thomas know Christ, especially seeing Rahabs house was a figure of
Christ's body; the window a sign of the wound in his side; the red thread a
figure of the stream of blood issuing out of that wound? When Ulysses had
been long from home, no man almost at his return knew him, yet Euriclea his
nurse espying by chance the mark of a wound in his foot, which he got by
hunting the wild boar, Hom. Ody. 9.
by and by made him known to his friends. In like manner Thomas, beholding the
wounds not of Christ's feet only, but also of his whole body, believes
verily, though the wild boar out of the wood stroke fore at him that he might
fall, yet that he has now recovered himself, and is risen and returned home
again. Even as the wisemen knew Christ was borne, by the star which
appeared in the East, Matthew. 2.9.
and knew also where he lay when he was borne, by the standing of that star
directly over against him: so Thomas, not by one star, but by many stars,
which notwithstanding are more beautiful and bright then all the stars of
heaven, knows and confesses that the true sun of righteousness is now
risen, and shines over all the earth. Thus these blessed wounds witness and
approve the resurrection of Christ. For now Jacob knows Joseph by his
chariots: Anna knows Tobias by his spaniel: Rhode knows Peter by his voice:
Protogenes knows Apelles by his line (...) Arthurs body is known by his (...)
King Alexanders stagges are known by their collars: Iannes knows Arsenius by
his hands: the spies knows Rahabs house by the red thread: Euryclea knows
Ulysses by the mark in his foot: the wisemen know Christ is borne by the
star that stands over him: Thomas knows Christ is risen again by the
stars that appear in him. As if our Savior should have said thus to his
Disciple; Thomas, I wo^ well what thou said, Except I see in his hands the
print of the nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and put my
hand into his side* I will not believe. Well, if this be all, thou shall have
thy desire. I that suffered the Jews to pierce my hands and my side, will not
deny thee to see and touch them. Come therefore, I give thee good leave. Do as
thou said, Put thy finger here, and see my hands, and put forth thy hand, and
put it into my side, and be not faithless, but faithful. So much for the
first cause, which is to approve his resurrection.

The second cause why Christ has his wounds yet to be seen in his body, is to
appease his Father. Almighty God was once ready to have destroyed the
Israelites, Psalm. 1^0.23.
had not Moses his chosen stood before him in the g^ppe. Moses as he was a
mediator between God and the people, was a singular type of the Messiah to
come. And standing (...) gap, he did as it were point to Christ. For when our
Saviors side was wounded, then indeed there was a great gap, and a great
breach made, by which all we that believe in him may escape. Therefore Moses
his standing before the Lord in the gap, did signify as S. Bernard notes, ^e
^. 59. in Cant.
that Christ making intercession before his Father for us, should always stand
in the gap, and show how he himself was broken upon the cross, and as I may
say, trodden down for our redemption. That poor creeple also which begged at
the beautiful gate of the temple, Act. 3.^.
teaches us what he continually does, who when he was rich, became poor for
our sakes. The Temple is his body, which after it had been destroyed, was
built up again in three days. The beautiful gate of this Temple, is the
precious wound in his side, of which the Psalmist says, This is the gate of
the righteous, the just shall enter in by it. Therefore as that poor creeple,
lying at the beautiful gate of the temple, was healed by S. Peter; so Christ
lying at the beautiful gate of his (...) body, showing his most greiuous,
(...) yet most glorious sufferings and torments, appeaseth his fathers wrath,
and obtains whatsoever he entreats of him. King Ezekias having received
railing letters from Senacherib, went up to the temple, Esa 37.1^.
and spread the letters before the Lord, and prayed, saying, Open thine eyes, O
Lord, and see and hear all the words of Senacherib, who has sent to blaspheme
the living God. No Ezekias was ever more taunted and reviled, more scorned and
reproached, then he who was counted the shame of men, and the outcast of the
people. Wherefore now he spreads forth, and lays open, not only the
blasphemous words, which were uttered against him, but also the dolorous wounds
and gashes which were given him, that so he may put out the handwriting that
was against us, and appease his father, and thoroughly reconcile him to us. And
look how king Solomon, 1. Reg 8.22.
when he prayed for the people, stood before the altar, and stretched out his
hands toward heaven: in semblable wise Christ, who is far greater then
Solomon, stands evermore beside the altar of his cross, and stretches out
his beskarred and wounded hands toward the throne of his heavenly father, that
he may move him to have pity and compassion of his people. Pel^pid^s a noble
Grecian, skirmished with the Lacedaemonians against the Arcadians, until such
time as being hurt in seaue^ places, he fell down at last for dead. Then
presently Epaminondas stepping forth bestrid him, and fought to defend his
body, he alone against many, till being sore cut on his arm with a sword,
and thrust into the breast with a pike, he was even ready to give over. But at
that very instant, Agesipolis king of the Lacedaemonians came with the other
point of the battle in a happy hour, Plutarch. in Pelopida initio.
and saved both their lives when they were past all hope. If we would apply
this story to our purpose now in hand, we must make, man like Pelopidas, Christ
like Epaminondas, God like Agesipolis. Since the overthrow of Adam, who went
down from Jerusalem to Ierico, how every man has been wounded, not only
with Pelopidas in seven places of his body, but even in all the parts and
powers of his soul, each one knows best by experience in himself. But
Christ has sheilded us with his grace, and fought for us; not till he was with
Epaminondas cut on his arm with a sword, and thrust into the breast with a
pike; but that which is in a manner all one, till his hands were goared with
nails, and his side thrust thorough with a spear. Wherefore God the father
with Agesipolis seeing him in the work of his mediation, fight still for us,
clothed even now in heaven with a garment dipped in blood, can not be angry
either with him, or with us, but when we are dead in sin, quickneth us
together in him by whose grace we are saved, and raised us up, and makes us
for his sake sit in the heavenly places above. Marcus Seruilius a valiant
Roman, who had fought three and twenty combats of life and death in his own
person, and had always slain as many of his enemies as challenged him man to
man; when as the people of Rome resisted Paulus Emilius triumph, Plutarch in
Paulo A^melio fine.
stood up and made an oration in his behalf. In the midst whereof he cast open
his gown, and showed before them the infinite skarves and cut^ he had received
upon his breast. The sight of which so prevailed with the people, that they all
agreed in one, and granted Emilius triumph. After the same fashion, Christ
has spoiled ^^^^cipalities and powers, and has made a show of them openly,
and has triumphed over them in his cross, ye^ and yet now bears about in
his body the marks and tokens of this triumph, that a final agreement and
atonement being made between God and us, by his only mediation and means:
we also may be more then conquerours in him that loves us, and may every one
of us say with Saint Paul, Now thanks be unto God, which always makes us to
triumph in Christ. Among other ornaments of the Sanctuary, there was a golden
censer full of holes, by which the sweet odours fumed forth, when Aaron once a
year burnt incense therein. No other high Priest do we acknowledge but Christ
the true Aaron, Heb. ^.4.
who has not entered into any Sanctuary made with hands, but into heaven it
self. And his golden censer is his own body, which through the wounds that are
in it as through chinks or holes, su^eth forth always a pleasing and a sweet
^auour in the nosthrils of his father. The sign of the covenant which God made
with Noah was a rainebowe in the cloud. And indeed that is a sure token unto
us, that the world shall never be drowned again with a general flood of
water, Genesis 9 16.
as it was in Noah's time. But the rainebowe which assures us we shall never be
drowned in the pit of everlasting perdition, is no such thing. Why may some man
say, what is it? Mane it is the blood of Christ, which makes as it were, a
rainebow in his side. For the other rainebow is but a transitory sign, which
shall pass away with the clouds and with the world. But this rainebowe,
whereof the other is but a shadow, shall continue for ever in the sight of God,
as the author to the Hebrews sai's, that Christ is entered into heaven, vt
appareat nunc vultui Dei pro nobis, to appear now in the fight of God for us.
Therefore S. John in the Revelation witnesses, that he saw a door open in
heaven, and a rainebow round about the throne of God. He saw a door open in
heaven, to teach us that we can have no access unto the Father, but by Christ,
neither yet by Christ simply, but as he is crucified, and has set open a door
in his side for us to enter by him. He saw a rainebowe round about the throne
of God, to teach us that the throne of God would be altogether a throne of
justice, a throne of wrath, a throne of anger and indignation, were it not that
the blood of Christ, spinning out as I may say still lively and freshly in the
sight of his father, makes a rainbowe round about his throne, puts him in
mind of his covenant, appeaseth his displeasure, and so makes his throne to
all us that love him, Genesis 30.37.
a throne of grace, a throne of compassion, a throne of favor and mercy in
Christ. We read that Jacob pilled certain rods, which being laid in the
watering troughes before the sheep, made them bring forth such lambs, as
afterward fell to his own share. So likewise if we sin, we have an advocate
with the father Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our
sins. The mark of the rods in his wounds laid open in the sight of God,
ingendreth and breeds in him a love and a liking toward us, so that he
conceiueth well of us, and seuereth us as good sheep from the goats, and in
the blood of the lamb is pleased and appeased, and satisfied for our sins.
This blood is the blood of sprinkling, Heb. 12.24.
which speaks better things then that of Abel. For Abels blood upon earth
cried out once for vengeance, but Christ's blood in heaven cries continually for
mercy. One deep calls another, because of the noise of the water pipes.
Christ's wounds are the watering troughs and the water-pipes, by which all
graces flow unto us. So that one deep calls an other, because of the noise
of the water pipes; because the wounds of Christ make a continual noise in the
ears of his father, and the depth of the extreme misery which he was in upon
earth, calls for the depth of Gods bottomless and infinite mercy in heaven.
Thus these holy wounds of Christ pacify and appease his father. For now Moses
standing in the gappe sues for pardon: the poor creeple lying at the
beautiful gate, begg's an alms: Ezechias spreading open his letters, makes
his supplication: Solomon stretching out his hands, offers up his prayer:
Epaminondas being wounded, mooues Ag^sipolis to save Pelopidas: Seruilius
discovering his wounds, persuades the people to grant Emilius triumph. Aaron
burning incense in his golden censer, perfumeth the whole Sanctuary: Noah
pointing to his rainebowe, puts God in mind of his promise: Jacob laying
forth his rods, make most of the lambs his own: Abel holding up his blood,
calls and cries for mercy: Christ showing his hands and his side appeaseth his
father. As if our Savior should say thus unto his Father, O my loving father,
look upon the face of thine anointed, look upon the hands, look upon the
side of thine anointed. The hands of thine anointed, how cruelly they are
mangled, the side of thine anointed, bow woefully it is wounded. Behold, and
see, if there be any sorrow like to my sorrow. These hands can signify what
exceeding sorrow I have suffered: this side can show that I have humbled my
self, and have been obedient unto death, even unto the death of the cross.
Therefore, O my dear father, Put thy finger here, and see my hands; and put
forth thy hand, and put it into my side, and as thou art not faithless, but
faithful, so be not merciless, but merciful for my sake, and pitiful to thy
people. So much for the second cause, which is to appease his Father.

The third cause, why Christ has his wounds yet to be seen in his body, is
to confound his enemies. When Saint Paul the Apostle before his conversion
persecuted the Church of God, Christ called to him from heaven, and said, Saul,
Saul, why persecutest thou me? Who art thou Lord, says Saul? I am, says
Christ, Jesus of Nazareth, whom thou persecutest. Alluding to the title of his
cross, which was, Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews. At which words, Saul
both trembling and astonished, said, Lord, what wilt then have me do? Act. 22.8.
Now if Saul, who repented him afterward of his persecuting Christ, stood so
astonished, when he heard but a piece of the title upon his cross, how ^he^
shall all they be astonished, how shall they be confounded, which without any
repentance or remorse of conscience, persecute Christ continually, when at the
latter day, not only the title written over his head, but even the very print
of the wounds in his hands and side, shall rise up in judgment to condemn
them? When like as Joseph said to his brethren, I am Joseph your brother, whom
you sold into Egypt: so Christ shall say unto them, I am Jesus of Nazareth,
whom you persecuted and put to death? Wonderful indeed is the fear and
confusion of a wicked conscience. After that Herod had beheaded John Baptist,
he imagined still he saw and heard that holy head, showting and crying out
against him. Mark. 6.16.
Whereupon hearing the fame of Jesus, he said not as others said, It is Elias,
or, It is one of the Prophets: but, It is John, says he whom I beheaded, he
is risen from the dead. Saying, whom I beheaded, he confesses not his fault
in true repentance, but only with his own mouth bears witness of his own
wickedness. In so much as that may be said to him, which David said to the
Amalakite, who brought him news of Saul's death: Thine own mouth testifies
against thee, saying, I have slain the Lords anointed. Now if the remembrance
of this cruel act, so vexed and disquieted Herod day and night, that he could
take no rest for it, but still, thought waking, and dreamed sleeping, John
Baptist was risen again, to be revenged of him; how then shall they be
affrighted, how shall they be confounded, which have not beheaded John, but
crucified Christ, yea and crucify him continually with their sins, when at the
resurrection of all flesh, they shall see him whom they have peirced, and w^ing
their hands, and weep and wail before him? Scipio appointed his sepulcher to
be so placed, as his image standing upon it, might look directly toward
Africa, that being dead he might still be a terror to the Carthaginians:
after the same sort, the Prophet Esaias prophesying of Christ, says, In that day
the root of Iesse shall stand up for a sign unto the people, and even his
sepulcher shall be glorious. Et erat schulchrum eius gloriosum.
So that as the body of Cadwallo an ancient king of the Britains, being
embalmed and dressed with sweet confections, Hollinshed.
was put into a brazen image, and set upon a brazen horse over Ludgate, for a
terror to the Saxons: in semblable sort he that is called Faithful and true
shall sit upon a white horse, and out of his mouth shall proceed a sharp
sword, wherewith he shall smite and slay the heathen. The sword wherewith David
hackt off Golias head, 1. Sam 21.9.
after he had wrested it out of his hand, was kept in the Tabernacle, wrapped in
a cloth behind the Ephod. Which when Abimelech the Priest brought forth, David
said, There is none to that, give it me. Christ also did conquer death even
with th^se weapons and armor wherewith death assaul^ed him. And he keeps
still a memorial of his conquest in the tabernacle of his body. That as the
Philistims were afraid, when they saw David figh^ing in the field with that
sword: so all Christ's enemies may be confounded; when they shall see the sign
of the son of man appearing in the clouds with power and great glory. It was
a strange miracle that of Aarons rod which budded. Therefore the Lord said
unto Moses, Numb. 7.10.
Bring Aarons rod again before the testimony to be kept for a token to the
rebellious children. The body of Christ was a green tree before it was
crucified. After being dead, it was clung and dry like Aarons rod. But it
budded, when as the third day it rose again. Therefore it is kept still for a
token to the rebellious children. That as Aaron convinced the murmuring
Israelites, and confirmed the authority of his priesthood by the budding of his
rod, which otherwise was but a dead and a dry thing: so Christ may confound
his enemies, when he shall show such flourishing glory, such excellent
majesty in his body, which has yet in it the tokens and the marks of death.
It is reported that Zisca, the valiant captain of the Bohemians, commanded
that after his decease his skin should be fleed from his body to make a drum
which they should use in their battles, affirming that as soon as the
Hungarians, Fox Act.
or any other their enemies should hear the sound of that drum, they would
not abide, but take their flight. And surely every battle of the warrior is
with noise, and with tumbling of ga^ments in blood, but this battle, wherein
Christ shall tread Satan and all his enemies under his feet, shall be with
burning and consuming of fire. So that no drum can be more terrible then the
last trumpet shall be, when the Lord Jesus shall show himself from heaven with
his mighty Angels, and shall so come down with the very same mark^ and sears
in his skin, as the men of Galilie saw him ascending up. They which dispatched
noble Julius Caesar in the senate house, did set a good face of the matter a
while, Dion. l. 44.
till Antonius the next day showed his robe in the market place all bloody, cut
and full of holes, as his enemies had left it. Then the people were so incensed
and enraged against them, that they made the best of them al glad to hide their
heads. The Romans said, We have no King, and therefore they slew Caesar: the
Jews said, We have no King but Caesar, and therefore they slew Christ. But at
the day of judgment, what shall Christ say? Those mine enemies, which would not
that I should reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before me. Then not
only the angels, but all creatures shall be ready to execute vengeance on
these murderers, when they shall see the robe of Christ washed in wine, and his
garment in the blood of grapes. Genesis 38.20.
When Thamar Iudahs daughter in law was accused for committing folly in Israel,
she sent to her father in law, saying, Look I pray thee whose these are, the
signet and the staff. Judah by and by knew them, and said, She is more
righteous then I. And so shall Christ's enemies be enforced to confess him more
righteous then themselves, yea they shall be quite confounded, when they shall
see how they have abused him, when they shall see the marks, which their signet
and staff have made, their signet in his hands, and their staff in his side.
The Prophet Daniel records, that while Balthazar was drinking wine in the
golden vessels, Dan. 5.6.
which he had taken out of the Temple, there appeared fingers of a man's hand
that wrote upon the w^ll, and the King saw the (...) of the hand that wrote.
Then his co^^tenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled him, so that the
(...) of his (...) were loosed, and his knees smote one against an other. In
this case of Balthazar we may consider the state of the wicked, what it shall be
at the last day: when they shall see the fingers and the palms of Christ's
hands, which they have so pitifully wounded, writing down their doom, they
shall tremble every ioyn^ of them, and be at their wits ends; and they shall
say to the mountains, ^al on us; and to the rocks, Cover us, and hide us from
the presence of him that fitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the
Lamb. Thus these victorious wounds of Christ shall confront and confound his
enemies. As Saul was astonished, when he heard Jesus of Nazareth calling to
him: as Herod was affrighted when he thought John Baptist was risen again: as
the Carthagineans were troubled, when they saw Sciplo's sepulcher: as the
Saxons were terrified, when they saw Cadwallo's Image: as the Philistims were
afraid when they saw (...) sword: as the Israelits were appaled, when they saw
Aarons rod: as the Hungarians were daunted, when they saw Zisca's drum: as the
Romans were dashed, when they saw Caesar's robe: as Judah was ashamed when he
saw Thamars signet and staff: as Balthazar was amazed when he saw the hand
writing upon the wall. So shall Christ's enemies be confounded, when they shall
see his hands and his side. As if our Savior should say thus to every one of
his enemies, Thou enemy of all righteousness, Many things many times have
thou done against me, and hitherto have I held my tongue; but now will I
reprove thee, and in before thee the things that thou have done. Thou art the
man, thou art the man, that did murder me, and put me to a most shameful
death. Deny it if thou dare. Verendum, n^ illan: vocem in iudicio suo ad vasa
iniquitatis prolaturus sit, fer digitum tuum hue. Caesar hom. 23.
Deny it if thou can. These are thy marks which are yet to be seen in my
hands. This deadly wound is thy doing, which is yet to be seen in my side.
Therefore thine own eyes shall give evidence, and thine own conscience shall
give sentence against thee. See now whether I say true or no. Look what thou
have done. Put thy finger here, and see my hands, and put forth thy hand, and
put it into my side, and as thou art not faithful, but faithless, so look
for no mercy at my hands, but for shame and everlasting confusion. So much for
the third cause, which is to confound his enemies.

The fourth cause, why Christ has his wounds yet to be seen in his body, is
to comfort his friends. Almighty God in the old law appointed cities of refuge,
whether they which had sinned unwillingly might fly and be safe, Number. 35.23.
if they stayed in any of them till the death of the high Priest. Our high
Priest can yet plainly prove by his hands and side, that once he died for us.
Whether then should we fly, sinful souls; whether should we fly for
succor and comfort but to Christ? His wounds only are the cities of refuge,
wherein we are safe and secure, according to that of the Psalmist, The high
hills are a refuge for the wild goats, and so are the stony rocks for the
conies. O blessed be these high hills, blessed be these stony rocks, which
protect and defend us, yea though we have willingly sinned, not only against
the fury of man, and the rage of the world, but also against the terrible and
dreadful displeasure of Almighty God. Therefore our Savior speaks to his
Spouse in this sort, Can. 2.14.
My dove thou art in the holes of the rock, in the secret place of the
stairs, show me thy sight, let me hear thy voice. Insinuating, that the
Church dares neither be seen nor heard of God, except she be in the holes of
the rock, and in the secret places of the stairs. The rock, is Christ. The
stairs also and the ladder, whereby Jacob climb's up to heaven is Christ. So
that the dove, which is the Church, lying hid in the holes of this rock, and
in the secret places of these stairs, dreadeth nothing but with great boldness,
why do I say boldness? yea with great joy, with great comfort, shows her
self to God, and speaks unto him. Here the sparrow finds her a house, and
the swallow a nest, where she may lay her young, even thine Altar, that is thy
wounds, whereby thou did offer up thy self, as a sacrifice for our sins,
even thine altars, O Lord of hosts, my King, and my God. When Elias flying from
Achab came to Bee^sheba, he sat down under a juniper tree, and desired that
he might die. A juniper tree makes the hoatest coal, Fabiolae Ma^s. 15.
and the coolest shadow of any tree. The coal is so hot, that if it be rackt
up in ashes of the same, it continues vnextinguished by the space of a whole
years. Therefore whereas we read in the hundred and twentieth Psalm, With hot
burning coals; it is in the Hebrew, as S. Hierom notes, with Juniper coals.
Which proves that Juniper coals be the most hot burning coals that are. Now
the coal is not so hot, but the shadow is as cool. Insomuch as the only
shadow of the Juniper tree, slaieth and kills serpents. Therefore Elias
seeking to rest himself where he might be safest from serpents, and other
daungerr, sat down under a juniper tree, and desired that he might die: For
he thought he could never with the sparrow find him a house, and with the
swallow make him a nest in a better place, the^ where he was ouershadowed with
that Juniper tree, which shadowed out the tree of the Cross of Christ. Of
which the Church sai's, Under his shadow had I delight, and sat down, and his
fruit was sweet unto my mouth. So that if Simeon holding the child in his
arms, desired to die, how much more blessedly then might Elias have departed
now in peace, when as being wearied with the world, he was shadowed with the
tree of life; and not only held the child in his arms, but also was held
himself as a child in the wounded and naked arms of Christ. Notably also does
the story of Noah declare what singular comfort the faithful find in Christ's
wounds. For only Noah saved all; only Christ redeameth all, Genesis 6.16.
Noah signified rest: Christ is our rest and peace. Noah saved all by the wood
of the Ark: Christ red^emeth all by the tree of the cross. Noah was tossed up
and down upon the waters: Christ says to his father, Thou have brought all
thy waves upon me. Noah saved all by the door in the side of the arc: Christ
redeemeth all by the door^ in the side of his body. Noah the fortieth day
after the decreasing of the flood opened the window: Christ the fortieth day
after his resurrection, ascends up and opens heaven, Lo ye, how all things
agree together. None but Noah, none but Christ: Noah's rest, Christ's peace:
Noah's arc, Christ's cross: Noah's water, Christ's woe: Noah's door, Christ's
side: Noah's window, Christ's kingdom. The Prophet Hose foretells, that
Ephraim shall fly away like a bird. This is fulfilled not only in Ephraim, but
even in all mankind. All have gone astray; all have flowen away from God: as a
hau^e which takes a check and gives over her pray: wherefore Christ holding out
his wounded, and bloody hands, as meat to reclaim us, calls us as it were,
and says. Return, return, O Shulamite, return; return, Can. 6 12.
that we may behold thee. Prudentius writes, that when Asclepiades commanded
the tormentors to strike Romanus on the mouth, the meek martyr answered, I
thank thee, O captain, that thou have opened unto me many mouths, whereby I
may preach my Lord and Savior: Tot ecce laudant or a, quot sunt vulnera, Look
how many wounds I have, so many mouths I have, to praise and laud the Lord.
And look how many wounds Christ has, so many mouths he has to call us to
himself, so many lures he has to make our soul fly for comfort only unto
him. Manna was a most comfortable meat, which God gave the Israelites. It was
like to coriander seed, and the tossed of it was like unto wafers made with
honey. Exodus 16.32.
This our holy Savior applies to himself. For when the Capernites said, Our
fathers did eat Manna in the desert, Jesus answered, Your fathers did eat
Manna in the wilderness, and are dead. I am the living bread, which came down
from heaven. Therefore as then there was a golden pot of Manna kept in the
Tabernacle, that the posterity might see the bread wherewith the Lord fed
them, so there is yet a golden pot of Manna kept in heaven, Bernard de amor.
dei. c. 2.
that the faithful in all ages may taste and see how sweet the Lord is, which
feeds them with his own body and blood, the least drop whereof, though it
be as small as a (...) and or seed, yet it is as sweet as a wafer made with
honey. Hard it is to gives reason wherefore Christ, when he came to the city
of Sichar in Samari^, (...) was Jacobs well, sat down upon the well about the
sixth hour. But certainly he did this, not so much for himself as for us. That
hereby we might learn when the sun is hotest about the (...) hour of the
day, when we are most exercised with afflictions, when we are ^^rest grieved
for our sins, always to have recourse unto Christ, always to see with the
King into the wineselles always to sit down upon Jacobs well. Ioh. 4.6.
Of which the Prophet Zachary sai^s, In that day there shall be a fountain
opened to the house of David, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin
and for uncleanness. In omnibus aduersitatibus n^ inueni tam essicax remedium
quam vulnera Christi. Manu. 22.
Whereupon S. Austin says very divinely, In all adversities, says he, I
could never yet find any remedy so comfortable and so effectual, as the
wounds of Christ. Christ is not unlike to the poole in Jerusalem, Ioh. 5.1.
called Bethesda, having five porches, which being troubled by an angel, healed
any man that went first into it, what soever disease he had. Bethesda
signifies the house of effusion or pouring out, in which house Christ dwelt
when he powered out his blood and his soul for our salvation. Therefore he
alone is the angel, which came down at a certain season, into the poole, and
troubled the water: because when the fulness of time was come, he came into the
world to be troubled himself, and to be crucified, that he might heal not
only that one man which had been diseased eight and thirty years, but even
all mankind, with the troubled water and blood which issued out of his side.
So that there is nothing so comfortable for sick and sinful men, as to fit
in the seats and porches of this poole. Wonderful are the words of the
Prophet concerning Christ, He shall seed his flock like a shepherd, Esa.
40.11
he shall gather the lambs with his arms, had (...) the^ in his bosom. Which
was profigur'd in the high Priest, who did bear up with his shoulders a breast
pla^e, wherein were the names of the twelve tribes, written in twelve precious
stones. That which the shepherd does with his arms and bosom: that which the
high Priest does with his shoulders and (...) that does Christ with his hands
and side. He is the good shepherd, which brings home the lost (...) upon
(...) shoulders. Yea he writes the (...) of all his sheep in his precious
wounds, which are the precious stones upon his breast plate, that both declare
his love to us. and also allure us to love him. This makes David say in great
(...), The Lord is my shepherd, there (...) can I lack nothing. He shall
feeded (...) in a green pasture, and lead men forth beside the waters of
comfort. For (...) hen gathers her brood under her wings: so God gathers
his children together. Deuteronomy 30.11.
And as an eagle stirs up her nest, flotereth over her birds, taken them,
and bears them on her wings: so Christ, carries us up in his hands to the
high places of the earth, and causes us to suck bonie out of the stone, and
oil out of the hard rock. Butheius an excellent painter, painted an eagle
carrying Ganimedes into heaven, so nicely and tenderly, that her talents did
not (...) him, but only bear him up. And in like sort, Christ bears us up
in his hands, that we dash no^ our foot against a stone; yea his right hand is
under our head, quis Dominus supponit ma. number suam.
and his le^t hand does embrace vt, so there though we should fall, yet we cannot
be hurt, because the Lord stays and supporteth us with his hand. Therefore S.
Chrysostom gives us good counsel, not to have iayes eyes but eagles eyes,
that we may behold these hands of Christ, and see his side in the Sacrament.
For indeed as often as we celebrate the memory of our Lords death, Christ our
Savior, delivering the bread and the cup by his minister, says in a sort to
every faithful receiver, Put thy finger here, and see my hands, and put forth
thy hand, and put it into my side, and be not faithless, but faithful. But
yet we shall not always drink of this fruit of the vine. The time will come,
when we shall drink a new kind of wine in Christ's kingdom. Wherefore he
says, As often as y^ shall eat this bread, and drink this cup, you shall
show the Lords death til he (...). Till he come. Declaring hereby, that when he
is come, his death shall be showed an other way. Namely, by his wounds, which
always he shows to his (...). Even as we sing in that heavenly Hymn or
Psalm, The humble suit of a sinner* Whose blo^dy wou^d^ are yet to see, though
not with mortal eye, yet do thy Saints behold them all, and so I trust shall
I. O how unspeakably do ^he Saints (...), how gloriously also shall we
triumph! when we shall see Christ in his kingdom, and behold those blessed
wounds of his, whereby he has purchased so many, and so great good things for
us? This is the new wine, which we shall drink. This is the Eucharist of the
Angels: the food of the Elect: the spirit (...) of the Saints. For wheresoever
the dead body is, thither shall the eagles refer. And we that with eagles
wings fly up by faith into heaven, shall ever resort to this dead body, and
we shall unsatiably desire to feed our eyes, and our souls with the sight of
Christ, who was once dead, and even now has in his body those skarres which
continue the memory of his death, that in all eternity it may never be
forgotten. Thus these heavenly wounds of Christ delight and comfort his
friends. As the cities of refuge, which save the sinner: as the holes of the
rock, which defend the dove; as the shadow of the juniper tree, which reuiueth
the wearied; as the door of the Arc, which preserves the world: as the lure
of the ^oule, which calls home the Shulamite: as the pot of Manna, which
nourishes the Israelite: as the well of Jacob, which refreshes the thirsty:
as the poole of Bethesda, which heals the sick: as the arms of the
shepherd, which gather his lambs: as the wings of the eagle, which bear up
her birds. So do the hands and side of Christ comfort his friends. As if our
Savior should say thus to every one of his friends, Can a mother forget her
child, and not have compassion on the son of her womb? though they should
forget, yet would not I forget thee. Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms
of my hands. Here I have still in my hands that price of thy redemption, which
I paid for thee, so that no man can take thee out of my hands. Yea I have
written and sealed thy salvation in my side. A spear is the pen: my blood is
the ink: my body is the p^per. Here thou may see the bowels of my
compassion, thorough the wounds of my passion. Assure thy self therefore,
assure thy self of my love, of my good will, of my favor for ever. Make no
doubt of it. If thou doubt any thing, Put thy finger here, and see my hands,
and put forth thy hand, and put it into my side, and be not faithless, but
faithful. So much for the fourth cause, which is to comfort his friends.

You see then, blessed Christians, you see how these causes of Christ's wounds
differ one from an other. The first cause, to approve his resurrection, was,
but neither is, nor shall be. The second cause, to appease his Father was and
is, but shall not be. The third cause, to confound his enemies, neither was,
nor is, but shall be. The fourth cause, to comfort his friends, both was, and
is, and shall be. So that Christ's wounds, did serve, to approve his
resurrection, only between his resurrection, and his ascension: do serve to
appease his Father, only between his ascension, and his second coming: shall
serve to confound his enemies, only at the day of judgment: did, do, and
shall serve, to comfort his friends, for ever. Wherefore though we be never so
great sinners, yet let us never despair of the grace and mercy of Christ. His
hands are still stretched out to embrace us, his side is always open to
receive us. Therefore let us creep low, and come humbly to him, that we may
with the woman in the Gospel, touch but the hemme of his garment; nay that we
may with S. John, lean upon his blessed bosom; yea that we may with S. Thomas
in this place, put our fingers into his hands, and our hands into his side. And
even as Constantine the great used to kiss that eye of Paphnutius which was
boared out in Maximinus time, and the Iayler in the Acts, washed S. Paul's
stripes and vvound^: so let us kiss the Son least he be angry, and honor
his holy vvounds, which are the precious (...) vvherevvith he has healed us,
and restored us to everlasting life. To the which we beseech thee, O good
Lord to bring us, not for our own deferrs or merits, but for the tender
bowels of Christ Jesus love and mercy tovvard us, to whom with the Father,
and the holy Ghost, be all honor and praise both now and for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.
MATTHEW. 5. V. 19. He that both does and teaches, the same shall be called
great in the kingdom of heaven.
Beloved in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, It is a very monstrous thing,
that any man should have more tongues then hand^. For God has given us two
hands, and but one tongue, that we might do much, and say but little. Yet many
say so much and do so little, as though they had two tongues, and but one hand:
nay, three tongues and never a hand. Insomuch as that may be aptly applied to
them, (...)
which Pandulphus said to some in his time: You say much, but you do little;
you say well, but you do ill: again, you do little, but you say much: you
do ill, but you say well. Such as these (which do either worse then they
teach, or else less then they teach: teaching others to do well, and to do
much, but doing no whit themselves) may be resembled to diverse things. To a
wherstone, which being blunt it self, makes a knife sharp. To a painter,
which being deformed himself, makes a picture fair. To a sign, which being
weather-beaten and hanging without it self, directs passengers into the Inn.
To a bell, which being deaf and hearing not it self, calls the people into
the Church to hear. To a nightingale* which being restles and sitting upon a
thorn her self, brings others by her singing into a sweet sle^pe. To a
goldsmith, which being beggarly and having not one piece of plate to use
himself, has store for others which he shows and sells in his shop.
Lastly, to a ridiculous actor in the city of Smyrna, which pronouncing; o
coelum, O heaven, pointed with his finger toward the ground: which when Polemo
the chiefest man in the place saw, he could abide to stay no longer, but went
from the company in a chase, saying, This ^oole has made a solecisme with his
ha^^^ he has spoken false Latin w^^^ his hand. Such are all they, which
teach one thing and do another: which teach well, and do ill. They are like a
blunt whe^stone: a deformed painter: a weather-beaten sign: a deaf bell: a
restles nightingale: a beggarly goldsmith: a ridiculous actor, which
pronounces the heaven, and points to the earth. But he that sits in the
heaven, shall laugh all such to scorn, the Lord shall have them in derision,
and hiss them off from the stage. Because howsoever they have the heaven
commonly at their tongues end, yet they have the earth continually at their
fingers end. So that they speak false Latin with their hand; nay that which
is worse, they speak false Divinity with their hand. Whereas we might easily
avoid all such irregularitie, and make true congruity between the tongue and
the hand, if we would make this text of holy Scripture, the rule of our whole
life. For then, I assure you, we should every one of us play our parts so well,
that in the end, the tragedy of this woeful life being once finished, we
should have an applause and a plaudite of the whole theater, not only of men
and Angels, but even of God himself, who does always behold us. Wherefore out
of these few words, let us observe these two parts. Division.
The first negative, what must not be: neither Pastor nor people must teach one
thing and do another: That must not be. The second affirmative, what must be:
both Past^r and people must do that themselves, which they teach others to
do. That must be. For He that both does and teaches, the same, shall be
called great in the kingdom of heaven.

First, that the Pastor must not teach one thing and do another, appears in
the fourth of Leuiticus. Leu. 4.20.
Where almighty God appoints the self same sacrifice should be offered for
the sin of the Priest, which is offered for the sin of the whole people. So
that all the people may better sin, though it be a thousand times, then the
Priest may sin though it be but once. For the people sinning, offend only by
their sin: Exodus 4.
but the Priest sinning offends more by his example, then by his sin.
Therefore Moses being comm^^^ded by throwing down his rod, Exodus 7.
to work miracles, delivered it to Aaaon, To signify, that especially it
belongs to him to do somewhat himself, whose duty is to teach others.
Whereupon also our Savior gives us a caveat, to beware of false Prophets,
because they say and do not. Matthew. 23.3.
They say one thing, and do another. They bind heavy burdens which they tie
upon other men's backs, Luke 1^.^6.
but touch not those burdens themselves, so much as with the least of their
fin^ers. So that that which was fondly and falsely said of Christ, Matthew. 27.42.
He saved others, himself he cannot save: may be fitly and truly said of
these* They save others, themselves they cannot save. Whereas the Apostle
making Timothy an example for all ministers to follow, writes thus to him;
Take heed to thy self, 1. Tim. ^.16.
and to doctrine: for in doing so, thou shall both save thy self, and them
that hear th^e. By taking keede to thy doctrine, thou shall save them that
hear thee: by taking heed to thy self, thou shall save thy self. Otherwise
if thou take heed to thy doctrine, and not to thy self, thou m^^est well save
others that hear thee, but thy self thou can not save. Thou may well
preach to others, but thou shall be sure to prove a castaway thy self. 1.
Cor. 9.17.
For when two pray, if the one bless, and the other curse, whose prayer will
God hear? And is it not then much more dangerous, when out of one and the
self same mouth comes both blessing and cursing? When one and the self same
Minister, Iam. 3.10.
teaches well, whereby the people are blessed, and yet does ill, whereby he
himself is accursed? Is it not likely that God will rather respect his cursed
doing to p^nish it, then regard his (...) teaching to praise it? Certainly the
Psal^ist puts the matter out of all doubt, where he says, Psalm. 8.2.
That God will surely cast away, God will reject, God will destroy the enemy
and the auenger. The enemy and the auenger: Who is he? He that is an enemy to
Gods glory in that he does ill, and yet would seem to be an auenger, to be a
maintainer, to be a defender of Gods glory, in that he teaches well, he is the
enemy and the auenger. And such an one as this, which is indeed an enemy, and
yet would seem to be an auenger, which is indeed a foe, and yet would seem
to be a friend, which does indeed ill, and yet would seem to teach well, such
an one I say, will God destroy. To the wicked thus says the Lord. Why do
thou preach my laws, Psalm. 50.16.
and take my statutes in thy mouth, whereas thou hate to be thy self
reformed by them, and have cast my words behind thee? By thine own mouth,
Luke 19.22.
by thine own confession I will condemn thee, thou naughty, thou lewd
servant. Job. 15.6.
Thine own words shall accuse thee, and not I, yea thine own lips shall bear
witn^sse against thee. For why go thou about to take a little moate out of
thy brothers eye, Matthew. 7.5.
and do not first cast out that great beam which is in thine own eye? Why
go thou to other men's houses, and priest into other men's matters, Mark. 5.^6.
and do not first go to thine own house, and see that all be well in thine
own heart? What meanest thou to do? Thou that teach others, do thou not
teach thy self? Romans 2.^1.
Thou that preachest a man should not steal, do thou steal? If thou be a
preacher, then preach to thy self as well as others. If thou be a Physician,
Luke 4.13.
then cure thy self as well as others. Seeing indeed as Hierome writes, he is
too nice and to dainty a Physician, Deliearus magister est, qui ple^o ventre
disputa^ de i^iunio.
either for the body or else for the soul, which prescribes fa^^ing to others,
and is sick of a surfeit himself. Wherefore the godly Pastor must not
prescribe fasting to others and be sick of a surfe^ himself: he must not
teach one thing and do an other. For not be that only teaches, but He that
both does and teaches, the same shall be called great in the kingdom of
heaven.

Now the people also are forbidden to teach one thing and do an other, as well
as the Pastor. For all Christians must imitate the example of Christ. And for
Christ S. John tells us, that he was full of grace and truth. Ioh. 1.14.
The fullness of his truth, made him teach well: of his grace, 1. Pet. 2.22.
do well. Saint Peter likewise, that he did no sin, neither was there guile
found in his mouth. Many have no guilt found in their mouths, which
notwithstanding (...) sin. But even as Christ had neither guile in his
teaching, not yet sin in his doing: so we that are Christians must neither
deceive others by teaching guilfully, nor yet deceive our selves by doing
sinnefully. For we know that not every one that says, Matthew. 7.21.
Lord, Lord, shall be saved. Neither yet every one that says, The Temple of
the Lord, Ier. 7.4.
the Temple of the Lord, shall be blessed. Seeing oftentimes a man, the nearer
he is to the Temple of the Lord, the further he is from the Lord of the
Temple. Therefore as that figtree was accursed, which did bear leaves and no
fruit: Mark. 21.14.
so shall every man be accursed which bears leaves without fruit. I mean a
flourish of teaching, without any fruit of doing. Yea such a man being once
accursed, shall be ever tormented. For knowing his masters will, Luke 12 47.
nay knowing it so well, that he is able to teach it others also, and yet doing
it not himself, he shall be beaten with many stripes. Chrysostom says, that
drunken men have both strings wherewith their tongues are tied, (...).
so that they can teach nothing well; and also strings wherewith their hands
are tied, so that they can do nothing well. They are both tongueti'de, Mark.
7.35.
and handti'de. But such as know their masters will, and do it not, are worse
then drunken men. For though the string of their tongue be loose, as that
stammerers in the Gospel was, so that they can teach well enough: yet the
string of their hand is not loose, their hand is still bound up in their
bosom, as that loyterers in the Proverbs is, Prou. 26.15.
so that they can do nothing well. Therefore they draw near to God with their
tongues, Ier. 12.1.
but are far from him with their reins. Yea they are so far from coming to
him with their hearts, that they never come near him so much as with their
hands. But though they have the smooth tongue of Jacob, which teaches well;
Genesis 27.22.
yet they have the rough hand of Esau, which does ill. Such do not touch
Christ, but throng Christ. They touch Christ, as the good woman did, Luke 8 45.
which follow him, and come near unto him by well doing. They throng Christ,
as the rest of the people did, which oppress and ouerwhelme him with a
multitude of words, without any matter or manner of doing; which are as wells
without water, 1. Pet. 2.17.
or as clouds without rain. Such as the Prophet Jeremy speaks, do steal
Gods word* They have not only false and lying tongues, Furantur verba. Ier.
23.30.
but also filching and stealing tongues. For teaching well, and doing ill,
their teaching does not become them, it does not beseem them, it does not
belong unto them. It is strange that a man should steal with his tongue: even
as it is strange also, that a man should speak with his hand. Yet as I noted
before, that these speak false construction with their hand: so now I note that
these steal true construction with their tongue. They steal their words, I
say, howsoever otherwise they be most true, who as Austin writes, would seem
to be righteous in that they teach the words of God, Qui boni volunt videri
loquendo quae dei sunt, cum mali sint, faciendo quae sua sunt. August.
whereas indeed they are unrighteous, in that they do the works of the devil.
Wherefore we that are a holy people, must not teach the words of God, and do
the works of the devil; we must not teach one thing, and do an other. For not
he that only teaches, but He that both does and teaches, the same shall be
called great in the kingdom of heaven.

Thus much for the first part negative, what must not be. Neither Pastor nor
people, must teach one thing, and do another. That must not be.

The second part affirmative follows, what must be. Both Pastor and people
must do that themselves which they teach others to do. That must be. First,
for the Pastor he has two kind of garments. ^xod. 28.4.
A brestplate, and an Ephod. The breast plate shows that he must have science
to teach: the Ephod shows that he must have conscience to do that which he
teach^th. And in the very breastplate it self is written, not only Vrim, but
also Thummim. Vrim signifies light. Exodus 28.30.
Thummim signifies perfection. To prove that the Pastor, must not only be the
light of the world, but also the salt of the earth: not only a light of
direction in his teaching, but also a pattern of perfection in his doing. For
even as the snuffers of the tabernacle were made of pure gold: so Preachers
which should purge and dress, Exodus 25 38.
and clear others that they may burne-out brightly, must be made of pure gold,
that by doing well they may also shine themselves. Hence it is that the Priest
has out of the sacrifices for his share, Number. 8.18.
the shake-breast and the right sho^lder. The shake-breast puts him in mind of
teaching well: the right shoulder puts him in mind of doing well. That great
Prophet Elias is called, The horseman and the Chariot of Israel. A horseman
directs the chariot, 2 Reg 1.12.
and keeps it in the right way: a chariot goes in the right way it self. And
so a Minister must not only as a horseman direct others, and set them in the
right way, but also as a chariot, he most follow a good course, and walk in
the right way himself. He must be both the horseman, that teaches, and the
chariot that does; both the horseman and the chariot of Israel. Therefore he
has upon the fringes of his vesture pomgrana^^, and bells. Many preachers are
full of bells which make a great ringing and gingling, Exodus 39.25.
but because they have not pomgranats as well as bells, therefore all the noise
that they make is but as sounding brass or as a tinckling cymball. For the
godly (...) must not only say well, and sound out the word of the Lord to others
clearly as a bell, but also he must do well, and as a pomgranate be
fruitfulll himself and full of good works. Exodus 26.37.
Even as the pillars of the Tabernacle were made of Shittim wood, and ouerlaid
with pure gold: so preachers (which are called in the Epistle to the Galatians
the pillars of the Church) must not only be ouerlaid outwardly with pure gold,
teaching the word of God purely, but also they must do as they say, and
inwardly be made of Shittim wood, which never corrupts, never rotteth,
having no cor^uption, no rottennes^e in their lives. Hereupon our Lord,
speaking to his Prophet says, Lift up thy voice as a trumpet. Diverse things
there are which sound louder then a trumpet; The sea, the thunder, or such
like. Yet he says not, Lift up thy voice as the sea* or lift up thy voice as
the thunder, but lift up thy voice as a trumpet. Esa. 58.1.
Because a trumpeter when he sounds his trumpet, he winds it with his mouth,
and holds it up with his hands: and so a Preacher, which is a spiritual
trumpeter, must not only by teaching well, sound forth the word of life with
his mouth, but also by doing well he must support it, and hold it up with his
hands. And then does he lift up his voice as a trumpet. Those mystical beasts
in Ezekiel, Ezec. 1.8.
which S. Gregory understands to be the Ministers of the Church, had hands
under their wings. Many Preachers are full of feathers, and can soar aloft in
a speculatiue kind of discour^ing: but if you should search for hand^ under
their wings, perhaps you should scarce find many times so much as half a hand
amongst them. But the godly Pastor must have not only wings of high wisdom
and knowledge, but also hands under his wings to do that which he knows.
Mal. 2.7.
For as the Prophet Malachie witnesses, The Priests lips should keep
knowledge. He says not, they should babble or utter knowledge to others, and
have no care to keep it themselves. But having delivered it to others, they
must as well as others observe and do it themselves. And then indeed may
their lips rightly be said to keep knowledge. For even as they which repaired
the walls of Jerusalem, held a sword in one hand, and wrought with the other:
Neh. 4.17.
so Preachers which by winning souls repair and build up the walls of the
heavenly Jerusalem, must not only hold the sword of the spirit, which is the
word of God in one hand, but also they must labor with the other hand. Else
they shall pull down and destroy rather then build up. But if they do as fast
as they say, then they shall build apace, and edify very much. Therefore Saint
Paul exhorts Timothy to show himself a workman, which needs not to be
ashamed, 2. Tim. 2.15.
dividing the word of God aright* He must not only be a word-man, but also a
workman. He must not only hold a sword in one hand, to divide the word of God
aright, but also labor with the other hand, and DO his best to show himself
a workman which need not be ashamed. And the same Apostle exhorts the same
Timothy again, to show the true pattern of wholesome words. 2. Tim 1.13.
Wholesome words is sound teaching: the true pattern of wholesome words, is well
doing. So that he shows the true pattern of wholesome words, which patterns
and samples his teaching by doing, making them both matches and paires, so that
(as Mark the Eremite speaks) a man may easily read all his sermons, and all
his exhortations to others, written down as it were, and expressed in the
lines of his own life. And thus must every faithful preacher do. He must have
not only a breast plate, but also an Ephod; he must have written in this
breast plate, not only Vrim, but also Thummim: he must be like the snuffers of
the tabernacle, not only purging others, but also made of pure gold himself:
he must have for his share of the sacrifices not only the shake-brest, but
also the right shoulder: he must be as Elias was, not only the horseman, but
also the chariot of Israel: he must have upon the fringes of his vesture, not
only bells, but also pomgranats: he must be like the pillars of the
tabernacle, not only ouerlai'd outwardly with gold, but also inwardly made of
Shittim wood: he must not only lift up his voice, but also lift it up as a
trumpet: he must not only have wings, but (...) hands under his wings: he must
not only with his lips utter knowledge to others, but also keep knowledge
himself: he must not only hold a sword in one hand, but also labor with the
other hand: he must not only divide the word of God aright, but also show
himself a workman which need not be ashamed: he must not only deliver
wholesome words, but also show the true pattern of wholesome words, which is a
godly life. The sum is this: The faithful Pastor must not only teach well,
but also DO well. He that both does and teaches, the same shall be called
great in the kingdom of heaven.

Now the people likewise are commanded to DO that themselves, which they teach
others to do, as well as the Pastor. Genesis 23.19.
We read that Abraham buried Sarah in the cave of Macpelah, that is in a double
sepulcher. He that burieth his mind in knowledge only, without any care of
practice, he buries Sarah in a single sepulcher: but he that buries his mind
as well in the practice and feeling of religion (which is all in all) as in the
knowledge and understanding of it, he buries Sarah in a double sepulcher. And
so must all we do which are the true children of Abraham. For then with
Abraham burying our spirit in a double sepulcher, we shall with Elizeus have a
double spirit. A spirit that as well does, as teaches. God appointed Moses to
make a lauer with a base or a foot. Exodus 30.18.
Now the word Labium, signifies as well a lip, as a lauer. So that the lauer
which washes must have a base, and the lip which teaches must have a foot.
Otherwise if teaching do not stand upon doing as upon a foot, then surely it
is footelesse, and so consequently it is bootelesse, and altogether
unprofitable. Job. 31.36.
Holy Job says thus, Though mine adversary should write a book against me,
would not I take it upon my shoulder, and bind it as ^ crown unto me? That
which he says of his adversaries book, may not altogether unfitly be applied
to Gods book, which we must study, not so much that we may bind it to our
head, or bear it in our memory to teach it, as that we may bear it upon our
shoulders to DO it. Then shall it be every way a crown unto us. Simeon the
son of Onias was as a fair Olive tree that is fruitful, Ecclus. 50.20.
and as a Cypres tree, which grows ^p to the clouds. A Cypres tree is high
but barren: an Olive tree is fruitful but low. So a Christian must, not only
as a Cypres tree reach up to the clouds, by a high gift in teaching, but also
he must as an olive tree bring forth the oil of mercy, and be every way
fruitful in doing. Then he shall be like Simeon, neither low nor barren. But
though he be an olive, yet he shall be as high as the cypres tree* and though
he be a cypres, yet he shall be as fruitful as the olive tree. Noah is
appointed to make a window in the top of the Arc, Genesis 6.16.
and a door in the side of it; A window is for the eye only to look out; a
door is for the whole body to go out. And in like manner a godly man, must
not have a window for contemplation as Daniel had, who said his prayers thrice
a day looking out of his chamber window; but also he must have a door for
action as Abraham had, who entertained his guests about the heat of the day
fitting in his tent door. At the window of contemplation he must meditate and
look to his teaching; at the door of action he must go forth to his doing.
Leuit 11.4.
Threfore by the old law all those beasts are accounted unclean that chew the
cud, but divide not the hoof; which law was not made for beasts, but for men.
To admonish us, that all they are unclean in the sight of God, which chewe the
cudde by meditating of his word to teach it, and yet divide not the hoof by
following the same to do it. When Gedion went to war against the Madianites,
Iud. 7.6.
he sent home again those soldiers which kneeled down to lap water, and
took those only with him, which lapt out of their hands. Because indeed they
are not fit to be soldiers in Christ's camp, which have mouths to say
somewhat, but no hands to do any thing. For if they have no hands to help
themselves, much less to hurt their enemies. And look how these Soldiers did
put their hands to their mouth; in like sort the wise woman puts her fingers
to the distaffe. Now there is a great resemblance between the distaffe and the
tongue. For as a thread either longer or shorter is spun off from the distaffe;
so from the tongue a speech. Therefore he may be said to put his fingers to the
distaffe, Prou. 31.19.
which puts his doing to his teaching, and does that which he teaches. Our
Savior speaking to his Spouse, says thus, Let me see thy sight, let me hear
thy voice. As if he should say, Let me not only hear a voice of of thy
teaching, but also see a fight of thy doing. Let me see thy sight, let me hear
thy voice. Eum eligas magistrum quem magis ad^iteris cum videas, quam cum
audias.
Whereupon Senec^ says fitly, Be sure thou imitate him above all other, whom
thou may admire more when thou see his sight, then when thou hear his
voice. So Paul wishes the Philippians to follow those things which they had
heard of him, Phil. 4.9.
and seen in him. His teaching they had heard of him: his doing they had seen
in him. Act. 7.22.
So Moses was mighty in words, and in deeds: Not mighty in words, and weak,
or no body in deeds: but mighty in both, in words and in deeds, Numb. 7.8.
in teaching, and in doing. So Aarons rod brought forth blossoms, and almonds.
Now as almonds are the fruit of blossoms: in like sort doing is the fruit of
teaching. So the Baptist was a shining, and a burning light, Ioh 5.^5.
He shined in knowledge, which made him able to teach well, he burned in
zeal, which made him willing to do well. So David says, Establish me with
thy free spirit, Psalm 51.12.
then shall I teach thy way unto the wicked. He did not only teach others the
way of God, but also he was established with the free spirit of God to do well
himself. So Titus was an example of good works, Tit. 2.7.
and vncorrupt doctrine. Vncorrupt doctrine is teaching well: good works is
doing well. How then was he an example of good works, and vncorrupt doctrine?
Clemens Alexandrinus makes the answer. Teaching as he did, and doing as he
taught, he was an example of good works and vncorrupt doctrine. And so must
every one be which is the sincere servant of God. He must with Abraham bury
Sarah not only in a sepulcher, but also in a double sepulcher: he must with
Moses make him, not only a lauer, but also a base: he must with Job, not
only bind the book to his head, but also bear it upon his shoulders: he must
with Simeon, not only be a cypres tree, but also an olive tree; he must with
Noah make him not only a window, but also a door: he must with those clean
beasts, not only chewe the cudde, but also divide the hoof: he must with
those valiant Soldiers, not only bow down his knees, but also lift up his hands
to lap water: he must with the wise woman, not only have a distaffe, but also
puts his fingers to it: he must with the Church, not only let Christ hear his
voice, but also let him see his sight: eue^ as Paul's excellent virtues were not
only heard of him, but also seen in him; eue^ as Moses was mighty, not only in
words, but also in deeds: even as Aarons rod did bear not only blossoms, but
also almonds: even as John Baptist was a light, not only shining, but also
burning: eue^ as king David was a prophet, not only teaching others, but also
established with grace himself: even as Titus was an example, not only of
vncorrupt doctrine, but also of good works. The sum of all is this: The
sincere servant of God, must not only teach well, but also DO well. For He
that both does and teaches, the same shall be called great in the kingdom
of heaven.

Now then, beloved, let us blush, and be ashamed, that even the very Gentiles
should go before us in this point. So^iades a heathen man could say thus much,
Better done then said. A good thing if thou know it, do it. It is written of
Julius Caesar, that he never said to his soldiers, Ite, but Venite: he never
said, Go ye yonder, but Come ye hither, I will go with you; nay, I will go
before you. And so saves our heavenly Captain and conqueror Jesus Christ, not
Ite, but Venite, Come unto me all ye that labor, and learn of me, because I
am meek and humble in heart. He says not, because I talk of my humility,
but because I am humble, because I show the practice of it continually in my
self. I (says he) came down from heaven to earth, I left my Fathers bosom,
and took a traitors kiss, to teach all men true humility. Therefore there is
no teacher to me, there is no master to me: Learn of me, because I am meek
and humble in heart. This kind of instruction both by teaching, and by doing,
is that two-edged sword which proceeds out of the mouth of the Lamb. For
tell me I pray you (if it be no trouble to you) tell me, what is the reason
think you, why so many Preachers in their Churches, so many masters in their
families, seek to redress abuses, strive against sins, and yet prevail so
little, but only because they fight not with this two-edged sword, but with a
backsword: the sword which they fight withal is very sharp, and cuts deep on
the teaching-side, but it is blunt and has no edge at all on the doing side.
Whereas if we would fight against ungodliness with this two-edged sword, both by
teaching and doing, we should soon cut down sin in such sort, as it should
never be able to stand out against us. Therefore David being ready to
reform many things, among his people, says in one of the Psalms, Bonitatem
and scientiam doceme.
O Lord give me goodness, and knowledge. Goodness, that I may do well, and
Knowledge, that I may teach well. For I am sure (says he) that all my teaching
without doing, all my knowledge without goodness, is to no purpose. Therefore, O
Lord, give me goodness and knowledge. But first goodness, and then knowledge.
Because indeed, one heartfull of goodness, is worth an hundred headfulls of
knowledge: one handful of doing, is worth an hundred tongue-fuls of teaching.
For what is the hand else, but the very seal of the tongue? So that as a
writing is not pleadable by the law of man without seals, no more is a word
warrantable by the law of God, without works. And therefore if they which serve
the beast, receive the mark of the beast, not only in their foreheads, but
also in their hands: how much more then ought we which serve the living God, to
receive the mark of God, not only in our foreheads by open professing of him,
but also in our hands by faithful practicing that which we profess. Therefore
it is an usual phrase well-nigh in all the Prophets to say, The word of the
Lord by the hand of Amos, by the hand of Zachary, or such like; I know indeed
it is an Hebrewe phrase, where the hand of the Prophet signifies the
ministry of the Prophet. But yet this phrase may give us thus much to
understand, that if the Prophets deal so, as every word of God passed not only
thorough their mouths, but also through their hands, that when we also must so
deal in hearing and handling the word of God, as we may bring unto God, says
Agapetus, not only a profering of words, but also an offering of works.
Wherefore dear brethren, let your light so shine before men, that they not
only hearing your good words, but also seeing your good works, may glorify
your Father which is in heaven. For then I assure you, if we glorify our
Father which is in heaven, he will glorify us his children which are upon
earth, and in the end make us great in the kingdom of heaven. O remember
therefore that golden saying in the Scripture, Psalm. 111.16.
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, a good understanding have
all they that do thereafter, the praise of it endures for ever. A good
understanding have all they that do thereafter? Why so? Because an ill
understanding have all they that do not thereafter. They that have
understanding, and do not thereafter, that is, according to it, have an ill
understanding. But they that have understanding, and do thereafter according
to it, have a good understanding. A good understanding have all they that do
thereafter: the praise of it endures for ever. It shall be eternally rewarded.
O how richly are the Apostles rewarded, how highly are they now honored in
heaven, because when they were upon earth, they had a good understanding. They
had cloven tongues. Act. 2.3.
Cloven tongues? What Is that? I Will tell you. Do you not see how our hands are
cloven and divided into fingers; So were the Apostles tongues. They (in a
manner, if I may so say) had fingers upon their tongues, as well as we have
upon our hands. It was but a word and a work with them. They had no sooner
taught others any good thing (as O Lord what good thing did they not teach us
all) but by and by they were ready to practice it, and to perform it
themselves. Therefore they are already great in the kingdom of heaven, yea,
and much more shall be. The twelve Apostles shall sit upon twelve thrones,
judging the twelve tribes of Israel. And if we can happily obtain so much
grace and goodness of God, as that we may have a care and a conscience as well
to do as to teach, then as sure as God's in heaven, we likewise shall be
great in the kingdom of heaven. We shall be installed with Christ and his
Apostles, in the throne of glory, when we shall hear him say unto us, Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom of heaven prepared for you. For ye
have not only professed, but practiced: ye have not only taught well, but
wrought well: ye have not only said well, but done well, therefore now you
shall be great in the kingdom of heaven. To the which kingdom of heaven, we
beseech thee, O Lord, to bring us, even for Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

FINIS.
A SERMON PREACHED before the Kings Majesty at Draytonin Northhamptonshire.
August. 6. 1605.
PSALM. 132.18. As for his enemies I shall cloth them with shame; but upon
himself shall his Crown flourish.


THe Royal Prophet having settled himself in his kingdom according to his own
desire; and besides having after many wanderings to and fro, at length brought
back the Arc again to Jerusalem; makes here his most zealous and devout
prayer to God for the continuance of his favor both to the Church and
Commonwealth committed to his government. Return, O Lord, to thy resting
place, says he, thou v. 8. and deinceps.
and the Arc of thy strength. Let thy Priests be clothed with righteousness,
and let thy Saints sing with ioyfulnesse. For thy servant David's sake turn not
away the face of thine anointed. Now that he might apparently see how near the
Lord is to all them that call upon him in faithfulness and truth, he waits
not long for an answer, but carries it away with him before he depart: For to
David's petition, Return, O Lord, unto thy resting place, thou, and the arc of
thy strength; Gods answer is this, v. 14. and deinceps.
This shall be my resting place, here will I dwell, for I have a delight
therein. I will bless her victuals with increase, and will satisfy her poor
with bread. To David's petition, Let thy Priests be clothed with
righteousness, and let thy Saints sing with ioyfulnesse; Gods answer is this,
I will cloth her Priests with salvation, and her Saints shall rejoice and
sing. Lastly, to David's petition; For thy servant David's sake turn not away
the face of thine anointed: Gods answer is this; There shall I make the horn
of David flourish, I, I have ordained a light for mine anointed. As for his
enemies, I shall cloth them with shame: but upon himself shall his crown
flourish. As if he should have said; Turn away the face of mine anointed?
Nay, that will I never do, I will indeed turn away the face of the enemies
of mine anointed. Their face shall be covered with confusion, and clothed
with shame: But contrariwise, I have ordained a light for mine anointed. He
ever shall have a light in his face, and a crown upon his head. As for his
enemies, I shall cloth them with shame: but upon himself shall his crown
flourish.

These words are principally to be understood of Christ. For never were any so
clothed with shame as his enemies the cursed Jews which murdered him. There
city was sacked, not one stone of it being left upon another, and they
themselves as stubble or chafe were scattered over the face of the earth. So
that they are the very shame of men, and the outcast of all people. Insomuch
as when we would signify we hate a man deadly, indeed we commonly use to say,
we hate them worse then a Jew. On the other side, Christ is so exalted now,
that all power is given him in heaven and earth, yea God has given him a name
above all names, that at the most sweet and most excellent name of Jesus,
every knee and every heart also might do obeys^nce. And as the Apostle
proves out of the eight Psalm, the Lord now after all his dolorous pains
and torments, has crowned him with honor and glory. Nevertheless in a
secondarie sort, this promise may be applied also to David, who was a notable
type of Christ; and so consequently to every faithful successor of David,
which is Christ's vicegerent and lieftenant upon earth. For ye know what was
the the end of all David's enemies: Absolon his disobedient son hung up by
the goldy locks of pride. Achitophel his traiterous Counselor made away
himself. Shemei, a reuiler of him, and a derractor from him, in his gray
hairs put to shameful death. The same may be said of the rest. But holy David
himself could never be overcome. For though many enemies, specially Antiochus
Epiphanes, bent all their force, to the very uttermost, to root out David's
posterity, and to destroy Gods people; yet maugre their heads and their
hearts, David's crown yet flourished and continued in his stock, till at the
length the son of David came into the world; of whom the Angel Gabriel spoke
to the blessed virgin Marie in this sort; Luke 1.32.
He shall be great, and shall be called the son of the most High; and the
Lord God shall give him the throne of his Father David, and he shall be ruler
over the house of Jacob, and of his kingdom shall be no end. Now if this
Scripture be so notably verified in David, be having faithfully served in his
time, and being now by the will of God dead: no reason but that we may
understand it also generally of every holy one of God, which treads in David's
steps, going in and out before Gods people. As for his enemies, I shall cloth
them with shame; but upon himself shall his crown flourish.

Here are two parts. His enemies; himself. His enemies, first shall have
shame; secondly shall be clothed with shame. Himself, first shall have a
crown: secondly shall have a flourishing crown. As for his enemies I shall
cloth them with shame; but upon himself shall his crown flourish.

The shame which the Lord God assures David shall light upon his enemies, is a
very droadfull judgment against them. Nicetas says plainly; No punishment so
greiuous as shame. And Nazianzene yet more expressly; Better were a man die
right out, then still live in repro^ch and shame. This, diverse valiant
worthies have showed to be true, ridding themselves voluntarily of their life,
that so they might be rid of their shame. Ajax being ready to dispatch
himself, used these as his last words; No grief does so cut the very heart of
a generous and magnanimous man, as shame and reproach. What should I speak of
any more Grecians, or Romans, as of Brutus, Cassius, Antonius, Cato Vricensis,
and such others? In Scripture we have a plain proof. Mighty Sampson, being
about to pull the whole house upon his own head, Judge. 16.18.
said thus: O Lord God I pray thee strengthen me at this time only, that I
may be at once avenged of the Philistims, for my two eyes. He desired rather
once to die valiantly, then long to live wretchedly. For as Saint Ambrose
writing of Samson, says, Viuere and mori naturae functic: ^udibrio esse probro
ducitur. Epist. yo.
For a man to live, or die, is natural: but for a man to live in shame and
contempt, and to be made a laughing stock of his Enemies, is such a matter, as
no well bred and noble minded man that has any courage, or stomach in him,
can ever digest it. Yet the Lord God promises David his anointed, that shame
shall be the reward of all his enemies; shame I say which is a great deal
worse then death it self. As for his enemies, says he, I shall cloth them
with shame.

Secondly, they shall be clothed with shame. To be clothed is an Hebrewe
phrase, signifying to have any thing unseparably cast upon one. And it is taken
both in the better and in the worser part. As a little before; I cloth her
Priests with salvation: that is, I will furnish Syons Priests with such
indowments and graces from above, which they shall be as it were invested into;
that both by their life and doctrine, they shall still further the salvation
both of themselves; and of them which hear them. Contrariwise, in this place I
will cloth them with shame; That is, shame shall so unseparably accompany
them, that as wheresoever a man goes, he carries his clothes with him; so
wheresoever they go, they shall carry their shame with them. And that which
is strangest of all; they which are ashamed, use to cloth or cover their
shame, and then think themselves well enough. But David's enemies shall be so
shamed, that even the very covering of their shame, shall be a discovering of
it; and the clothing or cloaking of their ignominy, shall be nothing else but
a girding of it more closely and more unseparably unto them. So the Prophet
speaks elsewhere, Psalm. 35.26.
Let them be put to confusion and shame together, that rejoice at mine hurt.
Let them be clothed with rebuke and dishonor, that lift up themselves against
me. O Lord God, say Amen to it; let it be even so, O Lord, Let them be clothed
with rebuke and dishonor that lift up themselves against thine anointed. And
again, Psalm. 109.19.
Let shame be unto him as a cloak that he has upon him, and as the girdle
that he is always girdled withal. And yet again, verse. 19.
Let mine adversaries be clothed with shame, and let them cover themselves
with their own confusion as with a cloak.

But to leave the word, and come to the matter. The enemies of David shall be
clothed with shame three ways: In their own conscience; In the world; In the
day of judgment.

Touching their own conscience, S. Austin says well, Omnis in ordinatus
affectus est sibimetipfi poena.
All inordinate desires, as none are more inordinate then traiterous and
rebellious enterprises, carry in themselves that bane which poisons and
punishes them at the last. Whereupon the Prophet says, Psalm. 57.2.
Hide me, O Lord, under the shadow of thy wings, until iniquity be ouerpast,
as the Septuagint translate it. But we read it, Until this tyranny be
ouerpast. And others transla^e it, Until this Calamity, or this Misery be
ouerpast. Which indifferent acceptance of the Hebrew word, shows that
nothing does so tyrannize over the conscience, nothing is such a calamity and
misery to the mind, as iniquity and sin. Judas after he had betrayed his
Lord and Master, was so confounded in his own conscience, that he cried out
and said, Matthew. 27.4.
I have sinned, in betraying innocent blood. Proditer Casca, vile traitor: if
his blood be innocent, then thy conscience is guilty. And if thou can
confess thou have sinned, when it is too late, why did thou not take heed
of sinning when it was time? I have sinned says he, sinned in betraying
innocent blood. A thousand hells could not have more tormented him, then this
desperate sorrow, and extreme shame wherewith his conscience was clothed,
tearing his bowels whilst he was alive, and pouring them out when he died.

Now as for shame in the world, we read Genesis 4.5.
that God did set a mark upon Cain the murderer of the just Habel; and so
consequently the ringleader of all David's enemies. Therefore as when men see a
wolf or a fox, or any such h^rtfull beast in the forest, they set all their
dogs upon him; so the enemies of the Lords anointed, being burnt as it were
and branded with the marks of shame, are howted and hunted wheresoever they
go. One example at this time shall suffice. Maxentius a wicked rebel against
his own Lord the famous Emperor Constantine the great, devised to have a
bridge made with cockebo^tes chained together over a river near Rome, thinking
to train the Emperor that way, and there to drown them in the river. But God
so wrought for his chosen servant, that the enemy himself being compelled to
fly that way, was taken in that pit which he dug for others. And so as
Pharaoh was clothed with shame in the open view and fight of all the world,
when he and all his host were drowned in the red sea, after the same fashion
Maxentius was dressed,

Lastly, touching shame in the day of judgment, David's enemies at that day
shall stand before the tribunal ^^ate of Christ, being naked in all
respec^^else, but only covered with their own shame. Then they shall be vexed
with horrible fear Sapien. 5.2.
, and clothed with confusion; whereas the righteous shall be clothed with
incorruption; 2. Cor. 15.
yea though in this life with the rich glutton, Luke 16.19.
they have been clothed with purple, and fine linen, yet then their attire
shall be dishonor, and their garment shall be shame. Thus will the Lord
cloth the enemies of his anointed with shame; cloth them in their own
conscience; cloth them in the world, cloth them in the day of judgment. As
for his enemies I shall cloth them with shame; But upon himself shall his
crown flourish.

The one half of this Sermon is now past, the other shall be as soon dispacht.
But upon him shall his crown flourish.

First, himself shall have a crown. Tertullian In libro de corona ^ilitis.
reports out of Diodorus Siculus, that the first that ever ware a crown was
Jupiter. The soldiers gave him a royal crown for a reward of his victory and
triumph over the Titans. Hereupon Jupiters Priest Act. 14.13.
brought bulls and crowns to the gates of Listra, and would there have
sacrificed to Paul. Afterward, when Gods people the Israelites would needs have
a King, as other nations had round about them; then their Kings would needs
have crowns also, as other Kings had round about them. Hence we read, that
David having vanquished the King of Rabbath, 1. Chron. ^0.2.
took the crown from off his head, and found it the weight of a talent of
gold, with precious stones in it; and set it upon his own head. Though indeed
long before that the 2. Sam. 1.10.
Amalakite brought him a crown, which he took from Saul's head when he slew
him.

So that the thing God promises is this: that any crown which king David
should get, either by conquest, or by succession, or by any other just title,
should still flourish more and more. Some there are in the world which to be
sure of outward ornaments enough, will needs wear a triple crown, Others
have been unwilling to wear that one which they might. Ca^^tus, that wa^
absolute King almost of fi^e kingdoms somewhat before the conquest, upon a
time in his progress riding near the Thames, lighted and sat down before the
shore. Then as it were to try a conclusion, he commanded the water being now
ready to ari^e again and to flow, not to come (...) nearer him. But the water
keeping his natural course, came still up higher and higher, til it began to
wet him. Whereupon turning to his Nobles, which were about him, You call me
(says he) your King and Master, and so indeed I am; and yet lo ye, I cannot
command so much as this little stream, but do what I can, that will do still
as it list. Whereupon presently he posted to Westminster, and resigned his
crown to the crucifixe there; neither could be ever (...) this be persuaded to
wear it any more. Now as the pride of that man of sin, which sits under the
sign of the triple crown, is too intolerable: so on the contrary part, this
was too much niceness in Canutus. Seeing, it follows not, because he could
not command the sea and the waters, as Christ did, and therefore he might not
wear a crown. For neither does Christ himself in heaven wear such a crown as
Kings of the earth do. But the truth is this, that royalty and majesty,
which is essential to God, he is content to communicate to his holy ones, and
to his anointed, by participation and grace. Therefore the Lords anointed,
which is as it were his favorite, may very well do all these three things at
once; wear the crown which God gives; and yet detest the pride which God
abhors; and still admire the Majesty which God inioyeth: So that the Lord
promising his servant David a crown, promises him wealth, wisdom, renown,
dignity, prosperity; in one word, all royalties belonging to a crown. But
upon himself shall his crown flourish.

Secondly, he shall have a flourishing crown. Flourishing is metaphorically
attributed to a crown. As in the next verse before. There shall I make the
horn of David to flourish. A metaphor taken from those goodly creatures, as
stagges, and such like; whose chiefest beauty and strength consists in their
horns, especially when they budde and branch abroad. So in these words, But
upon himself shall his crown flourish. A plain allusion to those flowers
which either continually, or else a very long time, keep fresh and green.
Besides at the first, kings crowns were not made of gold and pearls, as I told
you of David's crown, but only of green oken leaves, as that of Jupiters, or
else of some other branches or flowers, as others. The Lord then meaning that
David's kingdom should be established for ever, and that his lasting glory
should still grow green, he makes this loving promise unto him; But upon
himself shall his crown flourish. How flourishing beautiful flowers are,
consider but the Lilly, and you shall soon perceive. Mark (says our
Savior) Matthew. 5.24.
how the lillies of the field do grow, they labor not, neither do they
spinne, ye do I say unto you, that even Solomon in all his royalty was not
clothed like one of these. Now if God so cloth the flowers of the field,
which grow to day, and to morrow are cast into the oven, how much more shall
he cloth David's enemies with shame: but upon himself make his crown
flourish? For even as in Salomons Temple, five candlesticks at the right side,
and five at the left standing before the Oracle, and being made for matter of
pure gold, for form with branches and flowers, did well nigh dazzle the eyes of
any that entered into the Temple 1 Reg. 7.^9.
; so the Lord here gives his word, that the Kings crown shall ever flourish in
the house of our God, disparkling and displaying those rays of Majesty: those
beams of beauty, which shall amaze the world, and be a wonder as well to
Angels as to men. Wherefore, as I said even now of his enemies shame, that it
should be threefold: so here I repeat the same again of his crowns
flourishing: His crown shall flourish in his own conscience: in the world: in
the day of judgment. Touching his own conscience, the blessed Apostle calls
the Philippians his joy, and a crown Phil. 4.1.
. And to the Thessalonians he writes thus, What 1. These. 2.19.20
is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? Are not even you it, in the
presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming? yes, ye are our glory and
joy: Now, if this precious vessel of honor rejoiced in nothing so much, as in
the testimony of his conscience, that in simplicity and godly pureness, and
not in fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, he had his conversation in
the world, the power of Gods spirit working still most mightily by his
ministry to the conversion of the world to Christ: how much more shall the
Lords anointed have his conscience crowned with flourishing joy, with comfort,
with content, with heavenly peace, when he shall remember, that not only for
matters of religion and Gods true service, he has been and still is with
Saint Paul profitable to the Church; but also is a strong bulwark and a tower
of defense to maintain even the outward felicity and prosperity of Gods
people; yea the very particular right, wealth, life of every one of them; all
this I say, and a 100, things more, when he considers, what a great and a
glorious instrument he has been every way of Gods glory: O Lord God what a
heaven shall he have in his heart? what a sweet paradise of pleasure in his
soul? what security? what assurance of Christ's love? what a confident and
undaunted hope of eternal glory? what a flourishing crown of rejoicing shall
he have men in his very conscience? upon himself shall his crown flourish.
Touching the world, our holy Prophet speaking to God, though in the third
person, yet of himself says, Thou have prevented him with liberal blessings,
and have set a crown of pure gold upon his head. His honor is great in thy
salvation, glory and great worship have thou laid upon him. Now that crown
which is of gold, yea of pure gold, must needs be very flourishing even in the
view and face of the world. Neither is this to be understood of David's person
only, but even of his posterity in all ages to come. How was he himself
crowned with conquests and victories over his enemies? How was his son
Solomon crowned with riches, with wisdom, with same and glory i^ the whole
world? which flourishing of (...) soon, as of a noble branch, graced in a
^^^ner the ^etie roo^e of David himself. For, as his worthi^ son teaches,
Childrens children are the ^ed one of the elders, Prou 17.6.
and the glory of the children ^re their fathers. Therefore, as children may
^ustly glory of the renown of their fathers virtue and honor: so the
excellent father is in a sort crowned with happiness in this world, when he
sees his childrens children like to grow up and flourish after him. But upon
himself shall his crown flourish. Lastly, touching the day of judgment then,
then shall all the righteous flourish, when as having been faithful unto the
death, they shall receive the crown of life. A crown as S. Peter calls it
immortal and undefiled, 1. Pet. 1.4.
and that fades not away. Denying that ever it fades away, he affirms that
it ever flourishes. I would here be bold, if I might do it without offense,
as I hope I may, to show you one goodly cluster of grape^ of vhe land of
Canaan, a land flowing with milk and honey, whether you are now going, before
you enter into it. D. Thomas Bodleius, qui plur^mis and pulcherrimis libris
Oxoniensem bibliothecam instruxit.
A worthy and ver^^us gentleman* whom I need not name in this place, because,
no doubt many ages will name him, and renown him hereafter, gives for his
arms three crowns with this posey, Quarta perennis erit. As if he should say,
these three crowns, which I bear in my coat, are but the difference of my
house and gentry, but Quarta perennis erit: the fourth crown which I look for
in heaven shall be everlasting and immortal. That ^ourth, though it be but
one crown, yet shall be worth all those three crowns, yea three thousand more
such as these are; The fourth shall be eternal. Now, if he, and we that are
such a^ he no question is, faithful to God, and loyal to the chosen servant of
God, may well hope for a most flourishing incorruptible crown of glory, then
much more may Dau^d himself rejoice in God his Savior, and say, Quinta aut
sexta perennis erit: The fifth, or the fixed shall be eter^all. This crown
which God of his grace with his own right hand and his holy arm (...) upon
mine head, is indeed (thanks and praise he given vote the some God) a very
flourishing crown flourishing in mine own conscience: flourishing in the
world, both for my person, and for my posterity; But it is nothing, in respect
of that flourishing crown which I shall receive at the day of judgment. For
the Psalm. ^.^2.
just shall flourish like a palm tree, and shall grow like ^ Cedar in Lebanon.
Such as he planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the courts of
our God. And then indeed shall this bountiful promise of God be most fully
performed, But upon himself shall his crown flourish. As for his enemies, I
shall cloth them with shame, but upon himself shall his crown flourish.

To draw then to an ^ode: it may seem very strange, that David had any
enemies. Yet, o^^ of these words. As for his enemies, I shall cloth them with
shame; it may be well gathered that some he had. What? had David? meek David?
Lord remember David, and all h^^ meekness, says he, in the beginning of this
Psalm. He was the kindest, and the meekest man alive. Ween he had his mortal
foe at a vantage, and at a dead lift, as we say, and might have nailed him fast
to the ground with his spear: he only did cut off a lap of his garment, to
show, that when he might have hurt him, he would not. Posse, and ^olle,
^obile. Yet this meek David, patient David, merciful David, valiant and
victorious David, holy David, had enemies. Wherefore you most honorable and
blessed servants of God, you that excel in virtue, if you have some enemies,
think not strange of it. For, if you had nothing in you: (...) fear of God,
no reverence toward his word, no love and loyalty toward your Sovereign, no
for^itude, no temperance, no good thing in you; ye might perhaps walk on long
enough, and no man envy you, no man malig^e you, or malice you. But because
God has inspired you with his principal spirit, and endewed you with special
great graces above your fellows; therefore ^oth your adversary the Devil, the
old enemy of all goodness and virtue, who is ready to burst to see you do so
well: he, I say, does bestirre himself, and raise up enemies against you. But
(O blessed be our good Lord) what a wonderful comfort and encouragement have
all you; what a horrible terror and affrightment have all your enemies, in
this text? For the holy Ghost says not, They shall be clothed, or you shall
cloth them: but I, even I shall cloth them with shame. It is impossible, says
he, that you should always be armed at all points, circumspect at all places,
vigilant at all times, provided at all occasions, to prevent the mischievous
practices of your diuillish enemies. No counsel of man, no policy, no
wisdom, no wit, can foresee their barbarous undertakings and complottes, to
escape them. But in heaven, in heaven there is an eye, an hand there is in
heaven: an eye to desery them, and an hand to persecute and punish them: both
an eye and an hand to deliver you from dannger, and to cloth them with shame.
Therefore, says he, Cast your care upon me; let me alone with them, your
peril is my peril, your case my case: I Will pay them that they have deserved:
He take the quarrel into mine own hands: He trim them well enough. As for
your enemies, I shall cloth them with shame. Remember I pray you, beloved,
though indeed, they have made themselves worthy never to be remembered, or
once to be mentioned i^ our mouths any more: yet remember, I say, to their
egregious dishonor and reproach, how those are now clothed with shame, who were
the first cause of the solemnizing, or as I may say, of the sanctifying of this
present day for the day of the week, and of yesterday for the day of the
month, and of the twelve month, with so holy an exercise? How odious? how
execrable is their very name unto us? what true hearted loyal subject, such as
I am sure all are here, does not detest them, hate them, loath them, as a road,
or as a viper, or as some hidious misshapen monster: and curse the very day
wherein such a rebellious generation, and such a traiterous blood were borne?
Certainly, my good brethren, if the mercy of God, which is incomprehensible,
did not give them grace, at the l^st gasp to repent, and cry to God for
pardon: as they are clothed with shame in this world, so shall they be much
more in the world to come. And as we hold them for no better then cursed
creatures, so shall the Lord at last, say unto them, Go ye cursed into
everlasting fire. So let it (...), O Lord, even so to all the enemies of (...)
anointed, either open of secret, so (...) be to them: As for his enemies, do
them, thou, O Lord, thine own self, do them cloth them with shame.

But upon himself does his Crown flourish.

These words, upon himself, either (...) altogether impertinent and
super^^^ous, or else they are very important (...) material. For it had been
sufficient to have said; As for his enemies I shall cloth them with shame
(...) as for himself, his crown shall flourish. It is (...) greatly
necessary, as it should seem to say, his crown shall flourish upon himself.
Yet the Lord in his gracious ^^swer unto Dauide prayer, thought good to put in
this as a supernume^^^^^ word, over and besides the necessity of the sentence:
to teach the good King, and us all likewise, a very notable lesson. Namely,
that he would bless the crown, the dignity, the flourishing estate of his
loving ser^ant, not only in his own person and his posterity; in this world,
and in the world to come, as I have showed already; but also from a lesser
^^ight of glory, still to a greater and greater. Upon himself, sai^s he,
shall his crown flourish. For not only is shall be flourishing, as David left
it, at the day of his departure to God, but after his dissolution and death: as
fast as his body corrupts in the earth, so fast shall his crown increase
still in heaven. Trust me, truly, I speak i^ before the living Lord, and this
high presence, all the whole Church which shall be edified so salvation, by
David's blessed and godly government, even after his death, shall yet suffer his
crown never to die, but shall continually keep in fresh and green. Yes, as
every one brought to the building of the ^^bernacle, and to the reedifying of
the temple, such as they were able: so I assure you, I speak now a great word,
every particular subject, that is faithful to God, and to his Prince; as he
go^^h on forward to God, by the peace, and by the religion which he has
enjoyed under his Prince* so he shall still beautify and deck David's crown;
and one shall bring a white rose; an other shall bring a red rose, and add it
to the (...) that so upon himself still his crown may ^^^rish, the white rose
and the red rose, that are in the crown already, being ever made more and
more fragrant and flourishing. O Christ, what a crown is this? And what will
it grow to (...) more in the end? You that are mighty Kings and Potentates
upon earth, have indeed great cares and continual business in your head^; but
yet vouchsase I pray you to ^earken a little, what I shall say unto you. You
watch oftentimes over us, when we are asleep our selves. You care for our
peace, when it is not (...) our power to further it; you procuring good to
Sion, and prosperity to Jerusalem, yet many times enjoy the least part of it
your selves. But no force* Take this still for your comfort. We that cannot
all our lives long do the hundredth part of that good, which you do every
hour, shall have nothing so flourishing a crown as you shall have. Upon you,
upon you shall everlasting peace rest, upon you shall the glory of Gods majesty
shine, upon you, upon you shall your crown flourish. Which the Lord of his
mercy grant, I most humbly beseech him for Jesus Christ's sake: that as David's
crown ever flourished, till the first coming of Christ; so our gracious Kings
crown may ever flourish, till the second coming of Christ; and then, that
afterward for ever his royal Majesty may be royally crowned with eternal
life: thorough the same our dear Savior Jesus Christ: To whom with the Father
and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, power and praise, dignity and
dominion, now and evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
A SERMON PREACHED before the Kings Majesty that day he entered into Oxford, at
Woodstock^, August 27. 1605.
LVK. 8.15. But that which fell in good ground, are they which with a good, and
a very good heart, hear the word, and keep it, and bring forth to fruit with
patience.


IN this Parable of the sower, are 4. grounds mentioned. Whereof three are
badde, and only one good. Namely, they which with a good and a very good
heart, hear the word, and keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience.
Almighty God powers out his benefits no less plentiously then continually
upon us: yet we can make no requital: our goodness cannot reach to God. The
only thing that we can do for him, is to love and honor his word. Whereupon
King David thought it a death unto him, Psalm. 132.
that being banished from his people, he could not go^ up to the house of the
Lord, with the voice of joy and gladness, among such as keep holy day. And on
the other side he said; I rejoiced when they said unto me, We will go up into
the house of the Lord. Esa. 2.3.
The Prophet Esaias likewise, foretelling what alacri^ie and good will should be
in the Gentiles after they were converted to Christ, says thus; It shall be in
the last days, that many people shall go and say; Come, and let us go up to
the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach
us his ways, and we will walk in his paths. Look how it is in the health of
the body, Chrysostom. hom. 4. in Genesis
and so it is in the state of the soul. If a man have a good appetite, and a
stomach to his meat, it is a sign he is well in health: in like sort, if a
man be content to follow Christ for the loaves to fill his belly, and care not
for the food of his soul; questionless all is not well between God and him;
but if he have a longing and a hungring desire of the word, then indeed his
heart is upright in the sight of God. For as S. Au^^e^ notes well; August.
tract. 4^. in Johan. Si sermo meus caperetur, caperet. Nun sie est sermo Dei,
and sie esse debet fidelibus sicut pis^i hamus. Tum capit quando capitur. Nec
sit captis iniuria: Ad salurem enim, non ad perniciem capiuntur. Heb. 13.17.
if the word of God be taken by us, it will take us. Seeing the word of God so
is, and so ought to be, unto the faithful, as a hook is to fish. Then it
takes, when it is taken. Neither are they which are taken hurt by it. For they
are not caught to be killed, but to be drawn out of the damnation of this
world, and to be translated to the liberty and glory of the children of God.
Wherefore as fishers take most delight in angling, when they see the fish bite
quickly and greedily: so if you would put life into your Preachers, which are
called fishers of men, that they may preach the word with joy, not with grief,
you must show by your countenance, by your attention, by your reverence, by
all your outward behavior, that you desire n^^^ng so much as to bite at this
sweet bait, that so you may be drawn by the Father to Christ. For they only
are good ground as we have it here, which with a good, and a very good heart,
hear the word, and keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience.

Here are three properties of good ground set down. All opposite to the three
bad grounds mentioned before. First, they that are good ground, hear the word
with a good heart; contrary to the ground on the high ways side, which when
they have heard, let the devil take the word out of their hearts, and so they
hear not with a good heart. Secondly, they keep the word with a very good
heart; contrary to the stony ground, which for a while receive the word with
joy, but in time of temptation they fall away, and so they keep not the word
with a very good heart. Thirdly, they bring forth fruit with patience;
contrary to the thornie ground, which after their departure are choked with
cares, and bring no fruit, and so do not (as it is said here that the good
ground does) bring forth fruit with patience. But that which fell in good
ground are they, which with a good, and a very good heart, hear the word, and
keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience.

The first property of the good ground is this, that they hear the word with
a good heart. The two Disciples going to Emaus, Luke 24.
when Christ was departed from them, said thus one to another; Did not our
hearts burn within us, when he talked with us by the way, and opened to us the
Scripture? O Beloved, now you are busied in hearing the word, Christ talks to
you, and you are in the right way to heaven. Therefore that we may hear with
a good heart, we must feel in our hearts that burning of which the Disciples
say, Did not our hearts burn within us, when he talked with us by the way? For
so the Spiritual spouse confesses of her self, Ca^t. 5.4.
My beloved put his hand to the hole of the door, and my heart was affectioned
toward him. And againes My soul melted when my beloved spoke. Now Christ puts
his hand to the hole of the door, desiring himself to enter, and us to
repent: now our beloved speaks to us out of his word. So that we cannot be
good ground, except our heart be affectioned, and our soul melt toward him.
When the blessed Virgin saluted her cousin Elizabeth, Luke 1.44.
she felt the babe spring in her womb for joy. Certainly Beloved, you have
every one of you a babe in your hearts, even the child Jesus, which is formed
and fashioned in you. This babe we must feel even to skip and spring in our
hearts for joy, if we would assure our selves that we be good ground, and
hear with a good heart. Neither must we only rejoice, but also fear. Serve
the Lord with gladness, and rejoice before him with trembling, Psalm. 2.
says the Psalmist. We read that when the Almighty uttered his voice, Ezekiel.
5.24.
the four beasts, whereby are meant the Angels, let fall their wings. Where
are then our plumes of pride, our feathers whereby we fly so high in an
opinion of our own knowledge and wisdom? why are they not all let down,
that we may wholly submit our selves to the Lord, to be taught and directed by
his word? Remember I pray you what good Cornelius said. I know well there was
never more reverent hearing of the word in the Court* then at this day, yet
that which is very well already must so be commended, as that which may be
better and better, be evermore enforced. Therefore as I was about to say,
remember what the Captain Cornelius said to S. Peter, when he was ready to
preach unto him; Now, says he, are we all here present before the Lord, Act.
10.33.
to hear all things that are commanded thee of God: O that we had this good
heart to consider, when we hear a sermon, that we stand not before a man, but
coram domino, before the Lord. Th^^ we should hear the word, not as the word
of man, but as it is indeed the word of God. Then, we should put a difference
between other things which perhaps shortly we shall hear, either to recreate
the mind or sharpen the wit, or for state and majesty, or for some other
earthly purpose, and between this engrafted word, which is able to (...) our
souls. It is strange, what is repo^^^d of Constantine the great in this kind.
Eusebius writes of him that when divine service was said, De vi^a Constan. lib
^. cap. 17. and cap. 33.
he would help the minister to begin the prayers, and to read the verses of
the Psalms enterchangeable. And when there was a Sermon, if any place of
special importance were alleged, that he would turn his Bible, to imprint
the place in his mind the better both by hearing and seeing it, He adds
besides, that the Emperor many times being as it were ravished with those
things which he heard, rose up suddenly out of his throne and chair of
estate, and would stand a long while to hear more diligently, and though they
which were next him did put him in mind to remember himself, yet he heard the
word so attentively, that he would not hear them. How wonderfully do^^ this
confound us, that are far inferior every way, when we hear and see that
Emperors, and mighty Kings and Potentates of the world, show such a good heart
in hearing the word, and we in the mean time have lumpish and dull spirits and
affections, and are never a whit moved? Certainly ye honorable children of
God, now Christ talks with us by the way, therefore let our hearts burn
within us: now Christ puts his hand to the hole of the door, therefore let
ou^ hearts be affectioned to word him know our well-beloved speaks, therefore
let our souls melt: now the blessed virgin; yea a greater then the virgin,
then ^he virgins Son, saluteth us, and with^^ us all hail out of his word,
therefore let the babe spring in our heart fol joy: now the Almighty utters
his voice, therefore let our wings fall down, and let us wholly submit our
selves to be taught of God. Even as Cornelius the Centurion thought when he
heard Peter preach, that he stood not before a man, but before the Lord: and
Constantine the Emperor could never satis^ie himself with reverent attention
of his good heart to the word. Then indeed shall we be good ground as all they
are which with a good, and a very good heart hear the word, and keep it, and
bring forth fruit with patience.

The second property of the good ground is this, that they keep the word with a
very good heart. In our English translation it is read thus, with a good and an
honest heart. Cord be^^ and optimo. Vulga.
But I follow the vulgar Latin, which reads thus; With a good and a very good
heart. And I referr^ the good heart to hearing, the uery good heart to keeping:
As if the words stood thus; Which with a good heart, hear the word, and with a
very ^ood heart keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience. To the matter
then: It is to no purpose that the seed be sown* except it be covered in the
earth. Neither that the word be heard. except it be kept. Psalm. 119.
Therefore says the Prophet, In my heart have I hid thy word, that I may not
sin against thee. So that to keep the word with a very good heart, is to hide
and cover this holy seed in the fallow grounds of our heart, being plowed up
by the preaching of the Gospel. Whereupon the kingdom of heaven is likened to a
treasure hid in a field. And this very field is a faithful heart, which
keeps and hides in it self the word, which is the direct way to the
kingdom of heaven. According to that of our Savior. The kingdom of heaven is
within you. Matthew. 13.52.
Yea a faithful heart, not only is a field wherein is a treasure, but also is
itself a treasure, wherein are both old and new things. For every Scribe
which is taught unto the kingdom of heaven, is like unto a householder, which
brings forth out of his treasure things both new and old. His heart is filled
with a treasure of comforts, gathered out of the old and new Testament. Prou.
13.52.
The wife woman, by whom is meant the spouse of Christ, keeps her candle a
light all the night long. (...) apperiat Clem. August. de ciuit. dei lib. 21.
c. 6.
Clemens understands this ^ight to be the heart, and he calls the
meditations of holy men, candles that never go out. S. Austin writes among
the Pagans in the temple of Venus, there was a candle which was called,
vnextinguishable; whether this be true or no of Venus temple it is uncertain,
only Austins report we have for it; but without all doubt in every faithful
hearer and keeper of the word who is the temple of the holy Ghost, there is
this candle or light that never goes out. Psalm. 19.
For so we read, that the word of the Lord illuminateth the he^^t: there is the
light. And that this light goes not out at any time appears by that which is
written elsewhere: O Lord, how do I love thy sta^utes, they are my meditation
continuosly? Psalm. 129.
In the old law those creatures only were accounted clean, which did chew
the end. No otherwise shall we be accounted unclean in the sight of God, if we
chew not the end as it were, and ruminate, and meditate of those things which
we have heard out of the word. For even as it is not available to eat, except
the meat be inwardly digested and divided to all the parts of the body: so
hearing is unprofitable, unless the word heard be kept in mind and memory,
and showed and set forth in all the parts of our life. Therefore they of
Berraea were esteemed more noble then they of Thessalonica, because they after
Paul had preached to them, conferred among themselves, and searched the
Scriptures, not only to see whether the Apostles doctrine were warrantable by
the word, but also to confirm their own memory, and exercise their meditation
in the Law of God. Now then ye holy ones of God if we would be good ground
indeed, as the Patriarch Jacob ^^ted his son Joseph's dreams; Genesis 37.11.
so let us not only ^eare, but also (...) the word. For this is proper to the
child of God, to have the law of his God in his heart. Not noted in writing
tables, or written in tables of stone, but noted and written in the flesh^
tables of the heart. And (...) as the holy virgin kept all those sayings, Luke
2.1^.
and po^dered them in her heart, which (...) by the Shepherds reported and
published abro^d concerning her son Jesus* in like manner they that are wise
will hear, nay they will ponder and keep^ those things which they have heard,
that so they may the better understand the loving kindness of the Lord.
Especially seeing those things which we hear are no dreams, but unsearchable
mysteries of our (...)on: neither are we that publish and preach them, such
shepherds as the Angel spoke unto, but we are appointed to watch over the
flock which Christ has bought with his blo^d. Therefore if you would show
yourselues to be good ground, your very good heart must be as a field that
has a treasure hid in it: yea it must be as a treasure it self, that has
old and new things hid in it: it must be as a candle, that never goes out:
and as a clean creature that never leaves chewing the cudde: even as Jacob
noted his sons dreams, and the blessed virgin kept the shepherds sayings,
and pondered them in her heart. For they only are good ground which with a
good, and a very good heart, hear the word, and keep it, and bring forth
fruit with patience.

The third property of the good ground is this, that they bring forth fruit
with patience. Good ground is like a good tree. For indeed good ground will
make a good tree. Now a good tree brings forth good fruit. And the blessed
man which meditateth day and night in Gods law^, Psalm. 1.
is like a tree planted by the waters side, which brings forth his fruit in
due season. So that it is not enough for the word to go in at one ear and out
at the other, but it must go in at both ears, by reverent and religious
hearing, and settle deeply into the heart by faithful and diligent keeping,
and lastly, go out at both hands, by bringing forth fruit with patience.
Ecclus. 50.16.
Simeon the son of Onius was a fair Olive tree, that is fruitful, and as a
Cypres tree which grows up to the clouds. A cypres tree is high, but barren:
an olive is fruitful but low. So ^ Christian, must not only as cypres tree,
re^th up to the cloud: by meditation of high mysteries in the word, but also he
must as an olive tree, bring forth fruit with patience. Then he shall be like
Simeon, neither low, nor barren. But though he be an olive, yet he shall be as
high as the cypres tree: and though he be a cypress yet he shall be as
fruitful as the olive tree. Genesis 6.16.
Noah is commanded to make a window in the top of the Arc, and a door in
the side of it. A window is for the eye to look out, a door is for the whole
body to go out. And in like manner he that would be good ground, must not
only make him a window for contemplation, as Daniel did, at which he prayed
thrice a day, but also a door for acti^^, as Abraham did, at which he fat^
(...) a day. At the window of contemplation be must meditate, with a very good
heart to keep the word: at the door of action he must go out to bring forth
fruit with patience. The Lord also commanded Moses to make a l^uer with a base
or with a foot. Now the Latin word Labi^^ signifies as well a lip, Exodus
30.38.
as sla^er. So that the l^^er which w^sheth (...) a base: and the lip which
v^tereth great knowledge, must have a foot to walk according to it. Otherwise
if knowledge do not stand upon doing, and upon fructifying as upon a foot,
then questionles it is footles, and so consequently it is bootlesse, and the
(...) wanting a base is altogether unprofitable. The Prophet Isaiah is willed
to lift up his voice like a trumpet. Esa. 58.^.
Many things sound louder then a trumpet, as the sea, the thunder, and such
like. Yet he says not; Lift up thy voice as the sea, or lift up thy voice as
the thunder; but lift up thy voice as a trumpet. Why so? Because a trumpeter
when he sounds his trumpet, he winds it with his mouth, and holds it up with
his hand. And so every faithful heart, which is as it were a spiritual
trumpet to sound out the praises of God; must not only report them with his
mouth, but also support them with his hand. And then indeed holding up the
word of life with his hand, and bringing forth the fruit thereof with patience,
he shall lift up his voice like a trumpet. The Patriarch Abraham buried Sarah
in the cave of Macpelah, Genesis 23.1^.
that is, in a double sepulcher, H^ that buries his mind^ in knowledge only,
without any care of bringing forth fruit, be buries Sarah in a single
sepulcher, as Philo Iuda^^ does alleg^rize upon his story; but he that burieth
his mind as well in the performance and practice of religion (which is all in
all) as in the knowledge and understanding of it, he buries Sarah in a double
sepulcher. And so must all we do, which are the true children of Abraham. For
then with Abraham burying our spirit in a double sepulcher, we shall with
Elizeus have a double spirit. A spirit that hears the word with a very good
heart, and with patience brings forth fruit. Neither is this addition (with
patience) altogether to be omitted. For though a man cannot hear the word
without patience, nor keep the word without patience, yet patience is never so
requisite, as in bringing forth fruit according to the word which we have
heard, and kept. Wherefore the holy Ghost says; Heb. 10.36.
Ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye may
receive the promise. He says not, After ye have heard it with your ear, or
kept it with your memory: but after ye have done the will of God, and brought
forth the fruit thereof, ye may receive the promise. For wherefore did not the
stony ground bring forth fruit, but only for want of patience. They received
the word with joy, and seemed to have very good hearts for a time; but in time
of temptation for want of patience they fell away. Wherefore did not the thornie
ground bring forth fruit, but only for want of patience? After their departure
wanting patience to digest their greifes, they were choked with cares, and so
brought forth no fruit. Therefore as a good field must endure many a cold frost
and snow, and hard weather in the winter time, before it can yeed a fruitful
croppe in Summer: semblably he that would be good ground, must possess his
soul in much patience, and continually endure yea even manfully reject all the
motions of his flesh, all the allurements of the world, all the temptations of
the devil, whereby he may be hindered from bringing forth the fruit of good
life, according to the holy will and word of God. He must like a good tree,
bring forth good fruit; he must with Simeon be not only high as the
cypress, but also fruitful as the olive: he must with Noah make him, not
only a window for contemplation, but also a door for action; he must with
Moses, make him a lauer with a base the must with Esaias lift up his voice like a
trumpet; he must with Abraham bury Sarah in a double sepulcher: in one word,
he must always bring forth fruit with patience. For they only are good
ground, which with a good, and a very good heart, hear the word, and keep it,
and bring forth fruit with patience.

To conclude then, It is not greatly needful to exhort you with a good heart
to hear the word. Never heretofore such diligent hearing in the Court, as now
a days. I dare be bold to say it; All the Preachers in England, in very many
years by all their exhortations, could never have done half so much good in
this kind, as the only, holy, and happy example has done, which we see every
day before our eyes. Neither need ye be greatly put in mind to keep in mind
the word heard. Memory ye have enough, understanding enough, knowledge
enough, learning enough: When you have heard a Sermon, you can remember and
repeat, and carry away, and keep much of it. But this, this is the thing
which I must call upon my self, and upon all you to think of, to wit, that we
bring forth the fruit of the word in patience, in temperance, and in all other
virtues of a sanctified life. For that Samaritan woman did not fill her pitcher
at the wall, to spill it by the way, but to carry it home full of water, and
there to use it as occasion served. Here where the word is preached, is the
well of living water, flowing forth to eternal life. But this water we must
carry away with us, and keep it to wash and purge our consciences, to cleanse
our ways, to water the roots of Gods graces in us continually, that we may
b^ing forth s^^^ with patience. Rachel also, that other holy woman did not
desire the mand^^^^ so much to hold it in her hand, (...) to s^ell to it, as to
be made ^p^ (...) to bring forth the fruit of her (...) To teach us, that we
must not (...) so much to know the word, the^ (...) may subtly dispute or
discourse o^^^^ to practice it that we may show the fruit of it in the
amendment of our lives. Therefore King David being ready to redress diverse
things among his people, says in one of the Psalms* O Lord, teach me
goodness, and knowledge: knowledge, that I may keep thy word; and goodness
that I may show the fruit of it. For I am sure, says he, that all my keeping
without s^nctifying all my knowledge without goodness, is to no purpose.
Wherefore, O Lord, give me goodness and knowledge. But first goodness and
then knowledge. Because indeed a little goodness, though it be never so
small, is better then all knowledge, though never so great. One handful of
goodness is worth ^n hundred headfulls of knowledge. For the fear of the Lord
is the beginning of wisdom, a good understanding have all (...) that do
thereafter, the praise of it endures for ever. A good understanding have all
they that do thereafter. (...)? Because an ill understanding ^oe all they that
do not thereafter. ^^ey that have understanding, and do (...) thereafter,
that is, bring not forth fruit according to it, they have an ill understanding.
But they that have understanding, and do thereafter, and lead their life
according to it, such have a good understanding. The praise of these shall
endure for ever. O how highly shall Christ praise you, how richly shall he
reward you, if you have a conscionable care to express his virtues, and to be
transformed as it were into the obedience of his word? Then he shall say unto
you; Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom of heaven. For ye have
not only heard my word, and kept it as far as knowledge goes, but also ye
have practiced it, and fructified thereby. I was in prison, and ye visited me; I
was harbourles, and ye lodged the* I was hungry, and ye gave me meat. These
and such other have bin the good fruits, which have followed you^ hearing and
keeping of my word. Theirfore now ye shall be praised for your weldoing, and
for ever ye shall be blessed for your fruit-bearing. Which God grant to us all
for Jesus Christ his sake, to whom with the father, and the holy Ghost, be all
honor and glory, power and praise, dignity and dominion, now and evermore.
Amen.

FINIS.
A FUNERAL SERMON Preached in S. MARY'S. May 10. 1605.
PSALM. 32.7. Surely in the flood of many waters they shall not come near him.


THe principal scope of the Prophet in this place is to prove, that the
righteousness, and so the blessedness of man, consists only in the free
forgiveness of his sins, and gracious imputation of Christ's merits. His
argument may be framed thus; That which the whole Church and every godly man
therein has ever especially prayed for in all afflictions and troubles, that
is happiness* But for remission of sins every godly man will pray in time of
tribulation: Therefore this is the felicity of the faithful. To confirm this
reason more fully he sets down, first, the circumstances going before the
praye^; For this shall every (...) that is godly make his prayer unto thee in
a ti^^ when thou may be found. Then, the form of the prayer it self; Thou
art a place to hide me in, thou shall preserve me from trouble, thou shall
compass me about with songs of deliverance. Lastly, the effect following the
prayer; Surely in the flood of many waters they shall not come near him.

Prayer is the true sacrifice of faith* The efficacy whereof is briefly, bu^
pithily set down to the Hebrews. God I have spoken elsewhere (...) largely
of this point. Now but a word only to make a ^^e entrance into this sermon.
Take it therefore (...). The effects of prayer heretofore have been
wonderful. Prayer has set down (...)-sto^es from heaven, to overcome five
Kings with their armies. Prayer has shut up the windows of heaven, that it
should not rain, and again has opened them that the earth might give her
increase. Prayer has stayed the swift course of the son, and caused it to go
backward fifteen degrees. Prayer has held Gods hands that he could not ^^ike
when he was ready to plague his people. Prayer without any other help or
means has thrown down the strong walls of Jericho. Prayer has divided the
sea, that the floods thereof could not come near the Israelites. In this place
it delivers the faithful man from all the dangers of the world. Surely in
the flood of many waters they shall not come near him.

The sum is this; That no calamities of this world, no troubles of this life,
no terrors of death, no guiltiness of sin, can be so great, but that a
godly man by means of his faith and felicity in Christ shall wade out of them
well enough, For howsoever other things go, still he shall have such a solace
in his soul, such a comfort in his conscience, such a heaven in his heart,
knowing himself reconciled to God, and justified by faith, that Surely in the
flood of many waters they shall not come near him.

Which, that it may the better appear, I shall desire you to observe two
things. The danger: the deliverance. The danger is in these words; I^ the
flood of many waters. Where the tribulations that the godly man is subject to
in this life, are likened, First to waters: then to many waters: thirdly, to a
flood of many waters; In the flood of many waters. The deliverance is in these
words; Surely they shall not come near him. Where the deliverance of the godly
man has three degrees also. First they shall not come near: secondly him,
they shall not come near him: then Surely, surely they shall not come near
him. Surely in the flood of many waters, they shall not come near him.

First, the afflictions of the faithful are likened to waters. Fire and water
have no mercy we say. But of the two water is the worst. For any fire may be
qu^c^ed with water, but the force of water, if it begins to be violent, cannot
by any power of man be resisted. Canutus who was King of England, Polyd. lib. 7.
Scotland, Denmark, Norway, and a great part of Sue^i^ all at once, sitting at
a low water upon the Thames shore, commanded the water not to come near him.
But notwithstanding his commandment, the water returning and flowing again,
as (...) in Ezekiel which came to the ankles, Ezech. 47.2.
then to the knees, and yet higher to the neck, so never left rising till it
came up near him and wet him. Then turning about to his noble men that were
there attendant on him, he said, You call me your Sovereign Lord and Master,
and yet I cannot command this little channel of water to keep a loofe off from
me. Whereupon he went immediately to Westminster, and with his own hands set
his Crown upon the Crucifix there, and could never be persuaded after to wear
it upon his own head. This experience that Canutus so mighty a King made,
does directly prove, that no man but God only can set bars and doors
against the water and say; Job. 38.11.
Hitherto shall tho^ come, but no further, and here shall thou stay thy proud
waves. The afflictions of the righteous therefore being ^ere compared to
waters, must needs ^e very violent. For thus the Psalmist ^^ith, Thine
indignation lies hard on me, Psalm. 88.8.
and thou have vexed me with all thy waves. And God himself; I will p^^re out
my wrath upon thee, as water. So that the security and felicity of the
faithful man is invincible. He may be often in danger of tribulations as of
great waves or waters, Hos. 5.10.
but they shall never ouerwhel^e him; Surely in the flood of many waters they
shall not come near him.

But these our tribulations which are waters, are also many waters. Our common
proverb is, Seldom comes sorrow alone. But as waters come rouling and wauing
many together: so the miseries of this life. Ezeck. 2.10.
The Prophet Ezekiel saw the roll of a book written within and without, and
there was written therein, Lamentations, and singing, and woe. The book is
written within and without, ^o show that many are the troubles of the
righteous, both inward and outward. And it is two to one if any thing befall
us, it is rather an ill hap, then a good hap. Seeing for one singing, there
is in the book a double sorrowing, lamentations, and woe. Or if it be read as
some translate it; Et scriptura in eo erat lamentarionum, lugub^isque carmin^s,
and vae. Tremel.
Lamentations, and mourning, and woe; then it is yet more plain, that in this
world many troubles as many waters come one in the neck^ of an other, no
earthly joy, (...) comfort coming between. This the good King greatly
complains of, Psalm. 4^.7.
One deep calls another, because of the noise of the water-pipes, all thy
floods and storms have gone over me. And Job, Job. 16.14.
he has given me^ one wound upon an other, and he has run upon me as a
giant. And Saint Paul, Philip. 2.37.
though in one place he write, God showed mercy toward him, that he should
not have sorrow upon sorrow, yet oftentimes elsewhere he speaks of his own
manifold dangers. 2. Cor. 11.26.
I suffered thrice shipwreck, says he; night and day have I bin in the deep
sea: In iourneying I was often, in perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in
perils of mine own nation, in perils among the Gentiles, in perils in the
city, in perils in the wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils among
false brethren. Th^s we see how many waters the godly m^n is subject to in this
life. For one thy he has at least two sorrows, if he (...) no more: one
deep calls an other; one wound brings another: he has sorrow upon
sorrow; perils upon perils; Many waters; many dangers: Nevertheless, Surely in
the flood of many waters, they shall not come near him.

Thirdly, the dangers of this life, are as a flood. The very naming and
mentioning of flood must needs ^e very terrible, ever since Noah's flood
destroyed the whole world. For even as a horse or a mule of whom the Prophet a
little after speaks in this Psalm, verse. 9.
having been once well lashed with a whip, does ever after fear, if he hear
but the bell which is tied to the whippe: so man since the world was so well
s^oured and scourged with a flood, could never almost abide either to talk or
think of it. Now though our whole life be nothing else but a flood of many
waters, yet nothing in the world may more fitly be so called, then our going
our of the world. This indeed brings with it a flood of many waters, and an
Ocean sea of infinite cares. Aristotle writes, that nothing is so terrible as
death, which Antiochus feeling sensibly in himself, 1. Mac. 6.11.
cries out thus, Oh into what adversity am I come, and into what floods of
misery am I now fallen? He adds the reason an on after; For I must die with
great sorrow in a strange land. What speak I of a wicked tyrant? Holy men
often are in great perplexity at the time of their departure. Hier. in vita
^ius
S. Hiero^ writes of Hilarion, that being ready to give up the ghost, he said
thus to his soul; Go forth my soul, why fear thou? go forth, why
tremblest thou? Thou have served Christ almost these threescore and ten years,
and do thou now fear death? Christ himself also feeling that he was
compassed about with the sorrows of death, began to be afraid, and to be in
great heaviness, and he said moreover, Mark. 14.33.
My soul is very heavy even to the death. I know well Christ was afraid
without sin, nay, with great comfort. For he prays thus, Not as I will,
but as thou will. And again, Into thy hands I commit my spirit. This then was
his comfort, that the Jews could do nothing in putting him to death, but as
S. Peter testifies, that only which his Father bo^^ by his counsel and will
has decreed, and by his hand has ordained. Hilarion also that holy ancient
Father, comfort himself with this, that he had s^^^d Christ almost
seauentie years. O^^^^ children of God have had other comforts; and all have
this, that both in life and in death they are happy in Christ. Howbeit seeing
many holy Christians, and even Christ himself feared death, it remains that
death simply and in it self considered, is a flood of many waters. But yet the
faithful man even in death is out of all danger. Surely in the floods of many
waters, they shall not come near him.

Thus much for the first part which is the danger; In the flood of many waters.
The second part follows, which is the deliverance: Surely, they shall not
come near him.

First, they shall not come near. They, that is, The waters shall not come
near. The holy Church and every member thereof is likened to a house built
upon a rock. Matthew. 7.^5.
Upon which though the winds blow, and the floods beat, yet it cannot be
thrown down, because it is built upon a rock. So that the floods which shake
it, can never come near it to overthrow it. The some may be said of the ship
covered with waters. It might well floa^e, but it could never be drowned. For
as soon as the Disciples cried upon Christ to save them, Matthew. 8.24.
presently there followed a great calm. Therefore Luther when his life was
sought of all the world in a manner, Psalm. 46.1.
translated the Psalm Deus noster refugium, into dumb meeter, and caused it to
be sung in all the reformed Churches. God is our hope and strength a very
present help in trouble. Therefore will we not fear though the earth be
moved, and though the hills be carried into the midst of the sea. Though the
waves thereof rage and swell: and though the mounta^^^^ shake at the tempest of
the same. S. Peter the Apostle began to sink, but he sunk not right down.
Christ was ready at hand to help him. For as soon as he saw himself in
present peril and danger, forthwith he cried, Master, save me. Save me, Psalm.
69 1.
O God for the waters are co^^ in even unto my soul. I stick fast in the
deep mire where no ground is; and 16.
I am come into deep waters; so that the floods run over me. Take me out of
the mire that I sink not, and out of the deep waters. Let not the water (...)
drown me, neither let the deep swallow me up: and let not the pit shut (...)
mouth upon me. S. Paul likewise suffered shipwreck, but lost not by it one
hair of his head. Act. 17.34.
Whereby we may see the absurdity of the Papists. They would prove that
justifying grace may be lost, because some have made shipwreck of faith. but
if we should grant them that the Apostle speaks of justifying not of
historical faith, 1. Tim. 1.19.
yet we have the help of a second answer. To wit, that shipwreck is one thing,
and drowning an other. Therefore faith which is wrackt is not by and by
drowned. For it may happen to suffer shipwreck as S. Paul did, and swim out
safe to the shore. But this (...) but a touch by the way. Mean season we see
how safe and secure the faithful man is in Christ. He is a house to which the
floods may come near to shake it, but never to throw it down; he is a ship,
which the waves may come near to toss it, but never to turn it over; even as
Saint Peter began to sink, but still kept up his head: and Saint Paul
s^ffered shippewracke, but was not a hair the worse for it. Surely in the
flood of many waters, they shall not come near him.

Secondly, him. They shall not come near him. This word must in no case be
omitted. It helps us to answer a very strong objection. For it may be said,
Many holy men have lost their goods, have suffered great torments in their
body, have been troubled also in mind; how then did not the floods of many
waters come near them? The word Him helps us to answer. The very
Philosophers themselves reckoned their goods pertained no more to them, then,
be it spoken with reverence and regard, the parings of their nails. Zeno
hearing news he had lost all he had by sea, Rene facis fortuna cum ad pallium
nos compellis.
said only thus: Thou have done very well Fortune to leave me nothing but my
cloak* An other called Anaxarchus, whom as Nicocre^^ the tyrant commanded he
should be (...) to death in a mortar, spoke thus to the executioner; Beat and
bray as long as thou will Anaxarchus his bag or sachell (so he called his
own body) but Anaxarchus thou cansts not touch. Yet these making so small
reckoning of their goods and body, set their mind^ notwithstanding at a high
rate. Men's cuinsque is est quisque.
The mind of a man, is himself, say they. Hence it is that Julius Caesar,
when Amyclas the Pilot was greatly afraid of the tempest, spoke to him thus,
What meanest thou to fear base fellow, do thou not know thou carriest
Caesar, with thee? As if he should say, Caesarem ve^is.
Caesar's body may well be drowned, as any other man^ may, but his mind, his
magnanimity, his valor, his fortitude, can never be drowned. Thus far w^nt
Philosophy: But Divinity goes a degree further. For Philosophy defines Him,
that is a man, by his reason, and the moral virtues of the mind; But
Divinity defines a Christian man by his faith, and his conjunction thereby
with Christ. Excellently says Saint Austin: Whence com's it that the soul
dies? Tract. 49 in Johan. Vnde mors in anima ^ quia non est fides. Vnde mors
in corpore^ quia non est ibi anima. Ergo animae tuae anima fides est.
Because faith is not in it. Whence that the body dies: Because a soul is
not in it. Therefore the soul of thy soul is faith. So that if we would know
what is a faithful man, we must define Him, not by his natural soul, as he
is reasonable, but by the soul of his soul, which is his faith. And when we
easily answer the objection, that a flood may come near a faithful man's
goods* near his body, near his reasonable soul, but to his faith, that is
to Him, it can never come near. For if you speak of the life and essence of
him, that it is faith, the Prophet also witnesses, Abacuck.
The just shall live by faith. Gal. 2.20.
And the Apostle, Now I live not, but Christ lives in me, but that I live, I
live by faith in the son of God; who loved me, and gave himself for me. And
he that was wiser then all the Philosophers, determines this point thus; The
sum of the matter when ye have heard all is this; Eccles. 12.23.
Fear God, and keep his commandments; for this is all of man. All of man,
what is that. All of man which will hold out against all floods of many waters:
For the goods of man may be gotten away by forged cauillation: the body of man
may be weakened by sickness: the soul of man, and the faculties thereof, as
memory, wit, and such like, may be impaired by age, but faith in Christ, the
fear of God, a care to keep his commandments, is all of man, which no
floods, either in life or in death can ouer-whelme. All of man wherein man
ought to employ himself while he is alive, and without which, man is but
vanity when he is dead, but with which, man both in life and death is most
blessed. For if this be the sum of all, then of any thing but this there is
no reckoning at all to be made. Matthew. 16.18.
I have prayed for thee, says our Savior, that thy faith should not fail,
and the gates of hell shall not prevail against thee. For love is strong as
death: Can. 8.7.
jealousy is cruel as the grave: the coals thereof are fiery coals, and a
vehement flame. Much water cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown
it. Even as Paul also glories, Romans 8.
that nothing can separate him from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus.
Wherefore seeing the godly man is so invincible, that neither the gates of
hell, nor the floodgates of many waters, can prevail against him; Surely in
the flood of many waters, they shall not come near him.

In the last place must be considered the asseueration, Surely. For if both
living and dying my felicity be most certain in Christ, and yet I know not so
much, what comfort can I gather thereby? Now in all adversities this is my
greatest joy, that the favor of God which is most constant in it self, is
fully assured also to me. For, I know that my reedeemer lives. And if I be
judged, I know I shall be found righteous. And I know whom I have believed,
and I am sure. In one word, I am Surely persuaded, that neither life, nor
death, nor any thing else can separate us from Christ. Nay in all the flood of
waters we shall be more then conquerours. Romans 8.37.
They shall not come near to conquer us. But rather we shall conquer them. Yea
that which is strangest of all, Surely we shall be more then conquerers over
them. Though an host of men were laid against me, Psalm. ^7.3.
yet shall not my heart be afraid: and though there rose up war against me,
yet will I put my trust in it. Not in him, as it is ill translated in the
English, but in it; that is, In the very war it self, I will not fear. Nay
I will be of good hope. Yea Surely in the very war will I hope and trust. For
even as a building made arch-wise, the more weight is laid upon it, the more
strong still it is: so the more force and strength is brought against me, the
greater triumph and victory I shall have. Therefore I will not be afraid of
ten thousand of the people, Psalm. 3.7.
that have set themselves against me round about. For a thousand of them shall
fall at my side, and ten thousand at my right hand, but they shall not come
near me. The Arc in the flood was not drowned, Genesis 7.18.
as other things were, but floated upon the waters. Yea the higher the waters
increased, the higher Surely for that did the Arc still arise. Likewise the red sea did not hinder the Israelites passage, Exodus 14.22.
but opened an easy way to them. Yea Surely it was moreover as a wall to back
them against all their enemies. The words of Saint James are very plain: Iam.
1.2.
My brethren, count it exceeding joy when you fall into diverse temptations.
Tentation of it self does vex and disquiet a man. But to the godly it is a
joy. As we read else where, That they which are justified by faith have peace:
nay, have easy access to God, and great joy in tribulations. But the Apostle
adding, Romans 5.
that this joy is not common or ordinary, but Surely exceeding joy, raises up
the amplification as high as may be. Whereunto, S. Paul also accords; We are
afflicted on every side, 2. Cor. 4 9.
yet we are not in distress: in poverty, but not overcome of poverty; we
are persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but we perish not. Here he
proves directly, that the flood comes not near the faithful. But where is
the Surely? It follows in the same epistle; As dying, and behold we live: as
chastened, and yet not killed: 2. Cor. 6.20.
as sorrowing, and yet always rejoicing: as poor, and yet making others rich:
as having nothing, and yet possessing all things. O the security and felicity
of the faithful! For his faith makes life of death; joy of sorrow: riches of
poverty. What shall I say more, or what would you have me say more? then as
the Apostle says? It makes all things of nothing. As having nothing says he,
and yet possessing all things. But the special thing to be noted i^ this
sentence is, As dying, and behold we live. For they import, that death is no
death, but As it were death, an image, or a shadow of death: being indeed
life, and Surely a better life and more immortal then we had here. Therefore
he says, Behold we live, to show that by death the faithful live a life
wherein there is some great specialty and excellency worthy indeed to be
beholded and regarded. As if he should say; Behold we live, Behold we live a
more happy life, then ever we lived in our life. Saint Augustine often
comme^deth the saying of his master S. Ambrose when he was ready to die.
Speaking to Stilico and others about his bed; I have not lived so among you,
Non ita vixi inter vos. ve me pudea^ vinerenet mori time^, quia bonum
dominum^^o (...) Pontius in fine vitae eius.
says he, that I am ashamed to live longer if it please God: and yet again I
am not afraid to die, because we have a good Lord. He does not say, Mine own
goodness puts me out of fear, but Gods goodness. This goodness of God makes
me quiet in my conscience, and secure in soul, ready to embrace death
whenever it comes. Wherefore, Surely is fitly added. For afflictions as
waters do not overcome the faithful. Nay they come not near him. But
contra^iwise the faithful conquereth afflictions. Yea, Surely he is in them
all more then a conqueror. In war he is not afraid. Rather he greatly
hops. And Surely even in the very war he hops. The flood of waters
comes not near to drown the Arc, but lift it up. And so much the higher
Surely the arc still rises, as the flood rises. The sea staieth not the
Israelites passage. It is a dry land for them to march on. As a wall moreover
to back them Surely against all their enemies. Tentation not only is no
matter of sorrow, but also on the other side of joy, and Surely of great joy.
Death is no death, but a life, and Surely such a life, as only of it we may
say, Behold we live. So happy both in life and death is the faithful man:
Surely in the flood of many waters, they shall not come near him.

To conclude then; No calamity or adversity can possibly disseuer that
conjunction which faith makes of every godly man with Christ. For feeling the
remission of his sins assured and sealed unto him, he contemns not only
the works of the world, and dismaiments of his conscience, but even the very
fears and terrors of death. This our dear brother M. Edward Lively, who now
rests in the Lord, lead a life which in a manner was nothing else but a
continual flood of many waters. Never out of suits of law, neuer-ceasing
disquieters of his study. His goods distrained, and his cattle driven off his
ground, as Jobs was. His dear wife being not so well able to bear so great a
flood as he, even for very sorrow presently died. A lamentable and ruefull
case. So many children to hang upon his hand, for which he had never
maintenance, neither yet now had stay, his wife being gone. Well, but that
sorrowful time was blown over. He was appointed to be one of the chiefest
translators. And as soon as it was known how far in this travail he did
more then any of the rest, he was very well provided for in respect of living.
For which my L. his Grace of Canterbury now living, is much to be reverenced
and honored. But being so well to pass both for himself, and for his
children, suddenly he fell sick. He was taken with an ague and a squinsey
both together. And the more usual that was, the less dangerous was this
accounted, but the event shows the contrary. For the squinsey being both by
himself and his friends not greatly regarded, within four days took away
his life. These were many waters, and diverse tribulations. Besides a thousand
more, which I cannot now stand to repeat. Yet he carried himself so in life
and death, as these waters seemed not once to come near him. He was professor
of the Hebrewe tongue in this University thirty years. (As his father in law
D. Larkyn had been professor of Physic five or six and thirty years.)
Which tongue, howsoever some account of it, yet ought to be preferred before
all the rest. For it is the auncientest, the shortest, the plainest of all. A
great part of wisdom, as Plato shows, In Cratylo.
is the knowledge of true Etymologies. These in other tongues are uncertain,
in this taking out of the natural qualities of every thing that is named. In
so much as when any man has found out the Hebrewe Etymology, then he need
seek no further. Besides, all the Scripture written before the birth of
Christ, except a few chapters of Daniel and Ezra, were written in Hebrewe. And
the Rabbis themselves, though they have no small number of fables and lies in
them, yet diverse things they have notwithstanding fit for the opening of the
old Testament. Therefore though a man cannot read the Rabbis, yet unless he
can understand handsomely well the Hebrewe text; he is compted but a maimed, or
as it were but half a Divine, especially in this learned age. Lastly, diverse
learned men are of opinion, to whom I very willingly assent, that the holy
tongue which was spoken in Paradise, shall be eternally used in the heavenly
Paradise, where the Saints shall ever extol and praise God. But this worthy
Professor deceased, got him great credit, as well by the continuance, as by the
holiness of his profession. For he was not a Professor for one or two years,
as others are; In Itineratio. Page 444.
but full thirty years together. Nathan Cytraeus writes, that in Prage an
University of Bohemia, where John Hus, and Hierome of Prage professed, that
they that have continued Professors for the space of twenty years together,
are created Earls and Dukes both together. And therefore their style is to be
called Illustres, whereas they which are singly and simply, but only either
Earls or Dukes, are called Spectabiles. Neither makes it any matter that they
have no revenues, to maintain Earldomes or Dukedoms. For they have the title
notwithstanding, even as Suffragans have of Bishops. Our good Brother having
no such profit or dignity propounded unto him, but contenting himself with
his stipend, spent half his life in this place. For he was upon threescore
years old when he died. He wrote a book of Annotations upon the first five
small Prophets, dedicated to that great patron of learning and learned men, Sir
Francis Walsingham. Wherein diverse speeches and phrases of the Prophets are
compared with the like, in Poets and Orators both Greek and Latin, and many
notes neither unpleasant nor unprofitable to be read, are set out of the
Rabbis. But in mine opinion he took greatest pains in his Chronology, which
he dedicated to Doctor John Whitgift, the reverend late Archbishop of
Canterbury. This book indeed is full of hidden learning, and shows infinite
reading in stories. I asked him within this little while, whether he had
written no more books, He told me he had, but printed no more because he had
no time to peruse and perfect them for other business. Now by business he
meant, I ween especially his study and care to perform well his task in the
translation. Wherein how excellently he was employed, all they can witness who
were joined with him in that labor. For though they be the very flower of the
University for knowledge of the tongues, yet they will not be ashamed to
confess, that no one man of their company, if not by other respects, yet at
least wise for long experience and exercise in this kind, was to be compared
with him. For indeed he was so desirous that this business begun by the
commandment of our most gracious Sovereign King James, should be brought to
a happy end; that oftentimes in many men's hearings, he protested he had
rather die, then be any way negligent herein, Which as some think by all
likelihood came indeed so to pass. To wit, that too earnest study and pains
about the translation, hastened his death, and brought it on sooner. Now as he
lived so, in his profession, in his writings, in his translating, as though all
the floods of many waters had never comn' near him: even so also he died.
During the short time of his sickness, he carried himself, as always
before, humbly, mildly, quietly, constantly. One of his loving friends standing
by his bed, and saying; M. Lively, I pray God you may have patience, and hope,
and especially faith unto the end. He lifting up his hands said heartily and
cheerfully, Amen. Little he used to speak, and more he could not say, for the
pain and impediment of his squinsey. Which though it made a speedy end of
him, as the apoplexy did of the good Emperor Valentinian, yet how could any
death be sudden to him, whose whole life was nothing else but a meditation of
death, and whom the Lord whenever he came, might find doing his duty?
Wherefore no reason we should lament his departure out of this world. He lived
blessedly, he died blessedly in the Lord. Rather, you Reverend and learned
Vniuersitie-men, lament for this, that you have lost so famous a Professor,
and so worthy a writer. Lament you translatours, being now deprived of him,
who no less by his own merit and desert, then by the privilege of his place,
was to order and ouersee all your travails. Lament you poor orphans, (...)
poor children of you, which he left (...) him, as Christ (...) left eleven
Disciples bere^^^^ of your kind and dear Father, destitute of necessaries for
your mai^^enance, to seek of all help and (...) but only (as poor folks
use to speak) such as God, and good friends shall pro^ide. L^^ent, lament all of
you, of the To^ne, as well as of the V^^^ersitie, because our School has lost
such a singular ornament of this age, because our Churches have lost such a
faithful and sincere servant of Christ. Questionless, as it should seem by
the taking away of this man, almighty God is greatly angry with us all for our
sins. Christ Jesus our Master, as though he meant no more to care for us,
seems to lie fast a sleep in the ship, while we most miserably in the flood
of many waters are tormoiled and tossed. Wherefore let us in time cry aloud,
and awake him with our prayers. Or rather indeed he is not a sleep, but awake
already. We have awaked him, not with our prayers, but with our sins. Our
sins have cried up to heaven. And the Lord being awaked, as a giant comes
forth against us, and as a mighty man refreshed with wine. For not only those
are waters which are in the channel, or in the sea: but as waters are here
understood, even those fires are waters, those fires I say, which very lately
awaked us at midnight, and affrighted us at noone day; which raged on the
South Side, and anon after on the North-side of the Town. It was but a few
men's loss, but it was all men's warning. And what? shall we make nothing of
this, The plague, the small pocks, and the squinsey.
that one kind of disease deuoureth up the Townsmen; ^n other the scholars?
This is now the tenth course of Scholars, which within this month has been
brought forth to burial, not one of them dying of the plague; whereas
heretofore if one or two scholars have died in a whole year out of all
Colleges, it has been accounted a great matter. This and such like grievous
judgments, beloved, do plainly declare, that the Lord being awaked with the
cry of our sins, is greiuously displeased and offended at us. Wherefore let
us now at the length in the name of God, rowse up our selves, and awake out of
our deadly sins. Let this that our holy brother did so suddenly in a manner
fall asleep, be a loud O yes, as it were to awake us all. Let every one of
us, amend one, judge one, accuse one, condemn one, that we be not all
condemned of the Lord. Let every one of us I beseech you cry up to heaven for
mercy, and say ^ith David, I have sinned and done wickedly. Or with Jonas;
Take me, for I know that for my sake this great tempest is upon you. Then our
most merciful father shall bless us all, as he has done this holy Saint,
both in our life and in our death, by the pardoning of our offenses, and
covering all our sins, with the bowels and blood of Christ. And though in
this world we be ever subject to a flood of many waters, yet he shall draw us
still out of many waters, as he did Moses. Surely in the floode of many
waters, no more then they did to Jonas, they shall not come near us. Neither
only shall we be safe in the flood of death, but also in the flood of the day
of judgment. For that also is a flood, and a terrible fearful one too. To
wit, not of water, but of fire. As it was in the days of Noah: so shall it be
at the coming of the son of man. In the first flood they which had not an
arc, ran up to the tops of houses, to the tops of trees, to the tops
of mountains; because they desired to hold up their heads above the still
rising raging water. In the second, they which are not found in Christ, shall
say to the mountains, Fall upon us: and to the Caves, Cauer us, and hide us
from the wrath of the Lamb. Then they shall be glad to creep into every hol^
and corner that they may avoid the b^rning of fire. But we that confess our
sins, and forsake the same, shall lift our heads to no other mountain, but
to Christ from whom comes our salvation; we shall desire to be covered with
no other rock, but only with that out of which came the blood and water of
life. For never did Noah's flood so clean wash away all wicked men from the face
of the earth, as the blood of Christ shall purge us from all our sins, and
present us blameless before the face of our father, only if we be faithful
unto death. For then the next thing is felicity, and the crown of life. Which
God for his mercy sake grant us all, that as we make no doubt, but this our
holy brother now triumphs with Christ, so all and every one of us, after we
have waded through this world as a flood of many waters, may inherit that
kingdom of glory, which our loving Lord Jesus has purchased for us with his
dear blood: to whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all honor and
glory, now and for evermore: Amen.

FINIS.
A SERMON PREACHED at Whitehall before the KING on Twesday after L^ Sunday.
1604.
2. COR. 3.18. But all we, with open face, behold as in a glass the glory of
the Lord, and (...) transformed into the same image, from glory to glory, as
by the spirit of the Lord.


THe old Testament, and the new Testament, in sum and substance, are all one.
Christ Jesus the very sum and substance of them both, in himself is one and
the same yesterday, Heb. 13.^.
and to day, and for^uer. Those mystical wheels, which Ezekiel Ezekiel. 1.16.
sees in a vision^ are one within an other. After the same sort, there is
Gospel in the law, and there is law in the Gospel. One wheel is within
another: one testament is within an other. For neither is the law so full of
threatenings, but that it has some comforts in it: neither is the Gospel so
full of comforts, but that it has some threatenings in it. So that the law, is
nothing else but a threatening gospel; and the gospel, is nothing else, but a
comfortable law. The two cherubims, Exodus ^5.^^.
which shadow the mercie-seat, have their faces one toward another. In like
manner, the two testaments which shadow out Christ the true mercieseat unto us,
have their faces one toward another. For the old Testament looks forward
toward the new, which is come: and the new testament looks backward, toward
the old, which is past. Those glorious seraphims Esa. 6.3.
which sing, Holy, Holy, Holy, do call to one another. So the law and the
Gospel, lauding him alone, which is the holy one of God, do call to one
another. Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world.
There the law calls to the gospel, when John commends Christ. Among them that
have been borne of women, there has not risen a greater, then the Baptist.
Here on the other side, the Gospel calls to the law, when Christ co^mends
John. Whereupon also commending his spouse Can. 4.5.
, he says, Thy two breasts are like two young ^oes, that are twins, feeding
among the lillies. The two breasts of the Church are the two testaments; out of
which we that are the children of the church, s^^k the pure milk of the word
of God. These testaments feed among the lillies. Because they treat and
discourse especially of Christ, who says, I am the lilly of the valleys.
These testaments also are like two young roes, that are twins. Because twins,
(as we read of Hippocrates twins) when they go, they go together, when they
feed, they feed together. And after the same fashion, the two testaments,
being the two breasts of the Church, go together, and feed together, like
two young roes that are twins, feeding among the lillies. The Prophet Zachary
Zach. 4.12.
sees in a vsiion, two olive trees which thorough two golden pipes, empty
themselves into the golden candlestick. This golden candlestick, shining
continually, and giving light to every one that came into the tabernacle was a
figure of that light which lighteneth every one that comes into the world.
And even as the light of that candlestick, was always maintained only with
the oil, which dropping from the olive trees, and distilling thorough the
golden pipes, was conveyed into it: so, Christ shines in our hearts, only by
the light of his word, and the two testaments, are, as it were, two golden
pipes, flowing forth, and streaming both together, whereby the oil of all
gladness and goodness is powered into us. Wherefore, it is manifest, that the
old testament and the new testament, as Ezechiels wheels, are one within
another. Yea moreover, as those cherubins, they look one toward an other: as
those seraphims, they sing one to an other: as those young roes, they feed
both together: as those golden pipes, they flow forth both together. And
therefore, as there are two cherubims, and yet but one object that they both
look upon, which is the mercie-seate; as there are two seraphims, and yet but
one song that they both sing, which is the holy; as there are two roes, and yet
but one food that they both feed upon, which is the lilly: as there are two
pipes, and yet but one vessel that they both flow into, which is the golden
candlestick: so, there are two testaments, and yet but one sum and substance
of them both, which is Christ. Christ the only Mercy seat; the only Holy; the
only Lilly; the only golden Candlestick.

But now, though these two Testame^ts agree together thus in Christ, whom S.
Paul calls, Ephesians. 1.10.
(...), the rec^pitulatio^, or the abridgme^t of them both; yet, if it will
please you to confides the diverse dispensation of them, you shall in this
whole verse observe six differences between them. And every difference, is a
dignity. Every difference of the Gospel from the law, is a dignity of the
Gospel above the law.

The first difference is in these words, But all we. In the time of the old
Testament, very few did behold the glory of the Lord. When the Law was given,
only Moses might come up to the top of the mount, all the people stood below
Which custom continued even until the coming of Christ. For when incense was
offered, Luke 1.10.
only Zachary went into the temple, all the multitude stood without. But
suppose more men then Moses or Zachary did at that time behold the glory of
the Lord, yet certainly more nations then the Jews did not behold it. The
Jews only were Gods peculiar people. As for the Gentiles, they were suffered
to walk in their own ways. The Lord showed his word unto Jacob, his statutes
and ordinances unto Israel. He dealt not so with any other nation, neither had
the heathen knowledge of his law: which likewise continued even until the
coming of Christ. For when a woman of Canaan cried to our Savior, saying,
Have mercy on me; he answered her, I am not sent but to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel. Yea, not only he himself denied mercy to the Gentiles, but
also he charged his disciples for a time to show no mercy unto them. Go not
into the way of the Gentiles, says he, Matthew. 10.5.
and into the cities of the Samaritans enter ye not. But go rather to the lost
sheep of the house of Israel. So that it was but one man only among all the
people, namely Moses, or Zachary; or, to take it at the very highest, it was
but one people only among all nations, (...)ly the Jews, or the Israelites,
which did in the time of the old Testament behold the glory of the Lord.

But all we, now all we, with open ^^ce behold as in a gl^sse the glory of the
Lord. Then they did sing, Psalm. 76.
Notus in Iada^ deus, In Iewry is God known, his name is great in Israel. But
now we sing Psalm. 117.
Landate dominum omnes gentes, O praise the Lord all ye heathen, praise him all
ye nations. Then, no uncircumcised stronger might eat the Passover, Exodus 12
45.
only those might eat it, which were borne in the land. But now, all we that
are otherwise strangers from the commonwealth of Israel have an altar Heb.
1^.10. (...). Vide Theodor. in Exodus quest. 24.
and being circumcised with circu^cisio^ ^^de without hands, we may all of us
eat the Easter-lambe, which has been slain for us. Then the name of Christ
was as an ointment kept close in an alabaster box, the savor whereof perfumed
only a part of the house. Vnguentum effusum.
But now, it is as an ointment powered out Can. 1.2. Christi nomen ante eius
aduentum in Israel populo quasi in vase aliquo claudebatur, Ambr.
, the sweet smell whereof perfumeth all the house of God. Then, the doctrine of
salvation was preached only in the secret places of Palestina, which was but a
corner of the world. But now, it is as it were, proclaimed upon the tops of the
houses Luke 12.3.
, and published over all the whole earth. Then, only the ass used to the
yoke, the Jew used to the yoke of the law, was brought unto Christ. But now he
has ridden into Jerusalem, upon the asses foale Matthew, 21.7.
, and he has made all the Gentiles, which were before like vntaimed colts,
tractable and obedient, and serviceable to himself. Then, only natural
branches which were the Jews, did by faith take root downward, and by charity
bear fruit upward. But now, wild branches are grafted into the right olive
tree Romans 11.17.
, and all the Gentiles are incorporated into the body of Christ.

Therefore that is now most true which our Savior says concerning his Church,
Can. 6.8.
The Queens and the concubines have praised her. The Queens are the Jews,
whom Christ of old had espoused to himself. The concubines are the Gentiles:
which though heretofore they have run a whoring after strange gods, as the
Prophet speaks, yet now they are faithful unto Christ. So that, not only
the Queens, but also the Concubines praise the Church, yea all generations do
call her blessed* Which is the cause, why Solomon also had three hundred
queens, and (...) hundred concubines 1. Reg. 11.3.
. Not so much to satisfy his own fancy, at ^o signify Gods pleasure. Namely,
that there should be seven in the time of the Gospel, to three in the time of
the Law, seven to three, which should love the true Solomon Christ Jesus. And
that, not only three hundred persons among the Jews, but also seven hundred
nations among the Gentiles, yea all the Nations of the earth, should at length
be joined to Christ. Now Solomon, not only by the multitude of his concubines
(and likewise by marrying Pharaohs daughter) did foreshewe the calling of the
Gentiles; but much more 1. Reg. 5.^
by requesting Hiram King of Tyrus, to help him build the Temple. For none but
Israelites did meddle with building the tabernacle; whereas Sidonians, and
diverse other Gentiles, did help to build the Temple. Which did mystically
insinuate a further thing. To wit, that though the synagogue of the Jews did
consist only of Israelites, yet the Sydonians, and all other nations, should
one day come together, and put to their helping hand, to edify and build up
the Church of Christ: Even as the Father of Solomon prophesied of it long
before, Psalm. 72.10. Vide Ambros. de vocat. gent. lib. 2. c. 1. and Cyril.
contr. Julian. l. 8.
The Kings of Tarsis and the Isler shall give presents, the Kings of Arabia and
Saba shall bring gifts. All people shall fall down before him, all nations
shall do him service. We read Numb. 33.9.
that the Israelites removed their tents from Marah, and came to Elim, where
they found twelve fountains of water, and seauentie palm trees. All the while
they were in Marah, which signifies bitterness, they saw no fountain, no palm
tree. But when they came to Elim, which signifies rams, then they found twelve
fountains and seauentie palm trees. This journey of the Israelites did
intimate thus much: That the Church of Christ should never leave iourneying on
forward, till it came from Marah to Elim. That is, from the Jews, whose
mouths are full of cursing and bitterness, to the Gentiles, which are the true
flock and sheep sold of Christ. Here, the Church finds twelve fountains,
and seauenty palm trees, Non dubium quin de d^o decim apostolis sermo sit, de
quorum fontibus deriuatae aquae, otius mu^di siccitatem tigant. Hier. Epist. ad
Fabiol. M^.
twelve Apostles, and seauentie Disciples. Which twelve Apostles, as twelve
fountains, have flowed more generally over the face of all the earth to renew
it, then Noah's flood did to destroy it. And the seauenty Disciples, as
seauentie palm trees, have flourished and spread themselves over all the
world, so that, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm 80.10.
The bills are covered with the shadow of them, and the boughs thereof are
like the goodly Cedar trees. Almighty God commanded Moses to make 12. cakes,
which should be set continually upon the table of shewbread, yet so as they
should be changed every Sabbath day Leuit. ^4.8.
. These twelve cakes did prefigure the twelve Apostles Beda de taber. lib 1.
cap. 7.
, and all those disciples of Christ, which continually show to his people the
bread of life, that is, the word of God. Now these twelve cakes are changed,
when as the twelve fountains, and the seauentie palm trees, are changed into
twelve Apostles and seauentie Disciples. That so, Gods promise to his Church
may be fulfilled, which is this, Psalm. 15.17. Constitues eos principes super
omn^m terram. De Apostolis dictum est. Veique and de nobis, qui loca
apostolorum minoribus reuera meritis, sed maioribus consolationibus obtinomus.
Arnulfus in set in Conc. Turonens p 65.
In steed of thy fathers thou shall have children, whom thou may make
Princes in all lands. As if in other words he should have said, Thy shewbread
shall be changed. For instead of thy twelve fountains, and thy seauentie
palm trees, thou shall have twelve Apostles and seauentie Disciples, whom thou
may make Princes in all lands. To this mystery of the twelve fountains, is
answerable that which is written of the twelve oxen 2. Chron. 4.4.
. The molten sea did stand upon twelve oxen, whereof three looked toward the
North, and three looked toward the West, and three looked toward the South, and
three looked toward the East. The great caldron was called a molten sea,
because it did foreshew the depth of the twelve Apostles doctrine, which
flowing from them, as from twelve fountains, did make, as it were, a maine
sea. This sea did stand upon twelve oxen, that is, as Saint Paul does interpret
it 1. Cor. 9.10. Duodecim bones, duodecim Apostoli sunt. Beda de temp. Salom c.
10.
, upon twelve Apostles. Which in that they looked four ways, East, West,
North, and South, they did teach all nations Potest intelligi quod quatuor
facies ro^a habeat, propter hoc quod scriptura sacra per gratiam predicationis
extensa in quatour mundi parts innoruit. Gregor in Ezech. Hom.
. And in that they looked three and three together, they did represent the
blessed Trinity. Not only teaching all nations, but also in that sea of water
baptizing them, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost. Wherefore, though the two kine which carried the Arc, wherein were the
tables of the Law, went straight, and kept one path, turning neither to the
right hand nor to the left 1. Sam. 6.12.
* Yet these twelve oxen, which carried the molten sea, signifying the doctrine
of the Gospel, went not straight, neither kept one path, but turned into the
way of the Gentiles; yea, they looked all manner of ways, East, West, North,
and South. And those two kyne stood still and lowed no more, when they came to
the field of Joshua, dwelling in Bethshemesh, that is, in the house of the
sun. To note, that all the ki^e, and calves, and sacrifices, and ceremonies
of the old law were to cease, and stand still, when they came to Jesus, which
is the true Joshua, dwelling in heaven, which is the true Bethshemesh. But these
twelve oxen, were so far from leaving off, either to go, or to low, when
they came to Christ, that even then, they went much faster, and lowed much
louder, so that now their sound is gone out into all lands, and their words
into the ends of the world; and in them has God set Bethshemesh, that is, a
house or a tabernacle for the sun. Therefore as the material sun, thorough
the twelve signs in the Zodiake, goes forth from the uttermost parts of the
heaven, and runs about to the end of it again P^^^. 19.^.
: in like sort, the spiritual Son of righteousness, by the twelve Apostles,
as by twelve signs, has been burn round about the world, that he might be
not only the glory of his people Israel, but also a light to lighten the
Gentiles, and that all, all the ends of the earth might see the salvation of
our God. Truth it is, touching the Synagogue of the Jews, Christ says, Can.
4.^2.
My sister, my spouse is as a garden enclosed, and as a fountain sealed up.
For as Saint Jerome writes Terra a Dan vsque Beersabee via c^ntu^ sexaginta
millium in longum spa^io tenditu^ Ep. ad Dard.
, the whole country of Iewrie where the Jews dwelt, lying between Dan and
Beersabee, was ^carce a hundred and threescore mile long. So that it might
well be likened, to a garden enclosed, and to a fountain sealed up. But now,
this sealed fountain has been turned into a springing well, since the twelve
fountains have flowed over all the earth: and, this enclosed garden has been
turned into an open field, since the twelve oxen have plowed the field of all
the whole world. Therefore now Christ says of himself, Can. 2.2 Ego sum flos
campi.
I am a flower of the field. And so likewise to his spouse; Can. 7.11.
Come my well-beloved, let us go forth into the field, let us remain in the
villages. For though before his passion he was apprehended in a garden, yet at
his passion he was crucified without the gate Heb. 13.12.
. To signify, that he would be, no^ only a garden-flower, but also a
feild-flower; and that he would remain, not only for the salvation of the
Jews within the city of Jerusalem, but also for the salvation of the Gentiles
without the gate of the city, in all the villages round about. Nabuchadnezzar
Dan. 2.35.
saw in a vision a stone cut without hands, which became a great mountain, and
filled all the whole earth. This stone cut without hands, is Christ begotten of
a pure Virgin, without the company of man. Who was indeed a very little
stone, or, as I may say, but a spark at the first. Wherefore the Jews for his
poverty and humility despised and refused him. But now this poor little
stone which the builders refused, is become the head-stone in the corner, and
it is made a great mountain, which fills all the whole earth. According to
the prophecy of Esaias; cap. 2. v. 2.
It shall be in the last days, that the mountain of the house of the Lord
shall be prepared in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above
the hills, and all nations shall flow unto it. So that now Christ, which is the
head corner stone, may be fitly called the second Adara. The Greek letters of
which name, as S. Cyprian Oportuit vt ex quatuor cardinibus orbis terrae nomen
in te portare^ Adam. Tract. de Si^a and Sion. initio.
writes, do severally signify all the quarters of the earth. A (...), the
East: (...), the West: A* again, (...), the North M. (...), the South.
According to the promise of God unto Abraham, Genesis 28.14.
Thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth: (that is, as the first Adam was made
of the dust of the earth: so thy seed, which is Christ the second Adam, shall
be dispersed as d^st over all the earth.) Thy seed shall be as the dust of the
earth; and thou shall spread abroad, (as a great mountain,) to the East, and to
the West, and to the North, and to the South; and in thee, and in thy seed,
shall all the families of the earth be blessed. The Jewish Synagogue speaks
in this sort, Ca^. 6.11. Anima meaconcarba^it me, propter quadrigas Aminadab.
My soul troubles me, for the chariots of Aminadab. Aminadab ^ignifieth a
willing, or an obedient people. Such are the faithful Gentiles. Of whom God
says, Psalm. 18.44.
A people which I have not known shall serve me. As soon as they hear of me
they shall obey me. But the strange children shall dissemble with me. The
strange children shall fail, and be afraid out of their prisons. Though God
have been a loving father to the Jews, yet they dissemble, and are strange
children to him. Contrariwise, though God have not known the Gentiles, yet
they do know and serve him. Therefore the obstinate Jews repining and
grudging that the Gentiles are called, say every one of them, Anima mea
conturbaui^ me, My soul troubles me, thorough envy, malice, blindness, and
disobedience. Because they fail, and are afraid out of their prisons. On the
other side, the obedient Gentiles, being called to this liberty of the sons
of God, lie not in any prisons, but ride in the chariots of Amminadab, Because,
as soon as they hear of God, they willingly obey him. Which is implied, in
that a man of Cyrene, named Simon Matthew. ^^ ^2. Vt talifacto praefignaretu^
gen^ium fides. Leo de Pa^. ^o. ^^.
, did carry the cross of Christ. A man of Cyrene, is a Gentile: Simon
signifies hearing and obeying. Therefore, a man of Cyrene named Simon carrying
the cross, is a faithful Gentile, which as soon as he hears of God, does
willingly obey him. For now God has persuaded Iapheth to dwell in the tents of
Shem Genesis 9 2^.
. That is, he has persuaded the Gentiles coming of Iapheth to embrace that
obedience unto Christ, which the Jews coming of Shem have refused. This is
the reason, why the Hebrew Scriptures are translated into Greek, and Latin,
and all other languages. To show, that Iapheth does now dwell in the tents of
Shem. And that those oracles, which before were appropriated to the Jews Romans
3.2.
, are now imparted unto all the Gentiles. So that the prophecy of the
Patriarch Jacob is now also fulfilled, who says, Gen 49.21.
Nepthaly shall be as a Hind let loose, giving goodly words. For Christ did
first preach in the land of Nepthaly among the Jews Matthew. 4.13.
. But seeing the Jews would not obey him, therefore he has turned to the
Gentiles Act. 13.46.
. And so Nepthalie is as a hind let loose, giving goodly words. Because Christ,
who first preached in Nepthalie, is not now any longer in prison among the
Jews; but, as a hind let loose, leaping by the mountains, and skipping by the
hills Can. 2.8.
, so he has run swiftly over all the world Psalm. 147.15.
; and with his goodly words, with his gracious words, he has persuaded Iapheth
and all the Gentiles, to dwell in the tents of Shem, and to ride in the
chariots of Amminadab. These chariots of Amminadab are called in Latin,
Quadrigae, because each of them is drawn with four horses. Which very aptly
befitteth the doctrine of the Gospel. For, as Calvin notes in the Epistle
before his Harmony, God has of set purpose ordained, that the Gospel should
be written by four Evangelists, that so he might make a triumphant chariot for
his son Vide^ur consuli^ deus quasi triumph^lem curt^m filio suo para^^e,
vnde to^^ fidelium populo conspieu^s appare at* Infine Epistolae.
. Which being drawn with four horses, and running upon four wheels, might
quickly pass over all the earth, and so show the glory of the Lord, unto all
his Church. Wherefore, the Church is like a grain of mustard seed Matthew.
23.^^.
, which is indeed the least of all seeds, but when it is grown, it is the
greatest among herbs, and it is a tree, so that the birds of the air come and
build in the branches thereof. Thus the congregation of Christ rises from
small beginnings, to great proceedings. And though at the first, it was but a
seed, yea but a grain, yet new it is grown to be an herb, yea to be a tree;
where in all the birds of the air Ezec. 17.23.
, all the faithful in the world, do make their neasts.

Therefore the church of Christ may be compared also to the Samarit^ns inn
Luke 10.34.
. For that inn is called in greek (...), because it receives and lodges all
strangers that come: So the church lodges all pilgrims upon earth. (...)
Theophyl^ct. p. 26^. g^abulum ecelesia est; vnde and in stabulo dominus natus
est Emis. Do. 1^* post Pen.
In the Synagogue there was not lodging for all. For then it was said, Deuteronomy.
23.2.
The Ammonites and the Moabites shall not enter into the congregation of the
Lord: But now, Christ is borne in an inn Luke 2.^.
. To signify, that in the Church there is lodging for all. For Christ is the
host: the Church the inn: the cross is the sign. Harken to the Host which is
Christ, and you shall hear him say, Come unto me all you that labor and
travail, and I will refresh you: I will bring you into the wineseller Can. ^.4.
, yea I will suppe with you, and you with me Reu 3.10.
. Go into the inn which is the Church, and there you shall find Parthians,
and Medes, and Elamites, and all na^ions under heaven, stayed with flagons, and
comforted with apples C^n. 2.5.
; yea, refreshed and filled with new wine Act. 2.5.
. Look up to the sign, which is the cross, and you shall see diverse things.
First, you shall see one crown of thorns. To show, that the earth is the
Lords, and all that therein is, the round world, and they that dwell therein.
For the roundnes of the crown does declare the large dominion of him that is
crowned. Namely, that his dominion is from the one sea to the other, and from
the flood unto the worlds end Psalm. 52.8.
. Secondly, you shall see two hands. To show, that God is, not the God of the
Jews only, but of the Gentiles also Romans 3.^9.
. For not only one hand, but both his hands, are fast nailed and stretched-out.
The one to the one theife, the other to the other theife; the one to the Jews,
the other to the Gentiles, that he may embrace all that love him. Thirdly, you
shall see three tongues. To show, that Christ, is not the King of the Hebrews
only, but of the Greci^ns, and the Latins also. For his title, Jesus of
Nazareth King of the Jews, is written in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin. That at
the most sweet and most excellent name of Jesus every knee may bow, and all
tongues may confess, that Jesus Christ is the Phil. 2.11.
Lord. Fourthly, you shall see four quarters of the cross. To show, by the
four quarters of the cross, the four quarters of the world. For God is no
accepter of persons, but in every quarter and country, he that fears him, is
accepted with him. Therefore also Christ's garments Ioh. 16 23.
were divided into four parts. Because, out of what quarter or part soever we
come of all the four parts of the world, if we be naked, Christ has garments
to cloth us, if we be harbourles, Christ has room to lodge us. Even as he
himself says, All that the Father gives me, shall come to me, and
whosoever comes to me, Non eijciam for as, I will not turn him out of
doors. Wherefore whether we respect the host; or the hosts inn; or the innes
sign; and about the sign it self, whether we respect one crown; or two
hands; or three tongues; or four quarters; every of these does plainly show,
that now in the Church there is lodging for all, and so consequently that the
Church may be compared to the Samaritans inn. It may be compared likewise to
S^lomons troop of horses Can. 1.8.
. For S^lomons troop of horses was kept in four thousand stables, ten and ten
in a stable 2. Chr. 9.1.
; so that he had in his whole troop forty thousand horses 1. Reg 4.16.
; which were either bought by 1. Reg. 10.28.
him, or els^ brought to him 2. Chr. 9.24.
out of all countries. So the Apostles, as we may read in the Acts, brought by
one sermon 3. thousand souls Act. 2 41.
, brought by an other sermon five thousand souls to Christ Act. 4.4.
; and so every day, out of all countries and kinreds Revel. 7.9.
, there are added to the Church by infinite and innumerable multitudes Dan.
^.14.
, such as shall be saved. It may be compared to S. Peter's sheet Act. 10.12.
. For in Peter's sheet, were all sort of beasts, four footed beasts of the
earth, and wild beasts, creeping things, and fowls of the heaven. So, in the
Church there are all manner of men, Circumcised and uncircumcised, Barbarians
and Sythians Colloss. 3.1^.
. It may be compared to Noah's Arc Genesis 7.14.
. For there came to Noah into his Arc all kind of creatures, clean and
unclean, male and female. So there comes to Christ into his Church, all
manner of men, Jews and Grecians, bond and free 1. Cor. 12.13.
. It may be compared to S. James his net Luke 5.10.
. For that ne^^e had cork above to make it swim, and led below to make it
sink, that it might take all sorts of fishes. So, the Church has diverse
fishers of men, some that teach slightly and superficially, some again that
teach more deeply and profoundly, that all manner of men may be taught Ioh.
6.45.
, and caught Matthew. 13.47.
, and drawn unto Christ. Lastly, it may be compared to King Assuerus his
feast Est 1.5.
. For that feast entertained all kind of guests, seven days together, in the
court of the garden of the Kings Palace. So, in the Church, the Lord of hosts
has made unto all manner of men, a feast of fat things, even a feast of fined
wines, to use the Prophet Esais Esaias* ^5.6.
words, and fat things full of marrow, of wines fined and purified. Before that
this ^east was prepared, the oxen and fatlings killed, and every thing else
provided, all men were not bidden. But now that Christ has bin killed, he
keeps, as I may say, open house Prou. 9.2.
, and sends his servants into the high ways Luke 14.23.
, to gather together all that ever they find. Yea his servants have not only
bidden all that they could find in the hie-waies, but also they have crossed the
seas, and called the very furthermost Esa. 60 9.
Islands of all the world, to behold the glory of the Lord. Blessed. O blessed
be the Lord for his unspeakable mercies toward this Island, now far more
flourishing then ever it was, in which we live. For, alas, in the time of the
old Testament, who was there, I pray you, in this whole Monarchy, at least
wise that ever we could read or hear of, which had any true knowledge of God?
S. Ierom in the end of his dialogue against the Pelagians, writes thus, Vsque
ad aduentum Christ^, Brittannia fertilis prouincia tyrannorum, and Sto^icae
gentes, omnesque vsque ad Oceanum per circul^^ bar b^rae na^i^^er, Moysen
Prophetasque ignorabunt.
Until the very coming of Christ, says he, the Province of Britain, which
has bin oftentimes governed by tyrants, and the Scottish people, and all the
nations round about the Ocean sea, were utterly ignorant of Moses and the
Prophets. So that then, by the testimony of S. Jerome, all our religion was
superstition: al our church-seruice was, Idolatry; all our Priests, were
Paynims: all our gods were idols. Then there was in Scotland, the temple of
Mars: in Cornwall, the temple of Mercury: in Bangor in Wales, the temple of
Minerua Stow Annal. in vita Morgani.
: in Malden in Essex, the temple of Victoria Camden. Brittan in Essexi^*
; in Bath, the temple of Apollo: in Leycester, the temple of Ianus: in York,
where Peter's is now, the temple of Bellona Stow Annal, in vita Bladud and
Leiteregnum, and Seue^i imperat.
: in London, where Paul's is now, the temple of Diana Iuellus in tractat. de
sac^is Scrip page 129.
. Therefore it is very likely, that they esteemed as highly then of the
goddess Diana in London, as they did in Ephesus Act. 19.28.
. And that, as they cried there, Great is Diana of the Ephesians: so they cried
here, ^reat is Diana of the Lo^diners. Even no more then three and fifty
years before the incarnation of Christ, when Julius Caesar came out of France
into England, so absurd and senseless were the people of this Land, that in
stead of the true and everliving God, they served these heathenish and
abominable idols, Mars, Mercury, Minerua, Victoria, Apollo, Ianus, Bellona,
Diana, and such like. And not long after, to wit, an. Christ. 180. King Lucius
being first christened himself, forthwith established religion, in this whole
kingdom. But thanks, thanks be to God, in the time of the new Testament,
three and fifty years after the incarnation of Christ: when Joseph of
Arimathea come out of France into England, many in this Realm of blind and
ignorant P^gans, became very zealous and sincere Christians. For Saint Philip
the Apostle, after he had preached the Gospel thorough-out all France, at
length sent Joseph of Arimathea hither into England. Who when he had converted
very many to the faith, died in this Land, and he that had buried the body of
Christ, was buried in Glascenburie himself Gildas lib. de victor. Aurel. Em.
. Also Simon Zelotes an other Apostle, after he had preached the Gospel
thoroughout all Mauritania, at length came over into England. Who when he had
declared likewise to us the doctrine of Christ crucified, was in the end
crucified himself, and buried here in Britain Ni^ep l. 2 c. 40
. About this time Aristobulus one of the seauentie Disciples, Doroth in synops
c. 23.
whom Saint Paul mentions in his Epistle to the Romans Romans 16.10.
, was a reverend and a renowned Biship in this Land. Also, Claudia a noble
English Lady Martial. Epigrama^at. lib. 4.
, whom S. Paul mentions in his second Epistle to Timothy 2. Tim. 4.21.
, was here amongst us a famous Professor of the faith. Since which time,
though the civil state has bin often turned vpside down, by the Romans, by
the Saxons, by the Danes, by the Normans; ye^ the Gospel of Christ, has never
utterly failed, or bin taken from us. This the holy Fathers of the church,
which have lived in the ages next-ensuing, do declare. Tertul^ian, who lived
Ann. 200. writes thus, Aduers ^uda c. 3. Hispaniarum omnes termini, and
Galliarum diuersae nation^s, and Brittannorum in a coessa Romany loca Christo
vero subdita.
All the coasts of Spain, and diverse parts of France, and many places of
Britain, which the Romans could never subdue with their sword, Christ has
subdued with his word. Origin, who lived Ann. 260. writes thus, Hom. 4. in
Ezech. Qua^do terra Brittanniae ante aduentum Christi in vnius dei consen^^^
religionem* Nunc veroo vniuersa terra cu^ l^titia ela^at ad dominum.
Did the I Will of Britain before the coming of Christ ever acknowledge the
faith of one God? No. But yet now, all that country sings joyfully unto the
Lord. Constantine the great, the glory of all the Emperors, borne here in
England, and of English blood, who lived Ann. 306. writes in an Epistle thus,
So^^^. l. 2. c. 9.
Whatsoever custom is of force in all the Churches of Egypt, Spain, France,
and Britain, look that the same be likewise ratified among you. S.
Chrysostom, who lived An. 405. writes thus, Hom. ^8. in 2. Cor.
In all places wheresoever you go into any Church, whether it be of the Mores,
or of the Persians, or even of the very Isles* of Britain, you may hear John
Baptist preaching. S. Hierome, who lived Ann. 420. writes thus, Epist. ad
^^^g^ium. Anno. 500. Columbanus in Anglia, Palladiu^in Sco^is, Patric^u^ in
Hib^r^ia floruit.
The Frenchmen, the Englishmen, they of Africa, they of Persia, and all
barbarous nations, worship one Christ, and observe one rule of religion.
Theodoret, who lived Ann. 450. writes thus, Aduers. Grae. lib 9.
the blessed Apostles have induced the Englishmen, the Danes, the Saxons, in
one word, all people and countries, to embrace the doctrine of Christ. Gregory
the great who lived Ann. 605. writes thus, Epist l. ^. c. 58.
Who can sufficiently express, how glad all the faithful are, for that the
Englishmen have forsaken the darkness of their errors, and have again
received, the light of the Gospel. Beda, who lived Ann. 730. writes thus,
Hist. l. 1. c. 1.
England at this present, is inhabited by Englishmen, Britains, Scots, Picts,
and Romans, all which, though they speak five tongues, yet they profess but
one faith. Thus you see, how the Gospel of Christ, having been first planted
in this land by Joseph of Arima^he^, and Simon Zelotes, (in whose time
Aristobulus and Claudia, and not long after King Lucius also lived) has over
since continued amongst us; as testifies, Tertullian, Origin, Constantine the
great, Athanasius, Chrysostom, Hierome, Theodoret, Gregory, Bed^, and many
more which might here have been Vide praet^r caete^o^, vitam Bernardi l 2 c.
7. and Bernard de confide^^* l. 3.
alleged.

Lo ye then, ye blessed and belo^ed of the Lord. Lo ye, and mark it well I
beseech you, how far the new Testament, excels the old. In the time of
the old Testament, they did sing only, Notus in Iudaea deus: but now, we sing
also, Lauda^e dominum omnes gentes. Then they that were borne in the Land only
might eat the Passover: but now, we that are strangers also, may eat the
Easter lamb. Then the name of Christ was only, as an ointment kept in an
alabaster box: but now, it is also, as an ointment powered out. Then the
doctrine of Salvation, was only preached in secret places: but now, it is also
preached upon the tops of houses. Then, the old ass only, was brought unto
Christ: but now, the young foale also, obedient unto him. Then natural
branches only, did prosper and flourish: but now, wild branches also, are
granted into the olive tree. Then, the Queens only, did praise the Church:
but now, the concubines also, do call her blessed. Then, Israelites only, did
build the tabernacle: but now, Sidonians also, do help to build the Temple.
Then, they pitched their tents only in Marah, where was neither fountain nor
palmtree: but now, we pitch in Elim, where there are twelve fountains, and
seventy palm trees. Then, the two kine which carried the Arc, looked only
one way: but now, the twelve oxen which carry the molten sea, look every way,
East, West, North, and South. Then, Christ was a flower, growing only in the
little garden of Judea: but now, he is a flower, flourishing in the wide field
of all the world. Then, Christ was only a little stone, cut without hands: but
now, be is a great huge mountain, which fills all the earth. Then, the
Church of Christ was, as it were, in prison, being tied and bound only to one
place: but now, it pos^eth over all places riding and triumphing in the
chariots of Aminadab. Then, the Church of Christ was only a small grain of
mustard-seede: which is lesser then any other seed, but now, it spreads
abroad as a mighty big tree, wherein all the birds of the air do make their
nests. So that, the Church of Christ, now in the time of the new Testament, is
like the Samaritans i^ (...) which lodges all passengers: It is (...) Salomons
troop of hourses, which comes out of all countries. It is (...) Saint Peter's
sheere, which in foul^th, all sort of beasts. It is like Noah's arc, which
receives all kind of creatures. It is like Saint James his net, which catches
all sort of fishes. All Is fish, that comes to this net. It is like King
Assu^rus feast, which entertaineth all kind of guests. To this feast all we
that will come are well-come. Not some few Jews only, But all we: even all
we Britains, all we Isay, with open face, behold as in a glass the glory of
the Lord. This is the first difference, between the Law and the Gospel, in
these words, But all we.

FINIS.

