THE HISTOR OF EVRIALVS AND LVCRETIA.

Written in Latin by ENEAS SYLVIVS; And translated into English by Charles
Allen, Gent.



Printed at London by Tho. Cotes, for William Cook, and are to be sold at his
shop near Furnivalls Inn Gate in Holborne. 1639.

EN EAS SYLVIVS To Marianu's Sozinus, Health.
SIR,

YOur suit is unproper for my age, but to your own repugnant. For in an
argument of love, what can I who am almost forty write, or you who are fifty
with convenience hear? It is a thing which delights young spirits, and tires
upon tender breasts; but old men are as unfit auditors of Loves, as young men
are of Moralls. Nor is there any thing more ugly than age, which shall serve
Venus with an impotent devotion. Yet shall you find some of these old ones in
love, but not reloved, for they are equally contemptible both to maid and
matron, nor was Woman ever taken but by the flourish of our years. If you
shall be taught otherwise, it is but a covert illusion. But I know that an
amourous tractate does extremely misbecome me, who having passed the Meridian
of my time do now post to my evening; yet is it not a greater indecencie for
me to write than for you to solicit me. It is my duty to obey, let it be
your care to see what you impose; for as there is the greater ripeness of
years in you, so it will be the great requitie in me to subscribe to the
Laws of friendship: which if your justice fears not to violate by an
injunction, my folly shall not doubt to transgress by an obedience. Your good
graces to me have been so many, that I cannot dare to deny you, although some
looser wantonness were employed in the request, I shall therefore condescend to
your petition so often reiterated, nor any longer oppose that which has been
solicited with so much vehemency. Yet shall I not, as your desire was faigne
any thing, nor will I there be a Poet where I may be an Historian. For who is
so mad as to make use of a lie, who has a truth can justify him? Because your
self have been amorous, and have not yet that fire extinct, it is your
pleasure I should compose the History of two Lovers. This game somnesse does
hold
You from being reckond old.
I shall submit my self to your desires, but will not present you with fiction
in so great a variety of truths. For what has the World so universally
common? What City, Hamlet or Family is barren of examples? What man arrived
to thirty has not exploited something for love? I ground this conjecture in
my self, whom love has a thousand times engaged, and Heaven has disingaged a
thousand times; in that happier than Mars whom Vulcan captivated in an Iron
Net, and exposed a scorned spectacle to the Gods; but I shall rather touch at
others loves than mine own, least while I stir up the Embers of my ancient
fire, I discover a spark still living. Yet will I give you the relation of a
strange and almost incredible love, with which a noble pair were mutually
inflamed, nor will I make use of old, and obsolete examples, but discourse of
the wanton fires of our own age, which I will demonstrate to you in our own
City, not Babylon or Troy, although one of the lovers was borne in a
Northern Climate. And perchance the story may furnish us with this benefit.
For sithence the Lady which is our Theme, when she had lost her love,
breathed out her soul in a mixed passion of sadness and indignation, and the
Knight was never after the master of any true contentment, it may be a fair
advertisement to youth to desist from such vanities. And the tender virgin may
be informed by this accident not to lose her self in the pursuit of another.
The narration may tutour young Gallants, that they address not themselves to
this kind of war, where the Gall is so much predominant over the Honey, but
that renouncing lasciviousness which does infatuate them, they would rather
make virtue their design, which is the only possession that can make its
possessour happy. If any man be a stranger to that infinity of miseries Which
lie concealed in love, let him from hence correct his ignorance. Farewell Sr,
and with attention hear that story which I by compulsion write.

THE HISTORY OF Eurialus and Lucretia.
WHen Sigismund kept his Court at Sienna, it fortuned that upon the way to his
Palace, which was adjoining to S. Marthas Chapel, he encountered four Ladies
whom feature and nobility, age and habit had almost made equals, and in the
general repute not mortals but Goddesses: Had there been but three of them
it had been a pardonable error to judge them for those, whom fame has made
Paris see in a vision. Sigismund, although old in years, yet young in desires
was much addicted to the courting of Ladies, nor did any object beget in him a
delight equal to that of an elegant beauty. At this sight allighting from his
Horse he was enterteined in their arms, and turning to his Courtiers asked if
they had ever beheld such delicate pieces: professing that it was his doubt
whether they were humane faces, for that their looks were heavenly if not
Angelical. The Ladies fixing their eyes upon the ground by their modesty gave
an addition to their beauty. For the red diffused in their Cheeks rendered
such a color, as the Ivorie of India distained with Vermilion, or the snow of
Lilie married to the purple of a Rose. But among these Lucretia sparkled with
greatest luster, a Lady not yet twenty married in the family of the Camilli to
Menelaus a rich Lord, unworthy to be the Jailer of such preciousnesse, yet
worthy to be deceived by his wife, and to be taught the note of April; her
stature taller then the rest, her hair thick, which she had not cast back
like a Virgin, but bound up in the rich imprisonment of Gold and Pearl, her
forehead high, and of a comely largeness, nor drawn through with a wrinkle,
her brows daintily arched with black, and few hairs distracted from
themselves with a just distance. Her eyes lightning with such a splendour that
they put out the beholders; with these she slew and made alive: her straight
nose made an equal division between her checkes; nothing more amiable than
these cheeks, nothing more delicious, which with her smile were dimpled: Her
mouth small, her lips Coral, her teeth Crystal, and when she talked, it
was not so much speech as harmony. What should I speak of her chin or neck,
seeing that in the whole frame there was nothing but excellency. Her exterior
parts did speak her inward beauty, and so often as she was seen, so often was
her husband envied; besides she was very facetious, and spoke like the mother
of the Gracchi, or the daughter of Hortensius, and in her discourses modesty
and sweetness stood competitours, she made not a show of honesty with a
severe brow, but of modesty with a cheerful one; nor bold, nor timorous, but
attempted with a civil bashfulnesse; she carried a masculine spirit in a
feminine breast. Lucretia was the Theme of every discourse, and the Argument
upon which Caeaesar and the whole Court employed their Oratorie. When she
turned, the eyes of the spectatours turned, as if they had no motion but what
they borrowed from her: for her looks were as attractive as the ftraines of the
Thracian Lyre, and led all in triumph after them. But Eurialus a Lord of
Frankenland was transported with a desire more violently than any other a man
most fit for love, whether you looked upon his face, or fortune^. His age two
and thirty, and his stature rather comely than tall, his eyes shining and
full, and his other parts graced with a kind of majesty, answered each other
with a most exquisite symmetrie. The other Courtiers were all impoverished by
the war: but Eurialus, who was rich both in his own revenew, and his Princes
favor, saluted every day with a new bravery: his train of followers great,
richly appareled and gallantly mounted, so that he wanted nothing but leisure
to awaken that gentle heat of the soul, Which men call love. Let posterity
cease now to admire the tale of Thisbe and Pyramus.

For they were neighbors and the adjoining wall,
Might easily be their loves original.
Eurialus is now no more his own Master; he no sooner saw, but he was set on
more with what he saw, and his thoughts dwell no where but in Lucretia. But he
meta reciprocal love; and this is the wonder, that in so great a raritie of
perfections and choice of beauties, Eurialus should pitch upon none but
Lucretia, and Lucretia fasten upon none but Eurialus: yet at the first either
of them being ignorant of the others flame, either of them thought they were in
vain inflamed.

But neither of these had any knowledge of the other, either by the eye or
care: He was of Germany, the Lady of Thuscanie, and wanting the commerce of
Language, they discoursed only with their eyes: Lucretia therefore wounded
with heavy pain and fed upon with hidden fires, forgetting now that she is a
wife: and the memory of husband lives only in her hate; Thus cherishing her
wound, and carrying the figure of Eurialus deeply imprinted in her breast she
enters into this soliloquie with herself;

How is it that I now nauseate at my former diet: The embraces of my husband
are but hated confinements, and his kisses as the arrests of death: the Idea of
that stranger who stood next Caesar does ever present it self to my
imagination, yet if thou can (poor Lucretia) Out of thy breast which is yet
chaste,
Let such notions be effaced.
O happy I if could, but a sweet violence leads me captive; judgment prompts
one thing, but desire countermands it with another suggestion: I see what is
best by the light of my reason, but pursue the contrary by the instigation of
my passion. But what? nothing but a stranger relish my palate? must another
world be the boundure of my exorbitancie? But alas, whom does not that form
take, certainly it does me: and I cannot, will not live if mercy be not the
chicfe ingredient in his constitution, but shall I conform my self to the
appetite of a Travelour, who when he has plentifully feasted shall rise and
go away without giving thanks: But now his worth nor sweetness of aspect
Do threaten or oblivion or neglect.
Let me therefore dispell these mists of doubts and fears, and confident in
the powerful assistance of my own beauty, presume him to be my prisoner, as
I am his.

But shall I forsake mother, husband, and country? why not? she is cruel,
and he unworthy, and that is my country where I delight to live: but my
reputation will suffer. But why should the buzze of fameawe me, since I shall
not hear it: they dare do nothing who are so anxiously studious of their
credit: nor am I alone in this kind of love; Helen, Medea, and Ariadne are my
precedents, and crimes pass unnoted in the universalitie of the offenders.
Thus disputed the Lady with her self, and poor Eurialus is melted with an
equal fire.

Lucretia had a house adjoining to the Court, so that Eurialus could not come
to the Palace, but he received a gentle influence shot by Lucretia from out
some window: but so often as she saw him, so often did she blush, so that the
Emperor read her love in those red letters, and passing by her house, he would
sometimes pull down Eurialus his hat in his eyes, as if he envied him the
fruition of so dainty a spectacle.

Lucretia being alone by herself would resolve to extinguish this new flame,
yet his presence ever rekindled it, for his sight was both the fire and fuel.
As a dry field, once set on fire,
If the winds blow it, flameth higher.
So did Lucretia burn. True is that opinion of the wise, that chastity is
most religiously enshrined in a humble cottage; and lust the inscparable
associate of great fortune inhabiteth the stateliest buildings. Lucretia having
now often observed Eurialus, and unable to give her passion the check, she
sat in counsel with her own thoughts, what Cabinet to choose where she might
safely lay them up: For He does most torture feel,
That does his flame conceal.
She had an old servant, by his name Sosias, by his country a high German;
him she intends to assault, not so much trusting the man as his nation.
Caesar was then going through the City with a great train, and when she knew
Eurialus was near the house, she called Sosias, and commanding him to look
down, asked if the world would not be posed to produce such another troop of
young gallants, their compositions so strong, and yet so lovely, somewhat
troubled her faith to believe, if they were men of that kind, which her native
Thuscanie bred. They are of immortal birth
And sent from heaven to earth.
Had fortune drawn me a husband out of this Lottery of men, although blind,
yet could she not have erred; should you have told me thus much of your
countrymen, I had given no credit to your relation, but now my eyes come in and
confute my unbeleefe; I suppose that lying Northerly they are beholden to the
cold for much of their fairness. But know you any of them said the Lady, he
told her many; but Lucretia not willing to be long at Rovers, but to come more
speedily to her mark, asked if he knew Eurialus of Frankenland, as my self
said Sosias; but why make you that question? I shall tell thee said Lucretia,
and I know my secret will be under seal, for thy goodness bespeaks my
confidence. It is he in whom my soul mooveth, nor will my thoughts give any
truce to my sufferings, until I be made known to him, let it be your errand
to tell him I languish for him; I ask you but this, and for this ask you what
you please; what is this said Sosias that I hear? can I act, nay can I think
such a villainy? shall I betray my master, and be a knave now I am old, a name
I trembled at when I was young; rather dispossess your breast of so unclean a
spirit, and follow not the counsels of your deluding hope: Love has easily
the repulse, if you make head against his first sallies: but who by flattering
themselves shall give ground to this sweet mischief, they sell their liberty
to a most insolent master, and bind themselves to one who will never give them
back their Indentures: your fire cannot be hid with so much secrecy, but my
master will smell the smoke, and then the greatness of the fault may give your
expectation assurance what your punishment will be. Peace fool said Lucretia,
in a heart prepossest with love there is no room for terror: she fears
nothing, who fears not death, and is resolved to stand the malice of the
extremest event. But (replied Sosias) will you sullie the splendor of your
family, or do you think it an honor to be the first adultresse of your
house? nor must you imagine you can sin, and securely sin. You have the
guard of a thousand eyes about you, besides your husbands two, which have a
faculty to discover secrets above that thousand; Your servants are but so many
spies, and if you bribe them into a silence, yet may your little dog bark, and
reveal the fact with his inarticulate Dialects: The bed, which was oppressed
with your lascivious weight shall be a plaintive against you, and the
curtains will disclose that lust which they did once conceal so closely. For
it is a curse attending high crimes, not to find where they may put affiance.
But admit you deceive the diligent observation of Espialls, yet you cannot be
masked from the vindictive eye of Heaven, which will penetrate into the most
abstruse recesses. In your own bosom shall you carry your own tormenter, and
the light of your conscience will ever wait upon the darkness of your sin.
I confess these truths said Luerelia, but by the furious concitation of my
spirits I am hurried to their contrary: I see the precipice, yet wittingly do
I precipitate. Love and fury have usurped upon me, and will not suffer reason
to be interressed in their possession: Often have I wrastled but in vain, and
therefore conclude to execute loves Imperious mandates: by these white hairs
(said groaning Sosias) by this loyal breast, by my faithful services I conjure
you to curb this passion, and in that be your self your selfs best
Physician: for the first degree of cure consists in your willingness to be
cured. Well Sosias (said Libcretia) modesty commands me to embrace your
counsel: I have but one refuge left, by death to prevent this mischief.
Collatines wife with her dagger vindicated the fact committed, but by a nobler
course of justice I will anticipate the commission. I shall never permit that,
replied Sosias. But who (said Lucretia) can hinder a mind resolved to dye? The
noble Portia, deprived of all instruments of death, swallowed down burning
coals, and by fire made a way to follow the ghost of her beloved Brutus. Nay
(said Sosias) if you are possessed with so resolute a fury, my studies shall
be rather to provide for your life than your reputation; for this fame is but
a counterfeit gloss: the worst man may have a very fair one, and the best be
published with a harsh comment. I shall therefore assay Eurialus, and express
all diligence in the service: with these words her flame advanced, and her
wavering mind anchord upon stronger hopes: but his purpose went not with his
tongne; for he only intended to extenuate her heat by delays, and put her off
with false loves, until either the Emperor should leave the City, or she her
resolution: Least upon her refusal, she might get her death, or a new agent,
he often feigned to have bin with Eurialus, and that he thought himself
infinitely happy in her love, and laid wait for all occasion to have some
conference with her: sometime he told her he could have no access to him:
sometime upon pretense of business, he absented himself from home, and so
frustrated her ficke soul with dilatorie evasions. But that he might have one
truth among so many lies, he once gave Eurialus a light intimation; O said he,
how extremely are you beloved? Then suddenly withdrew himself, and left the
poor Gentleman unsatisfied: but certainly Eurialus could give himself no
rest, a stealthy fire consuming his veins, which did incinerate his marrow;
yet little did he know Sosias, and less did he think that he came from
Lucretia. So incident is it to man never to have his hopes planted in so high a
mounture as his desires: but at last seeing himself to be indeed in love, he
severely began thus to call his judgment into question. Thou know
Eurialus how Tyrannical the Scepter of love is; a fit of laughter, with the
penance of many a tear, a minute of joy bought at the dear expense of a
months fear, and a continual dying without a death; but at last instructed
with many a trial, how vain it was to struggle with his passion, he cried
for quarter and yielded; comsorting himself with the consideration of the
company, who before him had sought under the banner of Love. He remembers some
of the great Masters in Philosophy admitted in his School, and Princes made
subject to his Empire, denying that assertion which denies, That Majesty and
Love,
In the same sphere can move.
Hercules (said he) the indubiate seed of the Gods, disarmed himself at the
command of his Mistress, and changing his Clubbe for a Distaffe, drew a thread
with the same hand with which he drew blood: for it is a passion naturally
implanted in all; the airie regiments are galled with this arrow, For the
Turtle's loved, they say,
Of the green Poppinjay.
And the cold inhabitants of the water have this hie, Bores by whetting their
teeth, Lions by shaking their manes, and the Hearts by their bellowings give
signalls of this fury: nothing is loveproofe, nothing impregnable to love. Why
then should I rebelliously oppose a prescript of nature? No, since love is so
universal a Conqueror, I am content to be his spoil; being now confirmed,
his Quaere is for some good old woman, that might carry a paper to the Lady,
one at last by the assistance of Nisas (an excellent professor in that
Science) was procured to convey his Letter, which spoke thus.

Eurialus to Lucretia.
Lady, these lines should bring you health, if the Writer had any, but his
health, and the hope of it, have a necessary dependence upon your goodness.
Above life I love you, nor can I think you a stranger to this truth, for you
might see my love in my tears, and hear it in my sighs. Take it graciously
if I give you the Table of my thoughts: That beauty which has seated you
above comparison, has surprised me, and the Venus of your face has brought
me into captivity. I have been ever ignorant of this same love, until you
taught me the lesson, and although I long contended to defend my self from
this servitude, yet were my attempts ever subdued by your splendor, and the
beams of your eyes more powerful than those of the Sun, mollified me to an
obedience. I am therefore your Captive, and follow the triumphant Chariot of
your excellencies: you have taken from me the use of repose, and repast; nay my
self from my self: you are the subject of my meditations and the center of
all my passions, it is you whom I fear and love, hope, and weep for: you have
all that I am, so that whilst I am divided from my self, I am undivided in you;
you sit upon my life and death; let not your sentence be more cruel, than your
eyes seem merciful: my letters beg only this favor to have the honor to
speak with you: the grant will be my happiness, but the denial my ruin;
farewell, Soul of my being.

These Letters, when his seal had enjoined them secrecy, were by this woman
dispatched with all speed to Lucretia, whom she sound without any company,
but that of her thoughts; Lady (said she) this missive comes to kiss your
hands at the directions of the noblest love in Caesar's Court, who humbly begs
that you would be but as merciful as you are fair. Lucretia knowing her to be
a noted queen, was highly offended, not so much at the message, as the
messenger. Thou filthy bawd (said she) what boldness, or madness rather
could counsel you to profane the threshold of a Magnifico's Palace, and bring
with you a little silent bawd, (a letter forsooth) to scale the chaste breast of
a matron, and negotiate the violation of religious wedlock. Were it not that I
had my own honor, in a higher esteem than your desert, you should bid
farewell to all Letters, and be no longer the devils footpost. Be gone
therefore with your packet: but no matter give me the Letters, and by their
entertainment let your hot gallant be instructed how coldly his suit
advances. The paper she presently tore in pieces, and spitting upon it (for
her teeth watered) threw it upon the ground, where she kicked it up and down,
as if the very conceit would not let her hold her heels still. and thus (said
she) lewd woman should thou be used: but be gone, and show thy love to thy
self, in thy care not to meet my husband, who will pay thee my debt with
interest. The Bawd might have feared to have miscarried in the action, had not
her experience taught her, that the strong desires of women were inseparable
from their strong denialls. For the present she asked the Lady mercy, and if
she had offended, begd a pardon for her sin of ignorance, but withal
advising her not to commit the greater sin of contempt, she took her leave.
So returning to Eurialus, Happy lover said she, take up your Passion, and
give your sorrow leave to breath. Time would not give her leave to vie Letters
with you, but she outvies you with her love. I found her in a great fit of
melancholy, but the powerful name of Eurialus conjured her up, and the
sovereign receipt of your letters, which she often kissed, miraculously
restored her to her self. With that she departed, and conscious of the foul
play she had shown him resolved to come no more upon that stage. Soon as the
old Hag was gone, Lucretia finding the fragments of the Letter, set the
dislocated parts, and with much questing retrived the lost words: so that she
made a legible copy which a thousand times she read, and kis'd a thousand
times; then wrapping it up in a fine cloth, she laid it up with her Jewels,
but prizd it above them: and repeating now one word, now another, she drunk
love in deeply, and determined to write to him: the mind of her letter was
this:

Eurialus, Teach your hopes a lower ambition than to fly at a game which is not
feasible: trouble not your self to trouble me, but save the charge both of
Letters, and messengers, which imply that you conceit me to be of their trade,
who sell themselves, and are both their own shoppes, and wares. Be disdeceived
Sir, I am not she for whom your error mistook me, nor a woman to be sued
to by the mediation of a Bawd. Seek to prostitute some other, I will be the
mistress only of an honorable love, do with others as your pleasure shall
counsel you. Farewell Sr. and let your requests to me be both advised, and
noble.

Although this Epistle seemed harsh to him, and of a strain different from the
Bawds relation, yet it opened a way to their mutual commerce of Letters, for
he could not but trust her, who had adventured to trust him: his ignorance of
the Italian was a principal impediment, but love made him so ingenious, and so
industrious, that in a short time he arrived to a competencie in the Language,
so that enabled to be his own Secretary he answered to this purpose;

Lady; It is an act of injustice to be so highly offended with me for that my
Letters were presented to you by a hand so infamous: for seeing I was a
stranger and knew it not, by the law my fact may be excused by my ignorance.
That I did send to you let, it be an imputation upon my love, and such a love,
as harbors nothing but honorable intentions. Let my confidence of your
chastity beget in you an assurance of my love: for I detest a woman that is
prodigal of her honor, of which being once despoiled, she is not the subject
of any thing which can be the subject of a commendation. Beauty is a good, no
less corruptible than lovely, and if it wants modesty, it wants too many
grains to be current. But she who has joined chastity to her form, has
enrolled her self in the list of the Gods. In you fair Lady is met this
admirable union, the sole cause which has Sainted you in his devotion, who
would solicit nothing that might prejudice your fame. Deigne me only the
liberty to speak with you, that my words may give you a full display of that
affection, which cannot be bounded in the narrow limits of my Letter. This
Epistle was accompanied with a present, rich for the materials, and curious
for the work, and thus replied upon by Lucretia.

Sr. I received your Letters, and admit of your Apology. That you love me is
none of my wonders, for you are neither the first, nor the only man that has
homaged to my beauty. Many have, and yet do court me, but their travailes
were frustrated, and do not promise to your self any better event. To speak
with you I neither can, nor will: to find me alone is impossible unless you
could assume the shape of a Bird, which is no less impossible; for my lodgings
are high, and a guard has made all the entries inaccessible. I accept your
token, and am won to that only by the elegancie of the workmanship. But to
let you know I will neither be in your debt, nor take it as a pledge of your
love, I return you a Ring with a stone in it of such a value, that what you
sent me was rather sold than given. Farewell.

Eurialus returned this answer.

Excellent Lady, Your mercy has set a Period to your complaints against the
Bawd: and in that is my joy: but you will not give entertainment to my
disesteemed love, and in that is my torment. For although you are beleagred
with a multiplicitie of loves, yet none of them dare stand forth to parallel
mine. Yet will not you believe this, which infidelity arises from your severe
refusal of conference; but were that permitted, it would beget faith in you
and rectify your opinion of my worth I could wish to be unmand into a bird,
or rather (if wishes were effectual) to be transformed into a Flea, and so
not to be excluded by the narrowest crevis. But (dear Lucretia) Why say you,
you will not speak with him, whose All is yours, and whose profession it is to
be such a servant as shall anticipate your injunctions by his obedience? O
forget that same word I will not: and carry not death in your mouth, and life
in your looks. Let not that sentence be irrevocable, which pronounced that to
love you was but to abuse my self and my time. Abandon this cruelty, and
^urne your style, or conclude to be my murderer: for be confident that to me
your breath is more inevitably mortal, than another weapon. Love is the
total of my desires; but say, you love, and make me really happy. How that
mean present stands in your esteem, I dispute not, seeing your acceptance
has set a price upon it above its first value. Your Ring shall never from my
finger, which supplies the place of your lips, and is kissed for them. Farewell
my delight, and do not envy me those joys, which you may confer upon me
with such facility:

Having thus often bandied one to another, at last Lucretia took a paper, in
which she drew the counterfeit of her mind with these lines.

Eurialus, I could willingly entitle you to what I am, for your worth does
challenge love, and your gallant qualities command it. I speak not how I am
surprizd with your beauty, and extasied with your face so full of Loves, and
Cupids: Yet I dare not love, for were I once enterd into those amorous lists I
should observe neither measure nor mean: you cannot be here long, and I, if I
once come into play, must always be in action. The examples of those so many,
forsaken by foreign loves, are my so many advertisements not to prosecute your
love. Jason treacherously cosened Medea, by whose alone assistance he finished
the adventure of the golden Fleece: And Theseus whom Ariadne did extricate out
of the fatal Labyrinth, ignobly left that distressed Lady in an unhabited
Island, the worse Labyrinth of the two. I know what an inconveniencie it is to
embrace a strangers love, and until I shall be of the forlorn hope will not
engage my self in so certain a danger: you men are of a spirit more
confirmed, and have a greater command over your passions: but poor impotent
women! if they once take this fit of raging, nothing but death can be Physic
to their frenzy: They are rather out of themselves than in love, and if they
meet not a correspondent return of affection, nothing so dreadful as a woman
in that fury: when this fire has once insinuated, we respect neither fame,
nor fate, and must either enjoy our love, or not live. The greatness of the
want of what we would have, adds degrees to the greatness of our desires:
and we expose our breasts to the menaces of destruction, so we may sat the
impatient longings of our appetites. But I, who am as nobly married, as I was
nobly descended, have decreede with my self to barricado all passages, and
make good the place against the forcible entry of love: and of yours in
chief, who being a stranger may give me as unworthy a farewell, as Demophoon
did to the unfortunate Phyllis. Be therefore over entreated not to solicit
my love, and to cancel your own, and if you do love, make demonstration of
that truth in desisting from a suit which inferres my ruin, as it is necessary
consequent. Farewell.

Eurialus not cooled but heat with these Letters called for a Pen, and
contrived this answer. All happiness to my life Lucretia; you have restored
me to Health with the Dose of your Letter; yet was it not all Cordial, but
blended with some gall, which I hope shall be no ingredient in the next. I read
it often, and kissed it oftener: but it seems to intimate something contrary to
your former overtures. It counsaime not to love, because it is not expedient
for you to do so, and this you would evince by the instances of some Ladies
who have been betrayed by strangers; which you have done with such Rhetoric
that you rather teach me to admire than to forget you; whilst you command me
not to love you with eloquence, which commands me to love you. The more I
read the more my flames advanced to see that delicate conjunction of wit, and
beauty. To bid me not love is to bid a stream recoile into its first head,
and to command a mountain to humble it self to a vallie. If Scythia can be
without Snow, or Heaven without motion; then can Eurialus be, and his love not
be. It is not so easy for men to rake up their flames as you imagine, for
what you ascribe to our sex, many have imputed to yours. But I shall not reply
upon you, rather answer to your induction, which from the treachery of some
few strangers would definitively conclude me false. You have musterd up some
few authorities, but I could give you a Catalogue of more forlorn souls, who
have been deserted and ruind by Ladies. Trotlus deluded by Chryseis, Deiphobus
undone by Hetena.

Ana Circe with her charms, her lovers suits,
In skins of Swine, and hides of other bruites.
But it is bad Logic to conclude universally from particular premises: and
if for the falsehood of two or three men you shall unjustly quarrel all
mankind, by as good a consequence, for the perjuries of as few women, may I
bid defiance to the whole sex. Some others love may supply us with a better
coppie after which to write our own: That of Antonie and Cleopatra was a love
contracted between strangers, and yet inviolable.

How many of the Graecians at Troy were taken by those Ladies whom they had
taken, and so powerfully detained by those foreign loves, that by a miraculous
kind of oblivion, they did forget their country, before they could forget
their Mistresses. Dear Lucretia let these be your precedents, seeing he that
now sueth for you will ever love, and ever be yours. Nor call me a stranger,
for I am Citizen of this place, by a better title than a Native: for he was
made one by his fortune, but I by my choice. No country shall be mine, but
where you are, for your presence can make me a free Denison of any place. When
I go from hence, my return shall be speedy, for my journey into Germany is
but to settle my estate that my stay with you may be the longer. I shall
casily find pretenses to reside here, for Caesar has many affairs of state
in these parts, and I shall so prevail with him, that their dispatch may be
commended to my care: sometimes I will be here in some Embassage, sometimes
upon some other employment: befides he must have a deputy in Thuscanie, and I
dare give my self the promise of that charge. Therefore doubt not sweet
Lucretia, the rather because you and my heart are convertible, and if I can be
without one, I can be without the other. At last therefore extend your pity
to one, Who like Snow dissolves away
Exposed to the sunny ray.


Take my languishment into your noble consideration, and at last set a happy
period to my misery. Look upon my pale and extenuated body, and wonder that
my soul remooves not out of so ruinous a habitation. Had I killed your father,
your ingenious cruelty could not invent more exquisite torments. Ah my
Lucretia, how severe would you be against the profane contemners of your
beauty, who thus trample upon your prostrate votaries. No longer continue my
sufferings, but receive me into your grace, that I may be, and in that happy,
the servant of Lucretia. Farewell.

As a Tower which broken within seems outwardly impregnable, suddenly
falls with the battery of the Ram, so did Lucretia fall at this assault. And
confident of his loyal integrity, she revealed her dissembled love, and
unmasked her self in this Letter.

Eurialus, I can no longer make good the place against you, nor any longer deny
you a place in the breast of Lucretia. You have won the field, and I am yours. I
have made my self obnoxious to too many dangers, if I be not secured by your
providence, and fidelity. Faithfully observe what you have written, for I come
now to give you livery, and seisin of my love, and if you shall ever surrender
this possession you are a villain, and a Traitor. It is an easy thing to
overreach a poor Gentlewoman, but the facility of the fact adds to the
foulness of it. As yet there is no hurt, and if you think me worthy of a
desertion let me know so much before my flame be enraged by the addition of a
new violence: and let us not at all begin that which must be concluded with
repentance. In all actions the end is principally attended by the agent: I have
but little foresight the true character of my sex: but you are a man, and
assuming to your self a double charge, must be a guardian to us both. I
present you with the dedication of my self, and honor your faith, to whose
bosom I have let my love for term of life, and not as tenant at will.
Farewell guide of my life, and star of my course.

After this, many ejaculations passed between them, and never did Eurialus
write so ardently, but Lucretia answered with an ardencie as equal. There was
nothing wanting now but conveniencie of meeting, which seemed to be joined with
a kind of impossibility, the Lady being guarded with the observation of so
many eyes. Argus kept not a stricter watch over the Heifer at the command of
the jealous gods, than Menelaus had set over Lucretia. It is the national
sin of Italy to immure and lock up their wives as they do their money, which
wife men have thought to be none of the best policies. For women do most
violently long after forbidden fruits: what you will, they reject, and your
severest prohibitions are their hottest pursuits: had they but the reins in
their neck, they would not trip so often: If a woman be not chaste out of her
own free and noble inclination, bolts, and keepers are but impertinent
vanities.

For who is it, can those keepers keep, for them
Finely to win, is her first stratagem.
Lucretia had a brother, who was of her counsel, and the faithful Mercury
between her self and Eurialus. He is entrusted with all privacy to receive
Eurialus into the house, which he might do, for he lived with Lucretias
mother, whom Lucretia did often visit. The plot was this; That, Eurialus being
shut up in some closet, after the old Lady was gone to her devotions, Lucretia
should come in to Eurialus, coloring her love with the pretext of a dutiful
visit. The term of two days was the time prefixed for this amorous design,
which were as so many years to the longing couple: for although to men in
fear time has a winged heel; yet to men in hope it walks with leaden
sockes. But fortune shined not upon the desires of the Lovers, for Lucretias
mother had smelt out the conspiracy, and upon the day assigned, she went from
home, but locked out her son in law, who presently carried the sad news to
Eurialus, which was no less grievous to Lucretia: who seeing that the plot was
detected, well said she, since I cannot arrive at my wished Port by this
passage, I will attempt a new one, nor shall my mother glory, that she could
stop the eddie of my impetuous affections. There was one Pandalus, a Gentleman
allied to her husband, him she called to the Table, and made of her counsel,
for her mind once enfired was incapable of rest. She signified to Eurialus by
letter that he might confidently impart his counsels to him, as a man of
experienced fidelity, and the fittest instrument to contrive their meetings.
But Eurialus, who had observed this Pandalus never to be from Menelaus his
side, doubted his honesty, and suspected some treason. While he is in this
demurre, he is dispatched away to Rome to treat with his Holiness about the
Coronation of Sigismund: which cast both the lovers into an Agony, but Casars
authority must be obeyed. For the space of two months (for so long he was
absent) Lucretia confined herself to her Chamber, and put on mourning weeds,
as if he had been departed the world, who was but departed Thuscanie. All
wonderd, but none knew the cause of it, which indeed was the reason why they
wonderd, for ignorance is the cause of admiration. The whole family thought it
self in darkness as if the Sun had bin eclipsed, for the light of her beauty
was commonly overcast with her curtains, and the light of her smiles was never
seen. In this state she continued, till she heard news of Eurialus his
return, and that Caesar was gone to meet him. Then as if awaked out of
sleep, she stripped off her mourning apparel, and resuming her former dress
she, opened the window, and joyously expected him. So soon as Caesar saw her,
O (said he) Eurialus no longer deny a truth so evident; this Sun was set, while
you were gone, but you have brought us the morning, and the Sun is again
risen. Love has no boundures, and it can be concealed no morethan the Cough.
It is your pleasure Sr. (said Eurialus) to be merry, and to amaze me with
riddles. Perchance the noise, and neighing of the Horses brought her to the
window: with that he stole a look, and constellated his eyes with hers: and
this was their first parley, but a silent one. Not many days were passed,
before Nisus (a trusty servant to Eurialus, and a great favourer of the cause)
had spied out a Victuling house, which being situated on the back side of
Menelaus his Palace, had the prospect of Lucretias Chamber. He quickly had
won the Victuler to secrecy, and then brought his master thither, where he
sat privately expecting when fortune would present herself to his sight, nor
was his expectation deceived: for at last she appeared; and Eurialus no sooner
saw her, but (said he) how faires the governesse of my life, turn thy aspect
hither, and make me happy with its influence. Art thou there my dear Eurialus
(said Lucretia) I have now the happiness to hear thee speak, but this
accursed distance envieth me the happiness of thy embraces. A Ladder (said
Eurialus) shall remove that difficulty, do you but make fast your Chamber
door, for we have too long procrastinated our joys. O my Eurialus said she,
if you tender my safety be more circumspect; here is a very suspicious window,
and a worse neighbor; as for that Victuler, a little money will purchase him to
betray us both: we will walk in a securer tract, and for the present acquiet
our selves, that we have had this liberty of conference. After they had
drawn out their discourse to some length, and by a reed mutually enterchanged
favors, they sadly took their leaves, Sosias having now sounded their
purposes, in vain (said he to himself) do I oppose their attempts; if I do
not intervene with some devise, my Lady will be ruined, and my Mistress
defamed. Of these mischiefs it shall be my province to avert one. Let my
Mistress love; if her love be secret it cannot but be secure. But her
passion has blinded her, and put out her providence. If therefore we cannot
bridle that, we will labor to muzzle report, and keep the house inviolate
from the aspersions ofinfamie. I have hitherto resisted the commission of this
unlawful act, but since I can make head no longer, it shall now be my last
care, that, that be secretly done, which I see will be done. For it little
differs, either not to do, or so to do, that no man knows the doing.
Sensuality is generally implanted in all, nor is he a man whom this fury does
not haunt, and he is most chaste, that is most cautious. Whilst he thus reasons
with himself, Lucretia came out of her chamber, to whom having addressed
himself, he humbly demanded the reason, why she thought his bosom a casket
too unworthy for her secrets of love? I know said he you love Eurialus, and
without my privitie would love him, but be circumspect whom you make a sharer
in your counsels, for you are a servant to him, who is the master of your
secret. The first degree of wisdom is not at all to love: The second to love
closely, and to blind the world, as your passion has blinded you. This you
cannot do alone without the assistance of a third: my heart has been prooved
true to you by the Test of time, and the Index of a long experience. If you
shall please to encharge me with any thing, command with all assurance: it
shall be my study that your love be not unmasked, and your self exposed to
punishment, and your husband to obloquie, and scorn. Honest Sosias (replied
Lucretia) I confess this truth, and confidently repose my trust in you,
presuming that my affiance will oblige your fidelity, but you were me thought,
somewhat cold in seconding my desires, or rather hot in opposing them, yet
since I see you undertake my cause as a voluntary, I shall entertain your
service, nor suspect any treachery, an improvident act of many who have taught
others to deceive them by seeming fearful to be deceived. You know, that I
burn extremely, and therefore cannot burn long, for the violence of a motion
is an enemy to its continuance. Eurialus languisheth for love, and I dye: and
to oppose our Passions is to advance them. One meeting would rebate our edge,
and rectify our loves to a moderation. Go therefore to Eurialus and inform
him that the poverty of our fortune will afford us but one way of access, if
four days hence, when our Peasants bring the Corn home, he will humble
himself into the habit of a Porter: the gods are his precedents who have
masked under more inglorious disguises. Thus dissembling his person, and our
purpose under a Frocke let him carry Wheat into the Granarie. Give him a
punctual situation of my Chamber, where I shall attend him at the day
prefixed: and when courteous opportunity shall leave him alone, let him enter
my lodging, where I will be found with no more company than himself brings
with him: Sosias although sensible of the danger, yet apprehensive of a greater
imbarkes for the action: and finding Eurialus, he delivers him those
instructions he had in commission from his Lady, which although in themselves
very weighty, yet they seemed light in the seal of his estimation: he hugges
the attempt, and addresses himself to the adventure, and complains of nothing
but those same four ages, which Sosias had called by the name of four days.

So insensate is the breast of an Inamorato, and so desperately is the eye of his
judgment seeld up, that his heart takes no impression from the justest cause
of terror, and the apprehension of a danger was never there. His Optickes are
so irregular, that all objects lose the truth of what they are, their Ideas
being defaced by his abused imagination. What is most inaccessible presents a
smooth surface in a lovers Glass, and the greatness of any undertaking is
lessened in his perspective. The anxious watches of a jealous husband, are in
his valuation as vain as his dreams, which proceeds from the want of fear,
which was never one of Cupids retinue, and contempt of love, which in his
judgment is but a Goblin to awe simplicity. Such an invincible Rascal is that
same blind Lad, that he can Cow the bravest spirit beneath the lowest
servitude. Eurialus high in the favor of his Prince, and Fortune, but so high
in the impregnable tower of his own judgment, that it is not imaginable that
he should finke to an humility so base: yet this Eurialus exchanged Scarlet
with Sackcloath, and he that grew up in the delicacie of all softness, did
now harden his shoulders to the patience of a burden. Since our owne^ age has
enabled us to give evidence of a transformation so prodigious, we will not
dispute the realitie of those famous metamorphoses, which were transmitted to
posterity by the most delicate of the Roman wits: for although those changes
were not natural by the assumption of shapes, yet they were moral by the
harmony of Conditions: so that where the nobler operations of the discursive
parts are drowned in a Lethargy of sensualtie, you must look for such a
creature in the History of Beasts; for the inquiry would be ridiculous, should
you search in the definition of man. The morning did now leave old Tithons bed,
to do a courtesy to a younger lover: and the Sun rendering all things in their
colors, could not but give Eurialus a fresh one; who by his own sentence then
pronounced himself happy (such corrupt judges are we of felicity) when a
child new come from the Arch of his Cradle, would have doomed him miserable:
when he was mingled with the contemptible crowd of Porters: where he
accounted that his glory, which is the opposite to glory, to lie obscured and
unknown. Thus our gallant Porter jogges on to the house, where he learnedly
fills his sack, and having emptied it in the Granarie, as being puney in
this fraternity, came last down. In his way (as his instructions taught him)
he gently opened her chamber door, of which, by the description of Sosias, he
had a Mathematical knowledge: which he as suddenly shut, as he had entered
privily; there he finds Lucretia alone busy with a needle, in expectation of
other imploiment. Advancing near: Thou great Tresurer of my spirits, said he,
which art president of my life, and hopes; I have now found thee aloncout of
the danger of any House informers, and shall be initiated in thy chaste
embraces, which has been the summarie of my desires. No interposed wall can
now eclipse thy beauties, nor the tyranny of distance any longer usurp upon my
eyes. Lucretia, although her self the Projectresse was astonished at the first
encounter, imagining that she saw some spirit, and not Euralius, and thinking
it incredible, that so great a man should run so great an hazard, she stood
amazed at her own workemanshippe, and her invention almost put her out of her
wits. But Eurialus was a very good woman's Doctor, and with some kisses well
applied restored her to her senses, and self. Poor heart, said she, art thou
he? Art thou my Euralius? And having her cheeks double died (for the tincture
of a blush was added to their Roses) she gave him such an embrace, as if she
intended an union of souls. His forehead she sweetly pressed with her lips,
and intermingling words with kisses; ah, said she, upon what a doubtful cast
have thou played: it shall be to me an indubiat argument of thy loyalty, and I
were Infidel, should I require a second demonstration. Thou have made an
undeceiveable experiment of thy love, and my faith, shall be found a prize
worthy the adventure, Fate prosper what we have designd,
And fan us with auspicious wind.
While I live, not any man but thy self, shall by the least color entitle
himself to me: no, not my husband, if he may boast that name, who never had
my heart, and my hand only which was forced, and therefore not obligatorie.
Come on thou extract of my delight, and pleasures, cast off this Frocke, and
let me see thee as thou art, not personating another in a disguise. Put off the
Porter, and put on Eurialus. Then uncasing himself of those fordid weeds, he
appeard in the luster of an unclouded Sun, and by the forwardness of his
defires, as well as the bravery of his apparel, he spoke himself to be what
she expected. But now Sosias who stood sentre knocked at the door, and warned
the gentle lovers to provide for their safety; for Menelaus, in great have was
coming for something in that Chamber. You must said he play the jugler to
cast a mist before his eyes, and gull him with some fallacy. Said Lucretia
suddenly, by that bed there is a blind Closset, in which are all my lewells of
price, of which I value you to be the richest, and will put you up in the same
Cabinet. You may remember what I have writ to you, if we should be at any time
fair to be taken by my husband, Damage faisant, Go in boldly, the
darkness will be your security: so that you neither move, nor spit. Eurialus
was in some doubt what to do, but finding that time could spare no place for
consultation, he resolved upon execution, and concluded to take her advise:
with that she opened the door, and returned to her needle. Menelaus and Betus
with him are now entered to search for some records appertaining to the State:
but not finding them in any of the Deskes, they are without question said
Menelaus in that Closset, and command Lucretia to bring a light to look there.
Eurialus terrified at the word, his blood discomfited in his face made a
retreat to his heart. And now beginning to hate Lucretia, he severely declaimed
against his own lightness, the alone cause of his present captivity. I shall
now, said he, be publicly traduced: the loss of my Princes favor is
inevitable, and that of my life is too fair a possibility. What power
created, or can safety herself rescue me from destruction? O the simplest of
what ever was called man, who have made my own ruin my Option. At what
intolerable rates are these pleasures of love sold, for the buyer is often the
price of his own ware? Yet for loves cause, which like smoke, then vanishes
when it is at the highest, we will skrue our selves into the most inextricable
streights. I am my self an example of this sad Truth, for humane reason cannot
furnish me with so much thread, as will clear me of this Labyrinth. If
pitying fate would send me a gracious Liberate, love should never make me
another Mittimus. Kind Heavens redeem me hence, and dispense with this
youthful error: do not severely measure my ignorances in all their
dimensions, but reserve me till repentance has made an atonement for my
delinquencies; for it will be your greater glory that I live a monument of your
mercy, than die a sacrifice to your justice. It was Lucretias purpose not to
love, but to betray, and to bring me like a poor Heart into the Toil. This
day is the period of my life if the date be not extended by the power of an
omnipotent hand. I have often heard of the impostures of women, and never had
the wit to decline them, but if I come off now, I will bid defiance to all
their future stratagems.

Lucretia her self was in as great an agony, distracted with a double fear,
both for her lovers safety, and her own. But as it happens in unexpected
occurrences, the conceit of a woman, is more present than that of a man (the
suddenness of the danger setting an edge upon her wit) she had instantly
contrived a remedy. Husband, said she, there is a box in the window, where I
remember you used to put some of your records, let us see if these you now
look for be not there: and with that running hastily to the Box with a
pretense to open it, she thrust it out at the window with such art, that they
supposed, it had been by chance, and not her intention. O husband, said she,
haste that we suffer not: the Box is fallen down, make all speed least either
Jewels, or writings be lost: for Heavens sake get you down, and in the interim
I shall watch that nothing be stolen. See the boldness of the woman; the best
eye has been deluded by their false apparitions. He only was never
deceived, whom his wife never attempted to deceive: but he that has escaped,
and yet has been laid at, let him ascribe his felicity to his Stars, and not
to his Providence. Menelaus and Betus moved with this accident so much
concerning them, run speedily down into the street. The house being built
high after the Thuscan manner had many stares to be descended, which favored
Eurialus with time to provide for his better security: who by the counsel of
Lucretia took a new covert. Having now gathered up the Jewels and writings but
not finding those they came for, they returned to search those Boxes, which
were in the Closset, where Eurialus first took sanctuary. There they met with
the papers, and having taken leave of Lucretia they departed. Then did she open
the door to her sweet prisoner, and invite him forth with the delicate
compellations of, Thou living sourse of my delights, and summarie wherein all
my joys, are abbreviated, and yet not lessend by the contraction: we have now
liberty to discharge our minds by conference, and to let our selves loose to
the freedom of uncontrol'd embraces. Our pleasure will be more endeard, and
fined by this difficulty of the beginning, which though the perverseness of
fortune would have nipped, and blasted, yet some favorable power, unwilling to
see so loyal a pair abandoned to destruction, kept life in our love by a
gentler Influence. Here is now neither place nor cause for fear, let me
therefore embrace thee, thou armefull of Roses, and Lillies: why do
thoustand? Why do thou doubt? I am thy Lucretia, do thou abhor her touch?
( Eurialus his shaking sit having scarce left him) mustred up his spirits, and
in his arms closely entwined his Mistress: never, said he, was I arrested
with so terrible an expectation of death. But the greatness of worth makes the
sufferings, and deservings of thy servants inferior to the acquist: and if
things beratable to their value, then it is a breach of commutative justice,
that such kisses, and embraces should be banished away Gratis. And my self
(for ingenuity will speak truth) have bought this good at an under rate, having
paid nothing for it but the fear of danger. Could I so dye, as to live again,
and enjoy thee: a thousand times would I dye, to revive and enjoy thee a
thousand times. O the felicity that I am estated in! Do I see a vision, or is
my joy a real one? Do I indeed embrace thee, or am I deluded with a
phantasme? No surely, here is no apparition, for this is flesh, not spirit.
Lucretia was arrayed in a vcty thin Pall, which did fticke to her so close,
and without wrinkle, that it rendered her breasts, and hippes in their true
figure, and dissembled not her most private motions. Her neck was purely
white; and her eyes did flame strongly: but to say white like the snow, or
flaming like the funne, were to dishonor her with the beggerlinesse of the
similitude. A cheerful look, a lively face: the Lilly, and Rose are but the
obscure types and shadows of those delicate tinctures laid on her cheek by
the pencill of Nature. Her laughter was free, but modest, her breast full, and
her paps like two Pomegranates, did rise up on either fide with a gentle, and
tempting swelling: which as they did beat, gave both a signal, and a
challenge to the encounter, Eurialus his continency was too weak, any longer
to abide the Trial: and the poor Gentleman was not mortified enough to
combat so violent a temptation: but having already left his fear, he resolved
to leave his modesty too, and so boarding the Lady, Now, said he, let us make
our selves one, in each others reciprocal fruition, she (resisted, it seems
it is an old fashion) telling him a tale of the great care forsooth she had of
her reputation, and that she imagined that his love would be limited within the
boundures of kisses, and pretty talking. At that Eurialus smiling assaulted her
with this Dilemma. Either it is known, said he, that I am here, or not: ifit
be known, who will not suspect the rest? and it will be a simple thing in
you to undergo such an imputation, and do nothing for it: but if it be
unknown, then this likewise shall no man know: it is the earnest of my Love,
and to want it, is to dye. It is a sin, said Lucretia, Nay, said Eurialus, it
is a sin not to make use of a good thing, when you may. To refuse this
occasion so freely vouchsafed by your self, and so diligently labored for by
me, were to slight your noble favor, and to give the lie to my own
endeavors. And with that taking hold of her wrist, he easily overcame her,
who did but prevacilate in her resistance, and fight with a purpose to be
overthrown. Nor did the fruition of her bring any satiety to his appetite,
although usually such desires are emptied, and evaporated in the enjoying; it
did rather add a thirst to his dropsy. But Eurialus having an eye upon his
danger, after he had refreshed himself with a banquet took leave of the most
unwilling Lucretia: from whom he went, unsuspected, and unobserved, being only
taken for what he was not, a Porter, walking homeward, he begins to wonder
at himself, being by himself almost put out of his own knowledge: and
pensively considers, what the event might be, if Caesar should meet, and know
him. Into what a jealousy (said he to himself) would this confused habit put
him: I should be the common Tabletalke, and the best help to discourse; I
should never be at quiet, till he had extorted from me the mystery of this
clownish disguise. But I should be bold to acquaint his Highness with a very
little of the Truth: he should not know that Menelaus his house was the scene,
and that I personated the Porter upon that stage: for Caesar is privately my
Rival, and it would prove a matter of dangerous consequence, were there but
the least whisper abroad, that the man had been in the saddle, before the
Master could put his foot in the stirrup. Lucretia must not be discovered, she
entertained me, she saved me: and my silence is the least reward I can pay her,
for her fidelity. While he thus talked with himself, he espied Palinurus, and
his trusty Achates; but was at home before they could discover him: then having
doft his frocke, he told them all the passages of his adventure. His passions
had so strongly continued their impressions in him; that in the relation of his
fear, and joy, he seemed to the spectators really still to fear, and really
still to joy. Fool, said I to my self, to consigne my safety, to the faith of
a woman, and adventure my life in so weak a vessel, whose contrary has been
so often commanded by my Father, that to have perished in the fact, had been
the merit of my disobedience. He would discourse to me of their inclinations,
and manners, in so hated a language, that he offered violence to my ears: for
not any name which employed vice, but with him was an Epithet, worthy that
sex. I was thus taught, but I forgot my lesson. If I had been known by any
man, sweating under my burden, the dishonor would have been traduced to my
posterity; and it would seem an abatement in my Coat, when my Heir should be
told that his Father bore a sack in his Arms. I had been lost to Caesar, who
would have thought my Levity fitter for a Bedlam, than a Court. But to
interpret favorably for my self, admit my Master had passed it for a jest;
what if her husband when he was hunting for his papers, had started me? The Law
of Italy is severe enough against the violaters of the marriage bed, but the
grief of a wronged husband enlarges it self to a vengeance, that will not be
limited, nor mitigated by Law.

One Husband whips the Adultrer dead,
Another stabs him in his bed.
But suppose he had spared my life, he would send me to the Jail, or which
is worse, to Caesar: And grant that I had delivered my self from him, he
being disarmed, and I having an approved sword secretly by my side, yet there
were others with him, and the room had weapons to furnish them. Besides in the
house were many tall fellows, who would presently have shut the doors, and
then tortured me with such an extremity, as would have extinguished the memory
of the persecutions. But chance, not cunning, redeemed me from this
slaughterhouse. Yet why should I call that chance which was the dexterity of
Lucretia's wit, and so unjustly rob her the honor of my delivery. Singular
is this love, and this Lady goes alone. Dear Lucretia, thy self art Argument
enough to confute my Fathers invectives, and to vindicate thy whole kind from
the imputation of an in constancy. Why should I doubt then to lay my life in
thy fair hands, and dedicate it to the protection of so pure a faith. Had I a
thousand necks, I would render them all to thy custody: for thy virtues are
fidelity and circumspection, from whence a prudence is derived, by which thou
know how to love, and how to save thy Lover. Invention it self could not
have contrived a neater trick to divert those importunate searchers: whom thou
did delude with so much Art, as if thou had bin born for this end alone to
be recorded the Author of so memorable an escape. Thou were the preserver of my
life, be pleased to be the disposer of it; and what it was first thy favor to
save, be it now thy Grace to accept. I am thy creature, and my breath is from
thy benevolence, which in thy service I shall be as ready to lose, as thou were
ready to save; for both my life and death are thy Prerogative. I am ravished
with the speculation of the peculiar rarities of thy wit and beauty, and shall
my self be sick, unless I give them another visit. When shall I make the
second impression of my love, upon thy yielding lips, and with my fingers
make so many dimples upon thy tender pappes? That which thou have seen
Achates, is not enough to make thee truly say, thou saw her. There be
degrees of activitie in her looks, for at a distance they wound, and at hand
they murder. Had thou been with me, thou had been struck with a more
confounding sight, then Tantalus his friend, when that Lydian King, in a pretty
frollicke, showed him his wife naked: And had I power, my faithful Achates, I
would present thee with the like spectacle: for neither can I with all the
flourish of Rhetoric give you the description of her features: nor can thou
by all the vigor of meditation comprehend the plenitude of my joys.
Congratulate therefore with me, and content thy self with this small portion
of knowledge, seeing that words are too narrow interpreters to express her many
graces, and that my pleasure had something in it more copious, and significant
than language. Thus Eurialus talked with Achates, and Lucretia talked as much
with her self. Yet was her joy less for want of a partner. Grief, indeed a
passion contracting the heart, is lessoned by communication, because it is a
motion opposite to that contraction: But joy, a Passion distending the heart,
is augmented by communication, because it is a motion concurring with that
distention. But Eurialus must not love alone; for to love Lucretia, and to love
without a Rival, is in the number of impossibles: it being a fortune attending
great beauties, to have a multitude of flies to court their flames.

Baccarus a Knight of Hungary, a man both noble by his birth, and by his
nearenesse to Caesar's person, fell extremely in love with her: his hope
persuaded that she loved him by an argument drawn from his face, which he knew
lovely: but his fear dissuaded the contrary, by an argument drawn from her
breast, which he thought chaste.

Lucretia, after the manner of the Thuscan Ladies, dispensed the smiles of her
brows upon the Courtiers, with so fine an impartiality, that while none of
them saw others preferred, every one by a flattering application made himself
the man. It is an Art, or rather a trick which our Ladies practice whereby to
dissemble their love. Baccarus is in a manner dispossessed of the state of his
Reason, and no counsel can reestablish him in it, until he has some
acquaintance with Lucretia's mind, which was thus attempted. The Gentlewomen
of Sienna, have a custom to visit our Ladies Chapel, about a mile from the
City. Thither went Lucretia attended with two Maids, and an old Woman,
Baccarus followed, with a posee of Violets in his hand, very delicately
gilded, in whose leaves there was a Letter of love, with fine subtilty
enclosed. And let us stay our wonder at this, since the Orator has avouched
that himself saw the Iliads of Homer comprehended in the narrow capacity of a
nut-shell. After some humble recommendations, he tenderd both himself, and
Violet to Lucretia, and she rejects both: But at the importunity of the
Hungarian, and by the assistance of the old woman, she was wrought to accept
it: for why, Madam (said she) should you faigne to your self a fear, and
frame a danger in your imagination to tremble at. But Lucretia had not long
kept it, before she gave it one of her Maids, who soon after encountering two
Students was easily over-entreated to part with it, who being naturally
inquisitive, had suddenly unutiled the Mystery, and discovered the Paper. Men
of this profession, have been heretofore principally in the grace of our women:
but since Caesar's Court came hit her, they are but their sport, and contempt;
for instructed by so fair a precedent as that of Venus and Mars, they prefer
arms to arts, and hold, that a pen is not so substantial a weapon as a
Lance. The scholars proud of an opportunity to vindicate themselves of the
swordmen, deliver the letter to Menelaus, and wish him to peruse the tenor of
his injuries. Presently the good man was filld with indignation, and the house
with noise. Lucretias innocence plead her not guilty, and the narration of
the fact, and the old woman's evidence, did undeniably confirm the plea.
Complaint is made to Caesar, and Bacarus convented: who ingeniously confessed a
truth so apparent, and gave his majesty an oath never to make new attempts
upon his virtue. But he had too much of that heresy, that Jupiter frowns not,
but smiles upon the perjuries of lovers. This animates him to reenforce his
determination, and the rather because it was forbidden: it being a humor
originally traduced, most irregularly to prosecute that, which is provided
against with the greatest caution, and commination. It was now winter, and
Zephire resigned to a ruder breath, now the women threw Snowballs into the
streets, and from thence the youth of the City bandied them as fast into
their windows. Baccarus will now take an occasion from the winter, as before
from the spring: then a violet was his messenger, and now a ball of Snow, in
which with much cunning he had enclosed a letter, and with no less dexterity
directed it into Lucretias window. Who will not then confess (before the rack
be presented him) that there is no bearing of sail which is not of fortunes
trimming, and that she is Lady Regent of all sublunaries.

One hour of gentle fate's more prevalent
Then thy commands to Mars from Venus sent.
There is a wild kind of sect, which has forced this principle, Fortune has
no interesse in wise men. A sort of Stoicall wits, who if they were put in
Phalaris his Bull, would not rore but sing. Yet certainly in the managing of
the common affair she has a double stroke, uphill and down hill; to advance
a hope, and ruin it. She overwhelmed this poor Gentleman even when his hopes
did almost touch upon the cape of happiness. He was not well advised to
enclose his love-letter in a posie of violets, nor at this time to the same
purpose to choose no surer convay then a Snowball. But had Fortune crowned this
devise of his with wished success, then had his subtlety and wisdom bin
extolled by all men above the skies. But see the ill chance, the Snowball
falling out of Lucretias hand, ran toward the fire, and it self and the Seal
being dissolved by the heat, the letter lay open to view; which Menelaus then
in presence presently snatched up, and as greedily perused. The contents
occasioned a great combustion, but Baccazus thought it his safer course to
trust to a fair pair of heels then to apologies in a fact so evident.

This love of his stood Eurialus in good stead, for the jealous husband taken
up in watching Baccarus steps and actions, gave Eurialus fair advantage to put
his plots in execution.

To keep to ones proper use asks mickle pain,
What many seek by love or force to gain.
Between Lucretias and the adjacent house went a narrow alley, the near
posture of the walls afforded an easy ascent into Lucretias Chamber; but this
was to be attempted by night only. Menelaus was to go into the country, and
to lodge from home. The lovers thought this joyful day long a coming. He takes
his journey, Eurialus changing his habit hies him to the alley. There Menelaus
had a stable whereinto Eurialus got by Socias directions, and there under the
Hay took up his lodging. Dromo that was Menelaus groom in the morning came to
the Hayloft with his Pitchforke, which he struck well nie into Eurialus
sides, and had certainly murdered him had not Sosias by good fortune come that
way: who knowing the danger Eurialus was in, called to Dromo: Prithee brother
let me alone to give the Horses meat, and in the mean while see what good
cheer is providing for dinner. Let us be frollicke while our Lord is away.
We live a better life with my Lady in his absence: she is merry and
freehanded: he peevish, unquiet, convetous, and never pleased. See thou not
what a miserable house he keeps, how he lockesup the victuals from day to
day wretched catiffe! that seeks by this sordid penury to heap up riches; for
is it not the height of foolery to live poor all a man's life time, to die
rich. What a good Lady have we that imagining beef and mutton not sufficient,
feasts us with hollow foul, and denies us not plenty of the rarest wines.
Prithee Dromo provide good junkets. Let me alone for that quoth Dromo, I have
more mind to be in the Kitchen then the Stable. I brought my Master out of
town, he gave me not one word all the live-long day, but at evening he bad me
tell my Lady he should lie abroad all night. I commend thee Sosia that
abhorrest our Masters conditions, and I had long ere now given him the bag if
my Ladies hadnot retained me by her liberal breakefasts. If you will agree to it
we will not sleep a wink to night, we will eat and drink till day appear,
and waste more in one mcale, then our Master shall have in a whole month.

Eurialus was glad to hear them thus in discourse, yet observed the conditions
of servants, and imagined that his own in his absence served him with the same
sauce. So when Dromo was gone Eurialus rising up: what a happy night (quoth
he) Sosia shall I enjoy by thy courtesy that have directed me hither, and by
an excellent wile kept me from being disclosed. Thou art an honest man, and
thy deserts challenge my affection, nor will I prove ungrateful, this good
turn shall not go unrewarded.

The appointed hour drew onjoyfull Eurialus, although he had twice escaped
narrowly with life, climbes the wall, and the window being open, finds
Lucretia by the fire with her junkets about her, expecting his coming. She
knowing him to be her sweet heart arose and embraced him. They kiss, and
after salutation, with wine and dainties refresh their tired spirits. How
momentany are our joys! how durable our grief! Eurialus had not had one
hours fruition of content when Sosia brought the sad tidings of Menelaus
return and blasted all their joy. Eurialus is frighted and bethinkes himself
how to make escape. Lucretia having hid the junkets goes to welcome her husband
home. husband (quoth she) thou art welcome: but prithee why staydst thou so
long in the country? take heed I smell out no piece of waggery: why do thou
not reside at home? why do thou excruciate me by thy absence? but prithee
lets sup here, and then we will go to bed. They were then in the Hall where the
household used to sit at meals, there she endeavored to stay her husband that
Eurialus might more opportunely make escape. But Menelaus had supt abroad and
made haste to his bed chamber. Then said Lucretia I am no body in your regard:
why chose you not rather to sup at home with me; I because you were absent have
neither eat nor drunk all this day. Some country men brought me wine
affirming it most neat and terse, my grief would not permit me to taste one
drop. Now you be come home please you let us go into the Celler, and let us
experiment if the wine be suitable to their report. Having thus said, with her
right hand she snatched a light and took her husband by the left and so
descended the Celler and spun the time out until she thought Eurialus had
shifted for himself, and then against her will she went to bed with her
husband; Eurialus in the dead of the night returned into the house again.

Next morning Menelaus (whether through provident care or jealousy I wot not)
commanded the window to be made up: I verily believe (for our country men are
shrewd conjecturists and wonderously jealous) that Menelaus suspected the
fitting situation of the place, and having none of the best conceits of his
wife, was willing to remove the occasion, for though he could nottax her with
false play, yet he saw her followed by many suitors, and knew a woman's mind
was sickle, having as many changes as a tree, leaves: the feminine sex being
great lovers of noveltie and sated with the fruition, set naught by their own
husbands. He therefore trackt the path that all jealous husbands go, who
strongly conceit that watchful observation may keep their wives from treading
awry. By this means their meeting was debarred, and their intercourse by
letters was likewise stopped, for by Menelaus persuasions the governor put down
the Vintner, out of whose rooms (situated on the back side of Lucretias
house) Eurialus was wont to talk unto Lucretia, and by a Reed reach letters
to her. They had nothing left them but an interview only, and unspeakable was
their grief that were unable to desist, yet knew not how to make progression
in their amorous negotiation.

Eurialus thus musing what way to take, he remembered Lucretias counsel
concerning Pandalus a Gentleman allied to her husband: and in imitation of
learned Physicians that in dangerous diseases rather experiment some doubtful
dose and perilous potion then desert their patient for incurable: he resolves
to assay Pandalus and make trial of a remedy which he had formerly refused.
Having called him and being withdrawn into a private room, he thus bespake him:

Friend, I desire you to sit, I have a weighty business to disclose to you.
It requires diligence, trust and secrecy with all which I acknowledge you are
endued: I would long since have intimated the same unto you, had not the tender
growth of your acquaintance retarded me; I now both know you, and for your
approved fidelity love and honor you: but if you were a mere stranger to me,
your country men's general good report were sufficient; and those friends of
mine with whom you be familiar, have let me know your rare qualities, and what
great esteem you merit; by whose insinuations I am informed that you are
desirous of my favor whereof I now deliver you seison, your merits as much as
mine claiming an enterchange of our mutual affections. But to the point. There
shall not need many words between friends, you are not ignorant what
imperious sway love, either virtuous or sensual, bears in the hearts of
mortal men; no heart that is not made of Adamant, but has felt the force
thereof. From this passion I have not read of any man could claim immunitie.
This frenzy can be no otherwise cured but by the fruition of the party
beloved, our times and former ages afford plentiful examples of both sexes,
who prizing love at as high rate as life it self, denied the one, have
disdained to retain the other. My drift in this relation is to acquaint you
with my love and what I would request at your hands. I will not conceal from
you what profit will redound hence; because I esteem you as my most
intrinsecall friend. I love Lucretia; nor am I (my Pandalus) to be blamed, but
Fortune the Lady Regent of this lower world we all adore. I knew not the
customs of this City, your women dissemble with their looks what their
hearts mean not. Hence grew my error Lucretias smiles made me think my
self beloved, and can any accuse me for setting my affection on so worthy an
object. But finding my hopes beguiled, I not being able to retreat, I left no
means unassayed till I won Lucretia to my love: now our flames have equal
vigor, and without your assistance we are both of us undone. Her husband and
brother watch her narrowly: the golden Fleece was not so attended by the
restless Dragon, or Hell gates by Cerberus as she is. I know your lineage:
your nobleness, riches, power, would I had never known this woman. But who
can stand against destiny. Fortune, not my election made her my mistress. In
this posture matters now stand. Our love is concealed as yet, but once brought
to light will produce some hideous mischief, which I pray heaven avert. Happily
I could master my desires by departing this City, which I would doethough to
my great grief for your house sake, if I thought it would do any good: But I
know the height of her passion is such she would either follow me or forced to
stay, by her own hands rid her loathed life, which would be an everlasting
stain to your family. For the removal of these evils I desired this meeting.
To your care I commend the management of this important affair. It lies in you
by procuring our congresse to assuage our mutual flames, you know the several
accesses of the house, what time her husband is away, and know how to introduce
me. Your help is needful to beguile her husbands brother that keeps so
strict a watch over her. Be diligent and give me inkling at what time her
husband is absent. Use some slight to remoove the brother, and that he may
surrender that charge to your self alone, which I pray Heaven may so fall out,
then by your admission of me by night while all are in a deep slumber all
things will sort to a happy conclusion. It cannot be unknown to your
wisdom what sundry commodities will hence ensue. The honor of your house
will be kept untainted: our love concealed which if it should be known would
be an infamy to your family, you shall preserve your kinswomans life. Menelaus
shall be obliged to you for his wives safety; of two evils the less is to
be chosen. What course soever be taken there will be danger in it: but this
expedient has the least. Nor would I have you think your pains shall go
unrequited, you know my favor with Caesar; you shall obtain whatsoever you
will ask. And this I will promise you, you shall be made a Count Palatin to
you and your heirs for ever. Then bestirre your self. I commend to your care
and fidelity Lucretia: my self, our love, our reputation, the honor of your
family; they are all in your power; it lies in your hands to ruin all or to
preserve all.

Having heard all this, Pandalus smiled, and pausing a while. O Euralius, said
he; All this I knew and wish things had been otherwise, but you have said no
more then truth, things are now at that pass that I must of necessity help,
or great infamy will light upon our family. Lucretia is so far engaged in
love, that if I succor not, she will either stab her self, or throw her
self headlong out at windows: she regards neither her life nor honor. Her
self has disclosed her love to me. I dehorted her, chid her, sought to
extinguish the flame, but could not prevail; she regards nothing but you,
she thinks on nothing else but you. Calling often to me she says, do
hear Eurialus. Love has so changed her that she is not like herself. The
whole City had not a chaster, a wiser dame. What a wonderful thing it is
that love should bear such rule in humane minds. You have hit on the right
way of cure. I will about this business, nor will I exact any reward at your
hands, knowing it is not the part of an honest man to ask any boon where no
recompense is deserved. What I do is to remove the scandal threatened our
family. But quoth Eurialus, if you do not disdain it I will procure you the
style and dignity of a Count Palatine. I scorn it not (quoth Pandalus) but I
would not have it by way of bargain, but would have it conferred on me freely
and unconditionally. It would have more sorted to my desires to have promov'd
your wishes, and brought you into Lucretia's presence, and you not to have
known the author of so good a turn. Farewell. And fare you well quoth
Eurialus: set all your wits a work to bring us together.

Away goes Pandalus rejoicing with acquisition of so great a man's favor, and
with the hopes of being made a Count; which dignity the less he seemed to
desire, the more he coveted; many men in this being like women who the more
they say nay, the more intensely desire what seemingly they refuse. This man by
playing the Pandar is honored with an Earldom and his posterity ennobled
for ever after.

O Marianus there are many degrees in nobleness, and if you search the
original thereof, in my opinion you will find very few that can rightly boast
a lawful propagation. The rich they commonly are ennobled; but riches and
virtue seldom move in one sphere; therefore such noblenes flows from an
impure fountain. It is a wonder to see a man grow rich by honest courses. All
approve that verse, None ask how wealth's attaind but it must be had;
After the bags are well lined, then nobleness is the thing next sought after;
I say, Virtue alone does make a noble man.
Not many days after, there grew a broyle amongst Menelaus tenants, many
whereof being much gone in drink lost their lives. For composing whereof
Menelaus presence was held requisite.

Upon this occasion it was concluded that Eurialus about the hour of five in
the evening should draw toward the house, and if he heard Pandalus sing
should hope the best. Eurialus came at the hour prefixed, and listened
attentively for the watchword, but he could hear no music, nor so much as
any whispering noise at all.

Achates as soon as the appointed hour was past counseled Eurialus to
depart, telling him that they meant nothing else but to gull and delude him. It
liked not Eurialus to remove, alleging many reasons one after another for a
longer stay. The brother of Menelaus was left behind, whose vigilancie and
suspicious scrutiny up and down in every corner hindered Pandalus singing.
Quoth Pandalus shall we not go to bed to night, I can no longer hold open my
eyes. I wonder that being in your tender years you should so sympathise with
the nature of old men, that deprived of their youthful moisture feldome fall
asleep till morning, when it is time for others to rise. Its high time, pray
lets go to rest. I marvel you sit up so late; Lets go then quoth Agamemnon
if you will needs have it so; yet first lets see that all be sure, so going to
the gate he double locked and bolted it very strong. A huge bar of Iron there
was which two men were not able to lift, which Agamemnon finding himself
unable to weild, Pandalus (quotlhee) lets make fast the door with this bar,
and then we will go to bed. Eurialus heard these words and whispered with a
soft voice: If they had done with this bar once then all were done. Come,
come (quoth Pandalus) what a quoile keep you? if it be thieves only you
fear, all is cocksure; if enemies, all the ammunition in this house is not
able to keep them out. He lift no bar to night, or do it your self, or it
shall be undone for me. Well it matters not greatly quoth Agamemnon, and so
went to rest. Then said Eurialus He watch here for an hour to see if any will
open. Achates was so tired that in his heart he cursed Eurialus for keeping him
out of his bed so late. They had not stayed long but at a chinke they might
perceive Lucretia with a small Taper in her hands. Eurialus pressing as near
as he could possibly: Sweet heart Lucretia (quoth he) all health to you. At
first she began to fly, but presently better bethinking her self, she asks
who is there? Quoth Eurialus, I thy Euralius am here. Open the door my joy; I
have watched here till midnight for thy coming. She knew the voice, yet for
more surenesse and prevention of any false dissimulation she forbore to open
till she heard the byword which they two privily gave each other. Then with
much ado she opened the door a little way, and Eurialus made as hard shift to
creep in at so straight a passage, and embraced her in his arms. Achates he
stood sentinel without doors.

I am not able to say whether it were fear or excess of joy that was the
cause, but Lucretia falling into a pale swoon in Eurialus his arms seemed like
a livelesse creature; her speech failing, and her eye lids being closed up,
some warmth remained, and her pulses beat faintly. Eurialus knew not which way
to turn him; if I leave her I am accessory to her death that left her in so
dangerous extremity: if I stay Agamemnon or one or other of the house will
find us, and I shall be sure to die. Oh unfortunate love, more bitter then
gall! for thee to how many dangers have I been obnoxious? How many deaths have
awayted me for thy sake. Was this a cross that thou keptst for me in store
to extinguish my dearest love, within my own embraces? But, love oversway'd
all other respects, and naught regarding his own safety he abode with his
dear, and being dissolved into tears, often kissing her speechless corpse: he
cried out: Woe's me Lucretia where art thou? Why do not hear? Why make
thou no answer? open thy eyes and behold me, and smile on me as thou wast
wont. I thy Eurialus am here. O my Dear, it is thy Eurialus that embraces
thee. O why do not return me one, for so many hundred kisses? Is this thy
entertainment? Are these the joys thou invitest me to? I conjure thee arise,
look on thy Eurialus, it is I thy Eurialus that am here.

Having ended these exclamations, a cataract of scalding tears, he let fall
upon her face and temples, whereby as one by strong waters help resuscitated,
seeming like one raised out of a dead Lethargye of sleep, and beholding her
Beloved: Ah me, Eurialus, said she, where have I been? Why did thou not
rather suffer me to expire it as a happy death, to dye in thy arms. Would
heaven I had departed so before thou depart this City. Conferring after this
manner, they set forward toward her chamber, where bathing themselves in
Venerian delights: Now quoth Eurialus, my toil and danger are changed into
joys beyond expression. O Summary of all beauty, am I now possessed of thee?
It were best dying now whilst this bliss endures, least intervenient misery,
again blast our contentments. My Happiness is incomparable. But alas, how
swiftly do the hours fly away? O malignant night, what makes thee make such
haste. This verily is the shortest night in all the year. This spoke Eurialus
nor was Lucretia behind, they vyed kisses, and for amorous phrases were neither
in others debt. At the peep of day our Lovers depart asunder.

Caesar having now wrought his peace with Pope Eugenius, hastens his journey
toward Rome. Lucretia was not without some inkling hereof, for what is it that
Love perceives not? Thus therefore upon this ground wrote Lucretia to Eurialus.

Lucretia to Eurialus.
Had I power to be angry with thee, it should be now, that being ready to
depart can so cunningly dissemble with me. But my heart is more affectionate
to thee then it self, and can by no cause be drawn to conceive displeasure
against thee. My dear heart why did thou not acquaint me that Caesar will
shortly be gone? He prepares for his journey, and I know thou will not stay
behind. What I prithee will become of me? Wretch that I am, what shall I do?
Where can I enjoy tranquillity? If thou forsake me I shall not live two days.
I conjure thee by these lines moystned with my tears, by thy hand and faith
given unto me if ever I have deserved ought at thy hands, or if ever my
acquaintance won thy acceptance, take pity on a forlorn Lover. I make no
boon that you would still reside here, but that you would make me the
companion of your travel. I will some evening give it out that I desire to
walk to Bethlehem, attended by one old woman, there let two or three of your
train lie in wait that may receive me; It is no hard task to carry one away
that is willing to go. Nor think not the attempt will prove your
disparagement, for King Priams son accounted it no disgrace to wed a stolen
Lady. My husband shall hereby suffer no wrong, for however things go, he shall
be sure to lose me; for if you carry me not away, death shall separate me
from him. But by your cruelty leave me not to die, who have ever prized you
dearer then my own heart.

Eurilus Answer.
I kept it from thee till this hour my Lucretia, that thou might not
torment thy self before the time were come. I know thy nature, and that every
light occasion causes thee to fret too too bad. Nor is Caesar to depart hence
for ever; when we return from Rome our way lies through this City into our
native Country; should Caesar make choice of another way, if I do not return
to thee, may I never see my own home again, but like Ulysses spend the
remnant of my days in foreign peregrination. Give not thy self over to
Melancholy, my dearest, but cheer up thy self. For the rape you speak of,
all the world affords not such a content as that would be to me, but I more
value thy honor then my own delight. The confidence you have reposed in me
awakens a provident care of your well-doing. You are deseended of a right noble
house, and your reputation is extolled not at home only but in far remote
regions. Should I commit this act: I speak not of mine own, what disgrace
would it be to your Family? What a heart-breake to your mother, what a
scandalous rumor throughout all the City. Behold will they say, Lncretia
that was imputed so chaste a Dame is turned a whore, and run away from her
husband. Hitherto you have conserved your credit unstained, this rape would
sully your reputation with an indelible disgrace. But to let pass fame, though
she worthily deserve our regard, this way we can never attain the fruition
of our love. I depend on Caesar; if I forsake him, my means are too short to
maintain thee after thy degree: if on the otherside I follow the Court,
there is no repose, we daily remoove from place to place, Caesar never made so
long abode any where as he has now at Sienna, enforced through necessity of
War. What infamy were it to us both, should I use thee in the Camp as a
common prostitute? I conjure thee my Lucretia upon these grounds alter thy
determination, take my advise in good part, and regard not thy passion above
thy welfare. Happily another lover would have persuaded thee otherwise, and been
the first that would have counseled thee to make escape, to the end he might
abuse thee at his pleasure, never forecasting for the future, but greedy to
satisfy his present Just; but such a one deserves not the style of a true
lover, that preferres the fulfilling of his lust before a care of reputation; I
(my dear Lucretia advise thee for the best, I prithee abide here, and diffide
not my return; I will so contrive it that Caesar shall send me agent into
these parts, and free of all discommoditie will compass our mutual fruition.
Farewell; live happy, and love thy Eurialus, and wrong me not by thinking my
love less servent then thine own, or that I am willing to depart: O no more
my sweet adieu.

Lucretia acquieted by these persuasions writ him back word that she would
follow his counsel.

Few days after Eurialus set forward with Caesar toward Rome, and shortly
after his arrival fell into a Fever. Unfortunate man that burning in love was
never the less seized by aguish inflammations. Love had brought his body low,
and his disease brought him even to deaths door; in so much that he was more
beholden for life to Physicians than nature. Caesar visited him day by day, and
was as tender over him as he had been his own child, and commanded to send
for all the prime Physicians. But a Letter sent him from Lucretia, whereby he
understood that she was both living and in good health, did him more good then
all the Doctors Receipts. It drove away his Ague, and made him strong enough to
walk abroad, in so much as he was present at Caesar's coronation, and honored
with the addition of knighthood.

When Caesar went to Perusium he stayed behind at Rome, as not yet perfectly
recovered. From thence he came to Sienna, very feeble and macilent: he might
see his Lucretia, but might not confer with her. Letters past mutually, and
the business about her rape is again had in agitation.

Here Eurialus stayed three days, but finding it impossible to gain access
unto her, he intimated unto her his departure. Their grief at their
separation exceeded their joy in their mutual society.

Lucretia stood at the window when Eurialus rode through the street, they cast
their blubbered eyes on one another, and were so oppressed with sorrow, as they
that felt their hearts even violently rent out of their bosoms; who but a
lover like themselves is able to draw the portrature of their resentments.
Laodemia when her husband Prothesilaus went to the Trojan Wars fell into an
ecstasy and dyed at report of her husbands slaughter. Queen Dido slew herself
after Aeneas stole away, and Portia would live no longer her Brutus being dead.
Our Lucretia when Eurialus was out of her sight fell down in a swoone, and was
by the servants got up and had to bed till she came to her self. But after,
suiting herself in mean habit, she was never heard sing, never seen to
laugh, nor could never be made merry by all the means that ever could be used.

Thus persevering for some space of time, and living heartlesse and
insusceptible of comfort, in the arms of her weeping mother that in vain
sought her consolation, she expired her latest gasp.

Eurialus having lost the sight of Lucretia spoke not one word as he
traveled, had Lucretia only in his heart, and his thoughts were whether he
should ever be able to return unto her.

At last he came to Caesar keeping his Court at Perusium, whom he attended
into diverse countries: but as he followed Caesar, so Lucretias ghost pursued
him, and suffered him not to take any quiet repose.

This faithful lover understanding that she was dead, struck to the heart
with sorrow he put himself in mourning. At last Caesar made up a match for
him, and he espoused a beauteous, chaste, and prudent Virgin of Princely lineage.

Dear Marianus you have heard a true narration of the sad Catastrophe of a
pair of unfortunate lovers; let the reader hereof by others harms learn to
beware, and not be inebriated with the potions of love which have ever a
greater mixture of Gall then Honey.

Farewell. From Vienna the fifth of the Nones of July, 1444.

FINIS.

