THE HAPPINESS OF A RELIGIOUS STATE Divided into three Books.

Written in Latin by FA. HIEROME PLATVS of the Society of JESUS. AND now
translated into English.

PERMISSV SVPERIORVM. ANNO DOMINI. M. DC. XXXII.

THE FIRST BOOK, OF THE HAPPINESS OF A RELIGIOUS STATE.
THE PREFACE. Of the beauty of a Religious State; and how it has been ever
opposed by the Devil.
IF the nature of man had always remained upright and entire, as it was
created by God, the course toward immortal life and glory, for which he was
created, would have been unto him both easy and pleasant, without any other
help then the grace of God, Humane nature decayed.
which in his first beginning he should have received, and al his lifetime
after abundantly increased through his own deserts. But now, since it has
been so much enfeebled, stained, and broken, first, by original sin (which
from one has passed through al mankind) then by the sins, which are proper
to every man; and seeing moreover he is in a perpetual combat and strife with
the world, in which he lives, and with the Princes and powers of this darkness,
by whom he is most fiercely and maliciously opposed; nothing can be more hard
unto him, or more laborious, then to raise his lumpish thoughts and decayed
nature to that happy State, for which he was ordained; nothing more easy and
ready then to fail thereof, and to run headlong down to everlasting ruin
both of body and soul.

The Creator therefore and governor of mankind, Ser. 2. (...) Natiu^ra.
whose nature is goodness, whose work is mercy (as S. Leo speaks) has ever
been careful, and does never cease to support and fortify this weakness of
ours, with most convenient remedies: and (...) offer unto al of his Divine
help, whereby they may securely, if they will, and also with facility, compass
the great work of their soul's salvation. Out of which heavenly fountain do
issue al spiritual counsels, aduises, and reasons, and all that variety of
holy Inventions, as I may term the^, which we see in the Catholic Church
proposed by our sweet Lord and Savior JESUS; partly, to uphold man, that he
fall not, being of himself so weak and prone to evil; partly, to raise him, if
he have chanced to fall; and partly again to strengthen and confirm him in the
continual pursuit of al Christian duty and perfection.

Among which Divine Inventions and helps, The benefit of a Religious state.
a Religious State is worthily to be reckoned, yea it is the chiefest and the
greatest of them al: and the benefit and spiritual commodities thereof are
every way so rare and excellent, that, without al doubt, among all the
heavenly addresses, and remedies, and rules of well living, which before I
mentioned, nothing can be, I do not say of greater, but of equal esteem and
value with this. For it does not direct us in one thing alone, at one time, or
in one business and exercise, as do most of other spiritual graces and gifts;
but it stretches itself to our whole life, and embraces every part and
parcel thereof, leading us by the hand, to the performance of al perfect
virtue, with that sasenes and dexterity, as that removing al lets and
impediments, ^ affords as much help, succor, and defense, as can be wished,
and does in very deed bring it so to pass, Luc. 1.74.
that, freed from the hand of our enemies, we serve him, who is our only true
Lord and God, in sanctity and justice in his sight, all the days of our life.

First therefore, it takes away and keeps from us al occasions and
allurements of sin, removing us out of the world, and wordlie traffic, into
a most calm and quiet haven, or rather into a strong fortifyed Castle, where
we may easily withstand the Devil, and purchase a glorious conquest over him,
though to his strength, no power upon earth can be compared. And having laid
this ground, and cleared the earth of our souls, of the thorns and thistles
which choke the corn, Mat. 13.7*
it sows in them the good seed of al spiritual virtues; of which, though
many may and ought to be practiced by all Christians, yet we find by
experience, that few men endeavor in them. But the very trade of life, which
the Religious do profess, does put them in a way of gayning them in a more
assured, more plentiful, and more permanent manner. For it ministers frequent
and daily occasion of the exercise of al virtue; and, by continual practice,
it engrafteth by little and little good habits in the mind, and good customs
in our outward actions; In brief, it teaches no other thing, then to bend al
our care, thoughts, and desires, toward the service and fear of God, and the
obtaining of a most inward conjunction with that infinite Sanctity.

But besides the virtues, which as I said, may be practiced by all, there be
others, so proper to a Religious State, that they are not to be found in any
other Course; such is the Poverty and absolute Renunciation of al things,
Virtues peculiar in Religious people.
which they profess; their Obedience and entire denial of their own wills;
their despising and setting at naught al things which are in this world, and of
which the world does usually vant itself and glory; which Religion does so
absolutely, and of se^ purpose, neglect and tread under foot, that among other
most excellent dispositions of the mind, it does work and settle this contempt
of al inferior things most, of al in them; then which there can not be a more
profitable or more noble a resolution.

The benefit of serving God in company with others.
And over and above the bene^it, which every one by himself and by his private
endeavor does reap, there is yet a far greater, arising out of that bond and
conuexion, which passes more straightly betwixt so many souls living
together, by which the whole multitude of them is so inwardly linked and knit
al under one, that of many members they become one body. For among those that
serve God one by one, though they serve him with all care and diligence, every
one is put to try his strength by himself, and to w^astle against his enemies
with his own single forces: But in a Religious company, the ability of one,
is so mingled and tempered with the ability of all the rest, and the good deeds
of al, are so common to every one and particular, that they are rich and
enabled, not only by their own, but with each others wealth and substance;
and certainly innumerable commodities do accrue unto every one, from this
common link and affinity.

The beauty of a Regl^ious course.
Now, in the framing of al natural things, we see, that God has had particular
regard, to couple beauty and sightlines with useful commodity, as in Man, the
frame of whose body, and the fashion of every part thereof, is not only
fitted for convenient motion and service, but made comely and goodly to see
to; which is easily discovered by the il sauourdnesse, which appears, if any
one of his members be wrested aside, or set awry. Seeing therefore, the
Al-creating Wisdom has so carefully observed this course in the inferior
rank of natural things; much more ought we to think, that in Religious
In^^^n^^s, which are of a more eminent degree and strain, he has so handled
the matter, that besides the exceeding profit and commodity, which they bring,
they should have singul^r beauty and seemelines, wonderfully graceful without
al doubt, in the eyes of God, and his Angels.

For as, when we behold a Brooch or Coronet, or other curious workmanship,
composed of many ge^^nes and precious stones, we admire not alone the beauty,
which every gemme does bring severally by itself, but this very beauty and
luster greatly augmented and increased by the multitude of them, and the
comely order, in which they are ranked. And as the sound of voices and
Instruments does take a man very much, though they be sole and single, yet a
Consort of Music, tempered with choice variety of diverse Notes together,
does much more fill and please the ear, the Bases and Trebles, with
proportionable disproportion, agreing and answering one to the other, so ^^erie
virtue severally by itsef, and standing as it were alone, cannot choose but be
pleasing and lovely, yet in Religion, by reason that there be many, in whom
the elegancie of this one virtue is very apparent, the selfsame must needs be
in every man's eye much more beautiful and glorious.

We may therefore with full consent of every body, Religious people more
happy, then the serua^t^ of King Solomon.
deservedly apply to this State and form of life, the saying of the Queen of
Saba, who being caled out of her own country with the noise and fame, that
ran of the greatness of King Solomon, having now heard with her own ears
the wisdom of his answers, and beheld neere-hand the abundance of his wealth,
his stately buildings, his sumptuous bo^des and table-seruices, the mansions
of his servants, the order of his attendance, their gorgeous attire, and
co^elie ^ayments; finally, the incredible plenty of his Victimes and
Sacrifices, she is said, to have stood amazed, and to have cried out: 3. Reg.
10.
Blessed are the men, and blessed are thy servants, who here stand in thy
sight, and hear thy wisdom. For who is more truly King Solomon, then our
Savior Christ, Colos. 1.20.
a king not only peaceable, but appeasing the things, which are in heaven, and
which are on earth?

This Solomon therefore, Coloss. 2.3.
in whom be all the treasures of the wisdom and knowledge of God, and who is
King and Lord over al, though he have other subjects, yet they ^ost of al, and
most truly are to be styled his servants, who dwell in his house, and always
wait upon his person, such are the Companies of Religious people, who for this
reason alone have forsaken their parents, their brethren, their friends, and
kinsfolks, and their dwelling-houses, to remove and transplant themselves into
his household and retinue. And they be also distributed into diverse orders,
different in their manner of life, and in their habit, and clothing: Here they
taste of princely dainties and delicacies of spiritual comforts, I say, and
inward joy, Proverb. 25.23.
and that peace and security of Conscience, which is a continual banquet, Here
is great plenty of Sacrifices and whole offerings, because every Religious
man is a Sacrifice, yea every work they do, may be called a Sacrifice;
because it is entirely offered to God, and wholly devoted to his service.
Finally, their peculiar office and only business, is to hearken ^o the wisdom
of this divine Solomon, that is, of their Lord God, neither in very deed do
they ^nie other thing, but abide perpetually in that heavenly light, praying
and meditating, and picking out of good books such wholesome instructions, as
may better their souls, and many other ways der^uing unto themselves, light,
strength, grace, and all good things from him, who is the fountain of goodness.
Blessed therefore are they also, who stand here in the sight of their Lord God,
and much more happy, then the servants of that Solomon of old, in regard they
serve a Master, who is infinitely more worthy, more noble, more able, and
ready to do well for them.

Religion ^s the more to be valued ^n regard of the oppositio^ against it.
Now, in my opinion, the excellency of a Religious life, is not only to be
valued by the favor, which it has with God, but by reason it is extremely
hated by the Devil. If therefore we observe things right, we shall find this
course so violently opposed, and assaulted with such su^^^l diuises and crafty
fetches of the sworn enemy of mankind, that it is very apparent, that among
all the gifts and graces, which have descended upon Man from above, this most
of al has angered him, and abidden the flaming rage of his malice. I say
nothing of private temptations and secret battails, which incessantly he bids
eu^rie one in particular; I speak only of that universal war, which he has
always most fiercely maintained against Religion in general. For Monastical
discipline, if we take it at the root, began presently upon the publishing and
spreading of the Christian Faith, and together with it, to spread and dilate
itself, chiefly in that golden Age of Constantin, when out of the solitary
places and vaste deserts, in which it lay hid for three hundred years and
upwards, it came forth to the view and eye of the world. In which times we may
observe, that whomsoever the Enemy got to plot or act any mischief against
the whole Church, the same be armed and incensed most of al against this
fortress of the Church. And we may behold them divided into two ranks. The
first sort of opposers of Religious courses. Julian
For some have gone about by might and authority, and by open war to
oppress the followers of a Religious life; Others, who had not that power,
have striuen by wiles and deceipts, by slanders and reproachful speeches, and
by sowing Heretical doctrine* to undermine them. For first of al Julian the
Renegate (the more bitter and heavier enemy unto us, in regard he was privy
to al things which belong to Christian profession) did not with fire and sword
afflict the Religious; for, as Gregory Nazianzen speaks of him, Orat. 1. in
Julian.
he did envy the Christians this glory of Martyrdom: But whatsoever he could
invent, without shedding of blood, that might molest, or disgrace, or quite
root them out, to that he bent all the strength of his wit, which, as men
report of him, was not mean. Which thing is set forth by S. Gregory Nazianzen
in his Oration to the same Apostate, in conclusion whereof, making himself an
humble suppliant in behalf of al Religious Companies, Ibidem.
he presents unto him the whole multitude of Philosophers (as he terms
them) who are wholly free and exempt from al earthly band and tie; who to their
own use, have their own bodies only, and them not wholly and entirely to
themselves; who owe Caesar nothing, but al to God, their Hymns, prayers,
watchings, and tears; with these men, says he, if thou will deal more
mildly, and use them like themselves, that is, as the servants of God, the
Disciples of Christ, the Contemplers of heavenly things, the first fruits of
our Sauiour's flock, the Pillars and Crowns of Faith, precious Margarites, the
prime Materials of that Temple, whose foundation and cornerstone is Christ,
thou shall do well, for thyself, and for them and us.

Valens (...) Arria^ Emperor.
The fury and rage of Valens was not much less, who is famous for his ungodly
behavior, chiefly against S. Basil. He by a general Edict or Proclamation
commanded that al Man's should bear arms, and follow the war; threatening to
lay most grievous punishm^ts upon the^ that should refuse it; which was a great
vexation to the servants of God, while those that said Nay, were most cruelly
handled, others were by force haled to the camp^manie were withdrawn from
giving themselves to the service of God, and those that had already put
themselves into it, might not enjoy the spiritual quiet which they professed.

The persecutour^ of Religious people pu^lished.
But this cruelty, not long after, cost both these Emperors very dear. For
Julian, when he had r^igned about one year and a half, was struck with a lance
brandisht from heaven, and so killed in the midst of his army. Valens, having
governed the stearne not much longer, his army being most sh^mefully put to
rout, and himself flying to a farme-house not far of, was there burnt to
death by the enemy.

Constantinus Copronymu^ followed the like strain; Constantin Copronymu^.
a man cruel and outrageous against the whole Church of God, but chiefly
against Religious families, which he labored to bring in disgrace, by most
infamous slanders, and reproachful language, and to oppress them also with
grievous afflictions and torments, being resolved within himself to put them al
down, not by way of dispute, or cauil, or course of law, but by imprisonment,
torture, and death; and he brought them to great distress, and Satan began to
glory in his triumphs, but that God, who never forsakes his own cause, by
particular providence, taking him out of this world, gave the raynes first to
his son Leo (who yet was a man much of like temper with his father) then to
Irene the Emperesse, who with exceeding piety employed herself in the cure of
the wounds both of the whole Church, and particularly of Religious Orders,
which (as we read in the Anuals) were under her wing and protection greatly
advanced and propagated. Nicephorus was Emperor after her, who was also a
great lover and favorer of Religious people. But this calm was not long: for
soon after, the Devil inflamed the rage and fury of Leo the Armenian, Leo
^^menus.
who is reported to have been the cruellest bent of all the rest against such as
gave themselves to a Monastical life, and to have punished them with famine,
exil, imprisonment, and al kinds of evil. But the heavy hand of God fell upon
him within a short time; for he was slain by his soldiers at the very Altar,
to which he had sled for refuge, and so abid in the manner of his death the
like barbarous cruelty, which in his lifetime he had practiced, after the
example of others.

But these things were done of old, and are taken out of ancient Records, we
want not practices of the same stamp acted before our eyes. Henry the ^.
For in England when Henry the Eight falling from the Church, made a league
with Hell (a league pernicious to himself and his) the first onset he gave, was
upon the Charterhouse-Monks, and other Religious families, afflicting them with
diverse kinds of punishments; which bitter proceedings have not been in later
times alayed, buthrought down to our days in more grievous measure, as
appears by the sharp laws, and fearful Executions, which are daily here
reported from those parts: wherein al Religious persons through-out the Realm,
but chiefly those of our society, are threatened with imprisonment, torture,
and death; and whosoever shall entertayne them, or afford them any releef, is
subject to the like penalties. And in like manner they have showed rigor,
principally over Religious people, not in that Island alone, but wheresoever the
flame of this Heresy has been spread abroad, in France, in Germany, and in
the Low-Countryes. For they have ruined their houses, profaned their
Monasteries, entered upon their lands and possessions, and taken them away by
open violence; they have tormented their bodies consecrated to God, with so
many several kinds of punishments and diverse indignities offered, that it is
not passible, that man to man should be so cruel, but that the Devil did use
them as actours of his hatred and malice. These took the sword in hand, and
went about by might and violence, to ouercharge and crush that feeble and
unarmed Company. Others undertook a war, These con^sorte of those that
opposed Religious Courses.
in show more soft and gentle, but perhaps more dangerous, by argument,
disputation, and written books, that nothing might be lest unattempted and
essayed. So we read, that many Ages past, while S. Hierome lived, there
sprang-vp two, that were equal in time and in wickedness, Iouinian at Rome, and
Vigilantius in France. Both of them aimed at the hart-bloud of Religion, the
one by teaching that Virginity is of no higher esteem then Marriage,
Heretic^^ old and ^ewe.
the other by equalizing Riches with voluntary Poverty. In later times
Wicleff the Heretic, resembling them both, and without doubt more pernicious
then they, began to make head, and speak bitterly against diverse positions of
the Church, but chiefly against Religious Orders, Iouinia^ Vigilanti^^ VV^^lof.
tearming them humane inventions, idle conceits and newly devised, and auerring
that there is no more perfection in ^he^, then the ordinary manner of living
of al Christians does contain, being equally instituted by Christ our Savior;
and that they take away the honor due by the commandment of God to Parents, as
if children, that entered, were released of their duty. This man's fictions
have been excellently well confuted by Waldenfis, Tho. Vraldensis de Sacram.
tit. 9. a cap. 83.
a famous Writer, who has so quashed his currish maliper^nes (for so he
styles it) that nothing can be penned more learnedly or more fully; and among
other things he says: That he cannot but wonder at him, why, having stolen his
argument against Religion from the pen of a Manichee, he did not take an
answer unto the same, from the pen of S. Austin. The self same Heretic has
been in a higher Court condemned by two several Councels, first by a Council at
Rome, under John the Two and twentieth, afterward by the Council of Constance;
in which himself, and the memory of him, Sess. 1.
there dead, was accursed, and his body commanded to be taken out of the
grave, and cast forth from Christian burial. But we shall not need to rippe-vp
Heresies of elder times; we have had experience in our own days, that al
broachers of wicked Doctrines have no part of the Church in greater hatred, nor
oppose any more ^lifly, then the Religious. Luther among many other villainous
^ants and reproaches, does fondly and foolishly, yet withal most vngratiously,
jest at them, as if they Sacrificed their bodies to the Idol Molock. Heretics
in out days.
Calvin calls the Vows of Religion, the nets of Satan. Melancton, styleth
them foolish observations, and Mahometical traditions. Finally, al those that
by word or writing have banded against the Catholic truth, have had in (...)
chiefly in their head, Melanctho^.
how they might make Religious people hateful and odious.

But, which is worse, besides Heretics, the Devil has often stirred-vp and
incensed, the Domestical of Faith against Religious Orders; endeavoring by the
malicious speeches of some such kind of people, Domestical (...).
to cast most grievous aspersions and heavy displeasure upon their manner of
living, or at least, to lessen the esteem thereof, when he ^an compass nothing
else which is so common and ordinary a thing, that it is bootelesse to enlarge
my self upon the matter, or confirm it by examples. And it has been always
observed, that never any Religious Order was raised by God, against which the
Devil has not presently armed at his troops, and bent al his forces and skill,
to oppress it at the first, to slander it, and destroy it. Which wicked
endeavor of his, seems to have been clearly prefigured of old, in that King
Pharao, who commanded all the male-children of the Jews should be made away,
and the femals reserved to live; as of whom he should not need to stand in awe:
Exodus 1.^^.
so the Prince of this world takes no great heed to the weaker sort; but whose
virtue and strength he thinks he may in ^ime feel to his cost, these he
labors early to overthrow. S. Benedict and his render flack found it by
experience: for as S. Gregory relates) when the Devil perceived the number of
them which the Saint had gathered together, Dial. ^.
daily to enercase, he made use of the malice of one Florentius a Priest, and
attempted by him, first to poison S. Benedict, and afterward, when this did
not succeed, to corrupt the minds of his disciples with a more poisoned and
most shameful sight set before their eyes. S. Benedict. opposed.
But he received soon after the deserved punishment of his wicked intention:
for the house, where he was, falling down suddenly upon him, he had much a
do to escape. The like happened to the two most famous and holy Orders of S.
Dominick and S. Francis. And S. Domini^k and S. Francis.
For when they began happily to increase and spread themselves about fifty
years after their beginning, the Devil stirred against them one Wiliam a Canon
of Mascon, and Gyraldus a Doctor of Paris, both equal in malice and madness.
These two endeavored what they could, both by word of mouth, in common
assemblies, and in the pulpit* and by (...) volumes set forth against them in
writing, to disgrace and stop the course of their institute: and flicked not to
say, that it was not lawful for them neither to beg, nor (...) study, nor to
preach, nor to hear Confessions. By which means there was, as we read, a
great commotion raised against these servants of God, not only among the
unlearned sort of people, but among most of the better sort, whom by opinion of
learning, and by their subtle manner of arguing, they had inueigled S. Thomas
of Aquin, S Thomas of Aquin and S. Bonauent^^e defended Religion with their
pen.
and S. Bonauenture (two glorious lights of these Orders) withstood the malice
of the two opponents. S. Bonauenture writ a book which he entitled. The
Apology of the Poor: S. Thomas set forth a little treatise against the
opposers of Religion, which he begins fitly with these words of the Psalm:
Behold thy enemies have made a noise, and those that have: he, have life up
their head: Upon thy people they have maliciously turned their counsels, and
bent their thoughts against thy servants: And among other things has this
excellent aduertisment, that, though God, as he is almighty, could easily by
himself bring al mankind to that everlasting happiness for which it is created;
Psalm. 82, v. 3.
yet because in this business of our salvation, which is the greatest of al
other businesses, he will hold the same sweet course and order, with which his
Divine Providence is delighted in all other things, he is pleased to use the
endeauours of his Ministers, who (as S. Paul says) are the Coadiutours, and
Assistants of God. Therefore on the contrary side, it is the project of the
Prince of darkness, 1. Cor. 3.9.
opposing himself against the glory of God, and the good of souls to hinder
these servants of God, 13. Moral. c. 5.
in so great and wholesome a work which they have undertaken. Which S. Gregory
confirms when he says, that the wicked do chiefly persecute that part of
holy Church which they see is likely to do good to many. Thus far S.
Thomas. Who with his learned pen did stop the mouth of these wicked teachers:
but much more God with his just and severe judgment over them. William by Pope
Alexander the Fourth, The opposers of Religion punished.
was called to Rome; where in open Consistory, being convict and condemned, at
the suite of both these Religious Families, pleading their own and God
Almightie's cause, besides that his book was burnt in sight of the whole
assembly, he, as author thereof, was deprived of his Ecclesiastical functions
and Living, and banished at the French dominions by Lewis then King. Gyraldus
was sharply punished in another kind; for being not long after taken with a
palsy, he dyed a leapre, to the end of the loathsomnes of his unwonted death
might make known to al, the loathsomnes of his offense. And as the Devil did
thus persecute these two orders in their first beginnings, the like he has
done to all the rest, and lastly to our Society, which he has not only
labored to extinguish by peecemeale, in several places and countries, raising
several combats against it, but did at Rome go about with might and main to
dissolve the very first foundation thereof, when it was newly laid in the
ground, by certain instruments which there he had, spreading most slanderous
reports of S. Ignatius our Founder, and of his Companions, charging them with
Heresy, and diverse other enormous crimes. But here also God showed himself our
God, and wrought so by his singular and most evident providence that S.
Ignatius and his followers were acquitted of al suspicion, S. Ignatius
persecuted by diuer^.
by a solemn and honorable Judgment pronounced for them, and the authors of
that infamous columniation were punished in several kinds. One of the^ was
banished; an other, pining away with sickness, dyed with great demonstration of
sorrow for his fact, a third, being himself guilty of Heresy, and therefore
stolen away privately, his image was burn^ in the face of the city; the fourth
of them likewise for Heresy was committed to the Goal during life; the fifth
and last, fell to be a Lutheran, which of all the rest was the heauiest
punishment. Thus if we compare together these and the like events, we may
justly think that the goodness of our God has strouen and as it were proved his
strength against the malice of the Devil, in behalf of Religious courses, God
laboring to erect, establish, and honor them; the Devil opposing them
continually, and playing upon them with all sorts of weapons and devises* yet so
as the goodness and powerful hand of God, who without comparison is more high
and mighty, Psalm. ^.1^.
both had the Maistrie, and with the shield of his good will and favor still
protected and vpheld this his so worthy and great a work.

These are the reasons, why of long time I have been of opinion, that to
declare (according to my ability) the Excellence of a Religious State, and the
unspeakable profit thereof, would prove an employment well deserving my pains
and labor, and be useful both to set forth the great wisdom of God in so
eminent a work as is a Religious life, and to abate and suppress the malicious
practices of the Devil against the same. For to this the Prophet Esaias does
seem to exhort us, ^sa. 12.^.
saying: Make known his inventions among the people. For certainly, as I said
in the beginning, among al those things which have been by God most advisedly
and most lovingly invented and accomplished for the help and salvation of
mankind, this manner of living under Rule and order, is to be accounted the
cheifest. And I have been the rather induced to undertake this labor, hoping
that besides other commodities arising thereof, The benefit which Religious
people may reap by this (...) arise.
the Religious themselves will be benefited, and enabled the better to
understand the good which they possess, and to embrace it the more ardently.
For it may happen that their mind may be sometimes as it were glutted with the
riches and greatness of this benefit, or carried aside with attention to other
matters, or dulled by daily handling the same things, so that themselves shall
be strangers to their own happiness, and in a manner hunger-starued at a full
board of dainties; as it falls out with country people that have gardens and
vineyards in occupation, and dwelling al their lifetime in that delicious
sweetness of air, with which others are so vehemently taken, that they come
from places far distant, only to have a view of them, and cannot satisfy
themselves with recording the praises, and feeding themselves as it were with
the shadow and remembrance of the pleasure, these poor snakes contrariewise
take no heed thereunto, as if they had even lost the sense of their eyes; which
fault were the more foul in a Religious man, because he has no other business
to attend to but this, or at the leastwise he ought to leuel and direct al his
other thoughts and employments to this alone; for otherwise he debarres himself
not only of the pleasure of the place, as those countrey-clownes I spoke of,
but of very many rich commodities, and cannot possibly bear toward God so
mindful, so thankful, and so loving a heart as becomes him to do. These men
therefore, as I said, are al to be rowsed up so much as we may, and encouraged
to hold their eyes open upon the great benefit, which they have received; that
beholding it, they may frame their life and behavior suitable to the great
worck thereof.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE HAPPINESS OF A RELIGIOUS ESTATE.
TESTIMONIES OF THE ANCIENT Fathers in commendation of a Religious Estate.
CHAP. I.
TWO things among men are of great force in persuading, to wit, Reason and
Authority. Reason is grounded in the light which it has within it self.
Authority, in the light which is in others: Which is so far from diminishing
the credit it ought to carry; that it does rather strengthen and assure it.
The force of Auctori^tie.
For if we think it fit to give assent to things which we have found out by
ourselves, and which ourselves have thoroughly examined; because we dare trust
our own wit and judgment; much more trust and assurance ought we to repose
upon the cunning and abilities of such men, as we know have had excellent
gifts of understanding and wisdom, and whom we acknowledge to be far above
us. Wherefore those very sciences, which canuasse truth upon the point of
Reason, do not lay Authority aside, but each of them have their authors, and
sovereign teachers whose positions they defend with tooth and nail: which in
sciences which aim at the direction of manners, ought much rather to be
practiced; because to make a right estimate of these things, besides sharpnes of
wit, we must have a will good and upright, which by virtue alone is engendered;
oftimes also we stand in need of experience in that which we are to resolve on;
wherefore as every one does think it reasonable in whatsoever art, or science,
he does mean^ to study, to make choice of some prime man upon whom he may rely,
and allow as warrantable whatsoever that man has plainly set down in
writing, or covertly given to understand (as for the precepts of Rhetoric we
Choose Cicero, or Demosthenes: Aristotle, or Plato in Philosophy; In the
Mathematics, Euclide, or some other writer of note.) So in the school of
Christ we have some heads and leaders, whose sayings ought to bear the greater
sway with us, because themselves were so eminent in learning and virtue, that
we may justly persuade ourselves, that they did not only by the strength of
their own wit, discover great matters, but were also particularly enlightened
by God: Wherefore in this subject which I have undertaken to handle, touching
the Happiness of a Religious life, I have thought good to lay down first of
all, the sayings of some such prime Auctours and Saints, plainly, and as they
have been delivered by themselves, without any discourse or gloss of my own
upon them: hoping that they will carry the greater weight with every body, in
regard that all of them, (one or two perhaps excepted) have bestowed all, or
the best part of their whole life and labor, in the practice of that which
they have commended, so that their Authority does not want experience to
strengthen it, of which I spoke before. (These men therefore we shall place in
the very front and vant of the battle as the strongest fence of our Cause.

S. Greg. Nazia^z Orat. in l^ulem Basil
2. S. Gregoire Nazianzen shall be the foremost; He esteems Religious men to
be the most choice and the wisest part of the Church; for those says he, are
to be accounted wiser then the rest, who have severed themselves from the
acquaintance of the world, and consecrate their life to God our Nazareans, I
mean: And in another place, he styles them, such as have raised themselves
above the earth; live free from the bands of Marriage; Religious men the wisest.
have little traffic with the world; have ordered the course of their life so
as day and night they praise God, with godly Hymns. They hate the goods of
the earth with which the Prince of this world is wont to inveigle the hearts of
people, In Carmine ad Hell.
and which he changes very often from one to another; and the ho^e of those
riches which never forsake their owners, they esteem equivalent to all manner
of wealth; And Happiest, in regard of their Renunciation.
They long not after that Rib which foolishly loves the body; they repose not
their hopes upon a new rank of Children, they place not their trust upon their
brethren and kinsfolk, or upon their Co^pagnions, that is, upon flesh and
blood, which shall shortly perish: neither do they covet the glory of this
world which does quickly vanish, but they fix their mind wholly upon God and
fasten their Cables to him, as to an immovable Rock; they are enrolled among
those that lead a life hidden in Christ that when the brightness of that life
shall break forth, they may also send forth their light on every s^de,
beholding the great glory of the heavenly host, not in dark resemblance, or
in a few traces of truth, but clear and manifest. Truly and neatly spoken; but
specially where he terms the wife (which Religious people look not after)
the Rib which coueteth the body of Man, from whom it was taken; pointing in a
word at their happiness, who have stolen themselves out of such allurements and
combats. Idem Orat. 1. in Iulianu^
But the same S. Gregory does speak yet more fully in another Oration of his.

3. Do thou behold these people, bereft of relief and shelter; these
abiects, these men of earth, that ouertop all earthly things. These who
converse among men, and have out-growne all things which belong to man; And of
the reward of their Mortification.
laden with chains, and yet are free; in restraint, and cannot be restrained.
These who possess nothing in this world, and have all things; because they
have the world under their seete. These men, who by their mortification are
become immortal; by hanging-off from all things are united with God; are cold
in love, and burn with the love of divine things. These to whom the fountain
of light does belong, who send forth their rays, and resplendent beams of
luster; who sing psalms like Angels; stand Centinell by night; whose souls
depart unto God before their death, their minds being ravished into heaven.
These to whom it does belong to purge others from imperfection, and themselves
are daily purged, because they do not stint themselves, in their progress
toward heaven, and in their endeauours to be like to God. They are disdayned
among men and troaden under foot, and withal are seated upon Celestial
thrones. They are naked, and clad with an incorruptible raiment, in the
wilderness of this world, they inioye the honorable Compagnies of the world to
come; they despise all pleasures, and have continual and unspeakable pleasure
of the mind; their tears are the deluge of sin; the worlds satisfaction, and
purging; the stretching forth of their arms does quench flames of fire.

3. Finally the same Saint in that most excellent Apology in which he gives
account why he forsook his Bishopric and fled into Pontus: Id^m in Apologia.
places this reason in the first rank, because of the goods without number
which a Religious life does co^tayne; styling it a quiet life, And of their
quiet.
void of trouble; a Sanctuary; And nothing (says he moreover) could seem
unto me more happy then a man, that has his corporal senses in custody, and
at comaund; who placed beyond the world, and the flesh and retired within
himself, undertakes no humane affair* unless he be driven there unto by
extreme necessity, and conuersing with himself, and with God leads a life
above all visible things, his mind filled with divine representations, and with
thoughts always pure, without mixture of terrene and wandering phancies: A
Seeing-glasse unspotted, representing God, and things divine, and daily
becomes more pure then other; his traffic is with the Angels, and though he
live here upon earth, he abandoneth the earth, and in spirit is seated in
heaven.

4. S. John Chrysostom does handle this matter much more at large, S. John
Chrysostom contra vituperatores vitae Monastic.
in many homelies, in which he does heap very many great praises upon this holy
Institution, but especially in three whole books which he wrote against the
dispraysers of a Monastical life: in which books he makes account, that he
has made it a clear case, not only to a Christian Parent: but (which is more
to be admired) to any Heathen: that if his son, swimming in worldly wealth,
should leave all, and betake himself to the poverty, That a rich man is the
happier by leaving all, and entering into Religion, even for temporal
consideration.
and abiectnes of a Religious life, it were far better for him. And this he
performed, first, by force of considerations drawn from the state of this
present life, not meddling with the life to come, of which the heathen has
little knowledge; for he proves that the riches of a Religious man are
greater, more real, and of a higher value; his pleasures more solid, himself
better fortified, both for defense of himself, and offense of his enemies* and
which is more hard to be believed, that in this world he shall be more
renowned. This he confirms by example of heathen Philosophers: and shows
that their poverty, and want was, and is, more famous, after so many ages,
then the great wealth, and preeminence of kings. Much more, for reasons
eternal.
Then turning his discourse to Christians, and having so much the easier task
in hand, he does reason so profoundly of the pains to Hell, of the joys of
heaven, of the latter day of judgment, of the snares and wiles of this world,
and of the fowlenes of sin: bringing proof of all, out of the ghospells, and
other books of Scripture, that he gives no man leave to doubt of the matter.
5. Climachus also, Climacus.
an ancient, and substantial writer, has many things to like purpose, through
his whole book, Grad^ 4.
but I have made choice of this one saying, short in words, but in substance
pithy; That a Monastery is a kind of heaven upon earth, and therefore with what
affection, Religion a Heaven upon earth.
and reverence, we believe that the Angels wayt upon God, with the like we
must minister unto our Brethren.

S. Ephrem ser. de virt. and vit.
6. To which saying S. Ephrem has another not unlike (who is an auctour of the
same age, and antiquity. When I consider, says he, this Angelical kind of
living, I hold, that all the wholesome orders of the same, are very blessed;
for can we reckon him otherwise then blessed, Religion an Angelical life.
who lives piously, and uprightly in perpetual chastity, in regard of the
infinite riches without measure which are reserved for him? wherefore let us do
our endeavor, in this short stint of time, to live in the fear of God in this
monastical, Religious, Angelical kind of life, and with all our strength,
cleave to the holy Commandments of our Lord and Savior, with all Humility.

S. John Damascen. De Barlaam and Iosaphat
7. S. John Damascen also speaks passing well, in commendation of Religious
people. Assuredly, says he, they are happy and thrice happy; for being
inflamed with the love of God, they did set all things at naught for his sake:
they powered forth tears, and continued in sorrow night and day to purchasse
eternal comfort; they voluntarily debased themselves, The blessing of a
Religious life.
that in heaven they might be exalted; they afflicted their bodies with hunger,
and thirst, and watching, that they might be intertayned with the delights of
Paradise through cleannes of heart; they were Temples of the holy Ghost, that
they might stand at the right hand of our Savior. They girded their loins
with truth, and had their lamps always in a readynes, attending the coming
of the Immortal bridegroom: for having their eyes open, they did at all times
foresee that terrible day, and had the contemplation of their future good, and
of the punishments of the other life, so engraven in a manner, in their very
body, that they could never be with-drawne from it. They were ready to take
pains here, that they might inioye eternal glory; and were free from all
turbulent passion, like the Angels of heaven, they are happy, and thrice
happy, because they discovered with the clear, and steady eyesight of their
mind, the vanity of all things present, and the variablenes, and inconstancy
of humane prosperity, and despising it, they laid up in store for themselves
everlasting riches, and took hold of that life which neue^ sets, and is never
cut off by death.

Eus^bius Casariensis. l. 1. d^m. Euang. c 8.
8. Eusebius Casariensis shall shut up the rank of the Greek fathers, who
says that in the Church of God there be two manners of life ordained. The one,
does stepp beyond nature, and the common strain of the life of man. It looks
not after marriage, Two states in the Church of God.
nor issue, nor goods, nor abundance of wealth: but is vowed to the sole
service of God, through excessive love of heavenly things, such as have
embraced this kind of living, look down upon the life of the rest of men, as
if themselves were severed from this mortality, and carrying their body only
hear upon earth, Unmarried, more perfect.

Married inferior degree.


dwell in heaven with their mind and cog^tation, as being consecrate to our
great God, in Feu of all mankind. And certainly among Christians there is such
a kind of perfect life; there is also another kind more slack, and which has
more of the man; this is entangled in sober wedlock, and breeding of children,
it groaneth under the care of howsehold business, and sets down laws for
those that follow a just war: it allows also of trading in merchandise, and
husbandry, so that the service of God go with it. These men belong to an
inferior degree of piety.

9. Now to come to the latin Fathers, that which S. Cyprian says of vowed
virgins, S. Cyprian de habitu Virg. ^. 4. c. 21.
is a notable commendation, and is quoted by S. Augustine in his treatise of
Christian doctrine, for a singular speech. It is says he, the flower of the
Ecclesiastical branch; the glory and grace of spiritual graces; The very
luster of honor and praise; Virgins the flo^er of the church.
a work perfect, and unattained; the image of God answearable to his
sanctity; the nobler part of the flock of Christ; the glorious fruitfullnes of
our holy mother the Church is filled with joy, by reason of these virgins, and
in them she does abundantly blossom; And by how much the number is greater of
this glorious virginity the more is the joy of the mother increased.

10. To him we may add the worthy testimony of S. Ambrose, S. Ambrose l. de
v^a^i^.
who in his book of widows, upon that document of our Savior, when you have
done all things that are commanded you* say* we are unprofitable servants, what
we ought to have done, Luc 17.10.
we have done, discourses thus: The virgin says not so: he that has sold all
his substance, says not so; but does look to have some recompense laid up for
him; A Religious man a profitable servant.
as the holy Apostle says, behold we have left all things, and followed thee,
what therefore shall we have; He says not, as an unprofitable servant, I have
done what I ought, but as profitable to his Master, and as one that has
multiplied the talents which were committed to his charge, Matthew. 19.27.
by putting his money to profitt, does wait for the reward of his trust, and
virtue, knowing he has done and deserved well And in one of his Epistles the
same S. Ambroise says, This is an Angelical trade of life, Idem Ep. 25.
to be always praising God, by frequent prayer they endeavor to appease our
Lord, and crave his favor: they keep their mind busied with reading, Religion
an Angelical life.
and with continual labor, and living a part from the Compagny of women,
they are Mothers and Nurses to one another; O what a life is this; in which
there is nothing which we need to fear, and very much which we ought to
Imitate!

1. Saint Hierome has many things to the same purpose in diverse places of his
works, S. Hierome. Ep 1. and 34.
and some whole Epistles of this matter, as to Heliodorus, and Julian. In that
which he writ to Marcella he speaks thus; Certainly the assemblies of Virgins
and Monks, Ep 17.
are the flower of the church, and amidst the Ecclesiastical ornaments a most
precious gemme. And writing to Demetrias; It is the height of an Apostolical
life, Ep 8.
and of perfect virtue, to sell al and ^eale it among the poor, and thus
lightened, and disburdned to fly up to heaven with Christ; though in this,
every one be left to his free will and choice. An Apostolical life.
He says if thou will be perfect; I do not force you, I do not command you, I
propose unto you the prize, I show you the rewards, It is yours to choose
whether you will be crowned in the lists, Matthew. 19.21.
and combat. In the Acts of the Apostles while the blood of our Lord and
Savior was yet warm, and the faith of the new believers did yet boil within
them, they sold their possessions and laid the price thereof at the feet of
the Apostles, to show that money was to be trodden under foot; and they dealt
to every one as they had need.

12. S. Augustine in the book which he writ of the manners of the Church does
record the like praises, S. Augustine de moribus Eccles. c. ^1.
with an equal current of eloquence, who can choose but admire, says he and
praise those, who forsaking and contemning the allurements of this world, dwell
al their life time in common together, in a most chaste and most holy manner
of living: occupied in prayer, in reading and in profitable discourses; not
swollen with pride; not turbulent with contention; not pale with envy; but
sober, modest and quiet, they offer up a life peaceable among them selves, and
most earnestly fixed in God; an offering most grateful to him, by whom they
have deserved to be able to perform these things, no man possesses any thing
as his own; no man is burdensome to the rest; The fathers excelling, not only
in sanctity of life, but in heavenly doctrine, void of all hautinesse,
provide for them whom they call their Children, The swetnesse of a Religious
life.
with a great deal of authority on their part, in commanding, and a great
deal of Willingness of their subjects in obeying. And after many other
praises he concludes thus. If I should go about to extol this trade, this
life, this Order, this Institution, I should not be able to perform it as it
deserves, and may justly fear that men will think me to be of opinion, that
it is not pleasing enough of it self at the first sight.

S. Bernard s^r. ad Fra^. de Monte Des.
13. To these let us add S. Bernard, who though he be generally more careful to
put fire into the Religious, then curious in setting forth their praises, in
many places of his works has left many things written to their Commendation,
and this among the rest; In d^di^. Eccles. ser 4.
I know not by what name I shall more deservedly call them, Men of heaven,
Religion the mansion house of God, and his demaine and possession.
or Angels upon earth; living on earth, but having their Conversation in
Heaven. And els-where he calls Religion, The castle, or fortress of God; A
castle strongly defended his Territory, or peculier possession; out of which
he gathers: great store of revenues: for so he speaks of his Monastery at
Cler-uaux; (which may be fitly applied to all other such places:) Thou take
from Christ a special Castle, and place of defense, if thou deliver Cleruaux
up to his enemies, out of it he receaueth every year a very good incomme, In
paru^ sermon. 63.
and reuennues very precious in his sight; Into this his place of defense he is
wont to drive the prey which he takes from the Contrary party in great
plenty, and he reposeth great confidence in the strength thereof; For behold
here those whom he has redeemed out of the hand of the enemy, Psalm. 106.2.
and from several countries has gathered them together; from the East, Idem
in Cant. c. 4.
and from the West, from the North, and from the South: But more at large and
more copiously in another place the same S. Bernard does with a special grace
apply to Religious people that which in the canticles is spoken by the holy
Ghost to his spouse the Church. Thy Teeth are like unto a flock of those that
are shoren. The Teeth are white, says he, and strong: they are not wrapped in
flesh, they have no skin about them, they can abide nothing to come betwixt
them, there is no pain to be compared with the pain of the teeth: they are
covered with the lips that they may not be seen, it is a shame to show them
but when we laugh: they chew meat for the whole body, and retain no savor of
the meat, they are not easyly wasted: they stand in order: some are above,
some beneath, the lower rank stirs, the upper rue never stirs. Religious
men are as the teeth in the body of the Church
I think that these Teeth are men that profess a Monastical life, who having
made choice of the gainer way, and of the safer manner of living, in the body
of the church which is all white, do yet appear more white, for what can be
more white, then they, who avoiding all manner contagion of filth, do bewail
the sins of their thoughts, as the sins of their actions: what is more
strong then they who esteem tribulation their comfort, reprocah their glory,
and want, as if it were abundance: They are not entangled in flesh because
living in flesh and being careless of it, Romans 8.
that of the Apostle agrees fitly unto them, But you are not in the flesh but
in the s^^rit. They have no skin about them, because not regarding the gay
trimnesse of the world, and void of the racking cares thereof, they sleep and
rest in peace together. Psalm. 4.9.
They can abide nothing to stick betwixt them, because the least offense that
may be is to them intolerable, when it is given either to one an other, or to
the Conscience of any one amongst them, there is no pain to be compared with
the pain of the teeth, because nothing is more hideous and distasteful, then
murmuring and contention among Religious. They are covered with the lips that
they be not seen; so are we also compassed with material walls, that we may
not ly open to the eyes and untimely visits of secular people. It is unseemly
to show ones teeth: unless it be perhaps sometimes when we laugh: because it
is an vggly thing to see a Monk running about, from town to town, unless
Charity do enforce, which covers multituds of sins: 1. Pet. 4.8.
for Charity is laughter, because it is cheerful, but not wanton and
dissolute. The teeth chew meat, for the whole body: so the religious are
appointed to pray for the whole body of the Church: to wit, for the living and
for the dead. They must not taste of the meat, that is, they must not attribute
any part of the glory to themselves, Ps. 118.
but say with the Prophet, not to us, O Lord, not to us, but to thy name give
glory; They are not easily wasted; because the elder they be, the more fervent
they grow: and the nearer they approach to the pri^e, they run the swifter.
They stand in order: for where is any thing in good Order, if here it be not:
where meat and drink, sleeping and waking, labor and rest, walking and
sitting, and every thing else is appointed in number, weight, and measure? There
be some above and some below: because among us there be Superiors and
subjects: and those that command are so united with those that are to obey,
that the higher do not disagree in any thing with the lower: The upper rank
does never stir though the lower move up and down: because though the
subjects be sometimes troubled, the Prelates ought always to have a quiet mind.
Like a flock of those that are shoren: How fitly are Monks resembled to a flock
of sheep, that are newly shorn? Because in very deed they are shoren, not
having any worldly thing left them, Cant. 4.
not their bodies, not their hearts as their own, which are come up from the
lauer or Bath: The bath is baptism: from which he may be said to ascend, that
aymeth at the height of true perfection; he desce^deth that gives himself to
dishonest life. Al bring forth twins, because they al edify their neighbor,
by word and example: There is not a barren one among them, because there is not
one that is unfruitful. Thus far S. Barnard.

14. All which is seconded by Hugo the Cardinal, Hugo Cardinalis in Psalm. 10.^.
Religion a Castle.
a learned and ancient Author; discoursing upon that place of the Psalm Be
unto me a God-protectour, and fortified place, for by this place of defense he
understands Religion, as having walls of Poverty; superiors, as watchmen;
towers of eminent doctrine, the trumpet of preaching, the shield of prayer,
stones also and bullets, to wit, austeritie of life, and wants not the water
of tears, and expounding the passage out of an other Psalm. Psalm. 34.10.
Religious men the bones in the body of the church.
All my bones shall say, Lord, who is like unto thee; he makes account that
Religious people are these bones of our Savior, and of his Church, and that
this is their language to God. Both because they are strong, and able to
undergo whatsoever burden and labor; and will rather break, then bend from
that which is right and reason: and because they uphold and bear the flesh,
that is, the infirmity of the weaker sort: also because as the bone, so the
Religious be void of the sense of feeling, Coloss. 3.5.
as being dead, and their life hidden with Christ. Moreover they are white,
both within, by pureness of Conscience and without, by example of good life;
They be full of morrow, to wit, with the fatness of Charity and devotion:
finally as the bones lie hid with in the flesh, and are knit one to another by
the sinews of man's body, so the Religious are hidden from the trouble of men,
Ephesians. 4.3.
and linked together with mutual obligations, in unity of spirit and in the
bond of peace.

S Antonine p. 3. (...). 25. c. 10. 11.
15. Let us not leave out S. Antonine, who besides many other commendations of a
Religious state, does learnedly declare how the happiness thereof was
prefigured in that famous ladder of Jacob; in which the stepps are no other
then the exercises of reading, of meditation, of mortification, and other such
like, of which ^eligion does consist; Religion the ladder of Jacob.
upon this ladder the Angels do ascend, offering up these holy works to our
Lord God; and do descend, to bring down in exchange, unto the Religious souls
diverse gifts and benefits from their spowse. G^n^sis 23.12.
God does lean upon the top of the ladder, because al our endeavors do rely
upon his grace and assistance, and while he vpholdeth them they cannot fail; He
is a stay to them that ascend, and a reward to them that come happily to the
end of their journey; so that the same may be said of this spiritual ladder,
which was said of the ladder of Jacob: Here is no other, then the house of God
and the gate of Heaven. To the same purpose he applies the signification of
the mount Tabor in which our Savior Christ was transfigured; The Mount Thabor.
in regard that Religion is also a mount, by reason of the dignity of the
state itself, Matthew. 17.
but a mountain falt; and curded; a mountain on which God is well pleased to
inhabit; upon this mountain is Peeter, whose name signifies obedience; James,
supplanting the world, Psalm. 67.
through poverty; and John the virgin, by Chastity; All which virtues are so
pleasing to God, as that in this kind of life he does give us a trial, and
taste of the eternal glory and happiness to come, and who soever shall have
tasted of it, will confess in words, but much more express in deeds that it
is good for us to be here.

S. Laurentius Iustinia^ tract de M^nast. Conuer^.

The Praise of Religious Poverty.


16. The testimony of S. Laurence Justinian is worthy to be ranked in the
number, in regard of his learning and holiness; he spend's himself very much
in the praise of Religion every where in his writings; and in his little
treatise of monastical conversation he says in this manner. O how blessed is
that voluntary Poverty, which has nothing in this world, and fears
nothing; because it has laid up in heaven the treasure it had; it is always
cheerful, always in plenty: and whereas it ownes nothing, it has part of all
things, and turns every incommoditie to profit, no man certainly but he that
has had the trial thereof, is able to conceive how lovely, how sweet, Idem de
Obedientia. c. 18

Religious houses armies of spiritual souldiar^.


and how precious the things be, which God bestows upon them, who for his
love renownce themselves and all that they have. And much more he says in the
same place, but yet more fully in his book of obedience he discourses thus.
What shall I say that monasteries of Religious people, and the dwellings of the
servants of God be, other then military stations, and spiritual armies of
figthing men: for there in the body, and through the body, war is waged in
spirit, in those dwellings I say, not visible, but invisible weapons are
menaged, tears of devotion, groans of compunction, sighs of pity and
compassion, and of the love of God are daily powered forth, there you have
incessant prayers, as so many fiery darts against our spiritual enemies: by
which their strength is beaten down to the grownd: their boldness quailed,
their deceits discovered, and their temptations overcome, certain it is that
the devotion of those servants of God, their sanctity, their concord, and
unity, and whatsoever is done among them praise worthy, does glorify God,
rejoice the Angels, is beneficial to the just, and terrible to the ^iuells:
it is a safeguard to the world, and does move sinners to penance. And ^oubtlesse
with great reason, for all things which are done among them, breath ^^nctitie,
through the presence of our Lord and Savior. Who says, were there be two
(...) three gathered together in my name, Matt. ^^.20.
there I am in the midst of them. Voluntary ^ouertie has there the first
seat, and expresses a resemblance of that perfection which the church did
practice at the first beginning: Commendation of Poverty.
this verily is the native shape of ^^ue poverty, yea rather, a very great
increase of treasures which cannot be taken ^^om us, belonging assuredly to
them that renounce the world, and give away their own, that they may serve
Christ our Savior more freely. What can be more (...) and plentiful, I beseech
you, then to have nothing, and to possess al things, to have nothing that is
superfluous, and to have al things necessary for use; to con^emne their own
patrimony, and to be Heirs of Christ. For the revenues of Monasteries are the
treasures of our Savior, and the devout offerings of the alms of the
faithful, which cannot be taken away by pillage, nor wasted with rust, nor
consumed by moaths: these treasures are common to all that live in common, and
are not distributed, after every ones fancy, but as necessity requires. The
rich man has not more because he was rich, nor the great man more, by reason
of his former state, but every one receaueth what is convenient for him, which
is a work divine, a great commendation of grace, a deed of charity, and
agreeable to nature. The body of man does take nourishment of meat, which is
divided into every member, without debate or contention, as nature it self does
think fitting. This kind of voluntary Poverty, does free the mind from
worldly cares, and make it more apt to know it self, and to dwell at home,
prepared for prayer, joyful in sparing, cheerful in imparting to others, secure
from danger, and well disposed for increase of al manner virtue. And this it
does so much the rather, because it does acquit the possessour thereof from the
world, it does sever him from the turmoiles of secular business, and bury him
in the tomb of holy Religion. There it eases him of the heat of carnal
desires, it preserves him from the boisterous storms of temptation, from the
allurements of al sensual pleasures, from the noise of the world, from the
snares of the devil, and from falling into many most enormous sins; no man
certainly can declare, with what gladness that man is replenished, what peace he
inioyeth, what spiritual daynties he feeds on, with how many divine
illustrations he is enlightened, who upon good advice, and inspired from heaven,
does willingly renownce the world, betake himself to a Cloistre, and serve God;
aiming at no earthly thing, possessing nothing that is temporal, and reserving
nothing at al to himself, Prerogat^ues o^ Religious Enclosure.
that may claim any part of his love. For a Cloistre is a garden enclosed, a
paradise of delights; the bedchamber of the bride; an unspotted couch; a
school of virtue; the tabernacle of the covenant; the resting place of the
bridegroom; the court of guard of the Army, a house of sanctity; a preserver
of Chastity; the establishment of honesty; the maistership of Religion: and
an excellent mirror of holy Obedience.

17. Thomas Kempis is not to be forgotten, Th^^ kemp. l. ^. de imit. c. 10.

It is glorious, and sweet, and beneficial to serve God in Religion.


who was a man of known sanctity; and if we regard antiquity, he lived about
two hundred years since: He says in this manner, It is a great honor, and a
very great glory to serve thee, and to despise al things for thee; for great
grace shall be given to them, that shall willingly subject themselves unto thy
most holy service; They shall receive most sweet comfort of the Holy Ghost, that
for thy love shall renounce al carnal delights; They shall attain great freedom
of mind, that for thy namesake shall enter into the narrow way, and shall have
left off al care of this world. O sweet and delightful servitude of God, by
which man is truly made free and holy! O sacred state of religious bondage,
which makes man equal with Angels, pleasing to God, terrible to the devil, and
grateful and of great esteem to all the faithful! O service to be embraced and
always wished for, by which we obtain the greatest good, and attain to that
joy which never shall have end! And in a sermon which he made to his brethren,
he speaks much of the benefit of living in a Religious Congregation. Id. 1.
par. ser. 2.
Whosoever (says he) has a good will, and seeks God, shall profit much more
among those that seek God, and shall abide more steadfast, for there a man is
more tried and exercised in virtue, there he is often rebuked for his
negligence, and drawn to more perfection by word, Commodities of living many
Religious in a house together.
and example. There he is enforced to behold and bewail his own imperfection;
there he is stirred up by the virtue of others, and instructed by the humility
of others, this man's Obedience; the other man's Patience does encourage him.
There he is ashamed to be found more slow then the rest. There he has some
whom he fears, there he has others whom he loves, and so profits by all.
There he has warning by an other that is blamed, there an others danger is an
example for him to take heed by. There one is a safeguard to an other. There a
man does bear, and is borne with all, there he sees and hears many things
by which he learneth. There those that are good, are commended, to the end they
may become better. There they that are negligent are reprehended, that they may
get fervor again. There a man is not suffered to be idle and dull, nor to do
as he has a mind. There be diverse offices, and many duties of charity
performed: There every thing has his time, and every one goes about his
business, as he is commanded. There the weak is supported by the stronger.
There he that is in health is glad to serve our Savior by visiting the sick.
There when one fails another supplieth his room; There the members which are
whole, take care for them that are feeble. There he that is in action,
labors for him that is at his prayers, and he that attends to his prayers,
beggeth earnestly for him that is at his labor. There a man has many praying
for him, and protecting him at his last end against the devil. There he has as
many helps as he has compagnions. Thus far this Author, and much more he
says, which whosoever lists may read in the book it self.

18. S. Basil the great shall shut up these two ranks of Greek and Latin
Fathers; whom I have reserved for the last place; S. Basil Con^^^t. Mon. c. 19.
because both his Authority is most weighty, and his Commendation most copious
and eloquent, which alone might be sufficient to prove what we intend, though
we should say nothing else. He therefore treating of the commodities of a
Monastical life has this discourse. First those that embrace this fellowshipp
and this manner of living in common, return to the happiness to which we were
bred by nature; for I do esteem, says he, this living in common to be a most
perfect thing; from which al propriety is debarred, and the possession of any
thing in private. It is free from all dissension, trouble and debate; and on
the other side al things are common in it: their minds, their wills, their
bodies, al things necessary, The Commendation of a Religious life, in regard
of unity and Concord.
meat, and drink, and clothing. They serve one God in common, their
Exercises of piety are in common; their salvation, their conflict, their
labors, their rewards, and crowns are common. In it many are one, and one is
not alone, but in many. What can rightly be thought of equal value with this
Institution? What can be said to be more blessed, or imagined more feate then
this concord, unity, and knot of friendship. What can be devised more trim
and dayntie then this mutual temper of minds and fashions among themselves.
That men picked out of diverse nations and countries should so grow as it were
together in one, through the perfect similitude of their manners and trade of
life, that they seem but one soul ^n many bodies, or contrariewise many
bodies made instruments of one soul and mind. Among these people, he that is
of a weak constitution of body, has the hearts of many that feel part with
him of his infirmity. And he that is sick in mind, finds many at hand by whom
he may be cured, and by whose help he is continually comforted. By equal right
and power over one an other, they are each others servants, and masters, and
inioying an invincible freedom, they serve one an other with great subjection,
which neither necessity has violently brought upon them to their grief, nor
unexpected Chance* but through their own free will they have undergone it with
joy; for Charity, has made them of freemen subject to one an other, and
preserves them notwithstanding in their entire liberty. Certainly God, when
he made us in the beginning, would have us such; and for this end he created
us. And doutlesse whosoever do live after this manner, do restore that ancient
happiness to the former luster, covering the fault of our first father. For if
the union of our Nature had not been dissolved by sin, there had been no
debate, nor disagreement, nor war among men. It is an imitation of our
Savior and his disciples.
These are the true followers of our Savior, and do truly express the life
which he led among us. For as he when he had assembled the number of his
disciples, had al things in common, and made himself common and familiar unto
them: so they (if they observe justly the rules of their Institute) obeying
their superior, do imitate the manner of living of Christ and his Apostles.
And preserving peace and quiet of mind; they resemble the life of Angels. And
of the Angels.
For among the Angels there is no strife, no contention, no debate, but every
one in particular inioyeth al things which the rest have, and have
notwithstanding their own riches wholly to themselves. For the riches of the
Angels are not such as can be bounded with limit, or being divided among many,
must necessarily fall less to every ones share; but their riches are spiritual,
and consist in the mind; and therefore al are equally enriched with the goods,
which every one has whole and entire to himself; because al do possess them
with out grudge, or contradiction. For the Contemplation of the sovereign
Good, and the assured Comprehention of al virtue, is the Angels treasure, and
is of that nature that though every one have perfect possession thereof to
himself, al of them may nevertheless perfectly enjoy it. So with out doubt the
lovers of true devotion, having their mind fixed not upon earthly, but upon
heavenly things, with a kind of Indivisible division of those heavenly riches
among themselves, al and every one are partakers of them. Moreover resembling
the form and fashion of a heavenly life and state, through the commendable
manner of living which they lead in common, they foretast the future happiness
of the kingdom which is provided for us. They observe Poverty most strictly,
accounting nothing their own, but al things common to al. They bring corrupted
^^ture to the former (...).
They give us plainly to understand how many and how great benefits our Savior
Christ has obtained for us, through the flesh which he took upon him; in that
they reco^cile to God and restore to the former integrity, as much as lies in
them, humane nature mangled by sin, and torn into a thousand pieces. For the
chief business which our Savior did in flesh, was to renew the nature of
man, and bring it home to God, and to the state it had at first; and curing the
wounds thereof, to make it sound and perfect as it was before, and as a most
skilful physician, to knit up again with wholesome plasters, and other
remedies, the body disme^bred and broken.

19. I do not speak these things to the end, to amplify in words the virtues
and privileges of those that have embraced this manner of living in common, or
to make them greater then they are, for my Eloquence is not so rare, as to ad
luster to things which of themselves are noble and excellent. But rather I may
justly fear least the brightness which they have, be obscured by my slender
style; my Intention is only to show the worth of this noble trade of life, and
the esteem which we ought to have of it: for what is there in comparison of
this, which ought not justly seem far inferior unto it. They have one
father among them, imitating the heavenly father. And they are many sons,
striving to surpass one another in all kind of loving duty toward their
Master and Teacher. They are many sons living peaceably together, They
resemble that union and communication which is betwixt God the Father, and God
the Son.
and by their honest and virtuous behavior they give their father great
contentment, neither do they ground this love and friendship upon any band of
Nature; but Reason (a tie more strong then nature) is the beginner and fosterer
of this Conjunction, and the band of the holy Ghost does hold the^ together.
What liknesse can there be found upon earth sufficient to express the
greatness of this noble Institution? Upon earth there is none. We must mount
up to heaven. The Heavenly Father is impassible, not moved with any
perturbation of mind. This father resembling that vnmoueablenes, does win al
unto him by the strength of Reason. The birth of that Heavenly Son is void of
al corruption; Here also the study of Incorruption has bred these adoptiue
^hildren, al things in heaven are linked together by Charity: Charity also
has coupled these together. Certainly the devil dares never come against
this fowr-square Army, They are terrible to the di^els
knowing that he shall never be able to make his party good against so many
Champions: in regard they are al so well provided against him and fight so
close; fencing themselves round with abundance of spirit, and fighting so thick
under their Targatts of mutual Charity, that they easily resist al his
atte^p^. Of these David does sing in his Psalms; Psalm. 131.
Behold how good and how pleasant it is for B^^thren to dwell together; Where
by the word (Good) he expresses the uprightness of their life, by the word
(Pleasant) he declares the joy and gladness which the concord and union of
their minds does breed: wherefore they that follow this kind of life, do seem
to me to express in themselves al heavenly and perfect virtue. Thus far S.
Basile, with whom I will conclude the sayings of the Ancient Fathers concerning
a Religious life in general; For in the Course of this treatise, I shall have
occasion to bring many other sentences of theirs in commendation of every part
and fruit of Religion in their proper places.

What Religion is; and how many kinds of Happiness it does contain. CHAP. II.
IN the examining and discussing of any thing by way of argument and dispute,
it is usual and necessary, first of al to define and determine, what the thing
is, about which we are to reason. Which I will also observe in this treatise of
Religion, to the end we may not mistake the matter. And because this very thing
will turn to the Commendation of this holy course of life. Many therefore not
unfitly, are wont to declare the nature of Religion by the name which it
bears. And some derive it from the Latin word (Relego) which signifies to
read, The deriuation of the word Religion.
or to gather again. Meaning that those were first called Religions, who did
often and carefully handle the things which pertain to the service of God, and
as it were gather them up together, and often repeat and read them. Others,
and among them chiefly S. Austin, derive it from the word (Religo) which
signifies to tie again, Cit. de na. Decr. l. 2. Isid. 10. Elym^. c. 17.
or to bind fast; which S. Thomas declaring more at large in the beginning of
the book which he writ against the Opposers of Religion, discourses in this
manner. We are said to hind a thing, when we tie it to an other, so that it
has not liberty to budge a way from it: but when we bind it again and again
to the same thing, S. Aug. de vera Religcir. ^ ^inem.
to which it was bound before, and from which it began to shrink, then we say
we have bound it fast again. Now every Creature was first in God, before it
was any thing in it self, and when it proceeded from God by Creation, it was
in a manner set a looffe from him. Wherefore they that are able, S. Thomas 5.
^mpugna^tes Relig.
and have capacity thereunto, must return and conioyne themselves to God
again. And the first bond wherewith man is joined and fastened to God, i^ Faith,
which faith expresses the duty it owes to God by external Action. Whence it
is, that the prime and head-signification of this word (Religion) betokneth al
service, and Ceremony by which in the true worship of God, we outwardly
testify our faith. But because God is not worshipped by Faith alone, nor by the
external Acts of Faith only, but by other virtues, as by Hope: and Charity;
therefore the Actions of these virtues also are sometimes termed Acts of
Religion, as to visit the ^atherlesse and widows in tribulation, as S. James
speaks. The first signification therefore of Religion is common to all
Christians; Jacob. 2.27.
for all of them in that profession which they make at the very first in
baptism, do bind themselves to God and vow to perform their duty toward
him. The later signification, expressing a tie, or obligation to some
particular works of Charity, is proper and peculiar to certain people,
obliged to some certain actions of virtue belonging to the Contemplative, or
to the Active life. And look how many several kinds there be of these
virtuous works, so many several Religions there may be erected for the
performance of them. Thus says S. Thomas in that place. But you will better
conceive his meaning, if first you understand, that the word ( Religion)
signifies two things. Sometimes it is taken for one particular kind of virtue,
The word Religion signifies two things.
which we call Religion, and is a bra^ch of Justice: sometimes it is taken, for
a state of life, grounded in this virtue. Wherefore if we once know the nature,
and quality of the virtue it self, we shall the easier come to understand what
the state of Religion is.

2. It is therefore a general doctrine among Divines, The office of Religion as
it is a particular virtue.
that the peculier office of Religion, as a particular virtue, is to worship
God duly, and as his infinite Majesty does deserve, in regard of his
Excellency and preheminency above all things and for the great benefits which
we have received and daily receive at his hands. Which worship being partly
inward in the mind, and partly consisting of outward duties, as Ceremonies,
Rites, Sacrifices and the like. The virtue of Religion comprehends them both,
and performs both the inward and the outward Actions. And they that employ
themselves in these kinds of services toward God, and bestow themselves wholly
in them, are called Religious. But to the End that a Man may be said to be in a
Religious Estate, it is moreover necessary, that he give himself so wholly to
the works of divine worship, that he rid himself of al things that may hinder
him in the performance of them. For as S. Thomas says well in the same place,
as in baptism we die to sin, so by taking upon us a Religious state, we die
moreover to the world, as much as concerns that particular work which every
one does profess. And as the life of the soul is taken from it by sin; so
the service of God is hindered by worldly business. Which the Apostle does give
to understand, when he says: 2. Tim. 2.4.
No man being a soldier to God, intangleth himself in secular business.

3. Now if we rightly consider, three things especially in this world, hinder
us in the service of God. Three things hinder us in the service of God.
Riches; Bodily pleasures; (not only those which are unlawful, and forbidden by
the Commandments of God, for they are sinful) but those pleasures also which
are bounded with wedlock: and lastly our Own Will; which (if we give it the
reyns) growe's unruly and carrie's us to al ambitious pretenses of superiority
and command. Wherefore they that will truly and wholly dedicate themselves to
God, must bar themselves of these three things: to wit, of Riches, by
Poverty; of Wedlock, by Chastity; and curb the vnrulynesse of their will, by
Obedience. And thus we come to have the description of Religion, which we
sought for all this while. For, Religion is a state, What Religion is as it is a
State.
which endeavors to Christian perfection, by the three vows of Poverty,
Chastity, and Obedience. The Christian perfection of which here we speak,
without al doubt consists in the love of God, casting aside the love of our
selves, and of all Creatures. It is said therefore that this state endeavors
to this perfection, It endeavors to perfection.
and not, that it has already got it, or that it is already perfect; because
it is not required that a Religious man should be already perfect, or have
attained absolute perfection; neither does he make profession of that: but he
satisfies his obligation, if he aspire and endeavor to it. Finally it is
called a State, because it is necessary, that this kind of life be constant,
firm, perpetual, immovable. And is a state.
For it is one thing to be pe^fect, and another thing to be in State of
perfection. Al may be perfect through virtue, and Innocence, and holiness of
life. To be in a State, something else is required. As if one man serve an other
man, and do it of his own good will, how much, and how long he pleases, (as
one friend is wont to wait upon an other;) this does not alter his state, and
condition. But if a man give himself wholly over for ever, and bind himself unto
another; this alter's his estate; because of a freeman, he mak's himself a
bondman: so the works of piety and Religion of themselves, do not make a
Religious man; but it is moreover required, Two things put a man in Relig.
estate Vo^^.
first, that by promise and express vow he oblige himself to those works, so
that from thence forth he is not free to leave them, nor so much as to have a
mind to leave them when he will. Secondly this obligation must be undertaken,
not for some certain determinate time; but for ones whole life time: and when
these two things meet together, it is called a State, by reason of the
firmness and stabilitie of it. and Perpetuity.
Which firmness and stabilitie is made much more strong, and of greater
weight by the Authority and Approbation of the Pope; who as in all other things
so in confirming and establishing Religious Institutions* In a course approved
by the Pope.
bears that sway, which beseems the person of him, who is Christ's-vicar
upon earth, with power to bind in heaven whatsoever he shall bind on earth. His
approbation therefore is so necessary, that without it, the very vows which we
make have not that force, Religions are not to be founded without the Popes
(...)
and strength which otherwise they have; and the Religion it self is not truly
a Religion; not that the Popes Approbation does pertayne to the intrinsecal
nature of Religion* (For that is grounded upon the Institution of our Savior
Christ, and the Evangelical doctrine) but because, as in several manners of
living, which are ^^uerily brought in, as men are severally disposed, there may
be many errors and (...) and avoid these errors, it has been profitably
provided, that no man should found a Religious order without consent and
Approbation of the Sea Apostolic. And for any thing we find recorded, S.
Dominick, and S. Francis (each of them severally for their own order) were the
first that presented a draught of their Institute, to Pope Innocent the third,
to be approved by him: and this they did rather volontarily and of their own
accord then compelled by law or Ca^non. And it happening about the time of the
Council of Lateran it was decreed in that Council, that ever after it should
be generally practiced; which decree not many years after was revived by
Gregory the tenth, in the Council of Lions, and so brought in use in the whole
Church.

4. By this therefore which has been said, we may discover somewhat, not only
what a Religious life is, but the beauty and excellency thereof, it being the
prime of so great a virtue, as is Religion. Religion the greatest of Moral
virtues.
For Religion though it be reckned among those which we call Moral virtues, yet
of Moral virtues, it is the greatest, and though the immediate object of it, be
not God, but the inward, or outward actions of man, which it undertakes to
direct, fashion, and train up in the service of God; it has notwithstanding
so near relation to that infinite Majesty, that it is the very next of al
others to the three Theological virtues, which by believing, hoping, and
loving, do as it were plunge and steep themselves immediately in God. Now the
flower of Religion, is Sanctity. S. Thomas 1.2. q 71. Sanctity the flower of
Religion, and Queen of Moral virtues.
The Office of which virtue, as Divines deliver, is to present our souls to
God, pure, innocent, unspotted, and to consecrate the same, with all the powers
and forces thereof unto him. And it is of that extent and command, that al
other virtues, are as it were subjects and servants to wait, and attend upon
it; Some by purifying our wills, some by inlightning our understanding, some by
restraining our lustful desires. The effects also, and daughters of it, (as S.
Thomas calls the^,) are most noble, to wit, prayer and devotion. Prayer brings
us into familiarity with God and into his bosom; devotion makes us ready,
and cheerful in all things belonging to his service; which cheerfulness and
fervor, Ibidem.
is of so great consequence, that when it is wanting, our duty is less
grateful to him, and whenever it does attend our works, they are far more
comme^dable, and more accepted. This virtue of Religion therefore, which is so
noble, together with the goodly attendance, which it has, as we have said, is
the very soul and life of a Religious Estate; and carries with it so great a
port and esteem, that in comparison of it, the very Religion and piety of
other states does not seem Religion; not that in very deed it is not, but
because it is so far beneath the other, and so dimmed with the brightness of
it, that it is hardly seen. And the very name does testify as much, for
commonly when we name Religion, no man thinks we speak of the particular
virtue, but of a Religious Estate; and none else are vulgarly called Religious,
but such as have forsaken the world, and bound themselves by vow to the
perpetual service of God.

5. Whereas therefore Aristotle does teach (and it is certain) that there be
three things which we call Good, Aristotle 2. Ephesians. ^.
wherewith men are taken, and esteem themselves happy; Three things which ^^ad
men's (...) in this life.
to wit, that which is Profitable, that which is Honest and worthy, and thirdly
that which is Pleasant and delightful. It is my intent in this treatise to
show that these three kinds of Happiness do jointly meet in Religious Estate;
whereas it is very seldom seen that in any other thing of this world they
should be found al three. For commonly wholesome things are bitter and
distastful; things pleasant and delicious, Spiritual things perfectly Good.
are not usually so worthy and honest: but al spiritual things have al
Happiness in them, as being every way good. Yet, as it is well observed by
Aristotle, great heed is to be taken, whether that which we call Good and happy,
be so indeed, or only seem to be so: Id. ^ Ephesians. 1.
for oftimes a thing seems good to many, because themselves be il disposed. As
for example; to be lanced, is really good and profitable for one that has a
disease, but it is not good for one that is in health: contrariewise a cupp of
cold water is pleasing to a feuerish body, Id. 3. Ephesians. 2.
and seems good; but if he be sound of his wits, he will not take it. The same
we may observe in our inward behavior. Seeming Happiness deceitful.
For if we ask a Heathen, or an Infidel; nay if we ask a Christian Man that
is Covetous or Ambitious, what he thinks profitable, or honorable, or
delightful, each of them will answer according as they are affected; one will
name Riches and Wealth, an other will reckon Honor and Preferment. Wherefore as
Artificers and buylders of houses, so we must measure and judge of these things
by rule and square, that we fall not into great errors in abusing of so main
consequence: And certainly the End of every thing is that, which must be the
Rule of al other things that have relation unto it; and by it we must make an
estimate of them. What is therefore the End why al men have received their
souls, their bodies, and whatsoever else, and to which they are carried, by
secret instinct of nature, and apparent motions of grace? Without al doubt this
End is Bliss, and Eternal bliss. For there is no true bliss, or happiness
but that which is Eternal, al things therefore which offer themselves unto us
under the title of being good or happy, By our End we must measure (...)
Happi^nesse in this life.
must be squared by this End. And those that conduce to the compassing of
Eternal Happiness, are truly and solidly profitable. Those again which
present unto us a taste of those high delights and unspeakable joys, are truly
pleasant and delitious. Finally those are truly Honorable and glorious, which
come nearest to that only true and everlasting glory, and be in a manner
coupled with it. So that whosoever believes assuredly, as al Christians do,
that there is an other life, in which Eternal Happiness is to be enjoyed by
man, and that this Happiness is the End for which he was created, must needs
make it the utmost bound of his desires and thoughts, as the only profitable,
only delightful, only glorious, and consequently the only good and happy
thing. Therefore in this ensuing treatise, I shall make it plain that all this,
is largely and abundantly contained in a Religious Estate.

THAT MAN IS NOT HIS own but Gods, and this for seven Causes. CHAP. III.
OF the three kinds of Happiness, contained in a Religious Estate; of which I am
to treat, the utility, or Profitablenes thereof comes first to hand. For
though there be commonly less doubt made of it, then of the other two, and all
do willingly grant that Religion is full of all Spiritual commodities: yet it
will not be amiss to entreat particularly of this very thing, as being in it
self very great and singular: and which alone may be sufficient to move any
living soul. For we see that in earthly things the regard of temporal profit
is so strong and forcible, that it makes a man adventure upon businesses very
paineful and laborious, and stoop many times very low of much greater force
therefore must all spiritual profit be, which as I said, is the only true and
solid profit, not short and temporal, but eternal; yet not withstanding to
make it more certain, and clear we must establish one thing, as the
groundwork, not only of this present discourse, but of all Christian
perfection; to wit, All men by nature are bound to serve God.
that all men are bred, and borne by nature vassals, and servants of our great
God, and as such, must in all things, great and little, observe his will, and
be wholly at his Command. For it is a general error, which has possessed the
hearts of most men, not only of them that be wicked and debaushed, but of many
that live not ill, to think, that it is enough to abstain from sin; that for
the rest, they may choose what course of life they list, and in the course they
are, live as they list, and take their pleasure, and ease: contrary to which
error, we must lay this strong foundation, as I said before, that it is the
very nature of man to be under one true, and Liege-lord; to wit, the infinite,
and sovereign power of God. Whose will and appointment must be the rule and
model of our life, of all our Actions, and of whatsoever is in us; and if we
will live as we ought, we must not stir neither hand not foot but at his
direction. S. August. tract. 29. (...).
For as S. Augustine says in a certain place fitly to this purpose; What is
more thine own, then thy self, yet what is less thine own then thy self, if
that which thou art, be another? And as a laboring beast, belonge's wholly to
the man that owes it; so man, much more belonge's to God, and is all and wholly
his, Wherefore as we say it is a good beast, which runne's not restily of his
own head, but moue's as his Master guide's him; so man behaue's himself like
himself, when he attend's upon God with will and work, and referre's himself
wholly unto him. Contrariewise, when forgetting God, he think's to be his own
Master, and will dispose of himself, and his actions as he pleases, turning
sail to every wind of his own will; it is a far greater deformity in him,
then for a restie Jade to kick and run away from his Master. Which holy
Scripture does fitly express saying: Job 11.12.
That the vain man is li^ted up with pride, S. Greg. 10. mor. c. 10.
and thinks himself borne as free, as the colt of a wild ass. Upon which
passage S. Gregory does discourse in this mannuer, it is necessary that man
should be restrained in all his courses by order of discipline, and as a
laboring beast, serve under the collar, held in by the decrees eternal. He
therefore that couetts to do whatsoever his unbridled licentiousnes lead's him
unto, what other thing does he desire, then to be like the colt of a wild Ass,
shaking off the collar of discipline, that he may wildly roue through the woods
of his lust. And a little beneath. Therefore if we will not be like the colt of a
wild Ass, we must first of al search out the signs of that which is secretly
appointed by God, that what soever we have a mind unto, we keep our selves
under the collar of supernall government; and fulfill our desires so much the
more profitably for to live, by how much we tread down the desires of this
life, against our own inclination. This servitude and bondage of man, which is
so natural and so profitable, S. Augustine did well understand; and does
learnedly express it, showing that this was the very cause why God did lay a
command upon our first Fathers in Paradise, and such a command as we read he
did: to wit, to put in ure his just and lawful authority over him and over us
all who were then contained in his loins. S. August. in Psalm. 10. Can^ 2.
For, says he, if Adam should have reasoned thus with himself; if this tree be
good, why may I not touch it? if it be naught, what does it in Paradise? God
would have answered, the tree is good, I will not have thee touch it, why?
Because I am Lord, thou art a servant. This is all the reason, Idem de (...).
ad literam. lib. 8. c. 6.
if it seem little reason to thee, thou scornest to be a servant, and enlarging
himself elsewhere upon the same subject, he says. It was necessary that man
being under God, should in some thing be restrained, that his subjection and
obedience, might be the virtue by which he should deserve the good will of his
Lord and Master; which Obedience I may justly call the only virtue in bred in
every reasonable Creature, living under the command of God. And that the first
and greatest of al vices, bringing us by swelling pride to ruin, is to covet
to do as we list, which vice is called disobedience: man therefore, unless he
had been commanded something, would not have known that he had a Lord and
Master; wherefore to conclude to our purpose, it is certain that if men will do
that which is their duty, they must order their life wholly dependent of God,
and tie themselves to his conduct and government, and be as attentive to
observe his pleasure, Ps 122.2.
as the eyes of servants be in the hands of their Masters, and the eyes of the
handmayde in the hands of her mistress, as the Psalmist speaks. Which is the
same which S. Gregory says in his morals, S. Greg. mor. ^^. c. 16.
as dutiful servants have their eye always upon their masters countenance, to
understand readily and perform that which is commanded, so do the thoughts of
the just wait diligently upon Almighty God. Neither is it any wonder that S.
Gregory and others of the holy Fathers should speak in this manner, Plato in
phae^^.
seeing Plato, a heathen Philosopher, writes that man is one of the freeholds
of God; whence he concludes that if a man should kill himself, he should wrong
God, for thou also says he if one of thy bondslaues should make away himself
without thy priuitie and consent, would thou not be angry at it? Wherefore
seeing it does so highly import us to understand that God is truly our Lord,
Amos 9.6.
of whom the Prophet says, our Lord is his name, and that we are his servants,
it will be necess^^ie for us to consider the causes of this subjection, which
does lay us, and all that we have so low at his feet. And of many causes which
might perhaps be ^ound out, we will breefly touch seven, which at this present
do occur.

God has command over us by reason of the excellency of his nature.
2. The first cause is, the Noblenes and excellency of the divine nature;
specially compared wi^h ours which is so infirm, abject, and almost nothing,
the strength of which reason I will show out of Aristotle, because the light of
nature will give the more light unto it. He therefore proves that one man may be
justly subject to an other man by nature; because in all things which have their
being by concourse of many together, and make as it were a community, some of
them must necessarily and by nature command, ^
and others be subject; which he shows through all kind of things. For among
those which have no life; in mixtures, some one element does still prevail, as
fire, in things which are light; earth, in things which are heavy, and so in
others; in living things; the soul has naturaly command over the body, and
does govern and move it, as it will; And in the soul it self, if besides the
natural inclination, it have also reason, as it is in man, without doubt
reason, as more noble, does by right command, and so by consequence man, among
al other living things, and among men the masculin sex, as being the better
and the worthyer of the two. Sovereignty is naturaly due to that which is most
excellent.
From which discourse ^e concludes, that sovereignty is naturally due to
whosoever among the rest is most excellent. As when we see a man that is well
made, and of an excellent feature, we say he is worthy to command, which if it
be true in regard of the body, much more in regard of the mind, though the
beauty of the mind be not so easyly discovered, as that of the body: Thus
far is the discourse of Aristotle, where moreover he declares* what he
means by servile condition and subjection, for he says that a Servant, or
Slave, is to his Ma^ster, as a part of any thing, is to the whole, or as a
thing that is in possession, is to the possessour, for as a part is not
properly for it self, but for the whole of which it is part and that which is
in possession, is not for it self, but for the possessour; so is a servant his
^aillers, all that he is: seeing therefore as we find by the discourse of this
Philosopher, there may be so great a distance betwixt creatures themselves,
that some by nature, may justly be subject to other some among them; how far
true shall this be found to be, betwixt God and man? For a man, th^ugh he excel
another man never so much, yet the difference can be but in wit, or learning,
or wisdom, or some such accidental quality, and though it be never so great,
yet it is limited, and not so very great neither: for in nature there is no
difference, every one of us having a body of the same earth, and a soul of
like substance to an others soul: God inf^^itely more Excellent then man.
But if we compare man with God, wisdom with wisdom, goodness with goodness,
power with power, essence with essence: The distance is not only infinite, but
whatsoever man has, he has it from God, and of himself he has nothing: and
therefore we may truly say of him that in very deed he has nothing, or rather,
is nothing. Which is the reason, 1. Tim. 6* 15.
why Saint Paul says, that God is only Powerful, and our Savior himself,
that he is only good; and Job, Matthew 19.17.
that he only is. And if the whole globe of the earth, as is taught in the
Mathematics, compared with the circumference of the heavens, be, Job 23.
but as it were a point, notwithstanding that the earth of itself, is of so
great a bulk, and the heavens have their limits; what shall we think that one
man can be, being compared with that Infinity, and that Endless Bottom, in
which so many perfections without number, Ps. 144.^.
and measure, do concur, which the Prophet David with great reason admiring
says: Great is our Lord, and exceedingly to be pray^ed, and of his greatness
there is no end.

3. The second Cause why we are not our own, God created us which is a 2.
cause of our subjection.
but Gods, is because we are made and created by him. For among men, though
there be many reasons, and grounds, wher-vpon we pretend right to the things of
this world; as by purchase, or deed of gift, and the like; yet no Title can be
greater, or more just, then when ourselves have made a thing, or begot it. Who
does plant a vineyard; says S. Paul, and does not ca^e of the (...) thereof;
1. Cor. 9.7.
so whoeuer buyldeth a house, or makes a chest or any other work, with his
own hands, by all right, and law, is Lord of that work, which is of much
greater force in God: for by art no man can do more, then give an outward
shape to a thing, he cannot produce the nature it self, or substance of iron,
or wood, or any thing else, nor so much as come near unto it; but God, Conf. ^.
as S. Augustine speaks, touches the very bottom of all things, that is, the
very utmost, and farthest degree of their Essence, by his strength and power;
and so we find that upon this title chiefly, holy Scripture does ground the
sovereignty of God, Ps. 23.
The earth is our Lords says the Psalm, and the fulness thereof, the sea^ his,
and as it were yealding the reason thereof, he adds, and he made it, and (...)
hands have sounded the dry land, Ps. 94.5. Ps. 88.12.
And again, The heavens are thine, and the earth is (...), thou has^ sounded
the circle of the earth, and the fulness thereof. Thine is the day, and thine is
the night, thou have made the dawning of the day, Ps. 7^.16.
and the Sun. And in an other place Mine are all the wild beasts of the woods,
Ps 49.10.
the beasts upon the ^^^s, and the ox^n; ^yne is gold, Agg. ^.^.
and mine is silver: finally in the book of Job, God does challeng to himself
all things together, (...) Act. 17.24.
all things under heaven are mine. And Saint Paul in his learned sermon
preached at Athens. God who made the world, and all things that are in it, he
being Lord of heaven and earth, etc. wherefore seeing he has sovereignty over
all other things because he has made them all, why should he not also have it
over men? Of whom he speaks in this manner, by his Prophet Ezechiel. Behold
all the souls are mine, ^
as the soul of the Father, so the soul of the son is mine: S. Bernard
therefore in one of his sermons does with great reason conclude from this ground
among the rest, S Bernard (...).
that we are wholly gods who made us, as a work is the workemans. Behold he is
at hand who made heaven and earth. He is thy Creator, thou art his creature;
he thy Lord, thou his servant; he the potter, thou the vessel, Thou art
debtour therefore to him of all that thou art, from whom thou have all. To that
Lord I say, who has made thee, and has done well for thee, and does serve
thee with the course of the stars, and with seazon of the air, and the
fruifulnes of the earth, and the plentifulnes of fruits. Him certainly thou
must serve with all thy force, and hartyest strength, least he behold thee with
an angry eye, and despise thee, and consume thee for ever. And to like purpose
S. Laurence Justinian writes thus. Reason bred in the very bowels of our
souls, S ^auren^e Iu^^^n lib. de ^^bed. ^. 5
does call upon every one to subject himself to him, from whom he has his
being: for the nature of man being created by God, and persisting actually in
being through him, by necessary course of equity and Justice, stands obliged
to the commands of his Creator. For though man have received benefits with
out number for which he is bound to serve God, yet this only thing of it self
does oblige him to obedience even unto death, that from him he has his being.
Finally Lactantius says also well to the matter which we have in hand.
Lact^ntius (...) c 27.
It is apparent that there is no hope of life left to man, unless he
acknowledge God, casting off all former vanities, and wretched error, and
serve him, renouncing this transitory life, and inform himself in the practice
of Religion by the principles of Justice. For this is the condition with which
we are borne, that we perform our Just and bounden duty to God that made us.
That we acknowledge him alone and follow him. This is the bond of piety with
which we are obliged, and bound to God, and from which Religion it self has
the name which it bears.

The ^. Reason of subjection is because God is our end.
4. The third cause of this subjection, is taken from the End of man; for when
soever any thing is made for an other thing, it must necessarily be subject to
that for which it was made, and be in a kind of servitude and bondage unto it,
and as I may say, always Eying it. Now certainly nothing is, or can be the End
of man, but God himself. For which reason it is said of him in the Apocalips,
That he is the Beginning and the End, Apoc. ^.17.
the first and the last; for as the cover is made for the target or shield, the
scabberd for the sword, and a house is made for dwelling, so man is made for
God only; S Thomas ^. and q. 44. ar. 4.
for as S. Thomas says, the cause efficient and the effect, must of necessity
have one and the same end proposed unto them, as the end of the house which is
built; and the end which the buylder had in buylding it are all one; seeing
therefore God (who through the excellence of his nature stands not in need of
any good which is not himself) cannot be moved to any work for any other cause
but for himself, it does necessarily follow, that man also can have no other
end but God, which may be gathered even out of the natural order which we see
in all things: for all are so connexed, and hang so one upon an other, that the
inferior and less perfect, are made for the use and service of those that are
more noble and perfect. And so Aristotle understood that the plants and all
things* that have life, Arist. 1.
but not sense, Pol. c. 5.
were made for those that have life and sense; and these again for man. And
among these such as are tame and domestic, were made for food, and other uses;
the wild and savage: partly for food, partly for the help of man in other
things, S Bernard in Ps. qui habitat sermon. 13.
as for clothing and other necessaries. But S. Bernard does much better
declare this matter; for he says that all these things were given us by God
for some commodity of ours; some for sustenance, some for Instruction, and
some for dilight and pleasure; many of them for our correction: By the example
therefore and subjection of these things we may learn (and so we must,) how
obedient and subject we ought to be to God; for we see that oxenplough the
grownd for us, with xcessiue labor, and reap no profit by it; horses serve us
for carriages, for iourneyes, for races; dogs ^unt carefully for us, and guard
our howses and persons; and are so ready at command that with a word they make
after the game, and with a word they are checked, and hollowed off, as no
servant can be more ready and obseruant. And the same may be said of many more
in their several kinds.

5. Neither shall we need to think our selves less happy and fortunate, To be
Created for God and not for our selves is more noble.
or less noble, because we are not borne for our selves but for an other. For
indeed it were something to be stood upon, if we must have had this relation to
some other Creature like our selves stinted and limited in perfection: but
seeing it is God upon whom we depend, who is perfection so high and so
Infinite, it is so far from diminishing our honor and dignity, that it does
greatly innoble it. For, as we said a little before, God having no other End
but himself, man by this means is advanced to the participation of this End,
which is a thing exceeding Honorable; neither can there happen to man any
thing more glorious then it. And it is the more to be prized, in regard that
the noblenes of this End does bring with it many great helps for the attayning
of it. S. Augustine de doct.
To which purpose S. Augustine discourses most excellently: for having
distinguished all things into two ranks, and placed one rank of such things as
we may enjoy, Ch^st (...) c. 21.
and rest in, as in our End; and an other rank of those which we must use as
means, he aduanceth this question, whether a man ought to enjoy or use
himself. And answers it truly and solidly, that it is no way lawful for a man
to love himself for himself; For, says he, if he love himself for himself, he
does not place himself in God. But looking back upon himself, is returned to a
thing that is variable; and therefore if he enjoy himself, it is with some
defect and imperfection; for he is far better when he cleaves wholly, to that
unchangeable good. Then when he relents from it toward himself.

6. The fourth cause of our subjection to God, The 4 cause of subjection is the
Commandment of love.
is the Command which he has laid upon us, not of serving, or fearing or
obeying him, but of Loving him, which one thing comprehends all the rest. And
as it is a thing more proper and natural to Goodness and love, to desire to be
loved, rather then served: so it makes a soul more perfectly subject to God;
the wedge and strength of this subjection being love; and it is a kind of
servitude far more pleasant and more noble. That it does more perfectly
subject a man to God, is apparent, because by love, the parties do not only
mutually dwell one within an other, according to that sayng of S. John; 1. Ioh.
4.16.
He that remains in Charity, remains in God and God in him; But they pass
out of themselves into the party whom they love, and are in that rauishment or
exstasis, S. Dionys^ l. de di^. no^. c. 4.
of which S. Denis speaks, and of which the common sayng is, that the soul
is rather where it loves, then where it lives; Now if the lo^^ of an
inferior good, (...). 22.3^.
be of this force and strength, what shall the love of that Ins^nite and
sovereign good, be able to work in our souls? especially a love so perfect,
S. B^s^^ ^^ Ps. 12.
as God requires of us, to wit, that we love him, with our whole heart, our
whole soul, and our whole strength. Fors as S. Basili says, when he requires
the whole love, he allows no division to be made among other things; for how
much love thou spendest in these inferior things, so much thou must needs take
away from the whole And S. Augustine says in like manner, S. August (...) 22.
that the love of God, which in this precept is so strictly commanded, cannot
endure that the least stream thereof, should be derived any other way, or the
cur^ent toward him diminished. S Greg 10 ^or. ^. 4.
S. Gregory also does say very well. You must observe that when holy scripture
commands that God should be loved, it does not only set down wherewith, but
instructs us also, how much we should love him, adding fro^thy whole heart
etc. To the end certainly that whoseeuer desires perfectly to perform his
pleasure, leave nothing of himself to himself; Whereby it is ployne that to the
end our love may be such as it ought, and as is required by express command,
it must deliver us wholly and perfectly to God, and put him in full and absolute
possession of us, or rather trans^use; and as it were empti^ us wholly into him.
All which is done by love.

The fifth cause is our R^demption.
7. A fifth cause most just and weighty, why we ow our selves to God, may be,
because we are bound unto him as slaves bought by the penny; so S. Paul says
of us: You are not your own, for you art bought vith a great price. This
great price is Christ himself, given wholly for us, as S. Bernard says, and
wholly laid out for our uses. And certainly never was man in service of another
man, 1. Cor. 19.^0.
so properly his; as the Eternal Word of God, S. Bernard form. 3. de cir. c. 5.
and Image of his Father, is properly ours, given, granted, and delivered to al
men in general, and severally to ^uery one. At which Esaias the Prophet rejoicing
in spirit, says. A little one is borne unto us; and S. Paul. He spared not his
own Son, E^a. 9.6.
but deliured him up for us al, Romans ^.32.
and in an other place, who gave himself for us. T^t 2 14.
And our Lord and Savior says of himself, God has so loved the world, that
he gave his only begotten Son. Ioh 3.16.
Wherefore if God may justly challenge us al and wholly for his own, in regard
he has created us; because he does but demand that soul, and that body of us,
which he bestowed on us. Certainly with much greater reason he may now
challenge us by title of purchase, since Christ himself has paid down for us
no less price, then his own life and soul, so incomparabily worthy and
precious; and withal, his body, and his divine person. Worthyly therefore does
S. Chry^ost^me say in one of his homilies, S. Ioh. Chrysostom. him. ^^ in ^. Cor.
seeing we live by the death of Christ we must certainly live to him by whom we
live. Where we may think, that this holy man repeateth twice, one and the self
same thing, in diverse words; but if we weigh them well, we shall find that he
means two several things: first that we live by Christ. Secondly that he died
for our sakes; either of them severally considered, is sufficient to obligevs
wholly unto him. But put them both together, S Bernard de qua r. a^^.
and every one may ^asyly se how the reckoning is inflamed. S. Bernard in his
sermon of the fou^efold debt, teckoneth this obligation to be the first. First
thou ar^ deb^our to God of thy whole life, because he has given his life for
thine, and endured most bitter torments, that thou migh^st not endure the
eternal. And ^^uing spoken many things to the same effect, he concludes thus,
when therefore I shall have given him all that I am, and all that I can do, is not
all this, like a little s^arre in comparison of the Sun, like a drop of water
in comparison of a main river; as a pibble stone, to a huge montaine; as one
grain to a heap of corn? ^^em ^pist. 4^. 1
And in an other place speaking of the same thing he says. To omit al other
things; for this reason alone he may justly lay claim to our life; because he
gave his own life for it; let not man therefore live to himself, but to him who
died for him, for to whose use should I with greater reason live, then to his
without whose death I had not lived? And for whom can I live with greater
commodity to my self, then for him who has promised everlasting life? For
whom had I more need to live, then for him that threatens eternal fire?
Finally we may easily discover how fully this Saint was persuaded of this
truth, and how deeply he had it printed in him, by an other discourse of his
more large to the same effect, where he says most excellently. Idem de
diligen^^ (...).
If I be debtour of my self wholly in regard he has made me, what shall I give
him for repayring me, and repayring me after so strange a manner? For I was not
so easily mended, as I was easily made. For he that made me with one only word,
once spoken, in repayring me again spoke many things, and wrought wondrous
things, and endured most paynful things, and not only painful things, but
things most unworthy. By his first work he gave me my self. In his second
work, he bestowed himself upon me; and bestowing himself, he restored me to my
self. Being given therefore and restored, I ow my self for myself, and am twice
debtour of my self. What shall I render unto God now for himself? For though I
could a thousand times lay down my self, what am I to God?

8. The sixth Cause, The sixth ca^se of our servitude is that eternal reward.
and none of the least, is the infinite reward which is prepared for us, to wit,
the eternal and immortal glory of Heaven: In which as S. Augustine speaks,
God will possess us and be possessed by us, and all for us. Seeing therefore he
is there to possess us, and this is one part of our eternal happiness, let us
now begin to enjoy this happiness, and suffer our selves to be possessed by him,
yea seeing we are there to possess him, S August. in Psalm. 32.
let it not seem heavy unto us to purchase the possession of so great a good,
and so inestimable, at so small and so easy a rate, as is the gift of our
selves, for this in effect is the price which God has sot upon that glory and
felicity, and upon those eternal joys, that we give our selves in purchase of
them. S. August. ser 6. de ver. dom.
Which argument is expressly handled by S. Augustine in these words. How much
does a man strive when death aproacheth, flying, hiding himself, giving all that
he has to redeem himself; taking thought, enduring torment and trouble,
putting himself under the hands of physicians, and doing all that is in the power
of man to do? How men strive to shun temporal death, and are careless of
eternal.
If therefore we endeavor with so great pains, so great labor, cost,
diligence, watchfulnes, and care, that we may live but a little longer, how
great should our endeauours be that we may live eternally? And if we esteem
them wise, who labor by all possible means, to differ their death to live a
few days, that they may not loose a few days; what fools are they that live
so that they loose the everlasting day? give me therefore a man that lives in
perfect health, and has nothing to suffer, if any body should assure him that
he might be always so, and that this happy state might never decay; how would
he rejoice and brissle up himself, and be as it were out of himself for joy, to
be, without pain, without grief, without end of living. And if God should
promise us this only which I have now said, and which I have expressed in such
words as I am able, what would we not give for it, if it were to be sold? What
would we not give, that it were to be bought? Would it be enough to give all
that thou have, if thou had the world in possession? Yet it is put to sale;
buy it if thou will, trouble not thy self over much to find some great matter
to give for it, in regard of that at which it is valued; it is valued at what
thou have; be not sollicitous what thou have, but what thou art. The thing is
worth as much as thou art; give thy self and thou shall have it. But thou will
say, I am naught, he will not take me. By giving thy self to him, thou becomest
good: This is to be good, to put thy self upon his assurance and promise: Thus
far S. Augustine. And by it we may conclude, that the heavenly kingdom is
not to be purchased but by giving our selves wholly and sincerly to our Lord
God, and what soever we are, How the gift of our selves to God is in a manner
infinite.
or can do. And it stands with great reason, because infinite reward deserves
infinite labor and pains; which is not in our power to take; it is reason
therefore we should lay down for it as much as we have; which will be in a
manner infinite; if we bestow it willingly with out end or limit.

The 7. cause of subjection is our promise in Baptism.
9. But all the obligations of which I have hitherto spoken; are partly
natural, and partly put upon us by the will and commandment of God, without
our consent or agreement: There remains yet one obligation more, which of our
own accord, and willingly we have undergone. For as kings take an oath of
allegiance from their vassals, which otherwise be their lawful and dutiful
subjects, to bind them moreover by their own promise and covenant; so God
though by right of Creation and purchasse, and by so many other titles as I
have reckoned, he do hold us bound and subject unto him; has obliged us not
withstanding by our own sworne-promise, to the end our ^idelitie may be more
constant by so great a tie. This Oath is taken when by baptism we are
regenerate; in which we are not only enrolled among the soldiars of Christ,
Gal. 4.5. Two parts of this promise*
but as the Apostle speaks, we receive the Adoption of sons. And it has
two parts: In the one we protest and vow to forsake and renownce the world, and
the allurements thereof: In the other, we yeald and consecrate our selves to God
alone, not to be his souldiars only, or his sons, as I said before, but to be
true and lively members in the body of Christ, and as such, to live noe more
for our selves, and for our own ends and occasions, but for that body of his,
and for the rest of the members thereof.

S. Cypr. l 1. epi^^ ^. S. Greg. H^. 29. in Euang. S. Ambr. 1. de Sacra
10. Of the first part of this obligation S. Cyprian, S. Gregory, S. Ambrose,
and others of the holy Fathers, do make often mention. S. Ambrose, has this
Excellent sayng. When he did ask thee; do thou renounce the devil and his
works? What did thou answer? I do renounce them; do thou renounce the
world and ^he pleasures thereof? I do renounce them: Be mindful what thou
sayedst, and forget not at any time the tenure of thy obligation. If thou
give a bill of thy hand to an other man, thou art bound to take his money:
thou stand obliged, and the lender will hold thee to it if thou fly back,
and there thou art held by thy own obligation; consider where thou did make
thy promise, and to whom. S Aug de (...). and (...) l. 6. c. 4.
Thou did see the Churchman, but he was the minister of Christ. Thy bill
therefore is registered in heaven, and not in earth. Thou have renou^ced the
world, thou have renounced these present things, be therefore careful, and
always remember thy promise. And S. August. you have openly promised to
renounce the enemy. When you said, I do renounce: This promise was taken and
enrolled by God and his Angels, not by men. Renounce him, not by word only, but
in behavior; not with the sound of your mouth, but with the deeds of your
life; not with the voice of your lips, but with words of your works.

11. Of the second part of this obligation Saint Paul does often speak in his
Epistles; as to the Galathians. Gall. ^.27.
As many of you as have been baptized, have put on Christ. And farther to the
Colossians. You are dead, and your life is hiden with Christ in God. Col 3.3.
To which purpose also S. Gregory Nazianzen says. To speak in one word; the
force and power of baptism is nothing else, but a certain covenant made with
God of a second and better life, S. Greg. Naz. or. 40.
of a more pure and more noble trade of l^uing. Wherefore we must always stand
in great awe, and keep a watchful guard over our souls, that we be not found
to have made a deceitful promise, for seeing we call God to witness to establish
the covenants made between man and man, much more ought we to take heed that
we break not the covenant, which we make with God himself, as it is a thing in
it self of more danger and dommage. S. Bernard also applies that place of the
psalm: S. Bernard 5. quis ascendit in meant. D.
neither has he sworn deceitfully to his Neighbor, to the promise which we
make in Baptism, and says. This is the profession of Christian Faith, that
whosoever lives, live not for himself, but for him first who died for all; then
for his Neighbor, for whom he also died.

12. Wherefore (to come to some conclusion upon so many and so forcible
reasons,) if we will show our selves men of reason and judgment, in the
business of our salvation, we must necessarily acknowledge a great and weighty
obligation toward God lying upon us. And I do not see in what words the force
and efficacy thereof can be better impressed, then with that affectionate
speech of the Prophet David: Ps 21.31.
And my soul shall live to him. For every man must make this account, and
thoroughly persuade himself, that he is not his own, but Gods; and whatsoever
he has, whatsoever he is worth, whatsoever he is; he is not to serve himself
with it, and his own ends, but to serve God alone, with continual relation
unto him. And must be content always to be at his command; and be glad of it.
And with all the forces and inclinations of his mind and will, continualy labor
that his thoughts, actions, endeauours, and himself wholly, be conformable to
the will and pleasure of almighty God. Finally he must always bear in mind,
and express in behavior that which the holy Prophet conceived when he said, I
am made like a laboring beast before thee, Ps. 72.23.
and I am always with thee. Thou have held my right hand, and have lead me in
thy will. Neither must we think much to be as obedient and serviceable to God,
It is not much that we should be as obedient to God as beasts are to man.
as beasts are to man. For if man require service of beasts which he made not;
and over which he has no title and right of command, but by pre-eminence of
Nature: how greatly must we be subject and obedient to God, seeing by nature we
are so far beneath him, and moreover were created by him, and stand obliged
by so many other titles? And seeing our case is thus, let us also consider how
grievous a fault it must needs be (nay how many faults there would be in one)
if a man should covet to be his own Master, and dispose of his life and
actions as he list himself, not according to the will of God; but live in manner
as if he had no dependence at al of him, and were wholly of himself, and at his
own dispose. For what can be more unseemly, or more disordered, then a servant
that will be still flinging out of doors, and shunning his Masters house; or
when he is within doors, regards not his Masters pleasure? Of which kind of
people, Hier. 2.20.
that saying, or rather check of the Prophet, may be fitly spoken: Thou have
broken the yoke, thou have burst a sunder the band, thou have said, I will not
serve. And what torment and punishment does atte^d upon these crimes? S. Bern.
ser 20. in Can^.
Certainly that which S. Bernard has left written in a certain t^eatise,
saying: He is manifestly worthy to die, He that liue's not for God, liue's for
nothing.
who refuses to live to thee o Lord Jesus; and he is dead: and whosoever is not
wise to thee, is a fool: and he that takes care to be for any other end, but
for thee, is to no end, and is nothing. Thou o God have made al things for thy
self, and he that will be for himself and not for thee among al things
begins to be nothing. And S. Cyprian. S. Cyprian cont. demetr.
Thou requirest service from thy servant, and being thy self a man, We serve
not God, and are angry if men serve not us.
thou forcest another man to obey thee; and though both he, and thou be borne
into this world after one manner, and both of necessity be to die, your bodies
be framed of the self same matter, your souls be of like substance; unless
thy service be done to thy mind, unless thou be obeyed out of hand, thou art
stern, and severely vrgest thy service; thou beatest thy servant, ofttimes
thou do punish and torment him with hunger, and thirst; and wretch that thou
art, do not acknowledge thy Lord, thy God; and yet will exercise thy auctority
thus over men?

THAT A MAN DOES DISCHARGE THIS debt by giving himself wholly to God in a
Religious Estate. CHAP. IIII.
IF this which we have said be true (as it is most certainly true) concerning
so great a debt, and a debt of so many titles which man does owe to God,
doubtless there lies upon every one of us a heavy charge and care; and our case
is somewhat fearful. For we have not to do with a creditour that is a man like
our selves, whose hands we may escape, but with one from whom we can no ways
hide our selves, but that he is able at al times to lay us up in prison, Til we
have paid the very utmost farthing. Neither is it a slender offense, or one
single error, if we deny our selves to God, whose we are al, and wholly: but
it contains as many errors in it, as there be titles for which God may
justly claim us. Wherefore if our Lord God would take the extremity of the law
against us, Man. 5.26.
and call us in a severe Audit to give a straight account of our whole receipt,
no man at al would be found sufficient. For though we lay down al before him
(which some man would think to be very much) we can lay it down but once; No
man is able, to pay God so much as he owe's him.
and yet all that which we have, is not once only due unto him: so that when in
this manner we should part with ourselves wholly, and with our whole substance,
it would perhaps discharge some one single bil, and scarce that, but all the
rest would remain vnansweared. Whereupon S. Bernard has this witty saying Will thou have two sons in law by one daughter? as the proverb goe's: Though
here thou lookst to have many more then two. And yet the goodness of God does
bear it, and not only bear it, but is glad of it, and does hold himself not
only satisfied, S. Bernard ser. de quadrup. debito.
but well dealt with all, if we once offer our selves wholly unto him: which is
performed in a Religious Estate. For in it al Religious wholly, together with
their whole endeauours, are perfectly given and consecrate to the eternal
Majesty, no part or parcel reserved. It presents to God their bodies, and
mouldeth them so by Chastity, and perpetual Continence, that they are apt for
whatsoever good Impression, and ready for all the Commands of God, as having
their loins girt, according to the will of our Savior (which S. Gregory
applies to Chastine, Luc 11.15. S. Gregory. Hom. 13. in Euang.
and being like to men waiting the coming of their Master, it offers up
their souls, which is a gift of far greater value. Their life is wholly
devoted to the service of God, al their works, al their endeauours, their
watchings, labors and pains, their whole practice; finally, that which of all the rest is the cheifest, their will (the Lady and Mistress over all that is in
man) is dedicated unto him: and by it consequently the whole man delivered into
his possession, and this by virtue of Obedience, of which they make a vow,
binding themselves thereby not to desire any thing contrary to the will of God.
To be subject to God is our greater happiness.
Wherefore as it is the greatest happiness and benefit that can fall to man, to be
wholly subject to God and wholly his, our whole salvation consisting in it; so
this very thing is best and most assuredly performed in Religion: in which
every one resigning his own will and choice, does deliver it into the hands of
God, in presence of an other man, that the resignation thereof may be the more
certain and evident: And it is the common doctrine of al Divines concerning
the nature and force of Religion, that it does contain a true and perfect
delivery of our selves to God, by solemn vow, so S. Thomas among the rest does
learnedly teach, S. Thomas 4 sert. d. ^7. q. 2. p. 3.
and declare's it by this Example. As when a man has promised a piece of land,
and afterward makes delivery of seizing in, or having promised to be an
others servant, and putt's himself presently into his service: The same does
he that gives himself in this life to God, S. August. in Ps. 131.
delivering also possession of himself into his service. And S. Augustine upon
those words of the Psalm. As he has ^w^rne to our Lord, has vowed to the God
of Jacob: does discourse to the same purpose. What do we vow, says he, but to
be the Temples of God. For we can offer nothing to God, more acceptable, then
if we say unto him, with the Prophet Esaias, Es 26 ^u^^ae ^0.
Possess us. S. Chrysostom also in that eloque^t epistle to Theodore the
Monk, has this excellent saying? Now then have nothing in thee at all, S. ^h.
Chrysostom ep ad ^h^od.
at thine own dispose; since thou have begun to serve under so great a
Co^mander: For if the wife has not power over her own body, but the Husband,
much more those that live rather to Christ our Savior, then to themselves,
cannot have the disposal of their own bodies. C. 2. c. 3.
And Cassian says, that this was one of the chief documents in which the
ancient monks did instruct, and most carefully practice their followers. That
they should not only renounce their external goods, and possessions, but withal
acknowledge that they were noe more Masters of themselves, S Basile Ep. ad
Canon. S. Bernard de praecep and disp.
but had given over, and lost al power and command in that kind with whom S.
Basil agrees, saying: that every Religious body must fully persuade himself
that he is no more his own man, but bound by God a slave to his brethren, and
must make no other account, but behave himself accordingly. S. Bern. is of the
same opinion, Idem in Ps. qui heb. 1.8.
and confirms it out of the rule of S. Benet. that a Religious man has not
power over his own body. And explicating that passage of the Psalm. yet with
thy eyes thou shall see, The eyes of Religious persons are not their own.
he says that this has relation to the time to come, to wit, when we shall
come to the sight of God, in which God will restore us to our selves again, and
will moreover give himself unto us: for here every Religious man must
acknowledge, and think with himself that his eyes be not his own, but Gods;
since by the vows of Religion, renouncing his own will, he has engaged in his
service every limme he has: and consequently that it is a most grievous
sacrilege to usurp to himself, and his own pleasure, the members which he
has thus dedicated to God, to bestow them upon occasions of vanity,
curiosity, and worldy business.

3. It is therefore certain, that by a Religious course, and chiefly by the
vows of Religion, we have this benefit, that God does fully and perfectly
possess us, God does perfectly possess us, by the vows of Religion.
because we give our selves so wholly over unto him, that he may without
contradiction or resistance serve himself of us, where, and when, and in what
he will, as we may serve our selves of any thing which we hold in our hand, to
send us, or to call us back; or to stay us; to set us high or low; to weald and
turn us every way, to alter; and place, and fashion us as his own. And to
declare these spiritual, and hidden things by known examples and humane
practice, as among men the dominion and propriety of things is often by course
of law made over from one to another, so it faleth out betwixt us, and God: for
by our own voluntary consent and act, we forgo the right which we had over
our selves, and make it over to God. And as in worldly businesses there be
certain usual forms of bargaining, established by statute or custume, which
when they are once passed, they cannot be recalled, or broken off again: as a
deed of gift, or bargain of sale, or exchange, so if we well consider, we shall
find all this in the contract between God and us. First by way of Trust.
For S. Paul calls it a deposi^um, or thing committed to an others keeping and
trust, for thus he glories. I know whom I have believed, and am certain, that
he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him until that day, 2.
Tim. 1.12
a just Judge. For as in such a bargain of trust, we commit a thing to an
other to keep for a time, and then to restore it, so we deprive our selves of
our own will and freedom for a short time, to wit, til we enter into the joy
of our Lord: and then we receive our will and freedom again, wholly and with
large increase, and God does restore us to our selves as S. Bernard speaks.
Yet because in such a bargain of trust, where we commit a thing to an others
keeping, S. Bern in qui hab. ser. 8.
the right is still wholly in our selves, and in a Religious course we give our
selves so to God, as we reserve nothing at all of our selves. It may perhaps be
more properly termed a deed of gift; because willingly, and of our own
accord we resign our selves wholly to God: Secondly by deed of Gift.
or a bargain of sale; because we do not give our selves away altogether
without present, or future gain and profit, but we take for our gift a great
reco^pense and reward, to wit, everlasting bliss. Or finally it may be called
a bargain by way of exchange: because at the very time of the bargain, Or
bargain of sale.
as we give our selves t^ God, so God giue's himself to us, though in a far
unequal proportion. For God is exchanged for man, mortal for immortal, a
wretched and poor thing, for him that is infinite and most glorious! But it
suit's most with my conceit, Or by Exchange.
that that which passes betwixt a Religious man and God should be called
Restitution, and me thinks it has the nature and necessity of it. For we
restore to God that which is his: Or by way of Rest^tution.
and whereas in all equity and Justice we must make Restitution to another
man, of any thing that we have of his* and if we do it not, we are guilty of
theft. Far more necessary is it, and more according to Justice that we
should not keep back from God, what we have of his, not one minute of time,
for it would not be bare theft, but most enormous sacrilege. S. Hilarie in
Matthew. 23.
Whereupon S. Hylary says, our Savior bids us restore to Caesar, that
which is Caesar's, and to God, the things which are his: our body, our soul
o^^ will; for these things we have originally from him, and have them improued
by him, therefore it is just and reasonable, that every one should restore
themselves wholly to him. From whom they must needs remember they have received
their beginning and their increase. S. Augustine speaks to the same effect,
S. Aug in Ps. 115.
and moreover says, that this Restitution is most perfectly acted in the
Religious vows, which thing falls fit for our purpose. In very deed, says
he, if one do mark well what he voweth to God, what vows he ^e^dreth, let him
vow himself, let him render himself to God. This is that which is exacted, this
we owe, looking upon the Coin, our Lord says: Render to Caesar, that which is
Caesar's, and to God, that which is Gods. The Image of Caesar must be restored
to Caesar, the Image of God must be restored to God. Since therefore all
Religious people have so perfectly performed this obligation, there can be no
doubt but the promise of almighty God does belong unto them, which we find in
the Prophet Esaye. Es. 43 1.
And now our Lord says these things, God may say that Religious people are
properly his.
who has created thee Jacob, and framed thee Israel; do not fear, because I
have redeemed thee, and have called thee by thy name. Thou art mine. A sweet
and pleasant name, ( Thou art mine) A name more glorious and more lofty, then
all the titles of honor, and state, and descent, which this world can boast
of. Which the same Prophet considering in an other place, weighing the Honor
of those that glory in that they belong to God, says: This man will say I am
our Lords, and another will call in the name of Jacob: and this man will write
with his hand to our Lord; and in name will be likened to Israel. Es. 44.5.
For they who take their oath, or vow, to Christ, may be said to writ with
their hand; and they do most truly take upon them the names of Jacob or Israel,
who on the one side by their wisdom have supplanted the wicked enemies, and on
the other side have made God himself stoop unto them by their Humility.

4. This is therefore, Two commodities of delivering ourselves to God.
among the large commodities of a Religious Estate, as it were the ground and
foundation: that it does deliver over to God the perfect possession of us,
which for two reasons is very profitable unto us. First because, by one and the
same Act; and as it were with one piece of money, we discharge al those debts,
which I formerly mentioned. Secondly because this very thing, to wit, that we
belong to God, and are written as it were in the Inventory of his personal
estate, does bring us profit without measure, and furnishes our souls with
all kind of commodities. Which S. Augustine does expressly teach, S. Aug in Ps.
34.
saying. Let him possess thee, that thou may possess him. Thou shall be his
farm, thou shall be his house; He possesses thee, to benefit thee; He is
possessed by thee, to improve thee; is it for any benefit he expects from thee?
For I have said to our Lord; Ps. 15.2.
Thou art my God, because thou have not need of my goods. Neither must we
wonder at this which I have said; Aristotle 1. Pol. 3.
since Aristotle himself teaches, and very truly, that wheresoever things are
so composed by nature, that there be some higher then others, and some lower,
nothing can be more beneficial to the Inferior, The Inferior is perfected by
subjection to the superior.
then to be perfectly subject to them which are of a higher degree. For the
body must needs suffer very much, if it be not governed by the soul; and much
more, if the soul do leave it. And in the soul it self, the Will or natural
Inclination must needs be out of order, unless Reason direct it. It is better
also for all other living creatures, and beasts, to be subject to man, then
otherwise, because by him they are preserved, and have sustenance and breeding
from him. Seeing therefore a creature which by Nature is subject to an other
creature, is perfected by that subjection, and by the contrary receaueth
dommage; the same must necessarily fall out by far greater reason betwixt a
creature and God, and by perfect subjection unto him, it must needs be
advanced. Contrariwise, when it shall, like the prodigal child, covet to have in
private possession the goods and substance belonging unto it, and the state or
portion severed from God, our common Father and Lord of al, it cannot but
suffer great dommage and loss, by want, famine, shame, dishonor and al other
unfortunate accidents.

OF THE SNARES AND OCCASIONS of sin which are in the world. CHAP. V.
LET us call to remembrance the ground and foundation of which we spoke before,
to wit, the general obligation in which al men stand bound to serve God, and to
give themselves wholly unto him. And having now found out how fully this
obligation is discharged by a Religious course of life, let us consider in a
worldly course, how far it is from being fulfilled. That reflecting upon the
miserable and dangerous state of a secular life, we may better understand the
happiness of Religion. For a man that has been in the goal, shut up closse
prisonner, the more misery he has endured, does value the benefit of his
delivery at a truer rate; so though there be very many things in Religion,
which do highly commend it, yet the wretched calamities of this world being well
considered, from which Religion does free us, will make it the more desired. And
these calamities and miseries be not hard to be discovered; they are no hidden
and secret thing, but palpable, and open to the eye of every one that has any
eyes to see with. Yet because it usually happens, that the greater the
spiritual evil is, the less it is known and felt, because the nature of it
is to dull the mind, and inueigle it with many errors. We will propound some
considerations, which touching upon our very senses, may make us the more
capable of the truth.

The world a steep and slipperie place.
2. Let us therefore frame somewhat to our Imagination, a place very steep and
slipperie, where a man that is strong, and able, can hardly hold his feet. And
in this place, one that is even eaten-out with long and grievous sickness, and
wholly decayed, and round about him, not one, but very many strong, and able men
pressing upon him to make him fall: such an one therefore, standing in such a
place, how is it possible he should save himself? This steep and slippery
place is the world; al men, are those that be so sick and feeble, the devils,
bear us this great malice, and are thus diligent to work us mischief. The
world without doubt is steep and slipperie, and there is nothing more hard in
it, then to keep our selves from falling, and from falling so dangerously,
that if once our footing begin to fail, we can hardly recover our selves, but
shall run down headlong, and bruise ourselves upon all the Rocks of vices. The
steepnes and slipperines of this world, be the occasions which are in it, and
allurements to sin, which are not to be reckoned. Yet if we will sum them up
in brief, they may be drawn to these three heads. First the corrupt and
wicked laws which it has, quite contrary to al order and goodness. Secondly
the examples of allewd and naughty life, which are so familiar in it. And
lastly the infinite occasions of sin, like so many snares and ginues to
intrappe the poor souls of men.

3. The world has his laws and fashions, The laws of the world.
which he will have kept by his followers; of the wickedness and malice whereof,
it is enough to say, that they are quite contrary to the holy and wholesome
laws of our Savior Christ. The laws of Christ are these. Blessed be the
poor: Blessed be those that mourn, if one stricke thee on the one cheek,
turn him the other; our will is to be denied; our Cross taken up; and many
such like. Now what be the decrees, and Axioms of the world? They are not
far to seek? Nothing is more miserable, and more base then Poverty, nothing
happier then to be Rich. We must cherish and pa^per our body. We must give our
selves to al kinds of pleasure. It is a brave thing to bear sway among others,
to rule and command; to be co^me^ded, and spoken-of by every body. If any body
give me an ill word, I must beat him. If he strike me. I must kill him. These
laws are every where in force. These are the rules of every bodies actions,
thoughts, and life. This is the talk at home and abroad, in public and in
private meetings, in every ones mouth and at the end of every business. No
sooner are children put to school, but under their Parents, and their Masters
elbow they learn these principles, and are seazoned betimes with all wicked and
erroneous persuasions of this nature, in those tender years when their minds
are most pliable, and most apt to take impression. But much more when they come
abroad into the world, and begin to converse with others; for then the common
voice of every body, praising and practicing that which is vicious, does
carry the^ into al corruption. It is hard to strive against the stream.
For when a man see's temporal and earthly things so extolled; riches and
honor, and al kind of vanity so violently sought after, who is there so wise
or stout, as to be able withstand the current of al men's judgments, speeches
and persuasio^s, and not to suffer himself to be borne down with the stream?
For as a man that is in a narrow passage, if he me^te a throng of people and
strive against it, is more likely to be carried away in the croude, then to
break thorough: so when the minds, and opinions, and behavior of a great many
do Side al one way, it is far easier, and more usual to be carried away with
the most, then to be able to bear the bru^t, and overcome them. For first our
understanding is ouerruled by the judgment of so many that think, and speak,
and do otherwise; that we can hardly conceive how we can do am sse in taking
the way, which is so common, and so troaden by every body. Or if a man be so
wise, and so happy, as to conceive his error, yet he has a greater combat in
hand, to bring himself to do that which he knows to be better for him. For
presently he shall be set upon by whole troops of the contrary party,
laboring with all might and maine to put him off from it, either by persuasion,
and entreaty, or by scoffs and taunts, or by il language behind his back. And
man (alas) at such an exigent, is so weak and poor, that he cannot tell how
to make light of what men think and say of him; which has been the ruin of
many, who at first have entered courageously upon a course of virtue, but have
been most miserably and shamefully driven back from it, by the speech of the
vulgar, and sometimes by their friends, sometimes by their enemies tongues.
These therefore, be the laws of the world, which he does strive to maintain
with all his strength and power.

3 The second point of danger in the world is evil Example, Evil Example.

And the danger of it.


For when the disorders of other men, their wa^ton behavior, and dishonesties,
their vanities, and Ambitio^s, and other sins, are continually before our
eyes, though we know them to be sins, yet they have a special kind of force
to peruerte us. Either because we begin to think it less evil, in regard it
is so general, and so familiarly practiced by most men: or because it is
natural to every man, to do that willingly and with ease, which he see's an
other do before him that is like himself. But whatsoever the reason be, it is
certain that there is scarce to be found a quicker spur to sin, Ecc^. 13.1.
then evil example, which the wise man shows by this similitude: He that
touches pitch shall be defiled by it, S. H^erome Ep. 7.
and he that commoneth with the proud, will put on pride.. And S. Hierome
confirms it saying: It is an easy thing to imitate that which is evil, and
whose virtues thou can not follow, thou will quickly express their vices.
And S. Cyprian says: S. Cypr. de Spect.
Our eyes and our ears are to be carefully "guarded, for we are quickly inured
in the vice to which we hearken. For the nature of man is of it self vitiously
enough inclined, what then will become of it, when it shall be provoked by
axample? And he that falls of his own accord, what will he do when he is thrust
along? For as in corporal things fire, is bred by fire and every thing is
engendered by another like unto it: so in our souls, pride breeds pride, and
anger breeds anger, and every vice is apt to breed the like vice in an others
mind, even though the party know not, or think not of it; oftentimes also
though he strive against it: for stealing into our mind by our cares and eyes
by little and little, they cleave so fast, that they cannot choose but make some
impression in it, and alter it for the worse. By which we may see how dangerous
a thing it is to live in the world, where ill examples are so rife, and do so
continually beat upon our souls, and provoke them to sin. And for this
cause S. Augustine does so violently bewail his youth spent in the streets of
Babylon, (as he call's it) where hearing his equals and compagnions, and those
that were of the same age, and standing with him, boasting their wickedness, and
glorying the more, S. Aug. 2. Con. c. 3. and 9.
the greater villainies they did commit; he was provoked not only to do the
like, but to feine things which he had not done, that he might not be accounted
the more abject, because he was the more innocent, and held to be more base,
because he was more chaste: for evil compagnie is too too contagious a thing,
when we hear people say, let us go; let us do it; and it is a shame not to be
quite shameless.

Occasions of sin and the multi^ude of them.
3. The third Rock with which we meet in this world, be the Occasions of sin,
which hedge a man in on every side, and it is not possible to avoid them,
because they are in every thing which we handle, and in every business we deal
in. To which purpose S. Leo says very well, that all things are full of
danger, all things full of snares. S. Leo. ser. 5. ^ quadrag.
Lustful desires do egg us on; pleasures way-laye us. Gain speaks us fair.
Loss afrights us. A slaundering tongue is bitter. And those that praise us,
say not always true. And in an other place: There is treachery in the open
field of Riches, and treachery in the strayts of Poverty. Those fill us with
pride, these fill us with complaints. Health is a temptation, sickness is a
temptation. That makes us careless, this makes us sad, and pensive. There is a
snare in security, there is a snare in fear; and the matter is not great,
whether the mind that is earthly given, Idem s. 11.
be overtaken with joy or with care: for the disease is alike, whether a man
rejoice in vain pleasure, or groan under heavy vexation. And this shall
suffice concerning the danger of the place. The weakness of man.
Now let us see the weakness and infirmity of man, that dwells in a place so
full of danger and peril: which though every one do sufficiently feel in
himself by experience, yet holy Scripture does put us often in mind of it, Genesis
8.21.
and lay it before our eyes very plainly. As when it says: Romans 7.23
the sense and thought of man's heart are prone to evil from his youth: and S.
Paul. I see an other law in my members, Romans 7.23.
fighting against the law of my mind, and bringing it into captivity under the
law of sin. This law of the members is no other then the force of
concupiscence, which taking the bit in her mouth, will not only not be governed
by reason, as it ought, but does often times bring it into captivity and
thraldom, and lay it at the foot of her lust: which corruption and disorder
is so much the more greeuons, and more full of danger, because it is not bred in
us of late days, and by easy and slight means, but it is an evil which we have
contracted from the beginning, by the disobedience of our first father, and is
so inbred in our nature that together with nature we receive the corruption
thereof, and are forced whether we will, or no, to carry it about us, and do
moreover increase it daily by our own offenses and wickedness.

4. S. Thomas does teach that by that one sin which originally in Adam we al
committed, Four wounds received by O^iginal sin.
we received in our soul and body four most grievous wounds, which by every
sin which afterward we commit, wax green again, and become far more
foul and worse. The first wound is Ignorance, which extinguishing the light of
Prudence and wisdom, S. Tho. 1.2. q. 85 and 2.
does almost put out the eye of Reason: The second wound is Malice, which
bereauing the will of the gift of Iust^ce, does thrust it always upon that
which is evil: The third and fourth are Infirmity and Concupiscence which with
joint forces setting upon all the inclinations of our mind, do on the one side
disarme it of Fortitude and make us shrink away from every thing that is hard;
and strippe us on the other side of the virtue of Temperance, leading us as
beasts into al kind of sensual pleasures, without shame or moderation. Therefore
S. Augustine says well that the state of our souls, S Aug. de veb Ap. ^.3.
(even after they have been washed by baptism) is fitly expressed in the
parable of him that falling into the hands of thieves, was wounded with many
wounds, and left half dead. For though he were carried into the Stable, or Inn
(by which, he says, is meant the Church) though wine and oil, as present and
powerful remedies, were powered into his wounds, yet still he is faint and
feeble, and will always be so, Romans 7.24.
til as S. Paul desired, he be delivered from this body of death. What therefore
will become of this man that is so weak, and but half alive, if in a place so
disaduantagious, he be set upon by his enemy; and an enemy so strong, that no
power on earth can be compared with him, Job 41.24. 1. Pet. 5.8.
an enemy that ranget l^ke a roaring Lion, and is so; not only in fiercenes
and cruelty, but in strength and ability? Who can be able to withstand his
shock, and rage, and defend himself from his poisoned weapons? Especially
seeing, as Cassian, Cassian. col. 2.6.11.
says, it is not one enemy which we have to do with, but there be troops
without number armed against every one of us, and al of them mercylesse, and
savage, and thirsting nothing but our heart blood and ruin. Besides that they
are invisible and cannot be discovered before hand, or avoided, which make's
the event of this spiritual battle the more disastrous to every body; the
enemies charge being so hot, and the encounter so secret; besides that he is
very expert in all kinds of stratagemes; S. Bernard s. de 7 frag.
and sometimes as S. Bernard speaks, he setts upon us and pursue's us with
open war, and hotly: sometimes with secret sallies, and deceitfully, but
always most maliciously and cruelly; and who is able (says he) I do no say
to overcome; but to withstand these things?

5. Such is therefore the miserable state of this world, 1. Io. 51.9.
which S. John the Apostle expresses in few words, but divinely saying, The
World is al glaced in Naughtines, as if he had said, it is so full of vice and
corruption, so desperately naught and perished, that it has not one patch
whole and sound in it. The wickedness of this world.
But now if we will not only imagine what it is but see it with our very eyes;
and take a thorough view of it, to the end we be not deceived with the outward
face it bears; we must mount up into that high watch tower of which S.
Cyprian makes mention, and from thence behold it from end to end, S. Cyprian
l. 2. ep. 2.
and consider with attention the several employments of men in this world;
their cares, their thoughts, their businesses, their curiosities, their
labors, their speeches, their traffic and al their doings; for thus cretainly
we shall discover, so much vanity in all their idle toys, so much filth in all
their sin and wickedness, such villainy and uncleanness among them, that the
man must be a very stock and stone, without sense or feeling, that does not
tremble at it: and shall prove himself to have very little or no care at al of
his own salvation, if presently he resolve not to withdraw himself, out of so
miserable, and stinking, and abominable receite of beasts and Monsters, into
some place of more saftie and quiet. Which deluge of evils (for so I may call
it) covering the face of the whole earth, though it be elegantly and copiously
described by S. Cyprian, yet I will rather take the description thereof out of
holy scripture; the authority of it being of far greater weight. Ps. 12.2.
This is therefore the thing which the Prophet David in the psalms does set
forth with great Majesty of words, saying. Our lord has looked down from
heaven to see, if there be any that understand and seek after God. And adds
what that divine eye beheld among men: They have al declined, they are
alltogeather made unprofitable, there is none that does good, no not so much as
one. Who would believe it that in so great a number, in a world so packt
together with men, there should not one be found that did well, but that God
himself by the mouth of the Prophet has delivered it? But his meaning is that
though there be some good among many evil, they are so few, that he chose to
say, there was not so much as one: Then he rehearses* and detesteth their
wickedness. Their throat is an open sepulcher; they have dealt deceitfully with
their tongues: The venom of the Aspis is under their lips, their mouths are
full of cursing and bitterness! And thus they offend with their tongue. What are
their works? Their feet are swift to sheed blood, contrition, and infelicitie
in their ways, and they have not known the ways of peace. Finally he
concludes with that which is as it were the Total of al evils. The fear of
God is not before their eyes: The Prophet Osee speaks also to the same
effect. Osee 4.1.
There is no truth, there is no mercy. There is not the knowledge of God on
earth. Cursing, and lying, and theft and adultery have ouerflow^e, and blood
has touched blood. H^^r 5.1.
The like has Hieremit the Prophet, who brings God speaking in this manner.
Go round the ways of Jerusalem, lock and consider, and seek in the streets
thereof, whether you can find a man doing Justice, and seeking after sidelitie,
and I will be merciful unto him And least a man might think that one only kind,
or race of men, stood thus guilty of al wickedness, he passes further. But I
said, perhaps the poor, are fools, and know not the way of out Lord, the
judgment of their God. I will go therefore to the better sort, and speak to
them. For they have known the way of our Lord; and behold these have more
broken of the y^ake, they have burst the bonds in sunder, I have filled them,
and they have committed adultery; they are made like horses that look after
the mare, and stalions; they have neyghed every one after the wife of his
neighbor; Thus spoke the holy Prophets, or rather God by their mouth. Whereby
we may moreover understand how ancient this disease of the world is, and how
far it must needs have spread, and rooted it self in the extent of so many
years: and we may well think that as it happens in the bodies of every living
thing, so the world growing old and decrepit, in this last hour thereof, as we
may say, all the juice of piety and devotion, being dried up, and the vital
vigor of divine love eaten away and extinguished, it has no more strength and
force in a manner left, but daily decaye's and growe's worse and worse. For
that which truth it self has foretold must needs come to pass, Mat. 24.12.
Luc 18.8.
The Charity of many will wax cold, and iniquity will abound; and in an other
place; when the Son of man shall come do thou think he shall find faith on
earth? Which being so, what must necessarily follow thereof, but, which is to be
bewailed with a whole world of tears, that an infinite multitude of men
created al for eternal bliss, and the joys of heaven, careless of this hope,
careless of the divine promises, and blinded with the fair outside of these
temporal things, leading their days in good things, Job 21.13. Esaye 5.24.
and al kind of pleasure, as holy Job speaks, shall in a point of time, in a
moment descend into Hell fire. Which the Prophet Esaye does also most severely
denounce. Therefore has Hell dilated his soul, and opened his mouth without any
bound, and his strong ones shall desced unto him, and his high ones, and those
that are glorious: And this has not only been foretold us by the holy
Prophets, but God has showed it in diverse visions at several times, and in
particular in that which we read in the History of S. Francis his order, In
the History of S. Francis his order.
not long after the beginning of the same order. For when Bertholdus a famous
man of that holy Religion, was one day preaching in Germany, and had earnestly
inueighed against a certain vice: a woman there present, and guilty of that
sin, fell instantly dead in the midst of the people, by force of her sorrow
and contrition: A memorable. Example.
and while every body betook himself to prayer, she came to life again, and
related the cause of her suddayne death, and how she was commanded to return
to her body, that she might confess her sin and be absolved. Then she
spoke of many things, which she had seen, but one thing chiefly which is most
fearful and wondrous. That when she stood before the judgment seat of God
there were at that instant brought thither threescore thousand souls, which by
sundry chances, in several quarters of the world, among Christians and
Infidels, had the^ newly departed this life, and of all this huge number, three
only were sent to Purgatory, all the rest were condemned to hell fire one only
man of S. Francis his order dying also at that very time, passed through
Purgatory, but stayed not long there and took with him to heaven, the souls
of two that had been his entire friends in this world. Many other such kind of
visions and Reuelatio^s we may read, but I will content my self with this one,
it having so many witnesses unto it, as there were people at the sermon; and
expressing both the things which here we treat of, to wit, the dangers of this
world, out of which so few do escape with safety; and the security of a
Religious estate which relieueth others also.

Three evils of this world, of which S. John does advertise us. CHAP. VI.
HItherto we have spoken of the miseries and dangers of the world in general;
though too compendiouslly, in regard of the number and greatness of them; for to
express them, as they deserve, we had need of a volume as big as the world it
self, which is so full of misery; wherefore since it is fitting we should yet
speak something more amply, and more particularly of them, what can we say
that can be better spoken, or be of greater weight and moment, then that which
we find in S. John the Apostle, who giue's us this advise; Love not the world,
neither the things which are in the world, of any love the world, the charity
of the father is not in him; 1. Io. 2.15.
because all that is in the world, is concupiscence of the flesh; and
concupiscence of the eyes, and pride of life. How foul and abominable a body
is it, which is composed of three so foul, and so abominable members? And that
the whole kingdom of this world, is fitly divided into these three parts, and
as it were provinces, and countries; is a thing which may be easyly understood,
because whenever a man begin's to cast aside the thought of Heavenly things,
and to bestow himself wholly upon things present and temporal; Three things
offer themselves unto him, upon which he may set his affection: First al
external things; and to these does belong the Concupiscence of the eyes, Three
things which ^ept our Affection.
that is, the unquenchable thirst of Avarice. Secondly his own body, inuiting
him to pamper, and feed it with every thing, that is delightful and pleasing;
which is concupiscence of the flesh: Thirdly he meets with other men; over whom
to have command, or at least to be renowned and praised among them, or to
ouer-top them in any kind, is held to be a great thing; and is that which the
Apostle does call Pride of life. Wherefore al those that serve this world and
subject themselves to temperal things, are slaves to one, or more of these
three: And these are as it were, three nets, which the crafty poacher of men's
souls, does lay so thick, that whosoever escapes one, is catched in an other.
These are three kinds of darts, which the enemy of mankind does incessantly
brandish against us, or rather three warlike engines whereby he does continually
labor to shake, weaken, and beat down the very foundation of a Christian
life. Therefore let us consider with attention, in what manner every one of
these do hinder and stop our passage to heaven.

The danger of wordly wealth.
2. And concerning the Concupiscence of the Eyes, we read that Oracle of our
Savior; Woe be to you that be rich, In which one syllable ( w^e) he
comprehends al evils, calamities and miseries. And in an other place more
plainly, and more significantly, he says: Luc 5.24 Matt. 19.23.24.
Amen I say unto you, that a rich in a shall hardly enter into the kingdom of
heaven, and again, I say unto you, it is easyer ser a Camel to pass through a
needles eye, then for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven; what can
we desire more? Is it not proof enough to every Christian man, that our Lord
and Savior, Truth it self, has said it, and said it so plainly, and so
expressly as we see? For if we believe al other Mysteries of our faith, as the
Mystery of the Blessed Trinity, of the Real Presence, and such like, for this
reason only, because our Savior who cannot ly, has taught them; and
notwithstanding natural reason falls short of them, and humane capacity cannot
diue so far as to conceive the depth of them; yet we believe them strongly,
and with that assurednes that we are ready to lay down our lives, rather then
to forgo them; why should not the same Authority, sway us also in this point
concerning riches; though the case stood so that it were not possible for us,
to behold with our eyes, the harm that is in them? But it is not a thing so
hard to conceive, nor so hidden or removed from our sense and understanding, as
be those other Mysteries; Four causes why Riches are dangerous.
For if we will diue into the causes and reasons why Riches are so dangerous, we
shall find them to be four. The first is because in the purchasing, and
increasing of wealth, many sins are easyly committed: 1. Tim 6.9.
of which Saint Paul gives us notice saying: They that will become (...), and
into the snare of the D^u^l, and into many vain and unprofitable desires,
which cast a man headlong into destruction and perdition. Wherefore S. Gregory
in his moralls says well, S Greg. 4. mor. c. 3.
that it is very seldom seen that those that have store of gold, should come
to eternal rest; seeing, Truth it self has said: It is hard for those that
have money, to enter into the kingdom of heaven; for they that here gape
after the increase of riches, what joy can they hope for in the life to come?
Idem in Pastor. 3. p. ad^^. 21.
And yet more effectually in his Pastoral, he says: They that are hot upon
sudden increase of wealth, let them hearken to that which is written, He that
makes have to be rich, Prou. 28.20
shall not be innocent; for certainly the man that is ambitious to increase his
riches, is careless in avoiding sin; and (as a sylly bird,) whilst he
greedily looks after the bayte of earthly substance, he heeds not the snare
of sin, that does strangle him. They that covet after whatsoever gain this
present world can affoard them, and heed not the future dommage which they may
suffer, Pr^u ^0.^1
let them hear what is written: The inheritance which we make have unto ^n the
beginning, at last will want a blessing; for this present life is the beginning,
which leads us in the end, to the portion of blessedness: therefore they that
make have to have their inheritance in the beginning, cut themselves off from
the blessed portion which they should have in the end* because whilst here
they desire increase through wicked avarice, they are there dis-inherited from
the everlasting patrimony; and those that covet to have al; or are able to
compass all that they covet after; Matthew. 16.26.
let them give care to what is written: What does it avail a man, if he gain
the whole world, and suffer loss of his own soul; as if Truth it self had
said, what does it avayle a man to ^ake to himself all that is without him, if
he damn this one thing, which is himself. etc.

3. Thus it fare's with us in the purchase of Riches; The 2. Inco^uenie^ce of
being Rich.
how is it in the possession and use of them? For this is another great
incommoditie of being rich, because it is not credible, how it does dead, and
extinguish the practice of virtue, and al affection, and thought of heavenly
things, razing the very memory of them out of our mind, and carrying it quite
an other way; to wit, upon the care and solicitude how to keep that which we
have gotten upon earth. For all kind of worldly wealth and riches, being of
their own nature perishable, and subject always to wast and decay; and
moreover lying open to the wrongs, and rapine of other folk, and al
unfortunate mischances, and yiedling continual matter of debate, and strife,
and suites in law; no forecast or provision can be great enough to preserve
them; Whereby the mind of a rich man distracted with many cares, and divided
within it self, is every day duller, and duller, for any business that concerns
the service of God, and having nothing day by day but earth in his thought, and
earth in his hand, by little and little he becomes wholly earthly. Whereupon S.
Ambrose is of opinion that our Savior for this reason chiefly, S. Ambrose l 5.
in Luc.
began his sermon, from the Commendation of Poverty. Because, says he,
Poverty is the first in the rank of virtues, and as it were a mother and
breeder of them; for he that shall have set worldly things at naught, may well
deserve the things eternal; but no man can be worthy of the kingdom of heaven,
that being possessed with affection of th^s world, has not power so much as to
lift up his head out of it. S. H^^rome thought, and wrote the same thing; to
wit, that virtue, and riches, cannot dwell together in one man's breast; and he
confirms it by the example of a Heathen philosopher; S. H^^rome p. 13
for Crates, says he, the Thebaean, a man in his time very wealthy, when he
went to Athens, to betake himself to philosophy, cast away a great mass of
gold and silver, making account with himself, that it was not possible for him
to be Master of virtue and riches both at once. And we, stuffed up to the very
eyes, think we can follow the poverty of our Savior Christ: And S. Bernard,
S. Bernard ^p. 103.
says in few words most pithyly. Blessed is he that hunteth not after those
things, which when we possess them, they ouer-load us; when we love them, they
defile us, when we leese them, they torment us. For such be the fruits of
riches, that though we do not set our heart to them; yet the care and
administration of them is toylesome. But if we love them also, then they defile
our soul; and do as it were cast dirt upon the face and beauty of it. If
moreover we chance so leese them all, or in part, as in the midst of so many
several chances, nothing is more easy; then they vex and torment us; and not
only when we come in good earnest to leese them, but long before, and in very
deed always, because there is always a possibility of leesing them.

The 3. mischeef of being rich.
4. The third mischeef of Riches be certain vices which usually accompayny
them. For Riches and vices though in name they somewhat agree, yet much more
in quality. And first S. Bernard says the fulness and abundance of temporal
things, Di^iti^ and viti^ magna est (...).
begets want and forgetfulness of the eternal. For a man that is full fed and in
a manner glutted with the things of this life, not only, does not hunger after
things of the life to come, but can hardly call them to mind, or once think of
them: yea you cannot put him in mind of a thing that is more distastful.
Wherefore the Wise man says truly. S. Bernard (...) 2 de 4. (...)
O death, how bitter is the memory of thee, to a man that has peace in his
substance? And this oblivion is not alone. For commonly, or rather I may say,
there necessarily followe's pride, disdaynefulnes, and insolency. For as S.
Augustine says very well, (...). 41.1.
Riches breed nothing more naturally, them Pride: Every fruit, every grain,
every corn, every tree, has his worms. The worm of riches is Pride. S. Aug.
de (...) D. s. 5
Moreover by this worldly happiness, and abundance of wealth, men grow to a kind
of boldness, and too much confidence of themselves and their own strength,
which some may perhaps think to be a small fault. But our Savior Christ
esteemed it a matter of so great moment, that for this very cause he said, Mat.
19.
it was not possible for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven. And
it is written in the Proverbs. He that confideth in his riches, shall fall. And
in the Psalms: They that confide in their strength, Prou 11 28.
and glory in the multitude of their riches. And to the same purpose is that
which we read in Ecclesiasticus, of not placing our trust in money hoarded up;
Ps. 48.7.
which the holy Ghost reckons to be of so great weight, that as if it were
above the power of man to do it, E^cl. 31.9.
he adds with admiration. Who is he, and we will praise him? And thus much we
may say truly of them, that Riches are Instruments to al evil, both in regard
of the power which is in them, for as the Ecclesialles says Al^^ings obey
money; Eccl. 10.19.
and by reason that most commonly those that have them in great abundance,
stand not in awe of any thing, which is a great spurr to sin; Wherefore our
Savior Christ does with great reason like^ al earthly riches to Thorns; Mat
13.22. S (...) Hom. 25. in Eua^g.
not only because they choke the Corn of virtue, and good Counsel, but
because they rend the mind in pieces; and as S. Gregory says dragging it even
to sin, they leave it al goare blood by the wound "which they give it.

The 4 mischeef of Riches.
5. A fourth evil which comes by riches, is, that very thing which makes them
so much desired by most men, and esteemed so great a happiness; to wit,
sumptuous furnitures, gorgeous apparel, dayntie fare, a galant life lead in
^ase and plenty and al corporal pleasure. Wherefore we shall do well to bethink
our selves how prejudicial these delights do prove, and learn what come's of
them, by that Rich man of old, Luc. 16.19.
who was buried in Hell; not because he had robbed others of that which
belonged unto them (for we read no such thing of him) but because he was clad
in purple, S Greg. 11. mor. 4.
and silks, and fared every day magnifically; And that which S. Gregory says
is well to be noted, that those whom God has once cast off, have al things at
will in this life; as it is a custom amongst us to deny the sick nothing,
when they are given over by the physician; and so they are lead to the dungeon
of hell and eternal death; through the pleasant fields and meadows of this
world. But whom would it not affright to hear that which the Prophet
threatens; Amo^ 6.4.
woe be to you that sleep in beds of yuorie, and are wanton in your Couches;
you that eat the calfe from the heard; and drink wines, taken from the lees;
and are anointed with the best ointments. S August. Epist. 121.
S. August. writes an Epistle to one Proba a noble and wealthy woeman; wherein
among many other good Instructions, he advises her that in the midst of her
daynties, she set them not to her har, least sucking the corruption of them,
they be her death. And moreover that to avoid this poison, many have forsaken
the world, and they that have not done so, will have much a do, to set their
accounts straight. These delights, says he, in which if a widow live, that
is, if she dwell upon them, and be entangled in pleasures of the flesh, living,
she is dead, many holy men and holy women shunning by all possible means, have
cast away the very Mothers of them, that is Riches; and have dealt them among
the poor, and so laid them up more safe in the heavenly Treasury: which
course if thou also do not run, as being withheld by some office of devotion,
thou know what account thou can give to God of them. And thus far shall be
sufficient that we have spoken of riches; of the dangers whereof, what can be
said more moving and fearful, then that which the holy Ghost has penned by
the hand of S. James, Jacob 5.1.
with so heavy threats. Go to now you rich men, lament, hou^ing in your
miseries, which shall come upon you. Your Riches are corrupted and your garments
are eaten by the moths. Your gold and your silver has taken rust, and the rust
of them shall be a testimony against you, and shall eat your flesh like fire;
you have hoarded up a treasure of wrath for your selves in the latter days,
you have fared well upon earth, and have nursed up your hearts in luxuries,
against the day of slaughter. This is spoken, not by an Ambrose or a
Chrysostom, or by some other wise and learned man, but by the Eternal wisdom
it self, by the holy Ghost in Scripture, whereof not one sentence, not one
title can fall to the ground without effect. What man therefore is there whom
these threats will not terrify, and so plain a declaration of the evils which
lurk in riches? Certainly if a Physician should give us warning that in such a
dish of meat were poison or that it were hurtful for us, we should easily
forbear it, though it were otherwise dayntie and delicious, and we would not
so much as touch it for fear of our lives. And yet the Physician is but a man,
who may deceive us and be deceived. God does so often, and so assuredly, and in
such weighty terms forewarne us, and give us notice that Riches are hurtful,
and very poison to our souls; and what madness is it to hazard, not our
temporal, but our eternal life, and everlasting glory, upon so base and so
brickle a thing; and set it upon the dice of riches? Matthew. 16.26.
For what does it avail a man if he gain, I say not one kingdom, but I say,
as our Savior fayd, if he gain the whole world, and suffer loss of his own
soul?

The vnworthyne, and mischief of Carnal pleasure.
6. Let us now speak of the Concupiscence of the flesh; and we shall not need to
speak much to convince and condemn it for wicked and dangerous. Nature it
self, and the light which is bred in every man's mind from his cradle, does
sufficiently condemn it. For we shall never meet with a man that is so utterly
shameless and impudent, and has lost so much of the face of a man, but that
he will conceal and dissemble, not only his acts, but his inclinations in this
kind, and blush if at any time they suddenly show themselves. Whereby we may
see how unworthy this kind of pleasure is, and how unsuitable to the Noblenes
of mankind. And in very deed there is no one thing which makes us more like to
beasts, or rather very beasts, then this one beastly vice. For it does take
from us al reasonable discourse, by which alone we are and show our selves to
be men; it barre's al kind of Council, it dasle's, and dull's, and blind's the
mind, and drowne's our thoughts in dirt and filth. And there is not that good
thing which this corruption does not chase utterly out of our mind, nor any
mischief, which it does not bring into it. Wherefore S. Greg. as he turns al
things to a moral sense, does apply to this vice, that with which in the book
of kings the Prophet Samuel does vpbraid king Agag, S. Gregory ^ m v. ^. 4.
that his sword had made mothers without Children. For by that king who was
very fat and pursey, he understands luxury, the pleasure whereof if it be
suffered to be like a sword unsheathed, 2. Reg. 15.^^
it presently murthereth al good thoughts, al virtue, and al good deeds. And
moreover whereas it is related in the same book, that the people of Israel
were delivered from the hand of the destroyers; 2. Reg 14.48
he does interpret these destroyers to be the violent motions of Con^upiscence,
of which it is said besides in the book of Job; Job. 31.12.
that it is a fire unto perdition, rooting out al generations. The destroyer,
says he, is the spirit of fornication, for whosoever it does enter upon, it
leaves him not one sole gift of virtue. The tender plants in gardens are also
said to be destroyed; for, which are the Gardens of the heavenly. Bridegroom,
but the hearts of the Saints, senced by their own watchful care, and set al
with flowers through the sweet odor of Chastity? For while they intertayne
no dishonest motion, The white sl^w^e of their shamefastnes is an honor unto
them. Therefore the unclean spirits are the destroyers, because if they chance
to deceive those honest hearts, the hearts deceived l^^se the tender flowers of
so great a virtue.

7. And in this manner to bereave a soul of al her honor and ornament, is not
the sole may me and misfortune which dishonestie brings, but as I said
before, it leads after it al manner of vices, as so many souldiars of the
contrary party into a City surprised by the enemy; and those vices
especially which S. Gregory sometimes calls the Army, 3. Gregory 31. mor. c.
17
sometime the daughters of luxury, as being never from her, but still hanging
at her elbow. Luxury, says he, breeds blindness of heart, inconsideration,
inconstancy, headlong resolutions, the love of our selves, the hatred of God,
affection to this present world, and a horror of the world to come, or
desperation. S. Bernard also among the other Chariots of king Pharao, The
Chariot of luxury.
pursuing the servants of God when thy fled from him, does make a pleasant
description of the Chariot of luxury, running upon four vices, as upon four
wheels, S. Bernard ser. 55 in Cans.
to wit, riotous feeding, soft and nice clothing, excess of ease and sleep,
and the stinking heat of Concupiscence: The Horses are two that draw it, the
Prosperity of this life, and Abundance of al things; One also sitts upon each
horse, to wit, slothful lithernes, and blind security. Neither of these have
any spurs, because in the jolitie of this pleasure there must be nothing that
may bring any disquiet, or vexation: but they hold a Canopee in their hands, to
make shadow unto them, which is dissimulation, and carelessenes of any future
thing which they should provide. For it is proper, says he, to an effeminate
and nice disposition, to waiue even necessary care, and to live under the
covert of dissimulation, that it may not feel the scalding heat of anxietie.

8. There remains Pride of life among the three Evils we were to speak of;
The harm^^ which come of Pride and Ambition.
which vice how forcibly it does not only hinder, but overthrow the health of
our souls, that one saying of our Savior Christ, which we find in S. John
spoken to the Jews, does sufficiently demonstrate; How can you believe, who
receive glory from one another? Io. 5.44.
So great is the darkness, and obscurity it brings upon a soul, which it
has once possessed. S. B^sil calls this desire of glory, S. Basil.
the whet-stone of wickedness: because it is not only evil in itself, but it
whetteth a man on to al other evil. And S. Bernard says more fully: S.
Bernard. in Qui hab. 5.6.
Ambition is a subtle evil, a hidden poison, a secret plague, a contriuer of
deceit, the mother of Hypocrisy, the breeder of envy, the offspring of al
vice, the fuel of wickedness, the rust of virtue, the moath of sanctity, the
blinder of men's hearts, turning remedies into diseases, and breeding sickness by
the helps of physic. Many things we may read in S. Gregory concerning this
vice, or rather this forge of al vices, and easily understand by what he says,
that whosoever shall give himself unto it, can have no commerce with any
virtue. And among other things he says in his Morals wondrous well: S. Greg.
34. mor. c. 18.
That other vices make war upon those virtues only, by which themselves are
destroyed, as Anger opposes itself against Patience, Gluttony against
Abstinence, Lust against Continency. But Pride, which we call the root of al
vices, not satisfied with the death of one virtue, bandeth itself against all the parts of the Soul, and, as a general and contagious disease, infecteth the
whole body. For as if a Tyrant should surprise a city which he has
besieged, so when Pride does breake-in upon the mind, the richer it finds a
man, the more cruel it is against him. But besides the robbing of a man, and
the depriving him of al spiritual ornaments, and the defacing and razing of al
virtue to the very ground; it does also bring with it al manner of evil and
corruption; which S. Gregory also teaches in these words: S. Greg 31. mor. c.
16.
Pride is the root of al evil, and of it the holy Scripture does testifye
saying: The beginning of al sin is Pride; And the first brood that is hatched
out of this poisoned root, are seven principal vices, to wit, Vainglory,
Envy, Wrath, Sadness, Avarice, Gluttony, Luxury. Wherefore by all this which
has been hitherto said, we may discover plainly the great misery of this
wicked and desperate world, and how wretched they are that live continually
amidst so many evils, and serve under such a yoke and such a Prince; the
Prince of this world being no other, according to our Sauiour's own verdict,
but he that is Prince of hell; and the world itself being al of it interlaced
with so many and so great mischiefs and corruptions as we have mentioned.

Of flying the world by a Religious life. CHAP. VII.
SInce the earth does thus flow and ouerflow with so many dangerous evils,
every one may with great reason lament and cry with a loud voice to heaven: Ps
54 7.
Who will give me wings like a dove, and I will fly, and take my rest? For he
that shall enter truly into consideration of so great calamities, and such
immine^t hazards of his eternal welfare, as in the former Chapters I have laid
open, cannot doubtless choose but wish from his very heart speedily to escape
by flight, and to place himself as farre-of from them as possibly he may; for
which flight, the wings of no other bird are useful, Sin is (...) ouer^^rne
by ^^ight.
but the wings of a dove, which is properly and naturally both simple, and
^eareful. For in the war and conflict with Sin, our strongest defense is
Fear* and the best way to overcome, is by Flight. Which he, that wished for
these wings, does give us to understand, which he says: I have removed myself
farre-of by flying, and remained in the desert. This is that which Religious
people do most of al. For they remove themselves far from the multitude and
throng of people, Ibid. v 8.
and remain in the desert, severed from the eyes of men, severed from earthly
businesses, severed from al noise and worldly trouble. The necessity of which
flight, and the excessive danger to which they expose themselves who will not
fly, has been, in my opinion, lively expressed in the subversion of those
five Cities, of which we read in Genesis, G^n 1^.
when only Loath and his small household were saved. His two sonnes-in-law,
scorning his counsel and admonition, Th^s is declared by example of the five
Cities.
perished with the rest by fire. His wife went out with him; yet because she
looked back, she was turned into a pillar of salt. For what does that wicked
place better signifye then this present world, burning with lust and
intemperate desires; blind, and walking in most hideous darkness, with deserved
punishment of enormous offenses hanging continually over it? A wonderful great
benefit therefore it is to them (and doubtless the greatest that can happen to
man in this life) to whom God has showed how to fly from the wrath that is to
follow, and sent his holy Angels from heaven to move us to take this flight,
and oftimes to urge and compel us, as they did Loath, when we hang-of and
prolong the time. But upon those, who either contemn the secret inspirations
of Almighty God that does call them, as did the two sonnes-in-law, or do
entertayne them as the wife did, but through inconstancy and ficklenes look
back with desire and affection to that which they have forsaken, God does lay
most heavy punishments.

2. But to what place must we direct our flight? For Loath, frighted perhaps
with the roughnes of the Mountain to which he was first commanded to repair,
desired that he might rather shelter himself in Segor, Relgion is the Mount on
which we must save ourselves.
which was a city upon the plain; but when he saw the fearful flames ra^ging
on every side, then of his own accord he betook himself with all speed to the
mount, and could not think himself safe til he was seated there. This Mountain
is the top of Euangelical Perfection, the difficulties whereof be so dreadful
to many men, that they choose rather to walk the easy and spacious ways of
this world, then venture upon this, which in their conceit is so hard and
narrow; yet if they once begin to discover in a clearer light, and behold with
open eyes the fowlenes of sin, the ficklenes and misery of this poasting
world, and the everlasting flames and torments, which are without measure;
presently they cast aside al delays, and make haste away to higher places, and
nothing comes in their way so hard, which they do not willingly embrace to
attain to eternal Happiness, and escape the evils which have no end.

3. And whereas in all combats or encounters of man with man, it is ever held a
base and shameful thing to fly; because he that shrinketh from his adversary,
and betaketh himself to his heels, does acknowledge himself to be the weaker,
and gives himself for vanquished, which among men is ever accounted a great
disgrace. In the conflict, which we have with Vice, it is quite contrary. For
to fly, To fly, is to overcome.
is to overcome; not only because we put ourselves in safety by keeping aloof
from the Enemy, but because we discomfit and overthrow him by our very
flight. For every vice has some subject, which is as the bayte or fuel of
it; which bayte he that does eschew, must needs vanquish his enemies. For he
does not only tread under foot the thing itself, which he does contemn, but
goes away with a far greater victory over himself and his own crooked
inclination, and is so far from showing any baseness or cowardice in this
manner of flight, or any one jot of fear, S Ambr de fuga sec. c 4.
or want of courage, as that rather he gives evident testimony of his
resolution and stoutnes, because it is a work of great courage and strength to
fly; as S. Ambrose witnesses saying: Let us not be ashamed to fly; for it is a
glorious flight, to fly from the face of sin. And as for the dangers which
concern our body and life, in every man's judgment it is wisdom to provide
betimes for our own safety, and to fore-think the dangers which may happen,
and deliver ourselves from al peril beforehand, if we can. Why therefore should
we not think and do the self-same thing in the hazards which touch upon our
souls, and do it so much the more effectually, in regard that the calamities,
which they threaten, are not only far greater, but eternal? For certainly the
man were both mad and blind, and a stranger to his own nature, and the state
of things, that should hope never to be overcome in so many battails, and never
to be hurt amidst so many snares and ginnes; Prou. 6.2^.
as if a man would hide fire in his bosom (as the Holie-Ghost speaks in the
Proverbs) and not have his garments set on fire; or walk upon the coals, and
that the soales of his feet should not be burned. And to this purpose S.
Gregory Nyssen brings a fit similitude in his Treatise of Virginity As a
swift river, S. Gregory Nyssen. de Virg^ni^.
that is subject to swel beyond the bancks, does annoy those that dwell near
it, but reaches not them that dwell farre-of; So the world, and a secular life,
tumbles them down that are in the stream, and have voluntarily cast
themselves into the troubles thereof; but those that have withdrawn themselves
from it, remain quiet and secure as dwelling far within the land. Wherefore,
says he, though there be a great number of evils in this life, heaped one upon
an other, there is but one means to free ourselves from them; to wit, utterly
to abandon it. For neither he that shall dwell in Sodom, can escape the showers
of fire; nor free himself from the servitude of Egypt, whosoever will not
forsake Egypt, and pass over, not that Red Sea, but this sea, that is so
black and truly filled with darkness. S. Hierome also does exhort us not only to
fly, S Hierome Ep. 34.
but to fly naked. For if we keep possession of any thing pertaining to this
world, we do not fly the world, but shifting from place to place, we carry the
world with us whither soever we go: Joseph, says he, but that he left his
garment, could not have escaped the Egyptian Lady. The yong-man, that
followed JESUS, covered with a Syndon, because the ministers laid hands on him,
cast away that earthly covering, and fled naked. Elias being taken-vp into
heaven in a fiery Chariot, left his weed upon earth. The Wisest man that ever
was says: He that touches pitch, shall be defiled by it. E^cl. 13.1.
So long as we handle secular affairs, and our soul is entangled in
administration of reuennues and possessions, we cannot think upon God freely.
And S. Ambrose writ a whole Book of this very subject, S Ambrose.
intitling it, Of the flight of the world; wherein among many other things he
declares, how in the Old Law we are instructed to fly, Deuteronomy. 19.
by the six Cities ordained for refuge and Sanctuary; which Cities were
seated in the portion of the Leuits; because the Leuits, says he, are those
that fly from this world, to the end they may please God. They forsake their
country, their parents, their children, and their kindred, to cleave to God
alone; Whe^efore he that has God for his portion, must not busy his thoughts
with any thing but God; to the end he be not hindered by other necessary
functions. For what we spend upon other things, we take from the service of
Religion, and the office of a Leuit. For this is the flight which is indeed
required of a Priest, that he forsake his domesticals, and become a stranger to
his dearest-beloued, that he that is desirous to serve God deny himself to
those things which are his own. S. Cyprian in one of his Epistles does also
advise us: S. Cyprian. ^. 1. ^p 11.
That we give not occasion to the Devil to work us mischief, for he lies in
wait, and is greedy to exercise his cruelty against us; Ephesians. 4 27.
the Apostle saying: Give not place to the Devil. Our ship therefore must be
carefully guided out of places of danger, that it be not split upon the rocks
and shelfes; we must speedily withdraw this earthie bundle out of the fire,
that it be not burnt in the flames which bend toward it. He that borders upon
danger, cannot be long safe. And in another place he says: The confidence,
which sets our life upon the point of danger, Id. ^e singul. Cier^.
is most unfortunate; and the hope deceitful, which looks for salvation
amidst the allureme^ts of sin; when we fight in the throng of our enemies,
our victory is uncertain; and it is not possible to escape from being
scorched, when we are hemmed-in with flames of fire. It may well be feared, that
he that sleeps on the bank-side, will fall into the river; and it is better in
this case wisely to be afraid then to be ouer-boldly confident; and more
profitable for a man to acknowledge himself to be infirm, then by desiring to
make a show of his strength, to prove himself but weak; which kind of
presumptious people the Apostle checketh saying: Gal. 6.3.
If any man think himself to be something, whereas he is nothing, he seduceth
himself. For certainly he seduceth himself, and deceaueth his own soul, that
bewareth not the things which are contrary unto him, but medleth with those
that are hurtful. And on the other side, he that is always jealous of those
that are wicked, and shye of every thing that has but the appearance of
naughtines, takes the safer course for himself. Thus far S. Cyprian.

4 And thus we have sufficiently demonstrated upon the point of Reason, and
Authority of holy Fathers, that nothing is more profitable for salvation, or
more necessary, then to fly from the dangers of this world; and from the
snares and ambushes which are in it; because, as the Scripture speaks: He
that loves danger, shall perish therein. Gal. 3.27.
Now it remains further, that we consider, to what place we are to fly, that
we may be safe; to wit, to the Mountain, as we said before; that is, to a
Religious state, Religion a Mountain, free from the mischeefs which are in the
world.
which we may truly call a Mountain; because it is high in perfection, and
above the earth, and al earthly things. It is also hard to climb, but yet
near to heaven. Upon this Mountain, that is, in a Religious state, the evils
of this world which are so many, have no place at al; both because it is
severed from secular affairs; and much more because it is composed of things
quite contrary to the world; and of most wholesome preservatives of health and
salvation. Which S. Bonauenture does excellently set-forth in his Apology for
the Poor, saying: that al sin is bred by inordinate conversion to one of
these three perishable goods: S. Bonauenture.
Riches, Two ways of avoiding sin.
Honor, and bodily Pleasure; and consequently that the whole accomplishment
of our salvation does consist in that we avoid offending in any thing
concerning these three; which may be done two ways: First in act only and
consent; which is performed by virtues opposite to such vices, as are occasioned
by any of these three things. A second way is by pulling-vp by the very root
al manner occasion of falling; possessing the virtues aforesaid, not in act
only, but in habit, and in a constant form of our whole life; a thing
doutlesse far more firm and durable, and in it self more excellent. And to
this end were the three Euangelical Counsels published upon earth, by our Lord
and Savior. For against the desire of Riches, he opposed the profession of
Poverty, by which we give away the possession of al external things. Against
the motions of Lust, he persuaded Chastity, to cut-of the use of that power,
which is given for generation. And finally to root out Pride and Ambition, he
proposed unto us the perfect abnegation of our will, which is Obedience. What
therefore could be bestowed upon mankind more effectual for salvation? For this
is that prudent Counsel and Divine ordination, which S. Gregory noted, S.
Gregory. Hom. 3^. in Euang.
that as in the art of Physic hot diseases are cured with cold medecines, and
cold affections with remedies, that are hot; so our Savior Christ has applied
to our sins remedies of contrary operation. S. Basil also does handle this
argument very solidly, S Basil. in reg sus. disp. c. 6.
proving it at large, and says, that it is necessary (for that is the term
he uses) that whosoever desires to live virtuously, forsake the world and
lead a life severed from others; and brings to his purpose that saying of
the Wiseman: Be not a friend to an angry man, Prou. 21.24. Esaias. 52.11.
nor dwell not with a man that is furious, least perhaps thou learn his ways,
and get a snare to thy soul; and that of the prophet Esaias: Go out from the
midst of them, and be separated from them; and gives this reason, because it is
not possible, but in the world we must continually hear and see many things,
which provoke us to sin, and enter into a kind of familiarity with it even
unawares, and carry away many pestilent imaginations and shameful impressions
in our mind. And among other things he says thus: It is no small matter, that a
man, when he sees such a multitude of those that offend God, cannot come to
know his own sins, and be penitent for them as he ought; but rather
comparing himself with others that are worse then himself, he pleases himself,
thinking himself virtuous; and his mind being withdrawn from God by the
diversity of businesses and turmoiles, which a secular life does furnish, he
does not only suffer loss (because he can take no pleasure in God, not taste
any spiritual sweetenes) but grows to a custom of forgetting and utterly
contemning his judgments; S. Bernard ser. ^. de (...).
then which there cannot happen to man a greater or more deadly mischief. Thus
says S. Basil, and much more to the same effect. S. Bernard following the same
strain, sets down three degrees, by which we arrive to Salvation, and
Perfection: The first is to abandon the world; the second, to join ourselves
in company with some that are of the same mind and purpose; the third, to put
ourselves in obedience under a Superior, by whom we may be governed and
directed. Which degrees he makes to have relation to three days of Virtue, as
he calls them; to wit, of Prudence, of Fortitude, and of Temperance.

5. It is a hazardous thing, says he, for a man to go about to do penance
amidst the turmoiles of the world; where doubtless some by their poisoned
persuasions, some by their wickeder example on every side allure us to sin;
others by flattery move us to vayne-glorie, others by detraction cast us back
into impatience. The light of Prudence therefore must necessarily go before,
and show how many, and how pressing occasions and opportunities of sin the
World does urge upon us, especially in these wicked times; and how weak the
soul of man is to resist them; chiefly when it has been nousled in the
custom of sinning. In this day therefore of Prudence, let him make choice to
fly from this present wicked World, saying with the Prophet: I have hated the
congregation of the malignant, and will not s^t with the wicked. Psalm. 25.5.
But this is not sufficient, for perhaps heervpon he will make choice of a
solitary life, not weighing thoroughly his own weakness, and the danger of
combating with the Devil; and therefore he must necessarily take with him the
day of Fortitude, that he may understand, that his strength is to be kept for
our Lord, Psalm. 58.10.
and seek to place himself with an Army of many fighting together. And when
he has chosen to be in company of others; shall he choose to be Master,
before he have been a Scholar, and teach that which he never learned? Let the
day therefore of Temperance shine upon him, seeking to alay and bridle the
loose motions of voluptuousnes, the beastly motions of curiosity, the
headstrong motions of pride and haughtines; let him choose to be abject in the
house of God, Psalm. ^3.11.
under a Master, by whom his will may be broken, and his inordinate desires
tamed by the curb of Obedience. Thus far S. Bernard. Wherefore certainly a
Religious state can never be sufficiently loved or praised, in regard it
brings us out of the dangerous seas of this world, to a quiet haven, and
disarmeth the Devil of the three weapons, with which he assaulteth every
body. It entrencheth us within a triple defense and rampire, and blocketh-vp
all the ways, whereby the Enemy may have any hope of passage. For in what
thing can this outrageous Lion or Dragon hurt a Religious soul? He cannot
hook him in with desire of gold and silver, or lands and possessions; nor
catch him by unlawful bargains, nor put him upon any other kind of unjust
dealing; because he has forsaken al his own, that he might not covet that
which belongs to an other. He cannot move him by beauty to intemperancie,
because his mind is bound from it by the bonds of his Vow; and his eyes (which
are the conduits of lust) and his whole body is fenced by the very walls
within which he lives. Neither is there any danger, that through ambition he
will flatter, or lie, or envy, and undermine others for preferment sake;
because he has cut from himself al these things, and is so far from desiring
to be above, that his whole contentment is placed in being under others.

6. This State therefore is every way safe, strongly fenced and impregnable,
and guarded from the enemy on every side, and consequently there can be no
doubt made, but as (al things considered) the best means to attain to
Salvation is to forsake the world, so the world cannot be more effectually and
perfectly forsaken, then by betaking ourselves to Religious Enclosure; which
whosoever shall understand and sink into, what bands or chains will be able to
withold him from taking his flight into this Castle of Salvation, into this
Fortification of Angels, into this Heaven upon earth? For if a traveler should
be certainly told, that there were a wood pestered with thieves lying upon his
way, he would do his best endeavor not to pass that way, and be glad to
choose any other, though it were farther about, and more troublesome; Now
since we know for certain, that this world is so full of Devils, and of their
snares and ambushes; how is it possible there should be found a Soul, who had
rather run the hazard of eternal perdition amidst al these treacheries and
deceits, then walk the way of a Religious life? specially seeing a Religious
life is not so full of difficulties, but much more pleasant and easy.

Of the benefit of a Religious life, in regard it strippeth us of al things
created. CHAP. VIII.
THe benefit and commodity of a Religious State does not show itself only in
keeping us from sin, and from things connexed with sin, as from scraping-vp
worldly wealth, from places of honor, and preferment, and such like, but in
debarring us of al things created, even of these which may perhaps be had
without sin. And the benefit is the greater, in regard it is a thing of so
high value and perfection. For by it we shake-of al impediments, and become
more nimble and active to perform whatsoever spiritual work. The Apostle
declares it by the example of those that run a race. 1. Cor. 9 24.
For if we consider with ourselves the life of man from the beginning to the
end, it is a continual race and course to life everlasting, and the eternal
rewards which are prepared for us. This is the only End, for which we were
created; to this End al our actions, al our endeauours, al our labors must be
directed; and he that at last arriueth not hither, has received his soul in
vain; because he fails of the end, for which he did receive it; and does on
the other side fall into everlasting and infinite mischief. Wherefore if we will be
wise, and love ourselves truly; our chiefest or rather our only care and
thought must be, to seek al possible means to run this race more nimbly,
and with more speed and alacrity; which means the Apostle has not concealed;
for he says: Every one that contendeth for the maistrie, refraineth himself
from al things. He says: from al things, not from some only; because it would
little avail a man to lighten himself of a weight of gold, and take the same
weight in silver, or some other thing; for in regard of hindering his course, it
were al one. And Cas^tan applying this passage of the Apostle to a spiritual
contention and strife, writes, that the laws of refrayning from al things
were so severe among those that did run in the race, The laws of those that
(...) a race.
that they did not merely forbear to ouercharge themselves with meat and
drink, but used no other diet but such as was prescribed them in that art, and
did for that time lay aside the care of al other business, and were so far
from using the act of marriage, that they had a fashion to wrap about their
loins plates of lead, to dry up those lustful humors; C^^^^an. lib. (...).7.
2. Cor. 9.25.
which Cassian alleges as an incitement to Chastity. And these men, as S.
Paul says, did this, that they might receive a corruptible crown. Much more
ought we to abstain from al things, or rather voluntarily cast them away, that
we may receive a Crown incorruptible; and not be clogd and held back in so
necessary and so noble a course.

Him 23. in Euang.
2. S. Gregory speaks to the same effect in one of his Homilies, and says:
That a man in this world is perpetually wrestling with the Devil, whose
strength is incomparable; and that these earthly things are like the clothes
which are about us; and certainly if one wrestle in his clothes he shall be
sooner cast, because he has something whereof his adversary may catch hold;
one has a wife, another has children, an other has goods and possessions.
Wherefore whosoever comes-in to wrestle (as certainly al must wrestle, and no
man can avoid it) if he will not be thrown by the Devil, he must lay aside al
his apparel, and enter naked into the lists. Idem. 21. mor. c. vl^.
And in an other place he compares this our life amidst so many suggestions
of the Devil, and so many waves of temptation, to a ship tossed with tempest.
For at such a time every body does willingly cast al things ouerboard to save
the ship from danger; when the billows swel so high, that they hang like hills
over their heads, and threaten present death, those that are in the ship have
no thought of temporal goods; carnal delight comes not then in their mind; then
they cast those things out of the ship, for which before they went on
shipboard; and set al things at naught through the desire of living. He
therefore is said to fear God as the waves which hang swelling over his head,
who despises al things which here he carries in possession through the desire
of true life. For when we cast away these earthly desires from our mind which
they oppress, we do as it were unload our ship overtaken with tempest, and
the ship thus eased will come to haven, which the burden would have sunck:
because the cares, which in this life do hang upon our soul, do drive it
down to the bottom. S. Basil also uses the same Similitude of those that
sail at sea, and adds that we have much more reason then they, S. Basil hom.
a^ non a^h. reb. se^.
to do as they do. For they that sail these material seas, leese all that
they cast ouer-board, and must be feign to live ever after in want and misery;
But we, the more we disburden ourselves of this heavy lading, become the
richer, and have greater plenty of solid wealth; to wit, of Justice and
Sanctity, which are riches of an other nature, and are not subject to the
mercy of the waves, or shipwreck. Wherefore when we forsake these earthly
things, they do not perish to them that forsake them, but as it were laded out
of a weaker vessel into a stronger and safer bottom, they are put in greater
safety, and do surge at a securer port.

S. Chrysostom. Hom. 15. ad pop. Eccl 9.20.
3. S. Chrysostom does to this purpose discourse excellently well upon that
sentence of the Wiseman: Acknowledge that thou walk in the midst of snares:
and pondereth, that not without great reason man is bid in this place to
acknowledge, rather then to see, because these snares cannot be seen with our
corporal eyes, but must be understood and discovered by the light of our mind,
in regard they are hidden, and (as he speaks) ouer-shaddowed with the bayte
of lucre, or pleasure, or other commodities; and that there is a mystery also
in saying ( in the midst of snares) because these gulfs and dangers do lie on
every side of us. A man walks, says he, into the marketplace, and sees
his enemy; the very sight of him puts him into a rage. He spies his friend
advanced, and it spites him. He sets his eye upon a poor snake, and he
contemnes him. He beholds a rich man, and enuie^h him. He meets with
some-bodie that has done him a displeasure, and he storms at him. He sees a
beautiful woman, and is catched by her. The wife is oftimes a snare to them
that foresee it not; oftimes our children, friends and neighbors. Which, when
S. Chrysostom had spoken concerning the multitude of these hidden snares, he
gives us a very pertinent advise to avoid them, by example of the birds. For
as birds, while they fly aloft, cannot be taken but when they stoop toward the
ground, they are easily catched in the fowlers net; so the soul of man is safe
enough from al deceits of the Devil, if it soar aloft in high and celestial
things, and keep itself there upon the wing; but if it stoop down to
inferior objects, i^ f^lleth into his snares. S Gregory (...) c. 20.
And S. Gregory (...) does declare this unto us by diverse examples drawn from
that which hayneth daily among men. For as we cannot (say^^ h^) follow two
federal trades of life at once, as husbandry and sea-satin^, or exercise the
handicraft of a blacksmith and a carpenter at one and the same time, but if a
body handle one, he must necessarily lay aside the other: So whereas there be
two several marriages preposed unto us, one consummate in flesh, the other
consisting in spirit, the cadeauour which we apply to the one, must needs a^er
us from the other. For no man can behold with his eye two things at once,
seated in two contrary postures; nor with tongue, express two several sounds
at once, as to speak Hebrew and Greek with one breath* nor with our cares can
we hear two several tales together; so our Will is of that nature that it
cannot enjoy corporal and spiritual pleasures both at one time; for the
exercises of them both, do l^a^e to very different ends The exercises of the
one extinguish the passion; of the body, and lay aside al things which come of
flesh, or belong unto it; the exercise, of the other follow al these things
very hotly. Finally we cannot serve two masters; Math. 6^
because it is not possible that the commands of them both should be at once
fulfilled. Thus much says S. Gregory.

3. Thou^h what n^ed we stand heaping au^horities of the holy Fathers? Let us
hear a Philosopher speak from-out of that blind Antiquity; for if such an
one could understand it, and write so well of it, by the only lig^t of Nature,
which wa^ yet but slender; it must needs be a great shame for us not to know
and feel it, in this abundant light of Grace, in which we dwell. (...) thereof
^e in his Treatise which he intitleth (...), ^
disputing the ^^licitie of man, (...) that it consists in Wisdom alone,
that is, in the contemplation and love ^f the Sovereign Good, and consequently
that it cannot be at^ayned in this life, because the bulk of this body is a
great ^indrance unto it, b^th by the natural lumpishnes of it, and by reason of
the (...) of our Senses and infinite other incommodities, which depend of the
body; as (...) inordinate affections, fears, and (to use his phrase) a
multitude of (...) and toys, wherewith in fills the mind; as also the
administration of outward t^ings; trading in money, and handling businesses of
(...). Whence he concludes, that either a m^n ^ha^ never attain to Wisdom
and Happiness, or he shall atttayne unto it only after he is dead; but not
possibly in this life, unless a man approach as near as (...) he may to
death, to wit, by withdrawing his mind from household-affayres, and from al
manner of worldly business, and from the world it self, finally from al
pleasure and care of the body, and so turn himself into himself, and dwell at
home within himself. For this is a kind of death, at which al true Philosophers
did always aim, spending al their labors and thoughts in striving to
persuade themselves, that they were dead, and daily endeavoring to dye more
perfectly. All this is Plato his discourse.

4. Which kind of death and the necessity thereof, was not hidden from our
Philosophers, but much more exactly understood by them, as appears by that
which S. Gregory has left written in his Morals: S Gregory l. 5. mor. c. 5.
We live yet to this world, while our mind is still wandering abroad in it; but
when being outwardly mortifyed, we conceal ourselves in the sepulcher of
Contemplation, we are hidden in our grave as dead men; which though hereafter
it shall be done more perfectly, yet in great measure it is now performed by
them that with inward delight are drawn from the turmoils of temporal desires,
and while their souls are wholly intent to the love of God, they are not with
any unprofitable perturbation torn in pieces and distracted. In which place he
has much more to the same effect, and this one thing besides worth
observation, that in regard that Wisdom is not found in the outside of
things, but lies hidden in things invisible, it cannot be apprehended, unless
we forsake these visible things, and hide ourselves also in those that are not
to be seen.

5. Wherefore finding it so solidly proved and so often repeated by the holy
Fathers, that it is most profitable and most perfect to withdraw ourselves from
al things created, and the more we withdraw ourselves, the more safe and
perfect we shall be: we may easily conclude, that nothing can be more profitable
then a Religious state, by which we compass this thing most perfectly and most
completely. For certainly there can be no greater renunciation of al things
then that, which is practiced in Religion, where not only Poverty is
professed, but a man is so wholly bereft of the dominion and possession of
every thing, that he cannot say, that this piece of land, or this house, or
(as Cassian expresses it) not so much as this garment, Cassian. l. 4. c. 15.
or this penknife, or quil is his own. And it takes away moreover al other
things, by which men are wont to bolster-vp their life, or solace their mind;
as the use of friends, the favor of Princes, the alliance of wife and
children, finally al earthly things, and whatsoever is of any esteem or
price in the world. Wherefore S. Bernard does extol the greatness of this
benefit, S. Bernard s. de quadr. deb.
as it deserves, so highly, as he is not afraid to entitle al Religious people
to complete Happiness; for this reason only, because they have found-out a more
compendious way to Heaven, by abandoning absolutely al things of this world. It
is true, says he, the ascent to Jerusalem is steep and difficult, in regard
it is cut strayte out from the very top of the mountain; but the
compendiousnes of the way does temper, or rather wholly take away, the greatness
of the ^aynes; and with happy facility, and easy felicity, you do not only
go, but run; because you are both unloaded and gyrt, and carry no kind of
weight upon your back. It is not so with some others; it is not so with those,
that loaded with carts and cart-loads, have taken their course by the winding
of the hill; and usually tumble down headlong by the sides of the mountain, so
that they scarce find how to bring their life to an end. Thrice happy
therefore are you, that have forsaken yourselues, and all that belonged unto
you, without al exception Which only sentence of S. Bernard well considered is
sufficient to persuade us to prefer a Religious state, before al Princely
treasures and command. For what stupiditie can be greater, then, seeing we must
not only al of us run (as the Apostle teaches) but (as S. Bernard says) we
must run vp-wards against the hill, which of itself is wonderful difficult,
voluntarily to charge ourselves with diverse weights, and moreover with
continual care and solicitude to increase and multiply those weights, which,
if we did right, we should rather wholly cast-of from us?

Of the benefit of Religious Poverty. CHAP. IX.
HItherto we have spoken of the commodities of a Religious State in general,
now we are to treat of the particular vtilities which are found in it; and
first of the benefit which arises from the three Vows proper and essential to
Religion. And we will begin with Poverty, because it is the first step to
Perfection, consisting in abandoning the things which are without us;
Commendation of Poverty.
the commodities whereof are in few words excellently well set-forth by
Climacus: Poverty is a riddance of worldly cares; Clima^us.
a passage to God without stop or hindrance; an expelling of grief; a
foundation of peace, and cleannes of life; it freeth us from the sorrows of
this transitory world, and enableth us to perform the Commandments of God
with perfection, S. Bonauenture writ a whole Treatise, S. Bonauen. in Apol.
paup^r.
of this subject only in a manner, entitled an Apology for the Poor; in which
he handles many things devoutly as a Saint, and learnedly as a Divine; and
among the rest, he lays a certain ground, which does greatly declare not only
the profit of Poverty, but a kind of necessity of professing it. And thus he
discourses: 1. Tim. 6.10.
Covetousness (as the Apostle says) is the root of al evil; for from it and
from Pride (which always goes hand in hand with it) al sins have their
beginning, their nourishment, and increase. Whereupon S. Augustine calls it the
foundation of the city of Babylon. This covetousness is seated in the affection
of our mind, as the proper seat thereof, but feeds itself upon the things
which outwardly we possess; and consequently the utter abolishing of this vice
must needs comprehend both the internal and the external; that not only the
inward thirst be quenched, but the outward possession also of things of this
world be forsaken; the one is performed in will and spirit, the other in fact
and outward work; whereupon he concludes, that as Covetousness is the foundation
of Babylon (as we said before) so contrariwise Poverty is to be esteemed in
very deed the groundwork of al Euangelical perfection, we being thereby
conformed to our Savior Christ our Lord and Lawgiver, who, when he drew the
platform of the new Jerusalem descending from heaven, began with this virtue,
as the foundation of all the rest, saying: Blessed are the poor in spirit. This
is the discourse of S. Bonauenture. Mat^. 5.
And that which he says, is very true; for if we consider well, we shall find
seven wonderful great commodities of Religious Poverty.

^
2. The first is, that it takes away the weapons and furniture from al kind of
sins and vices; the importance whereof has been sufficiently declared before,
when we spoke of the great damages which come by riches; for it does not only
pul-downe Pride, Arrogancy and haughtines, and many other mischiefs, growing
from abundance and plenty, as smoke does from fire; but it takes from us that
very power of committing diverse sins, because many (...) things are wrou^ht
by occasion of money and of that strength which money puts into men's hands.
Wherefore if no other commodity did accrue unto us, but only that it enforces
upon us a kind of necessity of living well, it were highly to be esteemed; and
voluntarily to put our selves upon this necessity, cannot choose but be
exceeding profitable for Salvation. But it does not only hinder us from sin,
but brings with it many ex^ellent Virtues, as Temperance, Modesty, and
chiefly Humility; which ver^ue has a particular kind of affinity with
Poverty, and is as it were cousin (...) unto it. S (...) ep ad Hebr
Which S. (...) gives us to understand in a certain (...), saying. A Christian
is more glorious in Poverty then in Riches. How can that be because it keeps
a man from s^elling Pride; he that is poor, cann^^ be lofty, but rather
obedient, modest, meek, wise; but he that has much wealth, has many things
which hinder him from weldoin^ (...) let us see, what a rich man does: He
seaseth upon that which is not his own, he burns with intemperate desire; he
giue^h the reins to his last; he leaves no mischief vnatchieued; Is it not
plain that these things are b^ed by (...) And you may also perceive, that by
Poverty al virtue is more easily gotten. And do not tell me, that rich men in
this life are under no man's correction; for it is very true, that among al
other evils, Riches have also this, that they defend and guard those that live
wickedly, that they may commit sin more boldly, and stand in awe of nothing,
nor be controuled by any body. So says S. John (...).

The second common(...)
3. A second commodity of Religious Poverty is, that it is a great means to
bl^t-out the sins of our former life, and to satisfy for them; and to this
purpose it seems the Holie-Ghost spoke by Esaias the Pr^phet, saying: Esaias.
^8.10.
(...) have boiled thee thoroughly, but not as sinner; I have chosen thee in the
furnace of Poverty; for where he says: I have chosen thee; it is as much as
to say: I have purged, or refined thee, and made thee so perfectly good, that
thou deserved to be chosen and loved. Wherefore as al kinds of metal are
severed in the f^rnace from dros^e and refuse, and from whatsoever is base and
of no esteem and value, and come forth far more clear and pure then they
(...); so Poverty giving matter of exercise both to body and mind, (...) vice
from them both. S. Gregory Hom 4^. in Euang.
Whereupon S. Gregory has this excellent (...): The fire of want purged
Lazarus his offenses; and the pro(...) rewarded the good deeds of the Rich man;
Poverty afflicted him and cleansed him; this man was requited with plenty,
and rejected; whosoever therefore you be that in this life have well to live,
when you call to mind any good deed that you have done, it behooves you greatly
to be afraid by occasion of it, least the prosperity, which is bestowed upon
you, be a recompense for those good deeds of yours; and when you see those,
that are poor, to do a thing that is blame-worthie, do not contemn them, do
not despair of them; for perhaps those that the superflui^ie of a small offense
does defile, the furnace of Poverty does refine.

4. The third fruit of Poverty is, The thi^d fruit of Pouert^e.
that it freeth a man from vnprofi^able trading in these perishable goods. For
our soul being immortal, and given us by God, to the end that in the short
term of this life, we may pain Immortality, it is great folly to employ so
excellent a nature, and out time also, which is so precious, upon that which is
always decaying, always fading and perishing. Poverty therefore, which we
profess in Reli^ion gives us leave to employ ourselves wholly, vpou the love
and pursuit of ^ternitie, taking no thought for earthly things for we are not
busied neither with husbanding of grounds, nor gathering of rents, nor
putting-forth of money, nor following of suits, nor with any other worldly
matter; which vacancie from al care and thought, must needs be of great use in
this our heavenly Phil^sophie, seeing the ancient Heathens in their earthly
Philosophy did esteem it so absolutely needful. For Z^no as S. Gregory
Na^ianzen relates, Zeno.
when he had cast al ouerboard in a tempest by sea, said: O fortune, I thank
thee for returning me to my (...). But Crates far ^etter; Crates.
for, as S. Hierome write^h, he was very rich, and did not by constraint but of
his own good will and choice, cast a great sum of money into the sea because
he was persuaded that he could not well give himself to Philosophy, and keep
his wealth. And all the whole pack of them were of the same mind; and chi^fly
Seneca, Seneca Ep. 17.
that great commender of the Stoics; for no man ever spoke more largely, or
better to the purpose, concerning a spare kind of living; and among other
things, he says thus: If thou will have thy mind free from trouble, thou must
either be poor, or like to the poor. Study does not profit, without care of
frugalitie.

5. A fourth commodity of Poverty is, (...) Poverty.
that it suffers not our mind to cleave to these base and abject things; the
affection to them, being the source of al mischief. To which effect S. Gregory
has a pretty passage; for he says, that travelers, as they pass on their
way, meet oftentimes with pleasant meadows, and willingly entertayne
themselves in them; sometime, they step out of the beaten path into them, and
so the delight which they take in the pleasantnes of the way, does hinder them
from making haste on their journey; therefore God is wont to make the ways of
this world tough and unsavory to the Elect, that seek after him, least
delighting themselves with the case of this life, as with pleasant fields, they
c^ue^ rather (...) to travel, then quickly to come to their iourneys end; and
pleasing themselves in their travels, they forget what they desired in their
country. This thing therefore which the wisdom of God does work in his Elect
(according as S. Gregory teaches) every Religious man does perform in
himself, S. Greg 23. mor c. 14.
when bereauing himself of worldly commodities, he undergoes the
incommodities of penu^ie and want, that nothing of this life may delight him,
and hinder his journey but that rather he may have as many spurs in his
course to Heaven, as he endures troubles and vexations in this world. And
being thus weaned from the love of al temporal things, that holy and wholesome
affection, which the Apostle acknowledges to have been in himself, is bred in
them al, esteeming that they have not here a permanent city, Heb. 13.14.
or dwelling, but are always seeking after that which is to come.

The fifth commodity of Poverty.
6. The fifth utility, which Poverty does bring unto us, is, that as itself is
greatly in the love and favor of God, so it causes al those, that espouse
themselves unto it, to be highly loved and favored by him; by reason whereof he
bestows upon them daily great benefits and spiritual graces. We need no other
testimony that God does love Poverty, then to see that his Infinite Majesty
comin down from heaven, was pleased to associate himself so near unto it,
takin flesh of parents that were poor (though of a Royal stock) and making
choice of the poorest place on earth for his birth, The love which our Savior
(...) to Poverty.
not so much as a little house, or cottage, or shepheard's cabin, but a stable
of beasts, belonging to others, in the cold of winter, and the night-season,
what should we stand to speak of the rest of his life, seeing he had no place
where to put his head, and wa^ relieved by the alms of other folk? That
Eternal Word, I say, was relieved, in whom are al treasures, and by whom al
things are made. And can any man d^ubt but that he will love in others that,
which he loved in himself and made choice of, and powre-out abundance of very
special blessings upon those in whom he shall find it? We shall not need to stand
coniecturing about the mat^er for we see what he at done already, so long as he
lived and co^uersed on earth those with whom he lived most, and were his most
familiar acquaintance, were not rich and wealthy people, but the poorer and
vulgar sort, for four of them were fisher men, one was a gatherer of Toule and
Custom, and the rest were much of the like stamp. No man can bei nora^t, how
at the self-same instant when he was borne, he made himself presently known to
poor people, with great demonstration of love and honor toward them; sending
from heaven a company of blessed Angels to tell them, that he was come into the
world, and inuiting them to himself by word, and by an extraordinary light,
and a most sweet consort of music, as if he had lo^ged for their presence and
acquaintance. How many noble persons according to the flesh (says S. Bernard)
how many great men, S. Bernard. ser. ^ de Nat^u^.
how many wise men of this world, were taking their rest at that hour in
their soft beds? and none of them was esteemed worthy to behold that light, to
taste of that great joy, to hear the Angels singing. From whence the Saint
draws this argument: If our Lord and Savior did bear so great love to those
poor people, that were poor by necessity, certainly he will bear far
greater love to those that are voluntarily poor, and have forsaken all that
they had, merely for his love. This is a benefit of al benefits, because they,
who^ God does love, can want no kind of thing that is good; no grace, no light,
no benefit, nothing at al can be desired by man, which he will not most
liberally bestow upon them.

The sixth commodity of poverty.
7. The sixth commodity of Religious Poverty is very great, and worthy to be
considered. For as among the evils which are bred by riches, we declared
before, that the excess of delight and pleasure arising of them, is very
poison and death to our souls, so contrariwise in poverty, the spare diet,
and mean fashion of living, is very profitable for salvation. For as we season
dead flesh with salt, to dry-vp the abundance of moisture, and preserve it from
corruption; so our living flesh, unless it be dried and preserved by
abstinence and austeritie, will certainly perish with delicacie and wanton lust;
and no wonder, because the affinity and nearnes of our soul and body is so
great, that they must needs infect one an other with their vicious
inclinations, S. Basil ^^as. 1. de^^ un^o.
and, as S. Basil speaks, while our flesh is lusty and fresh, our spirit
becomes dull and carnal. And S. John Chrysostom says, S. Io Chrysos^. Hom. ^
in Genesis
that sobriety is as it were the wings of our soul, wherewith it bears
itself above the earth, and is enabled to soar on-high by Contemplation.

8. Finally, The seventh commodity of Poverty.
to comprehend in one word all the commodities of Religious Poverty, what can
be spoken more full and effectual then that which our Savior says of it:
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven; in few
words expressing the present and future happiness of it? Matthew. 5.
And it is not without special cause, that for the most part he promises a
reward for other virtues after this life; but for Poverty he appoints
presently the Kingdom of heaven; either because the hope thereof is so assured
and so free from hazard, as if it were in our own present power and command;
or because it is so free from al worldly care, that in this very life it
gives a taste and earnest of the felicity which we shall hereafter enjoy.
Wherefore Religious people may worthily make account, that in this one virtue
of Poverty they have a very great and rich treasure, to which the infinite
reward of that Infinite Good is due, which neither eye has seen, nor ear has
heard, neither has it ascended into the heart of man. And every one may
esteem it as a thing proper to himself, which S. Augustine says of al; S Aug
ser. 1. de Verbie Apos^o^.
that the happiness of Christians is exceeding great, in regard they may make
Poverty the price of the kingdom of heaven; let not thy Poverty be
distastful to thee; there can be nothing found more rich; will thou know how
rich it is? it buyeth Heaven. What mass of treasure can be compared with the
worth which we see granted to Poverty? Poverty buys Heaven.
A rich man cannot find means to come to heaven by enjoying lands and
possessions, but by contemning them he finds means to compass it. And much
more he speaks in commendation of Poverty; but that is remarkable that he
says: that God did us a very great good turn, when he comprised the sum and
total of al felicity, in Having nothing. For if he had placed it in riches,
few men could have had the means and ability to attain unto it, and not
without great labor and trauail; but having placed it in the contempt of
riches, every man that will, has power and means to get it.

8. For these and the like reasons the Saints of God full of heavenly light,
have been as affectionately addicted to Poverty as any worldly man can be to
riches, and labored as hotly to preserve themselves in poor estate, as others
to increase their wealth. Among whom S. Francis is most eminent; S Bonauent.
in the life of S. Francis.
of whom S. Bonauenture (an Author renowned for sanctity and learning) does
write: that he was so dear a friend of Poverty, and loved it so entirely,
that a man would think, he searched all the corners of the world for it to
espouse it to himself with perpetual love; and for the love of it, he forsook
father and mother, and al things which he might have enjoyed. And (...)
brethren often asking him, what virtue makes a man most acceptable to our
Savior Christ, he was wont to answer wi^h very particular and extraordinary
affection, that it is Poverty, and that Poverty is the way to Salvation, the
nurse of humility, the root of perfection, and has many hidden s^ui^, and
commodities, known to very few.

Of the benefit of Religious Chas^itie. CHAP. X.
NExt unto Poverty, of which we have hitherto discoursed, we will speak of
Chastity; the commodities whereof are so much the richer then th^se of
Poverty; by how much our body is nearer unto us, then our wealth and outward
substance* and the affections thereof more violent and pernicious, (...) they be
not rest^ayned. These affections, Chastity does (...); and the (...) of it is,
that every man may know, as the Apostle speaks, (...); 1. (...) 4
that is, his body (as Cassian does in (...)) which is as a vessel and
recep^acle of the soul. To understand the greatness of the benefit of Chastity
it might be sufficient to weig duly that which we have said before, Cas^^^n.
lib ^ c. 1^.
of the beastlines of carnal pleasure, and the exceeding harm it does us But
whereas there be two kinds of these pleasures, to wit, some that are utterly
unlawful and forbidden; and some again that are lawful, but confined within
the limi^s of Mar^iage: we shall not need to say any more of the first, then
that which we find delivered by the Apostle, that they who do such things,
shall not possess the kingdom of heaven: G^l. ^.21.
but then part, (as it is said in the Apocalypse) shall be in the burning lake of
fire and brimstone, Apo. 21 8.
which is the second death. We will only consider what helps Religion does
afford toward the extinguishing of the flames of lustful desire^, which that
Leuiathan is wont to raise, whose breath does make (...) in burn. ^.


2. The first (...), that it takes away the matter which is wont to kindle
(...), to wit, ^
the si^ht, and speech of thin^s that are dangerous; dangerous (...) and (...),
and (...) occasion and commodity, which (...) always one of the greatest
incitements to sin. These are the engines, whereby many an able man has been
often overthrown and subdued, and (...) the Prophet speaks) t^ose that were
brought-vp (...), have (...). Against which there is no better defense, then to
betake ourselves (...) distant out of the reach of such allurements. For as it
is well (...) where S. Vaul (...) us resist and strive against al other (...) us
(...) from fornication; and the flight is very honorable which (...) by
example of chaste I^^eph, who let (...) his cloak, and (...) kind of fire, and
by that which the Wiseman ad^iseth saying: Ecel. 9.5.
Behold not the face of a virgin, least her countenance stumble thee. And among
many other things he brings the lamentable fall of King David; who though he
were so great a man, and so great a Prophet, with one glance of his eye was
catched; and may justly be a perpetual warning for every body ever since.
Therefore, says he, let no man deceive himself with overmuch confidence; let
no man presume dangerously of his own forces, but give ear to the Apostle
saying: Fly from fornication. Now by entering into Religion we utterly fly from
it; in regard that it separateth us from company, and conversation; and is
unto us, as a castle and strong fortification. And conformably to this
doctrine, P^s^^don in the use of S. August.
S. Augustine himself (as Possidonius Bishop of Calame writes of him) would not
only not dwell in house with other women, or have any familiarity with them:
but not with his own sister and brother's daughter; not so much in regard of
themselves, as of other women that would be coming unto them.

3. Besides this flight and precaution, Obedience a special defense of
Chastity.
Obedience is a special defense of Chastity; which S. Bernard in particular
does teach, saying, that the earth, which our Lord does promise in possession
to the me^ke, is our body, which if our soul be desirous to possess, and to
reign over the members thereof, it must be meek, S. Bernard s. 1. de omn.
sanct^s.
and obedient to superior powers; and does not stick to say, that when the
flesh rebelleth against the spirit, it is a sign, that the soul is not so
subject to Superiors as it ought: and contrariwise if the soul be subject, it
will find the body also obedient and in subjection.

4. The third help to Chastity, is the practice of al kind of virtue, as of
Prayer and Meditation, and such other exercises, which of their own nature
increase spirit and devotion; for what we add to our mind, we take away from
our body; and as our mind is strengthened, our body must needs be weakened. To
which purpose S. John Chrysostom says, S. John Chrysostom.
that Chastity when it is left alone to itself, is weak and infirm, and has
not strength enough to stand by itself; and to take away the continual practice
of other virtues from it, is as it were to cut the sinnewes of it; but
together with other virtues it is able and strong: For as trees, that are
planted in a fat soil, bring forth fruit; so the soil in which Chastity will
always flourish, Chast^^^ is weak without pra^^ise (...) other v^^tues.
is the concurrence of other virtues. Finally the root of Chastity, is a life
conformable to the Cross of Christ, that is, a life which is not given to ease
and daintines, but hardened with labor and patience. Wherefore it is certain
that a Religious life, is a most strong defense against al dishonestie,
preserving them, that live in it, pure, entire, and incorrupt, without any
great labor or pains to be taken on their part. To (...) is an (...) way (...)


5. Let us now speak of the other kind of pleasure, which wedlock (as I said
before) does make honest, and acquit of al imputation of sin. And certain it
is, though the duties of Marriage may be performed without offense to God, yet
to cut-of al pleasure in this kind also is not only more beneficial, but an
easier and a more ready way to save our souls. Which truth is grounded upon
the authority of S. Paul, who in his first Epistle to the Corinthians having
rehearsed many commodities of being chaste, says: It is good for a man to be
so. Whereupon S. Hierome adds: If it be good for a man to be so, it is il for
a man not to be so. And the evils belonging to Marriage are also there set
down at large by the same Apostle, Three inco^modities of wedlock
and may be reduced to three heads, to wit, Servitude, Tribulation, and
Division of mind; as he terms the^. The Servitude of Marriage is described
by him in these words: The woman has not power over her own body, but the
man; in like manner also the man has not power over his own body, but the
woman. This is no small kind of servitude, that the command of ones body should
be in the power of an other; S. John Chrysostom. de Virg c. 41.
which S. John Chrysostom does set forth very lively, saying: Do thou not
see the necessity which is in this business, a slavery which can not be
avoided? do thou not see two tied in ropes together? For the bond of
wedl^ck is like fetters, not only in regard of the daily troubles and cares,
but because it keeps them that are married in such a servitude, as no slave
is more at command of his master, then they are in each other's power. The
Husband, says our Lord, shall be lord over the wife. But what avails it the
husband to be lord, Genesis 2.
seeing he is liable to the like servitude under her, that is subject to him?
Where moreover he compares man and wife to two fugitive slaves, that are so
coupled together, that though they run from their master, they must
notwithstanding needs follow one an other, and cannot get asunder. Which S.
Paul also does insinuate in those words: 1. Cor. 7.
Art thou tied to a wife? And to show that this bond cannot be broken, he
presently adds: Do not seek to be loosened. But this servitude (which of
itself is very hard (specially being perpetual) is made much more hard and
heavy, when the parties chance to light upon a stearne and peevish master, as
it does often, or rather most commonly, fall out; or upon a master that has
but little wit to govern, which is yet much more intolerable. The Holie-Ghost
expresses the misery thereof in the Proverbs in these words: It is better to
dwell in a land that is desert, Prou. 21.19 Prou. 19.13
then with an angry and contentious woman. And again: A wrangling woman is
like a house, where it always raynes through. By which familiar examples we
are given to understand the excessive trouble and misery, which they undergo
that once put their neck under this yoke. Wherefore me thinks, when our
Savior abrogated the custom of divorce, which for some time was permitted in
the Old Law, the Apostles had great reason to say with common consent: If the
case of man be thus with his wife, it is not expedient to marry. Mat. 19.10.
And indeed it is not expedient; for though the bond might be broken upon
occasion, yet it were not expedient to put ourselves into such setters, though
it were but for a time; much less, seeing this bondage is perpetual, and never
after to be avoided. Religious people therefore are free from these
impediments; and as married people do hinder one another, so they are free
from being hindered; and are at al times at liberty, not only to run, but to
fly in the way of the Commandments of God.

The second incommoditie of wedlok.
6. The second incommoditie of marriage, is that which the Apostle calls
Tribulation of the flesh. For the discovery whereof, we shall not need much to
busy our wits; for we may see it with our very eyes; We cannot put our head
into any house or family, but we shall find it full of in^init care and
trouble: If it be rich, there is trouble in menaging their riches; if it be
poor and in want, what a do is there to find releef? If they have many
children, they are troubled in bringing them up; if they have daughters, they
know not how to bestow them; and to stand to reckon the calamities, which
besides are incident to every body, by the imparing of their estates, or the
miscarriage of their children, and other troubles and vexations of mind, were
an endless business; for they are continual, and rush-in upon them on every
side. But there is one thing heavier then all the rest, which the Apostle does
point at, when he does not barely call it Tribulation, but Tribulation of the
flesh; For when we take pains for things that are spiritual, and for the
saving of our souls, and the service of God, it brings great comfort with
it, and has a great reward prepared; but to toil in earth, and in carnal
businesses, if we aim no higher, has no comfortable savor at al, nor hope of
recompense. Wherefore S. Chrysostom his observation upon that verse of the
Psalm ( Virgins shall be brought to the King after her; they shall be brought in
joy and exultation) is very true and pertinent to our purpose. Behold, says
he, S. John Chrysostom ia Ps. 44.
how the saying of the Apostle is here made manifest; They that marry, shall
have tribulation of the flesh; and as they shall have tribulation, so these shall
have joy and exultation; for they must of necessity bewail their children,
their husbands, their houses, their servants, their kinsfolk, their sons and
fathers-in-law, and their newphewes; the abundance, or want, or loss of
children. But a Virgin crucified, and exempt from things present, walking above
the ca^es of this life, having her eyes daily fixed in heaven, and now past
this dangerous passage of the sea, is fed with gladness of spirit, and rejoices
with exultation.

7. The next incommoditie is Division; The third incommoditie of wedlock.
whereof S. Paul says in the same place: He that is with a wi^e, is careful of
the things of this world, how he may please his wife, and is divided; she that
is married, thinks of the things of this world, how she may please her
husband. Religious people therefore have this benefit above others, by means
of their Continency and Chastity; that they may offer their hearts whole and
entire to God, nothing impaired by this kind of division. S. Greg. Hom. 16. in
Ezech.
Which difference betwixt the two state, S. Gregory does very well express in
these words: Those that are married, though they live well, and desire to see
God, are troubled notwithstanding with hous-hold-affaires; and their mind of
necessity is divided betwixt both: But those that live chaste, being severed
from the employments of this world, and abstayning from that pleasure of the
flesh, which they might have in lawful wedlock, are not entangled with care of
wife and children, nor in hurtful and troublesome thoughts of
household-busines. A twofold division in wedlock.
This which S. Gregory speaks of, is the first division belonging to
wedlock; and contains in itself as many divisions and distractions, as there
be several things in this world to care for. But there is an other division
far worse then this, to wit, the division of our love. For when we must give
part thereof to our wife, and part to our children, and part to others of the
same flesh and blood; a small parcel, God knows, or none at al, will be left for
God. Which though it be true of al things upon which we set our affection, yet
it is much more sensible in the love of those that are near in blood; because
our affection is by nature more violently bent toward them. Aristotle 8. and
15. ^. 1^.
Aristotle says, that no love can be greater then that which parents have
toward their children, because they love them as part of themselves, and as a
parcel cut-of from them, yea as another self. And the like he affirms of the
love which is betwixt man and wife, that it is most natural unto us, and takes
place before al other bonds of friendship, as one household is before a
City, which is co^pounded of many house-holds; finally that the affection of
brethren among themselves is much of like nature and force, because they issue
al from one stock, and are al one with their parents; and consequently one
among themselves. Seeing therefore the natural affection to our kindred is so
forcible, it must needs follow that our love will be so divided and distracted
among them, that none of it can come to God; or if he also have part of it, it
will be so little and so cold, that it cannot but be a great wrong to that
Infinite Goodness, whose will is (and certainly he does deserve it) that we love
him with our whole heart, our whole soul, and our whole strength.

S Augustine l. 10. cons. c. 19.
8 These evils are avoided by Chastity and they that embrace it, have none of
these hindrances, but may powre-out their whole love upon God. To which purpose
S. Augustine says, that by Continency we are gathered in, and brought home
again to that One from which we were distracted and fallen-of in^o many
things; which One thing is God, the only Sovereign Good, by whose love we are
good, S. Gregory Nazi^n^^ Or. 3^.
and by enjoying him, eternally blessed. And S. G^egorie Na^^anzen in
commendation of Chastity says, that as the water, which is conveyed close in
conduits of lead, spouteth higher then the weight thereof does naturally allow,
because it is much pressed and driven thick together; so if as ^uled ^ gather al
her love together, and do not suffer it to run out upon creatures, but power
it forth upon God, it will still ^ise vp-wards, and never fall down upon earth.
S. Basil. (...) Mo(...) c. 1.
Wherefore S. Basil was not much awry, when having reckned-vp the incommodities
and infinite cares (for so he speaks) of a coniugal life, at last he adds
concerning the happiness of Religious people, to whom he wrote, that whosoever
desi^eth to be freed from the bonds of this world, must avoid wedlock as
plain fetters, and consecrate his life to God, professing Chastity. For he
that so does having resolved with himelf to love God alone, and longing to
taste of that purity and tra^quillitie of his (which is void of al trouble)
and of the joy and gladness which rises thereof, seeks nothing but how he may
perfectly withdraw his mind from al affinity with any material thing, and
from al alteration rising from the body; and contemplate things Divine with a
clear eye, free from obscurity, receiving light from heaven vnfatiably.

9. But there is yet an other thing in this business well to be considered. For
of al Christian virtues, which our Lord and Savior has specially commended
unto us, E^a^gelical Pou^rt^^, and (...) to be found in ^edlock. ^. Cor 12. S.
Io Chris. de Virg. c. 7^
two are of greatest note, to wit, Euangelical Poverty (of the commodities
whereof I have already spoken) and Fraternal Charity; of which I shall speak
hereafter at large. These two, as great and as beneficial as they are* are not
to be found in a Coniugal state; but in a Religious state they are inbred and
essential. For how can Poverty be, where wife, and children, and family, and
al things else, do put us upon a necessity of hoarding? to use the word of S.
Paul. And I find that S. John Chrysostom does reckon Poverty for a special
commodity of a single life. For in the Book which h^ wrote of Virginity,
having brought the examples of Helias, Helizaeus, and S. John Baptist, he says
If these men had had wife and children they could not have endured to live in
the desert, and forsaken their families, and not provided things necessary for
(...) and sustena^ce; but now free from al these ties, dwelling on earth as if
they had been in heaven, they wanted neither house, no^ bed, nor shed, nor
table, nor any such kind of things, but heaven was their covering, the earth
was their couch, the wide wilderness was their board, and the very barrennes of
the desert, which famisheth other solk, did furnish those holy men with
plenty of al kind of things; they stood not in need of vine^, or wine-presses,
or corn, or harvest; but the fountains and rivers yealded them abundance of
sweet drink; and for one of them, and Angel furnished a table with wonderful
prouition far beyond that which men do use. Thus says S. John Chrysostom
concluding, that Poverty is very easy, when we are not bound to wait upon a
wife, and have no charge of children.

10. The like we may say of Fraternal Charity, and mutual conversation; for
where women are, S August. l. 6. Conf. ^^ 14.
there is no living. To which purpose S. Augustine relates of himself a thing
worthy observation, that when he was yet a Manichee, he and diverse other
friends of his, How women hinder mutual conversation.
being weary of the turmoils of this world plotted together a kind of life
resembling somewhat a Religious course; for they resolved to withdraw
themselves from company and to meddle with nothing; and whatsoever any of
them had, they should bring it forth, and put it in common, that no body might
say, this was his, or the other an other's but that which came from al, should
belong wholly to every one of them, and al of it, to every body. Now when
this project was very much applauded by every one, and al of them did think
themselves happy in such a kind of life, the business was instantly dashed by
occasion of the women, which some of t^em had already, and some of them were
desirous to have; and so breaking-of they turned themselves (as S. Augustine
speaks) to groans and sighs, and bent their course to the bread and trodden
paths of the world. Therefore they that enter upon marriage, deprive themselves
of this and much more; whereas in Religion, nothing is more in force, or more
common.

11. But Chastity has yet an other commodity, which may be worthily esteemed
one of the greatest* For there is no question, A^ the act of marriage does
(...) a man's mind, so does Continence puri^ye and ennoble it.
but al pleasure belonging to the body, and most of all that which is ordained
for generation, does much aba^e the edge of the mind, and pull it down from the
constant, upright, and manly state which does become it; and the reason is,
because for as much as concerns the body, and specially that action of the
body, we do not greatly differ from beasts; so that whenever the mind does
stoop to that action, it becomes in a manner flesh, and of so base and
brutish a disposition, as the action itself is vile, abject, and ear^hlie; and
by often use, it grows so dull and lumpish, that it cannot think of any
higher matter, or raise itself to things more generous and Divine, because it
has abased itself to a thing so abject and contemptible; which dulnes and
obscurity grows upon the mind not only by use of unlawful pleasure, but also
by that which is lawful; and in this kind, they are alike hurtful. Whereupon S.
Augustine says: S. August. c. 1. so^loq.
I do not find any thing that does so much pull down the courage of man from
the top of Virtue, as the dallying with women, and that nearnes of bodies,
without which a wife cannot be had; so that nothing can be more to the
commendation of Chastity, or more glorious then that, as the functions of
Matrimony do prostrate the mind and abase it, so Continency and purity, does
raise and perfect it; and the less communication it has with flesh, the more
lively it is, the spirit of man remaining fully spiritual, and in good
disposition to receive divine impressions, to converse in heaven; and that the
uncertain and hidden things of that heavenly wisdom may be made manifest
unto it; Psalm. 52.
for all which, we have need of light; which light is stopped by the dark
clouds that rise from such gross exhalations as those of the body are.
Wherefore as Cassian says well, C^ssian l. 8. c. 6.
that every motion of anger (whether it be just or unjust) does blind the eyes
of our heart; and when they are blinded, it skils not whether they be blinded
with a plate of lead, or of gold: so we may say of this kind of delight, that
for as much as concerns the dulling of our mind, it is much one, whether the
cause be lawful or not lawful; as Aegidius (one of the first companions of S.
Francis) answered once a secular man very wittily, who bragging that he lived
chaste, A witty s^^ng and (...) of A^gidius.
and was faithful to his wife. Why (say^^ he) may not a man as well be drunk, of
his own vessel? For if a man be drunk, that is, if his reason be confounded,
and as it were drowned in lickour, the matter is not great from whence he had
his wine, so it were wine. Where we may learn by the way, the nature of this
remedy, which is allowed to humane infirmity in matrimoine; for it does not
take away the disease, but rather it give, C^ncupis^ence not cured by marriage.
matter for the disease to feed-on without offending God. For as if a man have
a Fistula, or a canker there be two degrees of healing it; the one perfect and
complete, so that the flesh becomes fully sound and solid; the other imperfect,
which leaves a sore, but takes away somewhat of the fowlenes of it, and
covers it with clothes and swathing bands: So in the state of Continency,
the disease of Concupiscence is perfectly cured and taken-of, but in the state
of Marriage it is not quite taken away, but only qualifyed by the holiness of
the Sacrament; so that the difference is very great; for if we go about to cure
our sensual inclinations, it is most certain, that it is a great deal more
effectual to cut the^ quite of then to restrain them in part, hoping that they
will be less violent if we yeald somewhat unto them. Aristole 3. E^h. c. vit.
For (as Aristole observed) the desire of pleasure is insatiable; and when we
think to satisfye it, it is the more inflamed by the exercise of Concupiscence;
and when it is in the heat, it takes away a man's reason from him,
Concupisce^ce falls from things l^^ful to unlawful, as in Da^^d and Solomon.
which a body would think were mischief enough, though we go not beyond the
bounds of Wedlock. But the mischief is, that the lustful desires, so long as
they are sed in whatsoever manner, grow so violent, that most commonly they fall
from things lawful to that, which is not lawful; of which we cannot have a more
famous example then that which has been showed us in king David, and in his
son king Solomon. The one of them being so holy a man, and the other so wise
a man, and having each of them not one wife alone (as now adays) but a
multitude of wives, their lust was notwithstanding so far from being
satisfied, as it was rather greatly incensed and inflamed; so that at last it
did most shamefully and most miserably foil the wisdom of the one, and the
sanctity of the other; whereas on the other side, of Elias and Helizeus, who
lived chaste, there is no such thing recorded; neither have we any reason at
al to suspect any such matter of them. To be brief, me thinks, that Secular
people that are married, do keep this fierce and cruel beast (like a lion) in
a cage, daily feeding it, and consequently making it daily stronger and
stronger. And who can be sure that it will not at some time or other breake-out
of the cage, and do some great mischief according to the wonted custom and
nature thereof? Therefore those that live chaste, take the better and the wiser
course, not contented to hamper and tie it up in chains and fetters, but they
labor by famine, and by often blows to take away the life of it, and to kill
it.

12. Cassian in one of his Collations does handle this matter excellently well,
Cassian. co^. 21. c. ^4.
comparing Concupiscence to a flame of fire, which being kindled some time upon
necessary occasion in stubble or some other like matter, can hardly afterward
be withheld, but that it will flame-out beyond that which is desired, and not
only burn the stubble, but catch upon some other thing that is next it, and so
range farther and farther; for so (says he) does carnal pleasure, restrained
within the bounds of wedlock, set other things on fire also, and the use of it
draws a man on to forbidden excess; but those whom the grace of our Savior
has inflamed with holy love of Incorruption, do so perfectly consume all the
thorns of carnal desires with the fire of Divine Charity, that not so much as
the embers of vice can any ways impair the coolenes of their integrity. S.
John Chrysostom.
Finally S. John Chrysostom was also of this mind, as we may read in that rare
Apology which he wrote in in behalf of a Monastical estate; and among many
other proofs he confirms it by the verdict even of secular people
themselves, acknowledging that a Religious course is the safer and more assured
course of life. And that whereas Secular people think and say, that we have a
more hard task and warrefare in hand, then they have, to wit, the preserving of
Chastity, in regard that they have wherewithal to satisfye their lust; Lib. 3.
he answers, that they are very much deceived; and proves it, because you
shall see (says he) many more married folk then Monks, that have fallen; and
that there be not so many by far that out of their Monasteries have betaken
themselves to marriage, as there be of those, that from marriage bed have gone
after common strumpets. Much more might be said of the excellency and pleasure
which is in Chastity; but because in this place we treat only of the utility
thereof; we will refer the rest to the Books that follow.

Of the benefit of Religious Obedience. CHAP. XI.
OF the three Vows, of which we purposed to treat, Obedience remains to be
spoken of; which doubtless is greater then either Poverty or Chastity, whether
we consider the excellency or the merit thereof, or the manifold fruits which
come of it. The excellency of Obedience may be gathered out of holy
Scripture, preferring it before Sacrifices and Holocausts, that is, before al
good works what soever. For so Samuel from the mouth of God, professes, 1.
Reg. 15.
saying: Obedience is better then Sacrifice; and to hearken, is better then to
offer the far of rams. Whereupon S. Gregory discourses thus: S. Greg. mor.
35. c. 10.
Obedience is worthily preferred before Sacrifice, because in Sacrifices the
flesh of an other thing, by Obedience our will is killed. Every one therefore
does appease God so much the sooner, by how much in his sight curbing the pride
of his own free will, he slays himself with the sword of his commandment.
Whereby we may see how far a Religious life does surpass, not only a secular
life that is vicious and debaushed, but an honest and commendable life. For the
best that can be said of a secular man, is that he gives himself to good
works; which is not to be compared with the perfect and entire oblation of
ourselves by perpetual Obedience. Obedience ennobleth the att^^^s which of
themselves are but mean and ordinane.
And this excellency of Obedience is that which makes it to be so meritorious
as it is; for they that order the good which they do, according to their own
will and pleasure, do merit no more then the price and worth of the action
itself can give them; but Obedience adds a great deal more; for it does not
only make those actions better which are good in themselves, but ennobleth
those that otherwise of themselves are nothing worth; and makes them exceeding
grateful in the sight of God. For what is in itself more ordinary and mean,
then to eat and drink, to have care of bodily health, to walk for recreation
sake, and such like natural or necessary actions: which notwithstanding are
highly esteemed of God, if they be performed upon intent of doing that which we
are bid to do, by those that have lawful command over us. Wherefore they are
in the right, who compare Obedience to a wand, that has virtue to turn that
which it touches, into gold, for such a wand would not only make silver and
such precious metals, more precious then they are in themselves, but put an
incomparable value upon wood, stones, and very earth, which of themselves are
little or nothing worth.

S. Gregory 25. Mor. c. 1^.
2. And if we will know what fruit comes of Obedience, S. Gregory has comprised
an inestimable praise thereof in few words, saying: Obedience is the only
Virtue, which planteth al other virtues in the mind, and preserves them after
they are once planted. It planteth o^h^r virtues two ways.
It planteth them two several ways: First because the liberal offer of
himself, which man makes to God, provoke God to be bountiful and liberal
again toward him; for God is of that disposition and goodness, that he will
never suffer himself to be overcome in bounty, and love, and services done
unto him; and consequently whosoever shall give himself and all that he has,
freely unto him, shall be sure to receive from him again al spiritual graces,
and finally God himself. Secondly it planteth other virtues in the mind,
because in the practice of Obedience, we must necessarily practice them al, for
when we subject ourselves to an other man for God, we practice Humility in a
high degree, putting ourselves under one, to whom in nature we are equal, and
in other things perhaps better then he; we practice Patience, undergoing things
that are hard and contrary to our will and inclination; we practice Faith,
reuerencing God, whom we see not, in man whom we do behold, and acknowledging
that the care and providence of Almighty God does watch over us in him, we
practice Hope, contemning things present; but charity most of al, and in an
action which of itself is very difficult, to wit, preferring the will of God
before our own will and pleasure; so that we see that the exercise of all the
rarest Virtues of Christian life is contained in this one virtue of Obedience,
and consequently that (as S. Gregory teaches) it does plant al other virtues
in the mind; and while it prospers, all the rest do prosper and increase. It
also conserueth them.
It also conserueth them; which is an other benefit and glory of this virtue;
for all other virtues in a manner are subject to be wronged, and shaken, and
stolen from us by the Devils; who lie like thieves in wait for such precious
jewels; and the more they are worth, the more those hellish Fiends do whet
their teeth against them; yea the virtues themselves may in some sort be said
to destroy themselves, not that there is any fault in them, but through the
pride and arrogance of those that possess them; as it happened to Lucifer, Esaias
14.
who (as Esaias the prophet says) was adorned with all kind of precious stones;
but those very ornaments threw him down headlong from the heavenly
habitation. But Obedience preserves itself and the other virtues, which it
brings with it; because it trusts not to itself, nor attributes any thing
to itself, nor indeed reserueth any thing for itself; but taking no thought of
itself, Ion. 1^.
it casts itself wholly into the hands of God, out of whose hands no body can
take us, as our Savior says. For either the Enemy dares not approach, or, if
he attempt upon us, it does now belong to God, in whose hands we are, to sight
for us, or to give us so much strength, that we shall easily withstand his
fury. And so S. Gregory says in another place: S. Gregory in 4. reg. c. 4.
The exercises of those that do obey, are Sacrifices; for while we are
obedient to men for God, we overcome the proud Spirit. With other virtues we
fight against the Devils; by Obedience we vanquish them. Wherefore they that
are obedient, are conquerours; because while of their own accord they subject
their will to others, by Obedience they command over the Angels that are fallen.
These are the fruits of Obedience alone; for so S. Gregory speaks: Obedience
is the only virtue which planteth al other virtues in the mind. Whereby it
appears, how great a good is wanting to al Secular people; and on the other
side, how strayte, and solid, and short a way Religious people walk to
Perfection, their life being nothing else but Obedience, and so finding means
by the practice of one only Virtue, to compass all the rest with great ease
and expedition. Wherefore Climacus says, Climacus Grad. 4.
that Obedience is a perfect abnegation of our soul and body; a voluntary
death; a life void of care; a journey by water without damage; the burial of
our will, a life of humility; and as if a man should travel sleeping; that to
live in Obedience, is to lay our burden upon an other's shoulders, to swim
upon an other's arm, and to be held-vp by the chin, that we sink not, but
pass the huge gulf of this life without danger, and at a short cut. What could
be spoken more pithily in commendation of this Virtue? But where he says, We
travel sleeping, me thinks is specially to be noted, and pondered, for the
gives us to vndertand, that by Obedience we are carried like little children in
an other's arms, so that all the care and trouble belongs to them that carry
us; and where this spiritual journey is toylesome and laborious to some, and
dangerous to others, and full of hazard; Religious people have so easy a time
of it, by means of this Virtue, that they do not so much as feel their journey.

3. There is an other commodity of Obedience, in which we may truly say al
other commodities are contained; to wit, that it does subject us, and al our
actions, Obedience puts us into the immediate and certain direction of God.
to the will and pleasure of God so perfectly, that they are wholly dependant of
him, and altogether directed by him. But before we declare, how this is
performed by Obedience, we will show the necessity of it. And certainly there
is no body but does find within himself, that in the government of ourselves,
and settling the course of our life, there hangs a great mist and obscurity
before our eyes, which makes us subject to many errors and faults; whereof
holy Scripture does put us in mind, saying: The thoughts of mortal wights are
fearful, Sap. 9.
and foresight uncertain. For what darkness can be greater, then where we have
no notice at al of things to come, and very little of those, which are present?
and as for the minds and intentions of other men, with whom we must necessarily
converse and traffic, we are so far from understanding the^, that most
commonly we know not what lurketh in our own breast. Sometimes we think we can
do more then indeed we are able to do; sometimes that we cannot do so much;
the one thrusting us upon adventures above our strength, the other discouraging
us in things that are good for us, and necessary to be undertaken. It is
therefore one of the greatest benefits that can befall us, to have some body in
so great a night of darkness, to lead us as blind men by the hand, and that we
may as it were lean upon their shoulders; much more to have God for our
leader, whose wisdom is so infinite, that nothing can be hidden from him
nothing deceive him, and his power and goodness is so great that (as S. Augustine
tells us) he has as much care of every man in particular, S. August. 3.
Cons. 11.
as if he had that one man only to care for. Whosoever therefore shall light upon
so good a fortune, must needs esteem himself wonderfully happy in it, in
regard he may confidently say with the Psalmist: Psalm. 22.
Our Lord does govern me, and nothing shall be wanting unto me; For the one
does follow of the other; and while God does govern us, we shall not only want
nothing, but he will place us in a place of pasture upon the waters of true
refection, that we may have abundant plenty of every kind of thing.

The Providence of God reaches to every thing.
4. Now let us see how God does most truly and most certainly govern us by
Obedience; and to make it the more plain and evident, we will search the ground
of it to the very root. For though among the ancient Philosophers (as they
styled themselves) there were some so shamefully unlearned, as to think that
God has care of no kind of thing without himself, or only of things eternal;
yet Faith and Nature does convince and compel us to believe and profess, Sap.
14 3.
as it is in the book of Wisdom; Thy providence, o Father, does govern al
things from the beginning; al things without exception, little and great; he
excepteth not the greater, as if he were unable to menage them; nor the lesser,
as if he did contemn them, or thought it unworthy of his Greatness and
Majesty to look down upon them. The manner also which the Divine wisdom
does hold in the government of this world, is worthy to be observed, and is
set down by the Holie-Ghost in an other place of the same Book in these
words: Sap. 8.
He does react from end to end strongly, and disposes al things sweetly. Here
likewise his strength and power is declared, which nothing can withstand* as we
said before nothing hinder his counsel and providence, nothing escape his
hands. The sweetness of his Providence, The sweetness of the providence of God.
which is the chiefest part of Wisdom, consists in two things; first, in
governing every thing as the nature of that thing does require; things that
are necessary, necessarily; things contingent, contingently; those that are
free, so as their freedom be preserved; Secondly to govern them orderly in
their due rank and proportion, the highest agreing with those that stand in the
middle, the middlemost with those that are below, effects with their causes,
precedents with those that are next and consequent, and that this order be
never broken or confounded. Wherefore as we see that corn, and other fruits of
the earth* do not suddenly put-forth al at once, and come to full growth and
ripenes, but first are small and tender, and by little and little wax ripe by
the warmth of the Sun; and the Sun itself, that it may not scorch and burn
them up, is tempered with timely showers, and the showers which fall upon the
ground to moisten it, fall not suddenly from above, but grow of the vapors
which are suckt-vp from the earth; and the like course is constantly observed
in all works of nature, every thing being produced by an other which is next
it, and by some immediate cause; so it was fitting, the same order should be
much more observed in actions that are voluntary; they being of a higher
strain then the other. For first, it could not have stood with reason, that
the wills of al men should have been, as it were, severed and distracted
asunder, every one taking a course by himself alone; for what could be more
confused? But it was certainly best, that they should be lincked one with an
other, and ordered dependent of one an other, to that end, which God in his
infinite wisdom has ordained. Secondly it being fitting, that such an order
should be established among the wills and intentions of men, it was also
necessary, that among them there should be that connection, which is betwixt a
cause, and the effect thereof, that is, that there should be some who move
others, and some again that are moved by others But, as S. Thoma^ says, S. Th
2.2. ^ 104.
in the order of natural things, those that are of a higher degree, move those
that are lower, by a certain force and efficacy, and abundance of virtue
inserted in them by God, through which they prevail over those things which
they move; but in humane actions no other power does move, but the Will, which
is likewise ordained by God, and does move by command and precept. For the
first and principal rule of al reasonable Wills, being the Will of God, al other
Wills are ordered under that Diuinie Will, some nearer unto it, and some farther
of, as it has pleased him, who appoints every thing his place, and as it
were his turn and ward.

5. Thus says S. Thomas. And it is the ground of an other discourse, which he
sets down more at large in a Book entitled The Regiment of Princes; where
he shows that al power, which one man has over an other man, is derived from
God; and proves it by many natural reasons, applied to moral government, and
drawn from the nature of every Entitie, The ground of the connection and
dependa^ce one of another which is among al things of this world.
and Motion, and End. For as the foundation of al power and dominion is first
to have a being; and every thing that is created, has his being from one
which is not created, So it has also power and motion; which if it be so
necessary in corporal motion, that from the inferior we must pass to those
that are higher and higher, til we come to the highest of al motions, which
(according to Philosophy) is the motion of the Heavens; much more must this
order be kept in spiritual things, in regard they have a near resemblance with
him that is the first M^uer of al things, whose nature is spiritual And this
Motion is nothing else but the Light of our mind derived from the fountain of
al light, which is God.

6. But the argument which is drawn from the consideration of the End of
every thing, is much more conuincing and evident. For if God, through his
divine providence, do order every man in particular, and every thing that man
does, to some end by himself forethought on; much more does he order the
community of men to some end, because the community is more noble; as the
whole is more noble then every part by itself, and has a higher end. And
further, it being necessary that every community be governed by some body,
the governors likewise must necessarily be ruled by God, and directed to some
end by him; which holy Scripture does plainly teach us, Prouer. 8.14.
where the Divine Wisdom is made to speak in this manner: Mine is counsel and
equity; mine is prudence; and mine is fortitude. By me Kings do reign, and
Lawmakers decree just things; by me Princes do command, and those that are
powerful determine justice. Authority and ability (...) do (...) come from
God.
In which words two things are given us to understand; first, that those that
are in authority, come not to their place by chance, or humane policy, but
are chosen unto it, and picked-out by God; whereof we have in Saul, and David,
and Iehu, and many others, m^st evident presidents; secondly that for the
government of their place, they receive strength from God, that is, power; and
likewise counsel and prudence, that is, light and understanding; whereby
oftimes against their will, and when they little think of it, they are brought
to do that, which God is pleased should be done. Romans 13.
And this thing is so certain, that S. Paul saying, that they who resist power,
resist the ordination of God, gives this very reason, because there is no
power which is not from God. And in an other place upon the same ground he
exhorts servants to obey their carnal masters, Ephesians. 6.5 1 Pet. 2.^3.
not serving to the eye only, that is, with external work, but from their heart,
and willingly; in regard they do the will of God. And ^ Peter says to the same
effect: Be subject to every humane creature for our Lord's sake, whether to
the king as excelling, or to the leaders as sent from God. Out of al which we
may draw a forcible argument, and certain conclusion; that in Religious Orders
those that govern, are selected thereunto by the particular providence of
Almighty God, and are as his Vicegerents, governing and directing us by the
power and light, which they have received to that end from him. For the
argument which S. Basil brings, S. B^si^ (...) Monast c. 2.^
must needs be here in full force If S Paul, says he, do command Christians
and the sons of God, to be subject, not only to them that by law of man have
received power of commanding, but even to those that are Infidels and wicked,
such as al of them were at that time: what obedience shall be due to him, who is
constituted Superior by God himself, and has received power by the Divine
law. In which because we should be no ways doubtful, we have the verdict of
our Savior Christ saying: He that hears you, hears me; and he that
despises you, desp^seth me. Lu^ 10.
Which law, as the same S. Basil notes, was not delivered and spoken of the
Apostles only, who were there present at the proclaim^ng of it, but is common
to al, and comprehends al aftercomers, that at any time ever after shall be
appointed Governors of other men. For a Prelat, says he, is no other then one
that bears the person of Christ, S Bernard (...)
a Mediator betwixt God and man* sacrificing to God their safety, who are
under his charge. Whereupon S. Bernard was not afraid plainly to auerre, that
whether God, or man who is God's Vicegerent, command any thing, it is to be
performed with the self-same care and respect; with this only caution, unless
man command that which is contrary to God.

7. Wherefore having proved so many ways, that God does govern and direct
every Religious man by those, whom he has placed over them in lawful
authority, the benefit which they reap, and their continual happiness, must
needs be exceeding great, both in regard that in this mist of darkness, they
have fallen upon so sure a guide, and met with such an excellent master, in
the ignorance of supernatural and divine things; and in their weakness received
so great a stay and defense. Insomuch that we may say with the Royal Prophet,
Every Religious man is governed by God.
that every Religious man is as a traveling beast, guided with reins and
bridle, by him that sits him; And he that sits us, is our God: our Governors
are as it were the bridle; for they likewise are in the hands of God, and do
not move, but as they are moved. But commonly we mistake the business, in regard
that feeling the bridle, because it is nearer unto us, we heed not him that
sits us, because he is farther of; that is, we perceive the voice and command
of our Superiors, because we hear them and see them; but because God is
beyond the reach of sense, we consider not that every order which they make,
comes from him; which very thing, in my opinion, does most of al, and most
plainly show the benefit and necessity of having some body, whom we may see
with our eyes, and hear with our ears, to deliver God Almightie's will unto
us. And it may be declared by that which passes in the Sacraments instituted
by him in his Church for the salvation of mankind For though we might have had
Grace and Justification given us by Faith only, The necessity of having
spiritual governors, declared by that which passes in the Sacraments.
by Penance, and Charity, and other internal actions of our own; yet he
thought it better, that we should have certain Sacraments, as conduits of his
grace, some consisting in the forms of Bread and Wine, some in Oil, some in
the sensible Pronunciation of certain words; And this for two reasons: first
because the nature of man consists of body and soul, and consequently it
was ^itting he should use corporal instruments. To which purpose S. John
Chrysostom says: If thou had not a body, he would have given thee naked and
incorporeal gifts; S John Chrysostom Hom 83 in Matthew.
but because thy soul is invested in thy body, he presents unto thee things
intelligible in those, which are sensible. The other reason is, because if the
business should have been dealt between God and us inwardly only in our mind,
every body would have been full of scruples and doubts, whether he had sorrow
enough, or love enough, or done his duty in every other respect, and never
have been at quiet, and our life would have been tedious unto us amidst so
many difficulties. Wherefore the Divine Wisdom did prouidently ordain such
helps for our Salvation, which we might partly touch with our hands, and see
with our eyes, and perceive with other senses. Both which reasons may be
applied to our case concerning Religious people. For in regard that our body
is one part of us, it was fitting we should be governed and directed by men,
that have a body as we have, not by God only, or by his holy Angels, who are
merely Spirits; and it belonged to the sweetness of his Providence, of which we
spoke before, so to ordain it. Besides that, in this life (and no man must
marvel that I often call it darkness) where nothing is more hard and difficult,
then to understand what in very deed is the will of God, there could not have
been contrived a better thing, and a thing more beneficial for our souls
salvation, then this; being thereby put into a ready way, not only to
conceive, but to hear, and see his will, a way so plain and evident that we
can neither mistake it, nor doubt of it, nor have any cause to make any stand
in the business.

8. These are the commodities and fruits of Obedience, from which al Secular
people are wholly excluded; and I do not speak of them that give themselves
over to this world, Secular people do want this benefit of direction.
and take no thought for their soul and spirit, but of those who pretend to be
spiritual, but yet order their virtuous practices, as they think good
themselves; for they must needs go on with more labor and pain, and more
slowly, and be always doubtful and uncertain in their resolutions and
proceedings, and full of rubbes and demurres, and so much the more, the better
they are disposed; because on the one side they are desirous to follow
punctually the will of God, and on the other side, they have so many mists
before their eyes, that it is very hard for them to understand what his will is,
and must needs often mistake it; and though they do not mistake it, yet they
have cause to be troubled as much as if they did, because they know not when
they hit upon it.

That al Christians are bound to Perfection, and not only Religious people.
CHAP. XII.
Having spoken of the profit in general, both of Religion and of every
Religious Vow, we shall hereafter declare many particular commodities and
special fruits of this state of life. But before we begin, it will be necessary
to take in hand, and root-out a common error, which is among men, esteeming
the case of Religious people to be much heavier then it is, and that they stand
in much harder terms then others, in regard that their Profession binds them
to al perfection and sanctity, whereas secular people (say they) have no such
obligation, but may freely be imperfect; It is a great error to think that al
Christians are not bound to be perfect.
which certainly is most false: for absolutely al men, in regard merely that
they are Christians, and have subjected themselves to the laws of the Ghospel,
have put themselves upon a very great obligation to be perfect. And whosoever
shall think this strange, may reflect, and perceive thereby, how much
Christianity is decayed from that which was first instituted by Christ our
Savior, and degenerated from the fervor of their forefathers. Wherefore I will
bring nothing of mine own to prove this point, but what I shall say, shall be
wholly out of holy Scripture, and the ancient Fathers; and specially out of two
of them, who have clearly and at large, and, which is the principal, of see
purpose handled this subject, that they that oppose it, must either absolutely
reject their authority, or admit of their Conclusion.

S. Basil.
2. First therefore, S. B^sil in that learned and eloquent Homily which he
wrote of Relinquishing al things, discourses, how God, to condescend to the
weakness of mankind, has distributed the life of man into two ranks and states:
the one of Wedlock, the other of Co^tinencie; that whosoever should not find
himself with strength sufficient to undergo the one, might betake himself to
the other; yet so as in the state of Marriage they must make account to live as
the holy men did live, of who^ we read in the Old Testament, specially
Abraham: Abraham an example of perfection in a secular life, and many others.
who though he heard not the Ghospel preached, nor could learn out of it, to
sell what he had and give it to the poor; yet his devotion and fervor was so
great, that his house and purse was ever open to pilgrims and strangers; and he
refused not to lay hands on his own only son at the very first word of God
commanding it. And having disputed these and the like things to and fro, he
says further thus: Do thou not think that the Euangelical law was made for
married people also? Do thou not perceive that an account will be taken, not
only of Monks, but of those that have wedded wives, whether they order their
lives according as is prescribed in the Ghospel? For he that is married,
sins not in that he uses his wife: but al other co^mandments being set
down equally for all, they that do against them, are in equal danger,
whosoever they be. For Christ when he proclaimed the Precept of his Father,
spoke to those that were in the world, and followed an ordinary course of
life. And if sometimes, upon a question moved by his disciples, he delivered
any thing in private, he plainly told them: Mar. 13.3^
That which I say to you, I say to al. Thou therefore that have chosen a wife,
have no ground to give thy self to idleness, as if thou might freely follow
the world; Secular people obliged to more diligence and care.
but rather have need to labor, and watch, and strive the more, to save thy
soul, because thou have seated thy self in the midst of all the snares, and in
the heart of thy Enemie's kingdom, where the allurements of sin are
continually before thy eyes, to the desire whereof the whole inclination of thy
Sense is perpetually and violently carried. Thou must therefore understand that
thou can not possibly avoid wrestling with the Devil, nor go away with the
victory without much labor. For how is it possible to shun this fight with
thy Adversary, being already shut-vp together with him in the pit ordained
for it? This pit is the earth compassed round with the circle of the heavens,
which (as we read in the History of Job) he does walk round and pass through
and through like a mad dog seeking who^ he may devour. Job. 1.
Wherefore if thou will not join battle with this Enemy, thou must get thy
self into an other world, where he is not; for so thou may escape without
fighting, and bid the precepts of the Ghospel Farewell without danger. But if
this be impossible, it remains that thou learn the art to fight cu^ningly
with him. This is the discourse of S. Basil.

3. Let us see what S Chrysostom says, ^. John Chrysostom.
who in the Book which he wrote against the dispraysers of Monastical life
disputing this matter very clearly, has these words: Thou beguilest thyself
certainly, and art mightily deceived, if thou think that one thing is required
of Secular people, and another thing of Monks. The laws of the Ghospel speak
equally to al.
For there is almost no other difference betwixt these two lives, but that they
are entangled in the bonds of wedlock, and these are free from it; for the
rest, one rule of life is required of them both, one and the self same
punishment due to both their faults. For he that is angry with his brother
without cause, offends God alike, whether he be Secular or a Monk; and he
that beholds a woman with lustful desire, of which soever state he be, shall
be punished with like punishment of adultery; again he that swears, whether
he be this, or that, is ^liable to the same sentence. For Christ, when he gave
instructions in these things, and made these laws* did not make such
distinction, as to say: if he that swears be a Monk, the oath is naught, if
he be not a Monk, it is not naught; but he said absolutely: I say unto you that
you swear not at al. And again when he said: Woe be to those that laugh:
Matthew. 5.34.
he did not add Monks, but he passed this definitive sentence upon al; Luc.
6.25.
and the same he does in his greatest commandments, and those at which men do
most wonder. For when he says: Blessed are the poor in spirit; Blessed are
they that mourn; Matthew. 5.
Blessed are the meek, and so forth; he puts not the name of a Monk to them,
or of a Secular; but this distinction is brought-in by men's mistaking For the
holy Scriptures acknowledge no such thing, but rather command every body to
lead a life like Monks, though they be married. Finally harken what S. Paul
says, whom when I name, I name Christ. He therefore writing to men that were
married, and had children, requires as much care of them, as is in a Monastical
life; for barring altogether al delicacie of apparel or diet, 1 Timothy 5.6.
he uses this speech: She that is in delights, living is dead; and again: 1 Timothy 6.8
Having meat, and apparel, let us content ourselves therewith. What could he
require more of Monks? In another place giving directio^s, how we should
refrain our tongue, he sets down most holy rules, and such rules as Monks
themselves have much ado to keep them. For he does not only condemn
filthiness and foolish talk, but he reprehendeth severely al scurrilitie or
immoderate ieasting; Ephesians. 5.4.
and does ba^nish it utterly from a Christian life. Sometimes also he exhorts
us vehemently, to the imitation of Christ himself. For when he admonishes us
to love our Neighbor, he chiefly sets before our eyes the example of
Christ; and in like manner, when he exhorts to patience, or humility. Seeing
therefore he does not only bid us imitate Monks or the Apostles, but Christ; and
threatens them with most grievous punishments that do not imitate him; how
can thou say, that more perfection is required of Monks, seeing the like
perfection proposed to every body, and exacted of every one? But this it is
most certainly, that turns the world vpside down, that we persuade ourselves
that Monks must be exceeding careful to live well, but others may live
carelessly: But it is not so, in very deed it is not so; for the same
Philosophical manner of living, is required of every one. And this I say
without al question; yea it is not I, that say it, but it is Christ, who is
Judge of us al. Mat. 11.28.
For where he says: Come to me al; Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me,
because I am meek and humble of heart, he speaks not only to Monks, but to al
mankind. Matthew. 7.13
Again where he commands us to walk the narrow way, he conuenteth not Monks
alone, but al men; and when he bids us hate our own life in this world, and
the like, he excepteth no sort of men. And when he delivered any decree which
was not to comprehend al, he declared himself accordingly; as where he spoke of
Virgins, he added: He that can take, let him take. Matthew. 19
Wherefore that a Secular man, and a Monk, are by the laws of God equally
bound to have care of their wel-liuing, and to the same height of Perfection,
and that both of them, if they fall, shall receive wounds alike, I think no body
will deny, howsoever he may otherwise be of a wrangling, and impudent
disposition. All this and much more does S. John Chrysostom say. And could any
thing be expressed more plainly, or more significantly, and in more weighty
terms? Though what need we stand upon the testimonies of men, seeing we have
our Sauiour's own verdict for it, Mat 5.48
Be ye perfect? and because we should not be ignorant what measure of
Perfection he requires, and of whom, he says further: As your heavenly
father is perfect. So that the top of al sanctity is to be imitated, If we will
be true sons of God our Father, we must seek to be perfect.
and imitated by all them that glory in that they have God their Father, which
certainly is the chiefest glory of al such as bear the name of Christians, to
whom (as S. John speaks) God has given such charity, that they be named
the sons of God, and be so; and who (as S. Paul says) in right of sons,
shall be the heirs of God, and co-heyres of Christ. Wherefore either we must
yeeld-vp the hope of ever enjoying that inheritance, or if we will maintain the
Adoption of Sons, we must maintain it by imitation of our heavenly Father;
1. Io. 3.1.
because (as S. Cyprian says) it is unseemly that children should degenerate
from their parents, Romans 8.17.
and specially from such a parent and so worthy a Father.

4. And for the same reason S. James the Apostle, writing to the vulgar sort,
and not to some great Il larions or Macaries of the desert, S Cypr. ser. de Con
pat.
exhorts, that we be perfect and entire, failing in nothing; and S. Peter:
That ye be holy in all your Conversation; because it is written: You shall be
holy, for that I am holy. And God himself speaking to Abraham amidst all that
wealth, and the government of so great a family and stock, Jacob. 1.4. 1. Pet.
1.16.
says: Walk before me, and be perfect; Which seeing it was spoken, when the
law of Nature only was in force, no man can make any doubt but that now it does
much more oblige, since the Word of God coming down from heaven, Genesis 17 1.
has to this end visited, and made redemption of his people ( a^ Zachary full
of the Holie-Ghost did feel within himself) that we may serve him in sancti^^e
and justice. And the law itself (which that Eternal Word opening his mouth
diuulged to the whole world) does give us to understand as much; Luc. 1.
for it being so divided, that some things are to be observed toward God, some
things toward our Neighbor, and others toward ourselves, in all these things
it requires great perfection of us. The law requires sanctity.
For we see what fear, what confidence, what faith, what love it prescribes
toward God, from al our heart, al our soul, al our strength and force. And
directing us in the love of our Neighbor, it commands us to love him as
ourselves, it requires great compassion of his miseries, and so great patience
if an injury be offered, that if he take our cloak from us, we must let him
have our coat also; and if he strike us on the one cheek, we must turn the
other. And as concerning ourselves, what heavier or more perfect commandment
could be laid upon us, then always to watch, to hat^ our own life, to take up
our Cross, to deny ourselves, to l^ese our life, to renounce al things, to
sell that which we have, and give it to the poor, to enter at the narrow gate,
and in a word to offer violence to the kingdom of heaven? Al which and many
more things being promulgated by God himself without exception, distinction,
Secular people live as if our Savior had made (...) contrary to th^se which
he made.
or difference of men or callings, and commanded cuery body indifferently and
in general, what blindness is it of Secular people to exempt themselves of their
own head, and persuade themselves, that these things belong only to Monks and
Religious men? And by their manner of life they show indeed that they are of
this opinion; for they are so far from practicing the abnegation, or
renunciation, or taking-vp of their Cross, which our Savior commands, that
they abhor it, and shun nothing more; and contrariwise they follow
liberty, and pleasures, and licentiousnes so wholly, as if our Savior had made
quite contrary laws, and said: Blessed are the rich; Blessed are those that
live in pleasure; Blessed are they that are in greatest honor and reputation
with the world. Wherefore let us conclude, and stick to this Tenet, which is so
clear in the light of the Ghospel, that absolutely all that have believed the
Ghospel, and subjected themselves to the laws thereof, whether they be
Religious or Secular, are bound to frame their life and actions, according to
that high rule of Perfection, Two Conclusions out of the premises.
which is generally proposed to al, in the life, and wholesome doctrine of
Christ our Savior. Whereof two things must necessarily follow: First, that
Religious people take not any new obligation or burden upon them, or at least
that the obligation which is added, is but small; but on the other side, the
helps, which they receive, are very great, and ease them very much in the
carriage of that burden, which is imposed upon al; and make them bear it
far more cheerfully Secondly, that the condition of them that live in the
world, is far worse then it seems to be; in regard they are in a manner as
fully obliged to the self-same things, and yet have so few and so small helps
thereunto, and so many important hindrances. Wherefore the case of them both in
truth is, as if two were to travel a long and hard journey, The point of
difference betwixt the Religious and the Secular.
the one on foot, slowly, and with much pain and labor* the other, in a good
and easy coach, with this obligation, that he must not leave his coach, nor go
on foot. For as much as concerns the perfection of the Euangelical Law, both
are equally obliged to observe it of necessity. The obligation which lies
particularly upon Religious people more then others, is in the manner, and
means of attayning to this Perfection, which is a great commodity unto them:
for if it be profitable to use a certain kind of instrument for such a work, it
must needs be much more profitable, that it be not in my power, not to use it;
al which will be far more evident, when we shall have declared in particular all the special benefits of a Religious life.

The first fruit of a Religious life, to wit, perfect Remission of al sins
committed. CHAP. XIII.
(...) 7 8.
THe Wise man said: I will ascend into the Palm Tree, and gather the fruits
thereof. Being to treat more fully of the particular commodities of a Religious
life, this saying of the Wiseman in the Canticles comes fit to my purpose; S
Greg. 19. mor c. 16.
for the figure of the Palm Tree does sort with a Religious state in many
things. S. Gregory compares the life of spiritual men to this tree. For as the
Palm Tree ( says he) is rugged below, and hidden under a coorse bark, and
above is beautiful to the eye, embellisht with delicate fruits; below is pent
with the foldings of the rind, above spread-out in breadth with fair green
boughs; so the life of the servants of God, in the exterior does seem
despicable and poor, but on-high in soul, which is the cheifest part in man,
it is dilated in hope of large recompense. Which is most of al verifyed in
Religion; in which that which is first in sight, is the difficulties, and
rigor of Poverty, and an outward aspect, conte^ptible, knottie, and rough,
full of labor and toil; but when we cast our eye upon the inward riches, there
is not upon earth a sweeter life, nor fuller of a spiritual commodities,
Wherefore let us asce^d into this Palm Tree, or if by the mercy of God we be
already mounted-vp into it, let us gather the fruits thereof, and enjoy them,
not only in daily use and practice, but by ruminating and recording them.

2. The first fruit is a full and perfect Remission and pardon of al manner of
sins committed in a secular life. But no man can value the greatness of this
benefit, unless he conceive and reflect upon the greatness of the punishment,
which is due after this life, even for those sins, which have been forgiven
us, and blotted-out by virtue of the Sacraments. The punishments of the other
life exceeding sharp for 3. reasons.
The vnsufferablenes of which punishment arise^h of three things: First, by the
torment of fire, which is so bitter, and so pearcing, and burning our very
soul, that S. Augustine affirms it is a sharper punishment then whatsoever
torment any man ever saw, or felt, or can imagine in this world; Secondly it is
infinitely augmented, by the excessive desire which a soul, that is free from
the body, has of seeing that Infinite Good, for which we were al created; S.
Aug ser. 41. de SS.
this desire being in a manner infinite; And thirdly, the very sight of the
spots and ugly scarres which are left by sin, S. Aug. (...). ser. 41.
before they be purged away by fire, does greatly increase the grief; and
withal the multitude of them in regard, that not only enormous sins, but the
very least that can be thought of, are there punished; Sins punishable after
this life in Purgatory.
of which it is infinite to recount the number, whereunto we are daily subject.
S. Augustine reckoneth-vp many of them, as, to eat or drink more then needs;
to speak or to hold one's peace more then is fitting; to neglect a poor body
that presses upon us; to rise late; to be slow in visiting prisons, or the
sick; to co^plement with our neighbor, or speak harshly to him; to flatter
those that are in authority; rashly to suspect; to be too sparing in giving
alms; finally idle speeches; al which sins, he says, if hee^ they be not
redeemed, And forgiven by profession of a Religious life.
must be purged in that fire. Whereby we may see, what a heap of punishments
is layd-vp for so great a heap of sins, and such sins as a Secular life is
full of. B it as the instant that we profess a Religious life, we are in one
moment delivered of all the pains and torments so perfectly, that if our soul
should then depart this life, it would go directly to heaven. Which certainly
is a very great benefit, and greatly to be esteemed; for if we were to redeem
but one sin by our own labor and endeavor, how many tears, how many
fastings, how many disciplines, what pe^nance would it cost us? What then will
be necessary for such a mass of imperfectio^s, as an idle and careless life
is wo^t to gather?

3. It is very true, that there be diverse other means, to get remission of
punishment due to sin, and chiefly by Indulgences granted by His Holiness, to
whom God has* given power to that effect, The difference betwixt gayning
remission of our sins by Indulge^ces and by entrance into Religion.
but there is a great deal of difference betwixt these two ways. For though
the power, which the Pope has in this kind, be great, yet it is limited; For
first there must be some just cause to ^^ant an Indulgence, and a cause which
may carry some proportion to the Indulgence which is granted; Secondly there
must be some work performed, whereby to satisfye for our sins, in some
measure also proportionable to the sins which are remitted. If either of
these be wanting, the Indulgence is not auavlable, or at leastwise it reaches
no further, then the weight of the cause, or of the work will carry it; and the
valua^ion of these things depending of the judgment of men, and the matter
being obscure and hard to judge of, the Indulgence may quickly come to little or
nothing, specially seeing many faults may be also committed in performing
negligently the works which are enjoined. It is not so in the pardon which a
Religious life does bring us; for it does not depend of any grant of man, but
proceeds from the nature of the fact itself, so that there can be no doubt,
but that it is always auaylable to al* after one and the self-same manner; and
that God, as the Prophet Micheas speaks, M^^h^. 7.19
has mercy upon us, and puts away al our iniquities, and casts al our
sins into the deapth of the sea. Wherefore al Divines (who are wont to examine
these things very narrowly) with common consent do number this among the
greatest privileges of Religion. An^o p. 3. (...) Pa^. 4. d. 28 q ^.5 ill. 2.
Rel^g. ^. d 23 A^g. n. 47.
And among them S. Antonine (a man ren^wned for learning and sanctity) proves
it very solidly, and brings also Paludanus for his opinion. And many others
have delivered the same, and chiefly S. Thomas giving this reason: For if
Almes-giuing do redeem sins, as we find delivered by the Prophet Daniel, S.
Th. 2 2. (...) 3 and 3.
how much more shall the Entrance into Religion work the same effect? which
kind of voluntary penance, is not only of equal force with almes-giuing, but
does sa^e excel it, And there is good reason to think so, because he that gives
an alme^ to a poor body gives his external substa^^^, and part only of that
whereof he has plenty; but a Religious man gives al, and himself withal; so
that no alms or guilt can be equal with it. Of which also S. Thomas in an
other place gives this reason: Because when we en^er into Religion our sins
are forgiven us, S. Th 4. d 4. (...). 3. ad 3.
but yet so as we on our part lay down a real and very great satisfaction for
them. For when we deliuer-vp our will wh^ly to God, and bequeath ourselves to
his service, we give him that which is more dear unto (...) al things else in
the world, and consequen^ly do fully sati^fye for all our sins past, ^
because we give him the greatest gift that man can ^iue. Thus says S.
T^^mas. Wald^^^^, a learned Author, is of the same opini^n, and confirms i^
by the testimony of a holy man, who in a Vision saw the like Grace descend
upon a Monk, when he took the habit of Religion, which he had seen ^iuen in
Baptism. And S. Anselme in the latter end of his Book of Similitudes shows
it by example of one O^bor^^ a Monk, who not lon^ after he was deceased, S.
Anselme
appeared in the night to S. Anselme himself, and told him, that he ha^ be^n
^hree times most cruelly assaulted by the Devil in his last agony, and
defended by one that stood by him, R^^^rtur etiam ab An^ p (...)
and pleaded hard for him. For first, the Devil, (...) unto him the sins
which he had committed before Baptism (for he was baptized when he was in
years) but when it was answered, that al those sins had been washed away by
Baptism, the Devil was mute. A none (...) the sins which the man had
committed in the world before he entered into Religion* to which answer was
made, that these also were forgiven by the profession of a Religious life;
Finally he laid against him al his faults and negligences committed du^ing the
time he lived in Religion; but when it was replied that he had satisfied for
them by often Confession, and other virtuous exercises, the Devil having no
more to say, went away vanquished and confounded.

S. Athanas of S Antoni^ the (...).
4. S. Athanasias recounteth the like example of S. Antonie the Great, tha^
(...) Ninth Hour he was once in spirit carried up toward heaven (...) and
when the Devils flocking about him labored with all might to hinder him, the
Angels asked them what interest they had in him? and they began to rip up the
sins of his youth; but the blessed Angels presently stopped their mouths, and
told them, that they were not to look back upon those things which he had
committed in the world before he was a Monk; but if from that time forward they
had any thing, they should lay it open; but finding nothing to say, they were
feign to yeald against their wills, and leave him free passage to Heaven.

5. In the chronicle of S. Francis his Order we read also, Chronicle of S.
Francis.
that a certain Religious Priest of that Order, Christopher by name, was
wonderfully troubled in mind about the sins which he had committed in the
world; and desired one of his Brethren, that did often see and speak with his
Good Angel, that he would ask him concerning it. The Good Angel made answer,
that forasmuch as concerned those sins, he should not be dismayed, nor take
any thought, but from thence forward labor diligently to persevere to the end,
that he might be saved

6. And that which Leontius Bishop of Cyprus, Leontius.
an ancient Author, does relate in the Life of Simeon the Abbot, is a pleasant
narration, and worthy to be recorded, as suting to our present purpose. This
Simeon then a young man, and of noble extraction, to eather with one John, of
equal nobility, and in the flower also of his youth, coming to a Monastery,
and being both of them to be clothed the next day in their Monastical weed,
some of the Brethren of the house began to speak thus vnt^ them (for I will put
down the Author's own words, because they are plain, and full of ancient
simplicity) You are happy, because to morrow you shall be regenerate, and
cleansed from al sin, as when you were first borne, no otherwise then as if
you were Baptized the same day. Which when they heard, they were both of the^
astonished, and ran to the godly Abbot of the Monastery, called Nico, and
casting themselves at his feet said: We beseech thee, Father, that thou will
not baptize us; for we are Christians, and borne of Christian parents. The
Abbot not knowing what had been spoken by the Fathers of the Monastery, said
unto them: Why, Children, who goes about to baptize you? And they answered: our
Masters, the Fathers of the Monastery, tell us that to morrow we shall be
Baptized again. Then the Abbot understood how they had spoken of the holy
Habit, and said: They said well, my Children; for, if it please God, to morrow
we will cloth you with the holy and Angelical habit.

7. We have S. Hierom's opinion also in this behalf (which is of no small
weight) who for this only reason dares almost compare a Religious state with
Baptism. S. Hierome ep. 25.
For writing to Paula, he comfort her upon the death of Blesilla her
daughter in this manner: It is very true that if untimely death had ^eazed her
(which God forbid should happen to those that are his) in the heat of worldly
desires, and in thoughts of the pleasures of this life, she were to be
lamented: But now that by the mercy of Christ, some four months since, she
had as it were washed herself with the second Baptism of her holy purpose,
and lived afterward so, as treading the world under her feet, she was resolved
to abide in the Monastery; are you not afraid least our Savior say unto you:
O Paula, art^h ^angrie that thy daughter ^ become my (...)? And to the same
purpose he exhorts Demetrius, Idem ^p. 8.
saying: Now that thou have forsaken the world, and in the Second Step after
Baptism conditioned with thy Adversary saying unto him: Thou Devil, I
renounce thee, and the World, and thy pomp, and thy works; S. Bernard de Pr^^p
and disp.
keep the conditions, which thou have made. But S. Bernard teaches the same
thing more plainly then any of the rest; and having been asked the question by
some, gives two reasons for it, in these words: You desire to know of me, how
it comes to pass, that among all the courses of penance, a Monastical life
has deserved the prerogative to be styled a Second Baptism; I think the
reason is in regard of the perfect renouncing of the world, and the singular
pre-eminence of a spiritual life; the conversation thereof excelling all the
courses which man is wont to take, and making the lovers thereof like the Angels
of heaven, and far unlike to earthly men; it reformeth the Image of God in
man, configuring us to Christ, as Baptism does; finally we are in a manner
Baptized the second time, in regard that mortifying our members which are upon
earth, we put on Christ again, once more ingrafted to the similitude of his
death. And moreover as in Baptism we are delivered from the power of darkness,
and translated into the kingdom of eternal glory* so in the second kind of
regeneration of this holy purpose, in like manner from the darkness, not only
of one Original sin but of many Actual sins, we pass to the light of
virtue; accommodating that saying of the Apostle to ourselves; The night is
passed, and the day is at hand. Thus fa^re S. Bernard. Romans 13.12.


In Religion we dye to the world, as in Baptism we dye to sin. Rom 6. Ephesians ^.
Coloss. 3.
8. Al which may be confirmed with this one argument, wherewith I will conclude
this Chapter, as containing the substance of what has been hitherto said. For
the reason why Baptism blotteth-out al former offenses, is because in it we
dye to our old life, and are borne again into a new life; which is that which
S. Paul does every where teach, when sometimes he says we are dead, sometimes
buried with Christ, and revived again with him, and that our life is hidden in
him; so that, to speak properly, in the Lauer of Baptism the same man that
entered, does not come forth, but quite an other man; for he that entered, is
dead, and another risen in his place; so that the sins of that man that is
dead, cannot be laid to the charge of the man that is newborn; no more then
my sins can be laid to another man, or another man's to me; and the self-same
happens in Religion. For we dye to the world and to the works thereof, and
moreover to ourselves, and our own will; in so much that we cannot enjoy the
world, nor make use of the offers thereof, nor of our own will, no more then if
we were indeed buried. Wherefore seeing Religious people, as in Baptism, leave
to be what they were before, and begin to be new men in a new life, and quite
other thoughts and endeauours, placing their contentment in other manner of
pleasures, and ends, and intentions; it is no wonder that the punishment of the
offenses, to which the old man was liable, be blotted out, and lie dead; and
that this other man cannot be charged with them.

The contentment which the privilege of this re^ssion brings.
9. Which benefit, if it be duly weighed, breeds inestimable contentment and
ease of mind, burying those scruples and vexations, which the remembrance and
remorse of our former offenses is wont to bring. Many travel into far
countries, and ^ow long pilgrimages to Jerusalem, Rome, and Comp^^^^^a, and put
their lives in many hazards by sea and land, to gain Pardon and remission of
their sins, of which I spoke before; and they do well and devoutly: But yet
their devotion is mingled with many inconveniences; among which it is none of
the least, that generally they do not increase their fervor and devotion, but
rather leese it, through the toil and trouble of iourneying; and oftimes fall
upon occasions of offending God more. But this Indulgence gives great increase
of sanctity, and moreover (as I said before) does not proceed from the power
and authority of man, which is limited and confined, but from the mere will
and bounty of God, and the excellency of the work itself. So that every
Religious man may with great reason make account, that our Savior speaks
those comfortable words unto him, which are in the Ghospel: Thy sins are
forgiven thee; go in peace.

The second fruit of Religion, that it is a state of Penance. CHAP. XIV.
AS Religion at the first entrance presents every one of us with the
bountiful and welcome gift of Remission of al our sins and debts, as our
Savior calls them: so it yealds many sovereign remedies to purge our
souls, and blot out the same offenses; and all the exercises thereof are in a
manner directed to no other end. For it is a State of Penance, and so commonly
called; in regard the greatest part thereof is spent in bewayling the sins of
our life past, S. Tho. con. Impug. Rel. c. 1.
and repayring the faults and negligences of former years, as S. Thomas
proves at large in the Book he writ against the Opposers of Religion. Which
though some may think a needles labor, and time idely spent, specially after
that full and perfect Remission, of which even now I spoke; yet it is not so,
but a very great and special benefit, which we shall easily understand, if we
give care to that saying of the Holie-Ghost in Scripture: Eccl. 5.5.
Of the sin which is forgiven, be not without fear. For a man might say: If
it be truly forgiven, what need I fear? or if I have cause still to fear,
certainly it is not perfectly forgiven me. Our eternal ^eale never safe enough
But doubtless both our eternal weal is a business of so great weight and
moment, that men have great reason never to think themselves safe enough; and
sin itself is so fow^e a thing, that we cannot sufficiently express our
hatred against it, unless we voluntarily revenge ourselves upon it, and punish
those enemies of our own accord, which have wrought us so much mischief. For
that is very true and well to be considered, S. Greg 4. mor. c. 17.
which S. Gregory says, that our Lord does remit no sin without some
punishment or other; for either we must pursue it with tears, or he will
reserve it to his judgment. And the same he proves in an other place, Idem 9
in c. 17.
by that which Job says to God: Knowing that thou sparest not him that
offends; God spares not the offender, because he lets not the sin pass
without punishment. For either man himself does punish it in himself by
penance, or God does punish it, taking revenge upon man. Therefore he spares
not the offense, Sin^e never too much hated and punished. S. August.
because it is never remitted without revenge. To which purpose S. Augustine was
wont to say (as Possidon^us writes of him with a great deal of praise) that
no Priest, live he never so worthily, should ever think of departing this life
without just and convenient penance. And seeing it must be done, where can it
be better and more fully done then in Religion, which is a course in great part
erected for no other end, but to satisfye for the offenses of our life past?
And if we will know what means Religion has to this effect, we shall find that
it is very powerful in this, as in all other things, Many ways of doing
penance ^n Religion
and has many ways to bring it to pass; which may be reduced to some that
concern the body, and some that concern the mind. The body gives continual
matter of suffering, and enduring very much; and the very renouncing of the
pleasures of this world, is penance enough of itself; for it cannot choose but
be hard to flesh and blood, to be debarred from the use of things which are
delightful, and to which it is naturally inclined, as from marriage and dainty
fare, from companie-keeping, hunting and hawking, gaming, meeting at plays,
and such other sports and pastimes, wherewith men are so much carried away. So
that if there were nothing else, Religious people might with good reason be said
to live in continual penance, because to be deprived of that, which naturally
does content us, is very bitter.

Religious people are men Crucified. S. Io. Chrysostom Hom. 5.6. ad pop.
2 But there be many other things in a Religious life which are so harsh and
distastful to flesh and blood, and so ordinary withal among Religious people,
that S. John Chrysostom knew not how to express their manner of painful
living, better, then by calling the^ Crucified men; signifying that they live
perpetually as if they were nailed upon a Cross. For first their Poverty
brings many daily troubles and inconveniences with it, in their diet, and
clothing, and habitation, and furniture, and in all things else, which greatly
helps toward the satisfaction of which I speak; because they willingly
endure it for the love of God, besides other exercises more heavy and irksome,
which Religious discipline does require, as fasting, and watching, and other
austerities of the body, which the fervor and devotion of every one does
invent, or every one's particular Institute does put upon them. To which we
may add the labor and toil which oftimes they undergo for God, and the good
of their Neighbor, day and night; refusing no place, nor time, nor season to
do them good. And these things belong unto the body.

The mortifications of the mind
3. The functions of the mind are more noble, and more apt for satisfaction;
specially the con^inual exercise of al kind of Virtue, as Humility, Obedience,
Charity toward God, and men of al conditions; of which virtues Religion is
full, not only increasing our reward by the practice of them, but greatly
helping to the perfect blotting-out of al sins, and chiefly by the denial of
our own will; which every one does partly practice within himself, breaking
and cu^bing the violent motions of Sensuality, mortifying his eyes, and taste,
and other senses, and inclinations, and is partly laid upon him by his
Superiors and governors. Ob^dience the ^a^dest and most profitable act of
Penance.
For by depending wholly upon their will, he cannot choose but live in continual
restraint of his own will, which is the hardest and the most profitable act of
penance that can be; because in every act of sin, the will of man reiects
and contemnes the will of God, and wilfully follows his own courses, and
consequently we cannot make God better nor more full satisfaction, then by
delivering the same will of ours, as the party that is guilty, to God, whom it
has offended, bound as it were hand and foot in the chains of our Vows,
specially of Obedience; that as it has ouerlashed by taking overmuch delight
in pleasures and pastimes, it may make recompense again, by performing and
enduring those things which are unpleasant and distastful.

4. And certainly, Penance rather to be done upon the mind then upon the body.
if we consider the nature and intention of penance, it is rather to be
exercised in the mind, then upon the body; for it is the mind that sins.
The mind commands the body and every part thereof, and studieth the several
ways of working mischief, and consequently it deserves all the punishment,
specially seeing most sins are committed only in mind, without any act at al
of the body; as the sins of Pride, which are many, and of Envy, and the
like, and al those which pass only in thought, and inward consent to evil;
whereby we may see that penance does chiefly consist in punishing the mind and
will; and that Religion is the fittest, if not the only fit place for it. S. Th.
c. 10 and quod* 3. ar. 13 and ^.2. q. 189. a. 3 ad 3.
Wherefore S. Thomas in the Treatise, which he wrote of Spiritual Perfection,
says well, that in Religion there is not only perfect Charity, but perfect
Penance, and that no Satisfaction can be compared to the penance of Religious
people that consecrate themselves to God; and gives a good reason, No man can
be compelled to take upon him a Religious course.
because no man can be compelled to take upon him a Religious course, though he
have committed never so many enormous offenses; in regard that the works of
Religion exceed whatsoever private or public satisfaction and punishment
which may be due, or ever was at any time, or can be enjoined for any offense.

5. And moreover, two things concur in this kind of Penance, which are not
in any other; and it is a thing worthy to be considered. For other works of
penance, Two things in the penance of Religion, which are not elsewhere.
the sharper they are, are also the more effectual and fit to purge our souls;
and if they be mild and easy, they are the less auaylable; But Religious
discipline (which, if we believe S. Thomas, is the greatest kind of penance
that can be) is not sharp and terrible, but easy and pleasant; for it does not
require that we should punish ourselves with much fasting, long disciplining,
watching whole nights together, and such like austerities, which every man's
body or years is not able to bear, but rather it consists in a firm
resolution of the mind, despising al things of this world, denying our own
will, and in Obedience; of the easines and pleasantnes whereof we shall hereafter
speak at large.

6 And the holy Canons give us to understand as much: For whereas one Astulphus
had murdered his wife, 33. q 2. c. Adm.
Pope Pius exhorted him first to betake himself to a Religious course; that
being (as he speaks) humbled under the command of his Prelate, and helped by
the prayers of many Brethren, he might obtain mercy of God; but if he refused
to take that course, he enjoined him diverse grievous pennances which he was to
do continually; as, to drink no wine, to eat no flesh, not to marry, nor use
the bath, and many other things, which would affright a man to hear them;
whereby we may guess how much easier it is to satisfye God in Religion then in
the world; and that it is done more fully, in regard of the obedience and
humility which we profess under our Superiors, and the help which we have by
the prayers of our spiritual Brethren; which be the two causes which the Pope
does touch upon.

7. Finally, that which S. Gregory the Great (being so famous a Doctor of the
Church) does teach, is much to be noted, as proving evidently, that the
abandoning of the world, is not only the best and most wholesome kind of
satisfaction, but in a manner necessary sometimes; specially if we be desirous
to offer a perfect and entire satisfaction for our sins. For in a certain
Homily discoursing upon the words of S. John Baptist, S. Greg. Hom. 20. in
Luang.
that it is not sufficient to do works of penance, but worthy works of
penance, he declares himself in this manner: If we will speak of worthy
works of penance, we must understand, that if there be any body that has
not done any thing that is unlawful, he deserves to use lawful things, and
follow works of virtue, so that, if he will, he need not leave the world. But
if one have fallen into fornication, or adultery, which is worse, he must
debar himself the more from things which are otherwise lawful; in regard he
cannot but remember he has done that which is unlawful.

S Bernard. s. de q^adr. deb.
8. S. Bernard is of the same opinion; for among other reasons which he gives,
why a Religious man must make account, that he owes himself and his life wholly
to God, he reckons this as one of the chiefest: My sins past ( says he)
do require of me my life to come, that I do worthy works of penance, and
bethink myself of all the days of my life in the bitterness of my soul. I have
sinned above the number of the sands of the sea, and my sins are multiplied;
and am not worthy to behold the heaven on high. How therefore shall I number
that which is without number? how shall I satisfye, where I shall be constrained
to make satisfaction to the last f^^thing? and who understands his sins? That
heavenly Flute S. Ambrose says: I have found it easier to meet with those
that have preserved themselves innocent, then that have done worthy penance.
When therefore thou shall have consecrated al thy life, al thy thoughts,
whatsoever thou have, or can do, to this one thing, can it be any thing? or
reputed any thing worth? A little before thou had given thy life, for the
life which Christ ^aue f^r thee; and now the memory of thy former offenses
demands it al again.

(...) ser de dup Lept.
9. He confi^meth the same thing an other way else where, saying, that when a man
ha^h once cleft to the world by sin, he must quite forsake his own will
wherewith he sinned, and the world for whose sake he sinned, if he will
perfectly satisfye for his sin; and that this is a second Baptism. His words
are these: We have made our first covenant void; we have sinned against thee,
o Lord, obliging ourselves again to Satan and his works, putting our necks
willingly under the yoke of iniquity; and subiecting ourselves to a most
miserable slavery. And therefore, my Brethren, it is fitting we should be
baptized again, we must necessarily make a second covenant, a second
pr^fession; and it is not enough for us to renounce the Devil and his works, we
must also renounce the world and our own will. The world beguiled us, our will
betrayed us. In our first Baptism, when our own will had done us no harm, it
was enough to renounce the Devil: but now that we have apparently smarted for
the allurements of the deceitful world, and the unfaithfulness of our own will,
in this second Baptism of our conversion (as I may call it) we shall do
worthily, and not unwisely, if we be careful, not only to renew the former
covenant, but to strengthen it, renouncing also and denying our affections.
Thus far S. Bernard; and I find that other holy men have been al of the same
mind; inuiting men to a Religious life, to the end they may case themselves of
the heavy weight of their sins; as S. Romualdus, S. Romualdu^ persuaded
diverse great men and great sinners to enter into Religion.
who persuaded Peter V^seolus, King of Dalmatia, to leave his kingdom, and
forsake the world, to the astonishment of al men, for a murder which he had
committed. He persuaded also Thamnus to do the like, who was so great a fauorit
of Otho the Emperor, that they sat at one table, and wore one an other's
garments; but Thamnus had put Crescentius a Senator to death, against his
faith and promise given him; which was the cause he forsook the world. The
same he persuaded with Count Olibanus a great man in France; who after many
heinous offenses committed, being touched with remorse, came to S. Romualdus
his Celle with a great train, and laid open his whole life unto him. When the
Saint had heard him, he told him there was no way for him to be saved, but by
forsaking the world, and entering into Religion. The Count having quite other
thoughts in his head, was much troubled; and calling to him the Bishops and
Abbots, which were in his company, he advised with them, whether it were so
indeed; and they answered with one voice, that S. Romualdus had told him the
very truth, and that fear only had hindered them from telling him the same
thing before. Then Olibanus in private conference agreed with the holy man, to
forsake the world, and in effect did it not long after, to the great admiration
of all that knew him. Whereupon we may conclude, that if any body find himself
laden with sins, and desire to be cleared of them, as every one ought to
desire, and labor for it, no way can be compared to a Religious course, either
in regard of the certainty, or of the sweetness of the means of obtaining
pardon, and of many other pr^^^^atiues, in which it does excel.

The third fruit of Religion: Austeritie of life. CHAP. XV.
REligion has a third commodity, for which though must men shun it, yet it
contaynes many great commodities in it, to wit, that Religious people have so
much occasion, and some kind of necessity, of dealing harshly with themselves,
and afflicting their bodies: partly because the poverty which they profess,
does in a manner enforce it upon them, and partly because al functions of
Religion are somewhat harsh, and distastful to Sense. For that which
Ecc^^siastes says ( Frequent meditation, Eccl. 11.12. The commodities of
Austeritie of life.
is an affliction of the sl^^) has a further meaning, then of the
Contemplation of heavenly ^hin^s, which we commonly call Meditation For
whatsoever the mind is busied in, if it be a restraint to Sense, and to the
natural inclination which we find in ourselves continually craving, is an
affliction to the flesh, and does much quayle and abate the lively vigor of
the body. And yet this severity brings much profit with it; and first, by use
of hard and paineful things, Deuteronomy. ^2.25.
our nature is mortifyed and kept from flying out; if we pamper and deal
gently with it, the crookednes and corruption thereof is so great, that, as
Moses speaks in his Canticle, it kicketh and spurneth, when it is sarted us,
and utterly refuses the obedience which it owes to reason and the law of God.
We may see it more plainly in beasts, because the force of nature does more
lively show itself in them, in regard they are led in all things merely by
natural inclinations; let us therefore consider what happens in in them, and
take example by it. If we keep a horse in stable, and give him his fill of
oats, and rest; and keep an other at day-labour, with allowance little enough
to live and be able to do the work we shall quickly find the difference; For a
horse that is well kept and high fed, will be always playing and curuetting, and
a man shall have much ado to hold him in with a double bit; he will be running
away when the rider would have him stand, and stop and giue-back when he should
go on, and cannot be for much use, without a great deal of pains and danger
to the rider: But the horse that is kept at rack and manger is gentle enough,
and will not greatly stir: he will sooner sink, then offer to resist,
whatsoever load you put upon him; you shall not need to tie him to make him
stand, and be quiet; but you may lay the reins on his neck, and stay him, or
put him on, or turn him with a word. Now certainly this inferior nature of
ours, which consists of flesh and blood, and of that which we call Life, and
Sense, and Appetite, is the same with beasts; and so much the more headie in
us, then it is in them, in regard it is infected and corrupt by sin, from
which beasts are free; so that if we pamper it, and give ourselves to ease, and
a full diet, and feed it with daynties, and al manner of pleasure, S. Bernard.
Ep. 152.
it must needs grow stubborn and unruly in us, as it does in beasts, and
somewhat more, in regard of our corruption; but if we feed sparingly, and live
sober and continent, it will be always gentle and at command. Whereupon S.
Bernard says, that the mind that is accustomed to daynties, and not broken
with the mat^ock of discipline, gathers much filth; where he daintily
compares the Soul to a plot of ground, Austeritie to a spade or mattock; for
the ground cannot bear fruit, not only if we do not sow it, but though it be
fruitful of itself, S. Leo s^r 4. de (...).
and be sowed, yet it must be sometimes dug and cast up, or else it will grow
full of weeds and brambles; so our flesh (says S. Leo) unless it be broken
with continual labor, will quickly with ^ase and sloth bring-forth thorns and
brambles, and yeald fruit for the fire, and not for the barn And, to go no
farther, as the ground, if it had sense of feeling, would suffer in the
breaking up, and yet must bear it, for the good of itself, Job. 6.11.
as well as of the husbandman; for the cultiuating of it, is better for the
ground itself; so though we feel pain and difficulty (for our flesh is not
of brass, as we read in Job) yet we must not leaue-of for that, but think that
we shall have an eternal and unspeakable reward for the final labor and pain
we here endure.

2. To be short, we must bear in mind, that we are composed of two several
substances very different and contrary one to the other; the one is of earth,
and consequently bears continually downe-wards, toward the earth, dreaming of
nothing but earthly things: the other, as it begun in us by the breathing of
God into our face, so it is in substance light and active, resembling God, and
in nature spiritual, Genesis 1.
as he is; so that, as in a balance when one scale weighs down, the other
rises, of these two parts as one thriueth, the other pareth and falls away;
which holy Scripture does teach us saying: The body which is corrupt, Sap. 9
15.
does aggrauate and weigh down the soul; and certainly it must needs sink the
more, the more weight we give it. Wherefore that which S. Gregory says is
much to be noted, S. Gregory 2.3. p^ni^.
that the joy of the eternal reward is not reaped in heaven, unless first in
earth we sow in bitter tears and sighs, according as it is written: Going,
they went and wept, casting their seed; but coming, they shall come with joy,
bearing their bundles. For as when the flesh rests, the spirit faints; so when
the flesh takes pains, the spirit grows strong and able. And as the flesh
burnisheth with things that are dayntie, so the soul is raised with that which
is hard and rude. The flesh is bred-vp with delight; the soul grows with
that which is distasteful. Easy things refresh the flesh; harsh things
exercise the soul. And again, as hard things wound the flesh, so soft things
kill the soul; and as paynful things consume the flesh, so things delightful
pinch the soul. Neither shall I need to say any more to this purpose; because
no man's authority is greater then S. Gregorie's; nor could S. Gregory speak
more plainly or more effectually in any thing, then he has done in this.

3. But by this, which has been said, it is evident, how happy a thing it is
to be in Religion; 1. Cor. 9.27.
where we may perform that which S. Paul said of himself: I chastise my body,
and bring it into subjection; which is far from them, that have placed their
contentment in a life full of ease and daynties; of which S. Bernard spoke
truly, S. Bernard s. 48 in Cant.
when he said: A delicious life, is death, and the shadow of death; for
certainly it bordereth as near upon hell, as the shadow is near the body
whereof it is a shadow. When a soul therefore has once shaken-of this clog,
and maistered the insolency of the flesh, which is the hand-maide, there
arises another comoditie; to wit, that the mind, which is by nature mistress,
is enabled the more nimbly and cheerfully to run the way of spirit, and in a
short time to advance itself greatly in the perfection of Humility, and
Charity, and al other Virtues. For our soul being a spiritual nature and
substance, dark without virtue, as the air is without light, but bright and
ligthtsome when it is adorned with virtue; certainly in all reason, it must
needs love virtue more then any earthly thing; in regard virtue is spiritual,
and consequently more like unto it, and more beautiful, were not this desire
and inclination hindered by the lumpishnes of the body; which lumpishnes being
greatly diminished (for it cannot be altogether shaken-of til we come to
heaven) and the burden of this body folded into a small room, and easy to
carry* our soul must needs be, not only more light to run, but able to fly
in pursuit of whatsoever is virtuous and prayse-worthie.

4. To which purpose S. Leo says excellently well, S. Leo s. 2. de ^^^nio. 10.
m^n.
that Abstinence breeds chaste thoughts, reasonable desires, wholesome
counsels; and by voluntary afflictions, the flesh dies to inordinate lust;
and the spirit is renewed by virtue. It is recorded, that our Savior revealed
the like thing to S. Francis, when he (...) entered upon a spiritual life,
saying to him: Francis, take to thyself hard things, instead of those that are
pleasing; and contemn and vilisie thyself as much as thou can. And we read
of S. Catharine of Siena, that our Savior said the same to her almost in the
same words, to wit, that she should seek after bitter things, as if they were
sweet; and refuse sweet things, as if they were bitter. Which Truth itself
spoke indeed to these two Saints; but we may take it as spoken to every body.

5. A third commodity of Austeritie is, that it is the best disposition a
Soul can put itself into, Prou. 31.6.
to gain spiritual comfort, and plenty of inward joy. G^^e side^ to those
that sorrow, and wine to those that have a bitter heart, says the Holie-Ghost
in the Book of Wisdom. Religious do truly mourn.
What is this sider, or this wine, but the sweet lickour of heavenly comforts,
whereof the wine-celler is full into which the Spouse in the Canticles rejoiced
to see herself admitted? Those therefore only, Job 28.13.
that be sad and sorrowful, have part of this wine; because (as holy Job
gives us to understand) it is not found in the land of those that live at
ease. And our Savior confirms it, Math 5.
when he says: Blessed are they that mourn, because they shall be comforted.
This is to be sad and to mourn, to cut-of from ourselves whatsoever is
pleasing to flesh and blood, and may give contentment to our senses; and on the
other side, to embrace that which is irksome to them, and does restrain them
of their desires and inclinations. S. Bernard expounding those words of our
Savior which are written in S. John (Unless I go, the Paraclet shall not come
unto you) says very well, that the comfort which his disciples took in his
corporal presence, was a bar unto them, that they could not receive the
fulness of spiritual graces. S ^^rnard ser. 6. de As^^ns.
Upon which ground he discourses thus very pertinently to our purpose: The man
that gives himself to worldly pleasures, and follows the allurements of the
flesh, of sinful flesh, flesh borne and bred in sin, in which there is no
good; how dares he expect the Paraclet* He, I say, who is always nailed unto
this dunghill, pampers his body, sows in flesh, and favors naught else but
flesh; dares he notwithstanding hope for comfort of the heavenly visitation,
that torrent of pleasures, the grace of that vehement Spirit, which (as Truth
itself does witness) the Apostles could not receive together with the flesh of
the Word Incarnate? No no; he is far wide, whosoever thinks that such
heavenly sweetness can dwell with this du^t and ashes, or that Divine Balsame be
tempered with such wicked poison, or the grace of the Holie-Ghost with these
flattering pleasures. By which large testimony of S. Bernard, and many others
which might be brought to the same effect, it is plain, that carnal pleasure
is a main impediment to al spiritual delights; and contrariwise the strictnes
of Religious Pa^s^onie, a great entrance thereunto.

(...) due to (...) life.
6. Lastly I may reckon among the commodities of an austere life that, which is
the chief and total of al other commodities, to wit, Eternal Life, and bliss
everlasting. There is no other way thereunto, but the way of the Cross. This
way Christ himself our King, his Apostles and disciples, and al Saints have
walked, in labor, and patience, and continual mortification of their bodies,
denying here their own souls, that they might possess them eternally. That
life, and that glory, is the Euangelical penny, which is not given but to
such as labor in the vineyard; it is the Crown, which is not bestowed but
upon those that fight lawfully; it is the Prize, which those only gain, that
do run; we cannot reign together with Christ and his Saints, unless we
suffer with them; we cannot ^eape, but what we have sown. Few words are
abundantly sufficient to conclude this point: Since it behooved Christ to
suffer, and so to enter into the glory which was beforehand his own by so
many titles; how much more must we expect to suffer, that we may enter into an
other's glory, a glory which by right we have as often lost, as we have
sinned? But I know not what blindness has possessed mankind, that, as S.
Bernard speaks, so few will go after Christ, and yet al would come unto him;
they care not to seek, whom they desire to find; they would feign overtake,
whom they will not follow.

7. Let us rather harken to S. Hierome, S. Hierom. ^p 34.
who having taken upon him to persuade one Julian (a noble and wealthy man) to
forsake the world, and embrace a Religious life, insisteth chiefly upon this
argument: It is hard, yea it is impossible to enjoy the goods that are present,
and also those that are to come; here to fill the belly, and there to fill the
mind; to pass from pleasure, to pleasure; to be first in this world, and in
the next; to be in heaven and earth renowned.

8. But why do we stand rehearsing the testimonies of men, having the Oracle of
our Savior directly for this purpose? Woe be to you that laug^, because you
shall mourn and weep. Luc. 6.
And again: Woe be unto you that have your comfort in this world. And he
explayneth his meaning by the example of the rich Glutton, expressing no other
cause objected unto him by Abraham but this: Luc. 16.
Remember that thou receauedst good things in thy lifetime, and Lazarus in
like manner, evil; but now he is comforted, and thou tormented.

9. The self-same he declared to S. Catherine of Siena in a Vision. The vision
of S. Catherine of Siena, acted in a Religious life.
For he appeared unto her, holding in each hand a Crown, the one of thorns,
the other of gold and precious stone; and made offer of them both unto her: but
upon this condition, that which soever she made choice of in this life, she
should be sure to have the contrary in the life to come; if here she chose the
crown of gold, there she should have the crown of thorns; if here she made
choice of the thornie crown, there she should be crowned with the other of
gold. The Virgin, being truly wise, preferred the crown of thorns so far
before the other, that taking it greedily with both her hands, she pressed it
so hard upon her head, that she felt the pain and marks thereof sometime after.
This which S. Catherine then did, al Religious persons do al their lifetime
long, while they prefer poverty before riches, hard things before those
which are easy and commodious, many corporal incommodities, before the
delights belonging to the body, before pleasure and secular liberty; upon
this general and certain persuasion, that since no man can look to enjoy both
kinds of pleasure, it is far better to want the present, then those that are
to come; the temporal, then the eternal. Among whom we may reckon that
Theodore, Theodorus.
who was disciple to great Pachomius. He being borne of parents that were noble
and rich, at a certain feast in his father's house, when he was himself but
foureteen years of age, began amidst those festiual joys, to cast in his
mind, the honor, and wealth, and pleasures, and commodities in which he had
been bred and borne; and the Divine inspiration concurring with his thoughts,
he said within himself: Miserable wretch that I am! what will these short and
fading pleasures avail me, if I must leese the eternal? for this is the rule
of God's ordination, that no man can enjoy them both. And fetching a great
sigh, pensive concerning the point of his salvation, he withdrew himself from
company, to the farther part of the house; and prostrate upon the ground, with
many tears besought God to teach him his blessed will; and from thence
forward, laying aside al commodities belonging to the body, he lived in his
father's house the life of a Monk, til not long after he betook himself to the
conduct of S. Pa^homius; under whom he arrived in short time to that height of
sanctity, which these rare beginnings did promise.

The fourth fruit of Religion, that it takes away al occasion of sin. CHAP.
XVI.
Prou. 4.2^.
THe Divine Wisdom by the mouth of King Solomon does give us warning, to guarde
our heart with all safety, and diligence; because life does proceed from it;
giving us to understand, that whosoever has not this custody over his heart,
shall certainly loose his life, seeing life does proceed from the heart. Nothing
is dearer to man then life; and the truer the life is, the more dear it ought
to be unto us; and consequently the spiritual life which our soul does live (a
life eternal, like to the life of God and his holy Angels) ought to be much
dearer unto us, then this corporal life, which is perishable and uncertain, and
which the very flies and beasts have. S. Bernard ser 46. inter par.
And if we believe S. Bernard, there is a special necessity of setting a guard
over our heart and soul; in respect that the castle of our Soul is seated in
an enemie-countrie, and assaulted on every side; and therefore on every side
we must also place our guard, that is, stand perpetual Sentinel, and maintain
a continual and diligent watch over it. S. Greg. in ^nor. 6.12.
S. Gregory reflecting more particularly upon this sentence of the Wiseman,
says, that he advises us to keep our heart with all diligence; because, if a
city be fenced with a mighty rampire, and walled about with a strong wall,
and watchful Sentinel stand on every side of it, and one only passage be left
through negligence without a guard; doubtless the enemy will make his entrance
there, though every where else he be excluded. In vain therefore do we guard
the rest, (...) of this world are gaps for the enemy to (...) upon our heart.
if one place be left unguarded, whereby we lie open to the enemy.

2. Wherefore it behooves us to consider carefully, which be the gaps and
passages, through which our spiritual Enemy may either by open violence and
assault enter upon our soul, or by crafty undermining creep into it. These
gaps* are al creatures of this world: they are the weapons, with which he does
make war against us; if he be disarmed of these, he has scarce any thing
left him, wherewith to give us an assault. For the Devil of himself is so ugly
and wicked, that there is hardly a man to be found so desperately naught, that
does not hate and detest him; specially seeing no man doubts, but that they that
serve him, must look for nothing but everlasting misery in the life to come;
wherefore finding himself to be so much abhorred by every body, he has no
other means to enueigle the hearts of men, and wind them into his snares, but
by offering them such things as he knows are pleasing to nature. S. August.
de agon^ Christian. ^. 7.
Whereupon S. Augustine likeneth al visible things (which, as the Apostle
speaks, are temporal) to a fisher's hook; for as the fish is glad while it
swalloweth the bayte, and spieth not the hook; but when the fisher draws his
line, it is first tormented within, and soon after, from the joy which it had,
it comes to destruction by the very bayte, of which before it did so much
rejoice: so it fares with all those that esteem themselves happy by the
temporal goods which they possess. They have swallowed a hook, and go away
with it in their bellies; but a time will come, when they will feel how great
torment they have swallowed in their greedines. What remedy therefore is
there, Shun the bayte, and ye shall escape the hook.
and what course to avoid these hooks, of which S. Augustine speaks? The
remedy is not far^e to seek: we must shun the bayte, which hangs upon the
hook, and we shall escape the danger. If we be greedy of the bayte, we cannot
avoid the hook that is hidden under it; that is, eternal death and perdition.
Al things of this world be the Diuel's bayte: Honor, power, preferment,
wealth, and trading, wife and children, and not to stand reckoning-vp every
particular, whatsoever is created, whatsoever is under God, or not directly
tending to God, serves him for a bayte to catch us; God alone, and those
things which are immediately for him, are the only good things, which ca^ not be
evil, nor used by the Devil to our destruction. Al other things, because they
may be good, and may be evil, may also be easily wrested by him to overthrow
us, and in them he does lay his snares; so that we cannot take a safer, not a
readier course to save ourselves, then if we shun them al. And this advantage
the Devil has in the world. He is fearful and full of deceit, and does
willingly lay wayt in close and shadowish places; in the plain and open field,
he can do nothing; such as Religion is; the chief glory whereof is, that it
has nothing of this world.

3. The things themselves of this world breed no less danger unto us; for
naturally they are of that temper and composition, that if a man once meddle
with them, The love of earthly things is like bird lime.
he can hardly shake them of again. For, as the same S. Augustine says, the
love of earthly things is birdlime to our spiritual wings; thou couetest to
have them, and thou cleauest to them. Who will give me wings of a dove? when
will thou fly where thou may truly rest, seeing thou have wickedly taken-vp
thy rest here, S August. Ser. 31. (...)
where thou sinfully cleauest?

4. Some will say, this is true of the love of earthly things; but if a man
possess them and do not love them, he may escape. S. Bernard (a man
experienced in this and al other spiritual things) shall make answer: The chief
reason, why men should fly riches, is, because they can hardly yea never be
possessed of them, but they must love the^. Not only our external but our
internal substance is too too slimie and like glue; and the heart of man does
easily (...) to that which it often uses. He says, the heart of man does
easily cleave and stick to every thing which it uses; and we find it so by
daily experience. For the very house which we use to dwell in, the city or
town where we have made our abode for any time, the company with whom we use
to converse, the trade or course of life which we have been wont to hold, do
work mightily upon our affection, and we cannot choose but love them; we do
not perhaps find it, til we have occasion to part and leave them, but then we
feel the trouble, and grieve. Seeing therefore these ordinary things, which of
themselves have no great enticing virtue, do notwithstanding work so forcibly
in us by use and custom, and breed ^ kind of tie and linck of friendship
between us and them, as there is between friend and friend; how much more
forcible will the operation of those things be, which carry with them the face
of necessity and delight, as wealth, honor, and the like? Two evils therefore
do spring out of the use and love of these things, love necessarily following
the use of them: First, by occasion of them, many great sins are committed;
as robberies, usury, deceitful bargains through the thirst of avarice,
dissembling, flattery, slanders, and many other vnw^rthie acts, through
ambition and desire of honor; secondly, though in the pursuit of wealth, or
honor, and the like, we do not sin; yet while we are hot in the chase, or
quiet in the joyful possession of such things, they stop the course of our mind
to Godward, and either we run not at al, or so heavily and slowly, that it
is follye to say, we run.

S. Greg 3 (...)
5. Wherefore S. Gregory says well, that the commodities of this life are
irksome to al Spiritual men, because they know that they are a clog to their
inward desires. And elsewhere he gives this reason: Our soul can never be
without some delight; for either it pleases itself in base and unworthy
things, or in things high and worthy; and the more earnest it is in the
prosecution of high things, the more it loatheth the inferior; and the hoter
it is upon the desire of the inferior, the more damnable is the cold
tepiditie, with which it goes about the higher. These two loves can not dwell
in one heart: the corn of super^^l Charity can not grow, where the thorns of
base delight do choke it. For confirmation of which saying of S. Gregory, we
may add, that the mind spending itself upon outward things, does as it were
wander abroad out of itself; and the farther it wandereth from itself, the
farther also it goes out from God; S. Au(...)
because the kingdom of God is within us. Which S. Augustine bewailed in
himself in these words: Behold, thou were within, and I without; and there I
was seeking thee, and sell foul upon these beautiful things, which thou had
made. Thou were with me, and I was not with thee; those things withheld me
far from thee, which could not be, if they were not in thee. S. Augustine knew
not this, nor felt it, while he was in it; but understood it then, when
inspired by God, he withdrew himself from al creatures into God. And the like
happens to every body that is plunged in the love of earthly things.

6. Religious people therefore have this commodity, that they do, as it were,
with one blow of the axe cut-of al these rubs and dangers, when they absolutely
abandon al things; and this makes it easy for them to guard their heart with all
manner of custody and diligence, as the Wiseman advises. And we shall
discover the greatness of this commodity much more plainly, if we consider how
weak and feeble our nature is, Our nature is weak, when it is to encounter
Sense.
when it is to encounter Sense, and fight against those affections, which are
always more violently inflamed by the presence of the sensible object; of
which weakness we may easily find the reason to be, because while our soul is
enclosed within our body, and so lincked unto it that they make one man, the
things which our Senses as messengers do bring unto it, must needs make great
impression in it. We find it in the passion of grief, and joy, and fear, and
the rest; which are most violent, when the cause is present. A mother is more
violently transported with grief, when she sees the dead corpse of her son lie
before her feet, then when she hears of his death. And they that go about to
comfort them that are in sorrow, are careful that nothing come in sight, which
may refresh the memory of the thing for which they grieve. Wherefore as grief,
and anger, and other passions are sooner and more violently stirred by the
presence of their proper objects; why should not the same also happen in love?
doubtless upon the sight of a thing that is beautiful, it is also much more
inflamed. Religious people therefore take a wholesome and profitable course, to
hide and sequester themselves from al earthly things, of which the continual
sight cannot choose but stir men up to love them, and nourish the same love
in them. For if to preserve ourselves chaste and honest, it is not only
profitable, Job. 31.1.
but a necessary means, to enter covenant with our eyes, as holy Job speaks
of himself; tell me, I pray, why the same should not also be of force in every
other passion of the mind or body? For that which happens in that love, which
Chastity does withstand and vanquish, happens in all other kinds of love;
whether it be of money, or honor, or pleasure, to which avarice, or ambition,
or intemperance does incite us. These kinds of love must in like manner of
necessity be much more inflamed by the sight of gold, and the glittering of a
purple robe, and the touch of pleasure, which Sense does affect; and
contrariwise, if none of these things ever approach before our eyes, the love
of them must needs grow daily less and less, and at last be wholly
extinguished.

7. To which purpose S. Cyprian (or whosoever is the Author of that Treatise
of the Single life of the Clergy) says well, S. Cyprian de sing (...)
that the farther a man is from adversity, the less he feels it; and he that
comes not where there is much pleasure, is less stirred to pleasure; and he
that sees not riches, is less tempted with avarice. To me it seems too
violent a thing for a man always to have his eye upon that which is delightful
and pleasing, and still to strive and overcome himself in abstayning from it;
and it cannot last long; for it is an old Saying received even among
Philosophers, that No violent thing is everlasting. We see it with our eyes,
and experience it daily within our selves in the combat which we suffer in
ouercoming our appetite and delight in meat. For if we be at a full board,
set-forth with variety of dayntie dist^es curiously dressed, they set such an
edge upon our stomach, that we have great difficulty to temper ourselves, and
find it very hard to eat with that moderation, that we exceed not the limits
of temperance and sobriety: But if a man come not to board, then it is easy
to abstain; because the thought of the selfsame things does not so whet our
appetite, as does the sight of them; and the same may be said of al other
things; for the nature of our desire and passion is the same, and the force of
Sense is alike in all.

S. Aug. 6. Confess. 8.
8. S. Augustine in his Confessions relates of Alipius a passage expressing
lively that now we speak of. This Alipius in former times was much taken with
an itching desire of seeing the sword-fights or fencing-games, and such like
sports; Alipius.
and being reclaymed from that madness by S. Augustine, continued his good
resolution a long time; til once falling upon some of his companions, he was
lead by them with a friendly kind of violence to the fencing-game; yet he went
with purpose to keep his eyes shut all the time, and not to behold any thing
that passed. He did so for a while, but upon some accident or other of the
game, the people gave a great shout, and he could hold no longer, but lifted-vp
his eyes to see what it was, thinking within himself to contemn it, whatsoever
it should be. But it happened far otherwise; for as S. Augustine speaks, he
beheld it, and gave a shout; and was transported; and from thence carried away
that madness with him, which netled him to return, not only with those by whom
he had been drawn thither, but more eagerly then they; himself drawing others
also after him.

9. This which deceived Alipius at the swordplayes has deceived and does
deceive many others daily in far worse things* it is more then the weakness
of man can well away with, to abide the shock of the allurements which do
confront us, specially if the fight continue any thing long; for though we
abide the brunt for a while, yet either we grow negligent and lay aside our
armor, or we grow weary of the battle and cast al quite away, and so are
easily overcome. Wherefore the advice of S. Basil is none of the worst; S.
Basil. (...) monast. c. 4.
to wit, not only to bridle our inward passions and desires, but to avoid the
meeting with those external things which may rub upon our desires, and darken
our judgment and understanding, and so raise trouble and war within us. For
it is il, but pardonable, to be overcome in a war, which an other rayseth
against our will: but to bring trouble voluntarily upon ourselves, and to thrust
ourselves upon mischief when we need not, scarce deserves either pardon or
pity.

10. By all which as we may evidently discover the danger of a Secular life, so
we plainly see the happiness of a Religious state, in that it is sequestered from
possession, use, and traffic with any earthly thing, and consequently
neither the creatures themselves which they have casheered, nor the Devil who
works upon us by means of creatures, can have access to defile their hearts.
Wherefore S. Macarius said well, S. Macarius
that this general renunciation of al things, does not only inuit, but
constrayne us to seek heavenly things; and that this is the chief reason, why
Christ advises us to forsake our kindred, and to sell al, and give it to the
poor; because knowing that the Devil does use these things as instruments to
withdraw our thoughts to earthly things, he bids us leave them al, to the end
we may perforce seek heavenly things, and keep our hearts fixed upon God.

The Fifth fruit of Religion: Commodity of serving God. CHAP. XVII.
ANother great benefit of a Religious state, much importing us toward the
eternal welfare of our souls, is the commodity of attending to the knowledge
and due consideration of all that which may concern the wel-ordering of our
life, and attayning of Salvation. There be those that live in the world as if
they had no soul to save; so wedded to things present, that they do not so
much as dream of what is to come hereafter, nor take any care of future
things; they never consider, who they are, and from whence, Inconsideration the
root of al mischief.
or what will be their end; they think not of the way they walk, and whither at
last it will bring them, if they continue to live after the manner they have
begun; though it import them more to consider it, then any other business they
have in hand. And living thus in perpetual ignorance of Spiritual things, and
of whatsoever belongs to the service of God and the good of their own
souls, they run headlong into most grievous sins, and see it not (poor
souls) nor feel it not; Insomuch that the Prophet Hieremie does with great
reason make this the sole cause of all the mischief, which is in the world:
Iere. 12.11
The whole earth is utterly desolate, because no body does bethink himself in
his heart; the frame and building of our Salvation depending in a manner upon
the attentive and diligent consideration of those grounds of our life* which I
mentioned. For consideration breeds knowledge, knowledge love, love a desire
and endeavor to prosecute those things which we know and love, and to shun
the contrary. And if we be desirous to understand the manifold fruits of
Consideration, S. Bernard does set them down at large in the Books which he
wrote of that subject to Pope Eugenius; where among many other things, S.
Bernard l 2. d^ (...).
he says thus: Consideration purifyeth the fountain, that is, the mind, from
which it springs; it moderateth our affections; it guides our actions, it
reformeth excesses, it gives stayednes to our behavior; credit and order to
our life; and increases knowledge of Divine and humane things; It
distinguishes things which are confused, unites them that are distracted;
gathers them to eather that are dispersed; diue^h into secrets; searcheth-out
truths; discusseth that which is probable, discovers that which is feigned and
counterfeit; It fore-casteth what is to be done; i^ examineth that which is
done; that nothing may remain vncorrect in the mind, or wanting reformation.
In prosperity, it fore-tasteth what adverse thing may happen; in adversity it
scarce feels that which happens; in the one practicing Fortitude, in the
other Prudence. Thus says S. Bernard.

2. It is not therefore hard to understand, how great benefit Religion brings
to our souls, Religion* the Art to (...) God.
by continual consideration and practice of heavenly things. For as in all
other things there be several arts and methods, whereby to come to the
perfection of that which we apply ourselves unto, as, the several studies of
the La^, of Physic, of Philosophy, and the like; so we may truly and worthily
call Religion the art and method of knowing God, and understanding those things
which belong to his service, not by bare speculation (for many certainly that
have had much profound speculation, do burn in helfi^e, but with the
affections of fear and love, in which the main business does consist.
Wherefore let us weigh a little, what helps Religion affords to attain to
this knowledge, and with ease and facility to compass it. And first it freeth
us from external occupations, and worldly businesses, which are ever a great
hindrance to the study of heavenly Philosophy; and, as S. Gregory says
well, S Gregory 22. Mor. c. 21.
The multiplicitie of care of earthly things blinds, because it holds
occupied. For the Nature of God (though we were al created to behold and
contemplate it) is so free and separate from al connection with material things,
and withal so difficult to understand, and far exceeding our capacity (
dwelling, as the Apostle speaks, in a light inaccessible) that unless our
mind be by much labor cultiuated and purifyed, it cannot possibly arrive to
conceive what it is. To which purity al earthly things are contrary. For
being of themselves corporal, 1. Tim. 6.16
heavy, and lumpish, the more one busieth his mind with them, the more heavy
and earthie it grows: so that on the one side it cannot raise itself and
ascend toward God, in regard of the weight of earthly things lying heavy
upon it, and becomes on the other side more unworthy, and less deserving,
that such Infinite Purity, as GOD is, should stoop and descend to it; for, as
S. Gregory notes, S. Gregory 1. Moral. 8.
the mind cannot raise itself on high, if it be continually busied in
tumultuous cares below. For what can it be able to attayne-vnto concerning God,
being occupied, which, when it is most at ease and quiet, does labor to
conceive a small portion of him; so that the Psalmist says well; Take leisure,
and see that I am God. For he that neglects to attend at leisure upon God,
hides from himself the light of his countenance and sight, Ps. 45.11.
by his own verdict and opinion.

3. Moreover, the care of earthly things is intricate and mingled with so
many businesses, that it drinketh-vp al our time, and gives us no respit to
think of heavenly things; the Devil dealing with the servants of this world,
Exodus 5.
as King Pharao dealt with the Jews in Egypt. For when they spoke of going
into the Desert to offer Sacrifice to God, and told him that God had so
commanded, he doubled their day-labour in loome and straw, and ouercharged them
with work, that they might not have leisure so much as to think or project any
such thing, so the Devil still urges and thrusts people of the world upon
some new business or other, that he may the easyer divert their minds from the
wholesome thoughts of their Salvation; and, which is most pitiful, they
themselves heap upon their own shoulders new burdens and toylsome labor; and
it is not time only that is lost in them, but their mind is so torn in pieces
with several occurrences, and those worldly and temporal, that it loses the
strength and vigor for spiritual things, which is a far greater loss. S.
Gregory handles this point excellently well in his Pastoral, declaring how
man's heart is oftimes so beaten and tossed with sollicitous care of several
things, S. Gre^. ^. Past. c 4.
that being confusedly divided into many, it is not able to attend to every
one in particular. Wherefore a certain wise man (says he) does prouidently
admonish saying: My son, let not thy actions be in many; to wit, because the
mind that is divided into many things, cannot well collect itself to attend to
particulars; and being drawn abroad by immoderate care, it leeseth the
soliditie of holy fear within* careful in ordering external things, but
ignorant of itself; knowing only how to think of many things, not knowing
itself; and entangling itself more then needs in external things (as it were
busied in other things upon the way) it forgets at what it was aiming; and
not caring to search into itself, does not weigh the loss itself sustayneth,
nor know how many ways it fails. Wherefore seeing external businesses do
bring so many hindrances to a spiritual life, as S. Gregory has rehearsed,
and many more; a Religious state being free from them must needs enjoy
perpetual quiet, never interrupted with worldly care; that we may give
ourselves wholly to ^he contemplation, love, and fruition of God, as much as in
this mortal life can be attained unto.

4. S. Bernard in one of his Sermons to his Brethren, S Bern s^r. de Obed.
extolleth this commodity of a Religious state, as containing many other
commodities in it, in these words: Here the charge of bringing-vp children does
not lie upon you, nor the care how to please a wife. Here you think not of
fayres and markets, nor of Secular businesses; you need take no thought neither
for diet, nor apparel; you are free in great part from the malice of the day,
and solicitude of this life; so has God hidden us in the hidden place of his
Tabernacle. S. Tho. 2.2 q 186. a. 6.
S. Thomas his discourse upon this subject is more full, showing how a secular
life is troubled with three sorts of unquietness: Three distractions incident to
^ secular life.
First, in getting, keeping, and disposing of external goods, which cannot but
be always accompanied with infinite care and toil. From this most toylesome
and heavy burden, the profession of Religious Poverty does free us. The
second kind of trouble is in the government of wife and children, that must be
maintained, and bred up, and kept from running-out into such vices, as green
years are apt to fall into. And the present care is not enough, but the future
must be provided for, that they want not when their parents be dead, but may
live, and maintain themselves according to their degree; which makes there is
no end in worldly people of heaping-vp wealth, and increasing their estate.
This endless trouble and molestation, the Vow of Chastity does cut off.
Finally, the third, and most troublesome care of al, is, how to govern our
own life and actions; wherein we stand in need of daily counsel, in regard of
infinite difficulties which do occur, and the hazard of running into most
dangerous errors; from al which anxietie and danger Obedience does free us,
transferring this care to another, who, as the Apostle speaks, Hebr. 13.17
is to give an account for us; and no doubt, but whatsoever he ordayneth
concerning us, is the ordination of God himself by his means. This is the
effect of S. Thomas his discourse.

5. Wherefore we shall do well to weigh and ponder, and with all hearty affection
to embrace this most delightful and happy quiet and vacation from al things,
which Religion brings; in regard of the particular kind of force and
efficacy it has to raise our thoughts to the contemplation and knowledge of
heavenly things. For as no man can attentively think of any thing in the
midst of a great hurrie and noise, It is hard to think of good things in the
world.
but in the dead of the night, or in a solitary place, that very silence and
solitude does inuit a man to contemplation; so it is very hard to recollect
one's self in the world, where there be such endless distractions; but the quiet
of a Religious life does of its own nature call us, and hold us without
difficulty in the study of heavenly knowledge free from al kind of trouble.
Whereof S. Bernard is witness, S Bernard Ep 78.
saying in a certain Epistle, that Long silence, and continual freedom from
worldly noise, does compel us to meditate heavenly things. He says, it does
compel us, in regard of the strange force it has to hold the powers of our
soul from wandering after idle fancies; to reclayme them, when they chance to
stray; and wholly to fix them upon God, and things Divine. This difference
between a Religious life and a Secular, is excellently well expressed by S.
Gregory, expounding (as he is wont) in a Moral sense, that which in the Book
of Job is spoken of wisdom: And the sea pronounces, S Greg (...) 18. c. 25.
it is not with me. What other things is signified by the Sea, then the bitter
unquietness of secular minds, which, while they are at variance with themselves,
resemble the beating of contrary waves one upon another? A secular life
therefore is rightly called a Sea, because being tossed with the tempestuous
motions of outward actions, it is deprived of the quiet and stabilitie of
inward wisdom. Whereupon on the contrary side the Prophet says well: Upon whom
shall my spirit rest, but upon the humble, and quiet, and fearing my words? Es
66.2.
But from earthly minds the spirit does fly the farther, the less quiet it
does find in them. For he that does divide himself into endless thoughts of
earthly desires, cannot retire himself to the consideration of himself. And so
holy Job understanding, that wisdom cannot dwell amidst these waves of
unquietness, says: And the Sea pronounces, it is not with me. For no man does
fully receive it, but he that endeavors to withdraw himself from the
billows of carnal cogitations; as it is said in another place: Write wisdom
in the time of quiet; (...) 39.25.
and he that has little business, shall attain unto it. Thus far S. Gregory.

Al businesses in (...)
6. But some body perhaps will object, that Religious people also do many
things, and are cumbred with many toylsome businesses, about necessary
occasions of their own, or for the good of their neighbor. The answer is at
hand* that the business which they undertake for the help of their neighbor, is
spiritual, and not worldly or temporal; and consequently draws them not from
God, but rather knitteth them faster unto him, because they help God, and God
helps them, in so great a business. And though that, which they do for their
own domestical occasions and necessaries, be in some kind temporal, yet their
end is not temporal and secular, as be the ends of secular people; but in all
things they aim at Spirit and Eternity; and besides there is an other main
and important difference, to wit, that Secular people in following their
temporal businesses, have always their eye upon their own private interest,
seeking how they may purchase wealth or honor to themselves* But when
Religious people handle the self-same businesses, they seek not greatness, but
that which is necessary; they intend not any private commodity to
themselves, but their thoughts are for the common, their labors are for the
Common (as S. Hierome speaks in the life of Malchus the Monk) which is so
far from couetise or private interest, S. Hierome.
that it is a great act of Charity; yea these very employments do give a
double value and benefit to a Religious life; conioyning the holy and wholesome
labors of Martha, with the quiet of Marie; and calling us so to spiritual rest
and vacancie, from toylsome care and work, that, if notwithstanding any such
work do come in our way, directing it to a spiritual end, and giving it a
spiritual form and essence, it turns to our greater benefit; as we cannot say
but worldly servants do their Masters service, not only when they wait in
their presence, attending their pleasure, but when they go to and fro about
their Masters businesses; yea then oftimes they serve them better, and more to
their own and their Masters benefit.

The sixth fruit: Religious people always do the will of God. CHAP. XVIII.
IF men were truly wise, and understood indeed, what is good for them, Al must
conform their wills to God.
they should aim at nothing more, then perfectly to conform their wills with
the will of God, in great and little, and absolutely in all businesses concerning
themselves and others. Many reasons might be given of this truth, but one shall
suffice for all, to wit, that among creatures themselves, the inferior are ever
subject to those that are more excellent and higher in nature; which must needs
be of more force in God, he being sole Sovereign over al, King of Kings, Lord
of Lords; to whom al mankind is by right and equity subject, for those seven
causes, which I declared in the beginning. But in God there is yet an other
consideration of more weight and importance. For the Divine Nature, being
Goodness itself and equity, and the cause of al things; his Will also is the
rule and leuel of all that is just and upright; so that, as a written coppie, or
a house, or any other work, is said to be right and perfect, if it be
according to rule, and agree with the platform or sampler, after which it was
drawn; and how much it swarueth from the model and coppie, so many faults and
errors there be in it: So the will of God being the only rule, whereby our will
is to be ruled, our will is good and honest, or contrariwise faulty and
vicious, as it agrees or disagreeth with his will. Wherefore Climacus say^h,
Climacus grad. 21.
that the servants of God should always as ardently desire to know and
perform the will of God, as a Dear, that is even dead with thirst, thirsts
after a fountain of running water. S. Bernard in a Sermon, ^
which he wrote of this subject, having spoken something of Humility, says:
The substance of al Humility does seem to be this, that our will be subject,
as it ought, to the will of God as the Prophet speaks: Shall not my soul be
subject to God? I know that every creature is subject to God, whether it will
or no; but volu^tarie subjection is required of creatures that are reasonable,
that they sacrifice voluntarily unto God, and confess his Name, not because it
is Terrible, but Holy; not because he is Omnipotent, but because he is
infinitely Good. Much more might be said for proof heerof out of the holy
Fathers, who do ever highly commend, and often inculcate this point; but one
passage of S. Augustine shall suffice, S. Augustine (...) in (...).
who is bold to auerre, that the Mother of God was not so happy in that the
Word was made Flesh in her, as that she did the will of God; and he proves it
by the testimony of the Word himself, ^uc. 11.28.
when to the woman that cried: Blessed is the womb that bare thee; he presently
answered; yea rather blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep it;
which being so, can there be a thing more profitable, then that which is better
then to be the Mother of God? a function, then which there cannot a greater
befall Man or Angels. And this is the work of Religion; binding us so to the will
of God, that we wholly depend on it in all things, great an^ little, and are
governed by it (as I have said before) not only in businesses of greater
moment, but in every ordinary and daily action. Whereupon Cass^an in ^is last
Collation, Cass^an
having said many things of the necessity and greatness of this conformity
and dependence, and showed how our Savior left us a platform and model
thereof, coming not to do his own will, but the will of his Father* and
professing, that that was his food and sustenance, adds, that this virtue is
specially practiced by those that living in Religious houses are governed by
direction of a Superior, and do nothing of their own head, but their will
depends of the will of their Abbot.

2. This benefit of Religion will be every way more evident, if we consider the
manner, in which it brings this, which we have said, to pass. For as in a
piece of ground the thorns and thistles are first to be voyded, before the
seed be sown; so Religion first does root-out al impediments of virtue, to the
end to prepare the mind the better; Our o^ne will the ch^ef hindrance of virtue.
of which impediments the chiefest is our own will; the pestilent disposition
whereof can not be more signally expressed, then in the words of S. Bernard: Our
own will, says he, is a great evil; by it, thy good is not good to thee. And
in an other place: Let the servants of their own will hear and tremble to
understand, S. Bern. s^r. 7. in Cant. and s^r. 5. de Resurrect
with what fury self-wil does oppose the Majesty of our Lord God; first,
while it will be, as it is, selfwil, it with-draweth and steals itself from
under his government, whom it ought to serve, as Author and Maker of it. And
does it content itself with this injury? It presumes farther; as much as
lies in it, it takes al from God. Thus speaks that holy man, and much
more, always a deadly enemy of self will, which there also he calls a
leprosy.

Conformity with the will of God, our greatest happiness. and Four enemy,
thereof.
3. Other thing, there be besides, which hinder a man from uniting his will with
the will of God; which the same S. Bernard does particularly set down in
another place. For having showed that the greatest felicity the Angels have,
is, that their will is wholly conformable to the will of God, he adds, that we
also must desire the like conformity, and labor for it. But we have four
main obstacles in the business, to wit, Malice, that is, a natural kind of
inclination to vice; Infirmity, in regard this corruptible body, which we
carry about us, does oftimes hinder our will from subiecting itself to God, as
it should; S Bern s* 6. in quadr.
Concup^scence, tearing us in pieces with infinite and unspeakable desires; and
finally Ignorance; for how shall I follow ( says he) the will of God, "which I
know not? For I know it but in part only; and not yet, as I am known to God.
Let us therefore see, what helps Religion affords against so many, and so
dangerous enemies, which the Will of God has within us; and how it utterly
defeates them. And first, it labors nothing more then absolutely to stubbe-vp
this root of al evil, which is self-wil; curbing and beating down the very
first motions thereof, as much as may be; and accustoming a Religious person so
much to do nothing of his own head, but to govern himself wholly by an other's
will and command, that every one does exactly observe that, S. Hierome. Ep 4.
which S. Hierome (a man well skilled in what belongs to a Religious
Institute) writes to Rusticus, a Monk of his time: That thou may not do thy
own will, eat that which thou art commanded to eat, wear that which is given
thee, worke-out the task which is set thee, be subject to one whom thou have
no mind to, go to bed weary, and sleep as thou go, and be feign to rise
again before thou have slept thy sleep. Wherefore as self-wil does daily grew
stronger and stronger in a Secular man by practice and custom thereof, that a
man may sooner break it, then bend it, as an old crooked tree full of knots: So
the will of a good Religious man by contrary custom being continually beaten
down, there remaynes not at last so much as one bough or twig thereof entire.

4. To this we may add the concurrence of the subject with the Superior, and
the particular diligence and care of them both; on the one side to subdue and
mortifye, The ancient practice of breaking our will in small things.
on the other side to resist and withstand, the desires of self-wil. And as for
the Superiors; as those, that undertake to break a horse, sometimes spur
him up to make him run, sometime hold him in to his pace, sometimes turn him
round, sometimes when he is upon his speed they suddenly check him, or put him
on when he is given to stand, teaching him to go or stand, as he is guided, and
not of his own brain: So they endeavor with all diligence, by contrary
exercises to break the wills of their subjects, even in things which of
themselves are trifles, but that of final things, greater do depend. For when
S. Antonie the Great commanded S. (...) (surnamed the Simple) to sow his
clothes, and presently to vn^ip them again; to make a basket, and to undo it
again; when others of those ancient Heremits and Monks were wont to bid their
Disciples fetch water, and power it forth again; or water a dry stake for a
whole year together; or when S. Francis (as we read of him) bad Friar
Masseus turn round in the high way, til he was gyddie, and fell down diverse
times: finally when other holy men commanded the like things, to those whom
they had undertaken to instruct in Spirit and Virtue, what did they, but
root-out of their minds the very relics of self-wil and self-conceit? And
that which anciently these Fathers did, that is now also practiced in Religion,
where discipline is in force. A secular life far (...) life in thi^ point.


5. Now let us consider a Secular man, what he is in this point, and take not
an ordinary man, much less any of those that the Apostle describes to be
filled with all iniquity, malice, avarice, murmurers, detractours, inuentours
of evil, such men never think of virtue; but let us take a man that is virtuous
and upright, that comes often to the Sacraments, that is (as Job said of
himself) a father to the poor, Romans 1 29.
an eye to the blind, a f^ot to the lame, Job. 2^.2^*
and, in a word, keeps exactly all the Commandments of God, yet lives at his
own will, and the good works which he does, he does them as he thinks good
himself, what, and how much, and how long he pleases; this man is no il man,
yea he is highly to be commended; yet if we talk of perfection, he is far
inferior to a Religious man. For his own will may bea^e great sway in all the
good deeds he does, undertaking them or continuing them, because he finds a
sweetness in them, and the exercise of them is pleasing to his will, which
oftimes (while we think not, or reflect not on it) seeks itself; and when it
falles-out to be so, our own will is to be taken for the source and fountain
of al those actions, howsoever they may carry a fai^e show, and (be he what he
will, he is not far from that deceit, which S. Gregory attributes to
vayne-glorie; (...) ^4. mor. c. vlt.
that, whether it be taken in earthly things, or in heavenly virtues, the
vice is the same, but that it puts-on an other hue, that it may not be
discovered. So it happens oftimes in good works; we think we serve God, and we
serve ourselves; for it may be that though the works be good, and in others to
be commended; yet God, who is Sovereign over al, does not perhaps desire that
kind of work at thy hands, but some other; or if he would have thee bestow thy
time in that which thou do, yet it was a chance that thou dilst fall upon it;
not weighing so much what might be pleasing to God, as suffering thyself to be
driven upon it by thine own inclination and desire.

6. Now if things, which of themselves are good and spiritual, do lie open to
so much deceit; what shall we think of other things which are indifferent, and
may be made good or evil, according to the circumstances with which we do them?
such as are most part of humane actions; as, to go, to stay, to bargain, to do
this or that, or not to do it; these things are to be done according to the will
and pleasure of God, as I said before. And how shall our souls have light
concerning them, unless we have means to derive it into us, and a rule to
instruct and enlighten us in these particulars? Therefore no doubt, but as the
sta^e and course of life, wherein we retain our own will, and suffer ourselves
to be carried by the inclinations thereof, is subject to all the inconveniences
that grow from our own will, as I have heertofore declared. On the other side,
Religious people, who give away their own wills, and by daily purpose and
endeavor, and moreover by Vow, deprive themselves wholly of it, ^
are free from these dangers and da^mages. And thus Religion having once
digged-vp the foundation of self-wil, it does easily overcome and put to flight
all the other opponents of the Divine will, which (...) rehearsed before out of
S. Bernard. It ouercometh M^lice, instilling Piety and unfeigned Charity. It
strengthens our Infirmity by wholesome counsel, and practice of Fortitude and
Patience. With the sith of Mortification, it cutteth down a^ manner of
Concupiscence, engrafting in lieu thereof an earnest desire and thirst of the
true and Sovereign Good. Finally it instructs our Ignorance with that
fulness, that no man can doubt what God requires at our hands. (...) come to
kn^^ the (...).
For in Religion there be m^nie most certain ways to know the will of God; of
which ways, because it is to our purpose, we will here say something.

(...) 25.
7 (...), in the place above alleged, having spoken of the necessity, and
(...) of this business; sets down the means by which we may overcome it.
Whosoever, says he, will know the will of God must lay aside their own fancies
and opinions, and first put themselves in an indifferency, inclining to
neither side, but be prompt and ready at every sign which God shall give them
of his will; Secondly, with sincere confidence they must beseech their Fathers
and spiritual Brethren, to tell them what they are to do, and receive the
advice, which they shall give them, without any doubt or demurre, as if it came
from the mouth of God; though they, whom they ask, be not themselves very
perfect or spiritual. For God is not unjust, that he will dec^au^ those souls,
which with confidence and humility submit themselves to an other's directi^n
For if God at the sound of a Cythern did declare to the Prop^et Elizeus, what
he desired to know; much more will he do it by the voice of a reasonable man,
as being an Instrument more apt to receive influence from him. Thus says
Climacu^; whose argument if it hold in any private man, in regard of the
humility wherewith we subject ourselves to an other man; much more must it
hold in one that is our lawful Superior, and God's Vice-ger^nt over us; and we
may be very confident, that when we obey such a Ruler of our life and actions
in any thing that is not expressly contrary to the Law of God, Luc. 10 16.
we do the will of God himself saying: He that hears you, hears me.

8. This is the great happiness which a Religious man has; And the happiness
thereof.
a happiness, then which there can not in this life be a greater, resembling the
happiness which the Angels in heaven enjoy; of whom (as noble and blessed as
they are) the Prophet David could not give a greater commendation, then to
style them, as he does in a certain Psalm, Psalm. 102.^^
powerful in virtue; doing his word; to hear the voice of his speech; ^l you
his min^st^rs, who do his w^l And our Lord and Savior himself did not think,
we could ask of God a better or more wholesome thing, Mat. 6.10.
then that which he taught us in that Divine form of prayer; Thy will be done,
in earth as it is in heaven. And if there be a place on earth, where the will of
God is always fulfilled, though not equally as it is in heaven, yet in a
manner very near unto it, Religion is it: where every one is most ready and
free to obey God at every little sign of his w^l; and God does govern and
direct every one, in what manner, and in what things he is best pleased, by
the hand and conduct of the Rectours and Superiors.

9. The Jews of old had recourse to the Arc* and in presence thereof consulted
God, 1. Reg. 13.
when any matter of difficulty did arise; and we read that David specially,
among the rest, by answer received from thence, was delivered from many
dangers, and foretold many things which he was to act; as touching the
assault which he made upon Cela, and the treachery of the men of that town,
that he should go into Judea, to take possession of the Crown, and the like:
yet this help was not general to al, nor continual, but only for people of
worth, and matters of weight. How great a benefit therefore ought we worthily
esteem it to have such a domestical Oracle, as I may call it, by which we are
directed what to do, even in the least things that can be; and eschew infinite
dangers which might come upon our souls. Wherefore, whether it be spiritual
profit we aim at, or tranquillity and content of mind, if we were to study,
we could not invent a more convenient way, then this is. For, as S. Bernard
writes, S. Bern s 3. ^e r^surr.
we leese nothing, when we leave our own will, but are great gaine^s by it, in
regard we change it for the better, for we change it into the will of God, which
is no small profit. Our will most commonly is idle and unprofitable, oftimes
unreasonable and hurtful; his will is always holy, always just, and best for
us to follow. We of ourselves may fall into many errors, and are often
deceived, not knowing what we would have ourselves, coveting things that are
hurtful, and thinking perhaps that they are profitable for us; but God cannot
desire, but what is best and most profitable for his Elect; so that without al
doubt, it is best for us to commit ourselves and all that belonged to us, wholly
to his will.

A rare example of S. Fran^^s.
10. The life of S. Franci^ will funish us with a rare example in this kind, to
confirm what has been said. He being in a great doubt, and having long
disputed within himself whether he should give himself wholly to a solitary
life and contemplation, or rather withal attend to the help and salvation of
his neighbor, reasons on both sides beating in his mind, and having no
revelation from God concerning this point, as in others he was wont to receive;
he resolved to take this course. He sent to S. Clare and the Nuns of her
Monastery, and to his Brother Syluester (who was at that time re^ired to a
solitary place in a certain mount) that they should by prayer inquire, which
of the two courses were most conformable to the will of God, and send him word.
Now when the messenger returned from the^ both, he received him as if, coming
from God, he had brought answer immediately from him. He washed his feet, he set
him down and served him himself at board; then he drew him aside into a
mountain hard by, and there barehead, upon his knees, with his arms
on-crosse, he spoke thus unto him: what does my Lord Jesus Christ b^d me do?
And when the Messenger told him, that he was to help his neighbor also;
presently without delay, from the place where he stood, he returned not home,
but went about that new business so fervently, that he did not so much as mind
the way he took, but crossed over fields and woods, where otherwise there was
no way.

In^t^uc^io^^ ga^h^^^d out of it.
11. Thus S. Francis behaved himself; and out of this his fact we may gather
many good documents to the purpose we are speaking of. First, with what
earnest endeavor we ought to search-out the will of God even in good and
laudable things; with what reverence and devotion we ought to hear it; with
what fervor to accomplish it; how secret the will of God is, and hidden from us
in the darkness in which we live, seeing so rare a man, a man so dear and
familiar with God, was so long in suspense and doubtful in a matter of so great
weight and consequence, and withal so pious; finally we may see the way how to
come to know the will of God, plainly and without deceit. S. Franc^s, because in
his Order he had no Superior, was feign to take advise of his Inferiors; but
we receive more certain light from our Superiors, to whom God has promised
his certain assistance. He in a matter of great moment was feign to send
farre-of; we have them at home, by whom we may understand al things, great and
little; so that, unless we will, we need not fail in the least, but rather in
the very least work ourselves great measure of Grace and Glory.

The seventh fruit, that the Commandments are more easily kept in Religion.
CHAP. XIX.
REligion brings us another benefit, which is not to be passedouer in
silence; to wit, that it makes the precepts of the Decalogue, and al others,
so easy and light, that they may be fulfilled without any difficulty. It may
seem strange, that Religion adding to the Precepts many things in show hard
and tedious, as voluntary poverty, mortification of our will and senses,
watching, praying, and much corporal affliction; yet these things should be so
far from increasing the difficulty of the observance of them, as to make
them more easy to be observed. The like heerof we see in diverse works of art
and human industry: The ballast in a ship, though it be heavy and weighty,
helps the ship to brook the seas; and without it, it could not put forth. A
cart or wayne is lighter, if you take away the wheels, yet it goes heavier;
and with them it bears great carriages with ease. S. Bernard ^ p. 72.
S. Bernard uses this example of a wayne or chariot; as also of the feathers
of a bird, which, as he says, do after a strange manner make them more
corpulent, and more light; a wonderful work of Nature. The bulk is greater, and
the burden lighter; and by how much the body is bigger, the weight is less.
Which he applies to the Euangelical Counsels, styling them properly the burden
of Christ; which does not only not load a man, but carry him that is laden
with them, and makes the burden of the Precepts far more easy to be
undergone.

2. The difficulty and necessity of keeping the Precepts will give us better
to understand, The Commandments, are hard to be kept in the world.
how beneficial and commodious this other is. Our Lord expresses the
necessity of keeping the Commandments in these words: If thou will enter into
life, keep the Commandments; as who should say; he that does not keep them,
walks straight to death, and death everlasting. Math. 19.17. Ps. 16.4.
The difficulty of keeping them, is set-forth by the Royal Prophet, when he
calls them hard ways; and the experience which every one has of the
corruption of his own nature and propension to sin, the wicked life and evil
example of others, the laws and principles of the world, with which living in
the world it is hard to break, the very sins and daily falls of men in
the world, do sufficiently show how hard they are to keep. How few are there
in the world that keep themselves from rash oaths, from coveting an other's
goods, from wantonness of the flesh, as the Precepts require? And the few that
by God's grace do maintain themselves unspotted, what labor, and care, and
contention are they put-to? That therefore, wherein Secular people do most
commonly fail and perish, and wherein others, that do not perish, must take
such excessive pains, and, as I may say, sweat it out; Religious people find
great ease, and perform it with little or no difficulty. The reasons thereof
are many; and first, because (as we said elsewhere, speaking of it, as of the
source and head of many other commodities) Religion does take away the matter
almost of al sins; and the matter being taken away, the observance of the
Commandments of itself is easy. For our will is as it were a kind of flame or
fire; the fuel of this fire, is the presence of a pleasing object; put this
fuel to it, and presently it will flame up; take away the fuel, and either it
will not kindle at al, or much more slowly and remissely. And this is that which
Religion does, taking us out of the world, and the allurements thereof. And so
S. Basil even for this reason says, S Basil in proamio Reg. sut.
that Religion is highly to be esteemed, tearming it a quiet life; void of
multiplicitie of businesses, and a help to the wel-obseruing of the doctrine of
the Ghospel.

(...) Commandment^ in Religion.
3. A second cause, why Religious people find so much case in keeping the
Commandments, is the strength and vigor which a soul gets by little and little
by the practice of Religious discipline, growing into great hatred of al vice
and uncleanness, and great love of virtue and honesty, abhorring nothing more
then sin; not only because God is offended therewith, but because it is in
itself m^st ugly and deformed.

4. A third reason i^ because, whereas al men must commonly are induced to
sin, out of con^^ouines, or ambition, or incontinencie, either directly
offending in these things, or to compass t^eir pretenses in the (...) of these
poisoned roots are found in Religion, but the (...)arie virtues; in lieu of the
desire of temporal things, profesting (...)mble Obedience, in steed of ambition
and desire of rule; the flower of (...), in steed of filthy lust.

^
5. Besides, Religious people are always employed in things of a higher nature;
and therefore do more easily perform those which are of lesser moment. For as
to a man that has used himself every day to carry a hundred weight, it is
nothing to carry twenty; so when a Religious man has forsaken al his own
land and living, what hard matter will it be for him to withhold himself from
taking-away or coveting that which is another's? And being accustomed to carry
the yoke of Obedience, how can it be hard to resist the temptation of ambition
and desire of honor? And the like may be said of al other things which are
either commanded or forbidden by the Law of God.

(...) Eusebius.
6. This is that which Eusebius, a man of great sanctity, taught us by his own
example, as Theodoret writes in his History. For having on a time
ouer-curiously beheld certain husbandmen that were ploughing, for punishment of
this small fault, he put an iron collar about his own neck, and fastened it with
a chain about his middle; so that of force he must always hold his head
downwards; and this penance he endured forty years together, never being
able to rear himself and look up to heaven. And being asked why he did so,
and what benefit he hoped thereby; his answer was, that he (...) Satan from
greater combats, and from tempting him with pride or wantones, to these smaller
conflicts; in which if he should be overcome, there were no great harm done;
if he did overcome, the greater shame was the Diuel's that could not be master
in such small trifles. A memorable saying, and worthy of so spiritual and holy
a man; and by it we may understand to our purpose, that it is true, that
Religious men are the farther from transgressing the Commandments of God, in
regard they take so much care to perform many smaller things pertaining to
his service.

6. A fourth reason of this facility in keeping the Precepts drawn from the
nature of the state itself, is that this course of life is above the Law, and
consequently does lift a man above that which the Law requires. And as in a
Sch^ole, where there be many forms, according to the several capacity of the
scholars, and the progress which they have made in learning, they that be in
the higher form, do the exercises with great ease, which they of the lower
form can not at al, or very hardly, perform; so they that walk this higher
way of perfection, do not so much as feel the burden of the Precepts, they
are so light unto them; because, as I said before, their ability is greater,
and the state itself does enable them the more. Wherefore if there were no
other thing but this to be found in Religion, that it enableth us to keep the
Commandments of God constantly, with great ease and pleasure, and with very
little danger of ever sinning against them; we should not need to seek any
other benefit by it. For the more it enableth us in this kind, the more certain
and easy it does make our passage to eternal glory, to which we must come by
keeping the Commandments.

The eighth fruit of Religion, proceeding from the humble lowlines of the
State. CHAP. XX.
ANother great commodity of Religion, is that it is void of al worldly pomp,
ostentation, and (...) and in outward show, low and humble; that every
Religious man may truly say with the Prophet David: Ps. 8^.11.
I have chosen to be an (...) in the house of God, rather then to dwell in the
tabernacles of sinners. For Religion (as I have showed els-where) is truly the
h^use and household (...); and the Religious certainly do choose this
abiection, because neither m^annes of birth, nor necessity, does enforce it
upon them; ^
but they undertake i^ voluntarily of their own accord. S. Bernard does so
highly esteem this benefit, that he thinks it is a direct sign of
Predestination. For in one of (...) S^rm^ns turning his speech to his Brethren,
thus he speaks: Who knows whether al your names, who be here present, be
written in Heaven, and signed in the Book of Predestination? Me thinks, I see
in the conversation of so great humility, some ^i^nes of your Voc^^ion and
Justification. Wherefore, dearly beloved, persevere in the course you have
undertaken, that by humility you may ascend to (...). This is the way, and
there is no other way but it; he that goes otherwise, does rather fall; for
Humility alone exalts, humility alone leads to life. If therefore we be of
S. Bernard's mind, there is no cause, why we should envy Secular people their
preferments, or purple robes, or external pomp; rather we ought to esteem it
very beneficial and highly glorious, that we live without glory, because this
Humility is not only an assured way, but (as he says) the only way to
eternal Salvation; and is particularly rich in three commodities, or, as I may
call them, privileges, which here I shall set down.

Three privileges of the humble state of Religion.
2. First, God does particularly affect this kind of humble state and
communicate himself and his heavenly treasures with it more plentifully, more
familiarly, and with greater sweetness. A strange thing; yet such as the Prophet
David does also point at, when he says: Our Lord is high, and regards humble
things; Ps. 111.6.
and knows high things afarre-of. For likeness does most commonly breed
friendship and love; yet God being so infinitely great, as he is, does take most
delight in the love and conversation of such as are little and lowly; and
contrariwise does stand aloof and look afarre-of upon those that are high and
lofty.

3. Secondly, this kind of Humility, is the fittest coin, we can lay-out upon
the purchase of eternal glory. For though we are al created for that
Everlasting Happiness, as the only End of us al; yet God, as a most
understanding and upright prizer of such things, has most justly ordained,
that we should not come gratis by so great rewards, but buy them at a price;
and the price is to suffer in this life things contrary to that, which there
we shall enjoy; as, because there we shall have most perfect satietie, we must
purchase it here, Mat. 5.
with hunger and thirst; the infinite comfort which there we shall have, is
promised only to those that mourn; and to that abundance of al kind of wealth,
we must come by poverty; and as al other happiness, which is to be had in that
Heavenly Kingdom, is to be bought in this fashion, so the infinite honor and
glory which is there, is to be bought with humility and contempt of
ourselves. Luc. 14.11.
And because we should not doubt thereof, our Savior gave this general rule,
that every one, that exalts himself, shall be humbled; and every one that
humbles himself, shall be exalted.

4. Thirdly, by this Humility we avoid many dangers of our soul, and
impediments to virtue, which are incident to a life led in glory and pomp;
and in steed of them, we have in it many helps to salvation. For it is in the
life of man, as it is with them, that clime up to the tops of trees, or houses;
if they fall, they crush themselves most miserably; and how easy is it for them
to fall, if their hand or their foot do but slip? and what care must they have
that they do not slip? Those that keep themselves below on the ground, fall not
so soon, not so dangerously: So they, that are in honor, run great hazard,
not only while they are climing, and pretend, and labor for it, but even when
they are seated in the chair; Honor, the cause of ruin.
for we are by nature apt to slide, and tumble downwards, and shall meet with
many that will strive to thrust us along. They that keep themselves below on
the ground, and walk not in great and wonderful things above their reach, are
secure.

5. We might bring many examples to this purpose, but that which happened to
Saul, the first King among Jews, is so notorious, that it shall serve for all.
While he was but a private man, he was little also in his own conceit; the
meannes of his estate helping him to be humble in mind; But when he was seated
in the Throne, as King, he became so proud and insolent, that he may well be
ranked with the wickedest Kings that ever were. Before, he saved the life of
his enemies whom the people would have killed; afterward he labored to kill
his friend and sonne-in-law.

6. Whereby we may see, how much we are beholding to Religion, for keeping us
out of the eyes of men, and from worldly preferments, in a holy and wholesome
place of refuge; where we may abide unknown to the world, and it unknown to
us. S. Ber s ^. de natiui^^.
For this is that great and important Counsel, which S. Bernard gathers out
of the life of our Savior, comprised in a word or two, but large in effect and
substance: Love to be unknown; How happy it is, to be unknown.
an obscurity so glorious, that it is far more desireful thus to lie hidden,
then to be renowned, and walk in the mouths of men. For the more a man is
forgotten by men, the more mindful God is of him; and the more he is despised
by men, the more graceful he is in the sight of God and his Angels. Job. 12.4.
Both which holy Job does express in these words: The simplicity of the
just man, is laughed at; a lamp contemptible in the thoughts of rich men, S.
Greg. 10. mor. 17.
prepared for the time to come. Upon which place S. Gregory discourses in
this manner: The simplicity of the just man is deservedly called a lamp, and
contemptible; a lamp, because inwardly it shines; contemptible, because
outwardly it does not shine; within, it burns with the flame of charity;
without, it glittereth not with any glorious aspect. He therefore is
lightsome, and is contemned, that shines in virtue, and is esteemed abject Who
is there therefore, that considering so great rewards, had not rather rank
himself with those that are contemned, that he may be glorious with God, then
with those that make a fair show without, and within have no worth in them?
Exodus 26.
In which regard me thinks Religious men may be likened to the Tabernacle,
which God commanded to be made by the Children of Israel, and gave directions,
in what fashion they should make it; to wit, within of sweet wood, gilded, and
hung with silk curtins of violet and purple colors, running upon rings of
gold; without, it should be covered with heat-cloath, and sheepskins, which
made the outward show thereof but homely* so a Soul, dedicated and consecrated
to God, abounds with many rare spiritual gifts and ornaments, as Chastity,
Patience, Obedience, and other Virtues; but they lie hidden from the eyes of
men under the poor and abject habit which they wear, which notwithstanding
keeps virtue in them the longer; because virtue is best preserved, when it is
hidden; if once it come to be spyed by men, thieves will have about with it;
These thieves are the eyes and toungs of men themselves, bereauing us either
wholly or in great part of the glory, which we expect for our good works, Mat
6.16.
by eying and praising them; that we may worthily fear that saying: Thou have
received thy reward. Wherefore S. Bernard, S Bernard qu^ habit. ser 4.
among the reasons, which should move us to embrace a Religious course
reckons the benefit of concealing our good deeds to be one of the chiefest;
Mat 13 44.
his words are these: In the mean time if we have any good thing, we must
needs hide it; because the man that found the treasure of the kingdom of
heaven, hid it, for which reason we also hide ourselves in Cloisters and Woods;
and if you will know, how much we gain by hiding ourselves, I believe, that if
any one here among us should in the world do the fourth part of that which
here he does, he would be adored as a Saint, esteemed-of as an Angel from
heaven; here he is daily reprehended and chidden, as if he did neglect his
duty. Do you think it a small benefit that you are not held Saints, before you
be so indeed? or do you not fear, least receiving here so final a reward, you
fail of your reward in the world to come? Therefore it is very necessary to
be concealed, not only from the eyes of other folk, but much more from thyself.
Thus far S. Bernard.

7. Some will say, that even in Cloisters and Religious houses, many are so
conspicuous in learning, How Religious men are honored, and without compass
of danger.
or eloquence, or in virtue and sanctity of life, that they are admired, and
spoken-of through the whole world; and many times people get more renown and
glory living in Religion, then if they had lived in the world, and gaped after
honor and preferment. And this is very true; whereof I shall speak more at
large in process of this Treatise; for the present it is enough to know, that
honor, which like a shadow follows those that fly from it, is not so
dangerous; because as God does send it, so it belongs to his Divine
providence to give strength to them, upon whom he lays such a burden, to
bear it without loss, yea with increase of virtue; and it is one of the most
assured effects of Obedience, like an Antidot, to preserve those that live
under it, from the danger they might fal-into by the poison of Honor.

The example of S. Thomas of Aquin.
8. This was manifest in S. Thomas of Aquin; whose example may consorte with all
Religious people, their case being the same. When he read Divinity at Paris
with great applause, and his Superiors thought fit he should be made Doctor;
at the first, out of modesty, he would by no means hear of the promotion,
pretending want of sufficiency (if they would have believed himself) and want
of age, being then scarce twenty years old. His mind being busied in these
thoughts, and weeping bitterly, in the nightime he thought he saw a man of
venerable and grave aspect standing by him, and asking why he was so sad, bad
him confidently and without fear obey his Superiors; for such was the will of
God; and that he should take for the Text of the Speech he was to make at his
Commencement, these words of the Psalm: Psalm. 1^^ 1^.
Watering the (...) from the higher places of the^. With which Vision he was so
animated, that afterward he took his Degree without any fear or trouble.

9. Besides, it helps much to the preservation of Religious Humility in the
midst of honor, that the glory, which follows a Religious man, does not so
much accrue to his particular, as to God, and to the Religious Order, of which
he is a member; as if a man do any thing with his hand, we do not say, the
hand did it, but the man; or if in an army the day be won by the valor of a
few men, the fame of the victory rests not in those few, but redounds to the
whole army, and the army is called victorious; so in Religious Families, when
any thing is exquisitly performed by one man among them, the man himself is as
he was, neither higher nor lower, but the honor spreads itself to the whole
house, whereof he is part; by which means, though he be empl^yed abr^ad in the
eyes of the world, he still remaynes hidden; and every one taking notice of
him, he is yet unknown; and forsakes not humility in the top of Honor. And
truly, that Religious people should be thus humble and honored, is both
profitable and necessary; for if they should always remain in obscurity,
what could their labors profit the Church? and if on the other side they
should be puffed-vp with glory and applause, this also would nip the fruit,
which they might bring forth, and make them like a tinckling Cymbal, which
carries but an empty and unprofitable sound in one's care.

The ninth fruit; that Religion is the School of Virtue. CHAP. XXI.
AS among men there be several art; and sciences; and to deliver and teach
them, several Masters and schools appointed; one for the exercises of al kind
of Learning, an other for Chivalry and feats of arms, others for other kinds
of discipline and knowledge: So the method of gayning Virtue is delivered in
Religion; in so much that if we would define Religion, we may justly call it the
School of Virtue; which property and benefit that it may be the more
conspicuous to al, we must suppose some few things and first how bare our soul
is of al kind of virtue, if we consider it as it is in itself alone. Ar^stotle
2. E^h. c. 1.
Aristotle (whom S. Thomas in these Moral matters does punctually follow,
almost as if he did but translate him out of one language into another) does
teach expressly, Virtue is not naturally (...).
that naturally we have no Virtue in us; and proves it by many reasons.
Whereunto by the light of Faith (which he wanted) we may add, that we are not
only not borne with Virtue, but with much corruption, and deprauation, and with
great propension and forwardnes to al kind of vice; but only that together
with these evils, two things remain in us which are good, to wit, some
inclination to Virtue, given us by the Author of Nature, who first made us
good and upright; and certain seeds thereof, which may easily be brought to
ripenes, if we will suffer them to grow, and by care and diligence further them.

2. Out of which we may gather two things to our present purpose. First, how
foul a thing a Soul naked of Virtue is. For as our body, if it want diverse
limbs, or in many years grow no bigger then when it was first borne, is
ugly to see to, and unprofitable: so if our soul want the ornament of
virtues, which are as it were the parts thereof, it is lame and imperfect, and
consequently ugly and deformed. Secondly, what may be the best or only
necessary way, to get these virtues, of which our soul is destitute.
Aristotle says there is no other way, Aristotle. 2 (...) ^ 6. To exercise the
act of Virtue, is the (...) to get Virtue.
then by exercising acts of Virtue, and performing in work that which Virtue
does require; otherwise (says he) then is the fashion of most men, who, if
they discourse of Virtue, think they have it sure enough; which is a great
error in them; and they resemble some sick people, that give diligent ear to
that which the Physicians say, but will not observe their prescriptions; and as
these shall never recover the health of their body, so the others will never be
sound in some. This is the true and solid discourse of this prime Philosopher.
For Virtue is a Habit, as Philosophers call it; and seeing a habit is not gotten
but by often acts, Virtue also cannot be gotten but by use and often practice
thereof. And speaking of Moral Virtues, there can be no doubt made, but this
doctrine is true; and the same does hold also in the Theological Virtues. For
though they be at first infused into our souls by the sole gift of God, yet
(if we set infants aside that are new baptized) they require beforehand some
preparation of mind, which consists in the exercise of some acts; and after
they are infused, they are increased and strengthened by the same acts.
Wherefore that which S Bernard speaks of Humility, S. Bernard
may be said of al other Virtues, the reason being the same in all. The humbling
of ourselves is the way to get humility; as patience is the way to have peace;
and reading, to get knowledge. If thou desire the virtue of Humility, spare
not to humble thy self, for if thou can not endure to be humbled, thou can
not attain to Humility

In Religion Virtue is in continual practice.
3. Seeing therefore it is so certain and evident, that Virtue cannot be gotten
but by labor and practice; it does evidently follow, that the course of life
which ministers more often and better occasion to practice the same, is more
beneficial to our souls, and more useful toward Salvation. This (I dare
boldly say) among al other courses, is Religion, where Virtue is in the prime
and continual practice. For as for the Love of God and our Neighbor, we may
spare a labor to speak of it; because it is apparent, that in Religion people
do nothing else but seek how they may daily increase in the love of God; and
there cannot be among men more love and friendship toward one another, then
there is among Religious people; who as they are indeed, so are called
Brethren, as it were proceeding from one belly. The like may be said of
Obedience, the practice whereof runs through every thing that is done in
Religion. Humility is so frequent in this kind of life, that it may seem to
be composed of no other thing; S. Bernard Hom. 4. (...).
and is therefore deservedly termed by S. Bernard, the School of Humility
For, according to the account which worldly people use to make, nothing can be
more abject and contemptible then Religion, in outward show, poor, hard, and
obscure; performing accordingly base and seruil offices, and sauouring of
nothing but Humility, in their apparel, lodging, office, S. Io. Chrysostom Romans 58
ad p^p. Ant.
and functions; of which S. Chrysostom does discourse excellently well in one
of his Sermons to the people of Antioch, where among other praises of a
Religious course he says thus: There we may behold the height of Humility;
for their dwelling, their apparel, their employments, bear Humility as it
were written upon them in Capital letters; and the things which nourish pride,
as rich attire, stately buildings, a great train of followers, which puff a
man up almost against his will, are far from them; they make their own fires,
they cut their wood, they dress their own meat, they wait at board. No man
is great among them, no man is little; yet there is no confusion, but order most
exactly kept; for if any one of them be little, he that is great, regards not
that, but rather esteems himself lower then the least; and thereby becomes
greater. And that which S. Chrysostom says of Humility, may be savd of other
Virtues, al of them being in Religion continually practiced; which declares not
only how beneficial this course of life is, but withal an admirable sweetness of
the proceedings thereof, not by precepts alone (which yet are not wanting) but
by daily practice, inuring us to Virtue; and by frequent acts and exercise
thereof, introducing us to perfection without trouble to ourselves, but with
infinite profit.

4. An other commodity of Religion, common to al Arts and Sciences in their
several kinds, To excel in Virtue, is much esteemed in Religion, and thereby a
great encouragement.
Liberal and Mechanical, is this: that as in the very meanest of them, it is
esteemed a rare thing to excel, and to be able to do a thing better than any
of the same trade can do it; and such smiths, and carpenters, and other
tradesmen are most sought after, as are skilfullest in their occupation; and
though the trade in itself be base, yet to be rare in it, is esteemed a great
matter: so it falls out in Religious discipline; and with greater reason,
because in itself it is a more noble employment, trading wholly in the pursuit
and purchase of Virtue. Those that employ themselves with more earnestnes in
it, and profit more, are more commended and admited; as in a race (such as
Religion is to perfection) he that makes greatest speed, has all the applause,
which is no small encouragement to run apace. Secular people find it to be
true; for it is one of the greatest rubs they have, that others among them do
not approve of their endeauours in Virtue, but they are feign to sail against
the wind, meeting oftimes with hard censures, scoffs, and taunts of other men;
and our nature is so weak, that it can hardly withstand them, or contemn
them. Many for fear of such things are hindered from undertaking that which
otherwise they know is good, many after they have begu^ne a good course, grow
weary of it, finding that they must row so much against the stream; and while
they ease their arms, they are borne quite down again by the current. Among
Religious people it is quite contrary; for (as I began to say) because it is
their profession to live virtuously, they that give themselves most unto it,
and become rare in it, are most applauded, esteemed, and set by; And so when
any of them is employed in any mean office, or seruil business, 2. Reg. 6.20
there is no fear that others will contemn him for it, or laugh at him (as
Michol scorned David) but rather the more diligently and cheerfully he goes
about it, the more he is esteemed and loved of al.

5. S. John Damascen, Reli^iou^ men the more esteemed, the more cheerful they
are in humble offices.
a man both noble and wealthy, and one that had borne office with credit in
the Commonwealth, became a Monk, and being committed to the instruction of one
of the Seniours, the good old man thought it necessary first to ground him well
in Humility; to which purpose he put him to do all the inferior offices of
the house, to sweep, to scour, to make clean the houses-of-office, and
dispatch al other drudgerie that was to be done; and moreover, as if nothing
which he did were well d^ne, he was continually finding-fault with him and
reprehending him; and following this course some months together, brought him
to that perfection in Virtue, which ever after showed itself in the holiness of
his life. But to our purpose; those household-offices, which in themselves are
very mean and base, were notwithstanding so far from bringing the Saint in
disgrace with the rest of the Monks, as rather they bred him greater respect;
every one admiring and extolling so great contempt of the world and of
himself, in a man that in the eyes of the world had been so great. And the good
old man that had been so stearne unto him, when he saw his time, embraced him
with cheerful countenance, and congratulating with him the benefit which he had
made of this exercise in so short a time, dismissed him with large commendation
from under his charge, as an old soldier, and one that could now menage his
arms without a teacher.

6 And we may give ourselves to these exercises of humility, mortification,
and prayer, with such general approbation, as I have savd, not only within the
compass of our own walls, but before any secular people. For when they see
a Religious man do any humble office, they admire him, and are edified with
it; though if they should see any of themselves do the like, they would think
it a base thing in him; so much freedom does Religion give us in the practice
of every good thing.

Masters in Religion, (...).
7. And thus far we have spoken of the School itself, and of the Scholars.
The Masters of this School are two; the one visible, to wit, our Superior or
Prelat, of whom we shall have occasion to speak hereafter; the other
i^inuisible, whom we believe only, and understand to be so, and yet he is truly
and in a manner our only Master. So Truth itself speaks: Be not called
masters, Matthew. 23.12.
because one is your master, Christ, who is not wanting in any duty
belonging to a diligent and skilful Master. He takes pa^nes to instruct the
ignorant, a ^uanceth* those that have profited, and bestows greater light
upon the perfect; He reprehendeth those that do amiss, he puts them
forward that are backward and remiss, he comfort those that are heavy and
sad, and refreshes and strengthens them that are ouer-wearie; finally, (as
Thomas a Kempes, (...) Christ's. ^. ^.
a good spiritual Author, brings him in, speaking of himself) he reads two
lessons every day to his disciples; correcting those that do not follow his
directions; and encouraging and hartning them that do follow them, to go
forward daily with greater alacrity What then (...) Religious man want, having
such a Master, and withal such commodity of hearing and practicing the
percepts which he gives? The only thing which he needs to fear, is that he be
not wanting to himself, and neglect his own duty, and this very thing
belongs to his Maister's provident care to prevent, that it may not happen. One
man may bestow his labor in teaching an other man, but cannot give his
scholar either will or wit to conceive that which he goes about to teach him;
Our Master can easily give both will and power, to make benefit of that which
he proposes.

The tenth fruit: Plenty of Grace. CHAP. XXII.
THe way of prositing in Spirit, and advancing ourselves in Virtue, of which I
have lately spoken, brings great commodity to our ^^ules, yet requires
industry, labor, and pains, and hervpon is called a School, in which no man
reapes benefit without (...) and attention. The benefit therefore, of which now
I am to ^^^ake, is far greater, in regard that many good things accrue unto
us, and are as it were cast into our bosom by the State itself, without any
labor or endeavor on our part; al which, though they be many in number and
of diverse kinds, we shall comprehend under one general name of Grace. What is
understood by Grace.
For by the name of Grace we understand al supernatural gifts, working, a
luancing, or any way helping to our eternal welfare; among which the chiefest
is that he^uenlie inherent quality, which gives a new life, and as it were a
new nature to our soul like unto God: then the habits of Faith, Hope, and
others, even moral virtues; finally al inward inspirations of the Holie-Ghost,
enlightening our understanding, or moving and strengthening our will; which two
latter kinds of Grace, though they be far inferior, both in worth and
efficacy, to that quality which makes our soul grateful to God, and worthy
of his love, they have notwithstanding a supernatural force and virtue, whereby
they concur and help toward the effecting or increasing of that Divine habit
in which (as I have said) the life of our soul does consist. And seeing al
these Graces be so necessary, and so precious, nothing can redound more to the
commendation of a State for worth and commodity, F^u^e (...) of Grace^
Religion.
then if we show that it has many ways to purchase abundance of these
Graces; which of a Religious state every one must acknowledge and confess.
For if we mark it well, there be in it four Heads, from which this Grace does
flow.

2. The first is the very natural Constitution of the state itself; for being
in the rank of supernatural things one of the highest, it is, as it were,
compounded of many graces, and great plenty of them: which a Religious man
must needs receive together with the state. For a Religious course, Religion
wholly co^pounded of Grace.
and the very resolution of entering into it, containing so many things, as it
does, to wit, the contempt of al earthly things, hatred of riches, of honor,
and worldly pomp, the love of continency, and most perfect chastity, the
denial of our own will, the practice of humility, a resolution to go through
a great deal of hardness and difficulty, to take up our Cross and carry it,
finally a perpetual resignation and perfect yealding-vp of ourselves, and of
our whole life, to an other's dispose, which is no small maistrie; A Religious
course, I say, being as it were compounded of these and many more such like
graces and virtues, when God does call a man to be Religious, he must withal
needs inspire and give him al these things. What therefore can be more worthy
or more desireful then this state, wherein so many wholesome and necessary
gifts are so easily and liberally cast upon us, as that we need to take no
pains at al for any of them, but hold the bosom of our soul wide open to
receive and enjoy them* And me think it does somewhat resemble the casting of
an image in brass; f^r that is done al wholly at once, arms, and legs, and al
other parts together; and there remaynes nothing to be done to it, but to
polish it, or perhaps to supply some little pe^ces here and there, which might
remain imperfect which is but a small labor, when the whole bulk is once cast;
so when the Holie-Ghost calls us to Religion, he frames this his supernatural
and exquisit work in us and containing, as I said, al things belonging to a
Religious st^te, how ^^keth al in us; so that we have no more to do al our
lifetime, but only to polish, and perfect, and increase these heavenly
gifts, for which the grace of our voca^on does als^, give us means and
courage, for bringing al these benefits with it, it ever after conserueth them,
as a fountain of living water, which always flows. Wherefore we may truly
and justly say, that a Religious soul, is the tree planted by the rivers of
water, that is, of this plentiful and mani^old grace, running in that
abundance, ^.
that it is like a river which never stays (for it is the river of living
water which proceeds from the seat of God and of the Lamb) but as one
stream ouertaketh another, so grace follows after grace without
intermission, whereby our soul comes to yeald plenty of (...) in due season,
and a leaf ^alleth not, but al things prosper which it does.

The presence of God. Matthew. 13.
3. An other fountain of this Grace, is that which Truth itself gives us to
understand in these words: Where two or three are gathered together in my
name, there I am in the midst of them. For though our Lord God be full of
mercy, and r^chly liberal toward all that call upon him, yet the powers forth
his mercies more plentifully upon those, that live and are lincked together in
one community, S John Damascen in (...) I^saph^t. S. Basil.
by the bond of Charity. S. John Damascen does acknowledge, that this Divine
sentence is properly and truly fulfilled in a Religious course, and that, when
our Savior named two or three, he did not bar a greater number, but by that
certain number, understood wha^soeuer other number though never so great. S.
Basil argues further: I four Lord (says he) promises this where two or three
are gathered together, it is much more likely he will do the same, where
there shall be a far greater assembly; And concludes thereupon very truly,
that if Christ be with us, we can want nothing; as the ^^raeli^es in the Desert
never wanted any thing, because God was present with them. Charity bring the
ground of Religious assemblies, is also a (...) cause of grace.
Therefore when our Savior promises that he will be in the midst of a
Religious Congregation, and always with them, in one word he promises all that
can be wished, light in darkness, strength in infirmity, comfort in sadness,
case in pain, victory combats with the Devil, courage an^ constancy of
resolution, increase of virtue; finally what good thing can they want that have
him in whom al good things are?

4. But the greatness of this promise will appear the more, if we consider the
reason of it. The reason is, because Religious people assemble themselves
togea^her, upon no other ground but Charity. It is not nature, nor affinity,
nor the fellowship of trade or occupation (as among merchants, and soldiers)
which has drawn them together, but Charity only. Now God himself, as S.
John tells us, ^. ^^. 4.16
is nothing but Charity; so that, as the same Apostle speaks, he that
remains in Charity, remains in God, and God in him; and where the linck of
Charity runs, there God is betwixt them; so that God is not only present in
every company of Religious people, but more inwardly present, then they are
near one to another among themselves; as when two stones are laid in mortar
together, the mortar must needs be nearer them both, then the stones are one
to another. Certainly if this promise of our Savior extend itself to al
Christians, as it does, who notwithstanding have now in a manner nothing common
one with another, but their Faith, and that which follows of Faith, or
belongs to it; if we believe, that Christ's is in the midst of them, how much
more ought we to believe, he is in all Religious Families, where al things are
common, spiritual and temporal, their lodging, apparel, diet and exercises,
nothing is private and particular? Neither yet did our Lord JESUS make this
promise to whatsoever community or meeting, but to such as were gathered in
(...), as al Religious Orders are, being al of them erected for his service
only. But though al be partakers of this unspeakable benefit, this one word
does make me think, The prerogative of the Society of JESUS.
that our Society of JESUS (which in all other things is the least and lowest)
has a peculiar right and interest in this Grace, by reason of the Name it
bears, the name, I say, of JESUS, by which it is known among al other
Orders, as by the proper mark and devise. And we may the rather hope so, and be
confident of it, regard that this name was not taken upon human advise, but by
particular instinct of God, and by his will, made known in a Vision to S.
Ignatius our Head and Founder, when he was in an Ecstasy at his prayers. The
holiness therefore of this Name cannot but be a great comfort to us, that fight
as it were under this banner, considering the particular assistance and most
certain protection of God, which is promised us in all things. Tro. 18 10.
For that which the Wiseman says, is agreeable to this purpose. The name of
our Lord is a most strong tower; the just man runs to it, and shall be saved

5. A third cause of abundance of Grace in Religious companies, Influence from
the Community into every p^^ticular.
is an influence from the whole community of spirit and inward help to every
particular man of the same co^munitie. For every Order of Religion is (as it
were) one body consisting of so many members and parts, as there be men in
it. Every one of these bodies have their spirit, which gives them life and
motion; which spirit is partly common and like to the spirit of other Orders,
specially in such things as are esse^tial to al Orders, as the three Vows, and
al kind of virtues, and partly it is proper and peculiar, as different rites
and different offices and employments, which every Order does practice
according to the particular institute it has. Wherefore as if a man could set
a new hand or an arm to a body, in which it was not before, the soul that
gives life and motion to the rest of the body, would give influence into that
new member also, and make it live and move; so when any body upon mature
advise of his own, and by lawful authority of those, to whom it does belong,
is received into any Religious Order, the spirit, with gives life and vigor
to the whole Order, is derived into this new part thereof, and causes it to
work the same works which the whole Order does.

6. David was in company with the Prophets that were foretelling things to
come, 1. Reg. 19.20.
and singing praises to God, when Saul sent certain men to kill him. So soon as
they came, the spirit of God was upon them also, and they began to sing and
prophecy. Saul hearing thereof, sent the second and the third time others still
be^ter provided to execute the mischief that was intended, but it happened to
them al alike; for upon their arriual in steed of their wicked fury, they were
invested with Prophetical piety. Then the wicked King minding himself to do
the deed, ran to the place full of fire and rage; but when he came, he could
no more then the others resist the spirit of God, which lighting upon him, did
so tame him, that presently casting off his Princely robes, and himself upon
the ground, he spent that whole day and the night following continually
praising God. An evident argument and most certain proof of the point we have
in hand, to wit, how assured and efficacious a means it is to get abundance of
grace, to be adopted in those companies, which of themselves are full of grace*
for if these wicked men, even while they were acting their tragedy, could be
so suddenly inflamed with Prophetical spirit, being present in body and not in
mind, what shall we conceive will be done by th^se that have sorted themselves
with such holy company, upon full deliberation, and delivered themselves unto
it wholly and entirely, not for a day or two, but for ever. For if grace was
given to those that desired it not, but rather wi^hstood it, much more
certainly and more abundantly shall they doubtless be repleni^hed, that desire
it, and with all their heart endeavor for it.

Al graces (...) upon the ^hole Church, fall chiefly upon Relig^ous people.
7. The fourth reason of abundance of Grace, is because the infinite benefits and
gifts which our Savior Christ has most bountifully powred-forth upon the
whole Church, which he purchased with his own most precious blood, are in a
manner fallen within compass of the walls of Religion, and upon Religious
people alone. For though they be given for all Christians, many scarce make use
of them, many not at al; howsoever, Religious people certainly may best enjoy
them, and with greatest ease. Among these gifts we reckon the Sacraments of
the Church, and chiefly those two which are so full of grace, and so much the
more beneficial, because they alone among the rest may be daily used; to wit,
the Sacrament of Confession, and of the holy Eucharist, wherein after
Confession we feed upon the very Body and Blood of our Savior; from whence
unspeakable joy and happiness is derived to our s^ules. Now therefore, though
this infinite treasure be laid open for all the Faithful to partake of it, yet
who sees not that Religiou^ people do make fair better use of it, and have
greater commodi^ie for it? Secular people most commonly are hindered either
wholly from receiving these Sacraments, or from receiving them so worthily as
the maiedie of them does require, by the daily cares, and troubles, passions
and aff^ct^ons, to which that course of life is continually subject; the state
of Religion being free from secular business and vexation, and wholly composed to
the end to taste of God, does help the subjects thereof in the use of these
Sacraments, a^ in all other things. The like may be said of al other spiritual
riches, and chiefly of holy Scripture, which, as it is profitable for all
occasions, and withal most delightful to read and study, so we find by
experience, that very few others besides Religious men do employ themselves in
the study thereof, with that feeling and that spirit, with which it is fitting
so holy a thing should be handled.

(...) 4 (...) C^risti. c. 12.
8. A certain spiritual Author says truly and well, that as for the life of our
body we need meat to refresh it, and light to direct it; so to maintain the
life of our soul, ^e must have meat and light. Our meat, is the blessed
Body of our Lord; our light, is the Word of God, a lamerne to our ^^et^, as
the Prophet sp^aketh. Therefore, as I began to say, though these heavenly
gifts be infinitely p^^fitable and necessary, ^s. 118.
and indifferently proposed to every one; yet they are not known to al,
neither will al, that know them, use them; Religious people in a manner do
nothing else, and consequently every body must needs con^^^le, that they are
in full and perfect possession of all the riches and jewels, which C^ri^t our
Savior has most bountifully bestowed upon his Spouse the Church, and of
wha^soeuer is therein holy, beneficial, and precious, descended from heaven
upon mankind. I might say, that Religious people only have them; because few
others have ^he will or leisure to make use of them, Genesis 2.
howsoever, it is sufficient that Religious people have them in that abund^^e
which I have declared. These are the ornaments of a Religious state, (...) is
so much enriched and embellished* these we may liken to the fou^e Rivers (...)
out of Paradise; for the four fountains of Grace, of which I have discoursed,
do flow from the Paradise of Religion, washing ou^ s^ules, t^ make them
brighter, and watering them that they may become more fruitful.

The eleventh fruit of Religion: Greater merit by virtue of the State. CHAP.
XXIII.
AS the sun, which gives light unto the earth, has light within itself, and
borrows it not abroad, as the rest of the stars do from the sun: so God
only has Being and Blessedness of himself; Al things receive their being and
happiness from God.
al other things receive their being and blessedness by his bountiful gift and
participation; they receive, I say, life and being, without any cooperation of
their own thereunto; for before they were, they could confer nothing to their
being; but to the attayning of happiness, God has ordained, they should
concur with their own works, and such works as may have some proportion and
congruence with the final End, for which they were made.

2. The Justice of God, which he always regards, required this proceeding;
and it was also for our honor, that so great a good should not be given us
sleeping; but that we should employ our industry and prowess in purchasse
thereof. This is the reason why we were put into this course of pilgrimage upon
earth, and to this end al our life is directed; Job. c. 7 and c. 14.
whereupon holy Job does fitly term himself, and al us, day-labourers; This
life is a continual trade and labor.
who have nothing but what they earne day by day, by strength of their arms,
and sweat of their brow. Our Savior in like manner, resembles al men to
Merchants, in the Parable, where the Master of the house distributing his
Talents among his servants, speaks thus unto them: Trade (...) come; giving us
to understand, that this life is no other, Luc. 19.1^.
but a kind of trading or trafficking, not in earthly but in heavenly
merchandise. Wherefore as merchants employ their whole industry, and labor,
to become rich and wealthy; and therefore do withdraw themselves from al
other exercises, as hunting, ^iding, or following the camp; they seek al
occasions of gain, let nothing slip, whereby they may hope for any lucre; and
esteem al care and labor sweet, so that they thrive by it; much more ought we
to do the like in this spiritual trade of ours, the benefit thereof being
everlasting. And hence we may gather two things: First, the misery of this
world, wherein people live in great barrennes and dearth of al spiritual
commodities, their hearts being altogether set upon earthly pelf; secondly,
the happiness of a Religious state, wherein we may every moment of time increase
our heavenly stock with great ease and facility. The misery and foolishnes
of worldie people
Much might be said of the blindness, and indeed madness, of Secular people, who
so unprofitably lavish away this short moment of time (which was given to
purchase E^ernitie) in temporal things subject to corruption; But I will content
myself with one place of S. Gregory, who discoursing upon those words of Job:
Job. 6.18.
They shall walk in vain, and perish; does well express their foolishnes (for
why may I not call them fools, that voluntarily draw upon themselves so infinite
a loss?) S. Gregory therefore says thus: They walk in vain, who carry
nothing hence with them of the fruit of their labor; one strives to rise to
honor; another employeth his whole endeavor to increase his wealth; a third
runs himself out of breath after humane praise; but because every body must
leave these things behind him, when he dies, he that has nothing to carry
with him before the Judge, spends his labors in vain. The Law advises us to
the contrary: Deu. 16.16.
Thou shall not appear in my sight, empty. He that goes not provided of
merit of good works to deserve eternal life, appears empty in the sight of
God; Psalm. 12 5.6.
but of the Just the Psalmist says: Coming they shall come with ^y, bearing
their bundles. They who show good works within themselves, whereby they may
deserve life, come to account in Judgment, bearing their bundles. Hence the
Psalmist says again of every one of the Elect: Who has not received his
soul in vain. For he receaueth his soul in vain, Psalm. 23.4.
who thinking only of things present, minds not those that follow for ever. He
receaueth his soul in vain, who neglecting the life thereof, does prefer the
care of the body before it. But the Just receive not their souls in vain,
who with continual attention refer all that they do in their bodies, to the
profit of their soul; that when the work is past, the cause of the work may
not pass away; which purchases the rewards of life after this life.

3. Among these just men, whom S. Gregory commends, Religious people are
chiefly to be reckoned; but we are to show that the State itself does give them
great advantage above others in it. The two Cheeks of the Spouse. S. Ber. s.
40. in Cant.
Two things therefore are required to merit: the thing which we do, and the
end for which we do it. This S. Bernard calls the two cheeks of the Spouse;
he that wants either of them, must needs be exceedingly deformed; much more
if he want them both. He that handles temporal things for temporal respects,
wants both; he that does a spiritual thing, for a temporal end, is deformed
in one of them. Now that in which Religious people bestow themselves, is God's
own business, wherein it is unspeakable, and in a manner incredible, what
advantage they have of secular people. For there be usually two things in
secular people which do lessen their merit, Two things under the (...) of
secular people.
or deprive them wholly of it: First, that they must of necessity busy
themselves in earthly and temporal things; as to maintain their children and
family, to place their daughters, to furnish al other charges of
housekeeping; Secondly, that whatsoever they do, it is for themselves, and
for their own private commodity; their thoughts run upon nothing else, but
how they and theirs may live in plenty and ease. Now he that takes pains
only for himself and for his own benefit, serves himself and no body else,
and therefore cannot without impudency and injustice demand reward or hire of
an other. Hence it comes, that the works of most men, when they come to be
weighed in the balance of equity of God himself, are found faulty, and no^
current; the truth whereof was on a time showed in a strange Vision to the great
Arsenius, The Vision of S. Arsenius.
a famous Heremit. First he thought he saw a man very busy in cutting down
wood; and when he had bound it up in a bundle, he was taking it upon his
shoulders, and could not, it was so big and heavy* and to help himself, he
still cut down more wood and made his burden bigger and bigger. Again he saw
another laboring al day to draw water; and when he had it, he powered it into a
vessel without a bottom, and it ran al away. This Vision an Angel
interpreted unto him, and said, that the first were they, that heap sin upon
sin; the second are they, that do their works for humane ends; by which
means the works presently perish, and avail them nothing toward life
everlasting. And if there be any (as certainly there be some few in the world)
so wise and wary as to direct their actions carefully to God; yet the actions
themselves being of their own nature earthly, they must be continually
laboring and toyling to raise them, and keep them up from the earth, which
endeavor of their^ being somewhat violent, cannot last long, and so they
quickly shrinck downwards to the earth again, Religious men, God's household
servants.
as their nature draws them. It happens quite otherwise with Religious people;
for first forsaking their own house and goods, they are taken into the house
of God and his Family; and consequently whatsoever business they have there, it
is properly God's; and so long as they are employed in it, they labor for God,
and not for themselves, so that if we compare the state of a Secular man, that
lives well and upright, with the state of a man that lives in Religion, there is
this difference betwixt them, that the one serves as a friend, the other as a
servant; a friend by entreatie or of his own accord, may do his friend some
service, but yet he is to live of himself, and must provide for his own
occasions; a servant that dwells with his master, all that he does, must be
for his Maister's service: so when a Religious man has left all that he had,
and put himself into the service of God, he must of force, and in a manner
whether he will or no, attend God Almightie's business, and day and night wait
upon him; and he can do no other, because he has withdrawn himself from his
own private affairs; not only in will and purpose, but by distance of place,
and absence from the things themselves.

4. Moreover, Three sort of employments of Religious people, and al spiritual.
that which we handle in Religion is not properly earthly, but for the most
part Spiritual, or mingled with some Spiritual thing. For all that a Religious
man does, may be reduced to three heads: First are the actions which are
immediately directed to God, as Prayer, Contemplation, the use of the
Sacraments, the practice of the virtues of Humility, Charity, Penance,
internal by contrition of heart, and external by punishing the body; in which
actions a Religious man spends the greater part of his life, and no body can
make any doubt, but they tend directly of their own nature, without any
labor of ours, to God, and deserve a reward at his hands. There be other works
that are external, yet proceed from the very bowels of Religion; as to
preach, to hear Confessions, to encourage others to devotion, to give good
advice to those that ask it, and oftimes to those that do not ask it, 2. Tim
4 2.
as the Apostle wishes, opportunity and importunely, finally whatsoever is
done for the spiritual help of our Neighbor; to which we may add the
employments which are as it were preparati^ns to the former, to wit, to study
privately, or in public School, to dispute, to write; that thereby they may
benefit themselves or others, and such like. These things though they be not so
immediately set upon God, as the former yet of their own nature they tend to
the same end; and consequently, unless they be wrested and corrupted by a
different end and intention from without, they are of themselves good and
grateful to God; so that there is great difference betwixt the employments of a
Secular and a Religious man; because these be of their own nature Spiritual
and meritorious, unless they be marred by some extrinsecal accident; Secular
peoples business is of itself earthly and temporal, and always cleaues to the
earth, and dies with it, unless it be raised by some other means. And who is
so strong and able, amidst so much weakness as is in a Secular life, as to stand
perpetual Sentinel watching over his works, and always to keep his bow at that
full bent, that his arrows (his actions I mean) may fly aloft.

Natural ^^tions (...).
5. The third kind of works be those that are merely natural, as to eat and
drink, to sleep, to tend ourselves when we are sick or that we may not fall
into sickness, to provide necessaries for diet and apparel; wherein is much
business, and many occurrences; these things of them selves, if we go no
higher, are nothing; but may be easily so handled by a Religious man, as they
will be of great worth, and beauty, and desert in the sight of God. For, having
given them their body together with their soul, all the service and care they
bestow upon it as such is pleasing to God, and shall not fail of a reward. The
matter therefore rests in the intention, which is the other cheek of the
Spouse, as I said out of S. Bernard; wherein it is so apparently easy for a
Religious man to walk uprightly, and please our Lord God, that I shall not need
to spend many words in declaring it. For Secular people, though they have
many times no il intention in their actions, yet most commonly their intention
is earthly and temporal, aiming at the maintenance or setting-vp of their
House and Family. But what should a Religious man have any such thing in his
head? Though sometimes that which he handles be temporal, yet his end is
spiritual, not ordained to his own private interest, but to the common benefit
of his Brethren; which also is wholly directed to the honor and glory of God.

Ber s. le (...).
6. S. Bernard delivers this doctrine eloquently, and excellently to the
purpose, comparing Secular people with Religious, and says, that the labor
and pains which Secular people take, is twofold; to wit, partly peremptory,
as he terms it, because laboring in sinful actions, it brings everlasting
death with it; and partly, though not peremptory, yet perishable; because
though they keep themselves from sins, they are tossed with many cares, and
embroyled in much business, though not in much offense, toyling themselves in
the figure of this world which passes away, to maintain themselves and those
that depend upon them; which toil though it work not damnation, yet it
works not salvation neither; so that though they keep the foundation, yet
they shall suffer detriment by the loss of that which they have builded upon
it, and themselves be saved, yet so a^ by fire. But harken what is said to us:
^.
Work not the food which perishes, but which remains to life everlasting.
Neither do we leave working this food, though we be sometimes employed in
earthly occupation by obedience, or out of fraternal charity, because our
intention is different from theirs, whose labor shall perish; the self-same
labor, growing from a far different root, shall not perish alike, because it
is grounded upon that Charity which never perishes.

7. This, which S. Bernard says, S. Anselme.
agrees with the Similitude which S. Anselme brings, in which kind of
expression he is held to be rare; thus we read of him in his life. A certain
Religious man coming unto him for advise, and making his complaint, that he was
employed by his Superiors in temporal businesses, having betaken himself to
Religion of purpose to avoid them; he made him answer and encouraged him in
this manner: The life of (...) li^e a mil.
The life of man is like a mil, which is ever moved and never rests; but
there is great difference among the men that tend it; some look not after
their meal, and it al runs down into the river, and is utterly lost; others
save part of it, and part they leese through negligence; others put their
sackes underneath, and save it al. The first kind are those Secular people, who
never think of any eternal thing, but their thoughts are wholly buried in earth
and earthly things; The second kind is of those, who living in the world do
some good works; they give alms, they go to church duly, they visit the sick;
these shall receive a reward according to the measure of their works; The last
kind, are Religious people, who being employed by their Superiors upon
obedience, leese not their labor, though the business be temporal, which they
are set about, yea though by occasion of their business, they be forced
sometimes to do something otherwise then Religious discipline requires, or to
slack in somewhat which is commonly observed by others, the virtue of Obedience
recompenseth al, and g^there^h-vp the meal so clean, and lays it up so
safe, that it suffiseth to maintain them for all eternity.

8. Finally we shall do well to consider and bear in mind that which S.
Bonauenture writes touching this matter, S. Bonauenture 2 (...) d. 41 a. 1. q
3.
and the rather because the doctrine is his, who was so profound a Divine, and
is derived by him out of the very principles of Divinity. His discourse is
this: For a man to merit, it is not required that al his works be actually
referred to God, What intention i^ required, that our (...) be (...).
but it is enough, that they have an habitual rela^ion to him. This habitual
relation arises not by reason a soul is in Charity; that is not enough; but
because this particular work in the beginning thereof, or in the beginning of
some other work, from which this does flow, wa^ duly ^ffered and dedicated to
God; as for example: If a man purpose to give in al^e, for God's sake a hundred
pieces of silver; though he do not think of God afterward when he
distributeth them severally one by one, it does not follow, that those pieces
of silver are not profitably and ver^^ously bestowed* as it would follow, if he
should begin any other new work^ of an other kind; for then he must have a new
purpose to do that work for the service of God. Whence this holy Doctor does
in^erre, that the same must hold in all the actions of Religious people, who at
their first entrance into Religion, being resolved to goe-through with the
bur^hen thereof, whatsoever afterward they do, that is contained within the
bounds of their obseruances, is meritorious, by the force and efficacy of the
first will and purpose which they had, unless that purpose be contradicted by
some contra^ie resolu^ion; which no man, that has any care of his soul, will
do. This is S. B^nauenture'^ discourse alm^st word for word; concluding
thereupon that it is infinitely profitable, and withal most secure, to live a
Religious life.

9. But as touching merit, whereof we now treat, we may a^de one thing farther;
that it does not reach only to the works which before I mentioned, but to our
very passion^ and inward affections, though they be in a manner but natural.
For in truth when Religious people leave all that they have, and become, (...)
Passions.
as I have said, of the house and household of God, they are so wholly at God's
service, that whatsoever business God has, they account it theirs; and
whats^euer business they have, God accounts it his; and whatsoever is profitable
and convenient for one, is profitable and convenient for the other; so that
when they rejoice, or are sad for their own occasions, or desire, or fear
any thing concerning the^, God esteeming their occasions his, their fear and
desire, sadness and joy, proceeding from such a root, is meritorious; and yet
our life is in a manner spent in these affections; so that if we ground
ourselves upon reason, and cast-vp our accounts duly, as merchants do, we shall
f^^d at evening, that in one days reckoning the actions of a Religious man will
a^ise to an infinite sum of merit; and if one day be so full of merit, what will
it arise unto in a month, or a year, which has so many days, and so much
profit every day? And if a man continue in Religion many years, what mass
of merit must he needs heap to himself by so much industry, and so many
virtuous actions so often repeated?

10. This therefore being very true, and grounded in the principles of our
Faith, certainly the course which increases a man's crown and reward so much,
and his labor so little and in short time rayseth him to so great wealth, and
loadeth him with those treasures, Mat. 6.19
which neither rust nor moth do demolish, nor ^^eeues d^-vp and steal away,
must needs be of high esteem and worth; which will be more apparent, if we
compare the happiness which Religious people have he^rin, with the misery of
Secular people that love this world. For though they m^yle themselves never so
much, and put themselves to a great deal of trouble and incommoditie for the
world, the fruit of all this labor perishes here in earth; because when they
must leave the world, their works do not follow them; and they shall be forced,
with the slouthful man in the Proverbs, Prou. 20 4.
that would not till his ground, to beg in summer, when others feed upon the
labors of their hands.

11. S. Bernard reprehends this ^ollie of Secular people, and accounts them
little better then ^^asts, thinking only of the present, and taking no thought
for what is to come, as if they ^ad neither reason nor understanding, but sense
only as beasts. S Bernard ^p. 1^^.
For writing to Gualterus, who was a young man of a good wit, and well grounded
in matter of learning, he does urge him very much upon this very point, to
leave the world, and enter into Religion, being sorry he should waste so great
talents in so unprofitable a course, as he calls it; and with such rare
gifts, not serve the Author of them, but spend them in transitory things. To
which purpose he goeth-on in this manner: Look what you will answer at the
terrible tribunal-seate of God, for receiving your soul in vain, and such a
soul as yours is, if so be, you be found to have done no more with your
immortal and reasonable spirit and soul, then a beast does with his; the
spirit of a beast living no longer then it gives life to the body, and at the
same moment of time, in which it cease to give life, it cease^h also to live,
and be. What can you imagine that you may worthily deserve, if being made as you
are, to the image of your Maker, you maintain not the dignity of so great a
Majesty within yourself; but being a man placed in honor, do sort yourself
with beasts, and become like to them, spending your endeauours in no spiritual
and eternal things, but contenting yourself with corporal and temporal goods,
as the spirit of a beast, which as it receaueth beginning from the body, so it
ends with it' Your ear is deaf to that Euangelical counsel: Io. 6.27.
Work not the food, which perishes, but which remains to life everlasting.
But it is written, that none ascends to the mountain of our Lord, but he that
has not received his soul in vain; nor he neither, unless he be harmless
of his hands, Ps. 23.3.
and clean of h^r^. Consider therefore what iniqui^ie may deserve, if
unprofitableness alone be sufficient to damn a man: certainly the thorn and
the bramble cannot think themselves safe, when the axe shall lie at the foot of
the unfruitful tree. He that threatens the barren tree, will not spare the bu^h
that pricketh; woe therefore is to him, and woe again, of whom it shall be
said: Esaias. 5.4.
I have tarried that it should bring sweet grapes, and it has brought forth
w^ld. Thus spoke S. Bernard; whose sharp censure may in reason terrify al
Secular people, in regard of the danger and the shame, that in works they
become not beasts; and greatly encourage al Religious, and confirm them in
their holy pu^pose and resolution.

The twelfth fruit of Religion: Direction of Superiors. CHAP. XXIV.
IT follows that we speak of another great commodity which is in Religion,
arising from the care and government of spiritual Superiors; a benefit
containing many great benefits in it. And first we must consider, that the way
of virtue being full of darkness and obscurity, nothing can be more needful then
a good guide and light, A guide and directour needful in all things.
that we stray not out of it. For if neither the Law, nor Philosophy, nor so
much as any one handicraft or Mechanical art can be learned without a teacher,
though they be but natural sciences, invented and perfected by men, out of
their natural capacity and understanding of them; in this holy exercise,
which is above nature, and continually most stif^ly opposed by many enemies,
we must needs lie open to infinite errors, unless we take a guide to conduct
us, and we shall never be able otherwise to goe-through with it. S Hierome ^p 4.
To which purpose S. Hierome speaks home, saying: No art is learned without a
master. Brute beasts and wild herds follow their guide; among bees there is a
chief; cranes follow one, as letters in a row; there is one Sovereign, one
Judge in a country; One Bishop in a Church, one Archpriest; and the whole
order of the Church depends of the Rectours thereof; one Admiral at sea; one
master in a house; and in a great army, one man must give the sign of the
battle; and that I may not be tedious in reckoning-vp every thing, my intent
is this, to show thee by these examples, that thou must not be left to thine
own ^ispose, but live in a Monastery under the care of one Father, and in
com(...).

2. S. Gregor^e Ny^s^n discourses thus: Though there be many things written
for direction of a spiritual life, S Gr^g^rie (...) Virg c 23.
yet written precepts move not so much by far^e, as those that are delivered by
word of mouth and example; both which in Religion are ^requent, it being as he
terms it) the shop of virtue, in which this spiritual life, of which we
treat, is scowred from al dross and endure, and brought to great perfecti^n
of innocence. And as a man, that desires to learn a strange language, shall
never come to ^nie perfection in it, unless he learn of those that are
skilful in the tongue; so says he, we shall never c^mpasse the intent of this
life, unless we take a guide, but run great ha^a^d in att^mpting at our own
peril the trial of things unknown unto us. ^or as Physic was first invented
by long practice of some particular men, and yet now it were an absurd and
foolish thing to go to try the force and quality of al medicines first,
before we resolve to make use of any of the^; for we ought rather trust upon
those, that are already known and approved by others; so he that will follow
his own head in the study of virtue, must needs run into many errors and
inconveniences; on the other side, if we follow the a^u^^e and counsel of
others, and receive light from them, we shall find much ease; as we see by one
lamp, we light many; for in like manner gravity and sanctity i^ derived from
one to many, that are in will and practice linked to that one. Thus far S.
Gregory Nyssen.

(...) gr^^. 25.
3. (...) is bold to say, that as a ship, that has a skilful pilot, is easily
brought safe into the haven; so a soul that has made ch^ice of a good
Past^ur, will easily reach the haven of heavenly glory, though of itself it be
rude and ignorant, or also ouer-laden with sin and evil custom; And
contrariewise, says he, as one that traueleth without a guide, does often
miss his way, though he may be in other respects a wise man; so he that will
needs follow his own will and judgment in this spiritual way, though he have
alone all the wisdom that ever was, will easily notwithstanding bring his soul
to utter destruct^on.

S. Ber ^ ^. in Cant.
4. S. Bernard, a man expert in spiritual things, says thus: How many have
been found to have strayed most dangerously from the right path, by means ^h^t
they have been ignorant of the wiles of the Devil and of his tricks? Hence they
that began with spirit, have ended with flesh, most shamefully lead away, and
fallen most damnably. He that is loath to give his hand to his directour, does
give it to hi^ seductour, and he that le^ueth sheep a^ pasture without a
watch, is Pastor not of sheep, but of wolves. Wherefore if the danger of them
that will be their own guides, be so evidently great; the securi^ie of a
Reli^ious course must needs be as great, in regard we have so many to give us
light in darkness, and to instruct our ignorance with most wholesome, recepts.

^
5. An^ the great commodity, which we reap by direction of Superiors, i^vi^t
ri^^^^^ the temptations and molestations of the Devil. For whereas sometimes
(...) assault us openly, some^imes they steal closely upon us, and seek to
undermine us, and we need great strength and courage to resist the (...), and
wisdom and art to overcome the latter; the assist^nce and conduct of
Superiors furnishes us abundantly with both these weapons. This benefit
Cassian does often speak of, Cassian. Co^l. 6. c. 12.
and often inculca^e it; but particularly in a certain Exhortation, where he
brings Abbot Joseph speaking thus: Sa^an transfigureth himself into an Angel
of light, to the end he may fraudulently thrust upon us the dark and foggye
mist of sense, in steed of the true light of knowledge; which suggestions of
his, unless falling into a meek and humble heart they be reserved for the
discussion of some sober-harted Brother, or approved Sen^^ur, and being by
their discretion diligently sifted, be either rejected, or entertained by us,
without al doubt we shall be brought to a most mischeeuous end, worshipping in
our thoughts the Angel of darkness, in sleed of the Angel of light; which
mischief it is impossible for any man to avoid, that trusts to his own
judgment.

6. And this, which Cassian says, is generally delivered by all Authors that
treat of spiritual matters; wherefore it is most certain that there is no
better defense against the continual, hot, and dangerous impugnations of the
Devil, then to choose some body, who may be unto us a Father and a governor,
to whose bosom we may betake ourselves, and under whose sewing we may find
protection, like chickens under a hen, when the kite houereth over them* daily
experience teaching us, that diverse most grievous temptations, which could not
be put out of our minds by any industry or pains which we took, have been
overcome, and utterly blotted out by communication once had with a Superior.
And (that which does more highly commend the efficacy of this medicine it is
not their counsel or exhortation only, which fre^th us, but most commonly the
very revealing of the disease unto them, and l^ying it before their eyes; a
far better and more caseful cure, then any corporal medicine can bring to
our body; where when we have opened our grief to the Physician, much labor
and art is required before we can be cured; Cassian. Co^l. 1. c. 16.
but in the diseases of the mind, it is a constant course, as Cassian says in
an other place, that evil thoughts dye so soon as they are laid open; and
before remedy be applied to the disease, the wicked serpent runs away full
of confusion and shame, as it were drawn out of his dark den under ground,
into the open air, by virtue of Confession. And he confirms it by a
memorable example of the Abbot Serapion; Serapion deliuere^ from the tempta^ion
of gluttony by opening it to his Superiors.
who, he says, was wont to tell of himself, that when he was a young man,
yealding to gluttonous intemperance, he had got a custom to eat a loaf of
bread privately in a corner; and often bewayling, and yet daily falling into the
same offense, at last being touched with remorse of conference, he stepped out
into the middle of the room where diu^rs of the ancient Fathers were met, and
before them al confessed this his fault. His master, being a discreet
spiritual man, presently bad him be of good courage, because by this resolute
confession he had evidently given his aduers^ri^ the foil, who before had the
better of him by means of his silence. These words were scarce spoken, when
behold as it were a flame of brimstone issued out of the young man's bosom,
where he was wont to hide the l^af, and fil^ed the room with such a stench,
that a body could hardly abide in it, every one understanding thereby, that
the Devil was beaten out of the field, and Ser^^^^n did afterward often a^^re,
that from that very moment he never felt in all his lifetime the least touch
of any such itching desire.

7. And thus much of temptations, the ouercoming whereof is a main point of our
salvation. Direction necessity at al times.
But it is not the time of temptation only wherein we stand in need of help from
Superiors, but al other times; for we carry always about us the common
infirmity of mankind, in which we were conceived and borne; and it follows
us til our dying-day, when this corruptible body shall be clad with
incorruption. Through this weakness so inclinable to evil, we often fail, even
before we can well think of it. Oftentimes a kind of lazines creeps upon us, and
so benummes us, that we have no list in a manner but to sleep; wherefore it
does much importe us to have such Remembrancers and counselors as know us to
a hair, and will without flattery show us what we are, and sometimes with
wholesome counsel, sometimes also with reprehension, put life into us; they that
have not this help, must needs fall into many errors, through want of
know^edge of themselves, and of the things ^hey go about. S Basil. (...)
Monast. c. 21.
S Basil speaking of the commodity which Religion affords in this kind,
says: It is most certain that it is one of the hardest things that can be, to
know, and cure onesself, because naturally every one does ^oue himself, and in
regard he is apt to favor himself, he easily mistakes the truth: but it is
easy to be known and cured by another, because self-loue does not hinder him,
that is to cure another, from discovering the truth. From whence S. Basil
inferres, that Superiors in Religion may easily fin^-out the humors and
dispositions of every body, and apply convenient remedies to every one.

8. And let no man think, that beginners only, and such as are imperfect and
slack in the love of God, Direction necessary for those th^^ are perfect.
stand in need of government; for it is equally necessary for those that are
fervent and perfect; unless a body will think, that a ship at sea needs a
Pilot only in rough weather, and not when it sails with a prosperous gale;
rather prosperous winds, if they be strong, are the more dan^erous; it may meet
with rocks and shelues: and though it do not, the gale itself may be so
strong, as to sinck it; besides there must be some body to rule the stern;
otherwise the ship may store hither and thither upon the main, and never come
to haven. And as a horse is in greatest danger of taking harm, when he runs
his heates, unless he have one that knows how to ride him: so these spiritual
feruours are of their own nature headlong and rash, and breed many
inconveniences, if they be not tempered by the judgment and discretion of
others. S. Bernard thinks that the Apostle did harp upon this point, Romans 12 1.
when he required, that our service should he reasonable; because zeal is
easily carried away by the spirit of error, if we take not with us the light
of knowledge. S Bernard (...)
Neither has our subtle Enemy a more forcible engine to list Charity out of
our heart, then if he can make us walk indiscreetly in it, and not according to
reason. S. Hierome.
S. Heirome also finds the same commodity in a Religious vocation; for thus
he writes to Rusticus: I like well, that thou live in company with holy men,
and be not thine own teacher, nor travel in a way without a guide, where thou
never wentst before* least coming to a turning, thou go astray, or go
farther, or not so far as thou need, or run til thou be wea^ie, or lag
til thou fall asleep.

9. Finally in all this business that which most imports, is, that this is the
course which God does perpetually and constantly hold with all. For it is in his
power, Direction the usual means by which God does govern us.
for to give us ligh^ immediately by himself, or by his holy Angels; but he
has ordained, that men should be taught and instructed by other men, either
because he would linck them the faster together in the bonds of Charity, as
members of the same body, or exercise them in humility, by subjection to one
an other. Cassian to this purpose brings the example of Samuel, whom God
would not instruct by himself, when he was young, Cassian. Coll. 2 ^. 14.
but suffered him to have recourse the second time to old H^li; and intending
to bring him to the speech with himself, made him notwithstanding take
instructions from another; who though elder in years, was inferior unto him
in sanctity. When the Angel appeared to C^rnel^us the Centurion, could he not
al under one have revealed to him all the mysteries of our Faith? an easier and
a shorter way for them both; yet he sends him to Peter, Act. 10.6.
saying: Ca^ for Simon; he shall tell thee, what thou ought to do. That which
we read in the same Acts of S. Paul, is yet more strange. For Christ our Lord
having done him so much honor, as not to send an Angel to inuit him, but
himself in person to speak unto him from heaven, and vouchsafed him his
presence, when he was yet a blasphemer and a persecutour, though he could in a
moment of time have endued him with all heavenly knowledge from above, yet he
sent him to Ananias almost with the same arra^t which Cornelius had before: Act
9.7.
Rise, and go into the City, and it shall be told thee, what thou ought to
do. Which S. Bernard does wonderfully admire; and speaking to Religious people
he says, S Bernard s. de Conu. S. Paul.
that Religion is the city to which they are sent. Thus he speaks: O
wisdom, in very deed disposing al things sweetly! Thou sendest the man, to
whom thy self do speak, to be taught thy will by an other man, to commend the
benefit of a sociable life, and that being taught by man, he may learn to help
other men, according to the grace which he has received. Go into the City;
You see, my Brethren, that it was not without the providence of God, that you
entered this City of the Lord of Virtues, S. Aug. Prolo. de Doctr. Christian.
therein to le^rne the will of God. S. Augustine writes to the same purpose, and
brings the same examples of Cornelius, and S. Paul; adding farther in these
words: Al might have been performed by the Ange^, but the nature of man would
have seemed to have been neglected, if God had not chosen man to minister his
word to other men. Besides, Charity, which binds men together in the bonds
of love, would not have that means of unity and conjunction of minds, if men
did not learn of other men. From al which examples and reasons we must
necessarily conclude, that no man is so wise, as he may safely rely upon his
own wisdom; no man so holy, as it may be thought, that God will illuminate
him by himself, but by other men; the sweetness of the D^uine providence
requiring it, Luc. 12 42. The fatherly love of Superiors toward their
subjects.
as I have touched in an other place; and farther, that either we must not give
ourselves to the study of virtue (which is notwithstanding so necessary for all) nor bestow our time and care in spiritual exercises, or we must take some
Master and governor to direct us therein, whereof Religion affords best
commodity, by means of those whom God has placed over his Family, to give
them measure of ^orne in due seas^n; in regard they do not only point us out
the way with their singer, but they walk along with us, and lead us on our
way, and sometimes carry us, yea they often carry us on by comfort, counsel,
admonition, and exhortation: persuading themselves, as the truth is, that they
have not vassals to govern, but their fellow-seruants and brethren, and that
al are the sons of God, committed to their charge and trust by God himself,
and consequently that they owe them not only love, but honor and service;
insomuch that no nurse can be more careful of her nurs^ing, nor no mother of
her only child, then they are of those whom God has commended unto them with
so much love and affection, continually instructing, and teaching, and
directing them, how they may rid themselves of sin and imperfection, purchase
virtue, and withstand all the assaults of the Devil; they lead them along by
the hand, they carry them in their arms through al their exercises, and bring
them up by little and little to al perfection, safely, without danger of erring,
and in a most sweet and easy manner.

God di^^^^^th us (...), Supe(...) even (...) and (...).
10 The last commodity in this kind, i^, that besides the exercises of virtue
and perfection, al other occurrences of our life and actions are likewise
guided by direction of Superiors, or rather by God in them. Many doubtful
passages certainly do happen in this life, as when there is question, where we
shall fix our dwelling, what we shall take to do, in what kind of business we
shall employ our time, and after what manner; in these things we meet with
many difficulties, and are subject to many errors; Howsoever, can we desire
it should be better with us then if God be our guide in them? for so long as he
guides us, we cannot go amiss. Now I have proved before, that whatsoever our
Superiors ordain of us, is the will and appointment of God himself, so long as
they order not any thing expressly contrary to his Divine Law, which God
forbid they should. For what skilleth it, says S. Bernard, whether God declare
his pleasure unto us by himself, ^ Bernard de prae. C ^. p.
or by his ministers, either men or Angels? You will say, that men may be easily
mistaken in many doubtful occurrences, concerning the will of God. But what is
that to thee, that art not guilty thereof? specially the Scripture teaching
thee, that the lips of the Priest keep knowledge, and they shall require the
law from his mouth, because he is the Angel of the Lord of hoasts. Ba^a^h. 2.
Finally whom should we ask what God determines of us, but him to whom the
dispensation of the Mysteries of God is committed? Therefore we must hear him
as God, whom we have in place of God, in all such things, as are not apparently
contrary to God. Thus says S. Bernard. Wherefore, if it be profit and
commodity which we seek, what can be more profitable or commodious in this
life, then to have God for governor of al our actions, and be ruled, not by
our own judgment, but by his wisdom, and succored by his aid and
assistance?

The thirteenth fruit: written Rules* CHAP. XXV.
NExt to the lively voice of Superiors, is the written word of the Rules, as
it were the bones and sinews of Religion, without which it is impossible it
should subsist; and as by the counsel and direction of Superiors we reap all the commodities, of which I have lately spoken, so by the Rules we receive no
less benefit. First, by that general reason, which, as Aristotle writes, is
found in every Law; to wit, that they are without passion and particular
affections, Aristotle. 1. Pol. 11.
and speak to al alike, never varying from themselves, neither for love nor
hatred. Whereupon he concludes, that where the Law takes place, Where La^ takes
place, God gouerne^.
there God does govern, who is neither subject to passion, nor ever changed.
Besides, the Rules have somewhat more then Superiors and governors; because
al governors must follow the intention of the Law, and rule themselves by it,
to govern well. Wherefore the same Philosopher says, that a good Commonwealth
ought to be so ordered, that the Law be still in force, and govern in a manner
alone by itself; and that the Prince and Magistrates are only ministers and
guardians of the Law; yet so, as they have power and authority to interpret
and supply the Law, if in that general fashion of speech, which it uses, there
be any thing wanting or doubtful; which form of best government does most
certainly flourish in Religion.

2. Moreover, The commendation of Rule and Law.
in setting down laws, people take more deliberation and advise, then when
they deliver a thing by word of mouth; and the Law itself speaks not to one
man alone, nor rests upon one man's approbation, but speaks to the whole
community, and is received by them al; and consequently it carries great
authority with it, and people bear it great reverence; because no man is so
impudent, as to prefer his own private opinion before the judgment of so
many others.

3. Again, Law does in a manner compel us to live uprightly, which is an other
great benefit of it; Aristotle 10. E^h. (...).
so that that, which Aristotle writes of laws in another place, is very true,
that Law is so necessary, that men cannot live honestly and uprightly without
it. His reason is this, because Virtue (says he) is hard and difficult,
neither grows it with us, nor is inbred in our nature, but must be purchased
by labor and industry, and with the sweat of our browe^; and therefore,
because men for the most part are loath to take pains, and care not for the
profit that must cost them so dear, we must have something that may egg us
forwards, and in a manner constrayne us, which constraynt is pu^ upon us by
Law; and yet we have this solace by it, that whereas we began to live orderly
upon a kind of necessity, custom and practice and a kind of taste of the
swee^nes, which is in Virtue, does make us love it, and ever after voluntarily
to embrace it.

4. Plato does iumpe in opinion with Aristotle, Pl^to. (...)
affirming that there must of necessity be laws among men, that they may live
according to law; because no man by the strength of his own wit, can know
sufficiently, what is fittin^ in all res^ects for men, or i^ he come to know and
conceive it, he has not po(...) w^^, always to put it in execution. Wherefore
no man can doubt ^ut Re^igi^n is the most wholesome course a man can take, and
the m^st (...) to advance us in spirit, in regard it put; a kind of necessity
vp^n (...) to ^ine well, and in time makes this necessity voluntary; whereof S.
Hierome writes to Ru^ticus in these words: ^ Hi^rom. ^p 4
When thou art in the Monastery, thou wilt not be permitted to do this, but
growing to a custom, by little and little thou wilt begin to love that, to which
at first thou were compe^^ed, and thy pains will be delightful to thee, and
forgetting that which is past, thou wi^t search after that which is before thee.

5. Two things therefore are performed by the Rules and Institute of Religion:
They teach us what we ought to do, and how we are to order our life; and they
require performance of what they teach. For they carry such an authority, or
rather majesty, with them, that they tha^ are subject unto them, cannot but
obey them, nor go a hayres breadth from them; and they are wri^ten in that
particular manner, that they give us direction in all things, inward and
outward, concerning our body and our soul, for private and public occasions,
at home (...) abroad; and may be likened to the Aphorisin^^, which Physicians
write for preseruati^n of health; or as if a man in a long journey, when the
ways are hard to hit, should carry a map with him, or are ^iste^ of the
place^, by which he is to travel. For as such Aphorisme^ do help ^s for our
health, and such a register or map would help us upon our i^urnie, the one to
prevent sickness, the other that we go not out of our way: So it is incredible
how much this method and rule which we find in Religion, does preserve us from
falling into far greater errors and sickness; O^^ Rule a (...) gla^se.
beholding in it, as in a looking-g^asse, how we are to order and compose
ourselves, and what we are to put off and avoid, and what again to make
choice of and embrace so that if we truly love our own benefit, we shall never
need to ^e^re, least we be ouer-charged with too many rules. To which purpose
there is a witty saying reported of Sol^n, Sol^n.
who was one of the Seven wise men. While he was m^king laws for the people
of Athens, Anacharsi^ a Philosopher and f^iend of his came in, and finding what
he was writing, lau^hed at him, saying, that laws were like cob-webs, which
take little flies, but are easily b^^^en by the bigger sort of vermin. Solon
answered, that as bargains and covenants are best kept, when they are
beneficial for both parties, because neither part desires they should be void;
so he was making such laws, as were better for every body to keep them,
then to b^eake them. Which is far truer in the Rules and orders of holy
Religion; for they aim at nothing but the everlasting good of al, and of
every particular; and consequently every one must needs love and tender them,
as much as he loves and tenders his own eternal welfare; ^
specially seeing not only the greater Rules, and such as concern the whole
co^munitie, or the essence and substance of Religion, are thus profitable, but
the lesser also, if any of them can be called little, conducing so much as they
do to eternal salvation, yet (...) which in a vulgar eye are esteemed little,
have no final profit in them. For as a man may perhaps think, that so many
leaves are not (...) in a vine, or other tree that bears fruit, and yet they
are very needful, either in regard they are an ornament to the tree, or rather
because they do much preserve the fruit thereof: so in this abundance of
spiritual fruits, by which our souls health is maintained, there be many
little things in show, and yet our soul is preserved by them, and brought to
perfection.

6. But the chief benefit which we reap by our Rules, Rule, the written will of
God.
is that which I said before belonged also to the direction of Superiors, to
wit, that they are the very will and direction of God. And to the end no man
may doubt thereof, you must understand, that this property is not peculiar to
the Rules of Religion, but extends itself to al profane laws, enacted by
Prince or People, S. Thomas. 12. q ^3 a. 3.
so they be just and reasonable. So al Divines, and particularly S. Thomas, the
head of Divines, does deliver; to wit, that every law, so it be (as I said)
just and reasonable, is nothing else but a branch, or parcel of the Eternal Law,
which is in God; and this two manner of ways: by participation of power and
authority, from which al laws must proceed; whereof S Paul speaks when he
says: Rom 13.
Al power is from God; Secondly, by reason that whatsoever is ordained by a
lawful Superior, consorteth with that which from al eternity was decreed in
the intent of God. For it is certain, that God does govern al things, and
direct them every one to their several ends; and moreover that he has in his
mind and intention a certain comprehension, how he means to govern them, and
consequently must needs communicate this his intention with whom he does employ
as ministers to execute his government, so much as is necessary for every
one; to the end, that by their decrees and commands, his will also and decrees,
which lay hid in his mind and intention, may be made known and manifest. This
is common to al Lawmakers, but has force chiefly in Religion, because al
things are well ordered in it; neither is there any reason, why it should be
otherwise, in regard neither wealth, nor rich preferments, nor any thing else
does provoke ambition, which in Commonwealths is wont to be the corruption of
the laws.

7. These be grounds of reason for this point; God the Author of (...)
Reli^^^^. Inst^^^^^ S^ Pacho^^us.
but God moreover has often declared by miracle, that he is the author of
every Religious Institute; as when we read, that an Angel brought the whole
Rule ready written to S. Pacho^^us, as it was to be observed by him and his
Brethren; wherein every particular thing was expressed, what apparel they
should wear, what offices there should be among them, how they should govern
themselves in their diet and lodging.

8. That which we read of S. Francis, S. Franci^.
is nearer our times, whom God did encourage to frame his Rule by this Vision.
He seemed to see himself and his Brethren in great distress for want of
sustena^ce; and that he had nothing to refresh them withal, but a great many
crummes of bread, which, in regard they were very small, he feared would moulter
away betwixt his fingers, while he were distributing the^. The (...)
B^ing in this thought, he heard a voice bidding him make one host or wa^er of
al those crummes together; and reaching it to his Brethren, he perceived, that
they that did refuse and contemn it, were presently covered with an ugly
leprosy. The next night one declared unto him wh^t thi^ Vision mea^t, to wit,
that the crummes were the Eua^gelical Counsels; the host the Rule he was about
the leprosy, malice. Afterward retiring himself, a^ an other M^y^s, for 40.
days, to a certain mount, to draw this Rule, diverse of his Order coming unto
him made their complaint, that they feared his Rule would be too strict; and
behold a voice from heaven spoke thrice in this manner: Francis, nothing is
thine in this Rule; it is wholly mine; and it is my will to have it entirely
kept, as the letter sounds; I know what men are able to bear, and what help
and assistance intend to bestow upon them. Finally having finished his Rule, he
brought it to the Pope, where again there was much difficulty made, touching
that new kind of rigid and strict poverty; but S. Francis still most constantly
and religiously affirmed, that there was not in it one word of his own, but
every thing as Christ our Lord himself had indicted and delivered it.

9. And it is reason to think, that as S. Francis penned his Rule by instinct
and inspiration of God, and according to his Divine intent; so al other
Founders of Religious Orders have in their particular Institutes been lead the
same way, as S. Basil, S. Augustine, S. Benedict, and others. For the thing is
the same, and the light and other heavenly gifts, which they had, were given
them in regard of the Religions which they founded, and not given to the
Religious in regard of them. S. Ignatius.
Thus much I can testify of our Father and Founder S. Ignatius, that in a
note-booke, which I have seen, written with his own hand, it was found
recorded, that when he was penning the Constitutions, he hung many days
doubtful in one point, for many difficulties which did occur concerning it.
And in that Book he noted day by day, the lights, rapts, and visions which had
happened unto him, of our B. Lady, the B. Trinity, and others. Whence we may
conclude, that not that point alone, of which we find this written, but all the
rest of the Constitutions were penned by Divine instinct, and not by humane wit
and invention; and the same we understand of al other Religions with so much
the greater reason, by how much ours is inferior unto them in worth and
sanctity.

S Greg. 2. dial. c. 37.
10. S. Gregory writes, that the same day S. Benedict dyed, two of his Monks
did seem to see a large and strayt way, strowed with men's garments, and full of
lights; and an ancient man stood by, saying: This is the way by which the
beloved of our Lord, Benedict, ascended to heaven. S. Bernard interprets that
this way is no other, but the Rule which he left written; by observance whereof,
as himself went to heaven, so might others do, that would follow it. For it
can no ways be doubted, S. Bern^rd. hom. (...).
says he, but that this manner of conversation is altogether holy, and
ordered rather by divine inspiration and instinct, then by human prudence and
invention, whereby S. Benedict came to so great grace of sanctity in this
life, and so much glorious happiness after his departure. And this which S.
Bernard speaks of that Rule, every Religious person ought to believe an^
pronounce of his; and if he walk the way it leads him, he shall without sail
(in regard of the great light which is in it) and with continual pleasure and
delight, arrive at his heavenly Country, which is full of al delight and
p^easure.

The fourteenth fruit: Good example. CHAP. XXVI.
THere is no man but finds by experience the force, which Example has to
incline us to virtue, or to vice; insomuch that the Holie-Ghost in the Proverbs
writes, Pro. 13.20
that he that walks with a wise man, shall be wise; a friend of fools, shall
be made like unto them. The force of example.
Religion therefore must needs be in this respect also wonderfully beneficial,
barring, as it does, evil example, whereof a worldly life is so very full; and
furnishing such store of good examples, which are worthily esteemed one of the
greatest incitements to virtue, that a Soul can have, that desires heavenly
perfection. S. Antonie the Great is witness heerof; S. Antonie.
of whom S. Athanasius (a special good author) writes, that he chose of
purpose, rather to live in company of others, then to lead a solitary life,
that he might have occasion to draw some good thing out of every one of those,
with whom he lived, and express in himself al their prerogatives, being as it
were watered from the spouts of virtue, derived from every one of them; which
as he practiced, so he always wished others to do the like. And Cassian does
relate it of him more at large in these words: Cassian. lib. 5. c. 4.
It is an ancient and a wonderful good saying of S. Antonie, that a Monk that
has chosen to live in a Monastery with others, and aymeth at the height of
great Perfection, must not think to learn al kind of virtue of one man. For
one man is decked with the flower of knowledge, another more strongly provided
of the virtue of discretion, another is grounded in constant patience, another
excels in humility, another in continency, another has a special grace in
simplicity; one is renowned for magnanimity, another for charity and
compassion; one for watching, another for silence, another for labor and
pains taking; and therefore a Monk must, like a provident be, gather the
spiritual honey which he desires, from the party, in whom he sees that virtue
most naturally grow, and hiue it up carefully in his breast. Thus speaks
Cassian from S. Antonie's mouth.

2. Let us therefore see, how and in what manner Religion does teach us al kind
of virtue by example of others. First whereas the way of Virtue is dark and
obscure, Ho^ Religion teaches virtue by example Seneca. ep. 6.
both in regard that Spiritual things are of their own nature hidden from
Sense, and the Prince of darkness does continually endeavor to obscure them
more and more, casting mists before our eyes; Religion does guide us by the
light of example, in the way of Virtue. Wherefore, as we use to say, that
pictures are the books of unlearned people, so are examples also books written
with great Roman letters, which a body cannot choose but see and read, be he
never so negligent and careless.

3. Seneca in few words pithily expresses two other fruits of Example. One
word of a man's mouth (says he) and daily conversation, will benefit thee
m^re, then a whole Oration penned; first, because men believe their eyes before
their ears; secondly, because it is a long business to go by precepts; example
is a shorter way, and more effectual. He calls it a shorter way, because we
understand the nature of virtue, Example a ^hort way to learn (...).
not by definition and division, and a long circumstance of words, such as
people use in Sermons and disputations, but beholding it in native colors
acted and represented before us; as if a body should go about to tell us what
kind of man Caesar was he must use many words and tell a long story, and yet
not be able to express him as he deserves; but if he show you the man, you
instantly conceive more certainly and clearly, what he was. So when S. Francis
washed the sick man that was full of leprosy, and S. Catherine of Siena did so
diligently tend a froward il-toungued woman, that was half mad, they gave far
better and more compendious documents, how we ought to love our neighbor, and
hate ourselves, and exercise humility and patience, then if they had
undertaken to declare the same with long circumstance of words.

And more ^^^^^tual.
4 It is also more effectual, as Seneca says; first, because, whatsoever the
matter is, when we see a thing done by an other, we learn that it is not so
hard, but we likewise may do the same. That which we read in books, or is
preached unto us, inst^n^teth our mind; yet most commonly it brings with it
such a show of hardness, that they that have not experienced it, think it harsh
and unpleasing, and when they see it ordinarily practiced by other men like
themselves, they think otherwise of it; as if there should be question, whether
there be any passage over a high hill, there could not be a more certain proof
of it, thea to show that many have passed already, and to see them stand on
the top of it. S. Gregory confirms this doctrine, ^
writing upon those words of Job: Thou renewed thy witnesses against me. These
witnesses, as he says, are just men, who give testimony to the commandments
of God, and to the rewards layd-vp for the keepers of them, that, if precepts
do not move us, examples may move us; and that we may not think any thing
hard in the desire of righteousness, which we behold perfectly performed by
others.

5. Now in Religion these examples are the more forcible, because they do not
only put us out of fear of difficulties, but moreover they do secretly egg us
forward with a burning kind of desire of virtue, S^ ^^ofer. de S. (...).
whereof S. Leo speaks in these words: Reason may be good to exhort, and
effectual in persuading; but examples are more ^orcible, then words; and it is
a fuller manner to teach by deed, then by speech. Many have found this true by
experience encouraged by example of others to come out of the filth of sinful
pleasure and other vices; S. Aug. lib. 8. C^nt. ^6. (...) converted by Example.
of which number were the two Gentlemen of the Emperor Theodosius his Court;
of whom S. Augustine writes, that falling by chance upon the Life of S.
Antonie, and reading it, they first began to wonder, and were somewhat netled;
but at last they grew so hot upon it, that from thence where they stood, both
of them forsook the secular course they were in, and began a new kind of
warfare in the service of God. Which passage Poli^ianus relating to S.
Augustine, as he was familiarly talking with him, and with all entering into
discourse of the life of S. Antonie (whose name S. Augustine had then scarce
heard of) and of the multitude of Monasteries that were in Egypt, and
declaring at large their manner of life full of the sweet smelling odours of
God, as S. Augustine himself speaks, put such a fire into his breast, that he
was never after quiet in mind, til he resolved to leave the world, and betake
himself to the like heavenly course of life; so that the example of S. Antonie
drew-on the two gentlemen, and their example again moved S. Augustine, who has
in like manner drawn infinite numbers after him.

6. The like has happened to diverse others, whom it were long to rehearse; but
the example of two of later times is memorable. S Io^n (...).
John Columbinus Founder of the Order of Apostolical Clarcks, was converted by
reading the Life of S. Marie of Egypt; S. Ignatius.
and Ignatius Founder of the Society of JESUS in like manner by reading the
lives of the ancient Fathers; and both of them happening upon these lives by
chance rather then setting themselves of purpose to pervse them, were so
suddenly changed, and arrived afterward to that eminent sanctity, which is
known to the whole world.

7. If therefore al kind of written examples, even those which make relation of
things done in ancient times beyond the memory of man, be so very powerful,
much more powerful must these needs be, which are fresh, and lively, and
domestical, acted daily before our eyes; for it is evident, that that which we
see and behold, makes a far greater impression in us, then that which we have
by relation of others; in regard our very sense of seeing is quicker then our
hearing; and a written discourse, let it be never so cloquent, cannot express
a thing so very lively, with all the circumstances, wherein the chief effect of
motion does consist. And farther, if they could be of such force in the world,
as to cause people to forsake the world, that were so wedded to it, and
entangled in so many bonds, with so little and so weak a light, as then they
had, and so many things to s^ay them, and cool their resolutions; shall they
not be of far greater force in Religion, where al things are more easy,
their light clearer, their strength greater to advance themselves in the
practice of Humility, Obedience, and other virtues? Without doubt they are so,
and do draw people on with unspeakable sweetness and facility; for the
impression which example makes, is not harsh and violent, but gentle,
delightful, and very natural.

8. Finally it is no small benefit, that by this means we come more truly to
know ourselves, (...) by example of others.
and preserve ourselves in profound humility, living in daily company with
such persons, as if we compare ourselves with them, we cannot but discover our
own excessive wants, and their abundant riches. Of which kind we read in S.
Bernard a notable president of a Lay-Brother, that casting himself at his
feet, S. Bernard ser. de altitud and (...) Cor.
accused himself with great confusion in these words: Woe is to me; because
this night I have marked one Brother, and reckoned in him thirty virtues,
whereof I find not so much as one to myself. How came this profound humility
(which alone perhaps was more to be esteemed then the thirty virtues, A
memorable example of humil^^^^
which he had marked in an other) into this man's soul, but by beholding
others; and comparing himself with the^? Which i^, the advice of S. Gregory in
these words: whosoever desires fully to know what he is, must behold such
persons as are not l^k^ himself; S ^^re, (...) l. 24. c. 6.
and by the beauty of the good, measure ^ow deformed he is, in forsaking that
which is good. For by them that are full of good things, he may justly know how
much he wants of weight, and by their beauty discover his own sowlenes, which
he suffers, but cannot see in himself. We must therefore behold the life of
that lus^, the we may precisely understand our own; S. Bernard s. 54 in cant.
for their behavior, is a sampler for us to imitate; and their life, a lively
lesson. Which document of S. Gregorie's cannot be practiced any where more
commodiously, then in Religion, where there be so many good men. Let us
therefore see, how S. Bernard did practice it, and teach his people to observe
it. Thus he speaks: I behold one of singular abstinence, another of wonderful
patience, another of most profound humility and meeknes, another of great
pity and compassion; this man I see with often Exstases in contemplation,
another beating the heavens with incessant prayer, and others excelling in
other virtues; these I behold, al of them fervent, al of them devout, al of
them flowing with heavenly gifts and graces, in very deed as so many
spiritual mountains visited by our Lord. But I, that find nothing of all this
in myself, what can I conceive of myself, but that I am one of the mountains
of G^lboe whom this most merciful Visitour of all the rest does passe-by in his
wrath and indignation? My Children, this thought makes me, that I dare not
hold-vp my eyes; it causes grace, and prepares a soul for the leaps ^f the
Bridegroom. Thus far S. Bernard.

Good example a c^^tinual spur to virtue.
9. Which fruit of Religion, is of no small price and value. For besides tha^ the
contempt and hatred of ourselves in comparison of others is the very fl^wer of
humility, a flower most acceptable and precious in the sight of God, it is a
con^inual spur, urging us to labor for those things which we see we want,
and to labor so much the more earnestly, because we see plenty in others of
that which we want ourselves, whereof arises a most honorable and ^^lie
emula^i^n among the Brethren of Religion in purchase of virtue; such as we see
among fellows of the same School for learning, among soldiers for the
victory, among racers for the prize. And this eagernes, I dare say, is one of
the chiefest means to Perfection; for as a man may best see his own heaviness,
when he runs in company of others, that leave him a great way behind; and
to be so left, does egg him on to make more speed; so in this spiritual race we
shall hardly find any thing, that does more plainly show and vpbraide us with
our own ^epiditie and sloth, then to see others so fervent, that if we be not
as heavy as stones and lead, it alone must needs suffice to spur us on.
Wherefore it cannot be denied, but that there is a daily great benefit
coming-in unto us by the example of our Brethren, with whom we live; which
suffers us not to be quiet, but is continually admonishing, and inst^ucting,
and egging us forward. A solitary life, such as the ancient Anach^rets did
lead, was certainly full of virtuous practices; yet because it wanted this
benefit of example, S. Hierome does exhort Rusticus rather to live in a
Monastery, S Hierome Epist. 4.
in the company of many; that, as he speaks, he may learn humility of
one, patience of another; one may teach him silence, another meekenes. To which
purpose Theodoret, Theodoret in (...).
also an ancient Author (who lived in time of those Fathers, and had seen
many of them) relates of a holy man named Publius; Publius.
who being of noble descent, in the degree of a Senator, borne in a city of
Greece called Z^ugma, took his dwelling upon a hill not far from the city;
and many resorting to him, at first he built for every one of them a several
cottage; but afterward, upon better advise, he pulled al those cottages down,
and built one house for them al together; that living under one roof, they
might encourage one another in virtue and devotion. In consequence whereof, he
was wont ever after often to exhort them, that they should endeavor
continually to profit by one another, imitating the meeknes of one, and
strengthening their own meeknes by the zeal of an other; and learning
watchfulnes of one, they should mutually teach him austeritie in fasting;
finally that among themselves they should be to each other both master and
scholar; for taking of another what themselves wanted, they should, as he
said, arrive to great perfection in virtue. Which excellent document be
confirmed with this fit Similitude: For as several tradesmen bring al kind of
commodities to the market, one selles bread, another herbs, another apparel,
or shoes; and no one man can sufficiently provide the market of al necessaries,
but imparting to others that whereof himself has plenty, as bread, or
apparel, receaueth of others what he wants, as oil, wine, shoes, and the
like: so the servants of God among themselves, seeing no one man can possibly
compass al things, must meet as it were in one market, and changing one with
another the several commodities and parcels of virtue, receive of one an other,
what they find they want.

The fifteeneth fruit: Concord and unity of Religious men among themselves.
CHAP. XXVII.
IT is well known, that in all the Law of Christ our Savior no one precept is
more earnestly or more often commended unto us, then the Love of one another.
The precept of love.
And as for the measure and proportion of this inward conjunction and charity,
how great and fast he desired it should be, himself euiden^ly showed, when in
his last speech to his disciples, as it were in his last will and testament, he
so ardently besought his Father, Job. 17.11.
that al his Elect might be one among themselves, as he and his Father was one.
What greater thing could be required, or more significantly expressed? seeing as
He and his Father have one and the self-same nature, so their will and
intentions must needs be one and undivided. This concord and unity did long
flourish among Christians, And the practice thereof.
specially in those first, and, as we may call them, golden times, while the
precepts of our Lord were yet fresh in their memories, and f^^ie in their
hearts, and, as we read in the Acts of the Apostles, Act. 4 32. Tertullian
Apol. c. 3.
the believers had one heart, and one soul; yea al their earthly substance and
possessions were one common thing to al and every one of them. Tertullian (a
learned author) for this reason does not stick to say, that the whole
Euangelical Law does consist in performing charitable offices toward one
another, and records that it was a common thing among the Gentiles in his
time, to say: Behold, what love is among them; in so much that they are ready
to dye for one another! Moreover he says, that the Christians of those times
did usually call Brothers and were so, not in word only, but in very deed;
because al things but their wives, were common among them; and none of them had
any thing so private to himself, that he had not rather his Neighbor had it,
then himself.

2. A^ example of this mutual charity, and charitable beneficence and
liberality toward one another, and of the force and efficacy thereof,
remaynes upon record in the Life of S. Pachom^us. The con(...) of S. Pa^^^mius.
He, while he was a Heathen, bare arms under Constantine the Great, at which
time the army being almost famished for want of victuals, it came before a
certain City, where presently al things they could desire were brought them,
with such expression of good will, care, and solicitude, that Pachomius
beholding it, was very much stricken and amazed; and being very inquisitiue,
what people they might be that were so ready to do them that good turn, he
was told they were Christians, a people whose profession was to love every
body, and to be ready to do them any service. Whereupon presently lifting up
his hands to heaven, and calling God to witness, he vowed to be of that
Religion, though he never had heard any thing of it before. Such was the
impression, love made in him. This Euangelical concord and amity therefore, a
virtue so noble in itself and so acceptable to our Savior Christ, in former
times so much esteemed, and now in this corrupted Age of ours so much neglected
and impaired, as there is scarce any remaynder of it, a Reli^ious Sta^e does
perfectly revive and bring to life again. And it is to be reckoned among the
best commodities of the State, that it does so solidly renew and set on foot
again this Christian society and charity, laying al things common, which
charity our Savior gave for the mark and Devise, by whi^^ his people should
be known to be truly his Disciples. But this will appear more clearly, if we
compare the bonds of this Religious society, with the bonds of other
companies, and consider the great difference that is betwixt them.

3. There be two kind of bonds, whereby men among themselves are bound to one
another: The bond of Religious (...) then one other.
One is voluntary, entered by consent and will, as among friends, m^rchants, and
soldiers of a company; the other is natural, as among brethren and others of
our kindred. The first kind of society and bond voluntarily entered, is not
certainly to be compared with the bond of Religion; for first it is confined
within certain limits and conditions, extending no farther then to the point of
^^ading, or warfare, or familiar conversation; al things that concern not
these particulars, are private to every one, the rest of the company have
nothing to do with the^. But among the servants of God, nothing is their own,
nothing private or particular, nothing different or divided from the rest, but
al manner of businesses and endeauours, and absolutely al things whatsoever, are
common among them. Besides those other bonds, as they are entered by consent and
will, so by consent and will they may be taken-in again, and are usually
taken-in, either because the dispositions of the parties sort not well
together, or their fortunes alter, or the times are different, or there
arises some controversy about the gain and commodity, as not rich enough to
content al parties; insomuch that it is very hard to keep any such society
or combination long on foot: Religious men remain bound not only by purpose
and firm deliberation, but by Vow; so that they can no more depart from one
another, then they can from the service of the Divine Majesty.

4. But what wonder is it, that Religious charity should so far surpass al
voluntary obligations, seeing doubtless it is stronger then any natural
conjunction Can ^he^e be any more near together then brethren among
themselves, who a^e derived from one stock, and once lay in one belly, and
seem to be (as (...) s^ripture speaks) the same flesh and the same b^ne? ^^n
^^.14.
yet they seldom agree, (...) betwixt them very often; and in their fashions
and proceedings they are very different, and you shall hardly find any that put
their stocks in common together, or can long maintain them so. In Religion it
is otherwise; for (as I said even now) al things are common; in so much that
comparing both the bonds together, we may truly say with S. Augustine: S. Aug
ser. 18. d^ verb. Apo.
The brotherhood of Christ is better then brotherhood in blood; for this is
often at variance with itself, the brotherhood of Christ is incessantly
peaceable; That with emulation divides among themselves things that were
common; this imparteth them with joy; That often despises brethren in company
of others; this often gives friendly entertaynment to a stranger.

5. Yea some of the Heathen Philosophers delivering their opinion in this kind,
have written, that no society or friendship can be more noble, or more fast,
then if good men of like condition enter league and familiarity together. To
which purpose a saying of Antisthenes is much commended, Cic. 1. off.
that a just and upright man, is more to be valued and loved, then a kinsman;
and that the obligations of virtue are stronger, then the obligations of
consanguinitie; in regard the disposi^ions of their mind suite better. Which S.
Ambro^e expresses more solidly, S. Ambros. 1. off. c. 7.
and also in better terms, saying: I love you never a whit the less, whom I
have beg^tten to the G^^spel, then if I had begot you in marriage; neither is
Nature more hot in love, then Grace; certainly we ought to love them far
more, with whom we make account we shall be for ever, then those with whom we
shall live only in this world.

6. Cassian in one of his Collations bringeth-in the Abbot Abraham expressing
more at large this whereof we now speak, Cassian Coll. vlt. cap. vit.
and preferring by far the conjunction which is among Religious, before any
conjunction, which nature can enforce. For it is certain, says he, that the
conjunction, in which either by society of wedlock, or the knot of
consanguinitie, parents and children, and cosengermans, and man and wife, and
other kindred, are knit together, is short and brickle; the best and most
obedient children, when they come to years, are often shut-out from their
father's house and possessions; the communication which is betwixt man and
wise, may be barred sometimes upon just occasions; the love which should be
betwixt brethren, is broken-of by contentious division; Only Monks maintain a
perpetual unity and coniun^tion, possessing al things without difference, and
esteeming that to be theirs, which is their Brethrens, and that their
Brethrens, which any way belongs to themselves. Whereunto we may add, for
further proof of the strength of this love and concord, that, and Coll. 16.6.
which the same Cassian relates of a speech of Abbot Joseph; where he
discomseth thus: To the end concord and unity may long endure, al desire of
wealth, or other earthly things must of necessity be utterly rooted out; and
moreover, every one must barie himself of his own will* and be more ready to
yeald to another's judgment, then to stand to his own. Which if it be true,
as certainly it is, we may easily see, that it is very hard for men in the
world, to hold many of them truly and sincerely together; and contrariwise,
that in Religion the same is very easy, and, I may say, almost necessary,
where voluntary Poverty does cut-of al cause of strife, and voluntary
Obedience al passions of self-wil, ^
and in very deed al use thereof. Whereupon S. Chrysostom says wondrous well,
speaking of this benefit of Religion: What marvel is it, that they should al of
the^ use one kind of habit and diet, seeing they have al of the^ but one soul,
not only by nature (for so al men have) but by love and charity: for how can
any man be at variance against himself? So that in S. Chrisostome's opinion it
is as hard for one Religious man to fal-out with another, as it is for a man to
fal-out with himself. For as in one and the same man, many members are held in
unity by one and the same soul, so in Religion many men are united together
by one only soul of Charity and consent. It is therefore certainly a great
matter, and full of great profit and pleasure, and, if we think well of it, half
a miracle, that in such diversity of nations, and natures, and age, and
dispositions, the Grace of God should have so much force as to knit together
so many companies of Religious people in so inward a conjunction of love and
vision of minds, as if they had been borne of one mother, and bred-vp with the
same milk, there could not be more, nor so much love betwixt them. Which S.
Basil does worthily commend, S. B^s^l. C^nst m^n. c. 1^.
admiting that men, as he speaks, of diverse nations and countries, should so
grow toge^ther in one, by perfect similitude of behavior and discipline, that
a man may justly think, that in many bodies there is but one soul, or that
they are of one soul but so many instruments. Which inward conjunction and
concord among Religious people, though it chiefly concern the mind, ^
that they be (as the A^^stle speaks) of the same meaning and will, it
extends itself to outward things also, and is not a litlest en^^^ned by them.
They dwell together; their apparel is alike; their employments, and their
ends, and their means be the same; and consequently for c^mm^ditie or
incommoditie, P^^l p. 2.
prosperity or adversity, they fare alike; and that which falls upon one,
falls upon another; which things though they be small in themselves and mean,
as al temporal things are, yet they testify great unity among them, and do
also greatly preserve it.

S. Lauren^e Justinian. de (...) Pl^to ^ial 4. de r^p.
7. Wherefore S. Laurence (...) extolling this commoning in outward things,
which we find among Religious people, says it is a perfect sampler of that
which is in Nature. For as the sustenance, which we take by meat and drink, is
equally divided to all the parts of the body, as every member or part has
need, and Nature itself, as a discreet householder, is judge and distributer
thereof, wi^h ^ut any strife or contention among the members; so al things
necessary are equally divided in Religion to the contentment of every one.
Wherof^^e there can not be any thing in the world more beneficial, or more
delightful to beh^ld, then this perfect unity and communication of al things
which is in (...). And to say no more, the very Heathen Philosophers going
about to (...) in their imagination a City or Commonwealth so absolutely
perfect and complete in all respects, that a man may rather wish such a thing,
then ever h^pe to find it, could not invent a more excellent, nor more qu^inte
form thereof then that of which I have spoken Plato, as we see, framed his
imaginary Commonwealth after this mould, wishing that, according to the old
Proverb, among friends al things might be common; and accounting it the
greatest virtue and happiness which could be in a city, that there be nothing
private, neither money, nor house, nor possessions, but every thing in common,
even those thin^s which naturally are so proper to private persons, that they
cannot be common; as that our eyes, and ears, and hands should see, and ear,
and lab^u^ for the common, our very D^ctam^ns and opinions should be common,
and every one thing well or il, and rejoice or be sorry for the same things
that another is. If in such a City, says he, or Commonwealth, the Gods or
the sons of the Gods do chance to dwell together, certainly they must needs
be blessed and full of al joy and happiness. This is Plato his discourse; and he
adds farther that there never was, neither ever will be such a Commonwealth
upon earth.

8. How great therefore is the excellency and happiness of a Religious
company, where this is so perfectly performed, which Plato thought could not
possibly be compassed; or if it were compassed, he was of opinion that they
were Gods, or the sons of the Gods, that lived in that joy and felicity? Now
though every one of us may better find by his own experience, then by any
man's relation, that this is so perfectly accomplished in Religion, it will not
be amiss for proof thereof, S. Basil. Constable. Mon. c. 9.
to bring two such witnesses, as are without al exception, and express it
besides in words, which come very near to those which Plato uses. S. Basil
says thus: In it al things are common, their minds, their wills, their bodies,
and al things necessary for meat, drink, and apparel; They serve one God in
common, their exercises of piety are in common, their salvation, their
confl^cts, their labors, their rewards and crowns are common; S. John. Chrysostom.
lib. 3.
In it many are one, and one is not alone, but in many. But S. John
Chrysostom is far more c^pi^us, po^^ring-forth on every side the golden
streams of his eloquence, but chiefly whenever he has had occasion to
plead for Religion, as he does in his Apology for Monastical life; Comparison
of a Religious life with that of the Angels.
where having reckoned-vp many incommodities and dangers of a Secular life, at
length he says thus: You shall find none of these evils at al in Monasteries;
but when others are tossed with the waves and surges of the sea, they alone
lying quiet and safe in the haven, behold as it were from heaven the shipwreck
which others suffer. For they have chosen a heavenly conversation, not
inferior to the Angels. For as among the Angels there is no doubtful change,
so that some of them glory in prosperity, and others lament their hard
fortune; but al are joyful and quiet, uniformly rejoicing together in that
heavenly glory; the like you shall see in Monasteries: No body is vpbrayded
with poverty, no body is more honored for his riches; so that Mine and Thine
(two things which turn al things vpside-downe) are quite shut-out of their
door; al things among them are common, their board, their dwelling, their
apparel, and, which is more to be admired, they are of one and the same mind.
They are al equally noble and honorable; equally rich, which is to be truly
rich; and equally glorious, which is the only true glory. Their pleasures, and
pastimes, and delights, and desires, and hopes, are the same. Al things are
among them most carefully ordered, as it were balanced by weight and measure;
there is no uneven dealing, but exceeding great order, and moderation, and
conuenience, and unspeakable care of concord and continual matter of joy. There
and no where else you shall find, that they do not only contemn things present,
and shut-out al occasions of quarrel and debate, and that they are happy in
the assured hope of eternal life, but also that they make account that al
things which happen, be they joyful, be they sad, be common to every one among
them; whereby their grief is more easily assuaged, in regard that every one
does endeavor to his power to bear part of the burden, and they have infinite
occasions of gladness, every one rejoicing, not in his own alone, but in
others behalf.

The sixteenth fruit: Mutual assistance in all things. CHAP. XXVIII.
THE unity and concord, whereof I spoke in the last Chapter, is certainly a
great benefit, and very pleasing to Almighty God, and includes two other
excellent commodities, whereof I shall treat severally in the Chapter following.
The one, is the mutual help and assistance, which Religious people have one of
another in all things. That many meet together, and join their forces and
abilities in one, ^^ist^tle (...)
must needs be exceeding profitable for every one in particular, and absolutely
for all occasions. For by this means (as Aristotle well observes* though every
one by himself be not so good, yet al together are better, then any one among
them, be he never so good. As (says he) a bancket, to the settin^-out whereof
many concur, and lay their purses together, is much more sumptuous, then if
it be provided at one man's cha^^es: So every one in common has some measure
of virtue and wisdom, which being put in common, does make one perfect thing;
which is also the reason, why many judge better of Music or Poetry, then
one; because some observe one thing, others another.

2. This is Aristotle's discourse; and it holds in his opinion, though every
one by himself be not perfect; much more then, if the number be of choice
persons, and every one among them very eminent, or at least endeavor to be
so: and consequently Religious people must needs reap in every kind great
benefit by the community in which they live; which secular people cannot,
living as they do; every one, as I may say, at his own charges. For as a
plank of a ship, if it be taken severally by itself, is for small purpose; but
many put together are very serviceable at sea, to transport commodities, and
brook the waves and billows. And stones upon a heap by themselves, serve for
little; but laid handsomely in mor^er together, make a glorious show of
princeli: Palaces and buyldings; and in towers, and castles, and towne-walles,
are ab^e to abide the Canon; and sever them again, they are but a heap of
stones as they were before; So one man alone by himself, either is not for so
much, or for no more, then by his own single strength he is able to perform;
but many together fortifye one another, as we see daily before our eyes in
works, that require corporal strength and labor. If one man take upon him to
carry or draw a great weight, with all his strength he is not perhaps able to
stir it; many together go away smoothly with it, which as it is true
absolutely in all things, which are done by concurrence of many, so I shall show
how it agrees with our particular case, both in respect of the benefit and
perfection of our own souls, and for whatsoever else is to be done for the
good and perfection of our Neighbor.

3. And first, as concerning ourselves, we read in holy Scripture, that It is
better to be two together, then one; for they have the benefit of their
society; if one fall, Company beneficial against mischief, which a soul may
come by.
he may be slayed by another. Woe to him that is alone; because when he is
fallen, he has none to lift him up. If two sleep together, they will cherish
one another. How shall one be warm? And if one prevail, two will resist him. A
triple cord is hardly broken. In which words we may find three commodities
expressed, without which a spiritual life cannot subsist. For first considering
we are so weak, and the place, where we stand, so very slipperie, that we
cannot but often fall, is it not a great benefit to have one always with us to
give us his hand, and lift us up? Which in the falls which the Soul does come
by, is much more necessary, then when our body falls. For in these, we may
foresee, when and where we are like to fall; but our soul is often blinded,
and falls in the dark, and lies still a great while, thinking not of it, or
perhaps thinking that it stands well enough. Besides when our soul once gets a
fall, it bruseth itself so sorely, that unless it have help from without, it
cannot rise again; which help comes chiefly from God, but yet by the hands and
assistance of men. And put the case, there were a man so fortunate, as never to
fall (which is impossible) he is in danger notwithstanding of a certain
spiritual coldness, which easily creepes upon us, in the dead winter of this
world, where we walk in so great a distance from that Sun of Justice, which
one day will show his face, and warm us. To put away this cold, and bring heat
into our souls, nothing can be better, then, as the Wiseman speaks, that
one cherish another; and if there be more together, the heat must needs be
the greater. For, as we see a piece of great timber will not burn of itself in
the fire, but if you put some brands ends unto it, it presently kindles; so
our souls, if they be left alone, wax cold; but in company of others that be
^eruent, they are easily inflamed, both by counsel and example, whereof I have
already spoken. But how shall one alone be warmed? as the Wiseman speaks.

4. The third commodity is, that if one be too strong, two will resist him;
pointing at the continual strife and combat which we have (as the Apostle
speaks) against the powers and rulers of this darkness; Ephesians. 6.1^.
in which fight it cannot be imagined, how much more safe it is to have
company. For, as S. Leo (who is excellent at al hands) says very well: S. Leo
ser. de ^^iun. s^ps men's.
Though a spiritual warrier may come-of valiantly, if he fight alone; it is
safer and e^sier for him, to fight standing in battail-array openly against the
enemy; fighting and bringing the battle to an end, not with his own strength
alone, but assisted with troops of his brethren, under command of an
invincible King. For many together fight with less danger, then every one
can do by himself; neither can a man be easily wounded, if opposing the
buckler of Faith he be defended, S. Bernard s. 4. de Circum^is.
not by his own only, but by others strength; that, as the cause is the same,
the victory may be common among them. S. Bernard says moreover, that there
cannot be a more dangerous thing, then for a man to stand to contend alone with
the Devil, whom he cannot see, and yet is seen by him; and therefore whosoever
does think of serving God, must himself have the virtue of Fortitude, and seek
besides to fight in array with others, where (a^ he says) he has as many
succors, as companions; and such companions, as may say with the Apostle: We
are not ignorant of the wiles of the enemy. For a Congregation, in regard of
the strength it has, is terrible, as a battle well ordered; but woe to him
that is alone; because when he is fallen, he has no body to lift him up. Thus
says S. Bernard.

5. Finally the Wiseman, besides the divine authority which his speech does
carry, does confirm what he says, by a very fit example: A triple cord is
hardly broken; as who should say, a cord is made of several little threads
twisted together; the threads, while they are several, are small and weak; when
they are wouen one within another, they are able to hold a huge weight, and
bear a great stresse: so by ourselves we are weak and feeble, but if we join
and agree with others, if we be well united and linked together, we shall be
able to abide, and go through with any thing.

Ho^ living in common does conduce for the help of our Neighbor.
6. And thus much of the help which Religious men afford one another, for the
ouercoming of the common Enemy, and to increase in virtue and fervor of
charity; The same does extend itself also to external things, and the benefit
of their neighbor, of which I am next to speak; wherein that which S. Gregory
writes in one of his Homilies upon Ezechiel, is much to be considered.
Almighty God, says he, deals with the hearts of men, as he deals with the
climats of the earth. He could have stored every country with all sorts of
fruit; S. Greg. Hom. 10. in Ezech.
but if one country stood not in need of the fruit of another country, there
would have been no co^merce betwixt them; wherefore to one he has given
plenty of wine, to another oil; upon one he has bestowed abundance of
cattle, fruits of the earth upon another; that the one transporting that which
another has not, and the other returning that which the former brought not,
the countries themselves might be joined together, by communication of the
fruits thereof. As therefore the climats of the earth, so the minds of Saints,
conferring mutually one upon another that, which they have received, do as it
were transport their fruits from country to country, that they may be al
united together in charity. And this which S. Gregory expresses by example
of several countries, the Apostle long before taught us by the known example
of a man's body; which S. Gregory again expounding in his Morals says thus:
What is holy Church but the body of her Sovereign Head? Romans 12.5. ^. or
12.12.
wherein one is the eye, discovering profound mysteries; another is the hand,
working good things; another the foot, S Greg. in 28 c. 6.
going about that which is commanded; another the ear, understanding the voice
of the precepts; another the nose, distinguishing the il savor of the bad,
from the sweet odor of the good; who while they assist one another by the
several functions they have received, as the members of man's body, do make
one body among themselves; and performing in charity several offices, the
body in which they are, can by no means be severed.

A special pr^uidence (...) that every one (...).
7. And S Gregory in many places does take it for a special point of God's
providence, that every one is not endued with all kind of graces, to the end
that he, that might perhaps have been proud by the grace he has received,
should be kept in humility by the virtue which he wanted; and again by
charity every one have al, possessing in another that, which he has not in
himself, and reciprocally bestowing that, which he has, upon another.
Wherefore (as S. Gregory discourses further) one is endued with the word of
wisdom, and is not seconded with the speech of knowledge, that is of teaching;
another is conspicuous for teaching, and yet is not strong in the word of
wisdom, being able enough to deliver whatsoever he has learned, but not
arriving to discern any profound thing of himself. This man by discretion of
spirit does subtily diue into other men's minds; but has not the skill of
several languages. Another in that one tongue which he knows, does by prudent
interpretation examine the weight of every sentence and word, and patiently
wants other good things, which he has not.

8. This being granted and auerred, that which follows is evident; to wit,
that no one man can be of himself so pregnant or well provided in this life, as
to be able by himself alone without help of others to do any great matter; but
of necessity he must join himself with others* and supply from others what is
wanting in himself. Wherefore a Secular state, must needs come far short of a
Religious state in this point; How the endeauours of Secular people come of
times to be frustrate.
in regard that Secular people stand alone, and follow their own private
dictamens; aiming at that which is most profitable, or commodious, or
honorable, or glorious for themselves; or if they attempt any thing of a
higher strain, for advancement of the service of God, or of his Church, they
have not ability enough of themselves to go through with it: so that even the
strength which they have, serves at last to little purpose; as if one man alone
should set his shoulder to remove a huge stone, to what purpose were it? but if
he set hard to it with many others, they may do something and whatsoever is
done, his labor has a part in it. Moreover we may be bold to say that which
is very true; that oftimes Secular people ouer-value their own abilities, and
trusting too much upon themselves, undertake things beyond their force,
specially the desire of fame and excellency, which possesses al mankind,
egging them forward to great matters, chiefly where honor and applause may be
gotten; and so leaving that which they were able to do, S. Greg 28. mor. c. 6.
they leese their time and labor in things which they will never be able to
compass. Which S. Gregory expresses very neatly and elegantly a little after
that, which before I cited out of him. Our Creator and Governor (says he) by
wonderful providence having bestowed some things upon one, and denied them to
an other, and again denied one that which he has given an other, whosoever
attempteth to do more then he has received, endeavors to go beyond the
bounds or measures which are set him; now he that marketh not the limits which
are measured-out unto him, sets his foot in a downefal, and boldly making have
to catch that which he cannot reach, does most commonly leese that which he
might have reached. We use the help of our members best, when we keep them to
their several functions; beholding light with our eyes, and hearing sounds with
our ears: But if a man change this order, and will hear with his eyes, and so
with his ears, he holds them both open in vain; If a body will smell with his
mouth, and taste with his nose, he takes from himself the use of both these
senses; for not being put to their proper uses, they forgo their own
functions, and reach not to do another.

9. This error therefore, Mutual help makes every thing easy.
and confusion, and disorder, of which the world (if we mark it) is very full,
has no place in Religious congregations; every one betakes himself to the
station, place, and office, which is appointed him by his Superiors, as by the
General of an army; and follows not his own fancy therein; and his
Superiors appoint him that which God has decreed and determined; for we have
sufficiently proved before, that God does govern and dispose al Religious
people by the hand of their Superiors. Wherefore being governed and directed
by God, who framed every one's nature, and knows every ^ne's capacity and
ability, no man need to fear, least he be not placed, where it is fittest for
him. And nearer to our purpose; seeing in Religion al have the same end, and
direct their actions and endeauours to one common intention and purpose, they
are as ready and quick to help one another, and do it as cheerfully, as the
hand is ready to help the eye; or the eye, the hand; or the feet, the head;
or rather as the hand, or the eye, or any other part is ready to help itself;
because that which is a benefit to the common, profits every particular man;
and that which every particular man does for any of the rest, he does it
certainly for himself; by which means that which one wants, is most easily
and perfectly supplied with an other's plenty; a thing so beneficial in
itself, and so much desired of every body. For whereas some have learning and
have not wisdom to dispatch businesses; others have wisdom, and not much
learning* some conceive a thing well, but cannot utter that which is in their
mind; and in all kind of knowledge one is m^^e skilful then another, because no
man can be perfect in all things; these perfections and talents, are in this
Brotherly community so tempered, that what may fail in one, is vpheld by
another's help, and in fine as I said out of Aristotle in the beginning of this
Chapter) every one has something, and al have al.

10. And this I take to be the reason, why there be always so many eminent
men in Religion in all kinds, and so many rare works have been achieved by
them, both for the help of their neighbor (of which I shall have occasion to
speak heeraf^er) and in matter of Learning, wherein they have mightily
flourished, and derived a great esteem thereof to al posterity, and in all kind
of virtue and sanctity; to wit* by reason of this concord and connection, which
enableth and en^icheth every particular man with the abilities and talents of
the rest; and what they could not do by themselves alone, they perform by the
hand and help of others; whereof we have a plain example out of holy Scripture
in the Tower of Babel, which by consent of many workmen aiming at one thin^,
Genesis 11.
and laboring in one business, grew to an excessive height; and was suddenly
dashed, and brought to confusion, by no other engine, then by disturbance of
the same consent, through the multiplicitie of several languages; being utterly
disabled thereby from assisting one another; and the like happens in all things
which men go about.

The seventeenth fruit: Communication of good works. CHAP. XXIX.
THE other effect of Religious unity, is the Communication of good works,
among al those that are of the same Order and Family; and that we may the
better discover the greatness of this benefit, we must consider what is
communicated, and how. First therefore it is certain, that in all good works
there be three things to be considered: The increase of grace which every good
work does merit, Three things in every good work.
together with the proportion of glory and reward in heaven, corresponding to
the measure and value of the work. And this is ever proper and peculiar to him
that does the work, for it is the privilege of Christ our head and mediator
only, by his pains and passion to have merited grace and glory for others.
The second commodity of a good work is, that it satisfyeth for our sins
past; and this may be communicated with others, and wholly applied unto them, if
we will. The third is Impetration, a great help toward the saving of our
souls; for whatsoever we do that is pleasing in the eyes of God, does not
only deserve a reward for that which is past, but deserves help for the time
to come, to wit, that we may persevere to the end, and go forward in virtue,
and withstand our ghostly enemies, overcome our passions, abide that which is
hard and difficult, in fine to obtain whatsoever may conduce to our salvation.
And this Impetration may be also conferred upon another by the will of him, in
whom it is; which is no small benefit, seeing it is in the next degree to that
grace, wherein the life of our soul does consist; for though no man can merit
Iustifying-grace for another, he may merit notwithstanding those helps whereby
Iustifying-grace is easily increased.

2. Now there be two ways, Two ways of communicating good works.
whereby these things may be communicated: the one, by will, as it were
bestowing my wealth upon another, by my own gift; the other without any
express act of the will, but as it were by natural consequence. For supposing
that some join in a community together, it follows naturally of itself,
though none of them think thereof, that al their works and merits are common
among them, so that the immediate ground of this communication is the bond or
tie which is betwixt them; insomuch that where that is, and the streighter and
firmer it is, the communion also of merits and works must needs be more ample
and full. And we may declare it by that which passes in a natural and outward
society or company, whereof there be diverse degrees: The first is grounded in
likeness of nature, which comprehends al mankind; and by occasion thereof many
things are common among al men, as the seas, and sea-shores, and many things
of that nature. Again those of the same country are more nearly lincked, and
have many things common among them; as their language, and many rights and
duties. A nearer degree then this, is to be of the same town and city;
wherein many more things are common, as the streets, the Courts, the Laws,
Churches, Customs. The neerenes of affinity and kindred is yet a streighter
tie; and the nearest of al is of those that be of the same household and
family, wherein al things are common, possessions, money, household-stuffe,
nobility also and honor. In like manner in the spiritual conjunction we
speak off, the greatest society comprehends all that are in the state of
Grace and Charity; and as among them doubtless many things are common, so
every particular man among them has some share of the good deeds, which are
done by all the rest. Which David reflecting-on did much rejoice saying: I am
partaker with all that ^eare thee, and that keep thy Commandme^ts; For in this
sense S. Ambrose and diverse others interpret this place. Psa 18.63.
Besides this general conjunction of al good and godly men, al Religious
people, of whatsoever Order or Institute they be, have a nearer tie, grounded
in the profession of the same Euangelical perfection in the same Vows, and
abrenuntiation of al earthly things. Nearer then this, is to be of one and the
same Religious Family, where al have the same Superiors, and Rules, and
rites, the self-same end, commodities and incommodities, and al things common
among them. Wherefore as in a wel-ordered Family, whatsoever one brother
acquireth, he acquireth it not to himself alone, but to all the rest of his
brethren; and in a company of merchants, the gain of every particular man,
redounds to the benefit of the whole Company, and the increase, which arises,
is equally divided among them al; much more the spiritual lucre must needs
extend itself to al such Brethren and Fellows as are linked together by a
spiritual knot and tie, which is yet more evident in the example of a man's
body, the conjunction of the members whereof do express the conjunction of
Religious people more naturally, then any thing else. For we see, that the
body receaueth sustenance so, as though one member take pains in getting it,
an other in chewing, another in disgesting it, yet the juice and nourishment is
equally de^iued into all the members; al are refreshed, al are strengthened by
it, without any contention or difference. And seeing it happens thus in Nature,
shall not Grace have the like effect? yes doubtless; and the more perfectly, by
how much the power of Grace is greater, and more effectual. To which purpose S
Leo says: Though every member be not alike beautiful, and in so great
variety of parts, al cannot deserve alike; S. Leo s. 10. de Qua^r.
yet the connection of Charity makes that there is a communication of
comelines. For they that be united in holy love, though al of them be not ^ich
in grace alike, yet they are glad of one an other's good; and so that which
they affect, cannot be any ways strange unto them; because they that rejoice
at an other's profit, increase their own riches.

3. S. August^n encumbred with Pastoral care, writing to the Monks that had
seated themselves in the solitude and quiet of the I^and Capraria, expresses
in himself this, S. Augustine Ep. 81.
which we have said, and speaks thus: When we think of the quiet which you
have in Christ, though we be in continual labor, yet in your charity we also
do repose. For we are but one body under one head; so that you in us are full
of business, and we in you are full of quiet; because if one member suffer, all the members suffer with it. And els-where he says thus: lib. 50. Ho^il. H^^^.
15.
Rejoice with him, upon whom God has bestowed grace; and in him thou art able,
for what thou art not able in thyself; Perhaps he is a Virgin; love him, and
his virginity is thine; Again thou have more patience; let him love thee, and
it is his. He can watch long; if thou do not envy him, his labor is thine;
Perhaps thou can fast longer; How Religious people partake of one an other's
merit,
if he love thee, thy fasting is his, because thou art in him; properly thou
and he are not al one, by charity you are. This therefore is the effect of
charity; for tying men's hearts inwardly together, and interlacing them one
within another, consequently their works are mingled and common among them. And
if the mere habit of charity be so powerful, what will not the State of
Religion founded in charity be able to do? For the tie of charity may be
broken, the state cannot be forsaken; and it has not only naturally in itself
all the force and strength of charity, but adds a permanencie and an
everlasting obligation, from which we cannot go back. Wherefore if we take
things right, we may be justly thought in Religion to love God with so many
souls, to work with so many hands, to run about good things with so many
feet, to bear hardness with so many shoulders, as we have companions; because
they do al these things for our benefit, and not for themselves only.

4. David was leading his Army against the enemy; 1. Reg. 30.
part thereof being weary stayed behind; the other part pursued on, and became
master both of the field, and of a great booty; whereupon some stood stiffly,
that they that remained behind, should not share with the others in the prey;
and at the first sight they seemed to have reason. For why should they that had
taken no pains, nor run any hazard, taste the fruits of others labors?
Again, why should they that had bought the victory with the price of their
blood, and hazard of their life, give part of the reward to others? Yet let us
see, how holy Scripture condemns the opinion of these men, and what Dauid's
judgment was in the business, who certainly was a very wise man. Holy
Scripture does so far dislike their doings, that it calls them wicked and
unjust dealers. And David pronounced this sentence upon them: you deal
unjustly; for certainly the part must be equal, of him that goes to the
combat, and of him that remains with the baggage. Could there be a cleerer
testimony of Religious communion? For if it hold among soldiers, and be, as
the Scripture says, ever since a constant law in military discipline, by
reason of the connection of fellowship which is in an army; why should not the
same law be in force in Religion, and every one be par^a^^r of that which any
one among them has labored? For Religion is a spiritual army; and of these
spiritual troops the true David CHRIST our Savior is General and Leader; here
be none that contend, that their works be not divided with others; rather they
desire it for their brethrens good (which is charity) and for their own: for
every one spending himself in common, employeth but one man's labor, but
enjoys on the other side the labors of as many as are of that Religious
Order. Whereupon S. Macarius says excellently well: S. Macarius Hom. 3.
The Brethren must converse together in love and joy; and he that works,
must say thus of him that ^^ayeth: I am partaker of the treasure which my
brother gets, because it is common; And he that prays, must think with
himself of him that reads: The fruit which he reapeth by reading is my gain.
He that wayteth, must think thus: My service redounds to the benefit of al; for
as the parts of a man's body are many, and yet it is but one body, and they
help one another, every one performing his several office; as for example: the
eye sees for the whole body; the hand works for the rest of the members;
the foot, when it goes, carries all the other limbs; so the Brethren must
yeald service to one another, and he that reads, love him that prays,
rejoicing in it, and thinking with himself: He prays for me. Thus says S.
Macarius.

The rich treasure communicated by participation.
5. Now to what a mass of infinite treasure must it needs amount, if all the
riches of so great an army, as almost al Religious Orders are, be brought into
one heap? Prayer, Contemplation, Mortification of our passions, strife and
victory over temptations, and an infinite number of good thoughts, some
inflamed with charity, some adorned with humility, and other virtues, al
which are internal; the punishing of the body by fasting, watching, and other
austerities; the suffering of diverse incommodities, the performing of humble
offices, paynes-taking for the good of our neighbor, heat and cold, iourneys
to and fro, hazard oftimes of our very life; what can a man wish for more,
then sitting still (if he be so commanded) in his chamber, to be partaker of all the labors, which those of the same Order in so many parts and provinces of
the world as they are spread, do undergo, in preaching, and praying, and
helping of souls, finally in performing devoutly so many good deeds, or
suffering patiently and courageously so many evils? Neither can a man easily
guess or declare, in how many occasions the merits of others in Religion do
afford us help; for if temptation rush-in upon us, they procure armor to
defend us; if through infirmity we begin to waver, by their means strength
and constancy is afforded us; if we be to ask any thing of God, or to appear
before his Infinite Majesty upon other occasions, we shall not need to fear to
appear empty in his sight; because we are put in favor with him, not only by
our own good deeds, but by the deserts of others; their influence into our
prayers adding grace and weight unto ours. What need I say more? Our coldness,
our faults, and sins are so recompensed on the other side with the good
offices of them with whom we live, that he is more pleased with their duty, A
(...) D^dacus Guia.
then provoked with our offenses. To which purpose it is recorded of D^dacus
Guia (who was one almost of the first Fathers of this our Society, and a very
holy man) that he was wont to say, that as every body refuses a cracked
groat, if it come alone; but if it be told-out among two or three thousand
other pieces, it passes current; so men that are imperfect, and have little in
themselves, that can be pleasing to God, yet because in Religion they come with
others that are perfect, the riches of the perfect supplye their penury and
want. ^
This was given us plainly to understand, when Abraham praying for the five
Cities, God showed himself ready to spare them, if fifty, or thirty, or ten
just men could have been found in them. For if by reason of the neernes which
is betwixt men of the same town, the virtue of so few would have been so
beneficial to so many wicked people, much more by reason of the vnio^ which is
far greater and nearer in Religion, the virtue and holiness of many will
counteruayle, I do not say the heinous offenses, but the infirmity of a few.
We see that God has often punished a whole Family, or city, or army, ^^s.
7.
for one man's fault; and particularly when for Achan his covetousness in
stealing something out of the enemie's camp, the spoils whereof were wholly
vowed to God, he suffered the whole house of the Children of Israel to be put
to flight and to the sword by the enemy. Wherefore if one man's fault was
prejudicial to so many, shall not the virtue and goodness of many be able to
benefit one man? specially considering the goodness of God is infinitely more
inclinable to mercy then to rigor, and does more willingly take occasion to
show his bounty, then to punish.

The eighteenth fruit: the bond of Vow. CHAP. XXX.
ANother commodity is the bond of Vow. What a Vow is.
A Vow, as the learned define it, is a Religious promise made to God freely of
our own accord, of some better and more excellent good. Which very definition
being common to every Vow, shows that a Vow is very beneficial, both in
regard the matter of it must be no ordinary thing, but some thing more then
ordinary; and because it contains a kind of contract betwixt a soul and
God, with whose Infinite Majesty to enter covenant, must needs be both
profitable and glorious. Now amongst al Vows, the Vows of Religion without al
question have the chiefest place, and consequently bring great profit to our
souls. And first (as S. Thomas says) whatsoever we do by Vow, S Thomas 1.2.
q 88. 1. c and Op. 17. c. 12. The bene^it of a Vow.
is much more meritorious in itself, and more grateful to God, then if we did
the same thing without any such tie or obligation. For if we do an act of an
inferior Virtue upon a higher motive, or commanded by a higher Virtue, that
act must needs be higher, and more noble; as an act of Justice or Fortitude,
done upon motive of Charity, or commanded by Charity; and consequently the
Virtue of Religion being higher then any Moral Virtue, and a Vow being an act
of Religion, whatsoever Moral Virtue we exercise by obligation of Vow, it must
needs be higher and of greater value, then if we did the same out of the proper
motive of the Moral Virtue. S. Aug de Virg c. 8.
S. Augustine delivers the selfsame doctrine in his Treatise of Virginity,
where he speaks thus: Virginity itself is not respected, because it is
Virginity, but because it is dedicated to God; it is kept in the flesh, yet it
is the spirit of Religion and devotion which keeps it; by which means the
Virginity also of the body is spiritual, which pious Continency does vow
and keep. And a little after: That Continency is to be reckoned among the
goods of the mind in a more honorable place, wherein the integrity of the
body is kept, vowed and consecrated to God the Creator of soul and body.
And this which S. Augustine says of Continency, may be said of al other
Virtues; as that the works of Obedience, Humility, Temperance, and others
ennobled by Religion, and done by obligation of Vow, are much more rich and
precious.

2. An other reason is, because every good thing is always better, by putting
an other good thing to it. Now the very promise of a good thing, is good; as
we may see by that which happens daily among men. For unless a body be a
very clown, he must needs love and thank a man not only for doing, but for
promising a good turn; and consequently it is better and more gratful to God to
vow a thing and do it, then to do it only. Besides a work offered by Vow, is
incredibly much better then the same work offered by itself; because by Vow we
do not only offer the work or act, but the power, which is our will and
freedom, renouncing it wholly and disabling ourselves from not willing, or not
doing it ever after. To which purpose S. Anselme brings a known Similitude of
one that gives away not only the fruit, S. Anselme lib. Sim l. S. Bon^uenture
in Apo. paup.
but the tree itself. And S. Bonauenture says thus: Acts of Virtue may be done
either out of our mere free will, and so they have only the perfection which is
in the virtues themselves; or besides our will, we may add the obligation of
Vow, and this brings with it the perfection of a State; because no man can be
in state of perfection, that retayneth freedom of doing, or not doing. Now the
necessity which a State does bring, is so far from diminishing Perfection,
that it does wonderfully increase and perfect it; because of a temporal thing,
it makes it to be eternal, and of ours, Divine, dedicating not only the
action, but the will to God, and offering it fully and wholly unto him, slain in
a most noble Sacrifice: which Will being a good inestimable, so near to man and
so dear, that in regard of it he contemns al other things, the gift thereof
must needs be most acceptable, and most pleasing to God. Wherefore as he that
has both use and possession of any thing, does possess that thing more
perfectly, then he that has the bare use of it; so he that offers to God not
his work only, but his free will, does give himself more perfectly unto him.
Thus says S. Bonauenture.

3. An other thing of great consideration is, that whereas the chiefest
commendation of our works depends of our will, as of the root from whence they
spring, the better our will is, the better also are our works, and the more
commendable. And doubtless among many qualities of a good will, it is none of
the least, that it be firm, settled, constant, and perpetual, and far from
that which holy Scripture finds fault with, Prou 13 4. Aristotle. 2. Eth. 4.
saying; The slouthful man will, and will not. Insomuch that Aristotle was also
of opinion, that Virtue must work firmly, and immouably, as he speaks; and
we may gather it to be so, They that vow, are like the Blessed in ^eauen.
by the contratie. For as it is il, to do evil out of frayltie, or out of
weakness of judgment; but much worse, to do it out of a perverse obstinate will
of committing sin, and persisting in it: so al acts of Virtue are good and
laudable, but certainly they are without comparison better, which are done with
a more deliberate and settled resolution; and as they that are so maliciously
evil, are like to the Devil, and the damned with him, who can not be won from
their peruersenes: so the others are like the Blessed in heaven, whose will is
so tied to that which is good, that it can never depart from it.

4. And what means is there to settle and tie our will, but by a firm and
solemn promise, which may last for ever? For there be bonds to bind the body;
and bonds to bind the soul; but with this difference, that our bodies may be
bound whether we will or no, and by the like violence the bonds may be knockt-of
again; our mind and soul cannot be bound, unless it bind itself; and having
bound itself, it is neither in our own, nor in any humane power to unbind it.

5. And the greatness of this benefit will be the more evident, if we consider on
the one side, our own infirmity, and on the other side the bold obstinacy of
the Devil in oppugning us, both in their kind being very great. Wherefore there
can not possibly be a more necessary defense then a Vow and promise; The power
of a Vow, to defend.
in regard our frayltie is thereby strengthened, and his attempts barred. For as
suitors, when they see that the maid, whom they made love to, is married to an
other, turn their thoughts another way; so when our ghostly enemies see us
espoused to God, they loose their hope of intangling us again in earthly
things; and therefore leave to solicit us, least to their own greater
torment they increase our crown. And what could be more fit to hold our will
fast and steadie (it being naturally so frail and slipperie) then the
obligation of Vow? For it does not persuade or move us only, but it forces us;
as S. Bernard does insinuate in these words: A happy necessity, which, as a
holy man says, forces to the better. The holy man, whose name S. Bernard
concealeth, S. Bernard de precep. and disp S. August. Ep. 48.
is S. Augustine. For in his Epistle to Armentarius he speaks thus: Do not
repent thee that thou have vowed; rather be glad that now thou can not do
that, which before thou could to thy loss. Set upon it therefore with
undaunted courage; and by thy deeds* make thy words good. He will assist, who
desires our vows. It is a happy necessity; which forces to the better.
Wherefore as we tie vines and tender sprigs to strong stakes in the ground, to
hold them upright; so if men did know, how weak and unconstant they are by
nature, they would easily see, that nothing can be more for their souls
salvation, then to fasten to God this will of theirs so frail and pliable, and
settle it by promise of Vow perpetually in his service. We read in Genesis,
that Isaac was bound when he was to be sacrificed; and doubtless he was willing
to it; Genesis 22.
otherwise it could not have been done, his father being an old man, and Isaac
in the prime of his youth and strength. Wherefore seeing he was so willing, as
his consenting thereunto does testifye; what was the reason, why the father*
thought it fit to bind the son, or the son would have himself bound?
Doubtless to the end his good will being bound in the same bonds his hands were,
it might not afterward withdraw itself upon any trouble or chance that might
happen. Wherefore it was not out of fear, but out of courage; neither was his
will therefore the colder, but the more constant, and so very resolute, as to
provide, that he might ever have the same will, and never be able to contrary
it.

6. In like manner in every Commonwealth there be laws to keep men in
order, and in some special cases of greater consequence they exact an oath; as
when they leauie soldiers, make Officers, marry, or treat among themselves
almost of any other business of moment, for buying and selling, and the like,
it is the practice of al nations to conclude it by some form of oath; making
account that by this means they provide sufficiently for their own and others
constancy and assurance; yet th^se are but natural and humane things, which
Nature itself has strength enough to compass, and the Devil does not much
busi^ himself in opposing them. Much more necessary therefore and behoofful
are the bonds we speak of, as in matters so far above our natural abi^itie,
that it is wonderful hard to go forward with them, wonderful easy to fail
and give back; so that we have great reason to say with the Prophet David: I
have s^orne and resolved to keep the judgments of thy Justice. Ps. 118.116.


7. Moreover by this chanel, as I may call it, of the Vows, Grace does flow
more plentiful into our souls: Vows, a means to increase grace.
both because our so liberal offer does stir up God to be more liberal
toward us, and because, as a vessel that is plunged over head and cares in
water, so our soul thus plunged, as I may say, in that infinite Goodness, and
so nearly linked to it, must needs be replenished with all kinds of heavenly
gifts; and finally because, being by Vow registered and enrolled among the
goods and possessions of God, what he bestows upon us, he bestows in a
manner upon himself, which doubtless makes him the freer in his gifts.

8. But to establish this doctrine of the benefit of Vows vncontroulably, we
must take away the error of some ignorant people, A vow does make the act more
voluntary;
who think that a Vow takes from the dignity and worth of a good deed;
because if a thing be done without Vow, it is voluntarily done; if by Vow, it
is necesarie. But they mistake the name of necessity; and do not reflect,
that there is a natural necessity, and a voluntary necessity: natural
necessity barreth freedom and power to choose, And more meritorious.
such as is in a stone, or in a beast; and nothing which is done after this
manner, can deserve reward or commendation; the same is, when by outward
violence a man is compelled to do any thing. But the necessity which arises
of an obligation voluntarily undergone, does not lessen the merit of the work,
but increase it; for both the work is voluntary, and also the obligation,
being entered and continued upon a set will and purpose. What shall we say then,
if a man repent him of his Vow; and be unwilling to perform it? In this case,
the distinction which S. Thomas gives, S. Thomas. Op. 18 c. 12.
must take place; to wit, that the matter of the Vow may be distasteful to us,
and yet the Vow please us; as if a man have made a vow that he will fast; and
fasting begins to be troublesome and irksome unto him, and consequently he
fasts unwillingly and with trouble of mind; and yet because his vow binds him,
he will fast; this is enough not only to make that he do not sin; but merit
more then if he fasted without vow. Which S. Anselme does illustrate with this
example: S. Anselme l. 1. Somol.
Oftimes (says he) we see, that if a man be to be out, he will have himself
first bound, and protests besides, that he will not be unbound, though he should
desire it; wherefore if it happen afterward, that overcome with pain he cry
out to be unbound, the Chyrurgian goes on, til the cure be done, and then the
Patient himself is glad, that they did not give ear unto him; and his cutting
cures him, though he was then unwilling to abide it; but indeed, when he cried
out, he repined not at the cure, but at the sharpnes thereof. In like manner,
when a man in the beginning does willingly put his neck under the yoke of
Religion, and will be under another to be cured by him, if afterward he meet
with any thing from which his will has auersion, he abides it, because he is
bound; and that very medicine does him good, though it be taken with not so
good a will; and it gives him health, which he would have refused, if he had
been free; and when his sickness is gone, he is glad he could do no other. Thus
says S. Anselme.

9. Wherefore seeing (as I have showed) there cannot be a streighter bond to tie
us to God, God particularly bound to them that bind themselves to him by Vow.
then the bond of Vow, we may easily discover, how many commodities do accrue
unto us out of it, both in regard it binds us to be constant, and never at no
time, nor for no temptation, to flinch away from him; and because it cannot be,
but that we should receive from God many other unspeakable benefits, by reason
of so near connection with him. For, as if a man be bound to a post, the post
is also bound to him, so he that binds himself to God, obliges in a manner God
to himself, and (as I said) al his goods and heavenly treasures, with him. So
that we may justly make account, that this is one of the special fountains of
Grace, which we have in Religion, whereby many other spiritual gifts are
derived unto us; light to understand, seruour to embrace, strength to execute
that which is good, and finally ability to run in the way of God with joy
and gladness of ha^t, which must needs redound unto us from the Father of
lights, the Father of al consolation, being bound to him, and he to us, with
that triple cord, which is not easily broken.

10. Wherefore with great reason does the Holie-Ghost exhort and inuit us,
willingly to put ourselves into these bonds of wisdom in these words: Eccl.
6.25.
Put thy foot into the shackles thereof, and thy neck into the collar; floope
thy shoulder and carry it, and be not weary in the bonds thereof. Happy
chains, and bonds to be wished, which therefore holy Scripture terms, not
chains, but collars or necklaces, adorning rather then binding the neck; for
they are not of iron, hard, and seruil, but of gold, noble, and pleasing; not
burthening, but honoring him that bears them; not barring, but rather
enlarging and establishing our freedom.

The nineteenth fruit: A safe and quiet death. CHAP. XXXI.
THE benefits, of which we have hitherto spoken, are very great; yet what would
they al avail us, if our life full fraught with virtue and heavenly gifts, as
a ship laden with rich merchandise, should at the hour of death, as it were,
in the mouth of the haven, suffer shipwreck? Wherefore to make al things sure
and everlasting, Religious people have this privilege among the rest, that
they are armed for death, with many special helps and comforts, which is
worthily to be reckoned among the greatest commodities it has.

2. Three things are dreadful at the hour of death. For first, death itself is
mightily distastful, and (as the Wiseman says) bitter; yea, the on^ie memory
thereof is very grievous; Three things d^^idful at the ho^re of death.
secondly it is dangerous, in regard the Devil is then most busy and violent
in tempting us, and sounds a man on every side; thirdly it is the more
terrible, in regard of the dreadful doom that follows; which (as S. Gregory
speaks) the nearer ^^ do in a manner touch it, E^cl. 4.24 moral. c. 28.
the more we fear it. Religion takes away al these things, and gives us
pleasure, in steed of bitterness; security, in steed of danger* assured hope,
in steed of excessive fear. And if we do but consider what passes ordinarily
among men, we shall see it evidently to be so. For that which is wont to grieve
men most at that time, is to leave their wealth, honor, pleasures,
commodities, their wife and children, their brethren and kinsfolk, and their
dearest friends; finally soul and body must pa^te, having lived so long and
so lovingly together. In Religion almost none of all this is to be found.
Religion free from al three.
For when they forsook the world, they left al outward things, wealth, and
honor, and al carnal propinquieie; so that they are in a manner the only men
that are wholly free from this manifold vexation, which does so trouble wordlie
people. They grieve not for loss of riches; the loathnes of leaving their
children under age, does not lie heavy upon them, not the ca^e of their future
welfare; they are not troubled how to make their will, or dispose of their
families, or prevent losses, which oftimes befall housekeepers. Which happiness
of Religious people, S. John (...) Hom 14. in 1. Tim.
S. John Chrysostom does curiously set forth in a certain Homily, wherein he
writes many other things also in commendation of this course: It is very true
(says he) that they dye among them, for their bodies are not immortal; but
they do not make account, tha: death is death. They sing Hymns when any do
depart; and they call it not a buryal, but a pomp, or procession, and a
sending of one of their company before them; yea they dare not say, the man is
dead, but consummate. Therefore they give thanks, and glory, and rejoice,
every one desiring the like passage, to leave the field in the same manner, to
rest from their labor and toil, to see Christ. And when they are sick, their
wife does not stand by, with her hair in her eyes, not their little children
lamenting the want which they shall shortly find of their parents; nor their
servants wearying them at the last gasp with their untimely requests, to leave
them commended to some body after death: but free from al these rubbes, their
soul is wholly bent upon this one thought, how it may giue-vp the last breath
to God, in greater grace.

2. This therefore, if we will believe S. Chrysostom, is to be reckoned among
the fruits of leaving al in time with joy and merit, The parting of soul and
body greeueth not Religious people.
that at the last hour they may not torment and vex us, when else of
necessity we must leave them, to our great grief and no merit. Wherefore if
any thing can trouble Religious people at that how^e, it is the loss of their
life. But of this loss also, they have but little feeling; for Religion does so
accustom the mind to leave the body, that even while it is in the body, it
is for the most part out of it, busy in the love of God, and the desire of
heavenly things. For as th^se that gave themselves over to carnal pleasure, or
the care of any worldly business, have their minds so carried away upon them,
that they seem to beset (...) in the same (...), as I may term it, of which
those things are made: so contrariwise, they that live chaste and entire, and
curb the flesh, and bring it under, and withal busy their mind in holy
exercises, and settle it upon spiritual things, are not much molested by the
corruption of the body, but rather, as S. Paul speaks, Phil. 3.20.
their conversation is in heaven; And consequently death being nothing but a
separation of the body from the soul (which Religious people do practice al
their life) they are not to begin to dye, when the soul is departing, but they
went about it long before, and were always dying; by which means they are not
troubled at the time of death, as if they were to abide some hard and unwonted
thing. It helps also, that they part not with a life, that has many things
to hold them with delight in it (which is one of the chiefest causes, why
people love this life) but rather a life, wherein they suffer many
incommodities by poverty, watching, and paynes-taking, much mortification of
their senses and will, which are as so many spurs quickening our souls to
desire more ardently eternal rest, and more cheerfully to embrace it, A
Religious man's life is a continual preparation for death.
when it is at hand. Besides, they come not suddenly and unprovided to that
hour; but they both soresaw daily, that it might happen, by reason of the
common frayltie of our nature, and wished daily for it, because they desire to
appear in the sight of God, and their whole life is but one good preparation
for death, as a certain Franciscan-Friar said truly of late years in the
Indies. For after he had long labored in those countries very paynefully,
sickning, and being advised by the Physicians to prepare himself for death, he
spoke thus: I have done nothing else all the while, I have worn this Habit, but
prepared myself for this passage. The same al Religious people do; for the
State itself does direct them to do no other, but, as our Lord commanded,
expect his coming with their loins gyrt, Luc. 12.15. S Greg. hom. 13. in Eua^g.
and burning l^ghts in their hands; which S. Gregory interprets to be
Chastity, and continual practice of good works, both which are principally
found in Religion.

3. Now as for the assaults and temptations of the Devil, wherewith every
body is troubled at his death, Religious people free from temptation at the
hour of death.
thus much we may truly say, that if there be any man that is not troubled at
al or very little with them, any man that does resist them and overcome them,
it is a Religious man. For first it belongs to the goodness of God, not to
leave him at his death, upon whom in his lifetime he heaped so many great
gifts and graces; somewhat also it belongs to his Justice, to defend and
protect him, that, during life, served him, and fought for his honor.
Wherefore we ought not to doubt, but that he that is our strength and
stabilitie, will assist us most of al in that dangerous and f^areful combat. and
in time of need enlighten our understanding, and give us courage, wipe away al
fear; and teach our hands and fingars to wage war, compass us round, and
cover us with the shield of his good pleasure, and with inward comforts
strengthen our mind, and fill it with assured hope of eternal salvation; which
being so, what crowns and kingdoms can be compared with this b^nefit? And no
man can think, but that it must needs be well bestowed, not only that he forsook
this one world, but if there were infinite worlds to leave, that he alone had
left them al, to the end that in such a fearful passage, he might have such
assured comfort and defense.

The comfortable assistance of our Brethren at the hour of death.
4. To this we may add the comfort which every one receaueth by the assistance
of his Brethren, their exhortations, counsel, and continual prayers; which
always, but chiefly at the point of death, are very powerful to encourage us,
and to abate the fierce assaults of the enemy. We learn this by example of a
young man, called Theodore, of whom S. Gregory relates, that having lived in
his Monastery somewhat wantonly, like a boy, he fell sick, and was brought to
the last cast; and while diverse of the Monks stood by, S. Gr^g. 4. dial c. ^7.
and Hom 38. in Euang.
praying for him, he began to cry out, as if he were desperate, to get them
gone. For he was (as he said) delivered to a dragon, to be devoured by him; and
their being present hindered him. Whereupon they fell presently upon their knees,
and prayed more earnestly for him; and soon after the sick man now quite, and
cheerful, affirmed that the Devil was gone, Two memorable examples.
vanquished and put to flight by their prayers.

5. The like passage, though somewhat more fearful, is recorded of Cuno Lord
of Malburch; who after he had spent in the world almost forty years, living
for the most part after a worldly fashion, betook himself to Religion; where
when he had lived some three years, he made a happy end. At which time the
Devil, by the mouth of a woman, whom he had possessed, told that he and fifteen
thousand more of his crew (for so many he said they were) came to this Cuno's
Celle, when he lay a-dying; but could not hurt him, nor so much as come near
him, by reason of the loud cries of those bald-crowned fellows, that stood by
his bedside (for so the enemy of God termed God's servants and their prayers
in scorn) And he complained further, that God had done him great injury, in
regard that whereas Cuno had served the Devils forty years, and God but
three, yet he spared him from the pains of hell, and carried him to Heaven.
Whereby we may plainly see the force of Religion.

6. It remains that we speak of the hope of salvation, which I said was in
Religion very assured. Hope of Salvation more assured.
Two things cause this assurance in a Religious man: first, not to be guilty
in his conscience of any grievous sin; secondly, the memory of the
abundance of good deeds of his former life; both which cannot fail in a
Religious course. For we are not here troubled with merchants accounts, nor
with obscure and ambiguous forms of conueyances, nor with worldly ambition,
nor such like occasions of sinning: On the other side, we have much matter of
patience, and continual occasion of practicing other virtues, whereof I have
spoken at large before. Wherefore S. Hierome says excellently well to this
purpose, writing to Julian, and exhorting him to Religion in these words:
Happy is the man and worthy of al blessedness, S: Hierome ^p 34.
whom old age does overtake serving Christ, whom the last day shall find
fighting under our Savior, who shall not be confounded when he shall speak to
his enemies in the gate, S. Bernard ^p. 103.
to whom in the entrance of Paradise it shall be said: Thou have received ^l
things in thy life, but now rejoice here. S. Bernard also pressing Romanus to
break with the world, follows the same strain. The just man also (says he)
dies, yet securely; his death being a passage from this present life, and an
entrance into a better life. It is a good death* to dye to sin, that thou
may live to Justice. This death must necessarily go before, that a secure
death may follow. While thou live in flesh, dye to the world; that after the
death of the flesh, thou may begin to live to God. ad mil. te^pli^
And again in another place: O secure life, where there is a pure conscience!
O secure life, I say, where we may abide death without fear, yea desire it
with pleasure, and welcome it with devotion!

7. Wherefore me thinks, we may with reason understand that voice, which S.
John heard in the Apocalypse, Apoc. 14.13
chiefly of Religious people: Blessed are the dead, who dye in our Lord; S.
Bernard Ep. 21^.
because (as S. Bernard discourses) Martyrs dye for our Lord, Confessors dye
in our Lord. For as he that was never at Rome, cannot dye at Rome; so he that
lived not in God* cannot dye in God; and on the other side, he that while he
lived was friends with God, shall also dye in God. And who lives more in God,
then he that has nothing else on earth to live in? And it follows
consequently, that their works follow them, and remain not behind them in
earth, as the works of Secular people, that have spent their life in earthly
labor. And doubtless it must needs be an unspeakable benefit, to be able at a
time, when every body else is in such fearful danger, and with fear and
trembling expects his Judge and doom, to look death in the face, not only
without fear, but with joyful eyes, and a mind cheerful and confident, as if
they heard a voice inui^ing them as workmen to receive their hire, or as good
and faithful servants, to ^^ter into the joy of their Lord, or as a Bride
invited to the bed of the B^i^egroome in these words: Cant. 4.8.
Rise, make haste (my beloved) come from L^banus; then shall be crowned. For
thus they are called from Libanus, that is, from the Mountain of perfection, in
which they lived, to a crown answerable to so great perfection.

8. This is the cause, Memorable examples of happy deaths.
why a certain Franciscan-Friar, burning with excessive pain of his whole
body, found no better ease of his pain, then himself to sing Divine praises,
and to hear others sing them; and being reprehended therefore by Friar Helias
saying: that it might beseem him better to bestow that last hour in tears
and penance, answered, that he could not do otherwise, because he knew he was
shortly to be with God.

9. S. Gregory in his Dialogues relates many examples of this nature; S.
Greg 4. dial c. 47.
but that which he tells of one Antonie, a Monk of his own Monastery, is
pleasant to hear. This Antonie had warning in his sleep to prepare himself to
dye; but out of his humility answering, that he was not provided for the
journey, it was told him again, that if it were his sins that he misdoubted,
he should not need to fear, because they were forgiven. But yet he still
fearing and quaking, the next night he heard the same voice, and the same
warning wa^ given him. Five days after, he fell into a fever; and dying in the
midst of his Brethren, with assured hope of eternal salvation, went joyfully to
receive it.

10. He writes of another called Merulus, a man very fervent and devout; who
on a time saw, as if a white crow had come from heaven, and rested upon his
head. Presently after he sickned, and with great chearfulnes gave up his soul
to God. Some fourteen years after, they chanced to dig near his grave, and
there came forth such a fragrant smell out of it, as if it had been full of sweet
spices and flowers. This and much more we have by relation of S. Gregory.

S. Nicolas Tol^n^^n^^
11. It is recounted of S. Nicolas Tolentinas, that six whole months before his
death, he heard every night a little before Matins, a most delicate consort of
Angels singing, and giving him as it were a taste of the life to come. How
ardently then may we think he did desire that life, to the pleasures whereof he
was so pleasantly invited? He himself can tell us; for he had often in his mouth
that saying of the Apostle: I covet to be diss^lued, Phil. 1.23.
and to be with Christ. And at the instant of his death, he began to express
in his voice and speech, great joy and gladness; and his Brethren, that were
present, asking him the cause of that unwonted joy, he answered, as if he were
amazed and scarce present to himself: My Lord JESUS CHRIST leaning upon his
blessed M^ther, and our Father S. Augustine says unto me: Welfare thee, good
and faithful servant, enter into the joy of thy Lord; with which words he gave
up the ghost.

Reginaldus.
12. Reginaldus, one of S. Dominick's scholars, having warning to prepare
himself to the last combat with the Devil by Extreme Unction, as it is the use
among Christians, answered thus: I fear not this combat; rather I wait for it
with joy; for long ago did the Mother of mercy anoint me, in whom I have
great confidence, and to whom I desire to go. Now that he says, he was
anointed before by our Blessed Lady, it happened thus: Many years before being
very sick, the Queen of heaven appeared one night unto him, while he was
awake, with two other Virgins in her company; and coming to him, anointed his
eyes, his ears, his lips, and his hands, with an ointment which she brought,
and with her own hand as he lay, and also his feet in preparation of the
Ghospel, as she said, praying as it were out of a book.

Adulphus.
13. The like favor she showed to Adulphus a Franciscan-Friar, who forgoing the
Princedome of Alsaria, lead an humble life in that holy Family; and coming to
dye, this universal Patroness and Mother of al Religious people, came unto
him, accompanied with infinite troops of Angels; and finding him fearful,
encouraged him in this manner: Son, what do thou fear? or why art thou
troubled at the coming of death? Come boldly; because my Son, whom thou have
served faithfully, will give thee a crown of glory.

S. Bernard ^ 26. in Ca^^.
14. We see also what S. Bernard says of his brother Gerard, who at midnight,
and almost at his last breath, brake forth in these words of the Psalm: Praise
God from heaven, praise God on high. It was then, o Brother (says S. Bernard)
day with thee, at midnight; and night was lightened as the day. I was called to
this miracle, to behold a dying man rejoicing, and bragging over death: Death
where is thy victory? Death where is thy sting? It is now no sting, but a
gladness, now a man dies singing, and sings dying.

15. And the like examples of such as dye most quiet and sweet deaths, and with
much expression of excessive joy, even in the flower of their youth, when life
is sweetest, happen daily without number in all Religious Orders. Truly in ours,
Examples of cheerful dying, in our Society.
though it be the last, and the least, partly I myself have seen many, and
partly have had by relation of others, that have seen them; as of one, who
being told that he was to look shortly for death, did for very joy embrace
him thrice that told him of it. Another having had the like message, did what
he could to sing the Hymn Te Deum, with great signs of joy, though his voice
and strength were almost quite spent. Another, when he was giving up the ghost,
began to sing that verse of the Psalm: I have rejoiced in the things that have
been said unto me; we shall go into the house of our Lord. I might relate many
more, but because I will not be tedious, I will content my self with one.

16. William Elsinston, William Elsinston.
borne in Scotland, of good extraction, rare for virtue and wit, was admitted
into our Society, a very youth. Not a full month after, he fell into a burning
fever, which brought death into his face, but yet was always wonderful
cheerful, and showed it in his speeches and countenance, and in whatsoever he
did, thinking he could never thank God enough, that he dyed in Religion. When
he began to draw on, his Brethren flocked into the room where he lay, and
seeing them he cried out: O glorious death attended by so many Angels! And
expressing exceeding joy, he said further; Do you not see, do you not see the
Angels? And calling upon* is good Angel, he spoke with him for a while, as if
he had beheld him with his eyes; and related, that he told him, he should pass
through Purgatory, but not stay long there. Whereupon one asked him, in what
shape he saw his Angel, and he pointed at a youth that stood by, and said: He
was like him. Soon after, his soul was so ouerioyed, that his body did as it
were leap upon the bed, as he lay, weakened, as he was, with a deadly sickness,
to the great admiration of the standers by, who had never seen the like; and
turning his eyes back to the beds head, with cheerful countenance, and
muttering something which could not be understood, he showed, that he saw
something that did give him great contentment; amidst whereof suddenly stopping,
he gave up the ghost, as if he had laid himself down to sleep. What can be
more happy, or more desireful, then such a death? Or who is there, that, were
he to choose, had not rather dye such a death, then as Princes are wont to dye
in their Royal palaces, in their Beds-of-state, in their silks and purple
garments, amidst their servants and retinue? And certainly, this young man being
but a Nouice, came not to so sweet an end, and so, easy a combat with the
enemy, and so happy a passage out of this life, by long exercise of virtue,
and strong habits thereof; but if any cause can be given thereof, it must needs
be the force of Religion itself, and the grace of God chiefly-bestowed upon him
in that plenty, in regard of Religion; so that by this one example we may
evidently see, how far more securely and more sweetly this last act of
warfare (as Job does call it) is shut-vp in a Religious state.

The twentieth fruit: that it is a sign of Predestination. CHAP. XXXII.
THE Kingdom of Heaven is so infinite a happiness, and the pains of hell so
infinite a mischief, that whosoever belieues them, should in reason have no
other care, nor fear, then least he leese the one, and fall into the other;
specially seeing they so necessarily follow one upon the other. Insomuch that if
God had revealed, that among all the men that are, or ever were, and shall be,
one among them al should be damned to hel-fire, every one might justly live in
continual fear and trembling, least he might be that unhappy and unfortunate
man, upon whom that dreadful lot should fall. But now seeing God has so often,
and so certainly, and so plainly told us, that many walk the broad way of
perdition, M^th. 7.13.
few find-out the way of salvation, what care, and circumspection, and fear,
ought every one to stand in?

2. In which so just occasion of fear, we cannot in this life have a greater
comfort, Without hope of predestination there is no comfort.
then to light upon some signs of our eternal salvation and predestination.
For S. Bernard says truly: When does God leave his Elect without some sign?
or what comfort could they have, standing doubtful, betwixt hope and fear, if
they were not worthy of some testimony of their Election? God knows who are
his; and he alone knows whom he has chosen from the beginning; S. Bernard
inoct. pas^h. ser. 2.
but among men who is there that knows, whether he be worthy of love or
hatred? Wherefore seeing it is certain, that we can have no certainty in this
kind; if we may at least meet with some signs of our Election, will not al
things be more delightful to us? For what rest can our spirit have, so long as
it has no hope of predestination?

3. This then is the fruit of a Religious state; and truly none of the least,
that it gives us so certain a hope, Signs of Predestination in Religion.
and so clear a sign of our predestination, that, without express
revelation, we cannot have a greater. For first we have the sign, which our
Savior himself gives, when he says: He that is of God, hears the words of
God. Whereupon S. Bernard els-where speaking to the Monks of his Order, Io. 8.47.
bids them be of good cheer, having reason to believe they are of the
number of the Elect, because they hear the word of God so willingly, S.
Bernard s. 1. Septuag.
and with so great fruit. And this is natural to the state of Religion. For
their chief and continual food is whatsoever proceeds from the mouth of God;
receiving it by prayer, meditation, and reading of good books, and principally
by giving ear to that word of God, which called them out of Egypt to his
Divine service. For the hearing and obeying of this word alone, is a great
sign of their predestination, Io. 10.16.
by that reason of our Savior: My sheep hear my voice; though indeed they did
not then only give ear unto it, and follow it, when they forsook the world,
but do continually hearken unto it, remaining in Religion upon command of that
voice, and spending al their life in doing according to his voice delivered
unto them by obedience; so that none can have more right, then they, to that
saying of our Savior: Blessed are they that hear the word of God, Luc. 11.28.
and keep it.

4. There be other signs of Predestination, whereof S. Bernard discourses at
large speaking to his Brethren, S. Bernard s. 2. in oct. Pasch.
and draws them at last to these three heads: If (says he) thou refrain
from sin; if thou do worthy fruits of penance; if thou work works of life.
Al which three can they be better, more perfectly, or more plentifully
performed, then in Religion? or where are they to be found, if not in Religion?
And of every one of them I have spoken sufficiently heertofore.

5. Another special token and full of comfort is given us by our Savior, as an
evident sign of eternal salvation, or damnation, in these words: The way which
leads to perdition, Matthew. 7.13.
is broad and spacious; and contrariwise how narrow is the gate, and the way
straight, which leads to life? S. Gregory does tell us in plain terms, S.
Greg. 32. mor. ^.17.
that this narrow gate and way, is Religion. What is more narrow to a man's
mind, then to break his own will? Of which breaking, Truth itself says: Enter
by the narrow gate. And what can be more broad and wide then never to strive
against his own will, but to suffer himself to be carried without restraint,
whither-soeuer the motion of his will does lead him? For these and the like
causes, S. Laurence Justin. de pers^mon. con. 7.
Religion is a very certain sign of predestination, insomuch that S. Laurence
Justinian says: Whosoever has been called to the Congregation of the Just,
let him assuredly hope to enter that heavenly Hierusa^em after the end of this
pilgrimage. For it is a great sign of Election, to have the company of such a
Brotherhood: and he that is severed from this, will be easily shut out of that.

6. But why should we stand upon conjectures, or upon reasons in this ma^ter
seeing we have a plain promise of our Savior? Eternal life promised to
Religious.
Every one, says he, that shall leave father, or mother, or brethren, or
house, or lands for me, shall receive a hundredfold, and possess life
everlasting. This S. Matthew, S. Mark, and S. Luke do deliver almost in the
self-same words; Matt. 19 29
which may be an argument, that the Holy Ghost would have it particularly
known for a most certain truth, Mar 10 ^1.
Of the hundredfold, Lu^. 18.29.
which pertaynes to this life, I will treat els-where, when I shall speak of
the pleasantnes of a Religious state; now I will only speak of the promise of
everlasting life, as an evident token of Predestination. And we may consider,
who it is that makes this promise, what it is that is promised, and in what
words. He that makes the promise, is God, Truth itself, who cannot mistake,
nor be changed, nor forget, nor be hindered from performing wha^ he will and has
said. Wherefore to speak in terms used commonly among men Religious people
having our Sauiour's own hand to show at the Barie and tribunal-seate of God,
whereupon they may argue their Case with God, as Job speaks, and demand
eternal glory by virtue thereof, they cannot desire any better assurance. But
they will not be brought to such an exigent; for the same infinite goodness, which
moved him to pass the promise, will move him to perform and accomplish it more
fully, then be promised.

7. The terms wherein the promise is couched, are large and pregnant: Every
one that shall leave these things. This word of itself is so express and
general, that it comprehends al, no man excepted; that the Devil may not have
any ground to cauil, nor any Religious man to mistrust. And yet S. L^k^
speaks more signally: Luc. 18.29.
There is no man that has left house, or parents, or brethren, for the
kingdom of God, and does not receive much more in this life, and in the world
to come, life everlasting. Wherefore certainly no man is excluded from the
promise, neither poor, nor rich, nor noble, nor mean; neither he that has
left much, nor he that has left little, so he leave al he had; finally he is
not excluded, that being called but at the Ninth hour, had but a short time to
labor in the Vinyard.

8. It is true, that Life everlasting is promised to many Virtues, as to
Meekenes, Poverty of spirit, Humility, and above al to Charity, which never
sayleth, 1. Cor. 13.8.
as the Apostle speaks; yet all this is uncertain and doubtful. For who
knows, whether he love as he ought, and upon the right ground of charity,
which is also necessary? And the like may be said almost of al virtues, which
lying hidden within our souls, can hardly be perceived; and a man can hardly
think he has them, without danger of flattering himself, and of presumption;
so that al our hopes are doubtful. But it is otherwise in this one act of a
Religious man, which has the promise of so great a reward annexed unto it. For
this act is not doubtful, obscure, or hidden, but plain and manifest to be
seen with our very corporal eyes, that possibly the fact cannot be questioned,
nor the reward, if we sail not in our intention, and persevere therein to the
end.

9. That which is promised, is Life Everlasting, that is to say, a most
complete happiness, full of bliss, and of al good things that can be desired,
immortal, everlasting; which our Savior calls Life, because indeed, that is
the only true life, which the soul shall then live, when free from this lump
of flesh, or the flesh itself being made spiritual, pure, and entire, it shall
see God face to face, as he is; and shall be itself transformed into his
brightness. That is promised, which contains al things that can be desired,
and in truth more is promised then thou^ht of men can conceive, or with for, or
understand. How high therefore ought we in reason to value this hope so
assured, and this promise of Christ, who is Lord of this life and glory, and a
promise confirmed with a kind of oath.

S. Antonie of Padua. The esteem that ought to be made of Predestination.
10. We read of S. Antonie of Padua, that it was revealed unto him, that a
certain Layman (who at that time was of no great good life) was one of the
Elect. Whereupon the Saint did carry himself toward him with so much respect
and reverence, that every one did wonder at it; and the Lay man himself was
angry, and did in a manner threaten him. But the Saint answered, he could do
no other then worship him on earth, whom he knew to be predestined to so
great glory.

S. Francis
11. And S. Francis once in a trance being assured of his predestination, when
he came to himself, cried out: My Lord God be praised, glory and honor to him
without end. And for eight days he could not speak of any other thing, nor
so much as say his Breuiarie, but was still repeating these words: My Lord God
be praised. For his soul was ouer-ioyed with so happy tidings; and not
without great reason. Wherefore seeing S. Francis did so infinitely rejoice at
this kind of promise, and al others in like manner, to whom it has been made;
what account shall a Religious man make of the same? For betwixt the two
promises, there is but this one difference, that the one is made to particular
men, the other to the State. And what matter is it, so we leave not the State,
and live according unto it? The like we see happens among men. For Kings and
Princes grant certain privileges and liberties to particular men, and certain
to places; which comes al to one, because the men enjoy them so long as they
live in those places, as freely, as if they had been granted particularly to
themselves, and they are put to no other care or trouble for it, but that they
remain in those places. What greater comfort therefore can we have, or desi^^
in this our pilgrimage, or rather banishment?

12. The Apostles came on a time to our Savior, rejoicing that in his name the
Devils did obey them. Luc. 10.20
Our Savior made answer: Rejoice not in this, but rejoice, because your names
be w^itten in heaven. In my opinion, the same may be said of Religious men; let
others rejoice in their wealth, or in the favor they are in wi^h men, or in
the preferments which they hope for, or have already gotten; we have a far
greater and better ground of rejoicing, that we have so certain a sign and
token to persuade us, and make us verily believe, as indeed we ought, that our
names are written in the Book of Life, drawn in the breast of Almighty God,
The grace of Predestination a fountain of ben^^its.
with the blood of the Lamb; which benefit is not reserved merely for the world
to come, but is the very fountain and offspring of al other benefits, which in
this life are bestowed upon us. For, as the Apostle writes, whom God has
predestined, these ^e has called; and having called them, Romans 8.30.
he confirms and strengthens them, and multiplie^h his gui^ts upon them; he
defends them from the assaults of the Enemy, either keeping him quite off, or
giving grace that they may make benefit of the temptation; finally, he orders
al things that concern them either inwardly or outwardly, in that manner, that
they turn al to their good; and it falls out, Io. 17.11.
as our Savior a little before his passion said to his Father: Whom thou have
given me, I have not lost of them; Sap. ^.
because (as another Scripture says) the souls of (...) lust are in the hand
of God; and no power under God can wrest them from him. Wherefore seeing
Predestination does comprehend al these things, look how much assurance
Religion does give us of our predestination, so much also it gives us of all the rest.

13. And as it works these things with God, so on our part it makes us to
love God the more, What Predestination works in us.
in regard he has loved us with so great and so ancient love, before the
Creation of the world, and from al Eternity; it makes us also contemn and
loath al earthly things, as being fully possessed, that the heavenly glory,
and those infinite treasures, through the goodness of God, are due unto us. and
laid up for us. For, as a young Prince, that is bred up to a Kingdom, takes
great pleasure in that hope, to which he is borne, and it breeds a kind of
Majesty in him, and greatness of spirit, that he disdaynes al inferior things:
so we also considering, that we are ordained for that heavenly kingdom, must
needs with a generous and noble heart disdain all the fair offers of the world,
as not beseeming our worth; and so much the rather, because a young Prince may
be cut-of from his hopes by many chances; but they that are chosen by God,
cannot be put by it by any force o^ misfortune.

The one and twentieth fruit: God's special care and protection. CHAP. XXXIII.
A memorable example of S. Francis.
WE read that S. Francis, when he had founded his Order, and that it began to
spread, being very careful to advance it in all sanctity of life and Regular
discipline, if any thing happened contrary, or that God did reveal unto him
any sinister accident, that was to fall out hereafter, was wont to give himself
so to weeping and greef, that it was like to cost him his life. Wherefore being
once at his prayers, commending this his Family with great earnestnes to God,
our Savior is said to have spoken to him these comfortable words: Francis, why
do thou trouble and vex thyself, when any of thy Friars do leave their
Order, or commit any scandalous thing in it? Do thou take thyself to be sole
governor of this flock, and that I am not also governor of it, higher then
thou? Who planted it but I? or who calls men to penuance, or gives them
strength to persevere when they are called, but I? I brought them hither; I will
stay them, and keep them* If they fall, I will raise others in their place.
Wherefore I directly command thee, that hereafter thou torment not thyself so
much, but know that I love this Family; and if one return to his vomit, I will
raise another in his place, that shall have his crown; and if he be not yet
borne, I will cause that he shall be borne; and if there remain but three in it,
I will not therefore ever leave it, but it shall be always my Family Thus spoke
our Savior to S. Francis; and the like we may imagine, and indeed ought to
believe of al other Religious Orders, their cause being the same. Wherefore it
must needs be a special commodity of Religion; that it is thus particularly
guarded and protected by Almighty God, from whose wisdom and knowledge
nothing can be hidden, whose infinite power nothing can withstand; so that those
whom he does undertake to protect, Reasons, why God has particular ^a^e of
Religiou^ (...).
must needs do well.

2. Now there be many reasons, which may move God to undertake the protection
of Religious Families; and first of all that which himself gave to S. Francis,
tha^ he is the Author of them. He laid the grounds of these Institutes; he
calls every one that enters into them; he alone gives them their good
desires, and grace, and assistance to persevere. Wherefore as a father does love
and take care of his son, and a workman of his work; so God does love and
take care of this so fair a fruit, as I may call it, of his womb.

3. Another cause may be the increase of his glory, which by every Religious
Order is greatly labored and effected. For as a gardener takes care of his
vines and fruit trees; and a shepherd of his flock, and shrinketh not for
heat or cold, or any toylesome labor, in regard of the commodity he reapes
thereof: so God has a provident care of these his flocks, not only out of his
infinite goodness and mere mercy, but (if a body may be so bold to say so) for
respect of some commodity; and why may we not say so, seeing S. Paul terms
such servants of God, vessels sanctified for honor, and pro^itable to our
Lord? 2. Tim. 2.21^


4. A third reason is Virtue itself and Devotion, which is so very powerful
with God, that putting us highly into his favor, it will never suffer us to be
neglected by him. Psa. 40.13.
Insomuch that the Royal Prophet says: Thou have received me for my
innocence, and confirmed me in thy sight for ever. And in another Psalm: Ps
33.16.
The eyes of our Lord upon the just, and his ears in their prayers. Many are
the tribulations of the just, and out of al them our Lord will deliver them. And
Ecclesiasticus: The eyes of our Lord upon those that fear him. Ps. 33.20.
But that which Zachary the Prophet says, Eccl 15.20
is most remarkable: He that touches you, touches the apple of my eye. Zach.
2.8.
What could be said more? He thought it little to say, he touches me; but
names that part of man which is dearest to every one, and most sensible;
which though it be spoken of every body that serves God sincerely, yet
particularly it suits best with Religious people; in regard they are more
diligent and more exact in his service, and employ themselves and their whole
strength and power in that alone.

5. A fourth reason is in a manner proper only to Religious people. For we find
euerie-where, that God is wont to take particular charge and care of those,
that are most destitute of humane help. So the Psalmist speaks of him: Ps.
9.3^.
The poor man is left to thee; thou will be a helper to the orphan; Ps. 145.9*
and again: A Lord preserving little-ones; and in another Psalm: Our Lord
protecteth strangers; the pupil, and widow he will receive; for these kind of
people have no humane assistance, to rely upon. God therefore owes protection
to Religious people upon the same title; for they are truly poor, in regard
they have nothing, and have given away al power of having any thing; they are
truly orphans and pupils, having forsaken father and mother, and al other
things, the friendship of men, the favor of Princes, the countenance and power
of riches; they are most truly orphans, bereft of al human help; and
little-ones, having humbled and abased themselves so low; finally they are
truly strangers, and, as guests and pilgrims in this world, have here no
permanent cit^^e. Wherefore to them most of al does that saying of the Prophet
David agree: Ps. 90.1.
He that dwells in the help of the Highest, shall remain in the protection of
the God of Heaven. For they do not (as Secular people) fly sometimes to the
help of the Highest, but dwelling in his house and family, they live always
in his help, and remain ever in his protection; and consequently that which
there is set down more at large, must necessarily follow, that he will shadow
them with his shoulders, and protect them with his shield, that they dread not
the night-feare, that is, the secret devises of the enemy, nor the arrow
flying in the day; that is, his open assaults.

Four commodities of the particular (...) God over Religious Orders.
6. Now the commodities which arise of this protection of God, are innumerable,
but may be reduced to four heads: whereof some concern our soul, some our
body, some the conservation of the whole Order, some are for defense of the
same against their enemies. First therefore God has care of the souls of his
servants, advancing them in Virtue, and not suffering them to be tempted above
their strength, but even when he does permit them to be tempted giving them
grace, that they may have the upper hand to their greater glory, finally, as a
diligent master labors by all means to advance the scholar, whom he loves,
in matter of learning: so God seeks with all diligence and care to put his
disciples forward in spirit; that we may truly say of them, Ps. 93.12.
as it is in the Psalm: Blessed is the man, whom thou, o Lord, do instinct,
and teach him thy law.

7. And that he has such care over our souls, will appear the more, by the
care which he has over our bodies. For if he do so diligently and lovingly
provide for our bodies, which are of so base a substance, we may easily
understand, how careful he will be of our soul and spirit. And certainly so it
is, that no father ever bestowed so much care in bringing-vp the children.
begotten of his body, and in maintayning them, as God does in maintayning
Religious people. Our Savior has given us testimony heerof in the care which
he had of the multitude, that followed him in the Desert; for beholding them he
said: Mar^. 8 2.
I have compassion upon the multitude, because, lo, three days they now
endure with me, neither have what to eat. For how much rather will he say so
now from heaven, and take compassion upon Religious people? For the multitude
had not endured more then three days, and yet had not left al they had, but
were soon after to return home again; but they that give themselves to God
in a Religious course, endure with him, not for three days only, but their
whole lifetime, and leave themselves nothing at al for his sake, not so much
as power to return to that, which upon good advise they have once forsaken,
and bound themselves thereunto by Vow. Wherefore it belongs properly to God
Almighty his providence, to provide them necessaries for life and mayntenance;
The miraculous providence of God (...) his servants.
which truly he does so carefully, and continually, that a man may say, he
takes pleasure in it. But as he does not upon the sudden create of nothing
the grain, or the wine, which is necessary for men's uses, or send it down
miraculously from heaven, but produce it out of the ground, and out of the
vine: so also he prouides for the necessities of Religious people by secondarie
causes, to wit, by other men's hands, moving first their minds thereunto. So we
see that God found Helias in the time of dearth, not by himself, but by the
woman, to whom he sent him with these words: 3. reg. 17 9.
I have commanded the widow-woman to feed thee. Wherefore S. Franci^, Ps. 17.15.
as we read, did not unfitly apply that verse of the Psalm ( Man did eat the
bread of Angels) to the bread which he gathered of alms, because the Angels
did move people to give that bread.

8. And to the end no man might doubt of this care, which God has ordinarily
over al Religious people, he has often testified the same with wonderful
extraordinary examples. In which kind Palladius does record, that the Abbot
Appollo living in the Desert with his disciples, and being unprovided of
necessaries toward Easter-time, our Lord was not wanting of his care and
liberality toward them. For upon the sudden certain men unknown to every
body, came and offered themselves saying, that they came a long journey, and
brought store of provision, great loaves of bread, a vessel of new milk, honey,
diverse kinds of fruit, pomegranats, figs, grapes, and such like as grow not in
Ag^pt, nor had ever been seen there by any of them; and they brought such
plenty, as they lasted til Whitsontide. What can a man desire more of the
goodness of God, then to provide for his servants in time, and withal so
plentifully, such dainties, at such a time?

9. S. Gregory does relate another, S. Gregory.
not unlike to this, of S. Benedict* that in a dear year, when his Monastery
was wholly unprovided of corn, there were found at the gate two hundred bushels
of meal, and no body knew from whence, or by whom, they were brought thither.
The same happened to S. Columbanus; S Columbanus.
who having seated himself in a solitary place upon the rock, he and his
Brethren had little or nothing to eat many days together, and upon the
sudden they discover a man coming toward them, with diverse beasts laden with
bread and other victuals; and the man, when he came, told them that he was
moved suddenly in his mind to bring them that provision. Another time when
their provision failed them, and they had a long time lingred-on with wild
herbs, and barks of trees, in quiet of the night, it was put in the Abbot of
Salice his mind, to relieve God's servants, that were ready to starve; and
when their carts were laden and knew not which way to go, they laid the raynes
upon the horses necks, and (doubtless guided by an Angel) they came directly to
the place, where Columbannus lay hid with his companions.

10. We have also many memorable examples of the like providence of God in
several passages of the life of S. Francis, S. Francis.
but chiefly at the time of the first general Meeting of his Friars at Assisi^.
For there being about five thousand of them then gathered together, he gave
them very strict command, that they should not take any care at al for any
thing pertaining to the body, grounding himself in that verse of the Psalm,
which he had often in his mouth: Ps. 54.2^
Cast thy care upon our Lord, and he will (...) thee. Dominick was present, when
S. Francis gave this commandment; and he thought it somewhat too much, fearing
least he might seem to tempt God, if he provided nothing at al for so great a
multitude. And behold not long after, there came from all the neighboring
towns and cities such a world of men and beasts, bringing with them al kind
of provision of victuals, household-stuffe, and household-vessel, that S. (...)
was quickly changed; and from that time resolved with himself, that his Order
also, which was then beginning, should have no certain reuennues to live on;
relying upon the Divine providence, whereof he had seen with his eyes so evident
a testimony.

11. And S. Dominick himself had afterward trial thereof. S. Dominick
For once in Rome there was nothing at al for them to eat in the Monastery:
and moreover two of the Friars that had been al about the city begging alms
from door to door, came back with empty wallets, to the end the liberality
of God might be the more remarkable. Well, notwithstanding all this, S Domini^k
caused them al to be called down to an empty board, and they were no sooner
set, but two exceeding comely youths coming into the Refectorie, served every
one of them with a wondrous white manche^ loaf, beginning from him that sat
lowest; and when they had dealt about to every one, they reverently bowed
down their heads, and vanished out of their sight. S Dominick presently called
for wine; and when they that waited, said there was none; he bad them go to the
empty vessels; and coming, they found one full of excellent wine. What joy may
we think there was at that board? What tears of gladness, beholding so great
liberality of God, and that he had so great care over them? Many like
examples we have in all Orders, and also in ours, but they are generally known,
and nothing is more frequent in the Lives of Saints.

The conservation of Religious Orders very miraculous.
12 The third commodity arising of the protection of God, is the conservation
and propagation of Religious Families, wherein we may evidently discover the
great love of God toward them, and his special providence, whereof we speak.
For who is there but must needs wonder, if he consider well, that among so many
Religious Orders, that from time to time have been erected and continued from
Age to Age, some very different among themselves, some very near alike, al of
them have been still sufficiently furnished with subjects; none of them have
decayed with age, none of them have been rejected for novelty. And doubtless,
as there must needs be a secret virtue in fountains, which breed such a
continual stream of water, and in cities, where people dye, there must be
others borne, and others again to breed, that the inhabitants do not quite
fail: So in these holy Congregations, there is something that does conserve
and multiply them, and furnish others in time, when others fail; which
certainly is no human thing, but altogether Divine. It is God alone, as I said
before, that inspireth these good thoughts, and inclines men to what course of
life he thinks good. And moreover, whereas among so many Religious Orders, some
have degenerated from their ancient holiness of life and discipline, The
persecutious of Religious people puni^hed.
in them also, as they are, God does show his goodness, not suffering them to
want men to uphold them, and to keep their rank in God Almightie's Church; as
if he did it of purpose to show how constantly he sticks to those that he has
once taken into his charge and protection, and how much he will do for the
Orders that maintain their first fervor and piety, seeing he does not cast-of
those that are slack and almost falling off from him.

13 It remains that we speak of the fourth Head which was proposed, to wit,
of the continual care which God has to defend every Religious Family against
those that malign them, and how he has ever revenged himself in a most
rigorous manner upon such wicked persons, as have banded against them. We have
a memorable example of both in S. Columbanus his Life, of which I related some
passages before. Theodoricus King of Burgundy, by instigation of his
grandmother Brun^childis, among other mischiefs wrought against him, banished
him out of the place where he lived, with some few of his Brethren. Theodori^k
K. of Burgundy,
First therefore in that journey of his, one of the Officers, that had
insolently stricken one of his Brethren with a cudgel, was not long after
drowned in the same place, as S. Columbanus had foretold him. Theodoricus King
being at wars with his brother Theodobert, was burnt in the city of Merz,
by a fire raised, God knows how, by chance, or from heaven. Clotharius King of
France invaded his Kingdom, and seasing upon his six sons put them al to
death. Brunechildis, another Iesabel, was set upon a camels back, and carried
scornefully through the whole army, and afterward commanded to be tied to
three or four wild colts tails, and torn in pieces, in which torment she
died most miserably; and that whole Family was quite rooted out, the Kingdom
being deuolued to Clo^harius.

14 The death of Balatiu^ President of Egypt, Balatius President of Agypt.
in S. Antonie the Great his time, was not much unlike. He did persecute the
Catholics many ways, but chiefly bent his rage against the Monks, and would
sometimes cause them publicly to be beaten with rods. S. Antonie wrote unto
him a short letter, declaring the wrath which hang over his head from heaven.
He took the letter in scorn, and cast it away, threatening besides, that seeing
S. Antonie took upon him to defend the Monks, he would have shortly to do
with him also. But he quickly repented himself of his proud demeanor; for some
four days after returning from his pleasure abroad, in company of one of his
bosome-friends, his friend's horse, who til that day was the gentlest that
could be, leapt suddenly upon him in a mad humor, and taking him in his
teeth, pulled him to the ground, and trampling upon him with his feet, could by
no means be beaten off: and so he died soon after most miserably, every one
admiring and confessing the just judgment of God in it.

15 That also which S. Gregory recounteth in his Dialogues of Florentius,
Florentiu^.
who was adversary to S. Benedict, is very strange, and we touched somewhat of
it before. This Florentius had endeauored first to poison S. Benedict;
afterward he labored to overthrow some of his disciples by wanton objects, S.
Benedict therefore thought it best to give way to his wicked intentions, and
voyded the place, taking most of his Brethren with him, but he was not gone
far, when the wicked Florentius came to his end by the fall of a house upon
him, and so lost both temporal and eternal life together.

16 That which happened in this kind to the Primate of Armach in Ireland in the
year of Christ one thousand three hundred foure-score and six, The Primate of
Armach.
is very memorable, and was acted upon a great theater. For first in England,
then at A^inion (where at that time the Pope did sit) he spoke much against the
Orders of Begging-Friars in open Consistory of the Cardinals. And persisting
obstinatly to prosecute the cause against them, he dyed soon after; and
together with him al his false accusations were buried.

16 About twenty years after this had happened, another thing fell out, which is
worthy to be noted. Certain Prelates (lead with what spirit, I know not) took
advise among themselves to put down the Order of S. Fran^i^; Another Bishop
strangely punished.
and to effect it, they appointed a meeting of certain Bishops. In the windows
of the great Church of that town there were two pictures painted upon the
glass, one of S. Paul with a Sword in his hand, an other of S. Fran^is, with a
Cross. The Sacristan one night heard, as it were, S. Paul saying thus; what
do thou, Francis? Why do thou not defend thy Order? And S. Francis
answered: What shall I do? I have nothing left me but the Cross; and it puts
me in mind of patience. S. Paul willed him not to put-vp such an injury, and
offered him his sword. The Sacristan was much frighted; and when it was day,
coming into the Church, he found that the two pictures had changed their
weapons, S. Paul had the Cross, and S. Fran had the Sword al bloody. And
while he was wondering at it within himself, the noise was about the town, that
the Bishop, that had first moved the business against the Friars, was found
dead, and his head cut off. Then he began also to relate, what he had heard in
the night, and showed the pictures to every one that came, that they might the
rather believe him.

17 Many such things have happened to those that have been troublesome to
Religious people; and few there be of them, that have not come to ruin, God
fighting for his servants; and indeed their causes are so linked together,
that he that opposes one, must needs oppose the other. Wherefore others may
glory, if they please, in the favor of Princes and Kings, and bestow their
whole time and pains in gaining it; our glory shall be to say with the
Prophet: Ps. 32.20.
Our soul endures with our Lord, because he is our helper and protector; our
heart shall rejoice in him, and we will hope in his holy name. And he on the
other side will say to every one of us, as he said anciently to Abraham: Genesis
15.
Do not ^eare, I am thy protector, and thy very great reward; ^or both go
together, and both agree to Religious people, if they agree to any body in
this life; that because they desire no other happiness or reward but God,
therefore he is their protector and defender.

The two and twentieth fruit: The protection of our Blessed Lady. CHAP. XXXIV.
BEsides the manifest and assured protection of God, which al Religious enjoy,
they are to understand to their further comfort and benefit, that our Blessed
Lady has taken them into her particular charge and care, defending and
cherishing them under her wing and protection. For as in a great household,
besides the father, who is head-gouernour, it is fitting there be a mother, not
only to breed children, but to bring them up, and find them necessaries; so
though in the household of the Church, Christ be our common Father, who
regenerated us with his sacred blood, yet it is fitting there should be a
Mother also, who with her virtue, care, and deserts might concur to the
breeding, fostering, and maintayning of the spiritual life, which our Savior
gives us, this Health-bringing Virgin, as S. Leo styles her, S. Leo ser. 1. de
pass.
is our Mother; of whom S. Germany Patriarck of Constantinople, S. German. in
orat. de deip virg.
an ancient grave author, writes thus: As the breath, which we draw
continually, is not only a sign of life, but a cause thereof: so the most holy
name of MAR^^, which (as he says) the servants of God have always in their
mouth, is both a sign that they truly live, and withal does cause and conserve
life in them, and gives them comfort and help in all things. And this she does
to al, that truly live; yet as the Sun does concur to al natural effects,
but in greater measure to those, that are greater and more noble: so al degrees
in the Church partake of her light and assistance; yet they that are higher in
sanctity and perfection, The life of our B lady a pattern of Religion
doubtless do most of al feel the benefit of it. And a Religious state has
this advantage, that it comes very near the manner and fashion of life, which
she herself lead on earth; for we may truly glory, that her life was a
pattern of a Religious course. The manger, and and the two young pigeons, and
many things else, bear witness of her Poverty. Her marriage, shows her
Obedience, being subject to a man, whom she did far excel in holiness of life
and wisdom. Wha^ need we speak of her Chastity, seeing she was the first that
displayed the ensign thereof, and held it not only by purpose, and constant
resolution, but by Vow? So al do write of her, and S Augustine in particular
says thus: S. August. ^ de Virg. c. 4.
Her virginity also was the more pleasing and acceptable, because Christ did
not take her, after he was conceived, to preserve her himself from an other
man, that would have deflowred her, but chose her when she was already
dedicated to God, before he was conceived, to the end to be borne of her. The
words in which Marie delivered her answer to the Angel that brought her tidings
of a child, show as much. How shall this be done, because I know not man? Which
truly she would not have said, but that she had vowed virginity to God before.
But because the custom of the Israelits did not as yet admit of any such
thing, she was espoused to a just man, who was not violently to take from her
that which she had vowed, but r^ther to preserve it from others that might be
violent. S. Bernard also writes to the same effect, and among other praises he
commends her, for that (as he speaks) transcending the decrees of the law of
Moses, S Bernard ser sup. ^lag.
she vowed an undefiled sanctity of body and soul; which inuiolably-grounded
purpose is proved by her resolute answer to the Angel, that promised her a
son: How shall this be done, because I know not man?

2. Wherefore seeing likeness breeds love, and there be such plain traces of a
Religious life in the Blessed Virgin, who can doubt, but she does behold and
embrace al and every Religious person, and every Order and Fami^ie of them,
with particular love and care? S. Bernard gives us to understand as much,
saying that our spiritual marriage does please her much more, then the carnal
marriage, S. Bernard s. de aqua in vinum ver.
at which we read she was present with her Son; in regard that in carnal
marriage, one man is coupled with another, but in spiritual marriage, our soul
is coupled with Christ her Son.

3. This will appear more plainly, if we consider the beginnings of many
Religious Orders; for finding them to have proceeded from the goodness and
charity of this most glorious Virgin, Religious Orders erected by ^er means.
by those of whom we find it so recorded, we may gather, that the like has
happened to others, of whom there is no such thing extant in writing, and that
absolutely al Religious Orders have been founded by her help, and continued by
her assistance.

4. We find upon record, that when the ancient and noble Order of the
Charterhouse-Monks was first founded in Grenold, many things were objected
against that holy Institute, by instigation of the Devil, specially at the
time that S. Bruno their Founder was absent from them, The Charterhouse-Monks.
whom Pope Urban the Second had commanded to stay in Rome, and a great storm
of temptation fell upon that little flock. On the one side, the extreme hardness
of that kind of life was represented unto them, the hideousnes of the place
they were seated in, it being very solitary, and that they were but few, which
of itself is irksome and tedious, On the other side the spirit of God had taken
root in their hearts, and the eminent men, who, as so many stars, were their
guides, and the fearful end of the Doctor of Paris, made great impression in
them. And while they were thu^ stumbled in their mind, a venerable old man,
with curled hair and a bald crown, stood in the midst of the^, and promised
them in the name of Almighty God, that our Blessed Lady mother of God should
always protect them in that solitary place, and be their Patroness and
Advocate, if they would every day say their Primer in her honor; and when he
had spoken these words, he vanished out of their sight, but left in their hearts
great confidence and joy. Whereupon making no doubt but that the old man was S.
Peter the Apostle, they presently by common consent and agreement chose our
Blessed Lady for their particular Patroness and Advocate; and we may plainly
see by the event, how faithfully she has performed her promise. For they have
not only perseuered til this day in that solitary place, but made it very
famous, and from thence forward increased ever in number and opinion of
sanctity.

5. We may say the same of the Cistercian Monks, The Cistercian Order.
the Founders of which Order were two: S. Robert, that began it, and S. Bernard
that augmented and increased it. Whosoever has read the Works of S. Bernard,
or heard any thing of him, can make no doubt, but his Order was exceedingly
favored by the Blessed Virgin, were it but for his own living in it, that was
so great a Fauorit of hers; and being such, was placed by her in that Order. S.
Robert (Founder, as I said, of that Order) was ordained by the Mother of God
for that course of life, before he was borne. For we find, that she appeared to
his mother, while she went with child of him, and holding a gold-ring in her
hand, spoke thus unto her: Engardis (For so was her name) I will espouse the boy
thou go with, to mysel^ with this ring. When she awaked, she reflected upon
it with exceeding joy, and that she might be the more assured of it, the same
Vision appeared unto her the second time; and by the event it proved true. For
the Espousals were his Entering into Religion, The Carmelit-Friars.
and his Vow of Chastity the ring. Of the Carmelit-Friars we read, that while
they were petitioning Pope Honorius the Fourth to confirm their Institute, our
Blessed Lady appeared unto him in the nightime, and bad him entertain the
petitioners and their petition favorably, and yeald to their request.

6. The Order of the Seruites is principally dedicated to the service of our
Blessed Lady, The Seruites
and bears her name. Their beginning was thus: They were a kind of Sodalitie
or Congregation gathered together in her honor. In one of their meetings upon
the feast of her Assumption, while they were at their prayers, moved by a voice
from heaven, they al forsook the world, and vowed themselves to the service of
God, and particularly of our Blessed Lady, in the manner they had already
begun; and are called Seruites, as it were, her special servants. Some seven
years after our B. Lady appeared to every one of them severally in the
night, accompanied with a great and glorious troup of Angels; she had in one
hand a russet Habit, in the other a Book open, commanding them ever after to
wear that Habit under that Rule, which she said was S. Augustin's. When it was
day, they al met together, and related the Vision which they had had, and
resolved, to the excessive contentment of their souls, The Orders of S.
Dominic^. and S. Francis.
to do as the B. Virgin, and Queen of Heaven had commanded them.

7. But that which is recorded to have happened to S. Dominick concerning his
own Order, and the Order of S. Francis together, is more memorable then any
of the rest. While he was one night in his prayers in S. Peter's Church in
Rome, at the time when he was framing in his mind such a course of life, he
thought he saw the Heavens open, and that Christ our Savior with an angry and
fiery countenance stood up, threatening the world with three darts that he had
in his hand, the one, to destroy the proud; the covetous people, with the
other* and those that were lasciuiously given, with the third: and no body did
oppose himself against his wrath; only the B.V. Mother of mercy, falling down
at his feet, beseeched him to spare those who^ he had redeemed with his
precious blood. And when Christ made answer, that Justice required, that so
great offenses should be no longer left unpunished, she replied, that she had
some of her servants, that would willingly bestow their labor to reclaim the
people, and bring them to penance. Our Savior appeased with her speeches,
desired to see them; and she brought forth S. Dominick himself (that saw the
Vision) and S. Francis. S. Dominick had never seen S. Francis before; yet
meeting him by chance the next day, he knew him by that which he had seen the
night before, and embraced him with much affection, as his brother and
companion in so great a work; and related unto him, what he had seen. And they
often found by the effects her special favor toward them, and particularly in
Pope Innocentius the Fourth his time. This Pope was, I know not upon what
ground, auerted from them, and had by his Breues restrained them of their
Faculties and privileges. The Friars had no other means of redress, but by
recourse to heaven; and among other devotions they had appointed to say the
Litanies. One day therefore, while those of S. Dominick^ Order were saying them
in their church at Rome, one of the Friars saw our B. Lady standing upon the
altar with her Son, as it were pitying the case of the Friars, and their
grief and tears which they shed bitterly; and turning to her Son repeated
these words diverse times, as it is in the Litanie^: Sonn^, hearken unto them.
Not long after, Pope Innocen^, lying upon his deathbed at Naples, showed
himself very penitent, and speaking those words of the Psalm ( For iniquity
thou have rebuked man, Ps. 38.12.
and made his soul waste away like a spider) he gave up the ghost.

8 The B. Virgin showed the like favor to the Monks of Mount-Oliuer (a place
in Italy) upon their beginning. The Oli^etans.
For the three gentlemen of S^ena, who were the first Founders of that Order,
agreing upon a course, and many resorting to them by reason of the ho^ie ^ife
they lead, there wanted not those that informed the Pope against them (who
lived then at A^igmon) as new-fanglers. Whereupon he cited them before him; but
dealt favorably with them and remitted them to Guido Archbishop of (...).
While they were upon their return into Italy, our B. Lady Mother of God
appeared to the Archbishop, attended with a great number of Angels, commending
those men unto him, and showed him moreover a white Habit and the Rule of S.
Benedict, which she would have them use. In the Church of the B. Trinity of
Are^^um, they say, there is a picture upon the wall, which testifyeth this which
I have related; in which Church the Bishop gave them the Habit and the Rule
under the protection of our B. Lady.

9 In like manner she promised her assistance to the Order of S. Hierome, and
showed favor toward them. This Order began in Spain; and when at first there
were but two or three little Monasteries of them, The Hieronimus.
some of the Brethren offended with so little a number, resolved among
themselves to put themselves into some other Order; and while they were going,
out B. Lady met them visibly upon the way, and bad them return, and persevere
in their former course of life; for shortly they should see it spread far and
near, and that all that were of that Order should be her particular servants.
Were with they were fully strengthened in their purpose, and the ^^ole Order of
them, uses besides their other garments, a while coat to this day, to
testify that they belong to this Virgin.

10 Finally, The society of I^SVS.
we may reckon our Society of JESUS in this number. For first S. Ignatius ou^
Founder, was certainly a creature of this B. Virgin. For we read of him, that
while he was yet a secular man in his father's house, she appeared unto him
very glorious, and stood some time before him; at which sight and some speech
which he had with her, he was quite changed into another man; and not long
after he vowed chastity in her honor. Afterward, when he was resolved to put
himself upon a spiritual warfare, he began it in her Church at Mount-serrate,
standing as it were Sentinel al night, before her altar (after the manner of
some ancient Knights, Mass l. 1. vit. ^n c. 2.3.
when they were first installed) to give and dedicate himself wholly unto her.
Wherefore as he that sets the kernel, sets the tree; so when the B. Virgin
brought forth Ignatius, she brought us al forth, and our whole Order, as being
contained in him, as the posterity of Abraham, in his loins. Which once was
showed unto a Priest of our Order, a man of great sanctity, by name, Martin
Guttieres, a Spaniard, who had many things revealed unto him; and among the
rest, as he was traveling through France, he rid by a chapple of our Lady,
and it was given him to understand, that he was to die within eight days; and
it fell out so; for being taken by the Heretics, and very hardly used, he died
in their hands. To this man, I say, the B. Virgin related many things, and
among others, this which concerns us al. On a time she appeared before him in
very comely fashion and statute, and her garment or huke was spread out into
a great compass, and under it was our whole Society, which she cherished as a
mother, and did protect it, as it were, with that garment of her grace and love.

11. Wherefore, seeing al Religious Orders do live under the protection of this
B. Virgin (as appears most manifestly by the examples and reasons hee^ set
down) we have great cause to rejoice, The Power and good vvil of our B. Lady.
and congratulate one another, that we have the selfsame Protectrice and Queen
on earth, which the Blessed have in heaven. For what can we want living under
her protection, seeing there is no mischief which she is not strong enough to
preserve us fron^, nor any good thing which her prayers and merits are not
able to obtain? For whereas two things are required in a man that will do good
to another, power, and will to do it, both are so great and certain in this B.
Q^eene, that nothing can be desired more; her power, to say in one word all that
can be said, is al one with her Sonne's: only he has it by nature, she has it
by grace and communication: And as for her good will and inclination to do
good, who can think worthily enough of it, seeing it is so nearly united with
the Divine infinite goodness, S. Bernard s^ct 1. de Assump^.
and wholly absorpt and drowned in it? Insomuch that S. Bernard says thus of
her: She is the Queen of heaven, she is merciful, finally, she is the mother
of the only-begotten Son of God. And nothing can so much commend the greatness
of her power and goodness, unless we believe that the Son of God does not
respect his mother, or make doubt, least the bowels of the B. Virgin Marie, are
not transformed into al charitable affection; Charity itself, which is of God,
having corporally rested in them for nine months. Which saying of S. Bernard
ext^ndeth to al Christians* but let us see, how she does exercise both power
and good will particularly toward Religious people. A strange vi^on.
Of her power we read a rare example in the Chronicle of S. Francis his Order.
Leo one of the special companions of S. Francis, saw one day, as it were upon a
great plain, Christ coming to judge the world. Multitudes of men and women
were gathered thither, the Angels sounded their trompets, and there were two
great ladders which reached down from heaven to the earth, one red, another
white; upon the red ladder Christ leaned, with a severe and ang^ie countenance.
S. Francis standing a little below him, beckned to his Brethren to come up
confidently that ladder, for that our Savior invited them, and would have it
so: w^erefore many ran up hastily, but quickly fell down again, some from
the third, some from the fourth, some from the tenth, some from the higher
steps, and some when they were almost at the top. At which S. Francis was
wonderfully sorry, but yet bad them take courage, and runne-vp the other white
ladder, for there was no danger at al. When they came to it, they saw our B.
Lady leaning upon the top of it, beholding every one of them with a loving
aspect, and helping them, and entertayning every one of them, so that they al
got very easi^y into heaven; which does sufficiently show her power.

An other comfortable vision.
11. Her goodness is as admirably expressed in the History of the Cistercian
Order, where we find recorded, that one Reynaldus, a very holy man, was one
day laboring in the harvest, among the rest of his Brethren; and because of
his old age, he was bid to leave off, and rest himself; so he sat down
somewhat troubled at it, and behold he saw suddenly a company of women
marching down a hill that was hard by: they were al clad in white, and one of
them went before, much taller and fayrer then the rest, and coming with her
retinue to the servants of God, she embraced every one of them very lovingly,
and kissed them, and wiped the sweat and dust off their brows, with the linen
towels which two of the company brought with them: and she cherished those
most, which labored hardest. Reynaldus beholding it, began to dispute with
himself and wonder, who these women might be, that were so bold with the
Religious men, beyond al order and custom. And a venerable man appeared
standing by him, who told him, that she whom he saw was the Mother of God, with
other blessed Virgins, and she came to see her haruest-folk, for so he called
them. This was the vision which Reynaldus saw; the rest, though they saw it no^
wi^h their eyes, yet doubtless they felt it in their souls, and in the increase
of corporal strength, and patience, and a heavenly sweetness amidst that
paynful labor: whereby we understand, that though we cannot see with our eyes
the many favors which this Blessed Virgin does us, yet we receive many and
often, in all places and seasons, specially in all labor and pains which we
undergo for her beloved Son our Savior JESUS.

The two and twentieth fruit: That the prayers of Religious people are easily
heard. CHAP. XXXV.
IT remains that we speak of another fruit of Religion, to wit, that the
prayers of Religious people are so grateful and effectual in the sight of God,
that they easily obtain whatsoever they ask, as in reason and by daily
experience we man find. A wort^ie thing doubtless in all men's eyes, and a so
exceeding profitable, to be thus gracious with our sovereign Lord and King.
For to use the wealth and power o^ one that is Omnipotent, as his own, is in a
manner to be Omnipotent. In the world it is esteemed so great a thing to have
the care of a Prince, that every one does desire it and strive for i^; what
must it then needs be, to be so high in the favor of God, as to have acc^sse
unto him as it were by right, and be so confide^t, as to ask, and so powerful,
as to obtain, any thing at his hands? This therefore that is so profi^able,
and withal so highly honorable, a Religious estate among other commodities does
bring unto us For we may justly make account, Ps. 80* 1^.
that our Lord says thus to every one of us: I am thy Lord God, that have
bro^ght thee out of the land of Aegy^^; open thy mouth wide open, and I will sit
it. The love which God has showed us in bestowing so great a benefit upon us,
as to bring us o^t to the land of Egypt, that is ou^ of the world, leaving so
many behind in ^h^ miseries thero^, does make us confident thereof. The
obedience also of a Religious man, heark^ing to the voice of God, Romans 10.12
in so great a matter, does seem to deserve i^; and many other causes there
be, why that infinite goodness, who is rich toward all that ^al upon him, should
particularly do Religious people this favor.

2. The Prophet David gives us one special reason to think so, Ps. 33:16.
when he says: The eyes of our Lord are upon the just, and his ears unto
their prayers. And again: Ps. 14^ 1^.
He will do the will of those that fear him: and hear their prayer. Now where
is more Justice and Fear of God, then in that State, which b^ reason of this
fear has betaken itself, as it were, into a castle of Justice? for so we may
call Religion in regard it remoueth us so far from al occasions of sin, and
the Devils from hurting us, that it is a manner harder to do eui^, then good:
the power of doing evil, is so taken from us.

3 Another reason proper ^o Religious people, God hearet^ the poor.
is Poverty, of which the same Prophet says: Our Lord h^th heard the desire
of the poor; God has heard the p^^pa^a^ion of their har^s. So that God does
prevent the prayers of those that a^^ truly, that is voluntarily poor, and
hear their very thoughts and desi^es before they v^t^r them in pr^y^r* I say,
Ps 9.28.
of those that are voluntarily poor; for there be many w^os^h u^es and ch^sts
are empty and poor, but their mind is rich, because it o^e^h and desi^eth
riches. The Princes of the world, that measure things by their fair outside,
favor t^ose most, that are rich and powerful; poor people have no access
unto them, they will not so much as look upon them. God deals after another
manner, and admits those chiefly to his presence, and grants their
requests, that for his love appear naked before him, and are bare of al human
substance. And how can it be otherwise, but that his infinite goodness and mercy
should deal liberally with them, who have been so liberal toward him, and
grant them any thing, that have given him al they had, and al they were in
possibility to have? For here that rule takes place, which himself prescribed
to his liberalities: What measure you measure, Mat. 7.1. Luc. 6 37.
shall be measured again to you; yea in more plentiful manner, to wit, a
measure pressed, and shaken together, and ouerflowing, they will give into your
bosom. And if this be the reward of that which we bestow upon our neighbor,
And the humble. E^cle 35 21. Ps. 101.1^.
what may we expect for that which we bestow upon God? A third reason is,
Humility; whereof we find written, that the payer of him that humbles himself,
does pierce the clouds; and in an other place: Our Lord had regard to the
prayer of the humble, and did not reject their prayers. Now there be two sorts
of Humility: the one lasts for a while only, as for the time we are at our
prayers; which humility is so forcible to obtain what we desire, that is in a
manner al in all, as we find by the example of Achab, 3 Reg. 27.29
that wicked king who notwithstanding his wickedness, no sooner humbled himself
in the sight of God, as the Scripture speaks, but he obtained what he would.
Wherefore if this kind of humility be so forcible, as to make sinners have a
favorable hearing before that sovereign Judge; certainly the hum^litie which
is to be seen in all our actions, and in the very manner of our life, and the
whole extent thereof, must needs be far more effectual to give the lust a more
favorable audience; I say the humility of the course of life, wherein
Religious people live, which does not only bar al pomp and state, but
places us in the lowest place, among the poor, subject to every body, which
in a worldly eye is a great slavery, though in very deed it be the greatest
liberty, and to be preferred before kingdoms. And those that delight in God
Ps. 36.4.


4. A fourth cause is that, which we find in the Psalm: Delight in our Lord,
and he will grant thee the desire of thy heart; which is the proper occupation of
Religious people. They have debarred themselves of al other delights, as of
marriage, children, riches, and such as rich men use, as hawking, and hunting,
bancke^s, plays, stately buildings, rich attire, and the like: and in steed
of them, they have placed al their delight in God, whom they enjoy by prayer,
meditation, and reading, and many other ways. The state itself helps them
heerin; for being spiri^ual, and wholly dedicated to the service of God, it
gives them no occasion of desiring or askin^* any thing, but that which is
spiritual and pertaining to his service; which makes that God is the more
easily inclined o^ care them, because when he hearkneth to them in these
things, he hearkneth to himself, and deals for his own honor and benefit; so
much does it in, o^^ to have the intercourse with God, which Religious people
have, and to deal in one and the same business: so that, that which is good
o^^i^ for the one, is good or il for the other. As when a servant deals for
his master, whatsoever he does in that kind, and whatsoever he asks his
master, concerns his master more then himself; and if hi^ master grant him
any thing, it is for the masters profit.

5. And doubtless these reasons are very forcible, Denial of out wills and
charity, two other reasons, why our prayers are heard.
to move the infinite goodness of God to give us a favorable hearing, yet there
be two other things which in my opinion are more forcible then any of the
rest, to wit, the denial of our own will* and the union and charity which is
betwixt us. As concerning the first, the Prophet Esaias answering the complaynt
which some did make, that God did not hearken to their prayers, nor their
fasts, nor their tears, speaks in this manner: Isay. 58.3.
Behold, in the day of your fasting, your own will is found; and promises them
moreover, that if they forgo their own will, Then you shall call upon our Lord,
and he will hear you; you shall cry out, and he will say, lo, I am here; and he
has reason in it For as it were an uncivil and unreasonable thing among
friends, for one to desire always to have his own will, and never to do as his
friend would have him, in regard that in friendship there must be equality,
and that which pleases one, must please another, whereby they come to that
confidence among themselves, that they may freely ask, and take by authority
that which is their friend's: In like manner, in the friendship that is betwixt
God and us, nothing does make him more friendly toward us, then the resigning
of our will to him in all things, great and small. And who is there that does
practice this resignation and conformity more perfectly, and more constantly,
then Religious people? who by the Vow of Obedience, have quiet cut off their
own will, and in place thereof, ingrafted in their hearts the will of God? So that
(in that measure that there can be right and equity betwixt God and man) a
Religious man may in a kind of justice require of God, that seeing he in all
things does the will of God, God will do his will in some thing that concerns
also his service.

6. Of unity and fraternal charity we shall not need to say much, Mat. 18.19.
seeing we have the promise of our Savior in these words: I say unto you, if
two of you agree upon earth, of whatsoever thing they shall ask, it shall be
done unto them by my Father that is in heaven. If therefore it go by consent,
what greater consent can there be then among Religious people, among whom al
things are common? and what agreement can be more durable then theirs, who are
linked together by so indissoluble a tie, as be their Vows? So that their
prayers must needs be more grat^ful, and more efficacious in the sight of God,
both in regard of the virtue itself of Charity, which cannot but be exceeding
pleasing to God, who himself is Charity, and for the participation, which, as
I said before, is betwixt them, and the communion of al good works, which makes
every one of them more gratful, and more powerful with God, appearing in his
sight, A great confidence of S. Dominick in his prayers.
invested with the merits and good works of all the rest. We read that S.
Dominick one day did fra^kly co^feste to a certain Priour of the C^stercian
Order, that was his great friend, that he never asked God any thing which was
not granted him; which the Priour wondering at, said unto him: And why then do
you not ask that God will make Conradus the Dutchman enter into your Order?
which Conradus was at that time, one of the learned men of Christendom. S.
Domin^ck answered, it was a hard matter, but yet he did not mistrust, but if he
should ask it, God would grant it him. And thereupon continued all that night at
his prayers; and behold, early in the morning, Conradus came to their Church,
cast himself at the seete of S. Dominick, begging to be received into his
Order; and was received, to the great joy and astonishment of every body. Al
books of History and Devotion are full of the like examples, and there is not
almost the life of any Religious person, man or woman, written, wherein we shall
not find that they have obtained of God many great things, either above the
common course of nature, which are the more remarkable or natural and
ordinary, which were usual with them, but yet less no^ed, And S Scholasti^^.
and many not noted at al.

7. And me thinks, the lesser the things be which they ask and obtain^, the
more admirable is the goodness of God in condescending in them to their prayers
and desires; of which kind we read of S. Scholasti^a, that she fell to her
prayers, and God sent a very great rain, to stay S. Benedict, who was her
brother, al one night with her. And S. Thomas of Aquin, S. Thomas of Aquin
longing for some he^^ings, S. Francis.
when he was sick, he sent him some, though at that time they were not in
season. And S. Francis in his sickness desiring ^o hear some Music, an Angel
came in the night, and played to him in his chamber upon the lute. These l^ttle
things, I say, of which there be infinite in the Saints Lives, do show both how
easy God is in harkening to the prayers of his friends, and that he is far
more inclinable in great matters, specially such as concern our own souls,
and others good, as more beseeming his greatness. In which respect S. John
Chrysostom says, S: John Chr^^^st. hom 4. in Genesis
that Religious people are not only beneficial to themselves, but to whole
Cities and Commonwealths; and gives this admonition: When thou see a man
outwardly but meanly clad, yet inwardly adorned with virtue, contemn not that
which thou see outwardly, but fix thy eyes upon the riches of his soul and
inward glory. Blessed Helias was such, when he had his goat-skin only about
him; and yet Achab in all his robes, stood in need of his goat-skin. Behold
therefore Achab's mi^etie, and Helias his riches.

A comparison between the state of a Religious man, and a Secular Layman.
CHAP. XXXVI.
BY the discovery which we have made of the fruits and manifold treasures of a
Religious life, we may without much labor, easily understand, how far it
excels al other courses of life, which be in the world, for as much as
concerns the profi^ablenes of it, and the easines of a tayning to salvation
by it. The courses which may stand in comparison with it, are these: The state
of a Lay man, of a Clergy man, of a Bishop, and of a Solitary life; and of
every one of them we will discourse apart. And to begin with the lowest, which
is the state of a Layman, the d^fference certainly betwixt it and a Religious
course, is very great and plain, and in my opinion evidently expressed by our
Savior in the Parable of the great supper, from which (and from the service of
God signified by it) three things did with hold the guests that were invited;
to wit, I have bought a farm: I have bought five yoke ^^^en: Lac. 1^.18.
I have w^dded a wife. Under which three heads the Divine wisdom does briefly
comprehend all the several trades and occupation^ and fashions of living, which
are so diverse in a Secular life. S. Ambrose l 7. in (...) c 14.
And so S. Ambrose does understand it, adding that our Savior in this Parable
does teach us, that we must forsake al earthly things, Mat. 19 21 3 Reg. 19.21.
because neither he, that trading in inferior things, purchases earthly
possessions for himself, can come to the Kingdom of heaven; since our Savior
said: Sell what thou have, and follow me; nor he that buyeth oxen, seeing
Elizaeus killed those which he had, and divided them among the people; and he
that has wedded a wife, thinks of the things of this world, 1. Cor. 7.34.
and not of any thing belonging to God, not that Marriage is condemned* but
because it is greater honor to be entire* for the unmarried woman; and the
widow thinks of that which is of God, how she may be holy in body and in
spirit. Thus far S. Ambrose. And let us consider a little more particularly
these bonds and hindrances, in which al Secular people are entangled, some in
one kind, some in another.

2. The dangers and dommages of the first of these impediments are fitly
expressed by S. Augustine in these words: S. Augustine. s 33. de Ver. Domini.
By buying a farm we understand the desire of command; The danger of Ambition.
for it is naturally pleasing to have a farm, to be master of something, to
have other men under us, and to be Lord. A naughty vice, and the first of al
vices; for the first man would needs be Lord, because he would have no Lord.
What is to be Lord, but to be in one's own power? But there is a greater
power. Let us submit our selves unto it, that we may be safe. By which speech
of S. Aug. we understand both the mischief which is in ambitions seeking to
bear rule and sway among men, and the happiness of Religious people, that are,
according to his advise, so perfectly subject to God, and bound to his service
by the indissoluble bond of their Vows. S. Gregory does often discourse of
the same dangerous state, in which they live that are possessed with an
ambitious spirit; and indeed there is no vice which he does more earnestly
inueigh against, Job. ^4 18. S. Greg. mor. 24. c. 14.
then this, and particularly upon those words of holy Job: Who says to the
king: Renegate; and calls the leaders, wicked; he gives us to understand
three things, for which honor and preferment is justly to be feared. First
because, when honor and ambition has once taken a man in the head, he
breaks with all justice and honesty, and trampleth it under foot. The sins,
says S. Gregory which are committed out of desire of command, are without
number. Second^y, the very desire of precedencie, is of it self a great fault,
though there be no other sin mingled with it; and in this sense S. Gregory
takes those words: Who says to the king: Renegate; because every governor
(says he) does fall into the sin of Apostacy, as often as delighted with the
command he has over other men, he pleases himself in that he is singularly
honorable. The third danger is by reason of the great charge which li^^h upon
him that is in honor, if either he help not his subjects to live orderly and
well, or, which is worse, they be perverted by il example; which is the cause,
(as S. Gregory interpreted) why God calls the leaders, wicked, because
(says he) the leader is wicked who strayeth from the path of truth, and
running headlong himself, inuiteth his followers to a downe-fal. Are not
therefore they most miserable, that neglecting a supper so plentifully
furnished with all that can be desired, cast themselves wittingly upon so many
mischiefs? In my opinion they are not only most wretchedly miserable, but
errant fools, that being so lovingly and freely invited to this Royal banquet,
prepared for them without any labor or cost of theirs, will rather buy such a
farm, at so dear a rate. And what must it cost them, but a continual
slavery, an infinite care, solicitude, and many sorrows, which is dearer then
gold or silver, these being external, the other internal, which go to our very
heart?

3. Now let us consider on the other side, the quiet and peaceablenes of a
Religious life, The bancquet of Religion.
free from ambition, fitly expressed in the Parable of a great supper or
bancket. For in a great bancket three things do concur: Rest, in sitting
down at board; delight, in plentiful feeding; and pleasure, in conversation
with good company. What greater quiet of mind can any body have, then a
Religious man, that has forsaken al, and desires nothing in the world, Romans
8.38.
but contents himself in God, from whom he is certain, as the Apostle speaks,
that neither things present, nor things to come, can sever him? What food can
be more delightful, then the contemplation of heavenly things, which infinitely
please the palate of the soul? What butchers-meate, or foul, or delicate
sauce, can be compared with the dainties which from the heavenly bancket of
the Blessed, do befall us? Which are yet made more sweet, by the sweetness of the
company of so many of our Brethren and companions as meet together at the
bancket. For as al meeting of good company together is naturally delightful,
much more the assembly of so many virtuous men so nearly linked to one
another. This is the bancket prepared for Religious men, and their whole life
time is a bancket, Prou. 15.15.
because as the Wiseman says, A safe conscience is a continual bancket. They
live without danger and anxious fear, and with out thought of any hard and
troublesome business, as in all banckets that which is any way troublesome, is
of purpose laid aside. So that the to^lesome and dangerous businesses, which
are incident to those that spend al their lifetime in buying of farms, is no
way to be compared with the pleasure and security of a Religious life.

The troubles and danger of gayneful occupation.
4. The second rank is of them, that are wholly set upon yoakes of oxen, and
lucr^, and gain, and traffic, and increase of worldly substance. A miserable
occupation: and to speak the truth, a base kind of people, that set their
thoughts so wholly upon so base a thing; and are therefore justly compared by
our Savior to them, that bought oxen for tillage, which is the meanest trade
of life among the rest. For as they that go to plough, labor and toil in
earth, and have their eyes and their minds continually looking down upon the
earth: so they that scrape wealth together, whatsoever they trade in, handle
nothing but earth, for in truth al is but earth, though people are foolishly
taken with the outward seeming appearance. And the dangers of sin are so
many, in buying, and selling, and trafficking, that it is very hard to trade
in any thing without sin, specially if once a man be possessed with the
greedy desire of gain. So that it is most evident, that this kind of life
which stand^ wholly upon greedines of gain, cannot be compared with a Religious
life in any thing For that is always restless, full of trouble and care; this
is ever quiet and peaceable, as having nothing to do with things that are
subject to so many chances, and by reason of them, do breed exceeding trouble
and disquiet. That is in continual hazard of eternal death: this is altogether
safe and without danger. In that it is a rare matter to think of any spiritual
thing, this handles and takes delight in nothing else.

5. The third sort of people are they that are married, of the bonds of which
state though I have discoursed at large before, this may be briefly said, that
it is none of the least hindrances for coming to the bancket, to which we are
invited. For if the trial of oxen, and the desire of wealth, were forcible
enough to divert them from coming to the bancket, what will not marriage be,
which besides the necessity of getting wealth, brings many other cares upon a
man, concerning wife, and children, and family, and many other things that
depend thereof; An excellent s^militude out of S. Bernard ser de 3. Ordin.
which again breeds ignorance and forgetfulness of God, and consequently ^^ch
pronesse to sin. Whereupon S. Bernard comparing a Religious life with the
state of Prelates and married people, says very well, that we al labor to pass
the great and dangerous gulf of this world, but with a great deal of
disadvantage in some. Prelates pass, as it were, in a ship, which is not
without danger, by reason of the continual tempests and storms, in which (as
he speaks) sometimes they mount up to heaven, treating of spiritual things,
sometimes they descend even unto hell, passing judgment upon facts infernal.
Religious men pass by a bridge, which is both a shorter, and an easier, and a
safer cut. Finally Secular people that have entered upon marriage, and earthly
possessions, pass neither by bridge, nor shipboard, but wade quite through; a
dangerous and difficult passage (says he) not minding which way they may best
get through. It is evident, that it is dangerous, because we see many perish
in it to our grief, and so few to get through as they ought; and it is very
hard, specially in these days, when malice is grown so strong, amidst so
many billows of this world, to shun the downefals of vice, and the many
pits of mortal sins. This is S. Bernard's discourse, lively expressing their
miserable, and our happy lo^, they taking so dangerous and troublesome a way,
and we a way in which those three things do meet, to wit, shortness, easines,
and safenes, then which nothing can be desired more.

6. What shall I need to stand speaking in particular of the several trades of
life comprehended in a Secular state, The dangers o^ ^^^dents in the worlds.
as Soldiers, Marchauts, Courtiers, Lawyers, and such as live by their pen? or
which of al these can any way be compared with Religiou^? The most gentile of
them al, be they that spend their days in st^^le, and may ^^siest of any
others be saved, if they will use the knowledge of the things, which God has
created, as a step to the love and fear of God who made them. And yet how hard
and rare a thing is this in the world, where every one has his several
pretenses? and making preferment or gain, or fame and renown, the end of
their studies, do spoil them in the setting-on and bring their thoughts and
labors at last to nothing that which S. Bernard speaks being most commonly
true among them, S. Bernard 3^. in Cant.
this some desire to know that they may be known, which is vanity; others to
know, which is curiosity; others to ^^l their knowledge, which is as it were
to marchand it.

7. Now if this Secular knowledge be subject to so many dangers, and of
Courtiers*
and in a manner nothing but an instrument of avarice and ambition, what shall
we think of others, and chiefly of those, that follow the Courts of Princes?
Doubtless to make a comparison betwixt theirs and a Religious life, were to
affront the sanctity of Religion. For though there be some little resemblance
betwixt them in that both do serve, and both look for a reward of their
service, yet in substance there is no comparison. For their reward is very
casual, the reward of Religious people most assured; theirs is temporal and
perishable, and, so and it never so big, it is in truth bu^ smal^ the reward of
a Religious man is immortal, eternal, far beyond his hopes, far beyond the
thought of man. The Masters whom they serve, are mutable and mortal, often
froward and hard to please, let a man do what he can for them, and oftimes for
a small offense the leese their favor which they labored many years to
gain. Our Lord and Master is so good and merciful, that he easily bears
with all our faults and negligences, and of his own accord offers to cure us of
them; of whom S. Ambrose said truly and wisely, An excellent saying of S.
Ambrose.
that he neither feared to die, nor re^^^d to live, because he served a good
Master.

8. This one consideration of (...) great d^fference, which is betwixt serving
men and serving God, A memorable example of two Courtiers out of S Aug^st^n c.
8. co^^ 6.
duly weighed, has been often the occasion that many have ^e^t the one, to
betake themselves to the other. S. A^^u^tin relates of two serving in no mean
place in the Emperor's Court, that falling upon the Life of S. A^thoni^, and
^^ading it were so changed, that presently they forsook the preterment and
hopes which they had a^ Court, and their wives which they had lately wedded,
and finally al other things which they had in the world; and, as S. Augustine
expresses it, encouraging one another in this business, they reasoned thus
among themselves: Tell me, I pray thee, what do we pretend in all there labors
of ours? what do we aim at? to what end do we bear these Colors? Our utmost
hope at Court, is it not to be in favor with the Emperor? And how fickle is
this, and full of hazard? And by how many dangers do we come at last into more
danger? and how long will it last? But if I will, behold, I am now presently the
friend of God. Doubtless it was the Holie-Ghost that put this consideration and
light into their mind. And certainly they were in the right, specially where
they fell upon the account, that by many dangers of waiting, and flattering,
and undermining others, of^^^es by slanderous reports, they come at last to get
the ear of their Prince, wherein is the grea^est danger of al: and for this
they take a great deal of pains many years together, still uncertain,
whether they shall ever compass it. But the savor of God is most assured; if I
will, I presently put my self into it; and I shall nor need to fear, that after
long service, I shall be cast off without reward. Wherefore as discoursing of
marriage, we said, that if a body must needs be bound, it is better to be
bound to God, who cannot but be good unto us, then to man, who is oftimes il,
and though he be good, may become evil: so now we may say of service; if one
must be tied to do another's will, it is much better to subject ourselves to the
will of God, as Religious people do, then to the will of man. The will of God
cannot but be good, and honest, and profitable for us to perform* the will of
man is oftimes, yea rather most commonl^ w^^^^ed and unjust, and which is
chiefly to be considered, always bends to the profit and commodity of him
whom we serve. And this is briefly as much as we shall need to speak concerning
the courses of this world in particular.

9. In general we may say truly of al, that a Secular life must needs be full of
a great deal of mischief, because self-wil, which is the source and fountain
of al mischi^f, does bear all the sway in it, for our will being so corrupt and
vitiously bent as it is, Danger of the ^orld by reason of self vvil.
it cannot hold it self from running headlong now in^o one thing, now into
another: and being withal to blind and infirm, and the passions of anger, and
hatred, and lust, so violent and headstrong, and so little endeavor used to
bridle them and keep them in awe, that rather by giving them continually the
raynes, they grow so strong that they bear al before them, infinite mischief
must needs come thero^ both to soul and body. For where reason and counsel
are shot out, and rash head oug^es takes p^ace, al must needs be uncertain and
full of misery, nothing constant and safe Heervpon we see in the world so many
sudden and rash determinations, so many passionate resolutions; for as
occasion serves, and oftimes without any occasion at al, they enter upon n^w
counsels of war, of trading, and other businesses, and alter them as rashly,
as they were rashly undertaken; and no straight, no gulf has more alterations
of waves and billows, then they have of their proceedings; whereby oftimes
themselves and their families come to utter ruin and destruction. Religious
people being lead by advise of others, are free from these inconveniences;
specially seeing (as I have said before, and must often say it, or rather we
must continually have it before our eyes) not man, but God does govern them:
so that there is no danger, least blinded with self-loue, they fail in their
choice. For in very deed they are not at their own choice, but others choose
for them, and so the whole course of their life is governed after one constant,
certain, and uniform manner.

10. Moreover in a Secular life there be two other most dangerous rocks, Sloth
and idleness, and too much business (...) dangerous roc^s.
and scarce any body, bu^^usheth against one of them, to wit, sloth and
idleness, or else too much business. The first is most commonly the fault of the
richer sort, the second of ^he poorer kind of people, or of those that would
feign be richer then they are, of which kind the world is full. Idleness (as S.
Bernard writes very truly) is the sinck of al temptation, S Bernard ad ^^a^.
de mon^e Dei.
and of al unprofitable and naughty thoughts finally the height of malice. And
as for the danger of too much business, the same S. Bernard does describe it to
a hair, in the beginning of the Books, which he wrote to Eugenius, of
Consideration, saying, that it does so harden the heart of man, that it can
neither be rent with compunction, nor softened with compassion, nor yeald to
threats, nor be moved by entreaties, but is ungrateful for courtesies received,
shamelesle in dishonest dealings, headlong in dangers, finally it neither
fears God, nor respects men, And S. Gregory understanding, S Gregory 5
More. ^^
that the anxietie of a secular life was figured in Esau, and the quiet of a
Religious life in Jacob, of which one was given to hunting and husbandry, the
other was a plain man, living at home in his tent, thereupon discourses in
this manner: What was designed by Esau's hunting, but their life that follow
the flesh in outward pleasures? And he is also said to have been a husbandman,
because the lovers of this world do the more earnestly labor in exterior
things, the more they leave the interior vncultiuated. But to dwell in tents,
as in a house, is to restrain ourselves in the inward of our mind, and not to
spend ones-self outwardly in desires, least gaping after many things abroad,
they depart wandering from themselves in their thoughts.

11. Finally to maxe an end of this comparison, secular Lay People, as times go
now adays, either run headlong into al manner of vice, or if any live more
reseruedly and honestly, they think they do well enough if they abstain from
sin, if they do not steal, if they do not kill, in brief if they offend not
God; if they can do this, they are held rare men, and pointed at, as the best
men in the world; Religious people do this, and moreover use their uttermost
endeavor to increase in virtue; and purchase new crowns of humility,
penance, mortification, and the like; whereunto Religion itself is a great
spur and help. Which of these courses is the better and more profitable,
might be declared many ways, which for brevity sake I omit, and will content
myself with this one saying of S. Hierome, S. Hieromo ^d Demetr.
or whosoever was author of the book entitled to Demetrias, where he say^h
thus: It is not enough for thee to do no evil, if thou do no good. Every tree
which brings not good fruit, shall be c^t down and cast into the fire; and
yet we soothe ourselves, if we be not charged with il fruit, though we shall be
condemned, if we bear not good fruit; so we read, that the Father will cut off
every branch that brings no fruit in his Son; and he that hid the Talent,
which he had received, in his handkereher, is condemned by our Lord as an
unprofitable and naughty servant; not only to have diminished, but, not to
have increased, is damnable. So says S. Hierome.

A Comparison betwixt the state of Religion and the Secular Clergy. CHAP.
XXXVII.
NExt above the Laymen is the degree of the Secular Clergy, much more perfect
and nearer to God then that of the L^ytie, and withal somewhat resembling a
Religious estate, in regard they profess themselves servants to God, and are
deputed thereunto by a sacred Character; Religion is a state of Perfection.
yet Religious men have the advantage of them in many things of no small
importance. And first Religious men are in a state of Perfection, the Secular
Clergy are not; for the nature of a state is to be immovable, constant,
unchangeable, which cannot be without obligation of Vow; and the Clergy make
no Vow, not only if they have no Cure, but though they have; for they may
relinquish it, and are not bound by any kind of promise to retain it. S.
Thomas de pers. spir. ^. 20.
S. Thomas handles this matter learned^y and at large in the Book which he
wrote of the Perfection of a Spiritual life, by occasion of an error of some
unlearned and wicked men, that to depresse a Religious state were bold to
compare the Secular Clergy with them, and also to prefer them before
Religious. But their rash censure was expressly con^emned by a Decree of the
Pope, and clearly confuted by S. Thomas in the Book above named, where among
other things he says, that when any body is d^^puted perpetually for an
office or function, the Church uses certain rites and Ceremonies in it, as
when the care of a Church is committed to a Bishop, he ^appoynted, and a
certain form of prayer said over him, the Crosier-staffe and bread and wine is
given into his hand, and a ring put on his finger, and many such other things
are done, to show that he is as it were espoused to his Church, and tied
perpetually unto it. The profession of Religious men has in like manner
certain rites and ceremonies, which are very ancient, and are related by S.
Denis, S. Denis de Eccl. ^. ^. c. 6.
who also delivers the reason and signification of them. And these ceremonies
are to this day practiced, some in one Religious Order, some in another, and
some in every one. But Secular Priests when they take a Cure upon them, use no
Ceremony at al; whereby we may gather, as S. Thomas says, that they are not
only not in a state of Perfection, but not so much as in a state.

2. And moreover we may understand how far their life is inferior to a
Religious state, because it is not only lawful but laudable to pass from the
bare life of a Secular Clergie-man into Religion, A Secular Clergie-man may
become Religious. C. 19 q 1. c. cleri^.
whereas certainly no man is suffered to descend from the greater and better
slate to that which is l^sse; and the holy Canons have so determined, not only
because a Religious state is more secure, but also because it is more perfect,
and ordained in a certain place, that Clergymen that desire the institute of
Monks, are not to be hindered from it, because they desire to follow a better
life, and the Bishops must suffer them to have free access thereunto. And S.
Gregory gives Desiderius, a Bishop that held back one of his, a fraternal
admonition, and it will not be amiss to see in what weighty words he does it.
S. Gre. l. 16. reg. ^p. ^0.
We exhort, says he, that your Brotherhood be no hinderance to his earnest
devotion, which he labors to have in the holy purpose; rather by Pastoral
admonition inflame him with what exhortations you are able, that the fervor of
this desire wax not cold in him, in regard that he that seuering himself from
the turbulent tumult of secular troubles, hastneth to the haven of the
Monastery, out of desire of quiet, ought not to be entangled again in the
troubles of Ecclesiastical cares, but let him be suffered to remain safe from
al them in the praises of God, as he requesteth. Thus says S. Gregory very
well; specially that a Religious life is a secure and quiet haven, and
contrariwise an Ecclesiastical function full of trouble, and unquiet with the
tumult of secular cares.

3. S. Anselme, S. Anselme
that holy and learned man, wrote an epistle much to the same effect, to
Godfred Bishop of Paris, in good manner, yet withal gravely taxing him, for
hindering one of the Clergy that was desirous to take upon him the yoke of
Religion; and proves by many reasons, that he had neither reason, nor warrant
to do so.

3. But that we may proceed the cleerer in this comparison which we have in
hand, The obligations and dangers of the Secular Clergy.
betwixt these two lives, let us consider the danger and difficulties incident
to the life of a secular Clergie-man. First, in respect of the dignity of his
Order: secondly, in regard of the weighty charge of souls, that lies upon
him: and lastly by reason of his Church-liuings and possessions. As for the
dignity of his Order, who can deny, but that it requires great vprightnes of
life and behavior, great sanctity and integrity, and that a little sault in
him, is so much the more foul and unbeseeming? For certainly the degree of
Priesthood is of that rank and esteem, that no Princely dignity upon earth,
nor of any Angel in heaven, is equal unto it, in regard that none of them have
power to consecrate the Body of our Savior, to handle it, to receive and
minister it to others: This power and virtue is Divine, and makes the^ that
have it, S. John Chrysostom Hom. 83. in Matt.
rather Gods then men. What purity therefore of life and soul does such an
office require? Whom must he not excel in purity (says S. John Chrysostom)
that offers such a Sacrifice? What beam of the Sun can be brighter then
that hand ought to be, which divides this flesh? or the mouth that is full of
this spiritual fire? or the tongue that is died red with this blood, which can
never be reverenced enough? And S. Bernard does with great reason bewail the
rashness of men in this kind: S. Bernard ad Cler. c. 19
and his just lamentation agrees as fitly to our times, as to his, and
somewhat more: Every one runs to Holy Orders, and men take upon them
without respect or consideration, the functions which are venerable to the
very Angelical Spirits, ^hey, in whom avarice does reign, ambition bears
sway, pride does rule, yea iniquity and luxury does command, fear not to lay
hands upon the Ensign of the the heavenly Kingdom, and put that Imperial
crown upon their heads. Religious men are far from this fault; for though
most of them be Priests (because the State should not want so great a dignity
and benefit) yet they come unto it with an other spirit and preparation: not
moved thervn^o by avarice, or ambition, which the State itself exludeth, nor so
much as by their own will and choice: for as in things of lesser moment, so in
this chief business of al, they are ruled by others whom they have in place of
God: Heb. 5.^
and consequently seeing they take not this honor to themselves, as the
Apostle speaks, but are called by God, as Aaron, no doubt but his infinite
goodness will furnish them, as he is wont, with abundant grace to go through with
it.

4. We have a memorable and pleasant example thereof in Rupertus, who was
afterward Abbot of Tuy, A memorable example of Rupertus.
and a great Writer. He relates of himself (and we need no better witness) that
being urged by his Superiors to take Holy Orders, and earnestly refusing it,
knowing his own unworthiness, in the night he saw a vision, by which he plainly
understood that it was God's will it should be so. He saw upon an Altar, an
Image of our Savior crucified* as if he had been alive, and looked full upon
him; I. 12. in Matthew.
at which sight he was much inflamed; and desired very much to embrace the
Crucifix: but the table of the Altar being great and large, hindered him: yet he
found himself by inward instinct invited by our Sau^our, and coming near, the
Altar divided itself, and made him way to the Crucifix; then he confidently
laid hold of it, embraced, and kissed it: and our Savior, to receive his
kiss, as it were into his heart, opened his divine mouth, and received him
gaping; where with amidst those loving embracings; his heart was greatly influmed
with the love of God; and he found within himself a desire to be Priest, which
before he so earnestly avoided. In the morning he related the whole passage to
his Abbot, and was not long after made Priest, to the great joy and contentment
of every body.

5. The same Rupertus relates another passage, by which, after he was made
Priest, he was much confirmed and comforted. While he lay in his bed, he saw
the likeness of a man coming down from heaven, with his head muffled, as if he
would not be known, and entering wholly into him, fit^ed head to head, and feet
to feet, and at the rest of his body to the (...) or parts, h^^of, and more
(...) made such an impression of himself into the substance of his soul, as
cannot be declared by words, more quick, and more deep, then any seal can be
printed upon the sufr^st wax. And he says further, a thing which may be easily
believed, that he found thereupon such a wonderful sweetness and delight^, that
had it not been presently stinted by the hand of God, without doubt the torrent
of pleasure had taken away his soul from his body. All this was a sign of the
holy Eucharist, wherein the Son of God does hide his face, but yet truly
infuse himself into our whole soul, and transform it into his own likeness,
and fill it with heavenly joy; into the souls, I say, of them, that come unto
him, as Rupertus did, not rashly, nor lead by any earthly desire, but
invited, yea compelled by God by means of their Superiors. And certainly, if a
body truly consider the weightines of the business, and the importance of the
function, he can never persuade himself, that he can safely undertake it,
unless he be secured by some such Oracle.

5. Seeing therefore no man can doubt of that which has been said, The heavy
charge of the care of Souls.
let us pass to the other point of the care of souls; at the heavy charge
whereof, we may give a guess by that, which the Wiseman says in these words:
Son, if that have answered for thy friend, thou have nailed thy hand to a
stranger, thou art ensnared in the words of thy mouth, and taken with thy own
speeches. Do therefore that which I say, Prou 6.1.
my Son, and free thy self, because thou art fallen into the hands of thy
neighbor. Run, make haste, rowse thy friend; give not sleep to thy eyes, and
let not thy eyelids wink. These are the cares and snares, as he calls them,
in which he intangleth himself, that answers for another, and not for one man
only, but for many* not in a monie-matter, but in a business concerning the
safety of a thing immortal and eternal, such as our souls are; and they that
have taken this charge upon them, do not only offend, if by sinful life and
evil example they hurt others (for this is the worst that can be) but by mere
cessation, Ezech. 34.16.
if they do not help others, if, as the Prophet Ezechiel complayneth, they do
not strengthen that which is infirm, nor heal that which is sick: nor bind
that which is broken, nor bring back that which is strayed, nor seek that
which is lost. Whereupon S. Gregory has certain words which are very true,
and greatly to be considered, S. Greg. Hom. (...) in Euang.
in one of his Homilies, speaking thus: I am of opinion, says he, that God
does not suffer more prejudice by any body then by Priests, when he beholds
those, whom he has placed for the correction of others, themselves to give
others il example: when we ourselves do sin, who ought to keep others from
sin, we seek not to gain souls, we daily attend our own ends: we covet
earthly things, and earnes^ly hunt after the praise of men; And because, in
regard we are set over others, we have greater freedom to do what we list, we
turn the ministry of the Benediction, which we have received, to be a ground
of ambition; we leave God's cause, and attend to worldly businesses, we hold
the place of sanctity, and are entangled in earthly works. Religious men are
free from these dangers, as having no charge of soules^; which they should have
little cause to brag of, if they did not otherwise attend to the help of
souls; for as they should be free from these incommodities, so they should
want the great reward, which God does promise to these that labor in his
vineyard. But in my opinion they enjoy all the good that can be in so great a
work, and yet are free from the dangers thereof: for they employ themselves in
the help of their Neighbor so carefully, and diligently, and paynefully, as
nothing more can be expected; and yet because they do it of their own accord,
without any tie or obligation, they are free from those sins, which follow
upon the obligation which others have. And so we find it plainly delivered by
S. Thomas, S. Thomas opus de per. c. 23.
that Religious men perform the offices of greatest perfection in the help of
heir neighbor, more then other Clergymen, because most commonly by their
Institute they travel in those charitable functions, not our of justice, as
others of the Clergy, but out of charity, assisting Bishops in the cure of
souls by preaching, hearing Confessions, public and private exhortations, and
as many other ways as there be means in this kind, as every one may see
with his eyes that so they do.

Church-liuings.
6. A third burden of the Secular Clergy is their Church-liuings; which most
yet think no burden, but rather labor al they can to increase them which they
would not do, i^ they felt how heavy they lie upon them. One day they will
understand, both that they are a but then, and in how holy and pious uses
these pensions bought by the blood of our Savior, and consecrated unto him
alone by the devotion of the Faithful, should have been employed. Al Diuices
and holy Writers handle this matter at large; therefore because I will be
short, I will content myself with the only authority of S. Bernard, S. Bernard
Sermon. 2^. in Ca^^.
who in one of his S^rmons upon the Canticles says thus: The Clergy ought to
fear, the Ministers of the Church may be afraid, who in the lands of Saints,
which they possess, deal so unjustly, that they are not content with the
stipend which ought to suffice them, but w^^kedly and sacrilegiously retain to
themselves the superstuous things, wherewith (...) needy were to be
maintained, and are not afraid to consume the living of the poor in uses of
their pride and luxury; offending doubtless with double iniquity, both because
they take that which is not their ow^e, and abuse holy things in their
vanities and filth. And I shall need to say no more of this point. For the
reason is evident, and which to my knowledge, has convinced some, and
persuaded them to become Religious, discoursing thus with themselves: To what
purpose shall I go seek to enrich myself by the Church? For when I have gotten
something, if I do no: make the poor partakers of it, I live in continual
sin: if I give them part, I live in perpetual care and trouble: and why
should I go make myself steward to the poor, with so much dommage to my self?
This consideration, as I said, has moved many to leave al, and embrace the
nakedness of Religion. But let us conclude with this short argument.

The Clergy in more dangerous condition then any other.
7. In the Church of God there be men of three conditions, which compared among
themselves, will easily show what judgment we are to make of each of them. The
first are Secular Laymen: who have this incommoditie annexed to their manner
of life, that they have in matter of perfection few helps and many hindrances*
but withal they have this commodity, that they have no obligation to greater
perfection, then the law of the Ghospel does lay upon al Christians in general.
The second are Religious men, who are obliged, not so much to be perfect, as to
desire and endeavor to be so, and have so many and so great helps thereunto,
and are withal so f^ee from being hindered, that they may not only attain it
with eas^ and facility, but with a great deal of pleasure and sweetness. The
third is the order of the Secular Clergy, of which we speak: which (if we
weigh things right) suffers in a manner the incommodities of both the other
S^ates, and wants the commodities of them. For first they have the same
obligation to Perfection, which Religious men have, and are certainly somewhat
more bound unto it then Religious men are, both in regard of the dignity of
their office, and of the diuinenes of the Sacraments of which they are
Ministers, and of the Cure of souls, and yet have not those helps which
Religious men have, no^ that particular and p^e^^ful influence of grace, of
which I have spoken at large before. And again, they may seem to be in worse
case then Laymen, because they are in a manner clogd with all the impedime^ts
of Perfection which Laymen have, and cannot pretend the excuse which they may,
if they be less perfect; for; living as they do in the world pel mel among
them, and sailing, as I may say, the same seas, they must needs be tormented
and tosted with the same winds and waves of avarice, ambition, and luxury,
which they are; which vices being inbred and ingrafied in every man's nature,
are also daily inflamed more and more, by the presence of delightful objects,
by the occasions, and commodity of sinning, by liberty itself. For how is it
possible to avoid the itching desire of vain glory, living in the midst of
honors? Or not to be taken with the love of riches, when we administer them
for ourselus and others? Or how can a man's honesty be long in safety, that
beholds with his eyes, the self same allurements, as Secular people do, and
pampers his body with the self same fare and attire, and is oftimes far more
cutious and delicious then they?

8. S. Bernard therefore had great reason to speak as he does, S. Bernard p.
3. de conside. in sine.
among other things, of this degree of the Church, to Pope Eugenius, in his
books of consideration: What is the meaning, says he,, that the Clergy will be
one thing, and seem another, to wit, soldiers in attire, and Clerks for
gain? But indeed perform neither; for neither do they fight, as souliders;
nor preach, as Clerks* O'miserable Bride, entrusted to such attendance, as
fear not to turn into their own coffers, that which is assigned her for her
wearing. And in one of his Sermons: Ser. de Conuers S. Paul
Holy Orders are made an occasion of for did lucre, and they esteem gain, to
be pi^tie; they are most wonderfully devout in undergoing, yea rather in taking
the care of souls; but it is the least care they care for; and the last
thought they have, is of the salvation of souls. Could there a heavier
persecution then this, fall upon the Savior of souls? In S. Bernard's opinion
therefore, the greatest fault of that degree, is, that attending to their
private interest, they neglect the care of souls, the advancing of the honor
of God, the function of preaching and teaching; that living of the Altar, their
last, and least thoughts be of serving the Altar, but are wholly bent toward
themselves, and their own private ends. And if there be any that refuse not
these Church labors, but employ themselves in preaching and exhorting the
people; where shall we find a man that does it, with the intention It ought to
be done? That bestows his pains and labor, in this vinyard of our Lord God
of Hoasts, gratis? That truly aymeth at the service of God, and reflecteth
nothing upon himself A rare matter and a hard piece of business, to preserve
ones-self in the world, from the world, that is, from al touch of secular
desire; and contrari wise, it is too too easy and obuious, for the desire of
honor, or some Eclesiastical presentment, or of a fat Benefice, S August. Ser.
^^. de Ver Domini. Philip. 1.15^
or some other temporal commodity, to creep-in amidst those works, which of
themselves are honest and laudable. And we need no other proof thereof, then
that which S. Augustine says, in these words: Hear the Apostle bewayling such
men. He says that others preach the Ghospel out of chariti^; others out of
some other occasion; and of these, he says, that they preach not the Ghospel
right; an upright thing, but themselves not upright. Whosoever seeks any
thing of God, besides God, does not seek God purely and chastely, if he did
seek God, he would be chaste, because God is the lawful husband of a soul.

9. Finally, let us grant that there be none of all the inconveniences in that
manner of life, and frame a Clergieman, as our selves can desire or imagine,
that he want nothing that may beseem his calling, yet this his perfection is
fatie inferior to the perfection of a Religious man, and comes far short of
the many great commodities, of which I have hitherto treated. He wants the
direction of Superious, the examples, and encouragement of his equals: he
enjoys not that participation of good works, which is so profitable and
useful; The plenty of spirit and grace more fully descending upon many so
nearly linked together: finally, he wants the commodities of Poverty and
Obedience, and which is the chiefest of al be he what he will, he is his own,
and is not arrived to so much perfection, as to depart wholly, from the use of
his own will, and by perpetual and irreuocable donation to yeald it up to God;
this being the privilege only a Religious Vows.

10. Wherefore we may conclude this comparison of Religious men, both with the
Secular Clergy and Lay people, with a fit similitude, which S. Bernard
brings of a Procession, An excellent simili^^^e out of S. Bernard S 1. de
ramis. 1 Cor. 6.20.
which our Savior makes, in which Procession he says, there be three ranks
of men: some strew their garments on the ground, which be Secular people, of
the better and deuouter sort, who of their earthly substance, which cleaves
to the soul out, wardly as a garment to the body, give alms. Others cut
boughs from the trees: which are the good and fervent Pastors and Curats of
souls, preaching to their subjects. Both which kinds of men, though they
accompany our Savior, though they both enter the city with him, yet the
beast which he rid upon, was much nearer to him, and labored more, because
those other bestow upon him part of that which abounds: the beast puts it
self wholly under his service. This beast ressembleth Religious people, who are
meek, and gentle, and in outward show despicable, as the Ass our Savior rid
upon, yet strong, and serviceable, fit for carriage and Obedience, and so near
the Son of God, as that they touch him, and receive him within them, and
bear him about to others. Whereupon the holy saint turning his speech to his
Brethren, concludes thus in a kind of exultation* Must I say no more, that you
may no^ be proud, or rather go on, that you may have comfort? Are not you the
beast whom Christ sits (according to the saying of the Apostle) glorifying,
and bearing, God in your bodies*

A comparison of a Religious State, with the State of Bishops and Prelates.
CHAP. XXXVIII.
The heavy Charge of a Prelate.
NOw we are to consider whether it be better, more desireful, and more
profitable for salvation, to be a Religious man or to be a Bishop or Prelate.
And supposing the dangers to which al Clergy men are exposed, as I have
declared in the precedent chapter, the Resolution is easy for the same, yea
^arre grea^er dangers do attend upon (...) sta^e of Bishops And those
two-things which S. Austin (...)reth in a certain Epistle, S. Augustine ^p^st.
148.
are very true: That nothing is more easy, more pleasant, more grateful to
man, then the office of a Bishop, a Priest, or Deacon, if a body carry the
matter slightly, and favor himself in it: yet if a body do so, nothing is
more miserable: more doleful, more damnable in the sight of God: For the
Apostle pronounces generally of al Prelates, Heb. 13.19. S Greg Mar. 24.4. vlt.
They watch, as who are to give account, or our souls. whereupon S. Gregory
gives this pertinent admonition: Let him, says he, that is perhaps scarce
able to satisfy the rigorous Judge for his own only soul, consider that when
he shall come to give up his accounts, he will be found, as I may say, S. Ihon
Chrysostom l z de Sacora^^ti^.
to have alone so many souls, as he has subjects under him to govern. S.
^hon Chrysostom wrote fix whole books of Priesthood, in which he may seem to
have employed all the golden eloquence, from which he takes his name, to show
how hard and dangerous a task he does undertake, that takes upon him the
government of souls: And among other things he brings a similitude of a
shepherd, keeping, not his own, but another bodies sheep, and if any of them
come to be devoured of a wild beast, Genesis 31.39.
or be stolen, or be lost, as Jacob said: he stands answerable for them,
because he undertook to keep them. And if he lee^e a sheep or two, out of
cowardlines, the master perhaps will easily pardon him, or take some small
compensation: But he that has undertaken the feeding of the flock of Christ,
shall not escape unpunished, if he leesse such sheep, not satisfy with a nie
thing else, but with his own soul. A shepherd has to do with wolves and
thieves: A Prelate warreth not against flesh and blood, but against the
Princes, and Powers, and Rulers of this darkness: against a huge army of
vices, against whoredom, uncleanness, lasciuiousnes, rancour* brawles,
iealousies, and many others: The diseases of sheep are commonly known and
easy to be discovered, and the remedies are not hard, they may be bound and
eat, and seared, as occasion serves: The diseases of the mind are secret, and
hard to be cured, Idem. l. 3.
some rankle and glow worse in the cure it self: This is S. Ihon Chrysostomes
discourse in his second book: In his third book he speaks thus* If a man
would put me in trust with a ship laden with rich wares to pass the Aegean or
Mediterranean sea, I should not stand much upon the refusing of it, for fear
of shipwreck, and yet there is nothing hazarded in it, but gold and silver: And
where there is danger of leesing not a ship, but a soul, and drowning it, not
in the waters of the sea, but in the bottomless pit of Hell fire, where death
expectes a man, and not corporal death, but together with the death of the
body, the death of the soul, who can find is strange, if I refuse to expose
my self ^^ so great danger?

2. S. Bernard calls the care of souls, S. Bernard ^.46. in Can^.
a thing deposited, and expresses the worth thereof by these similitudes: It is
a city, says he, Be watchful to keep it safe and in peace: It is your
spouse, be careful to love it, they are your sheep, attend to find them
pasture: and runs on discoursing at large of cuerie one of them. And much
more we may find every where in the holy Fathers, to the same effect; for
they do often and very severely inculcate this truth, so real and solid, that
no words can sufficiently express it. Wherefore what comparison can there be
betwixt the continual dangers, care, and trouble of this estate of Prelacie,
and the quiet, security, and holy retirement of a Religious life? an ample
Theme to discourse on. S. Bernard Ep. 42.
But me thinks S. Bernard has in few words knit up together all that can be
said in this matter; When in his Epistle to Henry Archbishop of Sens, he
speaks thus; If I lurking in a den, and as it were under a bushel, not
giving light, but smoking, am not yet able not withstanding to avoid the gusts
of wind, but wearied with continual temptations, and diverse assaults, am waued
up and down like a reed shaken with every blast, what would become of me if I
were placed on high upon a hill, or set upon a Candle-stick? Here I have but my
self alone to save, and yet to my self alone I am offensive: I am tedious to my
self, I am a burden, and dangerous to my self; so that I am often feign to be
angry with my own greedy appetite and gut, and my eyes that scandalize me;
with what vexation therefore is he turmoyled, what affronts must he needs
endure, who though he have nothing of his own to trouble him, can never want
in behalf of others, conflicts without, and fear within? All this is S.
Bernards discourse.

The Perfection of the State of a Bishop, and a Religious man.
3. Wherefore, seeing no man can be so blind, but that he must needs acknowledge
that a Religious state is far safer, and nearer to eternal salvation, then
the state of a Bishop, let us consider how the case stands concerning the
perfection of them both: Both of them profess perfection, but not after one
and the same manner. The dignity of a Bishop requires that the man be
actually possessed, and grounded in perfection; for Bishops are Successors to
the Apostles; and consequently their office and function is a spiritual
Maistrie; one of the Apostles professing as much of himself in these words: 1.
Tim. 2.7.
I am placed a Preacher, and Apostle, and Teacher of nations, in faith and
truth; and no man that is not himself perfect, can be a master of perfection,
as no man can teach philosophy, or any mechanical art, that has not learned
the same. The state of Religion requires not perfection, but leads a man
unto it; it is the school wherein perfection is learned by little and little,
partly by hearing them that teach it, partly by practice thereof Wherefore
Divines do term the one a state of perfection already acquired, the other a
state of perfection to be acquired: as wherein no man of necessity must
presently be perfect, but it is sufficient if he aspire unto it, and endeavor
by little and little to become perfect. S. Bonauent. Apol parch.
Which is the reason, as S. Bonauenture delivers, why sinners, and such as are
imperfect are admitted into Religion, to wit, S. Hierome Ep. 138. ad Fab.
that they may be reformed, and become good. And concerning Bishops, he bringes
this saying of S. Hierome: The learning and condition of a Bishop must be so
eminent, that his very gate, and carriage, and all that is in him, must be as it
were so many voices, that whatsoever he does, whatsoever he says, S. Thomas.
op. de perf. c. 49.
be Apostolical doctrine. S. Thomas very learnedly does gather this self same
difference betwixt the two States, out of the words of our Savior; for wishing
a certain young man to embrace the counsel of Poverty, he shows by the
manner of speech which he held with him, that he was not yet perfect, but
should be, if he followed his council: If thou will be perfect, go sell al. But
being to ordain a Prelate, Mat. 19.21.
he did not ask him only whether he loved, but whether he loved more then
others, Io. 21.15.
and asked him it three times over; either to express the great measure of
charity which such an one ought to have, or as S. Bernard teaches, S.
Bernard. ser. 76. in Cant.
to give us to understand that whosoever is placed over others, must love God
above al things that concern himself, above any friend of his own, above
himself. Finally (to the end that the words sounding alike, make us not mistake
the matter) both these States are perfect, and the State of a Bishop is in no
small degree the more perfect of the two, yet so, as the State of a Bishop
requires perfection, and yealdeth it not, the State of Religion, yealdeth
perfection, and yet requires not altogether so much.

4. The State of a Prelate differs also from a Religious State, The danger of
a Prelate in respect of the honor which he has.
in regard that riches, and honor, and temporal goods attend upon the State of
a Prelate, their dignity is eminent in the sight of men, they are reverenced
and respected by all: whereupon most commonly it follows, that their mind is
carried away with the desire of these outward things, more then with desire of
pleasing God, and serving him, and though they come to their dignity with
great perfection, yet lying open to so many, and so violent assaults, it is
half a miracle if they hold their perfection long, S. Greg 1. Pas. c. 9.
and a rare thing to see them hold it. For as S. Gregory says in his
Pastoral: most commonly, amidst the occupations of government the very use of
good works is lost, which in tranquillity we held, because while the sea is
calm, every unskillful mariner is able enough to steer the ship, but when it
is troubled with surging waves, a skilful Pilot is easily confounded. And what
is the power of dignity, but a tempest of the mind, wherein the ship of our
heart beaten continually with the storms of our thoughts, and wasted hither and
thither without intermission, at last by sudden excess of desire and deed,
does as it were split it self by the way upon the rocks? And this is the case
of a Prelate. Now with a Religious man it fares quite otherwise, for poverty
and humility, and the denial of our own will, waiting continually upon this
State, no man can desire or embrace it, but upon the motive of attayning
perfection; and it lies not open to so continual and so dangerous combats:
whereupon S. John Chrysostom, having in his books of Priesthood, discoursed at
large of the snares and dangers which attend upon the dignity of a Bishop, S.
John Chrisost. 1. de sacerdo^.
enters at last into a comparison thereof, with the quiet retirednes of a
Religious life, free from al these cares and troubles, and says: that though
sometimes some absurd thought may obtrude some such thing to a Religious man,
yet the suggestion is so weak and infirm, that he presently puts it away with
ease, because there is no outward matter whereupon the flame of that thought may
fix it self. And a Monk takes thought for himself alone, or if he must
sometimes have care of others of his own coat, it is not very troublesome
unto him, being neither tied to wife nor children, and having al his subjects
daily before his eyes, whereby he may easily epsy their faults, Poverty the
ea^^est way to perfection.
if they have any, and correct them. This is the sense of S. John Chrysostom:
whereunto we may add, that though Euangelical poverty (as elsewhere I shall
declare more at large) be not perfection, but a means to perfection, and such
as it cannot be denied, but that we may come to perfection by other means also,
yet it is so easy and compendious a way unto it, that no way can be more
ready and certain. Besides that, it carries a kind of grace and Majesty
with it, specially since it has bean sanctified in the person of our Savior,
insomuch, that they that want it, though inwardly they be abundantly qualified
with many rare parts, yet they want a kind of outward gloss and compliment of
perfection.

5. The last point of this comparison which we have in hand, is drawn from
Example, more then from Reason, and from the Example of men that have been very
memorable both for sanctity and wisdom, for in Religion we find an infinite
number of them that have so resolutely refused Ecclesiastical dignities and
preferments, Examples of Men that have (...) the dignity of a Bishop. S.
Bernard.
even when they have been proffered them, and have read such a lesson in this
kind to the whole world, that it is much to be admired* S. Bernard was chosen
Bishop in three several cities of nore, and twice Arch Bishop, but could never
be persuaded, to take the charge upon him, and doubtless more would have
chosen him, but that they al knew, that it was in vain to make any such
request unto him.

S Dominick.
6. We read that S. Dominick refused four Bishoprics, preffered him at several
times; and was wont to say, that he had rather dye, then have so heavier
burden lie upon him: Two of his Disciples are renowned for treading the same
footsteps: S. Thomas of Aquin, S. Thomas of Aquin. S. Vincent.
and S. Vincent Ferrera: S. Thomas constantly refused the Archbishopric of
Naples, proffered him by Clement the third: and could not be brought unto it by
no entreaty, nor persuasion, S. Vincent with like noble courage rejected first
the Bishopric of Valentia, then of Ilerda, and lastly a Cardinalship, which
Benedictus Pope offered him, having already prepared a Cardinals Cappe for him.

S. Bernardin.
7. S. Bernardin of Siena was of the same mind, and would never agree to be
chosen Bishop, though he was in elect and of three several Towns, to wit, of
vrbine, Ferrara, and Siena: and moreover, when Pope Eugenius once put a Mitre
upon his head, as he kneeled before him, he humbly begged he would not urge it
upon him, protesting that he would none of the dignity, to the end he might
the more freely and largely employ himself in the help of souls.

Andrews.
8. To these we may add, one Andrew a Franciscan Friar also, and nephew to Pope
Alexander the Fourth* who being made Cardinal by him, resigned his dignity,
and all that greatness which his neerenes to the Pope had bred him; choosing
rather to remain in the Religious humility which he had chosen, to the end,
that when the hour came, he might be exalted.

F. Laynes F. Borgia. F. Claudius Iaius.
9. I might bring many more examples of the same nature out of the ancient
Records of other Orders, some also of late years, out of our own, as of
Father Laynet, and B. S. Francis Borgia, who should have been made Cardinals:
and F. Claudius Iaius, who was chosen Bishop; but did their uttermost endeavor
to stop those proceedings, and at last overcame. It being nor only their own
desire so to do, but the sense of the whole Society, al jointly concurring
with much prayer, Masse^. 2. Vit Igna^ii. ^ 12.
and many thowsands of Masses, and much corporal penance and ^usteritie to
divert so great a danger and inconvenience from our whole Order. And having
effected it, they sung the Te deum publicly, to express the joy which they
conceived, and the greatness of the benefit which was befallen them. At which
time it happened that there was a young gentleman of Portugal present, who
beholding so great an expression of joy and gladness among the Society upon
such an unusual occasion, was greatly taken there with, and much edi^ied, and
resolved there upon, as it is recorded of him, to enter into the Society, which
accordingly he did; By which examples and many more of the same kind, which I
willingly omit, we may gather to one purpose, what inward esteem those rare
men had of a Religious State, in comparison of the state of Prelacie, behauing
themselves, as they did in outward fact, in the occasions which I have
mentioned.

10. The same may appear by Example of many others, who having (...) pressed
and in a manner constrained, Example of Bishops who have lived in the Charge
like Religious men. S. Martin.
by the express will of God, or by Obedience, to undertake this charge, have
notwithstanding so carefully observed al manner of Regular discipline, that a
body may easily see by them, they held the one as a burden, and the other,
they esteemed an ease and recreation. In this kind, we read of S. Martin, that
being drawn out of his Monastery by no il device, under color of visiting a
sick woman, to give her some ghostly counsel, as he was requested; the people
of Tours lying in wait for him, took him by the way, and with one voice and
consent placed him in the Bishops seat, wherein when he was installed,
retayning notwithstanding a love to his former quiet, he buylt a Monastery
some two miles out of town, where he lived with his Brethren in so great
humility and poverty (being particularly devoted to these virtues, as it is
recorded of him) that he never severed Rachel from Lia, that is, the
Contemplative from the Active life, but labored in the one, in regard of his
flock, and in the other in regard of himself and God.

11. Cassian recounteth the like Example of one Archebius, Cass. c^ll. 12. c.
2. Archebius.
that being taken by violence from among those ancient Anachorites, and made
Bishop of a City called Parephysis, he never slacked in any of his former
exercises of piety and humility, neither took any delight in the honor
which was put upon him, and was wont to say: that he was not promoted to that
dignity, because he was fit for it, but rather was cast out of the Religious
course he was in, as unworthy of it, in seven and thirty years, which he had
lived in it, having not arrived, (as he said) to the purity of so eminent a
profession.

12. S. Bernard does much extol S. Malachie, S. Malachie.
who being in election to be Bishop, did a long time at first withstand, that
he might not be chosen, and when afterward upon commandment of his superior,
and also of his Metropolitan, he had accepted of it, he behaved himself
notwithstanding in all points like a Religious man; For to speak in S. Bernards
own words. He served in the kitchen when his turn came, he waited upon the
Brethren as they sat at table, and would not suffer that they should pass him
over, when it was his turn to sing in the Church or to read, finally, he was
not only partner with them in holy poverty, but the foremost in it, being
chiefly and above them al, eager and ambitious thereof.

13. The like is delivered of S. Fulgentius. S Fulge^^^u^.
He hea^ing that the Catholics were resolved to create Bishops in all the
Churches which wanted, contrary to the order which Trasimundus, an Arian king
had made, fled out of his Monastery, and kept closse while many sought after
him, til he was told by one that was of his counsel, that now al Churches were
provided; being, returned to his Monastery, the people of Ruspa, who by
chance still wanted a Bishop, flocked thither in great multitudes, and took him
away by force, and did not entreat him, but compelled him to be their Bishop.
When he saw himself thus circumvented, and could do no other, he desired the
people they would do him so much favor as to buyld him a Monastery, in which,
ever after he lived in perfect subjection to the Abbot Felix, as if he had been
one of the least in the Company, and in all things belonging to domestical
discipline, was wholly ruled by him, attending notwithstanding diligently and
carefully to his pastoral charge, and not slacking in any part of his duty
toward his people.

14. Shall I omit that light of England, yea, of the whole Church, S. Anselme*
S. Anselme*
who whenever he could steal himself from business into his Monastery, ever
thought himself a happy man, And once he declared himself to his Brethren in
this manner: Discoursing with them, as he was wont often to do, about Regular
discipline, he showed himself much delighted with their sight and company, and
in a merry fashion said: That he was like an owl; for an owl as long as he
is in his hole with his young ones, is pleasant and iocond; but when he flies
abroad among the Crows and Iayes, they al fall upon him, and beat him; so he,
while he was with his Brethren, had great pleasure; but when he came among
secular people, he was always troubled, and combred with much secular business;
and moreover stood in fear and anguish, least he might run hazard also of
his salvation. And as he was thus merrily delivering his mind, Job. 19.21.
he suddenly burst forth into tears, using that saying of holy Job: Take
pity of me at least you my friends, because the hand of our Lord has touched
me.

15. S. Antonine also, hearing that Pope Eugenius the Fourth had designed him
Bishop of Florence, coming from Naples, where he was at that time, thought to
have fled into some desert Island, S. Anton.
and having attempted it, was brought back by some of his kindred to Siena;
where he labored with all might and mayo^, by letters, by entreaty, and by
friends also which he made, to avoid the charge; til the Pope half angry,
threatened to excommunicate him; whereupon aduising with some learned men, and
finding them al to be of opinion, that he could not with safe conscience
withstand it any longer, falling flat upon his face, and weeping bitterly, he
stooped to that Pastoral charge; yet so, as he forsook not the burden of
Religion: For he altered neither diet, nor apparel; and ordered his house, as
if it had been a Monastery; and often went into the kitchen, and scoured the
pots, and did such like other household offices, as it were to ease the
troubles of his Pastoral charge, with those Religious solaces. What more
pregnant proof can a man have, that Religious humility is far more to be
desired, then the dignity of a Bishop, then to behold so many Religious men,
and al of them eminent in sanctity, either constantly to refuse that degree of
honor* or when they could not refuse it, and had trial of it, always to
esteem it as a heavy burden, and bear it with grief; and with all,
continually to retain their Religious practices, either as a solace of their
charge, or that they might not want the benefit, whereof they knew full well, the
excessive greatness.

A Comparison betwixt a Religious life, and the life of an Heremit. CHAP. XXXIX.
WE read that in Ancient time, the solitary manner of life of Hermites, was in
great veneration among men, and much honored of God: Who called many famous
men unto it, and made them admirable to the world, both by the splendor of
many rare and excellent virtues, and the glory of Miracles; yea the perpetual
rigor and austeritie of life, of many of them, was a continual miracle. Such
wore the Paul's, and Hilarions* two or three of the Simeons, the two Macharia^,
and many other great Lights of the deserts, whose deeds, and sayings, and
examples, have always borne great sway in all matter of Perfection. But this
kind of life and way of san^titie is now almost out of use. yet it will not be a
m^le to compare the benefit of a Religious life, such as now a days is more
frequented, with the heigt and rarenes of that kind of perfection; to the end,
that seeing it never a whit inferior to that, which in all things was then so
eminent, but rather that in many things it has the advantage of it, we may the
easyer know, what esteem to make thereof within our selves. And upon whom can
we better or more assuredly ground our discourse in this kind, then upon that
famous Abbot, John? Cass. coll 19. c. 3.
who as Cassian records, when he had lined thirty years in company of
others in a Monastery, be^ooke himself afterward into the wilderness, The
opinion of Abbot John concerning this point.
and there remained full twenty years; and then in his old age and ripest
judgment, after so long experience of both those courses, having lived in them
both, with great ^arenes of sanctity, returned again to live with others; and
made choice to end his days in a Monastery; and being asked the reason why he
did so; he discoursed at large of both kinds of life, as having made long trial
of them both, and concluded, that a solitary life had this commodity, that
seuering the mind from al earthly things, it gave it the more freedom to unite
it self to God, as near as human infirmity will give it leave: But a
Monastical life had a double commodity, to wit, that first it does teach a man
to mortify, or (to use his own word) to crucify his own will, and
inclination, so that he may humbly say with our Savior: Io. 6.38.
I came not to do my will, but my fathers that sent me; Secondly, that it freeth
us from taking care of any thing that concerns the body, and thinking of
tomorrow, as our Savior speaks; and leaves the provision thereof, which is so
troublesome and so full of infinite distractions, wholly to those that govern us.

2. S. Basil, S. Basil. reg* fus. q. 7.
setting down the question in these words: Whether a man that is resolved to
forsake the world, were better to live apart from others, or in company of
others of the same mind and purpose; makes ready answer, that for his part he
is fully of opinion, that it is better for many reasons, that many live
together in one house or seat. And he does not speak it, as meaning to bear
it away by the strength of his own single authority, which notwithstanding
were sufficient to carry it, he being known to be so worthy a man in all
respects; but brings many solid reasons for it, and reckons up many
commodities of living in company with others, which in breef are those.

3. First, Reasons why it is better to live in company of others.
he that lives alone, must needs want many good things; and cannot make much
use of those which he has; For no one man can have al things, but some have
one thing, some an other; that by exchange of duties and courtesies bestowed
upon one another, Charity might be maintained, and that which is given a man,
is not given him for himself only, but for the benefit of others also: So that
in S. Basils opinion, a solitary life has two incommodities in it; first,
that it cannot supply by others, what it self wants; secondly, that if a man
have more good parts in him, Mat 25.27*
them may be for his own use, they are in a manner lost, because they are not
put out to profit, but hidden under ground, which our Savior in the Ghospel
does much condemn. But where many live together, a man lives upon his own,
and helps others also wi^h it, and makes use of that which he finds in others,
as much as if it were his own.

4. Secondly, he that lives in company with others, if he sail in any thing,
is told of ^^, reprehended, and corrected for it: and as S. Basil says, the
concurrence of many in it, does make the greater impression in him; because no
man is so obstinate, as not to prefer the opinion of many, before his own
single judgment, 2. Cor. 2.6.
and yeald ^o the correction which proceeds from many, as the Apostle
speaks to the Corinthian^. But in a solitary life, it is very hard to know
when we do a miss, because vice is sot^le, and we willingly persuade ourselves
that we are well. Besides that, though the secret judgments of God should be
forcible enough to restrain us, yet human infirmity is more carried by them
that they see and hear: as al are naturally much moved with that which falls
within compass of sense: reason, and says, have nothing so much force: and we
find by da^ly experience, that we stand more in owe of men when they are
present, then o God and his Angels whose eyes we know we never can, nor do
escape. Whereupon S. Bernard says well: S. Bernard Ep. 115.
The evil which no man sees, no man reprehends, where we fear no^ a
controller, the te^p* our is more bold to come: and wickedness is more freely
committed. But in a Co^uent, if thou do any good, no man hinders thee, and thou
art not suffered to do evil, though thou have a mind to it: it is presently
discovered by many, presently reprehended, and amended: as contrariewise al
admire, al reverence, al imitate the good which they see. Thus says S.
Bernard. And Cassian is of the same opinion, to wit, that in good company
vices are much more reproved: and being never let alone, but still laid open,
they are quickly cured.

Io. 17.
5. A third commodity of living together, arises from the union of minds and
communion of mutual offices, and of al things else: which as it is much
commended in the Ghospel, so it cannot be performed in fact and deed, when a
man lives alone, howsoever in Will, he may be well inclined thereunto: and of this
S. Basil speaks thus. If al of us gathered together in one hope of our
vocation be one body, and have Christ for our head, and are every one of us a
part of one another: truly unless we agree also to be linked together in the
holy Ghost, and iumpe one with another in the likeness of one body, and not lead
a life every one b^ himself, severed from communication with the rest, how is
it possible that in such a distraction, and as it were co^^ision, or
separation, the parts should sympathise among themselves, and perform their
duties one toward another? For being so severed a sunder, we cannot rejoice
with those that are glad, nor have compassion of those that suffer, because the
very separation, makes that we know not in what stare they stand. This is of S.
Basile.

6. A another special commodity of living in common, is that, as nothing is
more dangerous, according to the opinion o^ S. Bernard, S. Bernard s^r. 1. de
(...) ^earful Examples of those that hau^ failed in a so (...) ^a^^ ^n. col. 2.
^ 15.
then to suffer the devil to si^g^e us out in a combat so continual, and about
a matter of so great weight and consequence, as is life everlasting, and to
^i^ht alone hand to hand with him: so nothin^ is more secure the^ to be where
we may have help of many* that fight together with us. We may read the
tragical ends of diverse, that living many years in the desert, have fasted and
watched much, and performed many notable things, and at last spoiled al, being
circum^ented by the deceites of the wily serpent, or overcome by that terrible
lion and dragon: as Heron: who as Cassian reports, when he had served God
forty years, cast himself headlo^g into a well. And another, that foolishly,
or wickedly, became a Jew, and was circumcised* Which kind of mischances
hapening very often among those solitary people, we cannot imagine any other
cause thereof, then that one man alone is too weak, and (...) to w^thstand the
brunt of so continual and to herce assaults. That great Theodosius, who was, as
we read, father and governor of so great a Monastery, understood this very
well; for being persuaded, when he was a young man, by Simeon Sitylites, The
saying of Theodosius.
to forsake the world, he was doubtful within himself a good while, whether he
should enter upon a Monastical, or upon a solitary life; but at last, having
considered every thing, preferred the living in common, far before the other;
for as he said, if in an army no man is so foolish, or so rash, as to forsake
his rank, and himself alone to set upon the whole host; much less must we do
so in this spiritual combat, which is far more hazardous, and wherein we have
to do with an enemy that is far more terrible.

7. The fifth utility of living in common, is not inferior to the former, to
wit, that it is not so subject to spiritual pride, as is a solitary life,
wherein the danger thereof is very great; according to that saying of S. Hierome:
S. Hierome ep. 4.
In the desert pride quickly creeps upon us and S Basil gives the reason
thereof in these words: Having no body with him that can judge of what he does,
it is easy for him to think that he has abundantly done enough; whence it
follows that the state of his mind being hidden, and private to himself, he
understands neither what he wants, nor what profit he has made in virtue:
For in what can he show humility, who has no body under whom to humble
himself? Or what testimony can he gi^e of his charity toward others, living
a part from every body? Or how shall he exercise patience, when no body does
withstand his will.

8. By which words of S. Basil, we do not only understand, that it is easier to
get the virtue of patience in a Monastery, by reason of the company in which
we live, and by means of obedience; but we are put in mind of an other
commodity of that life, which perhaps also is greater then any we have as yet
spoken of; for it comprizeth al virtues; which doubtless are gotten by
practice, and practice requires some matter whereon to practice, and matter
there can be none, in a solitary life, as we hear S. Basil saying: For if we
speak of charity, upon whom, says he, will you exercise it* If we speak of
humility, under whom will you reckon you^self to be? And the like we may say of
pity, and compassion, of mercy, and obedience, and other such virtues; and
of vices also; for where there is no occasion at al of them, we cannot know,
whether there be any such thing in us or no; much less can we root it out
and exti^pate it. Cassian. l. 8. c. 17.
Inso much, that Cassian says, that the vices which we carry into the desert
not cured, are so far from healing by length of time, as that rather they
grow worse and worse: For a man thinks himself humble and patient, says he, as
long as he comes in no bodies company; but when occasion is offered, whereby
he may be stirred, he will quickly find nature work again: The^ the vices
which lay hidden in him, presently, show themselves, and as unruly horses,
which have been long kept-in and sed, break the more violently and fiercely
over the bars, to the utter undoing of their Master; for vices if they be
not cured, grow more fierce in us, for want of exercise and contrary practice:
Wherefore, if we believe Cassian, people that have little or no conversation
with others, may oftimes be in a great error, thinking that they are free from
some vice, which possesses the^, or that they are possessed of some virtue,
whereof they have none. A subtle error in matter of virtue and vice*
And the reason is, because it is easy to allow of virtue and love it, and
co^trariewise to hate and detest vice, while we consider the nature of each of
the^ within our selves; for the beauty of the one, and the deformity of the
other* is such, that they naturally make impression of love or hatred in the
mind; which people find, and reflect not on it, they think presently they have
the virtue, because they feel that they love it, and most commonly they are
deceived: for it is one thing to think well of virtue another thing to have the
habit, of virtue; wickedmen think well of virtue, and in a moment they frame a
favorable conceit of it, and it is but an act of our understanding and
reason: but good men only, have the habit of virtue, and get it by time and
practice, and it is seated in the will and affection. They therefore that live a
solitary life fall often into such like errors; because they have no means to
try themselves, and bring their virtue to the touchstone. Trial discovers
these deceits, and the occasion lays open our faults if we have any. In
company this is often offered, in the wilderness never so that it is with them
(as Cassian says in an other place) as it is with serpents; for as long as
they are in their holes, Cassian. ^.18
they hurt no body, not because they have no poison in them, but because no
body comes near them, to take harm by them; but if occasion be offered them,
then they spit their secret venime: And S. Basil in the discourse before
mentioned, laugheth at them that aim at virtue by mere speculation, S. Basil.
and consideration of it; and says, that it falls out with them, as if a man
would learn the trade of a Carpenter, or of any other handicraft, only by
considering the precepts, and rules thereof, and never practicing any thing:
for he will never be able to compass it; which says he, S. Paul does insinuate
when he says: Romans 2.13.
Not the bearers of the law are just in the sight of God, but the doers. And
our Savior showed us, when he did not only in words teach us humility, but
added his own example, girding the towel about him, and washing the feet of
his servants.

9. Another thing wherein living together has advantage of a solitary life,
is, that a solitary man, as S. Basil discourses, thinks of no bodies good but
his own: 1. Cor. 13.5. 1. Cor. 1^.33.
which says he, is apparently against the law of Charity, which seeks not
its own; which law we find that the Apostle did exactly observe, not seeking
his own benefit but of many, that they might be saved; And a little after, he
sticks not to call it a dull and barren kind of life: in regard that no action
directed to the benefit of mankind, does follow upon the contemplation which
they have of God. And S. Augustine having enlarged himself much in commendation
thereof, S. August. de moribus. Eccl. cap. 31.
yet adds at last, that many think it to be too much retired from that which
belongs to man, because it takes no kind of pains, or labor for others:
And that which S. Leo says is very true; No good man is good only to himself,
and no wisemans wisdom, is beneficial only to himself: S Leo Ser. 3 de Santo
Lauren^.
and the nature of true virtue is, to draw many out of the darkness of error.
Wherefore they that live in company with others are much to be preferred, in
regard that every one endeauours according to his ability to do good to
others; and their light shines to others also, according to the commandment of
our Savior, Matt. 5.4^.
and thereby they glorify their Father who is in heaven. Which thing S. B^^^il
does make no small account of. In a solitary life though many excellent things
be performed, yet they lie al hidden in darkness nothing appears whereby the
goodness of God may be proclaimed, nothing wherely men may be provoked to follow
them; wherefore there can be no doubt but that the race of virtue wherein many
run together, is both more pleasant, and more profitable, then where every
one runs alone by himself: and S. Bernard does with reason make account, S
Bernard (...) 3. de Circum.
that the temptation is in a manner equally dangerous, if, a man that is
resolved to serve God, think to do penance amidst the troubles and cares of
the world, or contrariwise, enter upon a solitary course of life; and says:
that neither of them do well consider their own weakness, nor the danger which
is in combatting with the Devil.

10. And this may suffice concerning that manner of solitary living, How much
inferior a retired life is to a Religious course.
which was in use among those ancient Hermites of old: new a days people
practice another more mild, and easy kind of solitude, leading a spiritual
life privately in their own houses, quiet, and free from al earthly and it
kesome business: with which kind of course they are so taken, that they think it
a securer way, and l^sse subject to trouble and disquiet, then a Religious
life, but they are far awry: For though it be something that which they do,
if we consider it in it self, for they do better, then they that out of
ambition or couetise, follow the Court, or trot from market to market, and from
one Fair to another: Yet if we set them in comparison with Religion, they are
so far beneath it, that they are not worthy the speaking of. For first they
want all the commodities which wait upon a life in common, as through this
whole book I have showed: and they are subject to the same inconveniences,
which a solitary life is: and finally, they are so much worse then the
Eremites of old, in regard that they of old betaking themselves into their
dens and caves, forsook the world quite and clean, and bad Adieu to al
riches and kinsfolk. These men retain al these things: and so do not perfectly
renounce that which they have, but rather living with it, live in the midst of
so many deadly enemies: For it is the saying of Truth it self; Matt. 10.36
The enemies of man are his domesticals: And are in continual danger to be
overcome by the occasions they are in, and so to forsake the service of God,
and the way of virtue upon which they had entered, and returned to the broad
and spacious ways of the world, upon the confines whereof they dwell: And though
they do personer, where is the virtue of obedience? a virtue so rare and
excellent, and of so great merit and consequence, where is the denial of their
own will? where is the exercise of true humility? where is the Hundredfold,
and the rest of the rewards and honors promised to the followers of a
Religious life? Wherefore if a man be of the mind to overcome the world in his
own house, and home, certainly if he desire it indeed, he should be better
advised, to betake himself to the house of God, that is, into Religion, and
rank himself with the host of God, where he shall more easily and more
constantly overcome, and find more plenty of grace and glory. Deus. 4 14.
For why should he not do that which he intends, with perfection, and the
service which he is minded to offer to God, offer it in the manner that may be
most pleasing to him, and most profitable for himself? And he may do well, to
call to mind the law which declared that the beasts, which had little wings, and
yet did creep on the ground, were al of them unclean, and not to be eaten of:
which was not without great mystery, and figureth those, that having received
a good will of God, whereby they may list themselves up from the ground, as it
were with little wings, will notwithstanding still cleave to the earth, and
thinking they may do both, and have one foot in the world, and the other in
the service of God, are rejected from the service of God, as beasts that are
unclean.

Of the benefit of a Religious vocation. CHAP. XL.
BY this which has been said of the benefit of a Religious vocation in
generalie there considered in it self, or as compared with other States, it is
manifest, that it is the most compendious, and safest way of any o^ her, to
bring us to heaven; and that al other States of life, in comparison thereof, may
be said, to sail, as it were, at the mercy of the wind and w^aes and
dangerous rocks in open sea; and that this only course of life is now even in
the harbor, secure from danger, within sight of eternal salvation; which is
the land for which our whole sleete, as I may call it, is bound: And
consequentl^ we must acknowledge with thanks giving and it is great reason we
should do so^ and profess with excessi^e joy and pleasure, that of al benefits
which God can be^tow upon a soul in this world, this is the greatest; and for
as much as concerns a course and order of living, he has not any thing to
add thereunto in this our banishment and pilgrimage, that can be more worthy
or more beneficial. S. Bernard (...) Ingr^^.
S. Bernard discourses li^ely of this subject in one of his sermons, earnestly
exhorting his Brethren to be grateful to the divine goodness for so great a
benefit, and among other passages has these words: Great, and very great is
the mercy of our God over us, having by the strength of his spirit so
unspeakable, and by some ^timable a gift of his grace, drawn us from the
vain conversation of this world, in which we were sometimes without God, or
which is more detestable, against God, not ignorant of him but contemn (...)
him: And I would ^o God the ugly Image of the l^se, or rather of that death
(for the soul that sins is dead) were always before our eyes, beholding
how great blindness, ^ow great wickedness that was; that continually weighing in
our thoughts the po^^e of his mercies, we might esteem of the greatness of his
commiseration by which he ha^^ delivered us, if not to the full value thereof,
yet at leastwise in some competent measure (...) if any one of us be careful
to consider diligently, not only from whence he is delivered, but where he is
placed; not only what he has escaped, but what he has recea^ed, not only from
whence he has been reclaymed, but whether he is called, doubtle, he will find
that the heap of this mercy does far exceed the greatness of the former.

2. Two things therefore, according to S. Bernard, are to be considered in this
bench* The misery of the world out of (...).
The Extremity from which we are delivered; and the term in which we stand.
For certainly the benefit is the greater, by how much the evil which we escape
is more grievous. As if a man be set free out of prison, he is the more obliged
to (...) that sets him free, the more ^ideous and nastie the (...) was,
wherein he was held. And what was our Prison? The world full of mischeef and
misery; full of sins, which is the greatest misery of al others; full of
ambition, and loosenes, and infinite dangers. The world, where we find no order,
but a perpetual confusion of al things, darkness, blindness, inconstancy; The
world, the laws and Maxims whereof are extreme pernicious, the examples
deadly, men and Devils innumerable provoking us to sin; let us therefore give
care to S. Leo, S. Leo 5.10. in quadrag.
who as he often treats of this subject, so in one of his sermons
particularly he says in this manner: It is very hard, and difficult, to s^ay
the vnsettlednes of our heart from al manner of sin, and where innumerable
allurements of vanity on every side do speak us fair, to yeald to no kind
of corruption. Who touches pitch, and is not defiled by it? Who does not yeald
to weakness in the flesh? Who is of so eminent purity, as to receive no stayne
from the many things, without which we cannot live? And thus much concerning
the evils from which we are delivered.

3. Of the blessedness of the life, to which we are translated, S. Bernard.
S. Bernard speaks in breef many things, and these are his words: Which, I
beseech you, is this so pre^ious a Margarite, The happiness of Religion to
which we are called.
for which we must give al, that is, ourselves, to have it? For he that has
offered himself to God, has given al unto him: Is it not Religion, holy,
pure, immaculate? Wherein a man lives more purely, falls more seldom, rises
more ^uddenly, walks more w^r^ly; is more of ten watered, rests more
securely, dies more confidently, is poorer purged, and more abundantly
rewarded. What can a man desire more? Or can there be a greater benefit than
this, which contains in one so many benefits? Or be placed in matters of
greater weight and importance? What can a man desire in this life more
auailable for salvation, or more likely to maintain a continual peace and
tranquillity of mind and body all the time of our life? S. John Chrysostom.
(...) Vux Mo.
S. John Chrysostom has a long elaborate discourse to this purpose, showing
evidently, that far more softer shipwreck in the world, then in Religion, and
are in far greater danger, and gives three reasons for it. First, because
more things trouble them; Secondly, because they live more negligently and
carelessly; Three reasons why living in the world is more dangerous.
Thirdly because they are more weak and fe^ble. Contrariwise, in the life of a
Monk, says he, the waves are not so great, rather they have continual fair
weather, and a quiet season, and their endeavor in breaking and over coming
the seas, is far more earnest. S. Caesarius speaks eloquently, and well to
the same point, in one of his homilies to his Monks: We know, says he, that
there is a great reward laid up in the life to come for the spiritual
warrefare, to which we have bound our selves; but if we mark it well, we are in
a manner in present possession of part of the reward in the work it self which
we have in hand: Casarius. Hom. 5. ad Man.
And certainly it is a very great benefit of this course, that we have had the
power to contemn the world, and begin to serve Gods that we have shaken off
the miserable command which sin had over us, and escaped the filthy slavery
of glottonie and lust: And is it not a great reward to have nothing to do with
the world? not to be troubled with desire of vanities? not to be acquainted
with any enormous crime? to lead an innocent life? to live in blessed
Chastity? to possess sufficient with the fear of God in glorious poverty?
whereof Wisdom speaks (...); Prou. 15.16
Better is a small portion with the fear of God; then great treasures without
fear.

4. Let us therefore consider how much God has bestowed upon us, in this holy
vocation; let us reckon, if we can, what gain we have made from the time which
we have been gathered together in this place; from how many coosenages; from
how many adulteries, thefts, periuries, sacriledges, we have been delivered;
and then we shall feel how much we are also obliged to God for the present
benefits. If we were now in the world, what should we do other, then wallow in
sin, and defile our soul with daily staynes, and goare it with daily wounds,
and not so much as feel them? For this is the property of wicked custom of
synning, that the more a man sins, the less he understands his sins; and
the more he is delighted to sin. And on the other side, the more careful a
man is of himself, the more he fears. All this out of S. Caesarius.

The honor which God does a man in calling him to Religion.
5. Whereunto we may add, that God has not only done us the favor to deliver
us from under the power of the Devil and sin; but exalted us to the height
and splendor of Euangelical perfection, which does mightily raise the value
and esteem of this benefit; and no words are sufficient to express the
greatness thereof; yet we will endeavor to declare it in some measure by the
example following. For as if a great and mighty Prince had an enemy, that by
many treacherous ways had diverse times sought his utter undoing and
destruction, and it being now in the Prince his power to kill him, he should
notwithstanding not only willingly pardon him, but be friends with him, and
take him into his house, set him at his board, and give him an honorable place
among his royal issue; so falls it out with Religious people, for the infinite
goodness of God, not contented to raise us poor and needy snakes his enemies,
from the earth of our vain imaginations, or from the dung of our loathsome
sins, has innobled us moreover so far, Ps. 112.8.
as to rank us with princes, with the princes of his people, that is, with
those, that for as much as concerns their own perfecction, hold the first
and cheifest rank in the Church of God, S Bernard. s. de Ingrat.
which S. Bernard does as he is wont, most sweetly express in these words:
Finally, if perhaps forsaking fornication, we had remained in coniugal
Chastity, and not embracing the council which we know is given of a single
life, but abstayning from rapine and fraud, had lawfully used that which was
our own, not arriving to the Euangelical perfection, whereof it is written: If
thou will be perfect, go, and sell all that thou have and follow me; Mat. 19.27.
how great a mercy had it be^n, if, I say delivered from so many sins, in
which many of us being entangled, expected nothing but death* and the sentence
of most certain damnation, we might have brethed in some inferior degree and
course of life? The prodigal Child durst not aspire to the rank of Children,
but thought himself happy, if he might but deserve to be admitted among the
hirelings. Lu. 15.19.
But fatherly love could not content^ self, without showing him mercy in so
abundant measure, as was able to make the elder brother, that had never
departed from his father, enui^^h in for it: So, d^erely beloved the mercy of
our God, abundantly powered forth upon v^, has of children of wrath and
distrust, not only received us among his elect, but called us into the
congregation of the perfect. Thus say^h S. Bernard.

A (...) saving of ^ordanus.
6. ^ord^nus first General of the Blackfriars after S. Dominick, a man of great
sanct the and authority, has a notable saying to this purpose. Having
clothed a certain (...) in the holy habit of his Religion, in the presence of
many of h^s (...) Companions, he made a long discourse unto them of the
happiness of a Religious State, at which they wept most bitterly; whereupon he
turned his speech unto them, and told them they ought not to weep, for they
were now to part from this their friend, but rather out of envy, that he had
chosen the better part by far, then they; because Religious men serve God in
nature of gentlemen of the privy chamber to a Prince, with whom he is ever
inward and very familiar: But secular people, if they serve at al, they serve
as it were in the kitchen or in some other meaner office. Therefore it were
far better for them to open their eyes, and consider, that the door is open
for them also, if they have a mind to enter, and sit at board with the king. And
his words fell not upon the ground, for one of the Company never went further,
but presently betook himself to Religion, and all the rest soon after took
in at the same port of salvation.

7. And certainly if we cast up the particulars of all the great commodities
whereof I have at large discoursed, The Benefits of Religion summed vp^n brief.
we shall find, that in this one benefit of Religion, al in a manner is
contained, that we can possibly desire: a consideration, which we should
always have before our eyes, and have deeply imprinted in our hearts. For here
we have perfect remission of al our former offenses, as in a second Baptism;
our flesh is tamed by holy sobriety; we are at leisure to think of heavenly
things; and severed from all that may any way hurt our soul. The will of God, is
the rule of our actions: and al kind of virtue in continual, and vigorous
practice. Here we receive direction from Superiors; light from particular
Rules; abundance of inward grace; increase of meri^; comfort in fraternal
charity; mutual assistance; and part of all the good works that are done among
us. Al which are in themselves wonderful beneficial: but withal, greatly
innobled and imbellished by the golden link of our vows, and crowned at last
at the hour of our death, with that security which a state so remote from the
world, and so near bordering upon heaven, and heavenly things, does usually
bring unto us. To the accomplishment and preservation whereof, do concur, the
particular love, favor, and protection of God, and our B. Lady; a thing
wonderfully to be esteemed, both for the profit and pleasure which accompany
it.

8. Seeing therefore we find so much wealth and riches in a Religious State,
Religion a hidden Treasure.
what can we reckon it to be other, then the Treasure hidden in the field,
which when the man had found, Mat. 13.44.
for joy, he went and sold all that he had, and bought that field? For
certainly Religion may most truly be called a Treasure, or rather it contains
an infinite Treasure, seeing it has within it so infinite riches, and such
abundance of wealth, not of one kind only, but al manner of wealth heaped in a
mass together. Now he that finds a Treasure, has great advantage over
another man, that is rich by trading, or otherwise; for he that trades (for
example) comes to his wealth by much pains and labor, and runs many
hazards in the purchasing thereof, and it is long before he get it togea^her:
but he that finds a treasure, lights upon al together, without labor or
danger, and in a moment is raised to excessive wealth and happiness. But it is
not every body that sigh^s upon it, but rather very few. So secular people
increase their stock of virtue by much and long striving for it, and oftimes
they suffer shipwreck, and in one hour, leese all that they had laid up
together in many years, by falling but into one mortal sin: which alas! how
easy, yea how da^ly a thing is it, in a sea so full of shelues and tempests? A
Religious man finds a Treasure, and consequently is far more happy,
because al at once is heaped and thronged upon him. The state it self and
vocation, breaths as it were into his heart the spirit of Poverty, and a
particular affection to Chastity, and Obedience, as things contained in the
very spirit of Religion; and withal it gives him al other virtues, as
necessary attendants, partly flowing from those three, and partly needful for
the upholding of them. A treasure, where not golden Iaspars, or orient Pearls,
but more precious and truer Gemmes, of great esteem and use, not only in
earth, but in heaven, are heaped together: But yet a hidden treasure, because
few do know the value of it, few do find it; for that which our Savior said of
Eunuchs, Matt. 19.11.
is very true, not al take this word, but to whom it is given, and where is it
hidden? In the field, a place void of company, free from the noise of
Ambition, from toylesome trafick, from the Courts of Princes, and yet not in a
wood, or upon a hill, but in a field, where people use to plough and sow, and
bestow labor in manuring the ground; al which agrees fitly to Religion, for
it is severed from the turmoyles of the world, and cultiuateth the mind with all
spiritual industry, sparing no labor, precaution, mortification; and it can
no sooner be laid fair open before our eyes, by the light which God does give
us, but presently our mind is so violently taken, and inflamed with desire of
it, that no strength, no bonds can withhold us, from running to possess
ourselves of it, and that with joy, as out Savior speaks, not weeping and
lamenting, as if a man were to undergo some great trouble or cross, but as to
a joyful, and gladsome, and fortunate business; in fine, as to a Treasure.

But the more precious the thing is, the more ought we to consider, by what
means we may come to the possession of this happy field, wherein so great a
treasure is hidden; The price of the field is to leave al.
for we cannot have it for nothing, but must buy it, and buy it at the rate, at
which our Savior, who has it to sell, has set it; that is, by selling all that
we have, and buying it therewith. To purchase this field, we must forgo al
possessions, Moneys, preferments, friends, parents, kinsfolk, ourselves;
which is both most exactly performed by entering into Religion, and is not easy
to say how it can be done otherwise. Where, by the way, we may consider the
goodness of God in no^ determining any certain sum of money or wealth, least
he that could not make so much, might be excluded from the purchase of so
worthy a thing and ha^h withal out of his infinite wisdom ordained, that the
price should be, not so much to give what we had, as to forsake it; to the end,
that whether we have much, or whether we have little, or nothing at al; we may
be al admitted to the purchase, so we leave al, and retain nothing to
ourselves, not so much as the hope, or possibility of having any thing. By
which means in very deed we do not wholly relinquish that which we leave, but we
make an exchange thereof for that which is far better, and better worth;
purchasing so incomparable a treasure, at so easy a rate; a treasure wherein we
shall have the price we gave, returned upon us again, and infinitely, more added
unto it. S. Hierome Epist. 16.
Which S. Hierome tells us in these words: We receive more them we ga^^, we
forsook a small thing, and have entered upon great possessions, the promises of
Christ are performed with return of hundred fold.

which being well considered, and proving so true and certain, as doubtless it
is, what heart can be so cold, as not to burn with desire, and love of so
precious a Margari^e, so inestimable a Jewel and Treasure? or who is there that
has already bought it, but will esteem so highly of it, as certainly to
prefer it before kingdoms, and seats of honor; and make account of al gold
and silver, as a little sand, or dirt, in comparison of it, and love it above
health and beauty; or if he have not yet bought it, will esteem any thing too
precious to bestow upon it, and not rather, as S. Gregory speaks in this
very subject, S. Greg. Hom. 11. in Euang.
willingly forsake all that he loved among earthly things, forgoing that which
he had got, distributing that which he had gathered together, and thinking the
beauty of earthly substance which pleased him before, deformed, in comparison
of the luster of this precious Margarite, which now only shines in his mind?

8. Aegidius, The advice of Aegidius a Franciscan Friar.
one of the first stones in the famous buildings of the order of S. Francis, a
man of so great sanctity, that when he heard the name of God, or of Heaven, he
was wont to be presently transported out of himself, is reported to have made
this amswer, to one that asked his advice, whether it were best for him to
enter into Religion: Tell me, said he, if a poor man should come to know for
certain that in such a place there lay hidden a great treasure; would he stand
to advise, whether it were best for him to dig there or no? The man answered,
No: Then, said he, with how much more alacrity and readynes should men run
to the infinite Treasury of God, where only are the true and eternal riches?
which the man understanding, went presently and sold all that he had, and having
given it among the poor entered into Religion.

9. The same holy man being once demanded, whether a man might remain in
favor with God, and live in the world, made answer, that he might, The same
Aegidius prefers one degree of Grace in Religion, before ^o, in the world.
but he had rather have one degree of grace in Religion, then ten in the world,
because grace is easyly preserved and increased in Religion, where a man lives
sequestered from wordly troubles and tumults, which are deadly enemies of the
grace of God; and moreover is encouraged and egged on to virtue by his
spiritual Brethren: In the world Grace is easily lost, because secular care,
which is the mother of distraction, does hinder and quite take away the
sweetness of grace, and by their evil examples people provoke one another to
evil, and withdraw one another from that which is good, and as it were by
force, take a way the life of the soul, and throw it headlong into everlasting
destruction; so that without doubt it is much better to have far less grace,
so it be secured and assisted with so many helps to increase it, as are in
Religion, then to have far greater grace, with so evident danger, The vision
of S Anselme.
as is in the world. These are the very words of that holy man.

10. Wherefore let us conclude what we have hitherto said, and much more which
might be said, of the misery of this world, and of the greatness of this
treasure, that is, of the happiness of a Religious life, with the heavenly
vision, in which both these together were declared to S Anselme, of who^ we
find recorded, that being once in an extasis, tra^sported out of himself, he
saw a mighty swift River, which drew all the filth of the whole ca^^h into it
self, so that the water thereof was most horribly foul and stinking, and
besides, it carried away with it whatsoever it met, men and women, poor and
rich. Which sight moving him to great admiration and compassion, he asked how
those people lived, and what was their sustenance? and it was answered him,
that they drank of that filth wherein they wallowed, and took great pleasure
therein, miserable creatures as they were; and withal, the vision was declared
thus unto him: That the Torrent was the world, wherein people are blindly
carried away with their riches and honors, and unlawful delights, and though
they be so infinitely miserable, that they cannot temper themselves in any
thing, yet they esteem themselves fortunate and happy men: From thence he was
carried into a large spacious seat, walled round about, and the wal^ being al
covered with beaten silver, made a most glorious show; within this enclosure he
beheld a pleasant meddow, full grown with grass of a strange nature, for it
was as silver, and yet grew, and was soft and pliable; so that when he sat
down upon it, it gave under him, and rose again, when he rise up. The air
was most sweet and pleasant; finally al things were so delicious in it, that a
man might think himself abundantly happy, if he had no more but that. And this
he was told was a Religious life; God showing him by these similitudes, that in
the world al things are vile and loathsome, fickle, deadly, and ever tending to
destruction; and contrariewise in Religion, al things beautiful and pleasant*
finally bright, and sumptuous, as silver.

THE SECOND BOOK, OF THE HAPPINESS OF A RELIGIOUS STATE.
THE PREFACE. That a Religious State is not only profitable, but honorable.
BEhold how good, Psalm. 132.
and how pleasant it is, to dwell Brethren in one! As the ointment in the head,
which descends upon the beard of Aaron: As the dew of Hermon, which
descends upon mount Sion^ because there our Lord has commanded blessing, and
life for ever. A great commendation of a sociable life, a life lead in common
together; and great promises, and rewards of Fraternal love and conjunction,
set forth, not by man, but by the Holie-Ghost, who cannot be mistaken in the
weight of his praises, nor miss of the performance, of what he promises: And
both the praises of this life, and promises of the Holie-Ghost do so properly,
and apparently agree with a Religious State, that no man can doubt, but the
Royal Prophet, when he uttered this Prophetie, had the frame and Idea thereof
before his eyes, and beheld so long before, the beautifulnes of this form of
life, S Basil. Constable Mon, c. 19.
in the divine light then communicated unto him. Which S. Basil delivers,
when speaking of Religious people, and discoursing at large of their happiness,
in conclusion he says, that the Prophet David in his Psalms, sung thus of
them: Behold how good, and how pleasant it is, to dwell Brethren in one!
Expressing the holiness of their life, by the word, Good; and the contentment,
and joy, S August. in Psalm. 132.
which arriseth from so great concord and union, by the word, Pleasant. And
learned S. Augustine, interpreting that Psalm, teaches no less, making no
doubt, but that the whole Psalm, was penned purposely, of Religious people;
and declares withal the great force which the, Good, and contentment here
described, has to work upon men's minds: These words of the Psalter, says he,
this pleasant sound, this sweet melody, both in the ear, and in the
understanding, begat Monasteries: This sound awaked the Brethren, who have
coueted to dwell in one: This verse was their Trumpet: it was heard over the
whole earth, and they that were before divided, were gathered together. Thus
spoke S. Augustine, and very truly.

2. For first, Religious men properly are Brethren.
the name of, Brethren, does so fully express, that which passes in a
Religious Community, that there could not be a word devised, to signify, the
thing more lively, because as Brothers, they have one, and the same Father, one
and the same Mother* al receive the spiritual life which they lead, from one
God, by the seed of the Holy Ghost sown in their hearts, and are conceived in
one and the same womb of their Mother, Religion, begot, not by virtue thereof,
but by the virtue of God, as I said, and Religion feeds them al, with one
milk, nurturing them, and bringing them to perfection, (...) true and natural
Children.

Though to the Prophets mind, the name of Brethren, did not sufficiently
declare the union, Act. 4.32.
which is betwixt them that are linked together by so ^^reight a bond, and
therefore he added, that they dwell in one, that is, are al one together; which
is so true of Religious people, that it is in a manner proper to them alone.
For as the same S. Augustine observes, they live ^o together, that they are
al as it were but one man; and that which is written in the Acts, is verified
of them; One soul, and one heart. Many bodies, but not many hearts.

Cass. Col^. 16. c. 3.
Which unity, is the more to be esteemed, because it is not grounded upon
neernes of place, but upon spirit, and consequently distance of place, does not
divide it; because, as Cassian speaks, the Cohabitation of manners, and not
of places, joins the Brethren together in the eyes of God. And as the
dwelling in one house, avails little, where there is not agreement of minds,
and conditions; so the distance of place, hinders not, where minds and
affections consort together.

Wherefore with great reason, the sweetness, and profitablenes of this life, is
compared, to an Ointment, Religion Compared to the Priestly ointment.
and to dew: And to no ordinary Ointment, but to the ointment, which was used
upon Priests, an ointment, most fragrant, and odoriferous, and consecrating
them to God, upon whom it was wont to be powered: To give us to understand that
they who enter upon a Religious course, and meet together in this brotherly
society, are consecrated to God, and consecrated as Priests, themselves being a
daily Sacrifice, and offering to the Divine Majesty every day many Sacrifices,
and oblations of themselves. No wonder therefore, it from so great perfection of
virtue, such abundance of sweet odours do issue, 2 Cor. 2.16.
as to replenish the whole house of God, which is the Church, and to make
Religious people themselves, both amiable, and admirable to al; and as the
Apostle speaks, and odor of life to life to many others, inflaming them with
love of the like virtue and perfection.

3. Moreover, as the Priestly ointment, was so perfectly good and fragrant,
because it was compounded of many odoriferous ingredients, so (as I have said
more at large elsewhere) the beauty, and benefit of Religious people is the
greater, because the virtue and sanctity of many, does meet together. In
which respect S. Basil comparing a solitary life, with a life lead in company
of others, prefers this; because, as he speaks, that Good, S. B^s^^ reg.
^us. disp. c. 6.
and Pleasant thing, to wit, the cohabitation of Brethren, in the same house,
which the holy Ghost compares to the fragrant ointment running down from the
head of the high Priest, can have no place, in the single habitation of one man
alone. The sweetness of which ointment, does not remain in the head only, but
descends, to the very skirt of the garment; which S. Augustine does learnedly,
S August.
as al other things, interpret to be, either the latter times, in regard that
so great excellency of virtue, was reserved to the fulness of the Ghospel; or
perfection itself; because as the garment ends in the skirt, so says he, they
are perfect, who know how to dwell together, they are perfect, who fulfill the
law.

4. Now as the Odoriferous sent of that ointment, expresses the pleasantnes of
this course; so the similitude of the dew, The spirit of Religion to dew.
declares the profit of it. For as dew is engendered in the air, by the heat
of the S^nne, and cools the selfsame heat, and gives contentment by the
freshnes which it has; so this heavenly spirit, whereof we speak, coming only
from heaven, falls upon them, that forsaking earthly things, are inflamed
which the sole love of God, and cools in them, al love of things inferior,
and extinguisheth the vnqui^t heat of concupiscence. And it falls not as a
sudden shewre of rain, with great noise and violence, but like dew, so small,
as no man perceaues it, but he that has it, and he that has it, does not only
find pleasure in the temper of the inferior heates which possess us, but
profit by the fruitfulnes, and plenty of good works bestowed upon him.

5. And this dew is not promised indifferently to al, but to the high and
craggy hills, of Hermon, and Sion, which signify Religious souls raised above
al earthly things and contemning the world, as inferior and base; and no
river can ouerflow them, that is, they are not taken with delight of any of the
transitory things, which they have forsaken. These hills stand in need of the
freshnes of this heavenly dew, and if it may be said to be due to any, it is
due to them, to the end that having before hand, in this life, a taste of that
future happiness, which we al expect, they may be the more inflamed with the
love, and desire thereof.

Wherefore in this state, thus improued and mended by the dew distilling from
above, thus sweetened and softened with the fragrancy of divine ointments, with
great reason has God commanded blessing and life for ever, that is, not any
temporal or short life, or blessing, but a blessing and life eternal, and never
fading. For here is great measure of the true knowledge, John. 17.3. John. 6 63.
1. John. 3.14
of God, which as our Savior tells us, is our true life. Here the word of
God soundes continually in our ears, which word, is spirit and life. Here we
love our brethren by which we know, as S. John speaks, that we are
translated from death to life.

6. But al are not lead by profit, many rather set little by the point of
profit, and aim at honor and preferment, that which S. Bernard says, S
Bernard. Sermon 4. de Ascens.
proving very true: Al of us are desirous to ascend, al covet to be exalted, we
are noble creatures, and carry a high mind, and therefore naturally desire
highness. Wherefore seeing God has made so great account of a Religious state,
as to enrich it so many other ways, he cannot be thought to have left it bare
of honor, and suffered it to be in glorious, and contemptible; rather it is
certain, that either there is no worth at al, in the spiritual works of God
(which were madness to think) or if there be any in his other works, The
dignity of Religion
most of al in a Religious state, as in one of the chiefest, and rarest of al
his works. For where as the Majesty of virtue, is so great, that though there
were nothing else to commend it, this majesty alone would make it shine like a
light in the midst of darkness; Religion being the proper seat and kingdom of
virtue, must needs partake of the same splendor and Majesty, and the more,
because it is so coupled with virtue, that Religion without virtue, cannot
subsist so much as in the thought of man.

7. And in some sort, a Religious course of life, has somewhat more then
virtue; because every body cannot discover the worth, and dignity of virtue;
some are so dull as they conceive nothing at al of it: but a Religious course,
has not only inwardly wherewith al to delight the eyes of the spiritual, but
outwardly it has that also, which draws the vulgar into admiration, and in
my judgment, even for matter of worth and nobility, it is not only equal in
greatness with the world, but far above it.

This second book therefore by the help of God, shall be spent in declaring the
dignity of Religion, a subject, in it self pleasant, and wherein a Religious man
has particular reason to rejoice.

8. And it is no small testimony of the dignity thereof, that we find such an
infinite company of men, A great testimony of the dignity of Religion.
that have so joyfully spurned at the honors, and wordly prefer^, (...) which
they might have had, and forsaken them which they had, or at leastwise
infinitely desired to forsake them, to enjoy the happiness of a Religious life.
For the desire of honor, being so natural to man, as I have said, it cannot
be thought that the bare consideration of profit, could put so much Zeal and
fervor into them, but that together with profit, they saw great honor and
worth in the business.

S. Gregory.
9 And among many strange examples in this kind, we shall hardly meet with one
more signal, then that of S. Gregory the Great; who having lead a Monastical
life from his youth, and being afterward made Deacon of the Church of Rome, was
notwithstanding so taken with the love of his former Religious course, that
being sent Legate by the Pope to Constantinople, he would not put himself upon
his journey, but in company of some of his Monks, that because he could not
himself remain in his Monastery, be might, as it were, carry a Monastery along
with him.

10. And which is more to be admired, when he was chosen Pope, in that height
of honor (then which there is not a higher upon earth) he did so continually
mourn, out of desire of Religious quiet, that almost al his writings are full
of his tears; And particularly in his Dialogues he speaks thus: My
unfortunate mind, goared with the wound of excessive business, S. Gregory in
pro^mio Dialog.
calls to remembrance what a life it lead once in the Monastery, how far al
transitory things were beneath it; how far it was above al things that pass
away; how it was not wont to think but of heavenly things; how confined within
the body, it did pass the bounds of flesh, by Contemplation: and death, which
to every one most commonly, is a greiuous pain, was welcome to my mind, as an
entrance to life, and a reward of the labor past. But now by occasion of my
Pastoral charge, it is moyled with business of secular people, and after the
comelynes of so goodly a quiet, which it had, it is disfigured, with the dirt
of terrene actions. I weigh what I suffer, I weigh what I have lost; and while
I behold what I have forgone, that which I endure is more greiuous unto me. For
behold now, I am tossed in the waves of open sea, and in the ship of my mind,
am beaten with the storms of a mighty tempest, and remembering the state of my
former life, as it were casting my eyes back, I sigh at the shore which I see
behind me.

11 Regest ep. 4 and seq.
11. Thus spoke S. Gregory; and much more else where to the same effect, and
with like inward feeling. And by this his complaint gives us sufficiently to
understand, that out of his own practice, he discovered something in ^
Religious life, so beautiful and excellent, that in that height of promotion,
he would have been glad of it, and was sorry that he wanted it. And his example
ought to weigh the more with every body, because he was so great a man, and
having had experience in his own person, of both kinds of life, could not
notwithstanding quench the love and desire of the one, which he had not, with
the great greatness of the other in appearance, which he possessed.

THE SECOND BOOK OF THE HAPPINESS OF A RELIGIOUS ESTATE.
HOW BASE ALL EARTHLY THINGS ARE. CHAP. I.
THAT which a Religious life aims at, and the Essence thereof, is utterly to
abandon all earthly things: I do not say the love of them only (for that all
must do) but the very use of them, so much as may be, which all are not obliged
to forgo. To understand therefore, the benefit of a Religious course, and much
more the worth and dignity thereof, nothing can be more necessary, then
thoroughly to conceive, and establish as a certain ground, how imperfect, and
abject all things of this world are by nature, and how unworthy the love, and
care of man. For so a Religious man, will be easily persuaded, to be content to
want that, by the absence whereof, he sees he shall suffer no great loss; and
secondly that which here we intend, will be plain to every body, to wit, what
makes a man truly honorable, and wherein true worth does consist.

2 First therefore all earthly things, Earthly things little in themselves.
let them carry never so fair, and magnificall a show, are in deed but bare
and slender, and of little value; which we shall find the sooner to be true,
if we look not upon the particulars, severally; but comparing them with the
rest of the world. For if we take the whole earth, and consider well what it is,
compared with the other Elements, and with the large circumference of the
heavens, we shall find it is the least of them all, and indeed of no great
compass; great part of it, is hidden under water; part of it taken up with
hills, and mountainous places; the remaynder divided into Provinces, and
kingdoms; kingdoms again into cities, and towns; towns into houses, and
demaines, and the several possessions of particular men: what a small parcel
now, God wot, falls to the share of every particular?

Socrates.
3. Socrates the Philosopher, has a grave and witty saying, to this Purpose.
For as it is recorded of him, perceauing that Alcibiades took great pride in
hi^ wealth and large possessions, he drew him a side to a map of the whole
world, and desired him to show him Attica (which was his country) in the
map: and when he had readyly pointed at it, he prayed him to show him, where
his lands, and possessions lay in it; he answered they were not set down in
the map, Wherefore, then, replied Socrates, art thou so proud of thy
possessions, seeing they are (...) part of the earth* But the error is that
men think gold and silver, and wealth, and possessions, great, not because the
things are great, but because themselves are little; as Emitts make account of
their little neasts, as if they were large palaces, and bestow as much labor,
and toil, upon a handful of grain to carry it in, and lay it up, as if
they had got a mighty purchase.

And of no value.
4. Yet if the things that are so small in bulk, and quantity, were in price
and value any great matter; a man might give some reason, why they should be
desired; but if we enter into the very bowels of them, and consider whereof they
are made, we shall find that they are composed of the known elements, whereof
some are more subtle and clear, as fire and air; some more gross and foggy,
as water and earth. Whatsoever we see, or handle, or take contentment in, is
but a compound of these four things put together, and in all of them, the
earth, which is the most lumpish, and base of any of the rest, has the
greatest part by far. In the mixture therefore of these things, can there be
any thing so very much to be admired, seeing the simples by themselves are so
mean? Or what sense is there in it, to make so great account of a little
earth, and to keep it so charily, under so many locks, and keys, if it have a
color which pleases your eye; and to tread the same earth under foot, and
make account of it, as it is, when mingled with water it is but dirt? For that
which S. Bernard says, S Bernard ser. 4. de Aduent. S John Chrysosto. ser. 2.
de vit. Dom.
is very-true, Gold and silver, is it not but white and red earth, which the
error of men only makes or rather esteems precious? And long before Saint
Bernard, Saint John Chrysostom made the like observation. And he says well,
that it is not made, but esteemed precious; because the judgment of man, when
it falls to be according to truth, can neither raise, nor pull down the price
nor true value of any thing; much less a false and erroneous persuasion, which
people frame to themselves.

5. And if we look yet nearer, into the substance of things, which are most
esteemed, we shall find it more certainly to be as I say. For what is Pearl,
but the excrement of a shelfish? And yet people now a days, use it to set
forth the beauty of their countenance. Wherein it may seem to some, a
ridiculous thing to set so little by the whole shell, or the fish it self, and
to value, the thicker, and harder part thereof, at so high a rate. What are
gemmes, but stones* What is silk but the bowels of an ugly worm? What is
Cloth, but the fleeces of sheep, which we account silly things, when they are
a live? What are Ermines and ^ables, but skinns of beasts? What are stately
buyldings, porches, and palaces, but a heap of stones, The laporians treasure.
set in order? We find that the Iaponians lay up in their closets, and
treasury, birds painted upon paper, triuetts, and brazen kettles: and esteem
highly of them, not for any neatnes of fashion or workmanship, (for there is no
such thing in them) but for bare antiquity; insomuch that a thing of this
nature, though it be quite worn, and eaten away, is sold among them for two,
and four, and sometimes for six thousand Crowns. And when Christians laugh at
them, for casting away so much money, upon such trifles, they laugh at us as
much, for buying stones and such other commodities at so dear a rate. For
their things, say they, are most of them for some use and service, ours serve
for nothing. And certainly they have reason to tax out error, but that they
are in the like errors themselves, and it falls out among us as with mad
men; that perceive well enough one another folly, but see not their own.

6. A third thing, All things are variable.
of far greater consideration is, that this small parcel of goodness, which is
in earthly things, is not permanent, but runs like a continual stream to
nothing which at first was the beginning of it. To which purpose Saint
Augustine says excellently well. S. Aug. 4. Conf. c. 10.
All things rise and fall; and rising, begin to be, and grow to perfection,
and when they are come to perfection, they wax old and perish. For all things
wax old and all things perish. Therefore when they rise and grow, the faster
they grow in being, the more have they make not to be: for so their measure.
And gives a solid and very plain reason, why their measure and fashion is so,
because every particular thing, being part of the whole universe, and the
whole, being a compund of things part, and things to come; some things must
needs give way that other may have place, and so the whole successively be made
up: for as when a man utters a speech, we cannot understand it all, unless
the former syllables and words pass, and others, and others come successively
after them, so if things were permanent in this world, they would hinder the
rest that are still to come after, and the whole, would not be complete in all
parts. And this is the greatest, and most intri^s^call defect, which all things
have that depend of time, that they pass away as fast as time it self; and
run hand in hand with it, full as speedily as it, though nothing be more
swift then time. S. Leo. ^. de (...).
Where upon Saint Leo gives us this good admo^^ion, that we make account of
all temporal things as if they were al ready past; and his reason is, because
the better part of them, is not; for that which is past, is quite gone; that
which is behind, is not yet come; that which is present is but a moment of
time. S Greg. 21. mor. c. 1.
And Saint Gregory says to the same purpose, that to place ones trust, in
things that pass away, is as it were to lay a foundation of a buylding upon
the running waters. God stands for ever, all other things pass away. What
therefore is it to fly from him that stands, but to cleave to that which
passes? For who was ever carried with the swelling stream of a swift river,
and could himself remain immovable, the water bearing him downwards. He
therefore that desires not to slide, must avoid that which slideth, least by
that which he loves, he be forced to come to that which he shunneth: for he
that cleaves to a shipperie thing, must needs slide with it, to the place
where that which he holds, goes. And he has the like saying in another
place of the life of man, which may be applied to any other thing. Id. 25.
mor, c. 2.
To live says he, with a necessity of dying, is as it were, to journey toward
death; for as many days as pass of our life, so many paces we draw nearer
the place intended in our journey. And the very adding of time, is a
diminishing of it, because the space of our life, which begins to be, begins
equally as much, not to be.

(...) 16.10.
7. And yet again, if this succession of things were to last any length of
time, people might have some comfort in the term they had in them. But alas,
how short, and unsettled, is this term! How suddenly is it ended? yet a
little while, says the Prophet, and the sinner shall not be. And in another
place. Man is like grass, (...) 102.11. ^ac 4.14. John 1.13. S Greg. 15 m^r. 24
his days l^ke the slower of the field, so shall he perish. And S. James
compares man's life to a vapor; Job calls it a point. Upon which place S.
Gregory writes thus. The whole length of time, of this present life appears
evidently to be but a point, when it comes. For whatsoever could have an end,
Was but short. And that we might not think that he speaks only of them, that
are taken away by untimely death in the prime of their youth, he repeateth the
same more expressly elsewhere in these words. (...) 5. mor. c. 2.
If we look back, from the beginning of mankind to this very time, in which
now we live, we shall quickly see, how short it is, seeing once it could have
an end. For if there were a man that having been created the first day of the
world, had lived till this very day, and this days should make an end of his
life that seeme^ so long; behold the end is come; that which is past is
nothing, because all is gone, that which is to come in this world, is also
nothing, because he has not a moment more to live. Where then is that long
time contained betwixt the beginning and ending! It is consumed as if had never been.

Every thing uncertain.
8. Which incommoditie, has yet a greater, to wit, that this small pittance of
time, which nature has allotted, to the things of this world, is uncertain.
Every thing is subject to so many chances, and adventures, that most commonly
in the midst of their course, they give us the slipp. By nature they are so
brittle, that every little encounter breaks all to pieces, as i^ they were
ma^^ of glass. The chances are so many, and so frequent in the world, by
roberies, tempests, war oppression of great men, and infinite other
accidents; that it is not conceauable how easy it is, for every thing to
perish, and to be changed from one to another. But easyly may be seen, that it
is the hardest thing in the world, to keep any thing long. Which S. Bernard
expresses in a homily which he made of the deceitfullnes of this life in
these words. S. Bernard (...)
Men take pleasure in meat, they take pleasure in pomp, and pride, they take
pleasure in riches they take pleasure also in vice, and time. But sorrow
enters upon the latter end of this joy and pleasure, because the pleasure
which we take in a thing that is changeable, must needs change, when the thing
is changed. We light a taper; it is not the pure element of fire, but a torch'
a taper, and the fire it self consumes that which feeds it, and is not fed,
but by consuming, and as the matter comes to an end, the fire also fails. As
therefore smoke, and darkness, waytes upon the end of that flame, so the
pleasure of every joyful thing, ends in sorrow. Thus says S. Bernard
excellently well. specially that all these temporal things, are so very
unconstant, that they are not only subject to be taken from us by external
violence: but decay suddenly by the very use of them, and fall away, by little
and little, through our fingars, while we handle them, as meare and drink, and
apparel, stately buyldings, and the like, how can therefore that long continue,
which is continually eating out it seize.

9. Which was the ground as I take it of an answer which S. Macarius of
Alexandria is reported to have made to a certain Tribune. For passing the
river of Niles with another Macarius, and being both of them but poorly clad,
and in fashion somewhat contemptible, and two Tribunes pass^ng in the same
boat, richly apparelled in cloth of gould, with a great train of horses and
followers. One of the Tribunes spying the two servants of God sittling in a
corner of the boat, said unto them. You are happy that make a fool of the
world. It is true said S. Macarius. S. Macarius.
We make a fool of the world, and the world makes fools of you. With which
short and saddaine replye the man was so stricken at heart, and his
understanding so enlightened, that when he came home, he presently made away al
he had, S. Bernard ser. (...).
and betook himself to Religion, perfourming that which S. Bernard advises in
a certain place, saying. It is better to fors^k^ the world, then to be
forsaken by it. And penetrating the truth of that which S. Gregory delivers in
his moralls. S. Greg 18. mora^. 12.
We cannot long remain with the things which we have, for either dying we
leave them, or they perishing do as it were leave us, while we live.

10. But let us suppose the goods of this world were great, The manner of
enjoying the creatures of this world is but base.
and certain, and long to be enjoyed, is the use and possession of them in
that fashion in which we have them, a matter much to be esteemed? For if we
enter duly into the manner of it, we shall find that all the joy we have in
them, is by means of our five senses, which are common to beasts, and wherein
many beasts go far beyond us. And consequently the manner of enjoying them is
but base and infirm, and the joy we have in them but very small For our sight
only takes pleasure in some, as in pictures, and images, and the beauty of
feildes and woods. In some, out taste; some serve for nothing but to be kept
locked up in chests. Others are so far from the owners reach, that they can
never set eye, or lay hand upon them. Moreover in things for example which
please the palate, it is the savor only, which gives contentment: if there be
any thing else in them, it is in a manner lost, and consequently we never
thoroughly enjoy any thing. For in other things, the smell only is for use, in
others the color; and so if we pass through al, we shall find that we enjoy
the least parcel of them, which certainly is not to be bought at so dear a
rate.

11. Finally, The goods of this worldful of trouble.
to the end we may the better understand the nature of al these earthly things,
and enter into a deeper contempt, and hatred of them, we shall do well to
consider, that the small uncertain good, which by the guist of God, is in them,
is alwaise beset with so many troubles, and mingled with so many evils, that
are far greater then the good which they present us with; that the pleasure,
which a man takes in them, can never be full and perfect, but is allwaise
necessarily clipped, and abated in many things: We might prove this by many
occurrences, which happen daily in the life of man before our eyes, but I will
content my self, with one passage out of an epistle of S. Berna^d to Sophia a
noble lady, S. Bernard epist. ad Sophiam.
of the deceiptful glory of this world, where having first discoursed of the
shortness of it, he says further of the very continuance which it has, in this
manner: The very permanency of it, such as it is, has it not more trouble then
pleasure? while you lay claim to your own; while you stand defending of it;
when you envy, when you are jealous; when you are continually hunting after
something which you have not, and the desire of having, is never quenched by
that which you have gotten; what rest do you find in your glory? If there be
any; yet the pleasure soon passes, never to return; the trouble remains,
and will never leave you.

12. But nothing does more plainly discover the natural condition and qualities
of every Creature, The greatness of God best shows the baseness of Creatures.
and show us more evidently how base imperfect al of them are, then if we
compare them with their Creator. For as a poor country fellow^ borne and
bred in some out village will ever think his cottage, and his clout^,
something, til he come into a City, and there behold the state and
magnificence of the Nobility in their buildings, and retinew, and al other
things: so as long as a man rests in these inferior things, he shall never
arrive to the perfect knowledge of them. But if we desire to see thoroughly
into them, we must raise our selves to the consideration of the greatness and
majesty, and infinity of God. For if the whole earth, as I insinuated before,
be but a point in comparison of the heavens, and the heavens themselves, if
they were as many more, and more vast then they are, were yet far less then
a point, in respect of God, what is the earth in comparison with God? And if
the whole earth be nothing, compared with God, what is a small parcel of the
earth, or a handful of money, or any thing else that can be named?

Creatures in comparison of God are not.
13. Wherein we may consider moreover the existence of every thing, and the
manner or measure of their being in this world; For doubtless they have so
poor and so weak a consistence, that they are ever nearer not being, then
being; specially if we set the being of God, and the ever permanent existence
of his Divine essence in comparison with them. In regard of which excessive
distance, Job says of God, Job. 14 4. S Greg. 16. mor. 18.
He only is. Which S. Gregory expounds in these words. Are there not Angels
and men, heaven and earth, sea, and land, the air and al flying foul, four
footed beasts, and such as creep upon the earth? Al these things are; but
principally they are not, because they subsist not of themselves: and unless
the hand of God, that governs them, do maintain them, they cannot be. Exodus
3 14.
Wherefore in all things he is only to be regarded, who is principally; and he
that said to Moses, I am, who am: so thou shall say to the Children of Israel,
He that (...), has sent me unto you. Al which put together, will easily
persuade a man of reason and judgment, that not only one field, or one house,
or any private man's possessions (which are often but small in every bodies eye)
are not much to be valued, or rather to be accounted in a manner nothing; but
that the whole world, with all that is in it, or if it were possible that there
were worlds without number in one man's possession, are al of them nothing, and
as such to be contemned.

WHEREIN TRVE HONOR AND nobility does consist. CHAP. II.
THIS ground supposed, it will be easy to understand, wherein true Nobility does
consist, and what makes a man truly honorable. Commonly men think it is wealth
or preferment, or greatness of descent which makes them honorable, S Grego^^^
mo^^^
because, as S. Gregory teaches, people shut their eyes to internal and
invincible things, and feed themselves only with things visible. And therefore
they respect a man not for that which he is, but for that which is about him.

H^ things are to be valued.
2. This error may be easyly laid open, and confuted if we do but consider
that we value al other things by that which is in them: Who esteem of a house,
as it is most fit for habitation; of an ox, or a horse, as they are most
seruiceab^^, either for the plough, or for the race, or saddle; and so in
smaller things, we commend a sword, or a knife if they be for the use, for
which they were made. What folly is it then, to honor man only for things
which are, without him, and far inferior to himself, and less deserving
honor? For wealth, apparel, a good house and such like, are not only outward
but inferior to man, and consequently far from adding any honor, or
ornament unto him. And in fine, both the good which is in them, is small, and of
mean value, and not for a man to glory in, seeing himself is greater and more
noble. And secondly, be it what it will, it is wide of him that possesses it.
For as it were a ridiculous thing for me for example, to brag of your learning,
or you of mine; just so it falls out with them, that brag of their gold, and
silver, and possessions. For that which is good or glorious in these things,
belo^gs to the gracing of the thing it self, and not of man. For that which S.
Bern. says truly of one kind, S. Bernard epist. 11 ^.
may be applied to al. Esteem it an unworthy thing, to borrow beauty of
mousefurre, or of the labors of worms. The true ornament of every thing is
that which is in it of it self, nothing else."

3. Wherefore the qualities of the mind, Wherein nobility consists.
only are the proper ornament of mankind, and only able to give a man true
honor, and worth. These are his own, and stick by him, and are great indeed,
and deserve accordingly, to be highly esteemed of every body. S Ambrose lib de
Noe 4.
Which S. Ambr gives us to understand in the example of Noe, in the book which
he wrote in praise of him: po^dering how, in the holy Scripture he is commended,
not for Nobility of descent, but for Justice and perfection. The descent of a
good man, says he, is the progeny of virtue? For as men descend from men, so
the lineage of souls is virtue. S. Hierom says as much in other words. S
Hierom. ep^st 14.
Our Religion has not respect to persons, nor stands upon the natures of
men; but considers every ones mind. It judges a man to be of noble, or
servile condition by his manners: Not to be a slave to time, is the only
liberty with God, and the greatest Nobility, is to be conspicuous in virtue.
For otherwise a man does but in vain glory of the nobility of his descent,
seeing all that are redeemed with the same blood of Christ, are of God equally
prized and honored. It makes no matter, in what state a man is borne, seeing
al are equally regenerated in Christ.

4. This was the sense and opinion of holy Fathers, as we find by what they
have left written; and a Christian that has good grounds whereby to discern
what is truth and what is falsehood, what is vain, and what is solid and
substantial, can think no other. The answer which S. Agatha virgin and martyr
made to Judge Quintian was pertinent in this kind. For he casting it in her
teeth, as a disgrace, that being horn as she was of noble parentage, she was
not ashamed to lead the base and servile life of a Christian? She replied,
that she esteemed it the greatest freedom and honor that could be to be the
handmaide of Christ. And certainly, as I said, it behooves al men to be of
the same mind, Christians especially.

5. That we find the like delivered by heathen writers, is much more to be
admired: And yet Plato in his dialogues of a common weal discourses after
this manner. Plato dial. 5. dereg.
Next after God we must honor our own mind: but it is no true honor, if
puffed up with a foolish opinion of our selves, we commend our selves, or let
our mind do whatsoever it has a fancy to; much less if we give our selves
over to pleasure. For this were rather to affront it, and fill it full of
mischief and repentance. Neither does he honor his mind, that esteems this
life to be any great good thing, because he also does disgrace and defile it.
Nor he, that prefers corporal beauty before virtue, or heapeth rich^^
unjustly. Al these do lavish that which in the mind is most beautiful, and most
honorable, for a small and idle gain: because all the goods of the earth, or
under earth, cannot equal virtue only. And consequently the only true honor is
to follow that, which is upright and honest.

Arist (...)
6. Aristotle does not only deliver the self same more exprestly, but adds
the reason, why most men are mistaken in their judgment, touching this point.
He says, that honor is only due to virtue, as a reward thereof, and a reward
nothing answerable to it, but far short of it. Because no honor is great
enough for perfect virtue. Also that every thing that is excellent in goodness,
deserves honor; and because commonly people take nothing to be good, but that
which is outward, as nobility of descent, riches, command, and the like; they
honor them more, as men excellent above others, in whom they find these
things. But in truth an honest man only, is he that is to be honored, and they
that have these other things without virtue, deserve no honor; though the
practice be otherwise in such as put themselves forward in the world, and think
because it outward appearance they are great, that therefore they are truly to be
preferred before others.

T^^ee difference of natures.
7. And besides the authority of Aristotle and others, there is an other reason
which is very plain and evident. For as we see God has created three
differences of natures in this world; on consisting of spirit, and
understanding only, as the Angels. One wholly corporal, as beasts. One of a
middle composition betwixt them both, or rather containing them both, which is
man: who has flesh as beasts; and spirit, and understanding as the Angels.
And consequently man performs the functions of both natures, understanding
things, considering their beginning and causes, remembering that which is past,
forethinking that which is to come, as the Angels do; and eating, drinking,
sleeping, greeuing, breeding, growing, increasing, dying as beasts, so that
placed as it were in the middle betwixt them both, that way which in the course
of his life and behavior he bends himself, to that nature, he does become
most like. If he take the path of sense and sensual or carnal pleasure, he
becomes a very beast, which is that which the Prophet says. Ps. 48.1^.
Man when he was in honor did not understand, he is compared to the foolish
beasts, and made like unto them. If he govern himself by reason, and
suppressing desires of the flesh, follow that which is spiritual, be becomes
not only like the Angels, but like to God, and increases more and more the
true resemblance of him in himself, Ps 81 6. Romans 8.
according to the testimony of the same Prophet. I said you are Gods.
Wherefore there is as much difference betwixt one that lives according to the
flesh, as the Apostle speaks, and one that liuech according to the spirit, I
do not say, as there is betwixt a Porter and a King (for though this distance
be great, it is still within compass of the same nature) but as there is
betwixt a beast and an Angel. Nothing being more contemptible then the one,
nothing under God more honorable then the other.

8. Wherefore we must needs conclude, that true worth, true Honor, true
Nobility, consists in virtue only; Which whosoever does not understand, has
not eyes to be hold the glory of virtue. S. (...) 1.
And that which S. Gregory says proves true in such a man. That carnal
people though for humane wisdom they seem to be reasonable creatures, want
the light of live reason; because they see only with the eyes, which the
serpent opened. For says he, if they saw the spiritual glory of virtue,
doubtless they would covet to have it within them, as well as other qualities.

OF THE DIGNITY OF Religious Poverty. CHAP. III.
EVERY virtue that a man does thoroughly practice, does beget him in the eyes
and opinion of other men great admiration, and people are in a manner forced to
love him, and respect him for it. And the rarer, and more excellent the virtues
are, and more hard to compass, Virtue naturally breeds love and admiration.
they work this effect of love and admiration more forcibly: because as their
beauty and splendor is greater, so they draw peoples thoughts the more to
admire them. In which number doubtless the virtues proper to a Religious
state, ought to be ranked, as truly innobling those that possess them.
Wherefore we will say something of every one of them in particular. And first of
Poverty; which as Saint Ambrose tells us: S. Ambr. l. 5. in Luc.
Is the foremost in degree, and as it were the Mother of other virtues.

2. Of the benefit, and commodity of Poverty we have discoursed sufficiently
in the precedent book; here we are to speak as I said, of the dignity of it.
Which we shall come the easier to understand, if we first suppose, that we talk
not here of Poverty, which is forced upon a man by necessity, or by some
sudden or violent accident* for such Poverty is base and sordide, and odious
among men, and not without reason; because seeing it is not voluntary, it
deserves no commendation; and being subject to many inconveniences from abroad,
it has no inward comfort at home to solace it: it quenches not the desire of
having, but inflameth it; it is so far from bringing quiet and contentment
with it, that it rather breeds nothing but care, and anxietie and anguish of
mind.

3. Euangelical Poverty, The excellence of Religious Poverty. Philip. 3.9.
which is that, which Religious people profess, is of a far other strain;
for it is voluntary, willingly undertaken, willingly undergone and borne:
Though it might have riches, and whole mountains of gold, it esteems al as
dung with the Apostle, for the love of God, and hope of heavenly treasure; and
setting al things at naught, is seated above all, and after a strange manner,
possesses al, by treading al under foot. They that profess it, cast away, not
only that which is superfluous, to bring themselves to the state, Pro^. 30.^^
of which the wiseman speaks; Give me neither riches nor Poverty, but grant
me only things needful for my sustenance: but they deprive themselves of
necessaries, and put themselves into a perfect kind of nakedness of al things.
They part not with few things only, or with many (which yet were very
commendable, and much to be admired) but they forsake al, they bereave
themselves of every kind of thing, and that for ever.

4. A man would think, this were enough and that no more could be added,
because he that says al, excludes nothing; and yet in Religious Poverty,
there is something, which is yet more to be admired, viz. that not only they
have nothing, but have put upon themselves upon such terms, as absolutely they
can have nothing, and have cut off from themselves, both al dominion, and the
very power of ever returning to have any dominion over any thing. Divines are
wont to declare this point by a familiar example of a laboring beast, which
expresses it very naturally. For as a horse for example, uses the stable and
hay, and litter, and clothes, and such like, and cannot be said to possess
any of them; because he has not understanding and reason, which is the ground
of dominion, but is himself possessed by man. So Religious people use the
clothes, and the meat, and other necessaries which be in the house, but they
use them not as their own: they have but the bare use of them, and cannot say
they are masters of any thing; because by the vow of Poverty, which they
make, they are altogether as incapable of true and lawful Dominion over any
thing, C^ss. lib. 4. c. 15.
as the horse I spoke of. And that which Cassi^s commended in the Monks of his
time, is common to all: They durst not say any thing was theirs, and it was a
great fault to hear a Monk say, my book, my paper, my garment. What more
perfect Poverty can there be? or to what higher strain can it rise?

Voluntary poverty is rare.
5. The difficulty which does accompany it, does not a little commend the
Excellency, and dignity of it. The difficulty I say, which both the nature
of the thing it self, does at the very first sight offer to our eyes, and which
may be gathered moreover, by the scarcity of this kind of pearl, for so I may
justly term it. Blessed is the man says Ecclesiasticus, who is sound without
spot, and has not gone after gold, nor hoped in treasure of money: who is he,
and we will praise him! for he has done wonders in his life. He asks who is
he? as if none were to be found; and gives this high commendation to a man,
that desires not wealth, nor labors for increase of his riches, and is not
continually hoarding: but Religious people go higher; for they cast away that
which they have, and bring themselves to the perfect nakedness, which I spoke
of, and consequently that which they do in their life, is a far greater
wonder.

Incitements of Covetousness in the world.
6. But let us consider a little how many ways the desire of having is subject
to be inflamed in this world: for when we shall find that Euangelical Poverty
does bar all those ways, and subdue so many fie^y Enemies, we shall S. Aug.
2. Con^^ss. c. 6.
which Saint Augustine deriueth from the likeness which we have with God, so
deeply imprinted in us, that eue^ when we sin, we retain a resemblance of
him: for as God has all things, so man desires to resemble him, by having as
many as he can. The beauty of the things of this world much whetteth our
lives; because it takes away the helps, by which life is maintained. So that
naturally we hate and shun Poverty, almost as much as we tender our own
life, the love whereof, commands all other loves, as every body feels in
himself.

7. If we add the point of honor, which men are so naturally taken with, It
is a sign of a noble heart to contemn riches. Ni^u^ lib. ad magna.
and how resolute a mind, must in needs be that spurneth and treads under
foot at once, all that which nature so much desires, and is taken with: and
co^trariewise does so lovingly embrace that which men by nature do so much
abhor? To which purpose Blessed Nilus as ancient Father, has a divine
saying, commending the excellency both of Poverty and Chastity, in regard, as
he speaks: beautye and riches are much alike desireful, and it must be a
resolute mind that is not taken, with either of them. But they that have
undertaken to possess nothing are worthyly much more to be admited, because
the esteem in which riches are held, could take no hold of them, nor bring
them to entangle their mind in such idle cares. For though there be many
things in this world pleasing to sense, which easily entice a man unto them,
yet riches are much more forcible in this kind, because they are so useful
both for attayning of honor and pleasure; and because long custom has taught
fools to account them happy that are rich, in regard of the glory and pleasure
they live in. They therefore are worthyly to be esteemed rare men, that striving
with themselves, have overcome the thoughts of their mind, moving them to
yield to the opinion, which the vulgar has of riches, as if they were truly
good, and which in the judgment of all men are thought to be of high esteem.
These are the very words of Nilus.

7. It cannot therefore be denied, but that to be voluntarily poor, is a token
of a noble spirit and of a high mind, soaring above whatsoever is in the world,
and contemning it as base and abject. To hunt after riches is an unworthy
thing. Saint John Chrysostom. Homil. vlt. in Ma^^h.
And yet it is the more to be admired and valued, in regard it freeth us from
all that base unworthiness, which they are necessarily subject unto, who seek
after wordly wealth: S. John Chrysostom in his last homily upon Saint Matthew,
does lay it before our eyes in this excellent comparison: A rich man must
needs want many things, and be a slave and basely stand in awe, and in
suspicion, and in fear of those that have their eyes upon him, and of their
tongues that speak their pleasure, and of the very desires of others, that are
Covetous. But poverty not so; For this is a princely palace, not subject to
thieves, but strongly guarded, Id. Hom. 47 in Matthew.
a quiet haven; an Academie and school of wisdom. And elsewhere more
copiously he speaks thus. If thou look into the very soul of a man that
loves money, thou will find it all boared full of holes with care, as a garment
that is eaten up by ten thousand moathes; rotten with sin, and full of iron
molles. In the soul of him that is voluntarily poor, it is far otherwise; it
rather glittereth like gold, shines as precious stones, and is as beau^iful as
a Rose. There is neither moath, nor these, nor worldly care to be seen; but in
his conversation he is he is not bound to attend upon any earthly prince, but
wayteth upon God. He serves not in the rank of men, but of Angels: earth is
not his treasure, but heaven: the wants no attendance, but rather has
servants, and possessions, and thoughts that are lords of al things. What is
more noble then such a poor man? But he has neither horses nor coach; what
need has he of them, that must walk upon the clouds and be with Christ?

Voluntary Poverty possesses all things. 2. Cor. 6.10.
8. A great Commendation certainly of Poverty, proceeding from so great a
Saint; but that which S. Paul comprizeth in one only word is yet far greater.
Having nothing and possessing all things. Whose words if we credit (and who
i^ there that will not give credit to the Apostle, unless he be extreme
ungodly?) Nothing can be more magnificent then poverty, as claiming possession
of the whole wo^l^, for what mass of wealth, what extent of Kingdoms can be
matched with it? Al Kingdoms though they be large, are confined within
certain limits; but the Kingdom of poverty has no bounds; by only having
nothing, it has all things and is in possession of all, for the whole business
consists in the mind: the mind cannot be possessed of a thing, All is in the
mind.
unless it be master of it; it cannot not be master unless it be above it;
the more it is above a thing, the more master it is, and does the more truly
possess it. Now they that covet to be rich, cannot but love the things,
without which they make account they cannot live: of love comes care and
solicitude, and consequently the man is a slave unto them. Contrariwise the
mind that has shaken off these things, is not only above them, but does
scorn them. Clima^us grad. 18.
Whereupon Clima^us does ground that grave and lofty saying of his: that a
Poor Monk is Lord of the world* and he that has cast his care upon God, by
that confidence, does possess all nations, as his vassals. And adds; that a
poor servant of God, loves nothing disorderly: for he makes account of that
which he has, or may have as if it were nothing; and if it b^e his fortune to
leese it, he esteems it as dung. To which purpose also S. Bernard applies
excellently well, as he does always that which was spoken of the only begotten
(to use his own word) to al his brethren; S Bernard. S. 2. in Cant.
If I be exalted from the earth, I w^ll draw all things to my self. For all
things, Io. 12.32.
says he, are not only added but made subject unto them, if naked of all
earthly things, they be exalted far above them. Let not therefore the rich
men of this world imagine, that the Brethren of Christ possess only heavenly
things, because they hear him say, blessed are the poor of spirit, for
theirs is the Kingdom of heaven. Matthew. 5.
Let them not think that they possess heavenly things only, because they
hear no other named in the promise. They possess earthly things also, 2.
Cor. 6.
As having nothing and possessing al things, and are the more masters over
them, the less they covet them. Finally to a faithful man the whole world is
his wealth; absolutely all the world, because al things, adverse and
prosperous, are equally subject unto him, and turn to his good. A Covetous man
hungers after earthly things, as a beggar; the faithful contemnes them, as
Lord. He possessing them, goes a begging; the other contemning them, is in
possession of them. This is S. Bernard^ true and elegant discourse.

God is the (...)
9. Another thing wherein this kind of poverty may justly glory, is that whereas
no body is so well provided of earthly wealth, but that sometimes he wants, o^
at least may come to want something which he would have. He that is voluntarily
poor, cannot possibly want any thing that is needful for him, in regard that
God through his divine providence, has undertaken to provide for him, and to
maintain him. Ps. ^^.11.
The Royal Prophet tells us as much. The rich, says he, have been in want
and hungered, but they that seek after our Lord shall not fail of any good.
Where-vppon S. Chrysostom. in one of his homilies, S. John Chrysostom. hom. 57. ad
pop.
does reckon this also, among the cheifest commodityes of a Religious life,
that God feeding us, as he speaks, we should not need to take thought for
any thing. For as if a king promise thee thy diet, out of his provision and
store, thou do fix upon it; much more does it befit thee to lay aside al
care and solicitude, being God does provide for thee, and al things flow unto
thee from him, as water does from a fountain. For if he feed al flesh, much
more those who have consecrated themselves unto him. Which observation of S.
John Ch^^sostome has not only relation to the profit, and quiet of mind,
arising of poverty, but to the worth and glory of it, whereof we speak. For
what greater glory can there be, then to have such a steward (as I may say)
of our household, Job. 9.13.
and him to make our provisions for us, who is Lord of Angels, in the heavenly
court, and under whom they stoop that bear the world.

1^. But nothing does so much grace the state of Euangelical poverty, The
example of our Savior who was poor.
as the example of the Son of God, Wh^ (as the Apostle speaks) when he was
rich, was made poor for v^: and not only poor, but a very beggar. For that
which is in the Psalm, is more truly our Saviors speech then Dauid's: I am a
beggar and poor. He chose a Mother that was poor, 2. Cor. 8.9.
and he that was thought to be his Father, was a silly Carpenter: Ps. 39.18.
he would not be borne in any man's dwelling house, but in a stable, that was
none of his own: His life was according; for as himself is witness. The
foxes have their dens and the birds of the air their neasts, Matt. 8.10.
but the son of man had not where to lay his head. Finally he in whose
hand, are all the bounds of the earth, was not ashamed, to maintain himself,
and his, upon others Charity. What can we desire more? For neither would the
word and wisdom of God, that is, God himself, have chosen such a manner of
life, but that he knew, it was both noble and beseeming God: and though it had
been never so mean, and abject before, his only example is sufficient to
place it in the highest rank of honor, and nobility.

11. Following the example of our Savior, The Apostles were poor.
the Apostles were also poor. For what other thing was it fitting they should
learn in his school, but to imitate him? and how should they choose, but be
willing to imitate him, seeing he was their master, they his scollars; he
their Lord, they his servants? Wherefore the chief of them, Act 3.6.
professing this golden poverty, said: gold and silver I have none. 2 Cor.
11.27.
Another speaks thus of himself: In hunger and thirst, in cold and nakedness.
And of the rest of the Apostles: 1. Cor. 4 11.
even to this hour, we hunger and thirst and are nak^d. And al of them had
this rule given them: Matt. 10.9.
Possess not gold no^ silver, nor ^wo coats. Holy poverty therefore being
raised to such honor and dignity by the example of Christ, and his Blessed
M^ther, the Queen of heaven, and of his Apostles, al Religious people have not
only embraced it, as always exceeding profitable, but accordingly reverenced
it, as a thing divine. Of which number and persuasion, was that Isaac, of whom
S. Gregory relates in his dialogues: S. Gregor. 3. dial 14.
that when many large possessions where presented him, to the use of his
monastery, he could never be drawn to admit of them, because (as he
expressed) that he was as much afraid, to leese the assurance of his poverty,
as the Covetous man is careful, to conserve his fading riches.

12. The like we read in S. Antonine and others, of S. Clare, S. Clare.
Mother of many virgins: S. Anton 3. Ps. Hist c. 4.
that she loved al virtues, but was cheifely inamoured with poverty, and was
wont to say to her sisters, that her Co^uent or company, should remain firm
and impregnable, so long as it was deffended with the walls of Poverty. And
when she requested Pope Innocent the fourth, to grant her the perpetual
privilege (as she called it) of Poverty, the Pope being much taken with that
new kind of form of privilege, (t^ere never having been such a request as
he said, made before to that holy Sea) he did not only willingly grant unto it
but with a great deal of contentment to his mind, he writ the whole grant
with his own hand.

13. And it was no wonder that she was so great a servant of this virtue,
having been bred up in Saint Francis his school; S. Francis.
who did not only much please him self in the commodities of poverty, but did
highly honor and reverence it as a jewel of great price, and a state whereunto
no dignity in the world could be compared. Saint Bonauenture writes in his
life, S. B^nav^. in the life o^ S F^ancis.
that whenever he had occasion to speak of that virtue, he was wont with
reverence, to style it his Mother, his Spouse his Lady, and Queen; in regard
that by the king of kings, and by his blessed M^ther, the virgin Marie, it had
been so highly prized and practiced. If by chance he had espied a beggar in
the streets, that seemed more poor then he, his heart began presently by to
burn within him, with holy envy against that man, as if he had been out-stript
in a matter of great consequence. And again if he were invited to a
gentleman's table, as oftentimes he was; in the way as he went, he always
begged of the neighbors, from door to door some crusts of bread, which when
he sat down, at board, he took most delight to feed on. And once the
Cardinal of Ostia (he that was afterward Pope, and took the name of Honorius)
did friendly complain of him for it, telling him that being invited to his
table, he did disgrace his house with that practice. A notable saying of S.
Francis.
Nay, rather said the Saint I do honor your house the more with it: because
in doing it, I do honor a greater Lord then you, and I am fully resolved,
never to forgo this princely dignity, which my Lord Jesus did assume, when he
was made poor for us; to enjoy counterfeit riches for so short a time, as they
are lent us for our use.

14. Al other Saints also were doubtless of the same opinion; for they could
never have been saints, but by contemning the world, nor contemn the world,
but that this was their judgment and opinion of it. Let us hear what saint
Gregory Nazianzen speaks to this purpose, S Gr^gor (...)
and how he glories in this virtue. But they will vpbraid me, says he, with
the nakedness, and poverty which I profess. But these are my riches. In this
I do not only glory, but I am proud of it. For when my enemies object this
against me, me thinks they object that I tread his foot-steppes, who when he
was rich, was made poor for our sakes. And would to God it were lawful for me,
to cast off even these rags, which you see me wear, that naked, I might
escaspe from the briars of this world, which withhold and draw back those, that
are running toward God.

(...) honored voluntary Poverty.
15. But what wonder is it, that in the light of the Ghospel, Poverty should
shine so gloriously; seeing in the darkness of infidelity, it was so highly
prized: For though that kind of Poverty were ever odious, and contemptible,
which came by birth or necessity; yet voluntary poverty, and they that did
practice it, were always in great veneration among al nations. Aristides a
man much adored in Athens, lived in great poverty, was ever clad in a ragged
coat, and did suffer at home much cold and hunger. Whereupon when Callias a
near kinsman of his, and a moneyed man, was called in question, and cited to
the bar, among other things his adversaries laid to his charge, that he
relieved not the worthy Aristides. Aristides.
Callias perceiving by the muttering of the Judges, Plutarch (...)
that they were offended at it, went to Aristides, beseeching him to depose in
judgment, with how much, and how often he had offered to furnish him, and how
he had still refused al, saying, that he gloried more in his poverty, then
Callias in all his wealth. For says he, there be enough to be found, that spend
their great stocks in idle uses: sew that do stoutly bear the grieuances of
poverty; and that poverty is no disgrace, but in them that are poor against
their wills. Which when Aristides had delivered with great applause before the
judges, there was no man upon the bench, that did not much more envy Aristides
his rare poverty, the Callias his wealth.

16. Diogenes his penurious manner of living, Diogenes.
is also much renowned and admired; Kings and Princes often gracing his Tub
with their presence. And many other Philosophers are named in this kind.
Cra^is. S Gregor. Nazian. ora 30.
Particularly Saint Gregory Nazianzen relates of Crate^, that when he had
forsaken his possessions, being proud of it, and desirous that the people
should know, what a great fact he had done, gat up upon a high stal, and cried
out aloud, Crates has this day set Crates free. Which course he would not have
taken, but that himself was persuaded that to be voluntarily poor was a
glorious thing, and knew that generally the people thought so. S. John Ch^ys^st
l 2. adu^rsus v^^uperatoris vit. (...).
S. Chrysostom in his second book against the dispraysers of Monastical life,
does handle this subject at large, and very eloquently; and directing his
speech wholly to the Gentills, and Infidells, draws al his proofs from the
grounds of natural reason. There he compares Plato, with Dionysiu^ the Tirant;
Socrates with Archelaus; Diogenes with Alexander the great: and shows that
the one are far more renowned for their poverty, then the other for their
large dominions. And relates how Epaminondas the Thebean being called to
council, Epam^nondas.
and excusing himself, that he could not come, because he had that day put his
coat to wahing, and had never another to put on, was more renowned and
admired, then all the Princes that came to the meeting. Whereupon Saint John
Chrysostom does conclude, that the height of Poverty, does not only appear
by the light of the Ghospel, but by force of natural reason.

17. The truth of al which things, Voluntary poverty, not poverty.
being so clear and apparent, we must needs acknowledge also that this Poverty
cannot properly be called Poverty, but rather a wealthy state, abounding in
far truer, and greater riches, then w^atsoeuer, p^i^cely treasures, and
magazins. For to speak the truth of men, that are esteemed wealthy in the
world, their coffers are rich, but not themselves: Their minds are void and
empty, and as poor as I^h, always craving, as if they had little or nothing
to live on. And so the holy ghost in the proverbs, disciphereth them both unto
us, Prou ^3.7.
both the Euangelical poor, and the fasly styled rich, in these words. S.
Greg. hom. ^5. in Euang.
There is a man that is rich, and has nothing, and there is a man that is
poor, amidst many riches. Wherefore S. Gregory does rightly observe that our
Savior in the ghospel does not call these earthly riches, absolutely riches, but
deceitful riches. For says he, they are deceitful, because they cannot long
abide with us. S. Ambrose l. 3. epist. 1.
They are d^ceitful, in regard they fill not the emptines of our mind. The only
true riches are they which make us rich in virtue S. Ambrose also, handling
this matter with his wonted eloquence and copiousnes, and maintaining that
wisdom only, does make a wise man rich, has these words. He is truly rich
that in the eye of God is held so: in whose sight the whole earth is little,
the compass of the whole world is narrow: now God does account him only rich,
who is rich in eternity, and hoardeth not wealth but virtue. Do you not think
that he is rich, who has peace, and tranquillity, and quiet of mind; so far
that he desires nothing, he is not waued up and down by the storms of
cupidity, Phil. 4.7.
he is not weary of old things, nor seeks new; nor in the height of riches,
is kept always poor, by continual craving This is a peace which is truly
rich, and does surpass al understanding. Great therefore is the dignity and
splendour of Religious Poverty; Two kind^ Euangelilical Poverty.
and such as al princes and wealthy men of this world may justly envy at, if
they understood it right. I will conclude this chapter if first I declare
briefly that there be 2. kinds of Religious Poverty: (for it is a matter of
consequence to understand it) and both of them are very worthy in themselves,
and eminent in the way of Euangelical perfection. One kind of poverty
retains absolutely nothing at al, neither in private, nor in common: Which is
the profession, which first of al S. Francis undertook, and after him by his
example, S. Dominick and many others. The other kind of poverty retains
possession, of certain necessary revenues in common only, nothing in private:
which is that, which all the ancient Fathers professed: S. Benedict, Saint
Bernard, S. Bruno and S. Basil, the most ancient of all the rest: for their
Monasteries were not only endowed, with yearly rents, but with such ample
possessions, as the remaynder of them does testify their greatness to this day.
Tith^mius li. 1. de viri^ i^l. c. 1.
Insomuch that Tri^hemius is bold to say of his order, that if it were again
in possession of all that it formerly had, without doubt S. Benedict, as he
speaks, would have the third part of Christendom in his ^ands. Which can not
seem strange, to whosoever shall call to mind, the devotion of those times, the
mother of liberality toward God and his servants. Kings and princes did take
a glory in buylding great Monasteries, in the lands belonging to their crown
and patrimony, and in bestowing upon them, very large possessions. And if any
wealthy persons did enter into any of those religious orders (as there were
very many that did) they carried their wealth in with them, and no body said
nay, no body repined, or sued them upon it, but did rather willingly yeald them
al favor, and furtherance.

18. So we read in the life of Placidus, that it was S. Benedict his fashion,
not to suffer the goods of his monks; to be otherwise employed, but to the
maintenance of store of Gods servants. But to say nothing of many others, the
only possessions of this Placidus were so large, that he alone was Master of
great part of Sicilie, besides other things which he had: which is testified to
this day by the Register of them yet extant, which is able to amaze the reader
with the only length thereof. And S. Bernard does speak of it, S. Bernard.
in one of his Epistles, as of a wondrous thing. To this day, says he, the
land is showed, which is recorded to have been given with him, and for him.
That S. Augustine also did the like, S. August Ep. 109. Auth^n^. col. 1. ^o^st.
3.5. Illud and col. 9. Constable. 15.5. si qua.
may be proved by his own testimony, in an Epistle of his, to certain
Nuns; where he advises them to put that in common, to the Monastery, which
they enjoyed in private, in the world. From whence the constitution of
Justinian the Emperor sprung, ordering that the goods of them, that became
Monks, should, ipso facto belong to the Monasteries, where themselves were
Religious. By all which, it is evident that this kind of Poverty so much
practiced by the ancient Fathers, mirrours of sanctity and wisdom (no other
kind of Poverty being then in use) is not only void of al imperfection, but
was esteemed by them most perfect, and most convenient to be practiced.

19. S. Thomas, S. Tho. 1. con^ g^n^. 135. and 21. q. 188. (...). 7.
the cheef of Schoole-Diuines, does give us to understand no less; for
propounding the question in these terms: Whether, to have anything in common,
does diminish the perfection of a Religion? answers directly, that it does
not diminish it: but rather, that it may in some cases be better, and more
convenient so to do. And al other Divines agree in the same. For all is, as I
have said, not to have any thing in private to a man's self, though in common
there be something to be divided, Act 4.
according to the form prescribed by the Apostles, to every one as he has
need. This is the institution, so much commended by S. Hierome in the Monks of
his time, S. Hierome. Ep. 22.
in these words: No man can say, I want a coat, or a frock, or a mattresse. He
that gouernes them, does so distribute al things, that no man shall need to
ask. Every one has what is fitting for him. If any one of them begin to be
il, he is removed into a larger room, and cherished by the service of so many
elder Monks, that he shall not have evasion, to long for the delicacies that be
in Cities, nor want the careful affection of a mother.

OF THE EXCELLENCY of Religious Chastity. CHAP. IIII.
POVERTY (of which I have discoursed at large in the precedent Chapter) is
exceedingly graced, by the profession of Religious Chastity; And Chastity is so
much the more to be admired, by how much our body is dearer unto us then our
worldly wealth, and in itself more noble. Holy Scripture commends Chastity
with a kind of admiration: Sap. 4^.
O how beautiful is a chaste generation with clarity? It calls the^, that
lead a chaste life, beautiful, and glorious, because there is a kind of
grateful comelines belonging particularly to that state, elevated above the
strain of Nature, and in a manner Divine.

2. To the end we may discover it the better, S. Basil. de vera virginitato.
it will not be amiss, to consider, how our Nature was ordered from the
beginning, whereof S. Basil has a learned discourse in his book of true
Virginity, and lays this for his first ground, that God when he purposed to
furnish the earth, with living creatures; would not himself create them al
immediately of nothing, The natural inclination which man has ^o generation.
but making first a few of every kind, ordered that the rest should descend of
them, and be taken of them, as out of a kind of nursery or seed-plot. And least
in so necessary a work his creatures should be slack, whereas he had
distinguished them into two sexes, he gave either sex a strong inclination to
come together, to the end to breed of one another; which inclination is full as
strong in men, as in beasts; and for as much as concerns generation, there is
little difference betwixt them, but that to man there is a further ground to
enforce it: For the woman being taken out of the side of the man, God ordained
she should be subject and obedient to man, as part to the whole: and on the
other side, that he should bear particular affection unto her, and desire her
company, and as it were claim her as party of himself, with desire to be
again joined with her, and make two in one, and one in two, and so be two in
one flesh. And to the end the love betwixt them should be the greater, he made
woman of a soft and tender mould and disposition, apt to allure man's affection
by sight, speech, touching, and every motion; both to provoke man the more to
the desire of generation, and provide for the woman's infirmity; for she not
being able to defend herself without the help of man, God tempered both their
natures so, that the woman's frayltie might be supported by the strength of the
man, and man, though by nature stronger, should be delivered as it were
captive, into the woman's hands, by a secret violence, as a loadstone draws
iron to it. This is Saint Basil his discourse of the nature of man, as it was
first created by God, and ordered by his al-prouident Counsel.

The corruption by Original sin.
3. To which if we add the wound of Original sin, and the general informitie
and corruption of our whole nature by it, what shall we be able to say or think?
For that which Saint Bernard writes, is very true, that though al parts of our
body, have tasted of the Addition of Leuiathan, as he terms it, that is, of
the poison of Concupiscence, S Bernard s^r. 2. de Circum.
and the sting of intemperate lust, this part has most of al been taynted with
it, and rages more violently, and is more perniciously malignant by reason of
it: in so much, that it often bandeth in rebellion against al deliberation, and
whatsoever purpose of our will: which the Saint thinks, was the cause why
Circumcision (which was the remedy of original sin among the Jews) was
rather ordained in that part of the body, then in any other Wherefore seeing the
malignancie of this disease, and our weakness also is so great, Chastity is
above nature.
the assaults of the devil on that side, as upon the weakest part of our walls,
so hot and fiery, so many difficulties and skirmishes arising otherwise; what
extraordinary virtue, what solid constancy of mind must it needs be, which
in all these things is both able to abide the brunt, and go away with victory?
This strength, this ability does not certainly proceed from any ground of
nature, nor by our sole endeavor are we able to attain unto it, but it
descends from above, as the Wiseman professes when he says: Sap 8 2.
I know that otherwise I could not be chaste, unless God did give it. And S.
Basil in the book aboue-mentioned does acknowledge it saying: S Basil. supra.
It is natural to marrye, but to be chaste is a thing more excellent, above
nature, above the law, no where commanded by God, neither in the old Testament,
nor in the new; because God, would not subject the merit of so great a virtue,
to the necessity of a command, but leave it to be a special token of a noble
spirit, willingly of our own accord, not compelled by precept or iniunction,
to embrace that which soareth so high above nature.

4. Climacus calls this virtue of Chastity, Clima^u^ grad. 15.
an odoriferous virtue, and says excellently well, that it is supernatural, and
a glorious kind of abnegation of nature, Chastity an edo^iferous and heavenly
virtue.
whereby this our mortal and corruptible body draws near the nature of the
heavenly Spirits, which have no bodies. That he that lives chaste, cannot
attribute it, to any desert or endeavor of his own; because to ouercom
nature, is no easy business; but whenever we have the upper hand of it, we
must acknowledge that it comes from a higher power, because nothing is ouercom
but by that, which is stronger and greater then it. Which if we ponder duly, we
shall easily discover the dignity and excellency of this virtue of Continency,
and how it transformeth our mind and body, into a near resemblance of the
state of life, which the Blessed shall possess in heaven, after the general
resurrection; when we shall again be invested, with that which was truly out
body, and truly our flesh, 1. Cor. 15.44.
but then incorruptible and spiritual, and free from the base and ignoble
qualities which here hang upon us, which the Apostle calls natural, the
function thereof being the same with beasts, and particularly this power of
generation, which alteration in this kind our Blessed Savior expressed in two
words: Matthew. 22.30.
They shall neither marry, nor be married.

5. Wherefore they that perform this now upon earth, and endeavor here to
mayntaine their flesh holy and impolluted, live after a heavenly manner; as
Saint Cyprian writing to certain Religious women tells us in these words:
S. C^prian de habi^a Virg.
That which we shall be hereafter, you have now begun to be. Now in this world
you have attained the glory of the resurrection; you pass through the world,
without thought of the world; and perseuering chaste in virginity, are equal
with the Angels of God. Which words of S. Cyprian concerning the equality of
virgins, with the Angels, give us occasion to reflect upon a farther dignity of
this virtue, to wit, that it teaches us to live in mortal flesh, as if we were
as Angels, not in flesh. For to be in flesh, is of it self no un worthy thing;
but to do the commands of the flesh, and obey the lust thereof, that is
unworthy. Wherefore they that live spiritually, and perform not the desires of
the flesh, but constantly mortify the works thereof, they live as the blessed
Spirits that have no flesh. S. And^ros^li de Virg.
Whereupon S. Ambrose discoursing of a single life, speaks thus: It is not
contained within the bounds of nature; who then is able to comprehend it? or
who can express with words of nature that, which is above the strain of
nature? It brought from heaven that, which it imitateth upon earth: neither
without reason does it seek in heaven a form of living, having found itself a
spouse in heaven; surmounting the clouds, the air, the stars, the Angels,
it found the Word of God in the bosom of his Father, and entertained it with
open breast. And who would have let pass so great a Good, having once found
it? Finally it is not my saying only, they that do not m^rry, nor are given in
marriage, shall be like the Angels of God in heaven: Let no man therefore
wonder, if they be compared to Angels, seeing they are coupled to the Lord of
Angels, Cassian has the like discourse in no less eloquent terms. To dwell
in flesh, Cassian li. (...).
says he, to be compassed round a bout with brickle flesh, and not to feel
the motions of flesh, is as it were to go out of flesh, and pass the bounds
of nature. And therefore it is impossible for a man to raise himself with his
own wings, as I may say, to so lofty and so heavenly a reward, unless the
grace of God, by the gift of Chastity, pull him out of the earthly slough. For
by no virtue are men of flesh so properly equalized with the spiritual Angels,
by imitation of their conversation, as by the grace and merit of Chasti^y: by
which, living as yet upon earth, they are (according to the Apostle) Denizens
of heaven, possessing here now in mortal flesh, that which hereafter is
promised, S. Gr^g. N^z an. Him. in Matt (...) Jesus.
that the Saints shall have, when they have shaken off this fleshly corruption.
Let us hear S. Gregory Naz^anzen also (so great a Divine) speaking to the same
purpose. He says thus: You see the excellency and sublimenesse of this virtue
is such, as can hardly be conceived or apprehended. For is it not a thing
surpassing the frayltie of flesh, that that which is borne of flesh, should not
breed of flesh? Is it not evidently an Angelical kind of life, to be confined
in flesh, and not to live according to flesh, but to crow over nature? Flesh
blindes us to the world, reason rayseth us to God. Flesh holds us down,
Reason lifts us, and in a manner gives us wings. Flesh imprisoneth us, but Love
settes us free.

5. Wherefore unless we will wilfully shut our eyes, and not give way to
Reason, we must needs admire the great splendor of Chastity, which ranketh
us, not with Kings and Princes (an honor so much hunted after by men) but with
the celesti^al Powers and Principalities. S. Bernard ep 4^.
And yet S. Bernard steppeth a degree further, being bold to say, that he that
lives chaste, is to be commended above the Angels: And his reason is clear;
What is more beautiful, says he, then Chastity, which cleanses him that is
conceived by unclean generation, and makes a familiar friend of an enemy, a
man an Angle^ A man that is chaste, dissereth somewhat from an Angel, but in
happiness, not in ve^tue ^f the Angel's chastity be more happy, man's is more
heroical. Chastity is the only virtue, which represents unto us the state of
immortal glory, in this time and place of mortality, Chastity alone amidst the
solemnities of marriage, challenges as a glorious thing the life of that happy
country, where they s^al neither marry nor be married, giving us in earth a
taste of that heavenly conversation. Chastity preserves the frail vessel,
which we bear about us, which of en is in hazard of breaking, and preserves
it, as the Apostle spea^eth, to sanctification; and serves us as a most
odoriferous balsame, to keep our bodies incorrupted. It refraineth our senses,
it binds our members from loosse idleness, from corrupt desires, from the
rotten pleasures of flesh, I^^l 1.17.
that it be not with us, as we read of some, that they were as rotten as
beasts in their dung. Saint Chrysostom iumpeth with S. Bernard in the
commendation of this virtue; S. (...) de vi^g c. 79.
and expresses himself in these words: In what did Elias, Elizeus, John, true
lovers of integrity, differ from the Angels? Truly in nothing, but that they
were by nature mortal: as for the rest, if a man look narrowly into it, he
shall find them no otherwise affected, then those blessed Spirits: and that
their nature was of an inferior mould, turns rather to their greater
commendation. For to the end, that earth-dwelling and mortal men should, by the
strength of their endeavor, arrive to so great a virtue, with what fortitude
must they be endewed? S. Basil. l. de Virg.
What rare course of life must they necessarily hold? We may add S. Basil, who
in the book above mo^tioned of Virginity, discourses after this manner: They
that preserve themselves continent, are certainly Angels in corruptible flesh,
and do excessiuely honor the mortal life which they lead. They are Angels of
no mean rank, but most glorious, and most noble: they that are in heaven free
from the encumbers of flesh, preserve their integrity, because both by nature
and by their place, they are impregnable, seated near to the sovereign King
of al, our God. But the others upon earth, strive many years with the
pleasures and allurements of flesh, and by their continual endeauours
ouercoming the temptations of the Devil, with rare courage and constancy, live
in the sight of their Creator, in incorruption, equal in purity with the
Angels.

7. Thus you see how these holy Fathers extol Continency and Chastity to the
dignity of Angels Others lift it yet higher, Chastity makes us like to God.
and place it in the next degree to the Divine purity. Climacus amongst the
rest aduentureth to say, that Chastity is the nearest similitude, Clima^us
grad. 1^.
which man can possibly have with God: who as he is neither corporal, nor
corruptible, delights much in integrity, and incorruption: Contrary-wise the
Devils delight in dishonesty; and there want not wise men, that say, they
rejoice in no vice so much, as in that. But S. Basil goes more profoundly to
work. S. Basil lib. de virginitate.
Virginity, says he, is a rare and excellent thing: and to comprehend al in a
word, it makes a man most like to the incorruptible God. It proceeds not from
the body to the soul; but being properly in the soul, by the integrity
thereof, a thing most precious, our bodies also are preserved entire. The soul
receiving impression from the true Good, and from the desire thereof, is lifted
up to that Good, by the holiness of Chastity, as by a forcible wing, and so
endeavoring to serve and please the like with the like, that is, the
incorruptible God, with purity incorruptible, it leads the integrity of the
body, as a handmaid, to the service of the se^f same highest Good. And so the
saithful soul preserving itself pure and unspotted, from al kind of filth,
arriueth at last to have within itself, as in the finest cristal-seing-glasse,
the similitude of God; God himself by his many graces infusing his glory and
likeness into it, as it were by a most sweet stream or ray thereof.

8. What can be said more honorable, or express more clearly the dignity of
Chastity, then that from this dust and dirt of ours, it raises us to the rank
of Angels, and not Angels only, but to the likeness and similitude of God
himself? what will take a man with admiration, if this do not? what dignity will
not justly seem base and sordide, compared with this heavenly honor? This is
that great happiness, which was anciently so much desired by man, Genesis 3.
that the old crafty Serpent could find no other motive more forcible, to bring
our first parents to his bent, then to promise them, they should be as Gods.
But that, which was falsely promised by him, that could not perform what he
promised, and promised by a way, by which it could not be compassed, we by
Chastity do truly attain unto and firmly possess, doubtless the more solidly,
the more perfectly Chastity is grounded in us.

9. And because it is evident, by what has been said, that Religious Chastity
is in itself very excellent, we will consider a little, in what degeee it is
excellent above al other kinds of Chastity: as gold does not only differ in
kind from of other inferior metals, but some gold is finer then other some, by
many degrees. Religious Chastity compared with other kinds of continency.
A few things considered in the nature of Chastity will easily discover this
unto us. It is ordinary in every thing, that the more white, the more
beautiful, one more neat a thing is, the more foul and deformed is the spot
also that falls upon it: And so it is in Chastity; no virtue is more tender
then it. Aegidius one of the first companions of S. Francis was wont to compare
it to a Cristall-looking-glasse, which the very breath does slain. Others
compare the contrary inticements to a flame of fire, which always leaves some
mark behind it, greater or lesser, according as the flame does continue.
Nothing therefore can be worse for Chastity, then to leave it in a place, where
it may come by many rubbs and assaults, such as the world is. For it cannot be,
but as Cassian writes, Cassian lib. 6. c 4.
(not only out of his own dictamen, but delivering it as the sense of all
those ancient Fathers) that whosoever is in continual battle* though he
often give his adversary the foil, yet sometimes he must needs be troubled,
or also wounded. But Chastity guarded with the fences of Religion, and thereby
drawn out of danger of al earthly things, receives no such damage; for
either the darts of the enemy come not near it, or they leese their force
before, and so their stroke is without effect.

Helps in Religion to prefer ^e Chastity.
^0. Moreover Chastity in Religion finds many helps to preserve it self, and
particularly a spare diet, which Poverty does in a manner necessarily bring
with it. For that which S. Hierome delivers (an author certainly to be
credited) is very true. It is hard to preserve Chastity at a full board of
dainties. It has also another Antidote, of which the same S. Hierome writes
to Rusticus. S. Hierome epist. 47.
Love the knowledge of holy Scriptures, and the corruption of flesh thou will
not love. For where do people more frequently and more earnestly study the
holy Scriptures, and al other good things, then in Religion? It has humility
and obedience, two special helps, and so inward to the state of Religion, and
withal so present and efficacious a remedy of this disease, that none can be
either more wholesome or more at hand amongst those which God has left us. Of
the one Saint Bernard writes thus upon those words of our Savior, S. Bernard
sermon 1. omn. sanct.
Blessed are the meek because they shall possess the earth. By this earth I
understand our body, which if a soul intend to possess, if it desire to have
command over the members thereof, it self must needs be meek, and subject to
Superiors. For as it self is to the Superior which it has, so shall it find
that, which is inferior to itself. And therefore the soul that finds the flesh
rebellious unto it, must understand that itself also is not so subject to
Superiors powers as it ought to be; Of humility S. Gregory does often speak
in this kind, S. Greg. (...) c. 13.
and particularly in his Morals thus: The vnspot^ednes of Chastity is to be
preserved by preserving humility. For if our spirit be devoutly kept down
under God, our flesh will not unlawfully be lifted up above our spirit. The
spirit has the rule over the flesh committed unto it, if so be
notwithstanding, it acknowledge the duty of lawful subject on under God. For
if it prowdly contemn him that is the Creator of it, it is reason it should
be combatted by the flesh that is the subject. Thereupon that first disobedient
man, as soon as by pride he had sinned, he covered his naked parts; for by
reason he had put a spiritual disgrace upon God, he presently found the
disgrace of his flesh, and he that would not be subject to his Creator, lost
the right of command one^ his flesh, which before he ruled.

11. This is the armor, with which Religion does defend the most beautiful
flower of Chastity, not only perfectly, but with a great deal of ease and
sweetness. It uses watching, fasting, and disciplines, and the like
austerities, but these virtues of which I have spoken, and whereof Religion is
the proper seat, together with the warines and custody, which I mentioned
before, are the chiefest defense: by them it may easily, and without any great
trouble be conserved all our life time, free from the least corruption, and
wholly unspotted; the body chaste, entire, unpolluted, and (which is the
principal) the mind itself pure, innocent, undefiled. What can be more
honorable in this frail, and slipperie life? honorable certainly in itself,
yet the more to be esteemed, because it is rare, and a gift imparted by God to
few. Others through the heat of Concupiscence, do as it were fry in the furnace
of their own flesh: Daniel. 3.
they that have received this heavenly gift in the same furnace of flesh, be,
as anciently the three Children, attended by Angels, who love this virtue above
the rest; and are not only nothing annoyed by the fire of lustful
concupiscence, but feel a cool dewie wind blowing upon them, which does so
temper, and abate that parching heat, which is so general to al, that nothing
is more easy, or more delightful to them, then to live chaste.

12. Moreover in Religion, so soon as a body has obliged himself by solemn
vow to perpetual Chastity, the power of using not only al unlawful pleasure,
but even of Marriage, Religious people incapable of Marriage.
is so wholly cut off, that al Marriages are eue^ after utterly void, as if they
were contracted with a dead body; which gives no small addition to the dignity
of Religious Chastity: because if it be laudable to abstain from the
vnseemlines of tha^ pleasure, certainly the farther a body does withdraw
himself from it, the more laudable, and more glorious it is unto him. Now no
man can be farther off from it, then he that had bound himself to such a state
of life, wherein, though he would, he cannot use it. For that which we cannot
do by right, and lawfully, is truly impossible for us to do. Which is the
point, our Savior would give us to understand in the Ghospel, by the name of
those Eunuchs, which neither nature, nor art of man made so but themselves
made themselves Eunu^hes, for the Kingdom of God. Which, as it were foolish
and absurd to understand of the cutting of the body, so it is evidently to be
taken for voluntary continency, and not for every kind of continency, but
for that, which does not only bar the act, but does for ever cut of al power
to the act. The words of our Savior import as much; for he does not say, they
that do continually gueld themselves, which might perhaps be applied to such,
as with a settled resolution, to bridle themselves in this kind, should live
chaste; but he says: Qui se castrauerunt; They that have guelded themselves;
pointing at those that by once making a vow, have bereaved themselves of al
power of using any such act ever after. The excellency and dignity of which
thing is divinely declared unto us, by the Prophet Esaias, Esaias 5.6.5.
who being wholly ravished, with the splendor of the Ghospel, among other
commendations thereof, does also fall upon this, in these words. Let not the
Eunuch say; behold I am a dry tree, withered away, because this says our Lord
to the Eunuchs: They that shall have kept my Sabbaoths, and chosen that, which
I would have, and kept my, covenant I will give them a place within my house,
and within my walls, and a name better then Sons, and Daughters: I will give
the^ an everlasting name, which shall not perish. Who are these Eunuchs, to
whom this is said, and promised, but Religious people? They keep the Sabbath
of our Lord, always abstayning from the toylesome and serui^ works of earthly
businesses, and wholly attending upon God; they have made a covenant with God,
and confirmed it by Vow; they make choice of that, which God would have done,
because by the conduct of Obedience, they depart not a haires-breadth, from the
performance of his holy will. These men therefore, though they attend not to
generation, and have moreover bereaved themselves of the power thereof; have not
any reason notwithstanding to be sorry for it, or to esteem themselves
therefore barren and unfruitful, because in the house of God, they shall have
something, that is far better and more happy, then sons an^ daughters in
the world. Which, as S. Basil does discourse upon it, S. Basil. lib. de Virg
is not only to dwell in his house, but to be in that rank and place therein, as
shall far surpass all the splendor and dignity, which succession of children
might have brought them; And not only so, but, as S. Augustine adds, S.
August. (...) Vi^g 25.
they shall have a peculiar glory proper to themselves, and not common t^ the
rest, that live in the same house and kingdom; which therefore perhaps is
learned a Name, because by it they shall be distinguished from al other people.
Which glory, and eminent dignity, and happiness, no doubt but the Holie-Ghost
did also intend to express in that other passage of holy Scripture. Happy is
the barren, S^p 3.14.
and undefiled, and the Eunuch, that has not wrought iniquity with his hands,
nor thought mischeeuous things against God. The choice gui^t of faith s^al be
^iuen him, and a most acceptable portion in the temple of God. Who can think
that this most welcome, or (as it is here termed) most acceptable portion, is
promised to any other Eunuchs, then the Eunuchs of God, who have voluntarily
deprived themselves for ever of al delights of this nature, and not without
some trouble and difficulty, as it were, cutting away part of their body; so
that not without reason, God may be said to owe them a greater recompense of
future pleasure and delights divine. Wherefore it cannot be, but that the
honor and dignity of Chastity, must be very great, seeing it shines even in
that heavenly glory above the rest. And what may we think of the light and
sple^dour, which it has in the darkness of this world, seeing in that height of
glory and splendor of the Saints, it is so far from being obscured, that it
rather adds grace and brightness to their glory? we may justly make account
that this state of continen^ie is a most curious rich jewel, unknown a long
time upon earth, but brought from heaven by our Savior JESUS, and first
consecrated in his own and his Blessed Mothers flesh, then delivered to his
Spouse the Church, to the end that decked therewith, and her grace and beauty
highly set forth by it, she might be the more welcome and amiable, both to her
Spouse, and God her father. For as S. Hierome notes, In the old law there was
a kind of felicity, S. Hierome Ep. 22.
which called him blessed that had seed in Syon, and promise of riches. But
presently when the Son of God set foot on earth, he enacted a new law in his
own behalf, to wi^, that he that by the Angels was adored in heaven, should
have also Angels be r^ upon earth.

Of the dignity of Religious Obedience. CHAP. V.
IT follows that we speak something in brief, of the dignity of Obedience;
which though we should be less capable to understand by other means, the
example and judgment of our Lord and Savior Christ may be a sufficient
testimony of it; finding, as we do, that he did so highly esteem of it. For
as a man, that has no skill in jewels and precious stones, if he see another,
that is skilful, buy a stone at a high rate, and after he has bought it, be
very charie of it, and set greatly by it, cannot choose but think it was worth
his money: so in weighing the deserts of whatsoever virtue, but chiefly of this
of Obedience, we must not rule our selves so much by reason, as by the example
of him, who, as we know, was Wisdom itself, and could not mistake or be
ignorant of what he did. Christ our Savior valued obedience at a high rate.
Io. 6.38. Philip 2.8.
Now that he did value Obedience at a very high rate, is evident, because
whatsoever he did, or said, or proiected in his lifetime, though al other
virtues had a part in it, is notwithstanding in a manner wholly ascribed to
Obedience. For of himself he says, that he came down from heaven, not to do
his own will, but the will of his Father that sent him. And S. Paul ascribes
his whole life and death, and the particular manner of his death, wholly to
Obedience; He was made obedient to death, yea the death of the Cross. Finally
S. Bernard affirms, S. Bernard in Cant. ser. 46.
that he preferred Obedience before his life, choosing rather to die, then not
to obey. Obedience therefore must needs be a great virtue, or rather there is
something divine, and more then virtue in it; seeing the Son of God, the
sampler of perfection, he that came of purpose to put us into the way of
perfection, did himself so seriously practice it, and commended it to us, to be
no less seriously observed by us. S. Thomas 2.2. q 104* art. 1.
S. Thomas does give this manifest reason of the importance and excellency of
it; for as, says he, in natural things it was necessary, that the things
which are higher, should move the inferior by the abundance of natural virtues
instilled by God into them; so in humane government, good order did require,
that one should direct another, by force of authority and power communicated
by God; which direction depending of reason and will, is not executed but by
precept and command. Wherein, as the same Saint affirms, as the rule of our
actions is no humane thing, but the first rule of al is the Divine Will,
governing and ruling al other wills, whereof one is more near unto him then
another, according to the order which God himself has instituted. Which
discourse of S. Thomas does clearly discover unto us the nobleness of
Obedience, because it conioyneth our will and judgment entirely with God; in
which conjunction al perfection of men and Angels does consist. For neither
almsdeeds, nor preaching of the word of God, nor whatsoever austeritie (and
why should I stand to reckon up al particulars?) Martyrdom itself is of no
esteem nor merit, unless it have relation to the performance of the Will of
God. A comparison between Charity and Obedience.
Wherefore, as Charity is usually called the Queen of Virtues, Obedience
certainly is the next unto it, and resembles it very much in all things; for
both of them conioyne us with God; both of them make us to accept or refuse
that, which God desires or refuses: The difference is, that Charity works
in nature of a friend, Obedience in nature of a subject; so that, though the
manner be different the thing is the same, and the profit no less of the one
then of the other; and in it we see the excellency of Obedience, whereof we
speak, in regard that going through al our actions, it directs them by a
rule Divine, to wit, by the self-same rule, wherewith the actions of God
himself are directed. And what dignity can be greater in any creature? Upon
which ground, Divines do style Obedience the form or sampler of other virtues,
because the actions of al other virtues do aim at nothing else, but to perform
the commands of God.

It runs through al.
3. Whereunto we may add another excellency, to wit, that though it be a
peculiar virtue by itself, yet it has a general extent to al things,
comprehending whatsoever may happen in the life of man. For whosoever gives
himself wholly over, and subjected himself wholly to another man, reserueth
nothing at al, neither place, nor work, nor any employment, neither outward
nor inward business. So that, whether he be in action or out of action* whether
he remain still in a place, or be upon going; whether he undertake, or leave,
or alter from this business or the other; whether the matter be great or small,
he is absolutely obliged in all things, and true Obedience takes hold, and
seasoneth and perfecteth al. And comprehends al virtues.
And moreover al virtues concur in it, and, as it were, attend upon it, to
the perfecting of a most admirable piece of work, compounded of many gemmes
and precious stones. For no man can ever subject himself wholly to another man,
unless he be first greatly inflamed with the love of God, and have placed his
whole trust and confidence upon him; he must also have great and profound
humility, patience, fortitude, constancy, and al other virtues; for if
Obedience want any of them, it will quickly begin to halte, and suddenly
fail, and fall to the ground.

4. But nothing does show the excellency of this Virtue more, then the
consideration of the matter, to which it does extend itself; which al Masters
of Spirit assign to be threefold. Three degree of Obedience.
First, al outward things commanded by Superiors, the execution whereof
belongs to Obedience; which is the lowest and least part of Obedience, and of
itself very imperfect, and if nothing else concur with it, it is but such as
slaves and brute beasts have, which are ruled by outward force, but their will
does not concur thereunto. The second degree therefore is a step higher, and
comprehends the will, which as S. Gregory speaks, S Greg. 35. Moral. c. 10.
is killed and sacrificed by Obedience: For the will of the subject conspiring
with the will of his Superior, they are both perfectly conjoined together, or
rather the subject wholly casting off and rooting out his own will, has the will
of the Superior fully ingrafted in him, and is moved and wealded by it every
way, as if it were his own. The third and highest degree of this Virtue, is to
subject also our reason and judgment to the judgment of our Superiors; and
not only to will, but to think the self same thing with them, and esteem it
right, reasonable, and profitable, whatsoever they shall ordain; in a word,
that their only beck bear such an authority in our mind, that unless it be
apparently contrary to the known commandment of God, their judgment and
opinion do wholly swey ours, and lead it captive after it.

5. This is, Obedience a gift presented to God.
as it were, the feature and beautiful countenance of Obedience, which if men
could behold with their corporal eyes, they would be greatly inflamed with the
comely sight and noble aspect thereof. Obedience also is a gift presented to
the Divine Majesty; wherefore look how much the thing which is presented, is
justly to be valued, so much is Obedience to be prized. Now what has man more
worthy or more dear unto him, then reason and will? For to be a man, he must
have them both, and consequently love them as much as he loves himself. For if
naturally we love our flesh and bone, and the least parcel of them, so dearly,
that to preserve them we will take any pains; what affection must we needs
have to those higher parts, parts more noble, and more essential to the nature
of man? and so we find, that nothing is more natural to us, then to preserve
not only the powers of our will and understanding, but the very use and actions
of them. The proper act of our will, is liberty; the proper act of our
understanding, is to pass our judgment upon a thing. Wherefore every man
does so naturally and so violently desire to have his own saying, and his own
will, in every thing: which is more apparent, when (as oftentimes it happens)
the thing itself is but a trifle; but it pleases us to have it so, because we
will be free. If a thing be forbidden, the very forbidding of it does whet our
desire, for no other reason, but because, as I said, the sweetness of liberty
does of itself delight us. Wherefore seeing these things bear such swey in us,
the difficulty must needs be the greater in breaking the violent course of
them; and so much the greater, then in ouercoming any other natural
propension, by how much we are carried toward them by a more violent current.
If therefore we put al these things together, the greatness of the oblation
comprehending in it self so many things; the worth of these two things, which
we offer; the labor and difficulty, which is in offering; we shall easily
understand the excellency of Religious Obedience, and how far it does
surpass the bounds of Nature, seeing it cannot possibly be accomplished, but by
perfect ouercoming and subduing Nature. In which sense S. Gregory does
interpret that saying of the Wiseman; Prou 21.28.
The Obedient man shall speak victories; because, says he, while we humbly
subject ourselves to an other's voice, S. Greg. ^5, mor. c. 10.
we overcome ourselves within our hearts.

6. But that, which does show the magnificence of Obedience more then any
thing else, is, that not only things, which are evil, or such as are but meanly
good, but things very specially good, compared with Obedience, do leese of
their light and beauty as the stars in presence of the Sun. It is S.
Gregorie's saying (who in my opinion, among all the holy Fathers did best
understand, and (...) best declared the nature of every virtue) and he does
not intend to carry it by his sole authority, ^ Reg. 15.22. S. Greg. lib 6.
in lib. reg. c. 2.
but he proves it by holy Scripture: Better is obedience then sacrifice. You
may see, says S. Gregory, in what height of perfection the virtue of
Obedience is placed, the Prophet beholding it in a higher elevation, then the
divine oblations. And if we will follow the spiritual sense, Sacrifices have
relation to great austeritie of conversation; Holocaustes to the compunction of
a retired life. Better therefore is Obedience then Sacrifice; and to harken,
rather then to offer the fat of rams: because it is of far higher desert,
always to subject our own will to the will of another, then to pinch our bodies
by extremity of fasting, or to kill our selves by compunction, in a more
private Sacrifice. For what is the fat of rams, but an inward and oily
devotion? But yet Obedience is better, because he that has learned perfectly
to fulfill the will of his directour, does pass in the heavenly Kingdom those
that do fast and weep. Thus says S. Gregory.

The excellency of Obedience confirmed by miracles.
7. Finally, in my judgment, the greatness of the often Miracles, which have
been wrought by Obedience, are a most certain proof and evident confirmation
of the excellency of it. For as if a man do many things above the course of
Nature, we take it for a sign of great sanctity in him; so among virtues we
may use the same argument, and, as I may say, canonize them the rather, and
esteem them worthy of veneratio^, the more their gratefulnes to God has been
showed by miracles. But who can reckon the miracles, which have been wrought by
Obedience? Al books are full of them; especially the Lives of the ancient
Fathers, who have given good proof to the world, how highly this virtue is to
be esteemed. S. Paul, S. Paul.
disciple of great S. Antonie, is much renowned for it. For as he was greater
then his master, in the power of miracles, as to whom S. Antonie was wont to
send those that himself could not cure; so by S. Anthony his own confession
there was no other cause of it, but Obedience; which he was ever wont to point
at, as a pattern for others to imitate; and many notable facts of his in this
kind are to be seen upon record to this day. John.
John is also very famous in this kind, who being by his Abbot in jest bid to
bring a lioness unto him, taking it as spoken in earnest, did not only not
fear least she should fall upon him, but following her when she fled, and
crying after her in his Abbot's name to stand, took her, and brought her bound
to the Monastery. What shall we say of him, that by command of his Abbot cast
his son into a burning furnace, and took hi^ out again whole and found? He
certainly imitated Abraham, in offering his son; but in the greatness of the
miracle he went beyond him, when he received him safe again. An other John for
3. years together watered a dry stake every day, as he was commanded, and
fetched his water a great way of: At last it bore green leaves and fruit,
which his Master gathering brought to the church, and said to the Brethren:
Behold the fruit of Obedience. No less wonderful is that, which Climacus
records of a young man called Innocentius. This man in his lifetime was much
devoted to the virtue of Obedience* and after his death and burial, being
called upon and asked whether he were dead or no, he answered with a loud
voice: That the obedient man could not dye. That, which is related of S.
Columbanus, is also very memorable, that coming to the Monastery of Luxouium
which himself had founded; and finding almost al sick, he used no other
physic, but called them al into the court to thresh the corn in the heat of
the sun. A hard task, especially for some of them, that were so feeble that
they could hardly stand on their legs. Some of them, that thought themselves
wiser and warier then the rest, kept themselves in their beds; others desirous
to obey, came down to their work: al these were presently so perfectly cured
of their disease, that they felt not so much as any grudging of it; the others
punished for their slacknes and distrust, had their agues all the year long, as
S. Columban, reprehending and blaming them, had foretold.

8. In the histories of the ancient Fathers we read of an other strange
accident, wherein also we may see what Obedience is, compared with other
virtues. Two natural brethren lived in one Monastery; one of them practiced
Obedience very much; the other gave himself to much austeritie. This last, to
try the other's sanctity, commanded him to go into a river that was full of
crocodiles; which he did without delay; and the cruel serpents came fawning
upon him, and licked his feet. Not long after they happened both upon a dead
man's body, and falling jointly to their prayers, the man came to life: Which
the Monk, that was given to fasting, secretly in his thoughts attributed to
himself; but his Abbot chid him sharply for it, having understood by
revelation, that it was not his fasting, but the other's obedience that
obtained it.

9. Such therefore is the dignity of Obedience, as to be worthy to be
declared by such extraordinary miracles. And no wonder. For they that live in
Obedience, have put themselves wholly into the hands of God, to be entirely
possessed and governed by him. And consequently that, which is in the Prophet
Esaias, Esaias 62.3.
is fulfilled in them: Thou shall be a crown of glory in my hand, and a
kingly diadome in the hand of thy God. From which glory and excellentie, the
commodities also do follow, which are there mentioned: Thou shall no longer be
called the forsaken, and thy land shall be no more called desolate, but thou
shall be called: My will in it. Which glorious name, and much more the thing it
self, to whom does it more fitly agree, then to a Religious man, who by
obedience is so wholly, as I said, in God's possession, that the Divine will is
in him always most perfectly performed in all things? Men therefore may
rejoice, if they will, in whatsoever other titles of honor, and be called
Kings, and Princes, and Cardinals: A Religious soul has far more solid
ground of joy in this name, which God has imposed, and wherein is briefly
comprised all that is Good, My will is in it.

That a Religious man is above al earthly things; and how glorious this is.
CHAP. VI.
IF the dignity of every one of these Vows by itself be so very great as we
have showed, what splendor and dignity must needs arise of them al, when they
meet together, as they do in a Religious state, it consisting wholly of these
three Vows concurring in one, with all that which is good and excellent in
them, to make, uphold, and adorn the nature, substance, and essence of
Religion? The generous mind of a Religious man.
which once set on foot and undertaken (besides the several greatnesses and
ornaments, which rise of several things in it) it has one general operation,
rare and admirable, to wit, that it breeds in him, that embraces it, so
generous, so noble, and so lofty a disposition of mind, that seated above al
worldly things, he beholds them as things unworthy to be regarded, he
despises them, he sets them at naught, and contemnes them, and does not only
not hunt after them, as worldlings, who wholly employ themselves in the pursuit
of them, and run into so many debates and differences among themselves about
them; but when they are offered, he refuses them; when he had plenty of them,
he cast them away; he spurns at them as dirt, or, as we said before out of the
Apostle, Philip. 3.^.
he loathes them as dung, which, as base and stinking, is hateful. How proper
this disposition of mind is to a Religious state, and how naturally and how
deeply it is ingrafted in it, S. Gregory will tell us, S. Gregory, (...).
(...)* 5.
describing his own state of mind in both his changes, when first he was
Religious, and afterward chosen Pope of Rome. These are his words: Desi^ing
nothing in this world, nor fearing any thing from it, I seemed to myself to
stand, as it were, upon the top of al things; in so much that I did almost
think that fulfilled in me, (...) ^8.14.
which by the promise of our Lord I had learned out of the Prophet: I will lift
thee up above the heighths of the earth; for he is lifted above the heighths of
the earth, who, by contempt of mind, treades under foot the things, which
seem in the world high and glorious. But suddenly blown off, by the tempest
of this temptation, from the height I was in, I am fallen into fears and
tremblings; for though in behalf of my self I do not fear, yet of those, that
are committed to my charge, I greatly stand in fear.

^
2. Which is not the sense of S. Gregory only; but S. Gregory having taken it
from Religion, it is the general persuasion of al Religious people, that live
according to their Rule, and indeed of Religion itself. Al have this spirit
infused into them, together with the mind and reso^^^ion, which is given them
to forsake the world: For they could not forsake it, but that they contemn it;
nor could they contemn it but that they are raised in mind above it. And they
forsake not only that, which they have in present (which oftimes is but a small
matter) but the desire and greedines of having, which has a great extent, or
rather has no bounds at al, but reaches absolutely to al things. Wherefore no
Religious man must think so meanly of this his oblation, as to conceive that
it is little, which he offers to God, when he bars himself by the Vow of
Poverty from possessing any thing upon earth: because he does not only offer
that which he had, or that which might have befallen him, or which he might
have gotten by industry, but absolutely the whole world. Which we learn by the
example of S. Peter, who certainly left not much, yea rather that which he
left, was little or nothing, and yet he did not stick to say, as we read in S.
Matthew: Behold, we have left al things. Of which profession S. Augustine writes
to Paulinus that, Matt. 19.27.
which agrees fitly to Religious persons: S. August. ep st. 34.
The fishermen, that at the voice of our Savior forsook their nets and their
little boats, boasted with great joy that they had left al things, and followed
our Lord. And he contemns al things, who contemnes not only what he could,
but what he would have had. The difference is, that the eyes of God only are
witnesses, of what a man would have had; of that which a man had, S Greg. hom.
1. in euang.
man also is witness. S. Gregory is of the same opinion, testifying that S.
Peter and S. Andrew are therefore to be said, to have left much; because they
left the desire of having any thing, the affection being more to be weighed,
then the substance, which we do forsake. He left much, says he, that retained
nothing to himself; he left much that left al, though al were never so little.

3. This is that, which al Religious people do; For they deprive not
themselves only of the possession of things, but cast away al desire of
whatsoever things in the world: Which whosoever does, has the whole world
under his feet, and consequently has not only whereof greatly to rejoice, and
account himself happy in the peace, and tranquillity, and pleasure of his
mind; but is to be accounted in honor and dignity higher then Kings and
Princes, notwithstanding their dominions and commands; Tob. 39.30
and may be fitly compared to the Eagle, which (as holy Scripture speaks) is
raised at the command of God, S. Greg. 31. mor. 19.
and builds his neast in craggie places. Upon which words S. Gregory
discourses in this manner: This is a special token of the Elect, that they
know so to walk the paths of this present life, as by certainty of hope to
discover, when they are arrived to the high places, where they may behold al
transitory things beneath them, and, through the love of Eternity, tread,
whatsoever is high in the world, under their feet. From whence it is, that God
by the Prophet says to the soul, Es 18.
that follows him: I will lift thee up above the heighths of the earth. The
low places of the earth are losses, reproaches, poverty, contempt, which the
lovers of the world, walking the playnes of the broad way, do not cease to
tread under foot, by avoiding them. The heighths of the earth are Interest,
flatteries of servants and subjects, abundance of wealth, honor, and height
of promotion, which they, that creep still upon the ground through earthly
desires, esteem high; because they make account there is some great matter in
them: but if our heart be once fixed in heavenly things, presently it appears
how abject that is, which before seemed high.

Religious people do good with ease.
4. Thus far S. Gregory; whereunto we may add further, that as the Eagle,
which is here described, does not only soar on high, but build also in high
places: so may we say of Religious people, and apply it fitly unto them. For as
to fly, is laborious, importing a continual strife and contention, and
consequently cannot be perpetual; but in the neast a bird is quiet, and settled
at case; so we may observe the like difference among men, which follow virtuous
courses. For they, that by strength of consideration only and desire, raise
themselves from the earth, as many secular people do, certainly do very well;
but it is, as it were, by force and strength of arms: and that which S.
Augustine bewailed in himself, S. August. (...) ^.42.
must needs befall them, But I fall back into the same, through the weight of my
miseries, and am swallowed-vp again by my wonted defects; and they hold me,
and I weep bitterly; but they hold me very strongly, so heavy is the burden
of Cuslome upon me. But they, who have builded their neast on high, do both
spare this wearisomnes of contention and strife with themselves, and repose at
ease. The neast of a Religious man, is the state itself. And have not then
Religious people placed their neast on high, seeing their state is raised above
al things created? In which height they contain themselves, not only without
any difficulty, but with exceeding pleasure, abhorring nothing more, then to
stoop to these base things again, which both in mind and deed they have set
at naught.

5. And that we may the better conceive both the great honor and profit of a
mind thus seated on high, as the Scripture expresses unto us in the
similitude afore-sayd, let us imagine with ourselves, that we see a man raised
by degrees so high from the ground, up into the air, that at last we behold
him seated upon the very clouds looking down upon us. For by this
representation, which cannot be verifyed in a body, we shall come to
understand, what may be done, and is daily acted, in the mind. For if a man
were seated so high, as I say, upon the clouds, many things were considerable
in him: First, that al would admire him; secondly if he had any enemy upon
earth, he were in safety, quite out of his reach; thirdly, these inferior
things being so far beneath him, would not trouble his sight; many of them
he would not see at al. Religious people are ^^ble (...)
The like does happen to a soul, when God has raised it from this earthly
dust and filth, and placed it in the eminent elevation of Religion. For it
gets presently a kind of noblenes of heart, far more excellent then that,
which worldly honor, or promo^ion, or birth, does raise a man unto; ^
as S. Cyprian avouches in these words: He that has renounced the world, is
above al honors and kingdoms: and therefore he that consecrateth himself to
God and our Savior, desires no earthly but heavenly kingdoms. Which
admirable worth of a Religious soul, does not only lie open to the eyes of God
(which were indeed enough) but it is most commonly very apparent to men; for
though they be not willing to imitate, yet they cannot but admire, those that
put themselves upon these high courses. Whereupon S. Hie^cme says very truly,
S. (...)
that, to have riches, is nothing commendable, but to contemn them for Christ
our Savior; nor to gape after honor, but to neglect it: and after a strange
manner of revolution, they that have these things, are neglected; and they that
will not have them, are much commended.

6. Religious people moreover are not subject to chances and misfortunes, Not
subject to worldly misfortunes.
as other men are. For what power can chance have over them, who forsaking al
changeable things have barred it quite out from them* and consequently, as it
were, placed above the winds, are never moved, but are constant in all events,
and in a perpetual calm; which calm or tranquillity of mind, were it to be
bought for gold, what would not be given for it? But gold will not buy it, nor
is it to be purchased by any earthly thing, but by contemning al things:
because whatsoever earthly thing thou have, thou may loose it; but he that
has forsaken al things, has nothing, by the loss whereof he may be either
hurt or troubled; so that this continual and neuer-changeable peace of mind,
this mind and countenance which in all events is ever the same (such as S.
A^hanasius does tell us that S. Antonie did always carry) is proper to a
Religious state. S. Athan. in vita S. Antony. S. Cyprian l. 2. ^p. 1.
And the same does place us beyond the reach of all the fiery darts of our
malignant Enemy; so that either they come not near us, or are easily avoided;
which S. Cyprian does express very well in these words: What power and strength
has such a mind? not only cleansed, and pure, and untouched by whatsoever
spot or blemish the Enemy endeavors to cast upon it, by reason it has
withdrawn itself from the pernicious traffic of this world, but higher and
stronger then any force he can make; in so much that it has a kind of
maistrie and command over his whole host and army.

7. But that, Above al things.
which is most of al, and most behoueful for our souls, is, that this state
does naturally breed in our mind an extraordinary light, making it very
plain unto us that whatsoever is under the cope of heaven, is of small value,
S. Chrysostom. hom. 15. ad popul. Antioch.
deceiptful, idle, and unworthy of our love. To which effect S. Chrysostom^
does discourse eloquently in this manner: As when we look down from the top
of a hill, al things seem little unto us, not only men and trees, but whole
cities and armies, are like so many emmets upon the ground: so they, that
raising their mind to heavenly things are as it were seated on high, think
al humane things, as power, glory, wealth, and the like, so small and so little
to be regarded, that they judge it an unworthy thing, if the noblenes of their
incorruptible mind should stoop unto them. What can be more glorious then
such a state, which by leaving us nothing, does put us into so great safety,
and make us so impregnable, that we shall not need to fear neither force, cor
fortune; neither man nor any humane chance? Which the same blessed Saint does
attribute much to Poverty: for taking upon him to commend a single life, among
other praises thereof, does reckon this blessing, that it may be poor, and
cutting of thereby al care and danger, raise itself the nearer to Heaven. S
Chrysoft. de V^rg. cap 81.
For, says he* he that has nothing, despises al things, as if he had al at
command: and with great freedom, is bold to speak to Prince and Potentate,
and to him that wears the crown. He that contemns money, being a
downright man, does easily also contemn death itself; and being ahoue al,
fearing nothing, dreading nothing, does speak the more freely to al. But a man
that is greedy of money, is not only a slave to his money, but a slave to the
opinion and reputation of men, a slave to his own life, and, in one word, S.
Greg. mor ^^ 7^ cap. 15.
a slave to all that belongs to this life. S. Gregory also, in the seventh
of his Morals does beat upon the same point; Let us life up the eyes of our
mind ( says he) and behold in what height the Elect are inwardly seated, that
are outwardly oppressed; all that which is eminent abroad, to their inward sight
lies flat, and is contemptible. For inwardly lifted above themselves, they
place their soul on high, and whatsoever they suffer in this life, they behold
it as it were passing under them, and little belonging to them; and while, as I
may say, they strive in mind to be rid of their flesh, they are almost
ignorant of what they endure in it. For, as seated in the top of a great high
hill, they utterly contemn the joys of this present life; and being higher
then themselves by a spiritual highness, they behold within, all that beneath
them, which by carnal glory is so high flowne without. From whence it comes,
that they spare no power opposing itself against virtue, but by the authority
of their spirit keep down whomsoever they epsy lift themselves up by pride.
Thus spoke S. Gregory, bringing also many examples of this nature, out of
holy Scripture, as of Moses against Pharao; Nathan against David; Helyas
against Achab; Elizeus against Ioram. And the like spirit Religion does put
into those, that follow it; and gives them an undaunted courage, not
proceedring of pride, but from the noblenes of their heart, and the contemp^ of
al earthly things, even to stand with Princes and Kings in behalf and defense
of the glory of God.

Religious men freely speak their mind.
8. It is recorded of S. Bernardin of Siena, that he was weary free to speak his
mind; and when cause required, sticked not publicly to reprehend the vices of
people of great quality, without respect of persons. In a sermon once he
reprehended the Duke of Milan; whereupon the Duke being highly displeased, sent
him word he should die if he left not off. S. Bernardin the next day spoke
far more sharply against the same vice, in a great assembly of people; which
confidence of his did so daunt the Duke, that he durst never after trouble him.
But to try whether he could be corrupted, sent him a golden boule full of gold;
which though the Saint rejected with a great deal of indignation, the Duke
commanded it should be again presented him with a long complement, and much
entreatie to admit of it. They, that carried it, did so press the Saint, that
when he saw there was no end, rising up, he bad them follow him, and going
directly to the prison, S. Columbanus.
he bestowed it upon those that were in for debt, and set them al free the same
day. We read, that S. Columbanus used the like freedom in reprehending
The^dorick King of the French, for his wicked life. And once the King hearing,
that he was come to town, sent a princely supper for him, to his lodging,
with all things necessary, and a great retinue to wait upon him. S. Columbanus
seeing it, Eccl. 14.25.
rejected it with ang^ie countenance and speech, pronouncing that verse out of
Scripture: The guists of the wicked, are not acceptable to the Highest. Adding
moreover, that it was an unworthy thing to pollute the mouths of God's
servants, with meat from him, that did so unjustly make war against them. He
had scarce uttered these words; when all the vessels, in which the meat was
brought, brake in pieces, the wine and sider run about the floare, and every
thing was scattered hi^^er and thither. They that served it, were much amazed;
the King himself much afrighted ran presently to the Saint, telling him: He
was his servant in whatsoever he would command. But not long after, he fell to
his wonted courses, and the Saint spared not to check him, and threaten him for
it. S Antonio of Padua.
But what shall we say to the courage of S. Anthony of Padua? when Ezelinus
wasted Italy with fire and sword, he went and spoke thus unto him: Thou cruel
and bloody Tyrant, when will thou make an end of spilling the blood of men?
And following on his discourse in he same strain, he ripped up al his violent
proceedings, his murders, robberies and pillages, threatening him with
vengeance from heaven* and the wrath of the Eternal God. His followers hearing
this kind of language, looked for no other, but that their Master, according
to his bloody custom, should bid them ru^ne the man through, that made
himself so bold a controuler. But it happened far otherwise; for taking his
gyrdle, he put it about his own neck in steed of a rope, of a wolf being
become a lamb, and falling down upon his knees, he humbly begged pardon for
his sins, and promised he would do whatsoever satisfaction or punishment the
Saint would impose upon him. But after a while returning to his former
villainies, he made an attempt upon the virtue of the Saint, after the manner
following: He sent some of his retinue to him, with very rich presents,
commanding them, that by earnest entreatie and importunity, and al means
possible, they should win him, to accept of them: and if he did accept of
them, they should presently cut of his head: if he could not be won unto it,
they should patiently stand to hear, whatsoever he would say unto them. They
went, and with all the courtesy and seeming humility of the world, they
pressed him over and over again, to admit of the present, their Lord and
Master had been pleased to honor him with. But S. Antonie with great freedom
spoke thus unto them: Away instantly with your wicked gifts, least the house
fall upon you, or the earth open and swallow you up, and we come in danger by
your destruction. And so sent them away; which Ezelinus hearing did ever after
honor the man, as a great Saint. So great is the opinion, which the contempt
of earthly things does breed in the minds even of wicked men.

9. Now seeing a Religious state does thus arm us against al adversity,
Religion preserves up in prosperity.
let us consider a little also, how it does defend us in prosperity; that
contemning both, we may neither fear the one, nor care for the other. Great S.
Antonie shall be our president in this kind; S. Antonie the great.
of whom we find it recorded, that whereas Constantine the Great, that famous
Emperor, and his two sons Constance and Constantius, were wont often to
write unto him in most submissiue and courteous manner, as to their Father, he
was so far from glorying in it, that he was wont to say: That no man must
think it any great matter, if the Kings of the world do at any time, write to
the servants of God; for though they have in outward appearance a greater
power, their nature is the same; they live and die, as others do. The thing
which is great indeed, and highly to be esteemed, is, that God has sent
letters unto us, that is, his Law, the fummarie of his will, and has spoken
unto us by his only Son Which notwithstanding, his Brethren entreating him
to make them some answer, that he might not seem to slight the courtesy of so
great Princes, he writ back unto them, exhorting them to Justice, and
Clementie, and always to remember they were Men, and should one day themselves
appear in judgment before the Tribunal of CHRIST, who is true Lord of al.
This mind so noble and so high, seated above al earthly things, contemning
them al as dust, S. Antonie and the rest did not bring with them to Religion,
but sucked it out of Religion; and we also being bred in the same school, may
easily gain the like; and the noblenes of our calling does require it and,
doubtless, instill it into us.

How noble a thing it is in a Religious man, to forsake his natural kindred.
CHAP. VII.
IT is a great matter to set al earthly things at naught; and they that do
so, are not to be ranked any more with the vulgar sort, but to be honored as
people of high degree of promotion and excellency: Yet it is a far greater
work, to fortake our kindred and nearest allies in blood. For the love, which
we bear them, is of a higher strain, far more intense, more natural, and
more deeply rooted in us. The force of the love of our kindred.
For what likeness, or what connection has a man with gold, and silver, with
lands and possessions? But with men he has a natural affinity, and specially
with such as come of the same stock: which is the reason, that the love of
parents toward their children, of children toward their parents, and of
brethren among themselves, is so hard to be dissembled. And that this
proceeds not so much out of judgment and deliberation grounded in reason, as
of a natural inclination and force, we see by that which happens in beasts,
who, to preserve their yong-ones, stick not to venture life and limme. And
consequently the stronger this bond and tie is, the greater force is required
to break it, and a heart more resolute, either to abide or to act this
disjunction. So that among the rest of the commendations of a Religious state,
this is none of the least, that, as it rayseth a man above al other things, it
overcomes also this natural affection, parting a man from those, with whom
he was bred and borne; and bringing him, for the love of our Savior, to enter
league with others, whom he never saw; and to take more pleasure in living
with them, then with his own natural kindred: which is an evident argument,
that this manner of calling is far above the reach of Nature. For if we see a
father of many children oftimes lament and grieve so bitterly for the loss of
some one among them, though the rest of his family and stock be sound and
safe; what grief should theirs, if we speak of nature, be, who leese al at
once, parents, brethren, sisters, friends, domesticals, and all that nature or
custom and familiar acquaintance had linked them so long and so deeply unto?
It is not nature therefore, that works this strange effect, but it is abundant
grace from Heaven, and plenty of virtue and infused from above.

Grace stronger the^ nature.
2. And so we find in the Ghospel, that our Savior does challenge it as one of
his greatest works. I came not, says he, to send peace, but the sword. For I
came to sever man against his father, and the daughter-in-law against her
mother-in-law. And it is not without great consideration, that he terms this
grace, a sword. Matt. 10.31.
For as a sword is made of iron, and used to cut a-sunder things which grow
fast together; so it gives us to understand, that this natural tie of
affinity is very strong, and cannot be severed but by a force as strong as
iron, that is, by the mighty hand of God, drawing to himself the hearts of
whom he will, and parting them from whom he will: and daily experience does
teach us it to be so. For how should it otherwise come to pass, that they, who
before lived most dearly linked together in the same house, inspired
afterward by this heavenly Spirit, should so suddenly resolve not to yeald to
flesh and blood, but depart for ever from them, with that constant resolution,
as if they had never known them, and did nothing belong unto them? and (which
is more signal) they that remain, weep for him that goes; he that goes
away, is full of joy and gladness. What is the reason of it, but because even
before he part with them, he is already cut off and severed from them by this
divine sword; and therefore parts without any sense of feeling: but they that
have not felt the force of this sword, are still linked to him, and consequently
feel much grief in parting. Theodoret recounteth of one Marcianus, Theodoret
in Relig. hist.
a man of noble extraction, and indeed of the blood Royal, that he betook
himself into a Monastery, that was seated far out of the way. After many
years, his sister, who was Lady of the City where she dwelt, coming with
her son (that was under age) and many presents to the Monastery, he would
by no means see her; only he admitted the child, to the end he might send him
home with some good instructions. And when she entreated him, that he would at
least accept of the presents which she had brought, if not as he was her
kinsman, yet as one that was poor, and might have need of them, he made her
this answer: How many monasteries of poor people did you meet by the way,
before you came to me? And seeing you bestowed not these presents upon them, it
is clear you present them me for hindered sake. And so constantly he rejected
them al. Which fact of his Theodoret does so extol, that he says, he was a man
above nature, fashioned after a heavenly manner. Doubtless therefore this
disposition of Religious people, is one of the specialest graces, which the
Holie-ghost is wont to imparte unto us, and requires great strength of mind;
and is also a sign of much virtue and worth in them that have it. In so much
that it is one of the chief commands, which our Lord is pleased to lay upon the
Spouse, whom he chooses for himself, Ps. 44.11.
and desires should be without spot or wrinkle; Hearken, daughter, and see,
and incline thy ear, and forget thy people, and the house of thy father. To be
his Daughter, to be his Spouse, and worthy to be in the arms of God, this
prime condition is first required, as a portion settled, that she do not only
forsake, but forget her carnal kindred: and if she do so, what is further
promised? And the king shall covet thy beauty. As who should say: By that fact
of thine, thy beauty and comelines will be so increased, that the sovereign
King and Lord of the world, enflamed with thy love, will presently take thee for
his Spouse, and place thee in Princely dignity.

3. We have a memorable example hereof in that great Patriarch Abraham, whose
fact does both much resemble, Genesis 12.
and greatly illustrate that, which al Religious people do. Our Lord said unto
him: Go forth of thy land, and from thy kindred, and from the house of thy
father, and come into the land, which I shall show thee. It had been enough, as
S. Ambrose discourses, S. Ambros. lib. 1. de Abrah. c. 2.
to have said, forth of thy land, because in this one word, all the rest is
contained; but he would add these particulars, that his affection might be the
more tried. Wherefore his faith is worthily renowned: and (as the same S.
Ambrose says) by this his fact, he prevented the sayings of the Wisemen,
whereof one is: Follow God. This al Religious people do going out of the house
of their father, and forsaking their kinsfolk not only by leaving the affection
to them, but corporally parting from them; and which is more then all the rest,
they part not to go to some certain determinate place, but whithersoeuer God
from thence-forward shall appoint them. For they deliver themselves over, to the
will and command of their Superiors, not in some one particular thing agreed
upon, as it were, by covenant and consent, but in whatsoever they shall be
pleased to order, and, as God's Vicegerents, show unto them.

The fact of Abraham and Religious men compared.
4. And if I may be bold to speak my mind, me thinks I see somewhat more in
that which every Religious man does, then in the fact of Abraham, for as much
as concerns this particular. For Abraham left indeed his country, and part
of his kindred: but yet carried with him al his wealth, which was very great,
and his brother Loath, Sara his wife, al his servants, and a full household; so
that a man may in a manner rather say, that he carried the chief commodities of
his country away with him, then that he left his country. But Religious
people, how truly, how perfectly do they forsake house, possessions, kindred;
and naked, and solitary betake themselves to the standart of Christ, who hung
naked for them upon the Cross? Abraham upon the performance of that
commandment of God, was promised great matters: Genesis 12.2.
I will bless thee, and magnify thy name, and thou shall be blessed. I will
bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee. Which being
spoken and performed to him, why should not we also hope to be partakers of the
same promises and reward, seeing in fact we iumpe with him? yea expect somewhat
more. For these blessings in him were temporal, and consequently a far less
reward; but ours are spiritual without comparison greater and better. But yet
from hence we may learn, how great the dignity of a Religious vocation is, in
regard of the point we speak of, seeing it equals so noble a fact of so divine
a man.

^
5. For what power over al carnal affection had that famous Pastor* who, as we
read in Vi^i^ Patrum, would not speak to the Provost in behalf of his sister's
son, that was in hazard to be put to death? or Pior, who being bid by S.
Anthony (whose disciple he was) to go to his sister that was come to see him,
went to her, but yet held his eyes shut, so that he did not see her. By whose
example, John also being commanded to present himself before his sister, showed
himself disguised as a stranger, and she not knowing him, he presently went his
way. And as these two dealt with their sisters, so did Marcus with his mother;
for he al besmothed his face with soot and smoke, and in a dirtie frock of
sackcloth stood before her, with his eyes shut, that he might have no sight of
her. Euagrius followed the same strain: For when one brought him word that his
father was dead, he told him: he lied; for (says he) my father is immortal. S.
Francis might have said as much, who together with his father's inheritance
renouncing also his father, made that worthy profession, that now he was more
f^^e truly to say: Our father which art in heaven. And many more like examples
we might bring; as of S. Bernard and his Brethren, of Pachomius, and Theodore a
disciple of his; whereof the first forsook their sister, the latter two their
mother, and refusing to admit them into their sight, were cause that they also
at last abandoned the world.

6. But we shall not need to search ancient Records; we see daily examples of
the like virtue before our eyes. For how often, or rather, as I said, how daily
have we ourselves beheld, not only men grown in years, but very youths,
entertain their weeping parents, and their whole kindred, without shedding one
tear, yea rather laughing when they lamented and grieved? Which comes not of
hardness of heart, or dull stupiditie, for if a stranger were in grief in misery,
they would soon bewail his woes. But the Sword, I speak of, is to be seen in
their hearts, and has divided them from their friends and kindred, to whom
before, their affection was so deep engaged; not that they have left to love
them, seeing they make profession to love their very enemies, but casting of al
carnal affection, which oftimes puts us upon things unworthy, they have wholly
changed it into spiritual charity. Which noble disposition, as it is in itself
most excellent, cannot choose also but be most grateful to God, and plentifully
rewarded with great graces. Moses does, to my thinking, lively express it,
when in his Prophetical testament, directing his speech to the Tribe of Leui
dedicated to God, and for that reason resembling somewhat a Religious state, he
pronounces this blessing over them: Deue. ^^.9.
He that has said to his father, and to his mother: I know you not; and to his
brethren; I am ignorant of them, and have not known their children. These have
kept thy speech, and observed thy Covenant. Bless, o Lord, his strength, and
receive the works of his hands. Strike the backs of his enemies, and let not
them rise, that hate him.

That a Religious man has also forsaken himself; and how noble a thing that
is. CHAP. VIII.
NEXT to external goods, and natural kindred, which Religious people do wholly
forsake, there is a third and more excellent degree behind, and doubtless the
highest that can be in matter of Perfection; to wit, that he leaves himself.
Thren. 5.28.
This is to lift himself, not only above al other things, S. Greg. Hom. 33 in
Fuarg.
but above himsels. Which the Prophet Hieremie does so highly commend. And of
the rarenes, and difficulty, and worth thereof, S. Gregory does say
excellently well: Perhaps it is no very hard matter for a man to leave his
possessions; The difficulty of renouncing onesself.
but it is very hard to leave himself: for it is a less matter to renounce
what he has; but it is very much to renounce what he is. And certainly it is
very true. For if we find so much difficulty in forsaking what we have,
loving it for ourselves; how much more difficulty must there needs be, in
forsaking ourselves? For as a natural and inbred as the love of a man's self
is, so hard must it needs be, to cast away a man's self: And if we consider
well, what the business is, and it be done in earnest, it is not much less, yea
it is a kind of death, because it is to dye to ones-self. And accordinly S.
Gregory does express it in these terms: To reneunce that which one it, To
fall soul with ones-self; To kill that which he is. And heerupon a Religious man
is accounted a dead man. Which Apollo, one of the ancient Fathers, declared by
this notable fact of his, related by S. Bernard and others: S. Bernard ser
dem^raculo in nupu^.
One of his carnal brethren came once unto him, craving his assistance in some
business, which he had: the Saint asked him, why he did not rather go to a
third, brother of theirs; his brother wondering at this question, told him he
was dead and buried long ago. So was I, says Apollo, above twenty years
since, when I to^ke this holy habit upon me.

S. Basil. Reg. (...). c. ^.
2. S. Basil is of the same opinion; and disputing the question at large
delivers, that no man entangled in the world, can attain to this abnegation
of himself, whereof our Savior says: If any one will come after me, let him
deny himself; and gives this reason: Because to deny ones-self, is nothing else
but wholly and utterly to forget every thing belonging to his former life,
(...) 2^.
and to depart from his own will* which in a secular life is most hard to
compass; not to say, that it is altogether impossible.

3. And we may compare this high degree of Perfection, to which Religion does
raise us by the denial of ourselves, an other way. For as when we give a thing
away to another man, we wholly forgo it; so when we give ourselves to God; this
being the nature, or, as I may call it, the essence of Religion (as I have
showed at large els-where) to put us wholly over to God by force of Vow, and
give him full dominion over us. For first it delivers our body unto him, both
by the vow of Chastity, and, as al other things, by the vow of Obedience, so
that it is no more ours that live in it, but his, for whom we live in it. Upon
which ground S. Bernard does solidly build this document, that Religious people
must deal with their bodies, S. Bernard (...)
as with a thing, that belongs not to themselves, but to God. Secondly, it
delivers our soul unto him, that is, our Will, our Judgment* our Freedom,
which is Al in all. For our soul is, as it were, the Castle in a City; the
key of this Castle is our liberty; so that when we deliver our liberty up to
God, we deliver al unto him; and so long as it is in his hands, he is master
of al. Finally it delivers up to God, the use of al these things; which
though it necessarily follow of the former, yet to make the thing more plain,
we speak of it a part. For we cannot employ our soul nor our body in things,
which of ourselves we are inclined unto, but in those, to which our Superiors
are pleased to order us. And this delivery is not a thing private or hidden,
acted only in thought or resolution, but it is made externally, by an outward
declaration, by word of mouth, before witnesses, and in the hands of an other
man, that, in place of God, accepts the donation; in brief it is a kind of
contract, to the solemnizing and authenticating whereof, nothing is wanting.
And consequently a Religious man, that by solemn promise has once dea^sed the
dominion of himself, has so wholly given over himself, that if afterward he
go about to resume any thing of himself, he offends as much as a man, ^
that takes from an other that, which himself had never any ^ig^t unto.
Whereupon S. Bas^l says, that Whatsoever steals himself from God, having
once consecrated himself unto him, commits sacrilege. S. Bernard s^r. 19.
in Cant.
And S. Bernard reprehendeth some of his Moncks upon the same grounds* in these
words: You, that have once entrusted us with the care over you, Why do you
meddle again with yourselues? As if he should say: what power have you now
over yourselues, since you have once given over your right? Which if it be
true, as S. Bernard will have it, can there be a more perfect manner of
renouncing ones-self then that, which is practiced in Religion? Again; how
excellent a thing must Religion needs be, and how high in the favor of God,
seeing it is so liberal toward him?

4. Among men, slavery and captivity is accounted one of the hardest and
heauiest things that are, because it takes away a man's freedom, and makes
him so subject to an other, that he must do al things after an other's fancy.
Yet if we look into the matter well, that kind of servitude binds the body
only; the mind is altogether free: for there is no slave but he may think his
pleasure, and love and hate what he lists, grieve and rejoice at what he will.
But a Religious man, offering his very soul to God, offers also the
operations of the soul; and must conform al his inward affections to the same
rule: whereupon in all Religious Orders, the laws and constitutions, which are
set down in writing, and the commands of Superiors by word of mouth,
prescribe not only what is outwardly to be done or avoided, but much more what
is inwardly to be performed. So that no servitude ever was or can be more
strict then that, which Religious people undergo: But the more strict it is,
it proves also the more pleasant; because of the infinite pleasure which is in
God, who communicates himself so much the more plentifully to his creatures,
the more narrowly they bind themselves, and the more sincerely they are
subject, unto him. Wherefore, among other great treasures of a Religious life,
we must also reckon this, that it brings us wholly to forsake and cast off
ourselves for ever, by so strict an obligation, Glossa number. 30.
that it can never be called-in or made void. In commendation of which thing
the Gloss (the authority whereof is very great in the exposition of holy
Scripture) does worthily speak these words: Others vow calves, others rams,
others their houses; the Nazarean voweth himself; this is the vow of the
Nazarean, which is above al other vows. Our son, and our daughter, and our
cattle be without us: but to offer ourselves, to employ not an other's but our
own labor, is more perfect and more eminent then al other vows.

That al Virtues concur in a Religious State. CHAP. IX.
Virtue the riches of a Christian.
THE only wealth of a Christian, is Virtue. He that has little virtue, is
poor; he that has much virtue, is to be accounted truly rich; and the more
virtue a man has, the richer he is. How much is therefore Religion to be
esteemed, where a man shall find, not one or two virtues only, but absolutely
al, in great abundance concurring together? insomuch that the very nature of
Religion is, as it were, a Compound of Virtue; and if we look into it, we shall
find it to be so; because if any one virtue be wanting* the whole State of
Religion is the weaker by it.

Virtues infused with a Religious vocation.
2. I speak not now of those virtues, which every one does get by his own
long practice in them, and daily endeavor, which notwithstanding this State
does so greatly facilitate, that it is deservedly called the School of Virtue,
as I have showed before: But I speak of those, that in the very first
conception, as I may call it, of a Religious Vocation, are infused into our
souls together with the vocation itself, and so inwardly linked to the State
of Religion, that whosoever admits of the State, must necessarily also
receive those virtues with it. Let us therefore search-out what virtues, and
how many, this State requires, as necessarily belonging unto it; for as many
as are necessary, certainly it brings with it.

3. And as a house, that is buylt of many parts, has some of them, that lie
open to the view of every body, as the forefront, the windows, the porches,
and the like; and some again that are hidden, at the timber, and ioyces, and
iron-worke, and chiefly the foundation: And in the body of every living
creature compounded of many members, some appear outwardly, as the head, the
legs, and thighs, and such like; some lie inward, as the heart, the brain, the
bones, and sinnewes, which also are more necessary, then many of the outward
parts: So in Religion, the three Vows of Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience
lie open to the view of every body; others are more secret* yet withal so
necessary, even for the due maintenance of those three Vows, and of the State
itself, that without them, al falls to the ground.

The admitablenes of the three Vows of Religion.
4. And yet if there were nothing in Religion but the practice of the three
Vows, we could not imagine a thing more beautiful. For what is Poverty, but so
noble a disposition of mind, that it makes no more account of heaps of gold
and silver, and of the reuennues and kingdoms of the world, then of a little
chasse? yea it does not only neglect them, as things of no value, but does
avoid them, as burdensome. A great Virtue; and a great gift of God. Poverty.
And if we cast our eye upon so many other men in this world, that do so
highly esteem and admire, and so earnestly hunt after these earthly things,
we cannot choose but see the greatness of it.

5. What is Chastity? Chastity.
A mind strengthened and hardened against al manner of pleasures of the flesh;
against those pleasures which do so domineere over the nature of mankind. How
rare therefore and how glorious a thing is it, to oppose ones-self against
them, and withstand them so constantly, and with so great a courage? The very
rarenes of this virtue does make it the more glorious; for we see that the
greatest part of all the world is lead away captive with desire of these
pleasures.

6. Finally, what a noble disposition of mind is Obedience? Obedience.
importing a denial of ourselves, and a renouncing of our freedom, which
naturally we desire so much in all things, and in all the passages of our life;
so that certainly, as we cannot overcome ourselves in a greater matter, so
there cannot be a more noble, or more glorious victory. And consequently, as I
said before, if there were no other virtue in Religion but these three, which
are in every body's eye, the beautiful aspect thereof could not but breed
great admiration and love in the beholders.

7. But, as I touched even now, so fair a building of Virtue could not long
stand, if it had not other virtues to uphold it, whereof some go before, as
preparatiues; some always accompany it. And to begin with the three
Theological virtues (which are so called because their object is God) it is
evident, not only that a Religious state cannot be without Faith, but it cannot
be without singular and very excellent Faith. Faith.
For every Religious man does forsake that, which he has in his hands and
before his eyes, for things which he does not see; he leaves the present for
the future, and, which is more, for that which is not to come but after so long
a distance of time, relying upon the sole promise and word of God; which no man
would do, were he not fully persuaded, that the future is much more assured,
then that which is present, which is the greatest act of Faith that a man can
have.

8. The like we may say of Hope, Hope.
which consists in two points: First and principally in hoping the glory of
Heaven; which, though it be still to come, Religion does give us so good pledges
of, as if we were actually in possession of it; and in regard thereof, as I said
of Faith, we forgo whatsoever we had in our hands; Secondly Hope extends
itself to the necessary helps of this present life; which part thereof, where
is it more practiced then in Religion? Religious people depriving themselves of
al things, which they may have need of, and bringing themselves to a most
perfect nakedness, upon the confidence which they have in God. So that in my
opinion there cannot be a greater hope and confidence in the Pilgrimage of this
world, then this, which Religious people have; because it extends itself not
only to some one kind of thing, or to many things of small consequence, but
concerns absolutely al, and our very life, with which we put God wholly in
trust. Charity is written in the very bowels of Religion, Charity.
and as it were in the Essence of it, and has three branches: The one
extending itself toward God; the other toward those of the same Institute;
the third toward al other men. Toward God, because doubtless it is the sole
Love of God, which drives a Soul upon such a strict course of life, and the
force or flame thereof must needs be excessive great, to be able to thrust out
so absolutely, as it does, al other love of our carnal brethren, our parents and
kinsfolk, of riches, and al other worldly commodities, and finally the love of
ourselves. For it were not possible for a man to forsake al these things for
God, if he loved not God much more then any of them. And if the beginnings of
this love be so great, and the first colors, as I may call them, so lively
and beautiful; what will be the continual increase thereof, to which it must
needs rise in time, by the daily functions of Religion, by prayer, meditation,
and other virtuous exercises; the end of them al being to increase in the love
of God.

9. Now whereas the streams of love and good will toward our neighbor are
derived from this fountain of the love of God, they fall first upon them, The
love toward those of the same Institute. Arist. 1. Lib. c.
whom God has linked unto us by profession of the same Institute and course
of life; who also, by reason of this nearnes, have been always wont to call
Brothers among themselves. And this love is wholly of Charity. For, as
Aristotle discourses, every society of men, being necessarily grounded upon
communication, in one kind or other, as the company of seafaring men, upon
shipping; a company of soldiers, upon military actions; a fellowship of
Students, upon the doctrine of their Master; a company of Merchants, The
excellency of the ground thereof.
upon money; such as the thing is, whereupon they agree, such is their
followship or society: Let us therefore see, what is the ground, whereupon
Religious people agree, and what bond tyeth them together. For certainly it is
not nearnes in blood; because oftimes they are mere strangers one to another;
neither is it any civil contract or bargain; in brief, if we reckon up al,
that can be reckoned, we shall find that they have no other ground of their
association, but this supernatural love, which is Charity. Charity bread it;
Charity vpholds it; without Charity it instantly fails. And, as a little
before I said of the love of God, so this fraternal Charity having so noble a
ground, and, as I may call it, so honorable a descent, it has many things in
like manner consequent unto it, and greatly advancing it. And first, the
likeness, which they have among themselves; which in all things is a great
encreaser of love, and among Religious people of the same Rule and Institute is
so great, that greater can hardly be in this world; for all their intentions,
practices, rites, and ceremonies, and their very outward Habit and behavior
are alike; Virtue itself, which a man cannot but love in his enemy, their
daily conversation one: with another, continual cohabitation, finally the
services and charitable offices one toward another, al proceeding of love,
must needs add oil to this burning flame of love, and inflame it more and
more.

10. The third branch of Charity reaches to al men. For excepting some few
Institutes, which attend wholly to Contemplation (who yet by prayer and good
desires help toward the salvation of others in no small measure) all the rest
are so wholly at the service of their neighbor, that al their thoughts and
endeauours seem to bend that way. And the employments of every Religious
family give sufficient testimony, what their affection is in this kind. For
not only when they appear in public to preach, or teach, or exhort, but when
in private they give themselves to study, when they labor and watch, or
perform any other exercise of religion, al of it is directed not only to
their own salvation, but for the better helping and assisting of others to get
Heaven. So that Religious people, as S. Paul said of himself, have made
themselves servants of al men, 1. Co^. 9.1^.
taking their cause so to heart, that next to their own salvation, they busy
themselves wholly upon their neighbor, either actually serving them in some
thing or other, or preparing that which may conduce to their good: finally as
often as they are called, they are as ready to attend upon them, as any servant
can be at his maister's beck. Al which shows, that Charity is intrinsecal to
a Religious vocation, and, as it were, a kind of glue, to bind souls
together among themselves, and with God; which if it fail, Religious Orders
themselves must needs fall asunder, because they have no other stay or hold.

11. It follows that we speak of Moral virtues; among which the first and,
as it were, the light of the rest, is Prudence, Prudence.
so coupled with Religion, that without it we cannot understand, what Religion
means. S. Augustine defines Prudence to be the knowledge of what we are to
desire, S. Aug. lib. 83 9 61.
and what we are to fly. And where is this knowledge more abundant, then in
Religion? S. Thomas delivers a doctrine which is very true, S Tho^. 2. q. 47
a. 1^. and a. 13.
to wit, that Prudence consists not only in the Understanding or Reason, but
depends very much of a wel-ordered will, and consequently is obscured and lost
rather by disordered affections, then by forgetfuln^s or oblivion. Whereupon it
follows also further (as the same holy Doctor teache^h) that a sinner
cannot have perfect Prudence: for perfect Prudence is that, which considering
the true End of man, does apply to the attaining ^f that End, upright advise,
upright judgment, and an upright command; which be the three acts of this
virtue. Now where is the true End of man better considered of, and better
weighed, then in Religion, where we direct ourselves wholly to God, for whom we
were created; and put ourselves so entirely under his dominion and power, that
we do nothing for any creature, not so much as for ourselves? Religion
moreover shows us, how to deserve the grace of God, how to preserve it, and
prevent and avoid the deceits of the Devil, what we ought to do or shun in all the particulars of our life. These are the acts of true wisdom; this is
the Prudence, which is both commendable, and necessary; not as commonly people
take it, to know how to grow rich, or to get preferment, which is rather craft*
then Prudence. For failing of the knowledge or pursuit of the true end of man,
and seeking some particular end of this or that business* or aiming of some
thing which is naught, it follows either to be imperfect, if it stay in the
first; or falsely styled Prudence, if it degenerate to the latter.

12. Justice is yet more apparently coupled with Religion: For it is not only
far from doing any body any wrong (for though there were nothing else,
Justice.
the state itself barreth al Religious people from al occasions of fraud and
deceit) but the office of Justice being to give every one his own, and
chiefly to God, that which belongs unto him, Religion beats wholly upon this
point. Al things, that be in the world, belong to God; ourselves, and all that
we have. Whosoever therefore reserueth any thing to himself, either of his own
person or any thing belonging unto him, wrongs God, and certainly deals more
unjustly with him, then if he should take another man's goods from him: Now
Religion labors nothing more then to deliver up to God, first al things
which are without us; secondly, the things which are within us; and lastly our
selves; by this means compendiously complying with all the duties of most
perfect Justice.

Temperance.
13. As for Temperance, who can doubt but that Religion is the proper seat of
it? For, as Aristotle delivers, the office of Temperance is, to bridle the
pleasures of the body, Arist. 3. Eth^c 10.
chiefly those that belong to the sense of Touching; of which there be two
kinds: some serve toward the sustenance of the body, by eating and drinking;
some for the use of generation. The first, Religion confineth within the bounds
of necessity, Poverty (the mother of frugalitie, and sobriety) helping
thereunto: The second belonging to generation (the desires whereof are more
violent and intemperate) it does wholly cut of and shun, as a body would
shun the plague. The greatest commendation, which Aristotle and the rest of
the Philosophers gave Temperance, was to keep a mean in these pleasures, and
durst not press Nature any further. How far greater commendation therefore
does Religion deserve, which does not only temper these pleasures, but utterly
abolish them, and banish them out of sight and thought?

Fortitude.
14. Some body perhaps will think, that Fortitude has nothing to do in
Religion, because there is no occasion of going into the field, nor any use of
weapons, nor any thing to be done that requires strength of arms: which
fancy if we yeald unto, we may as well grant that a Bull, or an Elephant, is to
have the pre-eminence of strength and fortitude above al men. But the nature of
Fortitude is far other; and, if we believe S. Gregory, it is to be measured
by the disposition of our mind. S Greg. 7. (...). 8.
The Fortitude, says ^e, or strength of the just, is to subdue their flesh, to
contradict their own will, to quench the delights of this present life, to
embrace that which is hard in the world, for the rewards eternal, to contemn
the smiling countenance of prosperity, to overcome in their hearts the fear of
adversity. Which words of S. Gregory, what do they decypher unto us, but the
duty of a Religious life? so that we must of force confess, that true
Fortitude is chiefly among them. For if we account them valiant, that fight
stoutly against other men; we have much more reason, to yeald this commendation
to Religious people, who in the continual war, which they wage against this
world, overcome enemies far more strong in nature then they, and far more
in number.

15. Besides these Moral virtues, which are the principal, there be others as
it were branches of them; Patience
as Patience, a virtue so noble and withal so necessary, that Religion meeting
with so many things as it does, which are very harsh to Sense, it cannot long
endure without it. It must therefore necessarily have Patience; and the daily
occasions of practice of it, do much strengthen and increase it. S. Ambros.
Ep^st* 2^
To which purpose S. Ambrose speaking in commendation of S. Eusebius Bishop of
Vercels, has these words: This Patience did first fasten in S. Eusebius by
Monastical conversation, and he grew able to endure any kind of labor and
pains, by custom of more strict observance.

Liberality
16. But every body will perhaps easily find out, that Religion must have
Patience; but make a question, whether there be any place for Liberality;
because Religious people reserve nothing that they can bestow upon others; ^
and yet truly considered, Religion is not without this happiness. For, as
Aristotle says, Liberality, as other virtues, is to be measured by the
disposition of a man's mind: Whosoever is so disposed in mind, that he
contemnes al worldly wealth, and is ready, if he had it, to bestow it in
laudable uses, is to be accounted truly liberal; so that, according to the
opinion of the same Philosopher, poor men may also be liberal; and
consequently Religious people are so far from wanting this virtue, as they
are rather to be esteemed more liberal, then any body else. For who can more
from their heart contemn riches then they, that not only do not seek after
them or desire them, but are ready to refuse whole mountains of gold, if they
were offered? Besides that, they have already acted all that magnificence and
worth, which can be in bestowing the goods of this world, when they forsook
al, together with the world; specially if it fell in their way to do also
that, which S. Basil advises, S Basil reg su^. c. 9.
and S. Francis put in practice, and (which is the principal) that which our
Savior commanded, to wit, if they distributed that, which they had, wholly in
releef of the poor. For they that lavish their substance in following their
pleasures, Matthew. 19.
or spend it in stately buildings, or bury it in orchards and gardins, are
not, Arist 4. E^h. c. 1.
even in Aristotle's judgment, to be accounted liberal. Religion therefore
wants no part in Liberality, but has it to the full, as a special ornament
among other graces.

17. But neither these, Humility.
nor any other virtue does seem so natural to Religion, as Humility For
first, what is Religion but an absolute renunciation of al wordlie honor?
which renunciation is an act of Humility. Secondly, the whole practice of
Religion consists in humbling ourselves as much as possibly we can, and in
endeavoring to hide ourselves from being spoken or thought of, and to be
rather subject to every body, then to go before any one; finally nothing is
more ordinary, nothing more lab^ured for in Religion, then to be the least and
lowest of al men. And consequently the commandment of our Savior ( Sit down
in the lowest place) is nowhere more exactly fulfilled. (...). 14.10.
The lowest place is, to lay ourselves under every one's ^eete, to deprive
ourselves of our own will, and of al power of doing any thing of ourselves;
for no man can descend lower, then he that has left himself nothing. We sit
down, that is, we take up our rest, in this lowest place; because the
Humility of Religion, is not one act or two, such as some Secular people
stoop-vnto sometimes, but it comprehends our whole life, and is
intrinsecally settled in the State itself, which we are bound to stick to, all the days thereof. And besides this humility, which the state itself does bring
with it, the daily practice of humble offices is so annexed thereunto, that we
see people, that are nobly borne, and brought up, not only honorably, but
deliciously, and attended-on before, with much state, S. Hierome Epist. 2^.
perform howerly and continually, the seruil offices, which S. Hierome so much
comme^deth in Paula and Euslochi^m, two noble Ladies, to wit, to set up lights,
make fires, sweep the house, shel beans and pease, put herbs into the pot
when it boyleth, cover the table, serve beer, dresse-out the meat, run
hither and thither: which are al acts of Humility, and partly show us what
Humility the State does breed in us, partly increase it daily more and more.

18. And this shall suffice, for as much as concerns Virtue. The like may be
said of the gifts of the Holie-Ghost. Wisdom.
For where is more perfect Wisdom t^en in Religion, where that light does
shine, which teaches us to value every thing according to the true worth of
it? that is, to make great account of Divine and heavenly things, and to set
lightly by earthly things: whereupon S. Augustine has this saying: S. Aug. in
(...)
The Prophet says: The beginning of wisdom is the ^c^re of our Lord. And
what is the beginning of wisdom, but to renounce the world? ^
because to be worldly wise, is foolishnes. Where is that Understanding more
quick, which diuing into the deapth of every thing, discovers clearly from
whence they have their beginning, by whom they were created, what beauty is in
them, what benefit they bring unto us, and how the Author of them is made
known by them?

Knowledge.
19. Knowledge (as the tree in the midst of Paradise, by which we might have
discerned good from evil) flourishes also in this place; neither are we here
forbidden to touch it, ^
as then we were, but rather we are bid to make use of it. The same we may say
of Counsel, and Forttitude; whereof the one armeth a soul against the vice of
headlong rashness, that it may neither err nor fall; the other strengthens it
against adversity, that it may rejoice and triumph in the midst of it.

(...).
20. (...) softneth the hardness of our heart, and melts it with love, of God and
our Neighbor, and the fear of God shuts up the rank, that no man may
confide in himself, (...) of God.
or in his own strength, but as the Wiseman admonishes, be (...): which
wholesome fear is proper and intrintsecal to Religion. Prou. ^8.14.
For the only cause (at least a chief motive) why people undertake this
profitable flight, from the pleasures of the world, to the sweet yoke of
Christ, is, because perceauing the dangers of the world, and the malice of the
Devil, and their own weakness, to be so great, they can think of no better
refuge, then to shelter themselves in Religion (as little chickens, when the
kite houers over them) under the wings of our Lord, and there to remain, ^d
iniquity pass away, and the misery of this life, the whole length whereof is
deservedly called by holy Job, a warrefare upon earth.

^
21. Wherefore to draw to a conclusion of this point, seeing there is such
plenty of rare virtues in a Religious course, what can we liken it unto
better, then to a Crown or diadem of gold set with pearl and precious stones
of al fortes? So that upon whomesoeuer the Crown is bestowed, all the gemmes
and precious stones must necessarily be bestowed upon him; because they are set
fast in it; for in like manner, whomesoeuer God does inspire to take a
Religious course, at the self-same time, and by the self-same act, he
conferreth upon him all the blessings and gifts, which I have rehearsed, and
that great heap of heavenly wealth and treasure is, at it were, at the
self-same instant put into his bosom. And as, when a man is borne into this
world, al things, which are necessary to the constitution of a man, are
consequently bestowed upon him, to wit, the body of a man and the members
thereof, and the soul of a man with the properties belonging unto it; because
otherwise he should not be a man: though this body is at first little, and the
self-same in time and by the continual nourishment, which we take, grows
bigger and bigger; and our soul, which is at first in a man not unpolished,
must be perfected by (...) and industry: So when God, who commands light to
shine in darkness, does ^^li^hten a ma^'s heart, and drawing him out of the power
of death, makes him worcester(...) the Saints on light, he does necessarily also give
him all the virtues, which are necessarily required for the accomplishing of
this course, ^
as Poverty, Faith, Humility, Obedience, and the rest, which I have already
mentioned; some expressly and directly, others at least inuoluedly, giving him a
desire and affection to others some, with a full deliberation, and purpose to
purchase them: though al these virtues are afterward to be conserved,
increased, and put into a better forwardnes, by the grace of God and man's own
endeavor concurring together. Which does evidently discover the greatness of
this heavenly benefit. For if al these virtues were to be purchased by our
own labor and industry, to what an exigent should we be brought? How much
toil and sweat of our brows would every one of them cost us, they being so
many in number, and so hard to compass? But now being al included in a
Religious state of life, God, that gives the state, gives the virtues also; and
whosoever takes the State upon him, must necessarily receive them together
with it.

How great the perfection of a Religious State is. CHAP. X.
SVPPOSING this great concourse of Virtues, whereof a Religious state is
compacted, as a body of many members, (as I have showed) it will not be hard
to conjecture, or rather it is apparent of itself, how great the perfection of
this manner of life is. For Virtue being the only perfection of a nature, that
is endued with reason, the institute or course of life, wherein al virtues
concur in so eminent a degree, must needs be most perfect, most honorable,
and most glorious, for a reasonable man to live in. And this is that, which at
this present we will take into our consideration; chiefly recording the
sentences of holy Fathers concerning this point, least following our own
discourse, we may be thought to flatter ourselves, and praise our own trade.

2. S. Dionyse (one of the ancient Writers in the Catholic Church, S. Dion.
Ecc. Hier. c. 5.
and of greatest authority, next to the holy Scriptures) called the degree
and Order of a Bishop, a Perfecting degree, because it is ordained for the
perfecting of others; and the state of Monks (whereof he delivers many great
commendations) he calls a state of such as are perfect. Caiet. 1 2. q. 189.
a. 3, S. Basil. de Just. monach. ser. 1.
Which our Divines declaring in other terms, say, that the State of Monks
aymeth at their own perfection, the State of a Bishop at the perfecting of
others. S. Basil in his Sermons of the Institution of a Monk, has this
discourse: He that renounced the world, must make account, and always bear in
mind, that he has stepped a degree beyond the bounds of humane nature, and
betaken himself to an Institute far different from the course of the body,
and consequently undertaken to imitate the conversation of Angels: For it is
proper to the nature of Angels to be free from earthly ties, and having their
eyes continually fixed upon the face of GOD, not to be drawn to contemplate
any other beauty; This is S. Basil's judgment of this course of life, Id.
Ser. ^*
which els-where he calls a Sublime and excellent manner of living.

S. Hiero. Ep. 1^0.
3. S. H^erome in his Epistle to Hedibia speaks thus: Will thou be perfect,
and stand in the highest rank of promotion? Do that, which the Apostles did;
Sell what thou have, and give it to the poor, and follow thy Savior; attend
upon the sole naked Cross with sincere virtue. And in another of his Epistles
to Demetrius: Id. Ep. 8.
It is the height of an Apostolical life and perfect Virtue, to sell al and
deal it among the poor; and thus lightened and disburdened, to fly up to
heaven with Christ; though in this, every age and every person is left to his
free will and choice. He says: Id. Ep. 34.
If thou will be perfect; I do not force you, I do not command you; I propose
the prize, I show the rewards; it is yours to choose, whether you will be
crowned in the lists and combat. And yet more plainly and copiously writing to
Iulianus: This I exhort thee unto, if thou will be perfect; if thou aim at the
height of Apostolical dignity; if taking thy Cross thou will follow Christ;
if laying hand on the plough, thou look not back; if placed in a high place at
the feast, thou contemn thy old clothes; and let go the cloak of this
world, to escape the Egyptian Lady. For Elias making haste to the heavenly
kingdoms, cannot go up with his cloak, but lets his unclean garment fall
to the world, that is unclean. Thou will say: This is for men of Apostolical
dignity, and such as will be perfect. Thou that art first in the world, why
shoudst not thou be first in the household of Christ? And a little after: If
thou give thy self to God, and perfect in Apostolical virtue begin to follow
our Savior, then thou will perceive, where thou were, and how in the army of
Christ thou hold the lowest place. S. Hierome styles the place, in which
Iulianus then was when he wrote this Epistle to him, the lowest place, because
he was still in the world, a man not evil and vicious, but a good man, and among
secular people, rare for his virtue and piety, leading a single life, and
being one, who (as S. Hierome writes of him) mayntayned whole companies of
Monks, upon the large possessions, which God had given him: And yet he does not
doubt to rank this man, that was so rich in good works, S. August. lib de 8.
Virg. c. ^1.
with the last in the army of Christ.

4. S. Augustine speaks to the same effect in many places, but chiefly in the
Book, which he wrote of holy Virginity, where he says thus: When the
professors of perpetual Continency, comparing themselves with married people,
shall find, that (according to holy Scripture) they that martie are far
inferior to themselves, both in the labor and in the hire belonging to it; in
their desire, and in the reward; let them instantly call to mind that, Eccl. 3 20
which is written: The greater thou art, humble thyself the more in all things.

Id. 89.
5. There is also an excellent Epistle of his extant, where he enlarges himself
very much in commendation of this kind of life; and among other things he
says, that to leave al, is a noble resolution; a more excellent perfection,
then the only keeping the Commandments of God; finally that they, who
entertayne this Counsel of Perfection, to sell al, and distribute it among the
poor, to the end that easing their shoulders of the burden of this world,
they may be the freer to take up the sweet yoke of our Savior Christ upon
them, do it out of a kind of generositie of a noble Spirit; and they that
arrive not to this perfection, are the more infirm, and not thought fit for so
glorious an enterprise; though, if they keep the Commandments, and use their
wealth as if they had it not, they may be saved.

6. S. Gregory particularly upon those words of holy Job: Job. 7 16. S. Greg.
8. moral. c. 15.
I have despayred, now I will no longer live, has this excellent saying: There
be some just men, that aim at heavenly things; yet so, as not to break with
the hopes, which they have in their earthly substance; they reserve the
inheritance, which God has given them, to supply their necessities; they
retain the temporal honors and preferments which do befall them; they covet
not that which belongs to others; they use their own within compass of
Justice and equity. There be other just men, that buckling themselves to the
attaining of the height of Perfection, while they inwardly aim at the
highest, forsake al things which are without; they bereave themselves of the
things they did possess; they deprive themselves of the glory of worldly
preferments; they refuse the comfort of al outward things; and the nearer they
approach in their mind to the inward joys, the more absolutely do they kill
within themselves the life of corporal delight. For to them S. Paul addresseth
his words when he says: Col. 3.3.
You are dead, and your life is hidden with Christ in God. And Truth itself in
his own words admonishes us, saying: Luc. 9.32. Luc. 14.33.
If any will come after me, let him deny himself. And again: Unless a man
renounce all that he does possess, he cannot be my disciple.

7. Origin (an Author much esteemed for his learning and antiquity) speaks
thus: Origin. Hom. 11. in Leuit.
If a man have vowed himself to God; if he entangle not himself in secular
businesses, to the end to please him to whom he has engaged himself; if he be
severed and parted from the rest that live carnally, and are tied to worldly
affairs; not seeking the things which are upon earth but those which are in
heaven; such a man is deservedly called holy. For while a man remains in
worldly company, rolling up and down in the multitude of unquiet people, not
attending to God alone, nor severed from the vulgar; Leuit 20.25. 2. Pet 1.16
he cannot be holy. Thou therf^re that hear these things when the law of
God is read, to whom the Word of God himself does speak, saying: Be holy,
because I, your Lord God, am holy: understand with discretion what is said,
that thou may be blessed, when thou have performed it. This is that which is
said unto thee: Depart not only from every other man, but even from thy
brother, that walks unquietly; sever thyself from earthly dealings, from the
concupiscence of the world; vow thyself to God, as the first-fallen calf; be
holy and layd-aside for the use of the Priests only, given over to their use,
as the first-begotten of every living creature; sever and set thyself apart,
as a holy viol-glasse, as holy censers to be used only in the Temple; and
attending to the service of God, be holy and severed within the temple of God,
as the holy Vestments of the high Priest. Finally the verdict of S. Bernard
must not be forgotten, S Bernard de pr^t. and discip.
when speaking in commendation of a Religious State, he gives it a singular
pre-eminence of a Spiritual life (for so he speaks) excelling al other kinds
of humane conversation; and making the professors and lovers of it like
Angels, and far unlike to men; and reformeth in man the image of God,
conforming us to Christ.

8. Moreover we may understand the perfection of a Religious vocation* by that
the ancient Fathers do usually style it, Religion (...) Apostolical life.
an Apostolical life and calling; which is to place it in the very top of al
Sanctity. For no man can doubt, but that the Apostles did excel in all
Euangelical perfection, as being Christ's own disciples, and Masters of the
whole world, and, as S. Paul speaks, Romans 8.23.
had the first fruits of Spirit, so abundantly, as the day of Pentecost does
witness. S. Bernard de 4. deb.
Whereupon S. Bernard in a certain Sermon speaks thus to his Brethren: What is
it thanks be to him, by whose grace all this is done) what is it, that your
life does resemble the life of the Apostles? they forsook al; and assembled
together in the School of Christ, in his presence, drew waters in joy of the
fountain of our Savior, drinking of the fountain of life at the fountain
itself. Blessed are their eyes that beheld it. Have not you also done somewhat
the like, not in his presence, but in his absence; not at the word of his
mouth, but upon the word of his messengers? Maintain this your prerogative,
which they upon sight and word of mouth, you by hearing and by message, have
believed. Behold, how he compares a Religious State with that worthy act of
the Apostles, and in a manner does prefer it before them, in regard that, Io.
20.29.
as our Savior said, they are more blessed, that have not seen, and have
believed.

S. Bernard s^r. de al^^. and Ba^^^. Cord^^. Religion compared with the
Prophets, Apostles, and Angels.
9. In an other place he does yet more fully and more plainly compare this kind
of life, not only with the Apostles, but with the Prophets, and the very
Angels. These are his words: You see, my Brethren, what spirit you have
received; the spirit, which is of God, that you may know the things which God
has given you. We have heard the degree of excellency, wherein the Apostles,
and the Prophets, and the Angels are seated, and I make account we cannot aim
at any higher thing. Verily me thinks, I find something of each of them in
you, and something that is excellent. For who will not be bold to say, that this
single life of yours, is a life celestial and Angelical? or that in the
Resurrection, all the Elect shall be as you now are, as the Angels of God in
heaven, wholly forbearing marriage? Preserve, my Brethren, this precious Jewel,
preserve that sanctity of life, which resembles you to the Saints, and makes
you of the household of God; Sap 6 ^0.
holy Scripture saying, that Incorruption makes a man near to God. You are
that which you are, not by your own desert, but by the grace of God, in regard
of your chastity and sanctimonie, Angels upon earth, or rather Citizens of
Heaven, but yet a while upon earth pilgrims. What shall we say of the gift of
Prophecy? Truly it is a rare kind of prophesying, A rare kind of Prophecy. 2.
Cor. 4.^8. Col ^. Plul. ^.13
that which I see you given unto, and an excellent study to which I see you
applied. What is that? that which the Apostle speaks of, not to consider the
things which are seen, but which are not seen. This certainly is to
prophecy; To walk in spirit; to live according to faith; to seek the things
which are about, not which are upon earth; to forget the things which are
behind; to stretch to those which are before us, is a great part of Prophecy.
For how is our conversation in heaven, but by the spirit of Prophecy? For so
the Prophets of-old were, as if they were not, among the men of their time; but
by spirit and Prophetical commotion, transcending the days they lived in, they
did rejoice to see the day of our Lord; they saw it and were glad in it. Let us
hear what profession the Apostles were of: Behold, we have left al, and have
followed thee. Matthew. 19^
If it be lawful to glory, we have glory; but if we be wise, we will have
care, that we have it with God. For not our mighty hand, but our Lord has
done al these things. He that is powerful has done great things to us, so that
our soul may worthily magnify our Lord. For it is by his great gift, that in
so great measure we follow that great course and purpose, in which those great
Apostles did glory. Thus does S. Bernard discourse in commendation of a
Religious state, paralelling it in many things with those three degrees of
Perfection. Let us see how in some things he does prefer it, which is a far
greater commendation. Perhaps, says he, if I will glory also in this, I shall
not be unwise; for I shall speak the truth: There be some here that have left
more then a boat and nets. And what is it, that the Apostles left al indeed but
to follow our Savior, who was present with them? It is not for me to say what
it is; we shall with more safety hear our Savior himself saying: Because thou
have seen me, Thomas, thou have believed; blessed are they that have not
seen, and have believed. Perhaps also it is a more excellent kind of
Prophecy, not to attend to any temporal thing, nor to things that with time
do perish, but to those that are spiritual and Eternal. And the treasure of
Chastity is more illustrious in a vessel of earth, and virtue in some sort
more laudable in flesh that is frail and weak. When therefore we find in this
body of ours an Angelical conversation, in our heart a Prophetical expectation,
in both an Apostolical perfection, what a mass of grace is there? Thus spoke
S. Bernard; and I know not what can be said more to the honor and commendation
of a Religious Institute.

10. But what do we stand heaping together the praises of men, when we have
the verdict of Truth it self from God's own mouth? For of this State our
Savior spoke those words: If thou will be perfect, go and sell all that thou
have, and come follow me. Matthew. 19.21.
Where it is to be considered what our Savior said; and to whom. He spoke to
a man that was not wicked and debauched, but honest and orderly; for he had
kept the commandments of God al his lifetime he had done no man no wrong; and
our Savior beholding him, did love him. Who would not have thought that this
man was perfect, seeing he had been so careful and diligent in fulfilling the
law of God? and yet our Savior tells him: Thou want yet one thing; a thing
so great and of so high a strain, that the man (though invited by our Savior)
had a horror to climb up this one degree and step. Let us see therefore in
what this Perfection does consist, which the man did want; If thou will be
perfect, go and sell al. He therefore that sells al, that is, he that
forsakes al and follows the doctrine of Christ, is in a perfect state: he
that has not done this, though he have done al other things, wants yet one
thing. Wherefore a Religious life is the highest Perfection, by confession not
only of learned and holy men, but of our Savior himself; and for as much as
concerns the perfection of our own souls, there is not a higher or more
eminent State.

Religion the chiefest of the Euangelical Counsels.
11. If we consider the nature itself of Religion, we shall discover more plainly
the same Prerogative. For first, Religion is ranked among the Euangelical
Counsels, and is one of the chief of them, or rather the chiefest and greatest
among them. Which we may gather by the manner of our Sauiour's speech, when he
wished the young man to this course, saying: If thou will. For as then it was
proposed to that young man, so it is now proposed to every one under the same
form: If they will. Now certainly a Counsel is far more excellent then a
Precept, Precept and Counsel compared.
for many reasons. First in regard of the matter* The matter of a Precept is
more easy, the matter of a Counsel more hard and difficult* The matter of a
Precept is grounded upon the same grounds that Nature leads us to, the matter
of a Counsel is above the strain of Nature; The matter of a Precept is always
good, of a Counsel better; because a Counsel includes the Precept, and adds
somewhat more above it. Moreover Precepts be common to al, to the high and to
the low, to the wise and to the simple; Counsels are not for all; yea they are
for those only, that will of their own accord admit them. Precepts oblige
people even against their will; Counsels are free and voluntary, before a man
has willingly obliged himself unto them. Precepts, if they be kept, deserve a
reward; if they be neglected, bring punishment upon us; Counsels, if they be
not undertaken, bring no punishment at al upon us; if they be undertaken and
kept, deserve a great reward.

The actions of Religion above Nature.
12. Another thing, by which we may discover the perfection of a Religious
State, is the excellency of the actions which flow from Religion; for they are
not only above the strength of Nature, but do so far surpass the bounds
thereof, as that they cannot be achieved but by an extraordinary abundant
current of Grace. For to bridle our senses, to subject our flesh to Chastity,
utterly to kill our own will, to forgo our freedom, to put our necks into a
yoke of perpetual servitude, to embrace Poverty, to possess nothing, to do
the basest offices in a house, to be ready at every beck of another man, and
always wholly to depend of another's will in all things concerning us: These and
many other things of the same nature, which are so inward to a Religious life
that Religion cannot be without them, are no less repugnant to our corrupted
nature bending wholly to self-loue, then it is against the nature of a man's
body, to fly in the air. For as the heaviness of our body does hinder that we
cannot fly; so the heaviness and corruption of our mind is opposite to al these
things. What therefore is a Religious man but a perpetual Miracle upon earth,
and so many Religious men, A Religious man a great miracle.
so many Miracles? whereof S. Bernard also speaks in this manner: What
greater miracle can there be, then for so many youths, so many young
Gentlemen, so many others whom here I see to remain as it were in an open
prison without irons, S. Bernard sermon 1. de de^i^. Ecclesiae
held only by the fear of God, and to continue in so great affliction of
Penance, beyond the force of man, beyond nature, contrary to their wonted
custom, and breeding? I verily think, that your-selues do see how many
miracles we might quickly find, "if we would search particularly into every
man's passage out of Egypt, his journey in the desert; that is, his renouncing
of the world, his entrance into the Monastery, and his conversation while he
is there. What perfection therefore can be greater then the perfection of
Religion, which is so miraculous?

13. Where we may observe, Two kind^ of Perfection.
that the Perfection of every thing is twofold. For there is a Perfection,
without which a thing is not perfect in his own nature; as, if a man want
body or soul; whereas if he have both these, he is said to be perfect, for as
much as concerns the nature of man. There is another Perfection, which gives
a kind of grace to a thing; and if it want it, though in nature it be complete,
it is still said to be imperfect; as, if a man have body and soul, but his
body be crooked and deformed. In like manner the perfection of a Christian is
twofold; one is as it were essential, and consists in the full observance of
the Commandments; and this Perfection by itself alone, is but lame and
imperfect; because it wants that grace and beauty, which the keeping of the
Counsels may add unto it, as a degree of far higher perfection; a perfection
which no man, doubtless, can choose but love and desire, Religion much to be
desired.
if he do behold it. For goodness, and beauty, and order, is naturally so
forcible, that we cannot but desire it, if we once cast the eyes of our mind
or body upon it; though in small things there can be but small show of it. How
forcible therefore must it needs be, when it appears in things that are rare
and excellent? For as we do not only take pleasure in viewing a gardin (for
example) that is neatly kept, and well set-forth and furnished; or a house that
is well built and commodious, and such other things of greater bulck; but in a
flower, and an apple, and in any little thing that is curiously wrought, and
has any workmanship in it, and finally in whatsoever we find any expression
of beauty and handsomnes, and in every one of these things, according to the
several kinds and natures of them: Much more contentment, doubtless, must we
needs take in any thing, the more complete and admirable the perfection of
the thing is. Wherefore seeing among all the things of this world, nothing can be
better or of greater value, then one's Mind and Soul; the perfect ornament,
and most complete perfection thereof must needs be the thing, which of al
others is most beautiful and comely in itself, and most to be desired. For if
a man, that beholds attentively the beauty of a body, be necessarily taken
with the proportion that is betwixt one member and another, and with the
convenient temper of the color and complexion of it; the same temper, and
proportion, and beauty being in the Mind far more excellent, shall it not
draw a man to the like contentment and admiration? And if no man, in whose
power it were to frame himself a body, would make it lame, imperfect, and
deformed; what madness is it, to choose a soul, that is crooked and imperfect?
In all other things, we desire the best, and the most complete. If we be to buy
a horse, or to build a house, or to make a suit of clothes, or a pair of
shoes, we should think ourselves fools, if of purpose we should choose the
worst, when we might have better; and of things that are within us, we desire
in all other things to be excellent; They that study, desire to be excellent in
learning; they that practice their weapon, content themselves with no mean
skill in it; and in every handie-craft, though in itself the trade be base and
seruil, yet every body desires to do it, after the best manner; because
Perfection pleases in every thing, and every body does aim at it, and
labor for it. If therefore in these little things, perfection does so much
please us, the perfection of the mind must certainly in reason be far more
pleasing, as being far more graceful and admirable, and specially the
perfection, which virtue and good life does work in us. Wherefore seeing there
cannot be found a subject more noble then our mind, nor a more noble form
then sanctity, and the compound of them both must consequently needs be the
rarest and most Divine that can be: Religion, which contains all this, must
necessarily also be valued accordingly, and loved, and embraced, and sought for
by all means possible.

Of the dignity of a Religious State, in regard of the similitude, which it
has with God and with our Savior. CHAP. XI.
HITHERTO we have spoken of so much of the dignity of a Religious life, as
comes by the Virtues and other extrinsecal ornaments which are in it: Now we
will consider what honor and excellency does accrue upon it by the similitude,
which it has with Christ our Savior, and with God; which doubtless is so
great, as greater cannot be upon earth. And as for the similitude which it has
with our Savior Christ, two things may be briefly considered, both of them in
themselves apparent enough. First the likeness which is betwixt his manner of
life, and a Religious course; secondly, the great honor and dignity, which
this similitude does bring with it.

Religious people imitate our Savior (...) of (...).
2. Al Christians, as the Apostle tells us, must imitate our Savior; their
profession and their very name does require it of them: Religious people
therefore do above al others most punctually and most exactly endeavor unto
it, framing their several institutions, after the manner of life and
conversation of our B. Savior* as painters draw a picture after life. Their
poverty, resembles his poverty, who had not where to lean his head; Their
chastity, his chastity, who was the brightness of the light Eternal; their
obedience is drawn from the deapth of his humility, who was obedient even
unto death; finally whatsoever Religious people do, ^.
al their exercises, al their endeauours, are conformable to that pattern and
example, which was showed the world in that mystical Hill, ^
which is the humane Nature of our Savior, ouertopping al men in virtue and
dignity, far higher then the highest hill does the rest of the earth.
Whereupon S. Bernard says, that men of good will, who out of a Christian
resolution have either exchanged their riches with poverty, or, though they
had none, have set them at naught as if they had had them, forsaking al for
him, as he forsook al for their sakes, do follow wheresoever he goes. Which
only word ( wheresoever he goes) does imply not only imitation, but a most
perfect expression of him.

3. This expression is most of al to be seen in the Cross of Christ; which
Cassian does lay before our eyes in lively colors, out of a Speech, which
Penusius (a holy Abbot) made in his hearing, to a Nouice, when he admitted him
to a Monastical course. For, according as Cassian relates, Cassian l 4. c. 32.
he said thus unto him; that the forsaking of the world, is as it were an image
of the Cross, the whole life of a Religious man expressing the manner in which
our Savior hung upon it. For as he that is crucified, cannot stir his body
as he list, neither on the one side, nor the other; A Religious man an image of
Christ Crucified.
so the will of a Religious man is fastened to the Cross, that is, to a thing
that is continually paineful and irksome to flesh and blood: And as he, that
hangs upon a Cross, does neither mind that which is before his eyes, nor
care for providing for to morrow, nor desires lands nor possessions, but
living in body, is dead to al things in though, and affection, and has his
mind wholly fixed upon that which shall befall him in another world; so a
Religious man is not only dead to vice and concupiscence, but to this very
natural world itself, and to al things in it, and his mind and body is wholly
bent to that place, where every moment he hops to arrive; and consequently
being absolutely dead to the world, and to all the actions and desires thereof, he
lives in him only, who was Crucified for him.

4. This similitude with Christ Crucified will easily lead us to the
understanding of the honor and dignity, The honor which he has by it.
which a Religious man gets by it. The Majesty of the Eternal God is so
very great, and the dignity of his Person so infinite, that whatsoever he
unites to himself, he rayseth it withal to an infinite degree of honor and
worth, and gives it part of his own beauty and glory, by the union, which
it has with himself, how mean soever the thing were before. For what can be
more contemptible then flesh, which is but dirt and filth? and yet so soon as
it was united to that Divine subsistence, that very dirt was not only worthy
of al veneration, but deserved to be adored as a thing Divine. The Cross
itself, which before was so infamous, and, as the Apostle speaks, a curse,
now since the Son of God has touched it, is become so honorable, that Kings
and Princes wear it for an ornament upon their heads. Which how due it is unto
it, S Andrew.
S. Andrew felt in himself, when at his death he was not only not afraid of the
Cross which was prepared for him, but having long-before desired it, went to
it with joy and gave the reason in these words: Hail, Cross, dedicated in
the body of Christ, and adorned with his members, as with so many precious
Jewels. And whosoever acknowledges and worshippeth Christ for God, must have
the like reverent esteem not only of the Cross of Christ, but of poverty,
and contempt, and obedience, whereby we subject ourselves to other men* and of
all the parts and offices of Religious humility; for by the connection, which
they have with our Savior, they received, as it were, a ray of his Divinity,
which has excessiuely graced and ennobled* and, S. Bernard vig. na^. Sermon. 1.
as I may say, in a manner Deifyed them. Whereupon S. Bernard said excellently
well: Because Poverty was not found in heaven, and abounded on earth, and yet
the price of it was not known, the Son of God descended, to make it
esteemed, Id. Sermon. 4.
by the account which he made of it. And in another place: The swathing-clowts
of our Savior are more honorable, then any purple-garment; Poverty
commanded.
and his manger more glorious then the golden Chaires-of-state; and his
poverty more rich, then whatsoever wealth and worldly treasure. And yet more
signally in one of his Sermons upon Christmasday: Our Savior, to whom all the
gold and silver that is, does belong, does consecrate holy Poverty in his
own body. Id in na^. domini. Sermon. 4.
What can be said more to the commendation and honor of Poverty, and of an
humble life, then that, by the union with God, it has received a kind of
sanctity and consecration? Which manner of speech I find also that S. Hierome
uses in his epistle to Nepotianus telling us, S Hierom. Epist 2.
that now we have no reason to be drawn to love riches by example of the
ancient Patriarcks among the Jews, seeing our Savior has sanctified the
poverty of his house. Faith therefore grounded in the example, which we have
before our eyes, in our Savior, ought in reason to move us to this esteem of
it; specially seeing the same example of our Savior not yet acted, Heb. 11.24.
but foreseen only afarre-of by the light of Prophecy, was so powerful with
Moses, that when he might have been thought to have been of the bloud-Royal of
Egypt, he chose rather, as the Apostle speaks, to be afflicted with the
people of God, esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches, then the
Egyptian treasures. If, I say, the knowledge of Christ was so forcible when he
was as yet to come; ought not his example, in reason, be now much more powerful
after his coming, Gal. 3.
when we behold him as it were painted and hanging before our eyes, S Leo sermon.
2 de R^sur.
and having filled the world with so many, so clear, and so pregnant examples
of al kind of Humility? For, as S. Leo says very well, rich men ought not to
contemn the humility of Christ, nor noble men be ashamed of it; for no
earthly felicity can rise to that greatness, as to think scorn of that, which
God in the shape of a slave did not think unworthy of himself.

5. Thus does the similitude with Christ our Savior grace and honor a
Religious State. But if descending to our Nothing, he could so exalt and
ennoble us, what shall we think he does when he rayseth us to the likeness of
that, which he is in himself? For therefore did the lover of mankind stoop to
the likeness of our weak state, that he might exalt us to the similitude of of
his Divinity. No excellency greater then to be like to God.
Therefore we will consider further, how this course of life does not only make
us like to his humiliation, but to his Majesty; which if we can prove, what
higher dignity can there be for a Religious state to stretch itself unto? For
certainly the greatest excellency that can be thought on in heaven or upon
earth, is to be like to God, which the Prince of Pride understanding, ^say.
14.14.
and being ambitious of it, said, I will get-vp above the stars, and be l^ke
the Highest; S Leo s^r 1. (...) 10. men^.
and was not condemned for desiring it, but for desiring it disorderly, that
is, not in that measure and way, which he ought. And so S. Leo says: We find
man created to the image of God, to the end he may imitate his Creator; and we
are then in the dignity, which does naturally belong unto us, when the face of
the Divine goodness does, as it were, in a looking-glass appear in us. And S.
Gregory discoursing of those words of S. Paul, Act. 17.28.
we are of the progeny of God, says thus: We are said to be of the progeny
of God, not that we are borne of his nature, but because by his spirit he has
voluntarily begot us, and as it were created us again by adoption; and
consequently the more a man is renewed to the likeness of God by imitation, and
more lively expression of the image, which he has received, the nearer does
he come to his native nobility.

6. Therefore to be like to God is without exception the greatest dignity,
Religious people like God.
which man can attain unto; let us then see how many and how efficacious
means Religion has to advance us to this likeness. First, it rooteth al vice
out of our mind, and al turbulent passion; which two are the chiefest
hindrances of the similitude we speak of. S. Basil ser. 1. de Inst. mon.
S. Basil does reckon this a chief benefit of a Religious State; and in one of
his Sermons discourses thus of it: Man being created to the image of God,
stained this his dignity most miserably, when he suffered his mind to stoop
to sin and sinful desires. By quiet of mind.
But whereas it is natural to God, always to enjoy perfect peace and
tranquillity of mind, never troubled with any sinister affection; whosoever
brings himself to this quiet, does doubtless restore the Image of God
(defaced in him) to the beauty which he formerly had, and makes himself like
to God: And consequently a Religious course of life must needs be wonderfully
effectual for this purpose, in regard of the Chastity and Abstinence, which it
does profess; not only cleansing us thereby from al filthy pleasure, but
reforming our whole life also, and restrayning our whole behavior within
certain limits, without which the integrity of a single life cannot be
preserved.

7. To which purpose also S. Gregory brings that saying of the Wiseman:
Sap. 12.18.
Thou, S. Greg. 5. mor. 3^.
o Lord, iudgest with tranquillity; and says thus: We must specially note,
that as often as we restrain the turbulent motions of our mind by the virtue
of meeknes, we endeavor to return to the likeness of our Creator. It being
therefore all the employment in a manner, which Religion has, to alay these
passions, and to teach us how to compose them; it does necessarily follow, that
it leads us withal to the perfect similitude with God, of which we are
speaking.

8. And yet Religion works a man to a higher and more excellent degree of
this similitude with God, directing him wholly to cut-of his own will, that the
sole will of God comes to have absolute pre-eminence in him in all things, And by
conformity of will.
great and little; in so much that he desires nothing, but what God will; nor
refuses any thing, but what God disliketh; and stands moreover so deeply
obliged to God, that it is not lawful for him to desire any thing but what God
will have; which is the most absolute similitude, which man can possibly have
with God upon earth. S. Bernard ad Fraires de Mon^^ Dei.
And of it S. Bernard speaks in this manner: The unity of spirit, which a
man, that has his heart seated on high, has with God, is the perfecton of a
will that profits to Godward, when a man does not only desire what God will
have, but is both so affected in mind, and so perfect in his affection, that
he cannot desire any thing else, but that which God will have. For to desire
that which God will have, is to be like to God; but moreover not to be able to
desire but that which God will have, is to be that which God is; whose will and
being are the same.

9. This great perfection, which S. Bernard speaks of, either cannot be
gotten in this life, or if there be any means to get it, it is by the Vows of
Religion; And by the (...) ^f ou^ Vows.
which do not only subject our will to God, but bind it unto him in bonds that
cannot be broken. From which firmnes of our Vows, we may gather another
similitude betwixt us and God. For as nothing is more natural to God, then to
be immutable, and subject to no kind of change or alteration; so the Vows of
Religion give a man the like property, as much as man is capable of it. S
Bernard (...).
Which S. Bernard also does insinuate when he says: There is yet a nearer
similitude with God by means of our will consisting in Virtue; when a Soul
does aim, as it were, to express the greatness of the Souueraigne Good, by the
greatness of Virtue; and the vnchangeablnes of his Eternity, by constant
perseverance in that which is good. Those sacred bonds therefore of the Vows
bring with them this firmnes; which is a kind of expression of the Eternity of
God, binding us even against our will, yet withal giving us strength and force
to be willing. And we may well liken it to a ship, that rides at ancker, which
may be wafted and tossed by the billows of the sea, but cannot be carried into
the main, nor driven upon the rocks: so a Soul obliged to God (who in himself
is so firm and immovable) may lie floating upon the water, and sometimes be
tossed, by reason of our natural infirmity, so long as we are in this world,
specially the waves and gusts of temptation rushing against us; but the cables
of our Vows do easily stay us; and though we be heaued-at, we give not place,
but stick immoueably to God, to whom we have vowed our selves.

Two kinds of Excellency in God.
10. There is yet an other similitude with God, which is admirable. For whereas
in God there be two kinds of Excellency; the one consisting in Holiness, the
other in Power; men most commonly care not greatly to be like him in Sanctity,
but do greatly affect to be like him in Power and authority, and dream of
nothing else, but how they may get honor, Sanctity the way to honor.
preferment, and command. Wherein they commit two several errors: For if a
body must needs fail of being like to God in one of these, we should rather
seek to be like him in sanctity, in regard it is necessary to salvation,
then in power, which is not necessary; secondly because there is not a more
effectual means to be like him in power and honor, then if we be like him in
sanctity: For as they are both necessarily conjoined in God, so whosoever does
imitate the excellency of his goodness, must necessarily be also like him in
power. And this has been the raising of a Religious State above al things
created; for, as I have discoursed at large before, it is raised by despising
and treading al things under foot; for they that love them, are slaves to them;
they that contemn them are masters over them. S. Bernard ser. 21. in ca^^.
Which subject S. Bernard does handle divinely in one of his Sermons upon the
Canticles in these words: When thou beginnest to renew and reform thyself
according to that rare and ancient similitude of the Eternal God ( with whom
there is no transmutation nor shadow of change and vicissitude) amidst the
adverse and prosperous chances of changeable time, ^^c. 1.17.
thou will retain a certain image of Eternity, to wit, an immovable and
inviolable evenness of a constant mind praising God at al times, and
consequently clayming, as it were by right, a kind of state of perpetual
unchangeableness, even in the midst of the doubtful events and undoubted defects
of this tottering world. For as he is, so shall thou be in this world; neither
in adversity fearful, nor dissolute in prosperity. Thus, I say, this noble
Creature made to the image and likeness of him that made him, does manifestly
receive again and recover the ancient degree of honor, which it had,
esteeming it an unworthy thing, to be conformable to this present world, but
endeavoring rather (according to the doctrine of S. Paul) to be reformed in
newness of his sense, Romans 12.^^
to that similitude, to which he knows he was created; and by this means
after a strange manner turning the state of things, he compels this world,
which was made for him, to conform itself to him; in regard that al things
begin to cooperate unto him for his good, as acknowledging their Master, for
whose service they were created, as it were, in his own natural likeness,
having shaken-of the base shape which he had assumed. So that in my opinion,
that, which the Only-begotten said of himself, may be also applied to al his
brethren, to wit, that if he were exalted from the earth, he would draw al
things to himself; Io. 12.32.
to them, I say, whom the Father has foreknowne and predestined to be
conformable to the image of his Son, Romans 8.29.
that he may be the first-begotten in many brethren. And I, if I be exalted
from the earth (I may boldly say it) will draw al things to my self: for I do
not (my Brethren) rashly usurp his speech, whose likeness I put on. Thus
far S. Bernard.

11. Wherefore it is certain, that this is the greatest glory and honor which
man can rise unto, to be in this manner like unto the Highest; for it places a
Soul in that pitch of height, that it has a kind of Sovereignty over al
creatures, like a little God. But no man arriueth unto it, but he that (as S.
Bernard speaks) is exalted from the earth, that is, he that has seated
himself far above the earth and al earthly things, by contemning and
abandoning them.

Religion is a kind of Martyrdom. CHAP. XII.
AMONG all the duties, which belong to a Christian, none is more excellent, none
more commended, then Martyrdom. And the reason is, because both Charity, from
which it proceeds, is the highest of al virtues; and among the works of
Charity, Martyrdom is the greatest work. The evil also, which we undergo by
Martyrdom, is the greatest of evils, to wit, death; and the good, with which
we part, is the most desired of al goods, to wit, life. And yet this being so
great a work as it is, if we compare it with a Religious State, we shall find,
that as in many things Martyrdom goes beyond Religion, Religion compared
with Martyrdom.
so in many things a Religious State ^ot^ surpass Martyrdom; and be it never
so great, Religion does partake in great measure with it.

2. Martyrdom excels, in regard it endures far greater torments; yet the
greater the torments are, they must needs be the sh^rter, and bring a man the
sooner to his end. Religion therefore even in this does, in a manner, excel
Martyrdom; because, though the pains be not so sharp, they are of greater
continuance, and last the longer time. Martyrdom is to be preferred in regard
it has the glory of laying down a man's life, which, as I said, is the
greatest thing that one can pawn for another. Religion, though it have not
this glory, it has the continuance of a long and holy life, furnished with
plenty of good works, advancing a man highly in the favor of God, and
rewarding him with many degrees of glory in heaven; so that, if we aim at
spiritual gains, which is the intent of our travels in the pilgrimage of this
life, there is no doubt, but many years well and holily spent in Religion,
according to the Rules and orders of that State, will amount to a greater mass
and increase of reward, then one only act of Martyrdom, which ordinarily does
pass in a moment of time, can purchase us.

Religion the safer way.
3. Moreover, whereas both these kinds of trafficking for the heavenly kingdom
are doubtless very gaineful, and bring a plentiful return to those that deal
in them, Religion notwithstanding must needs be the safer way of trading. For
in Martyrdom certainly the hazard is very great; and so we find that many,
who at first seemed stout and courageous, fainted at last most shamefully, when
they came to the push. In which kind we read of one of S. Pacomius his
disciples, who having by importunity drawn a consent from S. Pacomius, that
he might put himself into an occasion of Martyrdom, fell most miserably, and
returning to his monastery, repaired by Religious discipline the dam^age,
which he had suffered by ouer-greedie desire of that Crown. H^w pitifully
does S. Cyprian lament many, S Cyprian ser c^laps^^.
who in his time were overcome before the battle, overthrown before the
encounter; who, so soon as Proclamation was read, voluntarily of themselves
ran to the Marketplace, to deny Christ; and when the officers delayed them,
because night gr^w on, urged still, that their wicked Protestation might be
presently admitted? Religion on the other side is not subject to this danger,
because it is more suitable to a man's disposition; and there be many things in
it, which alay the harshnes of the course, so that the hardness of it is not
greatly felt. Martyrdom is not in our power: for neither ought we kill
ourselves, nor provoke others to kill us; both because it were presumption to
do so, and because, as S. Thomas argues, we should provoke another to do
evil, S. Thom. 2.2. q. 124. a. 1.
which is against Charity: so that the means of meriting by way of Martyrdom
happens seldom, and is scarce or not at al to be had. Religion is at hand; we
may this day, if we will, embrace it.

4. Finally, Religion a kind of Martyrdom. S. Greg. ^om. (...) in E^ang.
Religion is a kind of Martyrdom; and if we consider the nature of Religion,
together with the sayings of holy Fathers to this purpose, we shall not stick
to yeald it so much honor. For first S. Gregory writes thus: There be two
kinds of Martyrdom; the one in mind, the other both in mind and outward
work. We may be Martyrs therefore, though we be not killed by the sword of
another, that strikes us. To dye by the hand of the Persecutour, is Martyrdom
in open deed. But to abide reproachful speeches, to love those that hate us, S
August. ser. 150. d^ temp.
is Martyrdom in secret thought. And S. Augustine to the same purpose writes
in this manner: Let us strive against the deadly allurements of sin, knowing
that Christians cannot want daily Martyrdomes, even in these things. For if
Christ be Chastity, Truth, and Justice, he that lays wait against these
Virtues, is a persecutour; and he a Martyr, that is resolved to maintain them
in himself, and defend them in others. So that in the opinion of S. Augustine,
inward Martyrdom consists in this, that as in the Martyrdom of the flesh,
when the persecutour endeavors to take Christ from us by taking away our
faith, he is a Martyr that resists, to death; so when the devil, (who is our
greatest and cruellest persecutour) labors to take the same Christ our
Savior from our hearts, by depriving us of other virtues, as of Chastity,
Temperance, Humility, and the like; whosoever fights for our Savior in this
kind, and remains constant in the difficulties of this conflict, is also a
Martyr; the one fighting against the devil, as it were, in person; the other
having a man for his adversary. In which respect Climacus calls a Religious
State, Climacus grad. 4. S. Hierome Epist. 27.
the warfare of a spiritual Martyrdom. And S. Hierome writes thus upon the
death of Paula: Not only the shedding of blood is to be accounted Martyrdom,
but the unspotted behavior of a devout mind, is a daily Martyrdom; The
former Crown is made of roses and violets, this of lillies; whereupon it is
written in the Canticles: Voluntary Poverty a kind of Martyrdom.
My beloved is white and ruddie, in peace and in war bestowing upon those,
that overcome, rewards alike.

5. There be other things also, which draw this commendation upon a Religious
State; and, if we believe S. Bernard, Poverty is none of the least: S. Bernard
ser. 1 de omnib. sanctis.
for thus he speaks: What is the matter that one and the same promise is made
to Martyrs, and to those that be poor, but that voluntary Poverty is in
very deed a kind of Martyrdom? What is more admirable, or what Martyrdom can
be more grievous, then to be hungry in the midst of dayntie fare, to starve
for cold in plenty of costly apparel, to be poor in the midst of riches,
which the world affords, the Devil offers, our greedy appetite desires?
Shall not he deservedly be crowned that fights in this manner, rejecting the
World with his promises, scorning the Enemy with his temptations, and (which
is far more glorious) triumphing over him, and crucifying al itching
Concupiscence? Finally the Kingdom of Heaven is therefore promised both to
Martyrs, and to them that be Poor: because it is purchased by Poverty, but by
suffering Martyrdom for Christ, it is presently r^ceaued without delay. S.
Bernard ser. 30. in Can^.
And in another place, comparing the incommodities of Poverty and other
corporal austerities with Martyrdom, he says, that when our Savior tells
us, that we must hate our life, it is to be understood, either by laying it
down as a Martyr, or by punishing it, as those, that be penitent, do; And
adds moreover, that this kind of Martyrdom, in which by spirit we mortifye
the deeds of the Flesh, is not in show so terrible, but in continuance more
troublesome then that, in which our body is killed. And again in another
Sermon: There is a kind of Martyrdom and shedding of blood, in the daily
affliction of our body. Where also he says again, that it is a milder, S
Bernard in o^i. Pasc. Id. in ser. Por.
but a longer kind of Martyrd^me.

6. We may say the same of Chastity; and S. Bernard among the several kinds of
Martyrd^me without blood, reckons Chastity preserved, specially in the time
of youth. Chastity and Obedince a k^^d of M^rtyrd^me.
The sacrifice of our own will, and the binding of it so to Rule and to the
pleasure of other men, that it cannot wind itself as it lists, is another
Martyrdom; which Abbot Pamb^ (a man of great authority and fame among the
ancient Hermits) confirms in this manner: Four Monks coming once to him, al
of them rare for some one virtue or other, one for vigorous fasting, another
for poverty, the third for charity toward his nei^hbour, the fourth for that
he had lived two and twenty years under Obedience, he sticked not to prefer
this last before them al; because the rest had practiced the virtues which they
had, according to their own mind; but this last wholly casting-of his own
will, had made himself a slave to the will of another man; and added further,
that they that do so, are Martyrs, if they continue in that course to the end
of their life. And S. Athanasiu^ writes of S. Antonie, S. Athan. in Va S. Ao^.
that going to Alexandria with desire of suffering Martyrdom, and missing of
his purpose, in regard that God had ordained otherwise, he returned back to his
Monastery, to the daily Martyrdom of his Faith and Conscience, as S
Athanasius speaks.

R^l^^^^n (...) of death.
7. But because Divines deliver, that without death there is no Martyrdom, we
will show that Religion wants not this perfection of Martyrdom also. Death
hereaueth us first of our wealth, our friends, and of al manner of things in
this world: Religion does the same; and so wholly, that we can no more enjoy
them, then if we were dead indeed; where it is particularly to be considered
that when we dye our bodily death, it is easy to bear the want of al things,
because we go to a life, where we shall have no need of them* but ^eer where we
have need of these things, and where the presence of them before our eyes does
continually move us to desire them, it is far more hard to deny hem to
ourselves. Secondly our body feels pain, if we be killed by our enemies;
and who can deny but our mind has his sorrows, and s^rrowes the more paineful
by how much the mind is more noble? For if it has part with the body and the
griefs thereof, because it is the form of the body; the grief, doubtless,
which is within itself, must needs be more paineful to it. By Martyrdom a man
dies to his body; In Religion a man dies to himself. For (as I have showed
before) a Religious man can no more do any thing of himself, or for himself,
then if he were dead and buried, be^eaued both of body and soul. And what is
it for a man to have his soul still in his body, if he can have no use of it
for any ends of his own? For neither in Martyrdom is the soul killed, but
passes from this miserable world to a more happy life; life is not lost by
it, but changed for a life that is far better and more pleasant; so that if
we lay al these things together, confirmed by holy Fathers, we shall find not
one Martyrdom alone, Many Martyrdomes in Religion.
but many Martyrdomes in one Religion: One in Poverty, another in Chastity,
a third and greatest of al in the perpetual denial of our own will; another
again in the affliction and subduing of our flesh; and finally in the
perpetual conflict and combat, which we have with the crafty Serpent, who
labors by all possible means to take Christ from our heart. This was the
sense of Paphnutius a holy Abbot (not he of whom there is often mention in
V^^is Patrum, Paphnutius.
but another of great sanctity and austeritie of life.) This man in the reign
of Diocletian the Emperor being apprehended by the President of Egypt, whose
name was Arianns, and threatened with racks, and Scorpions, and burning
frying-pans, and such like tortures (which the President caused to be brought
before him) unless he would Sacrifice to the Gods, laughing at them said:
Do thou think, that thy torments are so terrible to me, that to avoid them
I shall choose to deny the living God? No; but rather know, that the Rules of
our Monasteries do contain many more grievous torments then these be; for we
are continually tried in many paineful exercises, but our Savior does
strengthen us so that we are able to bear and overcome them al; wherefore he
also will now strengthen me to overcome thy cruelty.

7. S Bernard declared the self-same point by a pleasant passage, S. Bernard*
which was thus: Meeting one day, in the territory of Prince Theobald, a great
throng of people leading a fellow to the gallows, that had been a notable
robber by the high-way-side, rushed in among them to the thief, and would needs
have him from them, saying, he would hang him with his own hands. Prince
Theobald being advertised of the arriual of the Saint, came running to him, and
thinking that he knew not what the fellow was, began to repeat his enormous
crimes, and to protest with great vehemency, that he deserved to dye. S.
Bernard smiling answered thus: I know all this well enough; and therefore,
because one death is not enough for his many offenses, I will make him dye
many deaths. And so taking of his irons he lead him to his Monastery, where
becoming a Monk, and for thirty years together dying (as the Apostle
speaks) every day, 1. Cor. 15.31*
he punished himself with many deaths, in lieu of that one death, which he was
to suffer by the hand of Justice.

Religious people are the Friends, and Children, and Spouses of God. CHAP. XIII.
S. Bernard. Sermon. de Ingrat.
SAINT Bernard in one of his Sermons to his Brethren, discoursing of a
Religious vocation, among other commendations thereof, to extol the greatness of
this benefit, says in this manner: He has not done so to every nation, as to
manifest not only his Judgments unto them, but also his Counsels. But
certainly with us he has dealt magnifically, not only admitting us to be his
servants, but choosing us to be his friends. He says truly, and with very good
ground, that God has dealt magnifically with us; because the friendship of
God, does not only inuolue excessive profit, but exceeding great honor and
dignity, according to that of the Psalm: Ps. 138.17.
Thy friends, o God, are greatly honored, and t^eir principality is greatly
strengthened; where he calls them Princes, whom God has exalted to his
friendship.

2. But to the end we may understand how far this dignity reaches, it will
not be amiss to consider the ground which Aristotle gives in this matter,
Aristotle E^^. 6.
who in Moral things, as far as the light of Nature can carry a man, writes
solidly. He therefore says, that ^riendship consists in an equality between
party and party, so that if there happen to be great inequality betwxit the
parties that are friends, either by difference of their dispositions, or
disparitie of their fortunes and state of life, friendship must needs fail
betwixt them; which is the reason, why we cannot (as he says) have friendship
neither with Kings nor with God. In that he says, there must be some equality
or likeness betwixt friends, How there may be friendship betwixt God and and man.
his opinion is not to be rejected; but he was mistaken in that he saw not how
man might be like to God; and no wonder, because he knew nothing of the gift
of God, which supplieth that in man, which is wanting in Nature. We have reason
rather to give ear to our Savior telling us expressly: Now I will not call you
servants, John 15.15.
but I call you friends; and to the Apostle who sticks not to call us, Ephesians.
^.19.
the domestics of God. Wherefore from the ground, which Aristotle lays, we
may more truly conclude, that seeing friendship must necessarily be grounded
upon an equality, something is put into us by the hand of God, which rayseth
the baseness of our nature to so excellent a likeness with him, as to be capable
of his friendship. Of which gift though al be partakers, that have the
Justifying Grace of God inherent in them, yet Religious people have many
particular reasons to rejoice in it above others, and reap many singular
commodities by enjoying it.

3. And first, they have that most excellent similitude with God, which
consists in the freenes, which they enjoy, from vice and multiplicitie of
affections, and in the constancy and permanencie of their will in good, whereof
I have discoursed at large before; and also by the sublime disposition of their
mind, soaring above al things created, and domineering over them by contemning
them; finally, not to repeat every thing again, by the integrity of their
chaste and continent life, Sap 6.20.
whereof the Wiseman says: Incorruption makes a man near to God; and
doubtless the nearer we come to the likeness with God, the truer and more perfect
is our friendship with him; and the effects of his friendship, The effects of
friendship.
more signal and more abundant in us. For whereas the first thing in friendship
is, to make things common among friends; what is there that Religions people
do not give unto God, or what has God, which he does not impart to them
again? The Religious give themselves, and that they have; God on the other
side bestows upon them his graces, and his glory, that is, himself. As
therefore in this state of life, there is a real communication of al things
betwixt God and them, and consequently true and perfect friendship; so they
that have not yet arrived to this degree of communication, may understand
thereby, that as far as they are short of it, so far they are short of the
perfection of the friendship with God.

4. Moreover, Arist^tle 7. (...) 5.
in this friendship there wants not Conversation, without which (as Aristotle
affirms) no friendship can hold. I do not mean such external conversation,
Conversation with God.
as depends of nearnes of body and sense, which can not reach the presence of
God, and things Divine; but the communication which we may have by our mind
and spirit, wherewith we traffic with God and his holy Angels, and perform
that which the Apostle says: Our conversation is in heaven. For where is this
more perfectly, more frequently, and more at ease performed then in Religion,
Philip. 3^ 20.
which of purpose barreth al other conversation, wholly to attend to this? And
God, who says, His delight is to be with the sons of men, cannot but
converse much more willingly with them, that so ardently desire his blessed
company, and absolutely prefer it before al things created.

5. What honor therefore, what pleasure, what commodity must necessarily
follow of this Conversation? For if we desire to converse with wise men, to the
end we may learn by their wisdom; and with rich men, that we may partake of
their riches; upon far more solid grounds we may hope for all kind of good by
conuersing with God, and in particular, many heavenly illustrations, many
sweet communications, and present tokens of his love toward us; which cannot
but bring wonderful contentment to our souls, and make us feel within
ourselves that, Sap 8.16.
which in the Book of Wisdom is spoken of the wisdom which we are speaking
of: S. Bernard^ sermon. de Quadr.
His conversation has no betternes, and his commerce no irksomnes, but joy and
gladness. Wherefore S. Bernard ha^ great reason to make the comparison, which he
does, betwixt the Religious and Secular people, saying, that Religious people
be of the household of God; Secular people, and they that are good among them,
belong indeed to his Army, but further off; and adds: Happy are you that
have been thought worthy to be of his ^ouse-hold, to whom the Apostle
speaks when he says: Now you are not strangers and forreners, but you are
Citizens with the Saints, and domestics of God. It is therefore a matter of
great consequence to be the friend of God, and to converse familiarly with him,
and a place of great honor and dignity, and also of exceeding great
commodity.

Religious people are kindred of God.
6. But yet this league, which is betwixt a Religious man and God, is (...) my
conceit of a higher strain then friendship, and deserves a more honorable
name, claiming a kind of kindred and near propinquitie with him; which if I
did feign of mine own head, it would savor of pride and presumption for me to
say it; but seeing our Savior has so expressly cast it upon us, it were both
foolish not to entertain it, and wicked not to believe it. No man can be
ignorant of the answer, which he made to the man that brought him word, that
his mother and his brethren were standing without, Matthew 12.5^.
He that does the will of my Father that is in heaven, he is my brother, and my
sister, and my mother. To what state of life does this saying more properly
agree, then to a Religious course, where people fulfill the will of God, not in
one or two things, but in all and always, and are bound to the will of God as
strictly, as they are bound to the Obedience which they vow to keep
perpetually al their lifetime? Wherefore the promise also, which S. Paul cites
out of the ancient Prophets, does belong unto them: Go out of the midst of
them, 2. Cor. 6.17.
and be separated from them, says our Lord, and I will be a father to you, and
you shall be my sons and daughters, says our Lord Almighty. Religious people
therefore having performed the first, and departed out of the midst of the world
and worldlings, it remains that God entertain them as his children; and
though it were honor enough to be servants to so infinite a Majesty, yet they
may justly claim this other title, and expect he should have a fatherly care
over them, and cherish them with fatherly love.

Religious people the spouses of Christ.
7. Finally, that no degree of love and friendship nor benefit also might be
wanting in this one benefit of God, he deals so liberally with these his
children, that (as al Divines deliver, and particularly S. Thomas) he makes
them his Spouses; which I know not whether I may say it is a nearer, but
certainly it is wont to be a more sweet kind of tie, S. Thom. 4. d. 27 q ^. ar.
3. ad 3.
then that of children. And to say no more then that which is true, the
marriage of a Religious soul with God, is in a manner as truly a marriage, as
any can be between man and wife. In regard of Chastity.
S. Augustine attributes this effect to voluntary Chastity. They that vow
virginity to God, says he, though they have a higher place of honor and
dignity in the Church, yet they are not without marriage; for they pertain to
the marriage with the whole Church, August. 9. in Joan.
in which marriage, the Bridegroom is CHRIST. Which doubtless agrees
particularly to al Religious people, in "regard of their Continency. For God
will never suffer himself to be overcome with liberality, but whatsoever we do
for his love, he rewards it even in things of like nature with great increase.
For as he returns a hundredfold in possessions to them that leave their
possessions for his sake, and to them that leave father and mother he gives
himself in lieu of them, with a hundred times as much love and charity as
father and mother could bear toward them; so he repayeth in like kind them,
that forsake carnal marriage for his love, and vouchsafes them a more happy
marriage with himself. And of their vow.
Though besides Chastity, there is another thing in Religion, which much
resembles marriage. For as marriage tyeth man and wife together with so
absolute a bond, as that our Savior said ^f it, Matt^^^ ^.
That which God has conjoined, let not man sever; so when a man has bound
himself once to God by solemn Vow in Religion, that bond can never be broken
or dissolved by any humane power. So that look what force the words ( I take
thee) have in carnal marriage, the same force that word ( I vow) has in our
spiritual marriage with God: and when it is once uttered, it draws upon us so
firm, and strong, and perpetual a tie, that no humane power (as I said) can
free us of it. The difference is that the first binds us to man, the second
to God; where we may easily see the infinite disparitie, which is both of
dignity and contentment betwixt the one and the other; yet they agree in this,
that as man and wife are both of them equally obliged by marriage, so the Vows
of Religion tying us to God, do tie also God to us; such is his infinite love
toward us. What therefore can we desire more? 1. Cor. 7.4.
They agree also in that, as the wise has not power over her own body, but
the husband (as the Apostle speaks) so Religious people have no power neither
over body nor mind; because spiritual marriage does equally give both to God,
and indeed the mind rather then the body, or at least principally the mind; so
that Christ our Savior has full title, and right, and power over both,
established upon him.

8. Moreover as in carnal marriages the Bride leaves her father's house, her
parents, and kinsfolk, and brethren, and al her friends which she had at home,
They go to h^^se with Christ.
and goes to house with her husband; so Religious people forsake al their
kindred, their parents, and al with whom they were bred and acquainted before,
to go to house with Christ, and be incorporated in his family. And they
forsake them more, then any wife is wont to do; because they part from them
not in bodily presence only, but withdraw their mind and affection from them,
and bar al communication with them. Upon which point S. Bernard has a
pleasant discourse (as his manner is in all other things) in one of his Sermons
upon the Canticles, where having showed how like a Religious Soul is to the
Eternal Word of God, S. Bernard. S. (...) in Can^.
he goes on in this manner: From this degree she, that is as I have said,
dares now think of marriage; and why should she not, beholding herself
therefore marriageable, because she i^ like? Highness does not fright her, seeing
likeness does equal her. Love makes the agreement, and her Profession weds her.
The form of Profession is this: Ps. 118.10^. Matt. 19.27.
I have sworn, and resolved to keep the judgments of thy justice. The
Apostles following this form said: Behold, we have left al, and followed thee;
what therefore shall we have? That which was spoken of carnal marriage, but
represented by the spiritual wedding of the Church with Christ, sounds to the
same effect. Therefore shall a man forsake his father and mother, and cleave to
his wife, and they shall be two in one flesh. Genesis 2.24^
Wherefore when you see a Soul forsake al, and cleave to the Eternal Word with all her desire, when you see her live according to the Word, rule herself by the
Word, and conceive of the Word, that which she may bring forth for the Word; a
soul that may say: To me, to live is CHRIST; Philip. 1.21. Prou. 31.^^.
and to dye, gain; make account she is a wife, married to the Word, the heart
of her husband confideth in her, knowing her to be faithful, because she has
set al things at naught in comparison of him, and esteems al things as dung,
that she may gain him. Thus S. Bernard.

9. Some body perhaps will ask, The children of this spiritual marriage.
where be the children of this marriage? They are not wanting; because nothing
that is good and delightful should be wanting in it. S. Bernard in the place
before alleged says, that in this spiritual marriage there be two kinds of
bringing-forth of children, and two sorts of children, different, but not
contrary, to one an other, to wit, when these blessed Mothers either by
preaching bring-forth souls, or in meditation bringforth spiritual conceits.
C^^^ 4.^^.
Of the first kind of children S. Paul speaks in these words; My little
children, with whom agai^e I am in labor, til Christ be formed in you. 2.
(...) 1.12
Of the second he says; whether we suffer excess of mind, to God. And
comparing them both together S. Bernard says thus: S Bernard (...).
The mind is otherwise disposed, when it does fructify to the Word and
otherwise when it does enjoy the Word. There the necessity of others does call
upon it; here the sweetness of the Word does inuit it: And certainly such a
Mother is joyful in the children, which she brings; but much more joyful in
the arms of her Spouse embracing her; dear are the pledges of children, but
kisses do more delight; It is good to save many; but to suffer excess, and
to be with the Word, i^ mo^ delightful.

S. Ambros. s^r 9.
10. This is the true and real marriage of a Soul with the Eternal God, wherein
if it glory, as S. Agnes anciently did, it shall not be unwise, because she is
betroathed to him, upon whom the Angels wait; by whose love and embracings,
purity is not lost, but doubled; from him she receaues a ring and princess
jewels, and by his vermilion-bloud her cheeks are dyed red. Of the happiness
and perpetuity of this Marriage, Osee 2.19.
Osee the Prophet speaks excellently well in these words: I will espouse thee
to me for ever; and I will espouse thee to me in justice, and judgment, and in
mercy, and commiseration; and I will espouse thee to me in faith, and thou
shall know that I am thy Lord. It is grounded (as he says) in faith, not in
flesh and blood; for it is not contracted with man, but with that infinite
Majesty; whom we come to embrace, not with the arms of our body, but by
stretching forth the arms of our soul, by the sinnewes of faith.

^
11. But what consideration can be more delightful then that, whereas ca^nal
marriage cease when we cast-of this flesh by death, the heavenly espousals
(as the Prophet calls them) are everlasting; they begin here on earth, but
are perfected and consummated in heaven; and are to last as long as our
Bridegroom and we do live, which is for all eternity. Finally of the dignity
of this marriage S. Bernard in an other Sermon both truly and eloquently
speaks thus: S. Bernard. (...).
How happens it, o Soul of man, how happens it to thee? From whence comes this
inestimable glory upon thee, that thou should deserve to be the Bride to
him, whom the Angels desire to behold? Whence comes it that he should be thy
Bridegroom, whose beauty the sun and the moon admir^, at whose beck al
things are changed? What will thou render to our Lord, for all that which he
has bestowed upon thee, that thou should be his companion at board, his
companion in his kingdom, finally his companion in bed; that the King should
bring thee into his chamber? Look what thou will hereafter think of thy God,
look what thou may presume of his Majesty! Consider what arms of charity
thou will lend him in the mean time, to love him again, and embrace him, who
has valued thee at so high a rate, yea who has made thee to be of so high a
value. For he made thee again out of his side, when for thee he slept upon the
Cross, and to that end entertained the sleep of death. For thee he came forth
from his Father, and left the Synagogue his mother, that thou cleaving to him
might be one spirit with him. Thou therefore, daughter, harken, and see, and
consider how great things thy God has thought thee worthy of, and forget thy
people, and the house of thy father, forsake thy carnal affections; forget thy
secular behavior; abstain from thy former vices, and forgo thy evil
customs. Thus speaks S. Bernard in this point. In which if we may give him
credit, so grave a man as he is, and writing so advisedly as he does, what life
can be more honorable, or in regard of pleasure more desireful, then Religion?
For in every ordinary marriage it is generally the custom and also
necessary, that man and wife partake of one an others condition, state, and
goods, insomuch that if a Prince, or a King, take a woman of mean estate to
his wife, she has part with him, both of his wealth, and of his command,
because as by marriage they are alone, so whatsoever they have, must needs be
common betwixt them. And the self-same happens in our spiritual marriage with
God, and is so much the more perfectly performed, by how much the goodness of
God is infinitely greater, and his love toward mankind infinitely more ardent
and vehement.

Religious people are the Temples of God, in regard they are consecrated to his
honor. CHAP. XIV.
ANOTHER degree of dignity accrueth to Religious people by Consecration. A
dignity certainly far hi^her then al humane honor, and raising us to a kind
of participation of Divinity itself, as much as humane frayltie is capable of.
For as al honor, worship and reverence is due to the Divine Nature, by reason
of the supereminent excellency and worth which is in it; so when a thing is
once dedicated to God, the very relation which it has to him, puts a new kind
of worth into it, and every one takes it ever after to be worthy of
particular respect and reverence, as a thing severed from the rank and number
of other things, which otherwise are of the same nature with it. And this is
that which Religion does, by dedicating and consecrating to God those that
undertake that course. For so the Glory of Schoole-diuinitie, S. Thomas 2.2. q
88. art. 7 By solemn Vows we are consecrated to God. S. August. in Ps. 231. S.
Basil ser. ^ de mon. Inst.
S Thomas and the Thomists, deliver, when disputing the nature of a solemn Vow
they say it consists in Consecration, which leaves such a print in the soul,
of relation to God, that it can never be blotted-out or razed by any means.
And it may be confirmed out of S. Augustine, who expounding one of the Psalms
says expressly, that by force of the vows of Religion we are made Temples of
God. And S. Basil says, that whosoever renounceth the world, is made as it
were a vessel for the service of God, and consequently must beware he be not
polluted by sinful use, but carefully preserve himself as a thing dedicated to
God, least defi^ing his body again, which he has consecrated to God, in the
ordinary services of this life, he be guilty of sacrilege. Behold, S. Basil
accou^teth it Sacrilege, not only if a man, that is once co^crated to God,
pollute himself by sin, but if he return to profane, or, as he speaks, to
common and ordinary conversation.

S. Bernard S. de dedic. (...). The Ceremonies of Consecration applied to
Religious people.
2. S. Bernard discourses to the same effect, applying the whole Ceremony of
the dedication of a Church, to the consecration of a Religious man to God. The
solemnity of this day (dearly beloved Brethren) is yours; yours is this
solemnity, you are they that are dedicated to God; he has chosen and selected
you for his own. How good an exchange have you made (my beloved) of whatsoever
you might have enjoyed in the world, since now by forsaking al, you have
deserved to be his, who is Author of the world; and to have him for your
possession, who is doubtless the portion and inheritance of his? And so he
goeth-on applying, as I said, to Religious people the whole ceremony, which is
used in consecrating Churches, wherein (as he says) these five things
concur: Aspersion, Inscription, Inunction, Illumination, and Benediction, al
which is performed in a Religious state. Aspersion is the washing away of our
sins by Confession, by rivers of tears, by the sweat of penance.
Inscription made not in stone, but in ashes, signifies the Law, which Christ
the true Bishop and Pastor of our souls writes with his fingar, not in
tables of stone, but in the new heart which he gives, a heart humble and
contrite. Unction is the plenty of grace, which is given to the end to make
this yoke rot from the face of the oil. Illumination is the abundance of good
works, which proceed from Religion, and shine before men, that they may glorify
the heavenly Father, and have before their eyes what they may imitate. Finally
Benediction (which is the conclusion of the whole Ceremony) is as it ^ere a
sign and seal of eternal glory, fulfilling the grace of our Sanctification,
and bringing a most ample reward of all the good works which we have done.

The digni^^ of a soul consecrated to God.
3. Seeing therefore the Consecration of a church built of lime and stone, does
so lively represent unto us the Consecration of a Religious soul to God; from
the same similitude of a material church we may take a scantling of the
dignity of a soul that is in that happy state. We see what difference there
is betwixt the house of God dedicated to his use, and an ordinary house which
is for the dwelling of men. If we regard the material, they are the same in
both; stones, and mortar, and timber alike: But the use of them is far
different. For in our ordinary dwelling, we eat, and drink, and sleep, and
play, and work, and bring-in our horses and cattle for our use, and we do
these things lawfully, and there is no indecencie in it; but if we do any of
these things in a Church consecrated to God, it is an irreuerence to the place,
and a sin. The same we may say of a Chalice that is hallowed; for not only if
we cast dirt upon it, but if we drink in it at table, it is a great offense;
and so we find, (...) 5.1.
that the King of Babylon, after he had used the vessel of the Temple of
Herusalem at his board, within few hours lost both his kingdom and life; so
great is the sanctity of these things; and people do usually make no other
account, but that there is something in them, for which we ought not to use or
handle them without reverence and veneration. As therefore betwixt the house of
God and other houses, and betwixt a consecrated Chalice and other cups, there
is so maine a difference in the esteem of them: so a soul that is consecrated
to God, does far excel the soul of a secular Layman in rank and dignity.
And we have so much the more reason to think and say so, because these material
things being void of sense and reason, are not capable of any inward sanctity
by Consecration; but though we say that the walls, and the vestements, and the
vessels be holy, and we reverence them as such, yet all this holiness is but
outward; inwardly they are nothing altered: But the soul of man, is the proper
seat of sanctity, and consequently by Consecration it is inwardly adorned,
and perfected, and drawn to a higher degree of dignity, and nearer to God.
What beauty therefore and grace must there needs be in that soul, which thus
inwardly changed puts off, as I may say, al mortal hue, and is clothed with
a kind of Divinity? what gold or precious stone can be compared unto it? or
what sun did ever shine so bright at noonday, if we had eyes to behold this
wonderful dignity of ours, and of others that follow the same course.

4. And this dignity is the greater, God particularly present in Religious
souls.
in regard that as a temple made of stone is therefore called the house of God,
because the infinite Majesty of God, which is every where, does particularly
manifest itself in such a place, and as it were rest in that house: so in these
spiritual temples, built, not by the workmanship of man, but by the hand of
God, when they are once consecrated unto him, he does willingly rest, and
particularly show his goodness in them. Which S. Paul witnesses in these words:
2 Cor. 6.16.
You are the temple of the living God as God says: Because I will dwell in them,
3. Reg. ^
and walk among them, and be their God And God himself declared it to be so in
that famous Temple of Solomon, when after the consecration, as we read, so
soon as the Priests came out of the Sanctuary, where they had set down the
Arc, a clowd coming down from heaven, filled the whole house, in so much that
the Priests could not stand to do the office; for as holy Scripture speaks,
The glory of our Lord had filled the house of our Lord. And Solomon out of his
wisdom understood it well enough; for presently he brake into these words for
very joy; Our Lord has said, that he would dwell in a clowd. Which is the same,
which passes in a soul that has voluntarily and le^ally consecrated itself
to God; for God does fill our souls also with his presence, and with his
glory; and not in a clowd, that may hinder us in our duty toward him, by the
thicknes and obscurity of it; but rather in a clear light both delighting and
helping us in so great a work. And the holy Angels.
And consequently whatsoever belongs to a consecrated temple, must much more
belong to a Religious soul; to wit, that the Angels dwell the more willingly
about it, by reason of the sanctity of it; that the prayers of such a soul
are the more acceptable to God, in regard they come from a holy place; and the
goodness of God inhabiting in it, 2. Reg. 6.1^^
must needs fill it with abundance of al kind of blessings, no less then the
Ar^^e among the Children of Israel; and finally all the thoughts, and actions
and endeauours of such a soul, retayning the natural savor of the root from
which they grow, must needs be the more welcome to God by reason of this
consecration, and more gracious in his sight. To conclude, as in the temple of
God we offer Sacrifice, as in a place properly ordained for that purpose; so a
Religious soul does daily offer to God sacrifices without number, Ps. 50.
laud and praise of God, inflamed acts of Charity, of thanksgiving of sorrow
for our sins, a contr^te heart and afflicted spirit, and many holy desires
and purposes, which are the spiritual sacrifices acceptable in the sight of
God, 1. P^tr 2.5^
which S. Peter wishes us always to offer.

Religious people are a continual Sacrifice, in regard of the oblation which
they make of themselves. CHAP. XV.
BY that, which has been said, we see how Religious people are truly the
Temples of God; now let us consider in brief, how they are also truly a
Sacrifice; for the Sacrifice doubtless is more holy and more excellent then the
Temple, seeing Temples are not consecrated but for Sacrifices. S. Greg. 9.
moral. ^.
Whereof S. Gregory speaks thus: We offer ourselves in Sacrifice to God,
when we dedicate our life to his divine service; and applies to this purpose
that which is commanded in Leuiticus, that the parts of the Victime be cut in
pieces, and so burnt by fire; which, as he says, is performed, when we offer
the works of our life distinguished into several virtues And Waldensis, Wal^^nt
de Sa^ramenus ut 9. c. 78.1.
a grave Divine, does not only call it a Sacrifice, but a high and excellent
Sacrifice, when a man, as he speaks, consecrateth all the actions of his mind
and body everlastingly to God, by entering into Religion. And certainly, if it
be a Sacrifice to offer any thing that we have, to God; "what question can
there be but that to offer ourselves, is truly a Sacrifice? the essence whereof
consists in the perfect oblation of ourselves, Entrance into Religion is a
Sacrifice.
specially in such an oblation, as is not afterward in our power to recall. For
as in the ancient Sacrifices the Host was killed, and could return to life no
more: so the gift which we make, and whereby we dedicate ourselves to God, is
immutable, and we cannot claim or reassume ourselves again, or that which we
have once offered. S. August. 10. de Ciu ^. ^.6.
Whereupon S. Augustine discourses in this manner, and says in express
terms: That a man consecrated and vow ^ to the honor of God, is a
Sacrifice, in regard he dies to the world that he may live to God: when also
we chastize our body by temperance, if we do it for God, as we ought to do,
to the end not to yeald our members weapons of iniquity, but weapons of
Justice to God, it is a Sacrifice. If therefore our body, which is but as it
were a servant and instrument of our Soul, be a Sacrifice, if the good and
upright use thereof be directed to God; how much rather shall a Soul be a
Sacrifice, when it directs itself to God, to the end that inflamed with the
fire of his love it may destroy in itself the form and impression of al
worldly concupiscence, and be reformed according to his unchangeable likeness,
subject unto him, and so much the more grateful, by how much it partaketh of
his beautie' All this is of S. Augustine.

2. Whereby we see that the Sacrifice, which we offer of ourselves, is
twofold, to wit, a Sacrifice of our body, and a Sacrifice of our soul: and
both of them are so wholly directed to God, that they have no relation at al to
ourselves; which is to dye to ourselves, The Priest, and knife and the fire, in
this Sacrifice.
and live to an other. If any body ask: whereis the Priest, and the knife,
and the fire, to offer, kill and consume this Sacrifice? The Priest is the same
with the Host and Victime; to wit, the man himself. For this oblation
consists in spirit, and is performed in spirit, and consequently no man's
hand but his that offers himself, can reach this Host; according to that
which we read in the Psalm: I will voluntarily Sacrifice unto thee. Ps. 53 ^.
The knife is the hatred of our own life, which our Savior wills us to
have, and the fire is no other then that fire, which the same our Lord and
Savior came to send into the world, Luc* 14 26.
and wished, and sought no other, but that it should burn. Luc 12 4^.
For this heavenly fire descending from above, when it once takes in our heart,
easily consumes our Sacrifice, as it did the Sacrifice of Elias, and the wood,
3. Reg 17.38.
and stones, and the very dust; that is, it directs us wholly, and whatsoever is
in us, be it never so earthly and base, to the service of God alone.

3. But because anciently there were many kinds of Sacrifices, and the
greatest of them al was a Holocaust, because in it, not part only, but the
whole Host was burned to the honor of God, we must understand that the
oblation which Religious people make, is a Holocaust, which does add no small
beauty and grace to their dignity. S. Greg. him. 12 in Ezech.
S. Gregory says it in these words: They that do the things which pertain
to God so, as not to part with some things notwithstanding which pertain to
the world, they offer Sacrifice, but not a Holocaust: But they that forsake al
things that pertain to the world, and consume their whole soul in the fire of
the love of God, they are in the sight of God both a Sacrifice and a Holocaust.

4. How could he have spoken in clearer terms, S. Thom. 2^ 2. q 186. art. 7:
or described a Religious man in more natural colors? And S. Thomas gives the
same reason why Religion is a Holocaust, to wit, because it gives al to God;
and whosoever puts himself into a Religious state, offers al things,
outward and inward, to the Creator of al: for we are not only said to
Sacrifice the things which are within us, when we offer them to God, but also
the things which are without us, 2 Reg. 2^6 17.
when we forsake them for God; as David, when he cast away the water which he
had in his hand, and cast it away for God's sake, he is said to have Sacrificed
it to God; the very depriving himself of it in that manner, being a new kind
of fashion of Sacrifice.

5. The blessed Apostle S. Paul does in my judgment clearly express the
nature and excellency of this inward Sacrifice, Hom. 1^.^
when he calls it a living host, holy, pleasing to God, a reasonable
service; for by calling it reasonable, that is, spiritual, he gives us to
understand, that not only our body but our mind, and reason, and soul is
offered; calling it an Host, he signifies that here also is a kind of death;
adding the word (living) he insinuates that this death does strangely both
take away our life and preserve it; The soul^ of man (...) grateful Sacrifice^.
finally he calls it Holy and pleasing to God, because whatsoever is
consecrated to God, is holy; and nothing can be more pleasing to God, thou a
soul that does willingly and entirely sacrifice itself to his Divine Majesty
for his love. The soul of a man a grateful sacrifice.
For if those ancient Sacrifices were so acceptable unto him, that he received
them willingly in an odor of sweetness, notwithstanding that in them there was
only offered the flesh of a heyfer of three years old, or of a red calf or
some other such beast; that which is offered in this spiritual Sacrifice being
far more noble and excellent, as being bought with the inestimable price of
the most precious blood of God, the oblation thereof to God must needs be also
far more grateful and acceptable. And what is this but the soul of man,
which we may truly say is sacrificed in this Holocaust? because, as we have
showed elsewhere, it is proper to Religious people, to dye to themselves and
to the whole world, because they leave themselves and the world, as much as if
they were verily dead, and the state, which they undertake, brings upon them
an undoubted and irreuocable obligation to do so. Whereupon S. Bernard
describing a Religious man, sets him forth unto us not only as a Pilgrim or
stranger, S. Bernard. sermon 7. Quadrag.
because a stranger has something, though he has but little; but he likeneth
him to a dead man, and a man that is crucified: because, says he, he is as
free from the works of the world as either of them: and it is al-one to him
whether he hear one praise him or dispraise him, or rather he hears them not
at al, because he is dead; and he honors, and riches, and pleasures, which the
world does love, are a cross unto him.

6. But that which is most strange in this Sacrifice, together with true death
we find true life conjoined, Life and death conjoined in this sacrifice.
as the Apostle insinuates; life not hindering death, and death not taking away
our life; which as in those other Sacrifices it could not possibly happen, so
in this our spiritual Sacrifice it cannot be otherwise. For if it should
bereave us altogether of our life, it would take away our means of serving
God; and yet if it were not death, it were not a true Holocaust. Both therefore
of necessity must be conjoined together, that, as S. Gregory speaks, S.
Greg. hom in vl^. in Ezech. Col. 3.3.
it be an Host, because a man dies to the world, and yet is living, because
still he does all the good he can. And of this liuing-death, as I may call it, S.
Paul says very well: You are dead, and your life is hidden with Christ in God;
Col. 3.3.
to which state, as the same S. Gregory interprets, we arrive, when severed
from the turmoiles of secular desires, S. Greg. 6 (...)
forsaking al outward things, we attend only to the inward, to the end that our
mind aspiring wholly to the love of God, may not be touched with trouble of any
earthly thing. So that we may fitly apply also to this Sacrifice that, which
God commanded should be observed in the ancient Holocausts; to wit, that
whereas the rest of the Host was consumed by fire, Leuit. 7 8.
the skin was reserved for the Priest. For, as I said before, there being in
this Sacrifice no other Priest but our selves, nothing at al remains of the
Sacrifice to ourselves but the skin, that is, the outward shape of a body, A
Religious life a continu^l Holocaust.
which Religion does not take away. All the rest that is inward, is consumed by
that Divine fire, when it is consecrated to God and to the honor of his Divine
Majesty; and so in this state that is easily performed, which S. Paul said of
himself, that he lived, to wit, according to the outward show, but yet that he
did not live, but Christ in him. Al which being in itself clear. we may
deservedly and truly say, that the whole life of a Religious man is a
Holocaust, as wanting neither death, or any other part or perfection of a
Holocaust, and a Holocaust which dureth not for a while, but continually, and
daily, lasting as long as our life does last; which one thing discouers the
wonderful dignity of a Religious life. For if Abel, or Not, or Abraham, never
pleased God more, then when they offered those memorable Sacrifices, which are
recounted of them; and no man in his whole lifetime can do any thing better,
or more holy, then to offer Sacrifice; which notwithstanding we cannot always
do, but seldom, and at certain times; what shall we worthily think of that
state of life, which is a continual Sacrifice, lasting as long as the man
himself lasts and breaths? And this our Sacrifice is so much the more
excellent then any of those ancient Sacrifices, in regard that it is not the
flesh of rams and bullocks which is now offered, but our own flesh, and our
own soul, far more precious then any flesh whatsoever.

A Religious State compared with the State of a King. CHAP. XVI.
THIS, which I have delivered concerning the dignity of a Religious State,
being well considered, is enough to make a man easily contemn al worldly
preferment in comparison of it, and esteem not only meaner places of honor
far inferior unto it, but even Princely dignities and the degree of a King;
which in men's judgment is the highest place, and the top of that, to which
humane ambition can aspire. A comparison which might with some color seem to
favor of pride and arrogancy, if we should ground it upon our own conceit;
but so many worthy and grave Authors use it, that their name and authority
must needs carry it against all that shall oppose. Though if we weigh that which
has been formerly said of the dignity of a Religious life, we may find reason
enough to think, that this comparison does rather diminish then add to the
luster of it. For it is a far greater thing, to be like to God, and so like
as we have showed, then to resemble any earthly Prince, whose power and
Majesty is little or none at al if we compare it with the power and Majesty
of God.

2. First therefore a Religious State does resemble the State of a King in a
degree, Al just men are Kings. Bell. 3. in Luc. c. 48.
which is common to al just and holy men, whom venerable Bede calls great
Kings, because they suffer not themselves to be carried down the stream with
every inordinate motion, which does tempt them by consenting unto them, but
they know how to command and govern them. To which purpose S. Gregory
applies that of the Canticles: Cant 6.7. S. Greg.
Threescore be Queens. For he says thus: What is signified by these Queens,
but the souls of the Saints, which ruling their bodies with discretion,
purchase an eternal kingdom? For there be some in the holy Church, that pull
down their flesh, and punish it for God; they overcome their passions and
vice; they subdue the Devils, as tyrants and usurpers; they prudently direct al
their affections in an orderly course; they preach to others that which they
do themselves; they draw many out of the jaws of the Devil, fighting against
him with the sword of the Word; what are these Souls but Queens, who tenderly
loving Christ their King and Spouse, by commixtion of love, and detestation of
lust, bring forth a Princely offspring, that is, Faithful people? S. Gregory
does not name Religious people in this place, but by the actions and functions,
which are proper to them, he does show plainly the thing itself, and the State;
specially where he calls these souls the Spouses of Christ, which title the
obligation of their Vow does give them, as I have showed before.

3. S John Chrysostom handling this argument more at large, does bring such
reasons for it, as cannot be applied to any other but a Religious course. For
in the Work which he wrote against the Dispraysers of a Monastical life,
addressing his second Book to the Heathens and Gentiles that were ignorant of
the Ghospel, and of the glory of the life to come, he lays down so pregnant
proofs, ^
drawn from that which happens in this present life, to demonstrate that the
life of a Monck is far to be preferred before the state of a King, that no
man can have any color to doubt of it. For whereas in a King there be two
things principally which are most aimed at, to wit, Power and Honor, thus he
discourses of them both: What is in your opinion the greatest sign of Power?
Is it not to be able to revenge himself of al his enemies, and of whosoever
stands against him; and reward al them that have been beneficial or dutiful
unto him? And yet ^^u will not find all this power in a King; For he has many
enemies, of (...) he cannot have his will; and many that are loving and
beneficial unto him, whom he is not able to reward. But a Monk has a greater
and a more eminent power then this, which Kings cannot enjoy. For if it be an
act of greatest power to be revenged of our enemies, it is a far m^re
excellent thing to find out such a state of life, as no man can hurt, though he
would never so feign. For though it be a great matter to be so skilful at one's
weapon, as to be able to strike any man that can strike me; yet it is far
better, and more ^are and excellent, to have such a body, as cannot be hurt by
any skill. And yet there is a greater power then this, to wit, not only that a
man cannot be hurt, but to be in such a state, that no man can have a mind to
hurt him. For so he is in much more safety, because of times though a man
cannot hurt another, yet if he hate him, this very hatred does in no small
measure abridge his happiness and contentment. What therefore can be imagined
more ra^e and Divine then this state of life, which no man has a mind to
hurt; and if he had a mind, he could not hurt it? For how can it come into any
man's mind to malice or offer injury to him, that has nothing to do with
any man? For we malice people either out of envy, or fear, or anger. But
this noble and indeed Prince-like man is above al these things. For who will
envy him that laugheth at al things, which others love and admire? Who will be
angry with a man that offers him no wrong? who will fear a man, of whom he
can have no suspicion? No man therefore certainly will hurt such a man. Now that
he cannot hurt him though he would is also plain; for he cannot find wherein
to entrap him. For as an eagle soaring on-high cannot be caught in the nets,
that are laid for lesser birds; so also a Religious man. For how, or by what
occasion can any man hurt him* He has neither money nor wealth, that he need
sear the loss of it; he has no country, out of which he can be threatened to
be bannished; he aymeth not at glory so, as to ^eare any disgrace. One thing
you will say there is, to wit, death: but whosoever shall kill him, shall not only
not hurt or contristate him, but shall do him a great pleasure; for he sends
him thereby to another life which he desires with all his heart, and for which
he does all that which he does. And if we regard honor, a Monk is in greater
honor, then any secular man. For secular power has many that fear it, and
never a whit fewer that hate it: But every body does willingly and joyfully
reverence a Religious man. And oftimes it happens that people of mean birth,
they that have been children of pesants or tradesmen* giving themselves to
this kind of Philosophy, have been so venerable in the eyes of al men, that
men of great quality have not been ashamed to go to their Cottages, and
converse with them with such signs of affection, as if the very speaking with
them had been a singular favor and fortune unto themselves, as in truth it was
Thus discou^seth S. Chrysostom, and much more copiously of this matter.

4. And yet more largely in another H^milie, ^
which he intitles: A Comparison between a King and a M^nk. where he handles
this subject so solidly and clearly, that whosoever shall read it, will find all that his heart can desire of this matter. We will only coppie-out a piece of it
into this place. A King ( says he) rules over Cities and Provinces, and
many Nations: A Monck commands over Anger* and Envy, and Covetousness, and
Lust, and the rest of the diseases of the mind, and has his thoughts elevated
above al humane things. And doubtless we have more reason to account this man a
King, then the other; for if the King himself be a slave to fear and lust, he
is not the governor of the people, but the things by which himself is
governed, and whose dictamens he follows. A King makes war against
barbarous nations for the bounds of his Empire, for wealth, for riches: A Monck
fights against the Devils, whose assaul^s be more violent, and their nature
more noble, and consequently the victory more glorious* and the intent of this
war is Piety, and the service of God. Behold both their conuersations, and
you shall see a Monck conuersing with the Prophets, learning the wisdom of S.
Paul, passing from Moses to Esaias, from Esaias to S. John, from S. John to some
other, and by this means becomes like to them, with whom he does converse, as
it usually happens. A King passes al his lifetime with them, who speak him
fair to his face, and flatter him for their own ends, and do nothing but
vant themselves of their own deeds. A Monck watches in the night to speak
with God, to have the company of the holy Angels, to delight himself in
heavenly things: A man, that is Governor over people and nations, you shall
find at those times laid along in his bed and snorting, not much differing
from a dead man. A King be he as bountiful as he can, that which he gives, is
but gold: a Monck obtaynes of God the spirit of Grace, and corporal benefits
also, by his prayers; and nothing is more hateful to the Devils, then the
prayers of a Monck, nothing does terrifye them more; 3. Reg. 1^.
and Kings themselves have been often const^ayned to have recourse unto them,
as Achab to Elias, Ezechias to the Prophet Esaias. 4. Reg. 19.
Finally death is terrible to a King; to a Monck it is welcome. A King is
always in fear of death, and therefore he has soldiers, for the Guarde of
his body; A Monck does not only fear no man, but guardes others, yea whole
cities, as if he were a rampire unto them. Th^^ far S. John Chrysostom.

Reli^i^us people come more nobl^ to their (...) King to his
5. To which for a Conclusion we may add another consideration of the
difference, how they come to their several dignities. For Kings are either
borne unto it, and so come to their Kingdom by succession; or they are chosen
by voices, which is more glorious of the two; for to be borne to a Kingdom, is
fortune, to be chosen, is a sign of Virtue, if so be that people have regard
to virtue in it: Religious people arrive to this great honor, neither by birth
nor by humane election or grant, but by the sole will of God, who chooses them
out from many others, and vouchsafes to translate them into his family, and
register them among his household-seruants. For it is not humane wit, ^r
industry, or the suggestion of any other man, or natural strength, wherewith
we compass these hard and difficult enterprises, to forsake the world, to
overcome the love of our parents and kinsfolks, to subject our will under such a
continual yoke, as this is. Nature has not so much strength, nor ladders so
high, nor wings so strong as to carry it to so high a pitch; but whatsoever we
do in this kind, is the work of God, as our Savior tells not his Ap^stles
only, John. 15 16.
but al, when he says: Yo^ have not chosen me, but I have chosen you And
again; Io. 6.44.
No man can come unto me, unless my Father do not only call, or inuit, and
put him on, but draw him. How greatly therefore are we bound to God, that has
so voluntarily and of his own accord loved and embraced us, and made us
partakers of so great a good, without any desert of ours* y^a rather when we
did deserve the contrary, and were wholly unworthy of it specially considering
that he leaves many others; that we may justly say with the Prophet: Ps. 147.
He has not donn^ so to e^^rie nation; nor manifested h^^ judgments unto
them. Great therefore is the dignity of a Religious man, not only in that he
is chosen to so high a Vocation, but in that so hi^h a Person has made choice
of him* a person, I say, whose judgment in our case is to be preferred not
only before the judgment of one nation casting a kingdom upon a man, but
before the judgment of the whole world, and of all the men that are, or ever
were, or ever shall be in the world.

6. How great this difference is betwixt a Religious state, and the dignity of
a King, Kings ^^e (...) on their King^dome^ to be Monck^
many Kings and Princes have testified by forsaking their Scepters and
Princely palaces, and stooping to a poor cottage, and a coorse garment, and
professing that they found more contentment and far truer happiness in that
kind of life, then they ever did in all the honor which the world does so
foolishly admire. And among the rest, we have a rare example heerof in
Sa^tocopius, Santo^opius King (...) M^^auia.
King of Morauia, in the year 900. who having been defeated in a battle
against the Emperor Arnulphus, forsaking his kingdom be took himself into the
Wilderness, where finding certain Moncks in the mountain Sain^^, he put himself
into their company, lived with them some years in a Monastical habit unknown*
what he was, and gave himself to much fasting and watching, and other
austerities. When he drew toward his end, he called them altogether, and
declared who he was; giving this glorious testimony of a Religious course,
that having had trial both of it, and of the life of a King, he found that
without comparison a Religious life was to be preferred. For here (says he) I
have slept quietly without any fear at al; here roots, and herbs, and a
cup of cold water has sauoured far sweeter to me, then al my Princely
daynties did before; for they were continually mingled with much gal and
bitterness of care and danger, and consequently this small time that I have lived
amongst you, has been to me far more happy, then all the time I lived
floating in pleasures; and have learned by my own experience, that that life
compared wi^h this, is rather to be called death. This was the judgment of
that King at his death.

Of the Power of Judicature which Religious men shall have. CHAP. XVII.
AL worldly command and dignity ends with this life; but Religious people
have many prerogatives in this life, and shall enjoy many more in the life to
come; among which we must reckon, that in the latter day they shall sit with
Christ in Judgment, to give favorable sentence upon them, that shall stand at
the right hand, and a terrible sentence upon them, that shall stand on the left.
And to the end we may the better understand the greatness of this Prerogative,
The day of Judgment a terrible day. Sophonias 1.24. Io^l 2.
we will consider somewhat of the horror and terriblenes of that day, of that
day, I say, which the Prophet Sophonias describes in these words: The great
day of our Lord is at hand; it is at hand, and very swift. The voice of the day
of our Lord is bitter; there the strong shall be afflicted. That day, a day of
wrath; a day of tribulation and anguish; a day of calamity and misery; a day
of darkness and mist; a day of clouds and ^hirlwinds; a day of the trumpet, and
of the sound of the trumpet. In which strain the Prophet Joel does also speak,
when terrifyed, as it were, with the presence of that day, he says thus: Let
all the dwellers of the earth be troubled, because the day of our Lord does
come; because the day of darkness and mist is at hand; the day of clouds and
whirl-winds. For the day of our Lord is great and very terrible, and who will
abide it? S. Gregory does ^ightly make a conjecture of the terriblenes of that
time, by that which happened at the entrance of the Passion of our Savior, when
with one mild answer of his mouth he struck al his armed adversaries to the
ground; What therefore, says S. Gregory, will he do when he shall come to
judge, seeing he stonned al his enemies with a word, when he came to be judged?
What Judgment will that be, which he will exercise being Immortal, seeing no man
could withstand his voice, when he was yet mortal? who will be able to abide his
wrath, when his very meeknes was not to be abidden? Wherefore at such a time
when all the men of the world shall be apaled, and stand amazed with fear, and
sorrow, and expectation of the rigid sentence of such a Judge, then in that
general vexation of al men, to be without fear and trouble, and attend that
last and irreuocable decree and sentence with joy, must needs be an inestimable
and excessive benefit.

S. Io. Crisost h^^de c^m. regis etc. mo.
2. S. John Chrisostom says, that Religion affords this benefit; for first in
this life it fills a man with all good things; and secondly in the life to
come it presents us before the Tribunal of God, joyful and sporting, when the
Princes of the earth, whom before al men adored, shall be severely punished for
their offenses. S. Bernard fitly applies to the same effect that, which is
said in the Psalm: S. Bernard for 3 qui habitat. 1. Tim. 6.9.
Because he will deliver me from the snare of the hunters, and from the bitter
word. He says, that this snare is that, which the Apostle speaks of, when he
says: They that will be rich, sal into temptation, and into the snare of the
Devil; and that the bitter word, is the last sentence in the day of Judgment;
And turning his speech to his Brethren, he speaks thus: You that have
forsaken al, and followed the Son of man, who had not where the lean his
head, rejoice, and say: He has delivered me from the snare of the hunters.
Praise him with all your heart, al your soul, al your strength; and from the
very bottom of your heart give him thanks, saying: because he has delivered
me from the snare of the hunters. And that you may know how great this benefit
is, and understand the things which are given you by god, harken what
follows: And from a bitter word. O man, or rather beast that thou art, did
thou not fear the snare? at least stand in awe of the hammer; From a bitter
word; Esaias. 16. (...) 7^. Ma^h. 25.
What is this bitter word but: Let the wicked be takes away, that he see not
the glory of God? Go you accursed into eternal fire. But you, my Brethren, you
that have wings, before whose eyes it is in vain to cast the net, you that
have forsaken the wealth of this world, why should you fear a bitter word,
seeing you have been delivered from the snare? For to whom shall it be said: Go
you accursed into everlasting fire; for I was hungry, and you gave me not to
eat? To whom, I say, shall this be spoken, but to them, that had wealth in this
world? Are not your hearts much rejoiced at this word, and filled with spiritual
contentment? do you not value your Poverty far beyond al worldly treasure,
in regard it is your Poverty, which freeth you from this bitter word? For how
can we think that God will require at our hands that, which we have forsaken for
his love? All this is of S. Bernard.

3. Wherefore, if this happy course did bring no other commodity to Religious
people, but that at that time, when other men wither away for fear, Luc. 11.26.
and expectation of the things, which are to come upon them, they exalt,
because their redemption approaches; this one thing were benefit sufficient to
make a man think all the labor and crosses, which he endures, very well
bestowed. But there is yet another thing which gives Religious men far
greater security, and adds also a far greater dignity; to wit, that in
the power of Judicature, which Christ has received from his Father, Religious
men shall be Judges of secular people.
they have their part and place; and are not to stand at the Bar to be
judged, but to sit upon the Bench to administer Justice. Which is so high a
prerogative, that it could not possibly come into the thought of any man to be
so bold as to hope for it, nor yet scarce to believe, that such a dignity
should be cast upon him, but that He, that does prefer him unto it, can do
^^ things, and cannot fail of his promise. What therefore can be more welcome
to a Religious man, then to behold the form of this assignement, Math. 19.28.
and promise* Amen I say unto you, that you, that have forsaken al things, and
followed me, in the regeneration, when the Son of man shals^, you also shall
sit upon twelve Seats judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. Where naming the
twelve Tribes of Israel, he does not understand only the people of the Jews;
but in a phrase, in which the Scripture is wont to speak, he ^ m^r^hendeth all the Kingdom of God, and all the Faithful. And by the word ( you shall sit) first
he gives us to understand the office of a Judge; secondly the security, and
eminency of dignity above the rest; and lastly a place of sitting near unto
Christ our Judge.

4. And it must not stumble any man, that he makes mention only of twelve
Seats For as S. Augustine (answering this very objection) well observes, S.
A^g in Ps. 86.
there is a mystery in those words, and by that certain number of Twelve,
whatsoever other greater number is to be, understood. For if there must be
precisely but twelve Seats, and no more, S. Paul, who is the thirteenth
Apostle shall not have where to sit, and consequently shall not be able to judge;
and yet he says of himself, that he shall judge, not only men, but Angels. 1.
Cor. 6.3.
Not only therefore (says S. Augustine) the twelve Apostles and S. Paul, but as
many as shall judge, shall have place in the twelve Seats, by reason of the
Universality, which the word does signify. And this which S. Augustine says,
is grounded upon good reason. For (as the tenure of the promise of our Savior
does found) the only cause, why this power and glory was conserred upon the
Apostles, was, because they had forsaken al, and followed him: wherefore al
they that have done the like, and forsaken al worldly wealth, and forgoing the
hopes and desires thereof have put themselves into the school of Christ, shall
have ri^ht to the like reward and promotion. For, that the Apostles followed
Christ when he was present with them, and Religious people follow him now he is
not present, does not diminish the value of their faith and service, but does
rather increase it For they had many motives thereunto, which we have not, as
miracles wrought before their eyes, the sweetness of his dillie conversation,
and of his doctrine; whereof S. Peter speaking in the name of the rest, Io. 6.
said: Lord, to whom shall we go? thou have words of life everlasting.

6. Neither is the merit ever a whit the less, by reason that they were
immediately subject to our Savior; we subject ourselves to another man that
bears his place. For now also they that subject themselves in this manner,
subject themselves to Christ, whom they acknowledge and reverence in the
person of that man; and if we value this business by the faith and fidelity,
which is practiced in it, perhaps it is the greater act, not only to obey a
Prince when he delivers his own commands himself, but also to obey his
meanest officers and ministers commanding in the Prince his name. Wherefore
though doubtless this action was performed by the Apostles with greater virtue
and charity, as having the first fruits of the Spirit bestowed upon them: yet
if we regard the fact itself, we do the same thing that they did, and for the
same end, and upon the like motives as they did. Insomuch that S. Bernard does
not stick to glory both for himself, S. B^^. ^^ ^ng.
and us, that we al have made prosession of an Apostolical life, al of us are
enrolled in the same Apostolical course. Which is not to be thou^ht to be
spoken of the eminent sanctities which they descrued to rec^^ne for themselves
and for the whole world, as the Psalmist does intimate in these words: Let the
^^^s receive peace for the people, and the ^^ll^ks justice: but of the
profession, which S. Peter made in behalf of them al saying, Behold we have
forsaken al, and followed thee. Whereunto we may add, that as the Redemption
of Mankind was the proper work of our Savior CHRIST, Es. 9.6.
in which respect he is called the Father of the world to come; so it was a
prerogative properly belonging to himself to be Judge of the world, Io. 5.12.
because the Father judges no man, but has given al Judicature to his Son.
And consequently the same our Lord having been pleased to associate the
Apostles to himself in so great an Office, as was the Redemption of Man, and
not howsoever, but by means of the same poverty, and humility, and
sufferings, as himself did undergo in this life; it belonged to the same his
goodness, and also in a kind of equity it was reason that he should communicate
his honor with them, that did share in his labors.

6. Now certainly Religious people have their share in laboring with Christ,
and have always had; for as we shall show more at large hereafter, there have
been at al times some Religious men that have assisted the Church of God very
much, Religious men have labored much in the Church of God.
even among the Orders of Monks, and much more in later Ages, since by special
instinct of God Religious Professions have been directed as well to the help of
others, as for their own salvation. And though there be in the Church
abundance of other Workmen also, who instruct the people, and assist them with
no small pains and labors, for which they are highly to be commended; yet set
Religious people aside, and where shall we find that Euangelical Poverty, which
is so perspicuous by possessing nothing, as they may worthily say: S. Th^opuse.
cont. vetra. ar. rel. c. 6. and 7.
Behold, we have forsaken al things. S. Thomas delivers, that the Order of
Bishops how soever it was most certainly instituted by our Savior Christ, yet
it was not instituted with that circumstance of possessions, and wealth, and
external splendor; but rather he gave them instructions how they should be
poor, Luc 10.
when he prescribed that rule: Carry not a satchel nor a scrip, and the like,
but riches were afterward admitted-of by the indulgence and dispensation of the
Church, times so requiring. And this which S. Thomas says of Bishops, is true
of all the rest of the Clergy that minister in the Church. Whereby it is
apparent, that this rare virtue, to which our Lord has promised so great a
pre-eminence in the latter day of Judgment, is not only truly found in
Religious men, but in a manner is only in them, because they alone have
forsaken al things.

7. But because this honor is so great, and this promise so honorable, that
the streightnes of our heart can hardly conceive it should be so; let us settle
this distrust by the authority of holy Fathers, who understanding this saying
of our Savior in the right sense, have upon this title taken occasion to
enlarge themselves much in commendation of Religion. S. Greg. (...) ^n Iu^^an.
S. Gregory Nazianzen in his Oration against Julian the Apostat, among other
praises of a Monastical life, reckons also, that they are to sit upon Thrones
to judge. S. Hierome in a certain Epistle of his says: S. H^^r Ep 28.
It is proper to the Apostles and Christians to offer themselves to God, and,
casting the mites of their poverty with the widow into the Treasury of the
Church, to deliver all the substance which they had to our Lord; Mar* 12.2.
and so deserve to hear: You shall sit upon thrones judging the twelve Tribes
of Israel. S. Augustine (an approved and sure Author) says the same: They that
have not followed (says he) that great and perfect Counsel of Perfection, of
Selling al, and yet keeping themselves free from damnable crimes, S August.
Epist. 89.
have fed our Savior in those that are hungry shall not sit on-high to judge
with Christ, but shall stand at his right hand to be judged in his mercy. And
contrarie-wise S. Augustine held it so certain, that Religious people are to sit
in Judgment with our Savior, that in the same Epistle he reprehendeth some of
them that were ouer-haughtie in bragging over the lower and more imperfect
state of Secular people, in these words: Let them walk the way of Perfection,
selling al, and giving it out of charity to the poor. S. August. ibid.
But if they be truly the Poor of Christ, and gather not for themselves, but
for Christ, why do they punish the weaker of our Savior before they have
received their seats of Judicature? For if they are to be such, as to whom
our Lord speaks, when he says: You shall sit upon twelve Seats, judging the
twelve Tribes of Israel; and of whom the Apostle says: Do you not know that
we shall judge the Angels? Lu. 16. ^^
let them prepare to receive into the eternal mansions rather virtuous then
wicked rich men, by whom they were made friends by the Mammon of iniquity.

8. S. Gregory does often deliver this doctrine. S. Greg. 10. moral.
For in the latter end of his tenth Book of Morals he discourses thus: Then
the wicked shall see with their eyes, that they, who have forsaken al earthly
things, shall be established in a heavenly power; of which Truth itself
speaks to the Elect: You that have followed me, in the regeneration when the
Son of man shall sit in his Ma^^stie, you also shall sit upon twelve Seats,
judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. Neither must we think, that heavenly
Bench and Court shall have but twelve Judges to sit, but by the number of
Twelve, the whole generality is expressed; for whosoever spurred-on with the
love of God, shall leave his possessions, shall doubtless obtain a high seat of
Judicature, coming as a Judge together with the Judge; because in
consideration of that Judgment he punished himself here by voluntary
Poverty. Whereupon Solomon says of the Spouse of the holy Church: Proverb.
31.23.
Her husband is honorable in the gates, when he shall sit with the Senators of
the earth. And the Prophet Esaias: Our Lord shall come to judge with the Elders of
his people. Esaias. 3.14.
In which respect Truth does term the said Elders not servants, but friends:
Now I will not call you servants, but friends; such friends as the Psalmist
beholding says of them: Job 15.15.
To me thy friends, o God, are very much honored; and beholding the noblenes
of their heart, and how they spurned at the glory of the world, Ps. 1; 8.17.
he presently added: Their principality is very much strengthened. And because
we should not think them few that arrive to this height of Perfection, he
says further: I will number them, and they shall be multiplied about the sands of
the sea. And in an other place, speaking of a kind of foolishnes, which is
truly wisdom, he says thus: They that perfectly follow this foolishnes,
deserve to hear from the mouth of Wisdom; You that have followed me, shall sit
upon twelve Seats. S. Greg. 8. mor. c. 26.
Behold, they that forsake temporal things, purchase glory of eternal power.
What therefore in this world is accounted more foolish then to f^rgoe that
which is one's own? and what is more honorable in Eternity then to come as
Judges with God?

9. And in the same Work he handles the same subject yet more copiously,
where distinguishing the men that shall appear in the latter day of Judgment
into four ranks, Faure sorts of me^ to appear in Judgment.
he says: Some shall come to be judged and perish, as wicked Christians; others
shall not be judged and also perish, as Infidels, who sinning without law, shall
perish without law; others shall be judged and reign for ever, as good and
faithful people; of the fourth kind of people, that shall not be judged and yet
reign for ever, he writes in this manner: They that by perfection of virtue
go beyond the precepts of the Law; S Greg. 7. moral c. 20.
they that are not content only to fulfill that which the Law of God commands,
but through a more elevated desire strive to perform more then the general
Precepts do require of them; they to whom our Lord says; You that have
forsak^n al, and followed me, when the Son of man shall sit in the seat of
his Majesty, you also shall sit upon twelve Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes
of Israel; These in the latter Judgment are not judged and do reign, because
they come as Judges also with their Creator. For leaving al things, they
fulfilled more out of a willing mind, then they had heard generally commanded.
For that which was said to the yong-man; Matthew. 19
Go and sell all that which then have, and give it to the peer; and thou shall
have a treasure in heaven; and come and follow me, was by special advise spoken
to a few more perfect, not generally to al; for if it had been a general
command binding al, it were a sin to possess any thing in this world; but
it is one thing which holy Scripture commands al in general, and an other
thing which is specially required of the perfect; and therefore with reason
they are not subject to the general Judgment, who in their life have ^one
beyond the general Precepts. For as they are not judge and yet (...), who by
persuasion of Infidelity contemn the Law; so they are not judged and yet
reign, who by persuasion of Piety have profited beyond the general
commandments of the Divine Law.

S (...) in (...) Benedict^.
10. Venerable Bede (an approved and learned Author) is not to be omitted. He
discoursing of this promise of our Savior in S. Matthew, of which I have often
spoken, says in this manner: A just reward; that they, who for Christ
contemned here the glory of humane preferment, should there, glorified by
Christ, sit as Judges in special commission with him. And let no man think,
that only the twelve Apostles shall then be Judges, because, after the fall of
Judas, S. Matthias was chosen in his room; as there be not only twelve Tribes
to be judged: for else the Tribe of Leui, which is the thirteenth, should escape
vniudged; and S. Paul, who is the thirteenth Apostle, should be deprived of his
place of Indicature; whereas he says: Do you not know that we shall judge the
Angels? For we must know that al they, that according to the example of the
Apostles, have left al they had, and followed Christ, shall come with him as
Judges, as al mankind is to be judged. For because by the number of Twelve in
holy Scripture the generality is often signified, therefore by the twelve
Seats of the Apostles the generality of al them that shall judge, and by the
twelve Tribes of Israel the generality of them that shall be judged, is
expressed unto us.

11. The testimony of S. Thomas in this matter (He being the chief of the
Divines) must needs sway much. S. Thomas up (...) a (...) ^.6. and 7.
He therefore is so confident, that this power of Judicature is promised to
Euangelical Poverty, that upon the eminency of this reward he groundeth an
argument to prove, how excellent a thing Poverty itself must needs be, and
moreover teaches upon the same ground, that Secular people ought to bestow
their alms rather upon Religious people, then upon any others, to the end
they may comply with the commandment of our Savior; S. Antonine Ps. (...)
10.8.8.
because Religious people have power to receive them into the eternal Mansions.
For (says he) they shall be iud^es with Christ. S. Antoninus (another great
Divine) is of the same opinion, and confirms it moreover with that saying out
of Job: Job. ^^.6.
He gives judgment to the poor. S. Greg 16. moral 10
To which sentence S. Gregory adds this reason, because ( says he) the more
contemptible they were to the world through their great humility, they grew
then to a higher preeminence of power, receiving Seats of Judicature. We may
add S. Anselme, S. Anselme Ep. 13.
who in one of his Epistles writes thus: Our Lord counseleth those, that will
be perfect, to leave al and follow him; he also promises those that do leave
al and follow him, that they shall sit in Judgment, judging the twelve Tribes
of Israel. But S. Bernard does both most eloquently and sweetly after his
wonted manner apply that of the Psalm to Religious men: Ps. 14^.6.
Their Judges are swallowed-vp near unto the rock; delivering that they shall
not only be Judges with the Rock, S. Bernard form 8. Qu^ habite^.
which is Christ, but so upright, that laying aside al feeling of compassion,
they will be at that time mindful only of Justice, according to the example of
the Sovereign Judge himself, swallowed-vp and wholly turned into a disposition
of doing Justice, and imitating therein the hardness of the Rock, to whom they
are so nearely linked; having forsaken al other things, merely to follow and to
cleave unto it. For this ( says he) is that which, when Peter asked what they
should have, the Rock itself made answer: You also shall sit judging the twelve
Tribes of Israel. O favor of familiarity! O height of honor! O privilege
of confidence! O prerogative of perfect security! For what can be more
dreadful, what can be imagined fuller of great anxietie and excessive care,
then to stand before that terrible Tribunal to be judged, expecting the
stil-vncertain sentence so rigourous a Judge? As some men's sins, so doubtless
some men's good endeauours are so apparent before the Judgment, that as they
waiting for their sentence sink instantly into hell by the weight of their
crimes, so these contrariwise mount up without any contradiction, in full
liberty of spirit, to the seats prepared for them. Happy is the voluntary
Poverty, my Lord IESV, of those that have forsaken al, and followed thee.
Doubtless a most blessed Poverty, which makes men so secure, yea so glorious in
that so hideous a dissolution of the elements, so fearful a trial of deserts,
so doubtful an expectation of Judgment.

1^. And els-where the same Saint discoursing at large and extolling the
greatness of this dignity and preferment, S. Bernard s^r. Eccen^^.
gives also the reason, why Religious people above al others are rewarded in
this kind. For whereas ( says he) Poverty has two incommodities, Why
voluntary Poverty is rewarded with so great dignity.
which accompany it, to wit, contemptiblenes, and toil and labor, God has
with reason appointed, that in regard of their former labors, they should sit;
in regard of the contempt they suffered, they should be endued with so great a
power, that if a man were greedy of pleasure, he might thirst after that
torrent of pleasures; if he were desirous of glory, he might rather aim at
this true and incomparable glory; and therefore quiet without pertu^bation is
promised us in the Seats, and prehemine^ce of honor in the power of
Judicature. Upon which ground he enlarges himself in declaring the glory of
this promise, and how much this dignity does ouertop al worldly titles and
preferments. What secular honor ( says he) can be thought of, which is not
base in comparison of so great a pre-eminence? For they are to sit Judges with
Christ, not upon one city, or people* or country, but upon the whole world.
They shall not only judge men, but Angels. They, I say, who disdaining and
blowing aside the vapor of this present glory, which shines for a while,
have preferred the reproach of Christ before al titles of honor. Be not
afraid, you little flock, because it has pleased your ^^ther to give you a
Kingdom. The decree is made, which shall not be void; the sentence stands
unchangeable; finally your Lord has sworn, and it will not repent him. Amen I
say unto you, that you that have followed me, in the regeneration, when the
Son of man shall sit in the Seat of his Majesty, you also shall sit Judges.
What can be more glorious? Let the Sonne^ of Pride sit now with their King that
has chosen the side of the North; Let them judge, and be preiudicate. O
unhappy ambition, which knows not how to aspire to great things, but seeks
to rise by trifles, and fails of that which is great indeed! They love the
first seats, which as untimely figs will quickly fall. They therefore that love
the first seats, let them beware they fail not of the second; and they that
choose to sit at board in the first place, begin not with shame to take the
last. You shall sit, says he, upon twelve seats, judging the twelve Tribes of
Israel. These seats he foresaw, who said of the heavenly City: There sat
Seats in Judgment, Seats upon the house of David. There doubtless, not here.
For this is the special glory of the Perfect, to be eminent even among the
faithful, and to have precedencie of Iudiciarie power even before others that
shall be saved, that according to the Psalm, they may sit upon the house of
David. What misery is it, that man should be so negligent as to sleep when he
hears the word of so great a promise?

12. Thus does S. Bernard admire this prerogative of a Religious state; and
withal that men being so greedy of vain and fickle and transitory honor in
this world, seek not after this so true and so high a preferment, as to be
companions with Christ himself the Son of God, in so noble and glorious an
action, in the view not of one City or Kingdom, but absolutely of al men that
are, or ever were, or shall be, and of innumerable multitudes of Angels.

Of the glory, which Religious people shall have in Heaven. CHAP. XVIII.
THOUGH the glory of this action, of which I have discoursed in the precedent
Chapter, be so great, that al Princely power and glory laid together, is no
way^s to be compared with it; yet the glory, which Religious people shall enjoy
in heaven, i^ far above it. For their Iudiciarie power is but temporal: their
glory in heaven is eternal; the first is but an honor done outwardly unto
them, this second is inwardly fixed in their soul; which we shall the better
understand, if we consider, Diverse d^grees in the bl^sse of Saints.
that (as Faith does teach us) though the bliss everlasting of the Saints, be
one thing in all of them, consisting in the clear sight of that Good, in which
al good is comprehended, to wit, the unchangeable Essence of our GOD; yet there
be diverse and very different degrees of seeing it; whereof S. Gregory speaks
in these words: S. Gregory 4. mor c. v^^.
Because in this life there is difference in our works, doubtless in the other
there will be distinction of honors; and as one is above another in merit, so
one shall surpass another in the reward. Wherefore seeing the inequality there,
proceeds merely out of the inequality here of merit in this life, if we show
that the course of a Religious life in this world does furnish them with far
more commodity and plenty of merit here, it will be easily granted, that their
reward there, must needs be far more plentiful also in the world to come.

2. First therefore, More occasions of virtue in Religion then in the World.
this State does afford far more abundant occasion of exercising virtue, then
a Secular life, and of virtues more singular and more heroical. For in the
world, a body seldom happens upon occasion of doing good, unless he be
careful in seeking it: Religious people have daily occasions at home; for both
their Institute, and their Rules, and their Su^eriours, and their Companions,
al and every thing that is in house with them, ministers them occasions of
virtuous actions, and indeed thrusts them upon them, and requires them at
their hands. And as the work of a carpenter or a smith, is wholly in wood or
iron, because his art is in handling those materials; so the works of Religious
people is Virtue, and they are al day employed in the inward and outward
exercises thereof. Wherein not only our own desire and devout endeavor does
help us, but a kind of necessity of doing well, having tied ourselves to
certain Rules and orders, which compel us in a manner s^metimes to pray,
sometimes to read, sometimes to employ ourselves in humble offices, sometimes
in charitable actions toward our neighbor; so that, though we would not, we
cannot but do well. And every day and every hour being full of these virtuous
practices, it is easy to see to what a sum the reckoning will at last amount.
To which purpose it is recorded that Aegid^us, Aegidius.
S. Francis his Companion, was wont to say: If the river of Tyber should have
stood, and the water been stopped, which was wont to have his course; how would
it have been swollen by this time? Not only so many years as it has already
had his course, but a few days would be enough to make it of a River a great
Sea. The like we may say of Religious people continuing daily and howerly in
virtuous actions, and day and night laboring to multiply them; what an
^ncrease of glory, and heap of crowns must they needs gather together at
last?

3. Poverty moreover is of itself a living fountain of merit, Poverty and
Obedience.
by reason of the daily troubles and incommodities which it brings, the
suffering whereof does infinitely enrich a Soul. And Obedience is no less* the
least and meanest kind of works being by means thereof oftimes more pleasing to
God, then fair greater works undertaken of our own accord and fancy. A
Religious life therefore consisting wholly upon Obedience; and al kind of
actions, great and little, being ruled by it, our very diet and sleep and
rec^^ation and such like, who will be able to say, to what an infinite treasure
it will come at length? Palladius (a Monk, Palladius*
and Register of the actions of ancient Monks which himself had seen) writes
of himself, that being troubled in mind as thinking with himself that he lead
but an idle and unprofitable life in his chamber, he went to that famous
Macarius of Alexandria, who (as he was full of the spirit of God) understanding
his grief, said unto him: Answer thy thoughts, that for our Savior Christ thou
keep the four walls of thy Cel; giving us to understand, how meritorious
the works of a Religious man are, when vacancie from al work for the love of
God and for the performance of his will, is not to be accounted idle or
unfruitful.

4 What shall we say of the humility of a Religious course, which doubtless is a
great glory unto it? Humility.
For the saying and promise of our Savior must necessarily be fulfilled:
Every one that humbles himself, shall be exalted. Which if it be to be
understood also of them that inwardly in their mind are humble, and think
meanly of themselves, Lu^. 18 14.
much more does it agree to them that are not only humble in mind, but have
chosen an humble manner of living far from al pride and oftentation,
perseuering moreover in perpetual poverty, which in men's opinon is the basest
and most disdaigneful state of al. It is reason therefore they should be
exalted in heaven, seeing they have so much abased themselves here on earth.

Reli^ious (...)
5. Our Savior does also put Religious people in good hope by this other
saying: He that ministers to me, let him follow me, and where I am, there let
him be that is my minister. Now among the servants of Christ there be many
differences. For as Kings and Princes have many subjects, and al of them owe
some duty to him, but the name of the King's servant does properly follow
them, that live in household with the King, (...) 12.26.
and are ready at a call and at a beck, and have no other business but the
King's: So al Christians may be called, and are, the servants of Christ, but
they that have left their own houses and possessions, and betaken themselves
into the house of God, to attend wholly and only to his affairs, may most truly
and most properly challenge this Prerogative.

6. Whereof Religious people reap another commodity (which I have spoken of
more at large before) to wit, that seeing the business which they handle is
God's, and not their own; by occasion of the state itself in which they are,
they may far more easily and the more effectually direct al their actions to
God and good ends, in which the greatest part of our merit does consist. For
unless a man will be wilfully evil, and defraud his master of his service, as
a naughty servant does him of his money, and employ it in other uses; most of
the works which a Religious man does, of themselves do tend to God; others may
be easily guided to the same end, with small industry and labor; which works
God accepts, acknowledging them to be done for his sake, and re^ards them
with liberal reward; and being multiplied in that manner as they are, they must
needs bring a man an infinite treasure and mass of glory in the l^fe to come. ^
Of which glory S. Basil discoursing, brings God, as it were, speaking to
the voluntary Eunuchs, such as have bound themselves to live chastely Vow, and
says thus: For a mortal name, I will give them the name of immortal Angels,
which shall not be taken from them, they shall have heaven and the choycest part
there ^f to dwell in, ^
to wit, my own house, and dwelling within my walls, they shall not only
partake of the nature of the Ange^s, and of the glory of their perpetual
succession, being themselves sufficiently able to found a succession of their
own in the life eternal; but they shall have an honorable and an eminent place
among the Angels, and a name which shall never sail in regard of the splendor
of their rare virtue.

7. S John Chrysostom speaking of the same glory in his third Book against
the Dispraysers of a Monastical life says in this manner: S John Chrys^st.
lib. ^. contra (...) vi^. Mon.
What then shall we say? may not he be saved that has a wife and household?
First there is not only one way and means to be saved, but many di^^erent
ways, which our Savior giving us to understand says, that there be many
mansions in the house of his Father; Secular people the last in heaven.
and S. Paul when he tells us, that one is the brightness of the sun,
another of the moon, another of the stars: that is, others shall shine like
the sun, others like the moon, and others like the stars. Consider
therefore well what steps of honor and merit thou must leave above thee, if
thou stoop from the greatness of the Sun to the least and lowest star. Thus
speaks S. John Chrysostom, adding moreover that men deal their business in
this kind but unworthily and with great disadvantage to themselves; in regard
that if they aim at a place at Court, they will endeavor to get the best and
most honorable, and be as near and as dear to the King as they can possibly
be: but it being in their choice to be Courtiers and Soldiers of heaven, as he
speaks, they are never a whit s^rrie nor grieved, if they light upon the last
place, and be the very hindmost of al. And he repeateth the same in the latter
end of his said Book, and endeauours to beat it into us, saying that though
we were certain of our salvation, yet we should strive for the first place in
heaven; as in all matches that are made, it is a shame to come behind. But
Secular people, says he, shall stand in the last place, supposing they be able
to break through the rubbs which the World does lay in their way, which
notwithstanding is very hard and difficult. Can there be therefore a foolisher
thing then to choose to remain behind with the last, when a man may step-vp so
high, as to look the very Angels in the face? Thus speaks S. John Chry^^stom
in that place. For in his other Treatise, where he compares a Monk with a
King, Idom Him. de Mon. and Rege.
he says further thus: After this life we shall behold a Monck taken-vp
glorious in the sight of al in the clouds, to meet Christ in the air,
resembling his Captain, the beginner of this sovereign kind of life, and
Author of al Virtue. But a King though he have governed his Kingdom with
justice and inte^ritie, shall notwithstanding have a l^sse degree of salvation,
and less glory. And if he have not behaved himself well, who can express the
misery which you shall see him endure, scorched with that fire, flead with
those whips, and punished with th^se torments, which neither tongue can
declare, nor can in themselves be abidden.

8. And we may add one thing more, which many learned men do auou^^; to wit,
The Accidental glory of Religiou^ people.
that Religious people shall not only enjoy an eminent place in the glory which
is common to al, as we have declared, but shall have a particular Laurel or
garland (as Divines do term it, and define it to be an Accidental joy added
over and above the Essential reward) manifestly to be seen in some particular
glory of their bodies, in testimony of some noble and heroical act achieved.
As we see in commonwealths that are well governed; al are kept to their duty
by certain general rewards and punishments; besides which general rewards for
that which is good, there be contain peculiar rewards for heroical actions: as
if a soldier had done any special exployt, besides his ordinary pension, he
was anciently rewarded with a kind of Coronet, or Laurel, or triumphant
Chariot, according unto the enterprise in which he had showed his valor; So in
heaven, besides the essential reward due to al good deeds, there be certain
honors, as we may call them, and particular recompenses for Virgins, and
Martyrs, and Doctors, as having very eminently showed their valor, and gone
away with singular victories over the Flesh, and the Devil, and Death itself.
If therefore these three have their particular Coronets, or garlands; why may
we not say, that Religious people shall have one also particular to themselves?
seeing they embrace perpetual Chastity, as Virgins; and cease not to do great
good to their Neighbor, as Doctors; and in regard of the many crosses they
endure, stand in so near a degree to Martyrs, as I have showed; and though
there were nothing else, have utterly set the World and al worldly things at
naught, and lived perpetually in so great a contempt of it, as we see; which no
man can deny but that it is one of the noblest and most heroical actions,
which a man can perform in this life, and consequently may worthily deserve a
singular reward, and, as the holy Scripture speaks, every one of them
receive from the hand of God a Kingdom of glory, Sap. 5.17.
and a dream of beauty.

9. The greatness of this glory, which attends upon Religious people, has been
diverse times showed to many, and once in particular to a certain Nouice of S.
Francis his Order, and made great impression in him as in reason it might. The
burden of Religion seeming unto him very heavy, and being moreover sorely
tempted by the Devil, A notable Vision.
he was upon the point of yealding, and began to harbor unworthy thoughts of
returning to the world, but was cured by this heavenly remedy. One night as
he passed through the Church, bowghing his head and his body to adore the
Blessed Sacrament as he went by it, in the very instant he was in a Rapt, and
had this Vision: He saw a long rank of people passing by him clad al alike;
their garments were white; their faces, and their hands, and feet, did shine
like the sun; they went (as he thought) in great haste and joy to meet, and
embrace, and entertayne a certain guest, that was newly come among them. And
being much astonished with this sight, he asked one of the company, what all this was; and it was answered him, that they were Franciscan-Friars that were
going to accompany a certain man of their Order into Heaven, that was newly
departed; that they themselves lined al of them in Heaven in great glory and
happiness; and that the honor of that white garment was particularly granted
them in lieu of the Habit of Religion, which they did wear on earth; the
glory of their bodies for the incommodities, which they had suffered in it; of
which glory he should be partaker, if he remained firm and constant in the
course he had begun; which afterward he easily effected, being so encouraged
with this Vision, that he never after had any wandering thoughts at al.

10. Which Vision does put us moreover in mind of another happiness and
particular joy, which Religious people shall have in heaven, by the concourse
and meeting of many of the same Order and Religion together. For (as the
tro^p, which this man saw, does give us to understand) we must think, that in
heaven there is a several distinct place for every Religious Order to be in,
to which place all that are of the same Order do presently repair, so soon as
they arrive in heaven, which cannot but give every one new matter of glory
and gladness. For if in this world it be so joyful a thing to meet with our
Brethren, and converse with those of our own Order and Institute, in regard
of the love which is betwixt us; there can be no doubt, but that in heaven this
joy will be far greater, where our love shall be more seruent, and al
perfections of Nature and Grace more eminent, without any mixture of vice or
imperfection; and withal most apparent to every one, beholding them before our
eyes as in a cristal-glasse; which as they will excessiuely increase our love,
so also the eternal sweetness of our loving conversation. Wherefore it is
certain, that to be continually in that Blessed company, and ourselves to be a
blessed part thereof, must needs be an infinite happiness, far^e greater then we
here can either conceive or believe.

Of the Antiquity of Religious courses; and first how they were prefigured in
the Old Law. CHAP. XIX.
WE are now to discourse of another kind of dignity belonging to a Religious
state. For that, of which we have hitherto spoken, though doubtless it be the
chiefest and most to be esteemed, as being founded upon the plenty and rarenes
of the Virtues which concur in it, the conjunction and similitude with God,
and the rewards and honor, which in the life to come it expects; yet it is
partly spiritual, and concealed within us; partly also not present, but long to
come hereafter; and consequently the glory and splendor thereof lies open
only to the eyes of God, and to those, that having their souls enlightened with
his sovereign light, are withal enabled to make a true estimate of these
spiritual things; who certainly are but few, and in a manner none in comparison
of the rest; Eccl. 1.
for (as the Wiseman says) of fools, the number is infinite. Wherefore to the
end that so rare and so excellent a thing should not be hidden from the most
part of men, God has enriched it with other graces and ornaments, so plain
and conspicuous to be seen of all that the rudest sort cannot be ignorant of
them. Matt. 5.
No man, says our Lord, does light a candle and put it under a bu^hel, but
upon the candlestick, that it may give light to all that be in the house. And
that which he said, he did, for he has not placed this light of Religion in
dens and caves of the earth, but in the public view of the world, into which
he brought it, to enlighten the darkness thereof; and has bestowed such high
favors upon it, that it does not only march side by side with the Nobility of
the world, but goes far before it, even for the things which the world does
most of al esteem and prize. For wherefore is it that Families, and Cities,
and whatsoever Companies or Corporations, are esteemed honorable in the eyes
of men, but for the antiquity of their standing or descent, the number and
worth of their subjects, their noble acts achieved, and derived to the notice
of others by common fame, and such like other things, which, as I said, are in
the world accounted glorious? Of al which a Religious state is so abundantly
furnished that humane Pride has not whereof to extol and beast itself, nor any
thing indeed, which can be comparable to this true and solid Glory. Wherefore
we will bestow some leaves in discoursing of these ornaments; and first we will
speak of the Antiquity of Religion. For though so rare an excellency of
eminent virtue was to be reserved to the times of the Ghospel, Antiquity of
Religion in figure. 1. Cor. 13.
and for the Son of God himself to bring down from heaven, those former Ages
(which the Apostle compares to the childhood of the world, because the Law
brought nothing to perfection) not being capable of so much spiritual
perfection, Heb. 7.
so rare virtue, I say, being to be reserved to the fulness of times, and grace
bestowed upon us by CHRIST JESUS our Savior, yet it is no small honor and
glory for it, that it is so plainly and so expressly prefigured in the Old Law.

^li^s.
2. First ^lias was a lively pattern of this course, living without wife, or
children, or family, a chaste and sin^le li^e, and continuing in it, in that
poverty, that his garment is expressed to have been a belt of leather, 4 Reg.
1.
and that he received his sustenance in a manner of alms, ^. Reg. 17.
sometimes by a widow, sometimes by means of a crow. 3 Reg. 15.
Eliz^us was one of his chief disciples, and resembled him most in the course
of life which he had lived; Eli^aus.
and being invited by him to this form of Perfection, he presently forsook
his father's lands and cattle which he was following, yea his parents, and
household, giving Religious people so long-before a rare example, how
courageously they are to forsake al these things for the love of CHRIST.

4. (...)
3. The Sons, as they called them, of the Prophets, were men that under the
conduct and discipline of these two, which I have named, did profess and
follow a more perfect kind of life then others in those days. For the miracles
which Elizeus is recorded to have wrought at their request, in Healing of the
waters, and in Sweetning the bitterness of the pot, and in Multiplying the
bread which was to serve them al, does sufficiently testify, that they were
separated from the rest of the Children of Israel, and lived in Community
together. And we may gather that they lived a single life, because we do not
had any mention of any wife or children which they had, and indeed with them
they could not have lived in common. Finally it appears sufficiently that
they lived in Obedience; 4 R^g (...)
because as Elizeus returned from beholding the taking up of Elias into the
air, they al meeting him, ^el down on their faces, and adored him as we find
in holy Scripture; as it were, professing by this outward sign of reverence,
that what Obedience they yealded before to Elias, the same they were ready to
yeald to him. Whereupon S. Hierome does with reason style al those, (...)
which I have named, Monks of the old Testament; and in another place reckoning
himself among them, he says thus: Our beginner was Elias, Elezius was ours,
our leaders were the Sons of the Prophets. And Isido^^e in his Book of
Ecclesiastical Offices says the same thing, almost in the selfsame words; and
calls Elias, and Elizeus, and the rest of the Prophets, Authors of Monks*
with whom we may rank Cassian saying, (...) c. 2.
that the beginnings of Monastical profession were founded by them.

^.
4. But none in the Old Law do more near and more plainly resemble Religious
people, then the Nazareans; and all the whole Ceremony which was used about
them. S. Gregory Nazianzen Orat in laudem S. B^s. S. Tho. 12. q. 186. a 6.
For which reason S. Gregory Nazianzen in the Oration which he made in the
praise of S. Basil, does call al Religious, our Nazareans. And S. Thomas
delivers, that the Nazareans, which were wont in the Old Law to be
sanctified, did signify those that aspire to the height of al Perfection; and
does learnedly conclude thereupon, that a Vow is necessary to a slate of
Perfection. They did therefore much resemble our kinds of Institute, in regard
they were consecrated and sanctified to God, as we; and wholly dedicated
themselves to the service of God, Number. 6.
obliging themselves thereunto by Vow. But we go far beyond them; because
they most commonly stood not obliged for their whole life, but for some certain
time, longer or shorter as they thought good; Our obligation is perpetual; They
abstained from some certain things only; we wholly forsake al worldly things.
But the laws, and ceremonies prescribed by God concerning them, representing
in figure diverse Religious practices, do most apparently lay before us, both
the likeness and the difference, which is betwixt them and us; and by the
shadow of those carnal things, we may easily discover the perfection of this
spiritual state.

5. First therefore, The ceremonies of the Nazareans applied to Religious
people. S. Hierom. Amos. 2. They drink no^ wine.
they are most strictly obseruant in abstayning from wine, and sider, and
whatsoever lickour that might make them drunk. S. Hierome takes wine to be
whatsoever may inueigle our understanding; to wit, the love of any earthly
thing For as no man loves drunkenness in itself, but the wine; which when he
takes ouer-largely makes him drunk; and the pleasantnes of it to our taste,
does draw us on to take largely of it; so there is no body that will willingly
be inueigled, but it follows by the use of earthly things, because it can
hardly be, but that our mind and affection should cleave unto them. Religious
people therefore to avoid this drunkenness which is so prejudicial, forsake
lands and goods and al things, and use but very sparingly the things which are
necessary for their sustenance, and have no dominion or power to dispose of
them; which is to be most perfectly naked of al things. Where it is specially
to be noted, that the Nazarea^s did not abstain only from wine, but from any
thing that had any affinity with it, as vinegar, and whatsoever lickour that
came of the grape, and from the grape itself, and al kinds of raysins, insomuch
that they might not so much as suck the stalks of them. For in like manner
Religious people by their very Insti^u^e have no co^municatio^ not only with
sinful things, but not with any that have any affinity or neernes unto them,
or may be any inducement thereunto: for it is easy to be drawn from the
stalk to the grape, from the grape to the wine, and from wine to drunkenness,
that is, from lesser to greater things, and from things lawful to the unlawful;
the nature of our Senses and appetite enticing us always on.

6. The second ceremony of the Nazareans was, They cu^ not their hair.
that the razour should not come upon their head, but that they should preserve
their hair untouched; which does evidently give us to understand, that
Religious people are so wholly God's, and entirely consecrated unto him, that
not only themselves, but whatsoever is in them, is holy and devoted unto him.
For if the hair was accounted holy, which is least of al belonging to man,
and least necessary; much more our tongue, and our hands, and the rest of our
body, and most of al our Soul. To which purpose Origines says very well:
Orig. Hom. 6. in L^uit.
The Nazareans do not cut-of their hair, because al things which the Just
do, shall prosper, and their leaves shall ^^t fall. Therefore also the hayres of
the heads of the disciples of our Lord are said to be nu^bred, that is, al
their works, al their speeches, al their thoughts are layd-vp in the sight of
God, because they are just, because they are holy.

They touch no dead body.
7. The third law, which they were to observe, was that they were not to
accompany any dead body, not so much as their own fathers or mothers, or
brothers or sisters corpse, least they might be defiled. A man might doubt, who
are to be understood by dead bodies, but that our Savior himself has declared
it unto us. For speaking of secular people to one, whom he desired should
follow him, Matthew. ^.
he said: Suffer the dead to bury the dead; but thou come and follow me; now
the dead, whom this man would have buried, was his father. In Religion they
that follow it, do utterly abandon and forsake the world first of al, which is
chiefly understood by the dead; secondly they forsake al flesh and blood, the
too much love whereof must needs defile our souls; but they have no
communication with it any more, by which means they easily preserve themselves
pure and unspotted.

The Sacrifices of the Nazareans.
8. Fourthly, when the time of their Vow was expired, they were brought to the
door of the Tabernacle, and there were to offer three sorts of Sacrifice^, to
wit, for their Sin, a Peace Offering, and a Holocaust. With us, the term of
our service, and of our life, are both one; when our life ends, our Vow
expireth. Then we are presented at the door of the Tabernacle; of that
Tabernacle, I say, in which God has his dwelling, and into his glory we are
translated to receive the abundant reward of our long service. The state itself
of Religion affords us a triple offering: A Holocaust, because by it we are
wholly offered to God, nothing at al reserved; A Peace Offering, because there
is no better way then Religion, to have peace with him, and plenty of his
favors; A Sacrifice for our sin, because though we may have been somewhat
negligent in our lifetime, the force and virtue of Religion, and the abundance
of good works performed in it, will easily blot that out. Whereupon also it
follows, that the hair which is cut-of, is cast into the fire as a
complement of the Sacrifice; into that fire, I say, in which the Sacrifice
itself is burnt and offered. For to what purpose may we think this is? to give
God contentment by the noisome smell of the burning hair? No, but it gives us
to understand, that the smallest actions of Religious people are exceeding
pleasing to God, because they are offered in the fire of Charity, which fire
the State itself does kindle; which is then most of al to be seen, when, the
evening coming, the workmen are called to receive their hire. Wherefore seeing
the Nazareans and the Religious people resemble one another so near, yea seeing
Religious people do so far surpass the Nazareans of-old; how can we doubt,
but that, as the Nazareans in the Religion of the Jews had the chiefest place
of esteem, so Religious people ought to have it among us?

9. Howsoever, we may truly and with far more reason say of our Nazareans
then of those of-old, ^
those words of the Prophet Hieremie: More white then snow, more neat then
milk, more ruddie then ancient Iuorie, more beautiful then the Sapphire. Which
place S. Gregory does fitly apply to Religious people, S Gregory ^2 (...)
^.^7.
telling us, that their life is said to be more white then milk or snow;
because by the snow, which comes from above, we may understand good and godly
men; by milk, which springs from flesh, we may understand them that dispense
earthly goods uprightly; but a Religious state excels them both. And because
by ^eruour of spirit they seem sometimes to go beyond the life and
conversation of the ancient and heroical Fathers (for Iuorie is a bone of a
great beast) therefore the Prophet says, more ruddit then ancient Iuorie.
Finally, because by their heavenly conversation they surpass many that have
gone toward heaven before them, they are said to be more beautiful then the
Sapphire; for the Sapphire is of an ayrie color. Thus says S. Gregory.

10. Wherefore as a Map of a Palace or of a gardin is pleasing to the eye,
not in regard of itself, but in regard of the Palace or garden which it
represents; and the things themselves when they are perfect, do much more
delight then any perfect delineation of them; so seeing we find, that that
draught, as I may call it, of those ancient Nazareans being but a shadow of our
Religious people, was so highly pleasing to God; how much more pleasing must
these our Institutes needs be unto him, wherein there is such solid perfection
of al Euangelical Virtue? And consequently in the E^angelical Law we may with
much more reason, then they could in those days, in a manner glory, and
proclaim it to al Christians and to the whole Church as a singular benifit,
that which we find in the Prophet Amos: Amos. 2.
I am he that made you ascend from the land of Egypt, and raised Prophets of
your sons, and Nazareans of your yong-men. For so great a work, and so holy
a conversation (as we have said before, and may often repeat) cannot be
begun, but by the hand of God, nor continued without his help.

That a Religious state was instituted by our Savior himself; and first in his
Apostles. CHAP. XX.
NOW if we will search into the beginnings of a Religious state, and value, as
it were, the nobility by Descent, we shall find the pedigree thereof to be more
noble, and more illustrious, then of any thing else. For it began not by man
nor by humane means, but from the Son of God himself, in whom are all the
treasures of wisdom, and knowledge of God; and among other documents of
Salvation he left this form of life so much the more clearly and carefully
expressed, Only Heretick^ call this in question.
both by word and example, by how much it is more perfect: whereof I find no
body but Heretics to make any doubt at al. Heretics indeed both ancient and
new (and among the rest that wicked Wickles) do clamor and urge very hotly,
that all this manner of life is a mere humane Invention. But it is clear without
question on the other side, Waldens^s lib. de Sacrament. (...). 9. cap. 13.
that Christ himself was the sole Author of it; and that by his advise, and
voice, and authority it was first diuulged; whereof many have learnedly
written, but more largely then the rest, Waldensis, a grave and principal
Divine, and later then he, Clitonans in his Book of Monastical Vows.
Clitonans lib. 5. cap. ^^


7. But what need we call men to witness, having the authority of the Ghospels
clear for us? for whereas Religion consists of the three Vows, whereof I have
often spoken, Matthew. 19.
we shall quickly find, that al of them were first brought to light by our
Savior. For of Chastity we have it from his own mouth, that there are
Eunuchs, who have guelded themselves for the kingdom of God; which saying
cannot be understood of those who abstain from marriage merely voluntarily,
and out of a single purpose or resolution of their mind; for having it still in
their power to make choice of the state of marriage, when they list, they
cannot be called Eunuchs; they only therefore are decyphered unto us in these
words, who have utterly cut-of al power of this kind from themselves by a
perpetual and solemn Vow, such as Religion obliges (...) unto.

Poverty.
3. And as for Poverty, in what terms could he more plainly and more
effectually commend it unto us, then when he said: Unless a man renounce all that he possesses, Luc 11.
he cannot be my disciple? or when he prescribed his Disciples this rule: Luc
10.
Possess neither gold nor silver; and bids them carry with them neither bag
nor scrip.

4. He instituted Obedience when he said: He that will come after me, let him
deny himself. Obedience.
For by this denial of one's self, Doctors do generally understand the Vow of
Obedience; and (which is of more weight) the Council of Sens (as appears by a
Decree thereof) does construe it to the same effect. Luc 9.
And our Savior having thus severally upon occasion given us these documents,
Conci^ium S^nense d^crit. 9.
he does as it were jointly commend them al unto us, when to the yong-man, that
came unto him and asked him how he might come to Life Everlasting, Matthew. 29.
he gives answer in these words, which three Evangelists do relate almost
word for word alike, Marc 20.
laying before our eyes (as S. Augustine auerreth, Luc 18.
and al learned men after him) a most perfect pattern of a Religious vocation,
S August. Ep^s^. 89.
and a draught of that, which daily happens in Souls, that are induced to
embrace that kind of life.

5. For first if we consider, that our Savior beholding him, loved him, as it
is said in the Ghospel: what does this signifye other, then that so great a
benefit is not given but to those whom God does behold after a particular kind
of manner and singularly love? That he tells him, that One thing is yet
wanting unto thee; and says it to one, that from his very youth had always
observed all the Commandments, doubtless he would edge him on with desire of
Perfection, the beauty thereof being of itself wonderfully amiable. For as if
an Image were so far begun, as that the head, and the breast, and the arms
were most curiously earned, and the rest of the body not yet finished, the
image itself, if it had sense and understanding, would grieve and desire, that
it might be brought to perfection; so this young man, hearing how much he yet
wanted, in reason he should have been so netled within, that he could not have
rested til he had obtained it. There follows the Counsel, and form of
Perfection, with the reward belonging unto it: Go and sell all that thou have,
and give it to the poor; and come and follow me; and thou shall have a
treasure in heaven. Naming Al, he wills him to reserve nothing to himself,
but bereave himself absolutely of al things. Bidding him Sell al, he prescribes
a perpetual and irreuocable abdication and defeisance. Finally in those words,
Follow me, he comprehends Obedience, and the rest of the Counsels. This
therefore was the Counsel of our Savior, clearly and expressly delivered by his
own mouth.

6. Which perfection, The Apostles the first Religious men.
though the young man foolishly rejected it when it was offered him by our
Savior, the Apostles, who were his first Scholars, admitted of it. For so do
diverse very learned men deliver, to wit, that the Apostles were the first that
ever received this kind of form of Religious Institute, and first put it in
practice. And of the Poverty which they professed, there can be no doubt made,
because we find it by that which is written of their practice in the Ghospel;
and S. Peter testifyeth as much, Matthew. 19.
when in the name of them al, he says: Behold, we have forsaken al things;
which words declare not only their Poverty, but their Chastity also. For
under the name of Al things, doubtless their wives are also to be understood;
and S. Hierome uses it as an argument against Iouinian; S. Hierom^ lib. 2. in
Iouin.
specially seeing (as he says) our Savior answering S. Peter, mentions wives
among other things that were to be forsaken, insinuating that the Apostles had
already performed that part. Whereupon S. Hierome concludes, that they had
wives before they knew any thing of the Gospel; but when they were chosen
Apostles, they presently laid aside the use of them; upon which ground in an
other place he says, that the Apostles were al of them either virgins, or,
having been married, abstayned from their wives. Finally we may gather their
Obedience from these words: And we have followed thee. For what is it to follow
an other, but to live according to his direction, and to obey him in all things?
Seeing therefore al these things are without question to be found in the
Apostles, let us show, that they obliged themselves also thereunto by Vow.

7. Besides other Divines, Aluar Pelag. lib. 2. cap 56. de Planct^^ Eccl.
Aluarus Pelagius (a grave and learned Author) does clearly demonstrate this
point in the Book which he writ of the Complaint of the Church, and brings
many arguments to prove it, but chiefly this, that a Vow, as he says, is the
Counsel of Counsels, and the soul and perfection of them; because whatsoever
Counsel is confirmed by Vow, it is essentially the more perfect, and the more
acceptable to God. From whence he concludes, that if the Apostles had made no
Vow, they could not be said to be in the top and height of Perfection; but the
abdication of the self-same things, which Religious people do daily profess,
would be more perfect then that which the Apostles practiced, in regard they
oblige themselves by Vow: now it were temerarious, and wicked, and impious to
think or say so of the Apostles. And he confirms it, because there can be no
question, but that the Apostles did not only leave the possession of that which
they had, but the will of having any thing; that they might truly say: They had
forsaken al. But this will of having, cannot be forsaken, bu^ by Vow; because we
renounce not our will, as long as we may resume it again at our pleasure. We
may add moreover, that certainly the Apostles did not forsake that, which they
had, more imperfectly then the young man, we spoke of, had forsaken them, if he
had followed the Counsel of our Savior, and sold al; for our Savior gave him
the same Counsel, which the Apostles had already embraced: But he: that sells
al thing ^reserueth to himself no power or right at al over it; and
consequently neither did the Apostles reserve any thing to themselves. S.
Thomas does clearly and solidly auerre the self-same, S. Thomas 2.2. qu. 88.
ar. 4. ad 2.
to wit, that there is no doubt to be made, but that the Apostles did vow al
things belonging to a state of Perfection, S. August. 27. de ciuit. cap. 4.
when forsaking al, they followed Christ. But S. Augustine does most
perspicuously and most learnedly of any other deliver it in these words: That
poor man is raised from the earth above al rich men, and that needy man is
extolled above al wealthy people from that dung, to sit with the Powerful of
the people, to whom he says: You shall sit upon twelve seats; giving them a
Seat of glory in inheritance. For these Powerful people had said: Behold we
have forsaken al, and followed thee. This Vow these most Powerful had vowed. So
S. Augustine. Seeing therefore it is clear, that the Apostles observed Poverty,
Chastity, and Obedience, and moreover that they did not observe them merely
voluntarily, but obliged themselves thereunto also by Vow; why may we not
acknowledge, that this height of Perfection is descended from Christ by them,
and account them the first foundations of Religious Conuents? And certainly it
was but reason, that so rare a course should be commended by their Dignity and
Sanctity; and that they, who were to be the Masters and Doctors of the
world, should not want this ornament, which in the glory of the Ghospels is so
conspicuous.

How Religious courses did flourish in the time of the Apostles. CHAP. XXI.
THE Apostles having received of Christ our Savior this form of sanctity,
they instantly printed it in the hearts of the first Believers, Act. 2.3.
which were then tender and pliable to al good things, and apt to admit of
whatsoever impression of the Holie-Ghost. Wherefore not only those Hundred and
twenty persons, who remaining together in that Upper room (as it is
mentioned in the Acts) made, Act. 4.32.
as it were, The first Christians vowed Poverty.
one body among themselves, embraced this Poverty, and nakedness of al things,
and a life in common; but other Christians also of those days converted in
Jerusalem by their means; of whom it is written: The multitude of Believers
were of one heart, and one soul; and none of them called any thing his own of
that which they possessed, S. Hierome Ep^stola. 8.
but al things were common among them. For as many as were in possession of
lands and houses, selling them, brought the price of that which they sold, and
laid it at the feet of the Apostles. And division was made of it to every one
as he had need. That withal they made some Vow or promise, Act. 5.3.
not only S. Hierome and diverse others do testifye, but that which S. Peter
said when he reprehended Ananias, does evidently show it: W^y, says he, ha^^
Satan tempted thy heart to lie to the Holie-Ghost, and defraude of the price of
the field? Thou have not lied to men, but to God. For if Ananias had been so
liberal merely out of devotion, and out of a forwardnes of a franck
disposition, wholly free and disobliged; neither could he have been said to have
lied to the Holie-Ghost, nor certainly deserved so grievous punishment.

2. Wherefore S. Hierome faith right well of that Age: S. Hierome in Scriptor.
Eccles. in Philona.
The Church of the first Belieuers was such as Monks now adays desire and
endeavor to be, that no body have any thing of his own, none be rich among
them, none poor; they divide their patrimony among the poor, attend to
Prayer, Psalms, Doctrine, and Co^tinencie; such as S. Luke relates that the
first Belieuers were in Jerusalem. So that in those very beginnings, they
that aspired to this perfect form of a Religious life, were greatly increased
and multiplied, living also apart from company of the rest in one certain
place among themselves, under the government and obedience of some one. Cas.
lib. 1. cap. 5. and col. 18. c. 5.
Whereupon Cassian writes that the life of those that live in common,
descends from the times of the Apostles preaching; when many out of the love
of Perfection, not contenting themselves with that which al did, to wit, to lay
al they had in common, but aiming at higher things, began to withdraw
themselves into more private places out of the town; and because they
abstained from their wives, and from the company of their kindred, and from al
worldly conversation, they were called Monks by reason of their solitude, and
Conuentuals by reason of their living in common.

3. Which perfection rested not only in Jerusalem and Alexandria, Religion
spread over the world.
but spread itself also at that very time into other parts of the world. For we
find that in Aethiopia the King's daughter was consecrated to God by S. Matthew
Thecla, by S. Paul in Greece, Domitilla at Rome by S. Clement, and in France S.
Martha (she that was our Sauiour's hostess) after the Ghospel was preached at
Marsells, is recorded to have built a Monastery in a solitary place retired
from the company of men, where together with diverse women of worth
consecrated to God, she lead a most heavenly life. And finally S. Denis (a man
that lived in that first Age) writes of this kind of Institute, S. Denis de Ec
Hierar. c. 10.
as of a thing usually received and practiced; and by that which he says of
it, he gives us to understand, not only that it is very ancient, but also that
even in those days it was highly reverenced. The names and Ceremonies of Monks
in the Primitive Church.
For this reason, says he, our Divine teachers have given them names which
sound of holiness: some calling them Worshippers, others calling them Monks, for
the sincere worship, and service which they do to God, and for their solitary
and single life, which makes them One, and apt to attain to Union with God,
and perfection pleasing unto him, by holy conjunction of things divided. And
then goeth-on to declare the Ceremonies and Rites anciently used in the
Consecration of Monks, and the reasons and mysteries of them. For first, he
says, it was the order that the Priest standing before the Altar should say
some prayer suitable to the Ceremony they had in hand; and when the prayer was
ended, turning himself to him that was to be admitted, he asked him: whether he
were indeed resolved to renounce his secular life (which, as his manner is, he
calls a divided and distracted life, because it forces a man to be
sollicitous, and troubled about many things) and separate himself from the
very sight of it, betaking himself to an other place. Then proposing unto him
a most perfect form of living, he gave him to understand that from thence
forward he was to surpass in conversation, both the vulgar and middle sort of
men; which shows how perfect this kind of course it, seeing (as he says
further) it is not ranked in the middle rank of them that aim at Perfection,
but with the highest and most perfect; so that many things may be done without
blame by them that are of the middle sort, which Monks are forbidden, because
their business is to draw themselves as near as they can and unite themselves
with God. When he that was to be consecrated had promised all this, the Priest
making the sign of the Cross upon him, did cut-of his hair in the name of
the Blessed Trinity, and stripping him of his garments, gave him others to put
on; and himself and others that were present saluting him, and giving him joy,
at last he gave him the Divine Mysteries, that is, the holy Communion and most
blessed Sacrament.

The signification of these Ceremonies.
4. This is that which S. Denis relates; and adds withal the explication of
all the Ceremonies. For the cutting-of his hair ( says he) did signify, that
laying aside al humane and earthly ornaments, and from that time forward
despising them, he was resolved to seek to please God by the sole beauty of
his soul. The changing of his garment, betokened the inward change of his heart
and mind; and withal it was to put him in mind, that his life and conversation
was to differ as much from others, as his Habit did from any vulgar wear. The
saluting him, represented that which our Savior said: that there should be joy
in heaven of one soul converted to God; Luc. 15.
for the like joy and gladness does happen also to them that on earth do
endeavor to imitate God. Finally the receiving of the sacred Body of our
Savior, does put us in mind of the end, for which such holy courses are
taken; to wit, a most perfect and inward conjunction with that Infinite
Sanctity, the fruit of Divine association, The particulary anciently practiced
by Monks.
which he was to reap by Monastical exercises. Thus far S. Denis And I doubt
not but whosoever in his heart does love a Religious course, will be willing to
hear the particulars of the beginnings thereof, and as it were behold with his
eyes, how full of devotion and fervor they were; and it will not be from our
purpose to relate them, because they will much confirm the Antiquity of
Religious Orders, which is the point we handle.

Philo de supp. virt. S Hierome de Scrip. Ec^l. in vita Marci.
5. Philo (who is said to have lived in the time of S. Peter, and to have spoken
with him at Rome) shall be our Author. He being (as S. Hierome writes) the
eloquentest of all the Jews, wrote a book as it were in praise of his own
Nation, which he entitled Of the Virtues of the Suppliants, stiling them so, in
regard they spent their whole time in supplicatio^s and prayer. And though the
Book be yet extant, and easy to be had, I will notwithstanding cote that which
is for my purpose rather out of Eusebius, Eusebius Eccl Hist. lib. 2. cap. 27.
a grave and ancient Historiographer, who takes what he says word for word
out of Philo, and does moreover give us some more light with apt
interpretations which he adds. F^r so we shall understand the thing better by
the light which he gives; and the authority of two such grave writers joined
together will be the greater, Eusebius therefore having said something before
in praise of Philo, and of the title of his Book, writes thus: First he
records, that they, who did enter upon this kind of Philosophy, did forsake
their possessions, and yeald-vp the right of that which did belong unto them,
and sequestered themselves from all the cares of this life, They renounce (...)
world.
and forsaking the cities, lived solitarily in the fields and gardens,
persuading themselves for certain, that the company of them, that followed an
inferior course of life, would be unprofitable and hurtful unto them, that at
that time endeavored in that course as they ought. When the aforesaid Philo
had said thus word for word, he adds: This kind of men is in many parts of
the world dispersed (for it was fit that both the Grecians and the Barbarians
should be partakers of so perfect a good thing) but in Aegipt they abound in
every Prefectship, as they call them, and most of al about Alexandria.

6. Then describing the fashion of their dwellings, Their Churches.
he says thus of the Churches of that Country. In every one there is a holy
house, which they call a Monastery, where they remain celebrating the
mysteries of holy life; and they carry nothing in thither, neither meat, nor
drink, nor any thing that belongs to corporal sustenance, but the Laws, and
the Oracles of the Prophets, and Hymns, and other things of like nature,
whereby knowledge and devotion is increased and perfected. And a little after he
says: All the time which is from morning to evening they bestow in exercise.
Their exercises.
For reading the holy Scriptures, they discourse upon them, and handle their
National Philosophy Allegorically. For they make account, that under the
manifest sense of Scripture there be certain mysteries of hidden nature
signified by the figures. And they have also Commentaries of ancient Writers,
who, as they were principal men of their own profession, left many worthy
Monuments after them in figure of things Allegorically delivered.

7. He seems to speak as if himself had been a Scholar to them that
expounded the holy Scriptures. Their Continency.
And it is likely that the Commentaries of those ancient Writers, which he
says they had, were the Ghospels and Writings of the Apostles, and some
Expositions of the ancient Prophets, such as the Epistle to the Hebrews is,
and many other Epistles of S. Paul. And much more he says in that Book of
them, of whom now we speak; but I have thought good to make choice of those
things, by which he gives us a scantling of this Ecclesiastical conversation.
Thus therefore he writes: Continency they place as the first foundation in
their Soul, and upon it they build other virtues. None of them do either eat
or drink before sunneset. For they make account, that the study of Philosophy
is worthy of the light, the nece^sities of the body may be supplied in
darkness; therefore they bestow the day upon the former, and a small parcel of
the night upon the latter. Some of them remember not to eat in three whole
days, as having a more earnest desire of knowledge then of corporal
sustenance. Some of them are so delighted and ouer-ioyed with the food of
Wisdom, furnishing them with abundance and plenty of documents, that they
double this time of abstinence, and for six days together do hardly take
any necessary sustenance. And he says moreover, that there be certain women
among these people of whom he speaks; most of them ancient virgins,
observing Chasti^ie, not of necessity (as the Vestals among the Gentiles) but
of their own accord for the zeal and desire of wisdom; and attending
diligently thereunto, they contemn the pleasures of the body, desiring rather
immortal children, which a Soul loving God may of itself bring forth, then
any mortal offspring. What shall we need to say further, how they meet in
conversation together, the men by themselves, and the women by themselves
apart; and what their exercises be, which continue to this day, and are
practiced by us, specially about the Feast of the sovereign Passion, in
fasting and watching by night, and in reading of the Divine words? which the
foresaid Author has carefully set down after the same manner, as with us
they are hitherto observed, describing their exercises with the Hymns which we
are wont to say; and how, while one sings a Verse, the rest harken in silence,
and make an end of the Hymn, singing the clause thereof al together with him.
He adds moreover, how they, to whom the Ecclesiastical functions are
committed, do govern among them; which if any one desire to know more fully,
he may read it in the foresaid History of this Author. So Eusebi^^ out of
Philo.

8. And doubtless Religion continued the self-same course and manner of living,
not only in those first times of the Apostles, and Apostolical men, but three
hundred years after, and more. For Tertullian, Tertullian. c. 20. q 1. co.
Virg.
who lived next unto the times of the Apostles, wrote a Book of Veyling of
Virgins, which is yet extant. And we find moreover to this day an ancient
Decree of Pope Pius the First, made in the year of our Lord one hundred
forty seven, of the Ceremony to be observed in the Consecration of Virgins;
S. Ambr. de Inst Vir. c. 17.
which Ceremony S. Ambrose in his Book of the Institution of a Virgin, and
Eusebius in the life of Constantine, do derive from the Primitive Church.
Eusebius. vita Constable. l. 4.
And in the writings of most of the ancient Fathers we find often mention of
Virgins, accustomed even in those days to be solemnly veyled and consecrated
the Spouses of God; and they speak of it as of a thing very ancient, Justinius
Martyr in 2. Apolog. Clem. Alex. in 2. Stromatum.
and much used. As in S. Justin the Martyr in his second Apology, which he
wrote in behalf of Christians, S. Clement of Alexandria in his second Book of
Stromata, in one of S. Ignatius his Epistles, who was disciple to S. John the
Evangelist, S. Cyprian, and Origin and many others. Russinus and Theodoret do
also relate, that S. Helen when she went to Jerusalem to seeke-out the wood of
the holy Cross, Ignat. epist. ad Tarsen. Cyprian l. 2. epist. 11. Ruffinus.
Theodores. S. Hierome.
found Virgins there consecrated to God. And S. Hierome in many places of his
Works, but specially in the life of Malcus, whom he knew a very old man when
himself was very young, does often make mention of Monasteries, and Fathers of
monasteries, and of the living of many Brethren together; Finally there is
scarce one of the ancient Writers, in whom we shall not meet with certain
marks, or rather with most evident testimonies and proofs, of this kind of
course.

9. If a man ask, whether the manner of living of Religious people in those
ancient times were the self-same which now is held; Religious Orders anciently
the same, as now they are.
there is no doubt to be made, but that they are both alike, and altogether
the same; and to deny it, were Heresy, or very near unto it. For in those
days, they did not only profess Poverty, and Chastity, and Obedience to
their Governors, as we have showed out of Philo, but al of them, or in a
manner al, did oblige themselves by Vow; so as to go back from that state, was
both unlawful and wicked. The difference was (if there were any) that those
Monastical Vows carried not as then hat authority, or (as Divines do speak)
had not that Solemnius which now they have.

10. Besides that, in those beginnings it is more probable that they did make
their Vows expressly and publikly; but Profession was so annexed to a Religious
life, by the general acceptance and opinion of every body, that though by word
of mouth they made no promise, yet they made account, that whosoever did enter
upon that state, did oblige himself to profess it; much after the same manner,
as I take it, as now adays the Vow of Chastity is included in the receiving
of Holie-Orders: which we may gather out of a certain passage of S. Basil, S.
Basil Epist. 2. ad Phil. cap. 19.
where he says, that they who did enter into the Order of Monks, did tacitly
admit of a Single life. Which custom stood as long, as that ancient piety and
bashfulnes was sufficient to keep men in awe; afterward it was thought more
convenient (as S. Basil ordayneth in the same place) to exact an express
promise of Continency; The obligation of the Vow of Chastity in ancient times.
but so as at first, if a man breaking his Vow had married, he had committed a
great offense; yet his marriage held. In which kind S. Cyprian in his Epistle
to Pomponius, and S. Hierome to Demetrias do speak of Nuns, aduising them
to marry, if they cannot live continently, as they had made Profession;
because marriage by legal dispensation obtained of the Bishop, S. Cyprian lib.
2.
was at that time no sin. And we meet with the same advice in S. Epiphanius;
and S. Augustine does expressly dispute against those that denied the marriage of
such people to be good marriage. Epist. 11. S. Hierome Epist. 8. S. Epiph.


11. And whereas Pope Innocent the First, who lived in those times, and some
Councels do command, that such marriage should be broken-of, it is to be
understood that they appointed (for the punishment of the parties) that they
should not live together, which doubtless they might with good reason ordain;
but they say not, Her. ^2.1. Apostol. S. August. de Bono vid. c. 9. and 10.
that the marriage itself was not valide; and yet this punishment was not even
in those days generally received and established in the Church. For Pope Leo
the First, who lived little more then twenty years after Pope Innocent, Conc.
Tol^t. 27. q 1. c. vidu^.
teaches that it was a sin to marry, but says nothing of breaking the
marriage. And Pope Gelasius, who sat in the year Four hundred ninety two,
exhorts such Nuns to resume the s^ate from which they were fallen, S. Leo
Epist. 92. c. 24.
but does not compel them, nor disannulle their marriages. S. Gregory himself,
who was more exact in this kind then any of his Predecessors, in diverse of
his Epistles and Decrees commanding such, Gelasius lib. 17 q 1. c. de vidu^^.
as were thus contracted, to be separated, and put into t^eir Monasteries
again; yet does not say any thing which enforces us to understand that their
marriage was inualide. S Gregori^ vid. c. 27. q. 2.
But rather we may gather, that their marriages did hold, by that which in one
of his Homilies he relates of his Aunt Gordiana, that having consecrated
herself to God together with two of her sisters, (...) Hom. 31 in (...)
after their decease, forgetting (as he speaks) the fear of God, forgetting
al shame and bashfulnes, forgetting her Consecration, took a husband, and
lived ever after with him

12. Wherefore the first (for ou ht we find recorded) that did not only forbid
Religious people to marry, Innocent the Second first disannulled marriages of
Religious people.
but make their marriages void, if they should chance to marry, was Pope
Innocent the Second, in a General Council at Rome, in the year of our Lord.
One thousand one hundred thirty nine. And yet if we search to the bottom of
it, we shall find, that though this was at that time first of al decreed by
general consent of the Church, and brought into universal practice, diverse
Bishops notwithstanding had ordained the same before in their particular
Dioceses; for we read in the Larger Rule of S. Basil, S. Basil. Reg fus. disp
c. 14.
that he that having once consecrated himself to God, and obliged himself by
Vow, did afterward pass to an other kind of life, did commit sacrilege. And
again in his Book of Virginity, I^em^n lib. de Viginitate.
he proves the same at large, giving this reason, because as it is adultery
and not matrimony to couple with an other, while the husband or wife lives;
so for one, that is already espoused to Christ who lives for ever, I^on Epist.
2. ^an 6. and 18.
it is adultery to marry at al. Now that S. Bas^l first ordained and decreed
this, is evident by that which he writes in his Epistle to Amphilochius, where
he says thus: Because now by course of time the Church of God is made
stronger, and the number of Virgins is increased, the marriage of Canons (that
is, of Regulars) is to be disannulled, and they that are polluted therewith, are
not to be admitted to the Blessed Sacrament, before they have cleared
themselves of that crime.

S. John Chrysostom.
13. We find that S. Chrysostom does write to the same effect in very weighty
terms to Theodore a Monk that was fallen. And S. Ambrose in like manner to a
Virgin that had forsaken her purpose; S. Ambrose.
If she will marry (says he) as others do, she commits adultery; she is
made a slave to death. Al which laid together does prove, that Religious Vows
did always make secular marriages unlawful; but the force which they have to
make them void (which Divines term the Solemnity of the Vow) was by
success of time brought in by degrees; and is a great ornament, and withal
gives great strength and worth to Religious courses; so that they not only
yeald nothing to the ancient Institutes, but for matter of order and form have
something in them, that is better and the more to be esteemed.

How Religious Orders have descended to our times. CHAP. XXII.
HITHERTO we have beheld, as I may say, the birth and younger years of
Religion; and it cannot be but to our much greater contentment, to see it now
in the perfect growth, and as it were in man's estate; to which, we may truly
say, it came about the year of our Lord Three hundred and fifty, when in that
Golden Age of Constantine, al parts of the Church of God began to flourish; and
this not the least among them.

^
2. The principal Author of this so notable increase, was that great S.
Antoni^, whom the wisdom of God may be said to have furnished with plenty of
al heavenly gifts for this particular end. For it is evident, that before his
time there were Monasteries and Religious people, by that which S. Ath^na^^
w^iteth in his Life, that he began this spiritual warfare in Monasteries, under
the conduct of others, and in company of them, by whose example an limitation,
as ^e writes, he indeauoured so to benefit himself, that he became more per^^^
in virtue every day then other, and picked out of every one of them some
spiritual profit, as bees do their honey. And still burning with desire of
greater perfection, he attempted to transport himself and his disciples after
him more inwardly into the Desert, and further from the company of men; and
his sanctity growing conspicuous to the world, it made such impression and
change in men's minds, through the example which he gave them, that the Deserts
of Armenia, and Scythia, and Nitria, and of both the Thebais, and al Egypt was
filled with Monasteries governed by his wisdom and direction, he being as it
were a general Father of them al.

3. We may well say, S. Hilarion.
that innummerable Monks and Religious people have been derived from this
fountain of Monastical discipline, and among others that renowned Hilarion (an
other S. Anthony in a manner) who, S. Hierome in his life.
as S. Hierome writes, was the first Founder of Monasteries in Palestine,
whereas in all Syria, there had not been a Monk seen before him. He (says S.
Hierome) was the Author and Founder of this Conversation in that Province; Our
Lord JESUS had in Egypt old Antonie; in Palestine he had young Hilarion. And by
his example there began to be Monasteries without number, and every one did
strive to come to him, to recaue from him documents of heavenly conversation;
which he perceauing gave the praise to the grace of our Lord, and exhorted
every one to have regard to the benefit of their soul. Thus writes S.
Hierome of S. Hilarion.

4. About the same time in Greece, S. Basil, S. Basil.
surnamed also deservedly the Great, without any relation (for ought I know) to
S. Antonie, but merely out of his own disposition and judgment, did
wonderfully advance and set forward monastical Discipline, ^p. 65.
himself being a professor of it. And we may see it by what he writes of
himself in one of his Epistles. We are accused, says he, that we have men with
us that follow their devotions, that have renounced the world, and al temporal
cares; which cares our Savior likeneth to thorns not suffering the word to
bring forth fruit; they carry about them them mortification of JESUS in their
bodies; and taking-vp their Cross, they follow God. As for my own part, I
would willingly give my life to have such injuries laid to my charge, and to
have people with me that by my direction should have made choice of such
exercises. I hear indeed that in Egypt there be men of such rare virtue; and
perchance in Palestine they live directly according to the Ghospel. I
understand also, that in Mesopotamia there be perfect and blessed men. S Basil
the first that wrote Rules.
But we are children in comparison of the Perfect.

5. But it was not in number only that S. Basil advanced Religious Institutes,
but much more by Rules and Constitutions. For whereas before him, there was no
other certainty of their orders and manner of government, then what either the
inward unction of the Holie-Ghost did inspire querie one, or the Governors,
whom they had chosen, would bid them do by word of mouth; S B^sil was the
first, that drew certain Rules and orders, in themselves most holy, and most
useful for the direction of that manner of Conversation. He appointed a time
for Probation, at the end whereof they should al oblige themselves by Vow; he
set down a certain method of living, as what exercises of virtue they were to
perform, what they were to avoid as hurtful; he appointed certain punishments
proportionable to the faults of the offenders; and ordered every thing with
that wisdom and moderation, that they were not only presently admitted-of by all, and put in practice, but to this very day the Monasteries of Greece and of
all the Eastern parts have no other Rule, but S. Basi^'s.

6. He brought also an other thing to pass; to wit, that whereas before, all that did make profession of a Religious course, did attend only to themselves,
and to their own private spiritual benefit, The first that brought Religious
people to help their Neighbor.
and therefore of purpose did shun company, as an enemy to their desired
quiet; he brought this Divine Philosophy as it were from the Third heaven, and
planted it nearer cities and towns, that their Neighbor might reap fruit
and commodity by it. S. Gregory Nazianzen does clearly testifye it of him in
these words: To the end he might not only benefit himself but others, he first
of al men thought of Monasteries, and brought that ancient and solitary
fashion of living of Monks, S. Gregory (...). de S. ^^sil.
to a certain method and order, nearer to Religion. For perceauing, that they,
who lived among others in the world, though they were careful to observe a kind
of Monastical abstinence, yet benefited others, and not themselves so much,
because of force they must dwell in the midst of many evils, contrary to a
quiet and perfect life; and on the other side, that they, who live far remote
from company in the Desert, are more constant in their good resolutions, and
more united to God, but yet are but for themselves, because they want
experience, and have no communication at al with others; he labored to join
both these kinds of life in one. To which purpose he ordered the building of
Monasteries not far from company, and would not have them wholly separated;
that when Charity required, they might be at hand by reason of their neernes;
and be otherwise confined within their own limits, to the end that company
might not hinder their quiet; by which means they should neither be deprived of
the employment which Charity toward others would call them unto, nor their
employment again become unprofitable, by reason of the multitude, but one help
an other; and the life of Monks become fruitful by conversation with them that
live in the world; and they again learn quiet, and contemplation, and wisdom
of the Monks; and be as the sea and the land embracing and helping one an
other. All this is out of S. Gregory Nazianzen.

7. At this time when the Grace of God was so plentiful in advancing Religious
courses in Greece and in all the Eastern parts; Monks in the West.
we must not think that the rest of the world was deprived of this glory. For
S. Augustine writes that he saw a Monastery at Milan, S August. 1 conf. ^.
which S. Ambrose (as he speaks) nursed up; and S. Augustine himself (as
Possidonius relates) did found Monasteries of men and women in Africa, S.
Anton. 3. p. tit. 24.14.
which many do think (and among the rest S. Antoninus) that they were of the
Institute, which now adays we call the Heremits of S. Augustine. For thus he
writes: S. Augustine, before he was Bishop, built a monastery in a wood near
the city of Hippo; The Augustine triars, or Hermats of Saint Augustine.
which monastery both in his lifetime, and after his decease grew to great
greatness, and divided itself into many branches in the bordering cities, but
after some years was by the In^^de, which the Barbarians made, dispersed; and
some of the Religious came into Italy, others went to other places, til
Innocent the Fourth, who was Pope in the year One thousand two hundred forty
three, finding diverse other Herem^^ dispersed here and there, called them al
together, and joining them both in Habit and Habitation, incorporated them to
the Rule of S. Augustine, and withal commanded them to live in Cities, that
they might also benefit their Neighbor; which course his successor Alexander
the Fourth did follow much more eagerly, being moved thereunto by a heavenly
Vision, S. Augustine appearing unto him with a great head, and a little body; by
which addition this Religion increasing daily more and more does flourish, as
we see this day, in the Church, and in the midst of the Cities keeps the
name of Hermits, which it had from the beginning, derived from the solitude,
which it professed. But this happened much later; wherefore let us return to the
times of S. Augustine.

8. S. Hierome insinuates, S. Hierome Epis^. 16.
that much about that time Religious courses were brought up to Rome, or rather
notably increased there. For writing in commendation of Marcella, he says,
that whereas before, the purpose of Monks was not known in Rome, and no body
durst by reason of the novelty of it take upon him that name, which as then
was, in the opinion of the vulgar, vile and contemptible; Marcella having
learned the manner of life of S. Antonie yet living, and of the Monasteries of
Thebais, by means of the Priests of Alexandria, that were in banishment for
fear of Arius, was not ashamed to make profession of that which she knew was
pleasing to Christ. And erecting a Monastery in a place without town, by her
example there grew to be many Monasteries of Virgins, and an infinite multitude
of Monks; insomuch that the multitude of them made that glorious, which before
was contemptible.

9. Upon these foundations Religion still grew more and more, and descended to
S. Benedict his times, S. Benedict.
which was a little more then a hundred years after; and we may gather it by
that which S. Gregory relates of him, S. Gregory 2. (...) c. 2. and 3.
to wit, that R^manus a Monk before him, brought him his meat to the den
where he was retired; and that he was chosen Abbot by a whole Monastery, when
the Abbot thereof was deceased, whereby we may see, that there were d^i^rs Monks
in Italy before S. Benedict, where notwithstanding he is deservedly called the
Father and Patriarch of of Monks, because he did raise Monastical discipline to
so great a height of sanctity, and esteem of wisdom, that he may be in a
manner said to have been the Author of it. For having begun his Order in
Monte-Cassino in the year Five hundred and twenty (as we find recorded) he
founded, as it were in an instant, twelve Monasteries in Italy, and out of
them drew other branches into France by S. Maurus, into Sicilie by S. Placidus,
and by others into other places. And he did not only store Religion with an
infinite number of subjects, but reformed the Orders of it. S. Gregory 2. dis^.
3^*
For he wrote a Rule which is yet extant and in practice, so full of wisdom,
that S. Gregory speaking in commendation of it, calls it very truly
perspicuous in words, rare in discretion. Insomuch that as the East does honor
S. Basil, so the West does honor S. Benedict, as the Author and Father of
Religion.

10. Out of this root, which he planted, diverse branches of several Families
have sprung, embracing the substance of the Institute of S. Benedict, but
reforming, or adding, or slightly changing some things, and differing somewhat
from it. The Order of Cluny begun by Odo.


11. The first and most ancient among them is the Order of Cluny, which was
begun in the year Nine hundred and thirteen, by Odo Abbot of Cluny, and from
him takes the name. For the Institute of S. Benedict growing to decay, as al
other things naturally do in time, he being eminent both in learning and
holiness of life, endeavored to restore it to the former perfection, and
effected it. By whose example most of the Abbots of Italy, Spain, Germany,
and England applied themselves to the reforming of their Monasteries with like
success and fruit, and uniting themselves together, and concurring in one
spirit, the authority of the Pope helping also thereunto, they had a meeting
every year, wherein they advised and resolved upon such things, as might
conduce to the maintenance of Religious discipline; and the change was so
notable for the better, that it is observed, that there were two thousand
Monasteries restored and reformed.

Camaldula.
12. A branch of the same Institute is the Order of Camaldula, founded by S.
Romualdus: who about the year of our Lord One thousand, seating himself in the
Mount Apennine, to the end there to follow a course of penance and Religion,
made such a change in the hearts of men by the example and admiration of his
sanctity, that (as we find recorded) it was thought, that the whole world
would have become Religious, unless he had hindered it. And there were so many
Monasteries built every where according to his Rule, that it may be in a
manner accounted a new Order.

Valle-^^^rosa.
13. The Order which is called of Valle-vmbrosa had the like beginning and
success, seauentie three years only after that of Camaldula. John Gualbertus
was the beginner of it; who not only pardoning his enemy, whom he ha^ in his
power to kill (in regard he besought him by the Passion of Christ who suffered
as that day, that he would spare him) but lovingly embracing him, and telling
him, that from that day he would take him for his own brother, whom the other
had killed; this fact of his was so highly pleasing of our Savior, that coming
presently into the next Church, and praying before the image of a Crucifix
which was of wood, the head of the Crucifix bowed down unto him, as it were,
thanking him, and the noise of the crack, which the wood gave; was plainly
heard by those that were present. And withal God planted in his heart a desire
of being Religious; and fi^^t he retired himself, and began a Religious
course in his own house, and afterward in the Valley aforenamed, a place as
then but mean and obscure, but not long after much renowned for the virtue of
this blessed man. And his Order grew great in time, and diffused itself into
many branches.

The Ci(...).
14. But the Cistercian Order is one of the noblest of them al, and the
beginning thereof as noble. In the year One thousand ninety eight, in the
reign of Henry the Fourth Emperor, and Philip the First King of France,
R^bert Abbot of Molismes, finding that his Monks grew disorderly by reason of
the number of them, and of their great wealth, aduising with some of them that
were more virtuously given (to the number of one and twenty, as it is
recorded) transported himself to Cabillon, the chief city of Burgundy in
those days; and chose his dwelling in a solitary place called Cisleaux, from
which the Order is named the Cistercian Order. But the Monks of Molismes
^eclaming themselves in the mean time, were earnest with Robert to return
unto them, which he did; and placed Stephen in his room at Cisleaux, a man
f^ruently given, and, as it is thought, the Author of that separation. Their
Company was very small, and continued so for fifteen years, that it was
likely to come to nothing; til S. Bernard inspired by God, coming unto it, did
not only uphold it, but made it wonderfully famous. For he put himself into
that Monastery with thirty others, whereof three were his own brethren; and
not long after, the fame of his virtuous living breaking-forth of that
obscurity, he drew so many to follow his footsteps, that sending his brethren
and disciples abroad into the whole world, he founded one hundred and
threescore Monasteries in his own lifetime.

15. Al these Families sprung out of the Rule of S. Benedict, which in those
days did bear all the sway; insomuch that in all the Western parts it is
holden, that there were no other Monks but they that professed that Rule, til
the Charterhouse-monks began, which was some sixteen years before the
beginning of the Cistercian Order; and the origin of them is well known, and
famous. For a Doctor of the Law in Paris dying with great opinion both of
learning and sanctity, as he lay upon the hearse, while the Di^ige was singing
for his funeral, and many assembled at it three several days together, spoke
alowde, one day that he was accused, an other day that he was judged, and the
third day that he was condemned. Whereupon Bruno a famous Doctor also of the
same University, afrighted, turning to his Scholars said: And who then can be
saved, unless he forsake the world? And presently betook himself with six
companion to a solitary place about Grenoble, esteeming it the fittest seat
to retire himself unto, from the world. And it was revealed to Hugo Bishop of
that Diocese, that their resolution was from God; for as he lay in his bed, he
saw (as he thought) the Majesty of God descending upon that desert place, and
that himself was building a palace for him there, and anon he saw as it were
seven stars of great brightness to rise by little and little from the earth in
form of a Coronet, far unlike to any other stars both in fashion, and
situation, and motion.

16. The Institute of the Carmelits, The Carmelits o^ White-Friars.
though it were brought into Italy about a thousand two hundred years after
Christ, yet learned men do deliver, that it is much more ancient; for we find
that John Patriarch of Jerusalem in the year Four hundred and twelve, being
of this Order and the head of it, Wald^nsis de Sacram. tit. 9. c. 84.
wrote a Rule for it; whereby it appears, that it should be yet more ancient
then ^his time. And there want not those (and among them Waldensis, an approved
Author) that are of opinion, that it began in the Apostles time in Mount
Carmelus (and the name shows no less) in a Church which was the first, that
ever was dedicated to the Blessed Virgin our Lady in this world; and
increasing in number of subjects and houses through-out al Palestine, was
dispersed by the Saracens that ouerranne the country; and they being
rooted-out again, it flourished as before, much about the year One thousand
one hundred. This is most certain, that about foure-score years after this
restoring of it, Albert also Patriarch of Jerusalem (a man learned and wise)
restored the Rule which John had instituted, and augmented it very profitably;
and about the time I said before, Pope Honorius the Third bringing diverse of
the Religious of that Order into diverse Provinces of Europe, approved and
confirmed their Rule, being wished thereunto by our B. Lady appearing unto him
in^^a Vision, as it is reported; and not long after, Pope Innocent the Fourth
made diverse Decrees in favor of it, and took it into the protection and
safeguard of the Sea Apostolic. A happy Age, not only for the propagation of
this Order, but for the instituting of four other Orders, to wit, the
Franciscans, the Dominicans, the Celestines, and the Seruites.

The Franciscans or Gray-Friars.
17. The Franciscans began in the year One thousand two hundred and twelve. For
we find that this year S. Francis brought his Rule to Pope Innocent the Third,
and that it was confirmed by him, they being as yet but few of the Order; but
it was half a miracle to see how quickly it increased; insomuch that not long
after there met of them at a General Congregation at Assisi five thousand, and
at the self-same time there were five hundred more that entered among them; so
that in a short time they filled the whole world, and are now so many of them,
that being divided into three branches, every branch of them is so populous,
that they may seem every one of them to be a great Order of itself.

The Dominicans or Black-^^iars.
18. The Dominicans have their name and beginning from S. Dominick, who being
first a Canon-Regular under the Bishop of Huesca, labored hard for ten years
against the Heretics of Tolouse; and then making some few partakers of his
determination, he framed a new Rule and Institute, the end whereof should be to
preach the Ghospel, which is the reason they are called Friar^-Preachers. And
they write that it was first confirmed by word of mouth by Innocent the Third
in the time of the Council of Lateran; and afterward in writing, by Honorius
the Third, in the year One thousand two hundred and sixteen.

The Serui^es.
19. Some sixteen years after, the Seruites began at Florence, at the time when
the Emperor Frederick the Second, being at variance with Pope Gregory the
Ninth, and with the Church, wasted the Pope's territory by all the means he
could. For it is recorded, that seven Gentlemen of worth, and well able to
live, called by a voice from heaven retired themselves to a hill that was not
far of, and living private there for some time, were discovered and made
known to the world by their virtuous life, whereupon many adjoined themselves
unto them; and being afterward dispersed into several Provinces, are grown to
that increase which we see. They are called Seruites, because they particularly
profess themselves Servants and slaves of the Blessed Virgin.

Celestines.
20. Not long after the Celestines were instituted by Peter Morone. This man, as
it is recorded of him, lived many years in the Wilderness; but the austeritie
of his life, together with the many miracles, which he wrought, made him so
famous in Italy, and throughout al Europe, that many putting themselves under
his conduct, they were distributed afterward into several houses and
countries. And there being at that time a General Council at Lions, and Pope
Gregory the Tenth present at it in person, he went thither, and procured his
Rule and Institute to be approved by him in the year One thousand two hundred
seauentie three. But the reason why they are called Celestines is, because this
very man some twenty years after being made Pope, called himself Celestin the
Fifth, and ever after that name of his remained to his Order.

C^^^hes-Friar.
21. We must not let pass the Croches-Fr^ars, the beginnings of which Order two
Popes, Alexander the Third, and the Sixth, in their several Breues, d^^ derive
from Cletus, S. Peter his successor; not that they lived in the manner (...)
(...) them, which now we see, but that there was in those times a Company
instituted for the entertayning of Pilgrims that were Christians, specially if
they were poor; which Company being impaired by the cruel persecutions of
those first Tyrants, and chiefly by Julian the Apostat, Urban the Second
restored it in the time, when Christian Princes armed with the sign of the
Cross, went against the Barbarians, and happily recovered Antioch and
Jerusalem. Alexander the Third afterward did them many great favors, in
regard that in his flight from Frederick Aenobarbe, they often and liberally
entertained him in their Hospitals, notwithstanding the sharp orders of the
Emperor to the contrary. Lastly Pius the Second in the year One thousand
four hundred and threescore, in a Council at Mantua, when he was preparing a
voyage to the Holy land, appointed that they should wear a purple Habit (it
is not certain wherefore) whereas before they went in ash-coulour.

21. The beginnings of the Order of Mount-Oliuet in Italy are also famous.
Mount-Oliuet.
Blessed Bernard Tolomens is said to have been the Author of it, together
with two others, whom he stirred-vp with an eloquent Oration, which in the
Academic of Siena, where he was public Reader of Philosophy, he made of the
Vanity of the world, as it were bidding it Adieu. For presently they retired
themselves from company to a hill not far of, which was called Oliuet (from
which the Order takes that name) to the end they might with better commodity
attend to a heavenly life. This was in the year One thousand three hundred
and twenty. And their fervor and strict living soon spread their fame, and
drew others to imitate their course of life.

22. Not long after, to wit, in the year One thousand three hundred fifty
six, Iesuati.
there began an other Order in the same city of Siena, called the Iesuati. The
founder of them was Ioannes Columbinus, who is said to have been converted by
reading the life of S. Marie of Egypt, upon which he had fallen by chance, and
suddenly changed thereupon, lead a most holy life, full of good works, and
specially of the denial and contempt of himself; when diverse others following
the same course, Pope Urban the Fifth returning out of France embraced them
lovingly as a new and tender offspring of the Church of Christ, and gave them
many privileges.

23. Much about the same time the Order of the Heremits of S. Hierome sprung
up, Heremits of Saint Hierome.
which flourishes chiefly in Spain and Portugal. Peter Fernandez is said to
have been the founder of them. For leaving the Court of Peter King of Cast^le,
in whose favor he was both for his own and his father's services, he first
joined himself to certain Heremits, that lived a solitary life; afterward
together with some others, to whom he communicated his resolution, he took
upon him the Rule which S. Hierome first began in the city of Bethleem, and
was afterward continued for a long time, but as then decayed; and this he did
first in the Province of Toledo. Then coming to Rome he brought this his now
Rule to Gregory the Eleventh, who was then Pope, in the year One thousand
three hundred eighty four, which when it was confirmed by him, it quickly
increased in number of subjects and houses.

24. After these again there arose the Minimes, about the year One thousand
^oure hundred and fifty; Mini^^^.
people that in their life and Rule profess the un^^l^tie, which their name
makes show of. The head and Author of this Order was Francis of Paula (a
town in Calabria) a man rare for Virtue, and as rare for a kind of facility,
which he had of working miracles; so ordinary with him, that we may say, he
did them always at his pleasure. Wherefore it is no wonder that his Order also
graced with such a Founder, does flourish so in Italy and, Spain, and chiefly
in France, and is so conspicuous in the world, that it may deservedly stand in
comparison with those that are more ancient.

Of the Religious Orders of the Clergy. CHAP. XXIII.
IF that be true, which we have said above of the manner of life, which the
Apostles held, and of the perfection professed in those times, as it is most
certain; there was not only anciently a Religious Order of Clergy, but
absolutely the first Religious men that ever were, were of the Clergy. For
seeing Religion consists in three Vows, The Clergy were at just Religious
men.
which I have often mentioned, and both Reason and Authority conuinceth that
the Apostles made them, why may we not say, and indeed openly maintain, that
they were Religious, and that Religious courses have their origin and
beginning from them. And upon the like certain grounds, we may also affirm the
same almost of the whole Clergy of those days; for taking example by the
Apostles, it was wholly framed and bred-vp to the like perfection. And as for
Chastity there is no doubt to be made, but they did vow it, when they took
Holy Orders; Medin^ lib. 2 de Can^n ^. 36.
for though some took Orders that had their wives yet living, yet (as Medina
and many others affirm and prove) they were wont in that case to imitate the
Apostles, who (as we said before) did voluntarily bar themselves of the use
of marriage. And every one of them vowed Obedience to his Bishop: whereof among
other proofs, we have this evident sign, Sulp in vit S Martin.
that, as Sulpitius records, S Hilarie having taken an affection to S. Martin
by reason of his virtuous disposition, could think of no stronger means to
oblige him, and bind him to his service, then by putting him into Holy Orders.
and S. Gregory observes, S. Gregory ^. 4. Reg. ^p^st. 74.
that even in his time it was still a custom in Rome, that in whatsoever Church
a man had taken Orders, it was not free for him afterward to depart from it.
And both these things are to this day in use in holy Church. For they that
take Holy Orders, are obliged by solemn Vow to live chaste, and they expressly
promise Obedience to their Bishop though use and practice has given a large
scope to this second Vow; for whereas in those days they obeyed their Bishop
exactly in all things, now they are obliged but in very few. But the Vow of
Chasti^ie has now as much force among them, as it has among Religious people
and makes their marriage not only unlawful, but absolutely void. As for
P^uertie, if we regard that, which is now in use, it were hard to prove it* but
if we cast our eye upon that which was anciently practiced, nothing is (...)
clear. For anciently it was the order, that the Clergy should yeald up their
liue-lode, if they had any, and possess nothing in private to themselves.
Whereof S. Hierome gives good testimony, yealding this for the reason, why
from the beginning of the Church the Clergy did shave their crowns; to
signify, says he, the casting-of al temporal things, because contenting
themselves with food and clothing, they ought to have nothing proper, but al
things common.

2. S. Prosper, Prosp. ^ib. 2. de vitae Constable. c. 9.
an ancient writer, reports the same. It is fitting, says he, to have
possessions of the Church, and to contemn one's own, for the love of
perfection For the possessions of the Church are not our own* but common; and
therefore every one that contemns his own, forsaking or selling that which
he had, if he be chosen Prelat of a Church, he is made steward of whatsoever
the Church has. And beingeth the example of S. Paulinu^ and S. Hilarie, who
selling their patrimony, distributed the money among the poor, and being
afterward both of them created Bishops, did carefully menage the
Church-liuings.

3. That the Clergy did live in common, The Clergy did live in common.
may be proved both by what we have said, and by the Epistle of S. Clement Pope
to the Clergy of Jerusalem, where he says: It is necessary for every one
to live in common, but specially for them that desire to serve God, C. 21. q.
1. c. Dilict^ss.
and to imitate the life of the Apostles, and of their Disciples. S. Gregory
also writing to S. Augustine, wills him to bring in among the Clergy of the
Church of England (which was then budding) the manner of conversation which was
practiced by our forefathers in the Primitive Church, S. Greg. in respons ad
August.
when no body called any things his own, but the possessons, 12. q 1 c.
necessaria.
which they had, were al common among them. And among the Canons of Eugenia the
Second, we find a Decree commanding, that the Clergy should have one
Refectorie, And did vow it.
one Dormitorie, and so of the rest of the Offices. Finally that they were
obliged to these things by Vow, Pope Viban testifyeth in his Epistle to al
Bishops, R^f^rtur 12. q. 1. ^. (...).
when after diverse other things, directing his speech to the Clergy, he says
thus: Whosoever among you has undertaken a common life, and vowed that he has
nothing proper, let him take heed that he make not his promise void, but keep
carefully that which he has promised God, that he may not heap upon himself
damnation, but merit; because it is better not to vow, then not to perform his
Vow.

4. By all which we may see, that in those days either all the Clergy, or in a
manner al, specially they that did aim at greater perfection, did make these
three Vows, and consequently were truly Religious men. In which also Divines
do agree; Medina lib. 5. de continent. c. 10.
and in particular Medina (a learned Author handling this question of purpose)
brings many proofs for it, and among others, confi^meth it by the name of
Canons which is yet in use, Canons.
and is as much to say, as Regulars. And moreover he says, that the case of
the Parish Priest was also the same, Parish Priests.
and that it was not fr^e for them neither to possess any thing as their
own; but that in regard they must necessarily live at large in their Parish,
and could not be with the community among the rest, they were exempted; much
after the manner that now adays Monks are, when by command of their Superiors
they are sent to govern a Parish. Thus he; and adds that Poverty, in which
Religion consists, was so proper to the Clergy, that it was rather by
sufferance, Aug. 1.2. (...) vita. (...) q. 2. c carte.
that they began to have any thing proper. And proves it by tha saying of S.
Augustine, wh^ in one of his Sermons of the Common life of the Clergy says,
that heert^^ore he was of a mind not to take any into the Clergy, but those
that would lead their life in common; but afterward he altered his mind,
least (which was worse) any through hypocrisy; and dissembling should break
the Rule, and not satisfye his promise; and therefore from thence forward he
would admit a man into the Clergy, though he would not live in common. Out of
which Medina does argue, that the nature of the State requires, that a man
should profess Poverty; and if al did not do it, it was by sufferance and
dispensation.

^^o causes of relaxation in the Clergy.
5. And I imagine that the causes of this relaxation might be two: First, the
great increase of the number of the Clergy; for the number of Christians
growing to that height, that they could not be helped by few, and it being also
a great ornament to the Church to have many Ministers, the fervor and zeal
of perfection could not be so well maintained in so great a number. An other
reason might be, because the farther times grew from the primitive state of the
Church, Charity and the love of God grew also more cold among men, self-loue
and the affection to private commodities taking place; so that it was hard to
keep all the Clergy to that strict denial of al things; and yet some, that had
more courrage and more fervor, maintained it, and so applied themselves to the
functions of the Clergy, that they performed also the offices of Religious
people, S. Ambrose Epist. 2 5.
and kept their wonted orders exactly. S. Ambrose commends Eusebius Bishop of
Vercels for his diligence in this kind, ordering his Clergy so, that (as he
speaks) he required of them two things together: the continency of the
Monastery, and the discipline of the Church. These being different in
themselves, Eusebius (of holy memory) first joined together in the Western
part* and dwelling in the city, kept the orders of Monks, and governed his
Church with sobriety of fasting. For it does greatly advance the grace of a
Priest, if he bind youth to the practice of Abstinence and the rule of
Integrity, and bar them that dwell in the city, from the use and
conversation of the city. Thus speaks S Ambrose of Eusebius; making him, if
we mark it, not absolutely the first Author of this manner of living, but the
erectour of it in the Western parts only; for it flourished in other Countries
long before; as we find by that which P^s^d^nius writes in the Life of S.
Augustine, Possidonius in vit^ Augustine.
where he tells us, that S. Augustine practiced it, erecting a Monastery
within his Church, where al lived at common charge, and did eat at the same
table, and no body called any thing his own; and moreover adds, that this
fashion of living, was first brought-in under the holy Apostles. Pius 4.
bulla^t. incipit. sedi^ Apost. apud Nanarrum in statur^^^^ 19. q. 3. in 6. and
7. (...) Regis. 10.1. (...) p^r.
Pope Pius the Fourth speaks to the same effect, when in a Bulle of his
decreing certain things for the honor of the Canon-Regulars, he gives this
reason: because this Order was instituted by the Apostles. Navarre cites the
Bulle, and adds many things to like purpose. So that S Augustine also was not
so much the first Founder as the restorer or Reformer of this Religious Order
of the Clergy; and I meet with no man, that makes any doubt, but that the
Order, which he did institute, is the same Order of the Canon-Regulars, which
even now I mentioned. For when S. Augustine dyed, and the city of Hippo was
destroyed by the Wandals, Gela^i^s, an African borne, came to Rome with some
Religious of that Order, and himself being afterward made Pope, his Companions
perseuered in the Religious, course, which they had begun; and the Church of
Lateran was assigned them for their dwelling. Whereof we find good testimony
to this day both in the ruins of that Monastery, and in some of the Popes
Bulls, and specially of Pope Eugenius the Fourth. And their employments.
And it is upon record, that their employments were to say Mass, to preach to
the people, to minister the Sacraments unto them, and finally to perform al
Priestlie and Apostolical functions, living in common together under Obedience
to one Provost or Superior, and having nothing of their own. And it is
certain, that Bonifacius the Eighth was the first that rem^ued these
Canon-Regulars from their house at Lateran, after they had had possession of i^
near upon eight hundred years, and placed Secular Canons in their room,
giving every one of them his part of the rents, which before were in common.
And we have many proofs, that this Institute was not only in use in Rome, but
in most countries besides. For S. Dominick in Spain was first for a time a
Canon-Regular, and the Life and Epistles of S. Bernard show that there were
many of them in his time in France* S. Bernard Ep. 3. and 81.
for he relates diverse things of them. There was therefore in those days this
only Institute of the Regular Clergy, for ought we know, to wit, the
Canon-Regulars, as I have said. But in this our Age, by the special providence
and will of God, diverse other Orders have sprung-vp much of the same kind, and
much to the advancement of the Church, al of them laboring in the cultiuating
thereof, as in the Vineyard of our Lord, so much the more fervently and
cheerfully, and with more fruit, by how much they come unto it with new
strength and vigor, and, as fresh workmen, less wearied.

6. In which number we may with reason place this our Society of IE^VS; which
God in these latter days has brought to light, to wit, in the year One
thousand five hundred and forty, for in that year it was confirmed by Pope
Paulus and Third, and established by decree of the Apostolic Sea. We will here
say nothing of the Founder thereof, nor what beginnings it had, because t^ings
are f^esh in memory, and known to every body. Only I will show briefly,
after what manner it endeavors to couple Religious discipline with the
functions of the Clergy, embracing, as much as may be, that which is best and
principal in both the kinds of life. For whereas Religion chiefly consists in
Poverty, in forsaking the world, in departing from ^lesh and bl^^d, and in
perpetual Obedience (which we may worthily call the principal part of Religion,
The Society of JESUS.
and as it were the Essence of it) the Society of JESUS embraces al these
things, and in particular so exact Obedience, that it bends all the forces it
has to the perfect practice and exercise thereof; yet it makes account, that
Obedience and to be eminent in the perfect abnegation of our will and judgment,
is the peculiar mark, whereby the true and right children and subjects of the
Society are known and distinguished from al others. Now as for the manner of
living of the Clergy, if we will go solidly to work, we must chiefly have an
eye to that, which was instituted by the Apostles, as our heavenly Masters,
which doubtless was very different from that, which now we see. For anciently it
attended to the functions only of teaching and preaching the Ghospel, of
instructing the ignorant in Christian doctrine, of ministering the Sacraments,
and, in a word, to purge, illuminate, and perfect the souls of others; by
which three^old employment the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy resembled the
Angelical, which is in heaven. The same kind of exercises, ou^ Order has
undertaken to put in practice, next after the saving and perfecting their own
souls, attending to help and perfect their Neighbor, by word and work, in
private and in public, at home and abroad, finally by all convenient means
that may be. Neither is it contrary to the ancient practice of the Clergy,
Schools.
that in our Schools we apply ourselves to the teaching of children. Syn. 9.
c. 4. and 5 Co^. c. Mog c 4^.
For we find it decreed in ancient Councels, that Priests and Monks should
have schools in their Monasteries and Churches, where the Faithful might send
their children. And S. Basil moving this very question, S. Basil. reg Prou q.
29^.
Whether it be sitting, that among the Monks there be some Masters to teach
Secular children, he answered that it is very sitting and agreeable to the
Ghospel, so it be done to the end, that together with learning, they be taught
devotion and the fear of God. And there want not examples of many Monks and
Monastical Orders, that have had Schools, not only for their own, but to
teach secular people also; whereby this, which I say, may be confirmed. And so
much concerning our Society.

The state of the Clergy, and the state of Monks compared
7. But to return to the Orders of the Regular Clergy in general, we may
easily guess by what has been said, how laudable a thing it is, to couple two
so profitable and excellent courses together, and how much it is to be
desired. For the Order of the Clergy, and the Order of the Monks, are as it
were two eyes, or two hands, or arms of the Church, whereof it has use in all
occasions, both of them noble and excellent in themselves, and so fraught with
their several commodities belonging to each of them, that whosoever shall
compare them together, will find that they surpass and are surpassed again
by one another. For in the Clergy the labor and industry, wherewith they
employ themselves toward their Neighbor, is remarkable, their diligence in
preaching and opposing themselves to the power of the Devil, and advancing the
glory of God; their Priestlie Order and function, and the handling of the
sacred Mysteries belonging thereunto. In Monks we admire their Poverty, having
nothing, possessing nothing; the br^therlie love and loving charity and union
which is among them, being, as it were, of many members one body; the mutual
assistance, which they have by one another; their Obedience to Superiors,
together with the lowlines of the state itself, and humility and other
fruits, which Obedience brings. So that each of the states having many
excellencies proper to themselves, which ar^ not in each other, what an
excellent kind of life must that needs be, which joins them both together,
and enjoys the excellencies ^f them both, together with the ca^e of their
own souls, which is proper to M^nks, attending also to the benefit and
perfection of their Neighbor, which is the business of the Clergy? And so much
the more, because the joining of them together brings also more plentiful
fruit in them both, then when they are exercised severally. For God does bestow
his gr^ces in greater abundance, when they are directed to the advancing of his
glory in others; and (ordinarily speaking) the nearer the instrument of these
spiritual effects is conjoined with God the principal Cause and Author of
them, the more benefit they work in our Neighbor; and the conjunction is
wrought by virtue, and chiefly by Humility and Obedience, both which belong
intrinsecally to a Religi^us State.

8. But let us spare our own, and hear how S. Ambrose discourses of both
these lives, S. Ambrose.
comparing them together. Who makes any doubt, says he, but that these two,
to wit, the functions of the Clergy, and the orders of Monks, are to be
preferred before all the earnest devotion, which is practiced among Christians?
the exercises of the Clergy being ordained to civil and humane conversation;
the Monks accustoming themselves to abstinence and patience. They are seated,
as it were, in the open theater of the world; these live private and secret:
every body's eyes are upon them, these are hidden from every body.
Therefore that noble Champion says: We are made a spectacle to this world.
They are in the race, these are within the listes. They strive against the
confusednes of this world, these against the desires of the flesh. They conquer
the pleasures of the body, these do shun them. Their life is more pleasing,
this is more safe; they govern, these restrain; yet both deny themselves,
that they may be Christ's, because it is said to the perfect: He that will come
after me, let him deny himself and take up his Cross, and follow me. That
life therefore fights, this stande^h aloof; that ouercometh the allurements,
this auoydeth them; that triumphs over the world, this bannisheth it; that
crucifyeth, or is crucified to, the world, this does not know it; that abides
more assaults, and therefore the victory is the greater; this falls
seldomer, and preserves itself more easily. Thus S. Ambrose, whereby we may
clearly see that which I said a little before, how rare that course of life
must needs be, where the excellencies of both these states are united
together, seeing that severally they have so many commendations in them, that
it cannot but be an excellent thing to embrace either of them. And doubtless it
is a hard piece of business, and a maister-worke to conioyne them; but nothing
is hard to God, with whom no word is impossible.

Of the great multitude of Religious, and Religious Orders. CHAP. XXIV.
HAVING discoursed briefly of the beginning and progress of Religious Orders,
we will spend a little time in considering the number and variety of the
branches of them. For who is there, that calling to mind the infinite
multitude of them, that have professed this kind of life in all Ages almost of
the Ghospel, will not greatly admire and be even astonished? We have spoken
before of S. Antonie, S. Antonie
whose fame and example drew so many to forsake the world, and give themselves
to a solitary life, even while the superstition of the Heathen, was yet strong
in all countries, Ps. 64.^2.
that we may truly say of that Age with the Royal Prophet: Thou (...) bless
the crown of the year of thy benignity, the fairenes of the desert will grow
fa^, and the hillocks will be gyrt with exultation. S. Athan. in (...) Anto^^.
Let us set before our eyes that which (...) A^hmasius writes of him and his
disciples in his Life. Upon the hill, says he, (...) were Monasteries like
tabernacles, full of Celestial Quiers of people that spent their time in singing
of Psalms, in reading, and praying; and occupying a great extent of land, they
made as it were a town among themselves, severed from worldly conversation.
Who is there, that beholding such a world of Monks, and taking into his
consideration that heroical company of people agreing in one, where there was
never an il-one, no detraction, but a multitude of followers of Abstinence, and
a continual striving in matter of Piety and good offices, would not presently
break forth into those words? How good are thy houses, Numb. 24.5
Jacob, and thy tabernacles, Israel? as woods that give shadow, as a garden
upon rivers, as tents pitched by God, as Cedars of Libanus near the waters.

S. Hilarion.
2. The like we may say of S. Hilarion; who, as S. Hierome writes founded about
the same time Monasteries in Palestine without number; and of Macarius a
disciple of S. Antonie's, S. Hierome in (...).
renowned for sanctity, and a Father of very many, S. Ma^arius
that followed his footsteps. Of Cariton also it is recorded, that he built
diverse Monasteries in Palestine; Cariton.
and still as he had finished them, he retired himself further into the desert.
Isidorus.
We read that Isidorus was governor of a thousand Monks in one Monastery.
Apollonius.
And Apollonius afterward in the same Monastery enlarged, had five thousand
under him. And upon a hill of Nu^^^, about a days journey from Alexandria,
there were five hundred Monasteries, that stood almost wall to wall, and al of
them were directed by one Master or President. Palladius an ancient Author,
Palla l. in hist Lausi.
and an eye-witnes of many of these things, relates in the history of his
Pilgrimage, that he saw a City, in which there were more Monasteries then
Secular houses; so that every street and corner ringing with the Divine
praises, which those servants of God did sing, the whole City seemed a
Church. He also testifyeth, that he saw an infinite multitude of Monks in
Memphis and Babylon, al of them singular for diverse guists of the Holie-Ghost;
and that not far from Thebae he met with Ammon, who was Father of three
thousand Monks. What shall we say of S. Pacomius, Pacomius.
who flourished about four hundred years after Christ? of whom we read,
that in several houses standing not fa^re asunder from one another, he had
seven thousand disciples; and in the house, wherein himself lived, he had
above a thousand with him, and al these he divided into four and twenty
Companies, according to the four and twenty letters of the
Christs-crosse-row, that he might the better take an account of them. Palladius
also writes, that he saw Serapion* Serapion.
when he had ten thousand Monks under him, distributed into several houses. And
S. Herome in the Epitaph of Paula makes mention, S Hi^r in Ep^t^ph. Pau^ae.
that when she went into the desert to visit those holy Fathers, there met her
(as he speaks) innumerable troops of servants of God; and that she was so
taken with that sight, that forgetting her sex, she had a great desire to dwell
amidst so many thousands of Monks. And whose Celle (says he) did not she go
into^ at whose feet did she not cast her self? she made account, she saw
Christ in every Saint.

^
3. And as the number of Monks was infinite, the multitude of Religious women was
little less; as we find recorded chiefly by Theodoret in the end of his
Religious History; where he says, that there were infinite Monasteries of them
throughout all the Eastern parts, in Palestine, in Egypt, in Asia, Pon^^^,
Cilicia, Syria, and in Europe also. Because, says he, since our Savior was
borne of a Virgin Mother, the fresh fields of Virginity are every where
multiplied.

4. And to the end we may not think, The great order, that was among them. S
Hier. Ep. 22.
that in so great a number there was much disorder and confusion, as it
falleth-out in a throng of people, it will not be amiss to set before our eyes
that which S. Hierome writes of the order of those times. The first thing they
agree upon, says he, is to obey their Superiors, and to perform whatsoever
they shall command. They are distinguished by tens and hundreds, so that every
tenth man is over the nine, and again the hundredth Superior has ten
governors under him; every one lives by himself alone, but their Celles are
close one to another. Their order is, that til the Ninth Hour they go not to
one another, unless it be the Decurion^ I mentioned, to comfort those, that
are under their charge, if any one of them chance to be troubled in his
thoughts. After the Ninth Hour they meet al together, they sing Psalms,
they read the Scripture as it is prescribed them, and when they have ended
their prayers, they al sit down; and he, whom they call their Father, standing
in the middle of them, begins his speech. While he speaks, there is such
silence, that they dare not look upon one another, nor spit. The commendation
of the speaker, be the tears of the hearers; their tears trickle softly down
their cheek^s, and their grief breaks not fo^^h into sighs. Then the meeting
breaketh-vp, and every company sits down at board with the Father of it, and
they wait upon one another by weeks. There is no noise, while they are at
their meat; no body speaks while he eats. Then they rise al together,
and having said Grace, they return to their Celles. There til evening they
discourse every one with those of his own Company, and say: Did you not
mark this man or the other? what a grace he has? how great his silence was?
how grave was his carriage? If they perceive any body to be weak, they
comfort him; if fervent in the love of God, they exhort him to follow it. And
because, setting aside the times of public prayer, every one watches in the
night in his own Celle, they go to every Celle; and laying their care, they
listen carefully what they are doing. If they find any one more slow then
others, they do not rebuke him, but taking no notice that they know any thing
of it, they visit him oftener; and beginning themselves first, rather encourage
then compel him to pray. Thus S. Hierome writes of them, and much more to the
same effect.

5. Let us return to our former discourse of the multitude of them; which we
must not attribute so to the happy fruitfulnes of those times, The multitude
of Religious in S. Benedict's days.
as to think, that with time also it shrunk away. For we find the like
increase of number in S. Benedict's days, and also in later Ages. Tritemius,
who lived about the year One thousand four hundred and foure-score, speaking
of the increase of his Order, brings for proof thereof, Tritem. l. 1. de
Vivi^ Illustr. c. 2.
that in his time in the only Province of Ments there were one hundred and
twenty four entire Abbyes yet standing, besides ten others, that were drawn
out of them; so that by this one Province we may guess at the largenes of the
whole Order. And it is no wonder there should be so many, if we consider, what
he adde^h further, that there was a time, when they had fifteen thousand
Abbyes, S. Bernard in vit. Malachi^
besides Priories and other less^r Monasteries. S. Bernard also in the Life of
S. Malachie records that in Ireland there was a Monastery, Monasteries in
Ireland.
the head of many Monasteries, out of which many thousands of Monks had been
bred; and says further of it thus: A holy place indeed, and fruitful of
Saints, bringing forth abundant fruit to God, insomuch that one only child of
that holy Congregation, whose name was Luanus, Luanus.
is reported to have been himself alone Founder of a hundred Monasteries; which
I speak, that by this one the Reader may gather, how infinite the rest of the
multitude was. In brief, the branches thereof have so filled both Ireland and
Scotland, as we may think, that those verses of David did chiefly foretell of
these times: Thou have visited the earth, Ps. 64.20.
and made it drunk; thou have multiplied to enrich (...); and in like manner
the rest, which follows. And these swarms of Saints have not only spread
themselves in the Countries aforesaid, but have also, as it were, overflowed
into foreign parts. S. Columbanus.
For S. Columbanus coming from thence into this our Country of France built
the Monastery of Luxouium, and raised there a great people. And thereport is,
that the number of them was so great, that they continued among themselves the
Divine Service day and night, one company succeeding still an other, S. Bernard.
that there was not a minut of time free from singing praise to God. This S.
Bernard relates of others; and we may say the like of himself and his Family;
for in a short time it increased so fast, that it was even a miracle to see it.
For while he was at Clairenaulx, and his company was as yet but small, he saw
in a Vision a multitude of people of several states and conditions and in
several attires flocking down the adjacent hills in that abundance, that the
place was not able to contain them.

The Franciscan-Fryars.
6. What shall we say of later Orders, especially of the Franciscans, who seem
to have been particularly blessed in this sudden and large propagation of
their Order. For whereas they are distinguished into several branches, al
derived from one Founder S. Francis, the sole Order of the Obseruantines, as
they call them, did reckon of late years, that they were in number about a
hundred thousand Religious. Finally it will not be hard to show, that the number
of Religious people in these our days is in a manner infinite; and there is
apparent reason for it, The number of Religious in these days.
besides that we may see it with our eyes. For Religious Orders having
flourished now so many Ages, so many of them anciently instituted, so many
new ones growne-vp in succeding times, those of old have still continued, and
the new ones have been daily increased to an excessive number. Which makes me
think, that the number of Religious people cannot only not be less then
anciently it was, when there was such abundance of them, but must needs be
somewhat greater then in those times. It may be, that then the number of them
made a greater show, because all that would be Religious, betook themselves to
two or three Orders (for in those days there were no more) now we do not
reflect so much upon the great number of them, because they are divided into
many Houses and Families. And what greater commendation can we desire, or
proof of the excellency of this kind of life? This being in a manner the
selfsame blessing, which anciently God promised to the Jews, as an evident
token of his favor and presence with them; My eye shall be upon you, and I will
make you increase; Leuit. 26.9.
you shall be multiplied, and I will confirm my covenant with you.

5. Yea it is an apparent sign of great perfection; for as by course of
nature, a thing must first be rightly composed, and grown to perfection in the
kind it is in, The multiplication of Religious people a sign of perfection in
Religious Orders.
before it bring forth an other like unto it; as we see in all herbs and
plants, and more apparently in all kinds of beasles and in men also: insomuch
that the ability of engendring an other, is a sign of abundant strength and
virtue in the thing it engenders: so in this supernatural kind of life, this
excessive increase, which I speak of, argues abundance of great perfection
and sanctity, which were not much to be admired, if Religion were a course of
licentiousnes and liberty, which works much upon Sense, and draws the
flesh and blood after it. But it is quite contrary; for it takes those things
quite away, which are any way pleasing to our body, and prescribes others,
which are opposite to Nature, as poverty, paynes-taking, contempt of our
selves, voluntary afflictions, and a perpetual carrying of our Cross. So that
this great concourse to Religion generally of young people, well borne, and well
bred, in those years and that education, which naturally abhorres al hardness
and austeritie, must needs be a sign, that there is something Divine in
Religion, and there can be no other cause given of it.

8. Moreover the multitude of Religious Orders is a great ornament to the
Church of God. An ornament to the Church. S. Bernard in Apol.
For, as S. Bernard does rightly and prudently observe, the Church
distinguished into so many different Orders, is as the Queen, of whom we
read in the Psalm, that she was clad round with variety; Ps. 44.20.
and in it we behold the garment of several colors, not of that Joseph who
saved Egypt, but of him that saved the world; and a garment without seame,
Genesis 31.3.
in regard both of the inviolable charity, and the uniform difformitie which
is in it. And besides this beauty, which S. Bernard here speaks of, it is a
great honor, and a great benefit to the Church. An honor, because as in the
Courts of Princes, so in this Court of the Eternal God, which is the Church, it
is both honorable and Maiestical to have several degrees of servants,
distributed into several ranks, and different both in their attire, and
offices; and it does much set-forth the glory, and service of God, and of
CHRIST our Bride*groome; and for the Church his Spouse and Bride, nothing could
be more glorious of more magnificent, then to resemble in this so near the
order and variety of the heavenly Jerusalem; in which there is not one Order
of Angels only, but many Orders, many Hierarchies of those Blessed Spirits,
like in nature, and yet different in degree and office, conspiring al in the
perpetual service of God. S. Thomas 2.2. q 18^ ar. 2.
To which purpose S. Thomas says both learnedly and wittily, that as in
natural things God made such variety of them, to the end that the several
qualities and perfections, which are in them, might be the more known, the
more they were dispersed into many particulars: So in the order of Grace, the
multiplying of States, and Offices, and Functions, makes that the fulness of
Grace, which flows from CHRIST our Lord and Savior, as from the head and
fountain, is communicated to more particulars, and in more different fashions.
By which, CHRIST himself is doubtless more glorified in regard that both the
force of his merit, and his liberality in giving, is much more conspicuous to
the world by this means. And addoth, that the beauty of the Church is also
much increased and graced by it, as we touched before; because Order is of
itself a comely and graceful thing, and Order cannot be but among many; and
he accommodateth that saying of the Apostle to this purpose: In a great house
there are not only vessels of gold and silver, but of wood, and earth.

2. Tim. 2.20.
9. And doubtless it is also a great benefit to the Church, because every
Religious Order proposing some particular thing to itself, at which it chiefly
aymeth, Variety of Religious Orders a benefit to the Church.
it compasses that, which it has in hand, better and with more perfection;
because it attends wholly to that one thing. For many businesses be of that
nature, that they hinder one an other; others are more easily and more sweetly
brought to perfection, if they be undertaken severally. Wherefore, as Aristotle
says, the body of man is naturally framed so, as every Sense has a several
member, and instrument, as it were, appointed for it, to the end they might not
hinder one an other, Aristotle. 2. c. 1.
if there were occasion to exercise several functions at one time: so in the
functions of Grace, it did much more beseem the bountiful and magnificent
wisdom of God to distribute to several particulars the work and reward, which
he has appointed. And as it is both decent and beneficial for a City to have
tradesmen of several professions, some working in wool, others in iron, or
timber, and the like, to the end al may have sufficient to cloth and maintain
themselves; and not only there be several trades on foot, but several
particulars working at one trade and occupation, to the end things may be the
more plentiful; so in this spiritual City of God, because very many things
are required to bring a man to Heaven, out of his infinite wisdom he has
provided, that we should have plenty of them by means of the several
Religious Orders which are erected.

10. The Church of God stood in need of Prayers, to relieve it in all dangers
and difficulties that do occur, and for a continual defense and rampire in all occasions. Therefore God provided certain Orders that should employ
themselves wholly in Contemplation of Heavenly things. It needed Fastings and
other austerities, both to appease the wrath of God bent against the sins of
men, and that they might have good example to imitate. To which purpose there
are other Orders founded, which give themselves most to this kind of ^igorous
life, professing it in their outward habit, and long abstinence, and ext^came
poverty. It wanted Sermons and teachers, and some that might privately
instruct the people, and hear Confessions. The providence of God has
furnished al these, and appointed several workmen for them, giving them both
will and ability to perform every one his several function: whereby this
City of God, as I styled it before, has all the helps, which can be thought
either necessary or useful for out eternal welfare.

11. And there is one thing in it worthy to be observed, because it shows the
goodness of God very apparently, and his particular providence over mankind.
For as when a sick man has lost his stomach, Several di^p^sitio^s re^ui^ed
several Orders.
the Physicians as much as they can, do order such meats for him, as he has
least auersion from, and do propose of themselves diverse kinds unto him, that
he may take a liking to some one of them: so because secular people through
multiplicitie of earthly businesses had lost their appetite to heavenly
things, and al desire and feeling of them, God of purpose has provided, as it
were, several spiritual dishes, dressed and seasoned by particular men several
ways, that they, that could not away with one, might be taken with an other.

12. An other reason also might be, and that very necessary, because God out
of his infinite goodness would provide for all, and as it were prepare the way for
every body, that had a mind to be perfect in virtue. For people are of
several natures and dispositions, several inclinations and abilities, even of
body. Some love to be alone, others in company; some cannot abide to have
little or nothing to do, others cannot away with businesses; some have their
health well, others are but weak, and are not able to take much pains, or
endure any hardness, so that every one of these was to be provided for, and to
have as it were a several diet by himself, which might agree with his health
and complexion; and the sweetness of the providence of Almighty God, which he
always uses, and never fayleth-of in the government of mankind, could not
but order it in this manner.

13. And finally his Divine wisdom, in this multiplication of Religious
Orders, had a respect also in the provision of new supplies to the Church,
which being fresh and entire, might themselves fight the more valiantly, and
encourage others also to pul-vp their spirits, who were perhaps even weary
with fighting. For it is ordinary, that they, who come last, are more fervent,
and either by their example, or for shame, or for other reasons, others take
heart and courrage by seeing them: by which means, fervor is always maintained
in the Church of God, because these new sparks, which ever and anon are
added, keep life and fire in it.

Of diverse Religious men, that have been eminent both in learning and
sanctity. CHAP. XXV.
AS among the proofs for the Catholic Church it is none of the least, that so
many eminent men have been of it, of whom it is scarce credible that any one
much less that al should err; so in my opinion, we may use the like argument
in commendation of a Religious course, The greatest part of the most eminent
men have been Religious.
that seeing so many rare men have embraced it, their sole example and
authority is forcible enough to convince that it deserves al praise and
honor, specially the number of them being so great, that if we would stand to
reckon-vp al, that have been conspicuous for learning and sanctity in the
whole Church of God, we should without al question find, that the greater part
of them al have been Religious For if Religion brought them to so much
eminency in both these rare qualities; what can be better, what more
beneficial then a Religious state? If being before so eminently qualifyed they
betook themselves notwithstanding to Religion, this were ground sufficient to
extol a Religious course, that men so eminent would profess that kind of life;
such men, I say, as it cannot but be both safe and commendable to follow them.
And if whole Cities and Countries do esteem it a glory to have had some one
or two among their inhabitants, singular for Learning, or Military discipline,
and keep them upon record in their Annals and Chronicles, boasting themselves
of them to al posterity, as if the prowess of one particular man did redound
to the honor of the whole community; how much more reason has Religion to
glory and boast itself of so many rare men, that have been bred in it? For it
is but by chance, that a man was borne at Rome, or at Athens; and he, that was
borne there, had no part of his choice in it: but these men entered into
Religion upon good consideration and of set purpose, because they knew the good
that was in it. So that the more eminent they were, the more honor they did
Religion by embracing it; first, because they would never have set their
affection that ways, but that they knew it deserved al love: secondly, because
the renown, which they brought with them, could not but add much grace to the
dignity which Religion had before of itself. And the number of them, who
became Religious, and were eminent and famous in the world, is without number;
wherefore we will not strive to reckonvp-al, because it would be an endless
labor, but confine our selves to those, that have coupled exquisite Learning
with singular Virtue; and among these also we will only pick-out the chiefest in
every Age; and first the Grecians, then those of the Latin Church.

Serapton.
2. Serapton does first present himself, as ancientest of them al, about the
year of our Savior One hundred ninety three. It is recorded of him, that
being in his youth brought-vp in Monastical discipline, he was afterward
chosen Patriarck of Antioch, the Eighth in order after S. Peter the Apostle;
and that he was the learned and eloquentest man of his time, and wrote many
excellent things for the benefit of posterity.

Pamphilus.
3. Pamphilus, a man not much inferior in all things, lived not long after, to
wit, in the year Two hundred and eleven; he was also accounted the eminentest
of his Age for learning; S. Hierome (...) p. Eccl.
and S. Hierome makes mention of the great Library which he had, and being
put to death under Maximian the Emperor for the Faith of Christ, added the
glory of Martyrdom to the commendation of the Religious life which he had
lead.

^u^ian.
4. Much about the same time, Lucian, who from his tender years was bred-vp a
Monk, was also famous for learning; and, as Suidas writes of him, taught a
School at Antioch, out of which many rare men proceeded; at last the same
Maximian having caused him to be imprisoned, and commanded that nothing should
be given him but such meat as had been offered to Idols, he there perished by
famine.

^
5. John Cl^macus is worthy to be reckoned in the number, who about the year
Three hundred and forty, was a Monk in Mount-Sinai; and honored his times
not only with his exemplar life, but with his good exhortations and writings.

(...).
6. To whom Eff^em Lyrus is nothing inferior; he, whom S. Basil was told by
(...) what he was, when he came once to visit him; and being made (...) by him
could never be persuaded to say Mass, he thought so humbly (...); yet he
performed other Priestlie functions with great applause, (...) and instructing
the people with such eloquent perswations, ^
that he is (...) had one of the fluentest tongues of his Age. And he wrote
also many things, which (as S. Hierome reports) were wont to be read
publicly in most Churches of the East, next after the holy Scripture.

7. But none were so conspicuous in those days, as S. Basil himself, S Basil.
and S. Gregory Nazianzen, S. Gregory Nazian.
both equal in learning, and sympathizing in affection, and in their manner of
life. For S. Gregory sailing to Athens, and being in great danger upon the
sea, Vide Russin lib. 11.
vowed to be a Monk, if he might escape with life; which Vow, when at the end
of his studies he was resolved to perform, he drew S. Basil with him, who had
been his familiar friend during that time. And for thirteen years together
giving themselves in a Monastery to the study of Scripture only and of
Divinity, they advanced themselves so far in them both, as the whole world
is witness, by the great benefit, which it feels. After which time S. Basil
was made Bishop of Cesarea; and S. Gregory first of Nazianzen, afterward of
Constantinople. The things which both of them did, and suffered, and have left
written, are so known, that it is needless to repeat them. Only I thought
good to observe, that they retained always b^th of them such a love to a
Monastical life, that S. Basil together with his Pastoral Charge did ever
join the practices of Monastical discipline; and S. Gregory giuing-ouer his
Charge, betook himself to his home, and there gave himself wholly to the
private exercise of those, that live in Monasteries, til his dying-day. And we
shall have no cause to think it strange, if we consider what himself writes of
himself in a certain Oration, wherein he gives this reason, why refusing a
Bishopric which was offered him, he fled into Pontus; to wit, because he was
so much taken with a Religious life, that he could not be persuaded to leave
it; Which life, says he, I having had so great an affection unto it from my
youth, as few, that have given themselves to learning, may compare with me, and
having vowed it to God when I was in extremity of danger, and moreover
practiced it to these years, and increased more and more in the love and
desire of it by the very practice, I could not suffer myself to be drawn out
of it, no more then out of Sanctuary.

8. Next after these we may reckon S. Epiphanius, S. Epiphanius.
who was certainly a very rare man. He was borne of Jewish parents; but meeting
one day with Lucian a Monk, and beholding a Bowl of light descending over his
head, was so inflamed not only with the love of Christian Religion, but also of
a Monastical life, that resolving presently upon it, he would needs put himself
into the service of God in his Monastery; and whereas the Monastery before was
of no note or fame, by his presence it came to be greatly renowned. At last
being chosen Bishop of a certain place, and putting himself into the first ship
he met, with intent to avoid it, he fell upon the same pikes which he labored
so much to escape. For arriving at Salamina in the Island of Cyprus, where they
were treating about choosing a Bishop, by Divine instinct, and the general
voice of al, he was there consecrated Bishop, though with much repugnance and
reluctation on his part.

9. What shall we say of S. John Chrysostom, S. John Chrysostom.
who flourished about this time also, to wit, in the year Four hundred? For
we read of him, that while he lived in a certain private Monastery, an Angel
appearing to Flauianus Patriarck of Antioch, in a great light, willed him to
go to John Chrysostom, and consecrate him Priest; and in like manner at the
selfsame hour and time, the Angel appeared to John, and willed him to follow
Flauianus, in whose Church for twelve years together he did God great good
service; and from thence being made Archbishop of Constantinople, he took so
much pains, and went through so many troubles, what with preaching, what with
writing, what with providing for the Common good, and withal was so tossed and
turmoiled through the envy of his opponents, and the power of Princes, against
whom he stood with great courage, that dying in banishment, and in great
misery, besides other titles of honor and commendation which he deserves, he
may worthily be styled a Martyr.

S. John Damascen.
10. S. John Damascen was also a very famous man about the year Four hundred
and thirty. His Works, which are yet extant, do sufficiently testifye his
learning; and his life was full of holiness grounded upon the deep foundation of
Humility and Mortification. Al which he owes to an other Monk, that being led
captive into Syria, became Master to S. John Damascen; and in short time put
al his learning into him.

11. There were others also less renowned then the former, but yet were rare
men, as Nilus, Isaacius, Eutimius, Diademus, Anastasius, and that great
Bessarion, B^ssarion.
who in the year One thousand four hundred thirty nine, was the chief actour
in the Council of Florence, in the reconciling of the Grecians to the Latin
Church, and solidly confuted both by word of mouth, and afterward in writing,
the Bishop of Ephesus, that was the only opponent in that business. And being
deservedly esteemed one of the learned men of that Age, and besides having so
much zeal and piety, he was made Cardinal by Eugenius the Fourth, and did
greater matters afterward for the advancement of the Church of God. And this
shall suffice concerning the Grecians.

S Hierome.
12. Among the Latins, those two lights of the Church, S. Hierome and S.
Augustine, do by right challenge the first place. And as for S. H^erome, it is
evident, S Augustine.
that he was a Monk from his youth, and never forsook that course of life;
though we find that he traveled to Rome, and to Antioch, and other places.
Insomuch that when Paulinus Bishop entreated him, and in a manner compelled
him, S. Hierome Ep. 62.
to take Holy Orders, he yealded, but upon this condition, that he might not
forgo his Monastical profession, as himself writes to Panmachius, giving this
reason, because he would not have that taken from him under the title of
Priesthood, for which he had forsaken the world; wherefore though he were made
Priest, Idem Ep 60.
he never suffered himself to be ranked among the other Clergy, nor would he
spend his labors in preaching to the people, though he was much importuned
unto it by Epiphanius, as himself writes in his Epistle to John Bishop of
Jerusalem. Finally growing now in years he returned to Jerusalem, and whereas
Paula had built two Monasteries at the Manger of our Savior, Idem Ep 26.
at her own cost and charges, one for women, an other for men, he took up his
rest in this that was for the men, and enlarged it at his own expenses. For to
this end (as he writes) he sent his brother Paulinian into his own country,
to sell the decayed Mannours which had escaped the hands of the Barbarians, and
the rest of his patrimony, to the end he might have room to entertayne the
multitudes of Monks, which flocked to him from al parts of the world, and did
(as he speaks) in a manner ouerwhelm: him. And we may gather also that he had
the government of the said Monastery in his hands, Idem in lib ^. Hi^^^m.
by that which himself writes in an other place, that he was forced to
dispatch his Commentaries upon Hieremie by pieces, by reason of the number of
those that came to the House, and of the charge of the holy Brethren, and of
the Monastery.

13. As concerning S. Augustine, S Augustine Ep 29. q. 4.
though the course of life, which he lead, be sufficiently testified and known
by that which several Authors have left written, and chiefly Possidonius, yet
it will not be amiss to hear what he says of himself. I ( says he) who write
this, have been much in love with the perfection of which our Savior speaks
to that rich young man, saying: Go, sell al thou have, and give to the poor,
and come follow me; and not by my own forces, but by the help of the grace of
God, I have performed it. And I know more then any other man, how much I have
profited in this way of perfection; yet God knows it better then I. And I
exhort others al I can to the like course, and have companions in it in the
name of our Lord, Idem 3. contra Petilian. c. 40.
who have been persuaded by my means. In an other place he sets down what
the Heretics said of him for this cause: Petilian with his foul mouth
advanced himself in disprayse of Monasteries and Monks, finding fault also with
me, because I have been author of a course of life of this nature; and yet he
knows not what kind of life it is, or rather makes as if he knew not that,
which is known over all the world. What therefore can be said of a Religious
state that can be more for the honor and credit of it, then that two so rare
and excellent men have embraced it with such love and earnestnes, as themselves
express? For if we speak of wit, who was there ever more acute? if of
Learning, who more learned? If we seek able Pens and tongues, where shall we
find any more eloquent and copious? if Virtue, who more holy? Finally if we
regard Authority, none did ever carry more sway in the Church of God then
they two, nor ever shall.

14. S. Hierome in one of his Epistles, S. Paulinus.
gives us to understand that S. Paulinus Bishop of Nola, a Gascon by nation,
was also a Monk. For writing to him as to a Monk, S. Hierome Ep. 13.
and not as to a Bishop as yet, he commends him for changing his coat
together with his mind, and for glorying in poverty both of spirit and of
works; and advises him to avoid the company of Secular people, and
particularly of great men. For how ( says he) can it be necessary for you to
behold the things often, by contempt whereof you began to be a Monk? His own
writings do sufficiently testifye his learning, and eloquence* and his virtue
is admirable in many things, which he did, but chiefly for selling himself to
the Barbarians to redeem a widows son; which fact of his is highly
extolled, and not without great reason, by S. Augustine, and S. Gregory.

15. I have cause to rank that great S. Martin Bishop of Tours with the rare
and excellent men of that Age: S. Martin.
for though he had not tha^ Learning which people get in Schools, yet he was
so stored with Learning insused from heaven, that he did both preach, and
dispute, and discharge al other parts belonging to the office of a Bishop with
great applause, which could not be done without Learning. And first he began a
Monastery at Milan, and being thrust out from thence by Maxentius the Arrian,
he erected an other at Poictiers, and a third at Tours after he was Bishop.
Where, notwithstanding he was Bishop (as Sulpitius writes, who was inwardly
acquainted with him) he observed Religious discipline to hi^ dying day,
together with foure-score other Monks, and in extreme rigor of poverty,
whereas most of them were nobly borne, and daintily bred.

John Cassian.
16. John Cassian lived much about the same time, a Scythian borne, but for his
style to be reckoned among the best Latinists. First he was scholar to S. John
Chrysostom, and afterward built a monastery at Marseils; in the ordering and
governing whereof no doubt but he put in practice all that which he had set down
in writing of the speeches and conversation of the holy Fathers; which every
body knows how much perfection it contaynes.

Eucherius
17. Eucherius Bishop of Lions, chosen out of the Monastery of Lerin to that
Pastoral charge, was famous in his time (which was about the year Four
hundred and fifty) and is yet to this day for the many learned Books, which
he has left written.

Prosp^r.
18. Prosper Bishop of Rhegio lived about the same time, and as Histories report
of him, was first a Monk, and then Secretary to Pope Leo the Great, and penned
many of his Epistles.

19. Not many years after, to wit, about the year Five hundred, S.
Fulgentius was renowned in Africa and throughout the whole world. S. Fulgentius
of Ruspae.
The passages of his life, and his writings, are full of great learning, which
he showed chiefly against Heretics, from whom also he su^lered many things
with great constancy, and esteemed so highly of a Religious course of life,
that he still practiced it all the while he was Bishop.

Cassiodorus.
20. Cassiodorus. was full as famous as he, once a Senator of Rauenna, and
Chancelour to Th^odorick king of Italy; but detesting his company after that
he had slain B^et^us, and forsaking him, and the world also, he founded the
Monastery of Clas^is for the Benedi^tin-Monks, which were new begun, and
entered himself into the Order; a man rare for all Secular learning while he was
in the world, and afterward also for Divinity, as his Works which are yet
extant do witness. He lived in the year Five hundred and fi^tie.

21. Who can commend S. Gregory the Great as he deserves, ^
who lived some fi^tie years after? or who can sufficiently admire his
sanctity, or the abun^ance of his learning, derived to the benefit of al
posterity, in so many Books as he has left written? But we shall have
occasion to speak of him again among the Popes.

S. Gregory (...)
22. S. Gregory of ^our^ lived also in his time and was placed in that
Bishopric out of a Monastery; and there be many things yet extant which
testifye his great learning.

Eutropius.
23. In Spain Religion has had the honor to have Eutropius, first consecrate!
to our Sauiou^ Christ from his youth, then Abbot, afterward Bishop of Vale^^
about the year Six hundred and ten.

Isi^orus.
24. Isidorus also, after he had spent much of his life in a Religious course,
was made Archbishop of Seuil. Ild^^onsus.
S. Ildefonsus was his scholar, and imitated his virtues with so great benefit
to himself and others, that he was created Archbishop of (...). His learned
writings are yet to be seen; and among others his Book of the Virginity of
our B. Lady* whose dear servant he was; and it is recorded of him, that when
he had written that Book, our B. Lady appeared unto him, holding the Book in
her hand, and thanked him for the pains he had taken in setting forth her
praises.

25. About the same time Caesarius was famous in France; Caesarius.
he was first a Monk, then Abbot of Lerin, afterward Bishop of Arles; a
learned and a holy man, and doubtless very eloquent.

26. England also has had rare men bred-vp in Religious Orders, Veneralls Bid.
as S. Bid, who dyed in the year Seven hundred thirty three. From seven
years of age, when he first entered into Religion, til he was fourscore and
twelve (for so long he lived) he spent his whole time in Learning and virtuous
exercises, and has left so many volumes so learnedly written, that he is in a
manner held to be another S. Augustine. And we may gather, what esteem the
world had of him, by that, while he was yet living, his writings were read
publicly throughout the Churches of England, together with the holy Fathers.
And because in his lifetime he could not be styled Saint, they styled him
Venerable; which title remains still in his Works after his death. But that
he was blind, as the vulgar report of him, is altogether false and forged.

27. S. Anselm^ also flourished in England about the year One thousand and
foure-score. S. Anselm^.
He was first a Monk, then chosen Archbishop of Canterbury; and by the holiness
of his life and learnednes of his writings, which are yet extant, has gotten
himself much renown, and done much honor to Religion.

28. And besides these, there have been many others in several Religious
Families, that coupling rare Virtue with no less exquisit Learning, have
shined, and do yet shine, in the Catholic Church, as stars to give light in
the night of this our pilgrimage. For what did S. Thomas of Aquin, or S.
Bonauenture, and many others, want for learning or holiness, that they may not
be compared with them that are more ancient? But we shall speak of them in
another place.

29. Now we will conclude this Chapter with joyful acknowledgement and
admiration, beholding with what rare men, or as the Apostle speaks, with what
Pillars Religious Orders have furnished holy Church, (...). 2.9.
and embellished it and themselves. For by that, which has been said, we may
perceive, that of the Four Greek Doctors, three of them were Religious, and
also three of the Four Latin Doctors; and moreover that the far greater
part of the holiest and learned men were in like manner Religious.

Of Kings and Princes, that have been Religious. CHAP. XXVI.
AL souls, as they are in nature equal, are of equal esteem with God; and if
he seem at any time to make a difference betwixt them, we shall find that he
rather makes choice of the poor then of the rich; of those that are abject
and contemptible in the world, Ez^^h. 18.
then of them that are in honor and dignity. Why Religion joined with
Nobility is so admired.
And yet, I know not how, the better a man is borne, and the more nobly he is
descended, he is the more admired and applauded, if he be also virtuous; either
because it is a harder thing for him to be so, or for the reason, which S.
Augustine gives, because such people being known to many, they lead many to
salvation by their example, and make way for many to follow them; and
therefore there is much joy of them, because the joy is not of them alone. S.
Augustine 8. Cons ^.4.
And the Enemy is more overcome in one of whom he has more hold, and by
whom he holds more; and he has more hold of the proud by occasion of their
nobility; and holds more by their means in regard of their authority. And
this is the reason, that God of his infinite goodness has called many of these
also to Religious courses, to the end he may not seem to have abandoned the
powerful, as Job speaks, himself being powerful; and that Religion might not
want the grace of Secular Nobility; Job 36.5.25.
and finally that the force and efficacy of the Grace of God might show itself
the more, in breaking through such main obstacles, as stand in great men's
ways betwixt them and heaven. To which purpose S. Bernard in a certain Epistle
of his directed to a company of young Noblemen, S Bernar^ ^p ^^^.
that had newly put themselves into the Cistercian Order, write^h thus: I have
read, that God chose not many noble men, not many wise men, not ma^ie
powerful; but now by the wonderful power of God, contrary to the ordinary
course, a multitude of such people is converted. The glory of this present
life waxes contemptible, the flower of youth is trodden under foot, nobility
not regarded, the wisdom of the world accounted folly, flesh and blood
rejected, the affection to friends and kinsfolk renounced; favor, honor,
dignity, esteemed as dung, that Christ may be gained. And S. Hierome admired
the same in his time in these words: In our Age Rome has that, S. H^^rome
(...) 26.
which the world knew not before. In old time among Christians there were but
few wise men, few great men, few noble men; now there be many Monks that are
wise, and great, and noble.

2. This is therefore the subject, which we have now in hand, to set down the
names of those, out of ancient Records, that forsaking the honors and titles,
which the world does so much admire, have triumphed over it, and (to use S
Bernard's word) by the contempt of glory, are more gloriously exalted, and
more sublimely glor^fyed. And first we will speak of Emperors, then of Kings,
and lastly of inferior Princes; wherein if our discourse prove of the longest,
I hope the pleasantnes thereof will so alay and temper it, that it will rather
seem too short and concise.

3. Many of the Grecian Emperors, Grecian Emperoura Religious.
as we find recorded, have lead a Monastical life, as Anastasius in the year
Seven hundred and fifteen; Theodosius not long after; Michael in the year
Eight hundred; and an other Michael in One thousand and forty; Isaacius
Commenus in One thousand and threescore; and diverse others. But because some of
them were in some sort forced to that course of life, others though they freely
chose and professed it, yet lived not in that union with the Latin Church as
they ought to have done, we will not insist upon any of them, but pass to the
Emperors of the West established in the year Eight hundred by Pope Leo the
Third in the person of Charles the Great, King of France.

4. The first therefore of the Latin Emperors that professed a Religious life,
Western Emperors.
was Lotharius, from whom the Province of Lotharingia or Lorraine is so called,
Lothariu^^*
whereas before it was called Austrasia. He governed the Empire fifteen years,
and was a just and virtuous Prince; and remembering, as it is thought, the
speech which Lew^^ his father had held unto him (while he lay a-dying) of the
vanity of this World, himself having found it true by his own experience, he
resolved to quit al earthly things, and to betake himself into the quiet haven
of Religion, from the tempestuous toiles of the Empire. And to the astonishment
of the whole world, he retired himself into the Monastery of Pr^m^; leading
the rest of his life in Poverty and Obedience. He lived about the year Eight
hundred threescore and five.

5. In the year Nine hundred and twenty, Hugo.
Hugo King of Prouence and Emperor, having gotten much renown for Martial
affairs, and being glorious for many victories, builded a great Monastery,
wherein himself embrasing the humility of CHRIST, exchanged his Imperial Robes
and Dominions with a solitary Celle, and the poor Habit of a Monk.

6. ^^chisius was the first king in Italy (that I know of) that became a Monk.
(...) king of Italy.
He was a Lombard, and so powerful, that he had a great part of Italy sub^^ct
unto him. It is conceived, that this change began in him upon a pa^ley which he
had with Pope Zachary, who held the Sea of Rome in the year Seven hundred
forty one. For presently thereupon leaving the sio^e of Perusia, he returned
to Pauia, and disposing of his kingdom to his brother Astulp^us, he retired
himself to the Monastery of Mount-Cassin, whereof it is thought that he was
afterward Abbot.

7. Pipin king of Italy and eldest son to Charles the Great, Pipin.
king of France, in the year Eight hundred and five, followed his example, and
after much honor gotten in war, frighted notwithstanding with the many
dangers which he saw were incident to so great a power, he betook himself to a
Monastery, which he had built at Verona in honor of S. Zeno, and had given it
a good foundation.

8. In Spain king Bamba having reigned eleven years, Bamba.
and showed himself a valiant King both at home and abroad, and among other
victories defeated two hundred sail of African Pirates, and taken king Paul
alive, that came against him out of France, prefe^^ed a Monastical life before
all this, wherein having lived holily seven years, he went to receive his
eternal reward the year Six hundred seventy four.

9. And in the year Seven hundred eighty six, Veremund.
the same Spain showed us an other example of the like conversion in Veremund
King of Castile, of whom we also read that he gave his voice for his cosen
Alphonsus rather to succeed him then his own two children that were under age,
because so it was better for his subjects, then to be governed by children.

Ramirez.
10. About the year One thousand one hundred and fifty, Ramirez King of Aragon
became twice a Monk: first in his youth, while his father Don Sanc^^ was yet
alive, who afterward dying without issue, and one Peter being chosen King and
not long after deposed for his pride and arrogancy, this Ramirez was by the
Pope's authority taken out of his Monastery, and crowned King, and also
married; of which marriage having had a daughter, he gave her his kingd^me in
marriage for her portion; retiring himself to his former quiet life in his
Monastery, as having discharged himself sufficiently of so great a work.

Kings of England Religious.
11. England has been more fertile of these examples then any other Country.
For first while the land was as yet divided into many kingdoms, Sigebert King
of the Northumbers, a man renowned for his learning, and much more for virtue,
having about the year Six hundred and forty established many good orders in
his kingdom for the service of God, consecreated hims^^^ also unto him in a
Monastery; of whom among other things it is recorded, that when not long after
Penda King of the Mercians invaded the Northumb^^^ with a great army, Sigebert.
the whole Country had their eye upon Sigebert, and compelled him for the
glory of God to take upon him the defense of the kingdom in so great an
occasion of danger, he went therefore into the field to fight for the Christian
cause, but in the selfsame habit which he wore in the Monastery, and governed
the whole army with his staff in his hand, without any other armor; and
whereas (God so disposing) the Christian army was overthrown, he also
together with the King was slain in battle, and is therefore by some
reckoned among the holy Martyrs.

Ethelred.
12. In the year Seven hundred and four, Ethelred King of the Merci^^^ with
like devotion, having governed the kingdom diverse years very religiously,
left it to Chemed his brother's son before he was yet of age, and betook
himself to a Monastery that was within the same his Dominion, wherein he
profited so far in virtue, that he was made afterward Abbot.

Chemed.
13. Chemed being more ambitious of this latter course of life which his Uncle
lead, then of the former, when he had reigned five years, went to Rome, and
received the habit of a Monk of Pope Constantine the first, and spent the rest
of his days in that City in great sanctity.

Offa.
14. Offa King of the East Saxons accompanied him in his journey and in his
holy purpose and in the flower of his age, and the height of his world (...)
prospetitie, contemning and treading al under foot, was by the same Pope (...)
haven a Monk, and Clothed with a Monastical weed.

Inas.
15. Not long after, to wit, in the year Seven hundred and forty, Inas King
of the same East Saxons, renowned in war and peace, and so memorable for his
deu^tion toward that Sea of Rome, that he voluntarily made his whole kingdom
tributarie unto it, went himself in person to Rome; and resigning his kingdom,
took upon him a Religious course of life with a great fervor, to the end the
more naked he was, he might the more freely follow our Savior, that vouchsafed
to be naked for our sakes.

16. The like did Ceolulf King of the Northumbers, Ceolulf.
to whom Venerable Bede dedicated his History. For having reigned eight
years, wearied with worldly affairs, and desirous of a quiet life, he fled
to Religion, and left his kingdom to his Uncle ^gbert; ^gbert.
who also when he had held it twenty years, followed the same course with
Ceolulf, and was professed a Monk in the self-same Monastery. Al these we have
out o^ England only.

17. Out of Germany we have a rare example in Charlemain son to Charles
Martel. Charlemain.
He was King of Austrasia and Sueuia, famous for many noble acts; but taken
with the love of heavenly things, he went to Rome as a poor private man; and
receiving Holy Orders of Pope Zachary, and the habit of a Monk, he built a
Monastery in the Mount-^oracte, and there spent part of his da^e^; but finding
himself encumbred with many visits, by reason he dwelt so near the City,
and his spiritual quiet much disturbed, he removed to Mount-Cass^^s; where
Petronax Abbot of that pl^^e entertained him with great joy and comfort; and
the profit which there (...) made in all kind of virtue, but chiefly in
humility, is very wonderful. We read in the Annals of that Monastery, that
(so great a man as he was) by commandment of his Abbot he was appointed to be a
shepherd or heares-man, and attended to that business with far more
alacrity, then ever he did to the affairs of his kingdom; and on a time one
of the sheep falling lame, he took it upon his shoulders, and carried it to
the fould, nothing reflecting upon the nastines of the business. He lived about
the year of our Savior, Seven hundred and fifty.

18. What shall we say of Trebellius King of the Bulgarians, Trebellius*
who in the year Ei^ht hundred threescore and two, by means of Pope N^colas
the First embraced the Christian Faith with so much fervor, that he presently
bannished Photinus the Heretic out of his kingdom; and delivering his Scepter
to his son, bound himself to the service of God alone; and finding not long
after, that his son was fallen again to his former impictie, he ^rieued
exceedingly, and took it so to heart, that leaving his Monastery, and
recovering his kingdom, laying hold on the young man, he caused both his eyes
to be pulled out, and condemned him to perpetual imprisonment; finally feeling
the kingdom upon a younger son called Alber^us, and giving him wholesome
Instructions, he retired himself again to his Colle.

19. These are the Kings that in a^cient time embraced a Religious life: for in
la^er Ages these kind of examples are far more seldom to be seen. John Prena
King of Jerusalem etc.
And yet we find it recorded, that John Prena King of Jerusalem and Emperor
of Constantinople was a Franciscan-Friar. For S. Francis appearing once visibly
unto him while he was at his prayers, and offering him his habit, he presently
sent for his Ghostly Father, and took that habit upon him; and not long after
died of a fever, and coming as it were at the Eleventh hour, received
notwithstanding his hire.

Henry King of Cyprus was yet more happy; Henry K. of Cyprus.
for he lived many years in that holy Institute, and is glorious both for
virtue and miracles.

20. Finally John king of Armenia is not to be left out, John King of Armenia.
whose kingdom was so large, that he had four and twenty kings under him, al
crowned with Princely Diademes; but he forsaking so great a kingdom and
resigning it to his nephew Leo, chose to be abject in the house of God, and
rather to serve for his love, then to rule over others. The Turks breaking into
the Country, and Leo not being able to make head against them, John seeing
God's cause in danger, puts armor over his Religious weed, and after this
new fashion going into the field, is master of it with very great loss on the
enemie's side; but following the victory (it pleased God) he was slain in a
certain skirmish, and so went to enjoy the reward of Heaven.

Three sons of Charles the Great.
21. Next after Kings and Emperors, their sons do follow: many of them
having preferred a Religious life before al worldly honor. And first Charles
the Great had three of his sons that were Monks: Hugo, Drogo, and Pip^n. The
two first embraced that course of their own accord, Pipin was at first
compelled unto it by his father (because he had thought to make himself King
afterward) when he had tasted of that quiet life and found it sweet, he
willingly continued in it. They al lived about the year Eight hundred and
thirty.

Three sons of Vibian King of Ireland
22. The three sons of Vibian king of Ireland, were al of them Monks, and al
of them Saints; Froscus, Folliang, and Vltan. They in the year Six hundred and
fifty, forsaking their Country came into France, and were courteously
entertained by Clou^s then king, who also giving them choice of a place, where
they would make their abode, they built the Monastery of Pontiny, and there
chose their seat. But the holy contention which happened betwixt the two sons
of a British king, about the year Six hundred fifty seven, is very rare and
mem^rable. ^or Iudaellus succeeding his father in the kingdom discovers to
his brother a purpose which he had of entering into Religion, willing him to
prepare himself to take the government upon him of the kingdom, which shortly
he would leave him; Joyce desired his brother to give him eight days term to
consider of the business; A n^table example.
and in the mean time, preventing his brother, he betook himself privately to
a Monastery, to the end he might not be hindered of his resolution, thinking
with himself, that if the fortune of a King were such, as it was best for his
brother to forsake it, it could not be good for him to accept of it.

Two s^nnes of Richard K. of England
23. Richard also king of England had two sons that were Religious in the
year Eight hundred and two; one of them by name Willebald professed in
Mount-Cass^n, the other V^ebald at Magdebourg in Saxony.

Two son of Charl^^ King of (...)
24. No less noble were the two brethren Clotaire and Carleman sons of
Charles King of France in the year Eight hundred forty one, both of them
prefer^ing the yoke of Religion before their Royal Scepters. And in the number
we may place Frederick son of Lew^s King of France, in the year Nine hundred
threescore and two* and Henry son of an other Lewis King of the same
Country, though somewhat later, to wit, in the year One thousand one hundred
and fifty.

^
25. The first that we read of, that entered among the Franciscan-Friars, was
(...) eldest son of the King of Mallorca, who though by right he was to have
succeeded in the Kingdom, preferred the Kingdom of heaven before it, and
entered, as I said, into the Order of S. Francis* and leading therein a very
holy life, did much good also to his Neighbors, both by word and example.

26. An other of the same Order was Lewis, S. Lewis, Bishop of (...).
eldest son also of Charles the Second King of France, a man of singular
parts, both for body and mind. He, while he was left in Spain for a pledge,
resolved upon this wholesome course of Religion, and the Franciscan-Friars still
differring him, for the respect which they bore to the King, he bound himself
publicly more then once by Vow unto it. And when afterward in the year One
thousand two hundred ninety seven Pope Boniface the Eight presented him with
the Archbishopric of Toulcuse, he would not accept of it, unless they would
first agree, that he might enter among the Franciscan-Friars, according to his
former Vow; and so taking the habit in a great assembly of the Nobility, he
never left it of, but together with the weed continued also the rigor of the
life belonging unto it, and mingled Religious exercises with his Episcopal
cares.

27. His nephew Peter son to the King of Aragon followed his example, Peter
son to the King of Aragon.
in the year One thousand three hundred fifty seven. And it is recorded of
him, that, while he was in deliberation of abandoning the world, and hung
doubtful in the contention of flesh and spirit, as it happens to very many,
this S. Lewis appeared unto him in the night with some of the Brethren of his
Order, al in great glory, and encouraged him to take that course of life,
which was in Heaven so highly rewarded; and so he did not long after, and lived
in Religion twenty years, to the great benefit of himself and many others,
for that he was a great preacher, and inflamed many in the love of God by his
sermons.

28. It is not possible to name or number all the Dukes, Princes of inferior
degree.
and Lords, and inferior Princes, that have led a Religious life; yet we will
point at some by the way. Of this degree was Algerius, Duke of Aquitaine, and
his son Amandus, in the year Four hundred thirty nine; also Anselme Duke
(...) Mode^na, Anno Seven hundred and forty; Dietland and Ancigard, Dukes of
Sueuia, in the year Eight hundred and fifteen; Vig^sius Duke of Spoleto, in
the year ^ight hundred and twenty; Wiliam Duke of Gasconie in the year Four
hundred and forty; and after him another Wiliam, Second of that name, in the
year Nine hundred and twelve; of whom it is recorded, that in the Monastery
of Cluny he led so humble a life, that he was ever subject (...) the least and
lowest; and being by his Abbot put to bake some bread, he was so quick and
exact in obeying, that because he had not a mowkin at hand, he crept into the
oven hot glowing as it was, and swept it with his coat, and was not hurt, nor
any thing endomaged by the fire.

29. Many others of the same rank have been Monks, Great men of S. Francis his
O^der.
but it were long to rehearse them al; wherefore we will pass to those that
have been of S. Francis his Order, and reckon-vp a few of them: as Wiliam Duke
of Burgundy; G^^salue Marin^ a Portugez; Adulphus Count of Alsatia, who
entering among the Franciscans about the year One thousand two hundred and
fifty, among other virtues was much given to Mortification; and once in
particular going through his own City with a pitcher of milk which he had
begd about the town, he met his three sons, whom he had left in the world,
walking the streets with great state; and because he began a little to be
ashamed, to overcome himself therein, he listed the pitcher up to his head, and
powered it al upon himself. And many such rare men have been of this Order.

And of the Society of JESUS.
30. And in this our least Society of JESUS, within these few years since it
was founded, there have not been a few Noblemen called unto it. But the prime
man of them al was Francis Borgia Duke of Gandie, who being in great favor and
esteem with Charles the Fifth in Spain, Fa. Francis Borgia, Duke of Gandie.
to the astonishment of al beholders, laying aside al his greatness, embraced
the humble state of a Religious life, and profited exceedingly in it. The
reason why he chose to enter into the Society before al other Religious
Orders, was this, which himself gave to the Emperor, and I have it by relation
from his own mouth in my hearing. If a man, that had many fruitful vineyards,
should moreover resolve to plant an orchard, for his own private pleasure and
contentment, you could not do him a greater courtesy then to present him with
a slip or tree to plant in it; Our Lord therefore having lately planted this
orchard of the Society, after so many other ancient and worthy vineyards of
other Orders, I thought with myself (says he) that it could not but be very
grateful unto him, if I presented myself, such as I am, as a tree to be planted
in it. Of the same rank of Dukes was Antonie de Cordoua, Antonie de Cordoua
son to the Duke of Feria.
son to the Duke of ^eria, a man of singular virtue. And in Italy we had Fa.
Rodulphus Aquauiua son to the Duke of Atri, which is one of the ancientest
and noblest Families in the kingdom of Naples. He was called to Religion with
such abundance of the spirit of God, that he could not by any means or force
be diuerted from it, though much was used to withdraw him. And having in a
short time profited exceedingly in all kind of virtue, R^phe Aquauiua son to
the Duke of Atri.
by his own importunity, as I may say, he was sent into the East Indies;
where he lead so holy a life, that not only those of our Society, and al
other Christians, but the very Heathens themselves did admire him, and
commonly called him the Angel. At last being sent to the Islands of Salsedo to
preach the Christian Faith, he was killed with some others of the Society by
the inhabitants that were Mahometans, in hatred of Christian Religion; adorning
his former life, and al his Religious virtues with the crown of a most certain
and most glorious Martyrdom. There be diverse others also in our Society of
like Nobility, descended from Dukes, and Marquesses, and other Princes, but
because they are al yet living, and we live and converse daily with them,
Civility, neither of our part, nor of theirs, will not suffer us to name them:
but we must obey the Counsel of the Wiseman, E^cl. 11.
where he says: Praise no man before his death. Wherefore passing the rest in
silence, we will remember only one that is lately dead, to wit, Andrew Spinola.
Andrew Spinola, a prime man of Genua for his birth; and of Rome, in regard of
the place which he bore in that Court next to the Cardinals, and as it were in
the very entrance to a Cardinalship. But he contemning both the honor in
which he was, and the preferment which he might have hoped, stooped rather to
Religious discipline; and set the world and the vanity thereof so much at
scorn, that not long after, he went twice about the streets of Rome in an old
tattered coat, begging his bread from door to door; which struck such an
admiration into al Rome, that people for some days could talk of nothing else;
and a certain Preacher discoursing of that place of the Prophet E^^y: Futrie
^il and every hillock shall be humbled, did not stick to point at this our
Spinola, as to one of the hills and hillocks, which had humbled themselves by
the (...) of our Savior. But it is time to draw to a conclusion, for as I said
before, there have been so many of this degree of Nobility, both in elder and
latter times, that shunning the waves and shelues of this world, have surged
with excessive joy at the port of Religion, that, if we should go about to
rehearse them al, we must resolve to make a whole long Volume of it by itself.

Of Noble women that have lived in Religion. CHAP. XXVII.
AFTER so many rare examples of men, we will speak also of some women, both
because they have been in their kind a great ornament to a Religious state, and
because the more infirm their sex is, the more encouragement does it give to
men, to employ themselves in all kind of virtue.

2. The Empress Theodora does first offer herself. Theodora Empress.
For being married to Theophilus an Heretic Emperor about the year Eight
hundred and fourscore, she kept herself always constant to the Catholic
Faith; and after his decease, she did wonderfully advance the Catholic cause,
chiefly by restoring the use of holy Images, and recalling holy men from
their places of bannishment. And having for some years governed the Empire,
she of her own accord laid down all that state and power, and shut herself up
in the monastery, where her mother Trurina had given herself to God before her.

3. Augusta an other Empress practiced the like devotion, Augusta.
not weighing the infancy and lonenes of her son, after Isaacius her
husband's death: but appointing him certain Tutours, withdrew herself out of
the world. When Alexius (for so was her son called) came of age, the Tutours
would by no means giue-vp the administration of the Empire; wherefore by her
sonne's entreatie returning to Court, she took the government into her own
hands again, retaining notwithstanding her Religious purposes and practice,
her veyle and her whole Monastical weed; til finding means to establish the
government upon her son, she returned to her Monastery about the year One
thousand one hundred and ninety. And these two were out of the East.

4. In the West we find, Richard.
that Richard wife to the Emperor Charles le Gross, being brought into
suspicion that she had been false unto him, easily cleared herself; but yet
made use of the occasion to quit his marriage, as she had long desired; and
retiring herself into Halsatia, built a monastery, wherein she lead a Religious
life about the year Eight hundred ninety nine.

5. The case of Cunegundes wife to Henry King of England first, Cunegundes.
then afterward Emperor, in the year One thousand one hundred thirty nine,
was not unlike to this. For diuorcing herself from him upon the like suspicion
and fault, which was cast upon her, she made a better marriage with Christ our
Savior.

S. Cunegundes.
6. And yet another Cunegundes was more happy about the year One thousand one
hundred and twenty. For being married to the Emperor Henry the First, she
lived many years with him, and kept her virginity; and he dying before her,
she lead so holy a life for fifteen years together in the Monastery of
Confugium, that she is registered among the Saints in the Church of God.

Agnes.
7. Agnes wife to the Emperor Henry the Third, governed the Empire after his
decease, according as he had left in his Will, til his son (who at the time of
his death was but an infant) came to twelve years of age; and then giving over
the charge of the Empire, and also the Dukedom of Bauiere, which belonged unto
her, she went to Rome, and there chose to live in the humility of a Monastical
life, in the year One thousand one hundred fifty seven.

Eliz^beth.
8. The like did Elizabeth wife to the Emperor Albertus the First, and Archduke
of Austria; for he being most lamentably slain, she bad the world Farewell, and
lived a heavenly life in a Monastery, which herself had built, in the year
One thousand two hundred and ninety. Two of her daughters followed her
example, the one married to the King of Hungary, the other to the Count of
Ottighen; and two of her grandchildren, the Queen of Polonia, and her
daughter, though she were sure to the Duke of Vratislaw.

T^s^a.
9. Now from Empresses to come to Queens; in Italy T^sia wife to Rachisins (of
whom we spoke before) following the example of her husband, would not be
farre-of from him neither in distance of place. For as he retired himself into
the monastery of Mount-Cassin, so she with her daughter Re^^uda hid herself in
a Monastery, which was not far distant, wherein S. Scholastica had sometimes
lived, and she had restored, and there she spent her days in great sanctity.

Radegundes.
10. In France in the year Five hundred twenty five, Radegundes being married
against her will to king Clo^^re, after some years by much importunity get his
consent, and retired herself to Poictiers, and there gave herself to God with
great fervor and earnestnes of devotion, that in a short time she arrived to a
high degree of perfection in virtue, as it is recorded of her.

Adocra.
11. Not many years after her, Adocra wife to Chilperick king of France,
together with her daughter Child^rade forsaking their Princes pleasures, be
took themselves to the same heavenly profession. Batilda.
And Batilda about the year Six hundred and fifty, by the decease of king
Clouis, remaining as it were at liberty, and with full power to perform what
she had always desired from her infancy, she went to Callis, and enlarging a
Monastery, which was there already built, the joined herself to a better
Spouse our Savior, and was famous for all kind of virtue, but specially for her
humility.

12. In Spain we find recorded of two Queens that were also Religious; Nunez
wife to Ver^mund, of whom we spoke before; for she entered (...) her husband,
and was no little encouragement unto him by her example; And Peresa, who being
by her brother Alfonso king of Leon, married to A^^^^^las king of Toledo (a
More or Saracen) she not being able by all the entreaties and protestations,
which she did allege to hinder it, God did hinder it. (...) the Barbarous king
a most grievous and deadly sickness; whereby he (...) it was the hand of God,
sent Teresa back again untouched; and she presently espoused herself according
to her desire to our Savior, in the Monastery of S. Pelayo, in the year One
thousand and six.

13. But it is strange to see how many of these like examples we have out of
England; English exampler. Alfred.
as of Alfred Spouse to the King of the Northumbers, who was slain before they
were bedded together, in the year Six hundred and seauentie; and Ethelburg,
Ethelburg.
who persuaded king Inas to the resolution which he took, as we said before,
and afterward followed his example in the like course. But what can be more
strange then that which happened to Etheldred, Etheldred.
who being wife to two Kings kept her virginity with them both, and obtained
of the second, after twelve years that they had been married together, leave
to go live among other Virgins in a Monastery? What a life may we imagine she
lived in the Monastery, that was so great a Saint in her worldly kingdom?
And she is also registered among the Saints by Holy Church. She lived about the
year Seven hundred and six.

14. Sesburg her sister, Queen of Kent, followed her not long after, so soon
as her husband was dead. And Alfrede Queen of the Mercians and Northumbers is
not to be omitted, who, like another Magdalen, to redeem her former offenses,
and, among the rest, the unjust murder of her young innocent sonne-in-law, lead
an austere life among other servants of Christ, in a Monastery, which herself
had built at her own proper cost and charge, about the year of our Lord Nine
hundred seauentie five.

15. It were long and tedious to rehearse all the Kings daughters, which both in
England and other Countries have consecrated themselves to God in Monasteries;
the number of them is so very great. Wherefore passing those in silence, which
are more ancient, we will mention a few only of those that are of later memory.
Margaret daughter to the King of Hungary.
Margaret daughter to Bela king of Hungary is famous among the Nuns of S.
Dominick's Order for her rare virtue, and shines like a star in the
firmament. For of eight and twenty years, which she lived, she spent four
and twenty in Religion, being vowed thereunto by her parents, when she was but
four year old. But the Nobility of her blood was the least thing in her;
for the Sanctity of her life, and the rigor which she used in punishing her
body both by continual fasting and with whippes like spurs, is far more
conspicuous, and her profound humility which she chiefly showed in tending the
sick; being always given to such like humble and charitable offices; the
practice whereof was far more to be admired in her, then her Princely
descent. And it is recorded of her, that out of the great esteem which she had
of this Religious course of life, she constantly refused the marriage of three
Kings, to wit, of Poland, of Bohemia, and of Sicilie; and when it was offered
her, that there should be a dispensation procured from the Pope for her Vows,
she answered resolutly, that she would rather cut-of her nose and her lips,
and pul-out her eyes, then yeald her consent to be married to any creature.
She dyed in the year One thousand two hundred and seauentie.

15. In the year One thousand three hundred forty three, Sancha.
Sancha Queen of Sicilie and Jerusalem, a few months after the decease of
Robert her husband, put on the habit of S. Francis his Order at Naples,
professing the Poverty and Rule of S. Clare; by which Rule none of them can
possess any thing as their own, not so much as in common. It is reported of
her, that ^ut of humility she earnestly begged of the General of the Order,
that he would forbid every body very severely from calling her any more
Queen, and that they should call her Sister as the rest.

Agnes.
17. No less was the virtue of Agnes daughter to Orethus King of Bohemia, about
the year One thousand two hundred and forty. For being given in marriage to
Frederick the Second, she would never yeald her consent, but vowed Virginity
in a Monastery of the same Order of S. ^rancis in Prague. C^^^gundes.
The like is recorded of Cunegundes daughter and wife to a King; for being
daughter to the King of Hungary, and espoused to Bol^^laus, surnamed the
Chaste, King of Poland, she kept her Virginity undefiled together with him,
and afterward lead also a Religious life in a Monastery, which herself had
founded.

Ioane.
18. Ioane also daughter to the King of Navarre, preferring the heavenly before
the earthly kingdom, vowed herself to the service of God in a Monastery in
Paris, to her own excessive benefit, and great astonishment of all the world.
Isabel daughter to the King of France, Isabel.
and sister to S. Lewis, despising the world took up the Cross of Christ in
the same Order, and lived with so great fervor in it, Blan^h.
that she is also famous for miracles. Blanch daughter of Philip King of France
followed the same footsteps about the year One thousand three hundred and
fifteen.

1^. And of late years our Age has been ennobled with no less rare an
example (with which I will conclude) in the person of Margaret of Austria
daughter to Maximilian the Emperor; Margaret.
and Marie sister to Philip King of Spain. She, notwithstanding her so noble
Extraction, contemning worldly marriages and al earthly things, vowed
Virginity a few years ago in the Order of S. Clare, in a Monastery, where
the ancient rigor of that Order is severely kept, and perseuereth therein to
this very day with great commendation of virtue.

20. What therefore can be more beautiful in the eye of the mind, or more
delightful to men or Angels, then to behold so great a Majesty and so great
Power voluntarily stooping to a Habit so contemptible, and to so poor a Celle,
and such humble offices as are incident to such a state of life? (...). 15.
Certainly, if there be joy in heaven of one sinner, that turning to God,
begins but to lay the first foundations of virtue; how much more joy must
there needs be at the practice of virtues so heroical and so absolutely perfect
in all kinds?

Of Popes, that have been taken out of Religious Orders. CHAP. XXVIII.
HITHERTO we have spoken of Secular Nobility, and showed how Religion has
been graced by the entrance of people of great rank in the world, into it. Now
we are to show, that it has received no less honor by those, that out of
Religious courts have been exalted to high dignities and promotions in the
Church. And first we will speak of Popes, because it cannot but be a great
honor to be assumed to that dignity, to which on earth there is none to be
compared, being inferior to none but God, and sustaining so weighty a burden
as must needs require a great wisdom coupled with no less sanctity and
holiness of life. And consequently as a House or Family, and all the kindred
belonging unto it, be it never so mean and poor before, is raised in the
opinion and esteem of the world, and made noble, by one man's promotion to
this great honor and dignity; why may we not say and think the same of every
Religious Family? a Religious man having full as much relation unto the
Religion wherein he is professed, as to his native House and stock, and by
means thereof arrived to so high promotion, as many as from thence have been
assumed unto it.

2. The first Pope therefore that without al question was a Religious man (for
I purposely speak not of those, of whom there is any doubt) was, as we find
recorded, Dionysius a Grecian borne, Dionysius.
two hundred and threescore years after Christ who possessing that Sea ten
years, is said to have ordained many good things both at Rome and in other
places; and is chiefly memorable for opposing himself in the Council of Antioch
against the Heresy of Paulus Samosatenus, who then began to spread his
pernicious doctrine, and endeau ^uted to take away the Divinity of our Savior
Christ. Afterward suffering also death for Christ, he had a double Crown, of
Martyrdom and of Religion.

3. In the year Five hundred seauentie five, Benedictus 1.
Benedict the First, a Roman borne, having been a Monk, was created Pope in
most woeful times, when al I alie was in combustion by means of war; and
having fate at the stern four years, he went to heaven.

4. Diverse Authors, and in particular the Book which is entitled the
Pontifical Chair (wherein the succession of all the Popes is exactly set down)
do make mention, Pelagius 2.
that Pelagius the Second (whose scholar and successor was S. Gregory) was
chosen Pope out of a monastery of Monks. He was made Pope in the year Five
hundred seauentie nine; and sat ten years.

5. Next after him succeeded S. Gregory the Great, S. Gregory the Great.
who had been a Monk in Rome in the Monastery of S. Andrew, and lived
according to the Rule of S. Benedict. What shall we need to repeat the famous
things which he performed during his charge, which was thirteen years? his
liberality toward the poor, his care in watching over Heresies which were
springing up, his courage in opposing himself even against Princes, his
patience in corporal infirmities, his endeavor and application in attending to
the care of al parts of his flock, his diligence and copiousnes in his written
Books, and (which graced all the rest) his wonderful modesty and humility, and
al kind of true virtue; his miracles also, and wholesome Decrees, seeing they are
infinite, and in a manner as known to al, as if he had lived in these our days.

6. Not much more then two years after him, an other of the same Order of S.
Benedict was Pope, to wit, Boniface the Fourth, Bonifa^ius 4.
who being bred-vp in Rome in the Monastery of S. Sebastian, learned there
that virtue and piety, which he afterward practiced in his Pontifical charge;
and is recorded to have borne so great an affection to the Religion, out of
which he was taken, that he made his father's house into a Monastery, and gave
it sufficient rent for the maintenance of it. And having spent six years and
some months in such kind of works, he went to receive his reward in heaven.

Adeodatus
7. Writers do generally agree, that Adeoda^us the First of that name was also
a Monk of the Monastery of S. Erasmus in Mount Caelius in Rome, and of so
holy a life, that in the height of his honor he practiced al kind of virtue
belonging to a Religious man, and was renowned specially for his meeknes and
sweet conversation; and was so great a despiser of worldly wealth, that he
spent almost al upon the poor and distressed, and in releeuing the Pilgrims
that came to Rome. He was Pope four years.

Agatho.
8. Two years after him Agatho (a Sicilian borne) was chosen out of a
Monastery; whose sanctity is testified by diverse miracles, among which that
was rare both for power and practice of charity, when vouchsafing to embrace
and kiss a leaper, whom he met, he presently also cured him. And his
constancy was no less in opposing the Heresy of the Monothelites (that said
Christ had but one will) and gathering a famous Council at Constantinople for
the speedy condemning of them, which is called the Sixth Synod. In which his
speedy course of Virtue, he was taken away by more speedy death; to wit,
after two years and a half that he had been Pope.

Benedictus 2.
9. Ten months after (in which time Leo the Second sat) Benedict the Second
succeeded in the year Six hundred fourscore and three; of whom it is recorded
that he lead a Monastical life in Rome from his infancy, and was a singular
man both for virtue and learning. The Emperor Constantine made a decree in
favor of him, that they should not need to wait for the consent of the
Emperors in choosing the Popes, but that the Election of the Clergy and
People of Rome should take place without it. But the Church had rather a glimse
then a sight of his rare virtue; for he dyed after ten months to the great
grief and lamentation of every body.

Gregory the Second and the Third.
10. There f^llowed him two Gregory's, the Second and the Third, the one in the
year Seven hundred and sixteen, the other fifteen years after; for so long
the former held that Sea, and did much good both in the City of Rome by
building Churches and Religious houses, and in the whole Church of God, and
specially in Germany, whether he sent S. Boniface a Monk to preach the Faith
of Christ, and received the first fruits of Gentilitie out of that Country
with so much contentment, that with his own hand he Baptized them. The
sanctity and prowess of the other Gregory did chiefly show itself in the
conflict, which he had concerning the Catholic Faith with the Emperor Leo the
Third, who was an Heretic, and an enemy of holy Images, for which cause also
he deprived him of the Communion with the Faithful, and of his Empire. Yet as
none was more courageous then he against his enemies, so none could be more
meek, and affable, and liberal toward the poor, and orphans, and widows,
he being commonly called the Father and Patron of al such people. He lived in
his Pastoral charge almost eleven years. The Book entitled the Pontifical
Chair, which we mentioned before, and diverse other Authors relate, that both
these Gregory's were Monks.

11. In the year Seven hundred sixty eight, Stephanus 3.
Stephen the Third was promoted to the Sea He was bred-vp from a child in the
monastery of S. Ch^^sigonus in Rome, and was rare both for virtue and
learning, and joining also practice therewithal, was held a wise man; and
thereupon was employed in matters of great moment concerning the Church, by
three Popes, to wit, Zachary, Stephen the Second, and Paul. And coming himself
to the Popedom thus furnished, it is incredible, how much he did benefit the
Church of God both by his exemplar life, and famous deeds; among which we may
reckon the Council of Lateran, which he gathered for Reformation of manners in
the Church. He also by the strength of his wisdom and courage thrust out one
Michael, that had intruded himself into the Archbishopric of Rauenna by favor
of some Kings and Princes. And finally after three years and a few months,
leaving this world, he left also in the minds of men both a great opinion of
his sanctity, and a great desire that he might have continued longer with them.

12. In the year Eight hundred and seauenteen, Paschalis ^
Paschalis the First, by special providence of God, was taken out of the
monastery of S. Stephen in Rome, where he was Abbot; and placed in the
Pastoral charge over the whole Christian flock, held the place a little more
then seven years. A man not only eminent for sanctity and Religion, which a
body might justly expect of a Monk, but for his courage, which he showed in
suppressing the endeauours of some Secular powers, that would needs challenge a
right in the choosing of Popes, whereas no such thing was due unto them. He was
also famous for his devotion, and magnificent in building, and adorning
Churches.

13. Four years after this Paschalis, Gregori^ ^.
Gregory the Fourth was chosen Pope out of the Monastery (as some say) of
Fossa-noua, where, many years after, S. Thomas of Aquin died, as is recorded
of him. This Pope, as al Writers testify, was eminent in sanctity, learning,
wisdom, and eloquence, and al manner of virtue. And when the Barbarians coming
over into Sicilie, had made themselves masters of the Island, by his means and
authority the Prince of Corsica setting upon part of Africa, forced them to
retire home again to defend their own country. And having thus happily and
holily governed the Sea sixteen years, he rested in our Lord.

14. Four years again after this man's decease, Leo 4.
Leo the Fourth was assumed to that dignity out of the Monastery of S. Martin
in Rome, and governed the Sea in the great difficulties and dangers, wherein
Italy then was by the incursions of barbarous people, that spoiled the whole
Country, and threatened the utter destruction of Rome itself; but he put them
al to flight, more with his holiness, and with lifting-vp his hands to heaven
(as another Moses) then by force of arms; and yet afterward fortifyed the
City of Rome, that it might be the better able to withstand the like
incursions. He entered upon his charge in the year Eight hundred forty
seven, and held it eight years.

Leo 5. Tri^h^mius l. 4. de Vir. Ill^c 8. Syluester 2.
15. And in the year Nine hundred and two, Leo the Fifth was chosen, and sat
only forty days; who, as Trithemius reports, was also a Religious man.

16. After him Syluester the Second was the next that was promoted to that Sea
from a Monastical course of life, two years before the thousand after Christ.
He was bred in France in the Monastery of Floriac, and first made Archbishop
of Rhemes, then of Rauenna, and then Christ's Vicar over the whole Church; and
held the charge four years and six months. He was a man complete in all kind
of Learning, as Authors write of him* but specially versed in Mathematick and
al kind of Philosophy as appears by the Book which he has left in written
hand of Geometry; which Science of his has been the occasion that people
talk that he was a Sorcerer, and that he came by his promotion by sorcerie,
and by a compact which he had made with the Devil; and at last deceived by the
doubtful speeches of the Devil, died miserably in the church of Holie-Crosse of
Jerusalem. Which fable taken upon trust of ignorant people, has crept also
into the Records of some careless writers. But the more learned and more
diligent writers show how this error came, by reason that there being in that
Age but few Philosophers and Mathematicians, they that were given to such kind
of studies were accounted Astrologers, and Sorcerers; and people believed it
the rather of this man, because being a stranger, he was notwithstanding
preferred to this great honor before al others.

Sergius 4. (...) 19.
17 Again in the year One thousand and nine, Sergius the Fourth and in the
year One thousand twenty two, John the Nineteenth were placed in the Sea of
Rome; the one taken out of the monastery of S. Anastasius in Rome, the other
out of another monastery not certainly known, but of the Order of S.
Benedict. Sergius continued in the Chair not full three years, John sat some
nine years*

Stephenus 9.
18. Stephen the Ninth was not only a Religious man before he was chosen Pope,
but lived a holy and devout life; for being of noble extraction, and son to
Cotelo Duke of Lorraine, he was made Cardinal by Leo the Ninth, and sent Legate
to Constantinople to reconcile the Grecians to the Latin Church, which also he
performed. Returning to Rome, and finding Pope Leo dead, weary of the world,
he retired himself to the Monastery of Mount-Cassino, where he applied himself
so seriously to this new warfare of Christ (so great a man as he was) that he
won the good opinion of al, and within less then two years was chosen Abbot
of that place. And coming to Pope Victor the Second to have his Election
confirmed by him as the manner then was, not only obtained what he came for,
but was again created Cardinal by him; and Victor dying not long after, he was
by the consent of al placed in his Chair in the year One thousand fifty
seven; (...) men for fifty years together.
but continued not therein scarce eight months, before death seized him, to the
great grief of all that knew him. And not long after, to wit, in the year One
thousand seauentie three, the administration of the Church of God fell again
into the hands of Religious men, and continued among the^ ^^^tie years
together, to the great benefit and contentment of al Christians.

Gregoriu^ ^.
19. The first of them was Gregory the Seventh, a Florentine borne; but yet he
followed Gregory the Sixth (whom the Emperor Hen^ie had thrust out of the
Po^edome) into France* and Gregory dying, he shut himself into the Monastery
of (...) few years he was made Abbot of that Monastery. Soon after, he was
in so great favor with Leo the Ninth, Victor the Second, and Sthephan the
Ninth, that they would do nothing without his advice; and much more was he in
grace with Alexander the Second, whom he succeeded; and governed the sea so
like himself, that diverse Authors affirm, that since the Apostles times there
has not been a Pope, that has taken more pains then he for the Church of
God, or gone through more trouble, or stood more constantly for the liberties
thereof. He excommunicated Henr^^ the Fourth twice as a deadly enemy of the
Church, and freed al his subjects from their Allegiance, nothing daunted with
his power and the great army, which he brought before the City of Rome. He
did the like to Nicephorus, that had invaded the Empire of the East. Hilbertus
Archbishop of Rauenna being in faction against him, surprised him, and cast him
into prison, upon Christmas Day at night; but in the morning the people, that
loved him dearly, thronging together, took him out by force. And many other
things without number he endured courageously, and decreed with great wisdom,
in the twelve years which he governed the Church.

20. Victor the Third succeeded him, Victor ^.
son to the Prince of Beneuentum, who in his youth being constrained to
marry a wife, fled to the Monastery of Mount-Cassino, before he touched her;
where he was created Abbot, and afterward made Cardinal by Gregory the
Seventh, and after his decease was esteemed the fittest to undertake the
government of the Church, in which charge he was not only conspicuous for his
Religious piety and modesty, but for such courage, as might beseem a General
of an army. For he thrust out of Rome the Antipope by force of arms, and
leauying a great army from al parts of Italy, he sent it into Africa, with
such happy success by the special help of God, that he had both the victory
miraculously at the very first entrance into the land, and the news of it in
Italy the very selfsame day, that the armies met, which was yet more strange.
Finally holding a Council al Beneuentum, he was taken with his last sickness,
and caused himself to be carried to Mount-Cassino; that, where first he had
received the spirit of Religion, there among the prayers of his Brethren he
might more securely and holily giue-vp his last breath, which he did a year
and three moreths after he had taken the Pastoral charge upon him, that a man
may justly wonder, how he could be able to think of so many things as he did,
much more how he could perform them in so short a time.

21. Viban^^ the Second succeeded him, taken out of the Monastery of Cluni in
Frace. He governed the Church somewhat more then eleven years, and showed
himself a notable Pope. For gathering three Councels in Italy, he decreed
many useful things, both for the quieting of those turbulent times, and for
reformation of manners. Then he went into France, and as he visited many
Cities, he ordained many wholesome things; and among the rest in the Council
of Clermont, ^e proclaimed the voyage to the Holy land; for which enterprise
there were leauyed three hundred thousand foot, and a hundred thousand horse;
by which forces at that time the Holie-land was recovered.

22. Pa^chalis the Second, Paschalis ^.
a Monk of Mount-Cassino, much against his will, and much lamenting his case*
was in the year One thousand ninety nine, placedia the Chay^e of S. Peter
with so general consent of the people and the Clergy and the Cardinals, that
he could not possibly withstand (...). He governed the Church eighteen years,
in which time he passed through many changes of times, and many difficulties,
and showed great courage in them. For by his wisdom and dexterity he
extinguished the Schism, which had many years most miserably distracted the
Church of Christ through the infidelity of some great Princes. He also
restored and enlarged the dominions of the Church, which had been invaded by
several persons; and having suppressed many other seditious proceedings, and
composed many differences of Christian Princes and Commonwealths, he was so
beloved of al men, that returning to Rome, he got his last sickness in the
press of people, that came to meet him; and died.

Gelasius 1.
23. Gelasi^s the Second did somewhat repair the loss. He was also breed-vp
from his infancy in Mount-Cassino, and had been made Cardinal by Urban the
Second; and lived in his Pontifical dignity with great sanctity of life and
temperance; a man of great learning and eloquence, as Authors write, which was
half a miracle in those days. He was much encombred through the factious
proceedings of some wicked men, and chiefly by the Emperor Henry and most
unworthily also beaten by some of his followers; but he took the injury as it
beseemed the Vicar of Christ, imitating his meekenes, and following the example
of Jonas, after the second tempest raised by his occasion, he went into France,
where he dyed in the Monastery of Cluny, having held the Chair but one year.

24. And presently the Cardinals, that were in his company, gave the dignity
to Callistus the Second, Callistus 2.
who was son to Wilyam duke of Burgundy, and had been a Monk either in the
Monastery of Palleri or luns (for Authors do vary in it) and was then
Archbishop of Vienne. A wise man, and dexterous in businesses, as it is
recorded of him, and in effect he showed it. For he was scarce arrived in Rome,
but he surprised (...) the Antipope, and cast him into prison; and making peace
with the Emperor Henry upon good condition, he appeased the controversies,
which had long time wronged the Church. And continuing near upon six years in
his Pastoral care, he died in the year One thousand one hundred twenty four,
to the great regret of every body, and much longing that he might have lived
longer.

25. One and twenty years after his decease, there followed three Popes one
after an other taken out of Religious Orders; Eugenius 3.
and first Eugenius the Third a Cistercian Monk, though he were not so much as
Cardinal before, but only Abbot of the Monastery of ^^^-fontane, which is yet
extant; so great was the opinion which people had of his virtue and wisdom S.
Bernard in his Epistle to the Court of Rome does much admire this their
proceeding. S. Bernard. Epist. 236.
God forgive you (says he) what have you done? You have produced a man that
was buried in his grave; a man that was fled from the company and trouble of
men, you have thrust him again into care and trouble; he that was crucified to
the world, is raised again to the world by you; and he that had chosen to be
abject in the house of his God, you have chosen him to be Lord over al. He had
powerfully freed himself from the allurements of the flesh, and from the glory
of the world, as from the violent hands of the Devil; and yet he could not
escape your hands. What reason or counsel was there in this business? so soon
as the Pope was dead, presently to rush-in upon a countrey-fellow; to lay hands
upon one that had hid himself; and taking from him his axe, or his hatchet, or
his spade, to draw him to Court, to place him in the Chair, to cloth him in
purple and silk, to gyrd him with a sword, to do vengeance in nations,
reprehensions in the people, and to tie their kings in fetters, and their
nobles in manicles of iron.

So; was there not among you a wise and practical man, to whom these things
might better agree? In very deed it seems a ridiculous thing, that a
threadbare fellow should be assumed to govern Princes, to command Bishops, to
dispose of Kingdoms and Empires. Shall I say, it is ridiculous, or miraculous?
certainly it is one of them.

This was the astonishment which S. Bernard conceived in the business; and
agrees no less to all the rest of whom we have hitherto spoken, or shall
hereafter reckon, as raised from Religious Humility to so great Honor; for in all of them there is part of that miracle which S. Bernard mentioned.

26. But to return to Eugenius, we may guess how virtuous he was, and how
much he loved Religion, by that which we find written of him; to wit, that
under the splendor of his Pontifical attire, he wore his Monastical weed, that
is a woollen garment next him, and his Hood, in which also he always slept, and
his bed was of straw only, though the bedsteed were guilt, and hung with
courtins of purple-silk; by which means he outwardly carried the Majesty
which beseemed his place in the eyes of men, and inwardly in the eyes of God he
never forsook his Religious Humility. After he had visited France, and among
other things, given the Cross to King Lewis for the voyage into the Holy
Land, returning to Rome, and being received with great joy, he died in the
eighth year of his Popedom, Anastasius 4.
when Anastasius the Fourth succeeded, Abbot of the Monastery of S. Rufus in
the Diocese of Veliterra; and in one year of his Popedom (for he sat no
longer) he gave great signs of virtues, and chiefly of liberality toward the
poor, releeuing them plentifully in a great dearth, which wasted almost al
Europe.

27. Adrian the Fourth succeeded Anastasius in the year One thousand one
hundred fifty four. Adrianus 4.
He was an Englishman borne, and as some say Abbot of the Monastery of S.
Rufus in France, afterward made Cardinal by Eugenius the Fourth, and Legate
into Swedeland and Norway, great part of which Country he brought to the Faith
and worship of Christ. Being put in the Chair and office of S. Peter, for the
time that he held it (which was five years and eight months) he maintained
the dignity of the Apostolical Sea in many things; and particularly in
excommunicating Wiliam King of Sicilie, and depriving him of his right to the
Kingdom, for spoiling some towns belonging to the Patrimony of the Church of
Rome.

28. A good space after him, to wit in the year One thousand two hundred
ninety four, Celestinus 5.
Celestin the Fifth was raised from this dust of Religion, to sit in the Throne
of glory. From a child he went into the wilderness, and lived there many
years; afterward he founded a Religious Order, which being spread far and
near, himself living a very austere life, and working many miracles, his
sanctity grew so famous, that whereas the Cardinals could not for two whole
years agree upon the election of a new Pope, they al gave their voices to this
man, though he were absent and hidden from the world; and his Consecration was
honored with the concourse of more then two hundred thousand people. Being
Pope he slacked not the rigor of his life, nor the humility of his
conversation, and within a short time began so to loath the noise and smoke of
Court, and so to long after his wonted quiet, that he resolved to shake-of that
troublesome burden and care, notwithstanding the people of Naples (whither he
had retired himself) and King Charles were much against it; and the people,
wheresoever they met him, with loud voice beseeched him, he would not do so.
Yet five months were scarce at an end, when he gave over his charge; diverse
bewayling the loss of him, others admiring so great humility, and an example
thereof never heard-of til that day.

(...) 22.
29. In the number of these Popes the memory of Benedict the Twelfth is
venerable. He was assumed to that charge in the year One thousand three
hundred thirty four, from the Cistercian Order, having been Abbot of a
monastery in France called Moni-froid. Many notable things are recounted of
him, both public and private; and in particular, that he preferred none of his
kindred to any Ecclesiastical Office, saying, that the Pope had no kindred.
Whereby and for his many other virtues, he was so well beloved of al, that
dying after he had sat seven years, his funerals were honored with many
tears, as it is recorded of him.

C^^m^ns 6.
30. The virtue of his successor Clement the Sixth alayed part of the common
grief. Maison-D^^.
He was a Monka^d Abbot of a monastery called Casa-Dei in the Diocese of
(...), a man of a great wit, and great learning, and having been made Cardinal
by his predecessor Benedict, when they came to choose an other Pope, he easily
carried it by the consent of al, and in his Popedom to his other praises he
^dded singular munificence and liberality beseeming a Pope, that is a common
Father and Pastor of al. He contracted the years of Jubilee from a hundred
years to fifty. He held the Chair ten years to the great contentment of the
whole world.

40. Not long after, to wit, in the year One thousand three hundred sixty
two, Urban the Fifth Abbot of S. Victor was assumed to the stern of the Church;
Ve^anus 5.
a man, in the judgment of al men, of singular virtue, great courage,
unspotted life, and one that applied himself wholly to the common good. After he
had sat eight years, by the special providence of God passing by (...), he
gave up the ghost in the selfsame Monastery, where he had been bred, in the
assembly of many Monks, much comforted in beholding them, and much assisted
by their prayers.

(...) Order (...) Dominick.
41. These are all the Popes which have been Monks, unless perhaps some have
escaped me at ^nawares; now we will look into other Religious Families also,
wherein it can be no wonder if we find fewer, because the Orders themselves are
much later. In S. Dominick his Order we find that three of them have been
Popes, unless we will reckon John of Vercels to be the fourth; of whom we read
in their Chronicles, that having been Governor of his whole Order twenty
years, and gone on foot to all the Monasteries thereof, it being at that time
dispersed in a manner through the whole world, in the Conclaue which was held
betwixt the times of Nicolas the Third, and Martin the Second, in the year One
thousand two hundred and fourscore, by consent of the Cardinals he was chosen
Pope* and being absent, dyed before he could have news thereof, preserved from
many troubles which that weighty Charge would have drawn upon him. Leaving
him therefore who was designed to that Charge, but never undertook it, the
first of this Order that was placed in it, was (...) the First, which name of
his, and that also which he had before of Petrus Tarantasius, Innocent ut 3.
is well enough known by the Books which he has left written. Entering upon
this dignity in the year One thousand two hundred seauentie six, he presently
gave his mind to pacifye the discords, which had set al Italy on fire. For
whereas the Florentius had been long in arms against those of Pisa, and the
Venetians against the Genoueses, he excommunicated all that would not presently
lay down their arms; and had doubtless brought this and far greater things
to pass, if God had lent him life, which he enjoyed but seven months.

42. In the year One thousand three hundred and three, Benedictus 11.
Benedict the Eleventh was chosen out of the same Order, and lived in his
Charge much about the same length of time, to wit, eight months; but supplied
the shortness thereof with his famous deeds. For by the verdict of al, he was a
man of wonderful wisdom and sanctity; and while he was General of his Order
(having long and laudably borne that office) receiving letters in his
Monastery of Narbona from Pope Boniface the Eight, wherein the Pope commanded
him to admit of a Cardinal's Hat, he almost blotted-out the letters with his
tears, and yet could not but obey the commandment. In the time of his
Popedom, how many profitable things did he ordain, decree, and establish in
a short time, specially being to succeed Bonifacius, who had a turbulent time
of it; and to cure the wounds, which Christianity had formerly received? He
proiected to gain Syria and Palestine out of the hands of the Barbarians;
which shows his zeal and courage. But yet, in my judgment; it was a greater
matter, that when his mother, who was yet living, a poor and needy woman,
came to Rome to congratulate him, and presented herself before him in costly
attire, such as friends had abundantly furnished her with; he taking no notice
of her, but as if she had been a stranger, asked, who that Noble-woman was? and
being answered, that it was his mother: No certainly (says he) for I know my
mother is very poor, and has not wherewithal to cloth herself in this
manner. At which words she blushing went her ways; and returning not long
after in her own apparel, the Pope rose-vp unto her, acknowledged her for his
mother, and friendly entertained her. Where shall we find a more temperate and
mortifyed man? or what greater testimony can we require of the sanctity of
any man, then such humility, which doubtless he learned nowhere but in
Religion? So that it is no wonder, if he wrought miracles after his death, as
they write of him. Pius 5.


43. The third Pope of this Order was Pius V. for virtue like to Benedict,
far beyond him for the businesses which passed through his hands: and the
memory of him is yet fresh in men's minds. What can we say worthy of his
virtue? Who being created Pope in the year One thousand five hundred
threescore and six, in the seven years, which he lived not fully complete,
showed again to the world the virtues of the ancient Popes, such a Religious
discipline does teach; as frugalitie, innocence of life, and wonderful
devotion; and such as are proper to great Princes, as munificence, providence,
strict rigor of justice, courage in war against Heretics, and against the
Turck^; entering league with the Spaniards, and the Venetians, and by that
means defeating a great navy which these Infidels had prepared. These were
the virtues which got him an opinion of sanctity, not only among Christians,
but even among the enemies of God's Church. And these be the three Popes, which
hitherto have been assumed to that dignity out of the Order of S. Dominick.

Popes that were Franciscans. Nicolaus ^.
44. The Order of S. Francis has had one more. The first was Nicolas the Fourth
in the year One thousand two hundred eighty eight; and lived four years in
the Charge, deserving exceeding well of al Christianity by his diligence and
care in performing al things belonging to his Pastoral function. And among
other things his carriage toward his kindred was memorable; for he was wont to
say, that he owed them no more then he owed any good man whatsoever. And being
rid of this household-bond, as I may call it, he was the freer to attend to the
common good of the Church, and was careful in it, for he appeased many
controversies betwixt Christian Princes, and brought them into league one with
an other; and recovered also by force some Cities belonging to the Church,
which had been unjustly usurped by others. And yet how unwilling he was to be
in honor, he showed long before, by that which he did when he was made
Cardinal by Gregory the Tenth. For having received news of it by letters in
France, he wrote again to the Pope as effectually as he could, beseeching him
to excuse him; and in the mean time, til a new command came, he would not
alter any thing concerning himself. And it is moreover reported of him, that
he was wont to say, he had rather be cook of a Monastery, then Cardinal.

Alexander 5.
45. Alexander the Fifth followed not long after in the year One thousand three
hundred and nine, though the honor abided not long in him, to wit, some ten
months, yet in so short a time he gave many demonstrations of a devout and
noble mind. For he deprived Ladislaus of his Kingdom, a powerful King, and a
great enemy to Ecclesiastical liberty. He was so liberal toward the poor,
not only during his Popedom, but in all his former life, that it is recorded
that he was wont to say in ^east of himself, that he was a rich Bishop, a poor
Cardinal, and a beggar when he was Pope.

Sixtus 5.
46. Sixtus the Fourth was of the same Order, placed in the Chair, in the year
One thousand four hundred seauentie and one, and sat thirteen years; a man
rare for all that belongs to wit, or learning, or prudence in handling of
businesses. He showed his zeal, both in the wars which he made for defense
of the Dominions of the Church, and in setting-forth a navy against the Turcks.

47. The fourth that out of the Order of S. Francis has been exalted to this
dignity, Sixtu^ 5.
is Sixtus V. he that holds the stern at the time that we are writing this;
of whose life and actions we will say nothing for the present, least we may
seem to flatter him; specially seeing no tongue can so well express that which
is in him, as his own lively presence. He was charged with the Pastoral care
in the year One thousand five hundred eighty five; and this is the fourth
year that he holds it.

48. Besides these, there be two other Popes of two other Orders, to wit,
Eugenius the Fourth, Eugenius 4
and Paul the Fourth. Eugenius was of the Monastery of S. Gregor^e in Alga in
Venice, of that Order which S. Laurence Justinian living at the self-same time,
and famous for all kind of virtue, did much illustrate. He lived in the Pastoral
charge near upon sixteen years, having been promoted thereunto in the year
One thousand four hundred thirty one. Of whom al Writers agree, that he was
diligent in the wars he waged for the Church, grave and wise in peace,
liberal toward people of learning, patient in occasions of wrong done him, and
a special Patron of Religious people, granting them many privileges and
franchises, and also great reuennues. But his maister-peece was the breaking of
the neck of the Council of Basle, which began to make head against the Pope's
authority; but partly by courage, partly by his singular wisdom and prudence,
he disappointed their designs, and called an other Council first at Ferrara,
and afterward translated it to Florence, whither John Paleologus Emperor of
Greece came, and acknowledged the Pope of Rome to be Head of the Church. Paulus
4.
Paul the Fourth was not only a Religious man, but Founder of a Religious Order
of Regular Priests. For first giving over his Bishopric of Theate, he betook
himself to a private and solitary life; afterward others, that had the like
purposes and resolution, joining with him, he began a new course of Religious
discipline, and professed it publicly in a great assembly in S. Peter's
Church in Rome, together with them of his Company, in presence of the Clergy
of that Church, at the Tomb of the Apostles, making the three Vows which are
common to al Religious people, in the year One thousand five hundred twenty
eight, upon the day of the Exaltation of the Cross; and from thence we account
the beginning of this Order, which since has been very much increased, and
does daily spread itself more and more to the great benefit of the Religious
themselves, and al others. Paul himself, who was then called John Peter Carasa,
was not long after made Cardinal by Pope Paul the Third, and created Pope in
the year One thousand five hundred fifty five; and sat four years.

49. These are the Popes, which we find upon record taken out of Religious
Orders; whose promotion doubtless is a great honor to that course of life, not
only by reason of the greatness of that dignity, as I said before, but much
more for the unspeakable benefit, which the learning, and sanctitie^, and
wisdom of so many rare men has brought to the Church of God in all Ages, and
in all kind of businesses, as we see it has. Wherefore though there were
nothing else in Religion, this alone were sufficient to conclude, that a
Religious course of life has deserved very much of al Christians and
Christendom.

Of Prelates that have been taken out of Religious Orders. CHAP. XXIX.
TO the glory, which has accrued to Religion by the many Popes, so often and
with such benefit of the Church, taken out of Religious Orders, we may add
another degree of splendor not far inferior to the former, arising from the
like choice of other Prelates out of the same Religious discipline, to no small
profit of Christianity in all Ages. We have set down the number, and the
names, and the order of the succession of the Popes that have been Religious,
but it is impossible to do the like in rehearsing other Prelates, because the
number of them is without number; neither do we find al their names upon
record; and though they had been al registered, it were not worth the labor to
reckon them up severally.

Trith. de vir. (...). c. 21.
2. For first, if we speak of Cardinals, Trithemius a careful and diligent
Writer, does show, that of Benedictius only there had been til his time (which
was about a hundred years since) fourscore Cardinals, Cardinals Benedictius
80. Dominicans, to Franciscans, 43.
whose names were extant, besides many others that were not known. And I find
that the Dominicans have had thirty, and the Franciscans three and forty of
their Order, of other Orders there have not been so many, yet most of them
have had some. And whereas these men were chosen to this dignity, not in
consideration of the noblenes of their blood, nor for their ambitious
pretenses, but by reason of their long tried and approved learning, virtue, and
piety; it is no wonder, that we may truly say, they did not so much receive,
as they did add honor to the honor, to which they were assumed. For to omit
many others, what a man was Cardinal Torq e^^d^, and Ca^e^an, and S.
Bonauenture ancienter then them both? and diverse besides, whom we shall not need
to speak of; themselves having got so great renown as the world knows, both
by their learned pens and noble actions.

Bishops.
3. Much less shall we need to speak of Archbishops, and Bishops; it is so
evident, that there have been in a manner infinite preferred to these sacred
degrees of Dignity out of al ancient and modern Orders. S. Antonine, S. Ant^n
p. 3. in. ^3. (...).
a known grave Author, reckoned a hundred twenty five of S. Dominick's
Order, til his days; adding that he names not al, but rather few. And least a
body might think, that it was the devour disposition of those times, which
cast these dignities upon them, we can reckon in these last threescore and ten
years, whereof the memory is yet fresh, ab^ue a hundred and foure-score
Franciscans only that have been Bishops, which a man may justly wonder at. What
shall I say of the Benedictins? Tri^^ l. 4. c. 1^.
of whom alone Trithemius above mentioned has collected to the number of
above five thousand threescore and ten: ^
which no man has cause to find strange, considering that antien^ly the name
of a Monck was so venerable, that Bishops were almost every where chosen only
out of Monasteries. Sulpi^^us.
In so much that Sulpi^^us relating of many Bishops, which had been elected
out of the Covent, which S. Martin founded, he concludes thus: For what City
or Church was there, which desired not a Bishop of S. Martin's Monastery?

4. Throughout al Greece it was so general a custom, that to this very day,
notwithstanding the Schism in which they live, they consecrate no Patriarck or
Bishop that is not a Monck. In other Countries it was also very frequent, so
long as the Dignities of the Church were not so ambitiously pretended, but cast
upon those, that were far from desiring, and farther from willingly thrusting
themselves upon them, upon those, I say, that did rather indeed resist their
promotion, and decline it as a heavy burden. Who can express, how beneficial
the light of these men, placed upon a candlestick, was not only to the people
whom they had in charge, but to other both people and Pastors, that learned
to govern their flock by their form of government and example? For where is
it possible for men to learn the Art of Arts (as S. Gregory styles the
business of governing of souls) more exactly then in Religion? S Greg. 1. p.
^ast. c. 1.
For that which is now grown into a common Proverb, is most true, that No man
can profitably be over another, that is not willingly under; and has not
learned how to be so. Religious men more fit to govern then any others Why?
And doubtless the hardness of the work requiring great forces, no place is more
apt to breed them, or by daily practice and exercise to increase them, then
Religion.

5. Innocentius the Fourth understood this point very well; and accordingly it
is recorded of him, that he chose so often and so many Bishops out of
Religious Orders, and chiefly from among the Dominicans, that every body did
wonder at him; which though it were a great credit to the Order, yet most of
the Religious took it very heavily for diverse reasons, and particularly
because they found themselves bereaved of their principal and grauest Fathers.
And thereupon their General John Teuto laying open his own and his whole Orders
aggrieuance to the Pope in this behalf, and earnestly beseeching him that he
would from thence-forward leave the Religious of that Order in the humility,
which they had professed; the Pope made him answer in the words of our Savior:
Matthew ^^ and 23.
that the candle is not to be hidden, but to be set in the midst, that it may
give light to the whole house; and that the Master condemned the Servant that
had hid his talent.

6. Moreover it is of no small moment that these kind of people come not by
stealth into the sheep-cote, Io. 10.
b^^ enter by the door; that is, they hunt not alter these dignities upon
ambitious desire of honor or wealth, but being lawfully called, they obey the
voice and commandment of God. So that being chosen in this manner, and bringing
with them the virtue, which is necessary for the performance of their charge,
Many notable Bishops that were Monks.
they must needs be both fit instruments for great matters, and bring forth
most plentiful fruit for the glory of God by their industry. Witness S. Basil,
and his equal in time and bosome-friend S. Gregory Nazianzen. Both their
atchieuements are well known to the world; S. Basil's against the heretical
Emperor Valens; S. Gregorie's against the Arians, the Macedonians, the
followers of Apollinaris, and against Julian the Apostate; S Basil. S. (...)
and once he ran hazard of his life, because the seditious people began to
throw stones at him, while he constantly stood for God's cause.

7. S. John Chrysostom was not inferior unto them in virtue and constancy,
both against Gainas an Arian Prince, and against the Empress Eudoxia, not
sticking publicly in a Sermon, which he made, to call her an other Herodias. In
a later Age S. Fulgentius was not behind in courage; S Fulg^nt^us.
for himself alone withstood the storm, which wicked King Trasimond had raised
against the Catholics; encouraging the Faithful, and danting his aduersaties
very much by his great learning, and sanctity, and by the admirable eloquence
of his tongue, so far that he was bannished into Sardinia; yet parting with
the great grief of al, he prophesied that he should shortly return; and so it
happened. For Trasimond dying not long after, his successor Hilderick restored
the Church to the former peace.

S. Anselme.
8. And to come yet lower, S. Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury came out of the
same school of Religion; and often showed, how much he had profited therein;
but particularly in his opposition against King Henry of England, who dividing
himself from Pope Urban, stood in Schism against him, and commanded that no
Appeal should be made to Rome in all his Kingdom. S. Anselme gathered a
National Council to deliberate upon this business; and whereas all the Bishops,
and Abbots, and Peers of the Realm held of for fear of the King, he alone
with two others only, whom he had won to himself by his authority, stood for
the Pope, and voluntarily went into bannishment, rather then he would yeald to
injustice.

Culi^^mus ^itur^^^n.
9. Wiliam a Monk of the Cistercian Order may be rancked with these great men,
whom nothing could compel to undertake the Bishopric of Burges but the command
of his Abbot, and of the Pope's Legate, both of them by sh^rp letters willing
him not to withdraw himself from that which was the will of God. In that
dignity he never put-of his Religious weed, he never eat flesh, nor remitted
any thing of his former obseruances; but to his priua^e virtues he added
those, which are proper to them that have care of s^ules, never c^asing to feed
his flock by public Sermons, and private conversation, and many profitable
decrees and laws: he maintained continually whole troops of poor people at
his own charges; he courageously withstood the King of France trenching upon
the Ecclesiastical liberties, and stopped the fu^^e of the Heretics that raged
in Guienne, sending diverse of his Cistercian Monks to preach among them; and
when that would not do, gathering an army by consent of the Pope, and sowing
a Cross upon his garment, made himself in a manner commander of it; and though
he dyed before the army marched, yet there is no doubt, but he assisted much
more from heaven toward the victory, which not long after the Catholic
party won against their enemies. And thus have these Religious men and
Saints behaved themselves in opposition against the enemies of God. What have
they done in peace, and calmer times, as in a field more suitable for Religious
people to travel in, their endeauours ever bending rather to peace and quiet?
And accordingly we find that in the quiet times of Christendom, the vigila^cie
of such Pastors has been the more remarkable, atte^ding to feed their flock
by example, word, and work, so much the more gloriously and with greater
effect, by how much more their famous endeauours were ever coupled with
admirable contempt of huma^^ thin^^; which virtue does make them more pliant to
the service of God, (...) others more ready to give credit unto them.

10. Boniface about the year One thousand one hundred and fifty, S Boniface.
borne of the blood Royal, and near kinsman to the Emperor Otho the Third, and
so highly in his favor, as the Emperor was wont to call him his Soul, entered
into the Order of S. Romualdus, and having done penance a long time in it, he
was moved by instinct of God to go and preach the Ghospel to the Russians;
which the Pope agreed unto, and moreover made him Archbishop of that Country;
notwithstanding which dignity, he altered nothing from his former rigor of
Abstinence and hard clothing; but riding on hors-back barefoot, the cold being
extreme violent, when he lighted, his foot was frosen to the stirrup, so that
he could not pull it out, but that he had some warm water brought him to bathe
it in. Which poor fashion of living brought-forth wonderful fruit in short
time. For coming to that Barbarous nation of the Russians, and beginning to
preach the Faith of Christ to the King, at first the King made account that he
came to tell them some strange things, whereby to get himself some releef; but
finding that he constantly refused the great gifts with which he had caused
him to be present^d, and moreover seeing him pass through the fire without any
hurt, he not only embraced the Ghospel together with his whole Kingdom, but
making his son his heir, he resolved himself to become disciple to S.
Boniface; and had effected it, had not S. Boniface within a short time after
been most barbarously slain by the King's brother; which happened well for him,
and according to an ancient desire which he had of suffering Martyrdom for
Christ Which kind of examples are frequent in older times; and yet of later
years also there never have wanted in the house of God the like burning and
shining lights, as Andrew Bishop of Fi^sol^, Andrea^ ^^sulanus:
about the year of Christ One thousand three hundred and sixteen; who being a
Carmel^^ was put into that Episcopal dignity much against his will, a^ he
evidently showed; because presently upon the first notice that he heard that
such a thing was in handling, he hid himself in a Monastery of the Car^^^s^^s,
til in an assembly of the Canons, that had chosen him, he was by God's
permission discovered by the speech of an infant; and at the self-same instant
a child in a white garment appeared to him also, bidding him not resist any
longer the will of God, which was the occasion of his making Bishop; and telling
him, there was an Angel appointed him for his Guardian, to direct him in the
performance of God's pleasure^ He being therefore so evidently chosen, not by
men, but by God, we may easily imagine, how he carried himself in his Pastoral
function. Among other things it is recorded of him, that he was so loving and
liberal toward the poor, that he had al their names written down in a paper,
and could not behold them without tears. His wisdom was such, as besides the
Decrees, which he made in his own Dioces, he appeased with great dexterity a
domestical dissension which was risen in Bologna, being sent thither to that
purpose by Urban the fifth, reconciling both parties, and preventing infinite
danger, which was coming upon that city. Finally much more is recorded of
this man's virtue and sanctity, whereof we have testimony enough in the
miracles, which he wrought, and in that he is Canonized for a Saint.

11. What shall we say of Laurentius Iustinianus; Laurentius Iustinianus.
who having lead a Religious life for thirty years together, and at last
being charged by Eugenius the Fourth with a Pastoral function, used al means
and al entreatie, and made use of al his friends to decline it; and when he
could do no more, he admitted of it, and handled it so, that to al men's
thinking nothing could be added to his wisdom in governing, his zeal of
God's honor, his fortitude in withstanding great men, and his care of the
poor, toward whom he was rather accounted profuse. Insomuch that they write
of him that both the people of his Diocese, and strangers from foreign places,
had recourse unto him as to an Angel sent from heaven; and that as often as he
went abroad, people thronged after him to behold him.

S. Antonine.
12. S. Antonine was his equal in time and virtue, compelled to take upon him
the Chair of Florence by the same Eugenius, and showed no less piety, and
skill in governing, then he has showed learning and erudition in his written
Books. It is written of him, that he much reformed the Clergy of that Church,
and visited al his Dioces himself in person; and in time of the sickness, like a
good shep-heard, did not refuse to go to the infected as they lay raging in
their disease, to comfort and refresh them; leading about with him a beast
laden with physic, to minister unto them; finally that he was so profuse
toward the poor, that having but three loaves of bread in his house, he gave
them to the poor, though not without full gaynes and recompense; for the
selfsame binne, that was empty before, was presently found full of bread, and
that very white. We shall not need to say any thing of his wisdom; because,
when he was but yet a private man, he was as it were an Oracle in all doubtful
questions, at home and abroad; insomuch that even then he was commonly known
by the name of Antonine the Counselor. Antonius C^^^^orum.
Great was also the fervor and constancy, wherewith he more then once
defended the liberties of the Church against those that were in highest
authority. In which business he once answered one that threatened him
grievously, that he did not fear him, because he had still a corner, whereunto
he should no: unwillingly retire himself; and withal showed him the key of his
Celle, which he kept of his Monastery; giving to understand besides, from
whence he had received so much courage.

13. Many like examples we might lay together not only out of Italy, from
whence the former are taken, but from people beyond the Seas, and beyond the
A^^^s, among whom Religion did anciently wonderfully flourish; but because our
intent is not here to write a History of these things, we will content
ourselves with one S. Dunstan, S. Dunstan.
who, about the year One thousand and twenty, being Abbot of Glastenburie,
was made Archbishop of Canterbury; in which dignity it is incredible how
nobly, and how beneficially to his flock he carried himself. We find in
particular, that he was wont to rebuke the two Kings, ^^^elstan and Edward his
successor, with such freedom and confidence, that he was twice bannished for
that cause, and yet called back again, and used by the selfsame Kings in
public businesses of great weight; such was the opinion which they had of his
wisdom. He was rare also for his gift and fervor in preaching the Word of
God; and one Ascension day, as he was at ^^s prayers, preparing for a Sermon,
an infinite number of Angels clad in white presented themselves unto him, and
told him, that they came to carry him to heaven, if notwithstanding he were
ready. He answered them, that for his part. he was ready, but yet it would
grieve him, if upon so high a Day the people would be frustrated of the food of
the Word of God. And the Angels taking his excuse, appointed the next day to
come for him; wherein he departed with excessive joy.

14. In these our days we have had occasion to behold the like virtue in
diverse Prelates, and particularly in Martin Sarmiento a Franciscan-Friar; Martin
Sarmiento.
who having long labored with abundant fruit, in the Province of Mexico in the
West Indies, was at last presented with the Bishopric of that place; but stood
constant in the refusal of it, til commanded by his Superior in virtue of
holy Obedience he accepted it. And having undertaken it, he altered not his
humble and austere manner of life; but wore the Habit he did before, and
traveled about al his Dioces always on foot, with one of his Friars for his
Companion; and finally dyed in the performance of his function, having spent
three whole days one after an other in ministering the Sacrament of
Confirmation.

15. Which examples, in my opinion, do make it much clearer then any reason
or proof by argument can do, that Religious Orders have in all times been, as
it were, a Seminary or Nurserie of Prelates; and of Prelates that have been
exceeding beneficial both to their own charge by their worthy labors, and to
others by the^^ example of life.

Of the fruit, which Religious people have brought-forth in the Church of God.
CHAP. XXX.
WHEN the wisdom of God had begun to lay the grounds of the Order of the
Gray-friars in S. Francis and his eleven first Companions, ^^^^uent. in ^^ta S.
Francis.
and this new offspring was upon the point of being brought forth, it was
represented in a Vision to Pope Innocent after this manner. He conceived that
he saw the Church of S. John Lateran (where at that time the Pope had his
Palace) gaping at the foundation, Reli^^^^^ pe^^le uphold the Church.
and ready to fall; and that a poor beggarlie fellow came running toward it
and held it up with his shoulders. When not long after S. Francis with his
little Company presented himself before him, demanding approbation of his
Rule; the Pope beholding him attentively, and weighing his Rule with good
advice, made no questi^n but that he was the poor man, that was showed him in
the Vision above mentioned; and the event proved it true. For not only that
Age, wherein this Order sprung up, was wonderfully enlightened and helped by it,
but it has ever strengthened and vpheld the Church of God these 376. years,
which it has continued since the first beginning of it.

2. Which commendation, as undoubtedly it belongs not falsely and idly but by
the true and solid testimony of that heavenly Vision to the Order of S.
Francis; so, in my opinion, it may as truly be given to the Order of S.
Dominick, which has labored in the same cause with no less industry; and in
like manner to al other Orders, which our Lord from time to time has sent
fresh workmen at diverse hours into his vinyard. And if it may be said of
every one of them severally, The prayers of Religious people very beneficial.
that they have been so beneficial for the defense, and cultiuating, and
maintaining of the dignity of the Church; how much more truly may we say it of
al of the^ together? So that we must needs conclude, that the profit and
fruit, which Religious Orders have wrought in the world since they were
founded, is unspeakable. For setting al other things aside, their prayers only
and hidden deserts in the sight of God, certainly are very powerful to
reconcile him to mankind. Upon which ground S. Bernard says, S Bernard sermon
par. 93.
that they are ordained to pray for the body of the Church, for the living and
for the dead; and S. Gregory Nazianzene, S. Gregory Nazian or. (...). de Eu^
c. 8.
that their tears are the deluge of sin; the world's satisfaction, and
purging; and Eusebius, as being consecrated to God in (...) of al mankind. ^ho
therefore can imagine, from how many mischiefs, and what disasters, the world
has been freed by their intercession, what benefits their prayers have
obtained? how often our Lord has been appeased not only at their humble suit,
but at the very sight of their good deeds? But to say no more of the account
which God makes of them, and of that which is only known to him; let us go
forward in the consideraton which we have prop^sed concernin^ al of them, and
weigh the fruit which in all Ages they have brought-forth two several ways;
first by example, then also by their labor and industry.

3. As for matter of Example, it cannot be denied, but that for the most part,
al Euan^elical virtues had been hidden in darkness but for the light which
Reli^ion has given them; The benefit of Example.
first practicing them, and by their very practice presenting them to the view
of al men, as it were, in a public Theater to be beheld of al. So that their
modesty, humility, piety, and devotion, has been always a leading
direction for all kind of people to follow; and we may justly conceive, that
this was the reason why they are termed by S. John Chrysostom, S. John
Chrysostom hom. 5^. ad p^p.
the lights of the world. For by them the world has learned, how God is to be
served, with what reverence, with what fear he is to be adored in the Churches
and in the Sacraments, with what diligence and attention we ought to pray unto
him, how patient we ought to be in adversity, how charitable toward our
neighbor, finally there is no Christian virtue, whereof they have not left
manifold examples in the world.

4. Yea though all this were not, their very forsaking of al things to embrace
the Cross of Christ, whereas many of them were nobly and richly borne, and in
the prime of their days, must needs be of great force to induce men to
contemn the riches and honors of the world; and so we find it has been; and
though few have the strength and courage of mind utterly to abandon these
things, yet by that which they see these men do before their eyes, they learn
to love these earthly things less, or at least will understand that they
deserve not to be loved. What shall we say more? their very aspect is a secret
exhortation to virtue, and reprehension of vice; which many daily experience
to be true, and S. Chrysostom does plainly testifye, exhorting the people in
two several Sermons, often to visit Religious houses for this very reason, S.
John Chrysostom (...).
because they cannot but car^i^ some benefit home from them. For there, says
he, al things are void of temptation, free from al disquiet and disturbance;
they are most quiet havens, and the dwellers of them are like so many fires,
shining from high places, and giving light to them that come near them; and
having taken up their rest in the haven, they inuit others to the same
tranquillity, and suffer not those, that have their eyes upon them, to run
hazard of shipwreck, or to be in darkness, if they behold them. Go therefore
to these men, converse with them; go, I say, cast yourselues at their holy
feet, for it is far more honorable to kiss their feet then the head of
other men. For, I pray you, if some apprehend the feet of certain Images, only
because they represent the King; shall not thou be in safety if thou embracest
him that has Christ within him? Their feet therefore are holy, though
otherwise they seem abject and contemptible. Thus speaks S. John Chrysostom.

5. Deservedly therefore may we apply to Religious people, that which was
spoken to the honor of the Apostles, and is common to them that lead an
Apostolical life: Matthew. ^.
You are the light of the world, you are the salt of the earth; the one
belonging to example of life, of which we have spoken; the other belonging to
their industry, of which we are now to speak; which is far greater also
then example itself, to wit, not only to preserve the behavior of men from
corruption (as it were) by casting salt upon them, but which is beyond the
nature of salt, Religious people do greatly help toward the salvation of
others.
to restore them when they have been corrupted; which Religious people
perform, when they reclaim those that are gone astray, raise those that are
fallen, instruct the ignorant, assist with their counsel, learning, and al
manner of industry, them that are in temptation and difficulties. We shall not
need to prove these things by authority of the holy Fathers, or by that which
others have le^t recorded; for we see it daily before our eyes, and find in our
daily practice, that it is so. It is apparent to every body, how much
Religiours Orders do further the salvation of man kind by hearing Co^fessions,
by public^ Sermons, by private reprehension of vice, by taking away (as much as
lies in them) the occasions of sin, by appeasing dissension and discord,
finally releeuing al sorts of people, instructing and teaching them how to
behave themselves against the Devil, against their own infirmities, against
the allurements of the world; al which businesses Religious people have in a
manner so engrossed, that few besides them, stir in them; and even those few
are oftimes stirred-vp by their example; and by a holy emulation of them.

6. And though these things be in themselves great, yet because they are
daily, they are not esteemed; and people perhaps think but slightly of them,
as the fashion is. Religious men oppose themselves against hereticks^
The war which we have with the enemies of God's Church, and with Heretics,
is of more reckoning; and Religious men are they, that bear the greatest part
of that burden also, opposing themselves as a counterscarpe and bulwark against
the fury of them, in their Disputations, and Sermons, and written Books; in
private and public meetings. Finally that which is most glorious and of
greatest weight, is the good which they have done, not in particular men, but
in whole Provinces and Kingdoms, bringing them under the yoke and obedience of
the Faith of CHRIST. And convert Nations.
How often have they spread the light of the Ghospel, where it was never seen
before, and restored it where it has been obscured? How many times has Faith
and Religion gone to decay in many places, and they have for it up again*
Certainly their zeal in this kind has been so eminent, that whosoever shall
give himself to read Histories, and observe the manner how the Faith of Christ
has been brought into every Country since the Apostles, and those
Apostolical times, will scarce find a man named in the business that has not
been Religious. It will be too tedious to rehearse them al; yet some we will
touch upon, S. R^migius.
for example sake.

7. First therefore we find that S. Remigius, he that about the year Five
hundred and thirty converted al France from Idolatry to the Faith of Christ,
was from his childhood a Monk, and afterward Archbishop of Rh^mes.

Martin.
8. About the same time, to wit, in the year Five hundred and forty, Martin a
Monk reduced the Swedens from the A^ian heresy. It is a known thing, S.
Augustine of England.
how England by S. Augustin's instruction (whom S Gregory sent thither with
four other Monks) was converted to God together with King Ethelbert, in the
year Six hundred and three. Lambert.
And in Six hundred twenty two, Lambert a Monk of Liege brought the country
of Taxandria in the Lower Germany to the Faith of Christ; and at the same time
Kilian a Scottish Monk wrought the like in Franconia, and there dyed a Martyr.
Wilfride also a Monk of the monastery of H^rpue in England, S. Wilfride.
and afterward Bishop of York, about the year Six hundred foure-score and
three, as he was sailing toward Rome, was by tempest cast upon the coast of
Holland and Frizland; and not to pass the winter without fruit, he began to
preach the Ghospel, which til then had not been heard of in those countries.
And returning home, and not permitted by wicked King Eg^rid to remain in his
charge, he went to the South Saxons, that were yet Infidels, and showed them
the light of Faith; and withal converted the whole Island of W^ght.

9 And that which Wilfride began in Frizland, Willebrord continued, a Monk of
the monastery of Rippon in England, and was afterward created Bishop of
Maes^icht. At the same time Swithbert bred-vp in the famous Monastery of
Landis^erne, with eleven others (in memory of the number of the Apostles) went
to the Saxons, and is recorded to have instructed an innumerable company of
them in the Faith of Christ; and was afterward made Bishop of Werda, and did
not cease notwi^hstanding to take great pains.

10. Bonifacius also is renowned in this kind, and to this day deservedly
worshipped as the Apostle of Germany. S. (...).
He was borne in Scotland, and led a a holy life a long time in a Monastery,
to which his parents had offered him from the time he was five years old; and
being sent by Pope Gregory the Second into Germany, he converted to the Faith
of Christ Thuringia, F^^sia, and Hesse, about the year One thousand two
hundred and sixteen; and that he might the better govern those whom he had
instructed, he was honored with the Archbishopric of Mentz, though he
received yet more honor by the crown of Martyrdom.

(...) and Lu^ger.
11. Willehard and Ludger, out of the monastery of S. Willebrord in France,
went into Franconia a province of Germany, about the year Eight hundred, and
begat many children there to Christ, and themselves endured a great deal of
hardness for his sake.

Ausgarius.
12. Not long, to wit, some ten years after, Ausgarius with three companions
out of the Monastery of Corby in the Wall^ns Country, passed through diverse
Provinces preaching the Ghospel, in Denmark, Sw^dland, Scotland, and
Greeneland, with incredible fruit. And ^ut (...) the same Monastery came
Stephen, who succeeded Ausgarius in the harvest of Swedland, and passed
afterward into the province of Helinghen, and brought it wholly out of error
into the way of truth; and lastly slain by some wicked people there, went to
enjoy the crown of Martyrdom.

13. To whom we may add Albus Abbot of Floriac, a Monastery which was built
by S. Ma^^^s in the possessions of one Florus Count, Allus.
as we find recorded; for he took much pains in dilating the Christian Faith
in that part of France which is called G^^cou^^; a man famous for his
Eloquence, and Sancti^ie, and the glory of Martyrdom. He lived about the
year Nine hundred and seauentie.

14. What shall we say of Adalber^us? Adalber^us.
who when he was Archbishop of of Prague, coming to Rome, lived a long time a
Religious life in the Monastery of Mount-Cassino, about the year Nine hundred
and foure-score; and then together with his brother Gaudentius a Monk also of
S. Alexus in Rome, went into Hungary to preach the Faith of Christ; where he
met with King Geisa, that had notice of his coming before from God; and being
entertained honorably by him, he converted all that fierce and barbarous people
to the obedience of of our Savior; and from thence going higher into Sarmatia,
preached the Ghospel to the Russians, Latuanians, Moscouites, Prussians, and
chiefly to the Polacks, and their King Boleslaus. Finally in Prussia being by
the wicked misbeleeuers bound to a stake, and stuck with seven darts, while he
stood gasping, he gave God thanks, that he had at last vouchsafed him that
favor to dye for his sake, which had long desired.

15. Bruno also son to Lotarius Duke of Saxony, Bruno.
after he had lead a Monastical life in the Monastery of S. Alexius in Rome,
was sent by John the Nineteenth to the Russians about the year One thousand
twenty five, and reduced many of that Country to the way of Salvation; and
to the end he might not want his reward for his service in that cause, he was
crowned with Martyrdom. And about the same time Boniface Disciple to S.
Romualdus, traveling into the same Country Russia, converted the King and the
whole Kingdom, saving the King's brother, by whom being barbarously slain, he
watered with his blood the Vinyard which he had planted.

16. In the year One thousand and fifty, Humbert, Humbert^^.
a Benedictin Monk, being sent Legate from the Pope to Constantinople, to
convince the Grecians of their Schismatical errors, appointing a day of
meeting with N^^etas, confounded him in Disputation before the Emperor
Constantin; and forced him to burn the Book, which he had written.

17. Otho in like manner a Monk of the Monastery of Waburg a city in
Germany, Otho.
being, in the year One thousand one hundred twenty five, sent by Callistus
the Second into Pomerania, converted Prince Warcislaus and his followers; and
traveling all the coast of Denmark, and the co^fines of Poland, wrought great
conuersions, and visited also many Cities of Saxony with great fruit.

18. Not unlike to him was Vicelinu^, Vicelinu^.
who not long after going out of France to the Wandals with four Companions,
took incredible pains for thirty years together in all that Country,
instructing innumerable people in the Law of Christ, and founded many famous
Monasteries there.

19. And of Conuersions of the like nature wrought by Monks, we might add much
more; but for brevity sake, we will descend to the Religious Orders, which are
of later standing; for since they have appeared in the Church of God,
businesses of this nature have for the most part passed through their hands.

20. The Dominicans have had many occasions of doing God great service in this
kind; and particularly about the year One thousand two hundred forty seven,
we find that diverse of them were sent by Innocentius the Fourth to the
Tartarians, Dominicans.
the chief among them being Ascelinus, a holy man; though for that time there
came no other good of it, but that which themselves reaped by the many
injuries and incommodities which they suffered in that measure, that it is a
wonder, that either their bodies, or their hearts were able to endure it.
Wherefore not many years after, they went in greater number and with better
success to the conversion of Nations; and traveled many countries, where the
light of the Gospel had never been seen, with such abundant fruit that it was
not possible, as they write, to number the souls converted by them; specially
in the Country of Cuma; from which parts Benedict (who was Superior of the
rest of the Brethren) writing to their General, relates that many thousands
not only of the common soit, but of the Nobility of the Country had received
the Sacrament of Baptism, which may suffice for a taste of the fruit which
that Order has and does daily bring-forth in the Church of God; there being
whole Books extant full of Relations concerning it.

21. Of the Franciscans, besides other times, in the year One thousand two
hundred and seauentie, one Hieronymus Esculus was sent to Constantinople, to
treat a reconciliation of the Greek Church; he that afterward was chosen
Pope, and called Nicolas the Fourth. Franciscans.
And he had so good success in the business he went for, that he persuaded the
Emperor and the Country to submit themselves; and (which was a joyful sight)
brought forty Peers of the Country to kiss the Pope's foot, The Greek
Church (...)
and to the Council, which was then assembled at Lions.

22. The Religious of the same Order have also more then once passed to the
Tartarians, first in the year One thousand two hundred forty five, sent by
Innocent the Fourth, at which time many being converted to the Ghospel, not
long after there went more of them into the Vinyard, Tartarians.
and erected there many Monasteries; and Christianity did much prosper among
them.

23. In the year One thousand three hundred forty one, two again of the
same Order were sent Legates from Benedict the Tenth, with others of their
Brethren with them, who obtaining leave of the Emperor of the Country to
preach the Faith of Christ, built again many Churches and Monasteries, to the
great enlargement of the Service of God, and conversion of many souls.

24. Moreover no small number of them passed into Armenia in the year One
thousand three hundred thirty two. Armenia.
The chief man among them was Gonsales Sa^rata, a man very learned, and one
that has much benefitted that Country both by his seruent preaching and by
translating many of our books into their language. ^
And about the same time we find that one Paschal^^ traveled in the couersion
of the Medes, and one Gentilis among the Persians. The former writes in an
epistle, which is yet extant, that the people of the Country tempted him at
first with diverse presents, and offered him many wives, which and many other
allurements he constantly refusing, they fell to injuries, and reproaches, they
twice stoned him, and burnt his face, and the soales of his feet, with fire;
and yet he was so far from being danted therewith, that he never so much as
altered his Habit for it, Babylon.
nor intermitted his preaching.

25. And of Gentilis there is this notable thing recorded, that living in
Babylon, and finding himself dull in learning the Arabic language, he resolved
to return into Italy. But as he was upon the way, there met him a young man,
that having sifted out the cause of his journey, bad him go back again,
because God would give him the gift of that tongue; and from that hour he
spoke it as perfectly as if he had been borne in the Country. Dalm^tia.


26. Bosna a city of Dalmatia was also in those days converted from Heresy
by the means of Gerard General of that Order, as he had occasion by chance to
travel that way; and afterward sending diverse others thither, he won also
the country there abouts, it being infected with the same Heresy; and brought
it within the fould of Christ.

27. Odoricus of (...) much about the selfsame time, both to shun the honor
which every one was forward to give him, and through the burning zeal of
Souls, got leave of his Superior to go preach to the Infidels; where ma^in^
his excursions into diverse countries toward the East and the South, in
seauenteen years, which he spent in that noble work, he is reported himself
alone to have baptized and instructed twenty thousand Souls. Cat^^^.


28. (...) on the year One thousand three hundred and seauentie, Hunga^^.
Wiliam (...) being sent to Caraye to preach the Ghospel of Christ, carried
threescore of his Friars with him. And in Hungary the King having lately
brought diverse ^ioyning Provinces to his obedience, sent eight
Franciscan-friars amongst them, whose ^ithi^ the compass of fifty days,
brought two hundred thousand to believe in Christ. The King seeing the happy
success, wrote earnestly to the General of their Order to send him two
thousand of his Friars, assuring him they should not want employment. The
letter which the General wrote back is yet extant, ^
wherein he devoutly and fervently inuiteth his Religious to so withful and
glorious an enterprise. And among the rest we must not let pass (...) Cap
stranus, who about the year One thousand four hundred and fifty brought to
the bosom of the Church in one excursion twelve thousand Infidels, and many
Schismatiks besides. The Society of I^svs.


29. We might here speak of much more that has been done to the excessive
benefit of the Church both by Other orders, and by this our least Society of
JESUS, which in Italic and Spain (where Catholic Religion does remain
incorrupt and flourish) labors with that fruit which every one sees and
knows; and in France, Germany, the Low Countries, Poland, and in all the
Northern parts infected more or less with Heresy, employeth itself
incessantly in strengthening Catholics, instructing the ignorant, reducing or
conuincing Heretics, by preaching, teaching schools, private conversation,
and by all manner of wholesome means and ways. At which how much the Devil is
grieved, he lately showed (as by certain Relation we have heard) when being
urged by Exorcisines in a possessed person, among other things he professed,
that he hated no kind of people more then the Jesuits.

30. But not to be too long, we will instance the matter we have in hand, in two
only of two several Families, by which it will sufficiently appear, how much
the whole Orders may have benefitted the Church of God, seeing one man in an
Order has done so much good. S. Bernard.
S. Bernard is one; and the good which he has wrought in the Church of God,
cannot indeed be valued. For in that fearful Schism, which was raised against
Pope Innocent the Second, he bestirred himself so diligently that we may truly
say, he was the cause and means at last of extinguishing it. For he alone
brought al France to the Pope's obedience; the S^nod of Estamps, where all the
Bishops of the Realm, the King and al his Peers were purposely assembled to
that end, putting al their voices in him. He reconciled King Henry of England
also to the Pope, even against the mind and endeau^ur of all the Bishops of the
Country; and afterward brought in Germany. Then he went to the Council of
^i^a, and was not only present at al their meetings and deliberations in the
weightiest affairs of Christendom, but did in a manner govern them, al
referring themselves to him. Again, when the Church ^f ^urdean^ was miserably
torn by factious people, insomuch that is diu^rs place^ the lawful Bishops
were thrust out of their Seas, he (stirred-vp by the Pope's Nantio, Carn^^
(...).
Bish^p of ^har^e.) quenched all that fire with his eloquence, authority, and
miracles. After this, Ro^^ being oppressed with public calamities, he was
called thither by the often and earnest letters of the Pope and Cardinal, and
there confuted Roger King of ^^^ilie in open disputation; and by his counsel
and wisdom so weakened the party of the Antipope Peter Leo, that being
forsaken of al, he made a miserable end. Peter Abaylard was an Heretic so
proud of his learning and eloquence, that no man almost could stand against
him. S. Bernard first in a private meeting, then publicly in the Council of
S^ns put him to shame. Soon after in the Council of Rhem^s, he so palpably
co^uinced ^ilbert Parr^t, a man that was also famous, that he himself publicly
condemned his own error. He alone constrained Henry (an other Apostate) to
fly* one that had infected the Dioces of ^olause with his wickedness, and was
^il laboring to infect it more and more; but at last he was intercepted and
del^uered-vp in chains to the Bishop. What shall say of his other iourneys to
M^^an, to G^^u^, to the King of France, al which he undertook for affairs of
great consequence to the Church, and al of them with prosperous success? And
in these iournyes who can number the causes which were brought unto him, or the
concourse of people, to and fro, to his lodging, pressing-in one upon another:
Neither can it be imagined, with what benefit he preached to the people; what
an infinite company he reclaimed from their wicked life; how many were
reconciled by his means; how many drawn out of the jaws of the Devil by the
fiery flames of Divine love, which he breathed wheresoever he came. But we may
give a guess at it, by that which is recorded of him, that besides those that
forsaking the vanities of the world, betook themselves to other Religious
Orders, he never returned home to Cla^^-vaulx, but attended with a great troup
of Nouices, whom^ he had driven by his own persuasions into the nets of our
Savior, and most c^mmonly they were men eminent either for Divinity, or
Humanity, or for their birth; among whom we find Henry brother to the King
of France, and one Herucus of the blood Royal. And so much of S. Bernard.

31. The other, whom I purpose to insist upon, is S. Vincent of the Order of S.
Dominick; S. Vincent.
whose labors have extended so far, that it is a wonder that any one man
could go so much ground as he has traveled, preaching the Ghospel of Christ.
For first in Spain he went over all the Kingdoms of Valentia, Catalaunia,
Aragon, Na^arre; and setting aside Galicia and Portugal, where for certain
reasons he came not, he passed through all the rest of the Provinces, and every
town of them, and almost every village. Then coming into the kingdom of
Ouiedo, Daulphinie, France, Burgundy, Normandy, Preuence, A^uergne, Gasconie,
Britanie, Flanders, and al Sauoy, he went-vp into Italy, and came down again
by Lombardie, Piedmon^, and Genua, and all that coast, and sailed to the Islands
of the Mediterranean Sea; and being invited into England by King Henry his
letters, and an express messenger and a ship to wait upon him, he visited all that Island, and from thence went into Scotland, and Ireland, and rested not
only in the head-citties, but passed, as I said before, to every town and
little village, following the example of Christ our Savior. Who therefore but
God alo^e can number the souls, which he reclaimed from their vicious courses,
and from the gates of hell; how many evil customs he rooted out of whole
cities and countries; what light and knowledge of heavenly things he left
behind him?

32. We find recorded that he converted above five and twenty thousand jews,
which Sect, as in those days it reigned much* he labored particularly with
great zeal to extirpate; of the Saracens he converted eight thousand; and of
Christians debauched, that turned over a new leaf, above a hundred thousand.
But it is more easy to reckon-vp the Countries and Provinces, then the souls
which he brought into the way of Salvation. For they write of him, that
wheresoever he set his foot, there followed presently a general repentace of
their former offenses, a general reformation of manners; dicing, and
blaspheming* and perjury, and other crimes, yea idle sports and toys, were so
laid aside, that people did think no more of any such thing; and their
cont^ition, devotion, and modesty was so great, not only while he was present,
but for some time after, that it did seem a new Primitive Church.

33. Wherefore if Religion had had only these two subjects, that had labored
(...) the reformation of the world, and deserved well of the Church, were it not
a sufficient commendation and glory unto it But it has had very many, as S.
Francis himself, of whom we read wonderful things in this kind, S. Antonie of
Padua, S. Bernardine of Siena, both of them not much, or nothing at al
inferior to S. Vincent; and others whom it were long to rehearse.

34. And though these things do turn much to the glory and renown of
Religion, yet nothing is more worthy of admiration and praise, then the
conversion of the Newfound World, which is wholly to be attributed to Religious
people. They were the first that carried the Ghospel into those Countries, they
diuulged the Name of Christ there where it wa^ unknown and never heard-of
before, and cease not to this very day to spread it still further and further.
The Francis^ans the first (...) and (...) the New World.
The first that undertook this charge, were the Franciscan-Friars, who also
helped not a little to the finding-out of th^se C^untreys, the names whereof
were not so much as known before. For when Christopher Columbus first treated
with King Ferdinand of Spain about that Voyage, and had no great audience, in
regard that the thing seemed a novelty, and uncertain, it is said that two
Franciscan-Friars helped the business much, both animating the King and
exhorting him not to omit the occasion, but to try what would come of it.
Columbus therefore with certain ships which were granted him, finding out the
Kingdom of Mexico, and returning into Spain to bring the joyful tidings of
it, presently some Priests of that Order shipped themselves for those parts
about the year One thousand four hundred ninety three.

34. About the same time, to wit, in the year One thousand five hundred,
Vasques Gama by order of Emmanuel King of Portugal finding a way into the
West Indies, eight of the same Order of S. Francis eminent for learning and
sanctity, were sent to preach the Ghospel. And by little and little te Order
multiplying in those Countries, they built many houses in a short time, and
were divided into thirteen Provinces (as they term them) greatly advancing
the Christian cause even to this day.

35. The Dominicans not long after, to wit, in the year One thousand five
hundred and five, The Dominicans.
joined themselves in the like business, and have done many famous things in
those far Countries; and after them the Augustin-Friars and l^sly (...)
Society of JESUS, at the request of ^ois^ King of Portugal w^^ brought into
the East Indies by S. Francis X (...) in the year One thousand five hundred
forty one, The (...).
and few years after into the West Indies by order of Philip King of Spain;
and has so taken it to heart, that from that time it has never ceased not only
to instruct those that were Christians before, but to preach the Ghospel far
and near, and spread it in places where it was not heard of; as in Iaponie,
where though the Country be so large, that it is said to contain about
threescore Kingdoms, yet all the Religion and Faith that is in it, has been
wholly and solely planted and watered by the Society; and God has given such
increase that they reckon now therein about two hundred thousand Christians. And
lastly also our Society has made a hole into China, a Kingdom so large, and
so rich, that it is almost incredible; which it seems the Devil had, as it
were of purpose, kept hitherto shut; but notwithstanding the penalty of death,
to which al strangers are liable by their laws, if they come within their
bounds, they got-in fearing nothing, and remain there to this day, with such
hopeful beginnings, that if it succeeds accordingly, undoubtedly the fruit will
be incomparable.

36. Now let us consider a little, what honor it is in the sight of God, and
his Angels for these Religious men, that they only are called to so great a
work in all that part of the world. For first the preaching of the Ghospel and
promulgating the Faith of Christ, where it was never before, is a great and
Ap^st^lical work in itself. For our Savior chose his Apostles, and said unto
them: Going unto the Whole World, preach the Ghospel to every creature,
baptizing them, and teaching them to keep all that I have commanded you. As, I
say, he gave the c^nversion of this our World in charge to those his Disciples,
so he has given the char^c of this other World to Religious people. If we
compare the greatness and extent of that World with this, they say there is not
much difference; but if we look into their fashions and dispositions, we shall
find them a great deal more barbarous and blind, worshipping the Sun and
Moon, Serpents, and Stones, and the very Oxen in some places, as in the
kingdom of Mexico, they make their festiual days most fearful by Sacrifices
of men; many of them feed most greedily upon man's flesh; a great part of them
know not what it is to go clothed, but are always naked, contrary to nature
itself. Whereby we may see, that the very light of nature is so obscured and
dulled in them, that they are in a manner beasts, under the shape of men. In so
great darkness and ignorance, it can not be but that they should be extremely
given to al manner of vice, and most enormous crimes; and no man can justly
wonder, if, as we read of them, they make no account at al of things that are
hideous to be named. Whereby we may conceive, what pains, what labor, and
toil was needful to bring such ignorance and barbarousnes to the knowledge and
fear of God, and to tame them so, as to sloope to the yoke of Christ; and
casting of their brutish behavior, to embrace Christian humility, temperance,
and chastity. For the glory thereof (next to the grace of God) fa^leth al
upon Religious people, by whom those Savages have been instructed and taught,
and bred-vp to the ciui^itie and devotion, which now they have.

36. To the labors and pains, The labors, troubles, and hazards, in
converting of Barbarous nations.
which the business itself requires, we may add the many difficulties, and
incommodities, and troubles without number both of body and mind, which are
incident and annexed unto it; as the long and difficult voyage by sea; the
disposition of the Climat and Country f^r in some places it is extreme cold, as
in Iaponie; in other places extreme hot, as at Ormuz, where they write that the
people in the sommer-time lie up to the neck in water to cool themselves; the
want of victuals, the countries being barren and vncultiuate; and that which is
to be had, is not for our diet, and manner of feeding; oftimes they suffer
shipwreck upon the rocks and shelues; and* which is most glorious, they are
often in danger to be slain by the Savages and enemies of Christian Faith;
which, if it happen, they are undoubted Martyrs, as killed for the Faith of
Christ. And I be^ieue, that diverse Religious men of several Orders have been
martyred in those parts; but that which I find recorded, is of the Franciscans,
that thirty of them in several places have suffered for Christ several kinds
of death; and of our Society in these few years, there have been about
threescore and ten crowned with Martyrdom, and some of them very lately.

37. How acceptable therefore may we justly think our labors are to Christ our
Savior, which being so much benefit to ourselves, are so beneficia^ withal to
others, and so much for the glory of God? God showed it once to one Alonso
Ro^as a Franciscan-Fryar, who having spent diverse years in this great work,
and returning into Spain, to recollect himself, and prepare himself the better
to dye, as often as he set himself to meditate upon any good thing, he
conceived he saw our Savior Crucified before him, in a kind of complaining and
angry manner, asking him, why he had left him so upon the Cross, and betaken
himself to his ease. Which Vision happening to him often, he was so pricked with
it, that he resolved to go into the Indies again to his former labors, and
bestowed himself there many years very profitably. Not unlike to this was the
manner, in which God invited our S. Xauerius to the same work long before he
undertook it. For as he was wont to relate of himself, oftimes in his sleep he
carried a Black-a-Moore upon his shoulders; and the burden seemed so heavy*
that it awaked him out of his sleep, much wearied with the very weight of the
man. And both came afterward to pass; ^or by his labor and industry he
brought those people to Christ, as it were upon his shoulders; and took so
much pains in that harvest, that it is wonderful how the forces of his body
could endure them. And this may suffice for a taste of that fruit, which the
fervent endeauours of Religious men have brought-forth in the Christian world.

Reasons, why a Religious course of life is most proper to bring-forth these
kinds of fruit. CHAP. XXXI.
IT is not only true, that Religious Orders have brought forth such abundance
of fruit, as I have said; but also that no state of life, no company of men,
is so proper and well provided for it, as they are. Whereof there might be many
reasons given, but we will reduce them to three. The first may be drawn from
the nature and disposition of God, and the fashion which he does hold with us.
For if we consider attentively the ways, which from the beginning of his
Church he has used to bring men to Salvation, we shall find, that he has
always chosen those instruments and helps for so great a business, which were
most destitute of humane means toward the performance of it.

God chose the ignoble to preach the Ghospel.
2. This is that which S. Paul writing of the Primitive Church observed and
taught, that there were not many powerful, or noble, or wise man according to
the flesh, but God chose the weak of the world to confound the strong; and the
ignoble, and contemptible, and the things which are not, to destroy those which
are; and gives this solid reason of it, that al flesh may not glory, that is,
that the glory of so great a work should not be given to men, and humane
forces, and so the Cross of Christ be euacuated, as he speaks. To which
effect S. Ambrose also speaking very well, 1. Cor. 1. S. Ambrose San Lucam.
bids us mark the heavenly project. He has chosen, says he, to send not
the wise, or the rich, or the noble, but fishermen and Publicans; to the end
that he might not be thought to have invited the world by ostentation of power,
or bought it out with abundance of wealth, or drawn any man to his favor by
the show of nobility and greatness, that the force of truth, and not grace in
disputing, might prevail. And we must not think that God is changed, or that
the wisdom of God takes an other course now for the conversion of souls, then
anciently he did. For neither can there be any change in God, and the motives
still remain, least that, which is altogether Divine, be attributed to humane
strength; to which men are prone enough in their own disposition; because
their carnal eyes behold only that which outwardly is done by man, and cannot
reach to see the force of the inward grace, from which al these effects
proceed. The difference only is this, that anciently God for the most part
chose those, which were bred and borne in poverty and want; and now he makes
use of those who have voluntarily made themselves poor of their own accord.
And the reason is, because if al they, that are nobly and richly borne, were
excluded from this perfection, they should be deprived of so great a good
without any fault of theirs: and on the other side, if they should be admitted
unto it with their worldly riches, God should go from his rule, as I have
said; and therefore he has divinely tempered it so, that they that are nobly
descended, and wealthy, and powerful, might have part of this glory, yet so
as first they forsake their worldly wealth and honor, and bring themselves of
their own good will to an humble and poor estate. And we may observe further,
that so long as the Church had no earthly possessions, and the workmen thereof
were poor and destitute of worldly helps, and lead their life, as the
Apostles did, in hunger and thirst, in cold and nakedness, God used in a
manner no other instruments in it but them: 2. Corinthians. 9.
But when afterward, as S. Hierome writes, it grew greater in power and
riches, and less in virtue (which Age he so long ago terms the dregs of
times) then, S. Hierome in vita Malach.
and ever since, the Divine goodness has called Religious poor men to this
work, which cannot be effected but by them that are poor. This was figured in
that great Golias the Giant, representing the Devil, that stood vpbraiding God
and his forces; for God chose not an other Giant, nor yet a man grown to pull
him down, 1. Reg. 17.34.49.
but a beardles and naked boy: And when the walls of Hierico, Ios. 6.
that is, the fortifications which Satan makes, were thrown down to the
ground, not by Cannon-shot, or military engines, but with the blast of a
trumpet, which God knows how weak it is. And the same was foreshewed in that
new manner of going into the field, without any weapon, but only a lamp put
into an earthen pitcher, to wit, sanctity covered with an outward humble
manner of life; which notwithstanding cannot but show itself, and showing
itself, confound all the host of Satan and al his forces. This is the reason
which has moved God to hold this course.

3. The second reason reflecteth upon the men that are to be helped. Example
more forcible then words.
For whereas example of life is much more forcible to persuade, then words
alone, if the Auditorie hear a discourse of shunning honor, of embracing
poverty, of voluntary abasing and humbling ones-self, and of all that
mortification which the Ghospel teaches; and yet the man himself that speaks
it, abound in riches, and honor, and worldly glory, his words will have little
force; because though we may retain these things, and our heart and affection
not be upon them, yet it seldom is so; and when it happens to be so, yet
people cannot know it, because they cannot diue into the secrets of our heart.
And here we speak not of what may be, but what is more forcible to persuade
and win peoples hearts. For who can make any doubt, but that people will
easier believe, that a man sets al humane things at naught, if they see him
indeed contemn them, then if outwardly they see no such thing by him, though
inwardly in his mind he be so disposed?

Contempt of the world, admirable in the eyes of the world.
4. Besides that, this kind of life carries a great authority in the world.
For whereas the goods and pleasures thereof, like smooth-toungued dames lead the
greater part of the world by the nose, they beholding others so easily to
resist them, and to tread those vices under foot, to which their consciences
tell them that themselves and others are in bondage, they cannot but have a
great conceit of them, and secretly in their hearts admire them, and extol them
among their neighbors, as men that have done strange things; and not without
great reason. For it is a great point to be master in this kind of al earthly
things, to subdue ourselves, and the crooked inclinations which are in us; and
they that contemn the world with all the allurements thereof, must needs be of a
noble and heroical spirit, and endued with rare and eminent virtue. So that
breeding so much admiration in the minds of men, nothing can be more forcible
also to move and persuade; and they that have not this in them, want a special
means, and as it were a proper instrument both to sow and reap this fruit of
souls.

S. John Chrysostom him 46. in Matthew.
5. Let us hear what S. John Chrysostom says to this purpose; for he does
verily think this to be the cause, why in the Apostles time there was so much
good done, and the Age wherein himself lived, was become so barren. If twelve
men, says he, were able to convert the whole world, think with yourselues* how
great our wickedness is, who cannot reform our own subjects, being so many of
us, that we might suffice for leven for ten thousand worlds. You will say, the
Apostles wrought miracles. But it was not their miracles, which made them so
much admired. For many sinners did cast out Devils, and wrought no such
effects, but were punished. What was it then which made them so great? The
contempt of money, the despising of honor, the abstaining from al businesses
of this life; if they had not had these things, though they had raised the
dead, they would not only not have helped any body, but been esteemed
seducers. Thus far S. John Chrysostom, most properly to the commendation of
a Religious state; the profession whereof is poverty, and a perfect
renunciation of al things.

Religious people more free to attend to the conversion of Souls.
6. The third reason may be drawn from the workmen themselves, that labor in
this harvest of Souls. For it cannot be doubted, but that they are much better
provided for this work, then others; by reason they have nothing at al in the
world. For first they are free, and lightsome, and ready to go and run,
whither soever the spirit of our Lord shall move them, because their minds are
not entangled in thoughts of children, or possessions, or household-affaires,
which thoughts bring two great inconveniences upon them; for they take up time,
which might be better spent in more profitable things; and our mind (will we,
nil we) does cleave too much to them, while we handle them, which is both
unworthy, and unbeseeming a labourer in the Ghospel and greatly inconvenient.

Deuteronomy. 20.
7. This was anciently figured in that Military Law^, which God made; that they
who had built a new house, or planted a new vinyard, or newly wedded a wife, or
were otherwise fearful, should not go with the Camp: upon which Caveat we
find often, and particularly in the war, of which Gedeon was the leader, that
two and twenty thousand soldiers were sent back. And of the ten thousand that
remained God casheered all that laid themselves down upon their breast to drink
at the river, and in the muster they were left but three hundred, that had
drunk standing; and yet as few as they were, they got a notable victory. What
is this but that which we have hitherto said, that they that plant vinyards,
that is, who give themselves to worldly businesses, or follow the pleasures of
marriage, and other co^tentments of the body, or are possessed with any other
worldly fear, or love, and abase themselves to these inferior things, are
unfit to follow this heavenly warfare? The chosen band of three hundred men, a
handful in itself, but full of manly courage, evidently signify Religious
people, that are void of al earthly cares, and al humane fear, which is wont
to attend upon them; and they are but few, if we compare them with the
multitude of other people. S. Ambrose therefore says well: S. Ambros. lib. c.
in Lu^.
The precepts of the Ghospel show plainly, what a one he ought to be, that
preaches the kingdom of God, that without rod, without scrip, without shoes,
without bread, without money, that is, requiring no assistance of worldly
help, secure in faith, he makes account, that the less he looks after these
things, People sin more out of infirmity, then (...) o^ance.
the more he may have.

8. We may add moreover, that whereas men for the most part sin not out of
ignorance (for the Law of God is now sufficiently diuulged, and people know
sufficiently what they are to do) whereas therefore, I say, they offend not,
because they know not wherein they offend, but because their will is infirm and
weak, they want not so much instruction, as fervor; and their will is more to
be stirred up, then their understanding informed. Now to sti^re-vp others,
nothing is so powerful and so necessary, as that he, that goes about it, be
himself moved and inflamed; which S. Gregory declares excellently well, as al
other things, in a certain place of his Morals: The mind (says he) occupied
with desires of outward things, cannot be warm in the love of God; and
therefore the warmth, which comes out of a cold heart, cannot inflame the
auditorie with heavenly desires, for that which has not fire in it, cannot
kindle another thing. Which saying of S. Gregory is grounded upon good reason;
S. Gregory 2. Mora^. c. 25.
for if, according to Philosophy, the effect must be like the cause from which
it proceeds, the works of loving God, flying from sin, going against our
inclination, and the like heavenly and divine effects, can never be wrou^ht by
force of human instruction, or eloquence, but there must be a Divine and
heavenly virtue added; which virtue as it is seldom to be seen in the world,
so it is ordinary in Religion, and springs largely and plentifully out of
the fountains thereof, where every one filling himself, delivers out of the
abundance of his heart, as out of a plentiful storehouse, new and old, for the
benefit of his neighbor.

9. There be yet two other things in Religious people, Union of many, is a
great help to compa^ good things.
that greatly conduce to the bringing-forth of abundant fruit, and beating
down of the adverse party. First, the union of so many together, and so
great union as there cannobe a greater; for it is evident, that there can be no
great matter achieved but by the help of many. And the reason is that, which
we have discoursed-of at large else where, that no one man can have al things in
him; and consequently he that shall go about to assist his neighbor himself
alone, must needs find himself short in this* Constable. mo. (...).
as in many other things. Contrariwise, Religious people (as S. ^asi^
expresses it) are as soldiers, that fight many of them close together under
their targets, that it is impossible to break through them or amongst the^: so
Religious people being so united together as they are, they are a fence, as he
speaks, and defense one to another, and easily ward the blows which the
enemy gives, and put others also in safety, causing them to fly, and yeald
the field, and this they do laying their wits, and their forces and their
labors together, and do it the more effectually, the more perfectly this
union and concord of wills and judgments is observed in every particular
Religious Order.

Chastity a great help.
10. The second is the Vow and observance of Chastity, which God does so highly
esteem, that he has used it in diverse occasions to overcome, and beat down
the Devil; a figure whereof we have in Holofernes and his army, which God put
to route by no other forces then those of chaste Judith, as Ioachim the high
Priest observed, and published in the public thanks, which he gave after so
great a victory, speaking thus in commendation of her: Because thou did love
chastity, and have not known any other man since thy husband, therefore the
hand of our Lord has strengthened thee, and thou shall be blessed for ever. And
certainly if it were so great a wonder to find one Judith among such a
multitude of people as there were, and this one woman brought so great a
happiness to all that nation; how glorious is it for the Catholic Church to
behold so many that live pure and chaste in it? and what benefit may we expect
thereof, but an excessive strength, and force to the utter overthrowing of the
Infernal Holofernes, that is the Devil, and of al his Satanical host?

11. Which when we behold, we may justly admire the wonderful providence of
God, in continually releeuing his Church with new supplies. For we may
distinguish, as it were, three Ages in it: The first of blessed Martyrs, that
have made the field of the Church more fruitful by watering it with their
blood. S. Greg. mor 2. c. q. Job 9.
The second Age was of holy Doctors, who in the Book of Job (as S. Gregory
interprets) were designed by the Hyades. For as the Hyades begin to appear
when winter is gone, and bring rain with them; so the Doctors began to rain
showers of knowledge and learning upon the earth, when the Winter of
persecution being gone, and the night of Infidelity lessened, the Spring began
to come-in and quiet times. The third Age was of Religious men, sent after the
two former in far greater number, to assist in the salvation of mankind. And
as in those first beginnings, when the Faith of Christ, being but yet as it
were in the cradle, was sorely co^bated with many enemies, it was fit there
should be some to defend it with the loss of their own life; and as the
number of the Faithful increasing, the learning of Doctors was necessary for
their instruction, and for the suppressing of Heresies, that necessarily sprung
up; so in this third state of the world, wherein the continuance of peace and
security bred love of earthly things, and brought people as it were into
darkness by forgetfulness of heavenly things, it was a special act of the
wisdom of God, to introduce such a kind of form of living every where in the
world, as should both curb vice by example of voluntary poverty and
humility, and with learning sight also against the Heresies, that are still
growing up.

12. At which, in my opinion, was evidently declared to S. Francis in an
admirable Vision, which he had, and by him to al others, that have forsaken the
world as he did. For S. Bonauenture relates of him, that on a time, when he
had given his clothes from his back to a poor man that asked him an alms for
the love of God, S. Ronauent in vi^a S. Fran^.
the night following as he was at rest, it seemed unto him, that he was brought
into a great palace, where there was a fair Hal full of al kinds of weapons,
and all the weapons were marked with the Cross of Christ. He asked whose all that armor was; and it was answered him, that it al belonged to him, and his
soldiers. Awaking out of his sleep, and not acquainted as yet with spiritual
things, he imagined that the Vision aboaded him some great excellency in
Chiualr^ and great honor; wherefore he presently went to a Count in Apulia, by
whose means he thought he might be advanced to some fortune in that kind. In
his journey our Lord appeared again unto him as he was asleep, and said:
Francis, who can be more beneficial unto thee, the Master or the servant? the
rich or the poor? Francis answered that which was the truth. Wherefore then
(says our Savior) do thou leave the Master for the servant? and God that
is rich, for man that is poor? And S. Francis replied: What then will thou
have me do? Return (says he) into thy country; for that which thou have
seen, does not aboade any temporal thing; neither is it to be fulfilled by any
humane, but by divine help. Out of which Vision we may learn that his Order,
and al other Religious Orders, which in like manner make war against the
Devil for the help of Souls, are al of them as so many magazins and armouries
richly stored, and as so many Towers of David built with forts, Cant. 4.
from which, as it is in the Can^^cles, a thousand shields do hang, and all the
armor of the strong.

How many Religious men have been eminent in learning and eloquence CHAP.
XXXII.
BESIDES these spiritual ornaments, which are supernatural, and without al
question the chiefest of al, and most to be esteemed, there be others within
the compass of nature, which add both grace and ability for the business of
which we are speaking; whereof the principal are Learning and Eloquence. For as
there be two things proper to man, wherein he surpasses the nature of beasts,
Man e^^elleth beasts in two things.
to wit, Reason and Speech: So whosoever does bring these two to greatest
perfection in himself, he is to be accounted most eminent among men, and more
eminent then if he excel others in wealth and riches; and men among themselves
are wont most of al to admire these things in others, and to have a great
conceit of those persons, in whom they behold them. Wherefore though the
benefits of Grace and Spirit be, as I may say, the proper coppy-hold of
Religious men, in which they are masters; yet the infinite goodness of God
has been also pleased to heap upon them these others in great abundance;
either because a Religious State should not want any thing that might be a
true and solid grace unto it, or because Learning and Eloquence applied to
spiritual things, make an excellent temper, both for the benefitting of our
own souls, and for the help of our Neighbors, which most of these Institutes
do attend unto.

Religious men have made Learning more learned.
2. And to begin with Learning, it has doubtless so flourished at al times in
Religion, that we may truly say, that Religious men have made Learning m^re
learned, and brought it to a more easy way of learning, and deriuing itself to
posterity. For in their lifetime they gave light unto it by teaching arguing,
explaining; and left after their death so many learned writings behind t^em,
that al Sciences, which they thought worthy themselves to take pains in, are
now by their endeauours far more plain and perspicuous to conceive. We will
therefore briefly runne-ouer all the Ages of Religion from the beginning, that
we may take a view of the infinite multitude of learned men, that have been
famous in all times. And it will be the more strange to find so m^nie of them, if
we consider that the ancient Monks did of purpose withdraw themselves from
matters of learning, to give themselves wholly to contemplation of heavenly
things, as S. Gregory relates of S. Benedict, S. Gregory 2. d. (...). 1.
who began to study the Liberal Sciences in Rome, but left them of purpose,
that he might be, as S. Gregory speaks, learnedly ignorant, and wisely
unlearned. And yet there never wanted learned men even in these times; for then
there was a Strapion, Lucian, Pamp^ilus, the six Doctors of the Church, three
Greek Doctors, and three Latin, of whom I spoke before, and many more, whom
I spare to mention, that we may come down nee^er our lives.

3. To begin therefore with the Order of S. Benedict, which is the ancientest
Order of the Latin Church, it is now one thousand and threescore and ^en years
since it first began. In the eleven hundred years therefore which have been
since the beginning of that Order, it is a thing almost incredible, how many
eminent learned men it has produced. For in the first Age, that is, til the
year Six hundred after Christ, we find Cassiodorus, Cassiodorus.
whom I mentioned before, and while he lived, Dionysius surnamed the Little,
Dionysius (...).
the learned man absolutely of his Age, both in Divinity and Humanity, as
the writin^s, which he has left, do show. About the same time lived also S.
Gregory the Great, 2. Gregorie^
Gregory of Tours; and Leander of Seuil, Lean^^r.
men that are famous to this day.

Caesarius.
4. In the second Age, from six to seven hundred, Caesarius (of whom also I
have spoken before) was famous in France, Eutropius in Spain, John Bishop of
Gerunda in Portugal, Abbot Adaman in Scotland, Theodore in England, Theodore.
who being a Monk at Rome, was sent to Canterbury by Pope Vitalian, and was
the seventh Archbishop of that Sea, in whose commendation Vencrable Led
speaks often.

Vencrable B^de.
5. In the third Age, which is to the year Eight hundred, lived Vencrab^e B^de,
a man sufficiently known by his writings; and Boniface Apostle of Germany,
B^^^fi^e.
renowned b^th for Sanctity and Learning. After them came Ae^^dus Abbot, a
Grecian borne, who was a great Philosopher, a Poet, and a rare Physician, and
ha^h left many things wri^ten in Verse of matters of Physic. And Alcu^^us
master to Charles the G^e^^, (...).
and so highly in favor, that he was w^nt to call him his Delight; to his
wisdom Charles committed the ordering of the University of Paris, the form
whereof he brought from Rome. He has written many things both of his own
invention, and upon the holy Sepiptures. Paulus Diaconus was in esteem about
the same time, he that made the Hym^e of S. John Baptist, and wrote m^nie other
things, whereof part is yet extant.

5. In the fourth Age, til the year Nine hundred, Haymo.
Haymo a Monk of Fulda, scholar to Alcumus, and afterward Bishop, is
deservedly to be ranked among the learned of his time; he has written upon
all the Scripture and many things of his own. Rabanus Abbot also of Fulda,
Rabanus.
and Archbishop of M^nts, is not inferior to him; his writings alone are able
almost to fill a Library. For when he was but a child when his parents offered
him to the Monastery of Fulda, he ^ad profited so far in Poetry,
Philosophy, and in the Scriptures, that he had not his like in all Germany,
and perhaps not in the world. Angelomus Luxoniensis, known by his writings,
and Strabu^ of Fulda, Stra^us.
who is said to be the Author of the Glossa Ordinaria compiled out of holy
Fathers, were next unto him in time and learning.

6. In the fifth Age, from the year Nine hundred to One thousand, Odo Abbot of
Clun^ is commended for his knowledge in Divine and human learning. Odo
Cluniacen.
Heriger Abbot of Lob has the name of a learned man not only in France, but in
Italy and Germany. Ratheriu^ also a M^nk of Lob, Bishop of Verona, a man rare
for simplicity joined with deep learning; and many others; but among them
none is more famous then Rap^e a Monk of Fulda* Rodulphus Fuldensis.
of whom the whole Church of God had so great an opinion, that thinking none
comparable to him for Philosophy or Divinity, all the ^ard Questions were sent
him from al parts of the world.

7. The sixth Age was yet much more fruitful of such wits; and among them,
besides many others, whose names are extant, we may reckon Marianus Scotus,
Marianus Scotus.
who lived shut-vp in a Celle at Fulda eleven years together, and fifteen
years at M^n^z, in which time of his retireme^t he wrote his Chronicle from
the beginning of the world to his days, and was much respected by all for his
learning an^ much more for his sanctity.

8. About the same time Lanfranck was held to be the learned of his Age in
Logic and Philosophy, Lanf^an^k.
and the Light and Master of Divines. It is reported of him, that going from
Pama (where he was borne, and had read with great applause) into France, he fell
into the hands of thieves, that robbed him, and carried him away; which he took
so impatiently at first, that reflecting upon it afterward, he much condemned
himself for it; because having spent so much time in the study of holy
Scriptures, he had not learned to praise God in aduersi^ie; and presently he
made a Vow, that if he escaped their hands, he would betake himself to the
service of God. Being set free he came to the Monastery of B^^k, and there
lived for a while unknown, as if he had been an Idiot without any learning at
al, til some Italian merchants coming thither, discovered what he was. Then he
was put to read in his own Monastery, and afterward was promoted to the
Archbishopric of Canterbury by the Pope's Holiness. Anseim^ was his scholar
and successor in his Chair, S. Anselm^.
first at Beek, then in the Archbishopric of Canterbury, and resembled him in all things. The books, which are yet extant, of his writing, show sufficiently
his learning, so that we shall not need to say any mo^e of ^im.

9. Next unto these, we may reckon the two Cardinals that lived at the same
time; to wit, Humbert a Monk of Toul, Humber^.
whom Leo the Ninth made Cardinal for the rare learning and virtue which was in
him, and sent him to Constantinople to suppress the audaciousnes of an other
Leo Bishop of the Bulgarians; and Petrus Damianus, Petrus Damianus.
whose learning and eloquence is to this day testified by his writings; his
sanctity appears in that having been a long time Cardinal, and Bishop of
Hostia, weary at last of that kind of life, he withdrew himself (as S.
Gregory Nazianzen had done before him) to his former Monastical course, and
yealded reasons thereof in writing.

H^rmannus C^ntractas.
10. Finally, to let pass others, Hermannus Contractus was a great man in those
days; and his learning was the more memorable, because he had it by miracle.
This we find written of him. He was descended of a noble Count of Swedland, and
was crooked and lame from his infancy, which gave him the surname of
Contractus. Entering to be a Monk, he besought our Blessed Lady very earnestly,
that she would be pleased to cure him of his infirmity. She appearing unto him
in broad daylight, bad him choose, whether he would be freed of his lamenes,
and remain unlearned as he was, or continue with his infirmity, and be
eminent in all manner of learning. Hermannus choosing this latter, as he ought,
he ever after profited wonderfully in all kind of knowledge; and it is thought,
that he had not his like in many Ages; and particularly he spoke Latin, Greek,
and Hebrew, as his natural language.

Petrus Cluniacensi^.
11. In the seventh Age, til the year One thousand two hundred, we find many
very learned men in all kind of Sciences. Peter Abbot of Cluni is reckoned
amongst the chiefest of them, whose books are yet extant, and in particular his
Book of Wonders and Revelations, that happened in his time.

Sigebert. Gratian.
12. Sigebert Monk of Gembl^ux at the same time wrote his Chronicle and other
Histories. Gratian Monk of Bologne compiled the famous Work called the Decrees,
out of the Sentences of the holy Fathers, and Determinations of Popes; which
Work was afterward allowed-of by Pope Eugenius the Third. But the famousest of
al were Hugo of Saint Victor in Paris* Hugo Victorinus. Rupertus.
and Rupertus Abbot of Tuy. The many Volumes which this latter has left
written, do testify the eminency of his learning, and the miracle also by
which he received it. For finding himself very dull, he earnestly begged of our
Blessed Lady, she would vouchsafe to beg of her Son, that he might
understand the Scriptures. Our Blessed Lady appeared unto him, and told him,
his request was granted; and that he should have so much insight in them, that
no body in that Age should come near him; only that he should not bury his
Talent in the ground, but carefully traffic with it; which certainly he
performed abundantly; for he never after ceased to write and read. In the
eighth Age, from One thousand two hundred til One thousand three hundred,
He^man.
Helman a Monk of Bea^uais was very skilful both in holy Scriptures, and
Secular learning, and left many things written. And at the same time Wiliam
Abbot of Poictiers was a great Divine, and a great Ciuil-lawyer. And Philip
Perganius in a Monastery of Padua was rare both for learning and eloquence;
and Peter Berchorius a Monk in Paris, of whose books there is a long Catalogue
to be seen.

13. From the year One thousand three hundred til the year One thousand four
hundred, we meet also with many famous men of learning, as Lapus Abbot of
Saint Min^a^, Lapus.
for Divinity, and both the Civil and Canon law; and Peter Bo^erius Abbot of
Auian, Doctor of the Canon law; and Peter Rogers, he that was afterward Pope,
known by the name of Clement the Sixth, Boli^ri^is Auian. Cl^men: 6.
a man of great wit, and excellent learning, and so eloquent, that he drew the
people in his Sermons to what he would; that it can be no wonder, if a man so
qualifyed, was raised to he highest dignity in the Church of God.

13. The tenth Age til the year One thousand five hundred, besides other
raremen, reckons some that are very eminent in the Canon Law; as Henry Abbot
of Nuremberg; John Rhode Abbot of ^reuers, who did God good service in the
Council of Basle; Nicolas also, he that first was Abbot of Munichen, afterward
Archbishop of Palermo, and lastly Cardinal. He wrote many Aduises in Law,
Panormitanus.
and a Comment upon the whole body of the Canon law; the authority whereof is
to this day so great, that no man is more famous then he.

14. Finally in this last Age, in which we are, we know of many learned men;
as Ignatius Abbot in a Monastery of Florence; John Bap^^lla in Parma; both of
them eminent in Divine and Secular learning. In Spain we hear of one
Paschalis, that was public Reader of Divinity in Salaman^a. And finally in
these our days, the name of one Gregory is famous, who was Abbot of the great
Monastery of Mantua, and afterward made Cardinal by Paul the Third. He is
said to have been skilful in all Sciences; and that he spoke Latin and Greek
both readily and eloquently. And as he lay on his death bed, it is reported of
him that he spoke thus to him that waited in his chamber: Behold, we have been
Cardinal thus many years; A memorable saying of a Cardinal.
what becomes now of this honor? How much better had it been to have dyed in
Religion, where my soul had been in less danger?

15. These were Monks, and few in comparison of them I might name. In other
Religious Orders, Learning has flourished more, because their endeauours have
been directed to the help of others, who cannot be helped without learning. And
it is a thing worthy of admiration, to see how plentifully al Orders have been
stored with rare wits, and men of great learning. But because these Orders are
of later standing, and consequently the subjects of them more known, we will
pass them over cursorily, and only name them.

16. First therefore, what rare men have the Dominicans had? Albertus Magnus,
Dominicans.
Heruous, Durand, Hugo Cardinal, who has written learnedly upon al Scripture;
Raymund, he that, according to S. Antonine, ordered the Decretals, by
appointment of Pope Gregory; S. Antonine himself, a man rare for learning and
sanctity; Capreolus, Petrus Tarantasius, he that afterward was Pope by the
name of Innocent the Fifth, Petrus Paludanus, Chrysostomus Ianellius, Ferrara;
both the Sotus; two Cardinals, to wit, Torquemada, and Caietan, and many more
whom it were to long a business to rehearse. But he that among them al cannot be
omitted, and of whom we have special reason to speak apart, as the chief of
them al, is S. Thomas, S. Thomas.
whose profoundnes, perspicuitie, and abundance of knowledge, who can extol as
he deserves? And besides these who are al of them known by their writings,
who is able to reckon al them that have labored profitably in the Church of
God, in every Age, to the great benefit of their Neighbor, by teaching
schools, determining doubts, delivering their opinions in several occasions,
and have lived with great commendation of al men, Franciscans.
the number of them is so infinite?

17. The Franciscans began somewhat later and not so generally at first to give
themselves to Learning. For their Founder S. Francis having received the
wisdom and knowledge, which he had, rather from heaven, then got it by his
own labor and industry, brought-vp his Friars to the same. S. Anthony of
Padua.
Yet S. Antonie of Padua coming to his Order with a great deal of learning
from the world, he permitted him to teach Divinity to them of his own Order;
and the short Epistle is yet extant in which he gives him leave to do it; so
that withal he be careful, as he speaks, that the occupation of learning,
extinguish not the spirit of prayer. Afterward upon this president (and also
upon necessity, that they might be able to help their neighbors) others among
them fell to their studies, and profited exceedingly in them. For about the
year One thousand two hundred forty five, Alexander Hales was famous for
learning; Alexander Hales.
and after him his scholar S. Bonauenture, S. Bonauenture.
a man full of knowledge, and facil and clear in his explications. And about
the year One thousand two hundred fourscore and five, Richard Midleton;
Ri^hard Middleton.
and John dunskot, commonly known by the name of Scotus in the year One
thousand three hundred; a man admirably subtle and acute. There followed them
their scholars Wiliam Ockam a very witty man; Scotus. O^kam. Ma^ron. A^uarus
Pelagius.
and Francis Ma^ron, he that in the University of Paris is styled the
Illuminate D^^tour. About the same time lived Al^^rus Pelagius a Doctor of the
Canon and Civil Law, and of Divinity; of whom every body had a great opinion
in his lifetime, but chiefly Pope John the Two and twentieth. We may add
Peter Auicolus, who by his learning got the Chair at Aix; and Nicolas Lyra,
Lyra.
a Jew by descent, who is famous for his Notes upon the whole Scripture
according to the Literal sense, about the year One thousand three hundred and
thirty, and of late years Alfonsus a Castro, Michael Med^na, Francis T^^lma^,
singular in interpreting the holy Scripture, and diverse others, that are so
known that it is to no end to name them.

18. We may make the like catalogue of men of other Religious Orders; for all of
them have been fraught with learned men, Other Orders.
and some very eminent among them. As among the Augustins Aegidius Romanus,
^^gidius Romanus. Thomas Waldensis. Dionysius.
in the year One thousand and fourscore. Among the Carmelites Thomas of
Walden in the year One thousand four hundred and thirty. Among the
Carthusians Dionysius, in the year One thousand four hundred and f^urescore.
To be short, he that desires to know more at large, what learning has been
brought to light by Religious men of al Orders, and what fruit has come of it
to the Church of God, let him read Trithemius, who has diligently and
carefully laid together all the Ecclesiastical writers, that have been since
the birth of Christ in every Age; in which large Work of his, he shall find
that Religious men are the far greater part among them, and shall meote with
few others in comparison of them; which is an evident argument of what I have
said.

The Society of JESUS.
In which kind also our Society of JESUS, though last in time, has done
something, and added a helping hand to the aduanceme^t of Learning. For not only
the whole body of the Society does atte^d to learning, it being one of the
chief things, which by institute it professes, but it has revived that which
was anciently ^he practice of Religious men, but of late years has been
intermitted, and not contenting itself with professing learning within itself,
it undertakes to communicate the learning, which it has, with others, by
teaching public Schools. And to the end it may derive the greater benefit to
others, it confineth not itself to Divinity or Philosophy, as for the most
part other Religious Orders do, but it teaches al Arts and Sciences and
Grammer-schooles; and leaves out none but such as are not so suitable to a
Religious profession to meddle in, as the Civil or Common Law, and Physic.

19. In fine, to summe-vp the discourse which we have made, Religious men may
in a manner glory, that most kinds of learning have been revived by their
industry, which but for them would have been wholly extinct; others have been
refined and polished by them. For what had become of Divinity, which is the
Queen of al Sciences, if it had not been cultiuated by them, and brought into
the way and method, in which it is? And though Philosophy has been learnedly
handled by others, yet Religious men have much illustrated and enlarged it, and
added, and explained, and reformed many things in it, according to the rule of
Faith.

20. It remains that we speak of Eloquence, Eloquence.
wherein Religious men have been as eminent as in Learning. And we shall easily
see it, if we consider the infinite multitude of Preachers, which in the
Christian world are beating their Pu^pits, specially at some times of the
year. For though al of them be not equally eloquent, yet no man can deny that
there have been and are to this day very many exquisit tongues, that with a
fluent style, and choice words, and abundance of good matter well couched
together, take, and delight, and lead the ^uditorie to what they please. For
if the effect of Eloquence be the applause of the hearers, certainly they, that
deal with people that are sensual (such as naturally loathe spiritual things)
and are notwithstanding able* not only to draw them to give ear unto them, but
to hold them suspense in admiration, and delight them, and steal upon their
minds and affections, so as to bring some from dishonest behavior to
chastity, some from unlawful trading to upright dealing, some from rancour and
hatred to peace and concord, finally not a few from the love of the world, in
which they were drowned over head and ears, to the contempt thereof, and utter
forsaking of al earthly things, must needs have a great gift in speaking.
Anciently the Orators that could speak to the humor of the people were in
greatest esteem; and we find few either in Greece or Rome that could do it;
and those few are so famous that the Countries, where they were borne, are
renowned for them. What an honor therefore is it to us, to have so many rare
men in this kind? But if we reflect upon the solidnes of the matter, the weight
of both their sayings, and, as I said, upon the effects which ours have
wrought, there is no comparison between them and us.

21. We read of S. Bernardin of Siena, S Bernardin of Siena.
a Franciscan-Friar; he was a man so wel-spoken, that in what place soever and
at whatsoever time he was to preach, not only the people that had nothing else
to do, came to hear him, but even tradesmen shut up their shops, and every
body else their houses, to be at his Sermon.

22. We find the like recorded of S. Peter, S. Peter Martyr.
who is now commonly called the Martyr, of the Order of S. Dominick. He
traveled almost through al parts of Italy; and making a stay for some time in
every city and village, he reclaymed and infinite number of people by his
wholesome exhortations from the filth of sin. At his first arriual unto any
place, it was an ordinary thing for all the inhabitants, from the highest to
the lowest, to go out to meet him with flags and sound of trumpets, and
accompany him with like solemnity when he went away, and had much ado to
part from him; and such a multitude always thronged to his Sermons, that he
was forced oftimes to be carried away in a cart, that he might not be crushed
in the press.

S. Antonie of Padua.
2^. What shall we say of S. Antonie of Padua? whom the people did usually
follow in such multitudes, that the largest Churches they could choose, were
not capable of them, but they were feign to carry the pulpit into the streets
or into the fields, and yet they flocked thither so fast to take place
betimes, that a man might see noble men and women repair thither before day,
and stand expecting his voice as it were from heaven. And while he was
speaking, though there were sometimes thirty thousand Auditors, there was not
the least noise, or muttering, or spitting to be heard, but al were extremely
silent and attentive. Did the like ever happen to Demosthenes, or to any of
those ancient Orators, though they were held to be never so eloquent?

S. Vincent.
24. We read no less of S. Vincent a Dominican-Friar; and one thing in
particular, which does lively set-forth the force of his eloquence. For whereas
on a time two malefactors were going to dye, he commanded them to stand at a
place where he was preaching, their faces covered, probably to the end they
might be less distracted; where he began to discourse with that vehemency of
the fowlenes of sin, of the pain of hell, and such other motives as are wont
to stirre-vp sorrow and repentance, that the two malefactors began first to
sweat for very grief and contrition of heart, and at last were turned into a
very coal, as if they had been burned with fire; which was apparent unto all the people, so soon as their faces were uncovered. How vehement was his
speech, which was able in this manner to inflame both the mind and the very
body also? We meet not with many of these very strange effects, which S.
Vincent wrought; but we meet with others much of the like nature, to wit,
inward conuersions, strange reformations, great restitutions. And that S.
Vincent and other Religious men were so powerful in their speech, is a great
honor and commendation to the whole State of Religion. Wherefore to conclude
this discourse of natural helps, as God commanded the Jews, when they went out
of Egypt, Exo^. 11.
to borrow the Egyptians best vessel and household-stuff, and carry it with
them: So when Religious men forsake the world, they go not out of it void of
natural gifts, but carry their abilities of wit, and memory, and learning,
and other qualities with them; and employing them with care and industry,
(...) the (...).
the Graces of Heaven concurring, they wonderfully increase them, and grow
eminent in them; and have in Religion both more abundance of these natural
gifts, then they could have had, if they had remained in the world, and are
more able to make use of them. For how often, or rather how daily are men's
wits, and eloquence, and other nobilities lost in the world, lying dead for
want of action? And though they be employed upon secular occasions, they are
notwithstanding but idly spent; because the things in which they are employed,
are earthly and pe^ishable; whereas in the negotiation, which Religion
affords, they are bettered, for the reasons which I have said, and concur
in great measure to the advancement of the glory of God.

25. In which respect some do truly and fitly compare Religion to that holy
Judith, Iud^^h.
who toward the ouercoming of Holofernes applied not only prayer, and fasting,
and hayre-cloth, as she was wont to do before, but made use of her rings, and
pendants, and slippers, and al her best attire, and set-forth her natural
beauty to the most; and God blessed her endeauours, adding (as the Scripture
tells us) more grace and beauty to her countenance; and gives the reason of
it, because she intended all this trimming of herself not for loosenes, but for
virtue. So when Religious men seek these natural abilities, they seek not
themselves, having utterly forsaken al from their heart; but they seek the
glory of God and the benefit of their neighbors, for whose good all that
beauty is intended; and consequently it belongs also to the goodness of God,
to increase their abilities, and (as I said before) to make them more graceful
and effectual, then the self-same would have been in a secular course of life.

Reasons, why Religious men profit so much in Learning. CHAP. XXXIII.
BESIDES the special assistance of God, which doubtless is the chiefest cause,
there be other reasons, why Religious men have been and are most commonly so
eminent in all kind of Learning. Time and application.
For first the study of wisdom requires time and application of mind; both
which are seldom found in the world, and abound in Religion. For Secular
people are continually in one business or other, and wholly taken-vp with the
cares of the world; they that have no business, spend their time in unprofitable
things, as in hunting and hawking, in play and such like pastimes; people being
generally given to ^ase, and to shun labor, as an enemy to nature.
Religious men on the other side are free from al worldly business, and
consequently have time at will, and they spend it not in idle trifles; neither
are they called from their studies, by the trouble and pains, which is annexed
unto them; because they are accustomed and take a delight in this cross and
mortification, as well as in many others.

2. Peace of mind, Peace of mind.
which follows out of the suppression and rooting-out of our disordered
affections, is a great help to profit in learning; for if it be not possible to
keep our mind attentive to our studies while we are running-about or in any
violent exercise of the body, much less can we understand any thing, if our
mind itself be wholly troubled, no more then we can see in a duttie troubled
water.

3. Temperance and sobriety helps also thereunto. Temperance.
For those that are full fed, have not the functions of the mind free as they
must, but are dull and heavy.

Chastity.
4. What need we stand multiplying words? Auerroes a Heathen, and yet a good
Philosoper, says, that Chastity and other virtues, by which the desires of
the flesh are curbed, The Grace of God.
are special helps for the attaining of Speculatiue knowledge. And finally (as
I said before, but I mean to insist somewhat more upon it) the light and grace
of God concurreth above al. For Religious men directing their studies and
labors to the service of God his immortal light, when God gives them good
success in them, he dilateth his own business, and concurreth to the advancing
of his own glory and cause; which is otherwise with most secular people, that
study for honor or lucre sake. And so we see that God does oftimes enlighten
the mind of Religious men, and show them obscure and hidden things, and makes
them capable to understand the hardest Questions by miracle, beyond the course
and ability of their nature.

S Thomas.
5. S. Thomas finding great difficulty in soluing a certain Question, on a time
when he had stuck much upon it, was ouer-heard by his companion Reginalu^ being
in the same chamber, as if he had been speaking with some body in the ni^ht,
and when their communication was ended, he called-vp his companion, and
dictated unto him many things without stop or pawse, contrary to his custom,
as if he had been reading them out of a book composed to his hand. Re^ina^dus
falling down at the Saint's feet, beseeched him earnestly and press him to
tell him, who it was he had been discoursing-with a little before. S. Thomas
ouere me by his importunity, tol^ him, it was S. Paul the Apostle, that had
given him the solution of that Question. And at other times the same Saint told
R^ginaldus in familiar conversation that all the knowledge he had, came to him
more by light from heaven, then his own labor and industry. Which Reginaldus
kept to himself so long as S. Thomas lived; for the Saint had desi^ed, he
would; but after his decease, he spoke of it often both in private and in open
School, that others might by his example learn, which is the shortest and
gaynest way to wisdom.

6. That which I rel^ted before of Hermannus Contractus, and Rupert Abbot of
T^y is yet more admirable, both of them coming to so eminent learning by the
gift of our B. Lady. Alber^us Magnus.
The like happened unto Albertus Magnus; for as we read in the Chronicles of the
Dominican-Friars, entering into the Order when he was but sixteen year old, and
profiting little or nothing in his studies, because he was dull and had but a
weak memory, he grew so weary of it, that he was tempted even to forsake the
Religious course which he had begun. And while he was thus wavering, he dreamed
in the night, that he was s^aling the walls of the Monastery to get away, and
that two venerable Matrons appeared unto him, and first the one and then the
other thrust him down the ladder, as he was getting up; and endeavoring the
third time to step up, a third Matron asked him, what he went about to do, and
wherefore? And having told her, she willed him rather to beg the assistance of
a fourth Lady, which was the Mother of God and Queen of Heaven; and told him
that herself and the rest would stand his friends. He did as he was advised;
and our B. Lady gave him friendly audience, but asked him, in what Science he
would choose to be eminent, in Philosophy or Divinity. He, like a young man,
that had not tasted of higher matters, says he had rather be eminent in
Philosophy. And our B. Lady replied, it shall be as thou desire; but because
thou have preferred this knowledge before the knowledge of my Son, in thy
^atter days thou shall leese al thy knowledge, and fall into thy former dulnes,
which now shall be taken from thee. The Vision vanishing, he presently felt an
alteration in himself, and ever after was easily master of whatsoever he heard
or read; or if he met with any difficult question, he turned himself to our B.
Lady, and claimed her promise; and instantly he was at the end of it. By this
means he came to that greatness which we read of him, and he taught many
years, and wrote very many things. And three years before he dyed, whilst he
was giving the explication of some passage or other in a public assembly, he
felt at the instant, that his memory failed him; insomuch that he could not
remember any thing at al. Then he told his Audience, what had happened unto him
in his youth; and making protestation that whatsoever might befall him, he
believed the articles of the Catholic Faith, and desired to die in the
profession of them, he came down out of his Chair, his Scholars following
him wi^h tears, and embracing him; and in the rest of his life he waxed as it
were a child again; and passed his time in great simplicity; yet so, as he
omitted not any thing belonging to the duty of a Religious man; for his
memory served him for such things, and for nothing else. This strange accident
which befell Al^ertus (God taking from him all the knowledge which he had lent
him, to show that it was his gift) gives us to understand, that other
Religious men, that are or have been excellent in Learning, have had it also by
the special help and grace of God.

Of three degrees of Beauty and Dignity, which are in Religion. CHAP. XXXIV.
LET us now consider the dignity of Religion, as it is grounded in the
distinction, which Divines do give, of three kinds of Religious Orders; for
some give themselves to Action; others to Contemplation; others couple Action
and Contemplation both together.

2. The first degree therefore confineth itself to outward actions, Religions
which give themselves to Action.
which though they be done to men, have relation to God; which S. Thomas
discoursing of, proves, because a Religious State is directed to Charity; and
Charity rests not in God only, but stretches itself to our Neighbor; S.
Thomas 21 q 188.2.2.
and yet in regard we love not our Neighbor but for God, whatsoever service we
do to our Neighbor, we do it to God; in which respect al such outward
actions belong to the virtue of Religion. And so we find, that whatsoever
benevolence is bestowed upon man, H^br (...)
is called by S. Paul, a Sacrifice, and an Host; and consequently, as the same
S. Thomas i^ferreth, Religious Orders may be erected for the performance of
any work, that is behoofful for our Neighbor; as for the exercises of
Learning or of War, so i^ be intended for the honor of God, for the Church,
or for the common good; and the like we may say of other works done for God's
sake, as to ransom prisoners, to gather alms for releef of the poor, or for
the placing of young women in marriage; to serve in Hospitals, and the like.

3. Which kind of Religious Orders is no new invention; for they have been
anciently in use, as we may understand by that which we read in Cassian,
Cassian.
where he brings Abbot Nestero^ discoursing to this effect: This manner of
practical life (for so he styles it) is used in diverse sorts. Colla. 14. c. 4.
Some employ themselves in entertayning of guests, in which kind he commends
Macarius for his meeknes and patience; others take charge of sick people;
others beg releef for them that are in misery; some again bestow their labor
in teaching, and instructing their neighbor, others in other businesses, and
(as he speaks) have been accounted great men for their good will and devotion.
And what can be said more in commendation of these kind of courses, then that
they that follow them, have made themselves voluntary servants not of God
only, but of men for the love of God, and of men infirm and needy? What
charity, what humility, what true and solid patience must needs belong to
such a course of life? Finally out Lord himself highly commends them in these
words: Matthew. 25.
What you have done to the least of mine, you have done to me. In testimony
whereof himself in person, King of Kings, has vouchsafed to honor these kinds
of service, with evident miracles; as when he was entertained by S. Gregory;
and received an alms from S. Martin; and the charity of John Columbinus, to
whom he appeared in the shape of a sick leaper lying in the streets; and when
S. John took him up upon his shoulders, and carried him home, and had washed
him, and laid him in bed, he vanished away.

Religions given to Contemplation.
4. The second degree of Religious Orders betaketh itself to the exercises of
the mind in Contemplation; which kind of life has been always held so
worthy, that Aristotle, and all the Philosophers that came any thing near the
truth, placed the felicity of man in it. Neither is this kind of quiet and
retirement to be accounted idle or unfruitful; for as Aristotle also did
observe, Aristotle. 10. ^^th. ^. 7 and 8. Eth^. 1. c 3.
it cannot be called idle, because though it cease from outward action, it has
the inward; and speculation itself is a kind of action. And we see, that
outward actions are oftimes attributed to them, that have not outwardly
labored in them, but inwardly only in thought and forecast; as a victory is
attributed to the General, though he fight not with his sword, but by his
counsel. Which if a Heathen Philosopher could arrive to know, what opinion
ought we to have of such a kind of employment, who know how great the business
is, which we handle in Contemplation, what communication is to be had with God,
what light, what acts of love? So that if we cannot but think the study and
occupation of knowing God, to be the prime and most excellent work we can
employ ourselves in, we must needs also conceive, that the Religious, who give
themselves wholly to this study, are equal, noble, and excellent. Let us hear
how S. Augustine does set them forth with his eloquence: S. August de mor^^.
I say nothing of them, that wholly retired from the sight of men, contenting
themselves with bread and water, ^
which is brought unto them at certain times, dw^l in the desert places,
enjoying familiarity with God, to whom with a pu^^ mind they cleave; and by
contemplation of whose beauty they are most happy; which happiness cannot be
conceived, but by them that are Saints. I will say nothing of them. Some are of
opinion, that they retire themselves out of the world more then they ought; not
understanding how much benefit we reap by their souls elevated in prayer, and
by the example of their life, though we be not suffered to see their bodies. It
were long and needles to dispute this question. For if a man conceive not of
himself, how venerable and admirable this eminent height of sanctity is, how
shall my words make him conceive it? Thus says S. Augustine. Now if we compare
these two degrees together, no doubt but this latter is more noble then the
former, consisting, as I said, in outward action. For as S. Gregory speaks,
S. Greg 6. mor c. 18.
great are the deserts of the Active life, but the Contemplative is to be
preferred; and this was figured (as he discourses) in the sisters, Genesis 29.
Rachel and Lia, Martha and Marie; Jacob beating more love to Rachel then to
Lia, Luc. 10.
and our Savior commending Marie above Martha, because she was not sollicitous
about many things, and had chosen the better part, which should not be taken
from her.

5. But because the vulgar sort, The contemplatiu^ life is a hard life.
who measure every thing by that which they do, and are capable of no more,
are wont to hold, that the Religious courses which are in Action, are more
difficult then others, which give themselves to Contemplation; S. Greg 10, mor.
c. 11.
making account that these latter live but an easy life; the authority of S.
Gregory, and the reason also which he gives, does evidently confute their
error. He says thus: The mind fastneth upon the Active life without fainting;
but in the Contemplative it is soon wearied by the weight of our weakness. The
Active lasts more constantly, by reason it dilateth itself in things that are
obuious for the behoof of our neighbor; The Contemplative shrinketh away the
sooner, because strayning itself beyond the bounds of flesh, it labors to
raise itself above itself. The Active takes the plain beaten way, and
consequently treads stronger in the works it goes about; the Contemplative
aiming at things higher then itself, falls the sooner through wearines to
itself.

6. But now finding that these two lives are both of them excellent, Religious
given both to Active and Contemplative.
though one of them be more excellent then the other, we may easily conceive,
how far the third degree, which comprehends them both, is more eminent and
more noble then either of them severally. For if we take them apart,
notwithstanding their excellency, there is something wanting in both of them.
S Cr^g 6. mor. c. 18.
For to go no further then the authority of S. Gregory aboue-mentioned,
Rachel (as he says) signifyes the Beginning seen; and Lia signifyes payneful:
betokening that in Contemplation we seek a Beginning which is God, in Action
we labor under the heavy burden of necessity. Again Rachel is said to be
beautiful, but unfruitful; Lia bleare-eyed* but yet fruitful: because, the mind
taking rest in Contemplation, sees more, and begets fewer children to God; but
where it is directed to the labor of preaching, Most excellent to join Action
and Contemplation.
it sees less, and bringeth-forth more children. These are S. Gregorie's
words. And by that which he says we may see, that if there were a course of
life, that without the incommodities of each of these States, could enjoy the
commodities of them both, there could not be a more perfect or more excellent
course. For whereas the greatest thing we can aim at, is God, who is the
Sovereign Good, and from whom we receive al things, and next are men of the
same nature with us, which is the greatest propinquitie or kindred in the
world, no action in this life can be more noble, then that which is directed to
the glory of God, and good of our Neighbor. And moreover God himself, Prince
and Gouuernour of this world, bending his thoughts and actions in a manner to
nothing else, but to raise men's minds to Heaven, from earthly things to which
they have so basely stooped, there is no question, but to imitate this care of
his, and cooperate with him in it, is one of the most noble, and most
acceptable businesses we can em^loy ourselves in.

S. Thomas 2 1. q. 188. a^^. 6.
7. Wherefore S. Thomas does rightly distinguish the functions of the Active
life into two sorts. For, says he, some have their full perfection in the bare
outward action; as to entertain pilgrims, to serve the sick, to go to war;
T^o sorts of outward a^tions.
and these certainly are far inferior to Contemplation: others flow from
the abundance of Contemplation, as when our mind inflamed with the love of God,
breaketh-forth into the outward actions of Preaching, Teaching, Catechizing,
and the like. And these are not only more noble then Action by itself, but also
greater then Contemplation alone, when it reflect no further then itself, and
reaches not to the benefiting of others. And yet this kind of life shall not
need to stand in fear, least it fall into that which our Savior reprehendeth
in Martha, to wit, solicitude and trouble about many things. For when
Contemplation is coupled with outward Action, they agree so well together, that
Contemplation is a help to the outward work, which we have in hand, and the
outward work does not hinder Contemplation. For, as S. Augustine says very well,
There is a kind of security and solid contentment of mind, S. Augustine Ep^st.
1^6.
which man does sometimes fall upon, so great as al worldly joy is not to be
compared to the least parcel of it; and it happens to him so much the oftener,
the more inwardly in the secret closet of his mind he adoreth God; and the
selfsame tranquillity remaynes not only while a man is solitary and retired,
but when he is in action, if his action proceed from that inward retirement.

8. For mine own particular, I am of opinion, that they that resolve to
communicate their virtue with others, are so far from leesing any thing by
it, as they rather get, in no small measure. For they put God to a kind of
necessity of giving them that, which is his will they should bestow upon
others. To which purpose we may apply that, which our Savior said; Give, and
it shall be given you; and the Holie-Ghost in the Proverbs insinuates: The
soul which blesses, shall be famed; and he that makes another drunk, shall be
made drunk. Luc 6.
So that it is with them much as it is with the Prince's Almner, whom the
Prince always furnishes with store of money; Prouer. 11.
though, if the Almner be trusty, there remain nothing to his share, nor is
he ever a whit the richer. Wherefore we may rather liken them to one of the
Prince's Nurses, that is fed from the Prince's table, and gives the infant part
of that, whereof herself has plenty.

9. Now how far this kind of life goes beyond al other Institutes, appears
by this one thing, because even they that have giuen-ouer al business, and
betake themselves to the spiritual rest of Contemplation, shall fail
notwithstanding of their duty, if, when their Neighbors are in spiritual
necessi^ie, they leave not their retired thoughts, and run to help them.
Which argument S. Augustine uses writing to the Monks of the Island Capraria, S
Aug. Ep ^1.
exhorting them not to prefer their own quiet before the necessity of the
Church; at whose labor (says he) if no good people would assist, themselves
would not have found the way, how to come into the world. And so we find, that
those great men among the ancient Fathers often forsook their solitudes and
the deserts in which they had continued many years, for this only reason; as
Theodore^ in his Book entitled the Religious history relates of Julian,
Theo^ore^ in Hist. Relig.
that when the wicked opinion of the Arians began to spread itself, Bishop
Acatius drew him from his den, with this persuasion, that seeing he endured so
much to please God, the best way to please him, Julian a (...). Io. 21.
was to go now into the field, and to his power rescue the Church, that was in
danger. Christ, when he asked Peter thrice, whether he loved him, bad him also
thrice feed his sheep. And God tendering the Salvation of Mankind so much as
he does, expects that all that love him and desire to be loved by him, take this
business to heart. And of Eusebius he also tells, how Am^anus won him to the
like business, wishing him to take heed he loved not himself more then God,
Eusebius.
spending his whole time and industry upon himself; for if he did truly love
God, he would labor to bring many more to love him.

10. Bu^ that which he recounts of Aphraates, a very holy man, expresses best
of all that which we are saying. For in the persecution which the Emperor
Valens raised against the Church, Aphraates.
he came like a good Soldier into the field, and put himself of his own
accord into the batail, leaving the wilderness, in which he had spent great part
of his life. And on a time meeting the Tyrant, and being challenged by him,
what he did among men, being a Monk, he answered vndantedly in these words: Tell
me, o Emperor; If I were a maid retired in my closet for modesty sake, and
should see my father's house al on a burning fire, were it fitting for me to
sit idly beholding the flame? And if I should do so, I should also be consumed
by the fire? And if thou think it comme^dable for such an one to run out, and
carry water, and labor by all means to quench the fire; it is that which thou
see me doing: thou have set the House of God on fire, who is most truly our
Father; and I do what I can to quench it. Thus spoke Aphraates in those days;
and ours are not much better, but are pestered with as much infection now
brought-in by Satan, as was then by Valens. So that the Religious Orders, which
now are in great number, and oppose themselves to his fury, do benefit the
Church exceedingly, and deserve great commendation and honor for it.

Religion is a perfect Commonwealth. CHAP. XXXV.
HItherto for the most part we have discoursed of the dignity, which every
Religious man purchases to himself by his virtue; which virtue notwithstanding
Religion itself abundantly gives occasion and means to purchase. Now we will
consider, what beauty and excellency is in the whole body of Religion. For
it cannot be, that God should so liberally bestow his graces upon every part
thereof, Arist. Imi^ Polit.
and leave the body neglected; the good of the whole being (as Aristotle
speaks) more divine. Therefore we will show, that Religious Orders are a most
perfect Commonwealth within themselves. And I insist the rather upon it,
because many ancient Philosophers having strayned their wits to set down some
absolute form of good, solid, and perfect government, not to the end to bring
it to effect and put it in practice, but only to draw such a thing in conceit,
and leave the form thereof in their writings, could never bring it to so much
perfection, as we see practiced in Religious Orders; but that which they
discourse-of in their books, comes far short, of what by the goodness of God
we possess.

2. First therefore to every man there belongs two kinds of life: a natural
life consisting of body and soul united, and a supernatural life infused by
Grace and other celestial habits; and consequently there be two sorts of
Communication amongst men; one in natural, another in supernatural things; and,
that which necessarily follows, S. August ^. ^. D^uit. d^ c. 8.
two Commonwealths. For as S. Augustine tells us, a Commonwealth is nothing
else but a company of men linked together by some common bond of society. So
that the nobler and the more excellent the bond is, in which men agree (it
being the ground of al Communities and Commonwealths) the more noble also and
more excellent is the Community and Commonwealth; as the Commonwealth of the
Romans, containing the government of the whole world, must needs be more
maiestical then a Commonwealth of pesants, or tradesmen, if any such be.
This our Commonwealth therefore does in this one thing far surpass al
Co^mon-wealths that ever were, or could be desired or proiected by the
Philosophers; because the good, which is intended in worldly Commonwealths,
is earthly and humane; the good which is in ours, is Heavenly and Divine; and
consequently surpasses al other more then any man can conceive. Arist 3.
(...) 6.


3. Another thing wherein our Commonwealth excels, is this. Cities, as
Aristotle acknowledges, are not erected for people only to live in; for so (as
he observes) there might be a city of beasts, because they must live, nor
only for defense against enemies, nor for traffic; because so al Confederats
should make but one City. The cause therefore, why Cities are built, is, to
live honestly and well in them. For if every one, that governs himself by
Reason, do th(...) does for some good end, a City also, which is a thing
much more noble then every private man by himself, must intend that which is
the best and greatest good, which is virtue and honesty. This is Aristotle's
discourse. To what Commonwealth therefore (if Aristotle himself were alive to
judge) does all this agree more properly, then to Religion? the end of it being
nothing but Virtue, and having so many easy ways to attain unto it;
specially that being also true, I Would 1. Col. c. 9.
which he observes, that where Virtue is not respected and honored above al
other things, the best state that is, cannot long endure. For where shall we
find one Commonwealth among those of this world, where power, and wealth, and
nobility, and favor do not bear the sway? But in Religion virtue does not
only usually, but almost necessarily, rule al because they have rejected al
earthly things, the glory whereof does so much dazzle peoples eyes; finding
also one thing more in it, which the Philosopher in another place does make a
great matter of, to wit, that it is a rule among Religious Orders, that
equality or superiority goes not by riches or blood, but by virtue; I Would 3
Pol. c. 6.
so that they that are equal or more eminent in virtue, are truly equal or more
eminent, and not if they be equal or more eminent then others in blood or
riches.

4. Wherefore having laid this foundation, as it were a beginning of our
Religious Commonwealth, let us consider the rest of the form of it, whereof
there be two parts; for as the body of every living creature consists of
the head that rules, and of other members that are ruled and obey, so the
body of every Commonwealth has certain members which belong unto it, to
wit, every particular person of it; The go(...) commended.
and the head, which be the Governors and Magistra^s. And to begin with that
which is principal, it is no small benefit and commendation of Religious Orders,
that they are governed not by many, but by one man. For whereas the greatest
good that can happen to a Community, is to be united and one within itself, it
is a much more effectual means to maintain this union, to have the government
in one man's hand, then to have it in many; for if it were in many, to
govern well they must become one by consent; as when many help to draw or
carry a great weight; for they cannot carry or draw it, unless they be in
some sort united, and in that union and c^^sociation become like to that, which
is truly one in itself.

5. Which kind of government we see in Nature. For all things depend of one* all the members of a body are governed by the heart; all the powers of the soul, by
reason; the whole world and al things in it, by one God. It is true, that in
the command, which one man alone has over others, there is this danger; least
al being in one man's hand, he turn al to his own private ends, by the
strength of his power, riches, or ambition. Wherefore to the end he may govern
well, he must (as S. Thomas discourses at large in his Direction for the
government of a good Prince) have God before his eyes, and endeavor to bring
his subjects to the obedience, and service, and honor of God; which how hard
it is in the world, and how easy and daily in practice in Religion, who is
there that does not see? For the principles, which are most apt to pervert men's
thoughts and affections, and turn them from the true service of God to their
private intentions (to wit, that we must establish our greatness* desire, to be
feared; cut-of the heads and causes of conspiracies; abound (...) pleasure and
plenty of earthly goods) are furthest of al from the servants of God; because
in that poor estate, there is no ground of wealth or pleasure, whereupon to
build the desire of these things.

Governors in Religion have nothing particular, but their ^^thoritie.
6. And moreover it is no small help, that they that govern in Religion, have
nothing more then the rest, but their authority; they have neither state, not
palace, nor attendance, nor servants, as Secular Magistrates have, which are
wont both to feed and inflame ambition, and make it swel; and ambition brings
with it al corruption of Government. Contrariwise the humility of the state of
Religion, which the Governors themselves always retain, put; them in mind,
that they are but like others that are under them* and that, which S. Gregory
admonishes, S Greg 2. Post. c. ^.
is practiced among them: They who govern, consider not in themselves the
power of order, but the equality of their condition; to the end they may not
rejoice in being over men, but in being beneficial unto them.

Governors by (...).
7. And in this kind our Commonwealths have the advantage of most others,
because that, which Aristotle esteems best in a Commonwealth, is observed in
them; Arist 2. (...) pol. ^.1^.
to wit, that the Governors succeed not by birth and descent, but by
election, being chosen thereunto by weight of their life, and behavior, and
wisdom. For they that come to their Government by inheritance, falling upon
their charge as it were by chance, whatsoever they be, they must be tolerated;
by which means many Cities have come to great mischief, the governors
undoing themselves and others, through rashness, and want of skill. The
government of Religion is free from this inconvenience; because it descends not
by right upon any man, but is given by Voices, or by other lawful power. And
whereas in other Commonwealths there is danger in the Voices, because Offices
and Promotions not being conferred but upon them that pretend and labor for
them, commonly he that presses most, and sometimes he that gives most money,
and makes most friends, goes away with it: In Religion it is far otherwise;
for Offices are rather cast upon them; that decline and refuse them. Wherein,
seeing Aristotle himself does directly affirm that they who pretend, are even
for that reason less worthy, in regard they show themselves to be ambitious
and desirous of honor, 2. P^l c. 7.
and such people do many unjust acts, what is it fit for us to think?

8. The same Philosopher does give this pertinent advise also, that the power
of them that govern, ^. Pol c 11.
must be on the one side so large, that they must have more then any one
particular man; Adu^^ for Governors.
and yet so limited, as they must have less then al of them together; which
we scarce see observed in any worldly Commonwealth. For he that once gets to
the stern, does presently so strengthen himself, that ever after he curbes the
people at his pleasure, and does with them what he list. In Religion the form
of government requires, that as they receive their power from their Order, so
it is stinted and limited by the Order, and may also be taken wholly from them.

9. Finally, not to spine-out this discourse too long, let us see what does
chiefly belong to the duty of a Governor, 1. P^l. ^.
in the opinion of this Philosopher. He places it in that he make account,
(...) are (...).
that he is servant to al his subjects, and bend al his actions and thoughts,
to the benefitting of them. This, says he, was at first the resolution of
every good King; but fell to be corrupted, merely by the commodities which
accompany that place. This which Aristotle therefore says was anciently in
use, and grew afterward to be otherwise, we findest^ in practice in Religion.
For the Governors do wait upon the benefit of their subjects, as servants
upon their masters, principally taking care for their souls* and being also
careful of that which belongs to the body; when the subjects are at rest,
and know not how or which way they are provided of necessa^ie food and
sustenance, the governors watch and labor for them, and every one in
particular taking no thought at al for himself, they are constrained to be
sollicitous for all. What is slavery, if this be not? By which means they are
also ^ree from the danger, which is in Kingdoms and Empires, least the
commodities which attend upon them, overthrow Religious discipline, because the
Poverty, which Religious men profess, excludes al these commodities, and
brings many inco^modities with it, and consequently excludes al envy and
ambition.

10. And so much for the head, If we compare the members one with another, two
things concur to the beauty and dignity of Religious Commonwealths. First a
great equality of unequal members, secondly, as perfect communication of
althings among them, as can be. For as a City, which has not several States
and Degrees of the Nobility, and meaner, and middle sort, of tradesmen, and
others, is but poorly provided, and never able to subsist* and yet if this
variety be not bound and linked together by participation in diverse things,
it would be in great confusion, because it could not be any ways One, but, as
Aristotle speaks, Arist. 3. Pol. c. 3.
full of many enemies of the Commonwealth. In Religious communities the
selfsame is full as necessary; and they enjoy both these perfections without
the incommodities opposite unto them.

11. For first, Diversity of Talents.
there is an inequality and difference among them in their natural
dispositions and inclinations, in their studies and knowledge, in their wit and
capacity, and other abilities of their mind and understanding; as in all other
things that are rightly ordered, there is ever some difference and distinction.
In the heavens, some stars are bigger or lesser then other some; in this
inferior world, all the beasts of the earth are not of like bigness, or
strength, or quicknes; the members of the selfsame body have a difference in
the honor and beneficialnes of them; and that great Householder has not
divided his Talents equally among al men, but to some he has given one; to
some, two; to some, five; which kind of disparitie in Religion, as it is
altogether necessary and very useful, so doubtless (if we consider it well) it
cannot choose but be a great ornament unto it.

12. And to the end it may be no occasion of breach of unity and concord, No
breach of unity among Religious.
it is tempered with such admirable equality among them, that there cannot be
any thing more like and equal one with another, then people that live in
Religion. They go clothed alike, and al wear one kind of Habit, their
lodging and diet is alike, and every thing else that is outward to the eye; but
much more that which is inward, agreing in love, and participation of good
works among them, of which I have spoken at large before, and having benefit by
what soever good is in the particular Religion of which they are, and in all
other Religi^us Orders besides. These are the solid comforts of a Religious
life, wherein there is no difference betwixt the learned and the unlearned,
betwixt the wisest and the ignorantest man among them. S. Aug ^. Ciuit. c. 2^.


13. Why therefore may we not say of them, s S. Augustine said of a City well
governed, Similitudes of concord.
that they are al like a consort of Music, where diverse Notes combined
together make a melodious harmony? For what City can challenge this
property with more right then Religion, where there is such variety of
persons, lincked together with such concord and discord, and proportionable
disproportion. For if the connection of natural things is beautiful and
admirable, by reason of the dependencie, which they have of one another in
their motions, from the first to the last, finding the like connection in things
that are governed with reason, it must needs be the more beautiful and decent,
the more perfect and noble the nature of them is; and consequently, if the
disposition and order of those inferior things, breed delight in whosoever
does behold them, these must needs breed much more in practicing the like order
and connection. So that whereas the Pythagorians imagined a kind of Harmony in
the Celestial Orbs, by reason that their motions so well ordered, and so
constantly observing the selfsame course and distance, does express a kind of
Musical co^cent equally various; Religious Orders do so lively represent the
same, that if we lend the cares of our mind unto them, we cannot but perceive a
most heavenly co^sort.

14. Finally, the perfect communication of al inward and outward things, which
I mentioned before, no body drawing any thing from the rest to his own
particular, is an exceeding grace and ornament to this Religious Commonwealth.
Plato, Plato dial. 5. de Rep. John Chrysostom^ ^ll^. ^^. al p. p.
that great Philosopher, did so highly esteem this one point, that it was the
main thing which he required in the Commonwealth, which he went about to
frame, as I said before; but it never could be brought to pass in any
Community, but in Religion. S. John Chrysostom does highly commend Religious
people for it, because their houses are free from Mine and Thine, which two
words (says he) have been the undoing of mankind. And it is in itself of great
consequence; not only because it is an evident sign of Union and charity, but
moreover preserves and nourishes it, and cutteth-of al matter of dissension,
which the desire of particular things, which every body cannot enjoy, is apt
to breed. And besides this communication* there be so many other means and
ways, to breed and establish perfect concord and union among them, that, as I
said els-where out of S. Augustine, they are one soul, and one heart; many
bodies, but not many hearts. They that wait, and those that are waited on
(says S. John Chrysostom) sit at one board, S. John Chrysost^me R^m. 58.
and are served alike; they are clothed, and lodged alike, lead the same kind
of life There is not poverty and riches, honor and contemptiblenes. There be
little and great among them, according to the measure of every one's virtue;
but no man sees that. He that is little, is not grieved, as if he were slighted;
nor is there any man, that slights him.

15. Deservedly therefore does the Prophet David reckon this among the
wonderful works of God, that he makes people of one fashion to dwell in a
house; that is, so loving and united together, as if many were but one. And
our Lord himself speaks of it by the Prophet Sophonias, Soph. 5 9.
as of a promise of great account: I will restore to the people a chosen lip,
^^at al may call in the name of our Lord, and serve him with one shoulder. Where
the nature of a Religious state is described unto us, consisting in two things,
to wit, in worshipping, and praying, and calling upon God, expressed by the
word Lip, and a ch^sen l^p; and in brotherlike love and union, al concurri^^
with (...) strength, and making as it were one shoulder, by which means, if
there be any burden in this service of God, it is the lighter to every
particular, and felt the less by them.

How much honor Religious Orders have done to the Church of God. CHAP. XXXVI.
A City placed upon a hill, cannot be h^dden; and they light not a candle, and
put it under a bushel, Matt. 5.
but upon a candlestick, that it may give light to all that be in the house.
Virtue has this property, that it bewrays itself by the light which it
has, no less then any other light; and the more perfect it is, the m^re it
does shine abroad. Which if it be true in every particular man that is
virtuous, how much more true is it, when many virtuous men join together,
and make one Corporation and city? We may justly therefore say, that Religion
is a City placed upon a hill, both because it is compounded of several persons
as a Cit^ie is, whereof we have spoken already at large in the precedent
Chapter; and it is seated in an eminent and lofty situation, to wit, in in the
top of Euangelical Perfection, which al, that have not arrived to so high a
pitch, but remain in an inferior estate, must needs admire, and lift-vp their
eyes, as to people that are above them. And consequently the City itself
being so noble, and seated moreover upon a hill, so that it cannot be hidden,
but must needs be in the eye of every body, all the glory, and commendation,
and worth, which it has, must also redounde to the glory and commendation of
the whole Church, whereof it is a part. For which consideration S. Gregory
Nazianzen calls Religious people, the first fruits of our Sauiour's ^lock, S.
Gregory N^zian. ^^. 2. in Iul.
pillars, and crowns of Faith, and pre^ious margarits. And S. Hierome:
Certainly the Order of Monks, and Virgins, is the sl^wer, and as it were a
precious stone among the ornaments of the Church. He says a Religious course
is both a Flower, S. Hier. ^p. 17.
and a Precious stone, declaring in the one the beauty of that state, and in
the other, the great esteem and value, which is moreover to be made of it, and
the holy Church partaketh of them both. For the dignity and beauty of this
life does both exceedingly comfort, and delight, and encourage the Faithful,
and confound the Adversaries thereof. Insomuch that that great Champion of the
Catholic Faith S. Augustine, in the book which he wrote of the Manners of the
Church, among other arguments, which he brings to disprove the errors of the
Manichees, against whom he penned that Treatise, he insisteth mainly upon this*
that in the Church, there shall be such multitudes both of Heremits leading a
solitary life, and Monks living in common together; and describing their
manner of conversation at large, at last he concludes, as it were, brauing the
Manichees in these words: S. August. de mori^u^ Eccl. 3.34.
Oppose yourselues, if you can, you Manichees, against these; behold them well,
and name them if you dare without lying, and with shame enough. Compare their
fasting with your fasting, chastity with chastity, clothing with clothing,
sare with fare, modesty with modesty, charity with charity, and, that which
in po^teth most, orders with orders.

2. S. Laurence Justinian, S. Laurence Just. de Obed. c. 1^.
a man renowned for learning and sanctity, handles this selfsame subject yet
more copiously, and deserves to have his whole discourse set down at large.
He says thus: Among other things which advance the glory of God, and make
Infidels have a good esteem of the Catholic Faith, is the living of the
Faithful in common together; and specially the life of them, that contemning
the vanities of this transitory world, and abandoning the pleasures of the
flesh, and promises of wealth and honor, dedicate themselves to God in the
Cloisters of Monasteries by perpetual vow of a voluntary servitude.
Description of a Religious life.
For who can do otherwise but praise and extol the Divine goodness, and wisdom
unspeakable, beholding innumerable people of both sexes in the flower of their
youth, in perfect health, and proportion of their body, swimming in abundance
of earthly substance, happy in the possession of lands, and vinyards, and
houses, and servants, and honored with many noble friends and kinsfolk,
willingly to renounce the world, and spurn at the pride thereof, to forsake al
their kindred, and to put themselves into the service of our Savior Christ, by
exercise of obedience, under the conduct of a man that in a manner is a
stranger unto them? For this certainly is beyond that, which men ordinarily
do, and beyond the common fashion of living. For the natural affection which
we have as children, does not suffer us to contemn them that begot us, and
brought us into the visible light of this world. The law, I say, which is
naturally inbred in the hearts of men, does not persuade us to leave our own
city, al our kindred, al our play-fellowes, al our friends and acquaintance;
and to go dwell with strangers, to travel into far countries, cities, and
villages, not for a year, or two, or three, but al our lifetime; and of our
own free choice to suffer hunger and thirst, cold and nakedness, to punish our
bodies also with watching, and fasting, and other labors, to bring it under
with daily abstinences, and, that which is greater then all this, to fight
against the inclinations of ou^ own will. For nature itself inticeth, custom
teaches, humane frayltie urges, love of good company draws, common
courtesy persuades, and the swe^^ conversation of people at home, and
specially of our kindred, does compele^^rie body, that has any spark of
reason, to keep where he was borne, to enjoy the company of his kindr^d, to
take care of his own possessions, and take his pleasure in them, and to follow
the inclinations of his own will. But when we see the quite contrary acted, it
proceeds either out of fear of death, or certain knowledge of the ficklenes
and falsehood of the world, or out of an assured and strong hope of future
happiness; which hope we cannot taste of, but by the light of Faith, which is
given us before. And we come not to the possession of this Faith, of which we
speak, by our own free will, but by the gift of God, who has mercy on us,
and draws us, and preserves us. The glorious Martyrs enlightened with the
splendor of this Faith, have with most ardent charity endured for Christ,
fire, imprisonment, chains, stripes, torments, reproaches, exile, loss of
goods, and death. The holy Anchorets, endued with the cleernes of this Faith,
have filled the deserts, walked the wildernesses, builded Monasteries, therein
to attend to the glorifying of God, to give themselves to often prayer, to
labor with their hands at convenient times, and to assemble together the
children of God dispersed every where abroad, and to overcome the secret
attempts of their invisible enemies. Inspired certainly by God, they understood
that this world is full of concupiscence of the flesh, allurements of the eyes,
and other pleasures, and of pride of life. They saw that men did daily cast
themselves headlong upon vice, neglect the Law of God, contemn his
commandments, follow the pleasures of present delight, and give themselves
wholly to earthly lucre, transitory honor, hurtful dishonestie, and secular
cares, which make the lovers of them strangers to God and to themselves, and
breed an auersion from al virtue. For, light and darcknes, vanity and truth,
virtue and vice, the love of God and of the world, the works of the flesh and
of the spirit, the joys of this life and of the life to come, cannot meet in
one, nor stand together. Wherefore to the end they might do God the service,
which is due unto him, and curb the passions of vice, which continually
boyle-vp from the sting of sin and itching flesh, and bridle their own will,
from which every beginning of sin does receive nourishment, for the love of
Christ they have delivered themselves over into such prisons. By these laudable
intentions, by this manner of living, our holy Mother the Church is glorified.
For even in these times, in which we see iniquity abound, and the charity of
many to grow cold, there want not some, who tread the footsteps of the holy
Fathers, though not with so great fervor of charity, as they. For there be
sundry Congregations of the servants of God, which though they be in their
habits different, different in their constitutions and ceremonies, yet labor
with one and the same intention of glorifying God, and gayning their Neighbor,
and for the same end of coming to their Heavenly country. O how many of both
Sexes, in this great multitude of servants of Christ diffused euerie-where
almost throughout the whole world, are eminent for sanctity? How many fatten
themselves with singular devotion, and continual prayer? How many are
conspicuous for heroical virtue? Some are rare for humility, others for
constant patience, others for purity of mind, others for zeal of
righteousness, others for the love of God and their Neighbor, others for their
singular pre-eminence in Religious conversation. Al of them labor without
envying one another, without pride of heart, according to the measure of Faith,
and of the Grace, which is given them, to please God, to profit daily, and to
heape-vp gaynes of the Talents, which are lent them.

3. Thus far S. Justinian; wherein he has discoursed so largely, and so
eloquently, that we shall not need to say any more of this point, but only
agreeable to the sense of these holy Fathers, apply the saying of the
Holie-Ghost to Religious people, Ps 42.
where he says by his Prophet: I have framed this people for myself; they shall
recount my praise. For who has framed this people brought from a farre-of, as
there it is said, and gathered together from the utmost bounds of the earth,
but God, who commands light to shine from darkness? And to what purpose is it
framed, but to recount his praise? This is the business of Religious people, not
only because they sing and proclaim his praises with their mouth, and speak
of his glory to al men, but they recount them by their very life and
conversation. For as a curious picture, or whatsoever excellent piece of
workmanship, does silently tell us, how rare the workman is and lays his worth
before our eyes, and persuades more evidently and certainly of it, then any
man's speech can do: so these kind of Religious Institutes, of which God only
can be the Author, do most clearly and certainly lay down before us, his
infinite wisdom and goodness.

Of the honor, which is done to Religious people, even in this life. CHAP.
XXXVII.
OUR Lord spoke a word by his Prophet, which he has always made good:
Whosoever shall honor me, I will glorifye him; and they that contem^e me, shall
be ignoble. Religious people therefore employing themselves so wholly in seeking
the glory of God, 1. Reg. 2.
that it is their whole endeavor to humble and abase themse^ues to that end,
we may with reason think, that the Divine goodness has also had a particular
care to honor this state of life, and to give it such beauty and grace, as
should be admirable even in the eyes of men. For the promise, Pr^u 14.
which we read in the Proverbs of the fruit of Wisdom, was to be fu^fi^led
in them: Take it, and it will exalt the^; thou shall be glorified by it; when
t^^u shall have embraced it, S B^sil (...). A^^e^.
it will give to thy head an addition of graces, and protect thee with a noble
cr^wne. S. Basil, among other reasons, which he brings to move people to
Religious courses, does not stick to use this: that they, that enter into
Reli^i^n, shall be glorious even upon earth; their friends will make great
account of them, and use their help and intercession in their behalf, and
furnish them with necessaries, is valiant soldiers, and inuit them home to
their houses, and entertain them joyfully as Angels of God, ^al. 4.
and (as the Apostle speaks) as CHRIST himself.

Arist. 4. Eth 3.
2. And if we consider the nature of the thing itself, we shall ^ind, that it is
in a manner necessary, it should be so. For first Aristotle says truly, that
the true ground of honor, is goodness; and the greater the goodness is, the
greater honor is due unto it; Virtue is only wor^hie to (...) honored.
and consequently Virtue is the only thing, which with reason we can think to
be worthy of honor; and in like manner, they that have virtue. People that
are noble and rich in the world, and have great power, have but an outward kind
of worth and excellency, in comparison of them, that have virtue; but the
reason, why they are vulgarly more honored, is, because the vulgar sort of
people make account, that there is no other good, but these exterior things.
This is Aristotle's discourse; whereof it follows, that not only the wiser
sort, but the vulgar also, if they have any conceit* what true Virtue is, must
needs honor it far more, then any outward thing; and consequently, if
Virtue be so plain and conspicuous, that every body must needs see it, they
cannot but bear great respect unto it, and beh^ld it with great veneration.
Religious perfection is of this nature. For it is an eminent state of life,
severed from the ordinary courses which people take, and full of those orders
and practices, which must necessarily be admirable to the beho^^ers. For the
greater part of the world being so much carried away with the love and desire
of honor, and wealth, and pleasure, and other (...) commodi^ies, they cannot
but admire those, that they behold so high-flowne above them, that they do not
only not seek after earthly things, but contemn and despise them. Which
contempt is not secret in the mind and heart only, but is to be seen in their
very habit and whole course of life; so that every ordinary man must needs
discover it, and needs no great reflection to make him in love with it.

3. Secondly, (...) to God, makes them respected.
the near relation which they have to God, being consecrated to him, and
dealing familiarly with him, as his domestical servants, or rather friends,
does naturally breed a great veneration toward them. In so much that we see,
that it has always been the custom, not only among Christians, but among
Infidels, and those that have not had the true knowledge of God, to deal with
more respect with them, that have particularly devoted themselves to the
service of God, then with any others. For as there is no nation so barbarous,
but does in some sort acknowledge, that there is a Sovereign Nature so
powerful, that al good things are to be asked of it, and punishment expected
for offenses committed, in which respect they worship that Nature with
particularities and ceremonies, so there is no body, that does not think, that
they are particularly to be respected and reverenced, that have particular
relation to that Nature; and so we see the practice of al Antiquity. For, as
we read in Genesis, Genesis 47.
it was a custom in Egypt, that the Priests should be maintained at the
common charge which was the reason, why their possessions were not taxed, nor
seized in that dearth. And at Rome not only the Priests, but the Southsayers,
and diverse other inferior Sacrificers, were in so great veneration, that those
Offices being in the gift of the people, they were sought after and conferred
with great concourse and emulation; and it was held to be so worthy and
magnifical a function to Sacrifice, that when the Kings were put down, and the
name of a King was so odious among them, that nothing more, it remained
notwithstanding to the Priest without envy or distaste. People (...) God,
(...) among al Nations.
And we read that the Priest of Jupiter bore such sway, that people flocked
unto him, as to a Sanctuary. For if a prisoner fell at his feet, he was
instantly released; and if he were guilty, he was pardoned. The V^ssal Virgins
(which among them were as our Nuns are among us) were held to be so holy,
that no body must touch them, and they had two Sergeants went always before
them; and if by chance they had met any man that had been going to execution,
he was presently set at liberty. And to speak of these our days; what honor
and power do not the Iaponians yeald to their Bonz^; who imitating every
thing, which our Monks profess (but Chastity and virtuous behavior) their
habit, and singing, and living in common, and the like, are reported to be in
so great veneration, that they are like earthly Gods among them; they rule in
a manner al, and oftimes give and take away Kingdoms at their pleasure. And to
conclude, it is most certain, that all that ever have acknowledged any Divine
Nature (as al have done) have also borne particular respect to them, that have
dedicated and consecrated themselves to this Nature; and this opinion is bred
not by persuasion of others, or by law, or statute, but by the light of Nature,
without any teaching or instructing; which general consent of al nations in
whatsoever it be, is to be accounted the voice of Nature itself.

4. Wherefore, if not only the foolish but wicked Superstition and belief of
false Gods was anciently, and is yet so powerful in this kind, certainly the
true Religion, and worship of the true and Sovereign God, must needs be much
more powerful. For the greater knowledge and esteem Christians have now of the
great Majesty of God, more then the Infidels had of their false Gods, cannot
but breed also a greater veneration of them, that are near to so great a God.

S Dominick (...) in his lifetime^
5. We read of S. Dominick, that the more he did humble himself, the more
every body, even Cardinals and the Pope himself, did respect him; and the
common people did honor him so much, that they thought themselves happy, if
they could but come to speak with him, or touch his garment; and every body
did cut-of pieces of his garment, and kept them for relics, so that his upper
weed was always cut-of by the knees. And when his Friars, to ease him of that
trouble, would hinder the people, from so continually pulling him by the coa^e,
he bad them let them alone, saying: they must satisfye their devotion.

S Francis.
6. When S. Francis happened to come into any town, people thronged so thick
about him, that he was in danger sometimes to be oppressed; and once he stood
still, and gave every body, that would, his hand and his garment to kiss. His
companion admiring at it, asked, when he was private with him, what he meant to
do so. S. Francis answered him; Know, Brother, that they have not done me the
hundredth part of the honor, which is due unto me. Which answer troubling him
more then before, he gave him this reason: Because (said he) people honor not
me, but God in me, who gave me all the good and all the Religion that is in me.
And it is not the vulgar only that honor Religious people, but great Princes
and Monarcks, as Constantine honored S. Antonie, the Emperor Otho S.
Romualdus, coming to see him in his celle, and vouchsafing, as great a man as
he was, to take a lodging upon his hard couch.

S. Maurus.
7. When S. Maurus was sent into France by S. Benedict, Florus who was the
greatest Fauorit, King Theodobert had, presented his son and al his wealth
unto him; A rare example of piety.
and afterward betook himself also to his Monastery, to the astonishment of
al France. And King Theodobert himself went some days journey to visit that
new company of Christ's Soldiers; and when he can^t thither, and had made an
end of his devotions in the Church, going into the Monastery, he cast himself
upon the store before the Monks, laying his purple Roles and his Royal Majesty
under the feet of poor beggerlike men; and beseeching they would vouchsafe to
admit him into their Company (for so were his words) and inrole his name among
theirs; and bestowing many rich presents of gold and silver for their Church
ornaments, he departed, thinking that God had done him a singular favor in
suffering him to see and converse with those servants of his.

8. And of later years, in the same Kingdom, when Lewis the Eleventh by much
entreatie, assisted by Pope Sixtus the Fourth his command, got S. Franc^s of
Paula to come unto him from the furthest parts of Calabria, ^
how lovingly and respectfully did he entertain him? how much joy did the
whole Court and Kingdom of France express at the coming of so poor and
contemptible a man? So that it was apparent in him, that the excellency of a
Religious life, does oftimes (as S. Chrysostom discourses) make people that
are borne obscurely and meanly in the world, S John Chrysostom (...) vi^up*
v^. Mo.
and had remained in obscurity if they had not forsaken the world, by change
of their state of life become honorable in the sight of them, that before did
account them base.

9. S. Arsenius was schoolemaister to Arcadius son to the Emperor
Theodosius, S Arsenius.
and was so far out of his favor, that he was feign to fly, because he
understood that Arcadius had plotted his death. But many years after, when it
was known that he had betaken himself to the service of God in the wilderness,
Arcadius then Emperor writ an humble letter unto him, commending himself and
his Empire to his prayers. Arsenius certainly was neither more learned, nor
more noble then he was before; rather all the credit and renown which he had
gotten in the world, was now forgotten. How then came he to this new honor,
but by the Religious course which he did profess?

10. We might bring many other ancient and modern examples to the same
purpose; but to be brief, we will conclude this whole discourse with a notable
testimony of Cassian, Cass. Col. v^t. cap. vlt.
who says, that the promise which our Savior made of an Hundredfold, is
fulfilled in the reward of the present honor, which Religious people have in
this life. These are his words: Do not they, I pray you, that serve our
Savior faithfully, most manifestly come by that Hundredfold grace by this,
that for his names sake they are honored by great Princes? And though they
seek not after humane glory, yet they are venerable, even in the afflictions
of persecution, to al Judges and people in authority, though otherwise their
meannes might have been perhaps contemptible even to people of inferior
condition, by reason of the baseness of their birth or seruil condition, if they
had remained in the world? Which we may evidently prove by the example of Abbot
John, who resideth in the wilderness which bordereth upon the town called
Lycus. For being borne of very mean parentage, he is grown so admirable to
almost the whole world for Christ his sake, that the Lords of this world (who
by reason of their government are terrible) even to Kings and Princes, do
honor him as their Master; and craving answer from him from countries
afarre-of do commend the state of their Empire, their safeguard, and the events
of wars, to his merits and prayers. Thus says Cassian. To which we may add,
that this is the truest and greatest honor of all the honors which are given
in this life to men. For when others are honored in regard of their power, or
their wealth and riches, the honor is not so much given to them, as to their
riches or their power, in regard of some commodity or reward, which people
hope from them. But in a Religious state, where there is none of all this,
certainly whatsoever respect is done them, comes wholly from the beauty and
virtue of the State itself. In which kind there happened a remarkable thing to
John Becanus a Fra^ciscan-Friar, John Becanus.
as we read in their Chronicles. He was held to be the learned man of his
time; and reading a public Lecture of Divinity in the Pope's palace, every
body had such an opinion of his learning, that besides others of al sorts that
came unto him, many Bishops and Cardinals resorted to hear him; and they were
wont to rise-vp and stand bare, as he passed through the school to his Chair.
It happened that he was made Archbishop of Canterbury, and continued
notwithstanding his Reading; and then none of the Cardinals would stir for
him, because before (they said) they honored Virtue in him, wherein they
acknowledged themselves to be his inferiors; but now they might be thought to
honor him in respect of his dignity, wherein they were above him. True honor
in Virtue.


11. True honor therefore is that, which is grounded in Virtue, and in the
State itself; and this is the best and solidst foundation. For if Religious
people suffer sometimes by slanderous and reproachful reports and speeches, it
is but seldom, and happens not only by malice of the Devil, that opposes them
but by permission of God to exercise our virtue, to increase our crown, to
make us conformable to his Son, who foretold his Disciples as much, and in
his Disciples al others: Io. 15.
If they have persecuted me, they will persecute you; and gives this reason:
because the servant is not greater then his master; as who would say, he that
will be my true Disciple, and true servant, must undergo the like.

12. Wherein we may behold the wonderful wisdom of God, and his providence over
us, disposing so, that whereas the excellency of this state is apparent to most
men, and honored by them as it deserves, he would not but that there should
be some, who should not see it, but be cross sometimes to Religious people, to
the end we and others might benefit ourselves by it. For if al should set
Religious people at naught, no body could have any benefit by us; if al
should love and cherish us, it would also turn to our great prejudice. In the
one therefore God had an eye to our good, in the other to the good of our
neighbor; and tempereth both so, that our life (according to the saying of the
Apostle) might ma^ch, as it were, by certain steps and degrees, by glory and
ignobilitie, by in^ainte and good report, and we ourselves as unknown, and yet
known; a^ seducers, and yet people of truth. And yet though we ought to be
thus armed on the right hand, and on the left, that, which we have savd and
proved, remains undoubted, that even the world does honor this State above
Kingdoms and Empires. A notable saying of S. Lewis.
Lewis son to King Charles of France understood it well, whom we mentioned
before. For abandoning the inheritance of so rich a kingdom, and entering among
the Franciscan-Friars, as ^e had much and long desired, one of the Friars of
the same Order coming unto him to congratulate him, among other things, said,
that he had that day highly honored the Order by his entering into it; but
Lewis replied: Yea rather, I am this day more honored by this Habit.

The end of the Second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK, OF THE HAPPINESS OF A RELIGIOUS STATE.
THE PREFACE. Of the pleasantnes of a Religious course of life; and the
impediments, which are wont to occur therein, by example of the Children of
Israel going out of Egypt.
IN the delivery of the Jews from the Servitude of Egypt, and their long and
laboursome peregrination to the desired Land of Promise, God anciently showed
us a perfect pattern of the whole course of a Religious vocation; and this our
happy state is so natiuely expressed, and as it were drawn to life, by that
admirable and famous work of all the works, which God wrought for the benefit of
that people, that so far as carnal things can express the spiritual, and
outward things, which are far inferior, declare the inward, it could not
have been set forth in more natural of lively colors Which diverse of the
holy Fathers, and particularly S Bernard does observe in one of his Sermons,
S. Bernard ser. 39. in Can^.
discoursing of this whole mystery, as if al things had happened to them in a
figure and shadow, and the fruit and substance had been wholly communicated to
us. There, says he, the people was brought out of Egypt, here a man is drawn
out of the World; There Pharao, here the Devil, is vaquished; there Pharao his
chariots are ouerturned, here carnal and secular desires, which war against
the soul, are overthrown; they in the, waves, these in tears; they are
brackish, these are bitter; and I verily think, that when the Devils happen
upon such a soul, they cry out: Let ^^fly Israel; because God fights for
them. Thus says S. Bernard, and much more to the same purpose.

2 Let us therefore, following so good a leader, acknowledge (according to the
grace which is given us) in this benefit bestowed upon the Jews, as in a
picture, a far greater benefit bestowed upon ourselves. For if in the clear
light, wherein by the goodness of God we now are, To serve the world, is a cruel
slavery.
we behold the Secular state, in which formerly we lived; what was it but a
servitude? And in very deed a far more hard and cruel servitude, then that
of Pharao; because it was not our body that was held captive, wherein people
apprehend so much misery, but it was our soul, which was in captivity, the
thraldom whereof is much more to be lamented. Besides that, for one man to be a
slave to another man, is not so very dishonorable; but nothing can be more
base, then to be a slave to Sin and the Devil; nothing more vain, then to
serve the World. The vileness, together with the trouble and tediousnes, of
the works, which we were forced to undergo under so severe a command, will lay
it more plainly before our eyes. For what was our daily occupation in the
world, but to work, as they did, in base and seruil businesses, in dirt, in
gathering straw, in making bricks? For when people bestow their whole time and
al their labors and thoughts, as the fashion is, in heaping of honors and
riches, they handle nothing day and night, but earth; their hearts, their
thoughts, their cares are set upon nothing but earth; because al these are
earthly things, and indeed nothing else but earth. And there wanted not in the
world cruel extortioners, to wit, our disordered desires with a hard hand
continually calling upon us, and pressing us, and compelling us to double our
labors, and to undertake more then (...) were able to wealde, and affording us
no rest nor respit; so that in effect we did then lead a most miserable life,
not only full of trouble and pressure, as the word Egypt does signify, but a
base and (...) kind of life, otherwise then people ordinarily take it to be,
out of the foolish conceit which they have; because it did inuolue so vile and
so abject a kind of slavery, as I said.

The Enemie's endeavor against good resolutions
3. Out of which servitude if by Divine instinct a man go about to withdraw
himself, with what fiercenes, with what fury does the cruel Pharao, the World,
and, he that domineereth in the world, the Devil, set upon him? Then, as it
were, beating his drum, and sounding his trumpet, he makes all the forces he
can to cut of those wholesome thoughts, or to divert them. On the one side he
ranks the pleasures and commodities of this world, the sweetness of liberty,
the hope of preferment, the greatness which worldly wealth brings a man unto,
the love of his kindred; and with these he bids him battle: On the other side,
he lays before him the austerities of a Religious life, the incommodities of
Poverty, the trouble of Obedience, and twenty such considerations, which are
apt and able to fright a man. And if these inward assaults, which he makes,
have not the effect which he desires, he betakes himself to his outward
engines; he stirres-vp friends to give him evil counsel, he tempts his
companions to laugh at him, he oftimes makes use of the power of great men, by
force to withdraw him. Among al which devilish devises, none are usually so full
of venom as when he labors to make us stoop to the authority of a father
commanding us, or of a tender weeping mother beseeching us, or of our brethren
and kinsfolks entreating us. These be the horsemen and chariots, with which
the Enemy of mankind does pursue them, that (...) from him.

God sighteth for them, that desire to betake themselves unto him.
4. On the other side, our Lord and God, who calls us out of Egypt to offer a
perpetual Sacrifice unto him in the Desert, does fight for us, as if the cause
were not ours, but his own; and does not only break the wicked encounters of
the Devil, and bewray his treacheries, but commonly does lay most grievous
punishments upon al such, as adventure to be his instruments in so wicked an
enterprise, as he dealt with King Pharao; and we shall scarce find any one
sin so severely and so presently punished, as this; and not without great
reason. For what greater wrong can a man offer God, then to ta^e away his
spouse from him, to profane his temple, to raze and demolish the workmanship,
of which he makes greatest account? what greater damage can a (...) do his
neighbor? or what has a man more precious wherein to suffer? So that S.
Hierome writing to ^usto^h^um (who had shut-vp herself in the famous Monastery
of the City of B^thl^^m) said both sagely and truly: S. Hierome Ep. 22.
Our Lord has delivered thee from the cares of this world, that forsaking the
strawes and brickes of Egypt, thou may follow Moses in the Desert, and
enter into the Land of Promise. Let no-bodie hinder thee, neither mother nor
sister, nor cousin nor brother; and if they attempt to hinder thee, let them
fear the scourges of Pharao, who, because he would not let the people of God
go to worship God, suffered those things, which are written. But God is not
only quick in punishing those that do oppose, but much more ready to assist
the Religious themselves, and to bring them out with a powerful hand and a
mighty arm; and if need be, he diuides the sea before them, he dries-vp the
waves, and breaking through al impediments, he brings them out of Egypt,
singing, that is, joyful, and with a light heart, and giving thanks to him, that
cast the horse and rider into the sea. This is that joyful Canticle, which S.
Bernard describes, S. Bernard sermon. 3. in Cant.
speaking to his Brethren in these words: Reflect upon that, which yourselues
have experienced in the victory, wherein your faith has overcome the world; in
the going out of the lake of misery, and of the dregs of dirt, you have also
sung a new Canticle to our Lord, who has wrought wonders. Again, when he
first gave you to settle your feet upon the rock, and directed your steps. I
imagine, that then also for the newnes of life bestowed upon you, a new
Canticle was put into your mouth, a Song unto our Lord.

5. S. Gregory discoursing of the Plagues of Egypt, and the Benefits bestowed
upon the Children of Israel, does particularly ponder, that the Egyptians were
punished with a multitude of flies, S. Greg. 18. (...). 2.
the Children of Israel rewarded with the Rest of the Sabbath, because, (...),
the people, which follows God, receaueth a Sabbath, that is, tranquillity of
mind, (...) any more in this life, with the motions of carnal desires. But
Egypt (...) of this world, is punished with flies; for a fly is an insolent
and unquiet (...) else does it signifye, but the intemperate cares of the
self-same desires of (...)*

6 When the Children of Israel were gone out of Egypt, there remained two
things. A (...), and the Land of Promise. Both signifye Religion; the Desert,
the beginning^* the Land of Promise, the proceedings and perfection thereof,
when a Soul cultiuated and manured by Rule and order, Religion a Desert.
enjoys with time the plentiful fruit of so happy a course. Religion is a
Desert, because it seuers a man from company and conversation with Secular
people, and withdrawes him from al worldly businesses, leading him into a
place, where the trouble and noise of this turbulent world is not so much as
heard of. Job 3.14.
These be the Deserts, which those Consuls of the earth (of whom Job speaks)
do build for themselves; S. Greg. 4. Mor. 28.
which S. Gregory construeth to be nothing else, but to expel the turbulencie
of earthly desires from the closet of our heart, and aiming only at our eternal
Country, to pant with love of that inward quiet. But what comfort, what joy
does a man find in this Desert, howsoever in outward show it seem uncouth and
distastful? For as, when the Jews suffered thirst, the very rocks furnished
them with water; Exodus 17 6. Exodus 15.25.
and when the waters fell to be bitter, they presently turned to be sweet by
putting a piece of wood into them; so whatsoever difficulty or trouble may
occur in a Religious life, it vanishes instantly, a man knows not how, and
is so tempered and seasoned by the power of God, that it is not felt; insomuch
as fasting, and watching, and (that which is more hard then all this) the
continual striving to break our own will, and whatsoever belongs to Religious
discipline (which when a man looks afarre-of upon it, seems so harsh and
heavy, that the very sight of it does make people afraid) when we come to
act, it proves pleasant and delightful; and no labor is so hard, not so much
above the strain of humane strength, Philip 4 13.
but, by the grace and help of God, it becomes easy and facil, and, as the
Apostle speaks, we can do al things in him, that comfort us.

7. And the Divine bounty and goodness is not contented barely to wipe away the
bitterness of this state, The spiritual dainties, which are in Religion.
but seasons it moreover with a great deal of sweetness, in several kinds,
very proper and peculiar unto it, figured also in that, which happened to the
people of Israel. For God sent them quayles, without any labor of theirs,
brought unto them with a blast of wind, in such infinite numbers, that all the
country round-about was full of them; and, that which is more wonderful, he
rayned Manna from heaven, a food made by the hands of Angels. This does
apparently set before our eyes the heavenly daynties, wherewith the souls,
Number. 11.31.
which forsaking Egypt have betaken themselves sincerely to the service of
God, are refreshed and fatned. Exodus 16.
For as that ancient Manna had this quality, that in itself alone it had the
right savor of al kinds of meat or sauce a man could think of: Sap. 16.20.
so the spiritual delicacies, which Religion affords, do not only go beyond
the sweetness of al earthly things, but contain in a more plentiful and more
eminent degree all that in matter of daynties is to be found upon earth; and as
a man, that has drunk an excellent cup of wine, ^^^teth not to drink water,
nor any other lickour of a sowrer grape: so Religious people are so satisfied
with this heavenly food, that they desire no other, and experience in their
own souls that, Psalm. 102 5.
which the Prophet said of himself: He that replenisheth thy desire with good
things.

8. Besides these daynties and sweet-meates, with which God is continually
feeding Religious people, The providence of God over Religious people.
he has a particular providence over them, to lead them and direct them in
their journey with a great deal of care and love, defending, protecting, and
preserving them in all their travels, and, as it is said of the Children of
Israel, guiding them by a cloud in the day, and all the night by the light of
fire: which is to say, he tempereth the scorching heates of this life, and
remoueth the darkness, carrying as it were a canopie over them against the heat
of the sun, and in the nightime going before them with a light in his hand,
to prevent the incommodities and dangers, that might come upon them.

9. We have also our Moses among us, The benefit of Superiors.
to wit, the governors and Superiors, whom God has placed as his
vicegerents over us, which is a benefit full of comfort, in regard they declare
unto us, what is the will of God; they deliver his commands, they are mediators
betwixt God and us, and continually pray for us; and when we are asleep, or at
our recreations, they watch in our behalf upon the hill, and earnestly deal our
business in presence of the Divine Majesty. And notwithstanding (as anciently
the Children of Israel) we want not enemies to confront us in this our journey,
Enemies in Religion.
to wit, temptations, rising either from the in bred corruption of our nature,
or from the malicious hatred of our sworn enemy the Devil; which, if we were
alone and were to fight it out by ourselves, were certainly a fearful thing;
yet by the help of God, who always assisteth us, and directs us in all our
ways, nothing is more easy, then to go through al, with great increase of
glory, and much greater reward. For by his assistance and by his strength,
that which was written of the people of the Jews, Deuteronomy 32.30.
happens also to Religious people: One pursues a thousand, and two put to
flight ten thousand; Ios. ^.
the enemie's walls and strongest works fall down at a ^illie blast; and
though whole armies rush-in upon us, we beat them down, and discomfit them,
by only holding up our hands to heaven. Exodus 17.11.


10. But where be these benefits to be found? where be these delicacies and
delights? who be the men, upon whom they are bestowed? They are not to be
found (as I said before) but in the Desert; they are not bestowed but upon
them, that have wholly and utterly departed out of Egypt. Wherefore in those
days also the Manna, which was a figure of that, which here we speak of, did
not come down from heaven, before the meal failed them, which they had
brought out of Egypt with them, and ceased again to fall so soon, as going
out of the Desert they began to taste of the fruits of the earth. Whereby we
understand, that no body can taste of this Divine sweetness, but he, that does
wholly and entirely withdraw himself from the world and al worldly things.
Whereupon S. Gregory says, S. Greg 27. (...) c. 13.
that this sweet food, which falls from above, is called Manhu; as who
should say: Whiti^ this? Because, when a soul is entangled in inferior
thoughts, it admireth that, which is "represented unto it from above, as a
thing unwonted.

Religion the Land of Promise.
11. But if the Desert abound with so much heavenly comfort, what shall we think
of the Land of Promise, which is the end of our journey, and the reward of our
labor some travels! Here doubtless we shall find far more solidly and
plentifully all that, which did set so sharp and edge upon the minds of the
Jews, when the promise was made unto them, a fertile soil, store of fresh
springs and running waters abundance of wheat and barley, of wines, figs, and
olives, and al kin^ o^ fruits, a land flowing with milk and honey; and if from
these gross and earthly figures, wherein the mysteries of our soul are
delivered unto us, we ascend to the spiritual understanding, which is hidden
under them, we shall easily fall upon the happiness, which is in Religion, though
we may better know, what it is, by experience and by trial of it, then we can
by hearing or reading understand it.

12 Having therefore discoursed in the precedent Books, of the Commodities,
and of the Excellency and dignity of a Religious life, in this third Book we
will declare the Pleasure, which is found in following it, that every body may
see, that al kind of happiness and perfection attends upon it, as I proposed in
the beginning. And we have some more reason to enlarge ourselves in this
subject of the sweetness of a Religious state, because it is generally less
known; and Secular people hardly believe, there is any pleasure at al in it.
They will easily grant that a Religious life is an excellent course of life, and
much more easily, that it is a profitable and safe kind of course for a man's
soul; but as for pleasure, they utterly deny, there is any in it, and rather
apprehend it to be extreme harsh, and full of insufferable difficulties. This
error we have here undertaken to confute, and to prove, that this State is not
only a pleasant state, S. John Chrys^stome Homil 69. in Matthew.
but much more pleasant then a Secular life. S. John Chrysostom does often
spend his eloquence in commendation of a Religious course, and particularly in
one of his Homilies upon S. Matthew, he prefers the sweetness of it far
before the pleasures of the world, and before al those iollities, and pastimes,
and delights, which are esteemed greatest among them, before the curious sights
and pageants, which were wont to be represented publicly in the Theaters with
great cost and state, and before whatsoever pleasure can be thought-of in
intemperate lust; showing evidently, that there is as much difference betwixt
these two kinds of life and delights, as betwixt the harmony of the Quires of
Angels sweetly singing, and hogs in their filth confusedly grunting. And
because the cruel stinking Pharao, whom I paynted-out before, does never cease
to pursue and molest those, that fly from the servitude of the world into the
Desert of Religion, either by himself or by his followers, armed with weapons
of his own forging, we will dis-arme him and them, and take away all the weapons
we can from them, and show, that the deceiptful reasons and fallacies, with
which they are wont to labor to pervert men's judgments, are of no force or
soliditie; to the end, that drowning our enemies again in the Red sea, al
de^out souls, that either purpose to get out of Egypt, or have already got
loose, and forsaken it, and arrived in the Desert and this happy Land of
Promise, may enjoy the pleasures thereof with more satisfaction of mind, and
more settled assurance.

THE THIRD BOOK, OF THE HAPPINESS OF A RELIGIOUS STATE.
That the pleasures of the Mind are far greater, then the pleasures of the
Body. CHAP. I.
AS in the precedent Book, to prove the excellency of a Religious State, we
first searched and settled, wherein true Honor and Excellency did consist; so
here we must lay the like foundation, and consider, what is true Pleasure,
whereof we are to treat. For many, and perhaps I may say most men, know no
pleasure, but that, which is the object of their taste, or touching, or other
senses; and consequently make account, that indeed there is no other, It is a
^eas^l^e persuasion, to esteem most of the pleasures of the body.
or at least, that these are the principal, and most to be stood upon. A
persuasion befitting rather beasts then men. For they speak and pass their
judgment of things, as if they had not a reasonable Soul, but a body only.
If they did reflect, that they are reasonable creatures, and have a Soul and
understanding in them, they would conceive also, as the truth is, that their
Soul so far surpassing the other part of them, which is their body, has
also functions and pleasures proper unto it.

2. Aristotle, Aristot. 7. E^h c. 1^.
though he were a Heathen, and wanted the light of Faith, which by the grace of
God we have, was of a far other opinion; and in his Seventh Book of Morals
writes much more advisedly to this purpose, that al men by instinct of Nature
desire pleasure, because al have, as it were, a spark of Divinity instilled
into them, which inclines them to that, which in best. But because the
pleasures of the body are most known, and every body has a natural
inclination unto them, they have in a manner engrossed the name and title of
Pleasure to themselves, as it were, by hered^^^rie prescription; insomuch tha^
many are persuaded, that no other thing can be delightful. I^em lib 10. c 3.4
5.6
And in his Tenth Book he says, that dishonest and filthy pleasure is not
properly and absolutely to be called Pleasure, because no man takes it for such,
but they are intemperate. That is to be taken for true pleasure, which an
honest and virtuous man accounts pleasure; for such an one is the rule of all the actions and pleasures of men; and that is only true pleasure, which is an
honest man's delight. That others find pleasure in other things, comes by
corruption; and consequently those things are not absolutely in all respects
pleasant, but to them only, that are accordingly disposed. For as when children
take a fancy to a thing and love it, they think for the present, that it is
the excellentest thing that can be; and yet when they come to be men, they make
no account at al of it; so good people take delight in some things, and wicked
people in others; but they only lean to the pleasures of the body, that have
not the right taste of sound and uncorrupted pleasure.

S. Tho 1.2. q 1^. art. 4. Three things concu^^e in pleasure.
3 ^l this is Aristotle's discourse; and S. Thomas enlarging himself upon the
same ground, says, that Pleasure requires three things: first, some thing that
is good, which may be conjoined; secondly, the thing, to which it is joined;
and thirdly, the conjunction itself; and the more perfect these three things
be, the greater the pleasure must necessarily also be. Now certainly a
spiritual good is greater then the good of the body, and man naturally loves
it more, and makes more account of it, as we may plainly see, because there is
no man, that will not rather choose to want the sight of his eyes, then the
light of his mind, and to be as a beast or a mad man. Besides that, the
knowledge of the mind is more noble and more searching, then that which we
have by Sense, as every body knows. And as for the conjunction, it is
certainly more inward, more firm, and more perfect; more inward, because Sense
reaches no further, then the outward accidents, and rests in the taste, and
color, and such like; a man's understanding searches and diueth into the
Essence and substance of every thing; It is more perfect, because Sense cannot
be joined with the object without motion, which is an imperfect action; and
therefore also no sensible pleasure can be al of it together, but part of it
must pass away, tha^ the remaynder may have place; the pleasures of the mind
are without motion, al wholly together, as the things themselves are in our
mind, when we think of them; Finally it is more firm and permanent, because
the things, in which the body takes pleasure, are corruptible, and quickly
gone, as meat, and drink, and such like; but spiritual goods remain for ever,
and waste not with age or handling.

^
4. Following this ground therefore of S. Thomas, the pleasures of the body,
compared with the pleasures of the mind, are apparently the worse of the two.
First, because the ground of bodily pleasure, is ever a creature, and
consequently, it is subject to whatsoever accident and misery can be incident
to creatures; whereof it is none of the least, that every creature does
naturally run poast to an end, and in time ends; and is ever falling away
betwixt our fingars, when we most think to use and enjoy it; and whatsoever
sweetness can be ima^ined in a creature, is much of the nature of time, now a
piece and then a piece, here a bit and there a bit, and slideth away as fast as
time itself, then which nothing can be swifter. S. Augustine (...) 25. de v Ap.
S. Augustine expresses it lively in one of his Sermons in these words: Where
are the delights, for which you walk your wicked ways? I do not ask, where
they will be, when this life is past; but where are they now? This day has
thrust out yesterday; to morrow will thrust out the day, in which now we are.
What therefore of all that, which you love, does not poast, yea fly away from
you? What part of it does not even slip out of our hands, before we have it?
For we cannot stop so much as one hour of the day, wherein we are. The first
hour is thrust out by the second, the second by the third; so that of this one
hour, which is present, nothing indeed is present, but every part and every
moment of it is still running away from us. Thus spoke S. Augustine.

5. Secondly, and base.
the matter of al corporal delights is base. For take a dish of meat, that is
well dressed and excellently seasoned, or any such thing; what is there in it,
that can be said to be worthy of a man's employment? Al things of this nature
are base and earthly; and consequently the delight, which they yeald, is never
a whit better. S. Bernard observing it, S. Bernard sermon 4. in Vig. Not.
says thus: The comfort of this world is base and nothing worth, and, which is
more to be feared, a hindrance to true and wholesome comfort. Besides that, most
commonly there is some kind of vnseemelines, more or less, in the pleasures of
the body; and it is easy to be seen, because (if we mark) they that are any
thing temperate, dissemble the desire, which they have of them, even in things,
which are otherwise necessary; an evident sign even in Nature itself, that it
is but an unworthy thing for man to place his affection upon them; whereas in
the solaces of the mind it is quite contrary; for naturally they quicken and
clear it up, and are an honor unto it. S. Augustine sermon. de Verb. Dom.
Whereupon S. Augustine says very well, that happy is the Soul, which is taken
with those delights; for it is not stained with any uncleanness in them, but
cleansed with the clearenes of truth.

6. If we look yet further into the nature and use of corporal delights, They
are but salues for our griefs.
we shall find, that the reason, why they are so pleasing and so much desired,
is, because they serve us as a salve and solace of the griefs whereunto we are
subject. Which Aristotle also notes, Aristot. 10. Eth c. 6. and 7.
commending the study of Philosophy as wonderful delightful, in regard of the
permanencie and purity, which it has; because it is not mingled with those
sorrows, which accompany the delights of sense in eating, and drinking, and
the like; the pleasure whereof lasts no longer, then we suffer hunger or
thirst. S. Bernard ser. de prim. med. and nouisi^.
S. Bernard says the same thing in far better terms and more fully,
showing that al these things are not indeed to be called good, but lesser
evils; and that, which we seek in them, is but to exchange heavier irons into
lighter. Thou desire to eat (says the Saint) because hunger molests thee;
both are troublesome; but because hunger is more troublesome, thou think it
is no trouble to eat. But mark, when thy hunger is past, if it be not more
trouble to eat, then to abstain. This is the nature of al things under the
Sun; there is nothing truly delightful in them, but a man is always desirous
to pass from one thing to another, that by often change he may ease himself of
the trouble, which he finds in both; as if a body should leap out of the
water into the fire, and out of the fire into ^he water again, being able to
endure neither. For the remedy of eue^^ trouble, is the beginning of another
trouble.

7. Moreover, to give every thing his due, there is none of al these corporal
delights entirely and absolutely delightful, Mingled with sorrows.
but they are still coupled with many inconveniences and sorrows, and by that
means they leese a great part of their savor, as a small quantity of wine
mingled with a great deal of water. S Basilin Psalm. 3^.
Every one does find this to be so true by his own daily experience in all
things, that we shall not need to seek farther proof of it. Yet S. Basil
expresses it naturally in these words: There is more trouble then pleasure in
the delights of the body. Barrennes, and widdowhood, and jealousy wait upon
marriage; unfruitfulness upon husbandry; shipwreck upon marchanding; deceiptful
practices upon wealth; the pleasures themselves, the saturitie, the continual
use of them, bring diseases and many distempers. S. Gregory applies to this
purpose that, which is spoken in holy Job of worldly people: Job. 30.7. S.
Greg. 20. Mor. c. 16.
They that rejoiced in the midst of these things, and made account, that under
thorns were riches. Their joy (says S. Gregory) is most commonly mingled
with vexation; and they are beaten with the things themselves, whereof they are
proud. For they cannot without trouble and care either get temporal things,
which they have not; or conserve those, which they have gotten. To aspire
therefore to honor above their equals, always to be working some mischief,
and yet to watch with fear that they may not have the name of being wicked,
certainly does miserably gal them; but overcome with the love of temporal
things, they feel not the sting. They rejoice therefore under thorns; they, I
say, that rejoice in temporal things; and yet not being able to dispense them
without vexation, the care, which presses them, galleth them. They remain
under thorns, and they esteem it a pleasure, because they suffer much hardness
for the love of this life; and yet entangled in the affection of their
ouer-greedie desire, they account the very trouble of their suffering a
pleasure.And much more says S. Gregory to the same effect, and particularly
he likeneth these kind of people to the Children of Israel, that sighed after
their pots of Egypt, and their pompions, and onyons, and chibols. For what is
signified, says he, by the fleshpots of Egypt, but the carnal works of this
life, which boil in the sorrows of tribulation, as in the fire? What are
pompions but earthly sweetness? What is figured by the onyons and chibols
(which most commonly make them weep that eat them) but the difficulties of
this present life, which the lovers of it pass not without lamenting, and yet
love it even with tears. Forsaking therefore the Manna, they desired onyons
and chibols with their flesh and pompions; because wicked minds contemn the
sweet gifts, which they may have by grace in quiet; and for their carnal
pleasures covet the laboursome iournies of this life, though they be full of
tears; they refuse to have that, wherewith they may rejoice spiritually, and
desire greedily that, wherewith they must lament carnally. Job therefore with
his truth-telling voice does reprehend their folly, in that out of an
erroneous judgment they prefer trouble before tranquillity, harsh things
before the mild, sharp before the sweet, temporal before the eternal, things
deceiptful before those that be assured. Thus speaks S. Gregory, not only
truly, as he does always, but also eloquently, whereunto we may add another
reason out of S. Bernard, to wit, that if our mind be sensible of the pleasures
of the body, to which it is united; how much more sensible must it needs be
of the pleasures, which properly belong unto itself, and are more nearly and
truly in it? For as a man does relish the business after another fashion, when
his horse feeds upon his hey, and when himself feeds upon meat, that is
convenient for him, so it fares with our soul in regard of our body, which
is but, as it were, the beast, which carries it. S. Bernard sermon.
Do not therefore mistake (says S. Bernard) do not deceive thy self so
far, E^ce nos.
as to think, that thy Soul is not more delighted with spiritual then with
corporal things.

8. Another consideration to prove this, Spiritual delights proper to man.
which we are saying, is, that the more suitable a thing is to our nature, it is
also the more pleasing and delightful. For so we see, that men take delight in
one kind of food, beasts in another; and among beasts some feed upon flesh,
others upon corn, others graze; and every kind of thing finds most
contentment in that, which agrees best with the nature, which it has. The
nature of man is to be governed by reason; for though he have also sense, and
motion, and the faculty of growing, yet these belong the inferior part of
him; and are not proper to him alone, but common betwixt him and beasts. Reason
and understanding is that, which is peoper to Man, and belongs so near to
the perfection and constitution of his nature, that without it he were not a
man, but a beast; and consequently the delights, which are conformable to
reason, and grounded in it, are both more suitable to human nature, and for the
same cause more pleasing; specially, if we consider withal (as we may justly)
that among the several qualities and powers, that are in man, the higher and
the more noble the power is, it is also the more pregnant and effectual in
operation; so that Reason being far more noble then Sense, it exercises the
functions belonging to reason with more perfection and vigor, then Sense can
perform the offices belonging to Sense; and as it is more pregnant in all other
operations, so it is more apt to take delight in the things, which are agreeable
unto it.

9. Finally, The difference betwixt corporal and spiritual delights.
whenever we compare these delights together, that, which S. Gregory says
excellently well of them, is very important to be considered. The difference,
says he, betwixt the delights of the body, and of the mind, is this: The
delights of the body, when we have them not, breed a burning desire to have
them; and when we take greedily of them, presently through satietie they breed
a loathing in him, that takes them. Contrariwise spiritual delights, S.
Gregori^ Hom. 30. in Euang*
when we have them not, are tedious; when we have them, they prove desireful;
and he that feeds upon them, hungers after them the more, by how much he
feeds upon them with the greedier appetite. In corporal delights, the desire
is pleasing, the trial distastful; In spiritual delights, the desire is cold
and contemptible, the trial delightful. In the first, desire breeds
saturitie, saturitie loathsomnes; in the second, desire brings saturitie,
saturitie again whetteth our desire of them. For spiritual delights increase a
desire in our heart, while they fill it; because the more we perceive the right
favor of them, the more knowledge we have of that, which we must needs love
more eagerly; and therefore we cannot love them, when we have them not, because
we cannot know the true relish of them. Nothing can express more perfectly the
difference, which is betwixt the delights of the body and of the mind, then
that, which S. Gregory here says of them, to wit, that the use of corporal
pleasures breeds a loathing of them; but spiritual delights contrariwise the
more eagerly we feed upon them, the more they win our affection to them. For
as we cannot discern, which is good wine, and which is bad, better, then by
tasting it, and our taste is in fine the best judge of it; so by duly weighing
the joy, which is true and solid, and also that, which is false and deceiptful,
and comparing them together, we shall be best able to discover, how that in the
one there is nothing but emptines and falsehood, and in the other, truth and
soliditie even beyond expectation, and abundantly enough to delight us more and
more without end.

10. It is therefore sufficiently apparent both by reason and authority of the
holy Fathers, that the pleasures of the Mind are the principal and the
chiefest of al other pleasures; yet because many are jealous of that which the
holy Fathers say, and think that they go further, and speak in a more
sublime strain, then humane infirmity can ordinarily bear, I will conclude
this Chapter with a discourse of Plato (besides that, Plato in Dial. de Rep.
which I said before out of Aristotle) where he clearly proves this, whereof we
are speaking. As hunger and thirst (says he) are an emptines of the body, so
ignorance and imprudence are emptinesses of the mind; and as our body is
filled, when we take corporal sustenance, so our mind with science and
knowledge. Which repletion therefore is the more solid? Is it not that, which
is made by things, which in themselves are more truly solid? And which things
are to be accounted such, and of a more pure substance, meat and drink,
victuals, and whatsoever sustenance, or persuasions of truth, knowledge, and,
in a word, al kind of virtue? Certainly we must needs confess, that that is
most solidly and most truly existent, which does always abide in an immortal
and unchangeable thing, and which itself also is immortal and unchangeable
(such as is the essence of every thing, and consequently also the knowledge of
it) rather then that, which is in a changeable thing, and itself is changeable;
such as are al things pertaining to the oeconomic of the body. Wherefore if it
be a delightful thing to be filled with that* which is suitable to our nature,
the more solid the things be, and the more truly we are filled with them, the
more true and more natural pleasure it must needs be, which we enjoy by them.
And thus it fares with us, when our mind is filled. Wherefore people, that are
void of virtue, and given to their belly and the like, never taste the least
parcel of true and solid pleasure, but as beasts have their eyes always upon
the ground, and spend their time in doing homage to their bellies; and fight
with one another with their heels, and with their horns, and with their
nails, for those base and abject things. And so the pleasures, which they
follow, must needs be mingled with many sorrows, and are indeed but
pictures and shadows of true pleasure, as the Poet Stesichorus said of the
Trojans; that, not knowing at all the true Helene, they fought only for the
imagination of her. All this is Plato his discourse.

That true content of mind is only in God. CHAP. II.
Having proved, that true contentment is only to be had in the pleasures of the
Mind, it remains to consider, wherein the Mind itself does take most
contentment, which is easy for a Christian to determine, and not far to
seek; because every Christian knows, and does most certainly believe, God
is the true life and delight of a Soul.
that GOD alone is the true food and true life of a Soul. And it is so clear
and evident besides, that the best learned Philosophers among the Heathens
could think no other. For Aristotle discoursing at large of Beatitude, Arist
10. (...). c 7. and 8.
wherein al pleasures are in their height, concludes at last, that it
consists in the knowledge and contemplation of GOD, and of Minds (as he
calls them) abstracted from the body, and free from al composition; in regard
that the function of the Understanding in Man is the sweetest and pleasantest
of al others, and complete within itself, and so far from standing in need of
any outward thing, that they rather hinder a man, that desires to give himself
to Contemplation. And whereas we must necessarily acknowledge, that God and
those spiritual Intelligences are always in some action or other (for no man
can think that they are so dull as to be idle, and, as it were, asleep) the
noblest action, which we can give them, is to be always in perpetual
Contemplation; and consequently men upon earth, that give themselves to such a
kind of life, take the perfectest course, that can be thought of, and most like
to God. This is the discourse of a man, that wanted the light of the
Euangelical truth; what therefore ought we to think or say in this business?

2. Let us hear a Christian Philosopher speak. S. August. in Psa. 102.
S. Augustine beholding this thing far more clearly and more particularly in
the light, then Aristotle could do in the dark, says thus: O soul! seek thy
own good. For one thing is good for one, an other for another; and every
creature has a good by itself, the good of the integrity belonging unto it,
the good of the perfection, which is natural unto it, and there is a great
deal of difference in that, which is necessary for the perfection of every
thing. Seek thy own good. Nobodie is good, Luc. 18.1^.
but GOD alone, the Sovereign Good; that is thy good. What does he want, that
has the Sovereign Good for his good? There be inferior goods, which are good
to this thing, and that thing. What is the good of a beast, but to fill his
belly, to want nothing, to sleep, to play, to live, to be in health, to
attend to generation? Do thou seek such a good? Co-heyre of Christ, wherein
do thou rejoice? in that thou art a companion to beasts? Raise thy hope to
the Good of al goods. Where you see S. Augustine lays the likeness of a beast to
them, that like beasts know no other good, no other delight, but that, which is
confined within the bounds of Sense; and gives us to understand moreover, that
such a kind of persuasion is so much the more unworthy, because al men are
created with a possibility to be Heirs of God, and Co-heyres of Christ, that
is, such as may be styled, and truly be, the sons of God. He says also, that
meat, and drink, and sleep, and other more unworthy things, are not the good
of a Soul, but only God; because that is the good of every thing, as he
says, by which the thing is perfected and made better; whereas these inferior
things do not perfect a Soul, but rather make it worse; because they draw it
from higher things, for which it was created, and make it stoop to base and
earthly things, by the love and use whereof it comes to be defiled.

God as the s^ueraigne Happiness, is the End of Man.
3. Another ground of that, of which we are speaking, is this. It is certain,
and it cannot be denied, that as al other creatures have their appointed ends
so Man much more has some end prefixed, at which he does aim; otherwise so
excellent a nature, as his is, should want so great a good, of which al other
goods do in a manner depend. This end of Human nature, at which al do aim,
is Happiness; and no other Happiness, but GOD; which S. Thomas proves, S. Thom
1.2. q. 2. a. 8.
because the good, wherein we place our happiness, must be so great a good, that
it may fill our desire, and absolutely satisfye it to the full. For it cannot be
said to be our last end, if there remain any thing further to be desired.
Seeing therefore the object of the will of Man is al Good, and the object of his
reason and understanding al Truth, nothing can absolutely satisfye two Powers
so capacious, but an universal Entitie, which also is an universal Good, which
cannot be found among creatures, because the nature and goodness of al creatures
is limited and confined; GOD therefore is the only felicity of man, in whom
al things are infinite.

S. August. de Mori^. (...) 1.
4. S. Augustine has a learned and elaborate discourse to the same effect in the
Book, which he wrote of the Manners of the Church. He says, that every body
does naturally desire to be happy; and that three things are required to
Happiness. First, that the thing, wherein we place our happiness, be the best,
secondly, that we love it; thirdly, that we possess it. For a man, that
desires that, which he cannot compass, is vexed with it; a man that
co^passeth that, which is not to be desired, is deceived in the business; and he
that desires not that, which is to be sought after, is in an il disposition.
Then he says further, that that which is best for man, cannot be worse or
less then man himself, for whosoever seeks after that, which is worse then
himself, makes himself worse then he was before, therefore that only can be
best for man, which is better and more excellent then man and withal that he be
able so to compass it, as not to leese it against his will; for if a man be not
assured of the good, which he has, the fear of leesing it, takes away the
happiness, which he might have in it. And consequently Virtue and GOD, God and
Ve^^^e, only Happiness of Man.
to whom by virtue we are conjoined, is our only Happiness; if we attend upon
God, we are well; if we comprehend him, we are happy. These are truths, which
S. Augustine delivers, and which no man can deny.

5. The nature of the End or final Cause and But of every thing, is, that
whatsoever has an End prefixed, In (...) E^d (...) re^t.
it can not be at quiet, til it have obtained the End, and when it has
obtained it, there it must needs rest; and the nearer it comes by degrees to
the obtaining of the desired End, the more pleasure it takes, and the in (...)
is at quiet; the further it is from the End, the worse and more unquiet it is.
Wherefore as it is most certain, that then we shall have perfect joy and rest,
when face to face we shall set God, as (...); so it does most certainly follow,
that the nearer we approach to God in this life, the longer we converse with
him, the clearer knowledge we have of him, the more contentment of mind also we
shall enjoy; and this contentment is of the self-same nature with that, which we
shall have in heaven; but only with this difference, that here our joy and
contentment is small, there it shall be infinitely great.

6. What should I stand making large discourses upon a thing, A comparison
betwixt pleasures.
which is evident? So far as the nature of God does excel the nature of
whatsoever creature, so much difference is there betwixt the pleasures of the
body, and the delights of the mind. What is there in the dayntiest fare that
is, in the fairest gardens, in all the pleasures of this life, that can be
compared with God? Which is better, God who is Al-Good, or a piece of veale, or
a partridge, or any dayntie dish? If the difference be so great, that it is a
shame to make such a comparison, it must necessarily follow, that the delight,
which rises by enjoying this Good, tasted and sauoured in the palate of the
Soul, S. Bernard Ep. 114.
is incomparably greater, then those other delights of the body; which S.
Bernard expresses in these words: Certainly that only is true contentment,
which is taken in the Creator, and not in the creature; the contentme^t, which
once possessed, no man can take from thee, and in comparison whereof al other
mirth is sadness; al pleasure, sorrow; al sweetness, bitter; al beauty,
il-fauoured; finally all that breeds delight, is troublesome.

7. I will conclude with one thing more, All that is good in creatures, is
insta^tly more in God.
which indeed is the ground of al, and therefore I will lay it down as plain
as I can, but yet briefly. In creatures there is nothing, which can be truly
said to be, no spark of goodness, no degree of beauty, which is not far more
abunda^t and more perfectly in God. First, because the nature of God is
infinite; and if any thing were wanting in it, it were not infinite; secondly, S
Bernard Ser ^ (...) san^^.
whatsoever creatures have in them, they have it from G^d; and no man can give
another that which he has not himself; whereupon S. Bernard makes this
reflection: ^n the Sun thou admirest the light; in a flower, beauty; in
bread, the savor; in the earth, the fertilnes of it. Al these things have
their being from God; and no doubt but he has reserved to himself far more,
then he has bestowed upon creatures. Which being most true, it does
necessarily follow, that whosoever has God, has in him al other things; and
consequently the very selfsame delight, which ^e should have taken in other
things, if he had enjoyed them severally, he enioye^h it in God in a far
greater measure and more elevated. For as a man, that has a piece of coin in
gold, has the value of many pieces of silver, as much as if he had the
several pieces of silver themselves, and so much the more co^modiously, because
he is rid of the trouble, which the weight and bulk of silver brings with it*
so he that is united with God, has the very marrow or quintessence, as I may
call it, of all that goodness, which, dispersed in this great variety of the
things of this world, cannot choose but be mingled with many incommodities and
imperfections, incident to the penurious, and limited, and corporal nature of
every thing; from which incommodities he, that has them in God, is free.

8. Which is the reason, why S. Francis, S. Francis
as we read of him, had always this saying in his mouth: My God, and al
things. A saying, which he was so wedded to, that he could almost think of
nothing else, S. Aug. 10. Conf. 6.
and oftentimes spent whole nights in this one Meditation. S. Augustine
discoursing excelle^tly well of it, speaks thus to God: What do I love, when
I love thee: Not the beauty of a body, not the comelines of time, not the
brightness of light so pleasing to these my eyes, not the sweet melodious sounds
of al sorts of pleasant songs, not the fragra^t savors of flowers or
ointme^ts, or delicate spices, not Ma^^a or honey, not the (...), which flesh
does so welcomely embrace. These be not the things, which I love, when I love
my God; and yet I love a kind of light, and a kind of sound, and a kind of
savor, and a kind of food, and a kind of embracing, when I love my God* the
light, the sound, the savor, the food, the embracing of my inward man, where
that shines to my soul, which no place is capable of; and where that
sounds, which time carries not away; and where I smell that, which the wind
disperseth not; and where I taste that, which eating diminishes not; and where
that remains fast unto me, which no fullness does divert me from. This is
that, which I love, when I love my God. This is of S. Augustine.

9. Wherefore seeing it is so evident by all these reasons, which I have
cursorily pointed at, that God is the chiefest delight of every nature, that
has reason and understanding, every body must necessarily also see, how
delightful a Religious course of life is, which is so wholly set upon the
enjoying of God, and has so many easy means and ways to enjoy him. But it
will be yet more evident, when we shall have discoursed of the several delights,
which are very many in it.

The first reason, why a Religious life is delightful; because it is free from
worldly trouble. CHAP. III.
AMong the many pleasures, which are in a Religious course of life (whereof I
am now going to speak) I may well reckon in the first place, the freedom,
which it enjoys from the vexations and encombers, wher^with a secular life is
pestered. To conceive the greatness of this benefit, it were sufficient to
understand, How happy it is, to be free from pain.
that some ancient Philosophers of no mean rank, were of opinion, that the
Happiness of man consisted in being free from pain and grief, and al kind of
trouble. For thereby we may conclude, that it was always held to be no small
good, to be free from al evil. But yet no man can thoroughly enter into the
importance of it, unless he first understand, how infinite the miseries and
calamities of the world be, so grievous, and so different, and so frequent, and
obuious, that we may sooner behold them with our eyes, th^n declare them by
word of mouth; and in respect thereof may justly say, The world is another
Egypt for (...). Exodus 12.
the world is another Egypt, when (as we find recorded in Exodus) there was
not a house in it, which did not ring with most lamentable cries at the death
of their first-begotten. And though (as I said) this be a thing, which we may
sooner see with our eyes, then learn by discourse, yet many of the ancient
Fathers hane handled this point at large and very eloquently.

S. ^o Chry. de Virg. c. 17.
2 In particular S. John Chrysostom, to show the happiness of Virginity, which
he had undertaken to commend, does lay together so many misfortunes of
married people, that it is a horror to read them. For he proves, that before
their marriage, The miseries of married people.
and when they marry, and ever after, al is trouble and vexation, and full of a
world of miseries; and that, if they have any touch of delight, it is not
comparable to their griefs; because it is drowned in their present calamities,
and in those, that hang over their head for the future.

3. S. Gregory Nyssen is so large in his discourse of the self-same miseries,
S. Greg. N^yss. lib de Virg. c. 3.
that (as he says himself) it were matter enough to make a Tragedy. For not
to repeat all that goes before, the pains of childbed are intolerable,
because not only the womb of the mother is most pitifully torn in pieces,
but the husband, if he have any feeling, must needs be exceedingly grieved at
it. When this is over, and the danger past together with the pain, and the
child borne, which was so long desired, the causes of lamenting are not less,
but ^reater. For then begins the care of bringing-vp the child, the continual
fear least it come by some mischance (which chances al ages and states are
subject unto, but specially the tender age of an infant) then they are ieal^us
(...) it catch a fever, or fall into some other disease. Finally (says he) the
miseries, which come of marriage, are very many: for children bring (...),
when they are borne, and before they are borne, while they are alive, an^ when
they are dead. If a man have cause to joy in the number of his children, he
has cause of sorrow, because he has not wherewith to maintain them. Another
perhaps has labored much to scrape a great deal of wealth together, and
has not an heir, to whom to leave it. So that one man's happiness is
another's misfortune, while neither of them would have that befall him, whereat
he sees an other tormented. This man's sweet child is dead, the other's lives
deboisht: both certainly are to be pitied, one grieuing at the death, the
other at the life, of their own child. Who can number the distempers, the
troubles, the branglings, which rise every foot betwixt them, upon true
causes, and false suspicions? This and much more to the like effect is the
discourse of S. Gregory Nyssen, S. Basil.
which almost word for word S. Basil takes up, and enlarges himself in it with
a great deal of Rhetoric in the Book, which he w^ote of true Virginity. S.
Hierome.
And S. Hierome no less copiously and effectually repeates the same against
Iouinian.

4. For my part, I am of opinion, S. Io Chrysostom. de Virg. c. ^7.
that S. John Chrysostom said very truly of this world of miseries, which
married people are subject unto, that no man can conceive the greatness of them,
unless he have tried them; and they that have had the experience be the only
men, that truly find, that there is far more sorrow and bitterness in the
delights, which people make account they shall have, then pleasure and
contentment. Besides that, it is to be observed as a certain truth, that both
these and al other sorrows seem much less, when we only read or imagine
them, then when we feel them. For no grief can go so near us, when we imagine
it afar off, specially if it concern not ourselves, as when we actually
feel it in our own person.

5. These therefore are the general miseries common to al Secular people, The
troubles of the world.
and from which they, that ^iue most at ease, and meddle not with any pub^ick
business at al, but attend only to the menaging of their own priua^e estate and
bringing-vp of their children, which people commonly account a happy kind of
life, are not exempt. But there be others, that labor and toil in (...) of
the world like horses. For what shall we say of the life of a S^^^di^, in the
midst of so many dangers of life and limbs, Merchants.
and incommodities of wind and weather, heat and cold, and the like? Or of
Merchants, that spending their whole time in thinking of their adventures, in
writing, and casting-vp their ends together, take as much toil as if they
were day-labourers; and there is little difference betwixt them, but that the
one labors in the sun, the other in the shade; for as for care, and
solicitude, and anxietie, and fear the merchant has far greater, still
taking thought, what may be come of his ship, whether it be castaway or no,
whether the plenty of corn be like to pull down the market, or least some
other mischance of thousands befall him, and sweep al away in an hour, which he
had so long sweat for.

6. What shall I say again of them that aspite to preferrement? Do they not
bereave themselves altogether of their liberty, Ambitious people.
and out of a greedy desire of command over others (which God knows whether
they shall ever attain unto, or how long they may enjoy it) make themselves
very slaves in present to other m^ns humors, waiting upon them like pages,
and putting themselves upon a necessity of observing every turn of their
head, and every change of their countenance? What do they not endure by day,
and what pensive nights must they needs have? What fire would they not
runne-through to compass their ends? And when they have gotten that, which
they aimed at, they burn with a greater fire within them, S. August. Ep. 121.
and make S. Augustin's words good: Riches, and the shadows of honor, and al
other things of like nature, wherein men think themselves happy, being void of
true happiness, what comfort can they bring, seeing it is far more honorable
not to stand in need of them, then to be eminent in them; and the fear of
leesing them does torment a man more, then the burning desire did of getting
them* Which kind of misery S. Paulinus also expresses excellently well in a
long Exhortation, which he wrote in verse to Licentius a young man, that
followed the Court of Rome for preferrement-sake, laboring to draw him from
the world to the service of CHRIST; where among other things, he says thus: S.
Paulin. Ep ad Licent. vid. Ep Aug. 36.
Vain Rome, and powerful to deboish the strong,
With diverse shapes sollicites thee aw^y.
That which he says of Rome in those days, that it was powerful to deboish
the strong, that is, even such as might be grounded in virtue, and divert them
from the course thereof, may be said of al other places in the world. Then he
shows the vanity and dangers of preferment: Now hope to rise, now fear to
fall, does throng.
Thy heart. Stand sure; 't is worse to fall from high.
And who is there, that can stand sure in so slipperie a place? who is there,
that does not rather stand very tickle? Wherefore he foretelles him also of the
late repentance, which experience of such things is wont to bring: Too late,
and then in vain, thou will bewail
Deceiptful hope, and wish to break this iayle,
Which now thou buildst.
For oftimes we rush into the snares and nets at unawares, and afterward would
feign break out of them, and we cannot, unless we look to ourselves betimes.
Wherefore having discoursed at large of the misery of such a kind of life, he
inuiteth him to the more easy and more happy service of Christ, in this
manner: Shake-of the yoke betimes; Christ's burden's light;
His yoke is sweet; his word is truth; his service,
Freedom; and to stoop to him, is, in right
Of sons of God, to command over vice,
And proudest Lords and Kings etc.
And enlarging himself in the comparison between these two lives, shows how
the service of God is true freedom, and the service of the world is very
slavery, to which al such are subject, as (to use his phrase) by Frequenting
Court
And Princely palaces,
And suffering Rome,
Make choice of miseries.
Where, as you see, he terms the living in Rome (suffering Rome) as a
toylesome and a trouble something; a new manner of speech, yet fitly expressing
the matter he speaks of; People that choose to be miserable.
and yet more neatly, where he styles them voluntarily miserable, that lead
such a life; which is as much to say, as to be twice miserable. For if a man
suffer misery against his will, yet he is sound in his judgment, which is a
great comfort, and not only a comfort, but oftentimes a remedy of his
miseries; but he, that loves the misery in which he is, does not only erro in
his judgment, which is of itself a great misery, but does not so much as seek
to avoid it, and consequently there is no hope of remedy for him.

7. A Religious life is free from al these evils, A Religious life free from
misery.
vexations, and miseries, which are in themselves so many and so great, and
perplexe people of this world so much, and tear their very hearts in pieces.
How much this freedom from misery is to be esteemed, may be partly understood
by that, which passes in our body. For though we have no special thing to
take pleasure in, yet, if we be in health, if we have no feuerish distemper
upon us, if the humors of our body be not altered and out of order, we take
great pleasure even in that want of disturbance; as on the other side, it is a
great vexation to be troubled with a pain in our side, or in our feet, or in
any other part of us. The self-same effect therefore, which perfect health and
tha^ general temper of humors works in our body, the freedom from worldly
troubles and vexations, works in our soul; and is of itself alone a
wonderful pleasing and delightful thing. Wherefore seeing people love their
health so dearly, and spare no cost to get it, nor time to attend unto it, and
many spend their whole substance, with the woman in the Ghospel, to purchase
it, Luc. 8.43.
and abide fire and lance, suffering their flesh to be cut and burnt, rather
then fail of it; who can think but the tranquillity of a Religious life is
much more earnestly to be desired, and al little enough to bestow and spend in
the compassing of it? For that, which S. John Chrysostom writing in defense of
a Monastical life, S. Io. Chrysostom. lib. 2. (...) Mon^st.
says, is very true: Which is easier and more full of quiet? to be entangled in
so many and so pickant cares, subject to such watch and ward, and slavery, to
live in continual fea^e and daily solicitude, least fortune fail us, our
substance wholly perish; or to be at liberty, free from these bonds and cares?
For though a man desire no more then he has, though he labor not to add more
weight to the burden of his wealth; though we grant all this, is it not far
better, to discharge himself of his burden, then to be crushed by tha^, which
he has already upon his shoulders? Finally, as I said before, if it be a
great happ^nes to be content with a few things of small value, it must certainly
needs be a greater happiness, to be above al necessity. And the same Saint
discou^sing to the same purpose in one of his Homilies proves, Id Hom 6. ^^
Pop.
that howsoever the world takes the life of Monks to be a distastful and
burdensome life, yet in very deed it is much sweeter, and more desireful (for all these are his own words) then any other life, seem it never so sweet and
easy, and for proof thereof appeals to secular people themselves, to whom
then he spoke, The testimony of worldly people for Religion
and says of them, that when they see themselves hedged-in with the trouble
and vexations of this world, then they call them happy, that free from marriage
live at quiet in Monasteries; because they have not such worldly sa^nes and
grief to oppress them, they are not subject to al those cases, and dangers,
and deceitful plots, they suffer not by envy, or jealousy, or phansies of
love, nor any other thing of that nature.

Two benefits in one.
8. Where we must note, that in this one happiness there be two great benefits
inuolued. For first we are eased of the burden and heavy carriage (as S. John
C^rysostome calls it) of the world; secondly, being discharged of it, and as
it were let loosse, we are at liberty; which liberty is accompanied with
unspeakable delight. And God through his power and mighty hand being the sole
author of it, it is not without great reason, that in holy Job he glories of
this his work, Job 19.8.
and professes, that it is himself, and no-bodie else, that unloose (...) bonds
of the (...)d Ass, and sets him free, and gives him a dwelling in the desert.
Which passage S. Gregory understands of Religious people, S. Greg. 10 moral.
c. 12.
giving this excellent exp^sition of it: The wild Ass, that abides in the
desert, does not improperly signifye the life of them, that live remote from
the troubles of the world. And this Ass is fitly said to be free, because the
se^uitude of secular businesses, wherewith the mind is much broken, is very
great, hows^euer the pains, which men take in them, be voluntary. And to
cover nothing at al of the world, is, in effect, to be free from this seruil
condition. For prosperous things lie like a yoke upon a man's neck, while we
covet them; and things cr^^sse and adverse, while we fear them. But if a man
once pull the neck of his mind from under the command of temporal desires, he
enjoys a kind of liberty in this life, because he is not rackt with desire
of prosperity, nor straightned with fear of adversity. For it is a hard
thing, and a heavy bonda^e to be subject to temporal things, to be ambitious
of earthly things, to labor to hold that which is always slipping, to stand
in things that cannot stand, to desire that which is still running from us, and
yet to be vnwillin^ to go with that which is always going. He therefore is at
liberty, that trea^ing those desi^es under foot by tranquillity of mind, is
discharged of the love of temporal things. All this is of S. Gregory.

9. Wherefore to conclude, as a man that has his irons knocked off, and is let
go out of prison, or is taken out of the water, where he was half drowned,
thinks he has a great benefit in it, though nothing else be done unto him, in
like manner shall not a man, that is drawn out of the world, and (...) no^ from
one only evil and trouble, as they are, but from very many great mischiefs
and calamities, make account, that he has gotten a great matter, and esteem
highly of this one thing, though there were nothing else in it? Certainly, it is
reason he should. And if we believe S. Bernard, this is the reason, why the
Holie-Ghost in the Canticles describes a Religious life under the title of a
bed strewed with flowers; Cant. 1.17. S Bernard ser. 4^. in Cant.
because as a man takes most ease in his bed, so people are at most ease in
Religion. I think, says S. Bernard, that the bed, wherein we rest in the
Church, are Cloisters and Monasteries, where we live quietly, void of secular
cares, and free from the anxieties of this life. And this bed is manifestly
strewed with flowers, when the life and conversation of the Religious Brethren
shines with examples and practices of the ancient Fathers, as strewed with so
many odoriferous flowers. Thus says S. Bernard.

That Religious discipline is easy. CHAP. IV.
IT is not enough to have showed, that a Religious course of life is free from
the difficulties and troubles, which are in the world; for a man might say,
that though it have not the troubles of the world, it has other vexations,
which make it irksome and tedious. We will therefore here make it plain, that
the whole order and practice of Religious discipline is easy and pleasant; a
thing contrary to the conceit, which usually people make of it, apprehending
a Religious course to be intollerably burdensome, as if one should lay a whole
hill upon a man's shoulder; Virtue agreeable to Nature.
and therefore that, which we are to say of it, requires a little more
attention. And to ground ourselves upon the principles of Nature, we must
understand, that nothing is so pleasing and so conformable to Nature, as
Virtue. For what is Virtue, if we consider it well, but Reason cultiuated and
perfected? Seeing therefore Reason is as natural to man, as man is to himself,
because without it he is not Man, Virtue must consequently be in the same
measure agreeable unto him. Which may be proved also by the natural and inbred
inclination and propension, which Man has to Virtue, manifesting itself in the
joy, which we feel within ourselves, when we do well, and the sadness on the
other side, and deiection of mind, when we do amiss. If therefore Nature be
so desirous of Virtue, the practice of it must needs be easy and pleasant; for
so we see it happens in every thing else. Al things take most conten^ment in
that, which is most suitable to their nature, as, birds in flying, fishes in
swimming, and every living creature in the food, which is most natural to it.
For though thi^ inclination to Virtue, of which we speak, be much weakened by
Original sin, and the multitude of our own offenses; yet these are but
outward encombrances, as clouds betwixt us and the sun, or ashes heaped upon
the embers; inwardly Nature still inclines to Virtue and good life, and Reason
does always sway us that way, whenever these outward impediments happen to
be removed.

The inferior part naturally subject to Reason. Arist. 1. (...) c. vlt 1. Pol.
c. 2.
2. And thus much concerning the superior part of our soul; let us see^ how
the inferior part thereof stands affected. Aristotle says, that naturally it
is subject and obedient to the upper part, which is Reason, and that therein it
differs from the rest of our vital functions, which are not pliable to the
command of Reason, as the faculties which serve for nourishment, augmentation,
and the like. And though this sensual appetite of ours have certain motions and
inclinations to that which is delightful, which are peculiar to itself, yet in
itself, and in every motion of it, it has a reference to the light of Reason;
for otherwise, says Aristotle, it were in vain for our betters to reprehend
us, or our equals to admonish us, or inferiors to entreat us. And it is a
strong argument, that it is so; because every thing does naturally take
contentment in that, which is like itself, and of the same rank and strain.
Our soul therefore being wholly spiritual, must necessarily be most delighted
with things, that are spiritual. Whereupon Abbot Isaac, a most holy man (as
Cassian relates) compares our soul to a feather. Cassian Coll. 9. c. 4.
For as a feather, says he, if it have no water or other gross humor upon
it, is easily lifted up from the earth on-high with every little blast of wind;
so the soul of man, being a spirit, has a natural lightness, which easily
mounteth it to things supernal and Celestial, contemning base and earthly
things, if vice and worldly care do not oppress it.

It belonged to the Providence of God to ordain it so Sap 8.1.
3. Finally, we shall not need to demurre long upon the proof of this point,
seeing no man can doubt of it, unless he will wrong the Divine Wisdom, and
accuse it of imprudence. For having created al men to the end, they might
purchase eternal felicity by good works and upright living; it belonged to the
self-same Providence (the nature whereof is to dispose al things sweetly) to
make them of such a mold, as might not be repugnant and adverse to the end, for
which they were created, and draw them from it, but rather further them, and
put them forward, as far as the strength of Nature can go, howsoever of
itself alone it is not sufficient and strong enough to bear them quite
through. And I see no reason, why we should make any question, but that God
has dealt so with us, seeing he has dealt so with all other creatures in the
world. For because the end of the Fire is to be above al other Elements, God
has put a natural lightness in it, proportionable to that end; in like manner
the Earth is naturally heavy and lumpish, because the Center thereof is the
midst of the world; and the same is in all things, that have life, and in others
also that have no life. God therefore holding this course in things so far
inferior to man, and ordained to ends far unequal in dignity and worth;
shall we think, he swarueth from it in a nature, that is the noblest of them al,
and ordained to the highest End, that can be? S. Basil speaking of Charity
proves by this very argument, that it is easy and very natural for Man to
love God; and what he says of Charity, may be applied to al other Virtues.
Charity, S. Basil Reg. ^usi^r in^^s.
says he, toward God, does not depend upon precepts of learning. For as we
do not learn to look upon the light, and take pleasure in it; or to love our
own life, or our parents, and those that have given us our breeding, much
less does any outward learning teach us to love God, but at the instant that
man enters upon his Being, he has withal a natural instinct of reason
ingrafted in him, containing the beginning of a kind of necessity of loving
him. And proves this his Tenet at large; because God having given Man diverse
other natural abilities proportionable to the performance of whatsoever he has
commanded, to the end he might not complain, that his Commandments are
grievous, it was far more necess^rie he should do the like in the Commandment
of the Love of God, it being the greatest of al, and consequently most
necessary we should from our cradle have an impulsion toward it, which might
carry us unto it. This and much more to the same effect is the discourse of S.
Basil, which though it were of force only in Charity, yet it were a great help
in nature to al goodness, in regard of the command, which Charity has over al
other virtues; but indeed that, which he says of Charity, holds in others
also: for the reason, which he gives, takes place in all, to wit, it was
necessary, that in Nature itself there should be some beginnings of virtue,
which might help it, not to resist, but the more readily to run with the
Commandments of God, to the end we might the more easily obey them.

4. That which we have hither to said, Grace far (...) effectual.
is grounded upon the facility of doing good, which God has planted in our
very nature, which is nothing to that, which the force of Grace does put into
us. That which is in Nature, is but a beginning, and a kind of seed, which of
itself alone can do nothing. Grace gives the true form and soul, as I may
say, out of which virtuous actions do proceed, 1 Cor 15.47 Psalm 50 Ma^arius
Hom. 44.
and, in a word, it makes man a new man, as the Apostle speaks, Celestial
and Divine; and gives us a new heart, and renews an upright spirit in our
bowels. S. Macarius in one of his Homilies sets forth the effect of this
Grace very lively, telling us, that our Savior Christ came down from heaven
to change, to transform, to renew our nature, and to new-molde this soul of
ours, by sin entangled in many evil affections and dispositions, tempering
it with his Divine spirit. He came, says he, to give us a new mind, a new
soul, (...) 6. Number 22. Dan. 3 and 7.
new eyes, new hands, a new spiritual tongue, and, to be short, to make those,
that believe in him, new men. For he that increased and multiplied the
substance of five Loaves; and gave speech to the Ass, which by nature was
absolutely dumb; and made the Fire like a wind of dew blowing, notwithstanding
that naturally it burns; and tamed the rage of the Lions for Daniel's sake;
he can also turn a soul into his goodness and peace, and fill it with a good
spirit, though of itself it be like a desert grown wild with sin.

^. This S. Macarius speaks of the Grace, The Grace of vocation
which God offers to al; but besides this, the peculiar Grace of a Religious
vocation does put so much new life and strength into them, that are endewed
with it, that they perform with a great deal of facility, and, in a manner,
with no labor at al, that, which others cannot away-with, that have not that
grace, and that, which indeed themselves could not do before. For as a beast,
that has no reason, cannot perform any thing, that properly belongs to
reason, as, to infer a Conclusion, to judge of a thing, to give advice, to
foresee that which is to come; but Man being endewed with reason, does these
things as easily as use his hands and feet: so if a man have not the vocation
and spirit of God, which includes Poverty, and Obedience, and other virtues,
it is wonderful hard for him to be content to have nothing, and to yeald
himself over to an other's will; but if he have this vocation, he takes great
comfort in it.

Custom of doing well.
5. Finally, besides Nature and Grace, daily practice breeds a custom and
habit of doing well, which is another Nature, altogether as forcible and
efficacious as Nature itself; and when it is once gotten and grounded in the
mind, al virtuous actions are easy and pleasant. To which purpose S. Leo says
very well: S. Leo ser. 5. de (...) 7. means.
The affection, which excludes earthly love, is strengthened by custom of
doing well; because a man's conscience must necessarily take delight in good
works, and willingly do that, which it is glad it has done. Religion therefore
being nothing else but a continual practice and trading in all kind of virtue,
the exercise of virtue must needs grow every day easier then other, and in
time, as so many goodly trees, bring forth abundant fruit, and furnish a
Religious soul with plenty, and profit, and heavenly pleasure. This is the
habit, which Cassian describes in a certain place in these words, Cassian.
Coll. 11. c. 9.
to wit: When a soul is transformed into a habit of virtue, that is, when a
man has so accustomed himself unto it, and gotten so much love of it, that he
thinks it the pretiousest thing in the world, and takes the transgression of
virtue, or the poison of sin, to be the grieuousest torment that can be; when
a man is come to this, he must needs take more contentment in his sober and
continent life, then others do in their incontinencie and riot; the flower of
chastity must needs be sweeter to him, then the filth of sensual pleasure to
them that are sensual; finally, he cannot but rejoice more when he is humbled,
and happens upon an occasion of suffering for Christ, then worldly ambitious
people in the applause, and glory, and preferments, which they so eagerly hunt
after.

6. Upon these and the like grounds we constantly auerre, as in the beginning,
that a Religious life is so far from being harsh and difficult, that it is
rather wonderful sweet and pleasant. And we may add the testimony of
Reginaldus a Dominican-Friar, one of the first and principal companions of S.
Dominick. He was a rich wealthy man in the world, and lived daintily at ease;
after he had undertaken that rigorous and paineful kind of life, they that knew
him before, often asked him (not without some astonishment) whether he were not
mightily troubled with it; and he always answered with a cheerful heart and
countenance: Reginaldus.
I would have you know* that al these things are so sweet and pleasant unto me,
that often I have been grieved at heart, that I live so easily; and have
thought, that I merited nothing in this life by reason of it. This was
Reginaldus his answer; and many more, yea al good Religious people, if they
were asked, would answer the same. I myself have heard many speak to the same
effect, and complain grievously, as if they lead an idle and lasie life;
whereas notwithstanding they applied themselves Religiously to those courses,
which in a Secular eye, measuring al by Sense, seem so harsh and rigid.

Of the pleasure, which is in a Religious life, by reason of the mortification
of the Passions. CHAP. V.
IF we look well into ourselves, we shall find within us a great diversity of
Affections, which God has planted in our nature for good ends, that as
faithful and obedient servants, they might be ready to execute upon al
occasions the commands of Reason, and be at a beck in all things Whereby we may
also see, that nothing can be more unseemly or more dangerous, Passions are
given us for good.
then to let these our Passions loosse. For casting-of the yoke of Obedience,
they trayle a man whither they list; and rule him, that should have ruled them;
as a horse without a bridle does overrule and endanger his rider.
Inconvenient, that Passion should rule.
For this inferior part of ours, which is the seat of anger and lust, is like
to that, which is in beasts, and consequently it has no government or wisdom
in it, nor any kind of light or understanding. As therefore, if it were
possible for a man to walk with his head downwards and his feet upwards,
besides the incommoditie, that all the filth and ordure would light presently
upon his face, which is the beautifullest part of man, it would be an
intolerable toil, and labor, and pain to him, to suffer that alteration, so
contrary to the natural situation of his limbs; the like inconveniences do
happen in our inward man, when the order, which God has settled betwixt the
superior and inferior part of our soul, is turned vp-side down. Aristotle
himself saw the misery of it, Aristot. Eth. 9. c. 14.
and describes it in these words: Vicious people cannot be at quiet within
themselves, but have their minds turmoiled and distracted into several
factions, as in a civil war: one part of the mind grieuing at that, which it
wants; the other rejoicing in that, which it is a shame to enjoy, and so is,
as it were, disioynted and pulled hither and thither: and though no man can
grieve and rejoice al at once, yet they presently grieve, because they did
rejoice; and their life is always full of repentance. As therefore they, that
are continually haled and hanted with these turbulent affections, as with so
many furies, are extremely unhappy; so they, that are void of passion, and
have al things quiet within them, must needs enjoy that incomparable peace,
which surpasses al understanding, and lead a most sweet and pleasant life.

2. It will not be amiss to hear, Passionate men are most miserable people.
what one of the ancient Philosophers, and he that was the eloquentest among
them, though a Heathen, does speak in this matter. What (says he) shall we
say, when we see a man burning and raging with passionate affections, mad with
insatiable desires of every kind of thing, Cicero. 8. Tus^^l.
and the more profusely he follows his pleasures in all things, the more
tormented with fiery thirst after them? may we not justly say, he is a most
miserable creature? what? he that set upon a light pin gives himself to idle
mirth and vnconsiderable gestures, is he not the more unhappy, the more happy
he thinks himself? As these therefore are miserable creatures, so they are
happy, whom fear does not fright, whom sorrow does not consume, whom
passions of lust do not disquiet, whom vain mirth does not dissolve into
languishing pleasures. Now if there be a man, that can abide the brunt of
Fortune, and think al things tolerable, that can any way befall him in this
life, and consequently is not touched with fear or grief, or moved with
disordered desires, or set a-gog with some idle fancy of delight, why should
we not account him happy? And if virtue be the cause of these effects, why
should not virtue alone make us happy?This is that Heathen Philosopher's
discourse, S. Aug. Ep. 121.
of which I know not what to say other, then that which S. Augustine, bringing
his words upon another occasion, said of him: What do you think of these
words? were they not spoken by Truth itself by whose mouth he would? Tit. 1.12.
And that, which the Apostle said of the Cretensian Prophet: This testimony is
true.

3. We read the like discourse in another Philosopher, who was also a Heathen,
and gives moreover this reason of his saying: Plutarch de Vitt. and Vit.
As health and the constant temper of our body is the ground of all the
delight, which our body feels, insomuch that, when our body is distempered,
we loathe the daintiest fare that is; so to the end, that we may taste the
pleasures of the mind, our mind itself must be in good temper, that is, it must
be void of fear, and enjoy peace and tranquillity within itself; The temper
of our mind, is the ground of pleasure.
if this health be wanting in our mind, we shall never know, what belongs to
pleasure. For though we may be put in good hope for a while, and have, as it
were, a glimpse of delight; some care or other, some cross anxietie rushing
upon us, will suddenly dash it, and amaze us, as mariners at sea, when sailing
with a prosperous gale, unexpectedly they see themselves upon a rock. If our
mind be in good order, as when we recover of a sickness, and our stomach begins
to grow upon us, we relish coorse bread and cheese, and feed with delight upon
such gross fare, though before we could not look upon the dayntiest fare that
was, so if a man have his mind purged of evil humors, he is always content,
even in greatest want. Thou will be content, says he, with thy self, if thou
once know what is good and upright. Thou will abound in poverty, and be a
king; and a private ordinary life will be as welcome unto thee, as to bear
rule and be in office.

Reli^^^ composeth the humors of our mind.
4. Seeing therefore there is so much happiness, and so much pleasure to be had by
healing and composing the turbulent humors of our mind, and that it is so much
the more to be desired, the more agreeable it is to Nature; let us see, what
helps Religious discipline does afford toward the curing of them. First, it
cutteth off the causes and occasions of them. For as Physicians prescribe
abstinence from certain meats that are hurtful and breed il humors in a man's
body; so Religion barreth al things, by which disorder may rise; for that,
which S. Gregory says, S. Greg. Hom 27. in Euang.
that al breach of charity grows upon desire of earthly things, because
others take that from us which we love, may be applied to many other things.
For whenever we break forth into passion, and fall upon others, the ground of
it is the love of some earthly thing. This is the cause of strife, and debate,
and branglin^s, and that we run ourselves upon the pikes, and disquiet
ourselves, and ag^tieue others and the like; with which disorders the world is
so much distracted and torn in pieces. Which made S. Macariu^ say, S. Ma^ar.
Hom. 5.
that the Sons of this world are like wheat in a sieve or vanne. For being,
as it were, cast into this world, as into a ^anne, they are continually tossed
to and fro with unconstant thoughts, and tumbled up and down as in a
tempestuous wind of earthly cares and desires. And as the corn is never at
rest, but thrown now against one side, now against the other, and in continual
motion; so the author of al wickedness, the Devil, does continually molest, and
trouble, and disquiet them, having once entangled them in worldly businesses,
and gives them not an hours respit. This was S. Macarius his conceit of
worldly people. And S. John Chrysostom will tell us, S. John Chrysostom. Hom. 69.
in Matthew.
what we are to think of those, that live in Religion. In one of his Homilies
upon S. Matthew he says, that there is as much difference betwixt the most
delightful life of a Monk (for so are his words) and the pleasures of Secular
people, as betwixt a quiet haven and a boisterous sea; and the ground of this
felicity, which Monks enjoy, is, because avoiding the noise and distraction,
which public places and markets are full of, they live where they have nothing
to do with things of this world, where no human thing disquiets the^, no
sadness, no grief, no anxietie, no hazard, no envy, no sinful love nor any
thing of this nature; but give themselves wholly to the conte^plation of the
Kingdom which is to come, and whatsoever leads to it. This is the first help,
which Religion affords toward the alaying of the heat of our Passions.

Two things set our passions on fire.
5. Another medecin it has, which takes away the very root of the disease.
Two things set our Passions on fire: the apprehension of good, and the
apprehension of evil. For when a thing is represented unto us as good, the
very apprehension, which Nature has of a thing suitable unto it, stirs up
love; if we have not the thing, love breeds desire; if we have it, it breeds
content and pleasure. Contrariwise if we conceit a thing to be evil or
hurtful; we hate it; hatred makes us fly from it and avoid it; if we cannot
avoid it, but that it will come upon us, then comes grief and sadness. In like
manner, in that part of our Appetite, which is the seat of Anger, two several
motions rise upon the apprehension of good, to wit, hope and despair, two upon
the apprehension of imminent evil, fear and audacitie; one upon the evil which
is present, to wit, anger, which differs from sadness, in respect it does not
yeald to the evil, that presses upon us, but strives against it and resists
it. Seeing therefore the whole troop of our Affections is lead by this one
Apprehension of Good and Evil, look what apprehension or judgment we make of
good and evil, such shall we find the desires and affections of our mind to be.
Religion preuents al trouble.
Now the whole drift of Religion is to alter our apprehension from earthly
things, which falsely usurp the name of good, to spiritual things, which are
truly good, and indeed to rid us wholly of them, and free our hands from them,
to the end we may attend the more perfectly to the pursuit and purchase of
that, which is spiritual only; which whosoever does compass, does as it were
at one blow cut-of all the roots and strings, that feed Passion. For what should
trouble a man, that is thus settled? what shall he need to be afraid of? least
his merchandise perish by shipwreck? or his corn and wine by hayle? or his
son dye under age? or least men be offended with him? or he leese the favor
of his Prince? He has voluntarily stolen himself from al these things, The
difference betwixt temporal and spiritual things.
and consequently prevented al* such casualties, and made himself impregnable
for whatsoever assault of Fortune.

6. Finally, there is this main difference betwixt temporal and spiritual
things. Temporal things are easily lost, and subject to infinite casualties; and
therefore the getting of them, and the holding, are always full of endless
care and anguish: Spiritual things are given us by God; and no power upon earth
nor in hell can take them from us against our will; and consequently they that
trade in them, live void of al fear, saving that which the Prophet calls a
holy fear, which keeps us always in subjection to God, acknowledging his
infinite power over us; and this fear is not only quiet and peaceable, but
(which a man would wonder at) increases confidence and security.

7. The endeavor of every Religious man in particular together with the
assistance of his governors and Superiors, is moreover no small help to the
rooting-out of al disordered motions; specially being a thing, which every one
does apply himself with fervor unto, as the chief exercise and exploit, in
which he is to play his prize. And what shall I say of the honor and pleasure,
which a man finds in following of Virtue? or of the joys of spirit, and that
most sweet repast of mind, which we enjoy by conuersing with God* Which from
the Mind diffused into Sense, does so satisfye the hunger thereof with food of a
higher nature, that it loatheth ever after al ordinary and vulgar meats.
Finally sobriety and moderation in diet and apparel helps to the ordering
of our Passions. For as fulness of meat, and drink, and dayntie fare does dead
the spirit, and quicken sense; so sobriety tames that part of us, which gapes
after pleasure, and makes it not so forward to kick; as a beast, that is
abridged of his oats, S. Basil. de abdicat. ^^.
is the tamer by it; and the other part, which is the seat of Reason and
counsel, is the more quick and able; both which S. Basil expresses in these
words: As a fountain of water drayned into several branches, makes the land,
through which it runs, fertile and fresh; so if the vice of gluttony
spreading itself through the veins of our heart, and running from thence, water
al our senses, it must needs turn our souls into a wood of lustful desires,
and make it a receptacle of wild beasts.

7. These be the helps, by which Religion brings a Soul to that quiet state of
mind we speak of; and composing and keeping down our Passions, delivers the
command and rule into the hands of Reason, Es 327.1.
which only ought to rule; and Reason free from the violence and encombrance of
them, is willingly subject to the will of God, and consequently, as in a
wel-ordered family, there is no dissension, no discord, no contradiction; but
every one attends to his office, and performs his duty with ease and
diligence. Who therefore can doubt, but such a Soul so ordered, is in a most
happy and most delightful state, tasting upon earth the first fruits of the
Celestial habitation, where every thing shall be brought to a most perfect
peace and concord? Which I take to be that peace, and that sitting at rest and
quiet, and that inward silence, which is promised by the Prophet Esaias to Virtue
by the general name of Justice, which gives every one his due. For no State
does so perfectly give every one his due as Religion, giving, and restoring,
and perfectly subiecting us to God, whose we are al of us by right, as I showed
elsewhere. And the work of Justice, says he, shall be peace; and the
performance of Justice, silence and security for ever. And my people shall sit
in the beauty of peace, and in tabernacles of con^idence, and in a quiet full
of wealth. What does man desire more then rest and quiet? not that rest which
is idle and unfruitful, store whereof we see in idle people of the world; but
such as is wealthy, and profitable, and furnished with all spiritual
commodities; as the holy Prophet describes it.

Of the pleasure, which Religious people take in Prayer. CHAP. VI.
TO the delights, which we have hitherto spoken of, we may add the comfort of
Prayer and Meditation, which taketh-vp great part of a Religious life. How
great the sweetness of it is, and how properly Religion may be said to be the
true seat of it, E^s. 56.6.
Esaias the Prophet will tell us, comprizing both in these few words: The sons of
the stranger, who adhere to our Lord to worship him, and love his name, and to
be his servants, every one that keeps the Sabbath, least he pollute it, and
observes my Covenant; I will bring them to my holy hill, and make them joyful
in the house of my prayer; their Holocausts and their Sacrifices shall please me
upon my Altar, because my house shall be called the house of prayer to al
people. This is the large promise of the Holie-Ghost, which not only for the
inward sense, but even for the outward sound of the words does so properly
agree to every Religious person, that we may spare to interpret it further,
S. Augustine 18. de Ciuit. c. 28.
least (as S. Augustine says in a certain place upon the like occasion) (...)
dead the savor of the Prophetical speech. And what wonders is it, that God
showing his Prophets his Church, that was to come, should withal show them so
long-before the beauty of a Religious course, which is so noble a part of the
Church?

2. First therefore the name of Strangers does fitly suit with them; Religious
people strangers in thi^ world.
because they have nothing in the world of their own, but, as pilgrims, use it
as if they did not use it; they have no permanent city of abode, but seek
that which is to come; they adhere to our Lord, being fastened unto him with the
strong and indissoluble bond of their Vow; and are truly his servants, and so
styled by all, because they live continually in his service, and their glory
is, to be called as they are; they offer unto him Holocausts and Sacrifices,
and that often, because they offer themselves wholly; and they keep his
Sabbath, living, not lazily without profit to themselves or others, as the
people of the world oftimes do, but a quiet and retired life full of holiness and
devotion, keeping holie-day from the works of the earth, and bestowing
themselves wholly in the contemplation and love of God.

3. Now why may not Religion be called also the House of Prayer, Religion the
House of prayer.
which God does so much honor as to style it His House; seeing it requires so
much exercise of prayer, and affords so much commodity of performing it, as
it ought to be performed? For first Religion riddeth us of al outward care not
only of following husbandry, or trading in merchandise and such like
negotiations of greater consequence, but of those, which are of less note, as
the care of household-busines, education of children, finally of al. These are
the banes of Meditation and Contemplation, not only because they take up al our
time, but much more because they stir up so many passions of anger, and
fear, and sadness, according to the several events which happen. These Passions
partly disquiet our mind, that it can settle to nothing, and consequently
absolutely hinder Contemplation; partly they do so ouerwhelme it, that they dead
our spirits, and suck-out all the juice, which is in us. For that, (...) 9. c. 3.
which Abbot Isaac (a great man) in Cassian does deliver, cannot be denied: to
wit, that to pray well, it is necessary universally to cut-of al care of carnal
things (for so he speaks) Secondly, that we do not only shot out care, but
the very memory of al kind of business; thirdly we must cut off al detraction,
multiplicitie of idle words, and, above al, the passions of anger and sadness;
finally, utterly roote-out the remaynder and occasion of avarice and carnal
concupiscence. Which if it be true, certainly the true exercise of prayer is as
rare in the world, as these hindrances and inconveniences are frequent in it;
and contrariwise in Religion it is easy to practice it; because the state
itself has already barred al these impediments.

Other helps of Prayer: as, Chastity.
4 Moreover Chastity and a single life is a great help to Prayer; which in
reason every body may see to be true, and the Apostle says it, commending
Virginity and a single life; because (as he speaks) it gives a man leave to
pray to our Lord without hindrance. The reason whereof among others, as I take
it, 1. Cor. 7.35.
is, because as our mind grows lumpish, and bears always downwards to base
and earthly things, by the use of corporal pleasure: so by continency it
becomes light and quick, and able, as it were with certain wings, to life
itself up to God; the purity, which is in itself, furthering the conjunction
of it to that purity, Humility and Poverty.
which is God. The humility also of so poor an estate, and so far from al
human glory, is a special disposition to Prayer. For as we read of our
Savior, that in his lifetime he lovingly embraced the little ones, that were
brought unto him, and checked his Disciples that would have forbidden them,
saying: Let the little-ones come to me; for of such is the Kingdom of heaven.
Matthew. 19.141
So we have just cause to think, that he practices the same now in heaven; and
conuerseth familiarly with such as be little. For if he made so much
demonstration of love toward them, that had nothing humble in them, but the
tenderness of their age, how much greater signs of love will he show to them,
that have voluntarily humbled themselves, and brought themselves to that
excess of Poverty and mean estate, which the Religious live in? So that for
these and many other reasons there can be no doubt, but that Religion is the
House of Prayer, that is, the most commodious, and most convenient place that
can be, to exercise our mind in prayer, and continue our thoughts in
contemplation of heavenly things.

The delight which comes of Prayer.
5. Now to speak of the delight and pleasure, which is in this noble Exercise,
God expresses it in the words following: I will make them joyful in the house
of my prayer. He makes himself the author of this joy, and truly he is so;
because it proceeds from him, and is of him. It proceeds from him, because he
infuseth it into our souls, the beams of his light shine upon us, his holiness
and his inspirations fall upon our hearts. It is of him, because there is nothing
else before our eyes to cause this joy; neither can so great joy and contentment
rise but of God. So that we find S. Bernard's saying to be true: S Bernard s^r
18 in Cant.
By prayer we drink the wine that rejoices the heart; the wine of spirit, which
makes us drunk, and brings oblivion of carnal pleasure; And S. Augustin's:
The tears of them that pray, are sweeter then the joys of them that go to
plays. S. Augustine in Ps. 12^.
S. Francis was often wont to commend spiritual mirth and chearfulnes to his
Religious, as a special defense against the temptations of the Devil; S.
Francis.
and said, that the ground of this chearfulnes was purity of mind, and that it
was to be purchased by good works, but chiefly by Prayer; and therefore
whenever we find a storm of sadness come upon us, we should betake ourselves
to prayer, as to a harbor or quiet haven. And certainly if we find so much
delight in conversing with men of learning and wisdom, that we can spend
whole days with them to our great contentment and satisfaction; what shall we
think of the communication and conversation, which we may have continually with
the holy Angels, to whom we are so many ways obliged for their charity and
care over us? or with the other Saints of Heaven, that know by experience, what
it is to carry this burden of flesh with which we are loaded? or with the
Queen of Saints and Angels, then whom under God there is nothing in this
world more beautiful, nothing that thought or affection can fix itself upon,
with more delight and sweetness?

6. What shall I say of GOD himself? First, the infinitnes of his Nature, The
delight, which is in thinking of God.
his endless Goodness, Power, and al things of excessive perfection contained
in it, affords a Soul a boundles scope to walk in; and walking without end,
it cannot but be absorpt in a bottomless deapth of delight. From thence again
reflecting upon the consideration of the benefits, which God has powered forth
upon us, either out of the superabundant bounty of his love and good will, or
out of the natural inclination, as I may say, which he has to liberality; and
much more upon those, in which so great a Majesty has taken so much pains
for our sakes; calling to mind his sorrows, his torments, the manger, his
poverty, his whipping, his crown of thorns, his Cross, and pondering every
thing with attention, and seazing upon them in contemplation, as upon an
infinite treasure of wealth and riches now belonging to ourselves, and made to
our use; what joy, what gladness, what contentment must a Soul needs take in
it? This causes a fountain of tears to gush forth from our eyes, this melts
us into a most sweet vein of weeping, this makes our heart to leap for joy
within us, and diffuseth itself to our very flesh; beholding such infinite
testimonies of the Divine love toward us, which of itself is enough to ravish
us with delight; and again tasting so many ways of the fruits of this love,
by his heavenly care and providence over us, grace in this life, and assured
hope of eternal bliss in the life to come. And though we lay aside the
consideration of the profit, which comes unto us, the very approaching to God
by prayer and communication with him, is a thing of another world. For as they,
that come near the fire, grow warm by the heat of it, and whatsoever is
mingled with honey, does taste of the sweetness of honey; so whosoever
conioyneth himself with God, and, as I may say, plungeth himself into the
fountain of al goodness and happiness, must needs by in great measure happy; as
we read in the holy Scripture, that Moses by the communication, Ex. 34.15.
which he held with God, received so much light inwardly in his mind, that it
was seen in his face, as two horns in his forehead.

7. These be the incomparable delights and daynties, which the servants of God
enjoy, and the daily food where with they are fatned; that we may not wonder,
if full of this spiritual marrow and fatnes, they be so strong and able, and
compass so great works in matter of virtue and the service of God, with ease.
S. Antonie.
This enabled S. Antonie so far, that, as it is recorded of him, oftentimes
beginning his prayer at the shutting-in of the evening, he was found at
break-of-day in the same posture; complaining of the light, that it rose too
early. We read almost the same of Arsenius, Arsenius.
that setting himself to his prayer in the evening, and leaving the sun
behind him going down, never stirred til in the morning the sun shined
again in his face. Sy^uanus.
Syluanus was ever wont to keep his eyes shut, after he had been long at his
prayers, that coming, as be said, from the wonderful sight of heavenly things,
he might not be troubled with the deformity of earthly objects. S Francis.
What shall we say of S. Francis, who was sometimes lifted up from the ground to
a man's height, sometimes as high as the tops of trees, often also as high as
the clouds? Or of others without number, whose ecstasies, and rapts, and long
prayers are full of such like miracles? Of which kind we might find plenty in
our days, if it were not from our purpose to stand rehearsing them al. And we
that are of the many, and cannot look for such extraordinary favors at
God's hands, yet in the very mediocritie, which he is pleased to imparte unto
us, find so much sweetness, that the little, Ps. 1^.11.
which we enjoy, is desireful above gold and precious stone, and sweetes then
home and the home-combe.

Of many other spiri^ual delights, which Religious people enjoy. CHAP. VII.
The comforts of a Religious life concealed; and shy?
IT is recorded of S. Laurence Justinian (of whose sanctity and wisdom we have
had often occasion to speak) that he was wont to say in commendation of a
Religious life, among other things; that God has of purpose concealed and
hidden the pleasure of it; because if men did know what it was, they would not
be able to stay themselves from running to it, S Laurence Justinian.
and the world be wholly dispeopled.

2. This testimony of so great a man is the more weighty, because he spoke of
his own experience in commendation of the life, in which he had been bred up,
and continued from his youth, and was a man of so great a wit, and, which is
the principal, so abundantly furnished with the light of Grace, that his
verdict must needs be of great authority; though he is not alone of this
opinion; for all men concur in the same, and they most of al, that have most
constantly and with most fervor followed this course of life. Palla^^^s in
Lausinum 32 Apollo.
Palladius relates of Apollo, who was a famous man among the ancient Heremits,
that having five hundred disciples, he was wont to bid them to be always
cheerful and merry; And a man should not meet upon earth such mirth and
exultation as was continually among them. For he said, it was an unseemly
thing for any of them to be sad and heavy, S. Anton. 2. p 5.15. c. 10.
that had such assured hopes of eternal happiness. The Infidels, and Jews, and
wicked Christians might with reason be truly sorrowful; but the servants of God
should always rejoice. For if people, that traffic in earthly things,
rejoice in them; why should not Religious people, that are in present
possession of so many good things* and do so certainly hope for the happiness
of the life to come, be in perpetual gladness? This was the saying of that
ancient Father; and he said true.

3. For first in this state people have the comfort of a good Conscience,
Religious people must be always cheerful.
which, if things go well with us, does much increase our joy; if they happen
cross as sometimes perhaps they will, it is a great solace unto us, and in fine
gives life to all the hours a Religious man does live. For a good Conscience
is, as it were, a Master or Tutour, that stands at our elbow, both in regard
of the light belonging unto it, which without much ad^e easily discerns good
from evil, just from that which is unjust; and in regard of the propension,
which it gives to our will, to love that which is good, and to shun that,
which appears to be evil; so that whosoever resists this light, and this
inclination or propension, must needs be in continual torment and vexation;
whosoever goes with it and obeys it, S. John Chrysostom hom. 63. ad Pop.
lives in joy and comfort. This we have out of S. John Chrysostom, who speaks
thus; Though there be some pains to be taken in the practice of virtue, yet it
sils a man's conscience with a great deal of pleasure, and brings so much
inward delight with it, that it cannot be expressed in words. For what is
delightful in things present? a board well furnished? health of body? riches?
But all the sweetness that is in any of these, is bitter, compared with that
delight. For nothing is more pleasant then a good Conscience, and good hope.

4. And this contentment of a good Conscience, which according to S. John
Chrysostom is so full of sweetness, is not alone in Religion, but brings many
other pleasures with it; which S. Macarius speaking of this very abundance of
spiritual comforts in one of his Homilies sets forth in lively colors, S.
Macarius hom. de gau^^^ Spiritus.
and says thus: It fares with the servants of God sometimes, as with them,
that sit at a Prince's table royally set-forth with all kinds of choice meats,
and there they exult with a gladness, which no man can come near to express in
words, and with admirable satietie and contentment. Sometimes they are like a
bride melting with vnco^ceauable heavenly delight in the arms of God their
Spouse. Sometimes they are like Angels, that have no bodies, and arrive to such
a lightness and freedom, that the weight of their body troubles them no more,
then if they had none at al. Sometimes they are so full of pleasure, as if they
had drunk largely of the best wine that is; and are even drunk with a holy
drunkenness of Divine mysteries, and are not sensible of any thing that passes
in this life Sometimes they are like mourners, lamenting the miseries of
mankind, pouring forth their prayers to God for the salvation thereof, ready to
lay down their own life and soul at stake, for the good of others. Sometimes
they do so burn with this spiritual love of their Neighbor, that, if it were
possible, they would hide al men, good and bad, within their bowels. Again at
other times they cast themselves so far under al men's feet, through humility
of spirit, that they make account they are the least, and the lowest, and the
worst of al men in the world. Contrariwise sometimes they resemble a stout
warrier, that gathering his weapons to him, goes of his own accord into the
field, and valiantly encountreth his enemies. Oftimes their soul reposeth in
profound silence, enjoying most sweet and quiet peace, and taking unspeakable
delight in it. Finally oftimes their mind is so cleared by the gift of the
Holie-Ghost, which we call Understanding and Wisdom, that in an instant it
conceaueth things, which no tongue can express. All this is out of S. Macarius.

5. How rare and admirable therefore must that course of life needs be, which
swimmeth in all these delights, and is served with joy after joy, and
contentment after contentment, as a sumptuous bancket with dish after dish?
Which the Prophet David deservedly admireth in these words: Ps. ^0.20.
How great is the multitude of thy sweetness, o Lord, which thou have hidden for
these that sent thee? It is great, but hidden, and known to them only, that
truly fear God. And they are in a great error that think, that they that vow
themselves to God, provide well for the good and safety of their Souls, but
buy this safety at a high rate of excessive toil. The journey of spirit
delightful.
For it is not so; this spiritual journey has also pleasure with it; and
greater pleasure, then flesh and blood is capable of; and conformably thereunto
nothing is more often repeated in holy Writ, or more seriously inculcated.
Light (says David) arose to the lust, and gladness to the upright of heart; Ps
96.11. Ps. 118.103. Ps. 117.15. Ps 67.4. Ps. 34.9. Ps. 35.9.
as who should say: That is true gladness, which rises of the light of our
mind, and the vprightnes of our heart. And again: How sweet are thy speeches to
my tawes, above honey to my mouth! And: A (...) of exultation and health in the
tabernacles of the Just. Let the just make feasts and exult in the sight of
God. My soul that exult in our Lord, and delight in the Savior thereof; al my
bones shall say: Lord, who is like to thee? But he comes most near unto us, and
speaks in a manner particularly to us, that dwell in the House of God, when he
says: They shall be drunk of the plenty of thy House, and thou will make them
drink of the torrent of thy pleasure. He calls it a Torrent, in regard of the
plenty; and because the source of it is not in the earth, but in heaven, and
raynes down abundantly from about. He likeneth it to drunkenness; because they
that are silled with these comforts, like people that are drunk, have not only
perfectly drowned and quenched their thirst, but see not the things, which are
upon earth, or at leastwise take no heed to that, which is before their eyes,
and inwardly burn with a spiritual fire and fervor, Ps ^^.3.
putting them upon many actions, which others perhaps may think foolish or
impertinent. The Prophet Esaias speaks to the same effect in diverse places, and
particularly when he says: I will put the desert thereof as delight, and the
solitude as a garden of our Lord. (...) and gladness shall be found in it,
thanksgiving and a voice of praise. A happy Desert, wherein so much joy
abundeth! And what can this Desert or solitude be more truly thought to be,
then Religion, which is a place severed from company, from honor, riches, and
al worldly commodities?

Other (...) pleasant.
6. Finding this and much more in holy Writ, which can not deceive us, though
we could not feel any thing of it by experience, it should be notwithstanding
sufficient to make us believe it more certainly and more undoubtedly then any
thing which we see with our eyes, or touch with our hands; because our senses
may deceive us, the Word of God can not. And yet we may strengthen this, which
we have said, by consideration of the natural disposition, as I may say, of
God, and his infinite goodness; which having showed itself so far, as to make
him come down from heaven, and suffer himself to be bound to a pillar, and
whipped, and crowned with thorns, and nailed upon a Cross for his enemies,
what will he not do for his friends? what will he not do for his children?
specially the first costing him his life and blood, whereas in affording these
comforts, he is to be at no labor, nor to suffer the least blemish of any
happiness belonging unto him. So that there can be no doubt, but that his
infinite bounty will be always liberal toward his servants, according to his
wonted custom and good Nature.

7. What trouble therefore can there be in this life so great, which these
comforts will not sweeten? or what infirmity so weak as not to be fully
strengthened by these heavenly gifts? or what other thing so hard and harsh to
man, S. Bernard sermon. Ecce nos.
which seasoned with these delights, will not have a dainty relish and easy
disgestion? S. Bernard said well in a long and eloquent Sermon, which he made of
the happiness of Religious people: It was part of the liberality of God, not
only to lay before us the reward of eternal life, but to promise us spiritual
joys even in this life. For so also the workmen of this world are wont to have
their meat at their work, and their hire in the end. In like manner soldiers
receive their pay, because their labor requires it; and at last they are
rewarded with a larger Donatiue, according to the measure of their labors. So
the Children of Israel, til they entered upon the Land of Promise, Sap. 10.17.
wanted not their Manna in the Desert. This double promise is evidently also
expressed by the Prophet, when he says: God will repay the reward of their
labors; and lead them in a wonderful way. This way is the way of the
testimonies (of the Commandments) of God; Ps. 118.14.
wherein another Prophet testifyeth, that he delighted as in all the riches of
the world.

8. We have many examples, Examples of these delights.
which prove this abundance of spiritual comfort, of which we are speaking.
Cassian relates, that a holy Abbot, ^amed John, was wont to be filled with
such wonderful inward sweetness, that he did not remember, Cass. Coll. 19. c. 4.
whether he had eaten any thing the day before. Blessed Ephrem finding his
heart ready to burst with heavenly joy, Ephrem.
was wont to cry out: Depart from me, o Lord, a little; because the weakness of
this vessel is not able to abide it. S. Bernard.
S. Bernard was so absorpt with the like joys, that riding al day long by the
side of a lake, he did not mark, that there was any such thing; and living a
whole year in a Celle, did not know, whether it were open at top or no. And it
is so ordinary to read of this kind of fruits in those days, that we way
spare a labor of rehearsing them. Neither is our Age barren of them; or can
they indeed be wanting in any, because God never leeseth of his bounty and
liberality, which is the stock from which they grow; though they may perhaps
not be so apparent, because they are fresh, and people be yet alive, and
consequently their actions have not that authority, which Antiquity affords.

9. They that were inward with our Father and Founder S. Ignatius, S. Ignatius
Riba^. l. 5. c. 1.
report of him, that he had such continual abundance of spiritual tears, that
his eyes decaying with it, he almost lost his sight; and had doubtless utterly
lost it, but that upon advice of Physicians and request of some of his
Company, he obtained of God the savor to have them as it were at command, to
give them scope, or restrain them, as he thought good.

S Xantrius. (...). 4. c. 7.
10. S. Francis Xauier was often seen to lay his hands upon his breast, and with
his eyes lifted up to heaven, out of the abundance of heavenly comfort, to cry
out: It is enough, O Lord, it is enough; as if he could bear no more, as we
said of S. Ephrem. And when he was in journey, which he always made on foot,
his mind was so fixed and absorpt in God, that going out of his way, he often
went upon thorns, and briars, and stones, and heeded it not; and by reason of
it, his feet and his legs were always bloody, and full of matterie sores; and
he notwithstanding did not feel it. And of my own knowledge, I know many of
this our Society, and have heard of more, that have been so familiar with God,
that they have lived perpetually in these kinds of comforts and joys; and
could name them, but that I have a custom (and mean to hold it) to name no
man, while he is alive. But these favors are extraordinary; and doubtless
happen not to al.

Ordinary comforts.
11. There be other great comforts, and of great value, which are ordinary, and
very frequent, or rather daily, and may be and are obtained by following the
common and ordinary manner of a Religious life, as being grounded in purity
of heart, and the practice of virtue, and mortification, which are the daily
exercises of Religion. For as the Sun communicates his light to every
thing, according to the disposition, which it finds in the thing itself; if
the air be pure, it fills it full of light; if it be clowdie and full of
mists, it does not therefore leave it wholly destitute of light, but gives it so
much, as the grossenes of the air will admit of, and pearceth into a house by
the passages and chinks, which it finds, as far as the chinks will give it
leave: In like manner God deals with us, his nature being no less inclinable
to do good, then the Sun to give light. To great men, where he finds no
hindrance, he communicates himself largely and fully; others, that are not yet
perfect, but have certain clouds within them, he does not wholly forsake or
neglect, but gives them so much right, as is proportionable to their
capacity. So that though our weakness come far sho^^ of the height, to which
the Saints are arrived, yet God stooping to out infirmity, never suffers
them that follow him, Joan 6.
as I said before, into the Desert, to go away fasting, least they saint by
the way, but fills them in such abundance, that many chests of fragments
remain. And these comforts and joys of themselves are so great, that the
least drop of them is able to extinguish al feeling and desire of worldly
comfort.

Religious people have pleasure in temporal things also.
12. And thus much of the multiplicitie of delight, which the use of spiritual
things affords Religious people, which is the principal; and yet they are not
altogether debarred of pleasure in temporal things; yea oftimes they are so
full of contentment in them, that worldly people have not more, though they be
never so greedy of them, and run headlong after them. I speak not of
fleshly delights, or those which cannot be had without sin; for no man in
his right ^^its can place true contentment in them, the first being beastly,
and the second bringing a remorse, which alone tormenteth a man more, then all the rest, which is in them, can give him ease. Setting therefore these aside,
and speaking of a man, as he is truly Man, that is, of one that governs
himself by reason, I may truly say, that spiritual men take more contentment in
the things of this world, then any carnal people whatsoever. For carnal people
set their hearts wholly upon that, which is the least and meanest in every
creature, to wit, upon the outside of it only; and following that, inordinatly
and too too greedily, what do they but that which S. Augustine confesses of
himself? S Aug 10 (...) c. 17.
They cast themselves deformedly upon the beautieful things, which God created.
But spiritual men proceed far after another fashion, and take another way
more apt to breed contentment. S. (...).
And we may declare it by that, which S. Bonauenture writes of S. Francis; for
thus he speaks of him: He took an incredible delight in the creatures
themselves, and was wont to exult in them, beholding them al as the works of
God; and, as it were, drinking of the fountain of his infinite goodness in the
streams of these several things that run from him, and considering the
natures, and qualities, and effects, which God has bestowed upon every one of
them, together with the order, and connection, and beauty, wherein they are
ranked and set forth, it was like a heavenly harmony and consort of Music to
the ears of his soul, and in the beautifulnes of them he did acknowledge and
love God, who is above al things beautiful. This was the manner, which S.
Francis held, and al do imitate him, that have not eyes only in their body,
as a horse and a mule, who have no understanding, but make use of the eyes of
their mind.

13. Now how far this delight does surpass that, which ignorant and carnal
people take, S. Cypr. Ser. de Sp^ct^^.
S. Cyprian will tell us, if we give care unto him; for he uses this very
argument to persuade people from going to stage plays: A Christian, says he,
has better sights to behold, if he will: he has delights, which are holy and
truly profitable, if he be think himself; and to omit those, which he cannot
yet behold, he has the beauty of this world, which he may worthily stand to
consider and admire. He may behold the rising of the Sun, and again the
setting, the vicissitude whereof makes day and night; the sphere of the Moon,
marking-out the times by continual increase and decrease; the multitude of
glittering stars; and the parts of the year divided by several changes. And
so discourses at large of the wonderful works of God in Nature, showing how a
Christian may take much more contentment by contemplating these things, then
any man can do in beholding a play or any such idle trifle, wherewith the
vulgar is so much lead away. So that if we lay al these things together, the
outward and the inward contentments, those that are spiritual belonging to the
mind, and those which I spoke off last belonging to the body, it is evident,
that nothing can be more delightful the^ a Religious life, where every thing
is so full of joy, and the pleasures thereof so interlaced one with another, and
so continual, and withal so real and solid, and (as S. Cyprian speaks) so
beneficial, one ouertaking another, and most commonly at one and the self-same
time, one following upon the nick of another, that we may well think, that our
Savior makes his word good in it, Io. 10.1^
when he said: He came to the end his Elect might have life, and have more
abundantly, that is, a more d^lightful and more contented life, and more full of
pleasure, then worldlings themselves.

Of the contentment, which Religious people take in Poverty. CHAP. VIII.
THere want not other fountains of pleasure in Religion; and among them we may
justly reckon Poverty; howsoever it may seem a Paradox to them, that (to use
the words of the Prophet David) call the people happy, Psalm. 143.
that abound in temporal things, and have many sons and daughters very fair
and beautiful, multitudes of flocks of fruitful sheep, granaries so full that
they need to be emptied one into another. These people in the vogue of the
world are accounted happy; but the holy Prophet instantly corrects this
error, and shows us a truer and a better happiness: Blessed is the people,
Who are truly happy.
whose Lord is their God. And who is there but will grant, that Religious people
have God for their Lord and Sovereign, and serve him alone so entirely, that
they acknowledge no other Lord but him? And they are indeed a People, because
they serve not God apart, but associated together with certain laws and
rules, and in one place, with all things common among them, the number of them
makes a family, and, as it were, a nation of people. To this people therefore
we may also fitly apply that, which the same Prophet says in another place: Ps
18.16.
Blessed is the people, that knows Iubilation. For whereas there be diverse
other spiritual Souls, that abound with heavenly comfort and sweetness, and in
their secret retirements enjoy their delights by themselves; Religious people
dwelling together, are as a multitude that lives in perpetual exultation, and
the concurrence of so many joyful Souls doubles their Iubilation.

It is a happiness to have nothing.
2. Blessed therefore is this people, though it have none of that temporal
wealth, wherein the world places so much happiness; yea the more blessed,
because it has it not; for withal it is free from the infinite troubles and
molestations, which wait upon the abundance of worldly wealth; and they that
by the light of God's grace can discover that, which is inward, do plainly
see, that one chief happiness of Poverty is, to be free from the unfortunate
goods of Fortune. S. Gregory understanding this very well, applied that place
of holy Job (When he shall be filled, Io^ 20.22.
he shall be straightened; he shall be in perplexity, and every grief shall rush
upon him) to a wealthy man, that has his fill of every kind of worldly
thing, S Greg. (...)
and lives in all abundance. For first, says S. Gregory, he had sorrow in the
tediousnes of his desires, how he might compass his intentions, how he might
come by some things by f^re means, and some by foul. When he has his desire
by possessing the thin^s desired, then another grief vexes him: he is
sollicitous and fearful how he may keep that, which he knows he purchased
with a great deal of labor. He is jealous or every body, and suspicious of
deceit, fearing that he may suffer by another, that which he did to others. If
he see a man more powerful then himself, he fears he may oppress him. If he
see a poor man, he suspects him for a thief; and it is no small care which he
has, least the things themselves, which he has gathered, waste of their own
nature, and by want of looking-to; and in all things fear itself being a
torment, he miserably suffers, whatsoever he fears he may suffer. Thus spoke
S. Gregory very truly, iudiciously observing, that though there were no danger
from abroad to be feared, that which is intrinsecal and inbred in the very
nature of every temporal thing, can never be wanting, to wit, that things of
themselves grow old and go to decay, and cannot be preserved without excessive
care, but are like a house, that is continually panching, unless a man be
always underpropping and bolstering it up, and have his eye and care
perpetually upon it. And consequently the more wealth we heap together, the
more we increase with pain and solicitude; and the very solicitude and
labor about it, bereaues us quite of the joy, which is imagined in it. It is
therefore no small happiness and comfort, to be free from so many vexations,
specially about things, which in themselves are so base, and indeed
unprofitable.

3. Secular people themselves, and the greatest lovers of worldly wealth among
them, confess that to be rich, is full of trouble, but will needs persuade us,
that the trouble is abundantly recompensed by the many commodities and
pleasures, which wealth does bring with it. Let us therefore see, what kind of
compensation this is. The end and use of mercy.
If we look into the grounds of Nature, as we ought, whatsoever is in the
world, was made for the maintenance of man, to furnish him with meat, drink,
cloth, house-roome, and the like. As for money, the use of it of itself is
impertinent to this purpose, Arist 1. (...) c. ^.
but was introduced merely for the easier exchange of things necessary for
sustenance, that (as Aristotle observes) he that has plenty of one thing,
might with his money purchase some others, which he has not. So that money
being a bare instrument for the getting of necessaries, and, as it were, a
supply, where they are wanting, it must needs follow, that there can be no
other end or use of having it, then that, for which we use al other natural
things, to wit, for our bodily sustenance; that which is beyond this, Nature
(...)
is disordered, and superfluous, and unprofitable and in very deed a burden.
For Nature is content with a few ordinary things; and if we will follow the
rule, and exigent, and measure, which Nature prescribes, it will be very easy,
not only to bring the desires thereof within compass, and furnish the
necessities of it, but to satisfye it, and, as I may say, to glut it. In witness
whereof I shall not need to bring a Simeon Styl^^es, or Arsenius, or some
Macarius, whose lives may perhaps seem too-too aus^ere and rigid to imitate;
but we will hear, Seneca Ep. 120.
what a Heathen Philosopher discourses advisedly to this purpose, and very
truly. I will not have you, says he, deny Nature any thing. It is stubborn,
and cannot be overcome, but will have his own. But yet know, that whatsoever is
over and above nature, is of courtesy, and not necessary. I am hungry; I
must eat; but whether the bread, which I eat, be coorse or fine, belongs
not to nature. Nature desires the belly may be filled; not that it be pleased.
I am thirsty; Nature regards not, whether the water, which I drink, be taken
out of the next pond, or passed through a great deal of snow to temper it with
a foreign coolnes. Nature requires only that my thirst be quenched: It
imports not, whether I drink in a cup of gold, or crystal, or glass, or in
the hollow of my hand. If hunger call upon me, I reach to that, which is next at
hand. Hunger gives a relish to any thing, that I lay hands on. He that is
hungry, refuses nothing.

S. Hierome.
4. S. Hierome in his second Book against Iouinian speaks to the same effect
in these words: And that which a man may justly wonder at, Epicure, the chief
vpholder of Pleasure, fills al his books with herbs and fruits, and
teaches a man to live upon gross meats, because it is an excessive trouble
and misery, to provide flesh and curious fare; and the care of providing it,
ouerswayeth the pleasure which is in feeding largely upon it, whereas our body
requires barely meat and drink; and it is not possible to attend to the study
of wisdom, and busy our thoughts with a table wel-furnished, and with the
trouble and care of providing it. The necessities of Nature may be supplied
with any kind of meat. Cold and hunger are driven away with ordinary food
and clothing. Whereupon the Apostle says: Having food and clothing, let us be
content therewith. Daynties and choice of curious dishes are nourishers of
avarice. It is an excessive comfort to a Soul, to be contented with a little,
and tread the world under foot, to exchange the power, and daynties, and
pleasures thereof (for which, riches are so greedily sought after) with coorse
fare and a poor garment, and think itself well rewarded with it. Take away
excess of bancketting and lust, and no man will seek to be rich. Behold how S.
Hierome teaches us to make Poverty sweet, by rooting-out the desire of
delicacies and disorder.

5. And seeing the cause of Poverty depends upon this string, it will not be
amiss to consider, how little these earthly daynties are to be esteemed, or
rather how full they are of gal and bitterness, seem they never so sweet and
sauourie to Sense. S. John Chrysostom de (...).
S. John Chrysostom in the Book, which he wrote of Virginity, has a large
and eloquent discourse of this subject, wherein he shows, that abundance of
good meat and drink brings surfits, choliks, shortness of breath, gyddines of
the head, and diverse other troublesome affections presently, and in time, the
gowte, hectic feauers, falling-sicknes, palsy and the like diseases, which
are so intolerable; that so small and so short a pleasure, as is the pleasing
of our palate, cannot in any reason be bought at so dear a rate. Frugalitie
on the other side brings health, and preserues it, and is not subject to those
mischiefs, whereof any one is able to dead all the pleasure, which can be
apprehended in them. And he proves further, that though none of these evils
were to be feared, there is yet more pleasure in Poverty then in riches; which
indeed is contrary to the common apprehension; ^
yet both here and in another Homily of his, he lays it down so clearly,
that he puts it out of al question. There is one thing, says he, wherein riches
seem to have the better of poverty, to wit, that they that are rich, swim
daily in delights, and have their fill of al kind of pleasure in their banckets;
but the tables of the poor have this also in a far better manner. For it is
not (says S. John Chrysostom) the quality of the meat, but the disposition
of the people, that brings contentment in banckets. If a man come hungry to
table, any ordinary dish will please him better, then your rare compounds and
exquisit sawces: whereas they, that sit down before they be hungry, as usually
rich people do, though they have very dayntie fare before them, they find no
taste in it, because their stomach is not in order for it; which both experience
teaches, and holy Scripture also in these words: Pr. 27.7.
A soul, that is full, will tread upon the honie-combe; and a hungry soul will
take bitter for sweet. And that which we say of meat, holds in drink. For as
hunger is better then any sauce for meat, so thirst gives a relish to any
kind of drink, though it be but a cup of fair water. Which the Royal Prophet
insinuates, Ps. 80.17.
when he says: And he filled them with ^onie out of the rock; for Moses did
not strike honey out of the rock, but the Children of Israel were at that time
so thirsty, that the water, which they then happened upon, seemed sweeter then
any honey. The like may be said of sleep; for it is not the soft bed, nor the
gilded bed-steed, nor the silence about us, nor any thing of this nature,
that brings us a-sleepe, but through labor and wearines, wanting it we are
half a-sleepe, before we lie down; to which purpose Solomon says: Eccl. 6.
iux. 70. S Basil. Constable. Mon. 27.
Sleep is welcome to a servant, whether he eat little or much. This is S. John
Chrysostom's discourse of Poverty in general. S. Basil speaking particularly
of Religious people, says, that they feed upon their little pittance of
coorse fare with more delight, then secular people do upon their great
services and abundance of al kinds of dayntie dishes.

6. Finally, it is worth consideration, that no man seeks to be rich, because
he loves riches barely for themselves, but because he loves himself, and by
them seeks ease and contentment. Were it not therefore much better (if it
could be done) to have this self^same ease and contentment of mind, which
riches fetch so far about, Contentment easier to be had without riches.
and through so many varieties of chances, without any trouble of being rich,
and so eat the fruit ready dressed and pared? Certainly it were. And this is
the fruit of Religious Poverty. For a Religious man is as well contented, and
takes as much pleasure in having nothing, as any rich man can do in
possessing all that he has, and far more; because rich men, though they live
in abundance, and indeed though they had all that can be had, cannot have the
pe^ce and quiet of mind, which themselves desire and aim at. For the mind
cannot be at quiet, unless it be filled; and it is not these outward things,
that can f^^it, because they are outward, but Virtue, which is within, fills
it, and specially the voluntary and affectionate embracing of Poverty.
Whereupon S. John Chrysostom^ alluding to a saying of the Prophet Esaias, Esaias
48.^0 S. Io. Chrys^. Him. 4. (...).
calls Poverty a fournace, wherein (says he) the miracle of the Three
Children is renewed, when as not only the flame of the fournace did not touch
them, but a cool air did refresh them in the midst of the fire. Poverty
considered in itself is a scorching and payneful fire: but if a man cast
himself voluntarily into it, and being in it give thanks to God, his bonds fall
asunder, and the fire goes out; or if it do not go out, in steed of the
scorching flame, he feels a cool dew, which is much more wonderful. This is
plainly to be perceived in the servants of God, who vow Poverty; for in their
Poverty, they are richer, then the rich of the world, and in the midst of the
fire, there desce^deth a most pure dew upon them. Not to desire to be rich, is
a heavenly dew naturally refreshing the soul; and as the Three Children by
contemning the command of the King, grew more conspicuous then the King
himself: so they that set all the rich presents of this word at naught, are the
more respected and honored for it by the world itself. This is the discourse
of S. John Chrysostom.

7. But because the very name of Poverty is grown odious, and the only
noise of it does instantly bring a world of miseries into our thoughts, let us
diue into the ground of this error, and see, how people come to be so much
deceived. Two kinds of Poverty, very different.
The ground of the error is, because (as we touched once before) there is a
kind of Poverty, which indeed is base and unworthy, and withal very irksome
and tedious; a vulgar kind of poverty, as we may call it, which people
apprehending, and not weighing things with their due circumstances, but carried
away with the likeness of the name, are jealous, least Religious Poverty have
the self same inconveniences annexed unto it, which that other has. But it is
not so; for they differ in many things, but chiefly in two. For first, the
Poverty of the world growing upon necessity, and not of virtue, is always
accompanied with a desire of being rich; and desiring it, they seek to
compass it; and not being able to compass it, thence comes their grief, and
sadness, and woeful cares. Religious people voluntarily choosing to be poor,
and being desirous ever to remain so, are not only free from al trouble of
mind, but do not so much as feel the want, in which they are, because they
desire and love it. To which purpose Seneca said truly: It is much one, Sen. Ep
110.
not to desire a thing, and to have it. And consequently this kind of Poverty
is so far from bringing trouble and disquiet, that a man has full as much
contentment in it, as if he had all the riches in the world.

The comfort of the Providence of God.
8. The other difference is, that Religious Poverty has a great stay and
comfort (which other poor people ordinarily have not) in the care and
providence of God, and his undoubted promise. For (as S. Francis was went to
say) there passes a kind of covenant and bond betwixt God and Religious
people; they on their part forsaking al things, and God on his part promising
to maintain them, S. Fran^is.
and provide for them, not only as a master for his servants, but as a father
for his children, and such children as for his sake, A contract between God,
and Religious people.
and for his love have abandoned al human helps and comforts. Wherefore if a
crow, as mean a bird as it is, have naturally so much love, that it brings
the yong-ones meat to the nest, when they call for it, and goes for it a-farre
of; shall we not with far more reason think, that God will have the like care
of those, whom he has begotten, and bestowed upon them a life incomparably
more excellent?

9. Nay Religious Poverty is yet more to be admired and loved, because it is
free from all the inconveniences of worldly riches, as we showed before, and
has notwithstanding all the commodities, which worldly wealth can bring a man,
and never wants necessary sustenance, provided by other folks labors, and
sent-in by the bountiful goodness of Almighty God; which adds greatly to the
pleasantnes of this life, whereof we are speaking. For when a man understands
truly, that the Sovereign King of Kings has so particular a care to provide
al things necessary for him, and experienceth daily so many evident tokens of
this care; how can it choose but savor more sweetly to him, then all the riches
of the world besides? We might testifye this be very many examples of holy
men; but S. Francis shall serve for all, because he did particularly affect this
virtue of Poverty, and often discovered the many benefits of it, and once in
particular the pleasantnes of it, by this occasion.

10. As he traveled into France, he sat down to dinner at the edge of a
fountain, The treasure of Poverty.
with his Companion Masseus; and pouring forth the pieces of broken bread,
which they had begged betwixt them from door to door as they went, many of
the pieces being moldie and hard, the Saint exulting in spirit, and turning to
his Brother, began to summon him to give thanks to God for so excessive a
treasure of Poverty, and repeated often this word treasure, raising his voice
every time a note higher. His Brother Masseus asked him, what that treasure
was, seeing themselves in such apparent want of al necessaries, and having
neither meat nor wine, nor table to eat on. The Saint answered: This is the
excessive benefit, which I speak of, that God has supplied al our wants, and
sent us this bread and this water, and this stone to dine on. And going from
thence into the next Church that was upon the way, he earnestly beseeched God
to give him and al his Brethren a particular love of holy Poverty; and prayed
with a great fervor, that his face did seem to be on a burning fire. In this
fervor, turning to his Brother Masseus with his arms wide open, he called him
unto him with a loud voice. Masseus astonished cast himself into the arms of
the holy Saint; but S. Francis did so burn with that divine fire, that the
breath that came from his mouth, carried Masseus many cubits high into the
air; in which posture, as he often after related, he found in himself such
inward sweetness, as in all his lifetime before, he had never felt the like.
Then S. Francis spoke thus unto him: Let us go to Rome, to beg of the holy
Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul, that they will teach us to possess, as we ought,
and with fruit, this so excellent a treasure of Poverty; for it is so rare and
so divine, and we so vile and abject, that we are unworthy to contain it in
such vessels as ours are. It is a virtue derived into us from heaven, teaching
us voluntarily to tread under foot al earthly things, and takes away al
impediments, that the soul of man may freely, and with all expedition conioyne
itself with his Lord and God.

Of the pleasantnes of Chastity and Obedience. CHAP. IX.
THE pleasures of Chastity and Obedience are not less then those of Poverty,
Cass. Coll. 12 c. 1^.
but rather so much the greater, by how much these two virtues are far more
noble and excellent in themselves. Abbot Chaeremon in Cassian discoursing of
Chastity, The pleasures of Chastity inexplicable.
among many other rare commendations of it, says very truly, that neither he
that has not tried it, can possibly conceive the pleasure of it, nor he that
has tried it, declare it. As, says he, if a man had never tasted honey, and
another should go about to tell him, how sweet it is, the one would never be
able to conceive by hearing, the sweetness which he never tasted, and the other
could never compass to express in words the pleasure, which his taste took
in the sweetness of it; but taken with the delightfulnes of it within his own
knowledge, he must of force admire in silence within himself alone the
pleasantnes of the savor, whereof he has had experience. But yet though we
cannot so well declare, how sweet it is in itself, there be certain ways,
whereby we may give a guess at it, and particularly by comparison thereof with
the troubles of marriage; a married life having no time free from grief and
bitterness; insomuch that S. Hierome writing of Virginity against Iouinian
says: S Hier^ 1. cont. Iouin.
We not kn^wing how matters pass, did conceive, that marriage enjoyed at least
the pleasures of the flesh; but if married people have also tribulation in
flesh, in which only they seemed to have pleasure, what is there left to move a
man to marry, seeing both in spirit and in soul, and in the very flesh, there
is tribulation.

2. It were easy to reckon-vp an infinite number of miseries and vexations,
which partly man and wife are cause of one to another, partly come by their
children, or by the charge of household, and many other ways; but al these
are too well known, and I have spoken of them before. Wherefore we will content
ourselves with one only famous saying of Cato, Cato.
a Hea^hen, but yet a wise and advised man: If the world could be without
wives, our life would be like to the Gods of heaven; and consequently they are
an evil, yet a necessary evil. Wherein he says truly for a man that lived in
that darkness of Infidelity, The easines of living chaste.
that it is an evil, to marry, and that it is a life full of misery and
inconveniences; but not so truly, when he says, it is necessary, and not to
be avoided. For the Grace of Christ does so bless this infirm and corrupt
nature of man, that in the beds, that is, in the hearts, where before dragons
did dwell, to wit, filth and uncleanness, thy greennes of the reed and ^ush
should rise, and the sweet odor of Chastity and holiness of life; Esaias. 35.7.
and has made it not so hard a thing, as that few are able to compass it, but
common and easy, to the end no age nor sex might plead infirmity, or be
afraid to aim at so high a dignity. This is that, which our Savior in S.
Matthew did intend to express by the name of Eunuchs, Matthew. 19.
giving us to understand, that as easy as it is for an Eunuch to abstain from
that, to which he is impotent, and consequently must have no thought of it; so
easy is it for them to abstain, that are voluntarily continent; because that
which Nature does in those others, Grace does in these: though in these there
be many more, and more efficacious things, which make Chastity far more
easy and more delightful to them. Think with thyself, S. Io. Chrysostom. Hom. 63.
in Matthew.
says S. John Chrysostom, if either by nature thou were an Eunuch, or were
made so by violence what thou would do, seeing of necessity thou must then
abstain from that pleasure, and have no reward for abstayning. Give thanks
therefore to God, because thou shall have a great reward and a glorious Crown,
if thou live as they do, without any reward, nay far more easily, more
safely, and more pleasantly; both because the hope of restibution does
strengthen thee, and the knowledge, that it is an act of virtue, does comfort
thee. And truly considered, what effect may we justly think the hope of a
reward in heaven, which S. John Chrysostom speaks of, will work in a
Religious soul, seeing the greedines of an earthly recompense, or the serious
application to study, or to any other worldly business* is forcible enough
easily to divert a man's thoughts from al obscenitie? Plato Dial. 8. de Legib.
Insomuch that Plato himself (which a man may with reason wonder at) exhorting
young men to live chaste, brings an example of a certain man of ^arentum, and
diverse others besides, whom there he names, that abstayned from al pleasure of
that nature, to the end to preserve their bodily strength entire and in the
full vigor, which it ou^ht to be, for the Olympical Exercises. They therefore,
says he, abstayned from that pleasure, which vulgarly is esteemed happy, that
they might overcome others in Wrestling, and in the Race, and such other
exercises; and shall not our youth be able to do the like for a far more
noble victory? what victory? to wit, that subduing pleasure, they may live
happily; and moreover shall not fear of committing a grievous offense be able
to make the^ overcome that, which others, that are far worse then they, are
reported to have overcome? What would Plato have said, if he could have had
experience of the force of the love of God, seeing he thought the love of
earthly things to be so effectual? whereas the love of God does so wholly
possess a soul, that it takes no delight but in things Divine and Celestial,
and abhors more then death itself, S. Macar. Hom. 4.
any thing that savors of uncleanness. Which S. Macarius proves in this
manner: If the love of carnal marriage separate a man so far from father and
mother and brethren, that esteeming them al strangers, he loves his wife only,
and cleaues to her and hers, as to his own; if, I say, the love of flesh does
so break with all other love, how much more shall they contemn al love and
delight in other things, that have so nearly linked themselves to God, and
drunk so plentifully of his love?

3. These are the reasons, why the abstayning from al pleasure in this kind is
so easy and pleasant, and the ground, whereupon S. Hierome delivers these
words in commendation of this virtue: S. Hier. lib. 1 cont. Iou^n.
How great happiness is it, not to be a slave to a wife, but to Christ? not to
serve the flesh, but the spirit? For he that cleaves to God, is one spirit.
And S. Bernard accordingly speaking both of Chastity and other virtues
accompanying it, applies to this purpose that saying of the Prophet, short in
words, Ps. 36.4.
but large in sense: Delight in our Lord; auerring that al Religious people are
so plentifully made partakers of this delight in our Lord, that none of them al
can deny, S Bern. ser. 5. in Qua^rag.
but that they feel it. My Brethren, says he; Secular people may say so, you
cannot say so. For who is there of you, that has not often experienced the
delight of a good Conscience, tasted the sweetness of Chastity, Humility, and
Charity? This is not like the delight in meat or drink or such like: yet it
is a delight, and a greater delight then al these. For it is not carnal
delight, but Divine.

4. S. Ephrem also, Ephrem. ser. de Cast.
as it were astonished with the pleasures of Chastity, discourses in this
manner: O Chastity, mother of love, resemblance of an Angelical life! O
Chastity, clean of heart, sweet in taste, cheerful in countenance! O Chastity,
which makes men like to Angels! O Chastity, rejoicing the heart of him, that
possesses thee, and giving wings to a Soul to fly up to heaven! O Chastity,
which bring a spiritual joy, and take away sorrow! O Chastity, which do
diminish the passions of the mind, and free it from perturbation! O Chastity,
a spiritual Chariot, lifting him on high, that possesses thee! O Chastitite,
that buddest like a rose in the midst betwixt the soul and body, and fillest
the whole house with a fragrant smell! This and much more says this holy
ancient Father. And certainly if we grant, that filthy obscenesse has
naturally so much force to allure us, and to set us so much on fire,
notwithstanding the vnseemelines of it; we cannot think but that honesty, and
purity, and the beauty of so rare a virtue must needs be much more forcible.
For what comparison is there betwixt light and darkness? or betwixt dirt and
mire, Can. 6.2.
where hogs do tumble? and those lillies among which the Spouse does so
willingly feed, that he refuses al food without them? And thus much of
Chastity.

Obedience delightful.
5 The delights of Obedience are somewhat more apparent; because Obedience has
none of the incommodities of Poverty, nor yet so fell an enemy as Chastity,
our own body making war against Chastity, and being both incapable of
feeling any delight in purity of life, and carrying us rather headlong to al
kind of sensuality. Obedience depends of the mind only; which being capable
to conceive the beauty of so great a virtue, may easily also persuade itself
to love it; and being so persuaded, there remains little or no contradiction
from abroad. Besides other things, which increase the sweetness of it, first
that if freeth us from the troubles and anxieties, which are wont often to
occur in settling or governing our estate, in undertaking or leaving this or
that business, and indeed, in all occasions and hours of our life; secondly,
because it puts us into the hands of God, and places us in his arms to be
carried, and ruled, and cherished by him, then which what can be more
delightful or more to be desired? For if we aim at honor, which doubtless in
itself is pleasing, nothing can be more honorable then to be so tenderly
loved, and so lovingly dealt-with by so great a Majesty; if it be profit that
takes us, which also is full of pleasure, nothing can be more profitable then
to rely our whole life, and all that we do, upon such a guide. Finally al
manner of comforts and delights are contained in this one, to see ourselves so
inwardly linked to him, who is the only Father of mercies (as the Apostle
styles him) and the God of al comfort; 2* Cor. 1.3.
which, as al other spiritual things, no man can rightly value, but he that
has tried it; and they that have tried it, do so lovingly and so passionatly
affect Obedience, that liberty is a cross unto them, as we read of B.
Aegidius a Franciscan-Friar. For when S. Francis by reason of his eminent
sanctity had given him freedom to go whither he would, and dwell where he
would, within less then four days, his soul finding no rest in that kind of
largenes, he returned to S. Francis, earnestly beseeching him, to appoint him
some certain abode; because in that free and loose Obedience, he had no
contentment at al.

Of the pleasure, which Religious people take in conversation with their
spiritual Brethren. CHAP. X.
I Come now to a solace of another nature, grounded in the sweetness of
conversation with our spiritual Brethren, which rests not in the mind, but
diffuseth itself to sense, and is taken in seeing, speaking, and hearing; and
consequently is more apparent and more universal, and a man needs not take
pains to perceive it. The greatness of it may be easily understood, in regard
it inuolues not one but many comforts. Love is naturally delightful.
For first, to love and to be loved, is of itself excessive pleasing, and we
shall not need to have recourse to grace to conceive it; nature itself shows
it, by the in bred propension and desire, which it has of company, and hatred
to be alone; and an evident proof of the sweetness of it is, that no man to
choose would abound in all kind of wealth, and be bound withal to love no man,
nor to be loved of any. So that this drawing and cleaving of man to other men,
being so agreeable to Nature, the effecting of it must needs be full of delight
and pleasure.

2. Aristotle is of the same opinion, Aristot 8. Eth. c. 1.
and says, that therefore Friendship is so pleasing, because it consorteth
with Nature; for as the beasts of the earth, and the fowls of the air, and
the fishes of the sea, and al kind of living creatures, whether they be wild or
tame, take a kind of contentment, to be with others of their kind; so Man much
more. For there is no man that would not choose a poor and mean estate in
company of other men, rather then a life in all other respects most happy,
upon condition, that he should see no man. And from this principle, both
Aristotle, and al other ancient learned writers do derive the chiefest
commendation of Friendship, not so much in regard we stand in need of one
another's help (though this be something) as by reason of the natural
inclination, which we have to love. To which purpose Laertius records, that
Aristotle was wont to call Friendship, the greatest Good of al good things.
Which perhaps Aristotle took from Socrates, Socrates* Nothing comparable to a
true friend.
who, as the same Laertius reports, had often in his mouth, that no freehold
was comparable to a true friend; nor nothing in the world could yeald man so
much profit and pleasure. Which if we grant, we may easily also discover, how
far the comfort of Religious Conversation does extend itself, and how much
pleasure they feel in the mutual love betwixt them, finding themselves to
love, and to be so entirely loved; and both being so natural to every body,
as nothing more.

3. Now if we consider, True frie^dship rare in the world.
that of this kind of true friends, which the Philosophers describe unto us,
there were scarce three or four couple to be picked out of so many Ages, such
as the bloody Tyrants themselves did envy, how far more fruitful and more
happy is Religion, where we find so many swarms of men so entirely linked
together in the bond of Charity, that we may truly say, so many persons, so
many inseperable companions, so many bosome-friends, so many loving brethren
both in heart, and effect, and name? If we diue to the bottom of that, which is
commonly called Friendship, we shall hardly find in this world any worthy to
bear the name. For they that love for profit or for pleasure, love not their
friend, but themselves; and such love cannot be called Friendship; for in like
manner we love our lands and our cattle; or speaking of men, we love a
Phisician or a Mariner, when we have use of them, Virtue the ground of
Friendship. Arist. 3. Eth. c 3. and 4.
or a common leaster, for the pleasure we take in his wit. The grounds
therefore of true friendship is Virtue and Honesty; and that, which depends
upon this string, is the only solid and constant friendship. Aristotle
speaks to this purpose almost word for word; and the self-same reason
conuinceth, that perfect friendship is rare, except it be among Religious
people, who have no other ground of their love and conjunction, but Religion
and Virtue; and consequently having so perfect friendship among them, it is
also evident, that they must needs enjoy all the commodities, and fruits, and
pleasures thereof, which the ancient Philosophers reckon to be very many.

Likeness a second ground of pleasure.
4. Another ground of pleasure in conversation, is likeness, which does so much
the more win men's affections, by how much Nature is of itself exceeding
greedy, as I may say, and extremely passionate, where it finds that sympathy
and similitude; which among Religious people is more absolute then in any
other thing. For they agree not only in nature as men, or in Faith and belief,
as Christians; but in life, and conversation, and proiects, and intentions, in
their endeauours, orders, and employments, in their very habit and clothing;
which must needs wonderfully inflame their affections and their love toward
one another; and love, the more ardent it is, the more sweetness it brings
with it. For as every body takes delight to live, and to enjoy himself, and
cannot be truly weary of himself; so the more inward our affections are
toward other men, and the nearer they draw to this degree of union with
ourselves, the more delightful they are. And if it be so in all men, as we
experience it in our children and kinsfolk, loving them though they be wicked
or deformed; Virtue on forces love.
and the more we love them, the more we delight to converse with them; to what
height will this pleasure rise, where virtue meets with this linck of
friendship? For virtue, wheresoever it is, does constrain a man to love it, as
we find in those, whom we never saw, or perhaps were once our enemies: for if
we perceive any incling of virtue in them, it silently speaks to our hearts,
to be friends with them. If therefore it make strangers friends; how much
easier and more inwardly will it bind those unto us, with whom we daily
converse, and of whose virtue and Religion we are the more assured, the more
familiarly we deal with them? So many in the world take pleasure in hunting,
and horse-races, and gallant apparel, and in their buildings, and in being
popular, it were most absurd to think, that these pleasures are comparable to
the pleasure; which a man may take in a soul adorned with virtue and holiness
of life, with ample return also of love for love. Plato says truly and
elegantly, that if Virtue could be seen with our corporal eyes, Plato in Phaed.
Cic. 1. Offi^.
it would wonderfully inflame the love of people toward it. But in Religion in
very deed we see it; for as we see not the soul, which is in the body, in
itself, yet we see it in the effects, in the motion, in the speech, in the
discourse, which it makes, and so clearly, that we can no more doubt of it,
then if we saw it with our corporal eyes: so we see Virtue in the acts thereof,
as if it were really before us. We see Charity extend itself to the service
and tendance of our Brethren; we see Humility stooping to servile offices, and
often humbling itself unto them, in Religion; we see Patience in enduring
hardness and embracing the Cross; finally we see al other Virtues of the mind,
and have them in our eyes, when they walk out before us, about the careful
performance of their several duties.

5. And besides this comelines of Virtue and Sanctity, there be many other
things in most Religious people, Religious people eminent for their natural
parts. 1. Cor. 12.10.
for which we ought in reason highly to esteem and desire their conversation.
For some are eminently learned, others profoundly wise, others wel-spoken, a
gift which the Apostle reckons among the rest And as for the pleasure, which
men take in these things, I appeal to secular people themselves, who by their
often repair to Religious houses, do sufficiently testifye the contentment
they take in their presence and conversation, though otherwise their palate be
distempered with the disordered pleasures of this world; and yet thither they
come for comfort in adversity, for light and counsel in their doubtful
questions, for advise and wholesome admonitions upon al occasions; and they
think, the world goes well with them, if they can enjoy this comfort for an
hour or two, but with Religious people it is an ordinary thing and continual,
and they have it at command as their own, and cannot but imparte these
comforts to those that live in house with them, and are their Brethren, far
more abundantly and more confidently, then they can with strangers.

6. Whence we may deduce another branch of pleasure growing from Religious
conversation, (...) Religious people.
to wit, that by living together, they have often yea continual occasion and
intercourse of such friendly offices, as must needs entertayne and increase
the brotherly love, which is betwixt them, as fire is nourished with wood and
coal. For first they live together like bosome-friends, they meet often,
they speak often courteously one to another; secondly they are always doing
and receiving good turns from one another, they prosser their service, not as
worldly people do, idly, and for the most part for their own ends, but are
really desirous to serve them in spiritual things; and aim at nothing else in
it, but to benefit their neighbors and brethren, and advance the glory of
God. For we must not think, that Virtue and Sanctity is so rigid and
inflexible, as if it were of iron, or that it is always mute, dreaming of
nothing but of doing penance. Rather in all occasions, but specially in
conversation with others, it is pliable and affable, the sweetness of charity
inclining thereunto, and making people to condescend, and accommodate, and
enlarge themselves to their neighbors. What therefore can be more delightful,
then to be thus continually endeavoring ^o requi^e one another's courtesies,
and striving to overcome their companions in charitable offices? specially
where a man cannot well ^el whether it be better to overcome, or to suffer
himself to be overcome in Charity. So that that, which Aristotle affirms of
Friendship in general, ^
is much more verifyed in this holy league of friendship: that though the
ground of friendship be far more noble and honorable, then the pleasure of
profit which comes of it, because it is grounded in virtue and honesty, yet
having so noble an offspring, neither pleasure not profit is wanting, but rather
it is very profitable in regard of the many good offices, which pass betwixt
friends, and much more delightful, then any thing grounded upon a meaner
motive, because the virtuous actions and behauiours of our friend is no less
pleasant unto us, then our own.

Religious friendship assured.
7. We may add for a complement, and as it were a delightful fawce to the
meat, which is here served in, that ordinary friendship is subject to many
branglings, by reason either of the difference of men's minds, or of their
fashion and behavior, or of their state and calling, or by age growing upon
them, or by desire of something which both parties cannot enjoy, and many such
like accidents, which oftimes are cause of great fallings-out and much hatred,
and make an utter breach of friendship when they happen, and before they happen
breed many suspicions and iealousies, insomuch that there can be no solid
comfort almost in any worldly friendship, specially the world being so
generally infected with the poison of self-loue, every one drawing to his own
ends, which is the absolute bane of al true league and friendship. The league,
which is betwixt Reli^ious people on the other side, is full of solid pleasure,
because being grounded in charity, and free from al private interest, Cass.
Coll. 16. c. 3.
it is not subject to those dangers and casualties, which I spoke of; but as
Abbot Joseph in Cassian says very well, whereas al secular friendship (whereof
there he recites several kinds) is fickle and unconstant, that only is
permanent and indissoluble, which is grounded in the likeness of virtue. This is
not subject to be broken by any casualtie, distance of place, or length of
time cannot shake it, nor death itself dissolve it.

8. And this pleasure, which I speak of, occurres unto us by conversation with
any particular man among us: what then shall I say of the whole family, or
College, or household? and of the joy which is to live in such company? For
who is there, that has not experienced in himself, that as often as he has
beheld so many of his Brethren in that decent, The pleasure of living in such
a community. Genesis 32.2.
and grave, and devout manner of habit and carriage, which is usual among them,
either singing in the Quire, or going in Procession, or set at a sermon or
Exhortation, or working at their manual exercises, or sitting at board in their
dining-roome, who is there, I say, that has not found himself ouerioyed at
such a sight, and said in his mind: These are the host of God, armies not of
soldiers, but of sons of the Highest. This made S. Leo say, that it did
exceedingly rejoice him, whenever it was his good hap to behold a company of
servants of God, and that in so many Saints he felt the Angels present, and
made no question, but God did visit them al with more plenty of his graces, S.
Leo ser. de sua Assump^.
when they were al together, as so many glorious tabernacles of God, so many
excellent members of the body of Christ, shining with one light. A saying
worthy to be noted, in regard he styles them, that are consecrated to God,
tabernacles of God, and excellent members of Christ, having every one of them
their particular light in themselves, but yet giving a greater light, and much
more contentment by it, when that, which is several in them, meets with all the
rest together, and diffuseth itself far and near by that conjunction, that
next unto the blisseful joys, which we shall have in the love and contemplation
of God himself, we may truly rank the joy and comfort, which we find in the
love and conversation with out spiritual Brethren.

9. The Saint-like family of holy Job was a lively resemblance of it. For he
had many children, and they lived al in such a league of perfect love
together, that though every one of them kept a several house and family, yet
they were al of them, as it were, of one household, and al things were common
among them, they fea^^ed one another (as the holy Scripture relates) in their
turns, and every one had his day. So that they lived always together in
mirth and iolitie, and continual banckets. The sisters could not inuit their
brethren, but were ever invited by them, and did eat and drink with them.
After this manner, every Religious man is, as it were, continually making a
spiritual bancket for the rest of his Brethren, with whom he lives; and the
bancket is not set-forth with ordinary dishes, but with exquisite virtues, and
choice actions* and speeches of devotion; they feast one another in their
turns, because every one does reciprocally serve one another in the ^^ke
kind. The children of Job could in one day meet but once at one of their
brethren's table; we feed at every one of our Brethren's table, and al at
once, which is far more. And as there were sisters among them; so if among
Religious people there be any that are inferior, and somewhat more imperfect
in virtue and fervor, as they were in sex (of which kind certainly there be
few in comparison of the rest, as among the children of Job there were but
three sisters for seven brethren) though they have not so much provision of
virtue as to be able to feast others, yet by reason of the brotherly union,
which is among them, they have the happiness to be feasted with the rest, and
enjoy for the present the pleasure of the feast, and bettering themselves by
little and little, furnish themselves with plenty, as I may say, of fat and
marrow; so that at last they also grow able and sufficient to inuit others.

Of the pleasure, which Religious men take in Learning. CHAP. XI.
THE ground of the pleasures, of which I have hitherto spoken, is supernatural;
it follows, that we speak of one that is natural, to wit, Learning and
variety of al kind of knowledge; which how delightful it is, may he gathered
by two things. First, if we consider the noblenes of knowledge, as belonging to
the noblest part of man, and being the fruit of the mind and understanding, and
withal wonderfully enriching and embellishing it: Secondly, if we weigh, how
proper and how agreeable it is to the nature of man, to know and understand. For
(as Aristotle says) every man is naturally bent to desire knowledge; and he
makes an argument to prove it by the love, The (...) of kn^^ledge is natural.
Arist 1 Metaph. c 1.
which we naturally have to the particular senses, which are most useful to
bring knowledge, as to the sense of Seeing and Hearing. Now if a man be so
naturally inclined to knowledge, it must needs be a great pleasure to be
learned. For commonly every thing ^^kes most contentment in that, which is
most agreeable to nature; as the chiefest pleasure, which birds have, is to
fly; fi^hes, to swim; and in our bodily senses, our eyes are most delighted
with seeing, our taste with tasting, our ears with Musical co^cent. Why
therefore should not our wit and understanding be far more pleased with the
search and knowledge of truth, which is the proper food of it, and the diet,
which it must naturally feed on.

2. Insomuch that Aristotle did not stick to say, A^ist 2. (...) c. 5.
that there was no other way to live always a contented life without sorrow*
but to betake oneself to the study of Philosophy, in regard of the abundance
of pleasure, which i^ affords. And no wonder, Commendation of Philosophy.
if we consider the number, the variety, the extent, the rarenes of the
things, which Philosophy treats of. For Philosophy being nothing else, but
the search of Nature, as Nature extends itself far and near, and is
admirable to consider, so universal and so admirable is the study of
Philosophy, leaving nothing in Nature, to the bottom whereof it does not
endeavor to diue. First it considers the beginnings and causes of every
thing, time, motion, place, things obuious and daily in our eyes and in our
hands, and yet withal so obscure and intricate, that nothing more. It searches
into the composition of man, soul and body, and all the properties and
faculties of either part. It disputes of the earth, and of the ayte, and
several affections thereof, as of the winds, thunder, lightning, rain, and the
causes of them. It beholds the heavens, and whatsoever belongs to the
knowledge of them, their greatness, their light, and perspicuitie, the number of
the spheres, the constancy of their motion, their power and influence into
these inferior things, for the continuance and preservation of them. Among so
many things therefore, and infinite more, which cannot be numbered, but are
exceedingly delightful, can any man make any question, but that a mind, that
is given to the contemplation of so many, so great, so admirable things, so
far above the capacity of ordinary people, turning and tossing them up and
down on every side, can otherwise choose, but live in a perpetual paradise?
For can there be any thing more absurd then to acknowledge, as we must needs,
that our ears and our eyes take pleasure in their several objects, and to
think that our mind, by which our senses come to be capable of pleasure, has
no pleasure proper unto it? The vulgar (...) in the ou^^ide.
For if it be delightful to behold a horse that is well limmed, or a tree that
spreads itself abroad with fair and large branches; why should it not be more
delightful to contemplate the nature and essence of the horse or tree, seeing in
this second contemplation that is inuolued, which we see with our eyes, and
much more and more excellent considerations? For as a picture, that is well
drawn and lively set-forth in colors, does naturally delight every body
that beholds it, but much more a skilful paynter, that besides the sight of the
colors, and draughts of the pensil, is able to judge of the reasons of them,
and the nature of the shadows, and the conueniencie and proportion and
connection of every part of it: So in all things of this world, the vulgar sort
beholds the outside of them, and rests there; they that are learned* consider
that which is more inward, the nature, the properties, and several qualities,
and dispositions of every thing, which as they are in themselves things far
more noble, so also more delightful, and indeed able sufficiently to entertayne
any man's thoughts, and accordingly al ancient Philosophers were so taken with
them, that they thought no happiness in the world comparable to this kind of
study. But Religious people have yet one thing more, that gives the business a
sweeter relish, which no Heathen could arrive unto, beholding all this world of
things not so much as they are works of Nature, but as works of God the Author
of Nature; and entertayning themselves in contemplation of the Power, and
Wisdom, and Love of so great an Artificer in his works, as if they beheld al
these his admirable attributs with their very eyes; and what can be more
pleasant or more profitable then such a sight?

The study of Divinity.
3. And thus much of the contemplation of natural things, which will easily put
us into the way of conceauing the pleasure, which must needs be far greater
in the knowledge of things Divine, laid open unto us by the light of Divinity,
which we find divided into three parts or branches, whereof one is called
Scholastical, comprised and delivered in a certain Method and way, in a manner,
as humane Sciences; for the honor and commendation and sweetness whereof, what
can be said more then that the object of it is Godliness? and comprehends all that, which the wit of man can arri^^^ know touching the Unity, Infinity,
Power, Immensitie, Simplicity, Kn^^^edge, and Providence of GOD over every
particular thing of this world, but chiefly concerning Salvation of mankind;
and moreover several processions, either inward, constituting three Persons in
one Essence, or outward, in the Creation of al things; among which the Angels
being the principal, it discourses of their Nature, their Excellence, their
Order and several Dictinctions. And Man also being a work of God next in
dignity to the Angels, has his place and rank in this Disputation, where the
End is discussed, for which he was created; and the means and helps ordained
for this End, chiefly the Grace of God, his Laws and precepts, Virtues both
Theological (so called, because their object is God) and Moral, among which
Justice and the branches thereof, are disputed at large, and whatsoever
belongs to the duty of a Christian in matter of Contracts.

4. But that part of Divinity is most copious and most delightful, which
discourses of the mystery of the Incarnation, and of the Sacraments, as
effects thereof, of the matter, form, and efficacy of them, and also of the
Ceremonies used in them, as conduits conveying the merits of the Passion of
Christ to the benefit of our Rules. So that if the life of those, that are in
heaven, be therefore blessed, because their mind is always fixed upon God;
what pleasure must this science needs afford, which is perpetually thinking of
the same God? with this difference that in heaven they co^template him face to
face without any veyle before their eyes, here they go upon grounds of reason
and most assured principles of Christian Faith.

5. The holy Scripture, The study of Scripture. S. Aug. in Ps. 145.
a second branch of Divinity, is like unto the former for pleasantnes of the
subject, and for authority far above it. S. Augustine does deservedly style
it the delight and riches of our soul; the riches, by reason of the fulness and
abundance of al goodness requisite for the instruction and direction of man in
the course of virtue, the delight, in regard of the unspeakable sweetness, which
is in it; in which respect also elsewhere he says: Id. l^b. 9. Conf. c. 4.
It tastes like honey, of the heavenly honey, and is lightsome by the light,
which it partaketh of God. S. Hierome in his Epistle to Rusticus a Monk, where
he gives him instructions to good life, comparing holy Scripture to an
orchard, S. Hier. Ep. ad Rust.
exhorts him to gather the several fruits thereof, to feed himself with those
daynties, to solace himself with holding them in his arms. S Bern. ser. 67 in
Cant.
S. Bernard likeneth this holy Word of God to a bancket excelling in three
things, delightful to the taste, solid in respect of nourishment, and
effectually medicinable: the sweetness of the sound of his words, delights our
affections; the copiousnes of their several senses, fattens and nourishes the
mind; the deapth of the mysteries contained in them, exercising our
understanding and keeping it in awe, wonderfully alayes the swelling of puffing
science. Cass. Coll. 8. c. 8.
Abbot Serenus in Cassian compares holy Scripture excellently well to a fat
and fertile piece of ground yealding variety of fruits, whereof some are to be
eaten raw from the tree, others by reason of the natural harshnes of them are
not so pleasant, and perhaps are also hurtful, if they be not first set over
the fire, and softened, and brought to a milder temper; others may be used both
ways, and are not distastful raw, and yet qualifyed by the heat of the fire,
are more pleasant and more wholesome. For in like manner the holy Scriptures
contain some things which yeald good nourishment, taken as the letter sounds;
others, if they be not explained by some declaration, are rather hurtful;
finally others again may be used both ways. Thus says Cassian, and truly.

6. For that which men (...), have left written, differs from holy
Scripture, in that men declare their (...) by words; but God as Author and
directour of al things, and al men's actions, uses the very things themselves
and actions to declare his secret intentions by them. Which causes so much
variety of senses in holy Scripture; the delightfulnes whereof is excelle^tly
well expressed by S. Gregory upon these words of Job; Job 22.26.
Then upon the Omnipotent thou shall flow with delights. To flow with delights
upon the Omnipotent, says S. Gregory, is in his love to be filled at the
bancket of holy Scripture. S. Greg. 16. Mor. c. 9.
In the words whereof we meet with so many several delights, as we conceive
diversities of senses for our benefit, feeding sometimes upon the bare
history, sometimes upon the Moral Allegory, which lies hidden, as the
marrow, under the context of the letter; sometimes raising ourselves in
contemplation of higher things, which in the darkness of this present life
gives us, as it were, a glimse of the light of Eternity.

7. This is the life, which Religious people lead in perpetual delights and
pleasures, the true and solid happiness whereof S. John Chrysostom sets forth
lively in a certain Homily, where discoursing at large of the co^forts of a
Monastical life, and in particular of the pleasure, S Io. Chrysostom. Hom. 69. in
Matthew.
which they take in Prayer and Contemplation, at last he descends to this,
which they take in the study of Scripture. Nailed to those sacred Books,
says he, they take exceeding comfort in them. For most commonly, when they
come out of the Quier, one betaketh himself to conversation with the Prophet
Esaias, another with the Apostles; another reads and contemplateth some thing
in God or in his creatures, of things visible and invisible, of the misery of
this life, of the happiness of the life to come. They set not themselves to
feed upon the boiled flesh of brute beasts, but upon the words of God, sweeter
then honey and the honie-combe. This honey was not gathered by wild bees, nor
digested into their hiues, as their manner is; but the grace of the Holie-Ghost
distributed it among the minds of Saints in steed of the comb, and the hiue,
and those little toulles, that whosoever would, might with ease eat of it. Like
bees therefore they fly about the honie-combes of the holy Bible, and receive
great pleasure in them. Thus S. John Chrysostom.

The study of the Fathers.
8. The third branch of Divinity, is the study of the holy Fathers, who, as
they were eminent for learning, and holiness of life, and eloquence, have left
so many monuments of learning behind them, that a man may spend his whole life
time with pleasure in turning them over, and find more then he can have time to
compass; God having moreover provided, that, as in a great bancket every dish
has his several re^^h, so among these great writers every one should have his
particular strain of sweetness to avoid satietie. For if we compare the Greek
Fathers one with another, we shall find the style of S. Basil to savor of
learning, and abound in precepts of sanctity: S Gregory Nazianzen more
profound entering familiarly into the deepest mysteries, The Greek Fathers
compared among themselves
and declaring them in weighty terms and sentences. S. Athanasius is more
facile, yetful, and with an equal style always like himself, teaching with a
great deal of authority. Epiphanius is eager against Heretics; Theodoret
plain and careful in exposition of Scripture. S. John Damascen full of
learning, and expert in explaining the hardest points of Faith. S. John
Chrysostom, as his name gives us to understand, eloquent and popular, easily
insinuating himself into peoples minds; and with the copiousnes of his quaynt
words, as with a torrent of Eloquence; carrying his Auditorie whither-soeuer he
pleases.

9. Among the Latin Fathers, The Latin Fathers.
S. Cyprian has a neat and copious style, and yet nothing too much, but grave
and weighty, and (as S. Hierom's censure is of him) his speech runs sweetly
and quietly on, as a cristal-fountaine; and S. Augustine does deservedly style
him the sweetest Doctor. S. Hierom. Ep. 1^.
S. Ambrose has a peculiar manner of expressing himself, very sententious,
with choice words knit cleanely together, that a body may justly think when
he reads him, that he hears a Divine making an Oration, or an Orator
speaking like a Divine; in commendation of whose sweetness we shall need to say
no more, then that God did seem to foreshew it by that strange accident, which
we find recorded of him, when a swarm of bees lighted upon his mouth, when he
was a child. The style of S. Hierome is learned, full of wit and examples of
Antiquity, expressing in natural colors, whatsoever he undertakes, either for
the litteral exposition of holy Scriptures, or Moral precepts for all kinds of
states, or in commendation or disprayse of any thing, or in exhortations to
virtue; in all which he is so eminent, that his eloquence seems more Divine
then humane. S. Augustine is copious, full of variety, and withal facil, expert
at al hands, both to dispute the profoundest questions, and to speak plausibly
to the people; and in his Sermons both instructs and moves with a great
deal of grace. Who can place his words more weighti^y, in better order, and
come off more roundly then S. Leo? whose speeches are always full of majesty,
and come, as it were, thundering out of his mouth. S. Gregory is altogether
Moral, and wonderful rare in that kind, entertayning his reader with variety
of sweet examples and similitudes, and instructing him in the course of virtue
with profound learning, and drawing him on to read him by the pleasant and
copious manner, which he has, of declaring himself. What shall I say of S.
Bernard? who is worthily called the Melli^luous Doctor; and is full of
spiritual docume^ts of highest perfection, and enterlaceth the sentences of
holy Scripture so naturally with his own discourse, that a man would think,
he speaks nothing but Scripture, or that the holy Scripture makes use of his
tongue, as an instrument to declare itself; which is both grave, and pleasant,
and wonderful effectual. And not to hold the reader any longer, this does
sufficiently prove that which I said before, that every Father has his
particular delightful manner of expressing himself, and that so much variety
must needs make the pleasure, in reading them, the greater, as it were walking
out of one garden into another; and by the often change of so many curiosities
as be in them, preventing al wearisomnes, which might creepe-in upon us.

10. And certainly, if, when they lived here on earth, it could not but be an
excessive comfort to deal with any one of them, and to converse with men of
so great worth as they were, can we think, ^he pleasure is less now they are
in heaven? Me thinks it should be far greater; both because the discourses,
which are penned, are always more elaborate and more ^^fined then that, which
is delivered by word of mouth ex tempore; and the glory, ^^ich they now enjoy,
does add weight and authority to their writings. To conclude therefore this
discourse of the three Branches of Divinity, I desire only people will reflect,
that, whereas the understanding of matters so sublime and specially of the holy
Scriptures does come unto us more by being humble and long acquainted with
spiritual things, then by strength of wit and assiduitie, it must needs be
evident, that Religious people are so much the better disposed for the comfort,
which may be had in that kind of study, by how much they have more plenty of
efficacious means to enrich themselves with the virtues, which prepare the way
unto it.

Of the joy, which Religious people take in the good of their Neighbors
souls. CHAP. XII.
MOst Religious men have yet another comfort, which goes beyond al carnal and
earthly comforts: when having had occasion to labor in cultiuating of numbers
of Souls, they see them forsake their vicious courses, and take to virtues, or
in sanctity of life daily to advance themselves, and increase in the service
of God. Who can express the joy, which this does breed? or the tears, which
it oftimes draws from our eyes? For if, as the Prophet says, Conquerours
exult, when they have taken a prey, Es. 9.3.
what greater exultation can there be, then in such a conquest, and such a
prey? For in other victories the prosperous success of one party, is loss to
the other; here the benefit, which comes to us, is beneficial also to our
neighbor; and the good of our neighbor, the increase of our joy. Witness the
labor, the sollicit^^e, the care, which most commonly this fruit does cost us;
whereof the Apostle writes thus to certain Disciples of his: My little
children, whom I trauail withal again, until CHRIST be formed in you;
comparing himself to a woman with child, Gal. 4.54.
to express the time, and labor, and pain also, which often accompanies
this charitable business. And consequently there can be no doubt, but that,
which our Savior says in the Ghospel, agrees also to this childbirth: A
woman, when she breeds, has sorrow; but when she has brought forth, now she
remembers not the pressure, Io. 26.21.
by reason of the joy, because a man is come into the world. But here the joy
is far greater, because man is not borne into the world, but in very deed
into heaven. For the life of the body is short, but the life of the Soul,
eternal. And what joy, think you, should we conceive of this everlasting fruit,
seeing we find a Heathen Philosopher rejoicing at the temporal progress of his
Disciples, S^n. Ep. 34.
and esteeming it a very just and reasonable cause of joy? If a tree, says he,
when it is come so far as to bring forth fruit, rejoices the husbandman; if
a shepherd take pleasure to see the fruit of his flock; if every man
beholding the child, which he nurseth, delights in the growth of his child, as
in his own; how do thou think it fares with them, that have nursed up wits,
when knowing the tender beginnings of them, they behold them suddenly flourish?
Thus spoke this Heathen Philosopher of the brickle, and ^^ort, and momentarie
fruit, which he could arrive to know. The fruit of our lab^^^s is spiritual and
immortal; so that if, as our Savior testifyeth, there be joy in heaven upon one
sinner doing penance, is there not the like cause of rejoicing on earth, when
we see a man either converted to do penance for his sins, or established in
virtue, and taking great strides to perfection? Doubtless there is. For
certainly in this one, we have many causes of joy and comfort, the glory of
God, the salvation of our neighbor, whom we are commanded to love as
ourselves; a joyful and most admirable representation of the Divine goodness,
and cleme^cie, and patience, not only in bearing with the lost sheep, but in
bringing it again to the fold upon his shoulders; of which goodness and
clemency we are witness and spectatours. Finally, it is no small increase of
joy, that we find ourselves made partners in some measure, in so great and so
noble a work, and able, 1. Cor. 3.6.
in a manner, to glory with S. Paul, and say: I planted. For it is natural for
every body to love and take delight in that, in which he has taken some kind
of pains; and the more excellent the work is, the more pleasure he takes in
it. And what greater work can there be, then to make men Saints? a work not
only proper to God alone, but the greatest of al his works; a work, whereof S.
Paul rejoiced in the Philippians, saying of them: My joy and my crown; and in
the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 1.14.
stiling them his glory in the day of our Lord; and to the Thessalonians: What
is our hope, 1. Tess. 2 19.
and joy, or crown of glory? Are not you, before our Lord JESUS CHRIST in his
coming? For you are our glory and joy. Wherefore seeing Religious people labor
so diligently in this harvest of Souls, and have so many peculiar helps
toward the reaping of the fruit of it (as we have showed in the precedent
Book) their joy and comfort in it must also necessarily be both most assured
and continual.

Of the Hundredfold promised to Religious people. CHAP. XIII.
THat which we have hitherto said of the pleasantnes of a Religiou^ course of
life, is very admirable; Yet one thing remains behind, more to be valued then
all the rest, as containing indeed al other things; and having it, we may justly
make account we have al. This is the large, Matthew. 19.19.
and ample, and magnificent promise, which Truth itself makes us in these
words: Every one that shall leave father, or mother, or brethren, or sisters,
Marc 10.30.
or house, or lands, shall receive a hundredfold in this life. Of which promise
S. Bernard discoursing says, S. Bernard. s^r. E^ce nos.
and very truly: These are the words, which have persuaded men through the
whole world, to contemn the world, and embrace voluntary Poverty; words,
that fill Cloisters with Monks, Deserts with Anchorets. These, I say, are the
words which put Egypt to pillage, and rob it of the best vessel it has.
This is that lively and efficacious word, converting souls by a happy
ambition of sanctity and faithful promise of truth. Finding therefore so great
a promise upon record, and knowing withal that he that makes us this promise,
cannot fail of his word, nor forget how fa^re he has engaged himself, it
concerns us, diligently to search into the riches of it, and acquaint
ourselves thoroughly with the treasure which it contains.

2. Cassian in his last Collation relating a discourse of Abbot Abraham, Cass.
Coll. vl^m. c. vltimo.
says that the words of this promise are to be understood plainly as they
sound, to wit, that we shall receive the very things which we leave, in
quantity multiplied. For, sa^thl^, A hundredfold repayed in (...)
whosoever contemning the love of one father, or mother, or child, for Christ's
sake, does pass into the most sincere love of al those that serve Christ, shall
receive a hundredfold in quantity of brethren and parents, that is to say,
for ^ne he shall find so many fathers and brethren, that will love him with a
more ardent and more elevated kind of love, and shall be also enriched with
possessions and lands in like manner multiplied; that is, whosoever abandoneth
one house for the love of Christ, shall possess innumerable Monasteries as his
own in all parts of the world, and enter upon them as upon his own land of
inheritance. For how does not he receive a hundredfold, and (if we may be so
bold as to add any thing to the words of our Savior) more then a
hundredfold, that forsaking ten or twenty servants that wait upon him by
force, and are scarce to be trusted, is attented ever after with the voluntary
service of so many men well borne and of honorable descent?A notable saying,
comprehending not only Religious people that have reuennues in common, B^d. de
Natali S. Benedicti.
but al in general, even those that profess the strictest Euangelical Poverty
that can be, and have nothing either in private or in common; for these also
have their hundredfold of alms, which the faithful bring-in unto them
abundantly of devotion. Let us give care (says S. Bid discoursing of this
kind of Poverty) to the joyful promises of our Lord and Savior, let us see
how out of the special favor of his goodness he promises them that follow him,
not only the rewards of eternal life, but excellent gifts also in this present
life. Every one that shall leave house, or brethren, or land, for my sake, shall
receive a hundredfold. For he that renounceth earthly love and possessions to
follow Christ, the more he profits in his love, the more he shall find that
will be glad to embrace him with inward affection, and maintain him with their
outward substance. The first degree therefore of this hundredfold in this
world, is to receive it even in these outward things.

3. But the inward treasures which God bestows upon us are far greater and
more to be esteemed; S. Hierome 3 in Matt.
to wit, a sweetness and satietie in our souls, incomparably better then al
earthly pleasure. S. Hierome conceived right of it, and says, that the
promise of our Savior is to be understood in this sense, that he that
forsakes ca^nal things for our Savior, shall receive spiritual, which, for the
worth of them, are in comparison of earthly things, Spiritual thing a hund^^d
times better then temporal.
as a hundred for one. And what shall we need to stand alleging many
authorities? If it be pleasure which we seek in these earthly things, we see
where it is to be had far more abundant and more solid. For this is the
tenure of the promise of our Savior: look how much contentment a man received
in his parents, and brethren, and kinsfolk, and acquaintance, or in the
pleasantnes or fruitfulnes of his lands and territories, or in the use and
possession of whatsoever other thing he was master of in the world, he shall
have the self same contentment in Religion, a hundredfold more added unto it.

S Gregory (...) in Eze^h.
4. S. Gregory in one of his Homilies delivers this which we are saying, and
adds moreover that this Hundredfold consists in a kind of habitual joy and
contentment of mind, P^^fection a l^^ge hundredfold.
giving a man as much and much more satisfaction in poverty, then the richest
men of the world can find in all their wealth and abundance. His words are
these: Holy men do not forsake earthly things, to the end they may have the
self same in this world multiplied; for whosoever does forsake earth out of an
earthly intent, does not forsake earth, but desire it. Neither is it to be
understood, that he that forsakes one wife, shall receive a hundred; but in the
name of a Hundredfold we understand Perfection, because whosoever despises
earthly and temporal things for God, receaueth here so much perfection in his
soul, that he desires not the things which before he set at naught, and in
the world to come he arriueth to the glory of life everlasting. He receaueth
therefore a hundred times over that which once he gave, because he receaueth
the spirit of perfection, which makes that he wants not earthly things,
though he have them not; He that desires nothing, is not poor.
for he is properly a poor man, that wants that which he has not. He that,
when he has not a thing, does not desire it, is rich; for poverty consists
in the penuriousnes of one's mind, not in the quantity of that which he
possesses; and he is not poor, that is not encumbred with poverty. Cassian
has the like saying, Cass. Coll. vltim. c. vltim.
and discourses of the sweetness of this Hundredfold in this manner: Certainly
a man shall receive a hundred times more sweetness by containing himself from
marriage, then people have in the act of marriage. And for the contentment
which they have in the possession of one house, or one piece of land, he shall
have a hundred times more joy of the riches which he shall possess by being the
son of God by adoption, Incomparably more s^eetnes in Spiritual things.
by virtue whereof he enters upon all that which belongs to his eternal Father
and possesses it as his own, and in imitation of that true Son says with
like love and virtue; Al which my Father has, is mine; and enjoys it without
paynful care, or distractiue solicitude, quiet and secure, as it were his own
inheritance, these words of the Apostle sounding daily in his ears: John 16 15.
Al things are y^rs, whether the world, or things present, or things to come;
and that of King Solomon: Of a faithful man the whole world is his wealth. 1.
Cor. 3.22.
Thou have therefore the reward of a Hundred-^old laid down before thee in the
greatness of the merit, and in the incomparable difference of the worth and
quality. For as if for a certain weight of brass, or iron, or other grosser
metal, a man should return the like weight in gold, he might well be said to
have rendered more then a hundredfold: So when for the contempt of earthly
love and pleasure a man is rewarded with spiritual joy, and the pleasure of
most excellent charity, though the number were alike, yet it is a hundred
times greater and better. This was Cassian's opinion in this business.

5. And S. Augustine does not only approve of it, S Augustine Ep. 89. q. 4.
but sticks not to say further, that the pleasure of Religious people is more
then a hundred times as great; and that the number of a hundred, being the
perfectest of al other numbers, comprehends all that can be had or wished; and
that the saying of the Apostle is verifyed in them: As having nothing, and
possessing al things. And elsewhere he repeateth the same; 2. Cor. 6.10^.
and adds moreover, that such as were poor in the world, and had little or
nothing to leave, shall not be excluded from this happiness, but al shall be
partakers of so ample and so abundant a a reward of pleasure, which makes the
joy of the hundredfold incomparably greater. And to this effect he construeth
those words of the Psalm: There sparrowes shall make their neasts; S. Augustine
(...) 103.
understanding by sparrowes, which are little birds, the poor and little ones,
that hearing the words of the Ghospel (Go sell all that thou have, and come
follow me) embracing it with all their heart, resolve neither to marry, nor to
trouble themselves with care of children, nor to tie themselves to any certain
dwelling, but to live in common. What therefore (says S. Augustine) have these
sparrowes forsaken? They that had ^^thing ^^leaue, (...) also a hundred fold.
what great matter have they forsaken? One of them turns to God; he leaves his
father's poor cottage, perhaps scarce a bed in it, or a chest. Let us not
crow over him; let us not say: Thou have left nothing. He that has forsaken a
great deal, let him not be proud of it. We know that Peter, when he first
followed our Savior, was a fisherman; what could he forsake? or his brother
Andrew, or the sons of Z^bedee, John and James? for they were also fishermen;
and yet what did they say? Behold we have left al, and followed thee. Our
Savior did not answer him: Have thou forgotten thy poverty? what have thou
left, that the whole world should be turned-ouer unto thee? He forsook a great
deal, my Brethren, he forsook very much. He forsook not only all that he had,
but all that he desired to have. What man is there so poor, that does not swel
with the hopes of this world? who is there that does not daily covet to
increase that which he has? This covetous mind is that which they cut off. It
was once aiming at an immensitie of wealth; they confined it; and shall we say
they left nothing? No certainly; Peter forsook the whole world, and the whole
world was turned-ouer unto him, as having nothing, and possessing al things.
Many do the like; they that have little, do this, and become fruitful
sparrowes. All this is of S. Augustine, So that we may justly conclude, that
Religious people have a promise, not only of a hundred times as many goods,
and a hundred times as much pleasure and happiness by these goods even in this
life, but under the title of a hundredfold, they have a promise of the whole
world.

6. Which is a rare and excellent thing; and yet there is an other degree of
this hundredfold, and indeed the highest that can be thought on, comprehending
not only the world, God alone hundred fold (...)
and all that is in it, but God, the Author of the world. So S. Ambrose
understands this hundredfold to be God himself; because he that forsakes
al, begins to possess God. He (says S. Ambrose) is the perfect reward of
Virtue, not counted unto us one by one to an hundred, but in the value of
perfect virtue; S. (...) Ps. 1^^.
and gives an example in the Tribe of Leui. For by commandment of God himself,
there being no portion of land set-out for them among the rest of the Tribes,
Deuteronomy. 10. and 18.
God promised, that he would be their part and possession, and often renewed
the like promise unto them. Whereupon S. Ambrose speaking of this their
honorable and delightful inheritance, says in this manner: He that has God
for his portion, is master of all that is in Nature. In steed of land, it is
enough that he enjoys himself; that is a good reuenew unto him, which cannot
perish. In steed of several dwellings, it is sufficient, that himself is the
habitation and temple of God, then whom nothing is more precious. For what is
more precious then God? This is a portion to which earthly portions cannot be
compared. What is more noble then a Heauen^ie guest* What is more happy then a
Divine possession?

7. This and much m^re says S. Ambrose of this Hundredfold, and particularly
that they that have forsaken al, are far more rich, then all the wealthy men
of the world, because though their lands and dominions extend never so far,
yet they have their bounds, and pay more out of them, then the profit of them
comes to: but, says S. Ambrose, he that has nothing, and serves God only,
has his inheritance above the earth, where land does not confine him, nor the
sea bound him. Which being so, how can the wealth of any King, or the earthly
riches, and commodities, and pleasures of any man living, be comparable to the
riches and pleasures of a Religious life?

8. We might bring many examples to this purpose; but that which happened to
Arnulphus a Cistercian Monk, Arn^l^^us
shall supply for all, whose wonderful conversion is recorded in the history of
that Order. He being nobly borne, and a wealthy man in the world, bred up in all manner of dainties, touched in a Sermon of S. Bernard, became a Monk in the
Monastery of Claire-vaulx. And in that poor and austere kind of life, among
other infirmities being once grievously tormented with the cholick, he lay for
a good while together in a swound and speechles; and at last coming to
himself, he cried out alowde: Al it true, which thou have said, o Lord IESV;
and repeated it very often. They that were about him, much am ze^, asked him
how he felt himself; but he gave them no other answer but as before: Al is
true, which thou have said, o Lord IESV. And some of them whispering to
themselves, and saying that they feared he was distracted with his pain, and
spoke idely, he spoke thus unto them: That which I said, I said in my perfect
senses; for our Lord in the Ghospel has promised, that if a man renounce the
wealth of this world, and al conversation with his kindred, for his love, he
shall receive a hundredfold in this life. And this I find now by experience.
For this very excessive sharp torment is so sweet unto me for the hope of the
mercies of God which I feel in it, that I would not have been without this
grief, not only for all the world which I left, but not* if it had been a
hundred times as much more. And if I, that am a wicked sinner, feel that these
pains are a hundred times sweeter unto me, then al my ancient worldly
happiness, what is that which good and fervent Religious people have in their
spiritual joys and comforts? For it is most certain that any spiritual joy,
though it be but in hope, is a hundred thousand times greater, then whatsoever
secular joy actually possessed. These were the words of this holy man: and
when he spoke them, all that heard him, were much astonished, specially to hear
a man, that had no learning, conceive and utter such things so pertinently; and
thereby they were the more assured, that what he said, came indeed from the
Holie-Ghost, that dwelt in his hurt.

A comparison of Religion with Paradise. CHA^. XIIII.
I Will conclude this discourse of the pleasantnes of a Religious life with a
conceit of S. Antonin's, who was both a very learned man, and a great Saint. He
therefore in one of his Treatises, where he discourses at large of this state
of life out of the principles of Divinity, among other commendations which he
gives it, says, it is like the terrestrial Paradise, a place of joy, and
pleasure, and delight, planted by the hand of God, the greatest and
powerfullest Artificer that ca^^e, and fullest of knowledge; God planted this
Paradise o^ Relig^^^.
and planted to the end that man should lead a most blisful life in it.
Religion yealdeth nothing to paradise, for as much as concerns the dignity
of the Author of it: for so great a thing as Religion is, could not have been
invented but by God, nor conserved to this day by any other power or wisdom.
This so holy and wholesome kind of life is his gift, he put it into the
thoughts of men; He is the author of this counsel and practice of making
Vows, and instilles into every man's mind the desire of undertaking such a
kind of course; he gives perseverance and victory in temptations; he orders
the rules and several constitutions and al things belonging to this Sat; and
consequently it cannot be but that the whole work proceeding from a fountain
of so great wisdom and goodness, must needs be every way perfect and
complete, and flow with full streams of happiness.

2. In that first garden and orchard of pleasure, God planted al kind of trees,
fair to behold, Fruits of this Paradise.
and pleasant to taste of, that no kind of delight might be wanting in it. Here
we have plenty of spiritual fruits, much more delightful to the eyes and
palate of our mind; to wit, the security of a sincere and upright Conscience,
light of Understanding to discover things of an other world, the solaces of
Prayer and Contemplation, and many other things which we have mentioned
before, yealding excessive contentment both by the variety and dignity, which
is in them.

The Grace of God the Tree of life.
3. Here wants not the Tree of Life, which S. Antonine will have to be the
Grace of God, in regard that the State itself is not grounded in Nature but in
Grace, and conteyneth within itself many easy and obuious ways both to
produce and increase daily the self-same Grace. And as in Paradise the air was
always of an even temper, never excessive hot, nor excessive cold, there was
neither hunger nor thirst, nor aguish distemper, nor any other thing that
could be distastful for the body: So in Religion we find peace and
tranquillity of mind, free from al turbulent motions and distempers, and a
constant kind of disp^sition and euennes of our inward carriage, which if it
were pleasing to the body, much more to the mind. As for the four Rivers that
flowed out of Paradise, S. Gregory tells us, S. (...) (...) In Marc. c. 27.
that they signify four Virtues, wherewith while our heart is watered, the
heat of al carnal desires is alayed.

The benefit of Company.
4. Let us see how that agrees to Religion which God said of Man: It is not
good for man to be alone; let us make him a help like to himself. What does
this signify but the help which every one finds in the company of his
Brethren for the benefit of his own soul, and for the more profitable
assistance of his Neighbor? Certainly it is not good for a man, that desi^eth
virtue, to be alone; rather it is dangerous and hurtful, both because it is
more easy for the Devil to supplant him, and himself is more apt to be wearied
with the labor (...) virtuous course of life; and a man cannot but want
sometimes good counsel, and good example. Great therefore is the help which
Conversation with our Brethren does yeald us; and is more like ourselves, then
the help which was made for Adam; because that was only like in nature, here
the Sex is the same, and our habit, and orders and al things else are al^ke.

5. If we look also into the inward disposition of mind, in which our first
Father was at the time of his creation, we shall find no small resemblance of it
in Religion. S. Io^n Chrysostom discoursing of the happiness of Monks, and
comparing them with Adam while he lived in Paradise, The inward disposition of
mind better in Religion.
expresses it in these words: W^y should these be in worse case then he, when
before his disobedience he was busied in working in Paradise? He was troubled
with no worldly care, no more are these, He conuersed with God with an upright
conscience, and so do these, and so much the more freely, by how much they
have greater grace bestowed upon them by the gift of the Holie-Ghost.

6. Finally S. Bernard discoursing of the delights of this Paradise, S. John
Chrysostom. Hom 69.
shows withal the way and means which we must take to come unto it; and it
is reason we should learn of him. Do not think, says he, that this Paradise
of inward pleasure is any corporal place. S. Ber l. 1. de Conuers. Cleri. c.
^^.
We must not walk with our feet into this garden, but with our affections. It
is not commended for store of earthly trees, but for the pleasant and comely
plants of spiritual virtues. It is a Garden enclosed, where a sealed fountain
is derived into four branches, and one vein of wisdom spreads itself into
four several virtues. There beautiful lillies spring forth; and when the
flowers appear, the voice of the Turtle-doue is heard. There the Spikenard
yealdeth the Spouse a most fragrant smell, and al other spices abound, while the
Southwind blows and the North Wind is shut out. In the midst is the Tree of
Life, the Apple Tree mentioned in the Canticles, more precious then all the
trees of the woods; the shade whereof cools the Spouse and the fruit is sweet
in her throat. There the brightness of Continency, and the knowledge of sincere
truth enlightneth the eyes of our heart, and the melodious voice of the inward
Co^forter gives joy and gladness to our hearing. There the pleasant Sent of a
fruitful field which God has blessed, does as it were beat into the nostrels
of our H^pe. There we have a taste of the incomparable daynties of Charity, and
eat greedily of them; and the thorns and brambles wherewith it was pricked
before, being now cut down, and our soul anointed with the oil of Mercy,
it reposeth happily in a good Conscience. And al these things are not reckoned
among the rewards of the life to come, but are part of our hire in this
temporal warfare, and bel^ng not to the future, but rather to the promise of
the Church which now is. For this is the Hundredfold which even in this world
is bestowed upon those that contemn the world. These are the words of S.
Bernard, the bare rehearsal whereof whom should is not in reason move to labor
for so great blessings, and to resolve for ever to live where there is such
plenty of happiness?

7. And yet we have no great cause to wonder, that Religion should be so like
the terrestrial Paradise, Religion a heaven ^po^^^^th.
seeing it is like to Heaven itself, which is in far greater honor. For
indeed if we look well into the nature of a Religious life, it is a lively
pattern of that happy and blisseful habitation, and resembles it in all
points as near as possibly the living in this world can come near unto it. And
because I will not have any man think that I speak this of my own head, S Lau
Just. (...) pers. Mon. c. 6.
S. Laure^ce Justinian shall speak for me, who has a long and eloquent
discourse to this purpose in the book which he wrote of Monastical perfection;
and among other things he says thus in express words: In all human things, and
in this pilgrimage of ours, there is no such lively picture of our heavenly
Country, as is Monastical conversation, and a Congregation dedicated to the
service of God. S. Basil (...) Constable Mon c. 16.
And then confirms this his (...) with many solid and evident proofs; which
whosoever will, may read in him And ^. Basil was directly of the same opinion;
for having made a long disc^^^se of the excellency of a Religious life, in the
end he concludes, that upon earth there is not any thing so great or so
beautiful, as to deserve to be compared with it, and that therefore we must
seek to heaven to have a likeness of it; because as in heaven al things are
incorruptible, so also among Religious people; and as the Citizens of heaven
love entirely together, so do Religious people.

8. The first reason therefore of similitude between Heaven and Religion, if we
follow S. Basil, Matt. 22.30.
is Incorruption, that is, Chastity, because as in heaven, they neither
marry, nor are given in marriage, according to the saying of our Savior, so
neither in Religion. Incorrupt^^n and Charity, (...) the properties.
The second reason is Charity, and that perfect love and union, which is
betwixt those happy Saints of heaven, grounded not in nature, or any natural
inclination or motive, but in God alone, and his only love. And what is there
upon earth that does more perfectly resemble this love then Religion? where
people do so absolutely concur in the self-same mind and opinions, and have
al manner of things so common among them, and love so entirely together, that
(as I have often said, and must often repeat it) they seem not to be many
souls, but one soul in many bodies, knit and united together, not for
natural reasons or human respects and ends, as merchants, soldiers, and the
like, but merely upon Charity, merely for the love of God. This Charity, as
the Apostle speaks, never sailing, 1. Cor. 13 8.
shall last with us in heaven, and be the self-same there, which is here upon
earth; and consequently while we are on earth, it lively represents the state
which we shall enjoy in heaven. S. Io Chry (...)
S. John Chrysostom speaking in commendation of Religious people, does not
stick to say, that they have made choice of a heavenly kind of life, and are
not worse disposed then the Angels (for so are his words) because as in the
Angels there is no distemper, neither do some grieve while others rejoice, but
are al of them joyful with one and the self-same gladness and quiet, so it
happens for all the world in Monasteries. And S. Basil delivering his mind yet
more plainly, compares the life, which Religious people lead in common, with
the life of the Angels, and gives this reason for it, because al enjoy the
self-same spiritual riches and treasures; which, because they are spiritual,
may without diminution be equally possessed by all, and therefore, says he,
Religion is a lively representation of heaven, and gives us a taste in this
life of the happiness which is to come.

Obedience
9. What shall we say of the similitude which Religion has with that perfect
subjection, in which all that are in heaven live under God, al their wills being
wholly and most admirably absorpt in his will, and holding it for the only rule
of al their actions and motions? For in like manner Religion cutteth off and
rooteth out by the vow of Obedience al will of our own; and by virtue of that
vow, the will of God, by the ministry of man, swayeth and rules in all things.

Poverty;
10. Poverty also has a hand in this resemblance; for as they that are in
heaven take no thought for gold nor silver, but mind only the spiritual
treasures which they enjoy: And Vni(...)
so Religious people shake off al earthly things, and glory most of al, that
they are masters of nothing.

11 Moreover in that heavenly Palace al have one kind of employment, and one
business, to wit, to love God, and continually to praise him. This is that which
Religion^ people also aim at, and labor for; to this end they forsake the
world, ^
to attend and see that God is sweet; to this they wholly apply themselves, and
this is the reason, as S. Denis writes, why from the beginning they were
called Monks, to the end their name, derived from unity, might signify the
unity of the Soul with God, which Religious discipline works in us.
Wherefore, S Aug. in Ps. 148.
as S. Augustine says, that they that are in heaven are blessed, because they
do nothing but praise God, they do not plough, nor sow the ground, nor go to
mil, because they are works of necessi^^^, and there is no necessity; nor they
do not rob nor steal, nor commit adultery, because they be works of
iniquity, and there is no iniquity: So we may say of Religion. For first,
Iniquity has no place in Religion; and as for Necessity, it is for the most
part shut out by abandoning al desire of earthly things; and for the rest
which remains, it is directed wholly to the glory of God, which of itself is
to praise God, and consequently they never cease praising him. For, as the same
S. Augustine delivers, S. Aug. in Ps. 146.
Thou praysest God when thou go about business; thou praysest God when thou
eatest, and when thou drinkest, thou praysest God, when thou do rest in thy
bed, and when thou sleep.

12. Finally it is no small resemblance of a heavenly life, Heavenly
conversation.
that a Religious Soul imitateth the conversation of those that are in heaven,
as S Bernard discourses in a certain place, as when it worshippeth and adoreth
God alone, as the Angels; S. Bernard sermon. 7. in Cant.
it is chaste, as the Angels, and that in flesh of sin, and this frail body,
as the Angels are not; finally when it seeks and minds the things which are
with them, and not that which is upon earth. And the same S. Bernard not
without great reason applying those words of the Apocalypse to our Savior ( I
saw the holy City Jerusalem, S. Bernard. Ibid. Apoc. 21.2.
new, descending from heaven) says, that when he came down from heaven to
teach us upon earth the conversation which is in heaven, he brought in himself
a perfect pattern and visible pourtraicture of that heavenly Jerusalem; S
Bernard. Ibid.
and gives the reason, why he says so, in these words: The Heavenly Man did
not appear in vain, seeing of earthly people he made so many heavenly ones
like himself. Because from that time we live here on earth after the manner of
them that are in heaven; while to the likeness of that heavenly and blisful
Creature, this also which came from the utmost bounds of the earth to hear the
wisdom of Solomon, cleaves to her heavenly husband with chaste love.

13. The last resemblance which Religion has with Heaven, is in Joy and
felicity. Heavenly joy and felicity in Religion.
For though there must of necessity be great difference in the quantity and
excess of this joy, because in heaven we shall see God face to face, and here
we see him by a glass in a dark (...); Yet the joy here is not only very
great, but of the self-same nature with that which is in heaven; 1. Cor. 1^.12.
for they both proceed from one fountain, and have the self-same objects, to
wit, not flesh and blood, or any thing created, but God only, who is infinite,
and the Sovereign Good of al.

14 And here we might spinne out a long discourse concerning the abundance, and
multiplicitie, and assurednes, and soliditie, and perpetuity, of the Joys
which are in Religion but that we have sp^ken sufficiently of them in all that
which go^^ before. Religious people dwell in the gates of heaven.
Yet upon that which has been hitherto said, we may justly conclude, that no
State can be fuller of al kind of happiness then a Religious life; specially
seeing it so lively resembles the joys and life of heaven, that we may truly
say, we are continually tasting of them, yea plentifully feeding upon the
excessive felicities which there we shall enjoy, and fitly apply to this purpose
that verse of the Royal Prophet: Bless our Lord, Ps. 13^.
al y^e servants of our Lord, who stand in the house of our Lord, in the courts
of the house of our God. Where inuiting the servants of God to the praises of
him, he distinguishes them into two ranks: Some he places in the house of
God, others in the outward courts. The first are they that dwell in Heaven,
which is the proper Mansion House of God; Religious people are the second, that
stand, as I may say, in the courtyard of the heavenly Palace. They are not
yet in the house, but next door to it, and in a manner in the porch or entry;
where they have two great commodities: First, that unless they will needs give
back, they may both easily and quickly get into the house, when their turn
comes; and secondly, bordering so near upon that Heavenly habitation, they
cannot choose but have part very often of the many commodities and daynties,
which that house affords, as so many crummes falling from a table richly
furnished.

An answer to certain Objections, which are wont to be made against Religion;
and first: That few enjoy these Comforts. CHAP. XV.
IF the World could speak for itself, or had Counsel that were not blind and
deaf with too much love of the World I make no doubt, but it would yeald to
Religion all that which I have said, not only of the dignity of it, but of the
immensitie and abundance of the joys and comforts, which are in it. For it
were not only impudency, but scarce the conceit of a man, but of a beast, to
value the pleasures of the body, and the itching delight, which grows from
these base inferior things, above true and solid contentment of mind grounded
in God, who is the only true good, and the good of al goodness; this contentment
and delight of mind being that sauourie Manna, which the goodness of God rayneth
down from heaven upon those that he leads out of Egypt into the Desert.

2. But because, as we said before, both in our passage out of the land of
Egypt, and afterward, there want not them, that stand in our way and oppose
us, Pharao with his horse and his whole army on the one side, and the
Philistians and Iebusaeans o^ the other, it remains that we now endeavor to
discover their plots, which is half the victory, and break their weapons in
pieces, which they arm against us. And first we will g^e in hand with that
objection which is usual: That al cannot be partakers of the pleasures and
delights, which we have discoursed of; a few rare men only attain unto them by
the special favor of Almighty God, and by long fasting and continual
punishing of their body; the rest that are of the ordinary sort of people,
and but of a mean strain in Virtue, are far from feeling any such kind of
sweetness, and never indeed taste of the delights we speak of. For confut^tion
of this error (for I can call it no other) we must first suppose, that
whatsoever has been said in all this Treatise, either of the benefit, or
excellency, or pleasantnes of a Religious life, is to be understood of the
State itself, and not of particular men. For what is it to the purpose, The
State i^ happy, though men be la^ie.
if men be lazy and careless, and suffer themselves to want in the midst of
al plenty and abundance, and to starve for hunger at a sul board of daynties?
Of which kind of people the Holie-Ghost speaks in the Proverbs thus: (...)
s^^athful man hide^^ his Land under his arm-pit, and does not put (...) to his
mouth. For in like manner Religious people are not far to seek for the goods
which abound in Religion, Proverb. 19 14.
but have them ready carved to their hand; it is their part to make use of
them, and to put them as meat to their mouths; if they will not take so little
pains as is required to make use of them, the fault is their own, if they be
in want, and not the State's; the State itself is fol fraught with excellent
commodities; if they remain empty and naked, they must blame themselves. When
Natural Philosophers discourse of the constitution of a man's body, they
discourse of it as it is by nature, entire and perfect, with hands, and arms,
and legs, and feet, and all the rest of the limbs belonging to a perfect body;
if any particular man want a hand, or an eye, or a foot, or any other part,
they take no notice of it, nor make any reckoning of it, because their aim is
to teach that, which is natural to the thing they treat of: So treating of
Religion, we show what profit and pleasure the State is apt and wont naturally
to produce and afford; if there be any particular man, in whom it works not
this wonted effect, Few that find not comfort.
the fault is in the man, not in the State. And yet I dare undertake, that the
number of these sloathful and lazy people is far less, then the number of
them that take comfort in Religion; because it is one of the happinesses and
benefits of a Religious life to rowse-vp the spirits of them, that are drowsy
and negligent; to put life into them, that are slow and dull; and set them on
fire, that are cold and lumpish.

3. But perhaps they that make this objection, intend only to say, that the
rapts or trances, and ecstasies and miracles, which they hear of, or read in
the lives of a S. Antonie, or S. Dominick, or S. Francis, or some other great
Saints of special note, be peculiar to such rare men as they were, and happen
not to al Religious people.

4. And this I willingly grant; neither was it ever my meaning to say
otherwise; nor if we consider the matter right, Miracles and Ecstasies happen
not to al.
is it any disparagement to Religion, that al have not these extraordinary
gifts. For as the fertilnes of a piece of ground appears, if it naturally
yeald a hundred for one; and if any particular man reap not so much, the
goodness of the soil is not the cause of it, but the negligence or want of skill
of him that ploughes it, or tilles it not as it ought to be tilled: The same of
Religion; of itself it is a fat soil, and the goodness of it appears chiefly,
and to the admiration of all the world, in such eminent Saints as they are, whom
we mentioned; if we do not find the like profit by it, we cannot lay any
blame upon Religion, but the fault is in us. And yet this very consideration
ought in reason to animate and encourage us to be the more diligent, knowing
what plenty of fruit we may reap of our labors, and what abundance others
have reaped. And no doubt but though we never arrive to taste of those
extraordinary and unwonted joys and pleasures, Yet al may have comfort.
which those admirable Saints did seele, we may notwithstanding find no small
comfort in Religion, and indeed abundantly enough to fill us. For though we have
not the marks of the sieve wounds of our Savior printed in our body, as some
of them have had, or be not rapt to the third heaven, or suffer not excess of
mind in prayer, and the like; Yet it is ordinary, and easy also to take so
much pleasure in reading of spiritual books, in prayer, in contemplation of the
Mysteries of our Faith, and such holy Exercises, that we would not exchange
the delight which we find in them, for all the delights which are in the world,
though they were ten thousand times more then they are. For these Divine guists
and comforts of God are like the Oil, which was multiplied by the Prophet
Elizaeus: 4. R^g 4.
they run so long as there are empty vessels to receive them; and though the
vessels which are presented, are some of them but small, and not so many as
might be filled, yet so long as any are offered, this heavenly oil does not
cease to run; and that which is derived by this means into our souls, be it
never so little, according to the proportion and capacity of the vessel which
we present, is notwi^standing wonderful sweet and pleasant.

God is not a niggard in his spiritual (...).
5. We may add, that they that are so full of these fears and doubts, least God
should sell his spiritual delights at too dear a rate, have a mean and
unworthy conceit of his infinite goodness and bounty, taking him to be
close-fisted, as I may say, and of a covetous disposition, which is far from
the bountifulnes of his nature. They should rather reflect, how freely, and
liberally, and profusedly he powers forth the rest of his benefits for the
sustenance of this natural life of ours. He makes the Sun to rise day by
day, and gives rain to the earth in due season; he furnishes the world with
plenty of corn, and wine, and oil, and al other fruits, not only
sufficiently to supply our necessities, but abundantly for pleasure and
pastime. And upon whom does he bestow these things? Upon men that blaspheme his
holy name; upon men that are wicked and ungodly, or at least for the most
part ungrateful; upon them that receiving so many inestimable benefits at his
hands, think not once of him, and oftimes abuse his gifts to his dishonor and
reproach. Seeing therefore God is so large and bountiful in the goods which
serve but for this natural life, why should he not be in like manner liberal
and profuse in the goods which serve for our spiritual life, a life far more
noble and excellent, and for which he voluntarily descended from the throne of
heaven, and dyed willingly upon the Cross, to the end we might be partakers of
it? We see what kind of people were invited to that sumptuous Bancket so
royally and magnificently set forth in the Ghospel. Did he call the rich and
noble only, or people clad in cloth of gold and silver? In^ 14.^1.
Go forth, says he, quickly into the streets and lanes of the Citt^e; and the
poor, and ^eeble, and blind, and lame, bring in hither. Who be these seeble,
and blind, and poor people (to interpret the Parable spiritually as we ought)
but such as are imperfect, and but Nouices for matter of spirit, too
weake-sighted to fix their eyes attentively upon heavenly things, and too
feebly vnderlayd to run the ways of Religious discipline, and finally but
slenderly provided of virtue, and poor in all spiritual graces? And yet these
are not only not excluded from the sweetness of this bancket, but unexpectedly
invited, and entreated, and, as the Ghospel speaks, compelled to go in. Let
no man therefore fear, when he is called to Religion, that he shall be kept
fasting from those plentiful fruits, which we have mentioned, or forced to
labor too long in digging for this current of living water.

Advantages of Religious life.
6. For a Religious life has many helps and furtherances toward these
comforts. First it has an advantage over a Secular life, which is of no small
importance: that in a Secular life every one must get what he can by his own
labor and industry; but in Religion, the State itself furnishes us with
many graces, and puts them, as I may say, into our bosom, when we think
not of them. And besides the good which we do ourselves, we have the help of
the good deserts of our Brethren; which participation how beneficial it is, we
have spoken at large elsewhere. The dignity of the State, and the favor in
which it is with God, does highly also endeere us unto him; and that heroical
act, when we resigned ourselves and all that belonged unto us, into the hands of
our Creator; for this act alone is of more value and esteem, and weighes more
with God, then many virtuous actions of a Secular body. And finally the
promise of Christ is of great weight, and very co^siderable; for he has
promised a hundredfold not only to such as live like an other S. Arsenius, or
S. Hilarion, but absolutely to all that forsake al without addition or
restriction, as we see. Which argument S. Bernard does handle excellently well,
S. Bernard (...)
confuting this selfsame error and the vain fears, which they object, who
say: He does so indeed, I perhaps do not so: I am of a tender complexion; I am
a sinner, and cannot go through with so much hardness without a great deal of
grace, and have it not in me to deserve this grace; As if grace were not grace,
but a reward of our work, as if al had not sinned, and stood in need of the
grace of God. D^st thou think o man, that there is exception of persons with
God? and that he does not so plentifully comfort al those that have left al? Be
not incredulous; yeald at least to Truth, of whose testimony no faithful man
can doubt. He says: And every one that shall leave father or mother or house,
or land for my name, shall receive a hundredfold. Christ excepteth no man. They
therefore are miserable that say: Beside us. It seems they think themselves
unworthy of life everlasting, seeing they do not hope for so much as a
hundredfold. But because God, who promises it, is true the man is a liar,
that mistrusteth it. Thus says S. Bernard.

7. But because beginners are they that are most of al subject to these fears,
in regard their mind is yet dull in conceauing spiritual things, Beginnings most
f^^ of comfort.
and feeble in resisting the encounters which may occur, and clogd with the
dregs of a secular life, we wilshew, that they have least cause of any body
to fear, because the beginnings of a Religious life are always most full of
comfort. For if we believe, as we ought, that the Divine goodness has so much
care over those that are his, that he carries them as it were in his arms,
and in his bosom; we must needs grant, that it belongs much more to the
self-same fatherly care and providence, to give this spiritual Infancy milk
to drink, 1. Cor 3.27
as the Apostle speaks. For if, as Author of nature, he provided so
carefully for our body, that as long as a child wants teeth and strength to
feed itself, it should be fed with milk, which is so pleasing a sustenance, and
so easy to be had without any labor of the child; shall we think that in the
order of Grace, of which he is in like manner Author, he has not had the like
care of our soul while it is weak and feeble? For this is that which he
promises of his own accord by the Prophet Esaias: Esa. vlt. 12.
You shall be carried at the breasts; and they shall make much of you upon their
knees; as if a mother should make much of one, so will I comfort you. How could
God express himself in more loving or more tender terms, then that, as
infinite as he is, he disdayneth not to stoop to the tender affections, and
services, and assiduitie of a Nurse? Though in these words he does not only
express his love toward us, in that he compares himself to a Mother; but
comparing us to little infants, he gives us moreover to understand, that we
shall enjoy these heavenly comforts before we be able to deserve them. For what
did a little infant, or what can it do, to deserve the love and good will of a
mother, but only that it is her child, for which there is no thanks due to the
child, but to the mother? And if we talk of merit, what did the Prodigal Child
do, that could deserve so much cherishing at his father's hands, or so much as
to be admitted to his sight? Luc. 15.
Rather he had done many things, by which he deserved to be deeply punished;
and yet what joy was there upon his return? what feasting, what music, what
singing? and that which doubtless to him was sweeter then all the rest, what
fatherly compassion, what embracings, what kisses, what tears, what falling
upon his neck? And, which is the more admirable, al these friendly offices
were heaped upon that son, which had so unfriendly departed from his father's
house, and lauished all that he had in riotous and vicious courses; whereas the
other son and elder brother, that had neither in word nor deed ever given his
father the least distaste, had never any thing given him, as himself complained.

8. Which makes it so much the more evident, that it is so far from truth,
that these Comforts are bestowed only upon the perfect, that oftimes they are
bestowed in far greater abundance upon the imperfect, and upon them that come
newly, as strangers, into the house of God. And the reason why the infinite
wisdom and providence of God deals thus with man, S. Greg. 24.
is that which S. Gregory points at in these words: Mar. c. 7.
It is the Divine grace which so dispenses, least in their beginnings they
should be danted with the roughnes of temptation: because if the bitterness of
temptation should seize upon them in the beginning, they would the easier
return to what they had left, the less way they had gone from it, and
suddenly again entangle themselves in the vices which are so near them.
Whereupon it is written, that when Pharao dismissed the people, our Lord did not
lead them by the way of the land of the Philistians, which was next them,
forethinking least it might repent them, if they had seen war rise against
them, and so return into Egypt. The war therefore in the confines against
them, that come out of Egypt, is prevented, because they that forsake the
world, first meet with a kind of tranquillity, least troubled in that their
tenderness and beginning, they should return to that out of fear, which they
had escaped.

9. Finally to conclude with one thing m^re, which may agree as well to them
that are Nouices in a spiritual course, as to al others that are imperfect; God
does deal his favors in a different fashion from that which men do use. For
men, both because their wealth and substance is limited, God^ own goodness is
the sole ground of his liberality.
and being communicated with others must needs grow less, and because
themselves stand in need at other times of the help and favor of others, never
almost bestow any thing upon others, but in regard of some good office which
they hope-for at their hands, or which they have already received. But God
standing in need of nothing, and abounding with infinite wealth, which never can
be exhaust by giving, has no other motive of being bountiful toward his
creatures, but his own loving nature and goodness, infinitely inclined to do
good to others. This is that which draws him to be so liberal, and so royal in
his gifts, and so open-handed toward al, and not to regard so much the
deserts of men in it, as his own goodness and bounty. This is also the ground
of that other noble and more admirable proceeding of his, to wit, that oftimes
he powers forth his gifts more largely upon them that are not so perfect, and
have not profited so much in virtue, then upon others, not that they have
deserved better, but because they have more need. For he deals with us as a
loving father, who though he tender the good of al his children, seems
notwithstanding in a manner to take no thought for them that are in health; but
if any of them be sick, he spares neither for physic nor physicians, nor the
greatest daynties that can be gotten; Or as a husbandman, or gardener, that
among the trees which he has care of, looks little after those that are well
grown; but is continually watering, and fencing, and underpropping those that
are weak and tender. The like and far greater love and care does God show
toward his servants, and makes profession of it in the Ghospel, Mat. 9 12.
when he says: They that are in health, need not a Physician, but they that
are il at ease.

An answer to them that say: There be many hard things in Religion. CHAP. XVI.
NOT only Sensual men, Phil. 3.
as the Apostle terms them, that mind nothing but earthly things, have a
horror of many things which they see in Religion, apprehending them to be
wonderful hard and difficult; but the very face of Religious discipline at the
first sight to the outward eye carries a sad and severe aspect, and is hateful
to sense to behold. Which, were it not I am verily persuaded that few would
refuse it, but rather most willingly and most greedily run unto it, because
they cannot but see, that by undertaking such a course of life, they purchase
for the present, tranquillity and peace of mind, they free themselves from
worldly cares and troubles, and are in a manner assured of the glory of the
life to come. But this outward show of hardness, which we speak of, does so
prevail with most men, that frighted with the conceit of it, they are
contented to think, that the great commodities of Religion, deserve not to be
bought with so much trouble, as they imagine to be in it. Seeing therefore the
Devil has scarce a more forcible engine to weaken this wholesome counsel, then
this is, it will be worth our labor to show, how this kind of temptation, may
be utterly reu^ised and defeated.

2. And we have two ways to do it: Difficulties are (...) virtue.
the one is, to grant, yea to glory, that there be some things in Religion
more hard and difficult then ordinary. For what life were it, if it lay
continually steeped in sensualities, if there were nothing to be suffered in
it, if it had not now and then a dash of trouble, if there occurred nothing
that might give displeasure? If this were the manner of it, what commendation
could a man give of it? Where should patience, fortitude, charity, and other
virtues be exercised? What occasion should a man have of merit, and increase of
his crown? A Religious life therefore is the more commendable, because it has
wherein to practice virtue, and by practice to increase it, and by increasing
it, to have the greater reward.

3. But yet, least the imagina^ion of this difficulty, Difficulties not felt
in Religion.
which is so wholesome and profitable, make too much impression in our
thoughts, we must understand, that all the difficulty which is in Religion, is
so seazoned and alayed with diverse comforts, that it is apparent enough, for as
much as concerns the merit of it, but the labor is not felt. In which respect
we can never sufficiently admire and love the infinite wisdom and goodness of
God, that, for the benefit of our souls, has after so incredible a manner
mingled and interlaced two things so contrary one to the other. For i^ this
kind of li^e were a course that were slac^ and easy, what commendation or
reward, as I said, could it deserve? If on the other side it were excessive
paynful and labori^us, who would abide it, specially considering the frayl^ie
of ^umane na^ur^^ The Lover therefore and Preserver of mankind has so tempered
the matter, that the self-same thing should be in itself very hard and
difficult, and yet wonderful sweet and pleasant, by reason of the admirable
mixture of other things, that mitigate and alay it. Which our Savior himself
insinuates, when resembling his service to a burden and a yoke, Matt. 11.^^.
he says, his yoke is sweet, and his burden light.

The service of God conformable to nature and reason Romans 7.12.
4. Which notwithstanding we must always bear in mind, that whatsoever
difficulty we find in the service of God, the service of God is not the cause
of it, but our corrupted flesh and affections which are always repining:
Otherwise the service of God being so comformable to reason, must of necessity
be pleasing to a man of reason. For one part of us taking delight in the law of
God, as the Apostle speaks, and this being the superior and more noble part
of us, if it apply itself seriously, and use the diligence and endeavor which
it may and ought, no doubt but it will be master, and keep the other part in
awe, it being both inferior and created to obey. For first this very
industry of ours, and diligent endeavor, which I speak of, is wonderful
forcible of itself; and the ancient Philosophers do acknowledge it, among whom
one speaks thus: Seneca. l 1. d^ira c. 12.
N^thing is so hard and difficult, but the mind of man may overcome it, and
make it famlliar by continual beating upon it. No motions are so wild and
headie, but that order and discipline will tame them. Whatsouer command the mind
lays vp^n itself, it goes through with it. Some have gotten of themselves
never to laugh; others have debarred themselves of wine and women, and al ^ind
of lick^ur; others have learned to walk upon small ropes, and to car^ie exce^^ue
burdens, and such as in a manner are beyond the strength of man to carry, and
to diue to an excessive deapth, and pass the seas without drawing their
breath. Another Philosopher writes to the same purpose in this manner:
Plutar^h. de prof. Verse.
They that learn to frame their manners uprightly, in the beginning fall
perhaps into many errors, and perplexities, and difficulties; as they that
leaving their own country, and not discovering as yet the land for which they
are bound, at first are anxious; but soon after, al things grow easy and
plain by practice, and by the light and cleernes which the Study of
Philosophy brings with it.

(...) of the Grace of God.
5. And all this, as proceeding of custom and habit, is for the most part
natural, what shall we say when Grace meets with Nature? The grace of God, I
say, which is so forcible, that it makes a man quite an other man, and, as the
Prophet speaks, Ezech. 11.
powers a new spirit into him, and in steed of a heart of stone, gives him a
heart of flesh, soft and flexible. Of which grace the Royal Prophet also says:
Our Lord w^l give virtue and fortitude to his people. P^ 6^.^6. ^s 141. Es.
40.31.
And again: Blessed be my Lord God, who ^eacheth my hands to war^e, and my
fingars to the fight And an other Prophet more plainly: They who hope in our
Lord, shall change fortitude; they shall take wings like an eagle; they shall
run, and shall not labor; they shall walk and not be faint. What can we desire
more? He promises us not only feet to run, but wings to fly in this
course, and that we shall not saint, nor so much as labor in it. And an other
Prophet does in a manner exult and triumph, Heb. 3.19.
not in himself but in our Lord. God our Lord, says he, is my strength. For as
the light which the Air has, is the light of the Sun; and it is not much
material to the Air, whether it have light of itself, or borrow it of the
Sun, so it be as useful to it, as if it had it of itself: So the power and
strength of God is our power and strength, that is, we make use of it, as if it
were our own; and therefore he is truly our strength. And what does this
strength work in us? He will put my feet, says the Prophet, as the feet of
s^ags; that is, he will make us run with speed and facility, and without
being weary, not only upon even ground, and over the playnes, as others do,
but in steep and craggie places; for so he says: And he as a Conqueror will
lead me over high places, singing psalms. He will fight for us, he will
overcome our enemies for us, and put them to route; he will lead us in this
way, not only without labor, but singing psalms of perpetual joy and
thanksgiving.

6. And here by the way I cannot but call to mind, what effect this very Saying
of the Prophet wrought once in Andrew Spinola, Andrew Spinola.
before he entered into our Society. For being then a man grown, and as
himself was wont to moan himself in an humble jesting manner, Io. 5.5
having thirty and eight years in his infirmity, when he began to think of
forsaking the world; and many reasons thronging into his mind, to fright him,
and beat him off from his purpose, as the consideration of the little health
which he had, his custom of being well tended, and daintily fed, the noblenes
of his birth, the greatness of his place in the Church of God, the hardness of
Religious discipline, and diverse others; upon the sudden God of his goodness
put this verse of the Prophet into his mind: He will put my feet as of stags;
and withal as with a clear ray of heavenly light, he was so enlightened, that,
as himself afterward related, al those fearful and distrustful cogitations
vanished away in a moment, and he remained resolute in his purpose, and fully
armed against all the fears and incommodities which before had so possessed his
imagination; and within a short time found by experience effect of it. For
whereas before, when he was yet a Secular man, he came sometimes to eat at our
board, as being our great friend, and many things went against his stomach, in
regard he had been used to a more dayntie kind of fare and to be served in
silver, and was extraordinary curious in his own house. Entering afterward
into our Society, he was no sooner set at table, but every thing seemed
otherwise, the linen showed extraordinary white, the dishes shined like
silver, and the dining-roome, as he thought, was perfumed; and he made no
question within himself, but the Rectour of the house had of purpose commanded
things to be provided in that manner, contrary to our wonted custom, to help
his extrordinarie infirmity; and friendly expostulated the matter in earnest
at that time with the Rectour, and often afterward was wont to speak of this
his error to his friends in familiar conversation.

7. This promise therefore of the Holie-Ghost, which wrought so strongly in the
heart of this good man, ought in reason to sway as much with every body else,
and of itself alone were indeed sufficient to encourage any body, were he
never so infirm and weak. But to return to our former discourse, by this we
may see, that the Grace of God does so temper the hardness, which seems to be
in Religion, that really it is not felt, but is rather pleasant, and to be
desired. And it is no such great wonder that it should be so. For if there be
an art to sweeten sour fruits, and to put a delicious taste into an unsavory
gourd, or such like green and ^ar^h ^uvcie commodities, tempering them with
sugar, or honey, or the like preseruers; shall we think that in Christian
Religion, there is no art to take away (...) difficulties, which flesh and
blood suggest? Certainly there is; and an art fa^re easier to learn and put in
practice, then the other, in regard it wholly depends of the min^; which if it
be once resolved, nothing is hard unto it, but al things easy and obuious.

8. And to make it so evident that no body shall be able to deny it, let us
consider the means which Religion uses, to alay these difficulties, and to
sweeten them; The consideration of heaven, a special ^^eetner of difficulties.
for it is a matter which does much import. Among many ways therefore, which
it has very effectual to this purpose, first it sets before our eyes the
immensitie of the rewards of heaven due to our labors, the e^etnitie of them,
the infinite felicity, which there we shall enjoy; and by these considerations
inflames us with the love of that heavenly happiness, which once enkindled,
makes al labor no labor at al S. Augustine discoursing at large and rarely (as
he is wont) of this subject, in one of his Sermons brings many examples of
men, that for human ends have suffered inhuman and cruel things, as to be cut,
and lanced, and burned, to pror^gue a few uncertain days of this life: of
soldiers, that for a small stipend run upon the pikes and into the very
mouth of death: of huntsmen, that for a short pleasure put thems^^^es to
excessive l^bour and toil; S. Aug. s 9 (...). 19.
and concludes thus: How much more assured^y and more easily shall Charity, in
regard of true Beatitude, effect that which worldly pretenses, as much as they
were able, have effected to our misery? How easily may whatsoever temporal
adversity be endured, to avoid eternal punishment, and to purchase eternal
quiet? Thus says S. Augustine, and much more to the same effect; which it
seems that great S. Francis understood very well, and in one word expressed it
once very lively. F^r his carnal brother, and indeed truly carnal, seeing him
once in the midst of winter half naked, as he was, shiuering for cold, sent one
unto him with a bitter jest (mo^e bitter indeed then was fit to come from a
brother) to ask him, how he would sell him a dram of that sweat of his. S.
Francis.
But the Saint returned answer with a cheerful countenance in these words: Tell
my brother, that I have sold it al already to my Lord God, it a very dear
price. And after some years, the same Saint being much tormented with
excessive pain in his body, and grievously assaul^ed withal by the Devil with
new strange devises, that it was not almost possible for flesh and blood to
bear it; a voice from heaven spoke unto him, and ba^ him be of good cheer,
because by those afflictions he purchased to himself so much treasure, that
though all the earth should be turned into gold, all the stones into diamonds,
and all the water into balsame, it were not comparable unto it. At which voice
he was so revived, that he felt no more pain, but instantly calling his
Brethren unto him, for joy related what heavenly comfort he had received. What
pain therefore, or what trouble can there be in Religion, which such a thought
will not easily blow over, seeing it was able so suddenly to alay and quite take
away so insufferable and so lasting a pain, Night-feares.
as S. Francis at that time endured?

9. Let us conclude therefore with S. Bernard, that this fear, which, as he
speaks, is wont to shake the beginnings of our conversion, and which the
horror of so austere a life, and the austerenes of so unwonted exercises,
thrusts upon us at our entrance, S Bernard s. 33. in Ca^^.
is that Night-feare, which the Royal Prophet mentions in his ninetieth
Psalm; and is therefore called a Night-feare, because, if the day did shine
upon us, and in that heavenly light we did compare the labors of Religion
with the rewards which we expect in heaven, the fear of the labor would be
nothing in regard of the desire of the rewards considered in a clear light.
Romans 8.18.
For the passions of this time are not condign to the future glory, which
shall be revealed in us. But now, says S. Bernard, because they are hidden from
our eyes, and the night is still in our Hemisphere, we are tempted by the
Night-feare, and are afraid to suffer the present evils, for the good, which
as yet we do not see. 10. This is the first salve and remedy, Ab^n^^ce of
^^r^^ual comfort.
which God has provided for us, to alay the difficulties which occur in
Religion. Another is the abundance of spiritual comforts, whereof I have spoken
before. And it is, as if a body should seek a drop of water in a great vessel
of wine; for the troubles which are incident to a Religious life, are so wholly
drowned and absorpt in the abundance of the sweetness of it, that it tastes of
nothing but sweetness. To which purpose S. Bernard alluding to a saying of the
Apostle, and among diverse other commodities of Religion, touching briefly upon
this particular, S. Bern. de conuers. Cler. c. 30.
says thus: The passions of this time are not condign to our sins past and
forgiven us; nor to the present comfort of grace, which is given us; nor to the
future glory which is promised us. Finally there is no bitterness so great in
it, which the sl^wer cast-in by the Prophet does not sweeten, which Wisdom,
the tree of life, does not seazon. And we shall the more easily believe all this
to be true, and not hard to compass, if we consider, that the difficulties
which are in Religion, are but small, and in petty matters, if we weigh them
right. For all difficulties of greater consequence, Difficulties in Religion are
t^ifles.
such as are so ordinary, and so distastful in the world, happening between man
and wife, and upon other occasions of marriage, and sinister accidents, by
loss of goods, impeachment of our credit and good name, and the like, are
far from a Religious life. And moreover the goodness and mercy of God is such
toward us, that the more misery we suffer for his sake, the more spiritual
joy and comfort he sends us; Dan. 14.
as when Daniel was in the Den with the Lions without al means of relief, he
provided him a dinner from a farre-of, and sent it in unto him. For it is a
general rule with God, and a constant manner of proceeding which he holds, to
measure comforts by tribulations; and King David professes that he felt it so:
Ps. 93.19.
According to the greatness of my griefs in my heart, thy comforts have rejoiced
my soul.

11. And it is so usual and so settled a course with him, that he has oftimes
miraculously showed it in diverse Religious persons; as once in one Raband a
great Prince in France, who was confirmed in his resolution for Religion by
this notable miracle. For having been accustomed in the world to an easy life
and dayntie fare, A general rule (...) God to meas^^^ (...)
being entered into Religion he began to shrink at the hardness of that course.
Whereupon the Abbot Porcarius, that then was, condescending to his infirmity,
caused some particular dish to be always prepared for him more dayntily
dressed then the rest; and yet the more he fe^, the more he pined away, and
grew wonderful thin. It happened on a time, that while the rest of the Brethren
were set at board, and fell hard to their dry bread and beans, Raband.
he saw two ancient men come into the room, the one of them was high-forheaded
and had two keys about his neck; the other was a Monk, as appeared by his
habit, and had a box of crystal in his hand. Both of them going round about the
ro^me, gave euer^e one of the Monks a morsel of something out of that box and
when they came to Raband, they looked upon him with a frowning and angry
countenance, and ouerslipt him But he stealing a little from his neighbor's
trencher, and tast^ng of it, found it sweeter then any thing that he had ever
^asted either in Religion or in the world. And when this had happened thrice unto
him, he went to his Ab^o^, and inquired of him, who these two ancient men might
be. The Abbot presently perceauing what the business was, told him that the one
was S. Peter, Patron of their Monastery* and the other Honoratus the Founder
of it, and that the reason, why he had not his part of that dish with the rest,
was, because he did not observe the ri^our of ^he O^der with the rest. Which
Raband hearing, reserved to abide the utmost of it, and found it far less
and easier then he thought it had been: and not long after he saw the same
Saints again making their circuit, and they gave him part of that swe^t-meate
with the rest, An^r^w (...).
which did incredibly animate him to go through with whatsoever difficulty
should occur ever after.

12. The like almost happened to Andrew Archdeacon of (...), a man nobly
descended, and rich; who in the beginning almost of the Cistercian Order entered
into it with great fervor. But the Devil taking occasion to tempt him by
reason of his tender complexion, and pressing him so hard, that he was rea^ie
to yeald, God of his infinite goodness sent him this remedy. When he was at
board, they set before him, a^ they did to the rest, a dish, which of al me^tes
he could not abide: but being very hungry, he forced himself to take a little
of it; and as soon as he had put it to his mouth, it tasted so sweet, that to
his remembrance he never felt the like, and eating it up al, he afterward went
to his Abbot, thinking that they had put some particular thing into his mess
above the rest. But when he understood that the dish was the same, and was
dressed but with water and salt, as the others were, he fell into the reckoning
that it was the goodness and providence of God, that had so ordained; and giving
him humble thanks, he was confirmed in his purpose of perseuering in Religion,
and so much the more, because he felt the like sweetness in those kinds of meat
for diverse days after, insomuch that he often said, that now he took more
contentment in feeding upon beans and pease and hea^bs, then before in his
wild foul and such kind of daynties.

13. This happened to these two particular men. The whole household was witness of
that which we read in the life of S. Bernard, when upon the first founding of
the Monastery of (...), though they did lead a wonderful auster life, and fed
upon bread that was half earth, S. Bernard's Monastery.
and dwelt in a house that was marvelous poor, and poorly furnished for
household-stuff and victuals, yet they al lived not only without any grudging,
but with such extraordinary delight and contentment, that they had a scruple
of it; because, as they said, ^iuing with more pleasure in the wilderness, then
they did before in the world, they conceived they had cause ^o suspect, least
they were lead a wrong way into their Country; til having opened their case
first to S. Bernard, and then to the Bishop of Chalons, who then lodged in
their house, they were informed at large, that it was the gift of God, and not
to be rejected. Whereby we may see, what custom, together with the grace of
God, can do, seeing it was so forcible, as to make so rigide a life seem to
such a multitude so sweet, that they had a scruple, least they lived too easily.

14. Who therefore can hereafter think, that a Religious life can be any thing
hars^, and that a body may not go through with it with joy and contentment,
seeing God does season it with so many helps and comforts? Though what need we
stand so long upon our defense for a Religious State in this kind? as if
Secular people, in whose behalf these objections are made against Religion, The
difficulties of a Secular life intolerable.
had nothing to suffer, no sorrow, no grief to struggle with; whereas indeed
their sorrows, and miseries, and afflictions are far greater, and not only
the poorer sort among them, and they that have small means to live on, and a
heavy charge of household and children lying upon them, groan under this
burden; but they that have the world at will, and are generally accounted
happy, though outwardly they make a fair show, are inwardly galled with
infinite troubles and vexations. And their sorrows are the more intolerable,
because they are destitute of heavenly comforts, without which it is a very
hell to live. What likelihood is there of any such thing in Religion? the
causes of whatsoever trouble may happen, being wonderful slight in themselves,
and easy to take away, and sometimes such, as it is better to contemn them,
or laugh at them, or perhaps to love them, and willingly to embrace them. On
the one side therefore the occasions of difficulty in Religion are very small,
and in a manner nothing; and on the other side, the comforts so abundant in our
Savior Christ, that they are able to sweeten a whole sea of distastes and
troubles, if there were any such in Religion.

15. Wherefore S. Bernard does excellently to this purpose apply the Ceremony
of anointing Crosses with Oil, which is used in Consecrating Churches; and
says, that the like is done in the minds of Religious people by the grace of
God. It is necessary, says he, that the Unction of spiritual grace help our
infirmity, S Bernard ser. 1 de Ded. Eccl.
anointing the crosses of our obseruances and several pennances with the grace
of devotion: because without a Cross it is not possible to follow Christ, nor
without Unction possible to endure the harshnes of a Cross. Hence it is, that
many abhor and shun penance, Crosses and Unction go together.
seeing the Cross and not seeing the Unction. You that have tried what it is,
know that in very deed our Cross is anointed, and by the grace of the Spirit
which helps us, our penance is sweet and delightful, and, as I may say, our
bitterness sauou^ie.

16. And in an other place discoursing of the same matter more at large he
says, that the Soul of a Religious man being beautiful within, and humble and
contemptible without, was figured by the Tabernacle, which was among the
Children of Israel. For within, it was gilded al over; but without, there was
nothing of it but couers of sackcloth and sheepskins; and as that kind of
covering, Exodus 26.
though it were contemptible to the eye, served to keep the T^bernacle from
the dust and the rain: So the outward humble fashion of Religious people
preserues their inward glory; G^n. 22.
and every such Soul may say truly of itself: I am black, but beautiful. Then
he brings the example of Isaac, who, though he came to be sacrificed, was not
sacrificed, but a ram in steed of him, and his life preserved; and he lived
so much the more joyfully, by how much the promise and hope of posterity was
now settled upon him. For in like manner Religious people seem to debate
themselves of al contentment, and yet their contentment is not indeed cut of,
but vice and rebellion; and the horns of this Sacrifice entangled in the
thorns, show that sin and contumacie can never be without remorse and
vexation. But Isaac, says he, living shall live, lifted up upon the wood; to
the end that thou also placing t^v^ioy on high, may glory not in thy own
flesh, but in the Cross of our Lord. This is the conversation of the perfect,
this is the life of Saints; finally, says one, as sorrowful, 2. Cor 6.10
but always glad; as having nothing and possessing al; as dying, and behold we
live.

17. The Abbot Abraham in Cassian holds the like discourse in those words:
They that serve God devoutly and faithfully, Cass. C^l. vlt. c. 25.
having taken the yoke of our Lord upon them, and learned of him, that he is
meek and humble of heart, as it were casting off the burden of their earthly
affections shall find by the help of God no labor, but rest in their souls.
The crooked ways shall be presently made strayt, and the rugged ways plain,
and tasting they shall see that our Lord is sweet, and hearing Christ in the
Ghospel crying alowde: Come to me al you that labor and are burdened, and I
will refresh you; casting of the weight of their sins, they shall understand
that which follows: My yoke is sweet, and my burden light And certainly if we
compare the beautiful flower of Virginity, The yoke of Christ sweet.
and the fragrant purity of Chastity, with the foul and stinking slowes and
hogsties of carnal pleasures; the quiet and security which Monks enjoy, with
the dangers and miseries in which worldlings are ingulfed; the repose which our
poverty brings us, with the gnawing griefs and restless cares of rich
people, which day and night not without danger of their lives do torment them,
we shall easily grant, that the yoke of Christ is exceeding sweet, and his
burden extraordinary light. Thus says Cassian.

The grace of God carries this yoke for us.
18. Where then is that harshnes, where be those troubles, which Satan, to
fright men, does so mightily aggrauate against us? Are not al things rather so
full of pleasure, that they take away al feeling of difficulty and
incommoditie, or in a manner al? Wherefore to conclude in brief, as if a man
had a great deal of luggage, and another should carry it for him, he should
have all the benefit, and the other all the labor: So in this burden of
Religion, the reward is ours, and yet we have no trouble by it, 1. Cor. 15.10.
because another carries the burden for us. Which is not mine but S. Paul's
conceit; for having reckoned-vp the many incommodities and difficulties which
he endured through poverty, nakedness, travel, persecution, and the like, he
adds: Not I, but the grace of God with me; acknowledging and openly
proclayming, that it was not himself, but God that brought to pass those great
things in him.

S. Ber. Ser. Q^ha^it.
19. Wherefore we must allow of that which S. Bernard says, when rehearsing to
his Brethren the labors which they endured, and daily mortifications, by much
fasting, often sweating, watching above measure, besides those things which are
inward, contrition of heart, and multitudes of temptations, he adds, that it
is not for their benefit to have these heavy and burdensome things lessened, A
cruel kind of compassion.
because if their penance be lessened, their crown by little and little will
leese the precious stones which are in it: and calls it a cruel kind of
compassion, in regard that the taking away of a small quantity of seed, comes
to no small loss in the harvest. What remedy? The remedy is, that the labor
remain, and yet become sauourie by the sweetness, which God does give it;
because if your tribulation, says he, do abound for him, your comfort also
will abound through him, and your soul be delighted in him, which in these
things refuses comfort. For with him tribulation itself may be found to be
great consolation. For is it not most cetain, that that which you endure is
above the strength of man, Heb. 1.3.
beyond nature, contrary to custom? Another therefore does bear these
things; he doubtless, who according to the Apostle, carries al things by the
word of his power. What therefore should we fear, if he be with us, that
carries al things? All this is of S. Bernard.

20. Let no man therefore accustom his eyes hereafter to behold the outside
only of a Religious life, which seems somewhat harsh, but let him look also
into the inward sweetness, and acknowledge, that there is such plenty of grace
belonging unto it, Custom makes hard things easy
to qualifye and alay the harshnes, and to strengthen us to bear it, that it
goes far beyond all the hardness and difficulty, which can be imagined in it,
specially when a man is a little accustomed unto it; for use and custom does
as it were harden us, and take away the feeling of pain, and makes virtue
familiar and pleasant. Which familiarnes S. Augustine does fitly express by the
word ( Embracings) and lays down the effects of it in these words: S August.
Ep. 37.
When Wisdom has once bound a man, and tamed him with certain laborious
exercises, it afterward vnbinds him, and gives him free liberty to enjoy
himself; and nurturing him first in temporal bonds, binds him afterward with
eternal embracings, then which bonds nothing can be imagined more delightful,
or more solid. The first bonds, I confess, are a little hard; the second, I
cannot say they are hard, because they are sweet, nor soft, because they are
strong. Whereas the bonds of this world have in them true harshnes, false
delight, uncertain pleasure, hard labor, timorous quiet, the thing itself full
of misery, and a deceitful hope of happiness. Beware thou thrust not thy neck,
thy hands, they feet, into these fetters.

An answer to them that object, that Religious people bar themselves of the
pleasures of this life. CHAP. XVII.
Upon the former grounds we may easily answer another imputation, which people
lay upon Religious courses, to wit, that they deprive a man of whatsoever is
comfortable to flesh and blood. For though it be true (as it has been
sufficiently proved) that no state under the cope of heaven is so capable, and
so fruitful of spiritual delights as Religion is; yet it may perhaps stumble
some body, that there is no place in it for the delights of Sense, without
which the joy, which man has upon earth, is maimed, and as it were lame of one
side. For Man being a compound of body and soul, there want not them, that
think they are never well, though their mind feast it, if their flesh, as I may
say, be kept fasting. And it sticks the more in their stomach, because the
pleasures of the mind are ayrie and subtle, and not so easy to be perceived;
the pleasures of Sense are more palpable, and plain for every body to see;
so that if a man have the first only, he has in a manner nothing: but he that
has plenty of these latter, is generally accounted happy. This temptation
figured in the murmuring Jews.


2. This kind of temptation, in my judgment, was fore signified in the
Children of Israel, when having Manna from heaven in that abundance, that all the country round about was full of it and they were to be at no further
trouble or care, then to gather it; and it being besides in itself a very
sauourie kind of sustenance, as being made by the hands of Angels, Number. 21.5.
what did the common people say notwithstanding of it, and how did they
murmr? Our soul, say they, does now loathe over this light kind of meat.
For being carnally given, they sighed after the fleshpots of Egypt; and
because those meats stuffed up their bellies, they preferred them before the
food of heaven, and thought this but light stuff in comparison of that other.

3. For the cure of which error, or rather madness, we must consider, that all the inconvenience which is here objected, depends of peoples imaginations,
conceiting that he, that is barred of the pleasures of the body, wants some
great matter; and the very name of Want, upon the first apprehension, is apt
to breed Sorrow and discontent; because it is as much to say, as, I have not
that which were much to be desired, A man wants not that which he desires not.
or which is necessary; which yet is not always true. For it happens
oftentimes, that we have not diverse things, which we have no need of, nor have
no great desire of them. For example, a man has not feathers like a bird, nor
horns like a beast, nor scales like a fish, nor diverse other things which
other creatures have; neither do we desire to have them, or because we have
them not, do we think ourselves the worse. The matter therefore is in our
desire, and consequently he that desires not a thing, want it not, And so they,
that are desirous of honor or wealth, if they have it not, are troubled,
because they want it: but they that desire it not, cannot be said to want it,
because they are not sorry they have it not.

4. And further, it is much more delightful not to desire a thing, then to
desire it, It is more delightful to desire a thing then to have it.
and withal to have it. For so we see, that they that are mad after their
bodily pleasures, when they have their fill of them, take much more pleasure in
abstayning from them, then in continuing in them. Is it not therefore much
better to do that betimes, which time brings them to choose? and out of
virtue, and upon good advice to resolve upon that before hand, which disordered
fulness forces them unto? And yet we cannot grant, that they are both filled
alike to their contentment. For if we speak of the fulfilling of our desires
(in which people ima^in that al happiness consists) they that desire nothing,
have their desire much more perfectly fulfilled, then they that desire a thing
and have it. Which S. John Chrysostom reckons among the rest of the
commodities of a Religious life; for with these worldly kind of people, S. Io
Chry. l. 2. contra vitup. vit. m^n.
it is, says he, as if a man should be so thirsty, that before he can drink
one cup, he desires another and another, and though he drink never so much,
cannot quench his thirst; certainly such a man though he have never so much
lickour to drink, cannot be accounted happy; but he is rather happy, that
free from this necessity of drinking, feels no thirst; nor is urged any way
to drink; for the first is like a man that has a burning fever, the other
like one that is in perfect health.

5. And this which S. John Chrysostom delivers upon the point of reason, S.
Augustine confirms by his own example, relating with grief this among the
rest of his errors of his secular conversation; that while gaping after lucre
and honor, he was walking one day through the city of Milan, with his head
full of an Oration, which he was to pronounce in praise of the Emperor that
then was, burning, S. August. 6. Conf. c. 6.
as he speaks, with a fever of consuming thoughts, by chance he cast his eye
upon a beggar, that was very pleasant and iocund; and at the sight of him, he
fetched a deep sigh, and spoke much to his friends, that followed him, of his
own folly, that haling the burden of his infelicitie after him through the
thorns of his disordered desires, and aggravating it by continually haling it,
the utmost of his hopes and aim was, That which al desire, is contentment.
to come to that assurednes of contentment and joy, to which that beggar was
already arrived, and to which perhaps he should never arrive. For that which
that poor fellow had gotten by a few farthings which he had begged, to wit, to
be joyful and contented in mind, that he aspired unto, by so many wretched
windings. This therefore which S. Augustine says of this poor man, may much
more truly, and with more proportion, be said of a Religious state. For why
does any man desire the pleasures of the body, but to have content and joy in
them? Religious people have this already, and are contented and joyful upon
far better and more worthy grounds, then the pleasures of Sense can arrive
unto; and on the other side not desiring them, they cannot be sorry they have
them not.

Nothing in earthly things worth the taking up.
6. Again; what is there in these earthly delights, why they should be so much
desired or sought for? For to say nothing of the damages and dangers they
bring a man's soul into, nor how unworthy a thing it is for Man, that is so
noble a creature, to be still hanging after that which is common to beasts, I
speak only now of that itching delight, which eggs a man on so much to these
pleasures. What great matter of commodity can these transitory and perishable
and earthly things bring a man, that they should be so much esteemed? What is
it to have a board daintily served, and curiously set-forth with excessive cost
and magnificence? or to go to a play? What is there in a garden, or in a
gilded coach, or in a long train of attendance, that, I do not say a Saint,
but an ordinary man of judgment should be taken with it? Besides that, if it
be joy and contentment which we seek in these things, as I said before,
contentment is not so much in fulness, as in sobriety and temperance; Sobriety
full of contentment.
specially, when with temperance so many other daynties concur as Religious
poverty does afford, and are so far from being found in the greatest
delicacies of rich men, that al their pleasures are continually mingled with
infinite corrasiues; Prou. 15.17.
insomuch as the Holie-Ghost in the Proverbs gives us warning of it in these
words: It is better to be called to a dish of herbs with charity, Prou. 17.1.
then to a fat calf with hatred. And in an other place: A dry morsel with joy,
is better then a house full of beasts killed, with wrangling.

12. Finally we must understand, that Religious people do not so much deprive
themselves of the pleasures of the body, as change them for better. For when a
soul meets with so many fountains of heavenly comforts, and has so many
vessels to fill with them, Religious people change for better comforts.
as I said before there were heads of these comforts in Religion, the comfort
and sweetness which it feels, remaynes not wholly in the soul, but diffuseth
itself further, and redounds to sense, and to our natural appetites, and also
to our body, by reason of the neerenes of one to the other, and the connection
which is betwixt them. Which is the cause why the Prophet said: My soul and my
flesh have exulted in the living God. And the Wiseman in the Proverbs: Ps. 83
3. Pro. 17.22.
A joyful mind makes flourishing years, a sad spirit dries up the bones. For
as we see the body pines away with the grief of the mind, so it has part also
of the joys of the mind, so far as it is capable of them.

13. Which things considered, Religion the pleasanter place for the body.
who can make any question, whether the World or Religion be the pleasanter
place even for the body? For though it be not, as I confess, invited every
day in Religion to a bancket, to dancing, to merry meetings, to
hunting-matches, and the like; it has that notwithstanding which is far
better, and more noble, derived from the superior part of the soul to the
inferior. As when in a great household the Master of the house marries, the
marriage concerns himself only, but the whole house and all the
household-seruants, have part of the feast and music. In like manner
therefore, Religious people, as I said, are not altogether barred of the
pleasures of the body, but make an exchange of that which is base and
momentarie, and always full of remorse of conscience and excessive care, for
that which is decent, honest, permanent, and so much the more delightful, the
more suitable it is to both the parts of Man, and to Nature itself.

An answer to them, that say, there be many temptations in Religion. CHAP.
XVIII.
OThers argue against a Religious course of life out of that place of
Scripture: Son, coming to the service of God, stand in ^eare and trembling,
and prepare thy soul to temptation. Eccl. 2 1.
Which warning of the Holie-Ghost does so terrifye them, that they think, if
they come to Religion, they must live in a continual combat; and therefore
conclude, that it is better to decline the battle, then by provoking their
Adversary, thrust themselves voluntarily into danger.

2. To which we answer; first, that holy Scripture (seeing they are pleased to
use the authority thereof) when it gives us warning of the temptations, which
we shall find in the service of God, The Scripture does (...) us d^cline the
^^^uice of God for temptations
does not advise us withal to decline the service of God for these temptations;
but rather, that foreseing the strife which will happen, we come armed
beforehand both with courage and weapons, and particularly with those weapons
which are there named, to wit, Fear and Trembling; for these will serve us as a
whetstone to whet our industry, and diligence, and virtue. The soldiers of
this world, though they know they shall often encounter their enemy, do not
therefore forsake the wa^res; rather they go to the wars, that they may meet
with their enemy; because, unless they fight, they cannot get the victory;
and without victory, they shall have no reward, nor crown.

3. Moreover in the wars among men there is this difference; for if a man will
si^ at home, Spiritual encounters cannot be avoided.
he may be quiet and safe; for no man ordinarily fights, unless he put
himself into the field. But spiritual encounters no man can avoid, though he
would never so feign. The Devils are enemies to al mankind; they lie in wait
for all, they set upon al, not only upon Religious people, but much more upon
Secular people, the more their lives are open to their assaults, and they less
wary of them. So that Religion does not raise an enemy against thee, that was
not thy enemy before, but does minister weapons, and courage, and counsel to
withstand, and also to assault him that was always thine, and every bodies
enemy.

4. The reason therefore, why Religious people seem to endure harder
encounters then others, Why Religious people seem to have harder encounters.
is, because when we begin first to cast-vp our Spiritual accounts, and to
consider what we are, and from whence we come, and whether we are walking, and
(in a word) what wounds and sores we have in our souls, then we begin to feel
we have an enemy. Before, not because we did not feel our wounds, therefore
we had none, but we were wounded, and did not reflect upon it; which of itself
was a very dangerous wound, and an evident sign not only of blindness, but of
death that had seized us. Though what wonder can it be, if the Devil do not
oppose a man, when of his own accord he gives himself bound into his hands,
and without contradiction yealds himself his slave, and does whatsoever he will
have him to do? But when he perceaues a man go about to wrest himself out of
his jaws, then he sets to him with greater fury, as a fugitive. S Greg 24.
^ar ^.7.
Which S. Gregory expresses excellently well in these words: Our Enemy, while
we lead this life, labors the more to overthrow us, the more he sees us
rebel against him; for he cares not for assaulting the^, of who^ he finds he is
in quiet possession: But against us he rises with the greater fury, the more
violently he is thrust out of our heart, as out of the right of his proper
mansion house. But that no man may be danted with these his wicked attempts,
let us hear also what the same S. Gregory adds a little after: But because
our merciful God permits us to be proved by temptation, 1. Cor. 10.13
and not reproved, according as it is written ( God is faithful, who does not
suffer you to be tempted above that which you are able, but will make also with
temptation issue, that you may be able to sustain) he does speedily succor us
with the help of his comforts, and abates the edge of temptation which rises
against us, and calmeth with inward peace the motions of our thoughts, that
beat one against an other. And presently our soul receaueth great joy of the
Celestial hope, because it has abided the brunt; that with reason we may say
of a man that is thus tempted and delivered: He shall see his face in
exultation; And again: He freed his soul, that it might not go to
destruction, but living might see light. Thus says S. Gregory, excellently to
the purpose.

5. For if temptations were governed only by the malice of the Devil,
Temptation (...) God.
that he might as^ault us, when, and how often, and how violently he list
himself, we had great reason to be afraid of them; but seeing he cannot so much
as move his ^ingar against us, unless God give him leave, we cannot doubt but
his infinite Goodness, out of the love and provident care he has over us* will so
temper al assaults according to the proportion of our strength, that we shall
not be tempted not only above it, but not so far as we are able to abide. S.
Ephrem. s^le pa^^^tia.
For, as S. Ephrem speaking of this business says: If men, knowing so little as
they do, can discern notwithstanding, how great a burden a beast is able to
carry, as for example, a mule, or a cammel, and load them according to the
measure of their forces; if a potter when he frames his vessel, knows how long
he is to leave it in the fournace, that it be not burnt, if he leave it too
long, or fall in pieces, if too little, and be for no use; How much more does
God, whose wisdom is infinite, know what temptations and trial every Soul
does want that desires to please him, and permits no greater to fall upon them,
then is for their profit?

6. Which being so, Temptations (...) Cas^ ^^l 4. c. 6.
we have not only no cause to fear, but much reason to rejoice; because, as I
said, there comes no harm to the servants of God by these temptations, but
great benefit. For as Cassian writes, by them we find by experience, that we
always stand in need of the help of God, and consequently we persevere in
prayer, we call upon him, we give not ourselves to sloth and idleness, we keep
our custom and practices of virtue, and of fighting against our enemies,
whereas oftimes (as he speaks) whom adversity could not intercept, security
and prosperity have overthrown. This is therefore the benefit which we reap
by temptation, that as a horse that is strong and full of mettle, makes
notwithstanding more speed if he be spurr^^ up, then otherwise; So these gyrds,
which the Devil gives Religious people, serve to put m^^tle into them, and make
them run with more fervor to their prayers, to be more diligent in
mortifying themselves, more eager in punishing their bodies, and more perfectly
to apply themselves to the practice of al kind of virtue.

7. Which benefit being so great, More for us, then against us. Ps. 26.3.
what reason have we to fear temptations, or to shun Religion in regard of
the^* because we are in danger of yealding to the^? If we look upon ourselves
only, and upon our enemies, no doubt but we have great cause to fear; but if
we look withal upon the helps which we have from heaven, we have cause to say
confidently with the Prophet: If armies stand against me, ^y heart will not
fear. This was once showed to one of the ancient Fathers, whose name was
Moses. For being sorely assaulted with temptation, Moses.
he went to the Abbot Isidore, and told him of the difficulties and combats
which he endured. Isidore being a wise understanding man, first endeavored to
comfort him with reasons, and sayings out of the holy Scripture; and then
leading him out of his Celle, bad him look toward the West, where he saw a
multitude of Devils, fierce and terrible, marching as it were against him; then
he bad him look into the East, and there he saw infinite numbers of blessed
Angels, as bright as the Sun, in array to assist him. Know then, said the
Abbot, that there be more for v^ (as the Prophet Helizeus said) then against
us: and that that is true, which S. John says: He is greater who is in us,
then he that is in the world.

G^d in (...)
8. And we may add, that they that are for us, are not only far more in
number, but so far beyond the others in strength and power, that the least of
them, is able alone to defeat and put to route all the damned crew of Hell;
because ours fight not with their own strength, P^. 33.8.
but with the power and strength of God. And moreover, Ps. 34.2.
God does not only send his Angels to compass them round about, that fear
him; but he himself descends to assist them, as King David tells us, who
had often experience of it: He takes his weapons and target to fight for us;
he shootes his arrows and desperseth our adversaries; he multiplyeth lightning
and confounds them. And yet he will not have us sit still, and be idle, and do
nothing, while he ouercomes our enemies for us; for that were not so glorious
neither for him not for us; But he gives us, feeble and weak creatures as we
are, power and courage to overcome, 1. Reg 17.37. Ps. 141.1. Ps. 17.35.37.
not one, as David while he was a little one, but many Giants, which is more
honorable both for him and us. He teaches our hands to war, and our fingars
to the combat. He puts our arms as a bow of brass, and makes them that they
are never weary. He gyrds us with virtue, and dilateth our steps, that we may
prosecute our enemies, and apprehend them, and not turn back, til we bruise
them as dust before the face of the wind. How easy therefore is it to
overcome, having so powerful a help? And what can be more to be desired, then
to fight, seeing the victory on our side is so assured?

Advantage of the place of combat.
9. But besides these strong succors, we have also the advantage of the ground
whereon we fight. It is well known what difference there is in fighting upon
even ground, or from a higher or lower seat. Secular people that encounter the
Devil in the world, fight with a great deal of disadvantage of place; for the
world is a slipperie kind of soil, where a man can have no footing, pestered
moreover with often gusts of wind, and other encumbrances, which make the field
very disaduantagious for them. Religious people fight as it were from a high
Tower; for the State itself is like a Tower, both in regard of the eminency of
it, and of the strong fortifications which are about it; so that they are both
defended from the enemies shot, and have better means to offend their enemies
as being above them.

10. Finally, Religious people have an other present remedy, and a general
antidote against al temptations, Direction of Superiors, and laying open of
temptations.
to wit, their Superiors and Governors, who not only by solid reason, and
counsel, and prudence are always at hand to relieve them, but oftimes it
happens, and I may say most commonly, that no sooner can a temptation be laid
open before them, but in a moment it vanishes away, and is defeated. A
wonderful thing! and doubtless if there were Physicians for the body, that
could cure a disease with only looking upon it, how would they be sought to,
and esteemed? But that which cannot be done in the body, is daily seen in the
diseases of the minds: Cass. Col. 4. c. 9.
and al spiritual Writers are witness of it, and particularly Cassian (a man
very well to be credited in this kind) says, that it was a general practice of
the ancient Fathers, to teach their subjects and disciples, never to conceal
the busy thoughts of their hearts, but presently to lay them open to their
Governors, so soon as they began to bud: and that whosoever did so, could
never be circumuented with the crafty devises of the Enemy. And this which
Cassian delivers, ^o 3.20.
daily experience, as I said, does much more prove to be true, and oftimes it
happens, that not only by declaring the temptation, but by the very resolution
to declare it and lay it open, it is vanquished, because the Enemy is one that
does evil, hates light, and cannot abide light; that is, the eye and
countenance of a Superior.

11. But not to stand too long upon a thing that is so evident, we will show
briefly, that they that live in the world, are far more exposed to the
assaults of the Enemy, then they that live in Religion. For all temptations
^ise of one of these three causes, to wit, either from ourselves, that is, out
of our own weakness and corruption; Three heads of temptations to which Secular
people are more subject.
or from outward things, which represented to our senses, solicit us to
desire them; or finally by the suggestion of the Devil. Al these three must
needs be far more violent, and dangerous in Secular people, then in
Religious. For if we speak of infirmity, who can make any question, who be
the weaker? knowing that Secular people are generally unacquainted with matters
of Spirit, full of evil habits, their passions strong in them, and they so far
from endeavoring by care and diligence to bridle them, that rather giving away
unto them, they strengthen them daily more and more. All the care on the other
side, of Religious people, is to mortifye themselves; Mortification is the
first thing they begin with; Mortification is that which they plye continually
al their life, and purchase by it al other virtues, which are the strength, and
as it were the sinnewes of Spirit; and consequently nothing, for matter of
Spirit, can be more strong then a good Religious man.

12. Now what outward occasions or allurements can annoy a Religious life,
where there is such continual watch and ward kept over us? our eyes, Custody
of Senses in Religion.
and ears, and other senses, by means of our Rule and our Superiors, and the
very walls themselves so guarded, that no hurtful thing can come near us.
Secular people stand continually as it were in the midst of the flames, seeing,
and hearing, and perpetually trafficking with those things which are evil in
themselves, or provoke a man to eui^; for which reason the Prophet says: Hier.
9.21.
Death comes in by the Windows, and there be so many windows as we have
Senses. So that in this also there is no comparison.

13. The third head is the Suggestion of the Devil. The Devils are like
thieves; and whom do thieves most set upon? Upon them that they may rob as
often and as easily as they will; or upon them that make head against them, and
most commonly get from them without any loss, and oftener yet with gain and
benefit to themselves? If a man have two enemies, and one of them be a coward,
and neither have any thing to defend himself withal, The Diuel^ like dogs in
the shambles.
nor skill at his weapon, and consequently must needs go by the worst at every
slight encounter; and the other be well armed, watchful, and skilful and oftimes
have had the better of his enemy; who can make any doubt which of these two
is likely to be oftener and more dangerously set upon? And thus it happens with
those infernal fiends; whom Abbot Isidore (as Palladius writes) fitly likeneth
to dogs, that lie about the shambles; for as long as there is any thing for
them, they hant the place; but when the shambles are shut up, or if they be
often beaten away with good dry blows, and that they cannot get what they come
for, they appear there no more.

14. These therefore are the grounds, upon which we may justly persuade
ourselves, that a man is with less danger of his soul, and not so often
tempted in Religion, as in the world; and that the temptations which do arise
against us in Religion, are so easy to be overcome, and withal so beneficial
unto us, that if we be wary of being ouer-confident of ourselves, we may say,
they are rather to be desired and wished for.

An answer to them, that say: It is against nature, to live under an other.
CHAP. XIX.
AMong all the difficulties which a Religious course has more in show then in
substance, some apprehend most, to be always at an other's command, always to
depend upon another's will; because they persuade themselves, that liberty and
freedom to do what a man will, is most agreeable to nature; and to depend upon
an other, is, in a manner, to be a slave.

2. This error aims at the very throat of Religion, and lays siege to the
Citadel. Wherefore, that we may utterly root it out, we must first consider,
What liberty is.
what Liberty is, and how natural it is to Man. For a man that shall think,
that men are borne so free, that they may do whatsoever comes in their fancy,
and what they list, and be bound to no Law nor Superior, is mightily deceived.
For S. Augustine says very well in one of his Epistles, speaking of the true joy
and happiness of Man: S. Aug. 1 p^st. 131.
First consider, whether a body may yeald to them, that will have that man
happy, that lives according to his own will. God forbid we should believe this
for truth; for, what if he will live wickedly? is he not vncontroulably the more
miserable, the more easily his wicked will may be fulfilled? They also that
without knowledge of the true God, have given themselves to Philosophy, have
deservedly hissed out this opinion out of their Schools. For one of the
eloquentest of them says: Behold others, not Philosophers indeed, Cic in Hor*
but nimble Disputants, say, that al are happy, that live according to their
own will. But this is false; for to have a mind to that which is not fitting,
is most miserable. And it is not so miserable, not to bring thy desire to
pass, as to bring that to pass, which thou should not. Thus says S.
Augustine, And Aristotle endeavoring to set down a perfect form of a
Commonwealth, Arist. 5. pol. c. 9.
does give special advise to root out this common error, which reigns so
much among men, who, because they make account that liberty consists in
doing what they list, will have every body live as he pleases, and do what
he thinks good; and says: It is a most false supposition; because to live
according to law, is not slavery, but safety.

3. Plutarch, Plut l. de audi^.
an excellent Moralist, writes to the same effect, that they that of children
come to man's estate, if they be well advised, ought to make account, that they
have not shaken off, but changed their Tutour. For in steed of a man, Man never
without a Tutour.
whom they hired before with wages, or bought with their money, they have now a
Divine governor of their life, to wit, Reason: and to obey it, is to obey God;
and they that obey him, are the only freemen. For they only live as they
list, who have learned to desire what they ought. Unreasonable thoughts and
fancies are but a shadow of false liberty, and bring much repentance.

4 Seeing therefore Heathen Philosophers could discover thus much; we have much
more reason to persuade ourselves the same, in regard that the properties of
our nature, We are naturally under God.
which they could not so well diue into, do lead us unto it. For if Man by
nature had no Superior, he might lawfully live as he list himself, and it were
natural for him to do so; and doing so, he should live a pleasant life, and
without it be miserable: But seeing we have God above us, who created us, and to
whom consequently by the laws of Nature we are subject, our own natural
inclination leads us to subjection to so Sovereign a Deity, to serve him,
and to humble ourselves and al our actions under him. S. Aug 14. de Ciuit. c.
12.
S. Augustine teaches this expressly; and to prove it, groundeth himself in the
commandment, which God laid upon our first father Adam, to abstain from the
forbidden fruit. In which precept: (says S. Augustine) Obedience is commended
unto us; which virtue in a reasonable creature, is as it were the Mother of
Virtues, and preserver of them, seeing the nature of it is, to make it
beneficial, to be subject to God, and pernicious to do a man's own will, and
not the will of him that created him.

5. But some body will say: Voluntarily to be subject to God, is true freedom.
What freedom has Man, if he be tied always, and in all things, to do the
will and commandment of God? This is our freedom; not to govern ourselves
after our own fancy, but voluntarily to embrace the will of God, voluntarily
to perform it. Stocks, and Stones, and brute Beasts, and al things are
governed by God's direction, but because they have no knowledge of it, they
cannot voluntarily apply themselves to follow it, which makes also, that they
are neither capable of merit nor reward.

6. This persuasion therefore and desire of being Masters of ourselves, and
Lords at our own pleasure, It is much one, when God gouernes immediately o^ by
others.
being taken away, the matter is not so great, whether God govern is
immediately by himself, or by Substitutes; specially seeing he always gouernes
us so by others, as himself also assisteth and directs both them and us, in
his will and pleasure. So we see in Cities and Kingdoms, all the labor is to
bring them to acknowledge the King their Sovereign. When they have once
acknowledged him, it is alone to them, whether he deliver his commands in
person, or by his Officer. And consequently it is evident, that as natural as
it is for Man to be subject to God, and to Reason (which is as it were a raye
of light proceeding from God) so natural is it for him to be subject to another
man in place of God; and if it be natural, it cannot be payneful or
troublesome, but must necessarily be both easy and pleasant.

7. And if we will yet more particularly reflect, Difference between servile and
(...)
what it is, that casts this mist before the eyes of some, we shall find that it
is, because they confound servile obedience or subjection, with this which is
honorable and free, drawn into error by an outward kind of resemblance,
which is betwixt them; and therefore attribute the difficulties and the
odiousnes of the one to the other. We must therefore inform ourselves of the
main distance which is betwixt them, in regard both of pleasure and dignity.
And we may take our information from Aristotle, Arist. 5. pol. c. 4.
who tells us, that there be two kinds of government: one, of a domineering
fashion, and the nature of it is, that a Lord of this humor aims chiefly and
directly at his own benefit, and regards the benefit of the subject but
accidentally, as the benefit of the subject redounds to him also; the other is
Oeconomical, as a father gouernes his children, a man his wife; in which
contrariwise the Superior attends directly to the benefit of the subject, and
to his own accidentally, because it falls out so, that the self-same is
beneficial to himself; as the Master of a ship or Pilot, as such, does first
and chiefly take care for the safety of the passengers, Plato de repub.
and of his own accidentally, because he is also a passenger. These are
Aristotle's own words. And Plato has the like discourse of a Commonweal. As
a shepherd, says he, in as much as he is a shepherd, attends to the
benefit of his flock, and not to his own; for his business is to see that that,
which is in his custody, be rightly ordered: So he that has the governing of
men, aymeth at nothing but the good of them that are under him. By which we may
easily see, under which of these kinds a Religious State is to be ranked. The
power of the Church and of Religion is Oeconomical.


8. And it is the more apparent, because not only the power, which is in force
among Religious people, but all the power which Christ our Savior has left in
his Church, tends to the benefit, not of him that has it, but of the subject.
Which our Savior himself, who is Author of this power, gave us to understand
in these words: Luc. 22.25.
The Kings of the Gentiles overrule them, and they that have power upon them,
are called Beneficial; but you not so; but he that is greater among you, S.
Bern. l. 2. de Con. c. 6.
let him become as the younger; and he that is the leader, as the wayter. Upon
which words S. Bernard writes thus to Pope Eugenius: This is the form given
to the Apostles; domineering is forbidden, they are bidden to minister; and it
is commended unto them by the example of the Lawmakers, who presently adds:
Id. l. 3. de Cons. c. 1.
I am in the midst of you, as he that ministers. And the same S. Bernard, in
an other place, likeneth this kind of authority to the power of a Steward or a
Tutour. For the farm, says he, is under the Steward, and the Yong-maister
under his Tutour, and yet neither is the Steward Lord of the farm, nor the
Tutour Master of his Master. And adds: Be thou therefore over others so, as
to provide, to advise, to take care, to preserve; be over others, to benefit
others. Be over others as a faithful Servant, whom the Master has appointed
over his family; what to do? To give them food in season; that is, to
dispense, not to be impetious. If therefore this which S. Bernard delivers,
or rather which our Savior has left ordered in his Chruch, be the model of al
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, how much more does the same hold in the government
of Religious houses, seeing both of them flow from the same head, and the
reason, and ground, and use of them, is equal in both, and the manner of
Religious profession requires moreover with much greater reason, this kind of
humble proceeding? He therefore that has command over others in Religion, is
not Master, but Servant; He attends upon al their necessities both of body
and soul; this is al his employment day and night; in this he spends al his
thoughts and endeauours. And again S. Bernard els-where says, that the
business of spiritual Governors is like to that of Physicians, Superiors are
Physicians and M^thers.
wholly directed to the help of their Patients. And in another place he styles
them Mothers, and exhorts them to their duty in these words: Forbear
stripes, lay open your ^earts: ^^l your breasts with milk, let them not swel
with arrogancy.

9. Seeing therefore all the power which is in Religious Orders, S. Ber s^r. 25.
in Cant. and s^r. 23.
is intended for the benefit of the Subject, what follows, but that it must
needs be as natural, and as delightful, This ^ind of subjection is natural and
delightful.
to live under such a power, as it is natural and pleasing to every body to
seek his own benefit? And what shall we need to stand gathering many voices
for it, since a Heathen Philosopher, and one of the greatest wits among them,
scanning the principles of Nature, auerreth it. With this desire of knowledge
of Tru^^, says he, is (...) a desire of Sou^raignetie; so that a mind well
framed by Nature will not willingly obey but him that instructe^^, or teaches,
or commands justly and legally, Ci^. lib. 1. Offic.
for the benefit of the party. In which sentence (whatsoever we may think of
the first part of it) we cannot certainly but admire in the second, how a
Heathen, as I said, and a man plunged in pride and ambition, could by the light
of nature deliver, that, when we speak of instructing and teaching, or any
other commodity redounding to ourselves, it is not only not repugnant to
Nature for one man to obey an other, but most agreeable to Nature.

10. Al which is yet more evident in the light which we Christians have. It
should have been in the state of Innocence.
For we see the like order settled among the blessed Angels; for some of them
have pre-eminence over others, and their very nature was ordained so by God,
and the same confirmed afterward in the state of Grace, which he gave them.
And Divines deliver, that the like had been with men, if they had continued in
the state of Innocence. S. Th. p ^.96. a. vl^.
Whereupon S. Thomas has this discourse, that the state of Innocence being
free from al misery and imperfection, could not have admitted of that kind of
Superiority, by which one makes use of an other man for his own interest,
because it is a servile kind of thing, and subject to much misery; But as for
the Superiority which is current among them that are freeborn, directed to
the good and benefit of them that are subject, there can be no doubt, but it
should have been in use in that state, because it is a comely and
wel-beseeming thing, and good for them that obey.

11. Though why do we stand reasoning the matter so long, since we find by
experience so many in the world, Worldly ser^ants serve with pleasure.
that for a small gain, or in hope of some little pre^erment, voluntarily sell
away their liberty? How many serve for daily, or monthly, or yearlie wages?
Others live in a more honorable service, but yet serve, in hope of greater
rewards, and wait so diligently upon some great man or other, and are so
ready at every call, so obsequious, so watchful, that happy were it for
Religious people, if they could be as quick, and cheerful, and lively in
obeying, as they are. Shall we say, that they also do what they do, against
nature and against the hair? If they did, they would not go so willingly and
so diligently about it, nor be so ambitious of such places, nor part with so
much money for the^.

12. If therefore it be natural and easy for them to serve after this manner,
because every body does naturally seek his own commodity; and that which
is agreeable to nature, cannot but be easy, why should not the case be the same
with Religious people? or rather better, by h^w much the reward, which secular
servants hope for, is but small, and neither durable nor certain; Religious
people serve upon hopes of an eternal reward and happiness everlasting.

Religious people serve upon better conditions.
13. Besides that, they that serve in the World, serve upon far harder
terms; first because they subject themselves to an other man, who in nature
is but their equal, secondly, because men's fancies and affections are so
uncertain and various, that oftimes we must labor many years before we can
creep into their favor; and when with much difficulty and many years
waiting we have got it, it is lost again in a moment, without any fault of
ours, only upon the other's fancy. It is not so in the service of God. For to
attend upon God, and to be his servant, is the greatest honor in the world, an
honor for Kings to aim at; and serving God, we obey Reason, and rule
ourselves by that Rule, which in itself is so strayt and so constant withal,
that we have nothing to stand in fear of, but least we ourselves depart from
it.

Religious people (...) God.
14. For this is certain, and we must never let it go out of our thought, that
Religious people serve not Man, as he is Man, but serve God, and are subject to
men, only as they bear the place of God. Which is evident out of the form of
their Vows, which tyeth them, not to any man living, but to God. And as we on
our part do vow ourselves to him, so he for his part never lays aside the
care of governing us, nor does ever put us over to an other so, as to forsake
us; but governs and rules us, and sends us, and calls us back, when he
pleases; according to the promise which he made to his Apostles: Lu^. 10.
He that hears yo^, hears me; so that to conclude, as it is not against the
nature of Man to obey God, but rather ingrafted and inbred in nature; so
neither is it against nature to obey that man, whomsoever God has appointed in
his place, and whom we have no other reason to obey, but because we behold God
to him; and consequently it cannot only not be hard to conform our wills in
this manner to the Divine will, ^
but must needs be more easy and more pleasant then to follow our own wills.
Which S. Bernard makes a^cou^t to be so true, that he says, it is a very
slavery to follow our own will, and a very hard task. And to this purpose he
applies that saying of our Sa^iour: ^
Come unto me, al you that are burdened with the hard setui(...) your own, or
of an other's will, and You shall find rest to your soul, (...). For by how much
the goodness of God is sweeter and (...) then any men, so much sweeter also is
his yoke, then what(...) yoke besides.

15. And hitherto we have held-on our discourse, as if in Religious Obedience
there were a kind of servitude, ^
howsoever we plead that it is both amiable, honorable, and suitable to
Nature. Now we will show, that there is no manner of si^ne of servitude in it,
but time and perfect liberty. For what is liberty? To live as a man will
himself. Who therefore be they that live as they will themselves? wicked people,
or they (...) be good and upright? Let us hear what S. Bernard says of a
covetous man: A (...) of them that with a heart insatiable gape after ^ayne and
luc^e, what he thinks of them, that sell al and give it to the poor, to
purchase by their earthly substance the Kingdom of heaven; Do they wisely or
no? (...) will say, they do wisely. Ask him again, why he does not himself
(...) commend: in an other? He answers; I cannot. Wherefore? because the (...)
will not let me; because he is not free, because that which he (...), is not
(...) own, nor himself is master of himself. If that which thou (...), be
^uly th^^^, lay it out for thy commodity; exchange earthly for heavenly
things. If thou can not, confess, that thou are not master of thy money,
but a slave to it; that thou art not true owner of it, but do wait upon it
to keep it. And this which S. Bernard says of Avarice, we may say also of
Luxury, of Gluttony, of Anger, that they that are entangled in these and
other vices, are not freemen, but sl^ues: and most of al of Ambition, of which
a Heathen author writes thus: Cic. (...).
Take heed of desire of glory; for it takes away a man's liberty, for which
al noble sp^^s ought to strive.

16. As therefore al t^ese are sl^^es, because they cannot do as they will, but
are forced to do as Vice will have them, which is a more stearne and more
dishonorable Master then any man whatsoever, be he never so savage and
barbarous: So contrariewise, he is truly free, that lives according to Virtue.
For the good which he does, he does it not unwillingly, but willingly and
cheerfully: and receaueth and performs the commands of his Superiors, or of
his Rule, as if he did it naturally. For as when a man directs a traveler in
his way, no man can say, he forces him to go that way, because the traveler
desires it more then he that directs him: So whatsoever is suggested to a
Religious man in this spiritual way and journey, either by word of mouth, or by
writing, he takes it as behooful for his own good and salvation, of which he
is infinitely tender. 1. Tim. 1.9. S. Ber. l. de prae ep. and ^sp ^.9. Arist 4.
^^h. c. 8.
Which is the reason, why the Apostle said: The Law is not made for the just
man; not (as S. Bernard explicateth it) that he must live without law, but
because he is not under the law; or (as Aristotle writes) because he is a law
to himself, and carries himself without law, as if he were under it.

17. S. Ambrose in one of his Epistles handling this subject at large, S.
Ambros. l. 2. ^p. 1.
proves it after this manner: He is free, that does what he will himself: now a
just man, though he obey the law, or man, does always notwithstanding what he
will himself, because he desires the good which is commanded, and excecuteth
it, not driven unto it by force of the outward command, but by his own desire
and inclination. So that what truer liberty can there be, then that which
Religi^us people enjoy? having moreover this advantage, that al their
obligation and tie (which is the chief thing that seems to bar them of their
liberty) comes by their own election and free choice? So that that, S.
^mbr^^^. ^p 83.
which S. Ambrose says els-where, may be fitly said of them: Who will shun
Christ, seeing they follow him, that are tied in bends? but voluntary bonds,
which set a man free, and do not restrain him.

18. And upon the same point S. Bernard grounds a discourse to his Monks, which
I will here relate. S. Ber in ps. qui habi^. s^r. 9.
For having laid load upon the hardness of this Religious captivity, and set it
forth to the utmost, in regard that a man hastening, as I may say, to the loss
of his own life in this world, and to the m^rtifying of his own will, puts his
neck into the collar of so rigid a course of life, and casts himself into this
hard prison of Penance, he releeueth them again with this solid comfort, that
this servitude were indeed a most miserable servitude, if it were forced upon
us, and not voluntarily undertaken. But voluntarily sacrificing ourselves to
God, and no violence being offered to our wills, but by our will itself;
whatsoever we do in this manner for God, though never so hard and toylesome,
is rather to be reioyced-at and welcomed, then thought on with compassion.

S. Aug. in Ps. 99.
19. Finally S. Augustine says pleasantly and rarely to this purpose. Al
servitude is full of bitterness; all that are bound in servile condition, serve
and murmr at it. Fear not, that you shall serve such a Master. In his
service there shall be no sighing, no murmuring, no indignation. It is great
happiness to serve in this house, though it be in fetters. The service of our
Lord is free: The service is free, where not necessity, but charity serves.
Thou art a slave and a freeman both together: a slave, because thou art
created; a freeman, because God, who created thee, loves thee; serve not
murmuring: for thy murmuring will not make that thou shall not serve, but that
thou shall serve like a slave. Thou art a servant of our Lord, franchised of
our Lord: do not seek to be so set at liberty, as to depart the house of him
that gives thee thy freedom. Excellently well spoken by S. Augustine, and
particularly where he observes, Men must do the will of God whether they will
or no.
that al men are so under the command of God, that though they repine and
resist, yet serve they must, will they nil they, and shall be compelled to fulfill
his will whether they will or no. For all things are governed by him, nothing
escapes the mighty hand of his providence. Man therefore being by nature and
of necessity a servant, how far better is it to serve voluntarily, and so,
that by his very service he may be franchized to his great comfort for the
present, and everlasting reward for the time to come, then by repining and
stubbornly refusing to obey, to be forced to that, which God out of his
infinite wisdom and providence has ordained, and have for his reward nothing
but sorrow in his world, and torments in the next?

An answer to them, that think it better to keep their wealth to spend in good
uses, then to give it al away at once. CHAP. XX.
THE Devil uses an other fallacy to divert people from Religious courses, and
it is so much the more dangerous* because it carries a color of devotion. For
he will needs persuade them that it is better and more profitable for salvation,
to keep their wealth, seeing God has given it them, then to cast it away al at
once; that they may be always doing some good deed or other, specially for
relief of the poor, whom our Savior does so particularly commend unto us,
Matthew. ^5.3^.
that in the latter day of Judgment it seems we shall receive our doom,
according as we have dealt with our Neighbor, and relieved him in his
necessities, feeding the hungry, clothing the naked, comforting the sick, and
visiting them that are in restraynt. Whereas Religion utterly disableth a man
from doing any of these good deeds; both because it brings us to extremity
of Poverty, and also takes away our liberty; so that a Religious man, though
he should haue^ mind to do any thing in this kind, yet he cannot do it,
unless he first have the consent of his Superior, and his particular
Institute allow of it. And for proof out of natural reason, (...) 1. E^h. c. 10.
Aristotle affirms, that riches is one of the best means to make a man
happy, and furnishes him with plentiful occasion of virtue.

2. These kind of arguments are the strength of this party, inuoluing doubtless
many dangerous errors. Many inconueni^^^^^ in admi^^^^^^ting an estate.
For first the administration of a temporal estate is accompanied with so many
offenses of God, that the offenses do far surpass all the good that can be
done with it. Pride, and haughtines, and freedom, and occasion and
opportunity of sin, are always waiting upon it. And if there were nothing
else, the very distraction of mind, and the withdrawing of our thoughts from
spiritual things, and the nayling of them to that which is base and earthly,
is a great misfortune. S. Gregory (excellent in delivering the Moral sense of
Scripture) discoursing of the calamities of holy Job, and how the Chaldaans
divided into three troops fell upon his Camels, says, that the Chaldaeans
signifye the Devils, the Camels (suting in some things with the beasts that
were accounted clean, and in some things with the unclean) signifye a
wel-dispensing of temporal goods. For every body (says he) that has care of
administering earthly things, S Greg 2. mor 26.
does lie more open to the darts of the hidden Enemy. He strives to do some
things prouidently, and oftimes, while he is careful suttlely to foresee that
which is to come, he ouerseeth at unawares the harms which are present.
Oftimes being slow in performing some things, he neglects others which he
should carefully perform. Oftimes being over careful in his dealings, he
rather marreth the business by his unquiet proceeding. And most commonly so
many intricate thoughts do entangle him, that scarce able to weald the
business which he carefully turns in his mind, and so bringing nothing to
effect, he sweateth a-mayne under the heavy burden of his heart. These are the
incommodities which the administration of earthly wealth brings with it, be
it never so uprightly handled, without wronging any man; for of this S.
Gregory speaks so that to buy the commodity of being liberal toward
others, with so great loss to ourselves, seems great folly.

3. And yet though there were no such incommoditie in it, which can hardly be,
To ^i^e al at once, (...) a greater (...).
considering how naturally these inferior things are coupled both with danger
and damage; Yet, as I say, if there were no such thing, what comparison is
there betwixt the works themselves? In the one, we bestow part of our earthly
substance; a small matter God wot; In the other, we bestow ourselves, and give
away the freedom of our own will, which is the greatest thing we have, and
that which men make more account of, then of any thing else. And here also we
may fitly apply the similitude, which we brought before out of S. Anselme, of
the fruit and the tree. For he that remains with the possession of his
earthly goods, gives part of the fruit of them; a Religious man gives the
tree, and consequently all the fruit with it. So that whatsoever act or
circumstance of virtue and dignity can be found in the first, is also in this,
and much more then in the former, and so much indeed, that there can be nothing
added unto it; for he that gives al, powers forth his liberality to the
very bottom, and once for all; which must needs inuolue a far greater
alacrity and chearfulnes in the very manner of giving, then when a man parts
with it by fits, 2. Cor. 9.7.
and by peece-meales: and these be the cheerful giuers w^^m God does love, as
the Apostle tells us.

4. But what do we stand demurring upon the matter? This was anciently the
Heresy of Vigilantius, S Hier. con. Vigilan.
so long ago, and so learnedly consuted by S. Hierome, and then by the
authority of the Universal Church condemned: of which S. Hierome speaks
thus: The Heresy of v^g^lant^us.
To that which thou say, that they do better, who use that which they have,
and divide the fruits of their possessions by little and little among the
poor, then they that selling their possessions give al away at once; I will
not, but our Lord shall answer: Matthew. 19.21.
If thou will be perfect, go, sell all that thou have, and give to the po^re. He
speaks to him that will be perfect, to him that with the Apostles forsakes
father, and boat, and nets. This which thou commendest, is the second and the
third step, which we allow of also, so that we acknowledge withal, that the
first is to be, referred before the second and the third. Thus says S. Hierome.

Testimon^es of a^cie^t Fathers.
5. And if we further require the testimonies of other ancient Fathers plainly
auerring, that it is far more beneficial to our own souls, and more
acceptable in the sight of God to shake off al at once, then keeping our wealth
in our own hands, S. Augustine de ^^no Con^^g ^. 8.
to bestow it by little and little in good uses; we shall meet first with S.
Augustine speaking to this purpose: They that ministered necessaries of their
substance to Christ and his Disciples, did well; but they did better that
forsook al their substance, to the end they might be the freer to follow our
Savior. And elsewhere he says thus: It is good to bestow a man's wealth with
discretion upon the poor; but it is better to give it al at once with
intention to follow our Lord, and free from care to converse with Christ. Idem
de (...).
He says, they are free from care, that have rid themselves of their worldly
substance; insinuating that Euangelical Poverty has no care nor anguish
hanging upon it, but is rather the true way to free a man from al care and
trouble. S. Ambrose (...) 36.
S. Ambrose in his Offices discoursing of liberality, and showing how naught a
thing it is, to lavish a man's worldly substance, and that it is to be laid
out prouidently, not carelessly cast away, excepteth this case: Unless it be
perhaps to do as Helisae^s did, when he ki^led his oxen, and fed the poor
with that which he had, to the end the care of household might not detayne
him, 3. Reg. 19.21.
but forsaking al, he might betake himself to the Prophetical discipline.

(...) 65. and 66.
6. Diadochus, a grave and ancient author, in a Treatise which he wrote in
Greek, of Spiritual Perfection, among other things says expressly thus: It is
very convenient and very profitable, after a man comes to know what the service
of God is, presently to sell al, and to dispense the money which he makes,
according to the commandment of our Lord, and not under color of obeying the
Commandments of God, to shut his ear to so wholesome a Counsel. For hence will
ensue, first, an excellent Freedom from al care and solicitude; secondly
Poverty, safe and sure from al attempts; thinking of higher things then
injury and contention; because the ^ewel is now taken away, which sed the fi^e
of Avarice. Humility will then above al other virtues make much of us naked in
her arms and bosom, as a mother makes much of her child in her lap, when out
of childish simplicity it puts off the c^ates, and casts them away, rejoicing
more in that nakedness, then in diversity of garments, being void of al malice.
Thus says Diadochus; and then putting this question in behalf of the adverse
party (If we sell al at once, from whence shall the poor have releef, who were
daily maintained out of our goods?) he answers in this manner: Certainly God
will ask account at our hands of almes-giuing according to that which we have,
and not according to that which we have not. If therefore for the fear of God
I give that bountifully away in a short time, which I might have been longer in
giving, what more will be laid to my charge, seeing I have nothing? God h^^h
(...) o^ (...).
But some body will say: What then shall become of those poor people, that were
wont to be maintained by little and little with our small estate? Let such an
one learn, not to vpbraide God by occasion of his own covetous mind. For God
will never want ability to govern those whom he has made, as from the
beginning he has governed them; neither did the poor want food or clothing,
before this man or the other were m^ued to bestow their charity. You see what
Diadochus says, and discouerseth yet further of the benefit which comes
thereof, in regard that riches make us proud, not only when we use them il, but
though we use them well: because it is easy to take a kind of complacencie in
bestowing daily something in good uses, as if we did some great matter, and
deserved something at the hands of God. But when we forsake al at once, and
bestow nothing daily upon the poor, we may easily think we do little good,
and stir ourselves to a wholesome sorrow and humility, and moreover be more
eager to get by prayer, and patience, and humility, that which we cannot now
purchase by almes-giuing.

7. Theonas in Cassian has the like discourse; Cass (...) 21 ^. 35.
that though a man do offer the first fruits and tithes out of his estate, and
be bountiful to the poor, yet it is hard for him not to fall often into the
snares ^f Sin. For while he delayeth or neglects the occasion, he must
needs offend either in quantity or quality or daily distribution of his
goods. And a ^i^tle after: It is impossible for a man to free himself to the
s^l from the domination of s^aue, though he dispe^se his wealth with never so
great magnanimity, unless by the grace of our Savior, together with the
thing itself he shake off the affection of possessing an^e thing. But in them
that have not neglected the Counsel of our Lord, but bestowing before hand
their whole estate upon the poor, The (...).
and taking up their Cross, have followed the plentifulnes of the heavenly
grace, sin can have no power. For though afteward^ a man have charge of
dispensing the wealth that is now consecrated to our Savior Christ, and handle
in a pious distribution the money which belongs to others, he (...) not be
troubled with unfaithful care of reserving for his mayntenance, nor will his
chearfulnes (...) be lost by (...) delay; because that which once he offered
wholly to God, (...) now as of a thing belonging to an other, not reflecting
upon his own necessity, no^ (...) will fall short, being assured that when he
shall arrive to his (...) nakedness, God will take much more care to feed him,
then he does of the birds of the air.

8. S. Gregory also well acquainted with the crafty fetches of the Devil, S
Greg. 12. (...).
reck^neth this among other hidden snares which he lays to intrappe us.
Another, says he, (...)
is resolved not only not to hunt after earthly commodities, but to renounce
all that he has, to the end he may the more freely exercise himself in the
precepts of the heavenly Teacher, the more disengaged he is from the things,
which being possessed might encumber him, treading them under foot by forsaking
them. The Enemy therefore lying in wait for this man, and speaking to his
heart by secret suggestion, says unto him: Whence rises the boldness of this
f^rash proceeding, as to dare to believe, that thou can subsist with leaving
al? Be^^^^e not very many that do not forsake their earthly patrimony, and
yet purchase with it the everlasting goods of the supernal inheritance by (...)
of mercy? (...) flattering suggestion, and by the by, in the self-same things,
which he (...) him in mind to retain f^llowing his deceitful humor, he lays
before (...) the pestiferous delights of them, to draw the seduced heart to
outward (...), and to turn it quite off from inward desires of Per^^^tion.

9 Behold where the source is of this preposterous care of the poor, if we
believe S. Gregory. Behold also what the Devil pretends by this his
suggestion; to wit, under so fair a color of Charity and pity toward the
poor, to hold us pl^y with these earthly things, that while we stand upon so
tickle a ground as the world is, he may the easyer give us a fall. For as it is
hard so to handle pitch, but that it will stick to our fingars; so it is hard to
have the administration of worldly wealth and riches upon whatsoever occasion,
but that our love, and affection, and desire will in some measure cleave unto
them, and as it were defile our soul by touching them.

10 That which S. Hierome therefore writes in his Epistle to Julian, stands
with great reason. This Julian was both wealthy and bountifully liberal
toward the poor, and yet S. Hierome exhorts him rather to forsake al, and
shows plainly that it is the much more perfect course and more beneficial for
salvation. These are his words, S Hierome Epist. 34.
I cann^t say but thou do well, in that thou do, as it is reported of thee,
minister to the use of Saints, maintain Monks, make great offerings in the
Churches. But these are but the first essays of thy warfare. Thou contemnest
go^d; many Philosophers also have contemned it; and one of them (to pass the
test in silence) cast the price of his many possessions into the sea, saying:
Away into the deep, you evil thoughts; I will drown you, that I may not be
drowned by you. This Philosopher, ambitious of glory, and a base slave to
popular rumors, cast away al his burden at once; Religious people have the
higher place.
and can thou think that thou have attained the height of virtue offering
part of thine? God will have thyself, a living host, pleasing God; thy self, I
say, and not that which is thine. If thou give thy self to God, and perfect in
Apostolical virtue begin to follow our Savior, then thou will understand where
thou were, and how in the Army of Christ thou have hitherto held the lowest
place. I will not have thee offer that only to God, which a thief may take from
thee, which thy enemy may invade, which banishment may deprive thee off, which
may come and go, and which like waves of the sea is possessed by every
master that is next at hand, and which (in a word) whether thou will or no,
Hierome Ep^st. 10.
at thy death thou must forsake. Offer that which no enemy can take from thee,
no tyrant bereave thee off; that, which will follow thee to thy grave, yea to
the Kingdom of Heaven, and to the delights of Paradise. Thou buildest
Monasteries, and a great number of Saints are maintained by thee; but thou
shall do better, thy self to live a Saint among the Saints. Thus writes S.
Hierome to Julian. S Hierome Epist. ^1.


11. And the like he writes to Pammachius; applying fitly to his purpose that
which we read of the low stature of Zacchaus: (...)
My advise is that thou offer not only thy money but thyself to Christ; (...)
skin for skin, and all that a man possesses he may give for his soul. Our
ancient Enemy knows, that the combat of Continency is greater then that of
money; that which sticks on the outside, is easily ^ast ^^f, a civil war is
more dangerous. We may easily vnglue that which is but (...) together, vnsow
that which is but sowed; Zacchaus was rich, the Apostles (...) (...)
red four times the value of that which he had taken, and divided among the
poor the one half of his substance that remained; our Savior admit(...)
entertaynement; and yet because he was low and could not reach the (...) of the
Apostles, he was not reckoned among the Twelve. The Apostles, (...) (...) their
wealth, left nothing, if their will, they forsook all the world at once. If we
offer our wealth and our soul together, he will willingly accept of it.

12. Let us rehearse an other testimony out of the same S. Hierome, exhorting
his friend Iaciuius to an absolute renunciation of al things in these words: It
is the part of beginners, and not ^f perfect people, (...). Ep. 28.
to cast away their money. Crates the Thebean did it, and so did (...), To
offer ones self to God, is proper to Christians and to the Apostles. The wants
of many have been supplied by thy abundance, to the end that their riches may
rebound again into the hands of them that want them. Luc 16.9.
Thou have made to thy self friends of the Mammon of iniquity, that they may
receive thee into the eternal tabernacles A thing worthy commendation, Prou.
13.8.
and to be paralelled with he virtues of the Apostolical times! But our Lord
seeks rather the souls of the Faithful, then their riches. We read, that a
man's own riches are the redemption of his soul. By a man's own riches we
may understand such, as are not gotten by pillage, or by the wrong of an other
man; but yet in a better sense, our own riches are the hidden treasure, which
neither the night-theef can undermine, nor the open robber take from us by
violence.

13. Seeing therefore we have the verdict of S. Hierome in so many places,
Riches a help for the Active life, and a hindrance for the Contemplative.
so clearly delivering his mind on our side, and so many other ancient Fathers
besides of the same opinion, the single authority of Aristotle cannot in
reason stumble any man, though he were against us. But indeed he is not. For
in that which was objected out of the first of his Morals, he speaks
consequently to that which there he handled; for he discourses there of the
happiness belonging to the Active life, toward which Riches are undoubtedly a
fit means and instrument; for had it not riches, it should not have
wherewithal to relieve others, and supply their necessities; whereas great part
of the felicity of that life is placed in that kind of action. Arist. 10 ^th
c. 8.
But toward Contemplation, wherein according to Aristotle's judgment also, is
the far truer felicity, riches conduce nothing at al, but rather hinder it;
for they disturb the quiet of a man's mind, which is one of the necessariest
things of al for Contemplation: Insomuch that Aristotle himself in his tenth
book of Morals, where he treats of the happiness which is in Contemplation,
says, that Action has need of many things, but Speculation has not need of
any thing, and that multiplicitie of things is rather a hinderance unto it. It
is therefore confessedly much more beneficial, and a much more noble act, to
forsake all that a man has at once, and to consecrate his life to God in
Euangelical Poverty, then to remain with some thing, though it be with
intention to spend it upon the poor. Which we may finally strengthen with a
notable sentence of that great S. Hilarion, A memorable saying of S. Hilarion.
of whom S. Hierome relates, that having delivered a marvelous rich man called
Orion from a legion of Devils, not long after, the same man returned to the
Monastery with very rich presents, and urged S. Hilarion very earnestly and
with tears, to accept of them, S. Hierome in vitae H^lar,
if not for himself, yet at least to bestow upon the poor; but the advised old
man answered him in these words: The name of the poor has been an occasion of
avarice to many; but mercy has no tricks with it. No man does spend better,
then he that reserueth nothing for himself.

An answer to them that choose to remain in the world, to do good upon their
Neighbor. CHAP. XXI.
OThers are withdrawn from Religious courses by a persuasion which they have,
that they may benefit their Neighbor more in spirit, remaining in the world.
An error much like to the former, which we have confuted, but that the former
takes occasion of our earthly substance, this latter of a good which is
merely spiritual; and consequently, as it has the fayrer pretext, it is the
more apt to deceive. For thus they discourse, and argue as it were, against a
Religious State: that in Religion we in a manner bury the Talent, which God
has given us, and the zeal and good will of advancing others in virtue;
because they that live under Obedience, are not so free to make their
excursions hither and thither, and sometimes, when they have begun a good work,
they are called away from it, and set about something else, or sent to another
place. On the other side, they that remain at their own freedom, may at al
times, and at al hours, assist al kind of people, and have no body to hinder
them, no body to forbid them, no body to interrupt them; so that whereas both
of them may be compared to hounds, that are ^a^er upon the sight or sent of the
game, the Religious are as it were in leash, and at the command of others;
Secular people run at large, and instantly make after the game without any
stop or stay. Let us therefore consider, how little force these arguments have,
to weaken so great a Counsel of Perfection.

2. And first we must understand, that Charity, as great a virtue as it is,
must be ordered, Charity (...) ordered is not Charity.
insomuch that if it be not duly ordered, it is not Charity, but some other
affection that putteth-on the mask of Charity. Order consists chiefly in
this, that in matter of Spirit, and in things which concern the grace of God,
and our souls salvation, every one be first careful of himself, and prefer
his own spiritual benefit and profit; before the good of whomsoever of our
Neighbors; and so God commands us to do. Which al Divines with one consent
deliver as a certain truth; and S. Thomas in particular proves it by this
solid and substantial argument. Because Charity, says he, is grounded in the
communication of goods that are spiritual; but after God, S Them 1.2. q 3 ^ ar
3.
who is the foundation of al, every one is nearest to himself, and must make
account to be first in the participation of this good; for we love our
Neighbors as our companions in that participation; Cha^^tie first (...) us to
our own perfection.
and consequently as Unity is to be preferred before Union, so that a man
enjoys such a go^d* is a nearer and dearer ground of love, then that an other
is his companion in the enioyning of it. And upon the same ground it follows
also truly and necessarily, that the habit of Charity cannot incline a man, I
do not say to commit the least sin, but not so much as to abide the least
loss or impayring of Charity, for an other man whosoever he be, no not though
it were to save the whole world, no more then fire can issue out of ice; which
also almost al Divines agree in.

3. If therefore we allow of this, and it cannot on the other side be denied or
any way doubted of, but that a Religious course of life is without comparison
the most absolute course of our own perfection, and far more apt to furnish
our own souls with virtue, then any Secular state whatsoever, it must
necessarily follow, that though some particular state in the world might be
more beneficial to our Neighbor, yet the benefit of our own souls is to be
preferred before the benefit, which might be derived to others. Our Savior
delivers it in these express words: What does (...) it avail a man, if he
gain the whole world, and suffer detriment of his own soul? And because we
should not think, Matthew. 16.26.
that his words are to be understood only of temporal gain, S. Bernard does
directly apply them to this spiritual benefit of our Neighbor which we speak
of, S. Bern. 1. de Cons. c. 5.
and in his book of Consideration writes thus: If thou will be wholly entry
body's, after the example of him, that was made al to al, I commend thy f^ee
na^u^e; but upon condition it be full. And how shall it be full, if thou shut-out
thyself^* for thou art also a man. Therefore that thy courtesy may be fall and
mine, let the bosom chose me which receaueth al, embrace thyself within
itself. Otherwise what avails it thee, according to the word of our Lord, if
thou gain al, and leese thyself alo^^? and he repeateth the like saying in his
second Book, and among other things, concludes pleasantly with these words:
In the purchase of salvation, no man is nearer of kin unto thee, then the only
son of thy mother.

4. Now the ground of the contrary party draws these two inconveniences
with it; Id^m lib 2. c. 3.
First that while they live in the world, upon what cause soever they remain
in it, they lie open to al occasions and dangers of sin, as much almost as
any Secular people; Inconveniences of remaining in the world.
for sailing the self-same seas, they must needs be tossed with the self-same
waves of these present allurements and baytes of honor, and riches, and
beauty beating continually upon their eyes and thoughts, that it is very hard,
and a rare thing, always to resist, and so to resist, as always to go away
with the victory. This is the first inconvenience, which they run themselves
upon. The other is, that though we should grant them the victory in all these
assaults, yet they cannot but suffer l^sse and detriment in matter of virtue
and perfection, because they deprive themselves of voluntary Poverty, and
Obedience, and other such unspeakable treasures, which are ordinary in
Religion, and, as I may say, common to every ordinary body. And what folly
is it, to wait upon others gaynes with so much loss of our own? Wherefore we
ought rather to harken to the counsel of the Holie-Ghost, and have it always
before our eyes, Eccl. 29.27.
aduising us in this manner: Recover thy neighbor according to thy virtue, and
take heed to thyself, that thou fall not in; that is, thou fail not; for he
that salleth, both hurts himself, and cannot help them to rise, that are
fallen.

5. We shall do well also, to call to mind the Parable of the Virgins, whom our
Savior so much commends in the Ghospel for their wisdom, in that when the
other Virgins be^ged oil of them, Matt. 25.9.
they answered: Least perhaps it suffice not for us and you, (...) rather to
them that sell, and buy for yourselues. Which saying S. Bernard upon the
Canticles applies to this which we have in hand, and among many other
reflections which he makes upon it, he falls also upon that, which we spoke
of before, that it is not true Charity for a man to desire to benefit others
with his own loss; because charity (as he speaks) w^^ abound in itself,
that it may have abundance for others. It reserueth to itself as much as it
wants, S. Bern. In Cant. ^.18.
that no man may want. Otherwise, if it be not full, it is not perfect. And
again: I make account, that in matter of Salvation no degree of compassion is
to be preferred before that degree, Eccl. 30.
which the Wiseman sets down, saying: Have mercy of hy own soul,
pleasing God.

6. And thus much upon supposition, that though a Secular life could be more
apt to do good upon others, yet Religion were to be preferred, because in
Religion we may reap more benefit to ourselves. Religion incompararbly more
proper for the helping of others.
What if we add now that ^eligion is far more able, and sufficient, and
proper to do good upon others? But it is so certain and evident, that we shall
not need to stand long upon proof of it besides that, in the second Book of
this Treatise we have plainly con uinced it, discoursing of the manifold helps,
which a Religious sta^e afforde (...) good of ^ur Neighbor; the sum whereof
i^ this: that God only (...) because of the conversion of Souls, and of their
progress and advancement in virtue. For so we fir^ it written: Ps. 83 12.
Grace and glory our Lord will give. And our Lord himself says: No man can
come to me, Job. 6.44.
unless the Father, who sent me, draw him. What then do men in the conversion
of other men? Coniun^tion with God the author of conversation of souls.
They are instruments which God uses, as a writer uses his pen, a sawyer
his saw. Wherefore as any kind of instrument, moving of itself can do
nothing, but if it be moved by the crafts-maister, it can do al things: So in
works Divine and supernatural, look how far a man is joined with God, and
moved by him, so far he goes, and no further. Now let us see, who is more
united with God, a Secular, or a Religious man? But there can be no question in
it: for besides the conjunction which Charity makes betwixt them (the force
of which virtue is far greater in Religion, and far more means to purchase
it) there be other virtues which mainly further this union, and chiefly those
two, which are so proper and natural to a Religious course, to wit, Humility
and Obedience, the one freing us from al worldly pride, the other delivering
us over to the Divine Majesty, and putting him in absolute possession of us,
to rule us and weald us as he pleases, besides the perpetual and irreuocable
bond of our Vows, binding us so inseparably to God, that there cannot be a
stronger tie, nor a more inviolable conjunction imagined upon earth. What
wonder therefore, if such instruments menaged by the hand of so great and so
skilful an Artificer, and so fit and pliable to his hand, work such rare and
admirable effects?

Other helps.
7. To this inward conjunction with God, we may add the outward helps, which in
Religion are many, as the joining of so many hands together, which is a
great means to bring business to an end; for that which a man has not in
himself, he has it in his Brother. Secondly the authority, which the
despising of earthly things gives Religious people above others; a contempt, I
say, of the world, which lies not hidden in every one's breast, but is
apparent to be seen in the state itself, and the whole course of a man's life.
Al which and such like other furtherances, they that labor for the benefit of
others in a Secular life, must needs want. And to pass over other things; of
what importance must it needs be, that Religious men are in this business of the
help of Souls, as well as in other things, wholly directed guided, and
illuminated by their Superiors? For first the advice and counsel of men that
are wise and expert in so weighty a business, cannot but be very useful;
besides that, it is God that governs them by their Superiors, which is al in all; for when God is the author and beginner of that which we undertake, it
cannot but prosper, whatsoever it be. And to answer that which was objected, by
example of a hound, does not the game go much better forward, when the dogs
are guided by a huntsman, that knows how to rule them, when to put them on,
when to take them off, and when to stay them from ranging about? Yea without
it, the dogs of themselves are not fit to hunt.

Experience (...) Rel^gi^^s people do more good.
8. But what do we stand disputing this question concerning the help of Souls?
Let us open our eyes and take a view of the Church of God, as now it is, and as
it has been for many Ages. Who be they, that now adays following the example
of our Savior, go about the Cities and towns and villages, instructing the
people, and drawing men out of sin, and putting them upon good courses in the
service of God, but Religious men? whom do we almost see in a pulpit preaching
but such as are of one Order or other? Finally who are the workmen in this
vinyard of our Savior, but they? and true workmen indeed, that abide the
weight and the heat of the day, and do al, that they do, merely for the
glory of God, and the help of Souls, not for any earthly commodity, or
temporal benefit redounding to themselves. For though there be of the Secular
State some, that labor in this harvest, they are so few of the^, that no man
ca^ attribute the general fruit, which is wrought and maintained in the Church,
rather to the Seculars, then to the Regulars.

9. Some body perhaps will grant all this to be true, speaking of the general
fruit which is wrought in the Church; A deceit about helping our Country and
kindred.
but for his part he speaks not of the whole Church, but is in pain only for
his own country, and patents, and kinsfolk; and thinks that if he remain
with them, he shall be better able to instruct them, and help them, then if he
go into Religion. A ridiculous pretense; for that which we have been saying all this while of the prerogative of a Religious State above a Secular in matter of
doing good to others, is much more of force in this case, because it commonly
falls out, that a man shall do rather less good among his kindred, then
more; which indeed might seem a Paradox, Marc. 6.4.
but that we find it by experience continually to be so; and Truth itself has
so long before given us warning of it in these words: A Prophet is not without
honor but in his country, and in his house, and in his kindred. And the
example of our Savior testifies as much, as well as his words. For wheresoever
he chanced to be, though it were among the Samaritans, which was a deboisht
kind of people, and at variance in many things with the Jews, al admired his
wisdom, and followed him most greedily to hear him speak; and yet in his
own Country he was held in contempt and derision; insomuch that it is written
of him; He could not there else any virtue; and: He wondered by reason of
their incredulity. What then may we weak and infirm creatures hope to do,
seeing the infinite Sanctity and Majesty could do no good upon flesh and blood?

10. S. Bernard therefore with great reason does reckon this subtle temptation
among the little foxes, Cant. 2.15.
which in the Canticles are said to demolish the vinyard; a temptation which
does not only hinder people from entering into Religion, but oftimes draws
some out of Religion to the world again. S. Ber in Cant. 5 ^4.
I saw a man ( says S. Bernard) that was running well; and behold a thought*
How great a good is this, which I enjoy alone? If I were in my country, I
might give part of it to my brethren, and kindred, and acquaintance, and
friends. They love me, and will easily hearken to my persuasions. To what end
is this loss? I go thither, and save many of them, and myself with them. And
I shall not need to fear the change of place; for so I do well, what matter is
it, where; but only, that certainly it is better to remain there, where I may
remain with more profit. Why should I be long? He goes, and perishes, wretch
that he is, not so much a banished man into his country, as a dog returning to
his vomit. Behold the unhappy man has lost himself, and gained none of his.
Behold one little fox, to wit, this vain deceitful hope, which he had of
gayning his kindred.

11. These so express and significant words of S. Bernard, together with the
rest which has been said, make it evident, that whosoever is moved indeed with
true zeal of Souls (for there be diverse who have not this zeal, but remain
in the world, because they are taken with the world, and use reasons which
favor of zeal as a color to shadow their covetous mind) but if there be
any such that desires sincerely to advance the service of God, and resolves
to dedicate himself unto the setting of it up, he must needs acknowledge, that
there is no doubt to be made, but that he may more perfectly, and more
assuredly, and with more plentiful success compass his ends in Religion, then
remaining in the world, specially if he confine not himself to one country or
Family (which were a sign of somewhat a straight heart, and but little
courage) but offer himself to be always in a readiness for all places in
general, Ez^^k. 1 11.
and al sorts of people, and as the beasts, which the Prophet speaks of,
wheresoever the motion of the spirit is, thither presently he got. And this he
may far easier and with less trouble and danger perform in Religion, then
in the world, because, as I said before, there be in Religion so many helps to
perfection and sanctity; and contrariwise in the world, so many hindrances
and rubs by the way, and allurements to sin. For it falls out with us in
this business, as with them that will save a man from drowning; for whosoever will
do so, must first put himself in safety; otherwise he endangers himself, and
consequently disables himself from helping an other out of danger, and in like
manner, he that will go about to help is neighbor out of the danger, in which
he is in the world, must necessarily himself wade out of the world, and stand
upon firm ground above al worldly things.

An answer to them that say: It is enough to forsake the world in affection,
though they forsake it not in effect. CHAP. XXII.
Here we are to deal with an other objection, not unlike the fallacy of
which we have been speaking; for some will not stick to say, it is in vain to
trouble oneself so much, as to make away from himself all the right and
possession of whatsoever he has in the world: it is enough to forsake the love
and affection unto it. And this they undertake to prove, because the substance
of perfection is Charity; ^
He that has greater charity, is more perfect, whether he live a Secular or a
Religious life. And to strengthen their cause, they bring examples of holy
Scripture, and tell us of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, who living in the State
of Matrimony, and abounding in all worldly wealth and plenty, were holy in
an eminent degree; insomuch that God conuersed familiarly and friendly with
them.

2. But we must take heed, that this be not also the language of such a flatter
themselves, and pretend reasons, of purpose, because they are loath to break
with the world, and worldly bonds, with which they love to be tied. And we
shall be feign to spend the more time and care in confuting it, because many,
that account themselves of the learnede^ and wiser sort, are subject to this
error.

^
3. Though it cannot therefore be denied, but that Perfection consists in
Chari^ti, as they allege, and that Religion is not perfection, but a way and
means to perfection; yet it is such a means, as they who embrace it, may
easily, and speedily, and without sail attain to perfect on, and they that
embrace it not either never come to perfection, or not without long labor and
difficulty. For as at the passage of a (...), every body seeks for the
bridge, or for a boat to pass without danger; and of a (...) be to go a
journey by land, he chooses rather to go on horseback, then on foot, because
he shall sooner come to his iourneys end, and more co^modiously: So in the long
and hard journey to the top of Virtue and Charity, of which they speak, what
account in reason ought every body to make of such a help, as enableth and
strengthens us not only to pass our journey, but to run with ease and
expedition, and is indeed rather a Coach to carry us sweetly a long in it? And
what kind of Coach is it? We have spoken sufficiently of this point throughout
the whole First Book of this Treatise, showing that Religion affords two
special helps to salvation: freing us, by abandoning the world, from al
impediments thereunto, which in the world are certainly innumerable; and
furnishing us with so many excellent commodities toward a spiritual life, as
there we have discoursed of.

4. Which was the reason, Ancient (...)
why generally al holy men, that understood very well, that the substance of
Perfection consisted in Charity, have notwithstanding so earnestly exhorted us
to abandon the world, as if without it we could not be perfect. Among whom
Cassian speaks thus: It is infallible, that whosoever leanes to his wonted
possessions and goods, does not take upon him entire humility of heart, nor full
mortification of his corrupted will. But S. Basi more copiously; for supposing
first as a ground, Cap. C. ^^ c. 24.
that the abnegation which our Savior commanded, consists in casting away al
love of ourselves, and al solicitude either for life or death, he sets
down, what is necessarily to be done to attain to this perfection. And these
are his words: This renunciation begins with parting from external things,
from our possessions, from vain glory, from the customs of our former life,
S. ^^sil. reg sus. c. 8.
from affection to things unprofitable; as the holy Disciples of our Lord have
put us in mind to do by their example, to wit, James and John, by forsaking
their father Zebedee, and their boat, of which their whole life and maintenance
depended. And a little after: Though what shall I need to strengthen that, which
I say, with reasons of mine own invention, or examples of holy men, seeing we
may allege the very words of our Savior, and with them animate a Soul that
is Religious, and has the scare of God? Iu^. 14 33.
For he plainly and without al contradiction testifyeth, and says: So
therefore, whosoever of you renounceth not all that he possesses, cannot be my
Disciple. And in an other place, Mat. 19.11.
having upon this condition ( If thou will be perfect) said: Go, sell what thou
have, he presently adds: Come, follow me. And to the like purpose, S Mat.
13.45.
he brought the Parable of the Merchant, that having found one precious
Margarite, sold all that he had, and bought it. For it is evident, that the
precious Margarit signifies the Kingdom of Heaven; which Kingdom, our Lord
says, we cannot attain unto, unless we contemn all that we have at once, to
the end to purchase it, wealth, glory, kindred, and whatsoever most men in the
world do ambitiously gape after. Thus speaks S. Basil; and what could be
said of more weight and strength to our purpose? S. Man. ^^.


5. The like we read in one of the Homilies of S. Macarius. It cannot be,
says he, that a man should purchase the possession of his own soul, or the
charity of the heavenly Spirit, unless estranged from al things belon^^^ to
the world, he apply himself to search-out the charity of our Savior, and
fever his mind from al gross cares, and earthly distractions, that he may
take his whole aim at one marck; that forsaking al, and cutting-of al material
and earthly impediments, and separated from carnal love and affection to
parents or kindred, he suffer his mind to attend to nothing else, nor to be
distracted by other means, but be wholly occupied in the care and search of
Spiritual things. This is that which S. Macarius says of this matter both
truly and advisedly, to the point we treat of.

6. For though, if we will go upon subtilties and speak metaphysically (as
they say in Schools) it cannot be denied, but a man may be a Saint in the
midst of worldly wealth, Practice shows the contrary.
and practice Humility in the height of honor, and perserue Chastity in the
midst of delicacies; yet if we cast our eyes, not upon that which might be
wished or proiected, but upon that which for the most part falleth-out among
men, and which we daily see in the ordinary course of their life and
conversation, no man can be so blind, as not to see what is best, most safe,
most conducing to salvation. But to go more solidly to work, we must sever that
which is certain, from that which is uncertain and disputable.

Al things m^st be for forsaken in affection.
7. It is certain, that whosoever sets his love and affection upon earthly
goods, is not fit for the Kingdom of heaven; and therefore they are to be
forsaken, at least in affection. This al must do at al times, and entirely,
without exception. For so the Prophet tells us: If riches abound, do not set
your heart to them. And again: Ps. 61.11. Ps. ^5.6. Mat 19 27.
Al men of riches have slept their sleep, and found nothing in their hands. And
our Savior gives us to understand as much in that rigid sentence: It is
easier for a camel to pass through a needle's eyes, then for a rich man to
enter into the kingdom of heaven. T^is therefore is most certain. That which
makes all the doubt, is, that some take upon them to be confident, that they can
remain with their earthly goods, and yet be poor in spirit, and not set
their heart upon them, or repose any trust in them, or leese the least part of
their love toward God in respect of them. Others again, understanding how full
of difficulty all this is, and how many hindrances of salvation there be in
the world, how many allurements to vice and sin, choose rather quite to
shake off the world, then to put their eternal salvation in such hazard, for so
short a pleasure in these temporal things. Which of these, have more solid
reason for their side?

It is wisdom to be on the surer side.
8. I make no question, but as in all other things it is the part of a wise man
to lean to the surer side; and if a body must offend in one, to choose
rather, to be too wary, then to be thought unadvised; and the weightier the
business is, the more reason we have to do so: so much more in this, which of
al other things concerns us most. For it is wonderful difficult, and indeed
beyond the strength of man to have many things in possession, and to suspend
our affection from them. S. Basil in the place before alleged takes it for a
certainty, To possess things with (...), is in a manner impossible.
that whosoever reserueth any earthly thing to himself, his mind must
necessarily (for so are his words) remain, as it were, buried in that slow of
filth, and the passage to heavenly contemplation be shut against him, because
he is so drowned in it, that he cannot think of the Supernal goods, which God
has promised us; for we cannot attain to those goods, S Basil reg su^^ 8.
unless a vehement and vndistracted desire of them do spur us on and
inflame us, and indeed so great a desire, that it make al things easy, to the
end we may gain them. This was S. Basil's opinion: and if any man think him
too strict and severe, let him consider well, whether he frame to himself a
right conceit of Perfection, according to the nature thereof and not rather
perhaps conceive of it according to his own or others remissenes, and want of
spirit.

9. S. John Chrysostom makes account, that it is a much more easy way to cure
our corrupted affections, To leave al is an easier cure. S. Io. Chrysostom hom. 43.
in Matt. Sen. Ep. 110 Cass. l. 5. de 8. princip. (...). c. 7.
to have nothing, then to have something, though it be but moderate. Nothing,
says he, does so quench the thirst of Cupiditie, as to cease from desire of
gain, like as abstinence and euacuation purge bitter choler. It is easier for
a man's body to fly in the air, then to quiet our desire, if we still add
more. And certainly we shall find it so, as the Philosopher says, that some
things, are more easily quite cut off, then in part tempered. And Cassian
speaking by experience, says: We have seen men easier abstain altogether
from gross meats, then use moderatly of those which are granted for
necessity; and those that deny themselves al for the love of continency,
then those that under pretense of infirmity, taking some, keep themselves
within the bounds of sufficiency. and this which Cassian says of Temperance,
in respect of Gluttony, is true in all other objects; which being present, are
apt to delight either our eyes or our mind. It is easier wholly to abstain from
them, then to use some with moderation. For as if a man should let himself
down from a high tower, it is not so easy, as he may imagine, to stay himself
in the midway at his pleasure: so it is not in man's power to withold and
prevent the violence of delight, or to assign in what measure it shall press
upon us; rather our weakness is apt to give way unto it, and to think it an ease
to do so; and by that means we are drawn further and further by little and
little, and, which is our own greater misfortune, at unawares and vnsensibly.
Which S. Leo expresses in these words: S. Leo. ^ 12. in qua^^.
By lawful use we pass to immoderate excess, while by care of health, the
delight of pleasure creeps in, and that, which might be enough for nature, is
not enough for concupiscence,

10. That which S. Basil observes, (...) things work upon the interi^^ S.
Basi hom. (...) mil.
how much external things conduce to the reformation of the internal, is of
force also in this. For if a man be desirous of humility, he must (according
to the advice of the Saint) practice humility in all outward things, which
belong unto him; as in his apparel, in his bed, his chair, his table, his
house, and household-stuff; and finally, in all things. And the reason which he
gives, holds not only in Humility, but in all virtues; and particularly in
that whereof we are speaking, that a Soul becomes like the business which it
has in hand, and is wholly configured (as he speaks) and conformed to that,
which outwardly it does. And no wonder, seeing there is such affinity betwixt
body and soul, that whatsoever is offered to our corporal senses, must needs
move it; and we find it to our cost by daily experience, that the things which
are represented unto it by our eyes, our ears, and other senses, do make much
more impression in it, then that which our thoughts offer unto it, though our
thoughts be the more natural, and more proper action of our souls.

11. Which if we consider, The difference betwixt them that forsake (...)
affection, and in effect
it will be no hard matter, to discover the difference which is betwixt him,
that leaves the world and worldly things in affection only, and in effect
retaynes them; and him that parts with them both in affection and effect. The
former roweth, as it were against the stream, and consequently riddeth less
ground, goes on with more difficulty, is much more tired with it, and far
more apt to be carried downwards again, and most commonly it falls out,
that he is; for whom shall a man almost find, that is able to stand in so
continual a combat, and bear up against so many rubbes and encounters? The
other sayleth with wind in poope, nothing lies in his way, nothing hinders him,
al things help him, al further him, the Place, the State, his Companions, his
employments, his intentions, al his thoughts, and whatsoever he hears or
sees.

12. S. Gregory addressing himself to those that are of this confident humor,
and think they can attend to the service of God, and keep their lands and
goods, determines the Cause for us, as if he had been chosen Vmpire on both
sides, and gives the other party a check in these words: Many covet not that
which belongs to others but out of a love to an imperfect quiet, (...) c. 14
sever themselves from the bra^glings of this world; they desire to be
instructed in holy Writ, they covet to attend to high Contemplations, but yet
forsake not the care of household-busines with perfect freedom: and so
oftimes, while they lawfully attend unto it, they are involued in the unlawful
contentions of the world, and desiring carefully to preserve their earthly
things, forsake the quiet of mind, which they sought for; and laboring with
continual forecast to save their flitting substance, the word of Divine
knowledge, which was conceived in their mind, comes to naught, because
according to the saying of Truth, the t^ornes ouercharge the seed which began
to spring, (...) 8.14.
and the busy cares of earthly things, shut out the word of God out of their
memory; and while they forsake not the world perfectly, they walk stumbling
on, entangling themselves in their going, that they cannot go. What could be
said more clear on our side? and particularly, where stiling al earthly
things a flitting substance, he gives us to understand, that the nature of
them is to be always either flitting from one hand to an other, or running to
decay, and consequently they ask so much care, and pains, and attention to
preserve and stay them, that while a man's thoughts are busied in it, what time
or means can he have to think of heavenly things?

13. Now whereas they will needs persuade themselves, that they can keep their
worldly possessions, Affection to earthly things grows silently upon us.
and not set their affection upon them, they are certainly much mistaken, not
only in my opinion, but in the judgment of al those that understand things
right. For we see daily before our eyes, how men are taken with the things of
this world, before they think of it, merely by use and custom of handling
them; and are oftimes most entangled, when they think themselves most at
liberty. For as a man grows secretly in love with the bed in which he lies,
and with the chair in which he is wont to sit, and finds it not til he be
called to rise: So the love of these earthly things creeps so covertly into
our affection, that we think ourselves still at liberty, and feel not the
fetters, in which they have inthralled us; but then we feel them, when death
or chance must part us. We cannot have a better witness of this, which we are
saying, then S. Gregory, who delivers it both upon good grounds of reason,
and his own experience. For thus he relates how he lived in the world.

14. That which I should have sought, was even then laid open unto me, out of
the love of Eternity; but my wonted custom had obliged me not to change my
outward manner of living; S Greg Ep. ante moral.
and while my mind did yet urge me to serve the world, as it were in outward
show, many things began to rise against me, of the cares of the world, that
now I was held, not in outward show, but (which is worse) in affection. S.
Gregory therefore confessing this of himself, others may easily see, how much
more they ought to fear, and beware of the like, knowing themselves to be so
far inferior to S. Gregory in strength and virtue. For this is the reason,
why holy men, as the same Saint observes in an other place, stand more in
fear of worldly prosperity, then of adversity. For they know, says he,
that while the mind is held-on in pleasing businesses, it willingly sometimes
leanes to exterior things; they know, that oftimes a secret thought does so
misleade it, that it is altered, it knows not how.

15. And thus much we have spoken of Religion, as it is a fit instrument and
means to Perfection, in regard it freeth the passage of al encumbrances, which
lie between us and a spiritual life, Many things in Religion, of themselves
to be desired.
and in a manner stop-vp our way. But there is yet something more in it, that
of itself, and for itself, is greatly to be desired, and they that have it not
(though we should grant them al things else) must needs confess they want no
small spiritual ornament and enrichment of their souls. For first in Religion
there is the point of Abnegation of our own will, a point of high perfection,
and properly Euangelical. Abnegation of our will.
For he that is free to dispose of himself as he list, may often, even in good
works, mingle much of his own will, in prayer, in almes-giuing, and the like;
and so much as he mingleth of his will, so much he leeseth of the value of his
work. So that the happiness which we purchase by wholly vnuesting ourselves, and
entirely casting-of our own will in all things, and for our whole lifetime, is
a happiness, that cannot be expressed in words, nor purchased but by the Vow of
Obedience.

16. A man may say, that in the world, the sole Will of God may be our Guide and
aim. And it is a glorious saying, and carries a fair show, and sounds big
as long as we stand in the speculation of it; but when we come to the proof and
practice, all that imagination of perfection vanishes into the air. For first
how secret and uncertain is the will of God? how many errors and perplexities
does a man run into in seeking it? Besides that, he that follows his own
dictamen in scanning it, and making his conjectures about it, puts always
something of his own unto it, which is a thing very considerable. And
certainly he is in the far better way, that orders his life so, as he may
say truly, he has nothing of his own in it. For this is that perfect
Renunciation and Abnegation, which our Savior commands, to forsake ourselves
so, as to reserve nothing of ourselves. True virtue therefore is that which
Climaens says, whose words I will set down, because the very simplicity of
them does much please me: Clim. c. 25.
An humble man always abhors his own will, as deceauer and erroneous: and
though al his thoughts and deeds he conformable to the Divine rule, yet he
follows not his own will, nor believes his own judgment. For to an humble
man, it is a grievous pain to rely upon his own will, as to a proud man it is
a pain and burden intolerable, to be under the ^il of an other.

17. And S. Gregory says excellently well: S. Greg ^1. mor. c. ^^
He without al doubt mounteth up to a higher form in the School of Christ,
that forsaking al, which outwardly he did possess, endeauours to break his
inward will, that putting himself under an other's will, he may renounce not only
his evil affections, but his good desires; to the plentiful increase of his
perfection, and be at an other's command in all things which he does.

18. And then speaking of the reasons which these men allege, and which we
have been hitherto confuting, The (...).
he reckons them al for temptations of the Devil. For thus he says: The
crafty Enemy speaks the fayrer to such an one, by how much he strives more
eagerly to throue him off from a more eminent standing; and flattering him with
suggestions full of poison, he says thus unto him: O how wonderful strange
things may thou do of thy self if thou put not thyself under an other's
direction? Why do thou lessen thy profit, under color of bettering it? What
evil did thou, when thou had thine own will? Seeing therefore thou art fully
able to live of thyself, why do thou seek, that another should be over thee
to direct thee? Thus he insinuates himself by flattery, and on the other
side, lays occasions for him to exercise pride in his own will. All this of S.
Gregory; which testimony makes the cause evident on our side, to wit, how
far more perfect, and more safe it is, to forgo our own will, then to
retain it, though we should use it well.

It is (...).
19. Besides, it cannot be denied, but that it is far greater humility, to
obey God in man, then to obey when he commands immediately by himself, as no
man almost will stick to obey a King when he speaks himself in person, but
many find much difficulty to obey his servants and ministers. And moreover,
he that in effect abandoneth the world, and all that is in it, abandoneth it
also in affection. For that which he did, he did it willingly, and of his own
free choice; ^
but he that will leave it only in affection, first comes short, in that he
leaves it not also in effect; secondly he may easily mistake, and think that
he has forsaken the world, when in very deed he has not. For in all things,
but specially in such as are distastful to sense, there is great difference
betwixt the will of doing a thing, and the doing of it; nothing is more easy,
then to have a will and desire; but to do a thing, is hard and payneful; and
the work most commonly tries our will, and examineth it, whether it be right;
for oftimes a seruent resolution when it comes to deed; begins to quail at the
difficulty of them.

20 Finally, that which ought most to move us in this kind, is the example of
our Savior; The example of our Savior, a pregnant a^gument for Religion.
for whereas his life was a most perfect and absolute model of al our lives, he
that comes nearest in imitating him, is doubtless to be accounted the most
perfect. He therefore embracing poverty, and humility, not only in will and
desire, but in effect and deed, and following it in the whole course of hi^
life, whosoever shall represent in himself, the likeness of him in both those,
shall deserve certainly greater commendation, then he that shall resemble him but
in one. Which was S. Barnard's opinion, when he said, it was enough for the
ancient Fathers to follow the Spirit of God in spirit only; but, S Bern ser.
Ecce nos.
says he, now the Word has been made Flesh and dwelt among us, in him a form
of life and sampler of perfection is given us, which we must corporally
imitate, that following him with both our feet, we halt not hereafter, with the
Patriarch Jacob, Genesis 32.
upon one leg. And yet we say not this, as if a man might not be saved in these
days, if he do otherwise; but to make him know his rank, and that he usurp
not the place of perfection, or the office of a disciple. Thus S. Bernard.

The ancient Patriarcks not to be fol^o^ed (...) in this
21 But because in the beginning, the adverse party used the names of those
ancient Fathers, Abraham, and Isaac, and others against us, we must answer this
objection also, or S. Bernard for us, who says pleasantly thus: What shall we
answer to these new followers of the ancient Saints? And you will, Let them put
calves upon the altar of our Lord, let them kill rams and Sacrifice goats;
because Abraham did so. And so goeth-on, discoursing how their temporal wealth
was a figure of the Spiritual riches reserved for us; and how they are
vanished, and these to be maintained. And adds (that which is very true) that
we shall find none almost of these ancient Fathers, who did not either suffer
much by aduersi^ie, or was not tried to the quick in worldly prosperity, and
perhaps in danger by it, and that we may truly say of them, that they walked in
the depth of the divided Sea, and in the mire of many waters, possessing
earthly things, and that lawfully; but we have an other more strange and more
wonderful new manner of walking upon the waters themselves, by forsaking al
things; which grace and prerogative was due to the State of the Ghospel, and to
Peter, as the Leader and Captain of it.

22. S. John Chrysostom in his book of Virginity, S. Io Chrysostom. de Virg.
c. 83.
has almost the like discourse; that we must not wonder, if those ancient
Patriarcks had lands, and wives, and great wealth; because God required not of
them the like measure of virtue, God requires greater virtue of us.
that he does of us. For now, says he, no man can be perfect, unless he sell
al, unless he renounce al; and not his money only, or his house, but lay aside
al care, even of his life. But in those days there was no such pattern of
perfection. And handling this point at large, he gives the reason, why we have
greater commandments laid upon us, then they had; because the grace of the
Holie-Ghost has been powered forth more plentifully upon us, and greater gifts
bestowed by the coming of Christ, who of weak and feeble creatures makes us
perfect. Wherefore as men expect more at their childrens hands, when they are
grown to be young striplings, then when they were children, and find fault with
those things in elder years, which it was a pleasure to see in their tender
age: So God in those first times condescended in many things, which now in the
light of the Ghospel we see are imperfect, specially, seeing now also we have a
greater reward promised us, to wit, for earth, heaven, for temporal things,
joys everlasting.

23. Finally to conclude, though among those ancient Fathers, or also among
people in these days there have been always some, Presumption to think,
because others have escaped in the world, that therefore we may.
as we know, that in the midst of their wealth and honor, and delights of
marriage, or in the degree of Kings, have lived virtuously, yet what boldness
were it, or rather madness, in any of us to presume to parallel ourselves with
them, and to make account that we shall be able to wade through the dangers
which they have escaped? For as S. Thomas well and prudently observes, they
effected it by the prerogative of their sanctity and eminency of Virtue,
which God, who works al things by the purpose of his will, was pleased to
bestow upon them; And yet they that are more in firm, ought not to be so
confident of themselves, S. Tho. 21. q 186. a 4. Ep. 5.
as to think, that they shall be also able to attain to perfection with all
those hindrances: as no man is so foolish as to set upon a whole army of men
himself alone, without weapon, because he has heard, that Sampson slew so
many of his enemies, only with the iawe-bone of an Ass.

24. By this therefore it is evident, that it is far better, more perfect,
and more safe (for all these commodities meet together) utterly to forsake the
world, and al worldly things, not only in desire, which is always uncertain,
and subject to many errors and mistakings, but in effect and very deed; a
thing which certainly b^ingeth to our souls infinite profit and commodity.

An answer to them that say: It is more perfect to live in the world, because
it is harder to live well. CHAP. XXIII.
THey must also be answered, that say, it is better and more meritorious, to
lead an honest and virtuous life in the world, then to live in Religion;
because in the world it is so hard to be virtuous and devout, by reason of the
manifold impediments that be in it; and contrariwise they take occasion to
slight Religion even by that, for which we have all this while so highly
commended it, because it is quiet a life, and so far from al fear of danger.
For, say they, what great matter is it, or what wonder, if a man, that is
shut-vp in his celle, desire nothing, when he sees nothing that is worth the
desiring? or that he live in peace and quiet of mind, when he meddles with no
kind of business, feels no loss of any thing? or that he never is transported
with passion, when he lives with people that are of an excellent temper, and
his own Brethren, that iumpe with him in conceit, and practice, and every
thing? But to converse continually in the midst of beautiful objects, and there
to temper himself; to live among the fry of al sorts of people, to have his
ears full of railing speeches, to hear and see many forcible things to entice
him to sin, and yet always to beare-vp, never to shrink or give back, this
is virtue. Whereof the Prophet glories: Psalm. 119.7. Job 1. S. Greg. 1. Mor. c.
1.
With them that did hate peace, I was peacable. And holy Scripture does not
without cause relate of Job, that he lived in the land of Hus; because, as S.
Gregory tells us, it is no great commendation to be good with the good, but
to be good among the bad.

2. We hear some speak after this fashion sometimes, either out of ignorance,
or by mistake, some perhaps also out of a kind of malice, to dissemble their
own imperfection, and that they may seem to have great reason to live in the
world, when indeed they live in it, because they love it. But it will not be
hard, to inform the one in the right, and to confute the other. For if it were
true that they always had the better in their spiritual combats in the world,
if they always escaped without touch, if they never were foiled nor wounded,
they might have some cause perhaps to glory. But it fares not so well with
them. They that make this objection, are most commonly not of the best.
For it is not possible, that a man without weapon, continuing always in the
midst of so many thousands of his enemies, without guard, without any special
care or heed of his own, should not daily receive many wounds, and the wounds
be so much the more dangerous, the less he perceaues them: and we need no
other proof of it, then the lives of them that use this kind of language; for
we see them continually full of vice and sin. They therefore that are so brag,
boast themselves but upon a false ground; for this is not to fight with the
enemy, but to be taken prisoner, to be defeated, to be slain by him. It is
hard to stand always.


3. But let us grant, that some one among them is Master of the field for
many years, that he has manfully withstood many encounters with the Devils;
what is this to the business, if after so many years standing, he once fall
before the face of his enemy, once come into their hands? And this is so easy
and so subject to befall a man, that it can hardly be avoided in so slippe^ie
and so dangerous a place. But let it be so, that he never receive wound: Yet a
Religious State has so many other prerogatives, A Religious life excels
for other things. Threo kinds of difficulty in good works.
and is in such continual practice of al kind of virtue, humility, obedience,
fraternal charity, and the like, that though this were true, for which they
will needs so highly commend a Secular life, as it is not, yet a Religious life
does infinitely ouertop it.

4. And because they speak of merit, let us sift this point to the bottom,
whether the difficulty which is in a Secular life, increase a man's merit? S.
Bonaventure does learnedly answer this question to the full, in the book which
he intitleth The Apology for the poor. There he shows, that a man meets
with three kinds of difficulty in the performance of good works: S Bon. in
Apol panp. a 2.1. resp. 3 p
The first rises from the works themselves, because they are great, paynful,
heroical; and this highly increases our merit. And of this kind of
difficulty, Religion is full; because it contains many payneful things, And
which of them increases merit.
many things contrary to custom, many things above the reach of man, if we
regard nature. Whereupon S. Hierome writes thus to Rusticus a Monk: If thou
desire to follow that which is perfect, go forth with Abraham out of thy
country; S. Hierome. Ep. 4.
and go, thou know not whither. If thou have worldly substance, sell it,
and give it to the poor; if thou have none, thou art eased of a great burden;
follow naked Christ, naked. It is painful, lofty, difficult; but the rewards
are great.

5. An other kind of difficulty, Difficulties rising from corruption of nature
do not increase merit.
says S. Bonauenture, rises from the corruption of man, by reason either of
natural infirmity, or of evil customs, which a man has plunged himself into.
For a covetous man finds much more difficulty in giving, then an other; a
proud man, to be under others; a glutton, to abstain; but this kind of
difficulty is so far from increasing our merit, that it does much diminish
it: because the repugnancie which is in our will, does abate the vigor of it, S
Hier. Ep. 22.
and makes that which we do, less voluntary; whereof the same S. Hierome
speaks excellently well in an other Epistle of his to Eustochium: Thy sister
Biaesilla, elder in years, but thy punie in purpose, after she married a
husband, in seven months fell to be a widow. O unhappy state of man, ignorant
of that which is to come! She lost both the crown of Virginity, and the
pleasure of Marriage; and though she stand in the second rank of purity, what
crosses notwithstanding do thou think she endures every moment? Beholding
daily in her sister that which she has lost, and more hardly wanting the
pleasure which she once experienced, she is feign notwithstanding to take a
lesser crown of Continency.

6. The third difficulty (following S. Bonauenture) is that, Outward occasions
of difficulty are to be avoided.
which rises from outward occasions; as for example, from the presence of an
object, that moves us so much the more violently, from the beautiful aspect of
any thing, and the like; which if we overcome, they add indeed sometimes by
accident and indirectly to our merit and reward, but yet because of themselves
and of their own nature they draw us to ruin, they are by all means to be
shunned and declined by every body; and he that does not shun them, does
not only sin when he falls, but when he lays himself open to the danger
of falling.

Whereupon S. Augustine reciting a speech of one that should say, S. Aug. ^. 250.
de Temp. S. August. ibidem.
he desired something that he might overcome, because it was a brave thing.
What is this, says he, I will have that which I may overcome, but I desire to
live under the ruins? In few words showing, that as it were folly and madness
for a man not to run out of a house, when he sees it falling upon his head,
so it is much greater folly not to fly presently, so emminent dangers of his
soul, as be in the world.

It is not cowardlines to fly the world.
7. And if any body think, that it is but a cowardly part to fly in this
case, and that to remain in danger is rather glorious, and a sign of a noble
mind; let him give ear to that which S. Hierome writes of this very thing,
against Vigilantius the Heretic. Thou will answer, says he, that this is not
to fight, but to fly: S. Hierome cont. Vigilant.
show thy self in the field, confront thy adversary with thy weapons about
thee, that when thou have overcome, thou may be crowned. I confess my
weakness, I will not fight in hope of victory. And what need is there, to leave
that which is certain, and go hunt after that which is uncertain? Thou that
fightest, may overcome, and be overcome. I, if I fly, shall not be overcome,
because I fly, but I fly that I may not be overcome. It is not safe to sleep
near a snake; it may be, he will not bite me, and yet it may be, that at one
time or other he will bite me. Thus S. Hierome argues, aduising, as he says
himself, that which is best for human infirmity.

He that seems to stand^^ out, is overcome.
8. But indeed nothing is stronger then such weakness, nothing weaker then such
boldness on the other side. For the weak, when he flies, ouercometh; for he
could not fly, unless he had overcome first, and utterly rejected the desire
of the present object; and on the other side, that strong man, that taken with
the sweetness of it, remains in the danger, is even then overcome, and shows
himself to be far then weaker, because he has not so much power as to
withdraw himself out of danger. And he may well be said, to be the more
foolishly rash in this kind, because he is blind only in matter of foreseing
and preventing the ruin of his soul, being otherwise in the dangers of his
body but too quicksighted. For who is there that will voluntarily cast himself
into a tempest at sea of purpose, to show his skill in steering the ship, and
not rather keep himself in the harbor, or put-in as fast as he can, before
the storm grow too strong? Which ought much more to be our practice in the
business of our soul, because that which holy Scripture says, E^^l. 3.27.
cannot but be true: He that loves danger, shall perish in it.

An answer to that which is wont to be objected: That Religious people are
bound to more perfection. CHAP. XXIV.
THat which was spoken by our Savior, and we find written in the Ghospel ( To
whom much is given, Luc. 12.48.
much shall be required of him) being spoken indeed to put men forward, and
stir them up to virtuous courses; some there be notwithstanding that make use
of it, to hold people back, and divert them. For they persuade themselves, that
it is the safer course, to content themselves with a kind of mediocritie in
virtue, then by aspiring to perfection, to take upon them so heavy an
obligation, as will prove in effect much more paynful to discharge it, and much
more prejudicial unto them, if they acquit not themselves of it as they ought.
But how wrongfully they allege these things, we will quickly and briefly show.

2. For first we must understand, Much shall be demanded of al Christians.
that this saying of our Savior concerns not only Religious people, but al
Christians, that have been enriched with so many heavenly treasures, and
honored with so many Divine gifts, and bought with the blood of the living
God, and loaded with so many benefits, as daily, and howrely, and every
moment of time they receive. They therefore that are not Religious, must not
think, that they have escaped the rigourous doom of that Sentence, but take it
for a certain truth, that as they have received much, that is, many
unspeakable benefits, they will find themselves also in the number of them, of
whom much, yea an immensitie of correspondance, will be demanded. Whereas
Religion, to our excessive comfort, though it throw more benefits upon us, yet
those very benefits are withal as many helps and furtherances to discharge
and re-inbourse that, The overplus in Religion helps to discharge the debt.
which we owe in regard of them, and of al others which are universal to al
mankind. For as it is the gift of God to fast, to be chaste, to be obedient: so
by the self-same fasting, and being chaste, and obedient, we render in a manner
as much to God, as the gift is worth.

3. Besides that, To be rich, is a disposition for more riches.
this strict denunciation of redemanding that which has been given us, ought
not so much to fright us, as that other promise encourage us: He that has,
shall be given unto him, and he shall abound. For so it is in truth; and the
manner and disposition of Almighty God, is, still more and more to enrich and
fill those that are full and rich. And in some sort we may say, it concerns him
to have an eye* Matthew. 13.12 and 25.29.
that they, upon whom he has heaped so much wealth, leese it not, but be still
receiving more and more at his hands, to strengthen and establish them in that
which formerly they had; as oftimes we see gamesters leese more, that they may
be no loosers; and they that go to law, the more pains they have taken, and
the more money they have spent in it, the more hot they are upon spending.

4. Finally that which we said before, Religious are only bound to aspire to
perfection.
is considerable also in this place, that the perfection of virtue is not so
required at Religious men's hands, as that they are bound to be perfect. And
they that are so much frighted with the obligation which lies upon Religion,
mistake the matter, if they think they are. But they discharge their duty, if
they aspire to perfection, if they keep themselves still in the way toward it.
As it is not required of a Scholar, that he be instantly learned, instantly
excellent at his book, because he is a Scholar, but it is sufficient that he
desire it, and endeavor to it: and the self-same we may say of Religious
people, if they do not wholly cast aside the thought of virtue, but with
convenient care and diligence labor for it, though they be notwithstanding
imperfect, they cannot be said to fail of their duty; and those very steps,
as short as they are, bring them daily nearer and nearer to God.

5. By which we may see, ^
that God deals not s^uerely and rigidly with Religious people, but rather
gently and sweetly; and is so far from ouerchar(...) them, as he lays
rather less upon them, the^ ^hey are able to go through (...) So that when we
meet with one of these, that neglect a Religious (...) fears of this nature,
we may well liken him to that unprofitable and naughty Servant in the Ghospel,
that excused his lazines to his Master in these words: I was afraid, because
thou art a hard man; thou reapest, where thou have not sowed; and gatherest,
Matthew 25.
where thou have not scattered. An allegation both false and impious. For God
is so far from demanding more then he gave, as he requires far less. And
the man was justly convicted and condemned by his Master, out of his own
mouth. They think unworthily of God.
For if he thought he was so hard and severe, it behooued him to be much more
diligent, and watchful, and active in making the advantage of his stock. And
the same we may say of these. For first they err in thinking so unworthily of
that Infinite Goodness and bounty, and casting so grievous an aspersion upon
him, as if he were so cruel as they make him. They should rather think the
truth, that his gifts are never to our ruin, but for our greater benefit and
salvation, and that, whatsoever he requires of us, he first voluntarily
bestows it upon us with a free and liberal hand. Secondly, if they fear,
least they shall be severely punished, if admitting of such a vocation, they
make less profit of it; how much rather ought they to fear, if they reject
the vocation which is offered them? For whatsoever is offered us, is accounted
among the gifts, seeing it was truly given us; and he that rejects such an
offer, does not only wrap-vp his money in his hand kercher, or dig it into the
ground, but, which is worse, he contemnes it, and casts it away. They should
therefore stand in fear of this, and also of that terrible sentence laid upon
that lazy Servant: Lied hand and foot, cast him into utter darkness. And this
is the truth of the business.

Whether the sins of Religious people be greater.
6. But by the way, we must here answer an other doubt, which perhaps staggers a
great many, imagining that the sins of Religious people are far m^re
grievous, then the sins of them that live in the world, and deserve far
greater punishment. Which if it were true, certainly their case were very hard.
We must see therefore, how it stand with them. S. John Chrysostom putting the
question, answers in these words: But thou will say: It is not a fault of
like consideration, S. John Chry^. lib ^ con. v^^up. vi mor.
when he, that lives in the world, sins, and when he that has once wholly
vowed himself to God, falls from his purpose of Religion. For they fall not
from the same height, and so they receive not harm alike. Thou deceauest
thyself mightily, and mistakest the matter, if thou think, that one thing is
required of Secular men, another of Monks. And following this argument at large
with many reasons, he concludes thus: Therefore, that a Secular man, and a
Monk, are both equally bound to the same diligence and care in their life, and
to the highest top of perfection, and that both of them if they fall, shall
receive harm alike, I think no man now, though he be very impudent and
contentious, will deny.

^
7. S. Thomas canuasing this self-same question, and disputing it with all the
subtleties of it, according to the ri^our of Schools, in two several places of
his Works, shows, that setting aside sins of contempt, and such as are
committed against their Vows, al other sins, Venial or Mortal, are rather
less in Religious people, ^
then greater. And because some perhaps might think it an incredible thing,
that it should be so, he gives three reasons of it. First, because the sins,
which proceed not out of a habit and custom, as usually those do which
Secular people commit, but of a sudden motion, which comes upon them as a
great blast of wind, are less voluntary, and therefore happen seldom; and
when they happen, the will of the party that commits them, is not so wholly bent
upon them. Secondly, because whatsoever evil they commit, it is easier drowned
in the good which they do; and their good deeds plead for more favor at the
hands of that infinite Goodness, which is always more inclinable to mercy, then
one fact can exasperate him against them; an example whereof we have in King
Iosaphat, to whom the Prophet spoke in this manner: 2. Paral. 19.2.
And therefore indeed thou deseruedst the wrath of God; but good works have
been sound in thee. Thirdly, as a Religious man has more knowledge of God,
purchased by long familiarity with him; so he cannot so carelessely cast
himself away, and plunge himself so deep into sin, as one that never knew,
what the beauty of Virtue, or the vglines of Sin meant.

8. For even speaking of our body, when a man comes by a fall, there is great
difference in falling by chance when his foot slips, and in casting a man's
self headlong down; for the first helps himself as much as he can, and
rises presently again: the other crusheth himself far more, and thinks not
of rising again, and consequently is more apt to fall an other time, whereas
the first grows more wary and strong after his fall. Which is that which the
Psalmist says in these words: Ps. 36 24.
A just man, when he falls, shall not be bruised.

9. We have also the authority of S. Basil to strengthen us in this point. S.
Basil reg. br. c. 81.
For moving the self-same question (Whether the sins of a Religious man, and
an ordinary man, being the same, be equal?) answers, that in a Religious man
they are rather less. For a Religious man, says he, being careful in seeking
the grace of God, and laboring wholly for it, does not fall of purpose, but by
chance, and against his will. But an ordinary man, regarding neither God nor
himself, and thinking it no great matter, whether he sin, or live well, either
contemns God, or thinks, there is no God at al, Ps. 13.2.
as the Scripture said: The fool said in his heart, There is no God. They are
corrupted, they are made abominable in their studies. And we must know besides,
that the sins of Religious people most commonly happen for their good,
through God's particular direction; God permitting them sometimes to fall, to
the end to cure some pride, which before they had in their mind, as it happened
to S. Peter. These are S. Basi^'s very words. Wherefore if Religion diminish
and lessen our sins rather then aggrauate them, what need any man fear,
least by reason of his good deeds more be demanded of him, then he may
discharge with ease? We may conclude therefore, and say with joy that, 2.
Para^. 3^ 19.
which we find in holy Scripture: Our good Lord will be merciful to all that
seek with all their heart the Lord God of their Fathers, and will not impute unto
them, that they are less sanctified.

Against those that object, that some Religious people live not well. CHAP. XXV.
SOme have often in their mouth the faults and sins of Religious people, who
either correspond not to their duty in Religion, nor to the sanctity of the
place, wherein they live, or, which is worse, forsake Religion, and having put
their hand to the plough, look back again, and for this they highly
discommend Religious courses.

2. But it is very hard and partial dealing, to impute the fault of a few, to
the rest that are faultlesse; Hard dealing.
and much harder, to lay it upon the course itself, which doubtless is holy,
and the work of God's own hand. And indeed the truth is, that many of those
faults, which are so blazed abroad against Religious people, are false; many
of them maliciously forged against them, the Devil laboring thereby to impair
the credit of those Servants of God, who are his greatest enemies. And what
wonder is it (says S. Augustine) if men speak il of the servants of God, S.
Augustine Epist. 136.
and labor to stayne their reputation, when they cannot deprave their life;
seeing they cease not daily to blaspheme God our Lord, when, whatsoever in his
just and secret judgment he does against their will, pleases them not?

In a coorse cloth, greater spots are not seen.
3. Though there be an other reason, why they talk so much of them, to wit,
because the beauty and dignity of the State makes them easily mark the
least blemish in it; as the least stayne is a disgrace to a rich garment, or to
a white piece of cloth; whereas in a piece of canuas or sackcloth no notice
is taken of greater spots; not because they are not greater, but because the
stuff in which they are, is so coorse, that that new blemish is not seen in
it. For so in a Secular state we let thousands of greater faults pass, and
there is not a word made of them, because it is no news in that State; but in
a Religious course the least fault that is, is presently spyed, and yet they
leave not to be of the least.

S. Basil Constable. Ma. c. 7.
4. That which S. Basil says to this purpose, is also very true, that Secular
people have a strange conceit of Religious men, as if together with their
State, they had presently changed their nature, and were not men, but of some
other far different mold; Religious m^n are men.
and consequently they wrong the servants of God, and think sometimes, that
they must scarce eat meat, as if they were not made of flesh and blood; and
if they see any of them attend to the necessities of their body, they load
them with reproaches and slanders, and turning their calumniations from one
upon all the rest, they call them al gluttons and bellie-guts, and think not how
themselves do daily feast it, and though they eat often in a day, and cram
themselves with a great deal of flesh-meate, and power down wine by whole
bowle-fuls, yet they gape after meat, as dogs that are let loosse out of their
chain half-starued. Thus speaks S. Basil in defense of Religious people.

5. But let us grant, False Christians and false Clerks as well as Monks.
that Religious men have sometimes their faults, and that some of them have
fallen, and do fall from Religion; must we therefore condemn Religious
courses? or censure the whole State, because some are sloathful and careless?
S. Augustine speaks wittily to them, that objected this against Monks, in
these words: And we also know some such people, but the devout Confraternitie
is not lost, because of some that profess that which they are not. There be as
well false Monks, as false Clerks, and false Christians. And S. Hierome says
very truly, that in all states and conditions the bad are mingled with the good;
and so much the more, the higher and more perfect and more eminent the State
is, for the greater the burden is, the less wonder it is to find some in this
weakness of humane nature, that are ready to shake it off, or carry it
faintly; and yet their slacknes ought not to lessen our conceit and esteem of
so eminent a calling. When the Heretic Heluidius had proclaimed war against
Virginity, among other things, for which he took occasion to calumniate that
State, he said, that some Virgins were tauerne-hanters. S Hier. con. (...).
And how does S. Hierome refute him? I, says S. Hierome, say more; some among
them are adulteresses; and, which is more to be wondered at, there be
Clergymen that are hucksters, and Monks dishonest. But who does not presently
understand, that neither a tauerne-hanter can be a Virgin, nor an adulterer a
Monk, nor a huckster a Cleargie-man? Is it the fault of Virginity, if a
counterfaiter of Virginity be in fault?

6. Let us look upon the whole Church of God, The Church is holy, though some
be not holy.
and argue in behalf of a member thereof, from the whole body. For though there
be many in the Catholic Church, that live deboisht, yet the Church is still
called Holy; and their wicked lives hinder not, but that the whole company of
the Faithful, is truly said by the Apostle to be without spot or wrinkle;
because we must not regard, how things have been defaced by most, but what was
the first institution in itself, as God ordained it. Ephesians. 5.27.
And in like manner we may say of Religious Orders; they leese nothing of their
sanctity, because some among them be not Saints. And if we weigh it well, the
argument is yet much stronger in behalf of Religious Orders; for if the Church
be styled al fair, Cant. 4.
and al of it the beloved of God, notwithstanding that there be more bad then
good in it, and more that walk the broad and spacious way, then the narrow; how
much more reason have we to give Religious Orders the like honor, seeing there
be so many good among them, and so few that are bad?

7. And besides the holiness of their Institute, The virtues of most, recompense
the faults of a few.
we may clear them upon an other ground; for whatsoever blemish may fall upon
them by the faults of some, it is abundantly stricken-out by the virtuous lives
and good deeds of others. Do not (says S. Hierome) cast thy eye upon Judas
denying, but look upon Paul confessing. And we have cause to be much more
animated at the sight of so many Paul's, S. Hier. ep. 34.
then to be disco^forted with one Judas. To which purpose S. Gregory Nyssen
also speaks in his book of Virginity, answering those that carped at so
holy a life, by occasion of some, S. Greg. Nyss l. de Virg. c. vlt.
that having vndertooken it, were afterward overcome and vanquished. I do not
deny (says he) but that it is hard matter, and beyond the common strain;
neither is it any wonder, if in so difficult a business some be overcome with
the toil of it, some by other means. And yet we must not be so discouraged at
it, as to forgo so rare a thing for that fear: but rather confidently venture
upon so profitable a navigations, in the Ship of Continency, with Christ our
Pilot, M^rc^ants le^ue not tra^ling, b^c^^se some suffer ship^rack.
with the sweet gale of the Holie-Ghost. For neither they that go to sea and
trade in merchandise, do abandon that course, because they understand, that
sometimes some have suffered shipwreck. Besides that, it is most absurd and
unjust, to condemn one that has always lived well, for a wicked man; and to
detest the course of life in which he was, for one fault into which perhaps he
fell, and on the other side, to think that a man that has spent his whole life
in sin and wickedness, took notwithstanding the best course for himself. For
if it be a hain us matter to sin once, and for that cause thou think it
better to abstain from those more sublime Counsels and purposes; in how far
worse state is he, who has been always wallowing in the filth of vice? Thus
spoke S. Gregory Nyssen.

8. This is the miserable frayltie of this life, so long as we are strangers
and pilgrims from God; Matt. 18.7.
and as our Savior foretold us: It is necessary, that scandals should happen:
and he that wondereth at it, seems not to understand where he lives, He that
wondereth at (...)
and what himself is made of, seeing he admireth it so much in others. Whereupon
Cassian, having related the memorable patience of Paphnutius, who being accused
of theft by an other Monk, voluntarily underwent the punishment that was laid
upon him, though indeed he were innocent, concludes his narration in these
words: And let us not wonder, that in the company of holy men, C^ss Co^l 14.
c. 16
there lie lurking some, that are wicked and detestable; because while we are
trodden and bruised in the floare of this world, it is necessary, that among the
choicest wheat, chafe should be mingled, which is to be cast into everlasting
^ire. Finally if we call to mind, that there was a Satan among the Archangels,
a Judas among the Apostles, a Nicolas (broacher of an abominable heresy) among
the chosen Deacons, it can be no wonder, that wicked men should be found
mingled among the order of Saints. And to insist a little more upon this
example of Paphnutius, The rare charity of Paphnutius.
and apply it to our times, if any man be offended, that in a house of that
holiness, in an Age so full of fervor, there was some one found so wickedly
malicious against one of his Brethren, as to accuse him falsely in that manner;
why should he not be as much edifyed at the humility, patience, and charit^e
of Paphnutius, who to save the credit of his neighbor, and such a wicked
neighbor, res^lued with himself to abide the disgrace of so foul a fault, and
to beare-out with head and shoulders the whole storm of this infamy? Was not
the virtue and simplicity of this Saint much greater, then the malice and
envy of that sinner? Besides that, in the whole Monastery there was this one
wicked man, and he only to be found in so many years continuance; all the rest
were good, and l^^d lives worthy of so holy a vocation. What peruersenes
therefore is it to be more forward, to take exceptions upon one man's
misbehauiour, then to comm^nd and think honorably of the course, upon the
virtue of so many?

9. At Bona in S. Augustin's Monastery, there fell a great quarrel betwixt a
couple, one char^ing another with a heinous crime, ^
so that one of them must nec^ss^rily be guilty, either of an enormous fact,
or of a horrible lie. The people, that had ^ot the voice of it, began much to
admire and complain. Whereupon S. Augustine wrote a notable letter unto them,
first reprehending them, for casting an aspersion upon al Religious, because of
one man's fact, and secondly he says, a^ Cass^an a little before, S Aug Ep ^^.
that it is no wonder nor no news, for some such thing sometimes to happen
among such men. What do these people (says S. Augustine) strive for, and what
do they aim at, but whenever a Bishop, or a Cleargieman, or a Monk, or a
Nunnefalles, to believe that al are such, though al can not be convinced to be
such? And yet when a wife is found in adultery, they neither put away their
wives, nor accuse their own mothers. But when either a false imputatio^ is
laid upon the^ that profess this holy name, or some true crime of theirs
discovered, they urge, they bestirre themselves, they glory to have it
believed of al. And a little after: How vigilant soever the order of my house
be, I am a man, I live among men, Genesis 9.
I dare not presume, that my house shall be better then the Ark of Noah, where
among eight persons one was a reprobate; or better then the house of Abraham,
Genesis 2^.10.
where it was spoken: Cast out the handmaid and her son; or better then the
house of Isaac, to whom, of the two twins, it was said, and done: I loved
Jacob, Mal. 1.3. Gen 28 2 R^g 15.
but Esau I hated; or better then the house of Jacob, where the son defiled
by incest the bed of his father; or better then the house of David, whose son
lay with his sister, whose other son rebelled against so holy a meeknes of
his father; or better then the company which our Savior had, where the eleven
good, tolerated the perfidious theeuing Judas; or finally better then Heaven,
from whence the Angels fell. And in conclusion, notwithstanding he acknowledges
that these things cannot be avoided, he pleads strongly for Religion, and
main^ayneth the honor and dignity of it to the full. Though we be sorry (say^h
he) for some dross that comes off, we have comfort of more ornament that
remains, do not therefore for the scumme that offends your eyes, loathe the
oyle-presses, which fill the cellars of our Lord with the fruit of a more bright
shining oil. He calls the Church and the Souls of the Faithful, Cellars of
our Lord; giving us to understand, that both the Church and every particular
Soul is enlightened with this oil, that is, by a Religious State, and by the
work and example of Religious people.

10. Finally it is not amiss to reflect, They are not Angels that make this
objection.
that if they were Angels that objected these things, they might have some
right to do it, because they live without flesh and blood, free from sin;
and it were to be wished, if it were possible, that we might exchange this our
life with theirs. But seeing they be Secular people that make this business, and
all this comparison is betwixt their life and ours, I know not what they can
pretend in all this discourse, seeing they cannot be so shameless, as to
prefer their State before a Religious State, finding, as they do, in their
own, that they fall so often; that virtue is so scarce among them; that their
rewards and deserts are so short in the world to come. S. Ansel. Ep. 3.
To which purpose S. Anselm^ has this excellent saying in one of his Epistles:
Perhaps some body will say, that in the Order of Monks also there is danger. O
the man that says so! Why does he not think what he says? O reasonable
creature! Is this reasonable counsel, because there is danger every where,
therefore choose to say where the danger is greater? Finally he that
endeavors to love God only, if he keep his purpose to the end, a sure of
salvation But he that will love the world, if he do not forgo his purpose
before the end, either must not expect salvation, or his salvation will be
doubtful, or less. Thus says S. Anselme.

An Answer to their Argument that say: If al should become Religious, the world
would perish. CHAP. XXVI.
SOME object sometimes against Religous courses, as a great inconvenience, that
they will be wel-nigh the destruction of the world; because, if al betake
themselves to a single life, the world must needs be dispeopled for want of
posterity. This is an ancient objection.
This is no new objection, but advanced in ancient times, and canuassed many
Ages past. For S. Augustine propounds it in a certain place after this manner:
I know some that mutter: S. August, de ^ono ^oning. c. 10.
What and if al will abstain from al carnal copulation, how shall mankind
subsist? S. John Chrysostom does not only propound the question, but heapeth
many inconveniences that would follow. If al should follow that good, S. John
Chry de vir. ^. 15
says he not to touch a woman at al, al things would perish, cities,
families, lands, trades, cattle, and whatsoever grows out of the earth. For as
when a General is slain in the field, the whole army must needs be put to
route: so if you take Man out of the way, who is the Prince of this world,
nothing else can subsist, or be preserved, and consequently this Counsel would
fill the whole world with innumerable calamities.

2. This objection therefore is ancient, and long ago strangled by the holy
Fathers. S. Augustine answers thus: Would to God al would do so; the Cit^ie
of God would be much sooner filled, A happy thing if al would live single.
and the end of the world hastened on. And his answer is good; for how much
better were it, that the Kingdom of God were come, which we daily beg, and
have been taught to do so by our Savior himself, and that GOD (as the Apostle
speaks) were Alin Al, which shall be, when Christ our Savior shall have
subjected al to his heavenly Father, 1. Cor. 15.28.
then to prolong our lives in this confusion and mingle of al things? And if it
should fal-out (as S. Augustine wishes) that al should live a single life and
chaste, it were an evident sign of the will of God, that the world should have
end; and it can not come to a better end, then if generally al should
consecrate themselves, soul and body, to so holy a life.

But it is (...).
3. S. Hierome answers the same objection after an other manner: Fear not,
says he, least al be Virgins; Virginity is a hard thing, and therefore rare,
because it is ^ard. Which answer of S. Hierom's is the stronger, if we compare
it with the saying of our Savior: Not al receive this word. Many there be,
whom God, out of his secret judgments, Mat 19.^^:
does not vouchsafe so great a benefit; others he calls to be partakers of it,
and they give no ear to his calling, but charmed with the pleasures of this
world, they cannot get their feet out of the nets, in which they are entangled;
finally others upon other motives and hindrances, are so held back, that the
truth of that, which Truth itself delivered in the Ghospel, is very plainly to
be seen: Matthew ^^.13.
The way is narrow, which leads to heaven; and few do find it. Which was
spoken indeed of the ordinary way, which al Christians ought to walk, but is
much more verifyed in the way, which Religious people take; i^^omuch that in
regard of the narrownes of it, al Secular ways may be said to be broad. And
not only the infirmity of man (which takes place in the far greater part)
does not allow this benefit in the common and ordinary among men, but it
belongs also to the provident wisdom of Almighty God, God also provides
otherwise.
to have care, that there be always some to attend to posterity, so long as
his will is this inferior world should last; which providence of his watching
over the very beasts and worms of the earth, and preserving every thing in
kind, as it was first created, no man can have cause to misdoubt, that he will
forsake mankind.

4. S. John Chrysostom does laugh at these people, S. Io. Chry. de Virg c. 15.
They should rather care for their souls.
that are so sollicitous to uphold the world, and laboring so earnestly, that
mankind fall not to decay, which concerns them not to think of, lay aside al
care of their own soul, as if it belonged not unto them; and consequently,
that they do it not out of a desire of the common good, but to color their
negligence and sloth. And tells us withal a truth, which is worth the
observing, that Marriage of itself does not propagate mankind, because the
parties are often barren, as it happened in Abraham; but it is the blessing which
God gives; and God can multiplye men as he thinks good. Then he shows,
Marria^e (...) n^w*
how there were two reasons in the institution of Marriage; the one, to beget
children; the other to extinguish natural lust in that kind; and says, that
the first now cease, seeing the world is so full, that it is rather
ouercharged; as for the other reason, there can be no question, but that lust
is far more perfectly extinguished by the grace of God, and by the virtue of
Chastity, then by the use of Matrimony.

5. But some body will say, Distinction of Sexes is not mad^ void by ^ single
(...).
that the difference of Sexes, and the faculty of generation, will be in vain
in them that do not marry; and yet Nature has given it us, and God has so
appointed; and no man that is wise, does any thing in vain. This is the
argument both of ancient Heretics, and of those of our days, that maliciously
oppose and cauil at the wholesome continency, with which the holy Church is
so much honored and stored. We must therefore make the same answer, which we
make to heretics, to wit, that whatsoever is instituted for the good of the
whole kind, is not idle or in vain, though in some particulars of that kind it
has not the effect, if in others it have. We see the like in most natural
things; for in all kinds of fruit and herbs there comes a great deal of seed,
which is never sown, rather a small deal of it is used to that end; and yet no
man ever accused Nature for it, as if it had made it in vain. And we may say
the like of man, though in man there is yet a further thing; for Continency in
this kind, being free and voluntary, and in every bodies power to practice,
or not to practice it, it was not fit, that Nature should determine it, but the
will of Man; neither that we should be borne so, but that we should out of
reason and judgment embrace it. Wherefore it was fitting, that al should
equally have the power by nature, both they that would use it, and they that
for the Kingdom of heaven would ref^ayne the use of it. And this is answer
enough to this point.

6. But we have an other reason still to deal with, not altogether unlike
this, which we have now confuted, of some that are not sollicitous for ^he
continuance of the whole world but of their own House and Family. The (...)
posterity
And therefore if their only son, or only daughter make choice of a
Religious State, they lament and mourn, and, which is worse, they repine at
it, as if their wh^le Family should be quite rooted out And to say the truth,
it is but a foolish and impertinent kind of grief. For which is more to be
stood upon, the sanctity of a S^ule, or Posteri^ie? And what good is there in
poste^itie? If they fear they shall want an heir, upon whom their lands may
descend, first they have a world of kindred, and perhaps more then enough;
secondly, there will never want poor people, in whom they may make Christ their
heir, upon far better conditions then their own child. For one man that is
heir to an other that is dead, cannot requite him that made him his heir, but
Christ our Savior does then most of al recompense a man with rewards eternal.
Moreover, what would they do, if that only son of theirs have no issue? For
so their line would fail, and, which is more to be lamented, without thanks
and without reward. Which argument S. H^erome does chiefly insist upon, S H^er.
(...). 10.
when he persuades Furia not to marry. Do thou fear the li^e of Furia shall
fail, and that thy father shall not have a little one of thee, to creep in his
breast? for all that are married, have children. It is ridiculous to hope for
certain that, which thou see many have not, and many leese it, when they
have it. To whom shall thou leave al thy riches? To Christ, who cannot dye.
What heir shall thou have? Him that is thy Lord.

The happiness of a Re(...) life, (...).
7. But to grant, that it is happiness to preserve a man's Family; how small, how
short, how far inferior is it to the happiness of a Religious life? For not
only particular men, but whole Families dye, and once come to an end* and
though they continue never so long, yet in time they must needs decay, and a^
last be wholly extinguished. Seeing therefore they a^e subject to so many
casualties, is not he a very fool, that shall feed himself with hope, that his
issue shall always continue, and moreover strive so much, that it may continue,
as to oppose himself to the Counsels of God, and endeavor to alter and hinder
them?

Too much desire of posterity is not Christian-like.
8. Finally how does this extrauagant desire of continuing a descent, become a
Christian? for in a Heathen and Infidel it might be perhaps more tolerable.
For, as Aristotle writes, the reason why men and beasts have a desire of issue
ingrafted in them, is because, says he, al things covet to be always, and
always to continue, but because they cannot in themselves compass it, being
subject to dye, Arist. 1. Pol. c. 1.
they labor to compass it at least in their own kind, in which they seem
after a manner themselves to continue, so long as a part cut of from them does
continue. What force has this reason in the light of Christianity, wherein we
have so certain a promise of an Eternity in our own persons, both in body
and soul, that we need not seek that in others, which we shall have in
ourselves? And this is that which Nature chiefly desires. But the misery is,
that most men do not govern themselves according to this Divine light, but
suffer themselves to be lead by Sense, and their natural inclinations, which, I
must needs confess, is a most corrupt and most dangerous proceeding.

Against the fear of some, that they shall want necessaries for their body.
CHAP. XXVII.
LEt us prevent, and cure, if we can, their fear also, that mistrust, least if
they forsake al, they shall not have wherewithal to pass their life. Two causes
of thi^ fear.
Of which fear what can be said more proper, then that which is in the Psalm?
And they spoke evil of God, and said: Can God prepare a table in the desert? S.
Bonauerture in his Apology for the poor, Ps 77.21. S. Bonan. in Apol. p^uy.
4. ris^ 3. par. a. 2.
reduces all this difference to two heads, and says, it proceeds either of
Infidelity, as in them that do not believe, that God has care of what
happens among men, at leastwise not of them in particular; or it comes out of
Pusillanimitie, which is ever coupled with a slacknes in the love of God, and
an earnest love of ourselves; whereas they that frame a right conceit of the
goodness and providence of God, cannot doubt but that God has more care of
their life, then they themselves.

2. Whereupon S. Augustine says: S. Aug de Orat (...).
A just man cannot want daily food, seeing it is vritten: Our Lord will not kill
the soul of a just man with hunger. And again: I was young, and became old,
and have not seen a just man forsaken, nor his seed seeking bread. And our
Savior promises, that al things shall be added to them, that seek the
Kingdom of God and the justice thereof; and whereas al things are God's, he
that has God, Dan 14.
can want nothing, if he be not wanting to God. So when Daniel was by the
King's commandment shut-vp in the Den of lions, God sent him his dinner, and
among the hungry wild beasts, 3. Reg. 17.
the man of God was fed. So Helias was maintained in his flight, the crows
ministering unto him, and the birds bringing him meat in time of persecution.
S. Hier^^ c. 5. (...).
S. Hierome says the same in fewer words: Let no man doubt of the promises of
Truth. Let man be as he ought, and presently al things shall be added to him,
for whom al things were made. A true and solid reason! For all things in the
world being made for Man, they never withdraw themselves from his service,
unless he first withdraw himself from the service of God. And if he return to
serve God as he ought, he may claim as it were by right al other things as his
own and due unto him.

3. S. Ambrose expounding that model of an Apostical man, S. (...) l. 6. (...).
which is set down by our Savior in S. Luke (without satchel or scrip) says
thus: Protected by Faith, let him make account that the less he requires, the
more he may have. Seeing therefore we have so many testimonies b^th of the
holy Fathers, and of holy Scripture, in behalf of this providence of
Almighty God* and the care which he has of his, that we shall scarce find any
thing more often and more expressly c^mmended unto us, it can be no small fault,
as I said before, to doubt thereof; for it were to make God either covetous or
forgetful; vnworth^e things both of them of so infinite a Majesty. For we
cannot possibly imagi^, how he can be either more magnificent and profuse in
giving, or more liberal of his love, or more careful in providing, or more
ready in doing for us. And S. Augustine does deservedly reprehend such as have
so mean a conceit of God, in these words: S Aug. de (...).
Do thou think, that any thing shall be wanting to a Christian? to a servant
of God? to one that is given to good works? to one that is dear to his Lord
and Master? Do thou think that he that feeds Christ is not fed by Christ?
Do thou think, that he to whom Divine and heavenly things are given, shall
want earthly things? from whence comes this distrustful thought? what makes
an unfaithful heart in the house of God? Thus says S. Augustine.

4. Al which will be yet more evident, if we consider the peculiar right, which
Religious people have in this kind, Men are (...) for Religious people. (...)
their P^uertie.
whether we regard God, or man. For speaking of men, there be many reasons,
that oblige them to furnish Religious people with all kind of necessaries. For
first, Religious people having given al they had to the poor, and brought
themselves voluntarily to Poverty, deserve likewise, that others should give
them wherewith to live; and they are in the right that are of opinion, that in
this there is not only an obligation of Charity, but in some sort, of Justice.
An other reason is in regard of the ^abour and pains, 1. Cor. 9.11. 2. Tim.
2.6.
which they take for the eternal good of their neighbor: for the workman is
worthy of his reward, and they that sow spiritual things, must reap carnal
things, as the Apostle speaks. And in an other place, he says: ^ The
husbandman that labors, must first gather of the fruit. The force of which
reason will be the more evident, And of the pains they take for their soul.
if we consider the cause, why Prelates demand sustenance as of justice due unto
them; for sustenance is not due unto them, as honor is due to power and
authority, but as wages is due for work and labor. Religious people therefore
having their part in this work and labor, and laboring so hard as they do,
it is but reason they should have part also of the fruit, specially so much as
is necessary to continue their labor. Which is not only of force in
Preachers, and such as labor immediately for the good of their Neighbors, but
in others that employ themselves in any profitable course for them. For they
that minister at the Altar, of the Sacrifice whereof al Faithful are partakers,
and they that attend to Prayer and Contemplation, and the Study of holy
Scripture, and such other spiritual functions, as are for the benefit of the
whole Church, al of them, as I said, have right to be maintained of the peoples
liberality.

5. A third reason is grounded in Religious perfection. For all Divines agreing
that alms is first to be given to them that are better, And of their virtue.
and rather to them then to others, is follows that they are in a perfect
State, and live in a course that is furnished with all kind of virtue, are to be
preferred far before al others. To which purpose S. Hierome applies that
which is written in S. Luke: Make unto you friends of the Mammon of iniquity;
that when you shall fail, they may receive you into the eternal Tabernacles;
Luc. 16.9. S. Hier. contra Vigi.
and shows, that it cannot agree to ordinary poor people. Are they poor,
says he, amidst whose filth and nastines, fiery lust does command? Can they
have eternal tabernacles, that neither have them in present, nor to come? For,
not simply the poor, but the poor in spirit, Mat. 5.3. Ps. 40.1.
are styled blessed, of whom it is written: Blessed is he, that understands
over the poor and needy; our Lord will deliver him in the evil day. In
maintayning the ordinary poor, there needs no understanding, but pity; in
the holy poor, there needs the understanding of Beatitude, to bestow upon him
that is ashamed to take, and when he takes, is sorry that he reapes carnal
things, having sowed spiritual. S Aug in Ps. 101. ^on^. 3^
And S. Augustine has the like saying upon the Psalm: The noble Cedars of
Libanus, the lofty rich men of this world, when they hear with fear, Blessed
is he that understands over the poor and needy, they look into their
goods, their farms, al their superfluous wealth, in which they seem so
lofty, and give them to the servants of God, they give orchards, they build
Churches and Monasteries, they gather sparrowes that make their neasts in the
Cedars of Libanus. It is therefore as it were a kind of impost or custom due
to Religious people from the Seculars, and Secular people understand it so, and
that makes them so free and open-handed, and always so ready to supply al
their necessities.

6. An other ground of this right (for so we may call it) more solid then the
other, God obliged to have care of Religious people.
is GOD himself; not only in regard of the general providence which he has
over al things in general, and provides for the birds of the air, and the
flowers of the earth, or which he has over al men, though they be wicked,
rayning, and making his Sun to shine upon them; or over the just, of whom it
is written: I saw not a just man forsaken, nor his seed seeking bread. But
Religious men have a particular reason proper to themselves; Ps. 36.25.
because, forsaking their possessions, and their hopes, they have cast
themselves wholly upon his fatherly charity. So that though there were nothing
else, this were sufficient to oblige, as I may say, his goodness to have care of
them, as a father of his children. For God is not one, that will suffer himself
to be overcome with liberality and munificence; and consequently, we are so
far from leesing any thing, when we forsake al we have, as we are rather
gainers by it; the infinite wisdom of God taking upon him the charge of
providing for us, so that we may be assured, Our for^cast very short.
that we shall want nothing. On the other side, when we will take upon us to
provide and care for ourselves by our own wit and forecast, how many things
must we needs want? For our forecast is so slender and so short, whether we be
to provide for the future, or to order things present, that we must needs often
fall into many great errors and inconveniences. S Io. Chrysostom. him. 50. ad pop.
Whereupon S. John Chrysostom gives us this Caveat: Take no thought for thine
own, but leave it to God. For if thou leave it to God, he will provide. And
again in an other Homily, which is al in commendation of a Monastical life,
he reckons this among the special benefits if God, I^. ho. 57.
because if God feed al flesh, much more will he feed his servants, that have
consecrated themselves unto him; and consequently, al things necessary are
derived unto them out of the providence of God, as out of a fountain of running
water. By which similitude of a fountain, he would give us to understand, both
the abundance and perpetuity of these benefits, and also that we come by them
without any labor, as wa^er springs from a fountain.

7 And it is a pleasant thing to behold the examples of this providence of God
over Religious people, and to read the many testifications thereof, which are
upon record in ancient histories almost without number. The providence of God
toward Abbot Hellen.
But that is singular, which Palladius recounteth of Abbot Hellen; who falling
a-sleep, after he had long fasted, there came an Angel, and awaking him, bad
him eat of that which was set before him. And rising he saw that there was a
large fountain of water suddenly sprung-vp by him, and abundance of green
herbs round about him, and tasting of both, he said, he never in his life
dined better. And afterward when he wanted sustenance, he ever was wont to
kneel down and offer up his prayers to God, and presently he was served with
diverse kinds of meat, with new bread, olives, and other fruits. What can be
more loving, or more pleasant to think of, then such a providence, which
stoopes so low as to act the part of a Steward? Or why should we think, he will
forsake his other servants, seeing he was so careful to provide for this his
servant by so daily a miracle, as if he had been his Clerk? But, as I said,
the Lives of Saints are full of these kind of examples, but we will make choice
of two especially, not unlike the one to the other, and taken out of two
Religious Families very like also together.

And two Dominican Friars.
8. For S. Dominick in the beginnings of his Order, sending his Religious into
diverse places, two and two together, according to the manner set down by our
Sauiou^, to preach penance: it happened that two of them being fasting and very
wea^^e with their journey, the ninth hour of the day being past, were
discoursing somewhat heavily betwixt themselves, how they might get some
relief, in that poor and unknown place; and as they were talking, there came
unto them a tal comely man in somewhat a strange kind of habit, and gave them
a good check for their weak and small faith. Could you, said he, believe God so
far, as to forsake al for his sake, and cannot you now believe, that he has
care of you? He that gives beasts their food, will not suffer his children to
dye for hunger, which you this day shall abundantly experience. And vanishing
out of their sight (for it was an Angel) they went a little onwards on their
journey; and coming to the next village, while they were at their prayers, a
Priest invited them very kindly home; and as they were going to his house, a
Gentleman met them, and would by all means they should go with him; and as
these two were thus strayning courtesy together, the Lord of the place seeing
them by chance, ouer-ruled the business, and bad both the Friars, and the
Priest, and the Gentleman to his house, and feasted them very nobly.

And two of S. Francis his Order Ps. 54.^3.
9. And it is recorded also of S. Francis, that when he sent any of his Friars
in Mission, he was never wont to give them any thing toward their charges
upon the way, but that only verse of the Psalm: Cast thy thought upon our
Lord, and he will maintain thee; the faith of which Verse was as good to them
as any money. It happened therefore, that two of them, having traveled almost
all the day long, what with emptines, what with wearines, began to ^aint; and
though they begged relief, no body gave them any thing; til at last there met
them a young man, that understanding of them the cause, why they were so weary
and sad, gave them a couple of loaves; and as they sat down to eat them, he
reprehended them sharply in these words: Men of little faith, why did you
mistrust the Divine providence? Why did you not call to mind the words of the
Prophet, which the holy Father has so often inculcated to you: Cast thy
thought upon our Lord and he will maintain thee; seeing his goodness is not
wanting to the very beasts of the field? Wherefore know, that God differred
his help for no other reason, but to punish this diffidence of yours with
hunger. And having held this and the like discourses with them, he vanished out
of their sight.

10. Let others therefore in God's name have their lands, and possessions, and
rents, and duties gathered with much toil and labor, subject to hair, and
drowth, (...) Lordships belonging to Religious people.
and rain, and other mischances; we have two Lordships, as I may call them, the
rents whereof are certain, and free from al miscarrying; to wit, first the
Providence of Almighty God, in a manner obliged unto us through his own
infinite goodness, and that act of ours, when we left al for his love: and
secondly the Relief from our Neighbors, due in a manner not only of charity,
but of a kind of justice. And this is that which the Prophet ^^ay seems to
promise, when he says: Es. 60.16.
Thou shall suck the m^lk of nations, and shall be fed at the breasts of Kings.
For by Nations, we may understand the common people, by Kings, rich men, and
men of authority; whose liberalities the Prophet compares to milk and a woman's
breast, because milk is the juice of harder meat, and of meat which is not
gotten but with some labor, and some work of nature in the nurse to make it;
and yet the infant sucks it without labor, and with a great deal of pleasure.
So Religious people have that for nothing, which others purchase with a great
deal of labor, and sweat, and trouble, and oftimes not without danger. So
that they may be well likened in this to the ancient Hebrews, Ps. 104 44.
of whom it is written: And they possessed the labors of people.

11. We may therefore conclude, that he that misdoubteth, least in Religious
poverty, that which is necessary, should be wanting, wants not only judgment
and consideration, but eyes to see, how many thousands of men and women
consecrated to God, have been in all Ages, and are to this day maintained
through his goodness and providence, and with such abundance and certainty,
that no Secular people can more certainly rely upon their lands of
inheritance. For they also have their lands, to wit, those two Lordships, as I
said, so rich and plentiful, that if our Lord should ask them, Luc. 22.35.
as anciently he asked his Apostles: When I sent you without satchel or scrip,
did you want any thing? they must of force answer with joy and thanksgiving,
as the Apostles did: Nothing.

Of the fear, which others have, least they may hasten their death, by the
incommodities, which they shall suffer. CHAP. XXVIII.
WE have cured this fear; yet there remains an other, which also concerns
our life, which as it is the dearest thing we have, so naturally nothing is
more hateful and more detestable then that, which either bereaues us wholly of
it, or in part diminishes it And to any man's thinking, it cannot be but that
our life should be in some measure shortened with the labors, and watchings,
and continual pains, and many incommodities, which a Religious course must
necessarily inuolue. Whereupon besides the hastening of our end, some may have a
scruple, least they be guilty of their own death, by thus voluntarily,
through corporal austerities cutting off the time, which is allotted them to
live. To answer this objection therefore, we will begin with this scruple; for
that being taken away, the rest will be easy to answer.

It is meritorious to shorten out days.
2. We must therefore understand, that Divines, who dispute this question at
large, make no doubt, but that it is lawful for a man to shorten his days, and
not only lawful, but commendable and meritorious. For though it be not lawful
of purpose to kill ourselves; yet to do some good thing, whereupon it shall
follow, that our life will be in no small measure shortened, is not only lawful,
but oftimes most acceptable to God. And we may iustifye it by many presidents,
and particularly by the ancient approved custom of the Church of God, in
appointing long fasts, and laying most grievous pennances upon such as
offended; which doubtless could not but cut off not a little, but much time of
their life.

Worldly people do the like for other ends.
3. And it is the more certain, the Religious people offend not in this kind,
because whatsoever incommodities they suffer in Religion, others suffer as much
in the world for other ends. For if Religious people watch al night, many
tradesmen do the like for gain; if they suffer cold, and hungar, and travel
much on foot, how many poor people be there, that are in far greater want,
both of relief and apparel, and other necessaries, and yet live? It is evident
therefore, that it is not rashness, and that we ought not to have any scruple
of doing that for the service of God, which so many do for the love of the
world.

4. Wherefore this point being cleared, that we are not murderers of ourselves:
If the case were so, that Religion did hasten our death, how glorious a thing
were it to be of so noble a spirit, as to contemn al things, even our own
life, for God? And if Religion did shorten our days, as Martyrdom does take
our life quite from us, might we not justly in this respect account Religion a
kind of Martyrdom? Religion a kind of Martyrdom.
For though we be not cut off suddenly, and with loss of blood, that does not
alter the case; for we find that S. Marcellus is accounted a Martyr, though he
lost no blood, but dyed in a cage of wild beasts, by the continual stench of
the place; and S. Pontianus, though banished into the Island of Sardinia (which
at that time was held to be a pestilent air) he pined away by little and
little; and others, that either with labor of digging in mines, or with the
weight of irons, in length of time, have come to their end. If therefore
Religion also should deal thus with us, how much should we think ourselves
beholding to it for making us Martyrs, A happiness t^l (...) our life shortened.
and bestowing so great a good upon us, as is Everlasting glory in heaven, and
bringing us so much the sooner unto it, which of itself is generally accounted
a great happiness; and taking us out of this mortal life, which is so barren of
al goodness, that in comparison of the life to come, it has no good in it, but
rather much evil? For we live here continually among so many traps to catch
us, that we do but prolong our misery, and increase affliction; and as long
as it lasts, we must of force abide the cruel assaults of our spiritual
enemies, and stand to the continual hazard of the combat betwixt us and the
Devil, the event whereof is so uncertain, and withal of so main importance.
What therefore, as I said, should we desire more then once to see an end of so
many evils, and such fearful dangers, and to end them in so blessed a manner
as we may in Religion? For Religion, as we showed in the first book, affords
extraordinary helps in that doubtful passage; so that whereas the very
thought of it is dreadful to others, the thing itself to us is sweet, secure,
and to be desired, in regard we have so long before shaken off al things,
which, as so many setters, are wont to hinder others, when the how^e of
parting comes; and enjoy moreover at that instant many comforts, and among
the rest the presence and prayers of so many of our Religious Brethren, as
then flock about us. Wherefore seeing in this life al things are irksome and
tedious, and in the death of a Religious man al things so safe and happy, and
death itself a beginning and entrance to a life more happy, though Religion
should hasten our death, what harm should it do us? Rather if we were so
wise, as we should be, we should even for this reason desire it.

5. But to say the truth, it is a false imputation, which people lay upon
Religion, when they say, Men live long in Religion.
it is a bloud-sucker, and dispatcheth men apace out of the way (for this is
their meaning though they will not say so in express terms) Rather, if we
look well into it, it prolongeth a man's life, as we may see by so many aged
men, as Religious houses are full of, and we find upon record in ancient
Writers, even among them, that have lead most austere lives; as S. Hierome, who
lived a hundred years; and S. Antonie a hundred and five; S. Pachomius was yet
elder then S. Antonie by five years. S. Arsenius came to a hundred and
twenty; and the same we read of S. Romualdus, and he passed one hundred of
them in Religion. Cassian mentions many of his own knowledge, and writes
almost of none, that lived not til he was very old, naming particularly three,
Nesteros, Joseph, and Cheremon; which last, he says, he saw a very old man, of
a hundred years, stooping, and venerable for his hoarie hayres. Now if a spare
diet, or the continual meditation of heavenly things, or any pains of this
nature, would kill a man (as these men will needs have it) they being so
wonderful temperate in their diet, and living so austerely as they did, should
by consequence have been taken away in a very sometime.

6. But there is no such thing, Secular people more subject to sudden death.
as both reason and experience shows. They on the other side, that are rich
among Secular people, and live in all plenty and abundance of pleasures and
daynties, are almost continually troubled with crudi^ies and fumes, and want of
sleep; they are oftener and more dangerously sick, and pass sharper cures:
and finally are subject to far more accidents, that hasten their ^eath, both
for the reasons already mentioned, and for other causes, which their own and
others folly and rashness does draw upon them, by (...) and the like; from al
which a Religious life is free; Temperance and the constant order which they
keep in all things, drying-vp superfluous humors, and so preserving health. In
which respect S. John Chrysostom sticks not to say, S. John Chrysostom. l. 3.
con. vit^vit. more.
that Religious people, besides the abundance of spiritual blessings, which
they enjoy, have also better health of body, by reason of their temperance and
spare diet. They are, says he, as strong as plough-men, and have able bodies
like beasts; whereas rich people, and they that are dayntily brought up, and
commonly accounted happy in it, are, as if they were bred in a quag-mire,
tender and effeminate, and more subject to al kind of diseases. And S. Hierome
holds the like discourse against Iouinian, S. Hier. ^. con^. Iouin*
and proves out of the Axioms of Physic, that a moderate diet preserves
health; and adds to this purpose: We read of some that being tormented with
the gow^e and diseases in their joints, who by having their goods confiscated,
being brought to plain and hard fa^e, were cured; for it freed them of
household cares, and profuse banckets, which destroy both body and oule.

Contentment of mind is a cause of health.
7. The constant peace and contentment of mind also, which Religious people
enjoy, is no small means for them to live long. For certainly as grief and
passion do wast a man's spirits, and put our life, as I may say, upon the
torture; so contentment of mind, redounding necessarily to the body, must also
needs preserve it, and give it much ease, by reason of the affinity betwixt
the soul and it. And though we grant, with S. Hierome in his discourse against
Iouinian, that a Religious life, and such temperate courses, do not make us so
strong as Nilo Crotoniates, that is nothing to the purpose. For what necessity
is there, says he, that a wise man, and a Christian Philosopher should have so
much strength of body, as one that professes himself a Wrastler, or a
Soldier, seeing if he had so much strength, it would but egg him on to sin?

8. Wherefore to repeat in brief that which has been said, there be two ways
to answer this objection. First, by denying that a Religious course does
shorten our life, and on the other side maintayning that Sobriety and
continency does rather prolong it; Secondly, by confessing that it does cut
off part of our days, and taking it for the greater benefit, in regard that
whereas al men, Kings, Princes, and al must necessarily dye, Religion makes this
necessity in a manner voluntary, by going, as is were, to meet death half
way, and increasing thereby our merit and reward in the measure which I have
spoken, the few days which we spare of the miseries of this life being added
to eternity, and abundantly recompensed by the increase of our everlasting
felicity. Contrariewise, they that neglect a Religious vocation for fears of
this nature, buy those few years, which they get, at a very dear rate;
neglecting so great a good for fear of so small a loss, and putting their
eternal salvation to so great a hazard.

An answer to those, whom the love of their body hinders from Religion. CHAP.
XXIX.
Our own flesh a deadly enemy of Religion.
AMONG al those that oppose Religious courses, we have not a more dangerous and
a more deadly enemy, then our own flesh. For naturally it loves liberty
and wantones, and is greedy of the pleasures of meat, drink, and sleep; it
shunneth labor and pain; it is hateful to it, to be alone; it will not fast;
it flies poverty and the incommodities thereof as a grievous cross. So that
whosoever will hearken to his own flesh, or call it to counsel in this business,
shall be sure never to put his neck under the yoke of Christ, or never
constantly to go through with it. We must therefore at the very first shut it
out of doors, and have no communication with it, but keep it in order and
awe, S. (...) de torp.
that it be always submissiue and obedient, and presume not to command or give
directions. We must chastise our body (says S. Basil) and restrain the
motions thereof as the motions of a beast; and by the command of Reason, as with
a whip, stint whatsoever trouble it rayseth in the mind, and not give all the
raines to our will without regard of Reason, least it be carried away headlong,
Pythagoras.
and torn in pieces, as a coachman with unruly horses. Let us imitate
Pythagoras, who seeing a pupil of his give himself to good cheer and pamper his
body, said unto him: Why do thou build thyself a prison? And of Plato also
it is reported, Plato.
that understanding well, how many hindrances came by the body to the mind,
he chose to place his School of purpose at Athens, which was an unwholesome
seat, thereby to cut-of the superfluous health of our body, as one would
prune a vine. Thus says S. Basil.

2. And supposing (as I have said) that our flesh is made to be subject, two
things are well to be considered in this place, which do necessarily follow,
First that it is not so hard a matter to keep it in subjection, It is a soul
fault to yeald to flesh and blood.
seeing it is naturally borne to be subject: Secondly if we d^e not keep it in
subjection, our fault is the greater. For if a man be overcome by one that is
stronger and more powerful then himself, it is pity, but yet he is to be
pardoned; but the spirit having so much power and strength to overcome flesh,
and to master the desires thereof, it is the greater shame if it do not;
specially seeing if it be not master, it falls into a most miserable servitude,
and is every foot apt to be drawn into al kind of unworthy actions at the
command of the flesh.

3. Wherefore i^ upon the wholesome deliberation of entering into Religion, our
flesh do repine and draw back, as most commonly it will, if it be afraid of the
hardness of the diet, and apparel, and other austerities incident to that kind
of course, we must take the more courage and resolution upon us, and arm
ourselves the stronger, against all the allurements and nicenes thereof, and
force it to do that, be it never so much against it, which when it shall have
accommodated itself unto, will be so profitable both for flesh and spirit, and
imitate the courage of S. Hilarion, The courage of S. Hilarion
who in the flower of his youth, as S. Hierome writes, having taken upon him a
hard course of life, when he found his body grudge at it, insulted over it in
this manner: S. Hierome in (...) vi^a^.
Thou ass, I will make that thou shall not kick; I will not feed thee with
corn, but with straw; I will punish thee with hunger and thirst, and lay heavy
load upon thee, and make thee think more of thy meat then of wantones.

6. But some body will say with the Apostle: Ephesians. 5.29.
No man ever hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it. And I
grant, it is so; neither do I deny, but that it is natural to love our body.
To chasti^e our flesh is to love it.
Nature teaches us to love ourselves, and whatsoever is part of ourselves.
Wherefore when we speak of chastising and curbing our flesh, it is understood,
that we must do it out of love, and not out of hatred of it, but consider
withal, what is truly love, and what truly hatred. If through sickness a man's
body be il at ease, and the Physician prescribe a diet to take away the
peccant humors of it, or order that it shall be let blood, or that a limme shall
be cut off, as sometimes it happens, because the party is otherwise past cure;
he that shall follow the advice of the Physician, shall he be said to hate his
body, ar to love it? Rather he shall be said to hate it, that does not follow
advise, because he hurts his body and increases his disease, and is oftimes
cause of his own death by it, which is the utmost that hatred can arrive unto.
This therefore, which we do in every ordinary disease and distemper of our
body, much more ought we to do in greater and more dangerous diseases of the
same, which are the evil inclinations, which it has. For the fever of lust,
and whatsoever other exorbitant heat of desire, is no less a fever, then
when our body is out of order with distempered humors; rather it is the more
dangerous fever of the two, because it pulls us in hazard of eternal death.
Wherefore, if we be content to take a bitter potion, or apply some other
distastful medecin to this evil affection also of our body, we cannot be said
to hate our body, ^ Aug. 1. (...). c. 24.
but then most of al to love it. To which purpose S. August^n writes thus: No
man hates his body; wherefore, whereas some say they had rather have no body,
they are deceived: for they hate not their body, but the corruption and burden
of it; and that which they aim at, is not to have no body, but to have a
body entire and incorrupt. Now that some seem to persecute their body with
labor and continency, they that do it as they should, do it not that they
may not have a body, but that they may have it subdued, and pliable to al
necessary actions. For, because after the Resurrection, the body shall be in
perfect quiet, altogether subject to the Spirit, and immortally flourish, our
care in this life ought also to be, to change our carnal conversation for the
better, that through disordered motions it resist not the spirit.

5. We have therefore out of S. Augustine, that, to chastize our flesh, and
bring it into subjection, is not to hate it, but truly and perfectly to love
it; not to go about to kill it or destroy it, but to perfect it, and give it a
beginning of that beauty and glory, Philip. 3.2.
which it expects, when it shall be configured to the glory of Christ; which S.
Leo also confirms in these words: A man loves himself so much them re, S Leo
^^rm vlt de Pas^.
the more he does not love himself for the love of God. But no man can speak
more plainly in this case, then our Savior: He that loves his soul, (...)
it; and he that hates his soul in this world, keeps it to life everlasting.
For by a man's soul in this place we must not understand the superior part,
Ioh. 12.23.
which we call the Spirit; but that which depends upon the flesh and blood, and
is called li^e. This our Savior bids us hate; and yet not properly hate it,
but because we must deal with it, as we do with the things which we hate,
that is, use it hardly and rigourously.

Diverse considerations to strengthen (...).
6. In this holy and wholesome hatred therefore, we must settle and fortifye
our soul and reason, that it be not drawn from the performance of that, which
a Religious vocation requires, by the allurements of the flesh; and fortifye
it, first, by the love of God, which does naturally rejoice in suffering
hardness for the service of God; we must fortifye it by the example of our
Savior Christ, who suffered so much for us, to the end we should follow his
footsteps; we must fortifye it by calling to mind the Divine comforts and
heavenly sweetness, which G^d of his go^dnes is wont to mingle with the labors
and difficulties of a Re^igi^us course, to season the harshnes of it. For he
deals with us, as we use ^o dea^e with little children, when we desire they
should take a bitter potion, or some wo^mewood-drink; before and after they
drink it, we put some sweet t^ing t^ it, to take away the bitterness of the
potion: so God much more; because the greatness of the Divine co^forts, drownes
in a manner all the bitterness of w^atsoeuer trouble of this life, and makes that
we do not feel it. The memory also of the rewards of the life to come, and
the hope of the recompense which we shall have in Heaven, is a forcible
encouragement to overcome al trouble, which our flesh may suggest; for if we
once settle our thoughts upon it, we cannot but concur in opinion with S.
Bernard, S. Bernard of qui ha^^ (...)
who likeneth al corporal austeritie to seed; for when a husbandman cast his
seed into the ground, there is a kind of show of loss in it* and yet we should
account him a fool, that for fear of that seeming loss, would not sow,
because the gain, which he shall reap in the crop, is far greater. S.
Bernard's words are these: How do carnal people say unto us: Your life is a
cruel life, you spare not your own flesh? Let it be so; we spare not the seed.
How could we spare it better? Is it not better for it to be renewed and
multiplied in the field, then putrifyed in the barn? do you spare your flesh
in this manner? Be it so, that we be cruel for a while in not sparing it;
certainly you are more cruel. For even at this time our flesh rests in hope.

7. Finally the innumerable examples of them that we know have lead most
austere lives, ^.
must needs be a great encouragement unto us, and perhaps the greatest tha^ we
can think of, when we represent unto ourselves a S. Antonie, S. Hilarion, the
tw^ Macaries, S. Pachomius, S. Romualdus, S. Bernard, S. Francis and infinite
others, that have been rare for all kind of sanctity, and particularly in
dealing rigorously with their bodies. And perhaps in truth, or at least if we
compare their manner of proceeding, with that which is ordinary amongst
others, we must confess they we^e too severe, and went beyond the moderation,
which a body would think we^e reason. But God would have it so in them, and
gave them that abundant measure of grace and strength, not that others should
strive to be as rigorous in that kind as they, and compare with them in it (for
that were absurd temeritie) but to the end we should the more willingly and
more cheerfully apply ourselves to that measure and proportion, which is now
used in Religious Orders, and not think any thing intolerable, seeing they
went through with far greater austerities. What therefore need we fear in a
way, which, we see, has been trodden by so many Saints before us; in a way
where we meet with such abundance of heavenly comforts, as I have discoursed
of in so many Chapters before; in a way, where whatsoever can be bitter, being
cast into such a sea of sweetness, must needs be exceeding sweet?

8. But all this, which we have said, belongs to the cure of the mind, and the
strengthening of it. Is there no medecin for the flesh itself? It is hard to
find any; because our flesh is neither capable of advice, nor apt to taste the
sweetness of virtue, nor to foresee the hope of that which is to come; An (...)
out flesh.
so that properly that which it does, it must do upon command, and be
compelled unto it, as a beast with the spur, and switch, and curb, and
sometimes perhaps with good bast^nados, and by use and custom be brought to
that, which is reason, and made less shy of good order and discipline. And yet
not to leave it wholly destitute, but by reason also to persuade it (as much as
it is capable) to be content to take pains, S. Bern. ser. 6. in Alu. D^m.
and live continent, we may lay before it that dainty exhortation, in which S.
Bernard demonstrates, that a Religious and virtuous course of life, is
profi^able for the flesh itself. These are his words: Do not, o body, do not
(...) all the time. For well may thou hinder the salvation of thy soul, but
can not work thine own. Al things have their time. Let the Soul now labor
for itself; or rather labor thou with it; because if thou suffer with it, thou
shall reign with it. So much as thou hindrest the reparation of it, so much
thou hindrest thine own; because thou can not be repaired, til in it God see
his image reformed. Thou have a noble guest, o Flesh; a noble one indeed; and
al thy welfare depends of the welfare of that guest; yeald due respect to so
great a guest. Thou dwell in thine own country, but thy soul lodges with
thee as a pilgrim, and a person exiled. I beseech thee, what country-fellow, if
a Nobleman or a man of great power would lodge with him, would not willingly
lodge himself in some corner of his house, or under the stayers, or in the
very ashes, and yeald the more honorable place to his guest, as it is sitting
he should? Do thou therefore the like; regard not thine injuries or troubles,
so that thy guest may have honorable entertainment with thee. And that thou
may not peradventure flight and contemn this thy guest, because he looked
like a pilgrim and stranger, think carefully with thy self, what benefit the
presence of this guest does bring thee. It is he that gives sight to thy eyes,
hearing to thy ears, sound to thy tongue, taste to thy palate, and motion to al
thy members. If there be any life, any sense, any beauty in ^^ee, a
knowledge it as a favor of thy guest. Finally his parting will show, what his
presence yealded; for so soon as the soul is departed, the tongue lies still,
the eyes see nothing at al, the ears are deaf, the body grows stif, the
face grows wanne; and after a short time al will be a stinking rotten
carcass, and all the beauty of it turned into corruption. Why therefore for
every small temporal delight do thou disgust and hurt this guest, seeing but
for him thou could not so much as feel any delight? Moreover if being as
yet exiled and an outcast from the face of God, by reason of the falling-out
of God and him, he be so beneficial to thee, what will he be when he shall be
reconciled? Do not, o body, do not hinder that reconciliation; for thy self
may come to great glory by it. Offer thy self patiently, yea willingly to
al; let nothing pass which may be a furtherance to this reconciliation. O if
thou could taste this sweetness, and value this glory! The Lord of hoasts
himself, the Lord of virtues, the King of glory himself will come down to
reform our bodies, to configure them to the body of his glory. How great
glory will that be, how unspeakable an exultation, when the Creator of al, who
came humble before and hidden, to iustifye souls, will com^ lofty and manifest
to glorifye thee (o miserable flesh) not now in infirmity, but in his glory
and Majesty? How long therefore does this miserable, foolish blind, senseles,
and truly mad flesh seek after transitory and perishable comforts, yea
certainly discomforts, if it happen to be put by, and judged unworthy of this
glory, and moreover eternally tormented unspeakable torments? All this is of S
Bernard.

Of them, whom the love of the world hinders from Religion. CHAP. XXX.
NO doubt but the comelines and beauty of Religion is so great, that were it
not, that people are as it were held in irons by the flattery of the world,
and the false shows which it makes of deceiptful pleasures, it were able to
inuit and bring al men to embrace it. For we know there are many, and ever
have been, that being called of God, and acknowledging themselves to be so,
have made offers to follow him; and yet held back by the commodities and
pleasures of the world, have not had the heart to disengage themselves, and fly
out of it, but still have remained in their former fetters entangled. What
remedy, but to show them plainly before their eyes, what the world is wherein
they live, that is, what mischief lies hidden in it under this shadow of
pleasure, which they are so loath to part with? Six kinds of mischief we may
reckon, Six evils reign in the world.
reducing them to these heads: Deceit, Shortness, Misery, Danger of offending
God, Blindness, Sin.

2. First therefore what is more full of deceit, and a more open lie, then the
world? Deceit.
making so many fair promises, and performing nothing; and when it makes a
show of performing, coming far short of what it promised, it tells us, that
the commodities which it offers, are special good, full of contentment and
happiness, where indeed there is no true contentment, no solid joy or pleasure
to be had in them. And we shall not need to stand alleging reasons to prove
it, we see it with our eyes. For how many do daily wait at Court, and spend
year after year in attendance, hoping for preferment, and promising
themselves by certain conjectures and possibilities, that infallibly now they
shall get it, and yet after so many reuolutions they neither obtain the suite
they pretended, nor any other reward or commodity, but must give it over with
loss, damages, and utter ruin. Amongst them that labor to raise themselves,
and their Families by traffic and merchandise, few come to that which they
desire, far more grow banck-rout, by mischances at sea or otherwise. And to
gran^, that the ambitious come to preferment, and the covetous to the wealth
which they aimed at; neither of them certainly do ever arrive to that
contentment of mind and pleasure in this life, for which they so much coueted
^^ese temporal things.

3. Rebecca desired to have a child, Genesis 15.
and what did she not to compass her desire? what means did she leave
vnessayed? And yet after she was with child, and felt her children fighting in
her womb, O, said she, ^^^t had been to be thus with me, what need was there to
conceive? And many there be, that daily sing the same song, and falling into
infinite trouble by the children, which perhaps they begged earnestly of God,
wish they had never had them. And that which they do in their children, others
do in other things; and being bitten by the incommodities of them, they loathe
them, and hate them as much, as before they were hot in pursuing them. And no
wonder; as long as they beheld them afarre-of, they seemed to be full of
sweetness and pleasure; but when they come to handle them, then the vinegar and
gal appears, S. John (...).
which was in them. Which S. John Chrysostom lays open before us with his
wonted eloquence in these words: Many have been desirous of a wife; and the
self-same day that they have had her, they have with open mouth called them
happy, that never married. And if they that have been married, have accounted
it a troublesome kind of life, what shall we say of them, that swallowed-vp in
the gulfes of whoredom, and more slaves then the basest slave that is, have
consumed themselves to nothing in those delights, and brought their bodies into
diseases without number? But some body will say, that Glory is pleasant.
Rather nothing is bitterer, then that kind of servitude. For a man that is
ambitious of glory, is more slave, then any sl^ue, begging favor of every
body, but he that treads it under (...), is above al. But it is a lovely
thing to have money. Rather I have often showed, that they, that are quit of
money, and have nothing, live in far greater abundance and quiet. It is
therefore more delightful not to be rich, then to be rich ^^t to have a wife,
then to be married; to be free from vain honor, then to be catching after the
glory, which is but wind, and to shun al pleasures, then to swim in them.
Thus says S. John Chrysostom.

^
4. A second evil of the world, is the shortness of al things in it. For in
reason we must needs see, that no worldly felicity can be longer then a man's
life is, that enjoys it. And how short is every bodies life by nat^^e? how
much shorter in many, by unexpected chances? We know there have been many
Popes, that have not held that Sea a year to an end; many have been preferred
to Bishoprics, and Cardinalships, and Princely dignities, that have been cut
off in a very short time, before they have been almost invested. And though
people should live a long time in them, and see ^euer so many years, yet at
last al must come to an end; and when that comes, all that which is past, being
gone, and come to nothing, we discover plainly, that that which seemed before
so long, was but a moment, specially if we compare it with the Eternity, which
follows; which seems to be the meaning of those words of Ecclesiastes: If a
man have lived many years, and been iocund in them, I. (...). 11.8.
he must remember the dark time, and the il days; which when they shall come,
the things which are past, will be convinced of vanity. And the Prophet Es^y
calls all that felicity a Dream; (...). 29.8.
because there is no truth, no soliditie, no permanencie in it, but al is mere
toy; (...) (says the Prophet) one that is hungry, dreameth, and cateth; and
when he awaketh, his soul is empty; and as one that is thirsty, dreameth,
and drinks; and after he awaketh, he thirsts still, and is weary.

5. And yet if in this short fel^citie, there were any parcel of time, though
never (...) short, ^.
in which a man might say, he had his full contentment, a man might seem to
have some reason to desire it; but it is nothing so. For here comes the third
mischief, that the world is so full of misery and misfortunes, that the
pleasures of it are like a little honey mingled with a great deal of gal and
bitterness, what with the diseases of the body, and with the unfortunate
chances of a man's estate, and household-busines, what with quarrels and
mischances without number. One suffers in his honor, another in his goods, a
third in his wife, or children, or kindred; another comes by a blow in other
things, which no wisdom, or virtue, or honesty can prevent or hinder. So
that we must necessarily acknowledge S. Gregorie's words to be true. S. Greg ^.
Dial. c. (...).
The world were to be despised, though it should flatter us, though with
prosperous things it should insinuate itself into us; but seeing it is loaded
with so many stripes, ouertoyled with so much adversity, and doubleth upon us
daily so many sorrows, what else does it cry unto us, but that it is not to be
loved?.

6. A fourth evil, is the continual danger of offending God, and the many
temptations assaulting us on every side, Danger of offending God.
of which I have spoken sufficiently already els-where. For in a manner there
be as many several occasions of sin in the world, as there be several things
in the world, al of them clawing and inflaming concupiscence, by the beauty or
pleasure, which is in them. Our senses are as so many gates and passages to
destruction; some things take advantage against us by our eyes, others by our
ears, others by our taste, others by other faculties of our soul, that we may
truly say with the Psalm: It shall rain snares upon sinners. Ps. 1^.6.
For these Snares hang as thick upon the things of this world, as drops fall in
a shower of rain some in poverty, some in riches, some in friendship, some in
distaste with others, some in company, some in solitarines, some in
prosperity, some in adversity, some in honor, and some in disgrace.

7. And a greater misery upon the neck of this; The blindness (...) world
(...) people.
that people ordinarily are so blind in the world, that they see not, and
consequently are less able to shun these snares, walking as it were in
darkness. Is it not great blindness to live as people usually live? To regard men
more then God; to be more obseruant of the laws and customs of the world,
then of the law of God; to be so very sollicitous for that, which concerns the
body, and so careless of their soul, as if they had none at al; finally to
take so much pains for temporal and perishable things, and not to be willing
to move so much as a fingar for that which is eternal; and knowing so certainly
as they do, that they shall dye, to discourse and talk and project, as if they
were always to live.

8. What wonder is it then, if through the multitude of these snares, and this
hideous darkness, and blind mist, which hangs before their eyes, they fall into
the last and greatest of al other evils, an infinite company of sins and
heinous offenses, and bring al things to confusion? For we see, that in the
world al in a manner live like beasts; Infinite offenses in the world.
their passions lead them by the nose, whither they list; they ^ustle and
run at one another, as beasts with their horns and heels, and are ready to
eat up one another through hatred and displeasure. The good are neglected, the
rich only and powerful, honored; the poor, oppressed; truth, sanctity,
sincerity in a manner exiled; deceit, dissembling, flattery, vanity b^a^e
sway; and, that which is the source of al other evils, a most desperate
forgetfulness of God, and their own souls salvation. This is the face of the
world, which if any man will behold and view with an impartial eye, he will be
so far from being taken with it, that I persuade myself, he will utterly
detest it, and think himself never at quiet til he have gotten out of it, as
out of a stinking prison and euer-winding labyrinth of error; which is that
which the Prophet Hieremie wi^hed: Hier. 9.2.
Who will give me in the wilderness an Inn of travelers, that I may forsake my
people, and depart from them, because al are adulterers, a company of
transgressors?

Some saved in the world.
9. But some body will say: Are al wicked that live in the world? and is there
no hope of their salvation? God forbid; some there be amongst Secular people,
whom God does preserve from bowing their knee to Baal; but they are few in
comparison of others; and they that are, go on but slowly, and with much
difficulty, and easily get a slip, and fall back again. Now when we advise
upon any thing, we always regard that, which most commonly happens, and that
which is natural to the thing, which we advise upon, and not that which happens
to one or two. The nature of fire is to burn, and of water to drown,
whosoever goes into it: and yet the three Children had no harm in the fire,
nor S. Peter in the Sea; and many others have escaped both without hurt. That
which happens to most, is to be regarded most.
And is there notwithstanding any man so mad, as to cast himself wilfully into
the sea, or into the fire, because they escaped? For, as I said, we must regard
the nature of the thing, not that which falls out sometimes contrary to the
ordinary course, by the particular providence of God. And the same we may say
of the world. For seeing the natural disposition of it is so evidently
deceiptful and malicious, and the pestilent infection of Sin so generally
spread al over it, that it is hard to avoid it, and few escape it; seeing also
there be so few in it, that find the narrow way to salvation, though some do,
in all reason it is to be shunned, as I said of fire and water.

10. For who can warrant thee, that thou shall be one of those few? And what
folly is it, to put a business of so great consequence as thy eternal salvation
or damnation in so great a hazard? or to imagine thyself so fortunate, that the
poison of the world shall have no force upon thee alone, though thou confess,
it generally infecteth others? This were madness indeed, and a sign of little
care of salvation, specially beholding before our eyes so many, that suffer
shipwreck; and holy Scripture so severely thundreth in our ears so many
fearful sayings, and amongst the rest that of S. James: Iac. 4.4.
Adulterers, do you not know, that the friendship of this world is enemy to
God? Whosoever therefore will be a friend of this world, is made an enemy to
God.

Against the fear, which some have, that they shall never be able to shake off
their evil customs. CHAP. XXXI.
THere be others, whom neither the love of the world, nor of their own flesh
does hinder from Religion, because it is too open, and too palpable a
temptation to yeald unto: But they are held back by another more subtle devise
and fear, least the evil habits which they have gotten in the world, will be
still hanging upon them, still confronting them; and have not so much confidence
as to hope to root them out, because by long custom they are so deeply
settled and ingrafted in them; and unless they do root them out, they think
they shall not be at peace and quiet, nor be able to persevere in a course so
contrary to their wonted strain.

2. But they that buzze upon these thoughts, A fear without ground.
first, in my opinion, fear where there is no fear; for there is no reason at
al, why they should doubt, but that in Religion they shall overcome al these
evil customs whatsoever they be; and secondly, I do not well understand the
ground and drift of their discourse in it. For if they conecaue, that a body
must continue to live a secular life, and that it is be^ter to do so, because
they think they shall never shake off their evil habits; me thinks it fares with
them, as if a man finding himself in a long journey, quite out of his way,
should choose to go on in his error, rather then go back again, because of
the labor and difficulty which he apprehe^ds in it; whereas he knows most
certainly, that the farther he goes on, the farther he goes out of his way, and
consequently shall either never come into the right way again, or, if he
resolve ever to come into it, must take much more pains and labor to effect
it; for so these kind of people will either be continually heaping one vice on
the back of another, Ephesians 5 1^.
despairing (as the Apostle speaks) of themselves, or, if at any time they
think of reforming themselves, and returning into the way of virtue, it will be
the harder for them to compass it, the longer they continue their wonted
customs.

3. But the principal means to break the neck of this temptation, will be to
show evidently, what a gross error they are in, that think it so impossible a
thing to overcome their evil customs, whereas indeed in Religion they may be
easily overcome; which we shall quickly demonstrate, if we consider the nature
of the customs themselves, Al habits perish by ces^ation from the act.
and the grace of God. And from the nature of the evil customs I argue thus:
Evil customs are habits; and the nature of al habits is, that as they are
gotten by use and often acts, so if we cease from these acts, by little and
little the habits themselves vanish away and perish. As for example; if a man be
skilful in music or in picture-drawing, or if he write a fair hand, or have
any other art or science, as he got it by use and practice and often
endeavor, so if he never exercise it, or, which is more, if he practice it but
seldom and carelessly, it decays of itself, and at last he quite loses it.
And no doubt but we shall find the like in all evil dispositions of the mind
also; as if a man be choleric, or intemperate in his diet, or other pleasures,
and cease from the acts of these vices, as before they grew and waxed stronger
and stronger by being fed with daily offenses, so if we take away their former
allowance, they must needs grow weak, and lessen in us.

4. Besides that, And by contrary practice.
as those evil dispositions were bred by evil actions, so the practice of
virtue breeds contrary habits of virtue; as when a Religious man does not only
cease from acts of pride and vanity, but practices humility, and embraces
al occasions of contempt of himself from his very heart; when in steed of the
love of worldly wealth, and his wonted pleasures he begins to love the hardness
of poverty and the like, in all which a Religious state does inco^parably help
him, ministering daily occasions of these and other virtues, and in a manner
forcing them upon him.

5. And what need I be long? Sight and conversation with good people, alter a
man.
Not only the endeavor and application of a man's mind is thus effectual, but
the very sight of so many good men as are in Religion, and the daily
conuersing with them, is able of itself to alter a man, be he never so rude and
uncivil, and by little and little to instill goodness into him. If we take a beast
out of the woods or forests, and bring him up at hand, he leeseth after a
while his wildnes, and becomes as tame and gentle as a whelp. And this we see
effected not only in dear, and wild goats, which are naturally timorous, but
in lions and bears, which are otherwise of themselves fierce and cruel; and
yet these beasts can add nothing inwardly of themselves, nor use any
endeavor to overcome their nature, but the bare custom of being among men
does silently work upon them, and by degrees give them another nature and
fashion, and make them tame. What effect therefore must the self-same needs
have in men, who have judgment moreover and understanding, and can inwardly
apply themselves, and labor their own reformation and polishing.

The force of the (...) of God.
6. And if nature, and industry, and application be thus forcible, what shall we
say of the Grace of God? It must certainly needs be much more powerful and more
effectual, and in a short time work a perfect cure upon whatsoever in us. For,
as the Wiseman says: It is easy in the eyes of God, suddenly to make a poor
man rich. (...) 11 23.
And by his holy Prophets he often promises, that he will help and assist us
forcibly in this kind; as when in Esaias he says: Fear not, because I am with
there, decline no^, because I am thy God; I have strengthened thee, and helped
thee, and received thee in the hand of my lust. Es. 41 10.
And then giving us to understand, that we have no cause to doubt of the
victory, he adds: Behold, they shall be confounded, and ashamed all that sight
against thee; they shall be, as if they were not; and the men shall perish, that
contradict thee. Thou shall seek them, and thou shall not find them; men that
are rebellious against thee, and they shall be as if they were not. Who be
these, that are rebellious against us, but evil customs, and sinful motions of
the mind, which will not hearken to Reason, and obey it? such as we cannot have
at that command, but that sometimes they will be stirring against our will. These
habits therefore and inclinations remain in us, as if they were not; that is,
they remain in us not to our destruction, but for exercise; to put life into
us, not to take away our life from us; finally as occasions of a greater
crown, not as snares to our ruin. Which is the reason, why S. Paul terms
the contradiction of his flesh, not a sword, 2 Cor. 12.7.
or a lance, but a prick; because a prick cannot run through a man to wound
him, but only prick him, and serves merely to awake us, and stir us up to
run, and be more quick and careful in the performance of virtuous actions.
This is the effect, which the Grace of God works in us: It reformeth our
understanding, our will, our sensual appetite, and all the powers of our soul,
and puts it, in a miraculous manner, in another kind of hue, which is that
New creature, of which the Apostle so often speaks.

Proved by experience.
7. And we should hardly believe, that it were possible there should be such a
sudden alteration in the servants of God, but that we find it by experience in
ourselves, and see it with our very eyes in others, and have for it the
testimony of al such men, that have written of spiritual things and Religious
courses. Cassian applies those words of the Psalm ( Wonderful are thy works,
Ps. 138.14.
and my soul shall know them exceedingly) principally to the works, which God,
as he says, orders by his Saints of his daily operation. For who, says he,
will not wonder at the works of God in himself, Cass. Coll. 12 c. 2.
when he sees the admirable ravening of his belly, and the costly and
pernicious lauishnes of gluttony suppressed, and brought to take a little
coorse fare, seldom, and against his will? Who can but be astonished at the
works of God, when he feels the fire of lust so cooled, that he finds scarce
the least motion in his body? whereas before, he esteemed it altogether
natural, and in a manner unquenchable. How can he but tremble at the power of
God, when he sees people of a rough and fiery disposition, that were apt to be
put into raging choler by the friendliest service a man could do them, to
arrive to such mildnes, that they are not only not moved at al with injuries,
but rejoice in them with a noble courage, when they are offered? Who certainly
can choose but admire the works of God, Psa. 135.5.
and with great affection cry out: Because I have known, that great is our
Lord; seeing himself, or another, from being extremely covetous, become liberal;
from being prodigal, become sparing; from proud, humble; from being nice and
effeminate, austere and careless, and voluntarily to embrace and rejoice in
poverty, and want, and perjury of things present? These are certainly
wondrous works of God, which particularly the soul of the Prophet, and of
such as are like to him, acknowledges with admiration by the light of
extraordinary contemplation. Psa. 45.9.
These are wonders which he places upon the earth; which the same Prophet
considering, calls al people to admire them, saying: Come and see the works
of God, which he has placed wonders upon the earth, taking away wars to the
end of the earth; he will bruise the bows, and break the weapons in pieces, and
burn the targets with fire. For what wonder can be greater, then in a moment
of time to make Apostles, of covetous Publicans; patient preachers of the
Ghospel, of cruel persecutours? Insomuch that with the shedding of their own
blood they have dilated that Faith, which before they persecuted. These are the
works of God, which the Son professes, Ioh 5.17.
that he daily works with his Father, saying: My father to this day works,
and I do work. All this is Cassian's discourse.

8. S. Bernard goes farther, A soul omnipotent by the grace of God. Cant.
8.5. S. Ber. ser. 8 5. in Can^.
and says, that a soul by reason of this grace of God, is in a manner
omnipotent, though not by the strength which it has of itself, but of God. And
interprets to this effect those words of the Canticles: Who is this that
ascends from the desert, flowing in delights, leaning upon her beloved? Truly
(says S. Bernard) leaning in this manner, she will grow strong against herself,
and more powerful then herself will bring al to reason; anger, fear, desire,
and joy; and govern like a good coachman the chariot of her soul, and bring
into captivity al carnal affection, and the inclinations of the flesh, to the
b^^k of reason, in service of virtue. How possible are al these things to her
that leanes upon him, Ps 4 13.
who can do al things? what a confident speech is it? I can do al in him, that
strengthens me? Nothing does make the omnipotency of the Word more evident,
then that he makes al omnipotent, that confide in him: So a soul, if it
presume not of itself, if it be strengthened by the word, will easily have full
command over itself, that al injustice shall have no command over it. So, I
say, him that leans upon the Word, him that is clothed with virtue from
above, no force, no fraud, no allurement can pull down from his standing, nor
bring in subjection from the command, S. Ber ser. 20. in Cant.
which he has. If therefore this be true, which S. Bernard says, how can we
fear, least our crooked inclinations should be more kept down with the weight
of them, then relieved by the sweetness of his grace? For really it concerns no
man so much as it concerns God, to cure the wounds and sores of a soul, that
has put itself wholly into his hands to be cured, and to thrust out old
customs with new, as we beat out one nail with another; as S. Bernard also
speaks.

9. Let us hear, what S. Augustine says in this business; for his testimony is
of great weight, as delivering for the common good that, which himself
experienced in the change, which he made of the course of his life. These are
his words: Mere toys and vanities of vanities held me back, S. Aug. 8. Conf.
^a. 11.
my ancient house-wiues, and shook me by the coat of my flesh, and secretly
muttered: do thou leave us? and from this instant shall we not be with thee
any more for ever? and from this instant must it not be lawful for thee to do
this and that any more for ever? And a little after: They held me back while I
yet was slow in breaking away, and ridding myself of them, and passing thither
whither I was called, my violent custom said unto me: Do thou think thou
can be without these?

10. And thus it passed with him in that strife and great quarrel of flesh and
spirit, as he calls it; but when he had once broken prison and shaken-of the
bands in which he was entangled, and given himself so wholly to the service of
God, that he neither looked after wife, nor any worldly hopes, how was it
with him then, and what did he find in himself? How sweet, says he, was it
presently unto me, to want the sweetness of those toys? Id. lib. 9. c. 1.
Now it was a comfort to forsake that, which before I was afraid to loose. For
thou, o true and sovereign Sweetness, did cast them out of doors before me,
and entredst thyself in lieu of them, sweeter then any pleasure, but not to
flesh and blood; cleerer then any light, more private then any secret, more
lofty then any preferment; but not to them that are lofty in themselves.

11. We have S. Cyprian also, that can witness the same out of his own
knowledge, setting down the two several states of his mind in these words:
While I lay in darkness, and in the dead of the night, while in the sea of this
wavering world I was tottering, S. Cypr. lib. 2. Ep. 2.
and perplexed, and floating with wandering steps, that which the Divine
commiseration promised me for my welfare, seemed hard and harsh unto me, as the
world went with me then, how a man could be borne again, and alter his mind
and soul, the frame of his body remaining as before. How is it possible (said
I) to make such a change, and so upon the sudden and so speedily to shake-of
that, which being bred in us, is grown hard by the settling of that natural
matter, or by long use made a custom, through ancientnes of age and time?
These things have taken too deep root in us. When shall he learn frugalitie,
that has been accustomed to long suppers and curious banckets? or he that has
shined in his silks, and been glorious in his rich garments and cloth-of-gold
and purple, when shall he stoop to plain and ordinary apparel? He that has
been compassed with troops of clients, and countenanced with a long train of
officious followers, will think it a torment to be alone. It cannot be
otherwise, but that custom of drinking wine will be always calling upon a man
with tough persuasions; pride will puff him up; wrath will set him on fire;
covetousness will disturb him; cruelty will egg him forward; ambition will
flatter him; lust will cast him headlong. This discourse I held often with
myself. For as I was entangled with diverse errors of my former life, which I
did believe was impossible to shake-of; so I yealded to the vices, which did
then cleave unto me, and out of despair of being better, I favored my evils,
as mine own, and borne in my own house. But when by help of the Regenerating
water the fowlnes of my former life was washed away, and the light from-aboue
shined upon my pure and sanctified breast, when receiving from heaven, the
second nativity had repaired me into a new man; presently, after a strange
manner, things which were doubtful, appeared certain; that which was shut-vp
from me, was laid open; dark things became lightsome; that which was hard, was
easy; and that possible, which before seemed impossible to be performed. All this, and much more is out of S. Cyprian; which every Religious man may see
and acknowledge in himself. For that, which Baptism wrought in him, Religion
works in us, dying to the world and our former conversation, and being
newborn in it to God and a spiritual life. And Religion is so much the more
able to work this alteration in us, because it does both help us many ways
to increase the inward grace, which we receive in Baptism, and furnishes us
besides with many outward means and instruments speedily and easily to, to
attain to al perfection.

An answer to them that fear, that they shall not persevere in Religion. CHAP.
XXXII.
Having shut-out this fear, which took occasion of the corruption of our
former life, it will not be hard to cure another fear not unlike unto it, and
most commonly caused by it, to wit, least our resolution howsoever it be
seruent in the beginning, in time growing cold, we look back, The causes of
this fear.
and be swallowed up again in the world. This fear rises first by
consideration of our own infirmity, man by nature being wonderful weak,
specially when he meets with hard encounters; and then the lamentable ends of
those, that began to run well, and in the midst of their course have sunck and
fallen back, work forcibly upon our apprehension; insomuch that some think it
wisdom, to learn by others perils, and to look to themselves betimes. But S.
Gregory does excellently discover this kind of temptation and deceit of the
Enemy, and conuinceth it to be no other, S. (...) Mor. ^.12.
in these words: Oftimes we see many that desire the life of holy
conversation, but have not the power to undertake it, because they fear
sudden chances and disasters that may befall them, who while like provident men
they take thought to prevent uncertain evils, are vnprouidently detayned in the
bonds of their offenses. For they lay many things before their eyes, which if
they happen in their conversation, they fear they shall never be able to
subsist. Of whom Solomon says well: Pro. 15.1^.
The way of lazy people, is as hedges of thorns; For while they love the way
of God, their fearful suspicions meeting with them, prick them as thorns of
the hedges that are in their way. This is S. Gregorie's opinion of this
business. And in my judgment, that saying of Job may be fitly applied unto
them: They that fear the white frost, snow shall upon them. For while they give
way to fear of uncertain dangers to come, Job. 6.1^.
they remain for the present in great and most certain evils.

2. But to lay open the root of this distrust, let us consider, what may be
the causes of so soul a breach betwixt God and us, after we have plighted our
troth and bound ourselves by Vow unto him. There can be no other ground of it,
but if either God depart from us, or we from God, that is, if either God
forsake us, and withdraw his holy spirit from us, God wi^ not ^^^sake us.
or we suffer ourselves to be overcome with tediousnes, or labor, or
inconstancy, and so forsake him. As for the first, it cannot enter into any
man's thought to think, that the infinite goodness of God will at any time take
from us the gifts, which once he has bestowed upon us. And S. Paul assures
us of it when he says: Romans 11.29. Mat. 3.6. S. Aug. 4. Conf. c. 9. Io. 6.37.
Iac. 1.17.
The gifts of God are without repentance; and God himself by his Prophet in
these words: I am God, and am not changed; and consequently that which S.
Augustine says to God, is true: No man leeseth thee, but he that leaves thee.
God therefore never rejects them that seek him; he never casts them forth,
that come unto him, as himself professes; and heaven and earth shall first
pass away, before any change or shadow of vicissituted come upon him. Seeing
therefore there can be no danger on this side, all the danger is in ourselves
and our own infirmity.

13. But yet because no body is il for nothing, and there is hardly any to be
found so malicious as to delight in sin, because it is sin, but that some
other cause draws him into it; let us see, what cause there may be to disioynt
and break this league of society and friendship so inuiolably and religiously
sworn betwixt God and us. In humane friendship many things of this nature may
happen; for in time we may discover some flaw in the league itself, or some
wrong may be offered, or one party may be damnifyed in his state, or we may
think we have enough of it, His friendship cannot be prejudicial or tedious.
Sap. 8.16.
as oftimes it falls out. Nothing of all this can be said of God; for we
cannot fear, least the continuance of our love with him be prejudicial unto
us, seeing we have all that we have, of him, and he most bountifully makes us
partakers of all that is his. Neither can we fear, least his conversation grow
tedious, seeing we find written of the Eternal Wisdom: Entering into my house I
will rest with it; for the conversation with it, has no bitterness; nor the
living together with it, any tediousnes, but joy and gladness. And therefore
that also is true, which the same Wisdom reports of itself: Eccl. 14.19.
They that eat me, shall still hunger; and they that drink me, shall still thirst.
So that by enjoying God, we shall be so far from having our desire of him
quayled at any time, as rather it will be daily more inflamed, the more degrees
of his infinite beauty and goodness we shall daily discover, and the better and
cleerer insight we shall have into him. And if, while we were as yet in the
world, a small raye of that beauty, which is in Religion, shining upon us in
that darkness, was so powerful as to bring us unto him, as it were, out of a
far country, and to draw us with such a violence as was able to break
through all the snares the Devil had to hold us back; what will not the
sunne-light and excellency of Religion do, when we shall have had leisure to
enter more into it, and by the knowledge and possession of so great a good, be
more taken and enamoured with it. And if it were able to force us to love it
and embrace it, while we were free and unconstant, how much more will it hold us
in love of it, when we shall be obliged and bound unto it with that triple cord,
which is hardly broken.

A^st^ritie (...) to be feared.
14. What ground therefore can we imagine, that we can have, to alter from our
purpose, with so great loss and shame to ourselves? Shall we alter in regard of
the rigor and austeritie of that kind of life? Wherefore then have we spoken
so much of the commodities of it (which alone were sufficient) and of the
sweetness besides and pleasure which is in it? Rather seeing we are naturally so
much taken with pleasure, and follow so greedily the bare shadow of it in the
idle toys, which the world does thew us, we have no cause to fear, but that
meeting with the very fountain of pleasure, which is God, we shall stick the
faster by it, and drink with more contentment of it. For our part therefore, we
have no cause, why we should ever repent ourselves of a thing, which has been
invented and commended unto us by God, so carefully practiced by so many holy
men, so earnestly desired and embraced by ourselves, and found by our own
experience to be much more beneficial and delightful, then we could either hope
or imagine.

15. What is it then that we fear? the secret underminings, or open assaults
of the Devil? Nor the temptat^o^s of the (...)
But of them also much has been said before, to show that we must wholly
contemn them, considering the many helps which we have to overcome them as
the State itself, in which we live as in a Castle; the custody of the holy
Angels, the care and watchful eye of God to defend us; and infinite other
things, which of themselves are powerful and strong helps; but much more the
Grace of God diffused in our hearts by the Holie-Ghost, which is given us, and
which does so cloathe us with virtue and strength from above, that if
inconstancy come upon us, it setleth us; if we be weak and feeble, it
strengthens us; if we faint and languish, it puts life into us; and taking us
as it were out of the hands of the thieves (which are the Devils) half alive,
and placing us in the humble, but wholesome stable of Religion, it cures us
with wine and oil. The wine (as the sharper of the two) is Religious
discipline, and the incommodities which are incident unto it; but this wine is
alayed with oil, that is, with an admirable kind of sweetness, which gives a
pleasant taste to all the incommodities which are in it. And therefore though we
bring to Religion a nature cut, and mangled and weakened with many wounds and
sores, we have no reason notwithstanding to misdoubt our perseverance, having
so many gentle, but yet efficacious medicines of the Grace of God, to cure it.

16. But al acknowledge, The grace of God is given freely.
that the grace of God is powerful, and it cannot be denied; yet some still
fear, least through their own fault and offenses they make themselves
unworthy of this grace, and so leesing it and forsaken by it, they fall into
their ancient errors. But they that lodge this fear in their breasts, and in
regard of it for bear to put themselves into the service of God, are far
wide of the mark, and know not indeed, what Grace is, which is therefore called
Grace, because it is given freely, and not for any desert of ours. And we shall
not need to look so far back as to the example of S. Paul, who was a
persecutour, or of S. Matthew, who was a publican, or of S. Marie Magdalen, who
was a sinner, to iustifye it, seeing we have proof and example clear enough of
it in ourselves. For if when we were yet enemies, when we fed hogs in far
countries, when we wandered like the lost sheep, God of his own good will
sought us out, followed us when we were flying from him, compelled us when we
striued against him, expected us when we sought delays and held back, and in
the end brought us home upon his shoulders; what will he not do for us now we
live in his house, and in his service?

17. Let us compare one time with another, His goodness toward us while we
lived in the world.
and that state we were in, with that in which now we are; then living in
extreme darkness, there was no goodness at al in us, al was sin, al was
earthly, al tending to the service of this world, our thoughts, our words, our
deeds, al bending that ways, we lived in perpetual forgetfulness of God, in
loosse carelesnes of al heavenly things. But now we spend al our days in the
practice of virtue, in the service of God, in the denial of ourselves; and
though we offend sometimes, our faults are but small and venial, and easily
ouermatched and covered with the abundance of the good deeds which we do. If
therefore the goodness of God were so great toward us in that first state, that
our ancient deformity could not hinder him from taking us out of that mire,
and placing us in his arms and bosom; now that we are washed (though perhaps
our feet need still some washing) will he shake us off and cast us out of his
arms again? He that dealt so lovingly by strangers, yea by his enemies, as to
adopt us his children, and take us into his house; now we are his children, and
have done him so much service, and lived so many years in his house, will he
thrust us out, and casheer us from among the rest of his children, among whom
he had ranked us? O absurd suspicion, and fear unworthy of such a father,
unworthy of children that have been so nobly brought up! How much better and
more truly does S. Bernard judge of this love of God toward Religious people,
S. Ber p. 109.
expressing himself in these words? He, He, I say, gathers you together,
that loves you as his own bowels, as the most precious fruit of his Cross,
as a most worthy compensation of the blood which he shed. He says, that
Religious people are the fruit and worthy recompense of the Passion of Christ,
because the virtue thereof is chiefly seen in them, and because, though no other
fruit had come of it, this alone had been enough for the Son of God, to think
al his labor and sufferings well bestowed. Wherefore if no merchant be so mad,
as to cast away the Jewels which he has bought at an excessive rate, when he
may keep them; what shall we think of him, that fears, least God cast us off
upon the sudden, whom he has bought with the precious blood of his only
Son, and enriched with such inestimable gifts and treasures?

The difference betwixt a servant and a son.
18. Besides, we must consider the difference, which is betwixt a servant and a
son. If a servant offend, or become unprofitable, he is put away, because he
is a servant, and, as our Savior says, remains not in house for ever; but
though a son be sick, and able to do nothing, yea though he offend and
displease his father, he shall be corrected with therod, Io. 8.35.
perhaps with a stick, and yet they will be rather a comfort to him (as the
Prophet speaks) then an affliction, Psalm. 22.4.
but it is not the fashion to banish him out of his father's sight; it cannot
sinck into the heart of a father to do so, the love wherewith he entertained him
in his house with music, Lu^ 5.25.
when he returned from a far country, will not suffer him to use such rigor,
much less thrust him out of doors.

God (...) a loving dis^position.
19. If we were to deal with a man like ourselves, we should do him wrong, if
we should think him so uncivil and froward, as to fal-out with us upon every
flight occasion, and never be friends with us any more. How much greater wrong
therefore shall we do to the infinite goodness of God, if we take him to be of so
harsh a disposition, notwithstanding that we see before our eyes daily, Sap
11.24.
how he bears with an infinite number of most grievous sins, and dissembles
their offenses, because of repentance. Rather as we are confident of our own
brother, or of our father, or of any man, that we know does entirely love us,
or (why should we speak of others?) as if perseverance in virtue and Religion
were in our own power, our heart would be at rest and ease; so must it be now
it is in the hand and power of God; and so much the more, the greater we know
his love is toward us, loving us more then we love ourselves, and desiring
with so much affection our eternal welfare and perfection, as the Apostle says
of him: His with your sanctification. ^


20. What therefore is our duty to do: That which S. Augustine did, when he
found himself in the like fearful humor, least he should not have strength and
courage enough to go through with that new course of life, We must follow the
example of S. Augustine.
which he was then resolving upon. For he writes of himself, that he heard as
it were a voice speak within him: Cast thyself upon him; fear not; he w^l not
wit^draw himself, that thou may fall; Cast thyself securely; he will receive
and cure thee. For if no man was ever so barbarously hard-harted and cruel (so
he were a man) as to withdraw himself, and suffer another man to be dashed and
hurt against the ground, S Aug. l. 8. Cons. ^. 11.
if he see that in his fall from some high place he is willing to save himself
in his arms rather the more trust and confidence a man puts in us, committing
himself and his life into our hands, with this hope, he obliges us the more
not to forsake him, or suffer him to perish for want of any thing, that we can
do for him. If therefore the nature of man even among those, that are none of
the ciuilest, go against such barbarous proceeding; who can suspect any such
thing of that bottomless pit of clemency and goodness, that he will forsake us,
having relied ourselves wholly upon his goodness, and prudence, and undoubted
promises?

21. Finally we must consider, God is constant in the works of nature.
that whereas the works of God pert^yne partly to Nature, and partly to Grace;
no man ever had the least fear, least in his natural works he should break
the uniform order and constant course of his Divine beneficence. No man ever
doubted, least the Sun should not rise every day, and with the usual
proportion, according to the times of the year, give light to the earth; or
that it would not rain according to the seasons, so that the fruits of the
earth should fail: we plough, we sow, we plant, we prune our trees and vines,
as if we were assured of al those things; which notwithstanding if they should
fail, al our labor and charges were quite lost. We make great vaults and
conduits to convey the water to many mils with excessive cost and expense;
which al were in vain, if the head of the fountain should decay; but it is so
certain, that it will not decay, that no man ever spared cost for that reason.
If therefore it never comes into our thought, to misdoubt these natural things,
why should we not in spiritual things hope, that the fountain of the Grace of
Heaven will continually flow? And if it were foolish for a man to forbear to
sow his ground, or plant trees, or follow any such kind of work upon such a
kind of idle fear, how much more foolish is it to omit our spiritual work, and
such a work as is the undertaking of a Religious course of life, for the like
fear, least forsooth the Sun leave shining upon us at noonday, or the
fountain of Divine grace dry away in the midst of the current of it? Yet some
body will say: We see diverse fall; The fall of someoughe not to dismay us. S Io.
Chry. con. vit. vitae (...) c. ^.
who knows whether I shall at last be one of them? S. John Chrysostom
propounds this very doubt in his Apology for a Monastical life; where
arguing against parents, that hinder their children from embracing Religious
courses, he brings them making this objection: How shall I know that my son
shall persevere, and never fall from his purpose? for many have fallen. To which
S. John Chrysostom, and I answer: How do thou know, that he shall not
persevere? for many have perseuered; yea many more, then have fallen; so that
we have more cause to trust in regard of them, then to distrust in regard of
these. And then he co^uinceth them by that, which they do themselves; for they
send their children to school, and are at charges with them, and yet few come
to be eminent in learning, because it depends of many things, whereas in
Religion a man needs not any great wit or strength of body to persevere, and
to arrive to perfection, but willingness and endeavor; and concludes thus: How
unreasonable therefore and unworthy is it, to run into fear and despair,
where for the most part there be manifest tokens of certain hope and salvation
at hand; and where there is less hope, and subject to so many impedime^ts,
there not to despair, but rather to be greatly and certainly in hope of a
thing, which is most difficult?

22. And this which S. John Chrysostom says of learning* is of force in all
states and employments in the world; Worldly chances do not d^nt us.
for people cease not to traffic, because many in traffic have become
bank-rout; neither do they forbear to go to sea, because many have perished
by shipwreck, nor they leave not the wars, though infinite perish in them,
some with one kind of death, some with another. And yet every one of these
kinds of life are daily subject to so many dangers and hazards, that we have
much more reason to fear misfortunes, then to hope that we shall go
prosperously through with them, especially considering, that no human wisdom
or forecast is able to prevent al mischances. But in Religion these accidents
happen seldom, and to very few, in comparison of the rest, and by moderate
care and diligence they may be prevented and eschewed; and are always
prevented, if we be as we ought, and have but a will to use those helps, which
the state itself affords us. Wherefore let us hearken to S. Gregory, who
like a maister-workman very handsomely cuts off this temptation with the knife
of Reason, and the authority of the holy Scripture. Another, says he,
setting the desires of the flesh at naught, is thinking to forsake al, and to
betake himself to the service of Almighty God; he purposes to cu^he himself
with the raynes and bridle of Continency and Chastity: S. Greg. hom. 3.^^
Ezech.
but seeing others that have fallen even after Chastity, he is afraid to do
that which he has a mind to do, and turns back in his thoughts, when
looking before him, he was with the steps of his mind even now mounting on
high. Of whom Solomon says well: He that observes the wind, does not sow; and
he that considers the clouds, shall never reap. By the wind we understand
the malignant spirit, that blows upon our mind with temptation; by ^he clouds
we understand a sinner, that is carried away by the violence of temptation. He
therefore that observes the wind, does not sow, and he that considers then
cl^wdes* never reapeth, because he that fears the temptations of the
malignant spirit, and considering the falls of the wicked. despayreth of
himself, does neither in present exercise himself in the seed of good works,
nor shall hereafter be refreshed by reward of just recompense. Thus says S.
Gregory.

23. The sum therefore of this whole discourse is this: If the resolution of
following a Religious course were to come of ourselves, or if it were so to
come of God, S. Peter upon the (...)
that it were necessary we should deserve it, we had reason doubtless to fear
our own frailty and inconstancy. But seeing it comes so from God, that on our
part it requires no desert, but gives us all the desert we have; as the grace
of God from the beginning works it in us, so it always ever after works
it, preserving us. We have an excellent example of it in S. Peter the Apostle,
when invited by our Savior, he walked upon the water, and was held up above it
by his holy hand, Mat^^. ^.
when for fear he began to sink. This does lively represent unto us a
Religious state. For as it is a great miracle for this heavy and lumpish body
of ours to walk upon the water, so it is no less a miracle, when our corrupted
nature (which of itself is always bearing downwards to earthly things, to
the works of the flesh, to liberty and licentiousnes) by the virtues of
Poverty, Chastity and Obedience breaks through al these wicked
inclinations, and walks above them, as a body above the water. And
consequently we cannot bring this to pass by our own natural strength, but by
the power of God; and it is the effect of his voice, when he says unto us:
Come; as he said to S. Peter, and by it gives us the like admirable power, as
he gave to him, and as long as the force of this voice lasts, so long we
remain with this power, and perform it with the self-same facility and
agilitie as we did at first. How comes the virtue of this voice to decay
sometimes in us, and to grow faint? By Diffidence, as it happened to Peter, when
letting our thoughts run more upon the winds and the waves, that is, upon the
difficulties and temptations which sometimes rush-in upon us, then upon the
grace of God and the virtue thereof, we begin to fear ourselves, and by fearing
sink. Yet if sometimes through frailty we chance thus to stagger, we have at
hand a present remedy and refuge, to wit, God himself, who stretching forth
his hand will instantly hold us up, Ph. ^ 2.1^. 1. Cor. 1. b.
and stay us, and, as the Apostle says: He that gave us to w^l, will give us
also to accomplish and confirm us to the end, without crime, in the day of the
coming of our Lord JESUS CHRIST.

Against the temptation of delaying our entrance into Religion. CHAP. XXXIII.
AS in war it is the fashion of the weaker side to be asking truce; and in
every troublesome thing that cannot be wholly avoided, Diverse pret^^ces of
delay.
we labor at least, that it be differred as much as may be; so it is one of
the Diuel's cunning tricks among the rest, when he cannot wholly remove people
from their resolution of entering into Religion, to pretend diverse causes, why
they should delay their entrance. To some he lays before the^ their tender
years, as not ripe yet for the yoke of Christ; others he persuades, that they
must take longer time of deliberation, ask advise of their friends, have some
trial of their strength, some experience by the practice of good works before
hand, that so they may prepare their way for greater and harder matters. Let us
see therefore, what force and reasons these pretenses have.

2. And to speak first of age; It is so far from being true, that a man's
youth is not a fit age for the service of God, A man's youth the first time to
begin to serve God. Thron 3.27. S Thomas opus. contr. r^^r. a r^g. c. 3.
that it is the fittest time of al others to serve him. Which the Prophet
tells us, when he says: It is good for a man, when he shall have carried the
yoke from his youth; and insinuates what commodities come of it: He shall s^
(says he) solitary, and hold his peace; because he has lifted himself above
himself. The meaning of which words, as S. Thomas interprets, is, that they
take the yoke of Religion upon them in their youth, lift themselves with much
more ease and to better effect, above their nature and natural inclinations,
and lead a most quiet life, free from al worldly cares and troubles; and
strengthens this his explication with the authority of S. Anselme, who
likeneth those, that are brought up in Monasteries from their childhood, S.
Anselme.
to Angels; and those that enter in elder years, to men.

3. The commodities of entering in our youth are these. First, youth being
naturally improvident, and by reason of our weakness pliable, as wax, to
whatsoever vice, if we pass our youth in the world, amidst so many snares and
occasions of sin, Diuer^ commod^^^s by entering into Religion in our youth.
Youth ap^^r to learn.
how easy is it for us to entangle ourselves in many errors, which will
afterward hinder us from taking a course of virtue and salvation? or if at
last we resolve upon such a course, will as so many wounds make us run the
slower and the weaker in the spiritual course we shall undertake? Whereas on the
other side, if we consecrate the flower of our youth and life to God, we shall
find the quite contrary, and prevent those dangers and misfortunes.

4. Secondly, youth is aptest to receive good impressions, and is most
disciplinable, while the mind is yet empty, and, like a piece of white paper,
fit to receive whatsoever a body will write in it; or like a young tree, which a
man may bend and lead which way he will. And we see it evidently, for example,
in most beasts, as in horses and dogs, and some kinds of birds; if we teach
them while they are young, we find by experience that they are apt to take,
every one according to their several kind; but if we let that time pass, they
grow so stubborn, that we can never bring them to any thing. It is true, that
al times with man are in season for virtue; but if we speak of a facility and
a kind of nimblenes in it, we find it certainly fair greater in that tender
age before a man be hardened in vice and vanity.

^
5. Thirdly, that which we learn in our youth sticks faster by us, and can very
hardly ever be b^tted out. So says S. Hierome in one of his Epistles: It is
hard to ra^^ (...) an unwrought mind has drunk in; a new earthen vessel keepe^
along (...), the sa^ (...) I^^nel, with which first it is seasone^. Aristotle
also conceaues, that it does much import what custom a man takes in his youth,
and says, that al in a manner lies in that. And in another place he says: The
first things do ever take p^ssessi^n of a man's mind, and preiudicate it, and
theref^re he orders that in a Commonwealth well governed, al obseene things
be put aside from children, that they may not so much as see the picture of
any such thing, nor a Comedy or Tragedy. Which care can never be had of them
in the world, nor can it be ex^ected or hoped for; but in Religion it is
constantly and most certainly observed.

^
6 Finally, it is no final commodity, that in younger years a man's mind is
lively and full of vigor, it is not divided, nor distracted with businesses or
affections of several natures so that if we apply it wholly at that time to God,
and bend our spirits, before they be tainted, to heaven lie things, our
progress in virtue must needs be the greater, and our course the swifter.
Which the grauest of the Heathen Philosophers expresses excellently in these
words: As that which as first powered out of a vessel, as always the cleerest,
the beauty and muddie staff stick^s to the bottom: so in our years, that
which is best, is first; shall we suffer that rather to vent itself among
others, and keep the lees to ourselves? Let this stick fast in our mind, and
let us esteem it as spoken from an Oracle: The best day of the age of each
mortal wight, flies first abroad. Why the best? Because that which remains,
is uncertain. Why the best? Because, while we are young, we may learn, Sene^a
Epi^^. 110 V^r^ in 3. G^^^g.
we may apply your mind to that which is best, while it is yet pliable and
tractable; because the time of our youth, is fittest for labor, fittest for
the whetting of our wits in learning, (...) est for corporal exercises in all
kind of works; that which is behind, is more dull, more feeble, nearer to a^end.
Thus Seneca.

7. Al which commodities we may see evidently expressed in a heavenly Vision,
which Humber^us (a famous man, A vision of (...) point.
and General of the Dominica^s) was wont to recount of a certain Religious man,
that after his decease appeared in the nighttime to one of his fellow-brethren,
compassed with a great light; and leading him out of his Celle showed him a
long rank of men clad al in white, shining wonderful bright; and they carried
most beautiful Crosses upon their shoulders, marching al toward heaven. Soon
after, there followed another rank far more comely to behold and more
glorious, and every one of them carried a dainty Cross, not upon their
shoulders, but in their hand. After them again appeared a third rank more
beautiful and more gallant then the other two, and their Crosses also surpassed
the others by far, both in workmanship and comelines, and they did not carry
them themselves, but every one had an Angel marching before him, and carried
his Cross for him; and they followed cheerfully, and as it were playing. The
man being astonished, and musing much at this sight, his companion that had
appeared unto him, told him, that they of the first rank were Religious
people, that had entered in their old age; the second were such as had entered at
man's estate; the third and last, whom he saw so lightsome and cheerful, were
they that entered into Religion in their youth.

8. And as this, ^
which we have said, ought greatly to encourage and comf^^ people of younger
years, so they that are men already grown, ought not to be dismayed. First
because, as the common saying is, It is better to turn back, thou^h with some
difficulty, then still to run on in an error. Secondly, if we will speak of
facility and ease, they that are elder in years, want not their comforts
also, and their helps and furtherances toward the leuelling and the taking
down of the ruggednes of the way they walk in, and toward the sweetning of
their sorrows and troubles; of which kind of comforts and the plenty of them,
I have spoken at large in this third book. And we cannot also deny, but it
often fails out, that though S. John, Joan 20.6.
as the younger, run before, more speedily then S. Peter, yet Peter the elder
enters first into the monument, Matthew. 20.10.
that is, comes first to perfect Mortification, and perfect similitude with our
Savior Christ. And the workmen, that were called at the Sixth and Ninth hour,
though they wrought but one hour, receive the same reward with them that were
hired early in the m^rning. For it is never too late to return to God; rather
it is always time, and we are always welcome, at whatsoever hour we come to
him, who always expects us, always knocks at our door, always embraces
and entertaineth those, that come unto him, with joy.

9. But it is time we say something of the other pretenses, Al delay is (...).
which the Diuelis wont to sow, as cockle, upon the good seed, which God cast
into our mind; either to choke it up, if he can possibly, or at least to hinder
the growth of it. And briefly to answer al these temptations in one word; there
is one excellent remedy for them al, to wit, thoroughly to persuade ourselves
and acknowledge as a certain truth, that whatsoever delay we make in so
profitable so wholesome, so important a thing, and subject to so many deceipts
and cousenages of the Enemy, is not only to no purpose, but in^^nitly
dangerous. This is the reason, why al holy men, knowing too well, how many
wicked snares lie hidden under these deceitful deliberations, S. Hier^m^ Fpist
105. S. Chryso^. hom. 57. ad pop. An^^h.
cry unto us with one voice, with one consent, to break off al delays, and
not to differ it by any means. Make haste, I beseech thee (says S.
Hierome) and seeing thy ship stick in the suds, cut the rope in sunder rather
then vnty it. S. John Chrysostom in one of his Homi^ies to the people, having
set forth to admiration the beauty and chiefly the pleasure, that is in a
Religious life, concludes thus: Perhaps many of you now are warm at heart,
and burn with a great desire of so beautiful a conversation. But what does it
benefit you, is while you are here, you have this fire; and as soon as you go
out, you quench i^, and the flame and beat vanishes away? What remedy? While
thy love is yet (...), got presently to those Angels, and there inflame it
more. Do not say: I will first speak with my friends, Matt. 8.12
I will dispatch my businesses. This delay is a beginning of shrinking away. The
Disciple would have buried his father; and Christ would not let him. Wherefore?
because the Devil is at hand eager to insinuate himself into our mind, and if
he get but a small resp^t or prorogation, he brings us to great coldness.
Therefore one does advise us: Differ not from day to day.

S. Aug ^. Conf. c. 5.
10. We may learn of what opinion S. Augustine was in this business, by that
which he says of himself, bewayling his own dulnes and lingering fashion, when
it was past, in these words: I had not what to answer thee, when thou saydst
unto me: Rise thou that steepest; and R^se from the dead, and Christ will
enlighten thee. And showing me on every side, that thou saydst true, I had not
any thing at al to answer, being convinced by the truth, but words only slow
and sleepie: Now, and Behold now; let me alone a little. But Now and Now had
never enough; Idem ca 6.
and Let me alone a little, grew to great length of time. And as here he
acknowledges his own fault in seeking so many delays, so he highly
commends the two brethren, that upon reading the Life of S. Anthony were so
hot upon imitating him, that at the self-same instant, and in the self-same
place, when they had read it, Idem (...) 59. ^^ verb. D^m.
they consecrated themselves to the service of God. And upon the same
groundsels-where he exhorts al in this manner: Behold the Giver of mercy
opens the ga^e unto thee. What do thou stay for? Thou should be glad, if
he should open unto thee at any time upon thy knocking. Thou did not knock,
and he opens, Prou. ^.^^.
and do thou remain still without? O differ not. The holy Scripture says
in a certain place of the works of mercy: Do not say, go and come again,
tomorrow I w^l give, when thou can presently do well; for thou know not
what may happen the day following. Thou have heard the commandment of net
differring to be merciful toward another, and art thou cruel toward thyself
by delays? Give alms to thy own soul. We do not say, thou should give it
any thing, but do not put aside the hand of him that gives.

S. Ans^lme Epis^. ^^
11. S. Anselme also says excellently well to the same purpose in one of his
Epistles: Make have to so great a good, because thou can not by any other
good more effectually come to the Sovereign Good. I have seen many that have
promised, and then differred, whom death so prevented, that they could neither
dispatch that in which they had engaged themselves, nor begin that for which
they had passed their promise. And again: He that differreth til the time to
come, and perhaps til the time, that will never come, to reform his life,
leaves undoubtedly a certain good and contemning that which he leeseth, he
shows that he loves not that which he expects, and deserves not to have
it.

S (...) and 10.2^2 (...) del^^beration in thi^, not t^ be c^^mended.
^2. The Judgment of S. Thomas in this point (being so great a Divine as he
was) is not a little to be regarded. He therefore both in one of his Opuscles,
and in his Sum of Divinity proposing this question (whether long
de^iberation upon this counsel be commendable?) proves that which we are
saying, by many weighty reasons, that we must obey God in it out of hand, and
diligently put in execution that which he speaks unto us. Though what do we
stand picking reasons here and there out of Authors, seeing we have the
authority of the Ghospel for us? Mat. 4 26.
We see Peter and Andrew, so soon as they were called by our Lord, presently
obeyed his calling, forsaking their nets and their boat. The like we read of
James and John, and in a more difficult and weighty occasion, of S. Matthew;
who, besides the general obligations of brethren and kinsfolk, set light (as S.
Chrys^stome observes) by all the human dangers, which might have befallen him
from the Princes of the land, leaving their service before he had cast-vp and
made even his accounts.

13. But nothing does more evidently confirm that which we are saying, then
that whereas he that was invited by our Lord to the Apostleship, Matthew 8.22.
did not refuse it, but craved respit, for a pious end, to bury his father;
the Divine Wisdom notwithstanding answered him: Follow me, and leave the dead
to burn their dead. Which S. John Chrysostom expounds in this manner: S. ^o.
Chrysostom. ho. 27 in Matthew.
This he said not bidding us to neglect the love of our parents, but showing,
that nothing must seem more necessary, then the businesses of heaven, though
the rubs which are cast in our way, seem great, necessary, and insuperable.
This therefore is that which al must think and do, that hear the voice of our
Lord calling, inuiting, and perhaps drawing them. S. Tho. 1.2. q 68 art. 1.
Arist 7. Mor. a^ Eudem. c. ^^.
And S. Thomas to this purpose does iudiciously among other things apply and
opinion of Aristotle's in his books of Morals, where putting this question:
What it is in a soul, that first and principally moves it? he answers, that
Reason first moves al other parts and powers of it, and that which moves
reason, is something better then reason; not knowledge or learning (for these
are not better then it) but God, and a little after he adds, that they whom
God moves, need not take further advise upon the business, because they are led
by a better principle then either Reason or Counsel. S. Ber. s^r. Ecce^^ When
(...) calls (...) needs to delib^^^^tion.
And S. Bernard rarely and eloquently says thus: How many does the accursed
wisdom of the world supplant, and extinguish the spirit conceived in them,
which our Lord would have vehemently enkindled? Do nothing, says it, rashly;
take time enough to consider of it, look more diligently into the business; the
thing which thou go about, is great, and needs much deliberatio^: Try
first, what thou shall be able to do; advise with thy friends, least after
thou have done, thou happen to repent it. This is the wisdom of the world,
earthly, sensual, diabolical, an enemy to salvation, a choaker-vp of life,
mother of tepiditie, which is wont to provoke God to vomit. It says: look to
thy self. And wherefore? what needs there any consultation, seeing thou make
no doubt but the word comes from God? The Angel of Great Counsel calls, what
do thou wait for the counsels of others? who is more faithful, who more wise
then he? Lead me, o Lord, and I shall be led; be thou more strong, and
overcome. I know what those things are which ought to be done quickly. I am
saved from the mouth of the pit of hell; and shall I seek respit, and hold back,
and delay to be gone, if perhaps something may be effected in the mean time? I
did hide fire in my bosom, and having burnt my side, and my very bowels lying
naked, and the corruption running down, shall I stand deliberating, whether I
shall awake, whether I shall shake it off, whether I shall cast it from me? A
great matter in very deed is offered me; so much therefore the more willingly,
and the more speedily is it to be admitted of, and embraced with open arms,
with fervor and joy. Let him prove himself, that confideth in his own
strength; for the strength of God is already sufficiently proved. Let him
advise with his friends, that has not read: The enemies of man, are his
domesticals. Why does he, that obeys not the Ghospel, Mat. 10.^^
use the Ghospel so often? For there certainly we read, that to one that
promised to follow our Lord, but desired first to bury his dead father, it was
answered by our Lord, Matt 8.22.
that he should suffer the dead to bury their dead; and to another that asked
only, that he might bid them farewell, that were at home, he said: No man
putting his hand to the plough and looking back, is apt for the kingdom of
heaven. All this of S. Bernard.

Diverse inconveniences of delay.
14. Moreover, the better to break with the delays, which the Devil puts in
our head, we shall do well to think, first, that (as S. Thomas advises) seeing
all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge of God are hidden in Christ, we offer
him wrong, when having had his counsel, we go afterward to take the advice of
any mortal man. Secondly, that though there were no other harm likely to
befall us, the very delaying a business of so great weight, is a great harm and
hinderance unto us; for it bereaueth us of the use and benefit of so many good
things as are in Religion; a loss which can never be repaired; for, so many
days, yea so many hours, as this demur^ing takes up, so much gaynes and
profit does it take from us; because in Religion no day, no hour passes
without excessive gaynes. Thirdly, we run hazard of inconstancy; and as we
are al mutable, frail, infirm, we put ourselves in danger of yealding in the
mean time, either to the importunate solicitations of the Devil, or the
flattering shows of the world, or to our own flesh, that still repineth and
labors to slip the collar. A ship out of the harbor, is always in danger,
and ought to desire nothing more, then speedily to put into the haven.

Delays in other things are hateful.
15. How speedily do we desire, that al other businesses should be dispatched,
even those that are of greatest weight and consequence, though they bring a
heavy obligation upon us for term of life? Who does admit of so many
delays, if he pretend for a Bishopric or other promotion, or if he be to
marry? and yet who knows not, what a heavy burden the one is, and how full
the other is of troubles and inconveniences? In Religion we tie ourselves to
God, and know that his nature is gentle, affable, loving, liberal in his
gui^^s, patient in bearing our imperfections. When we many, we tie ourselves
to a woman; a woman, I say, of as frail a nature at least as ourselves, in
sex inferior, most commonly inclinable to many vices, to anger, pride,
head-longnes, prattling, and some yet greater; and it is a wonder if we light
not upon such a one. The yoke of Religion has been long tried before by as
many as are, or ever were Religious. What therefore shall we need to fear
passing at such a foard, where such an infinite company have passed before us
with happy success?

Death may prevent us. S. Aug. ser. 16 de verb. Dom.
16. And finally, we must remember, how death continually hangs over our head,
and the many chances that may bring us untimely unto it; of which S. Augustine
speaks thus: Who has promised thee to morrow? Where thou read, that if
thou reform thyself, thou shall have pardon; read me, if thou can, how long
thou shall live. Therefore thou know not, how long it will be. Reform
thyself, and be always ready. Wherefore differrest thou til to morrow? S Ber.
Ep. 9.
And S. Bernard in an Epistle to certain Nouices of his, commends them
highly, because they were so forward to put their purpose of Religion in
execution. The Cross of Christ, says he, will not any more appear empty in
you, as in many sons of distrust, who delaying from day to day to be
converted unto our Lord, taken away by unexpected death, in a moment descend to
hell.

17. These are the points, Delay is but a cloak for our unwillingness.
which they that by the instinct of God are called out of the boisterous waves
of this world to the quiet haven of Religion, ought seriously to consider. For
what is the drift of this pretense of taking advise, or making some trial of
ourselves, but a color and shadow to cloak and hide the snares which the
Devil lays for us, and the secret love of the world, which we are loath openly
to acknowledge, to the end we may be long in leaving that, which we leave
unwillingly? which is scarce credible, how dangerous a thing it is; for nothing
is more easy, then at last never to forsake that, which we are so loath to
part with. And they that do so willingly accept of delays, let them give ear
to S. Bernard, a man of no mean understanding and experience in these things.
Let them hearken to what he says to one Romanus a Subdeacon of the Court of
Rome, and make account, that he speaks to themselves: Why do thou delay to
bring forth the spirit of salvation, S. Bernard Ep. 105.
which thou have so long ago conceived? Among men, nothing is more certain
then death, nothing more uncertain then the hour of death; for it will come
like a thief in the night. Woe to them that shall be great with child in that
day. If it come upon them, and prevent this wholesome childbirth, alas! it will
break through the house, and extinguish the holy young impe. For when they shall
say, Peace and security, then sudden ruin will come upon them, as the pains
of a childbearing woman, and they shall not escape. O therefore make haste, get
away, depart, let thy soul dye the death of the just, that thy latter things
also may be like to theirs, O how precious in the sight of our Lord is the
death of his Saints! Id. Ep 108.
Fly, I beseech thee, stand not in the way of sinners. How can thou live,
where thou dare not dye? And again the same S. Bernard writing to another,
that had asked a yeare's respit to make an end of his studies, speaks thus
unto him: I beseech thee, lay thy hand upon thy heart, and reflect that the
term of thy year, which to the injury of God thou have taken respit in, is
not a year pleasing to God, nor to please him in, but a sower of discord, a
feeder of anger, and a nourisher of Apostasy, a year to extinguish spirit, to
shut out grace, to bring thee into that luke-warmnes, which is wont to provoke
God to vomit.

Of a temptation rising from our Parents and Kindred. CHAP. XXXIV.
BEHOLD an other engine which the Devil makes use of against a Religious
vocation, grounded in the tender affection which every one bears naturally
toward his kindred; which S. Hierome fitly terms the Ram, S. Hierome ^p 1.
or a warlick instrument to batter down Piety and devotion; for it has two
parts, as it were two horns, wherewith it endeavors to shake and beat
down this rampire of Salvation. The one is the natural love which they of whom
we are borne, and they that are borne with us of the same Stock, do claim as
it were by right. The other comprehends all the ways which Kindred is wont to
use, to turn a man's resoluti^n from so holy a purpose, by praying, by
entreating, by tears, by argument, by laying load upon reasons concerning
their house, and family, and twenty such other devises.

2. Against this subtle and withal vehement and strong temptation of the Enemy
(for both concur in this, Whatsoeu^^ holds ^^ from following God, must needs
be temptation
which is seldom seen in others) it behooves us to be armed, and first to be
thoroughly possessed, and to hold it as an infallible Maxim, that when once we
are assured, that it is the will of God that calls us to Religion, what way
soever we come to be assured of it, whatsoever afterward offers itself unto us
to divert us, or draw us from that vocation, cannot come but from the Devil.
Wherefore whatsoever our parents, friends, or kinsfolk, or any body else (for
it is alone who they be) say or do in this kind, we must give them the
hearing, and make account of al, as coming out of his shop, that lays wait
for all; but as a cunning thief, is there most watchful and diligent, where the
booty is greater, H^^b. 1.16.
and of whom it is written: His food is the elect. For oftimes whom he has not
been able by himself to conquer, he has conquered by these kind of smoother
instruments, as making their way more easily into our breasts. And it is an
ancient devise of the Devil, which fell too well out with him in our first father
Adam. S August. ep. 38.
For what imports it (as S. Augustine speaks to this very point) whether in
a wife, or in a mother, so that Eve be she that we must beware-of in every
woman? For this shadow of piety comes from the leaves of that tree, with
which our forefathers did first cover their nakedness out of a most damnable
piety. Climacus therefore is in the right, Clim. grad ^. It is better to
contristate parents then Christ
when he says: It is better to contristate our parents, then to contristate
our Savior JESUS. He created us, he redeemed us; they by their love have often
been the destruction of their beloved. The love of God, and the holy desire of
him, extinguisheth in a soul the carnal love of parents: but he that imagines
that both these loves can be shut-vp together in one heart, deceaueth himself.
Let not the tears of thy kindred move thee, least thou bring upon thyself
everlasting tears, while thy parents and kinsfolk compass thee round like
bees, or rat^^e^ like waspes, weeping and lamenting, that so thou may
overcome grief with grief. Thus says Climacus.

3. Yet because they, that are ignorant and unlearned, plead in this case the
law of Nature, and the commandment of God, willing us to honor our parents,
let us see, what force this their argument has. And first, we must suppose as
a principle of Divinity, Exodus 20. Parents not to be obeyed i^ this case. S Th
2^. q. 104. a. vl^.
in which al agree, that in this kind of business we owe no obedience at al to
our Parents; and Divines give three reasons of it. The first we may take out of
S. Thomas, where he says, in that which belongs to the nature of the body, al
men are equal among themselves; a servant is not inferior to his master, nor
a child to his parent, meaning, for example of corporal necessities,
generation, and the like; from whence he concludes, that no man can in reason
be compelled either to marry, or to live a single life, for other men's, or his
own father's pleasure And Aristotle deduceth the same out of the grounds of
nature; for having disputed at large the obligation which children have toward
their parents, Arist 9. Eth. c. 2.
in the end he puts this question: whether in all occasions they must so live
in obedience to them, as it can never be lawful for them to depart from it? and
answers, that they are not bound in all. For if a child be sick, he must obey
the Physician rather then his Father, in that which concerns his health; and
in like manner, the General of the field, in that which belongs to the laws of
arms.

4. If any body allege the commandment of the Law, This is not contrary to
the commandment.
willing us to honor our Parents; we answer as S. Augustine did to the Heretic
Adaman^us, who grew to that height of impiety, that he was not ashamed to
slander the Ghospel, as if it were contrary to the Old Law in this point. For
he answers, that we must both honor our parents, and yet without any
impiety may contemn them, S. Aug. cont. Adamant. c. 8.
to preach the Kingdom of heaven, because we must honor them in their rank
and degree; but when that honor stands in competencie with the love of God,
specially if Parents hinder that love, then we must neglect it and shake it off.

5. A second reason is, The power of Parents is as of a deputy.
because the power which parents have over their children, being a
participation of the authority which God has over them, from whom, as the
Apostle speaks, al paternitie is derived, it is but as the power of a deputy
or delegate. Wherefore if God command one thing, and a Parent an other, Ephesians.
3.1^.
who can make any question, but the power and jurisdiction of a parent
cease, because it is contrary to the will of him that gave that power? For it
is as if a King should place a Steward of his household, or a Governor in a
town, and that Officer should command one thing, and the King the contrary,
by obeying the King's Officer, a man should be a rebel and disloyal to the
King. Upon which ground S. Bernard in the Epistle which he put his hand to, for
one Helias a Monk of his Monastery, to his parents, says thus: The only
cause, S. Bernard Ep 111.
why it may not be lawful to obey our parents, is God. For he says: Who loves
father or mother more then me, is not worthy of me. But if as good and
virtuous parents you love me, if you carry toward your son a faithful
piety, Mat 10.37.
wherefore do you disqu^et me, when I seek to please the Father of al, who is
God? why do you labor to withdraw me from the service of him, whom to serve,
is to reign? Truly now I know that the enemie^ of man are his domesticals.
Mat. 10.36
In this I ought not to obey you; in this I acknowledge you not to be my
parents, but my enemies.

In comparison of God, it is little which we have from parents.
6. A third reason is, because if we cast our accounts right, and summe-vp al
duties and the heads of them, which we owe to our parents, we shall find, that
in comparison of God, we have received little or nothing from them. For whereas
Man is a compound of soul and body, parents have no hand at al in bestowing
our soul upon us, which is notwithstanding the best part of us, and in a
manner al in all. For our soul is wholly created by God, and neither man nor
Angel can possibly come near the effecting of it, by all the power they have. As
for our body, if they had the whole framing of it alone, yet we should not owe
them much more, then if they had bestowed a garment upon us, or some kind of
instrument to work with, or a vessel to hold something in; for these are the
services which the body does for the soul, and truly not much more; rather in
many things it hinders it, it troubles it, it dulleth it; so that it has
not all that belongs to a perfect instrument, in the functions for which a soul
needs it. Wherefore, as I said, though our parents had been the sole framers
and giuers of our body, what were it? But indeed how little of the body itself
do our parents give vs' For if a man should spit upon the ground, and God
should presently of that spittle frame an image or some other thing, who should
be said to be author of that image? God, or he that by chance spet upon the
ground? For in like manner, God uses the unfashioned matter which falls from
man, to fashion a body out of it: He frames it, he orders it, he makes the
sinnewes of one part of it, the bones, the blood, and the rest of the members,
of another: and man is so far from having any hand in it, that he knows not
how, nor whether any such thing be done at al; as we see evidently, because
oftimes when they most desire children, they are farthest from having them. S.
Aug. in Ps. 70. con. 2.
Which S. Augustine expresses pleasantly in these words: While men beget, God
creates. For if thou createst, tell me what thy wife shall bring forth? and why
do I say: tell me thou? let her tell me, that knows not what she goes with.

That which they give, is much more the gift of God.
7. Moreover that little which parents give of their own, they cannot absolutely
by right call it their own, because they have it from God; and it is more God's
then theirs. Holy Job shows, that he understood this very well to be so,
where he attributes the framing of his whole body, and every part of it, so
wholly to God, as if man had no hand in it, but that it was wholly round about,
as he speaks, formed by the hand and fi^gar of God. Have thou not, says he,
stroked me like milk, Job 10.8.
and curdled me as cheese? with bones and sinnewes thou have joined me
together, and thy visitation has preserved my spirit. And an other Prophet:
Thou art our father, and Abraham knew us not; as who should say: Es. 6^.16.
what did Abraham give us, that we should owe him the name of a father? But our
Lord and Savior himself does express it in the fittest and weightiest
terms: Do not call to yourselues a father upon earth; for one is your Father,
Mat. 23.9.
who is in heaven.

8. And though parents were the authors and giuers of all this, it reaches no
farther then this natural life, which scarce deserves the name of life; And but
for this life, borne in sin. Ps. 50.
and if there were no other but it, were not to be called life but death. The
grace of God is that which gives us true life; and what hand had father or
mother in giving us the grace of God? Did not our mother rather conceive us in
sin, as the Prophet David complayneth, men condemned, before we were borne?
Which seeing we can not deny, he alone is our father, of whom we have both our
lives; him only we must thank for it, him only we must obey and hearken unto,
as to our father. Which is the ground of the advice which S. Hierome gives to
Furia, a noble Matron, in these words: Thy father will be sorry, but Christ will
be glad. S. Hier. Ep. 10.
Thy family will lament, but the Angels will give thee the joy. Let thy father
do what he will, with his goods. Thou are not his, whose thou art by
generation, but whose thou art by regeneration; his, who redeemed thee at a
dear rate, with his own blood. And it is not only lawful, but fitting, that
every Religious man say to his parents that, S. Bernard Ep 111.
which Helias (whom we mentioned before out of S. Bernard) said to his, that
were against him: What have I from you but sin and misery? I acknowledge and
confess, that I have this corruptible body from you, which I carry with me,
and this alone; can you not be contended, that yourselues being miserable, you
have brought me a miserable wretch into this misery of the world? that being
sinners, you have begot me in sin a sinner? that as I was borne in sin, you
have bred me up also in sin? but envying me also the mercy which I have
obtained of him, that will not the death of a sinner, you will make me over and
above the son of hell and perdition.

9. If we turn these things seriously in our mind, we shall easily master that
tenderness of affection, which is so natural toward flesh and blood, whenever
it shall stand betwixt us and so great a good; but much more, if we duly
consider that rigorous saying of our Savior: Mat. 10.37.
He that loves father, or mother, more then me, is not worthy of me. Which,
if we believe S. Bernard, is to be understood thus, S B^rn^ s^r. 20 in Cant.
that to love our kindred more then Christ, is for our kindred sake not to
fulfill that which Christ, when he was in flesh, taught us both by word and
example. Christ and our parents calling us several ways, who is to be obeyed?
And it is not without great reason, that the infinite goodness of God passes so
severe a doom upon this fault. For we must imagine, as if there were two that
did call upon us both at once, Christ on the one side, our parents on the other:
both of them lay before us, what they have deserved at our hands, but their
cause is far unequal. That which God has bestowed upon us, is infinitely of
greater value, then that which our parents have given us, besides that they had
it of God to give us, and so it falls out to be more truly indeed the gift of
God. Both of them therefore inuit us: God promises heavenly things, things
of inestimable weight, things that are most assured; they proffer earthly
things only, which indeed are of no value, neither is it in their power to give
them us when they will. God, though he should promise us nothing else but
himself, is himself beauty, goodness, happiness, honor, and worth itself, and
of himself a large reward for all the pains we can bestow. Wherefore, when we
turn our backs to God, when we prefer the will of an other before his will, we
do him infinite wrong. And what doom, what punishment does he deserve, that is
not ashamed, that is not afraid to prefer a mortal man before God immortal,
darkness before light, dirt and ashes before heaven? A punishment doubtless then
which there is none greater, a punishment most just and most suitable to the
fault committed: He is not worthy of me. Nothing can fall more heavy upon man
then to be rejected as unworthy of the company of his God, no punishment be
more just, then that he should be rejected, seeing he had so little respect, as
to prefer a creature before his Creator, specially being invited by him, and
God offering himself so lovingly unto him.

S. Gregorie's judgment in this case.
10. Let us see therefore, what S. Gregory prescribes for the care of this so
prejudicial an affection, and the evils, which, according as he declares, rise
of it. There be many, says he, that do not only not covet other men's goods,
S. Greg. 7. mor. c. 14.
but forsake also whatsoever they possessed in the world; they contemn
themselves, they seek not after the glory of this present life, they keep
themselves off from these affections, and tread under foot almost all the
prosperity that smileth upon them. And notwithstanding entangled yet in the
bond of carnal affinity, while they yeald indiscreetly to the love of their
kindred, oftimes they return through affection to their alliance, to the
things which they had overcome even with contempt of themselves. And while they
love their carnal friends more then needs, drawn to outward things, they
become divided from the parent of their heart.What do those therefore but walk
in a net, having been loosened from this present world by the perfection of
life which they had begun, Job. 18 8.
but entangled again in it by the inordinate love of earthly consanguinitie?
This is the reason, why Truth itself says: If any one come to me, ^uc. 14.16
and do not hate his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren,
and sisters, and moreover his own life, he cannot be my disciple. In which
saying when after the hatred of our kindred he infers the hatred of our own
life, he evidently shows, that we are commanded to hate our kindred, as we
are to hate ourselves; that drawing them to eternal things, and neglecting
their carnal favor, when it hinders us, we may learn to love them with the
art and temper of discretion, as it is fitting, and wholesomely to hate them,
to the end hatred may learn so to rise by love, that we may more truly love
them by hating them. For this cause it is said by Moses: He that shall say to
his father and to his mother, I know you not, and to his brethren, I am not
acquainted with you, D^ut 3^.^.
and have not known their children; these have kept thy speech, and thy
covenant, and observed thy judgments. For he coueteth to be more familiarly
acquainted with God, who for the love of piety desires not to know those, with
whom he was before carnally acquainted. For the knowledge of God is to our
great prejudice much diminished, if it be divided by carnal acquaintance. A man
must therefore sever himself from his kindred and alliance, if he will be truly
united with the Father of al; to the end that whom he courageously neglects
for God, he may love them the more solidly, the more he is unacquainted with
the soluble affection of carnal conjunction. All this is out of S. Gregory, and
much more to the like effect, concluding in the end, that though this natural
affection tempts us and press us hard sometimes, it is notwithstanding to be
kept down, and the way of virtue not to be forsaken for it. And to express
it, brings a similitude out of holy Scripture of the two Cowes, which drew
the wayne, in which the Ark of God was carried home; 1. Reg. 6.12.
for they lowed after their calves which were shut up at home from them, and
yet went on, declining neither on the right hand nor on the left. So, says he,
it is necessary, that they march, who having put their neck under the yoke of
the holy Law, carry ^ow the Ar^^ of God by internal knowledge; condo^ing the
necessities of their kindred, and yet not declining from the way of vprightnes
which they have begun.

11. We must needs grant, that all this is both truly and excellently well spoken
by S. ^regorie; yet because the temptation is violent and dangerous, (...) we
see that many run hazard in it, and some also sometimes do ^al, let us
(...) some more quick admonitions concerning it, not of our own, but of such
a^ (...) as have been both admirably eloquent, and are to this day venerable
for sanctity and authority in the whole Church of God. S. Hierome shall be
foremost, who in his Epistle to Heliodorus has this weighty saying: An (...)
ort^tion of S. Hie^ome S Hier ^p. 1
Hearken to the proclamation which thy King does make: He tha^ is not with me,
is against me: and he that gathers not with me, scatters. Remember the day
of thy imolmert, when buried with Christ in Baptism, thou tookest thy oath in
the Sacrament, that thou would not spa^e father, nor mother, for his name.
Behold the enemy labors to kill Christ in thy breast. Behold the camp of thy
adversary sigheth after the pay which thou receauedst, when thou were pressed.
Though thy little nephew hang about thy neck, though thy mother with her hair
loosse about her ears, and tearing her clothes, show thee her breasts at
which she nursed thee, though thy father lay himself down upon the threshold,
pass by them, treading on thy father, with dry eyes, escape to the standard
of the Cross. It is the only kind of piety, to be in this cruel. There will
come, there will come hereafter a day, when thou shall return conqueror into
thy country, when thou shall enter the heavenly Jerusalem crowned like a man
that has been valiant. I know well enough with what kind of fetters thou will
say thou art hindered. I have not a breast of iron, nor a heart that is hardened.
I also have passed by these things. Now thy forlorn sister hangs upon thee
with her tender arms; now thy home borne servants with whom thou have been
br^d til this day, say unto thee: To whom do thou now leave us to serve? Now
she that was thy nurse, laden with years, and thy foster-father next in
natural piety to thy own father, cries: To whom do thou leave us now, we
are ready to dye? The love of Christ, the fear of hell fire does easily break
these irons. But the Scripture on the other side commands us to obey our
parents. But again whosoever loves them above Christ ^ee^^th his own soul.
My enemy holds his sword at me to kill me, and shall I think of my mothers
tears? Shall I forsake the warre-fare of Christ for my father, whom for Christ
I owe not so much as the burial, which I owe unto every body for Christ? Mat.
16.25.
Peter by his fearful manner of aduising, was a scandal to our Lord when he
was to suffer. Paul answered his Brethren, that withheld him from going up to
Jerusalem* Act. ^1.13.
What make ye weeping, and troubling my heart? For I am ready not only to be
bound, but to dye in Jerusalem for the name of our Lord I^SVS CHRIST* This
warlike ^a^une of piety, by which Faith is shaken, must be deaded with the
rampire of the Ghospel: Mat. 12 50.
These are my mother and my brethren, Whosoever do the will of my Father who is
in heaven. If they believe Christ, let them be on my side, when I am to fight
for Christ; If they believe him not, let the dead bury their dead. Iudiciously
spoken by S. Hierome, and specially in that he concludes, that they that
believe in Christ will always be ready to favor any body, that is going to
the service of Christ: and consequently they that do not only not favor such a
business, but hinder it, and divert and stay people by all the devises they can
from it, what follows, but that they do not believe at al, or scarce believe
in him?

S. Aug. ep. 38.
12. Let us hear, how S. Augustine with no less eloquence, and with equal
weight of reason does press his friend Laetus to the contempt of the world.
For after a long discourse he says thus: Let not parents be angry that our
Lord commands us to hate them, S. Augustin's discourse.
seeing the like is commanded us of our own life; for a^ here it is commanded
of our life, that we hate it with our parents, for Christ, so that which the
same our Lord says in an other place, of our life, may fitly also agree to
parents. Io, 12.25.
Who loves, says he, his life, shall leese it. For I will also boldly say: Who
loves his parents, shall leese them. Behold the desire of the knowledge of
truth, and of learning the will of God in the holy Scriptures, has seized thy
heart; the office of preaching the Ghospel does draw thee. Our Lord bears up
the dru^^e to the end we should watch in the camp; to the end we should build a
tower, from which we may ouerlooke* and chase away the enemy of life
everlasting The heavenly trumpet calls the soldier of Christ into the
field; and ^hal a mother stay him? And what does she say, what does she
allege? Perhaps the ten months, in which thou did burden her womb, and the
pains of child birth, and the labor of bringing thee up. Kill with this
wholesome word, kill and destroy the fair speeches of thy mother, that thou
may find her in life everlasting. Remember that thou hate this in her, if
thou love her, if thou be a young soldier of Christ, if thou have laid the
foundation of the tower; for this is but a carnal affection, and sounds yet
of the old man. The service of Christ exhorts us to kill this carnal affection
in ourselves and in our kindred: and yet not so, that any body ought to be
ungrateful toward his parents, and scorn the benefits, by which he was borne
into this life, and bred up and maintained, when they are reckoned up unto him:
Let him observe rather piety every where. These take place, where greater
things call us not away. The Church our Mother, is mother also to our mother.
The Church conceived us of Christ; she was in labor with us in the blood of
Martyrs she brought us forth into everlasting light; she nursed us with the
milk of faith, and does still maintain us, preparing more solid food for us,
and trembles to see that you will be yet crying ^^ke little-ones w^^hout teeth.
This mother spread throughout the whole world, is molested with so many several
annoyances of errors, that her children, now abortiues, stick not to wage
cruel war against her. By the rechlesnes also and sluggishnes of some that
she holds in her bosom, she greeues to feel her ^immes grow cold in many
places, and to be less fit to cherish her little ones. From whence therefore
shall the look for such help as is due and reasonable, but from other children,
from other members of hers, of which number thou ar^ one? Will thou therefore
turn to carnal words, forsaking her necessities? does not her complaint sound
more lamentably in thy ears? does not she show thee bowels that are more
dear, breasts that are heavenly? Thus speaks S. Augustine, are much more to
the same effect, which whosoever desires to read, may find in him.

13. We will pass to S. Bernard, S. Bernard's admonition S Bernard epist. 104.
as copious and eloquent as the former two, upon the like subject. For thus he
writes to one Gualterus a famous learned man. What shall I answer thee to this?
that thou leave thy mother? it seems to be unnatural, that thou stay still with
her? but neither is this good for her, that she should be the destruction of
her own son. Perhaps, that thou serve the world, and Christ also? But no man
can serve two masters. Thy mother desires that which is contrary to thine,
and consequently to her own salvation. Choose therefore which thou will of the
two either to stand for the will of one, or for the salvation of both. But if
thou love her dearly, forsake her rather, least if thou forsake christ to stay
with her, she also perish for thee; otherwise she that brought thee sorth, has
deserved little at thy hands, if she perish for thy sake; does she not perish
for thy sake, if she kill him who^ she brought forth? And th^s I say to
condescend in some measure and to have some respect to thy carnal affection.
But it is a faithful speech, and worthy of al acceptance, that though it be
impious to contemn thy mother, yet to contemn her for Christ, is an act of
greatest piety. For he that says: Honor thy father and mother; he also said:
Who loves father or mother more then me, is not worthy of me. And thus much
out of the ancient Fathers.

14. But no exhortation can be of more force, nor more worthy to be hearkened
unto, The example of our Savior.
then the example of our Savior Christ, who though he had so worthy a mother,
would notwithstanding remain three days without her in Jerusalem, to execute
that which was his Father's. This was a preamble to that which afterward he did
in elder years, when he left to dwell and converse with her, that he might
wholly give himself to the seeking of men's salvation; wherein when once he was
employed, and word was brought him, that his mother was without, expecting, he
answered: Matt. 12. John. 20.
Which is my mother, and who are my brethren? Finally, which is most
considerable of all the rest, he chose to suffer death before her face; to teach
us by all these passages of his life, that we must not for respect to our carnal
kindred, forgo the study of virtue and perfection.

15. And how forcible this his example ought to be with all, has been
particularly declared unto us, by that which happened to one Albertus, a young man
borne in ^ermanie, of noble extraction, for he was son to the Count of
Falkenburg and allied to the King of France; and being sent unto him, to be
brought up at Paris with the sons of that King, he chose rather he heavenly
warrefare, and caused himself to be enrolled into the Order of S. Dominick,
which was then in a manner newly begun, about the year of our Lord One
thousand two hundred and thirty. When this news was brought to his father,
though he were now an ancient man, he could not contain himself, but came
instantly post to Paris with a great retinue, and used all the endeauours and all the art he could, to ^^ake this resolution of his son (for he was his only
son) but al in vain, the love of God having hardened the heart of the young man
against al carnal love, and al he ^ayre promises and allotements his father
could invent. But (...) was not an end; for he had yet a stronger combat with
one Theodorick a cosen German of his, who pierced with greef upon this
accident, used al means possible to weaken the purpose of his young cofen, by
tears, by entreaties, by argument, by putting him in mind of his mothers love
and greef, telling him that she was now either dead, or upon the point of death
for sorrow. It happened that they were ^itting right before an Image of our
Savior Crucified, his mother standing on the one side, and S. John on the
other. Albert therefore fixing his eyes upon that picture, and pointing at it
with his fingar, spoke thus to Theodorick: Behold Cosen, the Son of God, when
he saw his mother and his cosen German, both of them so dear unto him as you
know they were, pierced with the sword of greef, would not yet come down from
the Cross, though he could easily have done so but to his own and their
excessive torment remained in it til death. Wherefore, I also will never forgo
this Cross of a Religious life to which I have climed, though I should see
both my mother whom you tell me of, and you my Cosen german to fall down dead at
my feet: Rather, Cosen, come you also upon this Cross with me, and make off
the snares and fetters of this world, in which you stand entangled with such
infinite danger. What happened? This seruent speech of the young man struck so
deep, that Theodorick resolved presently to forsake the world, and entered into
the same Order of S. Dominick, the whole city standing amazed at it, so much
the more, because he was wonderfully given before to the humors of this world,
and al kind of vanity.

S. Anto. p. 3. hist. Tit. 24 c. 9.. 7.
16. That which S. Antoni^e relates in this kind is no less admirable. In the
same city of Paris, a famous Doctor entered into the Order of S. Francis. His
mo^her, that was a very poor woman and in no small want, among other good
offices which the had done him, had maintained him at his book by the labor
of her hands. She therefore with many tears, and much crying-out, began to
lament her loss, and the misery she was brought unto by the entrance o^ her
son into Religion, An other e^ample.
and stuck not to tax her son, and all the Fathers of that Order, as people
that dealt unnaturally, and very unjustly with her. Her son being troubled
with these her clamours, began to s^agger in his resolution; and praying before
a Crucifix, and as it were asking leave that he might go out again to relieve
his mother, he saw as it were the blood springing out of our Sauiour's side,
and withal heard this voice: I maintained thee at a dearer rate then thy
mo^h^r; wherefore thou must not forsake me for thy mother. Wherewith
astonished, and withal strengthened, he quite stopped his ears to all the
entreatings and complaints his mother could ever after make.

Against them that hinder their children or kinsfolk from Religion CHAP. XXXV.
HItherto we have done our best endeavor to encourage them that are called to
a Religious course of life, and to put heart into them to with^tand the
importunity of their kindred. It remains that we say som^thing, whereby
parents and kinsfolk on the other side, may be kept off from using such
importunity. For so, as in a battle, the one army being weakened, The fight
against God.
and the other reinforced, the victory will be the more allu^ed. And what can
any man say more forcible to keep them off, then that wittingly, or
unwittingly they fight in very deed against God himself; a war both impious,
and that which must needs follow, fatal to themselves? For without al doubt to
impugn the counsel of God, to destroy that which he does build, to scatter
that abroad which he does gather, to cut off the soldiers which he does mu^ter
under his Colors, is nothing else, but to join in league with the Devil, and
to wage war against God; which, as I said, is both an enormous offense, and
to them that are so bold as to attempt it, infinitely prejudicial. And
accordingly God does very often show, how highly he is displeased with this
sin, by strange and most evident punishments.

2. Pontianus bondslaue to a cruel barbarous master as S. Gregory of Tours
recounteth, inflamed with the love of God, And are severely punished. Greg.
T^r. de vita Pont. c. 5.
fled into a Monastery. His master redemanded him with wonderful
importunity, and he could not be denied, because he challe^ged that which was
his own, but suddenly he was stricken blind; and acknowledging the hand of God
in it, was maruelously sorry for his fault, and easily gave his consent, that
though the man was his slave, he might remain where he was in the service of
God; yet notwithstanding received not his sight again, til Pontianus had laid
his hands upon him, that the cause of his blindness might be the more apparent:
S. Thom 2.2. q. vlt. art. 6.
And yet, as I said, the man required but that which was just and reasonable.
For as S. Thomas and Divines agree, a slave cannot be taken from his service
without his Maister's consent; yea though he make his profession in Religion,
it is void and of no force, how soever inviolable that bond of vow is in other
cases. If therefore God were so much offended, for the redemanding of a slave,
and showed his anger by so grievous a punishment, have we not reason to think
he will be much more offended, if a man hinder his kinsman, or his brother, or a
father his own child from Religion, having, for as much as concerns this
point, no power at al over him?

3. S. Ambrose, S. Ambr. l. 1. de V^^gin.
so worthy an author, relates of a young Gentlewoman (that was then yet living
when he wrote the relation) noble, as he says, in the world, but much more
noble in God, that flying to the Altar, out of the desire she had to live a
Religious life, her kindred were much against it, and pressed her to the
contrary, offering her a great marriage, and promising mountains of wealth
and worldly commodities; but she remained constant and immovable. Whereupon
one of them more bold them the rest, spoke ru^^ly unto her in this manner Wha^^
if thy father were now living, do thou think he would suffer thee to live
unmarried? Perhaps, says she, he therefore dyed, that he might not hinder me.
And not long after, this man dyed, and every one was so fully persuaded, that
he was taken away for this his importunity, that the rest fearing what might
happen to themselves, began to farther her in her request, though before they
had labored so much against it.

4. But that which S. Hierome recounteth in his Epistle to ^aeta, is yet more
terrible; S. Hier. epist. ad La^a.
and these are his very words: Praetexta^a, in her time a noble Matron, by
commandment of her husband Hymetius, who was vncl^ ^y the father's side to the
Virgin Eustochium, changed her apparel, and wearing, and kembed after the
fashion of the world her hair, which she had neglected, cou^ting to overcome
both the resolution of the Virgin, and the desire of the mother. And behold the
same night she sees in her sleep an Angel, that came unto her, threatening with
a terrible voice to punish her, and breaking forth into these words: Were thou
so bold as to prefer the commandment of thy husband before Christ? How durst
thou handle the head of the virgin of God with thy sacrilegious hands? which
even now shall wither, that thus tormented thou may feel what thou have done,
and the fifth month being ended thou shall be carried to hell. And if thou
persevere in thy wicked fact, thou shall be bereaved both of thy husband and of
thy children. All this in order, as it was told her, was fulfilled, and speedy
death signed and sealed the late repentance of the miserable woman. So does
Christ revenge the profaners of his temple; so does he defend his jewels and
precious ornaments. This is the relation of S. Hierome.

5. And we might bring many like examples of later years; but what can we
bring more substantial to our purpose then this which we have said, or out of a
more substantial author? Wherefore it cannot be denied, but this kind of sin
has been always almost revenged by God with present and grievous punishments.
So that we see the saying of the Apostle fulfilled also in this: If any one
violate the Temple of God, God will destroy him. For if this be true of a temple
of stone, ^. Cor. 3.17.
dedicated to his Divine Majesty, how much more true will it be in a devout
Soul, which is a Temple far more holy and more dear to God? Wherefore if
parents be so eager upon this business, because they love their children* and
think it hard to want them, they must consider that they cannot do their
children, whom they love so deerly, more harm in any thing* and consequently
that it is not love but hatred; and if they do it for their own comfort and
solace in this life, they have just cause to fear, first least they offend
God, and secondly least they sail of that comfort and benefit which they seek.

How grievous an offenc^ (...) to h^nder people from Religion. S. Ansel ep. ad
God^f. Luc. 11 23. S. John Chrys^st l 3. co^tra v^t^p. vita Mon E^^d. 11. Deuteronomy.
22.
6. And we shall not greatly wonder, that God does so severely punish this
offense, if we consider the greeuousnes of it, which S. Anselme lays open
before us in one of his Epistles in these words: If he that separateth the
precious from the base, that is, a soul from the world, be as the mouth of
God: ^e, whose mouth and hand draws out a soul, that adhereth to God, to the
world, what shall he be? Shall not that fall upon him: which our Lord says: He
that gathers not with me, scatte^eth: and he that is not with me, is against
me? And S. Chrysostom laying load upon this offense, reckons how many
degrees of malice this one sin contains. The first degree of malice against
our neighbor, says he, is to neglect the beast or ca^tle of our enemy, if
they chance to stray, or fall into the mire; and this carelesnes was forbidden
by the law of God. The second, not to relieve our enemies themselves, if they
be in want. The third, to contemn our neighbor, if ^e be a stranger. The
fourth, to contemn those that are of our acquaintance. The fifth, to neglect
not the bodies only, but the souls of our Brethren that are perishing. The
sixth, to neglect our children that are in distress. The seventh, neither to
look after them o^^selues, not to get others to do it. The eight, to hinder
them that offer themselves to help them. The ninth, not only to hinder them,
but voluntarily to oppose their salvation. Behold to what height of malice and
cruelty in S. John Chrysostom's op^nion, this preposterous love of parents
does bring them, that thinking to do their children a pleasure, they become
pa^^icides, and commit so much the more barbarous murder upon them, as the
life of the soul is better then the life of the body. S. Bernard epist. 111.
Against which cruelty S. Bernard does deservedly exclaim in this manner: O
hard-harted father, o cruel mother, o barbarours and impious parents, yea not
parents but pe^e^ptorie man-killers, whose sorrows are the safety of their
children; whose comfort, their destruction; who had rather I should perish with
them, then reign without them. o strange abuse! The house is on fire, the
flame ^ingeth my back; and when I am flying, I am forbidden to go out; when I
am escaping away, they persuade me to return. And they persuade me that
remain in the fire, and out of obstinate madness, and mad obstinacy, will not
shun the danger. O fury! fie upon it. If you slight your own death, why do
you desire mine? If, I say, you care not for your own salvation, what avails
it you to persecute mine? why do not you rather follow me that am flying, that
you may not burn? does it ease your pain, if you kill me with you? and is this
your only fear, least you perish alone What comfort can he that burns,
afford them that burn? What comfort, I say, is it to the damned, to have
fellows of their damnation? or what remedy is it for them that die, to see
other dying?

7. Parents therefore, The example of the mother of the Maccabees.
to the end that by opposing the wholesome counsels of their children, they may
not fall into these mischie^es which S. Bernard lays before us (and that which
I say of parents, al friends, and kinsfolk, and al others must take as spoken
to themselves) let them duly weigh these considerations and arm themselves
with them, as also by the heroical examples of such as have not only
courageously borne the loss of their children, 2. Matthew 7.
but rejoiced in it for the love of God. Let them set before their eyes first
that noble mother of the Macchab^es, which in one hour lost not one or two,
but seven sons; and did not leese them so as they still remained alive,
though separated from her, as in Religion, but saw them torn in pieces before
her eyes, and taken from her by most barbarours torments. And yet what said
she, what manner of exhortation did she use unto them? She exhorted every one
of them, as the Scripture speaks, stoutely, in her countrey-language, filled
with wisdom, and instilling manly courage to her wom^nish thought, said unto
them: I know not how you appeared in my womb, and as follows, al full of noble
aduertisements.

8. S. Felicitas in the New Testament patterned her virtue; S. Felicitas. S.
Greg. hom (...) T^^n other of S. (...) S Basil (...) 40. Mar.
and as S. Gregory discourses, having as many sons as the other, She did
fear in leave them behind her in flesh, as much as carn^^ parents are wont to
fear, l^ast by death they should send them before them. And the mo^her of
Mel^thon may be ranked with them; for he being one of the forty Martyrs, and
the youngest among the^, in the prime of his youth, she seeing ^im lie w^^h his
thighs broken in pieces and yet alive, exhorted him to co^sta^cie; and moreover
when the rest were catted away, she took him up upon her shoulders, and
following the catt, put him with his companions when he was dead.

9. What shall I say of Abr^ha^, Abraham G^^^s. ^2.
who did not, as these women not hinder the putting to death of his son by
the hand of another, but upon the commandment of God did not stick with his
own hands to put his son to death, and the son which was all the hope he
had of posterity? This is a resolution which beseems a faithful man, specially
a Christian: This is constancy required in the Ghospel, to desire rather that
our children obey God then ourselves; not, as we see now the fashion is, to
divert them, and by all the craft and devises possible to pervert them, when
they are going, not to death, but to life, and to a far more pleasant life,
and to think they have done a great exployt, if by what means soever they can,
they overthrow a man's resolution, that is aspiring to Religious perfection.

Anna Samuels mother. 1. Reg. 1.
10. Anna Mother to Samuel did not so, but after many years of sterilitie
having received a son, offered him glad and joyful in the Temple when he was
but three years old. And God did not suffer himself to be overcome by her in
liberality, but for one son gave her many, as it were the interest-money of
that one which she had lent him.

Paula. S. Hierome. ep. 27.
10. Paula that famous Roman Matron, was in the light of the Ghospel not
inferior unto her. S Hierome does high^y extol her, because the desire which
she had to see her country was only to the end the might see her son, her
daughter in law, her grandchild that had renounced the world, to serve Christ,
which in part the obtained. The mother of S. Bonauenture
Such also was (as we read) the mother of S. Bonauenture; for she vowed him to
^h^ Order of S. Fran^^s when he was yet but an infant, and he fulfilling that
vow o^ hers, became so great a man as we know he was. The l^ke happened to S.
Andrew Bishop of Fie^ols, S. Andrew Bishop.
a very holy man: for his parents having no c^^ldren, had made a vow that if
God would send them a son, they would offer him to the Order of the
Carm^lit-Friars; and they had this Andrew; but when he came to years, misled
by the liberty and licentiousnes of this world, he h^d quite other thoughts in
his head, but that his mother, beyond her sex and the affections of a mother,
won him by her counsel and earnest exhortations, to dedicate himself to God
in the flower o^ his youth.

11. I mu^t confess there be but ^ew examples of this nature (men are so weak
in this point) ^et those that are, are sufficient to move any man living: and
particularly that which we read of S. Bernards mother, S. Bernards mother. Gu^^
in vitae (...). l. 1. c. 3.
which also in reason ought to weigh the more with us, because the was dead,
and in heaven, and could not be deceived in her judgment. It is recorded
therefore, that when he began to think of leaving the world, and labored
withal to draw as many of his bre^hren and kinsfolk as he could to the same
resolution, a younger brother of his called Andrew, of a fiery spirit, as young
so^ldi^rs use to be, showed himself wonderful backward (...) altered upon a
heavenly Vision, he cried out: I see my mother. For (...) mother, with a
pleasing and cheerful countenance, giving her children the io^ upon so
wholesome a del^beration; and he was not alone that saw her (...) S. Bernard
also. And if she had been alive at that time she would have done no (...), for
they write of her that she was so devout a woman, that she did always
presently offer her children to God in the Church, so soon as they were borne,
and brought them up ever after as if she had not bred them for the world, but
for Religion. And yet parents may learn by her, of what opinion they shall be
in this matter after death, when they shall see plainly before their e^es the
eternity of the life to come, and how quickly al things pass away in this
world. How will they then lament and bewail themselves, if they have been the
cause that a son of daughter of theirs has fallen from so great a good into
so great in seri^^ (...)them therefore do that now while they are hee^, which
they would certainly do, if they were suffered, as fine was, to return from
that life to give advise to their children, since they must as certainly
believe the things of the other life, as (...) they had seen them with their
eyes.

12. Finally, if they desire that we apply some kind of cure to themselves, to
strengthen them on this opposition of the flesh against the spirit, Parents
must consider that their children are mo^^ God's the^ theirs.
they may consider these ^ew things following; First that when they offer one
or two or more of their children to God, in truth they give him nothing of
their own, but make restitution unto him of that which was his before. For as
we advised children before, to the end to overcome the natural love to their
parents, to think with themselves, how final a thing it is which they receive
from them, so, to the end that parents also be not overcome with too much
affection toward their children, and that they may with more ease and more
cheerfully offer them to God, it behooves them to remember, that they are not
theirs, but God's, in a manner almost, as an image of stone, or wood, is not
the grauing-iron's, nor a picture, the pen^^^s, but both the artificer's. So
that when God redemandeth them, he uses his own right, and challenges but
his own; and whosoever will retain them, retayneth an other's goods. which is
a kind of theft, S Greg. 4. regist ^p^st. 44.
or rather Sacrilege, because that which he takes, is from God. For that which
S. Gregory says, he takes ^s true; While unadvisedly we hold them back, that
are making have to the service of Almighty God, we are found to deny him
something, who grants us al things.

13. This is that which the mother of the Macchabees, whom we spoke of not long
since, had before her e^es and made open profession of, when she encouraged
herself and her children in these words: 2. Math. 7.
I did not give you spirit, and soul, and life; nor did I knit toge^ther the
limbs of every one of you; but the Creator of the world, who framed man's
nativity, and found the beginning of al, and will restore unto you again
spirit, with mercy, and life, as now you neglect your s^lues for his laws.
And the same account al parents must make in the like occasion. For so they will
find that they will leese nothing, by le^sing their children for the service of
God. What would they do^,if their child should die.
For thus they must reason with themselves: What should I do, if this child of
mine should be taken from me by sickness, or in the wars, or by some other
accident of many, which the life of man is daily subject unto? Should I then
also storm against God, by whose appointment al things hap^pen? How much
better is it for him and me, that he live in the house of God, in service of so
great a Prince?

14. If it be the absence of their children that troubles them so much, Absence
of children cannot in reason trouble them.
that they enjoy not ^he company of them, whom they love so deerly, first this
is too effeminate and too womanish a kind of love, not to be able to endure
their absence, when it is so beneficial unto them. Secondly, how many be ^^
ere, that upon diverse occasions never see their children in many years,
either because they are marc^ant-venturers, or serve some where in the wa^^es,
or bear office in the Common-wea^^h* and their parents are content they should
be from them, preferring the benefit and commodity of their children, before
their private comfort?

14. Finally, They cannot provide better for their children. S John Chry. (...)
vit. (...)
the admonitions which S. John Chrysostom gives upon this subject, are worthier
to be consi^ered, that seeing people do, and suffer, so many diverse things to
(...) great estates ^or their children, and to leave them rich, they cannot
leave them better provided, nor more wealthy, then if they bring them up to
Religion and true devotion, for these are the riches which s^ick by a man al
his life time, and after he is dead, and put their possessours in sa^eti^ and
beyond al danger. Besides that, a man is then most master of his children,
when he gives them to God; for God is better able to govern and order them,
and will have greater care over them. Wherefore if we make account that when a
Prince takes one of our children from us, and places him in some great office
in the kingdom, it is a far greater advancement for him. then if he had been
bred all the days of his life at home, and parents ordinarily do think
themselves honored by it, and are glad of it; much more when God calls any
of them to his service: And consequently parents ought to be very willing that
any of their children may serve in so heavenly a service, The greatest
preferment that can be, to serve God.
not bringing them up into the temple, as Anna did her Samuel, but as it were
into heaven itself, there to be dedicated to the divine service with the
Angels. For Religious people wait upon God with the Angels; in which respect
also their parents themselves have greater honor and happiness by them, then if
they had remained in the world. Thus says S. John Chrysostom, and is
certainly in the right.

15. For if Christians have that Faith and light in them, which their name
makes show of, they should not only not be sorry, but greatly rejoice both in
their sons behalf, and their own, that God does vouchsafe to do them so
great a pleasure, as to take a child of theirs into his service, seeing to serve
him, is to reign. For to seek no further, whereas the Egyptians anciently did
worship a Crocodile for their God, if it had happened at any time, that any of
their children was devoured by a Crocodile, they thought it a heinous offense,
to shead so much as one tear for him, rather they made great signs of joy,
and were wont to make it a Holiday, as if they had received in it a great
benefit. In what blindness therefore is that Christian, that shall mourn if a
child of his be called to the service of the true and living God, being called
not to death, and so miserable a death, but to the happiest and pleasantest
life that can be?

S. Basil prefat. in As^^^.
16. Wherefore let us give ear to the wholesome and reasonable advise of S.
Basil: Seeing, says he, so great rewards are offered them that follow the
warfare of Christ, let fathers willingly permit their sons, and mothers their
daughters, to come to him and bring their children cheerfully themselves unto
him, and let them rejoice at the hope of immortal goods, whereof they shall be
partakers together with their children, and endeavor to have them their
patrons in the sight of God. Let us take heed, I beseech you, least we show
ourselves to be too streight-harted in this unseasonable love of our children;
and let not the labors fright us, to which they seem to go, but rather
rejoice that they shall meet with so great glory Let us offer to God, that
which we have received of him, that we also may have part of the glory and
commendation of our children, offering ourselves together with them. For they
that proceed in this cheerful manner, Ps 115.15 Deuteronomy. ^^. secund 70.
and persevere thus constantly, may have that of the Psalm fitly said of them:
Blessed are you of our Lord, who made heaven and earth; and may pray as Moses:
Lord bless their works; break the pride of them, that have resisted them.

An answer to them that say, they cannot know when it is a true vocation of
God. CHAP. XXXVI.
THere remains yet a question and doubt, not unlike to that which we find
propounded in the Psalm: Many say who will show us good things? Psalm. 4.6.
And we may answer with that which follows in that very Psalm: The light of
thy countenance, o lord, is signed upon us. For we shall meet with some, that
while they are breeding these wholesome purposes of a Religious life, persuade
themselves that they are inwardly so disposed in mind toward God, that if they
knew certainly his blessed will, they would readily follow it; but they pretend,
it does no^ clearly appear unto them, what his will is. And some indeed say so
from their heart, others take it as a color to shadow their imperfection;
because in very truth it goes against the hair with them, to break with the
world, The vocation of God is plain. Bern de Conuers. ad cler. and 2.
and forsake the pleasures thereof. Both must be informed, that the calling of
God, is not so secret and hidden a thing, but rather plain and casie to be
understood, whereof S. Bernard is witness, who says thus: Most certainly the
conversion of souls, is the work of the voice of God, and not of man; and
there needs no great labor to come to hear this voice: It is rather a labor
to stop thy ears that thou may not hear it. For this voice offers it self
unto us, it presseth-in upon us, and cease not to knock at every man's
door. For it is not only a voice of virtue, but a ray of light, showing men
their sins, and together lightning the hidden things of darkness.

2. Which testimony of S. Bernard, is seconded by plain and evident reason;
because God calling us to the intent we should come unto him, his calling were
in vain, unless he called us so, as we might understand him. For what
Master, does ever give order to have a thing done by his servant, but he
delivers his mind so, that he may be understood by him? And they that teach
in schools, their business being no other but to instruct and inform their
scholars, must not only deliver such things as their scholars may be capable
of, but also in the manner of their delivery, they most frame themselves to
their conceit and abilities, and if need require, often repeat the same things
over and over again, and explicate that which may seem obscure unto them; and
if they proceed not in this manner, it is a fault in them, which fault cannot
be in God And though this be most certain, yet I will here set dow^^certain
rules and directions, (...) may lead us to the truth of this business without
danger of mistaking, if (...) declare, what errors and dangers are to be
avoided in it.

Rashly to run upon a settled course of life, is a great abuse.
3. First therefore, whereas the settling of a man's self in a course, which must
last all the days of his life, is one of the greatest businesses, which a man
has in this world, and which needs best advise, we see notwithstanding that
commonly men carry themselves more carelessly and negligently in this, then in
any other thing; though in any other business, if through negligence or
ignorance the matter be mistaken, the loss reaches no farther then that
particular thing; whereas if we err in this, the whole course and frame of our
life must needs hang awry, this being as it were the hinge upon which it must
bear. And yet commonly men are so careless of this point, that they rush into
what course of life soever comes next at hand by chance, or fall presently upon
that which the least occasion or hope of commodity presents unto them. Some
carried with the stream* of the world, take the way which seems to lead
most directly to honor or wealth, persuading themselves that, that is best,
because commonly people are so persuaded. Others taking example by their
parents, and following the principles which they instill into them, take the
same course, which they have done before them, and in that which they are
borne, in that they continue al their life time; Which is all the reason which
most men have, why they apply themselves, some to the Law, others to the study
of Physic, others to serve at Court, or in the wars, or to traffic and
marchand it; and to be short, there is so little choice made, or advise, and
counsel taken in this business, that it is an usual thing among al sorts of men,
to leap into that which is next, or which they take a phancie to, be it what
it will, or which some chance, or accident or other has cast upon them. Which
rash and casual manner of proceeding makes that it is no wonder, to see most
men repent themselves of the course of life which they have undertaken, or if
they do not repent themselves, yet they fall into infinite errors by reason of
it. Whereas if they would understand what reason is, The grou^de^ upon which we
should settle out resolutio^s.
first when they come to years of discretion, or not long after, they should
take leisure, to bethink themselves, and seriously to consider, what is the end
of man for which he was created, to wit, for eternal glory, and how this
glory is the thing which we must al seek after; and whereas the several
courses and occupations of this life, are not only necessary for the upholding
of this common wealth of the world, but are ways also to that eternal glory,
for which we are made, every one must make choice and enter upon that w^^,
which may best lead him to the final end of that eternal Beatitude, and may be
most pleasing to our sovereign Lord and God, which is the cheifest thing we
ought to a^me at, and indeed the vpshot of al. For it is not the part of a
servant, such as we al are, nor can it belong unto him, to enter upon what
place or office in his maister's house he will himself, but to take that which
his master ordains for him. And this which every man ought to do when he
first comes to years, and in that crosse-way, as I may say, at which he then
arriues, if he have not done it then, and consequently have fallen into some
error in the choice which he made of his course of life (if it be not such a
state as matrimony, or some other which cannot be altered, by reason of the
obligation annexed unto it) he must proceed, as in all other errors, rather to
correct them, then to go further on in them: for it is better to be at some
loss by going back again, and sit down with it, then by still going forwards
in our former errors, be farther and farther from remedying them.

4. Wherefore, Indifferency necessary before we choose.
to the end we may at first settle our estate as it ought, or afterward take
the right course in altering it, if any alteration be to be made in it, first
we must bring ourselves to an Indifferency, and so quiet our mind, that we
hang not more after one thing then after another, but desire merely to fulfill
the will of God, what soever it be. For so it is the duty of a good servant to
do, as I said before; and if he carry not himself in this manner, he cannot
be said to seek the will of God, but his own. But whosoever does this, shall
quickly see the heavens clear of al clouds, and receive the light from God,
which he desires. And this is a rule which Climacus also prescribes in these
words: In searching the will of God, Clim grad. 26.
we must needs dispose ourselves so, as al our own will cease, and lean on
neither side; for when it shall be wholly purged of al self-affection, then it
will be fit to receive the inspirations of God.

5. Another rule is, that we must not in this business desire or expect
Re^uelations or Miracles, We must not expect Miracles or Reuelatio^s.
or any extraordinary sign or token above the course of nature; because God
having given us by nature an understanding and the light of Reason, which
together with Faith and the Grace of God does sufficiently show us, what is
fitting for us to do for salvation, his pleasure is, that we make use of that
light, and by it he speaks and manifests unto us, what he will have us to
do. Wherefore they mightily mistake themselves, who, when they advise upon
these things, would have an Angel come to them from heaven, or at least require
some such sign of the will of God, as may be altogether unquestionable. For we
ought not to do thus, nor desire any thing beyond the ordinary custom and
manner of proceeding of God with men. And the manner of proceeding of God is,
that though he assist us with his light, it is the light of Faith, not of clear
sight, and consequently there remains something that is obscure in it. And S.
Ignatius, Reuelatio^s rather to be desired for to remain in the world.
the Father and Founder of our Order, was wont to say a thing which is both
true and prudently observed by him, and worthy to be noted, that, if we were
to ask signs of God, we should rather ask them and desire more evident
signs of his will, to remain in the world, then (...) embrace the Euangelical
Counsels. For our Savior himself has evidently exhorted us to his Counsels,
and on the other side laid before us as evidently the excessive dangers and
difficulties which are in a secular state, and in wealth, and honor which the
world is so greedy of; so that, if we will conclude righ^, revelations and
extraordinary tokens of his will, are to be required rather, for a man to
venture upon the world, then to enter into Religion.

6. Moreover, Two kinds of vocations.
as our soul has two powers; Will and understanding, so commonly there be two
kinds of vocation; The one, when our will is inflamed with the love of a
Religious life, and a man finds himself carried unto it without stop or stay,
or making any question of it, but goes on with exceeding pleasure in thinking
of it. The other, when our Understanding is enlightened, and therein we discover
the vanity and dangers of this world, and see clearly on the other side the
quiet, the safenes, the invaluable treasures of a Religious life, though
perhaps our affection be somewhat dull, and not so ready to follow that which
reason shows us. This second manner of vocation, to say the truth, is the
better of the two; and more generally approved by those that are wise and
experienced in these businesses, then the other which consistes only in a
seruent motion of our will; for being grounded in the light of Reason and Faith,
it is less subject to error, and more like to last; and as they also observe,
more noble; because Reason and Understanding, is that wherein man differs from a
beast, and excelles al corporal creatures: Whereas the slownes and backwardnes
of our will may be helped diverse ways, and many motives and incitements there
are to quicken it, if we reflect upon them, and cast them seriously in our mind.

A man may be truly called, though he find no violent motion.
7. By which also we may see, that they are likewise in an error, that think
they are never called of God, unless they feel such extraordinary motions
toward Religion in their minds, that they burn with desire of it, and find
themselves carried toward it, without any trouble or difficulty. For the
lu^^pish and earthly condition of our nature, will not suffer us to moun^ so
high, without labor and difficulty; and the Divine wisdom, is not wont to
destroy nature, but to help it; nor to kill our enemies outright, that we may
have no body to fight withal, but to give us grace and strength to overcome by
fighting, because this is a more beneficial for us many ways, and more
wholesome.

Particulars about our ^^oyce.
8. Agreed therefore, that we must use the discourse and judgment which God
has given us, thereby to find out his will; the way and means which directours
of spirit, tell us we must take in it, is this: First, as I said, we must lay
before us the end, for which we were created, which is but one, to wit, by
loving and serving God, to come to everlasting happiness. Secondly, we must
present to our consideration, all the courses of life which are sitting to be
advised upon, and examine and search diligently into every one of them, what
help, what inconvenience is in it, compared with the final end we aim at, and
resolve upon that, which both in it self, and for us, is absolutely the best; as
they that are to take a journey, choose the easiest, the shortest, and the most
commodious ways. Thirdly, we must bear in mind, that most certainly the day
will come when we shall die, and give a strict account to God of al our
negotiations; and consequently in reason we must now do that, which then we
would with we had done; and choose that, which then we would give any thing we
had chosen; For what folly were it, in a business of such weight, to carry our
selves so, as we know we shall repent it at last in vain?

Retireme^t necessary.
9. A third thing, which they that desire to know the will of God, and (...) to
what he calls them unto, must understand, is, that they m^st not t^i^k to
come to the knowledge of it, in the midst of the vanities, and distractions,
and multiplicities of business of the world. But let them withdraw themselves a
little out of that noise, And a gen^^^l confession.
that they may have th^^ ^ares free, and hear what their Lord, their God,
speaks to them; and first of al, if there be no reason to the contrary, let
them purge their soul by a general confession of al their sins, for that will
be a great help for the light of God to come more freely into them, al clouds
of darkness being dispersed. Then let them give themselves somewhat more then
ordinarily to prayer and meditation, to raise their hearts from earthly, And
prayer.
to heavenly things, and finally present themselves before the Throne of God,
as a scholar before his Master, pliable, attentive, desirous of this
heavenly doctrine. For what wonder is it, if we hear not the voice of God, S
Bernard. epist. 107.
when our mind and soul is otherwise busied, and taken up with the cares, and
delights, and love of earthly things buzzing continually in our cares. To
which effect, S. Bernard writes to o^e Thomas, that was in the like
consultation about leaving the world: O dearly beloved, if thou prepare thy
inward ear to the voice of God, sweeter then honey and the honie-combe, fly
the cares which are without, that having thy inward senses free and vacant,
thou also may say with Samuel: Speak, o Lord, because thy servant hears.
This voice does not sound in the market place, it is not heard abroad. A
private counsel, requires private audience; it will certainly give joy to thy
hearing, and gladness if thou harken unto it with a indicious ear.

10. And yet we must add one thing more, And a resoluti^n to do that which
God shall tell us.
to wit, that whosoever desires this light, must not only, as S. Bernard
advises, come near to God, but come with a mind resolved absolutely to do
whatsoever God shall say unto him. For there be those that do not deal
uprightly and sincerely with God, but desire of curiosity, to know his will,
not to perform it, but to know it, and to be thought in some sort to have done
their duty; but they are so far wide from being discharged of their duty by
it, as they incur a greater fault, as a servant that knows his maister's
will, and does it not. And moreover this very thing, is a means that God does
not give them that light which he would, because he sees, that it will be in
vain to give it them, Psalm 110.10
and to their prejudice; which is that which we read in the Psalm: Good
understanding to them that do it; because God gives a good understanding, to
them that do, or are resolved to do, that which they understand, as S. Gregory
S Greg hom. 23 in E^ag.
notes in these words: He that will understand what he has heard, let him
hasten to fulfill by work, that which hitherto he has been able to hear.

10. A fourth thing, A motion to Religion cannot but be of God. S. Tho. op. 17
c. 10.2.2. q. vlt. ar. vlt.
which we must bear in mind, and must needs be a great settling and comfort
unto us, in this consultation, is, that every instinct which moves a man to a
Religious course of life, cannot be, but of the Holie-Ghost. This is a posi^ion
of S. Thomas, both in the book which he wrote against them, that withdraw
people from Religion, and in the second part of his sum of Divinity, where
he says that he that comes to Religion* cannot doubt, Psa. 142.10
but that he is moved thereunto by God, whose it is (as the Prophet speaks) to
lead into the right way, supposing he knows in his conscience, he has no
sinister end in it, 1. Io. 4.1^
but comes out of a desire of virtue, and of the service of God. Wherefore when
the scripture says unto us: Try the spirits if they be of God, it is to be
understood of spirits, that be doubtful, and is to be practiced by them, that
have the charge of admitting others into Religion; for they not knowing with
what mind and inte^tio^ people offer themselves, do well to try their spirits.
And he says further, that if it should happen that Satan tra^sfiguring
himself into an Angel of l^got should move us to Religion, Those whom it does
belong to, to try spirits.
we have no cause to be afraid; first because as long as he suggesteth that,
which is common for good Angels to put into our mind, there is no danger* for
we are not forbidden to benefit ourselves by our enemy, specially when we know
not that it is our enemy; secondly because though the Devil should move us to
Religion, he alone could never move us so effectually, unless God did inwardly
draw us; and concludes, that a thought of entering into Religion ever comes
from God, by what means soever it come into our mind.

11. This is the doctrine of S. Thomas, and that his only authority may not
carry it, we may confirm it by reason; because, as Cassian writes, whereas
our thoughts rise from three heads or fountains, Cass. coll. 1. c. 19. Three
spirits that may move ^^.
to wi^, either from a good spirit, or from an evil spirit, or from our own
spirit; We may easily understand, that thoughts of mortifying our flesh, of
forgoing our freedom, of taking up our Cross, cannot be from our own spirit,
because nature does abhor and shanne al austeritie; much less can they be
from the Devil; for what has he to do with perpetual Chastity, with
Obedience, with the voluntary humiliation of ourselves, he being the Prince of
pride, and nothing more hateful to him, then these virtues? And if this wicked
spirit cannot move us to any particular virtue, as to the love of God, to a
greater faith, or hope in him, or to true and solid humility, no more then ice
can be cause of fire, or fire of ice, much less can he move us to that virtue,
which in a manner comprehends al virtues. If any body fear, It can be no
s^^^ght of the Devil, to (...) Religion. ^ac. 11.15.
least the Devil do it out of craft, and for some slight which he has in it,
that he may afterward work us some greater mischief; this is also a great
error, much like to that, in which the Jews were, that absurdly and impiously
objected to our Savior: In the Prince of devils he casts out devils: And
they must be answered with the answer which our Savior gave: That Satan
cannot divide his own kingdom; for so he should do in this, if he should go
about to thrust sin out of a man's soul or, which is al one, bring a man to
a place where he may easily get out of it. He is not such a fool, not so
little skilled in this war against souls, as to let go the prev which he
has in his claw^s, and to suffer it to save itself in so strong a hold, and a
place which does so much annoy him, and he himself to help him forward to that
place, upon hope that he shall recover him afterward with greater gain. Seeing
therefore this is but an idle and foolish fear, and of such only as know not
the devises which the Devil has, it remains necessarily, that it must be the
good spirit to whom we owe the beginnings, and the proceedings, and perfection
of so great a work.

^
12. If any man object, that some fail and go back from the course which they
have begun; and therefore they were not called of God, because the coun^^l of
God remains for eue^; S. Thomas shall make an answer for ^s whose words are
these: Not all that is of God, is eternal: for if it were so, God should not be
the Creator of things corruptible; (...) ^^.11. S Thom. ^.2. q. vlt. art.
(...).
which was the heresy of the Manichees. And as it is in nature, so it is in
grace; for grace is given us so, as while we live in this pilgrimage, we may
leese it, because we have freedom of will, which as it might have rejected the
heaue^lie gift, when it was first offered, and so not received it, so it may
cast it away when it has received it. And thereupon S. Thomas concludes, that
the thou (...) of entering into Religion needs no probation, whether it be of
God or no; but whose ever feels such a motion in his soul, must admit of it,
as of the voice of his Lord and Creator, and a voice which tends wholly to
his good and benefit.

13. I have been the more willing to enlarge my self in this matter, because if
it be once agreed, that these holy and wholesome thoughts cannot proceed from
the craft of the Enemy, nor from our own natural inclinations, but of the
sole goodness and liberality of our Savior JESUS, it cuts off a great part of
the occasion of fears, and doubts, and demurres in the business. And that which
I said before, follows evidently, that long consultation about it, is not
only unprofitable, the thing being so clear in itself, but very dangerous,
because it gives scope to the Devil to play upon us the longer. (...) to be
called to counsel.
It follows also, that when we are in deliberation about this business, we must
not call our carnal friends and kindred to counsel (which both S. Thomas and al
others with ^^ yet consent del^uer) both because the natural affection which
they have, hinders them that they cannot see truly, how things stand; and
because, as our Saui^ur himself said, Matt 19.11.
not al receive this word; that is, al are not capable of it. And what advise
can they give in a business which they do not understand: Wherefore, as if a
man be to build a house, he does not call paynters or goldsmiths to counsel,
but maister-carpenters or masons; and if a man be sick, he does not send for
Lawyers to advise with, but Physicians, and those of the best; and as in all
other things we take the opinion of such men as are most versed in the thing we
advise about, so in this great work, being to build a spiritual house, which
may stand against al winds, and weather, and floods, and to attend to the cure
not of our body but of our soul, shall we go and advise with them, that
either have no judgment at al in these things, or are preiudicated with the
several affection wherewith they are corrupted? It is therefore to be imparted
only to virtuous men, and, to speak truly, to them principally that have gone
the way before us, that is, to Religious men, who having had experience of it,
are the better able to direct others impartially in it, and show them how to
proceed without error. For were it not wonderful folly and madness, if a man
had a journey by sea, or land, to take such a guide as never went the journey
in his life, when he may have his choice of many, that have done nothing else
al their lifetime?

14. A fifth rule in this business is, Al vocations of God are not alike.
that al vocations of God are not alike, and that there cannot be one rule
given to measure them al by, so as a man may say, it is not a good vocation,
because it agrees not with this rule. God is richer t^en so, and more plentiful
in his counsels over the sons of men, and draws them unto himself several
ways; and men themselves being of such several dispositions and natures as
they are, and having so many different exercises and customs and fashions, it
agrees best with them to be brought to God by different means. For as fowlers
have not one kind of net, nor one kind of bayte, to catch fowls, but some for
one kind, and others for others, as they know the humors of the birds are: so
God bends and applies himself to the several natures of men, both for their
benefit, to win them the (...) to himself, and to keep the sweetness which is
fitting in his fatherly providence over al. Wherefore as he called P^ter and
Andrew from their boats, and Matthew from the Custom House, because the one
was a Publican, the others fishermen; and took S. Paul in the heat of his
zeal of persecuting the Church, because that was then his humor: so in all
Religious vocations, one is called upon one occasion, and others upon others,
and some also out of the midst of their sins. Which manifold wisdom of God,
Cass Coll. 13. c. 15. and 17.
Cassian among others admireth, dispensing (as he speaks) the salvation of
men with different and unsearchable piety, and bestowing the largess of his
grace, according to every one's capacity, diverse, and innumerable, and
unsearchable ways; while he quickneth the course of some, that go willingly
and silently on, to greater fervor; some that were unwilling, he compels
against their will; here he helps to fulfill that, which we profitably desired;
and there he inspireth the very beginings of a holy desire; which manifold
largess of the Divine dispensation the Apostle considering, cries out: O
height of riches of wisdom and knowledge of God! How incomprehensible are his
judgments, and his ways unsearchable!

Examples of several vocations.
15. And it is easy to see, that this which Cassian says, is true, if we
consider what occurrences of place, and time, and other circumstances God has
made use of, to bring people under this his blessed yoke of Religion. As that
which S. Hierome writes of Paul the first Hermit, that going by chance into a
den or cave of earth to hide himself from the rage of Decius and Valerianus,
S. Hierome in vit^ Pauli.
that persecuted the Church of God, after he had been there a little while,
began to take a delight in that solitude; Paul the first Heremit.
and that which he began of necessity, he continued willingly, and perseuered
in it al his lifetime. The angry humor of the young Prince Arcadius was the
occasion, why that great Arsenius, who afterward was so great a Saint,
Arsenius.
then Master to the young Prince, forsaking the world gave himself wholly to the
service of God; for while he sought to put his body in safety, he found the
much more deceitful safety of his soul. What shall I say of Paul surnamed the
Simple, Paul the Simple.
who taking his wife in adultery, forsook wife, and house, and al, and went
strayt to S. Antonie, in whose school he came in a short time to great
perfection of sanctity. That which we read of Abbot Nutius, Nu^^us.
a famous holy man, is yet more admirable; for while he was yet a Heathen, and
a notable thief, he went on a time to rob a Monastery of Nuns; and getting
up to the top of the house, there he fell asleep, and saw in his sleep a King
admonishing him to desist from his wicked courses; whereupon he presently
desired to be Baptized, and betook himself to a Religious course of life, and
therein came to that sanctity, that besides other miracles, like another Iosue,
he caused the Sun to stand. The like is recorded of Moses a Black amore,
M^yses
a notable cutter and murderer, that being once in danger of his life, he fled
into the next Monastery to save himself, and there stricken with remorse of
conscience and fear, took up his rest, S. Romualdus.
and never parted thence. An accident also brought S. Romualdus to a Monastical
life, wherein he so much flourished. For his father S^gius (who afterward
became a Monk upon his sonne's example) having killed one of his kinsmen upon a
deadly quarrel, which he had against him, lay close for some days in the
Monastery of Classi^; where Romualdus partly by the good admonitions of one of
the Monks of that house, partly by the advice of S. Apollinaris that appeared
twice unto him, resolved to forsake the world; so that the murder which his
father had committed, in which he also had some hand, was the occasion of so
great good.

16. But nothing is more admirable in this kind, Ayong the^f.
then that which Sophronius, a grave and ancient author, recounteth of a young
man, that seeing a noble Lady buried in rich attire, out of covetousness
attempted the next night to break open her grave, and steal away her
apparel; but the woman rising-vp suddenly, laid hold of his hand, and rebuking
him very sharply, threatened him withal, that she would never let him go, but
there he should dye with the stench and ordure of the place; yet at last upon
the wonderful earnest suit he made unto her, she told him, she would let him
go, upon condition he would promise her faithfully, to enter presently into
Religion; which he both willingly promised, and speedily performed; for from
the grave he went strait to a Monastery, where the Abbot, whose name was John,
admitted him, and related this whole story to Sephronius not long after it
happened; adding moreover, that the man wept so bitterly, when he came unto him,
that his tears were witness sufficient of the truth of so rare a miracle; and
the happy success declared, that this also was a true and well grounded
vocation.

17. What shall I stand recounting the infinite multitudes of them, It is not
despair but God that calls people by (...).
that have been brought to Religion by houshold-afflictions and calamities, by
sickness, by some wrong or other received in their estates, or in their persons
and good name, and by other inconveniences which have happened unto them in the
world? People commonly are wont to censure them, as if they entered out of
despair, and not as moved of God. But they speak ignorantly, fixing their eye
upon that which is without, and not seeing the inward grace of God. For in
truth, neither poverty, nor sickness, nor any worldly affliction is strong
enough to pull a man out of the world, and bring him to Religion: But if a man
enter, and enter in that manner, and with those intentions as he ought, it is
certain, that the wisdom of God does outwardly indeed use that as an
instrument, sprinkling world^ie things al over with gal, to withraw a man's
heart from them; but inwardly he gives him his light and the knowledge of his
truth, which pulles him from his former estate, and brings him unto his holy
Mountain, and into his tents. And we prove it evidently thus. For how many be
there and have always been, that oppressed with like poverty, sickness, and
calamities, have never had notwithstanding the least thought of entering into
Religion, but rather have stuck the faster to the world? What is the reason
therefore, that they saved not themselves out of that shipwreck, and these
escaped, but that these had the help and hand of God to draw them out? S.
Hierom^ Epist. 34.
S. Hierome understood the truth if this point very well, and uses this
argument among the rest to Julian, in his long and eloquent Epistle, which he
wrote unto him, to persuade him to forsake the world. For whereas he had buried
two of his daughters almost at a clap, and besides lost his wife, and suffered
much in his temporal estate by inrodes which the enemy made into the country,
S. Hierome makes use of all this, and tells him, that they are warnings from
God, who as it is written of the children of Israel, S. Macar^u^ ^^m. 32.
instructs him with stripes and sorrow, And S. Macarius also in one of his
Homilies observes, that it does often happen, that God handles a man roughly
with miseries and afflictions, that being otherw^se too much wedded to the love
of earthly things, and seeing al things f^^ cross unto him, he may begin a
discourse thus within himself: Since I cannot have my will in the world, behold
I quit the world, and betake myself to God, wholly to serve him; and at last he
thanks his il fortune, because by that occasion he was drawn to the sweet yoke
of our Lord.

C^s^. Coll. 3. c. 4.
18. And Cassian reckoning three kinds of vocations, places this in the last
place, when by loss of goods or by death of friends, or by other such
accidents, they that refused to follow God in prosperity, are compelled to
follow him by adversity, against their wills, as the Hebrews, of whom it is
written in the Psalm: Ps. 77.34.
When ^e killed them, they sought him, and returned unto him; and early in the
morning, that is, speedily, without delay, they came unto him. And adds, that
though this kind of vocation seem to be the meanest and of least esteem, yet
men of great perfection, and great fervor of spirit, have been called by it,
and have been nothing inferior to others, that entering upon the service of God
upon nobler principles, have brought their life to an end with great
commendation. God some time, catches m^^ by a holy craft.
Clima^us says excellently well, that it is the fashion of God sometimes to
catch men by an honest kind of craft, and draw them in by a wile, to save their
souls. His words are these: Let us not contemme some that renounce the world
without any great consideration, because the spirit does sometimes piously
deceive souls. Cl^m. gra. 1.
For oftimes such a renunciation has better success then another which came
upon more advise; as the seed, which falls from the hand of the husbandman where
he does not desire it should, grows sometimes better, then where it was sowed
of purpose. I have seen some, that have gone into a Monastery with no holy
intention, but driven by necessity, who afterward were taken with the great
wisdom of the Abbot, and the mild conversation of the Monks, and God giving
them the light of grace, they arrived to an eminent state. Thus says Cl^ma^u^.

19. The last rule, which we have to set down, is about the comparing of
Religious Orders among themselves, Which (...).
so to make a right judgment of them; for this also is necessary, and
requires an understanding that is judicious. For though in embracing a
Religious course in general, we cannot err, as I have showed, yet in choosing
this or the other particular Religion, we may err, and the Devil may put many
mists in our way. For oftimes when he sees a man desirous of perfection, he
puts a course in his phancie, where perfection is not followed, as it should
be, that the good desires, which he had, may come to nothing; oftimes with
preposterous fervor he eggs him on to take more upon him then the strength of
his b^die is able to bear; and finally al his devises tend to bring a man to
do either too much, or too little. Wherefore that in the choice of a particular
Institute we be not drawn into error, two things are to be discreetly
weighed. First, whether the Institute itself be perfect; and secondly, whether
it be perfectly and carefully observed. For though a Religious Family have
never so holy Rules and orders in it, if they be not kept, or if few do keep
them, the holiness of their Rule is to little purpose; and no man ought to be so
confident of himself, as to hope to bear himself up against the multitude, and
to keep the right way where the rest go wrong. And consequently a man must
not so much consider, which Order is most renowned for antiquity, or for
memorable acts in times past, or for the members of holy men that have been in
it, but which now at this present is more holy, more obseruant of Religious
discipline, and more full of that first spirit, wherewith the Order was begun
and founded.

20. And if we be desirous of some signs to direct our judgment in this kind,
What par^icula^ (...) to be ^^^sidered.
we may consider these things following. First, if there be an exact order
observed, that no body have any thing in private to himself, neither money
nor any thing else, but al things be kept and served out in common. Secondly,
if there be charity, no contention, no hanging off from one another. Thirdly,
if ambition be wholly excluded, and al pretenses and proiects for preferment and
honor, and rather such employments declined, as carry a show of greatness and
auth^riti^. Fourthly, if obedience to Superiors be kept entire and inviolable
without exemptions. Fifthly, if the Religious be seldom permitted to deal with
their carnal friends and kindred, and not but upon some spiritual occasion. And
finally, if they be zealous of the good of souls, and for that end spare no
labor or pains that is requisite. These are the chiefest and most important
things, which are to be looked into. Other things, though of less moment, are
not also to be neglected; as the greatness of the Order, if it abound in good
subjects, if it be spread far and near, if it have people in it of diverse
nations. For so it must needs abound likewise in learning and wisdom, and
have greater helps to effect that which it does undertake, and more store of
good works, by the communication whereof every particular man of the Order has
the greater benefit. As a fire is the greater, the more store of wood is laid
upon it, and the wood itself takes the easier, and burns the faster, and makes
the more lightsome fire, when there are many sticks together, then when they
are laid one by one. Though all this is but extrinsecal; that which I said
before of the perfection of every Institute, belongs to the essence and
substance of it. And because in Perfection there be many degrees, if we will
know how to compare them one with another, we must take S. Thomas in our way,
who answers the question in these words: The greatest perfection of a thing,
S. Th. opus. con. imp. re^^g. c. 1.
consists in attayning to the end, which it has.

21. Wherefore, to value the perfection of every particular Iustitute, we must
weigh two things: First, whether it have a nobler end; and secondly, whether it
have means accordingly more proportionable for the attayning of that end, The
(...) chiefly ^o be considered.
because the more perfect the work is, to which a course of life is ordained,
the more worthily we must esteem of that course; and likewise the more
effectual and abundant means it has for the effecting of those works, the
better is the Institute, and the more to be preferred. But because no man can
begin a new life, unless he repent himself of his old, and consequently every
Religious Order, in that it enters a man upon a new course of life, is a state
of penance, therefore we may make a third compa^ison of Religious Orders among
themselves, in matter of poverty austeritie of life, and al kind of corporal
afflictions, though the two first comparisons belong more to the nature and
essence of Religion, and by them we must iud^e of the greater or lesser
perfection which is in them, both because per^ection consists more in inward
justice, then in outward restraint, and because outward austeritie may upon
occasion hinder some greater good, specially for the help of our neighbor. And
all this in a manner is S. Thomas his discourse, which for these generalities
may be applied to find out the true value, and make a true judgment of the
dignity of every particular Order.

S. Greg. lib. 6 ^n lib. reg. c. 6.
22. And that which he said last, concerning austeritie of life, may be
confirmed out of S. Gregory, where he says: It is of far higher desert, to
keep our will always subject to the will of another, then to wear away our
body with great fastings, or to slay ourselves by compunction in a more
retired sacrifice. But to return to the rule which S. Thomas gives for the
valuation of Religious, that which he writes in another place, S. The. 2.2. q
188. ar 6.
is also to be considered as pertaining to the same rule: that the Religious
which are ordained to teach and preach, are the first in rank among the rest;
because these works proceeding from the abundance of Contemplation, comprehend
both Action and Contemplation. Three ta^ks of Religious Orders.
In the second rank he places those, which attend only to Contemplation; and
in the third, those which are altogether in Action. And among those of the
same rank, they are more excellent, that have more universal employments, and
better rules and orders; as for example, if they have more and better means to
assist their neighbor, and so of the rest.

Another error.
23. Finally, we must also apply a cure to their error, that when they are in
deliberation about the choice of a Religious course, decline of purpose those
Orders, in which they see there be many rare men of excellent parts, because
forsooth they shall be no body, and lean to those courses, where there are but
few men of learning or other qualities, thinking that there they shall be in
their kingdom. Which, to speak the truth, is but an absurd and foolish kind of
ambition, specially in a business which should be farthest off from it, and
therefore also we shall not need to spend time in confuting it, but content
ourselves with mentioning it; only I thought good to relate what passed with S.
Anselme in this kind. S Anselme.
For when he was thinking what place he might best choose for the course of
Religion, which he intended, two Monasteries offered themselves to his
consideration: that of Cluni, S. An^o^. 2. part h^st in. 16 c. ^^.
where there was no practice of learning, and that of Becque, which was famous
for learning. He was loath to put himself into that of Cluni, because having
bestowed some time in study, he saw al would be lost, and on the other file,
in Becque he feared that among so many learned men he should be of no esteem.
And these were his thoughts at that time, when, as afterward he was wont to
say of himself, he was not yet tamed, nor had not the contempt of the world
grafted in his mind. But reflecting upon himself, he said thus to his own
soul: What? Is this to be a Monk, to desire precedencie of others? to be
ambitious of honor and renown? Choose therefore rather that place, where for
the love of God thou may be behind al, where thou shall live in obscurity,
and be the last and lowest of al. And with this resolution, which doubtless
was from God, he chose the Monastery of Becque; but the event was far beyond
his expectation. For his living among so many learned men, was not only no
hinderance to his learning and fame, but growing daily in learning, he grew
also more famous then he was in the world; which happens also most commonly to
others.

The Conclusion of the whole Work, to Religious people. CHAP. XXXVII.
Having now discoursed at large of the riches and manifold commodities of a
Religious course of life, and taken a full view of the worth, and dignity, and
beauty of it in the sight of God and man, and showed withal, that no earthly
thing for pleasure and sweetness is comparable unto it; It is time to consider,
what effect all this together ought to work in the mind of him, The benefit
R^l^^gion to be highly esteemed.
that finds himself environed with such a world of blessings, powered forth so
largely upon by the bountiful hand of God, who is sole Author of them. For if
profit alone, or in matter of profit one single benefit, one point of gain,
specially if it be eternal, ought to be above measure esteemed; what shall we
say of such an infinite number of spiritual commodities, and together with
these commodities, so many noble and undoubted titles of true honor, and
finally such abundance of solid joys and co^forts? For God in this great work
of Grace has proceeded as in the principal operations of Nature, upon which
the conservation of every particular thing in his kind depends; for besides
the necessity which is of them, he has planted in itching pleasure in them,
to draw his works never to cease, never to be weary of that kind of
operation. And in like manner has he contrived this wholesome form of living,
that though it be in itself somewhat austere and bitter, yet the wonderful
benefit which comes of it, makes it worthy to be desired, as a medecin in
sickness, and again he has so seasoned it with joys and comforts, that though
it were not so profitable, it is notwithstanding to be infinitely loved for the
sweetness which is in it, and to be preferred before al mortal comforts.

2. Which seeing we have made plain to every body in the discourse of these
three Books, with what disposition of mind is it fitting we should entertain
and make use of so great and so useful a blessing? In my judgment three things
may be required of us, Three things required of al Religious people.
which are heads and fountains of many others. First, thanksgiving for so
great a benefit; secondly, a careful endeavor daily to increase in perfection;
and finally a diligent and watchful custody of so ample and so rich a
treasure. First therefore, as I said, the greatness of the benefit requires a
thankful mind. For if in every little courtesy, which one man does another, it
is held a kind of inciuilitie, not to return a man thanks for it; how much
more uncivil must it needs be, Grati^^ ^^ and Thanksgiving.
not to be thankful to God, for so rare and divine a thing? specially seeing the
Majesty of God is so great above man, that the least thing which we receive of
him, must needs be an inestimable courtesy. And this thankful mind includes
many things; it includes knowledge, it includes memory, it includes love
and good will, it includes finally joy everlasting. For unless a man know and
understand, what is given him, he cannot be thankful for it; if he know it, and
quickly forget it, he is equally unthankful: but if a man know it and remember
it* he cannot but be inflamed with excessive love of God, because he cannot but
love him that is so good, and so many several ways good to him, and finally
seeing himself so loaded, so enriched, so adorned with his liberaliue, he cannot
but rejoice, and excessiuely rejoice at it. But because al depends upon the
knowledge of the greatness of this benefit, the first thing that we must
persuade ourselves of, is, that this vocation to Religion is absolutely the
greatest and the soueraignest benefit, which God can bestow upon man in this
life.

(...) the (...) that God (...) life.
3. For what can a man desire more? Honor, or wealth, or learning, of
eloquence, or to be sovereign Emperor of the whole world? But all this is
corporal, and consequently perishable and lile worth. That is only great, which
is great in the sight of God, such as spiritual things are: Now of these
spiritual things, of virtue, or whatsoever other goodness* what is there that
abounds not in a Religious state? so that he that has that state, has al.
Which is that which S. Bernard so much extolleth in one of his Sermons in these
words: And first he created thee with the rest, S. Bernard (...).
and among the rest he created thee not without a singular prerogative of
honor. After this again, that infinite Majesty inflamed with excessive love
of thee, redeemed thee. So easily with a word, as he created thee? No, but he
wrought thy salvation in the midst of the earth thirty years, was nailed to a
Cross, condemned to die, adjudged to be a mockery. But toward us he has
added another special benefit, in that from the broad and spacious way which
leads to death, he has drawn us with his finger, and placed us in the
counsel and Congregation of the Just. What ought he to have done more which he
did not? Whose breast is of so hard a stone, as not to melt at the multitude of
such and so great benefits, powered out upon us by such and so great a hand?
With reason therefore does S. Bernard require of Religious people a grateful
remembrance of such wonderful gifts, and a memory inflamed with wonderful
love.

God (...)
4. Let us remember, how mindful God did require the ancient Jew should be of
the benefit of their delivery from the servitude of Egypt, ordayning the
yearlie solemnity of the Paschal Lamb in memory of it, to be performed with
so many rites and ceremonies; and he did almost no special thing in favor of
them, for the remembrance of which he did not appoint some certain day in the
year to be solemnized. We therefore* we, I say, having been delivered out of
the land of Egypt, that is, out of the dark and toylesome prison of this
world, having been fed in the Desert, as I have showed, with the most
delightsome Ma^^a, having received the Law by the ministry of Angels, to wit,
our written Rules, and the will of God made known daily unto us by the light
and conduct of our Superiors; how much more just and reasonable is it, that we
should keep a continual and lively memory of this benefit? And as God tied
the memory of those ancient benefits, not to every ordinary day, but to
days that were holy and festiual, to signify that the remembrance of them
must be festiual and full of joy: so the consideration of this our vocation must
be always accompanied with cheerful ha^t always full of joy and mirth. For
what is there that can contristate a Religious man, if he know his own
happiness? for the incommodities which he may suffer, are nothing to the
comforts which abound in this state. When Anna bewailed her unfruitfulness, her
husband Helcana cheered her up in this manner Anna, 1 Reg 1.
why weepest thou? and wherefore is thy heart a^^licted? Am not I better to
thee, then ten sons? If one of us may say thus to another, certainly God may
with much more reason say it; for if we have God, as doubtless in Religion we
have him, it is more to be valued, then if we had all the creatures in the
world; and the loss of al creatures, is abundantly recompensed by only
possessing God. Besides that, in Religion the noblenes of our spirit purchased
by forsaking al things, and consequently contemning them, and living
continually in the contempt of them, makes that there is nothing upon earth,
that can either seem so beautiful as to deserve our love, or so harsh and
hateful as we should be afraid of it. Wherefore, to conclude, if we will show
ourselves to be what indeed we ought to be, and what God desires we should be,
we must never cease from giving thanks to God, never slack or relent in it; and
though we can never return him so many thanks as he deserves, not bear him
that true affection for his benefits, which the thing itself requires, let us
notwithstanding employ upon him as many, as our weakness is capable of; and
acknowledge at least and confess, that he has so gone beyond us with the
immensitie of his gifts, that we shall never be able so much as to think
sufficiently, what thanks is fitting to give him.

5. But if we know the true value of this benefit, Desire of perfection.
and esteem it as we ought, it must needs produce in us the second thing which
I spoke of, to wit, an excessive and everlasting desire of attayning to
perfection; so that al our thoughts, all the powers of our soul, will be
continually bent upon it. For first, this is that which God requires at our
hands, whose will is our sanctification. This his love demands of us; for it
having been toward us so profuse and without stint, we cannot better, nor in a
more bountiful manner correspond to his love, then if we love him again, and
adorn and set forth ourselves in that manner, that we may truly deserve to be
loved by him. The state itself in which we are, demands it, because it is
nothing else but a profession of virtue and perfection. Wherefore, as it is a
shame for a soldier to be a coward, and for a student to be no scholar, and
men take it as a disgrace to be thought so; so in Religion, where the study of
virtue and sanctity is only in request, it is a shame to be imperfect, and to
follow that business but coldly, Apoc. 3.1^.
it being the thing which our Lord in the Apocalypse so much complains of.

6. Finally, two things, well considered, will greatly encourage Religious people
in that which they have in hand. The riches of (...) not to (...) got without
labor.
First, that all the commodities and pleasures which I have discoursed of in all
this Treatise, are certainly in Religion, and much greater also, then was
possible for me to describe; yet they are as gold-oare in the veins of the
earth, which by labor and industry is to be dug out. For what piece of
ground is there, be it never so fat and fruitful, which will bring forth fruit,
unless a man tii it, and sow it, and bestow labor upon it? So these treasures
and commodities of a Religious life are great, yet they require a man that
knows them well, and makes great account of them, and, which is consequent,
makes the best use of them he can, The (...) not gr^^^
and labors daily to increase them. The other thing which is to be considered,
is the easines of the business, and the commodity which a man has of getting
perfection, every thing being taken away, that may any way hinder him, and on
the other side, al helps concurring to further him plenty of inward grace, and
so many influences and assistances from heaven, that nothing can be said to be
wanting but ourselves, if we be not holy and perfect. Wherefore we must make
account, Hil^ 6
that the Apostle speaks to us when he says: The earth drinking-in the vain
often coming upon it (for where does the heavenly deaw and rain fall oftener
then in Religion?) and bringing forth gras^e, commedi^us for them that (...),
receaueth blessing of God; but bringing forth briars and thorns, it is
reproba^^, and a very curse, whose end is to be burnt. Where, both our
happiness if we do well, and our extreme misery, if we do not well, is set
before our eyes. But God forbid such a curse should fall upon us; rather he will
give us abundance of his holy grace, Ephesians. 5.8.
that, as the same Apostle exhorts els-where, because we were sometimes
darkness, but now light in our Lord, let us walk like sons of light, and
bring forth fruits of light in all goodness, and justice, and truth.

Care of keeping ourselves in Religion
7. The third effect, which we spoke of, was care, and diligence, and earnest
endeavor to preserve so great a good. And we need not stand proving, that it
is fitting for every body to have this care; the knowledge of the greatness of
the benefit does naturally put it into us; for he that does thoroughly know it,
will rather dye a thousand deaths, then let it go out of his hands, or suffer
any body to take it from him. And certainly nothing is more terrible, more
lamentable, more horrible, From whence, and whither they fall, that neglect it.
more detestable to Religious people, then to fall from such an estate, to be
shut out from so great a happiness, to be as Adam cast out of Paradise. For it
were, as S. Bernard discourses, to be drawn again into the wrack at sea,
from whence they crept out naked; to fall again, where they had been
half-burned, and hardly escaped; to light again among the thieves, by whom
they were left but half alive, S Bernard Ep. 111.
and by the mercy of God were now recovered; and for the soldier of Christ
almost in the sight of heaven triumphing, from the gates of that glory, to
return as a dog to his vomit, and as a sow washed, to her wallowing in the
mire. 2. Pet 2.22.
Wherefore the same S. Bernard does fitly apply to this purpose that which is
spoken in the Canticles to the Spouse in a threatening manner: Cant. ^.8.
Get you forth, and go; and says, that God cannot speak to a Religious soul
a harsher word then this, nor any thing that can strike more terror into it.
S. Bern ser. 38. in Can..
Which thou also, says he, may perceive, if thou consider well, from whence,
and whither thou art bid to go. From whence, and whither do thou think, but
from spirit to flesh, from the goods of the mind to the desires of the world,
from the inward quiet of the mind to the noise of the world, and unquietness of
outward cares? in all which there is nothing but labor and affliction of
spirit. For a soul that has once learned and received of our Lord to enter
into itself, and within itself to sigh after the presence of God, such a soul,
I say, I know not whether it would think it more paineful or more horrible, to
suffer the very, pains of hell for a time, then after having once tasted the
sweetness of this spiritual study and exercise, to go out again to the
allurements or rather to the troubles of the flesh, and seek after the
insatiable curiosity of sense. Thus says S. Bernard, and al spiritual
authors with one consent agree in the same.

8. For as he that falls headlong from any place, the higher the place is
from which he falls, the more he bruseth himself; so he that casts himself out
of a Religious state, which doubtless is an eminent high estate, must needs
break himself al in pieces, and crush, and disioynt, and put out of order all the powers of his soul. Matt. 5.13.
For, this is that Salt which having lost the virtue and savor which it has
received for the seasoning of itself and others, is now good for nothing any
more, and therefore nothing remains, but that it be cast forth, and trodden
under foot by men A just and worthy punishment, that whom the dignity of this
state before had placed above other men, and made him venerable unto al, having
lost this ornament, should first become as other men, and then baser then they,
by how much greater his offense is, and therefore be contemned by every body,
and made a laughing stock, and a very foot-bal to men's tongues.

9. And what do they, that enueigled with the loosse and fickle pleasures of
this world, A miserable exchange.
turn their backs to so great a benefit, which God had bestowed upon them, but
that which that wicked and reprobate Esau did, when he sold his birthright,
and moreover went his ways contemning that he had sold it? And for what did he
sell it? for one dish of pulse. O blindness of a reachlesse man! that could
entertayne such a thought in his mind, as for, and together with so base, and
so ordinary a dish of meat, to consume and devour in a moment so rich an
inheritance, to cast away his father's blessing, and all the right of his
primogeniture in an instant. But he that at that time made so slight of it,
afterward lamented his loss, roaring out with a great voice, but when it was
too late, and in vain to repent. In like manner, if we compare secular people
with Religious, they are indeed both sons of God, but Religious are the first
begotten, and have received already greater spiritual blessings in the state
itself, and if they live according to their state, they shall receive a larger
portion of the heavenly inheritance. What madness therefore is it for a
disordered desire of one unfortunate and base bit of pleasure, to slight and
utterly to cast away such hopes, such present and future entertainements, such
commodities, such delights, so many, and so rare blessings, as if another
would go about to take them from us, they were worthy to be defended with the
loss of our lives. What tears, what lamentations, even in this life will this
short and momentarie delight, bought with eternal torment, bring upon us?

10. And what shall we say of the wrong which we do to God, Wrong done to God.
when we break covenants with him, when we forsake his service, run away out
of his Camp, when to his face we make more account of the friendship of the
world, and the love of earthly things, then we do of his familiarity and
acquaintance? This is the reason why, though God is wont to reserve the
punishment of other offenses to another world, most commonly he reuengeth
himself of this baseness presently; and we see, that ordinarily they that fall
from Religion, either live afterward in perpetual misery, or dye suddenly a
most miserable death. As one of whom we read in the History of the
Franciscans, about the year. 1260. who by the Diuel's instigation having
forsaken his Order and Monastery, two of the Friars of that Order moved with
compassion, Severely punished.
went after him to persuade him to return again, but he obstinately rejected
their wholesome advice; they saw an ugly black dog make at him, and affrighted
with the sight of him, they cried out to the miserable wretch, to take heed of
that infernal fiend; but he being with that more enraged, plucked off his Habit,
and cast it from him, and ran his ways. And behold, he had not run far,
when that monster, which, as long as the man kept on his Habit, had not power
to annoy him* leaped upon him, pulled him to the ground, and throtled him so
suddenly, that the two Friars, though they made speed to rescue him, found him
dead when they came. And infinite such accidents have happened in all Orders,
insomuch that Dionysius Car^husianus has written almost a whole book full of
such lamentable and admirable misfortunes; and if we would undertake to set
down all that have fallen out in our Order, they would make a Volume by
themselves, which perhaps may be some bodies work.

11. And yet I will not omit to mention some few, that have happened lately within
those two years, or little more. For first it is certain of two, that lo^t our
Soc^e^ie, wherein they had spent some years, that one of them was not long
after wounded to death, and the other, though he were a strong healthful man,
in the prime of his youth, was suddenly taken away with a fever; whereupon an
other of ours, whom the Devil at that instant was soliciting also to revolt,
meeting his corpse, as they were carrying it to be buried, was so da^^ed with
it, that shaking off the temptation which hung upon him, he resolved to remain
in Religion. A third was a No^ice, who deboi^^d from that course by a kinsman
of his, after a few days, which (blinded with the world) he spent in tauernes,
in drinking, and al manner of licentiousnes, he and his kinsman, that had
deboi^^d him, with many others in company, met with the party with whom they
were at variance, and among so many swords drawn, these two only were hurt;
and the wounds at first seemed but slight; but rankled, and brought them both
to their grave in one day, though not with like event. For he that had forsaken
his vocation, as that man that was more guilty of the two, lost his speech and
sense^ upon a sudden, and so dyed, without either Confession (which doubtless
he needed) or any other Sacrament. And almost at the same instant, the other
wasted with a strong fever, in the midst of his youth, though he had at the
Sacraments, yet cried out continually, that he was damned, and could not by
any means be drawn from that note. A fourth was as miserable, if not more
miserable then he; for not a full year after he had forsaken the Order, he was
shot dead with a pistol. And that which happened to a Priest was as lamentable,
for having left the Order, he was killed with a mattock by one of his Tenants,
for certain iealousies. And an other fell mad and cast himself into a cesterne,
from whence being two days after taken out and known, all the City was in a
maze, no body making doubt, but that happened so unto him, because he had left
his vocation. Finally about the same time, another that had left the Society
while he was a Nouice, gave himself over so far to al kind of wickedness, that
at last he came to be put to death for it; and when he was to go to his
execution, after he had made his Confession to one of our Fathers, he fell into
a great passion of grief, exceedingly blaming himself for leaving this
Paradise, as he called it, and protested, that when he put off the Habit of
Religion, it was as if he had put off Christ, and set open the gates to al
vice. And all this; as I said, has happened so lately, and to people that are so
well known, that of purpose I forbear to name them, not to vpbraid the dead.
It is to no purpose therefore, to search ancienter records for the like
lamentable accidents, seeing we have so many fearful ones before our eyes. I
omit diverse others, because I will not be too long in so unpleasing a subject.
These shall suffice, to show, how near this injury does touch God, and how
highly he is displeased with it, seeing he does revenge it with so sudden and
so grievous punishments.

The enormousnes of the offense.
12. Though we have no great cause to wonder at it, if we consider, how great a
sin it is to forsake God, when once we have obliged ourselves unto him by
Vow, and as it were sworn our allegiance, and yet turn to the vanities and
services of the world. Of which sin S. Basil has this excellent discourse: S
Basil. in rig fus. c. 14
He that has once vowed himself to God, if afterward he pass to another kind
of life, commits sacrilege, because he steals himself from God, to whom
he w^^ conse^r^^ed. And els-where more at large thus: Id^m. Cons^. ^on. c. 12.
This is most certain, that he that has once obliged himself to live in a
spiritual Society with his Brethren, (...) separate and cut himself off from
the^, without a great offense. For if ^he^, when they have once entered into a
society together in matters concerning this mortal life, cannot go from it,
by reason of the (...) which are betwixt them; and he that (...) tempt it,
should be subject to the (...) of the (...) with out doubt much (...) he that
has (...) covenant of a spiritual conversation ^ this union being inseparable
and perpetualy cannot part and break off from them, with whom he was as it
were one body; and if he do, he is liable to most heavy punishments
appointed by God. For if a woman taken into the company of man by the laws of
marriage, and linked with him by (...), be to dye for it, if she be found to
have broken her faith; how much more grievous punishment shall be instricted
upon him, that divides himself from the spiritual cohabitation, to which he is
tied before the Holie-Ghost, as before a witness and mediator of it? As
therefore the members of a man's body knit together by the bond of nature,
cannot be pulled asunder from the body, or if they be pulled asunder, death
must needs follow; so a Monk that is vni^ed to the body of his Religious
brethren, and tied unto them by a stronger knot then the bond of nature, to
wit, by the covenant which he has entered with the Holie-Ghost, it cannot be
thought, that he can any way withdraw himself from them, with whom he is thus
linked: and if he do, he leeseth the life of his soul, and together with his
life, the grace of the Holie-Ghost, a^ one that has broken the covenant, The
scandal of it*
which upon his advise he made.Thus says S. Basil, and much more to the like
purpose, and concludes with this observation: Wherefore, he that is such a
one, is to be esteemed as condemned by the sentence of Truth itself, as one
that gives great occasion of scandal to others, and by his evil example
draws others to imitate him. He becomes heir to that terrible woe: Mat. 18.7.
It is expedient for him that a mil-stone be hanged at his neck, and that he be
drowned in the deapth of the sea* For a soul that shall have once cast itself
headlong upon this revolt, soon filled with all kind of vice, intemperance,
a^^a^^ee, gluttony, falsehood, and al loosse behavior, and finally plunged in
extreme wickedness, sinck^ headlong into the deapth of malice. Behold that
which we said before; he that falls from so eminent an estate, must needs
bruise himself in all parts of his soul, and consequently (...) into al manner
of sin, as S. Basil witnesses in this place.

13. S. Augustine avouches the same in this heavy sentence: S. August. Conf.
37.
I plainly confess before our Lord God, who is witness over my soul, from the
time that I began to serve God, as I have hardly found better men then they
that have profited in Monasteries, so I have not found worse then they are,
that have fallen out of Monasteries: so that I think it was for this cause
written in the Apocalypse: Apo. 22.11*
Let the just be more just, and he that is (...), become more filthy. S.
Ephrem also in one of his Sermons sets forth very lively this general (...)
both of spiritual and temporal goods; S. Ephrem. (...) Non (...).
which they incur that fall from Religion, and thus he speaks: If after the
renunciation, and the giving over of our former course of life, a man begin
to halt in his endeavor to virtue, and by little and little depart from the right
way, and look back again, he shall be an example to others in this life, and
after this life shut out of the kingdom of heaven, unworthy of the company
of Saints, yea and to his parents themselves his reachlessenes will be a
confusion, his friends will fall away for greef, and his enemies rejoice at his
slothfulnes and ruin. His kinsfolks and allies will wish him dead, because
naked of earthly things, he has not laid hold of heavenly things, but under
pretense of Piety stooped to the yoke of the Devil; His parents, lament the
loss of his soul; he himself, that is thus seduced in heart, and has
corrupted his ways, shaking off virtue, becomes impudent, and is not ashamed
to do shameful things; for he neither fears men, nor weighs with himself
the wrath of God. And as the impious, when he shall come into the deapth of
sins, Prou. 18. Marc. 2. Mat. 9.
contemns, so falling into this great rashness, he is afraid of nothing; but
like him that sold al his substance, selling his garment of inestimable price,
upon a fury, filles it with patches of coorse and filthy cloth; which if he
use again, he cannot use it with honor and commendation, but to his reproach
and disgrace. For who will not laugh him to scorn, seeing him that yesterday in
a Monastery had gyrt himself to the service of his Brethren dwelling in one
(after the example of our Lord Jesus Christ) to day walking with a company of
servants? or who will not blame him, that yesterday of his own accord, cast
away al temporal things, embracing poverty, and to day sits upon the bench in
judgment, and earnestly recalles that which before he had condemned, and
transferres his mind again from heavenly things to earthly? All this and much
more is of S. Ephrem.

14. S. Gregory also in his Epistle to Venantius, that was become an Apostate,
and a vagabond, describes at large the greeuousnes of this sin, and among
the rest says thus: S. Gregory Ep. 33. lib. 1. Reg.
Bethink thy self what habit thou were in, and acknowledge to what thou art
fallen, by neglecting the punishments which threaten thee from above. Consider
therefore thy fault, while thou have time. Tremble at the rigor of the Judge
that is to come, least then thou feel it sharp, when by no tears thou will
be able to escape it. Ananias had vowed his money to God, which afterward
overcome by persuasion of the Devil, he withdrew again; but thou know with
what death he was punished. Acts. 5.
If therefore he was worthy of the punishment of death, that took away from
God the money which he had given, consider what punishment in the judgment of
God thou shall be worthy of, that have withdrawn, not thy money, but thyself
from Almighty God, to whom thou had vowed thyself in the habit of a Monk.

Caesarius hom 3. ad Monaches.
15. And Caesarius in one of his Homilies to his Monks: What can be more
grievous then suddenly to be rooted out of the place, to which thy Lord God had
called thee, where he first enlightened thee, into which after the miseries of
this world he brought thee as to the haven, out of a terrible tempest? To
forget upon the sudden thy brotherhood, thy society, thy comfort; to forget
the place where thou had put off thy ancient habit, and thy secular
behavior? Birds love their neasts; wild beasts love the places, where they
have been bred, they love their dens and pastures. And thou that have
understanding, that are endued with reason, will thou at any time be so void
of sense, as to prefer thy own pleasures and intentions before the benefits
of God, and follow thy own phancies, which to whatsoever hard labor, to
whatsoever wrack of salvation, and losses of thy soul, they draw thee, thou
feel not all this, by reason of the extreme baseness of thy heart.

16. S. John Chrysostom also writ a long and eloquent Epistle of this subject,
to Theodore a Monk that was fallen, and begins it in this mourneful manner:
Who will give water to my head, S. Io. Chrysostom. Ep. 6.
and to mine eyes a fountain of tears? and as follows, expressing great
greef; and again speaks thus unto him: Thou rejecting the commandment of our
Lord, a Lord so meek and humble, do stoop to the cruel command of a Tyrant,
that oppugneth our salvation, without any feeling of compassion; Thou breaking
the sweet yoke, and casting away the light burden, instead of them, have put
thy neck in iron-chaines, and, which is more, have of thy own accord hung
about thy own neck a mil-stone. Where therefore do thou think thou can
stay thyself, that have drowned thy miserable soul in so great a gulf, and
brought thyself to an exigent, which drives thee always further and further
into the deep? ^uc. 15.
The woman in the Ghospel when she had found her groa^e, called her neighbors
togea^her to be a partakers of her joy, saying: Reioycce with me. But I calling
friends together for a quite contrary cause, will say unto them: Lament with
me, mourn, and crye-out pitifully with tears; for a great loss is come upon
us, not of gold, or silver, or precious stones, but of him that is more
precious to us then al these; of him that sailing together with us, this great
and vast sea, being cast over board, I know not how, is fallen ^^^o the depth
of perdition.

17. But S. Bernard speaks heauiest of all the rest, S. Bernards opinion about
going from one Order of Religion to another less strict. S. Bernard Ep. 1.
not to one that was fallen from Religion to the world, but gone only out of
one Religion to another more loosely governed, and had for it leave from the
Pope; and yet he says thus unto him: O senseless child, who has enueigled
thee not to perform thy Vows, which thy lips have uttered? and what does any
man flatter thee in vain with the Absolution from the Pope, seeing the sentence
of God does bind thy conscience? No man, says he, putting his hand to the
plough and looking back, is fit for the Kingdom of heaven. Look into thy
heart, examine thy intention, advise with truth. Let thine own conscience
answer, wherefore thou wentst away, wherefore thou forsookest thy Order, thy
Brethren, thy place? if to live more austerely, more uprightly, more perfectly,
thou art secure, because thou have not looked back; if otherwise, do not mind
high things, but fear. Thus writes S. Bernard in that Epistle, which is
famous for the notable miracle which happened in the writing of it. And his words
ought to make the greater impression in us, because, as I say, the man whom he
blames so much, returned not to the world, but went only to an inferior state
of perfection, and yet so great a man as S. Bernard, S. Bernard Ep 94. S. Greg
3. p. past. c. 28*
and so full of the light of heaven as he was, does not stick to condemn him as
one that had looked back. And being asked the question at another time, he
answers not in his own, but in S. Gregorie's words: For so, says he,
writes the holy Pope Gregory in his Pastoral: Whosoever has resolved to
undertake a greater good, has made the lesser good which he might have done,
unlawful unto him. And to prove it, he brings the testimony of the Ghospel
saying: No body putting his hand to the plough and looking back, Luc. 9.
is fit for the Kindome of heaven; and thereupon concludes: He therefore that
purposed in stronger endeavor, is convinced to look back, if forgoing the
greater, he bend himself to the lesser. And the same S. Gregory in his third
Homily upon Ezechiel: There be some that perform indeed the works which they
know, S. Greg ^^. 3. in Ezech.
and performing them, purpose better things; but unsaying themselves again,
they alter from the better which they had purposed. They do the good things
which they had begun, but faint from the better which they had thought to
do. These men certainly seem in the judgment of men to stand, but before the
^yes of Almighty God they are fallen from their purpose. All this S. Bernard
brings out of S. Gregory; and the authorities of two so great Saints meeting
together, make that which they said, the stronger.

18. And we may evidently conclude upon it, that if it be a wicked thing to go
from a Religion that is perfect, to one that is less perfect, and he that does
so, shall not escape the judgment of God; how much more wicked is it, to fall
from Religion into the dirt and mire of the world? Some labor to excuse their
inconstancy, pretending that they return not ^o the world, to return to
their sins, but are resolved to live uprightly and lead a virtuous life,
which by the grace of God (which forsakes no body) they hope to do, and that
it imports not where they live, so they live well. Against which foolish and
pernicious error we might say many things; but one word of S. Basil is
sufficient to stop their mouths: Whosoever, S. Basil de abdic. s^s.
says he, forsakes the Colors of Christ, because he thinks he may
notwithstanding practice virtue, and please God, is wonderfully deceived. For
he that in a course of life, not cumbred with distractiue cares, and therefore
less subject to sin, could not withstand his adversary, how can it be
thought, that in a life, in which there be so many gates open to sin, and
where it is in his own power freely to use his liberty, he will do any thing
that is virtuous? And yet though we grant he may, he can never escape the
infamy of having revolted from Christ, as those Disciples whom the holy
Evangelist openly reproves when he says: Job. 6.66.
And many of the disciples went back, and now did not walk with Jesus,
saying: This word is hard. And then alleges many arguments, to show how
damnable this inconstancy is, and particularly, that they that suffer
themselves to be thus put by their place, and leese their footing, become a
laughing stock and mockery to al, and together with the loss of their own
souls, scandalize al kind of people, giving them occasion to think, that the
service of Christ is intolerable.

19. But enough of this hideous offense, and perhaps more then enough,
considering the matter is so foul and detestable. Wherefore let us return to
our former discourse of the sweetness and happiness, which God has so abundantly
heaped upon this estate; for there can not be a greater incitement and
encouragement to persevere in it, then if we know truly what it is, and how
great a gift of God. Let every one make account, that those heavenly words
of the Apocalypse were spoken to himself: Apo. 3.11.
Hold that which thou have, that no man may take thy crown. For the service of
God may be truly called a Crown, which signifyes honor and dignity, and a
Princely state. This is the Crown which we must hold, that no body take it
from us; that is, endure whatsoever pain, trouble, labor, austeritie, yea
part with our very lives, rather then part with it.

The exhortation of S. Anthony
20. But what can we allege more effectual to encourage al Religious people in
that which they have in hand, then that discourse, which (as S. Athanasius
records) S. Anthony was wont to hold to his followers? And because it is the
discourse of so rare a man, and so universally agrees to al Religious people,
and lays lively before us the happiness which we enjoy in Religion, I have
made choice of it, as the fittest to conclude therewith this whole Treatise of
a Religious State. And this it is: In this present life the prices are equal
with the things which we exchange; S. Atha^^in ^^ta An^o.
and he that sells, receaueth not things of greater value from him that
buyeth. But the promise of everlasting life is purchased at a low rate. For it
is written: The days of our life threescore and ten years. When therefore we
shall have lived foure-score, Ps. 89 10.
or a hundred years, laboring in the service of God, in the life to come we
shall not reign just so much time, but for the years which I have said, the
kingdom of al ages shall be given us. We shall not inherit earth but heaven, and
leaving this corruptible body, we shall receive it with incorruption.
Therefore, my Children, let not tediousnes weary you, nor the ambition of
vainglory delight you. Rom 8.1^.
The sufferings of this time are not condign to the future glory, which shall
be revealed in us. Let no man, when he looks upon the world, think he has
left great matters; for the whole earth compared with the immensitie of the
heavens, is little. If therefore renouncing the whole world, we cannot say, we
give a just value for those heavenly habitations, let every one reflect upon
himself, and he will presently understand, that having contemned a small
treasure, or a little house, or a small portion of gold, he has neither cause to
glory, as if he had forsaken great things, nor to repent himself, as if he
were to receive but little. For as a man sets little by one piece of brass to
gain a hundred pieces of gold, so he that has forsaken the Empire of the
whole world, shall receive a hundredfold of better rewards in that sublime
Throne. Finally we must consider also, that though we would keep our wealth,
we shall be taken from it, whether we will or no, by the course of death. Why
therefore do we not make a virtue of necessity? why do we not voluntarily
forsake that, to gain the kingdom of heaven, which we must leese when our
life is at an end? Let us consider that we are servants of our Lord, Genesis 19.26.
and owe service to him that has created us; let no man by looking back
imitate the wife of Loath, especially seeing our Lord has said, that no man that
puts his hand to the plough and looks back, is worthy of the kingdom of
heaven. To look back, is nothing else, but to repent ourselves of that which we
have begun, and to entangle ourselves again in worldly desires. Be not, I
beseech you, afraid of the name of virtue, as if it were impossible; let not
this exercise seem strange unto us, or hard to come by; it depends (the
grace of God preceding) of our free will; Man has a natural inclination to this
work, 1. Cor. 9.24.
and it is a thing which expects only our good will; whereupon our Lord in the
Ghospel says: The kingdom of God is within you. This we have culled out of a
long discourse of S. Anthonie's, which every one must take, and ponder, as
spoken to himself, that seeing by the grace and goodness of God we are entered
into this holy race of Religion, we may continue to run so in it, as we may
one day happily obtain.

The Conclusion of the whole Work, to Secular people. CHAP. XXXVIII.
WE must now at last address ourselves also to Secular people; though not to
al, but to whom God has vouchsafed from heaven some rays of a Religious
vocation. Others that have received no such light, it is neither lawful for me
to move them in it, nor am I willing to meddle with admonishing them; but for
that which belongs to their duty, other discourses are more fitting for them.

Matt 9 9.
2. But they whom God has vouchsafed so great a benefit, as to cast his eye
upon them, and behold them sitting, as it were, in the Custom House, and
shining in their hearts, 2. Cor. 4.6.
has invited them, from earthly thoughts, and worldly fashions, to this
heavenly manner of living, stand in need of some body to admonish* to exhort,
to help t^em forward in this happy course. They that think of entering into
Religion, must expect encounters.
For many encounters stand expecting them, partly from the Devil their foreign
Enemy, partly from their own flesh, an Enemy more dangerous, because the
war is within the land. And though every one, by that which he finds by
experience within himself, may easily understand, what kind of assaults these
are, yet it will not be amiss to hear what S. Gregory says of them in these
words: In the first beginning of our conversion we have great sorrow; S Greg.
24.24. Mor. ca. 7.
for when a man considering his own offenses, desires to break in sunder the
fetters of worldly cares, and walk the way of God by the path of a safe
conversation, and cast off the heavy burden of temporal desires, to carry the
sweet yoke of our Lord in a free manner of servitude: while he has this in his
thoughts, the carnal delight, which was familiar with him, meets him in the
way, and being from a long time grown in custom, the longer he has used it,
the streighter it closes with him, and suffers him to part the slower from
it. And what sorrow is there, what anxietie of heart, when on the one side the
spirit calls, and on the other side the flesh draws back? on the one side
the love of a new conversation inuiteth, on the other the custom of our
ancient wickedness resists; on the one side, his heart burns with desire of
the heavenly Country, on the other side he endures in himself the pain of
carnal concupiscence; which also does in some sort delight him against his will.
This is S. Gregorie's discourse of it; and yet that fresh soldiers especially
may not be dishartned, let us see further, what succors and supplies God sends
them, (...) is (...) to be one come.
and how easily they may go away with the victory. For this is that which
follows in him: But because the Divine grace does not suffer us long to be
molested with these difficulties, breaking the fetters of our sins, he
quickly brings us to the liberty of this new conversation, by comforting us;
and the ensuing joy solaceth our precedent sorrows, insomuch that the soul of
every one that is converted, does so much the more rejoice, when it obtains
what it desired, by how much it remembers the greef was greater in the labor
to obtain it. His heart is excessiuely joyful, because now through hope of
security he approaches to whom he desired, and rightly we may say of him: He
will beseech God, Job. 33.
who will be pleased with him, and he shall see his face in inhilation; or: He
has delivered his soul, that it should not go to destruction, but living
should see light.

3. If therefore the case be thus, as S. Gregory tells us, who can be afraid
of such skirmishes as are, The goods of this world are nothing.
as we see, both short, and seconded on our side with so many helps toward
the victory? But first of al, for the better success in it, we must weane
ourselves from a conceit, which is wont to be a great rub in this kind of
deliberation, as if they that forsake the goods of this world, lost some great
matter, whereas in truth there is no great thing in them, nothing that can be
truly called good; and though there were, they that do forsake them, do not
indeed loose them, but exchange them for that which is better, and of far
greater value. Which is that, of which S. Bernard puts Sophia, S Ber. Epi.
ad Sophiam.
a noble and rich Lady, in mind, upon a resolution which she had to forsake
the world, and consecrate herself to God. The things, says he, which thou
abandonest, are small, earthly, transitory. That which thou desire, is
great, heavenly, eternal. I will say more, and yet say but the truth: Thou
forsakest darkness, thou entrest into light; from the deapth of the seas, thou
risest to the harbor; from a miserable slavery, thou art rescued into a
happy freedom; finally from death thou passest to life* For hitherto living
after thine own will, not after the will of God, living at thine own direction,
not according to the law of God, living thou were dead.

4. S. Ambrose for this reason likeneth the voluntary renunciation of al
things to a thing deposited, That which we renounce, is but deposited.
because when we depositate any thing with a friend, we receive the self same
thing again at the time agreed on, and have this commodity, that in the mean
time it is sure unto us in a safe hand. Thus he speaks to vowed Virgins: Let
us grant, S. Ambr ^. 1. de vi^g.
that you must sit down with loss of your patrimony; do not the kingdoms
of heaven hereafter reco^pe^se the loss of such fickle goods? Though, if we
believe the words of Heaven, there is no body that shall have left house, or
parents, or brethren, for the name of Christ, that shall not receive much more
at these times, and in the world to come life everlasting. Put thy trust in
God; thou that trustest man with thy money, put it into God's hands. He like a
good keeper of the hope, which we depositate in him, will repay the talent of
his trust, with multiplied use. Truth does not deceive, Justice does not
circumue^t, Virtue does not beguile

5. The force of which reason of S. Ambrose was declared by a heavenly vision
which happened to S. Laurence Justinian. For it is recorded of him, that when he
was about nineteen years of age, at which time youth is most slipperie and
most in danger, The Wisdom of God to 5. Laurence Justinian.
as being then upon the bending, our Savior appeared unto him, in the shape of
a Virgin, brighter then the Sun, and with a loving contenance spoke thus unto
him: Why do thou, my young man, thus waste thy heart, and seeking peace, power
out thy self upon many things? that which thou seek, is in my power to give
thee. If thou resolve to have me for thy spouse, I promise thou shall most
certainly have this peace. The young man taken with so admirable beauty, and so
large a promise, craved her name, and her descent. She answered: I am the
Wisdom of God, which took the shape of man upon me to reform mankind. S.
Laurence thereupon replying, that he most willingly took her for his spouse,
she kissed him, and with great expression of joy, as he conceived, went her
way. And not long after, he betaking himself to a Monastery to effect the
marriage which was offered him, found by experience, as we have said, that he
was not only no looser by it, but got much more then he had in the world, and
things of incomparable price.

The difficulties of Religion (...) susterable.
6. This conceit therefore of the greatness of earthly things being removed, we
must also banish a certain fear, which some people have, least the
difficulties of a Religious life be unsupportable, and more then the forces of
our frail nature are able to bear; or at least, that if a man have so much
heart as to abide them, he must needs live a heavy uncouth life; which, to say
the truth, is but an idle childish fear. For, as I have showed at large
before, we must not so wholly fix our eyes upon that which we see outwardly of
Religion (which I must confess is somewhat severe) but that withal we must
look into that which is inward, which alayes all the severity, and indeed
takes it quite away, and gives a man such inward sweetness, as nothing can be
more pleasant then a Religious life, which is one of the arguments, which S.
Hierome uses to Heliodorus, writing thus unto him: Do thou fear poverty?
S. Hierom. ep. 1.
But Christ says, the poor are blessed. Does labor dant thee? But no
Cha^pion is crowned without sweating for it. Do thou take thought for meat
and drink? but Faith feels no hunger. Art thou afraid to bruise against the
bare ground thy hollow limbs with fasting? But God lies with thee. Does the
il-fauoured hair of thy neglected head affright thee? but thy head is Christ.

7. But what need we stand upon force of reason in a thing, which we may see
with our eyes? For partly we read, partly we daily see before us, so many
examples of them, Experience (...) it is easy, to live in Religion.
that forsaking the world, have lived, and do this day live in Religion with
excessive joy and contentment, as it is wonderful Had they not bodies and
souls such as we have? If watching therefore and fasting, the yoke of
Obedience, the incommoditie of Poverty, finally al kind of labor and pains
that can be taken by man, were to them light and delightful, what weakness is it
for us alone, to imagine every thing so burdensome, and so intolerable? Had
not they the same nature, the same God, no acceptour of persons, father to al,
comforter of al? This is the consideration, which in the like exigent holp that
great S. Augustine, and absolutely thrust him upon the resolution, S. August. 8.
Conf. ca. 11.
which he took of abandoning the world, and of al those that have been
reclaymed from the broad and spacious way to the narrow path of Christ, for
ought we find written, none ever went so fearfully to work, and hung upon so
many delays, as he did, according to his own relation, writing of these his
difficulties and demurres, and of the horror which he had of a new life, in
regard of his old customs, which had taken so deep root in him: And yet he
overcame the^ al, as I said, with this thought, how many without number, not
only like to himself, but far weaker then he, in regard of their age or sex,
went cheerfully through with this kind of life. And these are his words: On
that side that I had bent my face to go, and where I trembled to pass, ^here
was laid open before me the chaste worthiness of Continency, cheerful, and not
dissolutly merry, honestly enticing me to come, and that I should not
misdoubt, reaching forth, to receive me and embrace me her pious hands full of
whole troops of good examples. There I saw so many boys and gyrles; there a
great deal of youth* and al ages, grave widows, and ancient maids; and
amidst them al, Continency itself, not bar^en, but a fruitful mother of sons
of joys of thee, o Lord, her husb^nd. And she laughed at me, with a kind of
laughter that exhorted me, as who should say: shall not thou be able to do
that which these and these? Or could these and these d^e it of themselves, and
not rather in their Lord their God? Whos^euer therefore shall find himself in
this kind of wandering mind, let him set before him, as S. Augustine, this
pour^raiture of Continency and Religion, and under the wings thereof so many
thousands of men and women, some of yong^r, some of elder years, that in the
world for the most part lived richly, commodiously, deliciously; and yet
afterward embracing Religious poverty, lived in that strict course of life
with great fervor and contentment, and with no less fervor have perseuered
in it to the end. Whom would not such a sight encourage? yea, whom would it not
provoke to put himself also into company to be one of so dear a flock of our
Lord, and be glad of it?

8. We might here lay together many other incitements to this purpose, as the
shortness of the life of man, the vanity of al temporal things, the fear of
death, the danger of hel-fire, the hope of everlasting rewards in Heaven, the
beauty of a Religious course, appearing in the very outward habit, and ga^e,
and behavior of Religious people, whereof sometimes one, sometimes more of them
together, have been forcible means to draw people, as in reason they may,
from the love of the world to Religion; but I pass to a few examples of them.

9. We read in the history of the Order of S. Dominick, Rowland of the Order
of S Dominick.
of a rich noble man, whose name was Rowland, that having spent upon some
festiual occasion, the whole day in feasting, sporting, and dancing, and other
vanities, himself glorious in new and costly apparel; The vanities of the
world.
at night reflecting upon it, he began to think: Lo, what is become of all this
feast we have been at? where is all the iolitie of this day? whither is it gone?
And weighing with himself, that as that day was gone and past, so all the rest
of our life would pass together with all the happiness and pleasures of it, and
that nothing would remain but sorrow and repentance, he betook himself the
very next day to Religion; and serving God many years in it, was famous for
sanctity and learning. And in the same Order about the same time one Peter
Gonzales was renowned both for holiness of life, Peter Gonzales.
and learning, who was converted upon a small occasion in show, yet such an one
as might plainly show the vanity of the world. The deceitfulnes of it.
For being nephew to the Bishop of Valentia, and holding many sat Benefices by
his means before he was of years for it, and spending the profits of them in
vain pleasures and pride; it happened that as he was one day riding like a young
gallant with his conforts about the City, he fell into a filthy slow, and
being taken-vp al wet and mirie, the boys of the street laughed at him, and
decided him bitterly; and the man was so ashamed, and so angry with himself
withal, that he presently fayd within himself: Seeing I have served the world,
and it has dealt thus with me, I will deal with it accordingly as it deserves.
And at the instant resolved to put himself into the service of God, which not
long after he did, to the astonishment of all the City, in the Religious
Family which I said. Another was moved to the like course by the fear of
hel-fire. Hel-fire.
For living loosely in all kind of pleasure, and suffering no man to open his
mouth unto him about the reforming of himself; a Religious man going once to
see him upon courtesy, Esa. 14 11.
at their parting spoke this only sentence of the Prophet: Under thee the
moath shall be strewed, and worms shall be thy covering. Which saying struck so
deeply into him, that he could think of nothing but worms and moathes, and
laboring to put so irksome a thought out of his head, by play and other
pastimes among his companions, he was rather worse; and thereupon reflecting,
that if the bare thinking of that punishment was so unsupportable, how much
more intolerable would the punishment itself be? and yealding the field to
God, he consecrated himself unto him in Religion.

The i^yes of Heaven.
10. At Bologna upon the first beginning almost of the Order of S. Dominick, a
great learned man was drawn unto it by consideration of the immensitie of the
joys of heaven. For Reginaldus a principal man of that Order preaching with
great concourse and great applause; this man, whose name was Monetus, was wont
always to shun his conversation and Sermons, much fearing he should be
catched by him. Yet upon a S. Stephen's day being drawn by importunity of
some of his acquaintance to a Sermon, he was taken instantly with the very
first words. For his text being: Behold, I see the heavens open, he began to
discourse upon it to this effect: That now the gates of heaven were open, and
any man might enter it that would, and be happy; But they that should neglect
this occasion, and shut their hearts to God, should find also the gates of
heaven shut against them, and would never be able to get in. The man needed no
more; for his heart being changed suddenly, though before he was much auerted
from a Religious life, he purposed to enter into Religion; and when the Sermon
was ended he went to Reginald, and opened his mind unto him, and moreover made
a vow, that he would effect it.

11. No less admirable was that which happened to one Andrew; who* as we read,
was famous in the Cistertian Order. For, being Archdeacon of Virdun, Andrew
Archdeacon of Virdun.
nobly borne and wealthy, he came to Clairenaux, that he might be an
eye-witnes of the virtues of the house, of which he had heard so much, it being
then but newly begun; not having the least thought himself to take upon him
any such course. But entering into the Chapter House (where all the Religious
were met) to the end to commend himself to their prayers, Beauty of Religion.
and beholding the order, and silence, and as it were the Angelical, habit of
that holy assembly, he was very much moved at it; and the spirit of God
seazing his heart, was wholly changed into another man, and inflamed with such a
desire of embracing that course, that he resolved not so much as to delay time
to go home for a while, either to bid his acquaintance farewell, or to dispose
of his means, but presently breaking with all the world, he forsook al
instantly to adhere to Christ.

S. Nicolas Tolentin.
12. S. Nicolas Tolentin was in like manner changed upon a different occasion.
For an Augustin-Friar preaching in the open streets upon those words of S.
John: Do not love this world, Dangers of the world.
nor the things which are in the world: and discoursing at large, and with much
vehemency, of the vanity and dangers of the world, this Nicolas being then a
young man, 1. John. 2 15.
and standing there by chance, was so inflamed with this discourse, that
resolving to leave the world, he went presently to the Monastery with the
Preacher, so soon as he had ended his Sermon.

13. Many like effects has our Lord and Savior wrought in our days, and
does daily work among men. One of our Society was moved to forsake the world,
to which he was much engaged in affection, Eternity.
by a thought of Eternity. For thus he discoursed with himself: Between that
which is limited, and that which is infinite, there is no proportion; and
consequently not only one life which a man has, but though he had many lives,
if it were possible, it were nothing in comparison of the eternal rewards.

14. Another, that while he lived in the world was a great Lawyer, and took
much pains in his Clients causes, Difference of rewards.
at last resolved thus with himself: Seeing a man must labor and take pains in
this life, it is much better to take pains for God, who rewards his servants
so bountifully, then for the world, where oftimes we have no reward at al, or a
very small and short recompense. Upon which consideration he presently entered
into our Society.

15. But that which happened to Father Claudius Aquauiua, Claudius Aquauiua.
General of the Society, was more notable. He was moved to forsake the world
by those words of our Savior: My sheep hear my voice; Io. 10.16.
for withal he was seized with a holy fear, least if he should not give ear
to the heavenly counsel, he should not be one of Christ's sheep; and therefore
came the same hour, and almost at the same instant, to our Fathers, and gave
himself wholly unto them. No less remarkable was the motive, upon which Francis
Borgia, B. Fa. Borgia.
another General of our Order, came to the Society. For while he was Duke of
Gandie, and in great credit with every body, it happened, that he was appointed
by the Emperor Charles the Fifth, to accompany the body of the Lady Isabel
lately deceased, wife to the said Emperor. In which journey there falling out
some occasion to have the coffin opened to view the dead corpse, he seeing it now
turned to corruption, and the worms swarming about it, and gnawing it,
presently began to reflect with himself, to what all the power and glory of
that woman was come, whose very countenance, while she lived, kept the world
in awe, and how little difference death makes betwixt a Prince and the poorest
creature that is. And this consideration of the sicklenes of al flesh wrought
so in his mind, that he left his Dukedom, and embraced an humble Religious
life.

16. Al these and infinite more, Two general motives.
whom it were long to rehearse, both of late years and ancienter times, some
for one cause, and some for another, have been moved to Religious courses: But
all the motives, which they have had, may be reduced to two heads, which it is
fit we should know, and have always before our eyes, to wit, the misery of
this world, and the happiness of a Religious life. And what infinite miseries
does the misery of this world inuolue? On the other side, this one happiness of
Religion, what number of happinesses without number does it comprehend? The
world and all the hopes and proffers of it pass away, and we from them. What
greater madness therefore can there be, then to resolve to perish with that
which perishes? What greater wisdom, then betimes to forsake that which
sooner or later must be forsaken? specially seeing, if we forsake it voluntarily
of our own accord, we shall have the honor of having forsaken it, and
inestimable rewards besides for doing so; whereas if we attend til it be taken
from us, we may well look oftimes for punishment, S Gregory hom. ^an Euang.
but certainly shall have no rewards. Which blindness of ours S. Gregory taxes
in these words: Our proud mind will not yet willingly part with that, which
daily it leeseth, whether it will or no.

17. For the time will come, and it will not be long, when thou that art now a
young man, in the flower of thy years, strong and able of body, and, as thou
conceauest, happy, drunk (as I may say) notwitstanding with ambition, with
desire of honor and preferments, with the fauo^^ and good will of men, with the
sweetness of earthly pleasures, shall lie nailed to a couch, scorched with a
burning fever, consumed to the bone with greef and pain, in the midst of the
tears of thy kindred, of the sorrows and lamentations of thy wife and
children, which now thou take so much pleasure in thinking to get, every
moment expecting the last hour, when body and soul shall be separated one
from the other. Of what opinion do thou imagine thou will then be? what greef,
what anguish, what torment will pessesse thee, when thou shall see, that heaven
is utterly lost, because in this life thou did neglect it; and now must leese
this world, which thou did so much affect? Think therefore betimes of that
hour, set that day often before thine eyes, and do (...) that, which at that
time, which possibly cannot be avoided, thou would wish thou had (...) What
will thou (says the Prophet) in the way of Egypt, Hier. 2.18.
to drink muddie water? and what have thou with the way of Assyrians,
Difference of the pleasures of the world, and of Religion.
to drink the water of the river? What is this way of Egypt, or of the
Assyrians, but the way of the world? where pleasures slide away like the
current of any river, and are moreover dirtie and muddie, choked with earth,
and grounded but in earthly things. How unworthy a thing is it for the soul
of man, descended from heaven, and borne to heavenly things, a soul bought
and washed with the sacred blood of the lining God, and made more white then
snow in that heavenly bath, to plunge itself in such muddie streams, having
at hand such fountains of living wa^er, springing to life everlasting? the
pleasures, and delights, I say, of a Religious life; pleasures that are chaste,
unspotted, undefiled; pleasures which here delight and spring-vp to life
everlasting, because the delight which we have in them, does not diminish but
increase our reward in the life to come, in regard it makes us more cheerfully
apply ourselves to the service of our God. The greatness of the Hundred fold.
It has at hand the Hundredfold promised us by our Savior, as the provision
for our charges, during this our pilgrimage, the solace of our present labor,
the earnest-pennie and pledge of our future rewards. And what has the world
comparable to this Hundredfold, seeing certainly this is a hundred times beyond
it, be it never so great? Wherefore, if to live contentedly, to live
pleasantly, to live happily, be our desire, why do we seek it elsewhere, but
where Christ our Savior, where Truth itself does tell us, it is to be had? If a
man should promise us of worldly gain, twenty or somewhat more for one, it
would not be long before we should put all the money we have, into his hand, and
moreover sell al to make money of it, to the end to place it so profitably; and
yet the man in whom we repose our trust, is a man, and may deceive us, he may
alter his mind, he may leese al and become banck-rout; But whom did God ever
deceive, or how can he possibly deceive any man, or grow less then his word?
sooner will he leave to be God, then one jot or one tittle of his promises shall
be void.

S. Ber. hom. Ecce nos.
18. S. Bernard therefore had great reason to say: In the mean time, from
whence soever they are to receive a hundredfold, so it be a hundredfold, so
it be worth a hundred times as much, let it please, let it delight, let it
comfort, and be loved a hundred times more then any thing else. What madness is
it for men to be backward in forsaking one for a hundred? where is the
covetous? where is the ambitious? where is the disputer of this world? what? Is
the covetousness of men asleep, and grown cold in matter of assured
negotiation, and most gaineful marts? what lew would thou refuse in this
kind, o man, that have received the name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST in vain? To
what sacrilegious person, would thou refuse to give all that thou have, for a
hundred times as much? Strange news! but coming from him, that makes al things
new; A man takes up a yoke, and finds rest; leaves al, and has a
hundredfold.

People do not bel^e^e (...) our Savior.
19. And doubtless, the true consideration of this hundredfold, and of the
immensitie of the rewards which we report, were able to make a man run into
the fire to purchase it, much more to Poverty and Obedience. But if people,
notwithstanding such gaynes and such rewards as are offered them upon the
forsaking of their worldly wealth and substance, will choose rather to remain
with it, what follows? but that either we must say, they care not for gain,
which cannot be, seeing naturally men love themselves and their profit
excessiuely, or call this recompense of a hundredfold in question, which is the
only thing which can be said, and which Aegidius (that famous man, one of the
first disciples of S. Francis, and one whom he loved entirely for his great
sanctity) charged a secular Doctor with. Aegidius.
For, putting this question unto him: Do thou believe, that the rewards are
great, which God has prepared for them that love him and serve him? And the
Doctor answering, that he did believe it: But I will show thee, says Aegidius,
that thou do not believe it. How much art thou worth? A thousand crowns,
said the man. If therefore (replied Aegidius) thou could place these thousand
crowns so as presently to have a hundred thousand for them, would not thou
instantly employ thy money that way? seeing therefore thou do not employ it
so, it is evident, that thou do not believe Christ's promises. Thus did
Aegidius argue to the point.

19. And thus much of the loss and diminishing of our gains; Many cannot be
saved, unless they enter into Religion.
which, considering the business concerns eternity, is of great importance.
But it is much more important, and more heavy, and miserable, that besides the
loss they run hazard of eternal damnation; first by reason of the general
danger, which al men are in, that live a secular life, as I have showed at
large in the course of this Treatise; and secondly, by reason of the particular
hazard, which this man or the other may be in, in regard that perhaps for his
particular there is no way to be saved, but in Religion; and unless he take
that course, he shall undoubtedly perish; which I do not speak of my own
head, but it is a document of S. Gregorie's in his Epistle to the Emperor
Mauritius, S. Greg lib. 2. r^gist. Ep. 6.
where reprehending him for a Proclamation which he had caused to be set forth,
forbidding ceratin kind of people to become Monks, he tells him, his law is
unjust, because many may be shut out of heaven by it; and gives this reason:
for though many may live uprightly in the world, yet (says he) there be
many, who unless they forsake al, cannot by any means in the sight of God
be saved. Which saying of so holy and so advised a man, as S. Gregory was,
ought in reason to make great impression in us; for every one may justly fear
himself, and has no cause, why he should not fear, least he be of the number;
and specially they that either admit not of the vocation of God, or having
entertained his holy inspirations, fly off again from them. For this
ingratitude toward so good a God, is that great offense, which S. Bernard
terms a Scorching wind, S. Bern s^r. 51. in Cant.
drying up the fountain of piety, the deaw of mercy, the streams of grace.
And if we consider the manner of proceeding, which God is wont to hold, as
himself gives us to understand, we shall think no less; for he does not only
withold his bountiful hand from them, that do not increase and multiply
that grace which they have received of him, but takes from them that which he
had given them before; and makes good his own saying in the Ghospel: ^uc. 19
16.
To him that has, it shall be given, and he shall abound; and from him that has
not, even that which he had, shall be taken from him.

20. But the beauty and dignity and comelines of a Religious life, Al men
desire perfection.
is of far greater consideration, and ought much more to move us to embrace
it: specially if we compare it with the crookednes, or (as we may well say,
considering most men's behauiours) the fowlenes and il-fauourdnes of the world,
as light with darkness. For Religion, as it professes and makes a show, is
indeed a state of perfection: And what is better, and more sought after in the
world, then perfection? We make so great account of a complete house, of a
horse that is perfectly well made, of a tree that is finely grown, that we are
never weary of looking upon it, never think we can sufficiently commend it.
How much ought we in reason admire the soul of man, which of itself is so
perfect a thing? But adding moreover the perfection of virtue and sanctity,
which it has in Religion, it is doubtless so perfectly beautiful, and so
comely, that nothing upon earth can be compared with it, nothing deserve more
love and esteem. In which respect S. Hierome had reason to say, S Hierome ^p.
34.
as he did, to a noble man, whom he labored to persuade to forsake the world,
and pressed him in these words: But thou will say, this is an Apostolical
dignity, and belongs to him that will be perfect. And why wilt not thou also
be perfect? why should not thou be the first in the family of Christ, that
art first in the world? And indeed it is a wonder, how men that so much desire
to have al things, which are without them, of the perfectest and compleatest
that can be gotten, should notwithstanding not only not desire the perfection
of their own mind, which does so far excel the other both in worth, and
profit, and importance, but neglect it, and oftimes not so much as look after
it, when they may easily purchase it. When thou art to buy a farm, says, S.
Augustine, thou seek a good one; to marry a wife, thou choosest a good one;
S. Aug. de verb Dom. ser. 16.
when thou would have children, thou would have them good; If thou be to
buy hose and shoes, thou will have no il ones: and do thou love an evil life?
What has thy life offended thee, which alone thou will have to be il, that
among al thy goods, thy self be only evil?

21. By which also we may see, how little ground they have, that willing to
decline a Religious vocation, Another fallacy answered.
excuse themselves by saying: God has commanded no such thing, but left it
free every body's choice; if he embrace it, it is well; if he do not, there is
no offense committed. Which foolish and inconsiderate kind of Argument, a
father of our Society, well experienced in spiritual things, once answered
home, and to the purpose. For assisting a Doctor of Divinity in the Spiritual
Exercises, and the Doctor feeling himself called by God to Religion, and
laboring notwithstanding to avoid it by this kind of fallacy, the Father put
him this case: Tell me, says he, if you were of force to sail into the Indies,
and among many ships that were ready to go the voyage, some better, some
worse, the Admiral of the Fleet should inuit you into his own ship, new,
strongly built, well provided of al things, sails, cables, Pilot, mariners of
the best, would you refuse his courtesy, and cast yourself into a
weather-beaten vessel, rotten, and unprovided of tackling and al other
furniture? or would you not rather with many thanks accept of it, or perhaps
yourself entreat him, and press him to admit of you? Much more therefore, to
avoid the shipwreck of your soul, which is a loss eternal, ought you to
choose that state, which may carry you safe, and in the more assurance,
through the dangerous and rockie seas of this world. Nothing more clear and
evident; and accordingly the Doctor conceauing of it, and convinced with the
truth, without further demurre, put himself into our Society.

22. But let us suppose for a while, that theve is no such danger in the world,
as we speak of; suppose a man be certain to go to heaven, is it not better
notwithstanding to labor not only to come to heaven, but to have as much
glory in it as possibly we can? For if, for example, a man should offer thee
pewter or silver, They that sow sparingly shall reap sparingly.
or silver and gold, to choose what thou think good, would thou make any
question what to choose? or would thou content thy self with a reuennue of
two or three hundred yearly, if a hundred thousand were presented thee? Seeing
therefore there is no gain so small, which men do not make great account of in
the world, and greedily lay hold of it when it is offered; what blindness is it,
when thou may be rich in that heavenly glory, that is, purchase many
degrees of it, great measure of joy, plenty of eternal felicity, to choose,
as I may say, rather eternal poverty? and sowing here sparingly, order thy
business so, as when thou come to heaven, 2. Cor. 9.6.
if ever thou come thither, thou reap also sparingly?

23. Let us give ear to what the Apostle, or rather our Lord by the Apostle
speaks to al: 1. Cor. 7.19.
The time is short; it remains that they also, who have wi^es, be as though
they had not; and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and they that
buy, as though they possessed not; and they that use this world, as though they
used it not: It is better to be without the things of this world, seeing we
cannot use them as we will.
for the figure of this world passes away. What does all this mean, but that,
though it be free for every body to keep what he has, it is not free for
every body to use it as he lift? He must use it so, as his heart be not set
upon it; he must use it, as a means only to pass this life; so as to be
content to part with it, if God be pleased to take it from him; and also
ready of himself to cast it away, when the glory of Almighty God shall so
require; to be short, he must use it as if he did not use it. This is the
manner set down by the Apostle, and extends itself to al things, to wife,
children, lands, goods, money, honor, and al things. If therefore the case be
thus, if these be the conditions, upon which we may possess the goods of this
world, how much better is it not to have them, then to have the use of them
with so many restraints? For first, it is much easier not to set our affection
upon them when we have them not, then to have them and not to affect them.
Secondly, there is also more contentment in it; for to be always curbing our
affections in that which we have always before our eyes, is extreme violent,
and consequently cannot last long; and for the time that it does last, it must
needs bring us into a continual war and debate with ourselves, wonderful
difficult and laborious to go through with; which difficulty they do not
find, who free themselves from the matter that feeds this contentment.

24. And all this belongs to the loss which they that refuse to yeald to God,
when he calls them to Religion, The offense and affront which (...) in
refusing God when he cal^eth.
and offers the^ so many treasures as a Religious vocation contains, draw
upon themselves, merely because they will follow the vanities and liberty of
this world. Let us consider now, what wrong, what offense it is to God. First,
they draw back from God, whose they are wholly, all that they are; He created and
made them for himself; he bought them, as the Apostle says, a^ a great price;
finally, not to repeat al titles, they stand engaged unto him by the promise
which they made in Baptism, when they were delivered over into his service,
and, as it were, sworn his soldiers. To withdraw themselves therefore from
him, and resolve to be at their own dispose, is as it were to take away a
slave, or any thing else from another man; which at least is theft.

24. And though the case were not thus, yet doubtless it is an affront. when
invited so often and so earnestly to his friendship and familiarity, we refuse
it, and neglect his proffers and promises, as if they were not worth the taking
up, or were uncertain. Great men of this world think themselves much wronged,
if upon their entreatie they should be refused. But there is no danger in it,
they seldom press a courtesy so far upon any man; people must rather seek
to them for favor, and entreat hard to be admitted in their service, and use
all the means they can to insinuate themselves into their good wills. God only
is left alone, and neglected, with all his promises and inuitations, though he
be far greater then any Prince, and make larger offers. A thing to be
lamented in the highest degree! And what then shall we think of the offense
which is in it? As before I showed, that it is a haynons sin, to go back
from Religion, when we have once undertaken to follow Christ in it: so they
come not far short of it, that contemn the voice and counsel of God, when he
calls them to Religion. For, setting aside the obligation which Religious
people have above others by the vow and promise which they make, the injury
(which is that which we now speak of) and the affront, is in a manner alike, to
break friendship, and to refuse to be friends, when friendship is offered: as
there is not much difference in the disobedience, when a man leaves to do his
Prince's will after he has begun to do it, and when he resolves never to
begin. And consequently, as there we showed. how God does in a manner always
manifest his high displeasure against the first, that forsake him, the like we
may expect and make account of in this. And that which we read in the Psalm,
does justly and in very truth fall upon them, that because they would not
blessing, it shall be set far from them; and because they loved malediction,
it shall befall them, and shall be put upon them like a garment, and enter like
water into their inner parts, Ps. 108.17.
and as oil into their bones. That also which the Justice of God threatens in
the book of Wisdom, is fulfilled in them: I called, and you refused; I held
out my hand, and there was not he that would look; you despised al my counsel,
and neglected al my rebukes. What punishment therefore belongs to such a
fault? It follows: Pro. 1.24.
I also will laugh in your dectruction, and scorn, when that shall happen, which
you feared.

Examples of them that have been punished for refusing to answer their vocation.
25. The effect of which rigorous denunciation appears in that which S.
Antonine records of one that had made a vow to be a Franciscan-Friar; but
afterward changing his mind, became a Prebend; and not many months passed,
but he fell deadly sick; and being put in mind by them that belonged unto him,
to think of setting his soul in order by a good Confession, he answered: There
was no need, because showed unto him that he was damned; and therefore they
should trouble him no more, because he could not Confess. For our Lord, says
he, S. Anton 3. part. ut. 14. l. 9.. 7.
appeared unto me very angry, saying: I called thee, and thou refusedst;
therefore get the gone to the torments of Hell; and with that he gave up the
ghost. A woeful and most lamentable end.

26. With another in like danger, it fell out better. For having had a purpose,
while he was a young man, A youth repreeued by the intercession of S. James.
Anton. 2. part. tit. 17. c. 1.. 2.
to enter among the Monks of the Cistertian Order (and yet he had made no vow)
differing it from day to day, he grew cold in it; and returning home from a
pilgrimage which he had made to Compostella, that very night our Savior
appeared unto him with his two Apostles, S. Peter and S. James. S. Peter held
in hand before our Savior a dainty book open, in which the name of the young
man, which was John, was written; our Savior therefore said to S. Peter: Blot
this man out of my book. S. Iame^ began earnestly to beg for him, as for a
Pilgrim of his, and took upon him, that the youth should reform himself. The
youth seeing that the matter concerned himself, was in a great agony; and
trembling with fear, made great promises, that he would begin a new life. But
our Sauiou seeming not to trust him by reason of his former inconstancy,
asked, who would give his word for him? and S. James offered himself. With
which the youth awaking, and being much astonished at it, yet fell asleep
again, and the same vision appeared the second time unto him, and moreover he
spyed in the book this instruction out of the Canticles: We will make thee
chames of gold enameled with silver. Hartned therefore on the one side with
this joyful promise, and frighted on the other with those threats, Cant. 1.11.
he presently went to Cisteau^x, where profiting exceedingly in virtue, he was
created Abbot of Bonavalle, and afterward Bishop of Valence.

27. In the Chronicles of the Franciscans we read, that about the year 1350.
a Scholar of Paris having purposed to enter into that Order, and gone so far
as to cause his Habit to be made ready, altered his mind. Not long after in
the night, he saw as if our Savior were sitting on a Throne of great majesty
to judge; Another taken to mercy, and yet chastiz^d. S Anton. 3. part. ut. 24.
c. ^.. 7.
whereupon with remorse of conscience he began to cry out: Have mercy upon me,
o Lord; and our Savior answered: I will have mercy, so as thou perform what
thou did intend. And he most willingly promising that he would, he was
notwithstanding by the Devil cast into a Copper full of boiling oil and pitch,
and felt himself in such grievous torment with it, as if his flesh had been
torn from his bones; and awaking with the anguish, he instantly with great
zeal betook himself to a Religious life. What shall I say of Gerard brother to
S. Bernard, whose fact was in two respects very memorable? For obstinately
rejecting the good admonitions, which S. Bernard gave him about forsaking the
world, as being in the flower of his youth, and hot upon the wars where he
had new begun to serve, A bro^er of S. Bernard.
S. Bernard pointing at his side, said unto him with a Prophetical spirit: The
day will come, and that quickly, when a spear thrust into this side, Vu. S
Bern. l. 1. c. 3.
will open thy breast to the wholesome counsels, to which now it is shut. And it
happened so. For within few days after, wounded in that very place of his
body, and taken by the enemy in a skirmish, remembering what his brother had
foretold him, he cried out, that he was a Monk of Cisteaux. They carry him
notwithstanding away, and put him in prison; where tormented with greef, that
he could not go to Ci^^^au^ with the rest of his Brethren, one day he saw his
irons were fallen off, and the prison-gates were open: and every body fled,
that might either have stayed him or discovered him; whereupon he fled to the
next Church, and from thence to the Monastery, desirous of th^^ holy course,
and confirmed withal in his desire by so la^e and so strange a miracle. By
which example, as I said, we see, both how dear it costs them, that resist the
Holie-Ghost, and how easy al things are to them, that resolve to follow his
Divine instinct.

A vision of his concerning two of his company. In vi^. S. Bernard.
28. I cannot omit that which was showed to the some S. Bernard, concerning two
of his Companions about the same time. For having by his exhortations
encouraged many of his brethren, and friends, and kindred, to forsake the
world; before that holy troop met together at Cisleaux, he thought one day
he saw them al sitting in one room, and every one in their turn eating of
one kind of dish of meat, which was white and wonderful sauourie; and while
the rest fed upon it with great contentment, two only of the whole company
fasted; one of them did not eat at al of it, the other eat a little, but
presently cast it up again. The event showed the meaning of the vision; for
one of the number withdrew himself from among them, before they brought their
purpose to effect; the other began with the rest, but continued not long: and
it was particularly observed, that though the man was well borne, and had good
friends, al forsook him, and he came to great misery, wandering about the
world, like another Cain, cast forth from the face of God.

Another that dela^ed his entrance.
29. The same S. Bernard relates another terrible example in this kind, in an
Epistle which he wrote unto one Thomas of S. Omers, who was delaying his
entrance into Religion, because he would make an end of his studies. To put him
off therefore from this delay, he tells him, how another was punished for the
like fault. S. Bernard Ep. 108.
Alas, alas, says he, thou seem to walk with the like spirit, as thy name
is like to another Thomas, anciently Provost of Be^erlee, who having vowed
himself with all his heart to our Order and to our House, began to take time, and
so by little to grow cold, til suddenly taken away with a fearful death, he dyed
a secular man, and a transgressour, and doubly the son of Hel-fire. Which, if
it be possible, God, who is merciful and full of compassion, preserve him from.

30. Examples of this nature are frequent in all ages, and in these our days;
and we ourselves have seen diverse with our own eyes, and do at this hour see
many, that rejecting the good purposes which God put into their mind of
entering into Religion, have themselves been rejected by God, and fallen into
extremity of misery, and a world of misfortunes. Wherefore though we cannot
propose a more forcible consideration to them that are inclining this way, or
taking advise in i^, Exhortations of holy Fathers to Religion
then that which we have hitherto discoursed, of the dangers which they see
they may fall into; yet to draw to a Conclusion, we will set down a few passages
of the holy Fathers, exhorting such people to their duty; for not only the
solidnes of their discourse, but the bare sign of their judgment and
inclination in this kind, ought greatly to sway with every body.

31. Let us therefore see, how S. Fulgen^ius did animate himself to renounce
the world. The conversion of S Fulge^tius; and how he encour^ged (...). Vid Sur
in (...) vita. To. 1.
He was descended of a worshipful family, and being in his time hold one of
the fortunatest men that were for wea^ch, lea^ning, dignity in the
Commonwealth, multitudes of C^ieres, flou^ishing years and the like, amidst
al these prosperous winds, he began first, as it is re^^^ed of him, to think
the burden of those secular bus^nesses ext^^^^ely heavy, to distaste the
vani^ie of that kind of happiness, to repay^e oftene^ to Religious houses, to
take pleasure in conuersing with the servants of God, to frame himself to their
behavior and exercises. He saw they had no worldly mi^^^ among them, and yet
were free from the troubles and tediousnesses, which are so frequent in the
world. They ^ued lovingly like brethren toge^ther, no debate, no mis-report, no
contention was stirring among them; and so m^nie young men in the flower of
their age living chaste and pu^e. Which when he had often reflected upon, and
duly weighed, he brake forth into these wo^ds worthy of eternal memory: Why,
I beseech you, do we labor in this world without hope of the goods to come?
what can the world finally do for us? If we des^re mir^h (though good tea^es
be better then evil joys) yet how much better do they rejoice, that have a
quiet conscience in God, that fear nothing but sin, that do nothing but
what God commands? They are not ioyled with common businesses, nor have cause
either wo^ully to bewail, or basely to fear loss of temporal goods; and
having forsaken their own, they practice not for that which is another's;
among themselves they live peaceably, sober, meek, humble, loving; there is no
thought of lust, but care and continual custody of chastity. Let us imitate
therefore men that are so worthy, and take upon us this constant kind of good
life; let us make use of that, which by the instinct of grace we have deserved
to acknowledge to be the better; let us shake off our wonted behauiou^, and
make an exchange of our pains and labors. We striued before among noble
friends to be thought more noble; let us now endeavor among the poor servants
of God to be the poorest. So he said, and so he did, al Carthage admiring and
ex^olling his fact, many also imitating him and ^^lling Monasteries with the
abundance of them that were converted.

32. Thus S. Fulgentius animated himself. The exhortation of S. Augustine to
Lic^^^ius.
S. Augustine held the like discourse to Licen^ius, a witty young man, i^^icing
him to the sweet yoke of CHRIST, and among many other things he speaks thus:
I see, what a disposition and what a wit, it is not in my power, to apprehend
and sacrifice to my God. If thou had found a golden cup upon the ground, thou
would give it to the Church of God; Epist. 41.
thou have (...) of God a will spiritually golden, and do thou serve thy lusts
with it, and drink thyself to Satan out of it? Give ear to this, you that
bestow your wi^s and learning, and other natural parts in secular vanities, in
hunting after the honors and vainglory of the world, and know, that it is
to employ the gifts of God in the service of the enemy of God. S. Basi^^
^^hortation. ^im 52.
Give care to this eloquent discourse of S. Basil upon the same subject: O man!
we inuit thee to life; why do thou shun^e this inuitation? to the
participation of good things, why do thou neglect the offer? The kingdom of
heaven is open; he that calls thee, is no liar; the way is easy; there needs
no time, no cost, no labor to pass it. Why do thou stand? why do thou
hold back? why do thou fear the yoke, as a young steer that h^th no^ been
broken? It is good, it is light, it does not gal the neck, but honor it; put
thy wild head under i^ become a beast of Christ, least leaving this yoke, and
living a loose life, thou expose thyself to be torn by wild beasts. Taste, and
see, that our Lord is sweet. How shall I be able to express the sweetness of
honey to them, that know it not? Taste of it, and see.

S. Greg. 6. R^g. Ep. 109
33. S. Gregory also has a fine exhortation to one Andrew, a noble man, to
draw him to the service of Christ, from the service of the Emperor, to which
he was pretending: Why do thou not consider, may noble son, that the world
is at an end? Every thing daily hastneth away: we are going to giue-in our
accounts to the eternal and terrible Judge; what therefore should we think of
else, but of his coming? For our life is like to one that is at sea; he that is
at sea, stands, and sits, and lies, and goes, because he is carried with the
motion of the ship: So are we, whether we wake, or sleep, or speak, or hold
our peace, or walk, will we nil we, by moments daily we go to our end. When
therefore the day of our end shall come, where shall we find that, which now we
seek for with so much care, that which we gather with so much solicitude? We
must not seek after honors and wealth, which must be once forsaken; but if we
seek good things, let us love them, which we shall have without end; and if we
fear evil things, let us fear them, which the reprobate suffer without end.
The very being in a Prince his service, what business does it draw the mind
into, for the desire which we have of earthly favor? and into what fears,
least we leese this favor when once we have got it? Consider therefore, what
torment it is, to be moyled now with desires of prosperity, and then to be
appaled with the fear of adversity. Wherefore I would rather advise, that
your Excellency would endeavor to live in your ancient purpose, for this small
time, in some delightsome retirement of this peregrination, and lead a quiet
and peaceable life, attend to the reading of holy books, meditate upon the
heavenly words, inflame yourself with the love of Eternity. To live thus, is
even now to be partaker of the eternal life. This I say unto you, my noble
son, because I love you much. And because you are putting yourself into that,
which will be like waves and tempests to your heart, I labor to draw you back to
the shore by the cables of my words: and if you vouchsafe to follow him that
draws you, you will see when you be on the shore of the quiet, what dangers
you have escaped, what joys you have met with.

S. Bernard's admonition.
34. Let us add an excellent saying of S. Bernard. For speaking of the dignity
of Poverty, which makes us Kings, which receaueth others into the eternal
tabernacles, and does not only not seek that others should patronize and
defend it, but defends others, speaks as follows of the vanity of this
world: S. Bernard Ep. 103.
But would to God thou would attend without dissembling, with what manner of
things thou do hinder thyself! Woe, woe. That which shuts up the passage
to eternal felicity, that which hides the boundless claritie of everlasting
light, that which deceaueth thee of the knowledge of al things, that which
depriueth thee of the honor of highest preferment, is a vapor appearing for a
while. How long will thou proferre before such a glory the hay, that to day
is, and to morrow is cast into the oven? flesh (I say) and the glory thereof.
For all flesh is hay, and all the glory thereof as the flower of hay. If thou be
wise, if thou have a heart, if thy eyes be in thy head, leave to follow that,
which to overtake, is miserable. Were it not better to contemn it with honor,
then leese it with greef? Is it not more wisdom to yeald to the love of
Christ, then to death? A thief lies in ambush, from whose hands thou can not
steal thy self, nor thine. He cannot be foreseen, because like a thief in
the night, so he shall come. Thou brough^st nothing into the world; doubtless
neither shall thou carry any thing away. Thou shall sleep thy sleep, and
find nothing in thy hands.

35. Thus says S. Bernard in that Epistle; Idom ser. 38. in Cant.
but he lays yet more load in a sermon upon the Canticles, showing that al
delay in this kind, is a kind of Infidelity: I say, that al they know not God,
that will not be conue^ted to God; for doubtless they have no other reason to
refuse, but because ^hey imagine he is stern and severe, who indeed is gentle:
they imagine him have and implacable, that is merciful; fierce and terrible,
who is amiable; and iniquity lies to it self, framing an Idol to it self, for
that which is not he. What is that which you fear, you of little faith? that
he will not forgive sins? But he has nailed them to the Cross with his own
hands. Coloss. 2.^4. Psa ^0^.^4. Psa 145 8.
That you are yet young and tender? But he knows our mold. That you are
il-bred, and bound in customs of sins? But our Lord loses them that are in
fetters. Perhaps least provoked with the enormitie and multitude of sins, he
be slow in reaching out his helping hand? Romans 5.20.
But where sin abounds, Grace also is wont to more abound. Are you
sollicitous for appartel, or food, or other necessaries for your body, and
therefore loath to forsake that which you have? Mat. 6.32.
But he knows that you stand in need of al these. What will you more? what does
now hinder you from salvation? Thus far S. Bernard.

Finally let us hear how S. Laurence Justinian does labor to draw al men from
the vanity of this world, S. Laur. Justin do perfect. Mon. Can. 2.
to the quiet of Religion; these are his words: O preuaricatours, return to
your heart; reclaim yourselues from your ways, least after a while you perish
for ever. Restrain your hearts that they go not after their concupiscences,
least at some time or other death seize upon you, and there be no body to
rescue you; sell that which you possess, that with this happy exchange you may
purchase heavenly glory. Give Christ that which you must leave to the world;
send your goods before you, that in time of necessity they may be restored
unto you multiplied. Renounce the world voluntarily, least you be constrained
to go out of it with sorrow. Make a virtue of necessity, and after this life
you shall receive an eternal kingdom. Consider their end, that have gone before
you, and would needs live as you do* They flourished in the world, they
abounded in wealth, they gave themselves to al kind of pleasure, they led their
days in good things, Job. 21.13.
and in a moment they descended to ^el: They rejoiced for a short time, and are
condemned to eternal death. It happens not so to them that serve God, that have
given their souls for Christ, and under the command of their teacher, have
crucified their wills without respit. Rich men, says the Prophet, Psalm. 33.1^.
have wanted and been hungry; but they that seek God, shall not fail of al
good.

But if there be any whom so many reasons, The inuitation which our Savior
man (...)
so many authorities of holy Fathers, so many examples are not forcible
enough to convince; let them give ^a^e to the sweet exhortation which our
Savior himself makes unto the^, that if they stoop not to men, they may yeald
at least to God. What therefore does he say? Come unto me al you that labor
and are laden, and I will refresh you. These words says S. Basil, Mat. 11.^8.
S. Basil* de abdi* sacul^.
are the words of God, which whether they signify the refreshing in this life
in which now we are, or in the life to come, it is evident, they exhort us,
that casting off the burden of riches, and distributing it among the poor, to
the end to blot out by almsdeeds and Confession, the innumerable multitude of
sins, which lie heavy upon us by the desire of riches, we betake ourselves
to the life of Monks, to carry our Cross. Wherefore he that has resolved to
obey Christ, and makes have to a life naked of the possession of al things,
and not distracted with the cares of this world, he is truly admirable and to
be accounted happy. Thus says S. Basil upon those words of our Savior.

It behooves us therefore diligently to ponder this heavenly Oracle, as spoken
to ourselves, and of ourselves; and that we may do it to the greater comfort of
our souls, let us take it, not as out of a dumb paper, but as it fell from his
Sacred mouth that was Truth and Love itself; and represent to our Consideration
his most sacred person, infinitely worthy of al love and veneration, as
anciently he was seen upon earth, and conuersed with men, poor, and humble in
outward show, contemptible, and the son of a Carpenter: yet truly the son
of God, and himself true God, supporting al things with the word of his power,
in whom are al treasures. Heb. 1.3.
It is he, that like a loving father burning with true love of our souls,
in^lamed with desire of our eternal welfare and salvation, cries out alowd to
al, and as it were mounted upon a high chair, preaches unto us in these
words: Come unto me al you that labor, Mat. 11.^
and are burdned, and I will refresh you: Take upon you my yoke, and you shall
find rest to your souls: for my yoke is sweet, and my burden light; as if he
should say in larger terms; sons of men, how long will you be heauie-harted?
how long will you have your eyes upon vanities and false madness? Wherefore
consume ye yourselues with foolish labor, seeking joy and content of mind in
false riches and vain honors of this world? All this is but a burden and
affliction of spirit, not rest and refreshing. The effect of al, is anguish
while you desire them, labor while you seek them, care and infinite
solicitude, while you possess them. You that labor under this heavy charge,
and are loaded with this dangerous burden, cast it off and come to me. For when
was it il with you, while you were with me, or well without me? Behold the devil
and the world call upon you; I on the other side do inuit you. The world calls
to infect you, the devil to kill you, and as a Wolf to worrie and destroy you.
Where do I call you, but to refresh you? I will refresh you with that inward food
that shall fill your desires, quench your thirst, and give your heart that ease,
that you will desire no more. For with me are the pastures of life, in me true
pleasure, and the delightful ref^^ction of the mind. Come the^fore to me, and
take my yoke yourselues upon you, I say, t^ke ^t yourselues; I command no man,
I force it upon no man; It must be taken voluntarily: and Humility and
Obedience are the virtues which make men stoop unto it.

Luc. 14.19.
The world also has a yoke, and not one only, but five yoakes, rugged and
heavy, and void of the rewards of eternity. Wherefore do you rather make
choice of this servitude, so hard, so insufferable, so manifold, then in my
serui^e which is true freedom, to swim in all plenty of delights and
comforts? My yo^k, I conf^^s^, is a yoke, but sweet; a burden, but light.
Without a yoke, without a burden, you cannot come to the joys which are
everlasting; The way is narrow which leads to life, Mat. 7.14. Luc. 24.26.
and it behooved the king of glory to suffer, and so to enter into his glory.
But what soever this tribulation be, it is momentarie, and the plentifulnes of
my house makes it light and sweet. Deuteronomy. 37.33. Esa. 10.27.
These are the works which I daily work* I bring water out of the rock, and
oil out of the hardest stone; I make this yoke rot from the face of oil, the
oil of that gladness, with which my self was anointed before al my Consorts.
This oil, I power forth largely upon them that are partakers with me. Here
therefore you shall find rest to your souls, and assured comfort. Here I will
lead you into that heavenly win^-ellar, where you shall exult, and drink the
wine that rejoices the heart of man. And yet this is not an end, but the
beginning of your joys. For after this life, there attends you a life and
reward, Es. 64 4. Io. 12 26.
which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has it ascended into the heart of
man. Because if any man minister to me, my Father will honor him; and the
honor is, Esa. 61.3. Io. 16.22.
that where I am, there my minister be. Then he will give you a Crown, for
ashes: the oil of joy, for mourning a cloak of praise, for the spirit of
sorrow; and your heart shall rejoice, and no man shall take your joy from you.

FINIS.
THE TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS OF THE FIRST BOOK: wherein is treated of the Profit
of a Religious State.
TEstimonies of the ancient Fathers in commendation of a Religious Estate.
chap. 1. fol. 1. What Religion is; and how many kinds of Happiness it does
contain. chap. 2. fol. 12. That man is not his own but Gods, and this for
seven causes. chap. 3. fol. 16. That a man does discharge this debt, by giving
himself wholly to God in a Religious Estate. chap. 4. fol. 26. Of the snares and
occasions of sin which are in the world. chap. 5. fol. 30. Three evils of
this world, of which S. John does advertise us. chap. 6. fol. 35. Of flying the
world by a Religious life. chap. 7 fol. 42. Of the benefit of a Religious life,
in regard it strippeth us of al things created. chap. 8. fol. 47. Of the
benefit of Religious Poverty. chap. 9. fol. 51. Of the benefit of Religious
Chastity. chap. 10. fol. 56. Of the benefit of Religious Obedience. chap. 11
fol. 63. That al Christians are bound to Perfection, and not only Religious
people. chap. 12. fol. 70. The first fruit of a Religious life, to wit, perfect
remission of al sins committed. chap. 13. fol 74. The second fruit of
Religion, that it is a state of Penance. chap. 14. fol. 79. The third fruit of
Religion: Austeritie of life. chap. 15. fol. 83. The fourth fruit of Religion,
that it takes away al occasion of sin. chap. 16. fol. 88. The Fifth fruit of
Religion: Commodity of serving God. chap. 17. fol. 93. The sixth fruit:
Religious people always do the will of God. chap. 18. fol. 97. The seventh
fruit, that the Commandments are more easily kept in Religion. chap. 19. fol.
103. The eigth fruit of Religion, proceeding from the humble lowlines of the
State. chap. 20. fol. 105. The ninth fruit, that Religion is the School of
Virtue. chap. 21. fol. 109. The tenth fruit: Plenty of Grace. chap. 22. fol.
112. The eleventh fruit of Religion: Greater merit by virtue of the State.
chap. 23. fol. 117. The twelfth fruit of Religion: Direction of Supetiours.
chap. 24. fol. 123. The thirteenth fruit; written Rules. chap. 25 fol. 129. The
fourteenth fruit: Good example. chap. 26. fol. 133. The fifteenth fruit:
Concord and unity of Religious men among themselves. chap. 27. fol. 137. The
sixteenth fruit: Mutual assistance in all things. chap. 28. fol. 142. The
seventeenth fruit: Communication of good works. chap. 29. fol 147. The
eighteenth fruit: The bond of Vow. chap. 30. fol. 151. The ninteenth fruit: A
safe and quiet death. chap. 31. fol. 155. The twentieth fruit, that it is a
sign of Predestination. chap. 32. fol. 162. The one and twentieth fruit: God's
special care and protection. chap. 33. fol. 166. The two and twentieth fruit:
The protection of our Blessed Lady. chap. 34. fol. 173 The two and twentieth
fruit: That the prayers of Religious people are easily heard. chap. 35. fol.
179. A comparison between the state of a Religious man, and a Secular Layman.
chap. 36. fol. 182. A Comparison betwixt the state of Religion and the Secular
Clergy. chap. 37. fol. 188. A comparison of a Religious State, with the State
of Bishops and Prelates. chap. 38. fol. 194. A Comparison betwixt a Religious
life, and the life of an Heremit. chap. 39. fol. 200. Of the benefit of a
Religious vocation. chap. 40. fol. 206.
THE CHAPTERS OF the second Book: wherein is treated of the Dignity of a
Religious State.
HOW base al earthly things are. chap. 1. fol. 201. Wherein true honor and
nobility does consist. chap. 2. fol. 206. Of the dignity of Religious
Poverty. chap. 3. fol. 209. Of the excellency of Religious Chastity. chap. 4.
fol. 217. Of the dignity of Religious Obedience. Chap. 5. fol. 225. That a
Religious man is above al earthly things; and how glorious this is. chap. 6.
fol. 230. How noble a thing it is in a Religious man, to forsake his natural
kindred. chap. 7. fol. 236. That a Religious man has also forsaken himself;
and how noble a thing that is. chap. 8. fol. 239. That al Virtues concur in a
Religious State. chap. 9. fol. 242. How great the prefection of a Religious
State is. chap. 10. fol. 249. Of the dignity of a Religious State, in regard
of the similitude, which it has with God, and with our Savior. chap. 11. fol.
256. Religion is a kind of Martyrdom. chap. 12. fol. 262. Religious people are
the Friends, and Children, and Spouses of God. chap. 13. fol 266. Religious
people are the Temples of God, in regard they are consecrated to his honor.
chap. 14. fol. 271. Religious people are a continual Sacrifice, in regard of
the oblation which they make of themselves. chap. 15. fol. 274. A Religious
State compared with the State of a King. chap. 16. fol. 277. Of the Power of
Judicature which Religious men shall have. chap. 17. fol. 281. Of the glory,
which Religious people shall have in Heaven. chap. 18. fol 288. Of the
Antiquity of Religious courses; and first how they were prefigured in the Old
Law. chap. 19. fol. 293. That a Religious state was instituted by our Savior
himself; and first in his Apostles. chap. 20. fol. 297. How Religious courses
did flourish in the time of the Apostles. chap. 21. fol. 300. How Religious
Orders have descended to our times. chap. 2^. fol. 306. Of the Religious Orders
of the Clergy. chap. 23. fol. 316. Of the great multitude of Religious, and
Religious Orders. chap. 34. fol. 321. Of diverse Religious men, that have been
eminent both in learning and sanctity. chap. 25. fol. 327. Of Kings and
Princes, that have been Religious. chap. 26. fol. 334. Of Noble women that have
lived in Religion. cap. 27. fol. 341. Of Popes, that have been taken out of
Religious Orders. chap 28. fol. 345. Of Prelates that have been taken out of
Religious Orders. chap. 29. fol. 356 Of the fruit, which Religious people have
brought forth in the Church of God. chap. 30. fol. 361. Reasons, why a
Religious course of life is most proper to bring forth these kinds of fruit.
chap. 31. fol. 372. How many Religious men have been eminent in learning and
eloquence. chap. 32. fol. 377. Reasons, why Religious men profit so much in
Learning. chap. 33. fol. 385. Of three degrees of Beauty and Dignity, which
are in Religion. chap. 34. fol. 387. Religion is a perfect Commonwealth. chap.
35. fol. 392. How much honor Religious Orders have done to the Church of God.
chap 36. fol. 397. Of the honor, which is done to Religious people, even in
this life. chap. 37. fol. 400.
THE CHAPTERS OF the third Book: wherein is treated of the Pleasantnes of a
Religious state.
THat the pleasures of the Mind are far greater, then the pleasures of the
body. chap. 1. fol. 409. That true content of mind is only in God. chap. 2.
fol. 415. The first reason, why a Religious life is delightful; because it is
free from worldly trouble. chap. 3. fol. 418. That Religious discipline is
easy. chap. 4. fol. 423. Of the pleasure, which is in a Religious life by
reason of the mortification of the Passions. chap. 5. fol. 427. Of the
pleasure, which Religious people take in Prayer. chap. 6. fol. 431. Of many
other spiritual delights, which Religious people enjoy. chap. 7 fol. 434. Of
the contentment, which Religious people take in Poverty. chap. 8. fol. 440. Of
the pleasantnes of Chastity and Obedience. chap. 9. fol. 445, Of the pleasure,
which Religious people take in conversation with their spiritual Brethren.
chap. 10. fol. 449. Of the pleasure, which Religious men take in Learning.
chap. 11. fol. 453. Of the joy, which Religious people take in the good of
their Neighbors souls. chap. 12. fol. 458. Of the Hundred-sold promised to
Religious people. chap. 13. fol. 459. A comparison of Religion with Paradise.
chap. 14. fol. 463. An answer to certain Objections, which are won to be made
against Religion; and first: That few enjoy these Comforts. chap 15. fol. 468.
An answer to them that say: There be many hard things in Religion. chap. 16.
fol. 473. An answer to them that object, that Religious people bar themselves
of the pleasures of this life. chap. 17. fol. 481. An answer to them, that say,
there be many temptations in Religion. chap. 18. fol. 484. An answer to them,
that say: It is against nature, to live under an other. chap 19. fol. 488. An
answer to them, that think it better to keep their weealth to spend in good
uses, then to give it al away at once. chap. 20. fol. 494. An answer to them
that choose to remain in the world, to do good upon their Neighbor. chap. 21.
fol. 500. An answer to them that say: It is enough to forsake the world in
affection, though they forsake it not in effect. chap. 22. fol. 504. An answer
to them that say: It is more perfect to live in the world, because it is harder
to live well. chap. 23. fol. 512. An answer to that which is wont to be
objected: That Religious people are bound to more perfection. chap. 24. fol.
514. Against those that object, that some Religious people live not well. chap.
25. fol 518. An Answer to their argument that say: If al should become
Religious, the world would perish. chap. 26. fol. 5^2. Against the scare of
some, that they shall want necessaries for their body. chap. 27. fol. 525. Of
the fear, which others have, least they may hasten their death, by the
incommodities, which they shall suffer. chap. 28 fol. 529. An answer to those
whom the love of their body hinders from Religion. chap. 29. fol. 532. Of
them, whom the love of the world hindered from Religion. chap. 30. fol. 537.
Against the fear, which some have, that they shall never be able to shake off
their evil customs. chap. 31. fol. 540. An answer to them that fear, that
they shall not persevere in Religion. chap. 32. fol. 545. Against the temptation
of delaying our entrance into Religion. chap. 33. fol. 551. Of a temptation
rising from our Parents and Kindred. chap. 34. fol. 558. Against them that
hinder their children or kinsfolk from Religion. chap. 35. fol. 566 An answer
to them that say, they cannot know when it is a true vocation of God. chap. 36.
fol. 573. The Conclusion of the whole Work, to Religious people. chap. 37. fol.
585. The conclusion of the whole work to Secular people. chap. 38. fol. 596.
Faults escaped.
Page 9 lin. 3. for Savior. Who says, were, read Savior, who says* Where
etc. Page 21^. in the Title of the Chapter in some Copies, read Chastity for
Charity.

FINIS.

