THE HISTORY OF THE WORLD: Commonly called, THE NATVRALL HISTORY OF C.
PLINIVS SECVNDVS.

Translated into English by PHILEMON HOLLAND Doctor of Physic.

The first Tome:

PLINIVS PINGIT VTRVMQUE TIBI
AKPOKOSOS
IKPOKOSOS
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by Adam Islip. 1634.

The copy of the said Letter, written as touching the Translation of Pliny.
MY beloved, in twenty years and better, so many tokens of our mutual love
passing between us, I need not now to profess my affection to your self; and
my daily conuersing with you, has yielded my approbation of your tedious labor
in translating Pliny. These few lines therefore shall only serve to witness
unto others the deserved account which for your learning I have always made of
you, and my conceit of this your travail in opening to your countrymen the
treasury of Nature: therein to see and to admire the wisdom, power, and the
goodness of the only true God, the Framer of Nature. I am not of their minds,
who desire that all humane learning in Arts and Natural Philosophy should be
reserved under lock and key of strange language, without the which no other
man should have access unto it: For as such knowledge is a branch of that
excellency wherein man was formed, so the repair thereof (though it be not
the chief) is yet a thing unworthily neglected, as well in regard of our own
comfort therein gained, as for the glory of God thereby promoted. And it was
the wisdom and provident hand of the All-sufficient, so to guide the wise
heathen in Arts and Nature, that they should publish such their skill unto
their countrymen in mother tongue: partly to correct the rudeness which is in
ignorance, and in part to leave them the more inexcusable: In Tit. 1.
which regard, they may in some sort be called, The Prophets and Teachers of
the heathen. And though Pliny and the rest were not able by Natures light to
search so far as to find out the God of Nature, who sits in the glory of
light which none attaineth, but contrariwise Romans 1.
in the vanity of their imagination bewrayed the ignorance of foolish hearts,
some doting upon Nature her self, and others upon special creatures as their
God: yet fear we not that Christians in so clear light should be so far
bewitched by such blind teachers, as to fall before those heathen Idols. Yea,
though some of them (as namely Pliny) have spoken dishonourably of the only
true God and of his providence, because they knew him not; which speeches (if
it might stand with the laws of Translation) I could wish were utterly
omitted; yet may we hope that Christian men so long taught by the light of
grace out of the holy word of God, will no less therefore give him his
deserved honor, than when they do in like sort hear the blasphemy of
Sanneherib king of Ashur, who sent to 2. Reg. 11.
rail upon the living God. I fear not the corrupting of unstable minds any
thing so much by these foolish Gentiles which are without, as by the deceitful
spirit of error speaking in the mouth of men within: such I mean as are within
the bosom of the Church. These are the foxes by whom we fear the spoil of
the Lords vines when as the grapes first begin to Cant. 2.
cluster; for whose taking I desire that all Gods husbandmen would be more
careful. As for the speeches of these blind heathen, the true Christian may
well thereby be provoked to extol the mercy of God, who sits in so
glorious a light as has dasled the sharpest sight of Nature; but for our
comfort has put a veil upon his glory, and by his grace has so cleared the
eye of our understanding, that we might see his face in his beloved, and know
him to be the only true God, and his blessed providence upon all his
creatures. And when they shall perceive that the wisest clearke in natural
skill could not learn by the book of heaven and earth to know their Maker,
whose glory they declare, and handiworkes set Psalm. 19. ^om. (...).
out; nor who it was that framed Nature, when by his word he first created them
in such Genesis (...).
excellency, and then, by his blessing gave, and by his providence working all
in all, does yet maintain such an operative power, as by the which they are
still coutinued in their kinds: nor how it came to pass that Nature lost her
excellency in all creatures, and Gen 3. Romans 8.
her power unto good was not only weakened (whence we see her fail in many of
her purposes) but also perverted unto evil; then (I say) they will the more be
stirred up by Psalm. 119. and 147.
Gods grace to make reverent account of the holy Scriptures, which God in rich
mercy has given to them to be a light in all things for to direct them
through the errors in Natures blindness, and to bring them to the heavenly
Jerusalem and happy world of all the holy where he dwells, whom they
worship in unity and trinity. Proceed then my beloved friend to bring unto
the birth your second labor; whereof I pray that God may have honor in the
praise of his works throughout nature, and wish you comfort in good acceptance
with the reader, and your country use and pleasure in the skill thereof. Unto
him which only has immortality and dwells in that light which none
attaineth, to God only wise be all honor and glory.

Iunij xij. 1601. Your loving friend in the Lord, H. F.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR ROBERT CECIL KNIGHT, PRINCIPAL SECRETARY TO THE
QVEENS MAJESTY, MASTER OF COURT OF THE WARDS AND LIVERIES, Chancellor of the
University of Cambridge, and one of her Majesty's most Honorable Pr^ie
Counsel.
THe friendly acceptance which T. Livius of Padua, has found in this Realm,
since time he showed himself in English weed unto her sacred Majesty, has
trained over unto him his neighbor Plinius Secundus, from Verona. Whom, being
now arraied in the same habit, yet fearful to set foot forward in the
foreign ground, without the countenance of some worthy personage, who might
both give him his hand at his first entrance, in token of welcome, and also
grace him afterward with a favorable regard to win acquaintance, I humbly
present unto your Honor. For considering the quality of the man, a
Philosopher discoursing so deeply in all Learning, where may he look for
better acceptance than of him, who is most justly styled, Patron of Learning?
Which dignity conferred of late upon your H. by the general suffrages of a
Noble University (and that for your singular insight in all literature) as a
complement to those high places vhereunto the favor of a most prudent and
judicious Princess has advanced you, and the same correspondent to the same
wisdom, justice, and eloquence, which concur in your person, like the
several beauties of the Rubie, Amethyst, and Emeraud meeting in one fair
Opal, gives a lovely luster to your other titles, no less, than if the nine
Muses and Apollo, represented naturally in that rich Agat of K. Pyrrhus, were
inserted therein. Now if, as we read of Magnus.
Alexander and Polyorcete^.
Demetrius, two mighty monarchs, who amid their desseines and making conquests
and besieging cities, beheld otherwhiles Apelles and Protogenes how they
handled their pencils; it may please your Honor between the managing of
State-affaires under her Majesty, to cast your eye eftsoons upon Pliny for
your recreation, and see how lively he depeincteth, not Venus Anadyomene,
drawn happily to the pattern of Campaspe a courtizan; nor Ialysus with his dog,
in which picture, fecit Fortuna naturam; but even Nature her self, the
immediate mother and nource of all things under the Almighty; I shall not only
think him patronized thereby and sufficiently commended to the world, but also
acknowledge my self much devoted to your H. and bound for ever to pray for the
increase thereof, with long life and true happiness.

Your Honors most ready at command,

Philemon Holland.

The Preface to the Reader.
Happy were they in times past reputed (and not unworthily) who had that
gracious and heavenly gift, aut facere scribenda, aut scribere legenda: that is
to say, either to do such things as deserved to be written, or to write that
which was worth the reading. Those that could not attain to these two branches
of felicity, and yet utterly misliked idleness, contented themselves in a third
degree, namely to take in hand the old works of their ancients, and by new
labors to immortalize their memory. Thus Nicophanes (a famous painter in his
time) gave his mind wholly to antique pictures, partly to exemplify and take
out their patterns after that in long continuance of time they were decayed;
and in part to repair and reform the same, if happily by some injurious
accident they were defaced. The ingenious mind of this artizan thus devoted to
antiquity, as I do highly commend; so I cannot choose but embrace his policy,
seeking hereby to avoid the envy and reproof of others. In this number I must
range those learned men in several ages, who to illustrate the monuments left
by former writers, have annexed unto them their Commentaries; to save them
entire and vncorrupt, have set thereto judicial observations; and to publish
them for a general benefit of posterity, have translated the same into their
mother language. As for my self, since it is neither my hap nor hope to
attain to such perfection, as to bring forth somewhat of mine own which may
quit the pains of a reader; and much less to perform any action that might
minister matter to a writer; and yet so far bound unto my native country and
the blessed state wherein I have lived, as to render an account of my years
passed and studies employed, during this long time of peace and tranquillity,
wherein (under the most gracious and happy government of a peerless
Princess, assisted with so prudent, politic, and learned Counsel) all good
literature has had free progress and flourished, in no age so much: me
thought I owed this duty, to leave for my part also (after many others) some
small memorial, that might give testimony another day what fruits generally
this peaceable age of ours has produced. Endeavored I have therefore to stand
in this third rank, and bestowed those hours which might be spared from the
practice of my profession, and the necessary cares of this life, to satisfy
my countrymen now living, and to gratify the age ensuing, in this kind. Like
as therefore I have traveled already in Titus Livius a renowned
Historiographer, so I have proceeded to deal with Plinius Secundus the elder,
as famous a Philosopher. Now albeit my intention and only scope was, to do a
pleasure unto them that could not read these authors in the original: yet
needs I must confess that even my self have not only gained thereby increase
of the Latin tongue (wherein these works were written) but also grown to
further knowledge of the matter and argument therein contained. For this
benefit we reap by studying the books of such ancient authors, That the
oftener we read them over, the more still we find and learn in them: as being
so judiciously and pithily penned, that, as the Poet said very well, decies
repetita placerent. Well may the newest songs and last devised plays delight
our ears at the first, and for the present ravish our senses: like as horarie
and early Summer fruits content our taste and please the appetite: but surely
it is antiquity that has given grace, vigor, and strength to writings; even
as age commends the most generous and best wines. In which regard, and upon
this experience of mine own, I nothing doubt but they also whom I might justly
fear as hard censours of these my labors, will not only pity me for my
pains, but also in some measure yield me thanks in the end, when either by
the light of the English (if they be young students) they shall be able more
readily to go away with the dark phrase and obscure constructions of the
Latin; or (being great scholars and taking themselves for deep Critickes) by
conferring the one with the other, happily to epsy wherein I have tripped, they
shall by that means peruse once again, and consequenly gather new profit out
of that author whom peradventure they had laid by for many years as
sufficiently understood. When some benefit (I say) shall accrue unto them
likewise by this occasion, I less dread their fearful doom, to which so
wilfully I have exposed my self. Well I wist, that among the Athenians, order
was taken by law, That an interlude newly acted should be heard with silence
and applause: which custom, as it was respective and favorable to the first
endeauours of the actours, so it implied an inevitable danger of hissing out an
utter disgrace, if afterward they chanced to miss and fail in their parts.
Having showed my self once before upon the stage, presuming upon this
privilege and the courtesy of the theater, I might have now sitten still and
so rested: In mounting up thus soon again, I may seem either in the assured
confidence of mine own worthiness, to proclaim a challenge to all men's
censures; or else upon a deep conceit of some general conniuencie make
reckoning of an extraordinary and wonderful favor. But as the choice that I
have made to publish the monuments of other men, without fathering any thing of
mine own, does excuse and acquit me for the one; so the froward disposition
of carpers in these days wherein we live, will check the other. Howbeit
considering such pains undergone by me one man, for the pleasure of so many;
so much time spent of mine, for gaining time to others; and some opportunities
of private lucre ouerslipt and lost, to win profit unto all; I fear not but
these regards may deserve a friendly acceptance, and counterweigh all defects
and faults escaped, whatsoever. The persuasion hereof, but principally the
priuitie of my affectionat love unto my country (which assured me of a
safe conduct to pass peaceably through their hands who are of the better sort
and well affected) induced me to a resolution not only to enter upon this new
task, but also to break through all difficulties, until I had brought the
same, if not to a full and absolute perfection, yet to an end and final
conclusion. Besides this natural inclination and hope which carried me this
way, other motives there were that made sail and set me forward. I saw how
diverse men before me had dealt with this author, whiles some labored to
reform whatsoever by injury of time was grown out of frame: others did their
best to translate him into their own tongue, and namely, the Italian and
French: moreoover, the Title prefixed thereto so universal as it is, to wit,
The History of the World, or Reports of Nature, imported (no doubt) that he
first penned it for the general good of mankind. Over and besides, the
Argument ensuing full of variety, furnished with discourses of all matters,
not appropriate to the learned only, but accommodat to the rude peisant of the
country; fitted for the painful artizan in town and city: pertinent to the
bodily health of man, woman, and child; and in one word, suiting with all sorts
of people living in a society and commonweal. To say nothing of the precedent
given by the author himself who endited the same, not with any affected
phrase, but sorting well with the capacity even of the meanest and most
unlettered: who also translated a good part thereof out of the Greek. What
should I allege the example of former times, wherein the like has evermore
been approved and practiced? Why should any man therefore take offense hereat,
and envy this good to his natural country, which was first meant for the
whole world? and yet some there be so gross as to give out, That these and
such like books ought not to be published in the vulgar tongue. It is a shame
(quoth one) that Liuie speaks English as he does: Latinists only are to be
acquainted with him: as Who would say, the soldier were to have recourse unto
the university for military skill and knowledge: or the scholar to put on
arms and pitch a camp. What should Pliny (says another) be read in
English, and the mysteries couched in his books divulged: as if the
husbandman, the mason, carpenter, goldsmith, painter, lapidarie, and engrauer,
with other artificers, were bound to seek unto great clearkes or linguists for
instructions in their several arts. Certes, such Momi as these, besides their
blind and erroneous opinion, think not so honorably of their native country
and mother tongue as they ought: who if they were so well affected that way as
they should be, would wish rather, and endeavor by all means to triumph now
over the Romans in subduing their literature under the dent of the English pen,
in requital so the conquest sometime over this Island, achieved by the edge
of their sword. As for our speech, was not Latin as common and natural in
Italy, as English here with us. And if Pliny faulted not but deserved well of
the Roman name, in laying abroad the riches and hidden treasures of Nature, in
that Dialect or Idiome which was familiar to the basest clown: why should any
man be blamed for enterprising the semblable, to the commodity of that
country in which and for which he was borne. Are we the only nation under
heaven unworthy to taste of such knowledge? or is our language so barbarous,
that it will not admit in proper terms a foreign phrase? I honor them in my
heart, who having of late days trodden the way before me in Plutarch, Tacitus,
and others, have made good proof, that as the tongue in an Englishmans head is
framed so flexible and obsequent, that it can pronounce naturally any other
language; so a pen in his hand is able sufficiently to express Greek, Latin,
and Hebrew. And my hope is, that after me there will arise some industrious
Flavij who may at length cornicum oculos configere. For if my self, a man by
profession otherwise carried away, for gifts far inferior to many, and
wanting such helps as others be furnished with, have in some sort taught those
to speak English who were supposed very untoward to be brought unto it; what
may be expected at their hands, who for leisure may attend better; in wit are
more pregnant; and being graced with the opinion of men and favor of the time,
may attempt what they will, and effect whatsoever they attempt with greater
felicity? A painful and tedious travail I confess it is; neither make I
doubt but many do note me for much folly in spending time herein, and
neglecting some compendious course of gathering good, and pursing up pence. But
when I look back to the example of Pliny, I must of necessity condemn both
mine own sloth, and also reprove the supine negligence of these days. A
courtiour he was, and great favourit of the Vespasians both father and son:
an orator besides, and pleaded many causes at the bar: a martial man
withal, and served often times a leader and commander in the field: within the
city of Rome he managed civil affairs, and bare honorable offices of
State. Who would not think but each one of these places would require a whole
man? and yet amid these occasions wherewith he was possessed, he penned
Chronicles, wrate Commentaries, compiled Grammatical treatises, and many other
volumes which at this day are utterly lost. As for the History of Nature now
in hand, which shows him to be an excellent Philosopher and a man
accomplished in all kinds of literature (the only monument of his that has
escaped all dangers, and as another Palladium been reserved entire unto our
time) wherein he has discoursed of all things even from the starrie heaven to
the center of the earth; a man would marveile how he could possibly either
write or do any thing else. But considering the agilitie of man's spirit
always in motion: an ardent desire to benefit posterity, which in these
volumes he has so often protested; his indefatigable study both day and
night, even to the injury of nature, and the same continued in every place,
as well abroad as withinhouse; in his journey upon the high way, where his
manner was to read and to indite; in his ordinary passage through the streets
between court and home, where he gave himself no rest, but either read, or
else found his notarie work to write; and for that purpose rode usually in an
easy litter, with the said Notarie close by his side: less wonder it is, that
he performed his service to Prince and state according to his calling; and
withal delivered unto posterity so many fruits of wit and learning. For what
is not the head of man able to compass? especially making sail with a fervent
desire and resolution to see an end, and besides taking the vantage of all
moments, and losing no time, whereof he was unus omnium parcissimus. Touching
his affection to search into the secrets of Nature, it was that and nothing
else that shortened his days, and hastened his untimely death: for having
lived not much above the middle age of man, desirous he was to know the reason,
Why the hill Nesuvius burned as it did? and approached so near, that with the
strong vapors and smoke issuing from thence, his breath was suddenly stopped,
and himself found dead in the place: a man worthy to have lived for ever.
What remains now, but only to recommend unto my countrymen this work of his
(which for mine own part I wish to be immortal) were it not for one scruple
to be cleared, which at the first troubled my self a little, and might
peradventure otherwise offend some readers. In attributing so much unto Nature,
Pliny seems to derogat from the Almighty God, to him (...); and therefore
dangerous (faith one) to be divulged. Far be it from me, that I should
publish any thing to corrupt men's manners, and much less to prejudice
Christian religion. After conference therefore with sundry divines about this
point, whom for their authority I reverence; whose learning I honor and
embrace; and in whom for judgment and synceritie of religion I rest, confirmed
I was in my first purpose, and resolved to finish that which I had begun,
namely, not to defraud the world of so rich a gem, for one small blemish
appearing therein. And that it may appear how I did not abound in mine own
sense, but had regard as well to satisfy the conscience of others as mine
own, I have thought good to annex immediately hereunto, in manner of a
Corollarie, the opinion of one grave and learned preacher concerning this
doubt, as it was delivered unto me in writing; which for that it is grounded
upon sufficient reasons, and according with the judgment of the rest, the
less I respect the rash projects of some fantastical spirits: nothing
doubting but the same will settle the minds of the weak, and free my labors
from the taint of irreligion.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF NATVRE,
WRITTEN BY C. PLINIVS SECVNDVS.
The Preface or Episte Dedicatorie to i. Titus.
Prince Vespasian, his [friend] C. Plinius Secundus sends greeting.
THese books containing the History of Nature, which a few days since I
brought to light (a new work in Latin, and namely among the Romans your
Citizens and Countrymen) I purpose by this Epistle of mine to present and
consecrate unto you, most sweet and gentle Prince [for Suavissim^.
this title accords fittest unto you, seeing that the name of [ Maximus.
Most mighty] sorteth well with the age of the Emperor your father:] which
happily might seem boldness and presumption in me, but that I know how at other
times Namque t^ soleb^s, M^ esse aliq^ (...) ^gas.
you were wont to have some good opinion of my toies and fooleries. Where, by
the way, you must give me leave to mollify a little the verses which I borrow
of my countryman Catullus. (See also how I light upon (...)
a word used among soldiers, which you are acquainted with, since time we
served both together in the camp:) For he as you wot full well, changing the
former sillables It seems that Pliny read thus in (...), (...) p^tare namque*
N^gas esse aliqu^d meas sole^as, which indeed was but an hand composition and
couch^g of the wo^ds.
of his verses one for another, made himself somewhat more harsh than he would
seem to be unto the fine ears of his familiar friends, the Veranioli and
Fabulli. And withal, I would be thought by this my malapert writing unto you,
to satisfy one point, which, as you complained in your answer of late to
another rude and audacious letter of mine, I had not performed, to wit, That
all the world might see (as it were upon record) how the Empire is managed by
you and your father equally: and notwithstanding this imperial majesty
whereunto you are called, yet is your affability and manner of conuersing with
your old friends, fellow-like, and the same that always heretofore it had
been. For albeit you have triumphed with him for your noble victories, bin
Censor in your time, and Consul (...), or rather Septies, out of Suetonius.
six times, executed the sacred authority of the Tribunes, Patrones, and
protectors of the Commons of Rome, together with him: albeit I say you have
otherwise showed your noble heart in honoring and gracing both the court of
the Emperor your father, and also the whole state of Knights and Gentlemen of
Rome, whiles you were captain of the guard, and grand-master of his house and
royal palace (in which places all, you carried your self respectively to the
good of the Commonweal) yet to all your friends, and especially to my self,
you have borne the same countenance as in times past within the camp, when we
served under the same colors, and lodged together in one pauilion. So as in
all this greatness and high estate whereunto you are mounted, there is no
other change and alteration seen in your person but this, That your power is
now answerable to your will, and able you are to do and perform that good
which you ever meant, and still intend.

And howsoever this great majesty, resplendent in you on every side, in regard
of those high dignities above rehearsed, may induce the whole world besides to
reverence your person in all obeisance; yet I for my part am armed only with a
kind of audacitie and confidence to show my duty and devoire unto you, after
a more familiar manner than others: and therefore, this my aduenturous rashness,
whatsoever, you must impute unto your own courtesy: and if I chance to fault
therein, thank your self therefore, and seek pardon at your own hands. Well,
bashfulnesse I have laid aside, and put on a bold face, and all to no purpose.
For why? although your gentleness and humanity be one way attrectiue, and
induces me to draw near unto your presence, yet another way you appear in
great majesty: the sublimitie I say of your mind, your deep reach, high
conceit, and rare perfections, set me as far back: no lictors and huishers
marching before you, so much, that I dare not approach. In the first place: was
there ever any man, whose words passed from him more powerful, and who more
truly might be said to flash forth as lightning the force of eloquence? What
Tribune was there known at any time to persuade and move the people with good
language, more effectually? How admirable was your utterance in those public
Orations, wherein you thundered out the praiseworthy acts of the Emperor your
father, that all the grand-place rung therewith? what a singular testimony
showed you of rare kindness and affection to your brother, in setting out his
praises to the full? As for your skill in Poetry, how excellent, how
accomplished is it. Oh the bounty of your mind! Oh the fertility of your
pregnant spirit! that you should find means to imitate, yea, and to match your
For Domitian Vespasian was reputed an excellent Poet.
brother in that kind. But who is able boldly to gi^e an estimate of these
gifts to their worth? How may a man enter into the due consideration thereof,
without fear of exquisit censure, and exact judgment of your wit, especially
being provoked and challenged thereunto as you are. For to say a truth, the
case of them who publish a work in general terms, is far unlike to theirs
that will seem to dedicat it particularly, and by name, to a Prince so
judicious as your self. For had I set forth this my book simply, and stayed
there without any personal dedication, the^ I might have come upon you and
said, Sir, what should a mighty Commander and General of the field, as you
are, busy himself to read such matters? written these treatises were to the
capacity of the vulgar people, for base commons, rude husbandmen, and peasants
of the country, for poor artisans; and in one word, to gratify them who had
no other means of great emploiment, nor time and leisure but to study upon
such points and nothing else: What should you make your self a censor of this
work? and verily, when I made first show of this enterprise of mine, I never
reckned you in the number of those judges that should pass their sentence upon
these writings; I wist full well, that you were a greater person far, and I
supposed that you would never abase your self nor stoop so low as to read
this book of mine. Over and besides, a common case it is, and incident to men
of deep learning and great conceit, that otherwhiles exception may be taken
against them, and their judgment rejected in this behalf. Even M. Tullius
that renowned Orator, and who for wit and learning had not his fellow, taking
the vantage of that liberty, uses the benefit thereof: and (whereat we may
well marvel) maintains the action by an advocate, and takes example (for
his defense) from Lucilius: for in one part of his works thus be says, I
would not have learned Persius to read these books of mine, loath I am that he
should censure me. As for Laelius Decimus, I am content to submit them to his
opinion. Now if such an one as Lucilius, who was the first that durst control
the writing of others; and took upon him to scoff at their imperfections, had
rather thus to say; if Cicero took occasion to borrow the said speech of him
for to serve his own turn, and namely in his Treatise of Politiques, where he
wrote of a Commonweal; how much greater cause have I to distrust my self, and
to decline and avoid the censure of some judge of deep understanding? But cut
I am from this refuge and means of defense, in that I expressly make choice
of you in this dedication of my work: for one thing it is to have a judge,
either pricked by plurality of voices, or cast upon a man by drawing lots; and
a far other thing to choose and nominate him from all others: and great
difference there is between that cheer and provision which we make for a ghest
solemnly bidden and invited, and the sudden fare and intertainement which is
ready for a stranger who comes to our house unlooked for. Cato, that
professed enemy of ambition, vainglory, and indirect suit for offices, who
took as great contentment in those estates and dignities which he refused and
rejected, as in them which he enioied, attained to this good name of
uprightness and sincerity, that when in the hottest broile about election of
Magistrates that ever was in his time, they that stood therefore, put into his
hands their money upon trust, as a cautionary pawn and assurance of their
integrity and fidelity that way; they professed that they did it in testimony
of their conceit of his equity and innocence, the chief and only thing that
a man is to regard in this life: whereupon ensued the noble and memorable
exclamation of M. Cicero, who speaking of the said Cato, brake out into these
words: Oh gentle M Portius, how happy and blessed art thou, whom no man was
ever so hardy as to solicit to any leaud thing, or contrary to right and
honesty! L. Scipio, surnamed Asiaticus, at what time as he appealed unto the
Tribunes of the Commons, and besought their lawful favor (among whom, C.
Gracchus was one, a man whom he took for his mortal enemy) presuming upon
the goodness of his cause, gave out and said, That his very enemies, if they
were his judges, could not choose but quit him, and give sentence on his side.
Thus we see how every man makes him peremtorily the supreme and highest
judge of his cause, whom himself chooses and appealeth unto: which manner of
choice the Latins call Prouocatio. As for your self verily, who are set in
the most eminent and chief place among men, and otherwise endued with singular
eloquence and profound knowledge, no marvel is it, if those that do their
duty unto you, salute you, kiss your hand, and come with great respect and
reverence: In which regard, exceeding care above all things would be had, that
whatsoever is said or dedicated unto you, may beseem your person, and be worth
acceptance. And yet the gods reject not the humble prayers of poor country
peasants, yea, and of many nations, who offer nothing but milk unto them: and
such as have no Incense, find grace and favor many times with the oblation of
a plain cake made only of Meal and salt; and never was any man blamed yet
for his devotion to the gods, so he offered according to his ability, were the
thing never so simple.

For mine own part, challenged I may be more still for this my importune and
inconsiderat boldness, in that I would seem to present these books unto you,
comprised of so slender stuff and matter as they be: for therein can be
touched no great wit (which otherwise in me was ever mean and simple) neither
admit they any digressions, orations, speeches, and discourses, ne yet
admirable cases and variable chanses, or any other occurrent, either pleasant
to rehearse, or delectable to hear. The truth is this, the nature of all
things in this world, that is to say, matters concerning our daily and
ordinary life, are here deciphered and declared, and that in barrein terms,
without any goodly show of gay and glorious phrases: and whatsoever I have put
down, concern it does the basest points thereof, insomuch as for the most
part I am to deliver the thing in hand, either in rusticall speech, or else in
foreign, nay, in barbarous language, such also as may not well be uttered, but
with reserving honor to the hearers, and reverence to the readers.

Moreover, the way that I have entered into, has not bin trodden beforetime by
other writers, being indeed so strange and uncouth, as a man's mind would not
willingly travel therein. No Latin author among us has hitherto once ventured
upon the same argument, no one Grecian whatsoever has gone through it and
handled all: and no marvel, for many of us love not to take any pains, but
study rather to pen matters of delight and pleasure. True it is, I must needs
say, that others have made profession hereof, but they have done it with such
subtlety and deepenesse, that all their travels and writings by that means,
lie as it were dead and buried in darkness. Now come I, and take upon me to
speak of every thing, and to gather as it were a complete hody of arts and
sciences (which the Greeks call (...)) that are either altogether unknown, or
become doubtful, through the overmuch curiosity of fine wits: again, other
matters are deciphered in such long discourses, that they are tedious to the
readers, insomuch as they loath and abhor them. A difficult enterprise it is
therefore to make old stuff new, to give authority and credit to novelties, to
polish and smooth that which is worn and out of use, to set a gloss and
luster upon that which is dim and dark, to grace and countenance things
disdained, to procure belief to matters doubtful; and in one word, to reduce
nature to all, and al to their own nature. And verily to give the attempt only
and show a desire to effect such a desseigne as this, although the same be not
brought about and compassed, were a brave and magnificent enterprise. Certes of
this spirit am I, that those learned men and great students, who making no
stay, but breaking through al difficulties, have preferred the profit of
posterity before the tickling and pleasure of itching ears in these days;
which I may protest that I have aimed at, not in this work only, but also in
other of my books already: and I profess, that I wonder much at T. Livius,
otherwise a most renowned and famous writer, who in a preface to one of his
books of the Roman history which he co^piled from the foundation of Rome, thus
protested, That he had gotten glory enough by his former writing, and might
sit still now and take his ease, but that his mind was so restless, and so ill
could abide repose, that contrariwise it was fed and nourished with travel, and
nothing else But surely me thinks, in finishing those Chronicles, he should in
duty have respected the glory of that people which had conquered the World,
and advanced the honor of the Roman name, rather than displaied his own
praise and commendation: Ywis, his demerit had been the greater, to have
continued his story as he did, for love of the subject matter, and not for his
private pleasure; to have I say performed that piece of work more to gratify
the state of Rome, than to content his own mind and affection. As touching my
self (forasmuch as Domitius Piso says, That books ought to be

(...) treasuries and store houses indeed, and not bare and simple writings) I
may be bold to say and aver, That in 36 books I have comprised 20000 things,
all worthy of regard and consideration, which I have recollected out of 2000
volumes or therabout, that I have diligently read (and yet very few of them
there be that, men learned otherwise, and studious, dare meddle withal, for
the deep matter and hidden secrets therein contained) and those written by 100
several elect and approved authors: besides a world of other matters, which
either were unknown to our forefathers and former writers, or else afterward
invented by their posterity. And yet I nothing doubt that many things there
be, which either surpass our knowledge, or else our memory has ouerslipt:
for men we are, and men employed in many affairs. Moreover, considered it
would be, that these studies we follow at vacant times and stolen hours, that
is to say by night season only; to the end that you may know, how we to
accomplish this have neglected no time which was due unto your service: The
days we wholly employ and spend in attendance about your person; we sleep
only to satisfy nature, even as much as our health requires, and no more;
contenting our selves with this reward, That whiles we study and muse (as
Varro says) upon these things in our closet, we gain so many hours to our
life; for surely we live then only, when we watch and be awake. Considering now
those occasions, those lets and hindrances aboue-named, I had no reason to
presume or promise much; but in that you have emboldened me to dedicate my
books unto you, your self performs whatsoever in me is wanting: not that I
trust upon the goodness and worth of the work, so much, as that by this means
it will be better esteemed and show more vendible: for many things there be
that seem right dear and be holden for precious, only because they are
consecrate to some sacred temples.

As for us verily, we have written of you all, your father Vespasian, your
self, and your brother Domitian, in a large volume which we compiled touching
the history of our times, beginning there where Aufidius Bassus ended. Now if
you demand and ask me, Where that history is? I answer, that finished it was
long since, and by this time is justified and approved true by your deeds:
otherwise I was determined to leave it unto my heir, and give order that it
should be published after my death, lest in my life time I might have bin
thought to have curried favor of those, whose acts I seemed to pen with
flattery, and beyond all truth. And therefore in this action I do both them a
great favor who happily were minded before me to put forth the like Chronicle,
and the posterity also which shall come after; who, I make reckning and know,
will enter into the lists with us, like as we have done with our predecessors.
A sufficient argument of this my good mind and frank heart that way you shall
have by this, That in the front of these books now in hand, I have set down the
very names of those writers, whose help I have used in the compiling of the^:
for I have ever bin of this opinion, That it is the part of an honest minded
man, and one that is full of grace and modesty, to confess frank ly by whom he
has profited and gotten any good: not as many of those unthankful persons have
done, whom I have alleged for my authors. For to tell you a plain truth, know
thus much from me, that in conferring the^ together about this work of mine, I
have met with some of our modern writers, who word for word have exemplified
and copied out whole books of old authors, and never vouchsafed so much as the
naming of them, but have taken their labors and travels to themselves. And this
they have not done in that courage and spirit to imitate, yea and to match
them, as Virgil did Homer: much less have they showed that simplicity and
apert proceeding of Cicero, who in his books of Policy and Commonweal
professes himself to hold with Plato; in his Consolatorie Epistle written to
his daughter, confesses and says plainly thus, I follow Crantor, and
Panaetius likewise in his Treatise concerning Offices. Which worthy monuments
of his (as you know well) deserve not only to be seen, handled, and read
daily, but also to be learned by heart every word. Certes, I hold it for a
point of a base and servile mind, and wherein there is no goodness at al, to
choose rather to be surprised and taken in theft, than to bring home borrowed
good, or to repay a due debt, especially when the occupying, use, and interest
thereof, has gained a man as much as the principal.

Now as touching the titles and inscriptions of Books, the Greeks therein
have a wonderful grace and great felicity: some have entitled them (...),
whereby they would give us to understand of A sweet hony-combe: * others (...)
^issus.
(...), that is to say, The horn of plenty and store: in such sort, that
whosoever reads these goodly titles, must needs hope for some great matters
in such books, and as the proverb goes, look to drink there or else no
where, a good draught of hens milk. You shall have moreover their books set
out with these glorious inscriptions, The Muses, The Coutaining a^l ^gs, as Ty^
Tull^us did
Pandects, A manuel to be carried always in hand.
Enchiridion, (...)
(...), A Table or Index.
(...): Goodly names all, and such, as who would not make default of appearance
in court, and forfeit a recognisance or obligation, to unclasp such books and
turn over the leaf? But let a man enter into them and read forward, Lord!
how little or no substance at all shall he find within the very mids,
answerable to that brave show in the front or outside thereof? As for our
countrymen (Latins I mean, and Romans) they be nothing so fine and curious
as the Greeks, gross are they in comparison of them in giving titles to their
books: they come with their Antiquities, Examples and Arts, and those also be
such authors as are of the most pleasant and finest invention amongst them all.
Valerius who (as I take it) was named Antias, both for that he was a Citizen
of Antium, and also because the ancestors of his house were so called, was the
first that gave to a book of his own making, the title of Lucubratio, as a
man would say, Candleworke or Night-studie. Varro, he terms some of his
Satyrs Sesculyxes and Flexibulae. Diodorus among the Greeks was the first
that laid aside toyish titles, and because he would give some brave name to
his Chronicles, entitled it Bibliotheca, i. a Library. Apion the famous
Grammarian, even he whom Tiberius Caesar called the Cymball of the world
(whereas indeed he deserved to be named a Timbrill or Drum rather, for
ringing and sounding public fame) was so vainglorious, that he supposed all
those immortalized, unto whom he wrote or composed any pamphlet whatsoever.
For mine own part, although I nothing repent me that I have devised no
pretier Title for my Book than plain Naturalis Historia, i. The reports of
Nature, without more ceremony; yet because I would not be thought altogether
to course and rate the Greeks, I can be content, nay I am willing to be
thought in this behalf like unto those excellent grand masters in Greece, for
Painting and Imagerie, whom you shall find in these Reports of mine, to have
entitled those rare and absolute pieces of work (which the more we view and
look upon, the more we admire and wonder at for their perfection) with half
titles and imperfect inscriptions, in this manner, Apelles Apelles faciebat.
went in hand with this Picture: or, Polycletus was a making this Image: as if
they were but begun, never finished and laid out of their hands: which was done
(no doubt) to this end, that for all the variety and diversity of men's
judgments scanning of their workmanship, yet the Artificer thereby had
recourse to make excuse; had means (I say) to crave and have pardon for any
faults and imperfections that could be found, as if he meant to have amended
any thing therein amiss or wanting, in case he had not been cut off and
prevented by death. These noble workmen therefore herein showed right great
modesty, that they set superscriptions upon all their painted tables,
pourtraitures and personages, as if they had been the last pieces of their
workmanship, and themselves dissabled by unexpected death that they could not
make a final end of any one of them: for there were not known (as I take it)
above three in all, which had their absolute titles written upon them in this
form, Ille fecit, i. This Apelles wrought: and those pictures will I write of
in place convenient: By which it appeared evidently, that the said three tables
were fully finished, and that the workman was so highly contented with their
perfection, that he feared the censure of no man: No marvel then, if all
three were so much envied and admired throughout the world, no marvel if
every man desired to be master of them.

Now For my self, I know full well and confess freely, that many more things
may be added, not to this story alone, but to all my books that I have put
forth already: which I speak by the way, because I would prevent and avoid
those fault-finders abroad those correctors and Homeromas^ges.
scourgers of Homer, (for surely that is their very name (because I hear say
there be certain Stoike Philosophers, professed Logicians, yea, and Epicurians
also (for at Grammarians hands and Critics I never looked for other) who are
with child still and travail until they be delivered of somewhat against my
books which I have set forth as touching Grammar: and for this ten years
space, nothing is come to light, but evermore the fruit miscarieth belike
before the full time, as the slip of an imperfect birth; whereas in less space
than so, the very Elephant brings forth her calfe, be it never so big. But
this troubles me never a whit, for I am not ignorant that a silly woman, even
an harlot, and no better, durst encounter Theophrastus, and write a book
against him, notwithstanding he was a man of such incomparable eloquence that
thereupon he came by his divine name Theophrastus: from whence arose this
proverb and byword, If women may be allowed to control men's writings, we may
be weary of our lives and go ha^g our selves well enough.
Marie then go choose a tree to hang thy self. And surely I cannot contain and
hold my tongue, but I must needs set down the very words of Cato Censorius,
so pertinent to this purpose; whereby it may appear, that even Cato himself a
most worthy personage, who wrote of military Discipline, who had been brought
up and trained to feats of war under Great Scipio Africanus, or rather indeed
under Anniball, who in the end could not endure Africanus himself, but was
able to control him in martial affairs: and who besides having the conduct
as L. General of the Roman army, achieved the better hand over his enemies
in the field, and returned with victory: this Cato (I say) could not avoid
such backbiters and slanderers, but knowing that there would be many of them
ready to purchase themselves some name and reputation by reproving the
knowledge and skill of others, brake out into a certain speech against them:
And what was it? I know right well (quoth he, in that book aforesaid) that if
these writings of mine come abroad once and be published to the view of the
world, there will be many step forth to quarrel and cavil therewith; such
fellows soonest and most of all who are quite void of virtue and honesty, and
know not what belongs to true honor. But surely say what they will, I let
their words run by, like rain water. It was a pretty speech also and a
pleasant apothegme, that Plancus uttered in the semblable case: for being
informed that Asinius Pollio was devising and framing certain invectiue
Orations against him, which should be set forth either by himself or his
children, after the decease of Plancus and not before, to the end that they
might not be answered by him; he said readily by way of a scoff, That none
but vain bugs and hobgoblings use to fight with the dead: with which word he
gave those orations such a counterbuffe, that (by the judgment of the learned)
none were accounted afterward more impudent and shameless than they. For mine
own part, being sure that these busy bodies shall never be able to bite me
(and verily Cato has given such fellows a proper name, and called them
Vitiligatores, by a term elegantly compounded of vices and quarrels: for to
say a truth, what did they else but pick quarrels and make brawls?) I will
proceed and go one still in my intended purpose.

Now to conclude and knit up mine Epistle: knowing as I do, that for the good
of the Common weal, you should be spared and not impeached by any private
business of your own, and namely in perusing these long volumes of mine; to
prevent this trouble therefore, I have adjoined immediately io this Epistle, and
prefixed before these books, the Summarie or Contents of every one: and very
carefully have I endeavored, that you should not need to read them throughout,
whereby all others also after your example, may ease themselves of the like
labor: and as any man is desirous to know this or that, he may seek and
readily find in what place to meet with the same. This learned I of Valerius
Sorranus one of our own Latin writers, who has done the like before me and
set an Index to these Books which he entitled (...).

THE INVENTORIE OR INDEX CONTAINING THE CONTENTS OF XXXVII BOOKS, TOUCHING THE
HISTORY OF NATVRE,
WRITTEN BY C PLINIVS SECVNDVS, WHICH IS RECEIVED FOR THE FIRST BOOK OF THEM.
The Summarie of every Book.
THe first Book contains the Dedicatorie Epistle or Preface of the whole
work, addressed to Titus Vespasian the Emperor. Also the names of the Authors
out of which he gathered the History, which he prosecuteth in 36 Books:
together with the Summarie of every Chapter: and begins, The Books, etc.
The second, treats of the World, Elements, and Stars: and begins thus,
The World, etc. The third, describes the first and second gulf, which the
Mediterranean sea makes in Europe: and begins in this manner, Hitherto,
etc. The fourth, compriseth the third gulf of Europe, beginning, The third,
etc. The fifth, contains the description of Affricke, and begins thus,
Afric, etc. The sixth, handles the Cosmographie of Asia, beginning thus, The
sea called, etc. The seventh treats of man, and his inventions, beginning,
Thus as you see, etc. The eighth shows unto us, land creatures and their
kinds, and begins after this manner, Pass we now, etc. The ninth, lays
before us all fishes, and creatures of the water, beginning in this wise, I
have thus showed, etc. The tenth speaks of flying fowls and birds, and
begins thus, It follows, etc. The eleventh tells us of Insects, and
begins thus, It remains now, etc. The twelfth treats of drugs and
odoriferous plants, beginning, Thus you etc. The thirteenth describes strange
and foreign trees: beginning with these words, Thus far forth, etc. The
fourteenth shows of vine-plants, etc. beginning thus, Thus far forth, etc.
The fifteenth comprehends all fruitful trees, thus beginning, There were,
etc. The sixteenth describes unto us all wild trees, beginning with, Hitherto,
etc. The seventeenth contains tame trees within hortyards, and begins with
these word's, As touching the nature etc. The eighteenth book treats of the
nature of corn, and all sorts thereof, together with the profession of
husbandmen, and agriculture, beginning after this manner, Now follows, etc.
The nineteenth discourses of Flax, Spart, and Gardenage, beginning after this
manner, In the former book, etc. The twentieth shows of garden herbs, good
to serve both the kitchen for meat, and the Apothecaries shop for medicine, and
begins thus, Now will we, etc. The one and twentieth treats of flours and
garlands, and begins, In Cato, etc. The two and twenty contains the
chaplets and medicines made of herbs, with this beginning, Such is the
perfection, etc. The three and twenty shows the medicinable virtues of wine,
and tame trees growing in hortyards, beginning thus, Thus have we, etc. The
four and twenty declares the properties of wild trees serving in Physic,
beginning thus, Nature, etc. The five and twenty treats of the herbs in the
field coming up of their own accord, and thus begins, The excellency, etc.
The six and twenty shows of many new and strange maladies, the medicinable
virtues also of certain herbs, according to sundry diseases, beginning thus,
The very face, etc. The seven and twenty goes forward to certain other
herbs and their medicines, and thus begins. Certes, etc. The eight and
twenty sets down certain receipts of remedies in Physic, drawn from out
of man and other bigger creatures, and it begins in this manner, Heretofore,
etc. The nine and twenty treats of the first authors and inuentors of
Physic, also of medicines taken from other creatures, and begins, The
nature, etc. The thirtieth book speaks of Magic, and certain medicines
appropriat to the parts and members of man's body, beginning thus, The vanity,
etc. The one and thirty contains the medicinable virtues of fishes and water
creatures, with this beginning, Now follow, etc. The two and thirty shows
other properties of fishes, etc. and begins in this manner, Now are we come,
etc. The three and thirty treats of gold and silver mines, and has this
beginning, Time it is, etc. The four and thirty speaks of copper and brass
mines, also of lead, also of excellent brasse-founders and workmen in copper,
beginning after this manner, In the next place, etc. The five and thirty
discourses of painting, color, and painters, beginning in this sort, The
discourse, etc. The six and thirty treats of marble and stone for building,
and has this beginginning, It remains, etc. The seven and thirty concludes
with precious stones, and begins at these words, To the end that, etc.
IN THE SECOND BOOK IS CONTAINED the discourse of the World, of celestial
impressions and meteors, as also of them that appear in the Air, and upon
Earth.
Chap. 1. Whether the World be finite and limited within certain dimensions or
no? whether there be many, or but one? 2. The form and figure of Heaven and
the world. 3. The motion of Heaven. 4. Why the world is called Mundus? 5. Of
the Elements. 6. Of the seven Planets. 7. Concerning God. 8. The nature of the
fixed stars and Planets: their course and revolution. 9. The nature of the
Moon. 10. The eclipse of Sun and Moon: also of the night. 11. The bigness of
stars. 12. Diverse inventions of men, and their observations touching the
celestial bodies. 13. Of Eclipses. 14. The motion of the Moon. 15. General
rules or canons touching planets or lights. 16. The reason why the same planets
seem higher or lower at sundry times. 17. General rules concerning the
planets or wandering stars. 18. What is the cause that planets change their
colors? 19. The course of the Sun: his motion: and from whence proceeds
the inequality of days. 20. Why lightenings be assigned to Jupiter. 21. The
distances between the planets. 22. The harmony of stars and planets. 23. The
geometry and dimensions of the world. 24. Of stars appearing suddenly. 25. Of
comets or blasing stars, and other prodigious appearances in the sky: their
nature, situation, and sundry kinds. 26. The opinion of Hipparchus the
Philosopher as touching the stars, fire-lights, lamps, pillars or beams of
fire, burning darts, gapings of the sky, and other such impressions, by way of
example. 27. Strange colors appearing in the firmament. 28. Flames and leams
seen in the sky. 29. Circles of guirlands showing above. 30. Of celestial
circles and guirlands that continue not, but soon pass. 31. Of many Suns. 32.
Of many Moons. 33. Of nights as light as day. 34. Of meteors resembling fiery
targuets. 35. Astrange and wonderful apparition in the sky. 36. The
extraordinary shooting and motion of stars. 37. Of the stars named Castor and
Pollux. 38. Of the Air. 39. Of certain set times and seasons. 40. The power
of the Dog Star. 41. The sundry influences of stars according to the seasons
and degrees of the signs. 42. The causes of rain, wind, and clouds. 43. Of
thunder and lightning. 44. Whereupon comes the redoubling of the voice,
called Echo. 45. Of winds again. 46. Diverse considerations observed in the
nature of winds. 37. Many sorts of winds. 48. Of sudden blasts and
whirle-puffs. 49. Other strange kinds of tempests and storms. 50. In what
regions there fall thunderbolts. 51. Diverse sorts of lightnings, and wondrous
accidents by them occasioned. 52. The observations [of the Tuscanes in old
time] as touching lightening. 53. Conjuring for to raise lightning. 54.
General rules concerning leames and flashes of lightning. 55. What things be
exempt and secured from lightning and thunderbolts. 56. Of monstrous and
prodigious showers of rain, namely of milk, blood, flesh, iron, wool,
brick, and tyle. 57. The rattling of harness and armor: the sound also of
trumpets heard from heaven. 58. Of stones falling from heaven. 59. Of the
Rainbow. 60. Of Hail, Snow, frost, Mists, and Dew. 61. Of diverse forms and
shapes represented in clouds. 62. The particular property of the sky in
certain places. 63. The nature of the Earth. 64. The form and figure of the
earth. 65. Of the Antipodes: and whether there be any such. Also, as touching
the roundnesse of the water. 66. How the water rests upon the Earth. 67. Of
Seas and rivers nauigable. 68. What parts of the earth be habitable. 69. That
the earth is in the mids of the world. 70. From whence proceeds the
inequality observed in the rising and elevation of the stars. Of the eclipse:
where it is, and wherefore. 71. The reason of the daylight upon earth. 72. A
discourse thereof according to the Gnomon: also of the first Sun-dyall. 73. In
what places and at what times there are no shadows cast. 74. Where the shadows
fall opposite and contrary twice in the year. 75. Where the days be longest,
and where shortest. 76. Likewise of Dyals and Quadrants. 77. The diverse
observations and acceptations of the day. 78. The diversities of regions, and
the reason thereof. 79. Of Earthquakes. 80. Of the chinks and openinst of the
earth. 81. Signs of earthquake toward. 82. Remedies and helps againg
eatthquakes coming. 83. Strange and prodigious wonders seen one time in the
earth. 84. Miraculous accidents as touching earthquake. 85. In what parts the
seas went back. 86. Islands appearing new out of the sea. 87. What Islands
have thus showed, and at what times. 88. Into what lands the seas have broken
perforce. 89. What Islands have bin joined to the continent. 90. What lands
have perished by water and become all sea. 91. Of lands that have settled and
been swallowed up of themselves. 92. What cities have been ouerflowed and
drowned by the sea. 93. Wonderful strange things as touching some lands. 94.
Of certain lands that always suffer earthquake. 95. Of Islands that flote
continually. 96. In what countries of the world it never raineth: also of many
miracles as well of the earth as other elements hudled up pell mell together.
97. The reason of the Sea-tides, as well ebbing as flowing, and where the sea
flows extraordinarily. 98. Wonderful things observed in the sea. 99. The
power of the Moon over Sea and land. 100. The power of the Sun: and the reason
why the sea is salt. 101. Moreover, as touching the nature of the Moon. 102.
Where the sea is deepest. 103. Admirable observations in fresh waters, as well
of fountains as rivers. 104. Admirable things as touching fire and water
jointly together: also of Maltha. 105. Of Naphtha. 106. Of certain places that
burn continually. 107. Wonders of fire alone. 108. The dimension of the earth
as well in length as in breadth. 109. The harmonicall circuit and circumference
of the world.
In sum, there are tn this boooke of histories, notable matters, and worthy
observations, four hundred and eighteen in number.

Latin Authors cited.
M. Varro, Sulpitius Gallus, Tiberius Caesar Emperor, Q. Tubero, Tullius Tiro,
L. Piso, T. Livius, Cornelius Nepos, Statius Sebosus, Casius Antipater,
Fabianus, Antias, Mutianus, Cecina, (who wrote of the Tuscane learning)
Tarquitius, L. Aquila, and Sergius Paulus.

Foreign Authors cited.
Plato, Hipparchus, Timaeus, Sosigenes, Petosiris, Necepsus, the Pythagoreans,
Posidonius, Anaximander, Epigenes, Gnomonicus, Euclides, Ceranus the
Philosopher, Eudoxus, Democritus, Cr^sodemus, Thrasillus, Serapion, Dicearchus,
Archimedes, Onesicritus, Eratosthenes, Pytheas, Herodotus, Aristotle, Ctesius,
Artemidorus the Ephesian, Isidorus Characenus, and Theopompus.

IN THE THIRD BOOK ARE COMPREHENded the Regions, Nations, Seas, Towns,
Havens, Mountains, Rivers, with their measures, and people, either at this day
known, or in times past, as follows:
Chap. 1. Of Europe. 2. The length and breadth of Boetica, a part of Spain,
containing Andalusia, and the realm of Grenado. 3. That hither part of Spain
called of the Romans Hispania Citerior. 4. The Province Nerbonencis, wherein is
Dauphine, Languedoc, and Provance. 5. Italy, Tiberis, Rome, and Campaine. 6.
The Island Corsica. 7. Sardinia. 8. Sicilie. 9. Lipara. 10. Of Locri and the
frontiers of Italy. 11. The second gulf of Europe. 12. The fourth region of
Italy. 13. The fifth region. 14. The sixth region. 15. The eighth region. 16.
Of the river Po. 17. Of Italy beyond the Po, counted the eleventh region. 18.
Venice, the tenth region. 19. Of Istria. 20. Of the Alps, and the nations there
inhabiting. 21. Illyricum. 22. Liburnia. 23. Macedonie. 24. Noricum. 25.
Pannonie, and Dalmatia. 26. Moesia.
In this book are described 26 Islands within the Adriatic and Ionian seas:
their principal cities, towns and nations. Also the chief and famous rivers:
the highest hills: special Islands besides: towns and countries that be
perished. In sum, here are comprised notable things, histories, matters
memorable, and observations to the number of 326.

Latin Writers brought in for testimony:
Turannius Graccula, Cor. Nepos, T. Livius, Cato Censorius, M. Agrippa, M.
Varro, Divus Augustus the Emperor, Varro Attacinus, Antias, Hyginus, L. Vetus,
Mela Pomponius, Curio the father, Coelius Aruntius, Sebosus, Licinius Mutianus,
Fabricius Thuscus, L. Atteius Capito, Verrius Flaccus, L. Piso, C. Aelianus,
and Valerianus.

Foreign Authors.
Artimidorus, Alexander Polyhistor, Thucidides, Theophrastus, Isidorns,
Theopompus, Metrodorus, Scepsius, Callicrates, Xenophon, Lampsasenus, Diodorus
Syracusanus, Nymphodorus, Calliphanes, and Timag^nes.

IN THE FOVRTH BOOK ARE COMPRISED Regions, Nations, Seas, Towns, Hills,
Havens, Rivers, with these dimensions and people, either now or in times past
known: viz,
Chap. 1. Epirus. 2. Aetolia. 3. Locri. 4. Peloponnesus. 5. Achaia. 6. Arcadia.
7. Greece and Attica. 8. Thessalie. 9. Magnesia. 10. Macedonia. 11. Thracia.
12. The Islands lying between those countries: among which, Creta, Euboea, the
Cvclads, Sporades: also the Isles within Hellespont near the sea Pontus,
within Moeotis, Dacia, Sarmatia, and Scythia. 13. The Islands of Pontus, called
Mer Major. 14. The Islands of Germany. 15. Islands in the French Ocean. 16.
Britain and Ireland. 17. Gaul or France. 18, Of Galia Lugdunensis. 19. Of
Aquitaine. 20. Of high Spain, named Citerior. 21. Of Portugal. 22. Islands in
the Ocean. 23. The dimension and measure of all Europe.
Herein are contained many principal towns and countries, famous rivers;
Islands also, besides cities or nations that be perished: in sum, diverse
things, histories, and observations.

Latin Authors cited.
M. Varr, Cato Censorius, M. Agrippa, Divus Augustus, Varro Attacinus, Cor.
Nepos, Hyginus, L. Vetus, Pomponius Mela, Licinius Mutianus, Fabricius Thuscus,
Atteius Capito, and Atteius Philologus.

Of foreign Writers.
Polybius, Hecataeus, Hellanicus, Damastes, Eudoxus, Dicaearchus, Timosthenes,
Ephorus, Crater, Grammaticus, Serapion of Antioch, Callimachus, Artemidorus,
Apollodorus, Agathocles, Eumachus Siculus the Musician, Alexander Polyhistor,
Thucydides, Dociades, Anaximander, Philistides, Mallotes, Dionysius, Aristides,
Callidemus, Menaechmus, Aedasthenes, Anticlides, Heraclides, Philemon,
Menephon, Pythias, Isodorus, Philonides, Xenagoras, Astyonomus, Staphilus,
Aristocritus, Metrodorus, Cleobulus, and Posidonius.

IN THE FIFTH BOOK ARE CONTAINED Regions, Nations, Seas, Towns, Hills,
Rivers, with their measures, and people, either at this day being, or in times
past: that is to say,
Chap. 1. Maurtania. 2. The Province Tingitana. 3. Numidia. 4. Affricke. 5.
Cyrene. 6. Lybia Maraeotis. 7. Islands lying about Afric, and ouer-against
Affricke. 8. The Aethiopians. 9. Asia. 10. Alexandria. 11. Arabia. 12. Syria,
Palaestina, Phoenice. 13. Idumaea, Syria, Palaestina, Samaria. 14. Iudaea,
Galilea. 15. Jordan the river. 16. The lake Asphaltites. 17. The Essenes. 18.
The country Decapolis. 19. Tyrus and Sidon. 20. The mount Libanus. 21. Syria
Antiochena. 22. The mountain Casius. 23. Coele-Syria. 24. The river Euphrates.
25. The region Palmyra. 26. Hierapolis the country. 27. Cilicia and the
nations adjoining: Pamphilia, Isauria, Homonades, Pisidia, Lycaonia, the
mountain Taurus and Lycia. 28. The river Indus. 29. Laodicea, Apamia, Ionia,
and Ephesus. 30. Aeolis, Troas Pergamus. 31. Islands affront Asia, the
Pamphilian Sea, Rhodus, Samus, and Chius. 32. Hellespont, Mysia, Phrygia,
Galatia, Nicea, Bithynia, Bosphorus.
Herein you find towns and nations, Principal Rivers, Famous Hills, Islands,
117 Towns. Also that are lost and perished. In sum, many things, histories
and observations memorable.

Latin Authors alleged.
Agrippa, Suetonius Paulinus, Varro Atacinus, Cornelius Nepos, Hyginus, L.
Vetus, Mela, Domitius Corbulo, Licinius Mutianus, Clandius Caesar, Aruntius,
Livius the son, Sebosus, the Acts and Records of the Triumphs.

Foreign W^iters.
King Iuba, Hecataeus, Hellanicus, Damastes, Dicaearchus, Bion, Timosthenes,
Philonides, Xenagoras, Astynomus, Staphilus, Aristotle, Dionysius Aristocritus,
Ephorus, Eratosthenes, Hipparchus, Panaetius, Serapion Antiochenus,
Callimachus, Agathocles, Polybius, Timaeus the Mathematician, Herodotus,
Myrlus, Alexander Polyhistor, Metrodorus, Posidonius who wrate Periplus or
Periegesis, Sotades, Periander, Aristarchus Sicyonius, Eudoxus, Antigen^s,
Callicratus, Xenophon Lampsacenus, Diodorus Sy^acusanus, Hanno, Himilco,
Nymphodorus, Calliphon, Artemidorus, Megasthenes, Isidorus, Celobulus,
Aristocrcon.

IN THE SIXTH BOOK ARE CONTAINED Regions, Nations, Seas, Cities, Havens,
Rivers, with their dimensions, People also that be or have been, to wit:
Chap. 1. The sea called Pontus Euxinus, before time Axenus. 2. The nations of
the Paphlagones and Cappadocians. 3. Cappadocia. 4. The nations of the country
Themiscyra. 5. The Region Colchica. The Achaei, and the rest in that tract. 6.
Bosphorus Cimmerius, and Moeotis. 7. The people about Moeotis. 8. The Armeniae
both. 9. Armenia the greater. 10. Albania, Iberia. 11. The Scluses and gates
Caucasiae. 12. Islands in Pontus. 13. Nations about the Scythian Ocean. 14.
Media and the gates or streights Caspiae. 15. Nations about the Hircane sea.
16. Also other nations confining upon that Country. 17. People of Scythia. 18.
The river Ganges. 19. The nations of India. 20. The river Indus. 21. The Arians
and the nations bordering upon them. 22. The Island Taprobane. 23. Capissene,
Carmaenia. 24. The Persian and Arabian gulfes. 25. The Island Cassandrus, and
kingdoms of the Parthians. 26. Media, Mesopotamia, Babylon, Seleucia. 27. The
river Tigris. 28. Arabia Nomades, Nabathaei, Omani, Tylos and Ogyris two
Islands. 29. The gulfes of the red sea, the Troglodite and Aethyopian feas. 30.
Diverse nations of strange and wonderful shapes. 31. Islands of the Aethyopian
sea. 32. Of the fortunat Islands. 33. The division of the earth calculated by
measures. 34. A division of the earth by climates, lines parallele, and equal
shadows.
Towns of name. 195. Nations of account. 566. Famous rivers. 180. Notablehils.
38. Principal Islands. 108. Cities and Nations perished. 195. In sum, there
are rehearsed in this book of other things, histories and observations. 2214.

Latin Authors alleged.
M. Agrippa, Varro Atacinus, Cornelius Nepos, Hyginus, Lu. Vetus, Mela
Pomponius, Domitius Corbulo, Licineus Mutianus, Claudius Caesar, Aruntius
Sebosus, Fabricius Thuseus, T. Livius, Seneca, Nigidius.

Foreign writers.
King Iuba, Polybius, Hecataeus, Hellanicus, Damastes, Eudoxus, Dicaearchus,
Beto, Timosthenes, Patrocles, Demodamas, Clitarchus, Eratosthenes, Alexander
Magnus, Ephorus, Hipparchus, Panaetius, Callimachus, Artemidorus, Apollodorus,
Agathocles, Polybius, Eumachus Siculus, Alexander Polyhistor, Amometus,
Metrodorus, Posidonius, Onesicritus, Nearchus, Megasthenes, Diognetus,
Aristocreon, Bion, Dialdon, Simonides the younger, Basiles, and Xenophon
Lampsacenus.

IN THE SEVENTH BOOK ARE CONTAINED the wonderful shapes of men in diverse
countries.
Chap. 1. The strange forms of many nations. 2. Of the Scythians, and other
people of diverse countries. 3. Of monstrous and prodigious births. 4. The
transmutation of one sex into another. Also of twins. 5. Of the generation of
man. The time of a woman's childbearing, from seven months to eleven, proved
by notable examples out of histories. 6. Of conceptions, and children within
the womb. The signs how to know whether a woman go with a son or a
daughter, before she is delivered. 7. Of the conception and generation of man.
8. Of Agrippae, i. those who are borne with the feet forward. 9. Of strange
births, namely, by means of incision, when children are cut out of their
mothers womb. 10. Of Vopisci, i. such as being twins were borne alive,
notwithstanding the one of them was dead before. 11. Histories of many children
borne at one burden. 12. Examples of those that were like one to another. 13.
The cause and manner of generation. 14. More of the same matter and argument.
15. Of women's monthly terms. 16. The manner of sundry births. 17. The
proportion of the parts of man's body and notable things therein observed. 18.
Examples of extraordinary shapes. 19. Strange natures of men. 20. Of bodily
strength and swiftness. 21. Of excellent sight. 22. Who excelled in hearing.
23. Examples of patience. 24. Who were singular for good memory. 25. The
praise of C. Julius Caesar. 26. The commendation of Pompey the Great. 27. The
praise of Cato, the first of that name. 28. Of valor and fortitude. 29. Of
notable wits, or the praises of some for their singular wit. 30. Of Plato,
Ennius, Virgill, M. Varro, and M. Cicero. 31. Of such as carried a majesty in
their behavior. 32. Of men of great authority and reputation. 33. Of certain
divine and heavenly persons. 34. Of Scipio Nasica. 35. Of Chastity. 36. Of
Piety, and natural kindness. 37. Of excellent men in diverse sciences, and
namely, in Astrology, Grammar, and Geometry, etc. 38. Item, Rare pieces of
work made by sundry artificers. 39. Of servants and slaves. 40. The
excellency of diverse nations. 41. Of perfect contentment and felicity. 42.
Examples of the variety and mutabilitie of fortune. 43. Of those that were
twice outlawed and banished: of L. Sylla and Q. Metellus. 44. Of another
Metellus. 45. Of the Emperor Augustus. 46. Of men deemed most happy above all
others by the Oracles of the gods. 47. Who was canonized a god whiles he lived
upon the earth. 48. Of those that lived longer than others. 49. Of diverse
natiuities of men. 50. Many examples of strange accidents in maladies. 51. Of
the signs of death. 52. Of those that revived when they were carried forth to
be buried. 53. Of sudden death. 54. Of sepulchers and burials. 55. Of the
soul: of ghosts and spirits. 56. The first inuentors of many things. 57.
Wherein all nations first agreed. 58. Of antique letters. 59. The beginning of
Barbers first at Rome. 60. The first deuisers of Dials and Clockes.
In sum, there be in this book of stories strange accidents and matters
memorable 747.

Latin Authors alleged.
Varrius, Flaccus, Cn. Gellius, Licinius Mutianus, Mutius, Massurius, Agrippina
wife of Claudius, M. Cicero, Asinius Pollio, Messala, Rufus, Cornelius Nepos,
Virgil, Livie, Cordus, Melissus, Sebosus, Cernelius Celsus, Maximus Valerius,
Trogus, Nigidius Figulus, Pomponius Atticus, Pedianus, Asconius, Sabinus, Cato
Censorius, Fabius Vestalis.

Foreign Writers.
Herodotus, Aristeus, Beto, Isigonus, Crates, Agatharcides, Calliphanes,
Aristotle, Nymphodorus, Apollonides, Philarchus, Damon, Megasthenes, Ctesias,
Tauron, Eudoxus, Onesicratus, Clitarchus, Duris, Artemidorus, Hippocrates the
Physician, Asclepiander the Physician, Hesiodus, Anacreon, Theopompus,
Hellanicus, Damasthes, Ephorus, Epigenes, Berosus, Pessiris, Necepsus,
Alexander Polyhistor, Xenophon, Callimachus, Democritus, Duillius, Polyhistor
the Historian, Strato, who wrate against the Propositions, and Theoremes of
Ephorus, Heraclides Ponticus, Asclepiades who wrate Tragodamena,
Philostephanus, Hegesias, Archimachus, Thucidides, Mnesigiton, Xenagoras,
Metrodorus Scepsius, Anticlides, and Critodemus.

IN THE EIGHT BOOK ARE CONtained the natures of land beasts that go on foot.
Chap. 1. Of land creatures: The good and commendable parts in Elephants: their
capacity and understanding. 2. When Elephants were first yoked and put to
draw. 3. The docilitie of Elephants, and their aptness to learn. 4. The
clemency of Elephants: that they know their own dangers. Also of the felnesse
of the Tigre. 5. The perceiuance and memory of Elephants. 6. When Elephants
were first seen in Italy. 7. The combats performed by Elephants. 8. The
manner of taking Elephants. 9. The manner how Elephants be tamed. 10. How long
an Elephant goes with young: and of their nature. 11. The countries were
Elephants breed: the discord and war between Elephants and Dragons. 12. The
industry and subtle wit of Dragons and Elephants. 13. Of Dragons. 14.
Serpents of prodigious bigness: of Serpents named Boae. 15. Of beasts
engendered in Scythia, and the North countries. 16. Of Lions. 17. Of Panthers.
18. The nature of the Tygre: of Camels and the Pard-Cammell: when it was first
seen at Rome. 19. Of the Stag-Wolfe named Chaus: and the Cephus. 20. Of
Rhincceros. 21. Of Onces, Marmosets called Sphinges, of the Crocutes, of common
Marmosets, of Indian Boeufes, of Leucrocutes, of Eale, of the Ethiopian Bulls,
of the best Mantichora, of the Sicorne or Unicorn, of the Catoblepa, and the
Basiliske. 22. Of Wolves. 23. Of Serpents. 24. Of the rat of India called
Ichneumon. 25. Of the Crocodiles and Skinke, and the Riuer-horse. 26. Who
showed first at Rome the Water-horse and the Crocodiles. Diverse reasons in
Physic found out by dumb creatures. 27. Of beasts and other such creatures
which have taught us certain herbs, to wit, the red Dear, Lizards,
Swallows, Tortoises, the Weasell, the Stork, the Bore, the Snake, the Panther,
the Elephant, Bears, Stocke-Doues, House-Doues, Cranes, and Ravens. 28.
Prognostications of things to come, taken from beasts. 29. What cities and
nations have bin destroyed by small creatures. 30. Of the Hiaena, the Crocuta
and Mantichora: of Bieuers and Otters. 31. Of Frogs, sea or sea-Calues, and
Stellions. 32. Of Dear both red and Fallow. 33. Of the Tragelaphis: of the
Chamaeleon, and other beasts that change color. 34. Of the Tarand, the Lycaon,
and the Wolf called Thoes. 35. Of the Porc-espines. 36. Of Bears, and how
they bring forth their whelps. 37. The rats and mice of Pontus, and the Alps:
also of Hedgehogs. 38. Of the Leontophones, the Onces, Graies, Badgers and
Sqirrils. 39. Of Vipers, Snailes in shells, and Lizards. 40. Of Dogs. 41.
Against the biting of a mad dog. 42. The nature of Horses. 43. Of Asses. 44. Of
Mules. 45. Of Kine, Bulls, and Oxen. 46. Of the Boeufe named Apis. 47. The
nature of sheep, their breeding and generation. 48. Sundry kinds of wool and
cloths. 49. Of sheep called Musmones. 50. Of Goats and their generation. 51.
Of Swine and their nature. 52. Of Parkes and Warrens for beasts. 53. Of beasts
half tame and wild. 54. Of Apes and Monkies. 55. Of Hares and Connies. 56. Of
beasts half savage. 57. Of Rats and Mice: of Dormice. 58. Of beasts that live
not in some places. 59. Of beasts hurtful to strangers.
In sum, there be in this Book principal matters, stories, and observations
worth the remembrance 788.

Latin Authors alleged.
Mutianus, Procilius, Verrius Flaccus, L. Piso, Cornelius Valerianus, Cato
Censorius, Fenestella, Trogus, Actius, Columella, Virgil, Varro, Lu. Metellus
Scipio, Cornelius Celsus, Nigidius, Trebius Niger, Pomponius Mela, Manlius
Sura.

Foreign writers.
King Iuba, Polybius, Onesicritus, Isidorus, Antipater, Aristotle, Demetrius
the natural Philosopher, Democritus, Theophrastus, Euanthes, Agrippa who wrote
of the Olympionicae, Hiero, King Attalus, King Philometer, Ctesias, Duris,
Philistus, Architus, Philarchus, Amphilocus the Athenian, Anaxipolis the
Thasian, Apollodorus of Lemnos, Aristophanes the Milesian, Antigonus, the
Cymaean, Agathocless of Chyos, Apollonicus of Pergamus, Aristander of Athens,
Bacchus the Milesian, Bion of Soli, Chaereas the Athenian, Diodorus of
Pyreaeum, Dio the Colophonian, Epigenes of Rhodes, Evagon of Thassus,
Euphranius, the Athenian, Hegesias, of Maronea, Menander of Pyreaeum, Menander
also of Heraclea, Menecrates the Poet, Androcian who wrote of Agriculture or
Husbandry, Aeschrion who likewise wrote of that argument, Dionysius who
translated Mago, Diophanes who collected an Epitome or Breuiarie out of
Dionisius, King Archelaus, and Nicander.

IN THE NINTH BOOK ARE CONTAIned the Stories and Natures of Fishes and
water-creatures.
Chap. 1. The nature of water-creatures. 2. The reason why the creatures of the
sea are of all other biggest. 3. The monstrous beasts of the Indian sea. 4. The
greatest fishes and beasts in every part of the Ocean. 5. Of Tritones,
Nereides, and sea Elephants: their shapes and forms. 6. Of great Whales,
called Balaenae and Oreae. 7. Whether fishes do take and deliver their breath?
whether they sleep or no? 8. Of Dolphins and their wonderful properties. 9.
Of the Tursiones. 10. Of the sea Tortoises, and how they be taken. 11. Who
first devised to sliue the Tortoise shells into leaves. 12. The skins and shells
of the sea creatures: the division of them into their several kinds. 13. Of
the Seal or sea-Calfe. 14. Of fishes smooth and without hair: how they spawn
and breed: and how many sorts there be of them. 15. The names and natures of
many fishes. 16. The presages by fishes, and their variety. 17. Of the Mullet
and other fishes. That the same fishes are not in request in all places. 18. Of
the Barble, the sea Raven Coracinus: of Stockfish and Salmon. 19. Of the
Exoecetus, Calamaries, Lampreies, etc. 20. The division of fishes by the shapes
of their bodies. 21. Of Eeles. 22. The manner of taking them in the lake
Benacus. 23. The nature of the Lamprey. 24. Of flat and broad fishes. 25. Of
the stay-ship Echeneis, and his wonderful nature. 26. The changeable nature of
fishes. 27. Of the fish called the Lantern, and the sea Dragon. 28. Of fishes
wanting blood. 29. Of the Pourcuttle, the Cuttle fish, the Calamarie, and the
fish called the Sayler or Mariner. 30. The fish Ozaena, and Nauplius: also of
Lobsters. 31. Of Crabs, Sea Porkespines: and of the greater sort named
Echinometrae. 32. Of Wilkes, Cockles, and shell sishes. 33. Of Scallops,
Porcellanes, of the shell fish Murex, and other such. 34. The riches and
treasures of the sea. 35. Of Pearls, how they be engendered, and where: also
how they be found. 36. The nature of the Purple fish and the Burrets or
Murices. 37. How many kinds there be of purple fishes. 38. How the purple
fishes be taken. 39. When purple was first worn in the city of Rome. 40. The
price of purple clothes at Rome. 41. The dying of the Amethyst color, of the
Skarlet in grain, and the light Skarlet Hysginus. 42. Of the fish called the
Nacre, and his guide or keeper Pinnoteres: also the intelligence of fishes and
water creatures. 43. Of Scolopendres, sea Foxes, and the fishes Glani. 44. Of
the fish called the sea Ram. 45. Of those things which have a third nature,
being neither living creatures, ne yet plants, to wit, of sea Nettles and
Spunges. 46. Of Houndfishes or sea dogs. 47. Of sea fishes that have stony
shells: of those that have no sense at all: of other nastie and filthy
creatures. 48. Of sea fishes venomous. 49. The diseases incident to fishes. 50.
The admiral generation of Fishes. 51. Item, Another discourse of their
generation: and what fishes they be which do lay eggs. 52. The matrices or
wombes of fishes. 53. What fishes live longest. 54. Of Oyster pits, and who did
first devise them. 55. Who first invented stews and ponds to feed Lampreies
in. 56. The stews and ponds for other shell Fishes, and who brought them up
first to be used. 57. Of fishes that haunt the land. 58. The rats of Nilus. 59.
Of the fish called Anthias, and how he is taken. 60. Of the sea stars. 61.
Of the fishes Dactyli, and their admirable properties. 62. What fishes do
entertain amity one with another, and which be ever at war.
In sum, this Book contains stories, notable things, and observations, to
the number of 650, collected

Out of Latin Authors.
Turanius Graccula, Trogus, Mecaenas, Alfius Flavus, Cornelius Nepos, Laberius,
the writer of merry Epigrams, Fabianus, Fenestella, Mutianus, Aelius Stilo,
Statius Sebosus, Melissus, Seneca, Cicero, Macer Aemylius, Messana Corvinus,
Trebius Niger, and Nigidius.

Out of Foreign Writers.
Aristotle, king Archelaus, Callimachus, Democritus, Theophrastus, Thrasyllus,
Hegesidemus, of Cythnos, and Alexander Polyhistor.

IN THE TENTH BOOK ARE CONTAIned the natures and stories of Fowls and flying
creatures.
Chap. 1. The nature of Fowls. 2. Of the Phoenix. 3. Of Aegles. 4. When the
Roman legions used the Aegle standard, and other ensigns. Also with what
creatures Aegles maintain fight. 5. A strange and wonderful case as touching
an Aegle. 6. Of the Vultures or Geires. 7. Of the foul Sangualis. 8. Of
Faulcons and Hawks. 9. Of the Cuckoo, which is killed by birds of her own
kind. 10. Of Kites or Puttockes. 11. A division of birds into general kinds.
12. Of unlucky and ominous birds, the Crow, the Raven, and the Like-owle. 13.
Of the foul that carries fire in her mouth. 14. Of the bird Clivina. 15. Of
many birds unknown. 16. Of fowls that fly by night. 17. Of Howlets. 18. Of
the Wood-pecker. 19. Of birds which have claws and crooked tallons. 20. Of
Peacockes: and who killed them first for to be served at the table. 21. Of
Cocks: how they be cut: of a dunghill cock that spoke. 22. Of Geese: who
first devised to make a dainty dish of the Goose liver: the grauie or fat of
Geese, called Comagenum. 23. Of Cranes, Storkes, Swans, strange fowls of
outlandish countries, of Quails, and the bird Glotis. 24. Of Swallows and
Martins, of Blackbirds, Thrushes and Merles, of Sterlings, Turtledoues, and
Quoists or Ring-doues. 25. Of birds that tarry with us all the year long of
birds that be for half a year only, and others that remain but three
months. 26. Marvelous stories of birds. 27. Of birds called Seleucides. 28.
Of the foul Ibis. 29. What birds will not abide in all places: which they be
that change both hew and voice: also of Nightingales. 30. Of Merles or Ousels.
31. The time wherein birds breed, lay, and sit. 32. Of the birds Halciones, the
nauigable days that they do show: of the Sea-guls and Cormorants. 33. The
industry and subtilty of birds in building their neasts: of the ordinary
Swallow, the river Swallow Argatilis: the bird Cinnamologie that steal
Cinnamon, and of Partridges. 34. Of House-doues. 35. Of Stock-doues. 36. Of
Sparrowes. 37. Of the Kestrell or Stannell. 38. Of the flight and gate of
birds: 39. Of certain footlesse Martinets, called Apodes. 40. Of certain Guls
that milk and suck Goats vdders, and be named Caprimulgi: also of Pelicanes
named Plateae. 41. The perceiuance and natural wit of birds. 42. Of the
Linnet, Popinjay, or Parret, and such birds that will learn to speak. 43. The
intelligence and understanding that Ravens have. 44. Of Diomedes his birds. 45.
Of dull witted birds that will be taught nothing. 46. The manner how birds
drink. 47. Of fowls called Himantipodes, and Onacrotali, and of other such
strange birds. 48. The names of many birds, and their natures. 49. Of strange
and new birds, such also as be holden for fabulous. 50. Who devised first to
cram hens and capons; of bartons, mewes, and coupes to keep and feed fowls:
and the first inuentor thereof. 51. Of Aesopes platter. 52. The generation of
birds, and what four footed beasts do lay eggs as well as birds. 53. The
knitting of eggs within the body, the laying, couving and sitting of them, the
manner and time of birds engendring. 54. The accidents that befall to broodie
birds whiles they sit, and the remedies thereof. 55. Auguries and presages by
eggs. 56. What Hens be of the best kind. 57. The diseases incident to Hens and
the cure. 58. The manner how birds conceive: what number of eggs they lay, and
how many they hatch 59. Of Peacockes and Geese. 60. Of Herons and Bitters. The
way to preserve and keep eggs. 61. The only bird that brings forth her young
alive, and feeds the same at the pap with milk 62. The conception of the Viper,
and how she is delivered of her young, also what land creatures lay eggs. 63.
The ordinary generation of land creatures. 64. The diversity of living
creatures in the manner of their engendring. 65. The young ones that mice and
rats do breed 66. Whether of the marrow of a man's back bone a serpent will
engender. 67. Of the Salamander. 68. What things be engendered of those that
were never engendered, and contrariwise, what creatures they be, which being
engendered themselves, breed not. 69. The senses of living creatures. 70. That
fishes do both hear and smell. 71. That the sense of feeling is common to all
living creatures. 72. What creatures live of poisons, and eat earth. 73. Of the
meat and drink of diverse creatures. 74. What creatures evermore disagree: and
which they be that agree well together. 75. Of the sleep of living creatures.
This book has in it of notable matters, histories and observations 904,
gathered out of

Latin Authors and records.
Manilius, Cornelius Valerianus, the public records and registers, Vmbritius
surnamed Melior, Massurius Sabinus, Antistius Labeo, Trogus Cremutius, M.
Varro, Macer Aemilius, Melisses, Mutianus, Nepos, Fabius Pictor, T. Lucretius,
Cornelius Celsus, Horatius, Desulo, Hysginus, Sarsennae, both father and son,
Nigidius and Manlius Sura.

Foreign Writers.
Homer, Phoemonoes, Philemon, Boethius who wrote a treatise called
Ornithagonia, Hylas who made a discourse of Auguries, Aristotle, Theophrastus,
Callimachus, Aeschylus, Hiero, Philometor, Archytas, Amphilochus the Athenian,
Anaxipolis the Thasian, Apollodorus of Lemnos, Aristophanes the Milesian,
Antigonus the Cymaean, Agathocles of Chios, Apollonius of Pergamus, Aristander
the Athenian, Bacchius the Milesian, Bion of Soli, Chaereas the Athenian,
Diodorus of Pryaene, Dion the Colophonian, Democritus, Diophanes of Nicaea,
Epigenes of Rhodes, Evagoras of Thasos, Euphonius of Athens, king Iuba,
Androcion who wrote of Husbandry, and Aescrion likewise who wrote thereof,
Dionysius who translated Mago, and Diophanes, who reduced his work into an
Epitome, Nicander, Onesicritus, Philarchus, and Hesiodus.

IN THE ELEVENTH BOOK ARE CONTAIned the stories and natures of small creatures
and such as creep on the ground.
Chap. 1. Of Insects in general. 2. The natural industry of those Insects.
3. Whether Insects do breath, and whether they have bloudor no. 4. The matter
and substance of the Insects body. 5. Of Bees. 6. The government and order
which Bees keep by instinct of Nature. 7. Diverse operations of the Bees, and
the terms thereto belonging. 8. Of what flowers Bees do make their cellars,
combs, and other works. 9. What persons took a great love to Bees, and
delighted to nourish them. 10. The manner of Bees when they be at their
business. 11. Of Drones. 12. The nature of Honey. 13. Which is the best Honey.
14. The several and particular kinds of Honey in diverse places. 15. The marks
and tokens of good Honey. 16. Of a third kind of Honey, and how a man should
know good Bees. 17. The regiment and policy that Bees observe. 18. Diverse
sorts of Bees, and what things be hurtful to Bees. 19. The diseases incident
to Bees. 20. How to keep the cast of Bees when they swarm, that they fly not
away, also how to recover Bees, in case their breed and race be lost. 21. Of
Wespes and Hornets. 22. Of silk flies, their worms and Iackes called Bombylis
and Necydalus, and who first devised silke-cloth. 23. Of the silke-worme in the
Island Choos. 24. Of the Spiders and their generation. 25. Of Scorpions. 26. Of
Stellions and Grasshoppers. 27. In what countries there be no Grasshoppers, and
where they sing not. 28. The wings of Insects, of Beetles and their kinds. 29.
Of Locusts. 30. Of Ants or Pismires in Italy. 31. Of Indian Ants or Emmets.
32. The diverse sorts of Insects. 33. Of certain creatures breeding of wood,
and living of wood. 34. Of a certain creature that has no passage to void
excrements. 35. Of Moths and Gnats. 36. Of flies living in the fire, named
Pyrales or Pyraustae. 37. A discourse Anatomicall of all parts and members of
the body. 38. Of Blood, also in what creatures blood will soonest clutter and
congeale, and whose will not at all. What creatures have the grossest and
heauiest blood, and which the finest and thinnest: and lastly who have no blood
at all. 39. Whether the soveraignetie, and excellency of sense consists in
blood. Of the skin and hide, of the hairs and dugs of living creatures. 40.
What creatures have notable dugs or teats above the rest. 41. Of Milk, and
what milk will make no cheese. 42. Diverse kinds of Cheese. 43. How the lims
and members of man's body differs from other creatures. 44. The resemblance
that Apes have to us. 45. Of Nails. 46. Of Houfes. 47. Of birds feet and their
claws. 48. Of Insects feet from two to an hundred. 49 Of Dwarfes in each kind,
and the genitall parts. 50. Of Tails. 51. Of Voices. 52. Of superfluous
members of the body. The sayings of Aristotle as touching long life. 53. Of
the wind and breath that living creatures take. What things if they be tasted
be venomous and deadly. The food of man, as well for meat as drink. What
causes they be that hinder digestion. 54. How to increase or diminish the
corpulencie of the body, and what things with taste only, will allay hunger
and quench thirst.
In sum, this Book containerh notable things, stories, and observations,
2270.

Latin Authors cited.
M. Varro, Hyginus, Scropha, Sarcena, Celsus Cornelius, Aemilius Macer, Virgil,
Columella, Julius Aquila, who wrate of the Tuscane discipline, Tarquilius, who
likewise wrote of the same, and Vmbritius that traveled in that argument, Cato
Censorius, Domitius Calvinus, Trogus, Melissus, Favonius, Fabianus, Mutianus,
Nigidius, Manilius, and Opius.

Foreign Writers.
Aristotle, Democritus, Neoptolemus, who wrote i. As touching the work of Bees.
Militurgia, Aristomachus, who likewise made a Treatise of the same, and
Philistus also that did the like, Nicander, Menecr^tes, Dionysius, that
translated Mago, Empedocles, Callimachus, K. Attalus, Apollodorus, who wrote of
venomous beasts, Hippocrates, Eriphilus, Erasistratus, Asclepius, Themiso,
Posidonius the Stoicke, the two Menanders, one of Priene, and the other of
Heraclea, Euphronius of Athens, Theophrastus, Hesiodus, and K. Philometor.

IN THE TWELFTH BOOK ARE CONTAIned discourses of Trees
Chap. 1. The honor done to trees, of the Plane-trees: when they were first
brought into Italy, and of their nature. 2. Of the dwarf Planes growing low,
and who was the first that cut and shred trees into arbours. 3. Of strange
trees, and principally of the Citron tree in Assyria. 4. Of India trees, and
when Ebene was first seen at Rome. 5. Of a certain Thorn and Fig Tree of
India. 6. Of a tree named Pala: also of other Indian trees that are namelesse,
and of those that bear wool and cotton. 7. Of Pepper trees and Clove trees,
and many others. 8. Of Macir or Sugar, and the trees growing in the region
Ariana. 9. Of Bdellium, and of trees along the Persian gulf. 10. Of trees
growing in the Island within the Persian gulf, and those that bear Cotton.
11. Of Gossampine trees, and those which serve to make cloth, and wherein
consists the fruit of certain trees. 12. Of Costus, Spiknard, and diverse
sorts of Nard 13. Of Asarabacca, Amomum, Amonius, and Cardamomum. 14. Of
Frankincense, and trees that yield Incense 15. Of Myrrh and Myrrh trees. 16.
Of sundry sorts of Myrrh, the nature thereof, and the price. 17. Of Masticke,
Ladanum, and Bruta, of Enhaemum, Strobus, and Styrax. 18. Of the felicity and
happiness of Arabia. 19. Of Cinnamon, and the wood thereof called Xylocinnamum,
and of Casia. 20. Of Isocinnamon or Canel, of Caucamum and Tarum. 21. Of
Serichatum, Gabalium, and Ben, otherwise called Myrobalanus. 22. Of Dates
called Phoenicobalanus, and sweet Calamus. 23. Of Ammoniacum, and the sweet
Moss called Sphagdus, or Vsnea. 24. Of Cyprus, Aspalathus and Marum. 25. Of
Baulme, as well the liquor called Opobalsamum, as the wood Xylobalsamum, of
Storax and Galbanum. 26. Of Panace, Spondylium, and Malobathrum or Folium
Indicum. 27. Of the oil of green Olives called Omphacium, and of Verjuice. 28.
Of Bryon, and the wild Vine Oenanthe, of the Fur Elate, of Cinnamon, and the
oil of Nuts called Caryopus,
In sum, this book contains in it of notable matters, histories, and
observations, 974.

Latin Authors alleged.
M. Varro, Mutianus, Virgil, Fabian, Sebosus, Pomponius Mela, Flavius Proculus,
Trogus, Hyginus, Claudius Caesar, Cornelius Nepos, Sextius Niger, who wrate in
Greek of Physic, Cassius Hemina, L. Piso, Tuditanus, and Antias.

Foreign Writers.
Theophrastus, Herodotus, Callisthenes, Isidorus, Clitarchus, Anaximenes,
Dioris, Nearchus, Onesicratus, Polycritus, Olympiodorus, Diognetus, Nicobulus,
Anticlides, Charax of Mitylene, Menechmus, Dorotheus, Xenias the Athenian,
Lycus, Antaeus, Ephippus, Chaereas, Democles, Ptolomaeus, Lagus, Marsyas the
Macedonian, Zoilus likewise of Macedonie, Democritus, Amphilocus, Aristomachus,
Alexander Polyhistor, king Iuba, Apollodorus the author of the treatise
concerning sweet odours, Heraclides the Physician, Archidemus likewise the
Physician, Dionysius, Democlides, Euphron, Obsenides, Diagoras, Iolla (all six
Physicians) Heraclides of Tarentum, Xenocritus of Ephesus, and Eratosthenes.

IN THE THIRTEENTH BOOK ARE CONtained Treatises of Ointments and of Trees by
the sea side.
Chap. 1. Of sweet ointments and perfumes: when they came to be first known
at Rome, and of their composition. 2. What ointment was that which they called
Royal: which be Diapasmate or dry perfumes, and how they be kept. 3. The
ryotous and superfluous expenses that the Romans were at for such ointments:
and when they were first taken up and used in Rome. 4. Of Palms or Date trees,
their nature and sundry sorts. 5. The trees of Syria. 6. Of the Terebinth tree.
7. Of the Egyptian Figtree or Sycomore, and that of Cypress. 8. Of the fruit
which is called Ceraunia Siliqua: 9. Of the Peach-tree or Persica of Egypt:
and the Egyptian Thorn, whereof comes Acacia. 10. Of the Plum tree and others
about Memphis. 11. Sundry sorts of gums, and of the Papyr reed. 12. Diverse
kinds of Paper, how Paper is made, the trial of good Paper, the faults of
Paper, and the paste that goes to the making of Paper. 13. The books of king
Numa. 14. The tree of Aethyopia. 15. The trees of Atlas, Citron trees, what
points are commendable or otherwise faulty therein. 16. Of the tree Thya. 17.
Of the tree Lotus. 18. Of the body and roots of Lotus. 19. Of Patyurus, of the
Pomgranat, and the flower of the Pomgranat. 20. Of plants and shrubs in Asia
and Greece. 21. Of Thymelaea, Chamelaea, Tragacanthe, Tragium or Scorpio, of
Tamariske, Brya, and Galla. 22. Of Euonymus or Spyndle tree, of Adrachne
Congygria, and Thapsia. 23. Of Capparis or Cynosbatos, or Opheostaphyle, and of
Sari. 24. Of the royal thorn of Babylon, and Cytisus or tree Trifolie. 25. Of
shrubs and trees growing upon our Mediterranean seas, the red sea and the
Indian sea.
In sum, there be comprised in this book of notable things, stories, and
observations, four hundred fifty and eight.

Latin Authors cited.
Marcus Varro, Mutianus, Virgil, Fabianus, Sebosus, Pomponius Mela, Flavius
Proculus, Trogus, Hyginus, Claudius Caesar, Cornelius Nepos, Sextius Niger, who
wrote in Greek of Physic, Cassius Hemina, L. Piso, Tuditanus, and Antias.

Foreign Writers.
Theophrastus, Herodotus, Callisthenes, Isidorus, Clitarchus, Anaximenes,
Duris, Nearchus, Onesicritus, Policritus, Olympiodorus, Diognetus, Cleobulus,
Anticlides, Charax the Mitylenaean, Menaechmus, Doroth^us, Xenias the Athenian,
Lycus, Antaeus, Ephippus, Dio, Adimanthus, Ptolomaeus Lagus, Marsyas and
Zoilus, both Macedonians, Democritus, Amphilochus, Alexander Polyhistor,
Aristomachus, king Iuba, Apollodorus who wrate of Odours, Heraclides the
Physician, Botrys, Archidemus, Dionysius, Democlides, Euphron, Mnesicles,
Diagoras and Iolla Physicians all, Heraclides of Tarentum, and Xenocritus the
Ephesian.

IN THE FOVRTEENTH BOOK ARE contained Treatises of Vine-trees and Vine-yards.
Chap. 1. Of Vines and their nature, the manner how they bear grapes. 2.
Sundry kinds of Vines in general. 3. More kinds of Vines according to the
property of countries where they grow. 4. Notable considerations as touching
the planting and ordering of Vines. 5. The nature of wine. 6. The best and most
kindly wines. 7. Wines outlandish and beyond sea. 8. Of the wine called Biaeon,
seven kinds thereof 9. Of sweet wines fourteen sorts. 10. Of second wines or
household wines. 11. What good wines began of late to be in request at Rome.
12. Observations of wine, set down by king Romulus. 13. The ancient usage of
wine, and the wines of old time. 14. Of cellars for wine, and the wine
Opiminianum. 15. Caesar's liberality in wine, and when first there were four
sorts of wine set down. 16. Of artificial or set wines. 17. Of Hydromell and
Oxymell. 18. Prodigious and strange kinds of wine. 19. What wines might not be
used in sacrifices, and with what sorts new wines are sophisticated. 20. Sundry
sorts of Pitch and Rosin: of the manner of sophisticating new wines: of vinegre
and winelees. 21. Of wine cellars. 22. Of avoiding drunkenness.
In sum, it contains notable matters, histories and observations 510,
gathered out of

Latin Authors.
Cornelius Valerius, Virgil, Celsus, Cato Censorius, Sarsennaes both father and
son, Scropha, Varro, Decimus Syllanus, Fabius Pictor, Trogus Hyginus, Flaccus
Verrius, Graecinus Julius, Accius, Columella, Massurius Sabinus, Fenestella,
Tergilla, M. Actius Plautus, Fabius, Dorsennus, Scaevola, Aelius, Atteius
Capito, Cotta Messalinus, L. Piso, Pompeius Lenaeus, Fabianus, Sextius Niger,
and Vibius Rufus.

Foreign Authors.
Hesiodus, Theophrastus, Aristotle, Democritus, king Attalus, K. Philometer,
Architas, Xenophon, Amphilochus the Athenian, Anaxipolis the Thasian,
Apollodorus the Lemnian, Aristophanes the Milesian, Antigonus the Cymaean,
Agathocles the Chian, Apollonius of Pergamus, Aristander of Ath^ and likewise
Batrys the Athenian, Bacchius the Milesian, Bion of Soli, Chereas the Athenian,
a^ Cheristus likewise of Athens, Diodorus of Priene, Dio the Colophonian,
Epigenes the Rhodian, Evagoras the Thasian, Euphron of Athens, Androcion,
Aescrion and Lysimachus, who wrote al three of Agriculture, Dionysius who
translated Mago, Diophanes who brought Dionysius into an Epitome, Asclepiades
the Physician, Onesicritus and king Iuba.

THE FIFTEENTH BOOK TREATS OF the nature of Trees fruitful, and planted in
Hort-yards.
Chap. 1. The nature of fruitful trees. 2. Of the oil of Olives. 3. The
nature of the Olive and young Olive trees 4. The nature of the oil Olive. 5.
The manner of husbanding Olive rows. 6. How to keep Olives and make oil
thereof. 7. Of artificial oil. 8. Of the dregs or Olive cake, being pressed.
9. Of fruits of trees good to eat, their several kinds and natures. 10. Of
Pine nuts four kinds. 11. Of the Quince. 12. Of Peaches four sorts. 13. Of
Plums eleven kinds. 14. Sundry kinds of Apples, and namely, nine and twenty
sorts. 15. Of Pears and Wardens: of sundry strange devises to graffe trees.
16. Of preserving and keeping Apples and such like fruits. 17. The manner how
to keep Quinces, Pomgranats, Pears, Wardens, Soruises, and Grapes. 18. Of
Figs nine and twenty sorts. 19. Of the wild Figtree: of caprification or the
manner how to bring Figgs to maturitie by the means of certain flies. 20. Of
Medlars, and three sorts of them. 21. Four kinds of Soruoises. 22. Of the
Walnut. 23. Of Chestnuts eight kinds. 24. Of Charobs called Siliquae, of
Apples, of Mulberies, of Grains, Pippins and Kernils within the fruits, also
of berries. 25. Of Cherries eight sorts. 26. Of the Corneill fruit, and
Lentisk. 27. Sundry sorts of juices, and odours. 28. Of the juices in fruits
and trees: of colors, smells, and the natures of diverse fruits, also the
singularities and commendations of them. 29. Of the Myrtle eleven kinds
thereof. 30. Of the Laurel or Bay Tree, thirteen sorts of it.
In sum, there be comprised in this book of notable matters, stories, and
observations 520, collected out of

Latin Authors.
Fenestella, Fabianus, Virgill, Cornelius, Valerianus, Celsus, Cato Censorius,
Sarsennae (both father and son) Scropha, Mar. Varro, D. Syllanus, Fabius
Pictor, Trogus, Hyginus, Flaccus Verrius, Graecinus, Atticus, Julius Sabinus,
Tergilla, Cotta Messalinus, Columella, L. Piso, Pompeius Lenaeus, M. Accius
Plautius, Fabius Dorsenus, Scaeuola, Aelius, Atteius Capito, Sextus Niger, and
Vibius Rufus.

Foreign writers.
Hesiodus, Aristotle, Democritus, king Hiero, Architas, king Philometor, king
Attalus, Xenophon, Amphilochus the Athenian, Anaxipolis the Thasian,
Apollodorus of Lemnos, Aristophanes the Milesian, Antigonus the Cymaean,
Agathocles of Chios, Apollodorus of Pergamus, Aristander the Athenian, Bacchus
the Milesian, Bion of Soli, Chaereas of Athens, and Charistus likewise the
Athenian, Diodorus of Priene, Dion the Colophonian, Epigenes the Rhodian,
Evagoras the Thasian, Euphronius, the Athenian, Androcion and Aeschrion (who
writ both of Husbandry) Dionysius, that translated the books of Mago, and
Dionysius the Epitomist, who brought them all into a Breuiarie. Asclepiades and
Erasistratus, both Physicians, Comiades, who wrate as touching the confectures
of wine, Aristomachus, Hicesius, who both treated of the same matter, Themison
the Physician, Onesicritus, and king Iuba.

IN THE SIXTEENTH BOOK ARE CONtained the natures of wild trees.
Chap. 1. Countries wherein no trees do grow: miraculous wonders of trees in
the North countries. 2. Of the great forest Hircynia. 3. Trees that bear
mast. 4. Of the Ciuick guirland, and who in old time were adorned and honored
with chaplets of tree leaves. 5. Of Mast thirteen kinds. 6. Of Beech Mast, and
other sorts of Mast: of Coal, and the feeding of Hogs. 7. Of Gals, and how
many things besides Mast and Acornes Mast trees do bear. 8. Of Cachrys, and of
the Skarlet grain: also of Agaricke and Cork. 9. Of what trees the bark is
in usage. 10. Of shindles to cover houses, of the Pinetree and the wild Pine,
of the Fir and Pitchtree, of the Larch-tree, of the Torch-tree Toeda, aad the
Eugh-tree. 11. The manner of making sundry sorts of Pitch and Ta^: how the
virgin pitch called Cedrium is made: of the thick stone pitch how it is made:
and the ways to boil rosin. 12. Of the ship pitch called Zopissa: of Sapium:
and those trees that yield timber good for building. 13 Of the Ash tree, four
kinds. 14. Of the Teil or Linden tree, two several sorts thereof. 15. Ten
diverse sorts of Maples. 16. Of the knot in Maple called Bruscus and Molluscum:
of a kind of Fisticke tree called Staphylodendron: of Box tree three sorts. 17.
Of the Elm, four kinds. 18. The nature of trees according to their situation
and places where they grow. 19. A general division of trees. 20. What trees
never shed their leaves quite: of the Oleander tree called Rhododendron. 21.
Again what trees lose not their leaves, but show always green, which be they
that shed their leaves in part. In what countries no trees at all do lose
their leaves. 22. The nature of those trees which let fall their leaves, and
which have leaves of sundry colors. 23. Three sorts of Asps or Poplers: and of
what trees the leaves do alter their for me and fashion. 24. What leaves use to
turn every year: the manner how to order the leaves of Date trees and to use
them. Also strange and admirable things as touching leaves. 25. The order and
course that Nature holds in plants: the blossoms of trees: their manner of
conception, blouming, budding, and bearing fruit: and in what order they put
out flowers. 26. Of the Corneil tree: the right season wherein every tree
bears fruit: what trees be fruitless, and therefore are supposed unhappy:
which they be that soon lose their fruit: and last of all what trees show
fruit before they be put forth. 27. Of trees that bear fruit twice and thrice
in one year: what trees suddenly wax old: the age of trees. 28. Of the
Mulbertie tree. 29. Of trees growing wild. 30. Of the Box tree, and the great
Bean tree or Lotus. 31. Of the boughs, branches, bark, tinde, and root of
trees. 32. Of prodigious trees that presage somewhat to come: of trees that
spring and grow of themselves. Also a discourse, that all trees grow not in
every place: and what trees will not live but in this or that one place. 33. Of
the Cyprus tree. Also, that the ground will bring forth some new plants that
never were set, sown, or growing there before. 34. Of Yvie. 35. Of the Ivy
called Smilax. 36. Of Reeds, Canes, and shrubs growing in water. 37. Of the
osier or willow, eight sorts thereof: also what twigs besides osiers and
willowes are good for winding and to bind withal: of bushes and grieves. 38.
The juice and liquor of trees: the nature of their wood and timber: also of
hewing down and falling trees. 39. Of the Larch tree, the Fir and the Sapine:
the time of cutting them down, and such like. 40. Sundry sorts of wood: the
extraordinary bigness of trees: what wood is not subject to be worme-eaten
nor to decay: other trees that be everlasting. 41. Of Woodwormes. 42. Of timber
fit for carpentrie and building: what timber is good for this or that use; and
namely, which is best and more firm and durable for rouses of houses. 43. The
manner of glewing bourds and planks: also of rent and cloven stuff. 44. The age
of trees: which be they that last not long: of Misselto, and of the Priests
Druydae.
In sum, this book comprehends of notable things, histories, and
observations, an hundred and five and thirty.

Latin Authors alleged.
M. Varro, Faecialis, Nigidius, Cornelius Nepos, Hyginus, Massurius, Cato,
Mutianus, Lucius Piso, Trogus, Calphurnius, Bassus, Cremutius, Sextius Niger,
Cornelius Bocchus, Vitruvius, and Graecinus.

Foreign Writers.
Alexander Polyhistor, Hesiodus, Theophrastus, Democritus, Homer, Timaeus the
Mathematician.

THE SEVENTEENTH BOOK Contains the nature of trees planted, set, and well
kept in Hort-yards.
Chap. 1. Trees of wonderful price. 2. Of the nature of heaven and the sky
respective unto trees: and what part of the sky they ought to regard. 3. The
society and accord of the clymat and the soil requisite for trees. 4. The
qualities of the grounds in diverse regions. 5. Sundry kinds of ground and
earth. 6. Of a kind of earth or marle that they in Britain and France set much
store by. 7. What the Greeks have taught, and what rules they have given as
touching this point 8. Of more kinds of earth. 9. The use of ashes, and of
dung: what plants will enrich the ground and make it more battle:
contrariwise, which they be that burn out the heart thereof. 10. The planting
or setting of trees: how to make a sion or slip to take and grow again that is
plucked from the root of the stock. 11. Of transplanting out of Seminaries,
young trees that came of pepins and seeds. 12. The spaces between, and distance
to be regarded in planting trees: the shadow and droppings, either from house
eaues or other trees. 13. What trees grow apace, and which thrive but slowly:
also of the Savine. 14. The setting and graffing imps and sions of trees in the
stock or cliffe. 15. Of the manner how to graffe a vine. 16. Of inoculation or
graffing in the leaf or scutcheon with a plaster. 17. An example or experiment
of this kind of graffing. 18. The order of planting and husbanding olives: and
which is the proper time for graffing. 19. What trees love the company and
society of others: the skill of baring the roots about trees, cutting off
their superfluous spurns, and raising hills about the roots. 20. Of willow banks
and rows of osiers: of places where reeds and canes are nourished: of other
plants used to be cut, for poles, pearches, stakes, and forkes. 21. The manner
of planting vines: the skill of trimming them. 22. The furrow about vines: and
the pruning of them. 23. The manner of planting trees to serve for vines to run
upon. 24. How to keep and preserve grapes: the diseases incident to trees. 25.
Of sundry prodigious and monstrous sights showed in trees: also of an olive
yard which in old time removed, and was transplanted from one side of a great
high way to the other. 26. Remedies against the diseases and imperfections or
faults in trees. 27. Of scarification and paring of trees: and the manner of
dunging them. 28. Diverse medicines against venomous beasts and pismires, and
other creatures noisome and hurtful to trees.
In sum, here be contained notable matters, stories, and observations, to
the number of five hundred eighty and one.

Latin Authors alleged.
Cornelius Nepos, Cato Censorius, M. Varro, Celsus, Virgil, Hyginus, Sarsennae
both father and son, Scrophas, Calphurnius, Bassus, Trogus, Aemilius Macer,
Graecinus, Columella, Atticus, Julius, Fabianus, Sura Manlius, Dorsenus Mundus,
Caius Epidicus, and L Piso.

Foreign Writers.
Isidorus, Theophrastus, Aristotle, Democritus, Theopompus, king Hiero, K.
Attalus, K. Philometor, Archytas, Xenophon, Amphilochus the Arhenian,
Anaxipolis the Thasian, Apollodorus of Lemnos, Aristophanes the Milesian,
Antigonus the Cymaean, Agathocles the Chian, Apollonius of Pergamus, Bacchius
the Milesian, Bion, Chaerea the Athenian, also Chaeristus of Athens, Diodorus
of Priene, Dion the Colophonian, Epigenes the Rhodian, Evagon the Thasian,
Euphron the Athenian, Androcion, Aeschrion, Lysimachus, who all three wrote of
Agriculture: Dionysius who translated the books of Mago, and Diophanes, who
out of Dionysius collected a Breviarie, and Aristander who made a treatise of
Wonders and portenteous tokens.

THE EIGHTEENTH BOORE IS A TREATISE of Agriculture or Husbandry.
Chap. 1. That our ancestors in old time were exceeding much given to
husbandry. Also, the singular care that men had to look unto hortyards and
gardens. 2. Of the first chaplets and guirlands used at Rome. 3. Of the acre of
ground and half acre, called at Rome Iugeris and Actus. The ancient ordinances
concerning cattle: in what time the market for victuals was exceeding cheap at
Rome: and who were famous and renowned for husbandry and tilling the ground.
4. The ancient manner of tilling the earth. 5. Where a ferme house is to be
seated and built conveniently: certain rules in old time concerning tillage. 6.
A discourse as touching the praise of husbandmen: what rules are to be observed
to come by a good piece of land. 7. Diverse kinds of corn, and their nature. 8.
That all sorts of grain will not grow every where. Of other kinds of corn in
the Levant or East countries. 9. Of baking and pastrie: of grinding and of
meal. 10. Of the fine cocked flour: of the white flour of wheat, and of other
sorts of flower: the manner of moulding and making dough, and baking. 11. The
manner of making and laying leaven: also of making past and bread: and when
Bakers were first known at Rome. Of sieves, serces, and bulters; and of sodden
wheat or frumentie. 12. Of pulse. 13. Of Rapes and Navewes in the Amiternine
tract. 14. Of Lupines. 15. Of Vetches and Ervile. 16. Of Fenigreeke: of
Messelline or dredgecorne: of Mung-corne or Bollimong for provander: of Clauer
or three-leafed grass called Medica; and of another Trefoile named Cytisus.
17. The faults and diseases in corn, grain, and pulse, and their remedies:
what corn or pulse ought to be sown with respect to the ground. 18. Of
prodigious tokens observed in corn. The skill of ploughing the ground: the
diverse sorts of culters and shares in the plough. 19. The seasons of the year
fit to till and plough the ground. The manner of putting oxen in the yoke for
the plough. 20. Of breaking clods or harrowing: of another kind of tilling:
the earing or second tilth or stirring the ground. And cutting the corn. 21.
The manner of tilling and husbanding land. 22. Examples of diverse grounds: of
such as are wondrous fertile: of a vine that bears grapes twice in the year.
The difference of waters. 23. The quality of the ground or soil: of compost
or dunging lands. 24. The goodness of choice seeds: the manner of good sowing:
how much seed of any corn an acre will take to be well sown. The seasons of
seednesse. 25. The observation of the stars for their apparition or
occultation, their rising and setting, as well for day as night. 26. A
recapitulation and brief summarie of all things belonging to husbandry. What
is to be done in the field every month of the year. 27. That husbandmen
should not so much regard the sign or the stars, as the fit season of the time
for seednes. The rising or fall, the apparition or occultation of planets
observed in some herbs. Of the rising and setting of stars. 28. Of medows:
how they are to be repaired and brought into heart: of sith-stones, hooks,
sickles, and sithes: the time of sowing corn, and what fixed stars are of
power about that time. 29. Of the seasons and times to be marked as well in
summer as winter: what remedy for barraine and lean ground. 30. Of the
harvest: of wheat, of chafe: how to keep corn. 31. Of vintage, and autumn,
and the constitution thereof. 32. What regard is to be had in the moon and her
age, in husbandry. (ture. 33. The consideration of the winds for agricul 34.
The bounds, limits, bawks, and ways, to be observed in cornefields. 35. Signs
whereby a man may prognosticat the disposition of the weather.
In sum, there be contained in this book of notable matters, stories, and
observations, two thousand and six hundred.

Latin Authors alleged in this book.
Massurius Sabinus, Cassius Hemina, Verrius Flaccus, L. Piso, Cornelius Celsus,
Turannius Graccula, D. Syllanus, M. Varro, Cato Censorius, Scrofa, Sarsennae
both father and son, Domitius Calvinus, Hyginus, Virgill, Trogus, Ovid,
Graecinus, Columella, Tubero, L. Aruntius who wrote in Greek of Astronomy,
and Caesar Dictator who likewise wrote of the same argument, Sergius Paulus,
Sabinus Fabianus, M. Cicero, Calphurnius Bassus, Atteius Capito, Manlius Sura,
and Actius who compiled a book called Praxidica.

Foreign Authors.
Hesiodus, Theophrastus, Aristotle, Democritus, K. Hiero, K. Philometor, K.
Attalus, K. Archelaus, Archytas, Xenophon, Amphilochus of Athens, Anaxipolis of
Thasus, Aristophanes the Milesian, Apollodorus the Lemnian, Antigonus the
Cymaean, Agathocles of Chios Apollonius of Pergamus, Aristander the Athenian,
Bacchius the Milesian, Bion of Soli, Chaerea of Athens, Chaeristus likewise the
Athenian, Diodorus of Priene, Dion of Colophon, Epigenes of Rhodes, Evagoras
the Thasian, Euphronius the Athenian, Andration, Aeschrio, and Lysimachus, who
wrote all three of Husbandry, Dionysius that translated the works of Mago, and
Diophanes who drew the same into an Epitome, Thales, Eudoxus, Philippus,
Callippus, Dositheus, Permeniscus, Meliton, Criton, Oenopides, Zeno, Euctemon,
Harpalus, Hecataeus, Anaximander, Sosigenes, Hipparchus, Aratus, Zoroastres,
and Archibius.

THE NINETEENTH BOOK CONTAINS a discourse of the nature of Flax, and other
wonderful matters.
Chap. 1. The sowing of Line seed: diverse kinds of flax: how it is dressed: of
naperie and napkins: of linen that will not burn nor consume with fire: and
when curtains were devised at Rome about the theaters. 2. The nature of a kind
of broom called Spart, when it came to be used first, how it is to be ordered
and dressed, what plants both spring and also live without roots. 3. Of Mysy,
and of Mushroms, of Tadstoles or Mushromes that be broad and without a tail
called Pezici, of Laserpitium, and Magydaris, of Maddir, and the Fullers root
Radicula, i. Sopeweed. 4. The manner of dressing and trimming gardens: also the
ordering and due placing of other plants good for to be eaten; over and besides
corn, and the fruit of trees and shrubs. 5. The nature, the sundry sorts, and
the stories of many plants that grow in gardens. 6. Of the roots, leaves,
flowers, and colors of garden herbs. 7. How many days it will be after the
seeds of herbs be sown, or their slips set, ere they come up: the nature of
seeds: how herbs are to be sown or set, and in what course and rank: which
herbs are but one of a kind, and which they be that have many kinds. 8. The
nature of such garden herbs as are good for the pot, or to make sallads, and
to season meat withal; their kinds to the number of 46, with their stories and
descriptions. 9. Of Fennel, and Hemp. 10. The diseases and maladies that
annoy gardens, the remedies against the same: as also how to kill ants,
caterpillars. and gnats. 21. What seeds be more or less able to endure any
hardness or injury, and which they be that salt waters are good for. 22. The
manner of watering gardens: what herbs they be, which being transplanted and
removed, prove the better: and finally, the juice, the sweet savors, and
relishnes of garden-herbes.
In sum, here are comprised memorable things, stories, and observations, a
thousand one hundred forty and three.

Latin Authors cited.
M. Actius Plautus, M. Varro, D. Syllanus, Cato Censorius, Hyginus, Virgil,
Mutianus, Celsus, Columella, Calphurnius Bassus, Manlius Sura, Sabinus Tyro,
Licinius Macer, Q. Hirtius, Vibius Rufus, Cesennius who wrote Sepurica, [i. a
treatise of Gardening] Castritius likewise, and Firmius, (who both twain made
a work of the same matter) and last of all Petreius.

Foreign Writers.
Herodotus, Theophrastus, Democritus, Aristomachus, Menander, (who wrote a
book entitled Brochresta, i. of things profitable for our life and diet) and
Anaxilaus.

THE TWENTIETH BOOK COMPRISETH medicines out of those Simples which are set
and sowed in Gardens.
Chap. 1. Of the wild Cucumber, and the juice thereof Elaterium. 2. Of the
Cucumber as well that which wande. reth and grows abroad called Anguinum, as
that of the garden: also of the Pompion. 3. Of the wild gourds, and the Rape or
Naves. 4. Diverse sorts of Navewes: of the wild Radish, of the garden Radish,
and the Parsnep or Carot. 5. Of Staphylinum or the tame Parsnip. The herb
Gingidium or Chervill: of Seselis or Siler-mountaine: of Elecampane, and of
Onyons. 6. Of Porret or Leekes used to be cut, and of cabbage Leeks or headed,
also of Garlic. 7. Of wild Lettuce or Hawke-weed, called also Lactuca
Caprina, of another kind named Esopus, of Woad, and tame garden Lettuce. 8.
Diverse kinds of Beets, of Endive, and Cichorie, of garden Endive. 9. Of Cawle
or Coleworts, of the wild Coleworts Lapsana, of Soldanella, of Squilla or the
Sea-onion, of Scallions or Chibbols, and of Dog-leeks. 10. Of Sparage both tame
and wild, of Libycum and Clarie. 11. Of Parsley, of Baulme, Smallage, and
mountain Parsley. 12. Of Alisanders, and garden Basil. 13. Of wild Basil, of
Rocket, of Cresses, and Rue. 14. Of wild Mints, of garden Mints, of Peniroyall,
of Nep, and Cumin. 15. Of Ethiopian Cumin, which staieth urine, of Capers, of
Lovach, of Panace, of wild Origan or Majoram savage. 16. More of wild Oragan
and Heracleotica, called also Gallinacea Cunila, i. Small majoram, Savorie or
Orgament, Rosemarie, sweet Majoram of the garden and of the mountain. 17. Of
Cockweed, Pepperwort, or Dittander, of garden Origan, of a kind of Orgament
called Onitis of Prason, of Tragoriganum or wild Peniroyall, the water Lilly
or Nenuphar, of Lepidium, of Gith or Nigella Romana, and of Anise. 18. Of Dill,
of Sacopaenium, of Sagapen, of Poppies both white and black: the manner how to
draw the juice of herbs: and of Opium. 19. Of the wild Poppie, of horned
Poppie, of Glaucium or Paralium, of Heraclium or Aphrum, of the confection
Diacodium made of Poppie heads, of Tythimall. 20. Of Purcellane or Peplium, of
Coriander and Orach. 21. Of Mallows, and Malope, of Althaea or Marshmallow, of
Dockes, sour Docke or Sorell, the water Docke, the herb Patience or
Bulapathum. 22. Three kinds of Senvie, of Horehound, of running Thyme, of
water Mints or Savorie, of Lineseed and Bleets. 23. Of Meu, of garden Fennel,
of wild Fennel or Myrsineum, of Hemp, of Fennel-geant, of Thystles, and
Artichokes. 24. The confection called Triacle, the composition of Antiochus.
In sum, there be be comprised in this book of medicines, stories, and
observations, one hundred sixty and seven.

Out of Latin Authors.
Cato Censorius, Mar. Varro, Pompeius Lenaeus, Gallio, Hyginus, Sextius Niger
who wrote in Greek, and Julius Bassus likewise, who wrote in the same
language, Celsus, and Antonius Caesar.

Foreign Authors.
Democritus, Theophrastus, Orpheus, Menander who made the book Biochresta,
Pythagoras, and Nicander.

Out of Physicians.
Nicander, Hippocrates, Chrysippus, Diocles, Ophion, Heraclides, Hicesius,
Dionysius, Apollodorus of Tarentum, Apollodorus the Citien, Praxogoras,
Philistonicus, Medius, Dienches, Cleophantus, Philistio, Asclepiades, Cratevas,
Petronius, Diodorus, Iolla, Erasistratus, Diagoras, Andreas, Mnesicles,
Epicharmus, Damion, Dalion, Sosimenes, Theopolemus, Metrodorus, Solon, Lycus, A
woman who was a Midwife.
Olympiades of Thebes, Phyllinus, Petreius, Miction, Glaucia and Xenocrates.

IN THE XXI. BOOK ARE CONTAINED the natures of Flowers and Herbs to make
Guirlands of.
Chap. 1. The nature of flowers and herbs that serve for Chaplets, the
wonderful variety of flowers. 2. Of Chaplets and nosegaies of flowers. Who
first devised to set flowers in order one with another. When Coronets or
Guirlands of flowers were invented and took their name, and upon what occasion.
3. Who first gave a present of a Chaplet garnished with silver and gold foil.
In what honor and estimation such Guirlands were in old time. The honor done
of old to Scipio. Of Coronets or Chaplets platted, wrythed, and braided. Also
of a notable act of queen Cleopatra in making of Chaplets. 4. Of Roses set in
guirlands. Diverse sorts of Roses, and where they be set and do grow. 5. Three
kinds of Lillies. The strange manner of setting them. 6. Of Violets, Marigolds,
of Baccharis, Combretum, Asarabacca or Folefoot, and Saffron. 7. Of the flowers
used in ancient time in Guirlands and Chaplets. The great diversity that is in
aromaticall and odoriferous simples: of Lavander, Spike, and Polium. 8. The
colors of cloth resembling flowers. Of floure-Gentle or Passee-velours: of
Chrysocome or Chrysites. 9. The honor done by Guirlands, and their excellency:
of Cyclaminum, of Melilot, of Claver or Trefoile, whereof there be three
sorts. 10. Of Origan, Thyme, Honey of Athens, of Doniza or Fleabane, of
Jupiters flower, of Helenium or Elecampane, of Sothernwood, and Camomile. 11.
Of Majoran, of Nyctigretum and Melilote, the white Violet or stock Gillofre,
of Codiaminum, also of wild bulbs or Rampions, of Heliochrysum, and Lychnis or
Rose Campion, and many other herbs growing on this side the sea. 12. The
manner how to nourish and keep Bees: of their maladies and remedies thereto.
13. Of Honey that is venomous, remedies against such venomous Honey, as also
against another kind thereof, which makes folk to be mad that taste thereof.
14. Of a certain Honey that flies will not touch nor come near to. Of
Bee-hiues. The way how to keep the Bees when they are at a fault for meat: and
how their Wax is made. 15. Of herbs good to eat which come up of their own
accord, and namely, those that are prickie. 16. Of Thystles, of Parietarie of
the wall, of Brambles and Orchanet. 17. The difference of many sorts of herbs
in their leaf. Which they be that do flower all the year long, of the
Daffodill, of ^stana, and of the Gladen or Swordgrasse. 18. Of diverse sorts of
Reeds, and of Cyperus, of the medicinable virtues which they have, of Cypirus,
and Squinanth. 19. The medicinable virtues of Roses, of the Lilly, of
Narcissus, of the Violet, and of Baccharis or Ladies gloves, of Combretum and
Asarabacca. 20. Of Nard Celticke and Saffron, the virtues thereof and use in
Physic, of the sweet ointment Crocomagma made of Saffron, of Spike or
Lauender, of Polium, and Flour de lis, of Heliochrysum, Chrysocome, and
Melilot. 21. Of sweet Trifolie, of Thyme, the wild yellow Lilly Hemerocallis
or the day flower, of Elecampane and Sothernwood. 22. the medicinable virtues
of Camomile and Marjoram. 23. The virtues of Corn Rose or Passe-flours
Anemone. 24. The properties medicinable of Filipendula. 25. The virtues of
Heliochrysum. 26. The medicines of Crowtoes. 27. The virtues of the
Perywinckle, Butchers broom, of Sampier, and wild Basil. 28. The medicinable
virtues of Colocasia, or the Egyptian Bean. 29. The properties of Anthalium.
30. The virtues of Fewerfue. 31. The virtues of Nightshade or Petie Morrell,
and Alkakengi. 32. Of Corchorus, i. Chickeweed, and of Cnicus, i. Carthanus or
bastard Saffron. 33. Of the herb Persoluta. 34. Of the weights and measures
used in old time.
In sum, there be in this book to be found medicines, stories, and worthy
observations, seven hundred and thirty.

Latin Authors alleged.
Cato Censorius, M. Varro, Massurius, Antias, C. Helius, Vestimus, Vibius,
Ruffinus, Hyginus, Pomponius Mela, Pompeius Lenaeus, Cornelius Celsus,
Calphurnius Bassus, P. Largius, Licinius Macer, Sextius, and Julius Bassus, who
both wrote in Greek, and Antonius Castor.

Foreign Writers.
Theophrastus, Democritus, Orpheus, Pythagoras, Mago, Menander who wrote the
Treatise Biochresta, Nicander, Homer, Hesiodus, Musaeus, Sophocles, and
Anaxilaus.

Physicians.
Mnestheus and Callimachus, who wrote both of Guirlands made of flowers,
Phanias the natural Philosopher or Physician, Simus, Timaristus, Hippocrates,
Chrysippus, Diocles, Ophion, Heraclides, Hicesias, Dionysius, Apollodorus of
Citia, Apollodorus of Tarentum, Praxagoras, Plistonicus the Physician,
Dieuches, Cleophantus, Philistio, Asclepiades, Cratevas, P^tronius, Diodotus,
Iolla, Erasistratus, Diagoras, Andreas, Mnesicles, Epicharmus, Damion, Dalion,
^osimenes, Theopolemus, Metrodorus, Solon, Lycus, Olympias the midwife of
Thebes, Phillinus, Petreius, Miction, Glaucias, and Xenocrates.

IN THE XXII. BOOK ARE CONTAINED discourses as touching the estimation of
Herbs.
Chap. 1. Of certain nations that use herbs to beautify their bodies. 2. Of
clothes died with the juice of herbs. 3. Of the Chaplet made of the common
meadow grass. 4. How rare these Guirlands of grass were. 5. Which were the
only men that had the honor to be crowned with the sad Chaplets. 6. The only
Centurion allowed to wear the said Guirlands. 7. Medicinable virtues observed
in the rest of herbs and flowers that serve for Guirlands, and first of Eringe
or sea Holly. 8. Of the Thystle or herb which they call Centum-capita. 9. Of
Acanus and Liquerice. 10. Of Brambles or Thystles called Tribuli, their kinds
and virtues. 11. The virtues and properties of the herb Stoebe. 12. Of
Hippophyes, and of Hippope, i. the Tazill, and their properties. 13. Of the
Nettle and the medicinable virtues of it. 14. Of the white dead Nettle or
Archangell Lamium, and the virtues of it. 15. Of the herb Scorpius or
Caterpillars, the kinds and virtues thereof. 16. Of Leucacantha or our ladies
Thystle, and the virtues of it. 17. Of Parietarie of the wall called Helxine or
Perdicum, of Feuerfew or Motherwort, Parthenium, of Sideritis, i. wall Sauge or
stone Sauge, and the virtues thereof good for Physic. 18, Of Chamaeleon, the
sundry sorts and properties that it has. 19. Of Coronopus, i. Crow-foot
Plantaine or Buckhorn Plantain, and the virtues thereof. 20. Of Orchanet, as
well the right as the bastard, and the virtues of them both. 21. Another kind
of Orchanet called Onochelis, of Camomile, of the herb Lotus or common
Melilot, of Lotometra, which is a kind of garden Lotus or sallade Clauer, of
Heliotropia, i. Turnsoll or Solcium, and Tricoccum, a kind thereof, of Maiden
hair called Adiantum and Callitricum. 22. Of bitter Lectuce or wild Cichorie,
of Thesium, of Daffodill, of Halimus, of Brankursine, of Buprestis, of
Elaphoboscum or Gratia Dei, of Scandix, i. wild Cheruill or shepherds needle,
of the wild wort Iasione, of bastard Persly, Caucalis, of Lauer, or Sillybum,
of Scolimus, i. the Artichoke or Limonia, of Sowthystle, of Chondrilla, and of
Mushromes. 23 Of Toadstools, of Silphium, and of Laserjuice 24. The nature of
Honey, of Mead or Hydromel: how it comes that the fashions are changed in
certain kinds of meat, of honied wine, of wax. A discourse against the
composition of many simples. 25. The medicinable virtues of corn.
In sum, here you shall find of medicines, stories, and observations, 906,
gathered out of

The same Authors which were named in this book before, and besides out of
Chrysermus, Eratosthenes, and Alcaeus.

IN THE XXIII. BOOK IS CONTAINED a Treatise of Hort-yard trees.
Chap. 1. The medicinable qualities of grapes fresh and new gathered, of Vine
cuttings and of grape kernils, of the grape Theriace, or Treacle Grape, of
dried Grapes or Raisins, of Astaphus, of Stauesacre, called also Pituitaria, of
the wild Vine, of the white Vine which is called Bryonie, of the black Vine,
of new wines, of diverse and sundry sorts of wines, and also of vinegre. 2. Of
the medicinable virtues of vinegre Sqilliticke, of Oxymell or honied vinegre,
of cuit, of the dregs or lees of wine, vinegre, and cuit. 3. The virtue of
Olives, of the leaves of the Olive, of the flower and ashes of the Olive, of
the white and black fruit of the Olive: also of the dregs or grounds of oil.
4. Medicinable properties observed in the leaves of the wild Olive, of the oil
made of the wild vine flowers, of the oil Cicinum, the oiles of Almonds,
Baies, and Myrtles, the oil of Chamamyrsine or grand Myrtle, also of Cypress,
of Cytrons, and walnuts, etc. 5. The Egyptian Palmetree that bears Ben, also
of the Date tree called Elate, and the virtues of them. 6. The medicinable
virtues of sundry plants, namely, in their flower, leaf, fruit, boughs, bark,
wood, juice, root, and ashes. 7. Of pears, and the observations to them
belonging, of Figs both wild and savage: of Erineum, and other sorts of
plants, with their virtues. 8. Of Pine-nuts, and Almonds, of the Filbard and
Walnut, of Fistickes and Chestnuts, of Charobs, Corneiles, Strawberrie trees,
and Baies. 9. Of the Myrtle gentle, of Myrtidanum, and the wild Myrtle.
In sum, there be noted in this book medicines, stories, and observations, a
thousand four hundred and nineteen.

Latin Authors cited.
C. Volgius, Pompeius Lenaeus, Sextius Niger, and Julius Bassus, who wrote both
in Greek, Antonius Castor, M. Varro, Cornelius Celsus, and Fabianus.

Foreign Writers.
Theophrastus, Democritus, Orpheus, Pythagoras, Mago, Menander the author of
the book Biochresta, Nicander, Homer, Hesiodus, Musaeus, and Anaxilaus.

Physicians.
Mnestheus, Callimachus, Phanias the natural Philosopher, Simus, Tamaristus,
Hippocrates, Chrysippus, Diocles, Ophion, Heraclides, Hicesius, Dionysius,
Apollodorus of Cittia, Apollodorus the Tarentine, Praxagoras, Plistonicus,
Medius, Dieuches, Cleophantus, Philistio, Asclepiades, Cratevas, Petronius,
Diodotus, Iolla, Erasistratus, Diagoras, Andreas, Mnesicles, Epicharmus,
Damion, Dalion, Sosimenes, Theopolemus, Metrodorus, Solon, Lycus, Olympias the
midwife of Thebes, Phyllinus, Petreius, Miction, Glaucia, and Xenocrates,

THE XXIIII. BOOK TREATS OF Trees growing wild.
Chap. 1. Medicinable virtues observed in wild trees. 2. The Egyptian Bean
tree, Lotus. 3. Mast and Acornes. 4. The grain or berrie of the tree Ilex, of
Gals, of Misselto, of little bals and mast of trees, the root of Cirrus, and of
Cork. 5. Of the Beech, the Cypress tree, the tall Cedar, the fruit or berry
thereof, and of Galbanum. 6. Of Ammoniacum, Storax, Spondylium, Spagnus, the
Terebinth tree, of Chamaepitys or Iva Muscata, of Esula or Pityusa, of Rosins,
of the Pitch-tree and the Lentiske. 7. Of stiff Pitch, of Tar, of Pitch
twice boiled, of Pissasphalt, of Sopissa, of the Torch tree and Lentiske. 8.
The virtues of the Plane tree, the Ash, the Maple, the Aspe, the Elm, the
Linden tree or Teil, the Elder, and Juniper. 9. Of the Willow, the Sallow
Amerina, and such like, good for windings and bands, also of Heath or Ling. 10.
Of Virga Sanguinea, of the Oisier, of the Priuet, the Aller, of Yvie, of Cistus
or Cifsus, of Erythranum, of ground Yvie or Alehoufe, of Withwind, of Perwinke
or Lesseron. 11. Of Reeds, of Paper cane, of Ebene, of Oleander, of Rhus or
Sumach, of Madder, of Alysium, of Sopeweed, of Apaynum, of Rosemarie and the
seed thereof, of Selago, of Samulus, of Gums, and the medicinable virtues of
them all. 12. Of the Arabian thorn or thistle, of Bedegnar, of Acanthium and
Acacia. 13. Of the common and wild thistle, of Ery sisceptrum, of the thorn or
thystle Appendix, of Pyxacanthum or the Barbary tree: of Paliurus, of the
Holly, of the Eugh tree and other bushes, with their virtues in Physic. 14.
Of the sweet Brier or Eglantine, of the Resp^ce bush, of the white bramble
Rhamnus, of Lycium, of Sarcocolla, of the composition named Oporice, and all
their medicines. 15. Of Germander, of Perwinke or Lowrie, of (...) or Oliuell,
of Chamaesyce, of ground yvie, of Lauander Cotton, of Ampeloprasos or Vine
Porret, of Stachys or wild Sauge, of Clinopodium or Horsetime, of Cudweed, of
Perwinke of Egypt, and their properties. 16. Of Wake-Robin, of Dragonwort or
Serpentine of the garden, the greater Dragonwort, of Arisaron, of yarrow, and
Millefoile: of bastard Nauew, of Myrrhis, and Onobrychis, with their virtues.
17. Of Coriacesia, Callicia, and Menais, with three and twenty other herbs,
and their properties, which are held by some to serve in Magic. Of Considia
and Aproxis: with others that reduce and revive love again. 18. Of Eriphia,
Lanaria, and water Yarrow, with their virtues. 19. Of the herbs that grow
upon the head of statues and Images, of the herbs that come out of rivers, of
the herb called Lingua simply, i. the tongue: of herbs growing within sieues,
and upon dnnghils, of Rhodora, of the herb Impia, i. the child before the
parents, of the herb Pecten veneris, of Nodia, of Cleiuers or Goose Erith, of
Burs, of Tordile, of Dent de chien or Quiches, of Dactylus and Fenigreek, with
their virtues.
In sum, herein are comprised medicines, stories, and observations, a
thousand four hundred and eighteen: collected out of

Latin Authors.
C. Volgius, Pompeius Lenaeus, Sextius Niger, and Julius Bassus, who wrate both
in Greek; Antonius Castor, M. Varro, Cornelius Celsus, and Fabius.

Foreign Writers.
Theophrastus, Apollodorus, Democritus, Orpheus, Pythagoras, Mago, Menander the
author of the book Biochresta, Nicander, Homer, Hesiodus, Museus, Sophocles,
and Anaxilaus.

Physicians.
Mnestheus, Callimachus, Phanias the natural Philosopher, Simo, Timaristus,
Hippocrates, Chrysippus, Diocles, Ophion, Heraclides, Hicesius, Dionysius,
Apollodorus of Cittia, Apollodorus the Tarentine, Praxagoras, Plistonicus,
Medius, Dieuchus, Cleophantus, Philistio, Asclepiades, Cratevas, Petronius
Diodotus, Iolla, Erasistratus, Diagoras, Andreas, Mnesicles, Epicharmus,
Damion, Sosimenes, Theopolemus, Solon, Lycus, Metrodorus, Olympias the Midwife
of Thebes, Phyllinus, Petreius, Miction, Glaucia, and Xenocrates.

IN THE XXV. BOOK ARE CONTAINED the natures of herbs and weeds that come up
of themselves. The reputation that herbs have been of. When they began first
to be used.
Chap. 1. The properties and natures of wild herbs growing of their own
accord. 2. What Authors have written in Latin of the nature and use of
herbs. When the knowledge of simples began first to be practiced at Rome.
What Greek Authors first wrote of herbs, the invention and finding out of
sundry herbs, the Physic of old time. What is the cause that Simples are
not so much in request and use for Physic as in old time. The medicinable
virtues of the Eglantine and Serpentary or Dragon. 3. Of a certain venomous
fountain in Almaine, the virtues and properties of the herb Britannica, what
diseases cause the greatest pains. 4. Of Moly, of Dodecatheos, of Paeonium,
named otherwise Pentorobus, and Glycyside, of Panace or Asclepios, of
Heraclium, of Panace Chironeum, of Panace Centaureum or Pharnaceum, of
Heraclium Siderium, of Henbane. 5. Of the herb Mercury female, of Parthenium,
of Hermu-Poea, or rather Mercury: of Yarow, of Panace Heracleum, of Sideritis,
of Millefoile, of Scopa regio, of Hemionium, Teucrium, Splenium, Melampodium or
black Ellebore, and how many kinds there be of them. The medicinable virtues
of black and white Ellebore: when Ellebore is to be given, how it is to be
taken, to whom it is not to be given, also that it kills Mice and Rats. 6. Of
Mithridatium, of Scordotis or Scordium, of Polemonia, otherwise called
Philetaeria or Chiliodynama, of Eupatorie or Agrimonie, of great Centaurie
otherwise called Chironium, of the less Centaurie or Libadium, called Fell
Terrae, i. the gall of the Earth. Of Triorches, and their virtues. 7. Of
Clymenus, Gentian, Lysimachia and Parthenius or Motherwort, Mugwort, Ambrose,
Nenuphar, Heraclium, and Euphorbia, with all their virtues medicinable. 8. Of
Plantaine, Buglosse, Hounds tongue, Oxe-eye or May weed, of Scythica, Hippice
and Ischaemon, of Betonie, Cantabrica, Settarwort, of Dittander or Hiberis, of
Celendine the greater, Celendine the less or Pilewort, of Canaria, of
Elaphoboscos, of Dictamnum, of Aristolochia or Hartwort, how fishes will come
to it for love of bait, and so are soon caught. The counterpoysons against
stinging of serpents, by these herbs abouenamed. 9. Of Argemonia, of Agaricke,
Echium, Henbane, Vervaine, Blattaria, Lemonia, Cinquefoile, Carot, Persalata,
the Clot Burre, Swines bread or Cyclaminus, Harstrang: all very good for the
sting of serpents. 10. Of Danewort or Walwort, of Mullin, of Thelyphonon.
Remedies against the sting of Scorpions, the biting of Toades and mad Dogs, and
generally against all poisons. 11. Receipts and remedies against headache and
diseases of the head. 12. Of Centaurie, Celendine, Panace, and Henbane, and
Euphorbium, all sovereign medicines for the eyes. 13. Of Pimpernell or
Corchorus, of Mandragoras or Circeium, of Henbane, of Crethmoagrion, of
Molybdaena, of Fumiterre, of Galengale, of Flower de lis, of Cotyledon, or
Vmbilicus Veneris, of Housleeke or Sengreene, of Pourcellane, of Groundswell,
of Ephemerum, of great Tazill, of Crow-foot: which affourd medicines against
the infirmities and diseases of the eyes, ears, nosthrils, teeth, and mouth.
In sum, this Book does yield of medicines, stories, and observations, a
thousand two hundred ninety and two.

Latin Authors cited.
M. Varro, C. Volgius, Pompeius Lenaeus, Sextius Niger, and Julius Bassus, who
both wrote in Greek, Antonius Castor, and Cornelius Celsus.

Foreign Writers.
Theophrastus, Apollodorus, Democritus, king Iuba, Orpheus, Pythagoras, Mago,
Menander who wrote Biochresta, Nicander, Homer, Hesiodus, Musaeus, Sophocles,
Xanthus, and Anaxilaus.

Physicians.
Mnestheus, Callimachus, Phanias the natural Philosopher, Timaristus, Simus,
Hippocrates, Chrysippus, Diocles, Ophion, Heraclides, Hicesius, Dionysius,
Apollodorus the Tarentine, Praxagoras, Plistonicus, Medius, Dieuches,
Cleophantus, Philistio, Asclepiades, Cratevas, Iolla, Erasistratus, Diagoras,
Andreas, Mnesicles, Epicharmus, Damion, Theopolemus, Metrodorus, Solon, Lycus,
Olympias the midwife of Thebes, Phyllinus, Petreius, Miction, Glaucias and
Xenocrates.

IN THE XXVI. BOOK ARE CONTAIned the medicines for the parts of man's body.
Chap. 1. Of new maladies, and namely of Lichenes, what they be, and when they
began to reign in Italy first. Of the Carbuncle, of the white Morphew or
Leprosy called Elephantiasis, and of the Collicke. 2. The praise of
Hippocrates. 3. Of the new practice in Physic, of the Physician Asclepiades,
and by what means he abolished the old manner of practice, and set up a new.
4. The superstitious folly of Magic is derided. Also a discourse touching
the foul tettar called Lichenes, the remedy thereof: and also the infirmities
of the throat and chawes. 5. Receipts and remedies against the kings evil: also
for the diseases of the fingers and the breast, and against the Cough. 6. Of
Mullin, of Cacalia, Tussilage or Folefoot, of Bechium, and Sauge, all herbs
for to cure the cough. 7. For the pains of the sides and chist, for the
difficulty of breath, and those that cannot take wind but sitting or standing
upright, for the pains of the liver and the heart-ach, medicines appropriat to
the lungs, difficulty of urine, and the cough, for the breast, for inward
ulcers, for the kidneys and imbecilitie of the liver, to stay vomit and yexing,
also for the pleurisy and disease of the sides and flanks. 8. Of all diseases
of the belly and the parts either within it or near unto it. How to stay the
flux thereof, or to make it loose and soluble. 9. Of Peniroiall and Argemone.
10. Of water Lilly or Nenuphar, of abstinence from Venus, of provocation to
fleshly lust, of Ragwort or Satyrium, called Erythraicum, of Crategis and
Syderitis. 11. General remedies for infirmities of the feet, anckles, joints,
and sinews. Remedies against diseases that hold and possess the whole body.
Of Mirthryda. Medicines and means to procure sleep: against the palsy, agues
with cold fits, feauers or agues incident unto laboring Horses, Asses, and
Mules: against frantic persons. Of the herb Chamaeacta, of Housleeke or
stonecrop, and Pricke-madame, of S. Antonies fire. 12. Remedies against
dislocations in the joints, against the yellow jaundise, fellons, fistulaes,
swelling of ventositie, burns, scalds, and other diseases, for sinews, and to
stanch blood. 13. Of the herb called Horse-taile, Nenuphar, Harstrange,
Syderitis, of many other remedies good to restrain the flux of blood: of
Stephanomelis and Erisithale, remedies against the worms. 14. For ulcers, old
sores, and green wounds: to take away werts, and of the herb Polycnemon. 15.
Many good experiments either for to provoke or to stay the flux of women's
months: sovereign remedies for the diseases of the matrice: also to cast forth
the fruit within the womb, or to contain it the full time, for to take away
the blemishes and spots in the skin, and namely of the face, to color the
hair, to cause the hair to fall, also against the scab or maunge of
foure-footed beasts.
In sum, this book leads you to medicines, stories and observations, a
thousand two hundred ninety and two: collected out of

Latin Authors.
M. Varro, C. Volgius, Pompeius Lenaeus, Sextius Niger, and Julius Bassus, who
writ both in Greek, Antonius Castor, and Cornelius Celsus.

Foreign Writers.
Theophrastus, Apollodorus, Democritus, Iuba, Orpheus, Pythagoras, Mago,
Menander the author of Biochresta, Nicander, Homer, Hesiodus, Musaeus,
Sophocles, Xanthus and Anaxilaus.

Physicians.
Mnestheus, Callimachus the professor of Physic, Timaristus, Simus,
Hippocrates, Chrysippus, Diocles, Ophion, Heraclides, Aicesius, Dionysius,
Apollodorus the Tarentine, Praxagoras, Plistonicus, Medius, Dieuchus,
Cleophantus, Philistio, Asclepiades, Cr^tenas, Iolla, Erasistratus, Diagoras,
Andreas, Mnesicles, Epicharmus, Damion, Theopolemus, Metrodorus, Solon, Lycus,
Olympias the Midwife of Thebes, Phyllinus, Petreius, Miction, Glaucias and
Xenocrates.

THE XXVII. BOOK COMPREHENDS all other sorts of herbs.
Chap. 1. The rest of Herbs. 2. Of Aconitum, and how this herb kills
Leopards or Panthers. 3. That God is the Creator of all things. 4. Of the
herb Aethiopis, Ageratum, Aloe, Alcea, Alypum, Alsine, Androsacum,
Androcaemon, Ambrocia, Restharrow, Anagyron, and Anonymon. 5. Of the great
Burre, Of Cliuers or Goose grass, Asplenum, Asclepias, or Swallowwort, Aster
or Bubonium, Ascyrum or Ascyroeides, Aphace, Alcibium, and Cocks comb. 6. Of
Alus. 7. Of sea Weeds or Reits, of Elder, wild Vine, and Wormwood. 8. Of
Ballote or stinking Horehound, of Botrys or Oak of Jerusalem, of Brabyla, of
Bryon or Corallina, of Bupleuron, and Catanance, of Calla, Cerceia, Cirsium and
Crataegonum, Thelygonum, Crocodilium, Dogs stone, Chrysolachanum, Cucubalum,
and Conferua or the river Sponge. 9. Of the grain called Coccos, Gnidia, of
Tazill, of Oak fearne, of Dryophonum, of Elatine, of Empetrum or Perce-Pierre,
of Epipactus or Elleborius, of Epimedum, Enneaphyllon, i. the nine leafed
herb, of Osmund or fearne, of Fenmur Bubulum, i. Ox thigh, of Galeopsis or
Galeobdolon, of Glaux or Eugalactum. 10. Of Glaucium, of Paeonie, Cudweed or
Chamaezelum, of Galedragum, Holcos, Hyosiris, Holosteum, and Hypophaestum. 11.
Of Hypoglossa, and Hypecoon, Idaea, Isopyron, Spurge, Pat-delion, Lycopsis,
Greimile, etc. 12. Of Medium, Mouse-eare, Myagros, an herb called Natrix,
Othone, Onosma, Onopordos, Toads flax, Woodsoure or Alleluiah, Crowfoot,
Knotgrasse, Camomile, Phyteuma, Phyllon, Phellandrion, Phalaris, Polyrrhizon,
Proserpinaca or Knotgrasse, Rhacoma, Reseda, and Stoechas. 13. Of Nightshade
and Dwale, of Smyrnium, Orpinum, Trichomanes, Thalietrum, Thlaspi, Tragonias,
Tragonis and Tragopogos, the serpent Spondylis. To conclude, that some diseases
and venomous things be not in all countries.
In sum, herein are comprehended medicines, stories, and notable
observations, 702.

Latin Authors cited.
Pompeius Lenaeus, Sextius Niger, and Julius Bassus, who wrate both in Greek,
Antonius Castor and Cornelius Celsus.

Greek Writers.
Theophrastus, Apollodorus, Cittiensis, Democritus, Aristogiton, Orpheus,
Pythagoras, Mago, Menander that wrote the Treatise Biochresta, and Nicander.

Physicians.
Mnestheus and his fellows, as they went in the former book.

IN THE XXVIII. BOOK ARE COMPREhended the medicinable virtues from living
creature.
Chap. 1. The medicines and virtues observed in living creatures. 2. Whether
charms and bare words or characters avail ought in Physic. The prodigious
tokens and presages may take effect in some, and may be auerted and made
frustrate by others. 3. Remedies even in the bodies of men against
enchauntments and Magic. 4. Of certain sorceries, also the virtue of a man's
spittle. 5. The regard of diet for a man's health. 6. Of sneesing, the
moderation to be used in the act of Venus or company with a woman, of other
preservatives of health. 7. What remedies and medicines a woman's man's body
does affourd. 8. The medicinable properties in certain strange beasts, namely,
the Elephant, Lion, Cammell, Hyaena, Crocodile, Chamaeleon, Skinke,
Riuer-horse, and Once. 9. The medicines which we have from the bodies of wild
beasts and tame of the same kind. The virtue of milk, butter, and cheese, the
observations thereto belonging: also of fat or grease. 10. Remedies received
from Bores and Swine, from Goats and wild Horses: also from other beasts,
serving to cure all manner of diseases. 11. Other remedies for many kinds of
maladies, taken from living creatures. 12. For the spots and wems in the
visage: for the infirmities of the neck and of the breast. 13. Against the
diseases of the stomach, loins, and reins. 14. To stay a laske, against the
looseness of the stomach, to cure the bloody flix: the inflations of the
belly, ruptures, the provocation to the seege without effect, the broad flat
long worms in the belly, and the collicke. 15. Against the torments and
pains in the bladder, against the stone, the infirmities in the privy parts
of man or woman: as also in the fundament, and the twist or groine, and the
cure thereof. 16. For the gout, the falling evil, for those that be blasted
or stricken with a planet, and bones broken. 17. Against Melancholic, and those
whose brains be troubled with fancies, the lethargy, dropsy, wild fire or
tetter, and the pains or ach of the sinews, apt remedies. 18. To staunch
blood, to cure ulcers or old sores, cankers and scabs. 19. Medicines appropriat
to women's diseases. 20. Strange and wondrous things observed in sundry beasts.
In sum, here be reported medicines, stories, and observations, to the number
of a hundred eighty and five.

Latin Authors alleged.
M. Varro, L. Piso, Fabianus, Verres, Antias, Verrius Flaccus, Cato Censorius,
Servius Sulpitius, Licinius Macer, Celsus, Massurius, Sextius Niger who wrate
in Greek, Bythus the Dyrrhachian, Ophilius the Physician, and Granius the
Physician.

Foreign Writers.
Democritus, Apollodorus who wrate a book entitled Myrsis, Miletus, Artemon,
Sextilius, Antaeus, Homer, Thcophrastus, Lysimachus, Attalus, Xenocrates who
wrote a book called Diophros, and Archelaus likewise that wrote such another,
Demetrius, Sotira, Elephantis, Salpe, and Olympias of Thebes, five women and
midwines, Diotimus, Iolla, Miction of Smyrna, Aeschines the Physician,
Hippocrates, Aristotle, Metrodorus, Icacidas the Physician, Hesiodus, Dialcon,
Caecilius, Bion the author of the book Peri Dynamaean, Anaxilaus, and king
Iuba.

IN THE XXIX BOOK ARE CONTAINED medicines from other living creatures.
Chap. 1. The first beginning and original of the Art of Physic: when
Physicians began first to visit Patients lying sick in their beds: the first
Physicians that practiced the cure of sick persons, by frictions, ointments,
baths. hot-houses, etc. Of Chrysippus and Erasi stratus their course and manner
of practice: of Empiricke Physic: of Herophilus and other famous Physicians:
how often the Art and state of Physic has altered: the first professed
Physician at Rome; when it was that he practiced: what opinion the ancient
Romans had of Physicians: finally the imperfection and faults in that Art. 2.
The medicinable virtues and properties observed in wool. 3. The nature of
eggs, and the virtues thereof good in Physic. 4. Remedies in Physic
received from dogs and other creatures that are not tame but wild: also from
fowls: and namely against the stings of the venomous spiders Phalangia. 5. Of
the Ostrich grease, and the virtues thereof: of a mad dog: also remedies had
from him, a lizard, geese, doves, and weasils. 6. Medicines against the falling
of the hair, and to make it grow again: to kill nits: to recover the hair of
the eyelids: to cure the dimnesse and redness, and generally all diseases and
accidents of the eyes, as also the swellings and inflammations in the kernils
under the ears.
In sum, there be medicines and other things worth observation in this book,
to the number of five hundred twenty and one.

Latin Authors alleged.
M. Varro, L. Piso, Verrius Flaccus, Antias, Nigidius, Cassius Hemina, Cicero,
Plautus, Celsus, Sextius Niger who wrote in Greek, Caecilius the Physician,
Metellus Scipio, Ovid the Poet, and Licinius Macer.

Forteine Authors.
Philopater, Homerus, Aristotle, Orpheus Democritus, Anaxilaus.

Physicians.
Botrys, Apollodorus, Archidemus, Anaxilaus, Ariston, Xenocrates, Diodorus,
Chrysippus the Philosopher, Horus, Nicander, Apollonius of Pytane.

IN THE XXX. BOOK ARE CONTAINED. medicines for living creatures, such as were
not observed in the former Book.
Chap. 1. The beginning of the black Science and Art magic, when it began,
who practiced it first, and who were they that brought it into request and
reputation. Also the rest of the medicines taken from beasts. 2. Sundry kinds
of Magic: the execrable and cursed parts played by Nero, and of Magicians. 3.
Of Wants or Mouldwarps: of living creatures as well tame as savage which
affourd remedies, and those are digested in order according to the diseases. 4.
How to make the breath sweet: against mols and spots disfiguring the face:
remedies for to cure the diseases of the throat and chaws. 5. Against the Kings
evil, and namely when the swelling is broken and does run: to ease the pain of
the shoulders, the heart and the parts about it. 6. For the diseases of the
lungs and liver: also to cure the casting and reiection of blood upward. 7.
Remedies for the bloody flix, and generally for all diseases of the belly and
the guts. 8. For the gravel and stone, for pains of the bladder, for swelling
of the stones and the groine, of apostems or swellings in the kirnels and
emunctories. 9. Against the gout of the feet and pains of other joints. 10.
Remedies against many diseases that hold the whole body. 11. Against the
jaundise, the frenzy, fevers, and dropsy. 12. Against the wild fire,
carbuncles, fellons or vncoms, burns, scaldings, and shrinking of the sinews.
13. To staunch blood, to allay swellings in wounds: also to cure ulcers, green
wounds, and other maladies, diverse remedies, all taken from living creatures.
14. To cure women's secret maladies, and to help conception. 15. Many receipts
and remedies huddled together one with another. 16. Certain miraculous things
observed in beasts.
In sum, this book shows unto us medicines and memorable observations 54.

Latin Authors cited.
M. Varro, Nigidius, M. Cicero, Sextius Niger who wrate in Greek, and Licinius
Macer.

Foreign Writers.
Eudoxus, Aristotle, Hermippus, Homer, Apion, Orphens, Democritus, and
Anaxilaus.

Physicians.
Botrys, Horus, Apollidorus, Menander, Archimedes, Ariston, Xenocrates,
Diodorus, Chrysippus, Nicander, Apollonius, Pitanaeus.

THE XXXI. BOOK SHOWS MEDICINES gathered from fishes and water creatures:
also it delivers unto us strange and wonderful things as touching the Waters.
Chap. 1. Admirable matter observed in the waters. 2. The difference of waters.
3. The nature and quality of waters: how to know good and wholesome waters
from them that be naught. 4. The reason of some waters, that spring on a
sudden, and so likewise cease and give over. 5. Many historical observations
of waters. 6. The manner of water conduits, and how to draw them from their
heads: when and how waters are to be used which naturally are medicinable: how
far forth navigation or sailing upon the salt water is good for the health:
medicines made of sea water. 7. Diverse kinds of salt: the preparing and making
thereof, together with the virtues medicinable of salt, and other
considerations thereto belonging. 8. Of the fish Scamber or the Mackrell: of
fish pickle: of Alex, a kind of brine or fish sauce 9. The nature of Salt, and
the medicines made of it. 10. Sundry sorts of Nitre, the handling and
preparation thereof, the medicines and observation to it pertaining. 11. The
nature of Spunges.
This book comprehends medicines and notable observations 266.

Latin Authors alleged.
M Varro, Cassius of Parma, Cicero, Mutius, Cor. Celsus, Trogus, Ovid,
Polybius, and Sornatius.

Foreign Writers.
Callimachus, Ctesias, Eudicus, Theophrastus, Eudoxus, Theopompus, Polyclitus,
Iuba, Lycus, Apion, Epigenes, Pelops, Apelles, Democritus, Thrasillus,
Nicander, Memander the Comicall Poet, Attalus, Sallustius, Dionysius, Andreas,
Nicreatus, Hippocrates, Anaxilaus.

IN THE XXXII. BOOK ARE CONTAINED other medicines behind, from fishes and
water creatures.
Chap. 1. Of the fish Echeneis, his wonderful property: of the Torpedo, and
the Sea-hare: marvelous things reported of the red sea. 2. The natural
industry, docilitie, and gentleness of some fish: where they will come to
hand and take meat at a man's hand: in what countries fishes serve in stead of
oracles. 3. Of those fishes that live both on land and water: the medicines and
observations as touching Castoreum. 4. Of the sea Tortoise: many virtues
medicinable observed in sundry fishes. 5. Receipts of medicines taken from water
creatures, digested and set in order according to sundry diseases; and first
against poison and venomous beasts. 6. Of Oisters, Purple shell-fishes, and
sea-weeds called Reits: their virtues medicinable. 7. Medicines against the
shedding of the hair: how to fetch hair again: also against the infirmities
of eyes, ears, teeth, and to amend the vseemely spots in the face. (ly. 8. Many
medicines set down together vnorder- 9. Remedies for the diseases of the liver
and sides, stomach and belly: others also disorderly put down. 10. Against
fevers and agues of all sorts, and many other infirmities. 11. A rehearsal of
all creatures living in the sea, to the number of 122.
In sum, ye hauehere medicines, stories, and observations, 928.

Latin Authors.
Licinius Macer, Trebius Niger, Sexitius Niger who wrote in Greek, Ovid the
Poet, Cassius Hemina, Mecanas, and L. Atteius.

Foreign Writers.
K. Iuba, Andreas, A Woman.
Salpe, Pelops, Apelles of Thasos, Thrasillus, and Nicander.

THE XXXIII. BOOK DECLARES the natures of Metals.
Chap. 1. In what estimation were the mines of gold at the first in the old
world: the beginning of gold rings: the proportion of gold that our ancestors
had in their treasure: the degree of knights or gentlemen at Rome: the
privilege to wear gold rings, and who only might so do. 2. The courts and
chambers of judges or justices at Rome: how often the gentlemen of Rome and men
of arms changed their title: the presents given to valiant soldiers for
their brave service in the wars: the first crowns of gold that were seen. 3.
The ancient use of gold besides, both in men and women: of the golden coin:
when copper and brass money was first stamped: when gold and silver was put
into coin: before money was coined, how they used brass for exchange in old
time. At the first taxation and levy made of Tribute, what was thought to be
the greatest wealth; and at what rate were the best men sessed. How often and
at what time gold grew into credit and estimation. 4. The mines of gold, and
how naturally it is found: when the statue or image of gold was first seen:
medicinable virtues in gold. 5. Of Borras, and six properties of Borras in
matters of Physic: the wonderful nature that it has to soder all metals,
and give them their perfection. 6. Of Silver, Quicksilver, Antimonie, or
Alabaster: the dross or refuse of silver: also the scum or some of silver
called Litharge. 7. Or Vermilion: in what account it was in old time among the
Romans: the invention thereof: of Cinnabaris or Sangdragon used in painting
and Physic: diverse sorts of vermillion, and how painters use it. 8. Of
Quicksiluer artificial: the manner of gilding silver: of touchstones: diverse
experiments to try silver: the sundry kinds thereof 9. Of mirroirs or
looking-glasses: of the silver in Egypt. 10. Of the excessive wealth of some
men in money: who were reputed for the richest men: when it was that at Rome
they began to make largess and scatter money abroad to the commons. 11. Of the
superfluity of coin, and the frugalitie of others as touching silver plate,
beds and tables of silver: when began fitst the making of excessive great and
massiue platters and chargers of silver. 12. Of silver statues: the grauing and
chasing in silver, and other workmanship in that metal 13. Of Sil, of Azur,
of superfice Azur named Nestorianum: also of the Azur called Coelum: that every
year these kinds be not sold at one price.
This book has in it of medicines, stories, and observations, 1215.

Latin Authors alleged.
L. Piso Antius, Verrius, M. Varro, Cor. Nepos, Messula, Rufus, Marsus the
Poet, Buthus, Julius Bassus, and Sextius Niger, (who wrote both of Physic in
Greek) and Fabius Vestalis.

Foreign Writers.
Democritus, Metrodorus Sceptius, Menaechmus, Xenocrates, and Antigonus, who
wrate all three of the feat and skill of grauing, chasing and embossing in
metal: Heliodorus, who wrote a book of the rich ornaments and oblations of
the Athenians: Pasiteles, who wrote of wonderful pieces of work: Nymphodorus,
Timaeus who wrate of Alchymie or mineral Physic: Iolla, Apollodorus,
Andreas, Heraclydes, Diagoras Botryensus, Archimedes, Dionysius, Aristogenes,
Democritus, Mnesicles, Attalus the Physician, Xenocrates the son of Zeno, and
Theomnestes.

THE XXXIIII. BOOK TREATS of other Metals.
Chap. 1. Mines of Brass, Copper, Iron, Lead, and Tin. 2. Sundry kinds of
Brass, namely Corinthian, Deliacke, and Aegineticke. 3. Of goodly
candlesticks, and other ornaments of temples. 4. The first images made at Rome:
the original of statues: the honor done to men by statues: sundry sorts and
diverse forms of them. 5. Of statues pourtraied in long Robes; and of many
others who first erected images upon columns and pillars at Rome: when they
were allowed first at the cities charges: also what manner of statues the first
were at Rome. 6. Of statues without gown or cassocke, and some other: the first
statue pourtraied on horseback at Rome: when the time was that all Images as
well in public places as private houses were abolished at Rome and put down:
what women at Rome were allowed to have their statues; and which were the first
erected in public place by foreign nations. 7. The famous workmen in making
and casting Images: the excessive price of Images: of the most famous and
notable colosses or gyant-like images in the city of Rome. 8. Three hundred
sixty and six pieces of work wrought in brass by most curious and excellent
artificers. 9. What difference there is in Brass: the diverse mixtures with
other metals: how to keep brass. 10. Of Brass ore called Cadmia, and for
what it is good in Physic. 11. The refuse or scum of Brass, Verdegris: the
skales of brass and copper, steel, copper rust, or Spanish green: of the
collyrie or eye-salue called Hieracium. 12. Of a kind of Verdegris named
Scolecia: of Chalcitis, i. red Vitrioll, Mysy, Sorry, and Copporose or Vitrioll,
i. black Nil. 13. Of the foil of Brass named white Nil or Tutia: of Spodium,
Antispodium, of Diphryges, and the Trient of Servilius. 14. Of Iron and mines
of Iron: the difference also of Iron. 15. Of the temperature of Iron: the
medicinable virtues of Iron, and the rust of Brass and Iron: the skales of
Iron, and the liquid plastre named of the Greeks Hygemplastrum. 16. The mines
of Lead: of white and black Lead. 17. Of Tin, Of Argentine Tin, and some other
minerals. 18. Medicines made of Lead and refuse of Lead, of Lead ore, of Ceruse
or Spanish white, of Sandaricha of red Orpiment.
In sum, here are contained natable matters, stories, and observations, 815.

Latin Authors cited.
L. Piso, Antias, Verrius, M. Varro, Messala, Rufus, Marsus the Poet, Buthus,
Julius Bassus, and Sextius Niger, who wrote both in Greek of Physic, and
Fabius Vestalis.

Foreign Writers.
Democritus, Metrodorus Scepsius, Menechmus, Xenocrates, Antigonus, and Duris,
(who all four wrote of grauing, chasing, and embossing metals, a work
entitled Toreutice:) Heliodorus, who described the ornaments and oblations
hanged up in Athens: Nymphodorus, Andreas, Heraclides, Diagoras, Botryensis,
Iolla, Apollodorus, Archimedes, Dionysius, Aristogenes, Diomedes, Mnesicles,
Xenocrates the son of Zeno, and Theomnestus.

IN THE XXXV. BOOK IS SHOWED IN what account Painting was in old time.
Chap. 1. The honor and regard of Pictures in times past. 2. In what price
Images were of old. 3. When Images were first erected and set up in public
place, as also in private houses, with their scutcheons and arms: the beginning
of pictures: the first draught of Picturs in one simple color: the first
Painters, and how ancient they were in Italy. 4. Of Roman Painters: the first
time that Painting and Picturs grew into credit: who they were that drew their
victories in colors upon tables, and set them forth to be seen: and when
foreign Pictures began to be of some good reckoning at Rome. 5. The art and
cunning of drawing pictures: the colors that painters use. 6. Of colors
natural and artificial. 7. What color will not abide to be laid wet: what
colors they painted withal in old time: at what time first the combats of
sword-fencers at utterance, were set forth in painted tables to be seen. 8.
How ancient the art of Painting is, when it began: a catalogue of the excellent
workmen in that kind, and how their workmanship was prised and esteemed. 9.
The first that contended and strove who could paint best: also who first used
the pencill. 10. Of Pictures so lively drawn that birds were deceived
therewith: what is the hardest point in Painting. 11. The way to still birds
that they sing and chatter not: who was the first that devised to enamell, or
to set colors with fire, and with the pencill painted arched roufs and vaults;
and among, the wonderful prises that Pictures were set at in old time. 12. The
first inuentors of potterie: of Images made of clay and cast in moulds: also of
vessels made of earth, and their price. 13. Sundry sorts of earth for potters:
of the dust or sand of Puteoli: of other kinds of earth which turn to be hard
stone. 14. Of walls made by casting in moulds: also of brick walls, and the
manner of making them. 15. Of Brimstone and Alume, their diverse kinds and use
in Physic. 16. Of sundry sorts of earth, and namely Samia, Eretria, Chia,
Selenusia, Pingitis, and Ampelitis, and the use they have in Physic. 17.
Sundry sorts of chalk for fullers to scour clothes, to wit, Cimolia, Sarda,
Vmbrica, of a kind of earth called Saxum, as also that gives a silver color
and is called Agentaria. 18. Who were they that enriched their slaves after
they were enfranchised, and who they were of slaves came up and grew to great
wealth and power. 19. Of the earth that coms out of the Island Galeta: of the
earth Clupea: also, of that which comes from the Balear Islands, and the Isle
Ebusa.
In sum, the medicines, histories, and observations in this book, amount to 956.

Latin Authors alleged.
Messala the Orator, Messala the Elder, Fenestella, Atticus, Verrius, M.
Varro, Cor. Nepos, Decius Eculeo, Mutianus, Melissus, Vitruvius, Cassius
Seuerus Longulanus, Fabius Vastalis, who also wrote of Painting.

Foreign Writers.
Pasiteles, Apelles, Melanthius, Asclepiodorus, Euphranor, Parasius,
Heliodorus, who wrote of the Pictures and other ornaments set up at Athens,
Metrodorus (who likewise wrote of Architecture, to wit, Masonrie and
Carpentrie:) Democritus, Theophrastus, Apion the Grammarian who also made a
book af Mineral or Chymicke Physic, Nymphodorus, Andreas, Heraclides,
Iolla, Apollodorus, Diagor as Botryensis, Archidemus, Dionysius, Aristogenes,
Demanes, Mnesicles, Xenocratos, the scholar of Zeno, and Theomnestus.

THE XXXVI. BOOK TREATS of Stones.
Chap. 1. The nature and property of stones: the superfluity and expense
about buildings, of marble 2. Who first showed at Rome columns of marble in
public place. 3. The first that brought columns of marble to Rome out of
foreign countries. 4. The first workmen that were commended for cutting in
marble, and at what time that invention began. 5. Excellent pieces of work in
marble to the the number of 126. The cunning and curious workmen themselves: of
the white marble of the Island Paros. The stately and admirable sepulcher
Mausoleum. 6. When they began at Rome to build with marble: who was the first
that ouercast the outside of walls with marble: at what times this or that kind
of marble was taken up in building at Rome: who cut marble first and brought it
into leaves or thin plates by cutting: the manner thereof: also of sand. 7. Of
the hard stone of Naxos, and Armenia: sundry kinds of marble. 8. Of the
Alabastre marble of Lygdinum and Alabandicum. 9. Of the great obeliske at
Thebes in Aegipt, and at Alexandria: of that also which is in the great cirque
or shew-place at Rome. 10. Of that obeliske which stands in Mars field at
Rome, and serves for a Gnomon or Style in a quadrant or dyall. 11. Of a third
obeliske at Rome in the Vatican. 12. Of the Pyramides in Aegipt, and a
monstrous Sphynx of a wonderful height. 13. Of the Mazes or Labyrinths in
Aegipt, the Isle Lemnos, and in Italy. 14. Of hanging gardens made upon
terraces: of a great town where all the houses were build upon vaults and
arches, seeming to hang in the air: also of the temple of Diana in Ephesus.
15. Of the stately temple of Cyzicum: of a certain rock of stone called
Fugitive: of an Echo that renders the voice seven fold: of an house built
without nail or pin: of the sumptuous and wonderful buildings at Rome. 16.
Sundry kinds of the Loadstone: the medicinable virtues and properties thereof.
17. Of certain stones which soon eat and consume dead bodies that be laid
therein: of others again that preserve them long: of the stone Asius, and the
virtues of it. 18. Of Iuorie dug out of the earth: of stones converted into
bones: of stones that represent palms imprinted in them, and of other kinds.
19. Of Curalius, or a kind of Marquesite called Pyrites, and the virtues
thereof: of the stone Ostracites, and Amiantus and the properties of it: of the
stone Melitites, and the power thereof: of the Geat and his medicinable
properties: of Sponge stones: of the stone Phrygius and his nature. 20. Of the
Bloud-stone, and five sorts of it; and of Schistus. 21. Four kinds of the
Aegle stone, of the stone within the belly of them called Callimus: of the
stones Samius and Arabus: also of Pumish stones. 22. of stones meet for to make
Apothecaries mortars, of soft stones, of the stone Specularis, and of Flints,
of the shining stone Phengites, of whetstones, and other stones meet for
building: of stones that will resist the fire and abide all weather and
tempest. 23. Of Cesterns, of Limestone, sundry sorts of sand, the tempering of
sand and lime for mortar: the ill building of some walls: of parget and
roughcast: also columns and buttresses in building. 24. The medicinable
virtues of Quickelime, of Maltha, and Plaster. 25. Of pauements: when they were
first used at Rome: of terraces and paued floores lying open to the air above:
of certain pauements called Graecanica: and when arched and embowed work
first began. 26. The first invention of glass: the manner of making it of a
kind of glass called Obsidianum: sundry sorts of glass in great variety. 27.
Wonderful operations of fire: the virtues thereof medicinable, and the
prodigious significations and presages by fire.
In sum, here you may find medicines, stories, and observations, in all 523.

Latin Authors.
M. Varro, Caelius, Galba, C. Ictius, Mutianus, Cor. Nepos, L. Piso, Tubero,
Seneca, Fabius Vastalis, Annius, Faecialis, Fabius, Cato Censorius, and
Vitruvius.

Foreign Writers.
Theophrastus, Praxitiles, K. Iubn, Nicander, Sotacus, Sudines, Alexender,
Polyhistor, Apion, Plistonicus, Duris, Herodotus, Euemerus, Aristagoras,
Dionysius, Artemidorus, Butoridas, Antisthenes, Democritus, Demoteles, and
Lyceas.

IN THE XXXVII. BOOK IS DECLARED the original of precious stones.
Chap. 1. The precious stone of Polycrates the tyrant, also of K. Pyrrhus: who
were the best lapidaries, and could cut excellently well in stone: the first man
that at Rome ware a precious stone upon his finger. 2. The rich stones that
were showed in the triumph of Pompey the Great: the nature and virtues of the
Crystal stone: the costly vessels made thereof, and the superfluous expense
that way: when the vessels of Cassidoine called Myrhhina, were first invented:
the wastfull expense in them: the nature and properties of them: what lies the
Greeks have told as touching Amber. 3. The true original and beginning of
Amber: the medicinable virtues thereof: the sundry kinds, and the excessive
cost that folk were at to get them: of Lincurium and the preperties of it. 4.
Of Diamonds, and their kinds: their virtues: also of Pearls. 5. Of the
Hemerauld and diverse sorts of it: of other green precious stones clear and
transparant. 6. Of the true Opall stones, their diverse kinds, and which be
counterfeit: the means how to try them: also of diverse other rich stones 7. Of
Rubies and carbuncles: which be counterfeit: the ways to prove whether they be
good or no. Also of other ardent stones like fire. 8. Of the Topaze, and all
the kinds: of the Turquois: of other green stones that be not clear through.
9. Sundry sorts of the Jasper stone. 10. Of cerraine precious stones set down
in order according to the Alphabet. 11. Of some precious stones which take
their denomination of the parts of man's body: also from other living
creatures, and of those which have the names from other things. 12. Of other
new stones growing naturally: of counterfeit and artificial stones: of their
sundry forms and fashions. 13. The manner and way how to prove fine stones
from other.
In sum, here are to be read of notable matters, worthy histories, and
special observations, to the number of 1300, gathered out of

Latin Authors.
M. Varro, the Records of Roman triumphs, Mecoenas, Iacchus, and Cornelius
Bocchus.

Foreign Writers.
K. Iuba, Xenocrates the disciple of Zeno, Sudines, Aeschylus, Philoxenus,
Euripides, Nicander, Satyrus, Theophrastus, Chares, Philomenes, Democrates,
Xenotimus, Metrodorus, Sotacus, Pytheas, Timaeus the Sicilian, Niceas,
Theocrestus, Asaruba, Mnasea, Theomenes, Ctesias, Mithridates, Sophocles, K.
Archelaus, Callistratus, Democritus, Ismenias, Olympicus, Alexander Polyhistor,
Apion, Horus, Zoroastres, and Zactalias.

THE SECOND BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF NATVRE,
WRITTEN BY C. PLINIVS SECVNDVS.
CHAP. I.
Whether the World be finite, and but one.

THE World, and this, which by another name men have thought good to call
heaven (under the pourprise and bending cope whereof, all things are emmanteled
and covered) believe we ought in all

CHAP. II.
Of the form and figure of the World.

THat the form of heaven is round, in fashion of an absolute and perfect
globe, the name thereof principally, and the consent of all men agreeing to
call it in Latin Orbis, (i.) a roundle; as also many natural reasons, do
evidently show: to wit, not only for that such a figure every way falls and
bends upon it self, is (as hereafter it shall appear) but also because the
eiesight does approve the same: in that look

CHAP. III.
Of the motion of Heaven.

THat the world thus framed, in a continual and incessant circuit, with
unspeakable swiftness turns round about in the space of four and twenty
hours, the rising and setting ordinarily of the Sun has left clear and
doubtless. Now, whether it being in height infinite, and therefore the sound
of so huge a frame, whiles it is whirled Tenerum is showed bv good arguments:
for that by the fall of natural seeds from thence of all things, and those for
the most part blended and mixed one with another, there are engendered in the
world, and the sea especially, an infinite number of strange and monstrous (...)
letter in that, and principally the middle circle over our head, more white
than the rest, toward the North pole.

CHAP. IIII.
Why the World or Heaven is called Mundus.

VErily for mine own part, moved I am and ruled by the general consent of all
nations. For, ^he World, which the Greeks by the name of ornament, called
Mundus. And without all question, Heaven we have named Coelum, as it were
Engraue^ (...) gar^ished, according as M. Varro interprets it. And hereto
makes much the order^y rank of things therein, and namely the circle called
Signifer, or the Zodiake set forth and divided by the forms of twelve living
creatures therein portraied: together with the manner of the Suns race
throughout them, keeping ever the same course still, for so many ages past.

CHAP. V.
Of the four Elements.

I Neither see any doubt made as touching the Elements, That they be four in
number. The highest* Fire: from whence are those bright eyes of so many shining
stars. The next, Spirit which the Greeks and our country men by one name
called Air: Vital this element is, and as it gives life to all things, so it
soon passes through all, and is intermedled in the whole: by the power
whereof, the earth hangs ^oised and balanced just in the midst, together with
the fourth element of the Waters. Thus by a mutual entertainment one of
another, diverse natures are linked and knit together: so as the light elements
are kept in and restrained by certain weights of the heavier, that they fly
not out: and contrariwise the massier be held up, that they those elements by
which it hangs in a counterballance. Thus it alone rests immovable;

CHAP. VI.
Of the seven Planets.

Between the earth and heaven there hang in the same spirit or element of air
above named, seven stars, severed one from another, and distant asunder
certain spaces, which of their variable motion we call wandering planets,
whereas indeed none stray and wander less than they. In the midst of them
the Sun takes Homer (the prince of learning) as touching him alone.

CHAP. VII.
Of God.

I Suppose therefore that to seek after any shape of God, and to assign a
form and image to him, bewraieth man's weakness. For God, whosoever he be
[if happily there be any other, but the very world] and in what part soever
resiant, all sense he is, all sight, all hearing: he is all life, all soul,
all of himself. And verily to believe that there be gods innumerable, and
those according to men's virtues Democritus was of opinion) that there are two
gods only, and no more; namely, Punishment, and Benefit: These conceits, I
say, make men's idleness and negligence the greater. But all comes of this,
That frail and crasie mortal men, remembering well their own infirmity, have
digested these things apart, to the end that each one might from thence choose
to worship and honor that whereof he stood in need most. And hereupon it is,
that in sundry nations we find the same gods named diversely, according to men's
devotion: and in one region ye shall have innumerable gods. The infernal
powers beneath likewise, yea, and many plagues have been raunged by themselves,
and reckoned for gods in their kind, whilst with trembling fear we desire
that they were pacified. Which superstition has caused a Orbona, near the
temple of Lares: because another erected to Bad Fortune in Esquiliae. And
thereby we may conceive that there are a greater number of gods in heaven
above, than of men upon earth: since that every one of their own accord make
so many gods as they list, fitting themselves with Iunoes and Genij for their
patrons. Now certain Nations there be that account beasts, yea, and some
filthy things for gods; yea and many other matters more shameful to be
spoken: swearing by stinking meats, by garlic, and such like. But surely, to
believe that gods have contracted marriage, and that in so long continuance of
rhyme no children should be borne between them: also that some are aged, and
ever hoarie and gray: others again young and always children: that they be
black of color and complexion, a man is he, that helps a man: and this is
the true and direct pathway to everlasting glory. Vespasian Augustus, both he
and his children: Vespasian, I say, the most mighty ruler of the whole world:
whiles he relieueth the afflicted State of the Roman Empire and Commonweal.
And this is the most ancient manner of requital to such benefactours, That
they should be canonized gods. And hereof came the names as well of all other
gods, as of the stars and planets (which I have mentioned before) in
recognisance of men's good deserts. As for Jupiter verily and Mercury, and
other princes raunged among the gods, who doubts that they were called
otherwise among themselves? and who confesses not how these be celestial
denominations, to express and interpret their nature.

Now, That the sovereign power and deity, whatsoever it is, should have regard
of mankind Here let Christians take heed, and be thankful to God for the
light revealed unto them out of the holy scriptures.
is a toy and vanity worthy to be laughed at. For can we choose but believe, can
we make any Jupiter, for all that he is ready to shoot his thunderbolts: and as
some speed well enough with their wicked deeds and irreligion; so others again
feel the smart and are punished by the saints whom they adore, and the holy
ceremonies which they observe.

How beit, between both these opinions, men have found out to themselves a
middle Godhead and divine power, to the end that we should give still a more
uncertain conjecture as touching God indeed. For throughout the whole world,
in every place, at all times, and in all men's mouths, Fortune alone is sought
unto and called upon: she only is named and in request; she

Now there are another sort, that reject Fortune and Chance both, and will not
abide them, but Augustus Caesar of famous memory has made report and left in
writing, that his left foot shoe was untowardly put on before the right, on
that very day, when he had like to have miscarried in a mutiny among his
soldiers.

Thus these things every one do enwrap and entangle silly mortal men, void of
all forecast and true understanding: so as this only point among the rest
remains sure and certain, namely, That nothing is certain: neither is there
ought more wretched and more proud withal; than man. For all lively creatures
else take care only for their food, wherein Natures goodness and bounty of it
self is sufficient: which one point verily is to be preferred before all good
things whatsoever, for that they never think of glory, of riches, of seeking
for dignities and

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Nature of Planets, and their circuit.

LEt us return now to the rest of Natures works. The stars which we said were
fixed in heaven, are not (as the common sort thinks) assigned to every one of
us; and appointed to men respectively; namely, the bright and fair for the
rich; the less for the poor: the dim for the weak, the aged and feeble:
neither shine they out more or less according to the lot and fortune of every
one, nor arise they each one together with that person unto whom they are
appropriate; and die likewise with the same: ne yet as they set and fall, do
they signify that any body is dead. There is not, ywis, so great society
between heaven and us, as that together with the fatal necessity

The obliquitie and crookedness thereof, Anaximander the Milesian is reported
to have observed first, and thereby opened the gate and passage to Astronomy,
and the knowledge of all things: and this happened in the 58 Olympias.
Afterward Cl^ostratus marked the signs therein, and namely those first of
Aries and Sagitarius. As for the sphere it self, Atlas devised long before.
Now for this time we will leave the very body of the starry heaven, and treat
of all the rest between it and the earth.

Certain it is, that the Planet which they call Saturn, is the highest; and
therefore seems (i. Eastward:) whereas the said heaven always hasteneth to
the right [i. Westward.] And albeit in that continual turning with exceeding
Saturn is of a Saturn. Jupiter.
cold and frozen nature, but the circle of Jupiter is much lower than it, and
therefore his revolution is performed with a more speedy motion, namely, in
twelve years. The third of Mars, which Mars.
some call the Sphere of Hercules, is fiery and ardent, by reason of the Suns
vicinity, and wel-neere in two years runs his race. And hereupon it is,
that by the exceeding heat of Mars, and the vehement cold of Saturn, Jupiter,
who is placed betwixt, is well tempered of them both, and so The Sun.
360 parts [or degrees:] but to the end that the observation of the shadows
which he casts, may return again just to the former marks, five days be
added to every year, with the fourth part of a day over and above. Whereupon
every fifth year leapeth, and one odd day is set to the rest: to the end that
the reckoning of the times and seasons might agree unto the course of the Sun.
Beneath the Sun a goodly fair star there is, called Venus, which goes her
compass, Uenus.
wandering this way and that, by turns: and by the very names that it has,
testifies her emulation of Sun and Moon. For all the while that she
preuenteth the morning, and rises Oriental before, she takes the name of
Lucifer (or Day Star) as a second Sun hastening the day. Contrariwise, Vesper.
This nature of hers, Pythagoras of Samos first found out, about the 42
olympias; which fell out to be the 142 year after the foundation of Rome. Now
this planet in greatness goes beyond all the other five: and so clear and
shining withal, that the beams of this one star cast shadows upon the earth.
And hereupon comes so great diversity and ambiguitie of the names thereof:
whiles some have called it Juno, other Isis, and othersome the Mother of the
gods. By the natural efficacy of this star, all things are engendered on
earth: for whether she rise East or West, she sprinckleth all the earth with
dew of generation, and not only fills the same with seed, causing it to
conceive, but stirs up also the nature of all living creatures to engender.
This planet goes through the circle of the Zodiake in 348 days, departing
from the Sun never above 46 degrees, as Timaeus was of Mercury, Mercury.
of some cleped Apollo: in an inferior circle he goes, after the like manner,
a swifter course by nine days: shining sometimes before the Sunrising,
otherwhiles after his setting, never farther distant from him than 23 degrees,
as both the same Timaeus and Sosigenes do show. And therefore these two
planets have a peculiar consideration from others, and not common with the rest
above named. For those are seen from the Sun a fourth, yea, and third part of
the heaven: oftentimes also in opposition full against the Sun. And all of them
have other greater circuits of full revolution, which are to be spoken of in
the discourse of the great year.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Moons nature.

But the Planet of the Moon, being the last of all, most familiar with the
earrh, and The Moon.
devised by Nature for the remedy of darkness, out-goeth the admiration of
all the rest. She with her winding and turning in many and sundry shapes, has
troubled much the wits of the beholders, fretting and fuming, that of this
star, being the nearest of all, they should be most ignorant; growing as it
does, or else waining evermore. One while bended pointwise into tips of horns:
another whiles divided just in the half, and anon again in compass round:
spotted sometime and dark, and soon after and trauelleth not. At one time ye
shall see her below, and anon aloft: and that not after Endymeon: and thereupon
the voice went, That he was enamoured upon the Moon. Certes, thankful we are
not, as we ought to be, unto those who by their travel and careful endeavor
have given us light in this light. But delighted rather we are wonderously
(such is the pestilent wit and wicked disposition of man) to record in
Chronicles, blood shed and murders: that lewd acts and mischievous deeds should
be known of them, who otherwise are ignorant of the world it self. Well, to
proceed, the Moon being next to the Center, and therefore of least compass,
performs the same course and circuit in seven and twenty days, and one third
part Saturn the highest planet runs (as we said before) in thirty years.
After this, making stay in conjunction with the Sun two days, forth she goes,
and by the thirtieth day at the most, returns to the same point and ministry
again: the mistress, if I may so say, and the teacher of all things
Astronomicall, that may be known in heaven. Now by her means are we taught
that the year ought to be divided into twelve months: for as much as, the
Moon meets or ouertaketh the Sun so many times before he returns to the
same point where he began his course. Likewise that she loses her light (as
the rest of the planets) by the brightness of the Sun, when she approaches
near. For borrowing wholly of him her light, she does shine: much like to
that which we see glittering and flying too and fro in the reflection and
reuerberation of the Sunbeams from the water. And hereupon it is, that she,
by her more mild

CHAP. X.
Of the Sun and Moons eclipse: and of the Night.

Moreover, the eclipse of the Moon and Sun (a thing throughout the
universal contemplation of Nature most marvelous, and like a strange and
prodigious wonder) does show the bigness and shadow of these two planets. For
evident it is, that the Sun is hidden by the coming between of the Moon:
and the Moon again by the opposition of the Earth: also that the one does
quit the other, in that the Moon by her interposition bereaueth the Earth of
the Suns rays, and the earth again does the semblable by

CHAP. XI.
Of the magnitude of Stars.

THe reason of this lifts up men's minds into heaven: and as if they beheld
and looked down from thence, discover unto them the magnitude of the three
greatest parts of the whole world. For the Suns light could not wholly be
taken away from the earth, by the Moon coming between, in case the earth
were bigger than the Moon. But the huge greatness of the Sun is more
certainly known, both by the shadow of the Earth, and the body of the Moon:
so as it is needless to search and inquire into the largeness thereof, either
by proof of eie-sight, or by conjecture of the mind. How unmeasurable it is,
appears

CHAP. XII.
The inventions of man as touching the observation of the heavens.

THe reason verily of both eclipses, the first Roman that published abroad and
divulged, was Sulpitius G^llus, who afterward was Consul, together with M.
Marcellus: but at that time being a Colonel, the day before that King Perseus
was vanqnished by Paulus. he was brought forth by the General into open
audience before the whole host, to foretell the eclipse which should happen
the next morning: whereby he delivered the army from all pensiveness and
fear, which might have troubled them in the time of battle, and within a
while after he compiled also a book thereof. But among the Greeks, Thales
Melesius was the first that found it out, who in the eight and fortieth
Olympias, and the fourth year thereof, did prognosticate and foreshew the
Suns eclipse that happened in the reign of Halyattes, and in the 170. year
after the foundation of the city of Rome. After them, Hipparchus compiled his
Ephemerides, containing the coutse and aspects of both these planets, for six
hundred years ensuing: comprehending withal the months according to the
calculation and reckonings of sundry nations, the days, the hours, the
situation of places, the aspects, was before set and to seek, fearing in
these eclipses of the stars, some great wrong and violence Stesichorus and
Pindarus the Poets (notwithstanding their lofty style,) and namely at the
eclipse of the Sun, as may appear by their poems. As for the Moon, mortal
men imagine, that by magic, sorceries, and charms, she is enchanted, and
therefore help her in such a case when she is eclipsed by dissonant ringing of
basins. In this fearful fit also of an eclipse, Nicias the General of the
Athenians, as a man ignorant of the course thereof, feared to set sail with
his fleet out of the haven, and so greatly endangered and distressed the state
of his country. Fair chieue ye then for your excellent wit, O noble Spirits,
interpretors of the heavens, capable of Natures works, and the deuisers of that
reason whereby ye have surmounted both God and man. For who is he, that seeing
these things, and the painful ordinary travels, since that this

CHAP. XIII.
Of Eclipscs.

Certain it is, that all Eclipses in 222 months have their reuolutions, and
return to their Hipparchus, that the Moon sometimes was eclipsed twice in five
months space, and the Sun likewise in seven: also that the Sun and Moon
Vespasians (Emperors) were Consuls, the father the third time, and the son the
second.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Moons motion.

Clear it is, that the Moon always in her increasing has the tips of her
horns turned from the Sun toward the East: but in the waine contrariwise
Westward. Also that she shines the first day of her apparition, parts, and the
four and twentieth part of an hour, and so rises in proportion the second
day forward, unto the full: and likewise decreaseth in the same manner to the
change. But always she is hidden in the change within fourteen degrees of the
Sun. By which argument we collect, that the magnitude of the other some
eclipses of the Sun, and exceeding deep pits, for so they are to be seen by
day light.

CHAP. XV.
General rules touching the motions and lights of other Planets.

THose three which we say are above the Sun be hidden when they go their
course together with him. They arise in the morning, and be called Oriental
Matutine, and never depart farther than eleven degrees. But afterward meeting
with his rays and beams, they are covered, and in their triple aspect
retrograde, they make their morning station a hundred and twenty degrees off,
which are called the first; and anon in a contrary aspect or opposition, 180
degrees off, they arise in the evening, and are Occidentall Vespertine. In like
sort Mars, as he is nearer unto the Sun, so feels he the Sun beams by a
quadrant aspect, to wit ninety degrees, whereupon that motion took the name,
called the first and second Nonagenarie from both risings. The same planet
keeps his stationarie residence six months in the signs: whereas otherwise
of his own nature but two months. But the other planets in both stations or
houses continue not all out four months apiece. Now the other two inferior
planets under the Sun go down and are hidden after the same manner in the
evening Conjunction, and in as many degrees they make their morning rising: and
from the farthest bounds of their distance they follow Venus, she likewise
makes two stations, according to the two manners of her appearance, morning and
evening, when she is in farthest bounds and utmost points of her Epicycle. But
Mercury keeps his stations so small a while that they cannot be observed.
This is the manner and order as well of the lights and appearances of the
planets, as of their occultations, and keeping close intricate in their motion,
and enfolded within many strange wonders. For change they do their magnitudes
and colors; sometime they approach into the North, the same again go back
toward the South, yea, and all on a Absides; for needs we must use in this
treatise the Greek terms. Now every one of the planets have particular Auges
or circles aforesaid by themselves, and these different from those of the
starry heaven: for that the earth from those two points which they call Poles,
is the very center of the heaven, as also of the Zodiac, situate overthwart
between them. All which Absides, whereupon it is, that they have
diuerscircuits, and different motions, because necessary it is, that the
inward and inferior Absides should be shorter.

CHAP. XVI.
Why the same Planets seem sometime higher, and some lower.

THe highest Absides therefore from the center of the earth are of Saturn, in
the sign Scorpio: of Jupiter, in Virgo: of Mars, in Leo: of the Sun, in
Gemini: of Venus in Mercury in Capricorn: and namely in the middle or
fifteenth degree of the said signs: and contrariwise the said planets in the
same degrees of the opposite signs are lowest, and to the center of the earth
nearest. So it comes to pass, that they seem to move more slowly when they
go their highest circuit: not for that natural motions do either hasten or
slack, which be certain and several to every one: Absis, must needs grow
narrow and near together about the center, as the spokes in cart wheels: and
the same motion by reason of the neerenesse of the center, seems in one place
greater, in another less. The other cause of their sublimities is, for that in
other signs they have the Absides elevated highest from the cen tree of their
own eccentrique circles. Thus Saturn is in the height of his Auge in the 20.
degree of Libra, Iupi^er in the 15. of Cancer, Mars in the 28. of Capricorn,
the Sun in the 29. of Aries, V^nus in the 16. of Pisces, Mercury in the 15.
of Virgo, and the Moon in the 4. of Taurus. The third reason of their altitude
or elevation, is not taken from their Auges or circles accentrique, but
understood by the measure and conuexitie of heaven, for that these planets
seem to the eye as they rise and fall, to mount up or settle downward through
the air. Hereunto is knit Venus goes beyond the circle of the Zodiake, 2.
degrees: which is supposed to be the very efficient cause, that certain living
creatures are engendered and bred even in the desert and uninhabitable parts of
the world. The Moon likewise rangeth throughout all the breadth of it, but
never goes out of it. Next after these, the star of Mercury has the
largest scope in the Zodiake, but yet so, as of 12. degrees (for that is the
breadth thereof) he wandreth but 8. and those not equally, but two in the midst,
four above, and two beneath. Then the Sun in the midst, goes always
between Ma^s in his latitude leaves the eclipticke line four half degrees,
Jupiter two degrees and a half, Saturn no more but two, like as the Sun.
Thus you see the manner of the latitudes, as they descend Southward, or ascend
Northward. And upon this is the reason grounded also of the 3. opin^on of them,
who imagine that the planets do arise and mount from the earth upward into
heaven. For very many have thought, although untruly, that they climb in this
manner. But to the end that they may be reproved and confuted, we must lay open
an infinite and incomprehensible subtilti^, and that which contains all those
causes and reasons above said. First therefore this is a ^reed o^ and resolved,
that these stars or planets in their evening setting, are nearest to the earth,
both in regard i when the Sun toward the evening covers them with his rays:
also, when they be farthest from the earth, as well in latitude as elevation,
they be Oriental Matutine, and arise or appear in the morning before the Sun
is up: as also that then they are Stationaries in their houses, which be in the
middle points of the latitudes which they call eclipticks. Likewise, confessed
it is, that so long as the planets are near to the earth, their motion seems
to increase and be quick: but as they depart on high, to decrease and be slow.
And this reason is approved and confirmed principally by the eleuations and
depressions of the Moon. As doubtless it is also, and held for an infallible
rule, that every planet being Oriental Matutine, rises every day higher than
other. The superior three above the Sun diminish even from their first stations
unto the second. Which being so, Absides, and so not seen at all, because they
are at the highest, and go their least motion, which is so much the less,
Absides. From the even arising after the Sun setting, they descend toward the
latitude meridio^ all, for now the motion less diminishes, but yet increases
not before the second stations: for that they are forced to descend, by reason
of the Sun beams coming from the other side of their Epycicle: and the same
force bears them downward again to the earth, which by the former
triangular aspect raised them aloft toward heaven. So much skilleth it whether
the said beams came from beneath or above. The same happens much more in the
even setting, when they be hidden with the rays of the Sun. This is the reason
of the superior planets above the Sun: but the Theori que is more difficult
of the rest, and has by no man before us been delivered.

CHAP. XVII.
General rules as touching the Planets.

FIrst and foremost therefore let us set down the cause why Venus star never
departs from the Sun more than 46. degrees, and Mercury not above 23. and
(being as they are diverse Planets) why oftentimes they retire back unto the
Sun within that compass. For to be resolved in this point, note we must,
that both of them have their Absides turned opposite to the rest, as being
seated under the Sun: and so much of their circles is underneath, as the
forenamed were above: and therefore farther off they cannot be, because the
curuature and roundle of their Absides in that place has no Absides, by a like
proportion keep an indifferent mean, and their course is limited: but the
short spaces of the longitudes, they recompense again with the wandering of
their latitudes. But what is the reason that they reach not always to 46.
degrees, and to 23? yes ywis do they: but this the Canonical Astronomers have
missed of in their Aphorisms. For it is apparent, that their Absides also or
Auges do move, because they never ouerpasse the Sun. And therefore when their
edges from either side are perceived to fall upon the very point, then the
planets also are supposed to reach unto their longest distances: but when their
edges or the points of their Epicicles be short so many degrees, the stars
themselves are thought to return more speedily in their retrogradation, than
in their direct course forward, albeit the utmost extremity which they both
have, is ever the same. And from Venus contrariwise is retrograde from the
Station Vespertine, to the Matutine. Howbeit, she from the morn rising
begins to climb the latitude Septentrionall: but to follow the altitude and
the Sun, from the morning station; as being most swift, and at the highest,
in the morn setting. Moreover, she begins to digress in latitude, and to
diminish her motion from the morn rising: but, to be retrograde, and withal to
Mercury, being Oriental Matutin, begins both ways to climb, that is, to mount
higher day by day; but to digress in latitude, being Oriental Vespertine: and
when the Sun has overtaken him within the distance of fifteen degrees, he
stands still for four days immovable. Within a while he descends from his
altitude daily, and goes back retrograde from the even setting, namely, when
the Sun hides him with his rays, to the Moon rising, when he appears
before the Sun is up. This star only, and the Moon, descend in as many
days as they ascend. But Venus ascends up to her station in fifteen days
and the vantage. Again, Saturn and Jupiter are twice as long descending, and
Mars four times. See how great variety is in their nature, but the reason
thereof is evident. For they which go against the vapor and heat of the Sun
do also hardly Mars, whose course of all others can be least observed, never
makes station but in quadrate aspect: as for Jupiter, in triangle aspect: and
very seldom severed from the Sun 60. degrees, which number makes six angled
forms of the heaven, that is to say, is the just sixth part of the heaven:
neither does Jupiter show his rising Cancer and Leo. The planet Mercury
seldom has his even rising in Pisces, but very often in Virgo, and the morn
rising in Libra. In like manner, the morn rising in Aquarius, but very seldom
in Leo. Neither becomes he retrograde in Taurus and Gemini: and in Cancer,
not under the 25 degree. As for the Moon, she enters not twice in conjunction
with the Sun in any other sign but in Gemini; and sometime has no conjunction
at all, and that only in Sagitarius. As for the last and first of the Moon, to
be seen in one and the self same day or night, happens in no other sign but
Aries, and few men have had the gift to see it: and hereupon came Linceus to be
so famous for his eye sight. Also the planets Saturn and Mars are hidden with
the Sun beams, and appear Jupiter 36, or at least ten days wanting, Venus
69, or when least 52. Mercury 31, or at least 17.

CHAP. XVIII.
What is the cause that the Planets alter their color.

THe reason of the Planets altitudes is it that tempereth their colors,
according as they be nearer or farther off from the earth. For they take the
likeness of the air, into the coasts whereof they enter in their ascent: and
the circle or circumference of another Planets motion colors them as they
pass either way, ascending or descending. The colder sets a pale color,
the hotter a red, and the windy a fearful and rough hue. Only the Absides,
and the utmost circumferences show a dark black. Each planet has a several
color: Saturn is white, Jupiter clear and bright, Mars fiery and red, Venus
Oriental (or Lucifer) fair, Occidentall (or Vesper) shining, Mercury
sparkeling his rays; the Moon pleasant, the Sun when he rises burning,
afterward glittering with his beams. Upon these causes the sight is
entangled, and discovers even those stars also which are contained and fixed
in the sky, more or less. For one while a number of them appear thick about
the half Moon, when in a clear and calm night she gently beautifieth them.
Another while they are seen but here and there, insomuch as we may wonder that
they are fled upon the full Moon, which hides them: or when the beams either
of the Sun or other above said have dazzled our sight. Yea, the very Moon her
self has a feeling doubtless of the Sun

CHAP. XIX.
The reason of the Suns motion, and the inequality of days.

AS for the Sun himself, a man may observe four differences in his course,
twice in the year making the night equal with the day, to wit, in the Spring
and Autumn, for then he falls just upon the enter of the earth, namely in
the eight degree of Aries and Libra. Twice likewise exchanging the compass of
his race; to lengthen the day from the Bruma or mid-winter, in the eighth
degree of Capricorn: and again to lengthen the night from the Summer Sunsted,
being in as many degrees of Cancer. The cause of unequal days is the
obliquitie of the Zodiake: whereas the one half just of the world, to wit, six
signs of the Zodiake, is at all times above and under the earth. But those
signs which mount upright in their rising, hold light a longer tract, and make
the days longer: whereas they which arise crooked

CHAP. XX.
Why lightnings are attributed to Jupiter.

MOst men are ignorant of that secret, which by great attendance upon the
heavens, deep Clerks and principal men of learning have found out: namely,
that they be the fires of the three uppermost planets, which falling to the
earth carry the name of lightnings: but those especially which are seated in
the midst, to wit, about Jupiter, happily because participating the excessive
cold and moisture from the upper circle of Saturn, and the immoderate heat
from Mars that is next under, by this means he discharges the superfluity,
and hereupon it is commonly said, that Jupiter shoots and darteth lightnings.
Therefore, as out of a

CHAP. XXI.
The distances of the Planets.

MAny have essaied to find out the distance and elevation of the planets from
the earth, and have set down in writing, that the Sun is distant from the Moon
18 degrees, even much as the Moon from the earth. But Pythagoras, a man of a
quick spirit, has collected, that there are 126000 furlongs from the earth to
the Moon, and a duple distance from her to the Sun, and so from thence to the
twelve signs three times so much. Of which opinion was also our countreyman
Gallus Sulpitius.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the Planets music and harmony.

But Pythagoras otherwhiles using the terms of Music, calls the space
between the earth and the Moon a Tonus, saying, that from her to Mercury is
half a tone; and from him to Venus in manner the same space. But from her to
the Sun as much and half again: but from the Sun to Mars a Tonus, that is to
say, as much as from the earth to the Moon. From him to Jupiter half a Tonus:
likewise from him to Saturn half a Tonus: and so from thence to the signifer
Sphere or Zodiac, so much and half again. Thus are composed seven tunes,
which harmony they call Diapason, that is to say, the Generality, or whole
state of consent and concord, which is perfect music. In which, Saturn
moves by the Dorick tune: Mercury by Phthongus; Jupiter by the Phrygian; and
the rest likewise. A subtilty more pleasant yw is than needful.

CHAP. XXIII.
The Geometry or dimension of the world.

A Stadium or Furlong makes of our paces an hundred twenty and five, that is
to say, six hundred twenty and five foot. Possidonius says, That from the
earth it is no less than forty stadia, to that height or altitude wherein
thick weather, winds, and clouds do engender. Above which, the air is pure,
clear, and light, without any troubled darkness. are, and such as men cannot
wind themselves out of: but as well may they now be delivered to Petosiris and
Necepsos have invented, do collect, That every degree in the circle of the
Moon, which is the least (as has been said) of all other, contains 33.
stadia, and somewhat more: in Saturn, the greatest of all the rest, duple so
much: and in the Sun, which we said was the midst, the half of both
measures. And this computation has very great importance, for he that will
reckon the distances between the circle of Saturn and the Zodiake, by this
calculation shall multiply an infinite number of Stadia.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Of sudden Stars.

THere remain yet some few points as touching the world: for inthe very heaven
there be

CHAP. XXV.
Of Comets or blazing stars, and celestial prodigies, their nature,
situation, and diverse sorts.

THese blasing stars the Greekescall Cometas, our Romans Crinitas: dreadful
to be seen, with bloody hairs, and all over rough and shagged in the top like
the bush of hair upon the head. The same Greeks call those stars Pogonias,
Pogonias.
which from the nether part have a maine hanging down, in fashion of a long
Acontiae, they brandish and shake like a spear or Acontias.
dart, signifying great swiftness. This was it, whereof Tiberius Caesar the
Emperor wrote an excellent Poem in his sift Consulship, the last that ever was
seen to this day. The same, if they be shorter and sharp pointed in the top,
they use to call Xiphiae: and of all other Xyphias.
palest they be, and glitter like a sword, but without any reies or beams:
which another kind of them, named Disceus (resembling a dish or coit, whereof
it bears the name, but in color like to amber) puts sorth here and there
out of the brimmes and edges thereof. As for Pitheus, Disceus. Pitheus.
it is seen in form of tons, environed with in a smokie light, as if it
were a concauitie. Ceratias Ceratias.
resembles an horn: and such a one appeared when the whole manhood of Greece
fought the battle of Salamis. Lampadias is like to burning torches: and
Hippeus to horse maines, most Lampadias. Hippeus.
into a spear, namely in the 108 Olympia's, and the 398 year from the
foundation of Charlemaignes Wain: some in no certain part thereof, but
especially in that white, which has taken the name of the Galaxi.
Milk circle. Aristotle says that many are seen together, a thing that no man
else has found out, so far as I can learn. Mary, boisterous winds and much
heat of weather are foretokened by them. There are of them seen also in
Winter season, and about the Antarticke South pole; but in that place without
any beams. A terrible one likewise was seen of the people in Ethiopia and
Egypt, which the King who reigned in that age named Typhon. It resembled fire,
and was Typhon,
pleited and twisted in manner of a wreath, grim and hideous to be looked on,
and no more truly

A fearful star for the most part this Comet is, and not easily expiated; as
it appeared by the late civil troubles when Octauius was Consul: as also a
second time, by the intestine war of Pompey and Caesar. And in our days about
the time that Claudius Caesar was poisoned, and left the Empire to Domitius
Nero, in the time of whose reign and government there was another in manner
continually seen, and ever terrible. Men hold opinion, that it is material for
presage to observe into what quarters it shoots, or what stars power and
influence it receives: also what similitudes it resembles, and in what parts
it shines out and first arises. For

In one only place of the whole world, namely in a Temple at Rome, a Comet is
worshipped and adored, even that which by Augustus Caesar himself, of happy
memory, was judged very lucky and happy to him; who when it began to appear,
gave attendance in person, as ouerseer of those plays and games which he made
to Venus genetrix, not long after the death of his father Caesar, in the
college by him instituted and erected: testifying his joy in these words, In
those very days during the solemnities of my Plays, there was seen a blasing
star for seven days together, in that region of the sky which is under the
North star Septentriones. It arose about the 11 hour of the day, bright it was
and clear, and evidently seen in all lands: by that star it was signified, as
the common sort belceued, that the soul of (Julius) Caesar was received among
the divine powers of the immortal gods. In which regard, that mark or ensign
of a slar was set to the head of that statue of Julius Caesar, which soon
after we dedicated in the Forum Romanum. These words published he abroad: but
in a more inward joy, to himself he interpreted and conceived thus of the
thing, That this Comet was made for him, and that himself was in it borne. And
verily, if we will confess a truth, a healthful, good, and happy presage that
was to the whole world. Some there be who believe, that these be perpetual
stars, and go their course round, but are not seen unless they be left by the

CHAP. XXVI.
Hipparchus his opinion of the Stars. Also historical examples of Torches,
Lamps, Beams, Fiery Darts, opening of the Firmnment, and other such
impressions.

HIppaachus the foresaid Philosopher (a man never sufficiently praised, as who
proved the affinity of stars with men, and none more than he; affirming also
that our souls were hard for God to perform, to deliver to posterity the
just number of stars. He brought the

There be also certain flaming torches shining out in the sky, how be it never
seen but when they fall. Such a one was that which at the time that Germ.
Caesar exhibited a show of Swordfencers at utterance, ran at noontide in sight
of all the people. And two sorts there be of them, namely Lampades, which they
call plain torches; and Bolides, i. Lances, such as the Mutinians Lampades.
Bolides.
Bolis burns all over, and draws a longer tail. There appear and shine out
after the same manner certain beams, which the Greeks call Docus: like as when
the Lacedaemonians being vanquished at sea, lost Docus:
the empire and dominion of Greece. The firmament also is seen to chinke and
open, and this they name Chasma. Chasma.


CHAP. XXVij.
Of the strange colors of the Sky.

THere appears in the Sky also a resemblance of blood, and (than which
nothing is more Philip made all Greece to shake with fire and sword. And these
things verily I suppose to come at certain times by course of nature, like as
other things, and not as the most part think, of sundry causes, which the
subtle wit and head of man is able to devise. They have indeed been
forerunners of exceeding great miseries; but I suppose those calamities happened
not because these impressions were, but these therefore were procreated to
foretell the accidents that ensued afterward. Now for that they fall out so
seldom, the reason thereof is hidden and secret, and so not known, as the
rising of planets above said, the eclipses, and many other things.

CHAP. XXViij.
Of the Heaven flame.

LIkewise there are seen stars together with the Sun all day long; yea, and
very often about the compass of the Sun other flames, like unto garlands of
corn ears; also circles of sundry colors, such as those were when Augustus
Caesar in the prime of his youth entered the city of Rome after the decease of
his father, to take upon him his great name and imperial title.

CHAP. XXjX.
Of Celestial Crowns.

ALso the same garlands appear about the Moon and other goodly bright stars
which are fixed in the firmament. Round about the Sun there was seen an arch,
when Lu. Opimius Q. Fabius were Consuls: as also a round circle, when L.
Porcius and M. Acilius were Consuls.

CHAP. XXX.
Of sudden Circles.

THere appeared a circle of red color when L. Julius and P. Rutilius were
Consuls. Moreover, there are strange eclipses of the Sun, continuing longer
than ordinary; as namely when Caesar Dictator was murdered. Moreover, in the
wars of Antony the Sun continued almost a whole year of a pale wan color.

CHAP. XXXj.
Many Suns.

OVer and besides, many Suns are seen at once, neither above nor beneath the
body of the true Sun indeed, but crosse-wise, and overthwart: never near
nor directly against the earth, neither in the night season, but when the Sun
either rises or sets. Once they are reported to have been seen at noone
day in Bosphorus, and continued from morn Sp. Posthumus, with Q Mutius, Q.
Martius, with M. Porcius, M. Antonius, with P. Dolabella, and Mar. Lepidus,
with L. Plancus, were Consuls. Yea, and we in our days have seen the like,
when Cl. Caesar (of famous memory) was Consul, together with Cornelius Orfitus
his Colleague. More than three we never to this day find to have been seen
together.

CHAP. XXXII.
Many Moons.

THree Moons also appeared at once, and namely when Cn. Domitius and C.
Fannius were Consuls, which most men called Night Suns.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Day light in the Night.

OVt of the Firmament by night there was seen a light, when C. Coelius and Cn.
Papyrius were Consuls, yea and oftentimes besides, so as the night seemed as
light as the day.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Burning Shields or Targuets.

A Burning shield ran sparkling from the West to the East, at the Suns setting,
when L. Valerius and C. Marius were Consuls.

CHAP. XXXV.
A strange sight in the Sky.

BY report there was once seen, and never but once, when Cn. Octauius and C.
Scribonius were Licinius Syllanus the Proconfull saw, together with his whole
train.

CHAP. XXXVI.
The running of Stars to and fro in the Sky.

Seen there be also Stars to shoot hither and thither, but never for naught
and to no purpose: for, from the same quarter where they appear, there rise
terrible winds, and after them storms and tempests both by sea and land.

CHAP. XXXVij.
Of the Stars called Castor and Pollux.

I Have seen my self in the camp, from the soldiers sentinels in the night
watch, the resemblance of lightning to stick fast upon the spears and pikes
set before the rampire. They settle also upon the cross Sail yards and other
parts of the ship, as men do sail in the sea, making a kind of vocal sound,
leaping to and fro, and shifting their places as birds do which fly from bought
to bough. Dangerous they be and unlucky when they come one by one without a
companion; and they drown those ships on which they light, and threaten
shipwreck, yea, and they set them on fire if happily they fall upon the bottom
of the keele. But if they appear two and two together, they bring comfort with
them, and foretell a prosperous course in the voyage, as by whose coming, they
say, that dreadful, cursed, and threatening meteor called Castor and Pollux,
and invoke them at sea no less than gods. Men's heads also in the even tide
are seen many times to shine round about, and to be of a light fire, which
presageth some great matter. Of all these things there is no certain reason to
be given, but secret these be, hidden with the majesty of Nature, and reserved
within her cabinet.

CHAP. XXXViij.
Of the Air.

IT remains now (thus much and thus far being spoken of the world it self)
to wit, the starry heaven and the planets) to speak of other memorable things
observed in the Sky. For even that part also has our forefathers called
Coelum, (i.) the Sky, which otherwise they with an huge deal likewise of
earthly vapors, it does participate confusedly of both. From

CHAP. XXXIX.
Of ordinary and set seasons.

IT is manifest, that of times and seasons, as also of other things, some
causes be certain; others, casual and by chance; or, such as yet the reason
thereof is unknown. For who need to doubt, that Summers and Winters, and those
alternatiue seasons which we observe by yearly course, are occasioned by the
Saturn especially, who sets open the gates for rain Suculae, which the
Grecians of rain name Hyades, because they ever bring foul weather. Howbeit
some, of their own nature, and at certain set times do cause rain; as the
rising of the Kids. As for Arcturus, he never lightly appears without some
tempestuous and stormy hail.

CHAP. XL.
The power of the Dog-starre.

WHo knows not, that when the Dogge-starre arises, the heat of the Sun is
fiery Orix, which the Egyptians say does stand full against the Dog-starre
when it rises, looking wistly upon it, and testifies after a sort by
sneezing, a kind of worship. As for dogs, no

CHAP. XLI.
That the stars have their several influences in sundry parts of the signs,
and at diverse times.

Moreover, the parts of certain signs have their peculiar force, as appears
in the Equinoctial of Autumn, and in mid-winter; at what time we perceive,
that the Sun makes tempests. And this is proved, not only by raines and
storms, but by many experiments in men's bodies, and accidents to plants in the
country. For some men are stricken by the Some takeit for Ruds or Wert-wort:
others for Turn-sol, or the Marygold.
Heliotropium, regards and looks toward the Sun ever as he goes, turning
with him at all hours, notwithstanding he be shadowed under a cloud. Now
certain it is, that the bodies of Oysters, Muskles, Cocles, and all shell
fishes, grow by the power of the Moon, and thereby again diminish: Vergiliae;
in the forehead other seven called Suculae; and Boots, who follows after the
wain or great Bear Septentriones.

CHAP. XLII.
The causes of rain, showers, winds, and clouds.

I Cannot deny but without these causes there arise raines and winds: for
that certain it is, how there is sent forth from the earth a mist sometimes
moist, otherwhiles smokie, by reason of hot vapors and exhalations. Also that
clouds are ingendered by vapors which are gone

CHAP. XLIII.
Of Thunder and Lightening.

Deny I would not therefore, but that the fiery impressions from stars above
may fall upon an hissing being thrust into water) and a smokie fume walmeth up
with many turnings like Altani. And those verily when they come back again
from the sea, are called Tropaei: if they go onward, Apogaei.

CHAP. XLIIII.
What is the reason of the resounding and doubling of the Echo.

But the windings of hills, and their often turuings, their many tops, their
crests and ridges

CHAP. XLV.
Of Winds again.

NOw there be certain caves and holes which breed winds continually without
end: like Aurae and Procellae, but simply called winds, by the Masculine name
Venti: which whether they arise by the continual motion of the heaven, and the
contrary course of the Planets; or whether this wind be that spirit of Nature
that engenders all things, wandering to and fro as it were in some womb; or
rather the air, beaten and driven by the unlike influences and rays of the
straying stars or planets,

CHAP. XLVI.
The Natures and observations of the Winds.

THe old Greek writers, not so few as twenty, have set down and recorded
their observations of the Winds. I marvel so much the more, that the World
being so at discord, and divided into kingdoms, that is to say, dismembered as
it

CHAP. XLVII.
Many sorts of Winds.

MEn in old time observed four Winds only, according to so many quarters of
the world (and therefore Homer names no more:) a blockish reason this was, as
soon after it was judged. The Age ensuing added eight more; and they were on
the other Sub-solanus: from the rising thereof in the Mid-winter, the
South-east Vulturnus. The former of these twain the Greeks call Apeliotes,
and the later Eurus. From the Midday, rises the South wind: and from the
Sunsetting in Mid-winter the South-west, Africus. They also name these two,
Notus and Libs. From the Equinoctial going down of the Sun, the West wind
Fauonius comes: but from that in Summer season, the North-west Corus. And by
the same Greeks they are termed Zephyrus and Argestes. From the North waine or
pole Ar Septentrio: between which and the Sun rising in Summer, is the
North-east wind Aquilo, named Aparctias and Boreas by the Greeks. A greater
reckoning than this for number, is brought in by some, who have thrust in four
more between; namely, Thracias between the North and the Summer setting of
the Sun: in like manner Caecias in the midst between the North-east Aquilo,
and that of the Sun rising in the Equinoctial Sub-solanus. Also, after the
Sunrising in Summer, Phoenicias in the midst, between the South-east and
the South. Last of all, between the South and the South-west, Lybonotus, just
in the midst, compounded of them both, namely, between the Noonestead, and
the Sunsetting in Winter. But here they could not lay a straw, and see to make
an end. For others have set one more yet called Mese, between the North-east
wind Borias and Caecias: also Euronotus between the South and the Southwest
winds. Besides all these, there be some winds appropriate and peculiar to every
nation, which pass not beyond one certain tract and region: as namely Scyros
among the Athenians, declining a little from Argestes a wind unknown to other
parts of Greece. In some other place it is more aloft, and the same then is
called Olympias, as coming Argestes only. Some call Caecias, by the name of
Hellespontias, and give the same winds in sundry places diverse names. In the
province likewise of Narbone, the most notorious wind is Circius, and for
violence inferior to none, driving directly before it very often, the current
at Ostia, into the Ligurian sea. The same wind is not only unknown in all other
climats of the heaven, but reaches not so much as to Vienna, a city in the
same province. As great and boisterous a wind as he is otherwise, yet a
restraint he has before he come thither, and is kept within few bounds by the
opposition of a mean and small hill. Fabianus also auouches, that the South
winds enter not so far as into Egypt. Whereby, the law of Nature shows it
self plainly, that even winds have their times and limits appointed.

To proceed then; the Spring opens the sea for sailers: in the beginning
whereof, the West winds mitigate the Winter weather, at what time as the Sun is
in the 25 degree of Aquarius, Fauonius (which begins to blow about the 7 day
before the Calends of March) by the name of Chelidonius, upon the sight of the
first Swallows; but many name it Orinthias, coming the 71 day after the
shortest day in winter; by occasion of the coming of birds: which wind blows
for nine days. Opposite unto Fauonius is the VVind which we called
Sub-solanus. Unto this VVind is attributed the rising of the Vergiliae or seven
stars, in as many degrees of Taurus, six days before the Ides of May; which
time is a southerly constitution: Prodromi, i. forerunners. And two days after
it is risen, the same winds hold still more stiffely, and blow for the space of
forty days, which they name Etesiae. The Suns heat redoubled by the hotnesse
of that star, is thought to be assuaged by them: and no winds are more
constant, nor keep their set times better than they. Next after them come the
Southern winds again, which are usually up, until the star Arcturus rises,
and that is nine days before the Aequinoctiall in Autumn. With it enters
Corus, and thus Corus begins the Autumn. And to this Vulturnus is
contrary. After Virgiliae go down, and begin winter, which season usually
falls upon the third day before the Ides of November. This is the winter
Northeast wind, which is far unlike to that in Summer, opposite and contrary to
Africus. Now, a seven night before the Mid-winter day, and as much after, the
sea is allaied and calm for the sitting and hatching of the birds Halciones,
whereupon these days took the name Alcionis: the time behind, plaieth the
part of Winter. And yet these boisterous seasons full of tempests, shut not up
the sea: for pirates and rouers at the first forced men with present peril of
death, to run headlong upon their death, and to hazard themselves in Winter
seas; but now a days covetousness causes men to do the like.

The coldest winds of all other, be those which we said to blow from the
North Pole, and together Corus. These winds do both allay and still all others,
and also scatter and drive away clouds. Moist winds are Africus, and especially
the South wind of Italy called Auster. Men report also, that Caecias in Pontus
gathers and draws to it self clouds Corus and Vulturnus are dry, but only
in the end when they give over. The Northeast and the North, engender snow. The
North wind also brings in hail, so does Corus. The South wind Vulturnus and
Favonius be warm. They also be drier than the East: and generally all winds
from the North and West are drier than from the South and East. Of all winds
the Northern is most heathfull: the Southern wind is noisome, and the rather
when it is dry; happily, because that when it is moist, it is the colder. During
the time that it blows, living creatures are thought to be less hungry: the
Etesiae give over ordinarily in the night, and arise at the third hour of the
day. In Spain and Asia they blow from the East: but in Pontus, from the North:
in other quarters from the South. They blow also after the Mid-winter, when
they be called Orinthiae, but those are more mild, and continue fewer days.
Two there be that change their nature together with their site and place: the
South wind in Afric brings fair weather, and the North wind there is
cloudy. All winds keep their course in order for the more part, or else when one
cease, the contrary begins. When some are laid, and the next Eudoxus is of
opinion (if we list to observe the least reuolutions) that after the end of
every fourth year, not only all winds, but other tempests and constitutions
also of the weather, return again to the same course as before. And always the
Lustrum or computation of the five years begins at the leap year, when the
Dog Star does arise. Thus much touching general winds.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Of sudden Blasts.

NOw will we speak of sudden blasts; which being risen (as has bin said
before) by exhalations of the earth, and cast down again; in the mean while
appear of many fashions, enclosed within athin course of clouds newly
ouercast. For such as be unconstant, wandering, and rushing in manner of land
floods (as some men were of opinion, as we have showed) bring forth thunder
and lightening. But if they come with a greater force, sway, and violence, and
withal burst and cleave a dry cloud asunder all abroad, they breed a storm,
which of Ecnephias: but if the clift or breach be not great, so that the wind
be constrained to turn round, to roll and whirle in his descent, without fire
(i.) lightening, it makes a whirle puff or ghust called Typhon (i.) the storm
Ecnephias aforesaid, sent out with a winding violence. This takes with it a
piece broken out of a congealed cold cloud, turning, winding, and rolling it
round, and with that weight makes the own fall more heavy, and changes from
place to place with a vehement and sudden whirling; the greatest danger and
mischief that poor sailers have at sea, breaking not only their cross sail
yards, but also writhing and bursting in pieces the very ships: and yet a small
matter is the remedy for it, namely, the casting of vinegre out against it as
it comes, which is of nature most cold. The same storm beating Procella
does, nor without a crack; they call this boisterous wind Turbo, casting down
and overthrowing all that is next it. The same, if it be more hot and Prester;
burning, and withal laying along, whatsoever it touches and encountereth.

CHAP. XLIX.
Other enormious kinds of Tempests.

NO Typhon comes from the North, ne yet any Ecnephias with snow, or while
snow lies on the ground. This tempestuous wind, if when it brake the cloud
burned light withal, having fire of the own before, and catched it not
afterward, it is very lightning; and differs from Prester, as the flame from
a cole of fire. Again, Prester spreads broad with a flash and blast; the
other gathers round with forcible violence. Typhon moreover or Vortex, Turben
in flying back, and as much as a crash from a crack. The storm Procella from
them both, in breadth: and to speak more truly, rather scatters than
breaks the cloud. There rises also upon the sea a dark mist, resembling a
monstrous beast; and this is ever a terrible cloud to sailers. Another likewise
called a Column or Pillar, when the humor and water engendered is so thick
and stiff congealed, that it stands compact of it self. Of the same sort
also is that cloud which draws water to it, as it were into a long pipe.

CHAP. L.
In what Lands Lightenings fall not.

IN Winter and Summer seldom are there any Lightnings, and that is long of
contrary causes: because in Winter the air is driven close together, and
thickened with a deeper course of clouds: besides, all the exhalations
breathing and rising out of the earth, being stark, congealed, and frozen hard,
do extinguish clean what fiery vapor soever otherwise they receive: which is
the reason that Scythia and other cold frozen quarters thereabout, are free
from lightenings. And Egypt likewise upon the contrary cause, and exempt from
Lightnings; namely, exceeding heat: for the hot and dry exhalations of the
earth, gather into very slender, thin, and weak clouds. But in the Spring and
Autumn, lightnings are more rife; because in both

CHAP. LI.
Sundry sorts of Lightnings, and Wonders thereof.

Very many kinds of Lightnings are set down by Authors. Those that come
dry, burn Martia a noble Lady of Rome being great with child, was struck
with lightning: the child she went withal was killed within her, and she
without any harm at all lived still. Among the Catiline prodigies it is found
upon Record, that M. Herennius (a Counselor

CHAP. LII.
Of observations as touching Lightning.

THe Ancient Tuscanes by their learning do hold, that there be nine gods that
send forth Lightnings, and those of eleven sorts: for Jupiter (say they)
casts three at once. The Romans have observed two of them, and no more;
attributing those in the day time to Jupiter; and them in the night to Summanus
or Pluto. And these verily be more rare, for the cause aforenamed; namely, the
coldness of the air above. In Hetruria, they suppose that lightnings break
also out of the earth, which they call Infera, i. Infernal; and such be made
in Mid-winter. And these they take to be terrene and earthly, and of all most
mischievous and execrable: neither be those general and universal lightnings,
nor proceeding from the stars, but from a very near Saturn, like as the
burning lightning from Mars: And with such lightning was Volsinij (a most
welthy city of the Tuscanes) burnt full and whole to ashes. Moreover, the
Tuscanes call those lightnings Familiar, which presage the fortune of some
race, and are significant during their whole life: and such are they that come
first to any man, after he is

CHAP. LIII.
Of raising or calling out Lightnings by Coniuration.

IT appears upon record in Chronicles, that by certain sacrifices and
prayers, Lightnings may be either compelled or easily entreated to fall upon
the earth. There goes a report of Volta. Also, that another was raised and
coniured by Porsenna their King. Moreover, L. Piso (a writer of good credit)
reports in his first book of Annals, that Numa before him practiced the
same feat many a time and often: and when Tullus Hostilius would have imitated
him and done the like (for that he observed not all the ceremonies accordingly)
was himself struck and killed with lightning. And for this purpose, sacred
groves we have and altars, yea and certain sacrifices due thereto. And among
the Jupiters surnamed Statores, tonantes, and Feretrij, we have heard that one
also was called Elicius. Sundry and diverse are men's opinions as touching this
point, and every man according to his own liking and fancy of his

CHAP. LIIII.
General rules of Lightning.

THat the Lightning is seen before the Thunderclap is heard, although they
come indeed jointly both together, it is certainly known. And no marvel, for
the eye is quicker to see light, than the ear to hear a sound. And yet Nature
does so order the number and measure, that the stroke and the sound should
accord together. But when there is a noise, it is a Sylla the Dictatour. In all
other parts of the element they be less fortunate or fearful. They that have
written of these matters, have delivered in writing, that there be lightnings,
which to utter abroad is held unlawful, as also to give Iunoes temple, found by
Scaurus the Consul, who soon after was President of the Senate. It lightneth
without thunder, more in the night than day time. Of all creatures that have
life and breath, man only it does not always kill; the rest, it dispatcheth
presently. This privilege and honor we see Nature has given to him; whereas
otherwise so many great beasts surpass him in strength. All other creatures
smitten with lightning, fall down upon the contrary side; man only (unless
he turn upon the parts stricken) dies not. Those that are smitten from above
upon the head, lie down and sink directly. He that is stricken watching, is
found dead with his eyes winking and close shut; but whosoever is smitten
sleeping, is found open eied. A man

CHAP. LV.
What things are not smitten with Lightning.

OF all those things which grow out of the earth, Lightning blasteth not the
Laurel tree, nor enters at any time above five foot deep into the ground; and
therefore, men fearful Jupiter, for this kind of weapon.) In Italy between
Tarracina and the temple of Feronia, they gave over in time of war, to make
towers and forts, for not one of them escaped, but was overthrown with
lightning.

CHAP. LVI.
Of strange and prodigious rain, to wit, of Milk, Blood, Flesh, Iron,

BEsides these things above, in this lower region under heaven, we find
recorded in monuments, that it rained milk and blood, when M. Acilius and C.
Porcius were Consuls. And many times else besides it rained flesh, as namely,
whiles L. Voluminous and Serve. Sulpitius were Consuls: and look what of it the
fowls of the air caught not up nor carried away, M. Crassus was slain by the
Parthians, and together with him all the Lucanes his soldiers, of whom there
were many in his army. That which came down in this rain resembled in some
sort Sponges: and the Wisards and South sayers being sought unto, gave warning
to take heed of wounds from above. But in the year that L. Paulus, and C.
Marcellus were Consuls, it rained wool about the Castle Carissa, near to
which a year after, T. Annius Milo was slain. At the time that the same Milo
pleaded his own cause at the bar, there fell a rain of tyles and bricks, as
it is to be seen in the Records of that year.

CHAP. LVII.
Of the rustling of Armor and sound of Trumpets heard from Heaven.

IN the time of the Cimbrian wars, we have bin told, that Armor was heard to
rustle, and the trumpet to sound out of heaven. And this happened very often
both before and after those wars. But in the third Consulship of Marius, the
Amerines and Tudertes saw men in arms in the sky, rushing and running one
against another from the East and West; and might behold those of the West
discomfited. That the very firmament it self should be of a light fire, it is
no marvel at all; for oftentimes it has been seen, when clouds have caught
any greater deal of fire.

CHAP. LVIII.
Of Stones falling down from the Sky:

AMong the Greeks there is much talk of Anaxagoras Clazomenius, who by his
learning and skill that he had in Astronomy, foretold in the second year of
the 78 Olympias, what time a stone should fall from out of the Sun: and the
same happened accordingly in the day time, in a part of Thracia near the river
Aegos; which stone is showed at this day as big as a waine load, carrying a
burnt and adust color: at what time as a comet or blazing star also burned
in those nights. Which if any man believe that it was fore-signified, must
needs also Anaxagoras was more miraculous and wonderful than the thing it
self: and then farewell the knowledge of Natures works, and welcome confusion
of al, in case we should believe that either the Sun were a stone, or that ever
any stone were in it. But, that stones fall oftentimes down, no man will make
any doubt. In the public place of Exercise in Abydos, there is one at this
day upon the same cause preserved and kept for to be seen, and held in great
reverence: it is but of a mean and small quantity, yet it is that which the
selfsame Anaxagoras (by report) fore-signified that it should fall in the mids
of the earth. There is one also at Cassandria, which was in old time usually
called Potidaea, a colony from thence deducted. I my self have seen another
in the territory of the Vocantians, which

CHAP. LIX.
Of the Rainebow.

THose which we call Rain-bowes are seen often without any wonder at all, or
betokening any great matter: for they portend not so much as rainy or fair
days, to trust upon. But manifest it is, that the Sun beams striking upon an
hollow cloud, when their edge is repelled, are beaten back against the Sun:
and thus arises variety of colors by the mixture of clouds, air, and fiery
light together. Certes, they never are known but opposite to the Sun; nor at
any time otherwise than in form of a Semicircle: ne yet in the night season,
although Aristotle says there was a Rainbow seen by night: howbeit he
confesses, that it could not possibly be but at the full of the Moon. Now
they happen for the most part in winter, namely from the Autumn Equinoctial,
as the days decrease and wax shorter. But as days grow longer again, that is
to say, after the Spring Equinoctial, they be not seen no more than about the
Summer Sunstead, when days are at longest. But in Bruma, namely when they be
shortest, they chance very often. The same appear aloft, when the Sun is low;
and below, when he is

CHAP. LX.
Of Hail, Snow, Frost, Mist, and Dew.

Hail is engendered of Rain congealed into an Ice: and Snow of the same humor
grown

CHAP. LXI.
Of the shapes of Clouds.

Sundry colors and diverse shapes are seen in clouds, according as the fire
intermingled

CHAP. LXII.
Of the properties of weather in diverse places.

Moreover, many properties there be of the weather, peculiar to certain places:
the nights in Afric bedewie in Winter. In Italy, about Locri and the lake
Velinus, there is not a day but a Rainbow is seen. At Rhodes and Syracusae,
the air is never so dim and cloudy, but one hour or other the Sun shines
out. But such things as these shall be related

CHAP. LXIII.
Of Earth, and the nature thereof.

THe Earth follows next: unto which alone of all parts of the world, for her
singular benefits we have given the reverend and worshipful name of Mother.
For like as the Heaven is the (mother) of God, even so is she of men. She it is
that takes us when we are coming into the world, nourishes us when we are
newborn: and once being come abroad, ever sustaineth and bears us up: and
at the last when we are rejected and forlorn of all the poor wretch,
pestiferous and hurtful creatures, when the vital breath of the air was too
blame

CHAP. LXIIII.
Of the form of the earth.

THe first and principal thing that offers it self to be considered, is her
figure, in which of hills and such plains of downs: howbeit, if the compass
thereof might be taken by lines, the

CHAP. LXV.
Of the Antipodes, whether there be any such. Also of the roundnesse of water.

MVch ado there is here, and great debate between learned men; and
contrariwise those of the leaud and ignorant multitude: for they hold, that men
are ouerspread on all parts upon the earth, and stand one against another, foot
to foot: also that the Zenith or point of the heaven is even and alike unto
all: and in what part soever men be, they go still and tread after the same
manner in the midst. But the common sort ask the question and demand, How it
happens that they opposite just against us fall not into Heaven? as if there
were not a reason also ready, That the Antipodes again shall marvel why we
fell not down. Dicaearchus (a right learned man as any other) is a favorer;
who, to satisfy the curious endeauours of Kings and Princes, had a charge and
commission to level and take measure of mountains: of which he said, that
Pelion the highest, was a mile and a half high by the plumbe rule; and
collected thereby, that it was nothing at all to speak of, in comparison of
the universal rotunditie of the whole. But surely in my conceit, this was but
an uncertain guess of his, since that I am not ignorant, that certain tops
of the Alps, for a long tract together, arise not under fifty miles in height.

But this is it that troubles the vulgar sort most of all, if they should be
forced to believe, that the form of water also gathers round in the top. And
yet there is nothing in the whole world clean. Last of all the very Ocean,
which we confess to be the utmost and farthest bound enuironing

CHAP. LXXVj.
How the matter is united and knit to the earth.

THe earth therefore in his whole globe is in the midst thereof, hemmed in by
the sea running round about it. And this need not to be sought out by reason
and argument, for it is known already by good proof and experience.

CHAP. LXXVij.
Navigations upon the sea and great Rivers.

FRom Gades and Hercules pillars, the West sea is at this day nauigable and
sailed all over even the whole compass of Spain and France. But the North
Ocean was for the most part disconered under the conduct of Augustus Caesar of
famous memory, who with a fleet compassed all Germany, and brought it about
as far as to the cape of the Cimbrians: and so from thence having kenned and
viewed the vast and wide sea, or else taken notice thereof by report, he passed
to the Scythian Clymat and those cold coasts, frozen, and abounding with too
much moisture. For which cause there is no likelihood that in those parts the
seas are at Seleuchus and Antiochus reigned, who would needs have it so, that
Seleuchus and Antiochus should bear their names. About the Caspian sea also
many coasts and shores of the Ocean have bin discovered, and by piece-meale
rather than all whole at once, the North of one side or other has been sailed
or rowed over. But yet to put all out of conjecture, there is a great argument
collected out of the Mere Maeotis, whether it be a gulf and arm of that Ocean
(as I know many have believed) or an ouerflowing of the same, and divided from
it by a narrow piece of the Alexander the Great viewed and compassed on every
side, even as far as unto the Arabian Gulf. Wherein when Caius Caesar, the
son of Augustus, warred in those parts, the marks and tokens by report were
seen remaining after the Spaniards Hanno likewise in the time that Carthage
flourished in puissance sailed round about from Gades to the utmost bounds and
lands end of Arabia, and set down that his voyage in writing. Like as also
Himilco was at the same time sent out in a voyage to discover the utter coasts
of Europe. Moreover, Cornelius Nepos writes, that in his time one Eudoxius a
great sailer, at what time he fled from King Lathyrus, departed out of the
Arabian gulf, and held on his course as far as Gades. Yea, and Coelius
Antipater long before him reports, that he saw the man who had sailed out of
Spain to Aethiopia for traffic of merchandise. The same Nepos makes report
as touching the compassing about of the North, That unto Qu. Metellus Celer,
Colleague to C. Afranius in the Consulship, but at that time Proconsull in
Gaul; certain Indians

CHAP. LXViij.
What portion of the earth is habitable.

NOw first and foremost me thinks men make this reckoning of the earth, as if it
were the just half of the globe, and that no portion of it were cut off by the
Ocean: which notwithstanding, clasping round about all the midst thereof,
yielding forth and receiving again all other waters besides, and what
exhalations soever that go out for clouds, and feeding withal the very stars,
so many as they be, and of so great a bigness, what a mighty space think you
will it be thought to takevp and inhabit, and how little can there be left for
men to inhabit? surely the possession of so vast and huge a deal must needs be
exceeding great and infinite. What say you then to this; That of the earth
which is left the heaven has taken away the greater part? For whereas there be
of the heaven five parts, which they call Zones; all Septentrio, that is to
say, the North, and the other over against it, named the South, it is
ouercharged with extreme and rigorous cold, yea, and with perpetual frosts and
ice. In both Zones it is always dim and dark, and by reason that the aspect
of the more mild and pleasant planets is diuerted clean from thence, the
light that is, shows little or nothing, and appears white with the frost
only. Now the middle of the earth, whereas the Sun has his way, and keeps
his course, scorched and burnt with flames, is even parched and fried again
with the hot gleames thereof, being so near. Those two only on either side
about it, namely between this burnt Zone and the two frozen, are temperate;
and even those have not access and passage the one to the other, by reason of
the burning heat of the said planet. Thus you is the very feat thereof: here
we seek for honors and dignities; here we exercise our rule and

CHAP. LXIX.
That the earth is in the midst of the world.

THat the earth is in the midst of the whole world it appears by manifest and
undoubted reasons: but most evidently by the equal hours of the Equinoctial;
for unless it were in the midst, the Astrolabe and instruments called Diophae
have proved, that nights and days could not possibly be found equal: and
those aboue-said instruments above all other confirm the same: seeing that in
the Equinoctial, by one and the same line both rising and setting of the Sun
are seen; but the Summer Sun rising, and the Winter setting, by their own
several lines: which could by no means happen, but that the earth rests in
the center.

CHAP. LXX.
Of the unequal rising of the stars: of the Eclipse, both where and how it
comes.

NOw three circles there be infolded within the Zones before named, which
distinguish the inequalities of the days: namely the Summer Solstitiall
Tropicke, from the highest part of the Zodiac in regard of us, toward the
North Clyme. And against it another called the Winter Tropicke toward the other
Southern Pole: and in like manner the Equinoctial, which goes in the mids of the
Zodiac circle. The cause of the rest, which we wonder Augustus men surnamed
Caesaris Thronon: yet be they stars there of special mark. And so evidently
bends the top of the earth in the rising, that Canopus at Alexandria seems
to the beholders eleuate above the earth almost one fourth part of a sign: but
if a man look from Rhodes, the same appears after a sort to touch the very
of a ball. And hereupon it is that the inhabitants of the East perceive not the
eclipses of Sun Alexander the great won that famous victory at Arbela, the
Moon by report was eclipsed at the second hour of the night; but at the very
same time in Sicily she arose. The eclipse of the Sun, which chanced before the
Calends of May, when as Vipsanus and Fonteius were Consuls (being not many
years past) was seen in Campania, between the 7 and 8 hours of the day: but
Corbulo, a General Commander then in Armenia, made report, that it was seen
there between the tenth and 11 hours of the same day; by reason that the
compass of the globe discovers and hides some things to some, and other to
others. But if the earth were plain and level, all things should appear at
once to all men; for neither should one night be longer than another, ne yet
should the day of

CHAP. LXXj.
What is the reason of the day light upon earth.

ANd hence it comes, that it is neither night nor day at one time in all
parts of the world, by reason that the opposition of the globe brings night,
and the round compass or circuit thereof discovers the day. This is known
by many experiments. In Africa and Spain there were raised by Hanibal high
watch-towers; and in Asia for the same fear of Philonides the curror or Post
of the same Alexander above named, dispatched in 9 hours of the day 1200
stadia, even as far as from Sicyone to Elis: and from thence again (albeit he
went down hill all the way) he returned oftentimes, but not before the third
hour of the night. The cause was, for that he had the Sun with him in his
first setting out to Elis, and in his return back to Sicyone he went full
against it, met with it, and ere he came home ouerpassed it, leaving it in the
West behind going from him. Which is the reason also, that they who by day
light sail westward in the shortest day of the year, rid more way than those
who sail all night long at the

CHAP. LXXij.
The Gnomonicke art of the same matter: as also of the first Dial.

ALso the instruments serving for the hours, as Quadrants and Dials, will not
serve for all places, but in every 300 stadia, or 500 at the farthest, the
shadows that the Sun casts change; and therefore the shadow of the style in
the Dial, called the Gnomon, in Egypt at noone tide in the Aequinoctial day is
little more in length than half the Gnomon. But in the city of Rome the shadow
wants the ninth part of the Gnomon. In the town Ancona it is longer than it
in a 35 part. But in Venice at the same time and hour the shadow and the

CHAP. LXXiij.
Where and when there be no shadows at all.

IN like manner they say, that in the town Syene (which is above Alexandria 50
stadia) at noone tide in the midst of Summer there is no shadow at all: and for
further experiment thereof, let a pit be sunk in the ground and it will be
light all over in every corner. Whereby it appears, that the Sun then is just
and directly over that place, as the very Zenith thereof. Onesicratus has set
down in writing. Yea and it is for certain known, that in Berenice a city of
the Troglodites, and from thence 4820 stadia in the same country, at the town
of Ptolemais (which was built at the first upon the very bank of the Red sea,
for the pleasure of chasing and hunting of Elephants) the self same is to be
seen 45 days before the Summer Sunsted, and as long after, Leo. In the country
of the Oretes within India there is a mountain named Maleus, near which the
shadows in Summer are cast into the South, and in Winter into the North. There
for 15 nights and no more is the star Charles-wain near the pole to be seen.
In the same India at Patales (a most famous and frequented port) the Sun
arises on the right hand, and all shadows fall to the South, Whiles Alexander
made abode there, Onesicritus a captain of his wrote, that it was observed
there, that the North star was seen the first part only of the night: also in
what places of India there were no shadows, there the North star appeared not:
and that those quarters were called Ascia, (i. without shadow) neither

CHAP. LXXIV.
Where twice in the year the shadows go contrary ways.

But throughout all Trogliditine, Cratosthenes has written, that the shadows
two times in the year for 45 days fall contrary ways.

CHAP. LXXV.
Where the day is longest, and where shortest.

IT comes thus to pass, that by the variable increment of the day light, the
longest day in Meroe does comprehend 12 Equinoctiai hours, and 8 parts of one
hour above; but in Alexandria 14, in Italy 15, in Britain 17: where in Summer
time the nights being light and short, by infallible experience show that which
reason forces to believe; namely, that at Mid summer time, as the Sun makes
his approach near unto the pole of the world, the places of the earth lying
underneath has day continually for six months, and contrariwise night, when
the Sun is remote as far as Bruma. The which Pythias of Massiles has written
of Thule, an Island distant Northward from Britain six days sailing. Yea, and
some affirm the same of Mona, an Island distant from Camalodunum, a town of
Britain, about 200 miles.

CHAP. LXXVI.
Of Dials and Quadrants.

THis cunning and skill of shadows, named Gnonomice, Anaximines the Milesian,
the disciple of Anaximander above named, invented: and he was the first also
that showed in Lacedemon the Horologe or Dial which they call Sciotericon.

CHAP. LXXVII.
How the days are observed.

THe very day it self men have after diverse manners observed. The Babylonians
count for day all the time between two Sun-risings: the Athenians, between
the settings. The Vmbrians from noone to noone. But all the common sort every
where, from day light Hipparchus, from midnight to midnight. That the spaces or
lights are greater or less betwixt Sun risings, near the Sunsteds, than the
equinoctials, it appears by this, that the position of the Zodiake about the
middle parts thereof is more oblique and crooked, but toward the Sunsted more
straight and direct.

CHAP. LXXViij.
The reason of the variety and difference of sundry Countries and Nations.

HEreunto we must join such things as are linked to celestial causes. For
doubtless it the people have white skins, hair growing long downward, and
yellow; but are fierce

CHAP. LXXiX.
Of Earthquakes.

THe Babylonians were of this opinion, that earthquakes and gaping chinks, and
all other Anaximander, the Milesian natural Philosopher, his prescience and
foreknowledge of things was excellent, and worthy of immortality; who, as it
is said, forewarned the Lacedaemonians to look well to their city and dwelling
houses, for that there was an earthquake toward: which happened accordingly, when
not only their whole city was shaken, and fell down, but also a great part of
the mountain Taygetus, which bare out like to the poupe of a ship, broken as it
were from the rest, came down too, wholly covering the foresaid ruins. There
is reported another shrewd guess Pherecydes, who was Pythagoras his master,
and the same likewise divine and prophetical: he by drawing water out of a pit
both foresaw and also foretold an earthquake there. Which if they be true, how
far off I pray you may such men seem to be from God, even while they live here
on earth. But as for these things verily, I leave it free for every man to
weigh and deem of them according to their own judgment; and for mine own
part I suppose, that without all doubt the winds are the cause thereof. For
never begins the earth to quake but when the sea is still, and the weather
so calm withal, that the birds in their flying cannot houer and hang in the
air, by reason that all the spirit and wind which should bear them up is
withdrawn from them: ne yet at any time, but after the winds are laid, namely
when the blast is pent and hidden within the veins and hollow caves of the
earth. Neither is this shaking in

CHAP. LXXX.
Of the gaping chinks of the earth.

AFter many and sundry sorts the earth therefore is shaken, and thereupon ensue
wondrous effects: in one place the walls of cities are laid along: in another
they be swallowed up and bellowing of beasts: otherwhiles it resembles a man's
voice, or else the clattering and rustling

CHAP. LXXXj.
Signs of Earthquake coming.

SAilers also have a certain foreknowledge thereof, and guess not doubtfully
at it, namely when the waves swel suddenly without any gale of wind, or when in
the ship they are shocked with billows shaking under them: then are the things
seen to quake which stand in the ship, as well as those in houses, and with a
rustling noise give warning beforehand. The fowls likewise of the air sit
not quietly without fear. In the sky also there is sign thereof; for there
goes before an earthquake, either in day time, or soon after the Sun is gone
down, a thin streake or line as it were of a cloud, lying out in a great
length. Moreover, the water in

CHAP. LXXXij.
Remedies or helps against Earthquakes toward.

But a remedy there is for the same, such as vaults and holes in many places
do yield: for they vent and breathe out the wind that was conceived there
before: a thing noted in certain towns, which by reason they stand hollow, and
have many sinks and vaults dug to convey away their filth, are less shaken:
yea, and in the same towns, those parts which be pendant be the safer: as is
well seen in Naples, where that quarter thereof which is sollid and not hollow
is subject to such casualties. And in houses the arches are most safe, the
angles also of

CHAP. LXXXIII.
Monstrous Earthquakes seen never but once.

THere happened once (which I found in the books of the Tuscanes learning) within
the teritorie of Modena, whiles L. Martius and S. Julius were Consuls, a great
strange wonder of the earth; for two hills encountered together, charging as it
were, and with violence assaulting one another, yea and retyring again with a
most mighty noise. It fell out in the day time, and between them there issued
flaming fire and smoke mounting up into the sky; while a great number of Roman
Gentlemen (from the highway Aemylia) and a multitude of servants and passengers
stood and beheld it. With this conflict and running of them together all the
Nero the Emperor (as we have showed in his acts) when medows and olive rows
(notwithstanding the great public port way lay between) passed overthwart
one into another place, in the Marrucine territory, within the lands of
Vectius Marcellus a gentleman of Rome, Procurator under Nero, in his affairs.

CHAP. LXXXIV.
Wonders of Earthquakes.

THere happen together with earthquakes deluges also and inundations of the
sea, being Tiberius Caesar, when twelve cities of Asia were laid level in one
night. But the earthquakes came thickest in the Punick war, when in one year
were reported to be in Rome 57. In which year verily, when the Carthaginians
and Romans fought a battle at Thrasymenus lake, neither of both armies took
notice of a great earthquake. Neither is this a simple evil thing, nor the
danger consists only in the very earthquake, and no more: but that which it
portendeth is as bad or worse. Never abode the city of Rome any earthquake, but
it gave warning thereof before hand of some strange accident and unhappy

CHAP. LXXXV.
In what places the seas have gone back.

THe same cause is to be rendered of some new hill or piece of ground not seen
before; when as the said wind within the earth, able to huffe up the ground,
was not powerful enough to break forth and make issue. For, firm land grows
not only by that which Rivers bring in (as the Isles Echinades, which were
heaped and raised up by the river Achelous; and by Nilus the greater part of
Egypt, into which, if we believe Homer, from the Island Pharus there was a cut
by sea of a day and a nights sailing) but also by the retiring and going back
of Diana. And verily, if we give ear to Herodotus, it was all a sea from above
Memphis to the Ethyopian hills: and likewise from the plains of Arabia. It was
sea also about Ilium, and the flat of Teuthrania; and all that level whereas
the river Maeander now runs by goodly meadows.

CHAP. LXXXVI.
The reason of Islands that newly appear out of the sea.

THere be lands also that put forth after another manner, and all at once show
on a sudden

CHAP. LXXXVij.
What Islands have sprung up, and when.

THose famous Islands long since, to wit, Delos and Rhodes, are recorded to
have grown out of the sea: and afterward others that were less, namely
Anaphe beyond Melos, and Nea, between Lemnus and Hellespont. Alone also,
between Lebedus and Teos. Thera likewise, and Therasia, among the Cyclades,
which showed in the fourth year of the 135 Olympias. Moreover, among the same
Isles 130 years after, Hiera, which is the same that Automate. And two furlongs
from it, after 110 years, Thia, even in our time, upon the 8 day before the
Ides of July, when M. Iunius Syllanus and L. Balbus were Consuls.

CHAP. LXXXViij.
What lands the Seas have broken in between.

EVen within our kenning, near to Italy, between the isles Aeoliae. In like
manner near Creta there was one showed itself with hot fountames out of the
sea, for a mile and half; and another in the 3 year of the 143 Olympias,
within the Tuscan gulf, and this burned with a violent wind. Recorded it is
also, that when a great multitude of fishes floted ebb about it, those persons
died presently that did feed thereof. So they say that in the Campaine gulf
the Pithecusae Islands appeared. And soon after, the hill Epopos in them (at
what time as suddenly there burst forth a flaming fire out of it) was laid
level with the plain champion. Within the same also there was a town swallowed
up by the sea: and in one earthquake there appeared

CHAP. LXXXIX.
What Islands came to join unto the Maine.

Again, she has taken Islands from the sea, and joined them to the firm
land; namely, Antissa to Lesbos, Zephyria to Halicarnassus, Aethusa to Myndus,
Dromiscos and Pern

CHAP. XC.
What lands have been turned wholly into sea.

NAture has altogether taken away certain lands: in the first place, whereas
now the sea Atlanticum is, was sometime the continent for a mighty space of
ground, as Plato says.

CHAP. XCI.
What lands have swallowed up themselves.

ANd now to pass over arms of the sea and lakes; the very earth has devoured
and buried her-selfe: to wit, that most high hill Cybotus, with the town
Curites; Sipylus in Magnesia:

CHAP. XCII.
What Cities have been drowned with the sea.

THe sea Pontus has overwhelmed Pyrrha and Antyssa about Maeotis, Elice and
Bura in the gulf of Corinth; whereof the marks and tokens are to be seen in
the Deep. Out of the Island Cea more than 30 miles of ground was lost suddenly
at once, with many men. In Sicily also the sea came in and bare away half the
city Thindaris, and all that Italy nurseth between it and Sicily. The like it
did in Baeotia and Eleusina.

CHAP. XCIII.
Of the strange wonders of the land.

FOr let us speak no more of Earthquakes, and whatsoever else of that kind, as
of graves and sepulchers of cities buried, and extant to be seen; but discourse
we rather of the wonders, than the mischiefs wrought by Nature in the earth.
And surely the story of celestial things was not more hard to be declared:
the wealth is such of metals and mines, in such variety, so rich, so
fruitful, rising still one under another for so many ages, notwithstanding
daily there is so much wasted and consumed throughout the world, with fires,
ruins, shipwrecks, wars, and fraudulent practices: yea and so much spent in
riot and superfluous vanities, that it is infinite: yet see how many sorts of
jemmes there be still, so painted and set out with colors? in precious stones
what varieties of sundry colors, and how bespotted are they: and amongst
Charoneae Scrobes, i. Charons ditches. Likewise in the Hirpines land, that of
Amsanctus, a cave near unto the temple of Nephites, wherinto as many as enter
die presently. After the like manner at Hierapolis in Asia there is another
such, hurting all that Cybele, the great mother of the gods. In other places
there be also caves and holes of a prophetical power; by the exhalation of
which men are intoxicate and as it were drunken, and so foretell things to
come, as at Delphi that most renowned Oracle. In all which things what other
reason can any mortal man make, than the divine power of Nature, diffused and
spread through all, which breaks forth at times in sundry sorts.

CHAP. XCIV.
Of certain Lands that always quake.

SOme parts of the earth there be that shake and tremble under men's feet as
they go: namely

CHAP. XCV.
Of Islands ever floting and swimming.

Certain Isles are always wauing and nuer stand still, as in the country
about Caecubum, Reate above named, Mutina, and Statonia. Also in the lake
Vadimonis, and near the waters many a man's life in the war against Mithridates.
There be other little ones also in the River

CHAP. XCVI.
In what lands it never raineth. Also many strange wonders and miracles of the
earth, and other Elements heaped together.

PAphos has in it a famous temple of Venice, upon a certain flower and altar
whereof it never Minerua. In the same also the beasts killed in sacrifice, if
they be left there never putrify. Near to Harpasa a town in Asia stands a
rock of stone of a strange and wonderful nature, lay one finger to it and it
will stir, but thrust at it with your whole body, it moves not at all. Within
the demi Island of the Tauri, and city Parasinum, there is a kind of earth
that heals all wounds: but about Assos in Troas there grows a stone,
wherewith bodies are consumed, and therefore is called Sarcophagus. Two hills
there be near the river Indus: the nature of the one is to hold fast all
manner of iron, and of the other not to abide it: wherefore if a man's shoe
sole be clouted with hob nails, in the one of them a man cannot pluck away
his

CHAP. XCVII.
What is the reason of the reciprocal ebb and flow of the seas; and where it
is that they

OF the nature of waters much has bin said: but the sea tide that it should
flow and ebb again is most marvelous of all other: the manner thereof verily
is diverse, but the cause is in the Sun and Moon. Between two risings of the
Moon they flow twice, and twice go back, and always in the space of 24
hours. And first as he rises aloft together with the world the tides swell,
and anon again, as it goes from the height of the Meridian line, and enclineth
Westward, they slake: again, as she moves from the West under our horizon, and
approaches to the point contrary to the Meridian, they flow, and then they are
received back for as she grows bigger, they flow more, but in the full they
swell and boil most of all. From Pythias of Massiles, writes, That above
Britain the tide flows in height 80 cubits. But the more inward and
Mediterranean narrow, seas are shut up within the lands, as in an haven. How
beit in some places a more spacious liberty there is that yields to the power
and command of the Moon; for we have many examples and experiments of them that
in a calm sea without wind and sail, by a strange water only, have tided from
Italy to Vtica in three days. But these tides and quick motions of the sea are
found to be about the shores, more than in the deep maine sea. For even so in
our bodies the extreme and utmost parts have a greater feeling of the beating
of arteries, that is to say, the vital spirits. Yet notwithstanding in many
firths and arms of the sea, by reason of the unlike risings of the Hercules,
is enclosed about like a well; the which at sometimes rises and falls as the
Ocean does: at others again it does both, at contrary seasons. In the same
place there is another spring that keeps order and time with the motions of
the Ocean. On the bank of Betis there is a town, the wells whereof as the
tide flows, do ebb; and as it ebbeth, do flow: in the mid times between,
they stir not. Of the

CHAP. XCVIII.
Maruels of the Sea.

ALl seas are purged and scoured in the full Moon; and some besides at
certain times. About Messala and Nylae, there is voided upon the shore
certain dregs and filthiness like to beasts dung: whereupon arose the
fable, That the Suns oxen were there kept in Aristotle (for I would not omit
willingly any thing that I know) that no living creature dies but in the
reflux and ebb of the sea. This is observed much in the Ocean of France, but
found only in man by experience, true.

CHAP. XCIX.
What power the Moon has over things on Earth and in the Sea.

BY which it is truly guessed and collected, that not in vain the planet of
the Moon is supposed to be a Spirit: for this is it that satisfies the earth
to her content: she it is that in her approach and coming toward, fills
bodies full; and in her retire and going away, emptieth them again. And hereupon
it is, that with her growth all shellfish wax and increase: and those
creatures which have no blood, them most of all do feel her spirit. Also, the
blood in men does increase or diminish with her light more or less: yea the
leaves of trees and the grass for sodder (as shall be said in convenient
place) do feel the influence of her, which evermore the same pierces, and
enters effectually into all things.

CHAP. C.
Of the power of the Sun, and why the Sea is salt.

THus by the fervent heat of the Sun all moisture is dried up: for we have
been taught, that this Planet is Masculine, frying and sucking up the humidity
of all things. Thus the broad and spacious sea has the taste of salt sodden
into it: or else it is, because when the sweet and thin substance thereof is
sucked out from it, which the fiery power of the Sun most easily draws up,
all the tarter and more gross parts thereof remain behind: and hereupon it
is, that the deep water toward the bottom is sweeter and less brackish than
that above in the top. And surely, this is a better and truer reason of that
unpleasant smacke and taste that it Denis tyrant of Sicily, when he was
expelled and deposed from that mighty state of his, and this it was; the sea
water within one day in the haven grew to be fresh and sweet.

CHAP. CI.
In like manner of the Moons Nature

ON the contrary, they say that the Moon is a planet Foeminine, tender and
nightly, dissolueth

CHAP. CII.
Where the Sea is deepest.

FAbianus says, that the sea where is deepest, exceeds not fifteen furlongs.
Others again do report, that in Pontus the sea is of an unmeasurable depth,
over against the Nation of the Coraxians, the place they call Bathei Ponti,
whereof the bottom could never be sounded.

CHAP. CIII.
The wonders of Waters, Fountains and Rivers.

OF all wonders this passes, that certain fresh waters hard by the sea, issue
and spring forth as out of pipes: for the nature of the waters also cease not
from strange and miraculous properties. Fresh waters run aloft the sea, as
being no doubt the lighter: and therefore the sea water (which naturally is
heavier) vpholdeth and bears up whatsoever is brought Bittumen) nothing will
sink nor can be drowned, no more than in Arethusa in the greater Armenia: and
the same verily, notwithstanding it be full of Nitre, breeds and feeds
fish. In the Salentines country, near the town Manduria, there is a lake
brim full: lade out of it as much water as you will, it decreaseth not; ne yet
augmenteth, pour in never so much to it. In a river of the Ciconians, and in
the lake Velinus in the Picene territory, if wood be thrown in, it is covered
over with a stony bark. Also in Surius, a river of Colchis, the like is to be
seen: insomuch, as ye shall have very often the bark that ouergrowes it, as
hard as any stone. Likewise in Jupiter being exceeding chill and cold, so as it
quenches and puts out light torches dipped therein, yet if you hold the
same near unto it when they are extinct and put out, it sets them on fire
again. The same spring at noontide evermore gives over to boil, and wants
water, for which cause they call it Anapauomenos: anon it begins to rise until
it be midnight, and then it has great abundance: and from that time again it
faints by little and little. In Illyricum there is a cold spring, over which,
if ye spread any clothes, they catch a Jupiter Hammon in the day time is cold,
all night it is seething hot. In the Troglodites country there is a fountain
of the Sun, called the sweet Spring, about noon it is exceeding cold, anon by
little and little it grows to be warm, but at midnight it passes and is
offensive for heat and bitterness. The head of the Po, at noon in Summer gives
over, as it were, and intermits to boil, and is then ever dry. In the Island
Tenedus there is a spring, which after the Summer Sunsteed evermore from the
third hour of the night unto the sixth, does ouerflow, And in the isle Delos,
the fountain snopus, falls and rises after the same sort that Nilus does, and
together with it. Over against the river Timavus, there is a little Island
within the sea, having hot wels, which ebb and flow as the tide of the sea
does, and just therewith. In the territory of the Pitinates beyond Apenninus,
the river Nouanus at every midsummertime unto Ilium, colors them reddish;
and hereupon the river took that name. In the land of [i. Soure] makes men
drunken no less than wine. Semblably, in Paphlagonia, and in the territory of
Cales. Also in the Isle Andros there is a fountain near the temple of Father
Bacchus, which upon the Nones of January, always runs with water that
tastes like wine, as Mulianus verily believes, who was a man that had been
thrice Consul: The name of the spring is Dios Tecnosia. Near Apollo Clarius,
there is a gutter or trench standing full of water: they that drink of it,
shall prophecy and foretell strange things like Oracles, but they live the
shorter time for it. Rivers running backward, even our age has seen, in the
later years of Prince Nero, as we have related in the acts of his life. Now,
that all Springs are colder in Summer than Winter, who knows not? as also
these wondrous works of Nature, That brass and lead in the mass or lump
sink down and are drowned, but if they be driven out into thin plates, they
flote and swim aloft: and let the weight be all one, yet some things settle to
the bottom, others again glide above. Moreover, that heavy burdens and lodes
be stirred and removed with more ease in water. Likewise, that the stone
Thyrreus, be it never so big, does swim whole and entire: break it once into
pieces, and it sinketh. As also, that bodies newly dead, fall down to the
bottom of

CHAP. CIIII.
The maruailes of fire and water jointly together, and of Maltha.

NOw let us relate some strange wonders of fire also, which is the fourth
element of Nature. But first, out of waters. In a city of Comagene, named
Samosatis, there is a pond, yielding forth a kind of slimie mud (called
Maltha) which will burn clear. When it meets with any thing solid and
hard, it sticks to it like glue: also, if it be touched, Lucullus gave the
assault, and his soldiers fried and burned in their own armours. Cast water
upon it, and yet it will burn. Experience has taught, That earth only will
quench it.

CHAP. CV.
Of Naphtha.

OF the like nature is Naphtha: for so is it called about Babylonia, and in the
Austacenes country in Parthia, and it runs in manner of liquid Bitumen.
Great affinity there is between the fire and it; for fire is ready to leap
unto it immediately, if it be any thing near it. Thus (they say) Media burnt
her husbands concubine, by reason that her guirland anointed therewith, was
caught by the fire, after she approached near to the altars, with purpose to
sacrifice.

CHAP. CVI.
Of places continually burning.

But amongst the wonderful mountains, the hill Aetna burns always in the
nights: and Ctesias of Gnidos writes, that the fire thereof is inflamed and set
a burning with water, but quenched with earth. In the same Lycia the mountains
Hephaestij, being once touched and kindled with a flaming torch, do so burn
out, that the very stones of the rivers, yea, and the sand in waters, are on
fire withal; and the same fire is maintained with rain. They report Crater
Nymphaei always portendeth some fearful misfortunes to the Apolloniates, the
neighbors thereby, as Theoponpus has reported. It increases with showers of
rain, and casts out Bitumen to be compared with that fountain or water of
Styx that is not to be tasted, otherwise weaker than all Bitumen besides. But
who would marvel at these things? in the mids of the sea, Hiera one of the
Aetolian Islands near to Italy burned together with the sea for certain days
together, during the time of the allies war, until a solemn embassage of the
Senate made expiation therefore. But that which burns with the greatest fire
of all other, is a certain hill of the Aethyopians Thoeet Ochema, and sends
out most parching flames in the hottest Sunshine days. Lo in how many places
with sundry fires Nature burns the earth.

CHAP. CVII.
Wonders of fires by themselves.

Moreover, since the Nature of this only element of fire is to be so
fruitful, to breed it self, and to grow infinitely of the least sparks; what
may be thought will be the end of so many funeral fires of the earth? what a
nature is that which feeds the most greedy voracitie in the whole world
without loss of it self? Put thereto the infinite number of stars, the mighty
great Sun; moreover, the fires in men's bodies, and those that are inbred in
some stones; others, which be indeed little, but yet naturally issuing out in
great abundance? In the Vulcan. It is found written, That if a cole of fire
fall down upon the arable fields under Aricia, the very soil presently is on
fire. In the Sabines territory, as also in the Sidicines, stones if they be
anointed or greased, will be set on a light fire. In a town of the Salantines
called Egnatia, if fire be laid upon a certain hallowed stone there, it will
immediately flame out. Upon the alter of Juno Lacinia standing as it does in the
open air, the ashes lie immovable and stir not, blow what Valerius Antias
reports, That the lake Thrasymenus once burned all over: also that Serve.
Tullius in his childehood, as he lay asleep, had a light fire shone out of his
head: likewise, as L. Martius made an oration in open audience to the army,
after the two Scipios, were slain in Spain, and exhorted his soldiers to
revenge their death, his head was on a flaming fire in the same sort. More of
this argument, and in better order, will we write soon hereafter. For now we
exhibit and show the maruells of all things hudled and intermingled together.
But in the mean while, my mind being passed beyond the interpretation of
Nature, hasteneth to lead as it were by the hand the minds also of the
readers, throughout the whole world.

CHAP. CVIII.
The measure of the whole earth in length and breadth.

THis our part of the earth whereof I speak, floting as it were within the
Ocean (as has bin said) lies out in length most from the East to the West,
that is to say from India to Hercules pillars consecrated at Gades: and as mine
Author Artemidorus thinks, it contains 85 hundred, and 78 miles. But
according to Isidorus, 98 hundred, and 18. M. Artemidorus adds moreover, from
Gades within the circuit of the sacred Promontorie, to the Cape Artabrum, where
the front and head of Spain bears out farthest in length 891 miles. This
measure runs Artemidorus his account, makes in all 86 hundred 85 miles. Now
the breadth of the earth, from the Meridian or South-point, to the North, is
collected to be less almost by the one half, namely, 54 hundred and 62 miles.
Whereby it appears plainly, how much of the one side heat of fire, and on
the other side frozen water has stolen away. For I am miles; to Gnidus, 84
miles and a half; to Cos, 25 miles; to Samus, 100 miles; to Chius, 84
Artemidorus was of opinion, that all beyond was unfound and not discovered;
confessing, that about Tanais the Sarmatian Nations do inhabit, who lie to the
North pole. Isidorus has added hereto twelve hundred miles, as far as to
Thule: which is a judgment of his grounded upon bare guess and conjecture. I
take it, that the borders of the Sarmatians are known to have no less space
of ground than this last Eratosthenes (a great Clerk verily for all kind of
literature, and in this knowledge above all others doubtless most cunning, and
whom I see of all men approved and allowed) has set down to be 252000 stadia.
Which measure, by the Romans account and reckoning, amounts to 300 hundred
and 15 hundred miles. A wondrous bold attempt of his! but yet so exquisitly
calculated and contrived by him, that a shame it were not to believe him.
Hipparchus, a wonderful man both for conuincing him, and all his other
diligence besides,

CHAP. CIX.
The Harmonicall measure, and Circumference of the World.

DIonysidorus in another kind would be believed: (for I will not beguile you of
the greatest example of Grecian vanity.) This man was a Melian, famous for his
skill in Geometry: he dyed very aged in his own country: his near
kins-women (who by right were his heirs in remainder) solemnized his funerals,
and accompanied him to his grave. These women Dionysidorus, written in his own
name, To them above, that is to say, To the living: and to this effect, namely,
That he had made a step from his sepulcher to the bottom and center of the
earth, and that it was thither 42000 stadia. Neither wanted there
Geometricians, who made this interpretation, that he signified that this
Epistle was sent from the middle center of the earth, to which place downward
from the uppermost aloft, the way was longest; and the same was just half the
diametre of the round globe: whereupon followed this computation, That they
pronounced the circuit to be 255000 stadia. Now the Harmonicall proportion,
which forces this vniuersalitic and nature of the World to agree unto it
self, adds unto this measure 7000 stadia, and

THE THIRD BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF NATVRE,
WRITTEN BY C. PLINIVS SECVNDVS.
The Proeme, or Preface.
HIt herto have we written of the position and wonders of the Earth, Waters,
and Stars: also we have treated in general terms, of the proportion and
measure of the whole world. Now it follows, to discourse of the parts
thereof: albeit this also be judged an infinite piece of work, nor lightly can
be handled without some reprehension: and yet in no kind of enterprise pardon
is more due; since it is no marvel at all, if he who is borne a mortal man,
knows not all things belonging to man. And therefore I will not follow one
Author more than another, but every one as I shall think him most true in the
description of each part. Forasmuch as this has been a thing common in manner
to them all, namely, to learn or describe the scituations of those places most
exactly, where themselves were either borne, or which they had discovered and
seen: and therefore neither will I blame nor reprove any man. The bare names
of places shall be simply set down in this my Geographic; and that with as
great brevity as I can: the excellency, as also the causes and occasions
thereof, shall be deferred to their sever all and particular treatises: for now
the question is as touching the whole earth in generality, which mine intent
is to represent unto your eyes: and therefore I would have things thus to be
taken, as if the names of countries were put down n^ked, and void of renown
and fame, and such only as they were in the beginning, before any acts there
done; and as if they had indeed an indument of names, but respective only to
the World and universal Nature of all.

Now the whole globe of the earth is divided into three parts, Europe, Asia,
and Africa. The beginning we take from the West and the Firth of Gades, even
whereas the Atlanticke Ocean breaking in, is spread into the Inland and
Mediterranean seas. Make your entrance there, I mean at the Streights of
Gibralter, and then Africa is on the right hand, Europe on the left, and Asia
before you just between. The bounds confining these, are the rivers Tanais and
Nilus. The mouth of the Ocean at Gades (whereof I spoke before) lies out in
length 15 miles, and stretches forth in breadth but five, from a village in
Spain called Mellaria, to the promontorie of Afric, called the White, as
Turannius Graccula born thereby, does write. T. Liuius, and Nepos Cornelius
have reported, that the breadth thereof where it is narrowest, is seven miles
over, but ten miles where it is broadest. From so small amouth (a wonder to
consider) spreads the sea so huge and so vast as we see; and withal, so
exceeding deep, as the marvel is no less in that regard. For why? in the
very mouth thereof, are to be seen many bars and shallow shelues of white
sands (so ebb is the water) to the great terror of ships and sailers
passing that way. And therefore many have called those Streights of Gibralter,
The entry of the Mediterranean Sea. Of both sides of this gullet, near unto
it, are two mountains set as frontiers and rampires to keep all in: namely,
Abila for Afric, Calpe for Europe, the utmost end of Hercules Labors. For
which cause, the inhabitants of those parts call them, the two pillars of that
God; and do verily believe, that by certain draines and ditches dug within
the Continent, the maine Ocean, before excluded, made way and was let in, to
make the Mediteranean seas, where before was firm land: and so by that means
the very face of the whole earth is clean altered.

CHAP. I.
Of Europe.

ANd first, as touching Europe, the nource of that people which is the
conqueror of all nations; and besides, of all lands by many degrees most
beautiful: which may for right good cause, have made not the third portion of
the earth, but the one half (dividing the whole globe of the earth into two
parts:) to wit, from the river Tanais unto the Streights of Gades. The Ocean
then, at this space abouesaid, enters into the Atlanticke sea, and with a
greedy current drowneth those lands which dread his coming like a tyrant; but
where he meets with any that are like to

Of which, the first, from Calpe the utmost promontorie (as is above said) of
Spain, windeth and turns with an exceeding great compass, to Locri, and as
far as the promontorie Brutium. Within it lies the first land of all others,
Spain; that part I mean, which in regard of us at Rome, is the farther off,
and is named also Boetica. And anon from the Firth Virgitanus, the hither part,
otherwise called Tarraconensis, as far as to the hills Pyrenaei. That farther
part of larger Spain is divided into two provinces in the length thereof: for
on the North side of Boetica, lies Lusitania afront, divided from it by the
river Ana.

This river begins in the territory Laminitanus of the hither Spain, one
while spreading out it self into broad pooles or meeres, otherwhiles gathering
into narrow brooks: or altogether hidden under the ground, and taking pleasure
to rise up oftentimes in many places, falls into the Spanish Atlantic Ocean.
But the part named Tarraconensis, lying fast upon Pyrenaeus, and shooting along
all the side thereof, and withal, stretching out it self overthwart and cross
from the Iberian sea to the Gauls Ocean, is separated from Boetica and
Lusitania, by the mountain Salarius, and the cliffes of the Oretanes,
Carpetanes, and Asturians.

Boetica, so called of the river Boetis, that cutteth in the mids, out-goeth
all other provinces for rich furniture, and a certain plentiful trimnesse and
peculiar beauty by it self. Therein are held four solemn Judicial great
assizes and Parliaments, according to four Counties Juno; the haven Besippo.
Towns, Belon, and Mellaria. The Streights or Firth out of the Atlanticke sea.
Carteia, called Tertessos by the Greeks; and the mountain Calpe. Then, within
the firm land, the town Barbesula, with Item. the town Salbula, Suel-Malacha
upon the river of our Confederates. Next to these, Menoba with a river:
Sexi-firmum, surnamed Iulium: Solaubina, Abdera, and Murgis the frontier town
of Boetica. All that whole coast, M. Agrippa thought to have had their
beginning and descent from the Carthaginians. From Ana, there lies against the
Atlanticke Ocean, the region of the Bastuli and the Turduli.

M. Varro says, that there entered into all parts of Spain, the Herians,
Persians, Phaenicians, Celtes, and Carthaginians or Africans: for Lusus, the
companion of Father Liber or Liba (which signifies the frantic fury of those
that raged with him) gave the name to Lusitania; and Pan was the governor of
it all. But those things which are reported of Hercules and Pyrene, or of
Saturn, I think to be as vain and fabulous tales as any other. As for
Boetis, in the Tarraonensian Scipio: and turning into the West, makes toward
the Atlantic Ocean, adopting the province and giving it his own name, is at
first but small, viz. Asta, which is called Regia: and in the mid-land [i. exce
Ilencie of Julius.] Vrso, which is Genua Vrbanorum: and among these, Munda,
which together with Pompeies son, was taken. Free towns, Astigi the old, and
Ostippo: tributarie, Callet, Calucula, Castra Gemina, Ilipula the less
Merucra, Sacrana, Obulcula, Oningis. As a man comes from the coast, near to
the river Menoba, which also will bear a ship, there dwell not far off the
Alontigicili, and Alostigi. But all that region which without the forenamed,
reaches from Boetis to the river Ana, is called Beturia: M. Agrippa has set
down 463 miles, and the breadth 257. But for that the bounds reached forward as
far as to Carthage, which cause breeds oftentimes errors in the taking of the
measures, whiles in one place the limits of the provinces were changed, and in
another the paces in iournying were either more or less; also, considering the
seas in so long continuance of time have incroched here upon the land, and the
banks again

CHAP. II.
The length and breadth of Boetica.

THe length of Boetica at this day from the bound of the town Castulo unto
Gades, is 475 miles: and from Murgi the maritine coast or lands end, more by 22
miles. The breadth from the edge or border of Carteia, is 224 miles. And verily,
who would believe, that Agrippa, a man so diligent, and in this work
principally, so curious, did err, when he purposed to set out a map of the
whole world openly to be seen of the whole city, and namely, when Augustus
Caesar of happy memory, joined with him? For he it was that finished the
Porch or gallerie begun by Agrippa's sister, according to his will,
appointment, and direction, which contained the said pourtraict.

CHAP. III.
The hither or higher Spain.

THe old form of the hither Spain is somewhat changed, like as of many other
provinces: considering that Pompey the great in his triumphant trophies which
he erected in Pyrenaeus, restifieth, That 846 towns between the Alps and the
marches of the farther or lower Spain, were subdued by him and brought to
obedience. Now, is the whole province divided into 7 counties, the
Carthaginian, the Tarraconian, Caesar Augustani, Cluniensis, Asturia, Lucensis,
and Bracarum. There are besides Islands, setting aside which, without once
naming them, Saturnes cape, the cut over the sea to Caesaria a city in
Mauritania, is of 187 miles: In the residue of that coast is the river Tader:
the free colonie Illici, of which, a firth or arm of the sea took the name
Illicitanus. To it Scipioes, like as Carthage by the Africans. The country of
the Illergetes, the town Subur, the river Rubricatum, and from thence the
Lacetanes and Indigetes. After them in this order following: within-forth at
the foot of Pyrenaeus, the Ausetanes, Itanes, and Lacetanes: and along
Pyrenaeus the Cerretanes, and then the Vascones. In the edge or marches
thereof, the colony Barcino, surnamed Fauentia. Towns of Roman citizens,
Baetulo, Illuro, the river Larnum, Blandae: the river Alba, Emporiae: two there
be of these, to wit, of the old inhabitants, and of the Greeks, who were the
offspring descended from the Phocaeans. The river Tichus. From whence to
Pyrenaea Venus, on the other side of the promontorie, are forty miles. Now
besides the forenamed, shall be related the principal places of mark as they
lie the Aquicaldenses, Onenses, and Baetulonenses. Caesar Augusta, a free
colony, on which Caesar calls Vaenales. The Setabitanes, who are also
Augustanes, and the Valerrienses. But of the Tributaries, of greatest name be
the Babanenses, the Bascianes, the Consaburenses, Dianenses, Egelestanes,
Ilorcitani, Laminitani, Mentesami, the same that Oritani; and Mentelani who
otherwise are Bastuli: Oretanes who also are called Germani, the chief of the
Celtiberians, the Segobrigenses, and the Toletanes of Carpetania, dwelling upon
the river Tagus. Next to them the Viacienses and Virgilienses. To the assizes
or law-court Cluniensis, The Varduli bring 14 nations; of which I list to name
none but the Albanenses: but the Turmodigi four, among whom are the
Segisamonenses, Sagisameiulienses. To the same assizes, the Carietes and the
Vennenses do go out of five cities, of which the Velienses are. Thither repair
Vespasianus Agustus the Emperor, tossed with the tempests and troubles of the
commonweal, granted the franchises of Latium. The mountains Pyrenaei do
confine Spain and France one from the other, lying out with their promontories
into two contrary seas.

CHAP. IIII.
The Province Narbonensis.

THat part of Gallia which is washed and beaten upon with the Mediteranean sea,
is called for reputation of men, regard of civility and manners, and for
wealth, worthy to be set behind Narbo Martius a colonie inhabited by the
Legionaries of the tenth legion, twelve miles distant from the sea. Rivers,
Araris and Liria. Towns in the other parts, scattering here and there by
reason of pooles and meeres lying before them: namely, Agatha, in times past
belonging to the Massilians, and the region of Volscae Tectosages. Also, where
Rhoda of the Rhodians was, C. Marius, and bearing his name, there was a notable
poole or mere. Moreover the town Astromela, and the maritime tract of the
Auaetici: and above it, the stony plains, carrying the memorial of Hercules
his battles. The region of the Anatilians, and withinforth, of the Desuviates
and Cauians. Again, from the sea; Tricorum, and inward, the region of the
Tricollivocantians, Segouellaunes, and anon of the Allobroges: but in the
marches, Massilia Galba the Emperor added of the Alpine inhabitants, the
Auantici and Eproduntij; whose town is named Dima. Agrippa says, that the
length of this province Narbonensis is 270

CHAP. V.
Italy, Tiberis, Rome, Campania.

NExt to them is Italy, and the first of all, the Ligurians: then Hetruria,
Vmbria, Latium, where be the mouths of Tiberis and Rome the head city of the
whole earth, 16 miles distant from the sea: after it is the maritime country
of the Volscians, and Campania: then Picontium, Lucanum, and Brutium, the
furthest point in the South, unto which from the crooked mountains of the
Alps, like in manner unto the Moon croissant, with some parts

Neither am I ignorant, that it might be thought and that justly, a point of an
unthankful

Well then, to begin, Italy is fashioned like for all the world to an Oak
leaf, and much larger Varro affirms; from Sardinia, an hundred and 20 miles;
from Sicilie, a mile and a half: from Corcyra less than 70; from Issa 50. It
goes along the seas, to the Meridionall line verily of the heaven; but if a
man examine it exactly indeed, it lies between the Sun rising in mid-winter,
and the point of the

Now will we describe the compass and circuit thereof, and reck on the cities;
wherein I must needs protest by way of Preface, that I will follow for mine
Author Augustus the Emperor of famous memory, and the description by him
made of all Italy, which be divided into 11 Regionsor Cantons. As for the
maritime towns, I will set them down in that order, as they Hercules and
Monoechus, and so the Ligurian coast. Of the Ligurians, the most renowned
beyond the Alps, are the Sallij, Deceates, and Oxubij: on this side, the
Veneni, and descended from the Caturiges, the Vagienni, Statyelli, Vibelli,
Magelli, Euburiates, Casmonates, Veliates, and those, whose towns we will
declare in the next coast. The river Rutuba, the town Albium Intemelium, the
river Merula, the town Albium Ingaunum, the port or haven town Vadum
Sabatium, the river Porcifera, the town Genua, the river ^eritor, the Port
Delphini, Tigulia: within, Segesta Tiguliorum: the river Macra which limiteth
Liguria. Now on the back side behind all these towns above named, is Apenine,
the highest mountain of all Italy, reaching from the Alps with a continual
ridge of hills, to the streights of Cicilie. From the other side thereof to
Padus, the richest river in all Italy, all the country shining with goodly
fair towns, to wit, Liberna, Dertona a Colonie, Iria, Barderates, Industria,
Pollentia, Augustus. This coast or tract of Liguria contains between the
rivers Varus and Macra 211 miles. To it is adioined the 7 wherein is Hetruria
from the river Macra: and it oftentimes changed the name. In old time the
Pelasgians chased the Vmbrians from thence: and by them the Lydians did the
like, of whose king, named they were Tyrrheni: but soon after, of their
ceremonies in sacrificing, in the Greeks language Thusci. The first town of
Hetruria is Luna, famous for the haven; then the Colonie Luca, lying from the
sea: and nearer unto it is Pisae, between the river Auser and Arnus, which took
the beginning from Pelops and the Pisians, or Atintanians a Greek nation. Vada
Volateranea, the river Cecinna. Populonium of the Cato says, and for
distinction is called Hetruscorum. Lucus Feroniae, Russellana, Senensis and
Sutrina. As for the rest, these they be, Aretini the old, Aretini Fidentes,
Aretini Iulienses, Amitinenses, Aquenses surnamed Taurini: Vlerani,
Cortonenses, Capenates, Clusines the old, Clusines the [i. the nine villages]
the Shire-wiek called Prefecture Claudia, or Foro Clodij: Pistorucin, Perusia,
Suanenses, Saturnini, who beforetime were called Aurinini, Sudertani, Statones,
Tarquinienses, Tuscanienses, Vetulonienses, Veientani, Vesentini, Volaterrani
surnamed Hetrusci and Volsinienses. In the same part lie the territories
Crustuminus and Caeletranus, bearing the names of the old towns. Tiberis,
beforenamed Tybris, and before that Albula, from the midst well near of
Apennine, as it lies in length, runs along the marches of the Aretines: small
and shallow at the first, and not able to bear a vessel without being
gathered together, as it were, by fish-pooles into a head, and so let go at
sluices: as Tinia and Glanis which run into him, the which are at the same
pass, and require 9 days for Hetruria from the Vmbrians and Sabines: and so
forth until anon, within thirteen miles of the Jupiter Indiges, The river
Numicius, and Ardea, built by Danae the mother of Perseus. Then the Colonie
Antium, sometimes Aphrodisium: Astura, Homer) but now with a plain. A wonder it
is what we are able to deliver concerning this thing to the knowledge of men.
Theophrastas, who of strangers was the first that writ (any thing diligently)
somewhat of the Romans (for Theopompus, before whom no man made mention at all,
said only, That the city was won by the Gauls: and Clitarchus next after
him, spoke of nothing else but an embassage sent unto Alexander) this
Theophrastus, I say, upon a better ground and more certainty now than bare
hearesay, has set down the measure of the Island Circeij to be eighty
Stadia; in that book which he wrote to Nicodorus the chief Magistrate of the
Athenians, who lived in the 460 year after the foundation of Rome city.
Whatsoever land therefore above ten miles compass Mutianus, a man who had
been thrice Consul, reports to have been a place wherein stood 23 cities.
Then there is the river Vfens, upon which stands the town Tarracina, called
in the Volscian tongue Anxur, and where sometime was the city Amycle,
destroyed by serpents. After it is there the place of a cave or peak, the lake
Fundanus, and the haven Cajeta. The town Formiae named also Hormiae, the
ancient seat (as men thought) of the Laestrigones. Beyond it was the town
Pyrae, the Colonie Minturne, divided asunder by the river Liris, called
Clanius. The utmost frontier town in this part of Latium laid to the other, is
Sinuessa, which as some have said, was wont to be called Sinope. Thence comes
to show it self that pleasant and Liber and dame Ceres. From hence the Setine
and Cecubine countries spread forth: and to them join the Falerne and Caline.
Then arise the mountains, Massici, Gaurani and Surrentine. There the Laborium
Champaine fields lie along under their feet, and the good wheat harvest to make
fine frumentie for dainties at the table. The seacoasts here are watered with
hot fountains, and among other commodities throughout all the sea, they bear
the name for the rich purple shell fish, and other excellent fishes. In no
place is there better or more kind oil pressed out of the Olive. And in this
delightsome pleasure of mankind, the Oscians, Grecians, After that, the plains
Phlegraei, and the mere or fenne Acherusia near to Cumes. And upon Minerua.
the seat sometime of the Meermaids. From the cape Circeij lies the sea open for
sail 78 miles. This is counted the first region of Italy, next Tibris,
according to the description of Augustus. Within it are these Colonies, Capua,
so called of the Champane country, Aquinum; Suessa, Venafrum, Sora, Teanum,
named withal Sidicinum and Nola: the Towns be, Abellinum, Aricia, Alba Longa,
Acerrani, Allifani, Atinates, Aletrinates, Anagnini, Atellani, Asulani,
Arpinates, Auximates, Auellani, Alfaterni; and they who of the Latin, Hernick,
and Albicane Valent
other name whereof to utter, is counted in the secret mysteries of ceremonies
an impious and unlawful thing: which after that it was abolished, and so
faithfully observed to right good purpose and for the safety thereof, Valerius
Soranus blurted out, and soon Angerona, whose holiday is solemnly kept with
sacrifices the ^2 day before the Kalends of January, is represented by an Image
having her mouth fast sealed and tied up. This city of Rome had 3 gates when
Romulus left it, or rather four (if we believe the most men that write
thereof) The walls thereof, when the two Vespacians, Emperors and Censors both,
to wit, the Father and Titus his son, took the measure, which was in the year
after the foundation of it 828, were in circuit Somer 30.
13 miles and almost a quarter. It contains within it, seven Mountains, and
is divided in 14 regions, and 265 cross streets or carfours, called Compita
Larium. The measure of the same equal space of ground, running from the gilden
pillar Milliarium, erected at the head or Tarquinius the Proud; a wonderful
piece of work as any other, and as excellent as the best: for he raised it
full as high as the walls, in that side where the aduenue to it was most open
and plain. In other Cn. Pompeius and L. Carbo were Consuls, even until the
last day of April; upon which day, L. Silla a lieutenant in the-Allies Antias
writes, that Apiolaea town of the Latins, was won by L. Tarquinius the King,
with the Pillage whereof he began to found the Capitol. From Surrentum, to the
river Silarus, the Picentine country lay for the space of 30 miles, reowmed
for the Tuscanes goodly temple built by Jason in the honor of Juno Argiva.
Within it stood the towns Salernum, and Picentia. At Silarus, the third region
of Italy, begins together with the Lucane and Brutian countries: and there
also the inhabitants changed not a few times. For held and possessed it was by
the Pelafgi, Oenotri, Italy, Morgetes, Sicilians, people all for the most part
of great Greece: and last of all by the Lucanes Lucius. In which stands the
town Paestum, called by the Greeks Posidonia: the Firth or creek Paestanus,
the town Helia, now Velia. The promontory Palinurum, from which creek retired
within-forth, there is a direct cut by water to the column regia, 100 miles
over. Next unto this, the river Melphes runs: also there stands the town
Buxentum, in Greek, Pyxus, and hard by is the river Laus: a town there was
likewise of the same name. And from thence begins the sea coast of Brutium,
where is to be seen the town Blanda, the river Batum, the haven Parthenius
belonging to the Phocaeans: the Firth Vibonensis, the grove Clampetia, The
town Temsa, called of the Greeks Temese: and Terina held by the Crotonians,
and the mighty arm of the sea, called the gulf Terinaeus: the town
Consentia. Within-forth in a demi Island, the river Hercules, the river
Metaurus, the town Taurentum, the haven of Orestes, and Medua: the town
Scylleum, the river Cratais, mother (as they say) to Scylla. Then after it, the
column Rhegia: the Sicilian streights or narrow seas, and two capes one
ouer-against the other; namely, Caenis from Italy side, and Pelorum from
Sicily, having a mile and a half between them: from whence to Rhegium is 12
miles and a half: and so forward to a wood in the Apennine, called Sila; and
the promontorie or cliffe called Leucopetra, 12 miles off. From which, Locri
(carrying the name also of the promontorie Zephyrium) is from Silarus distant
303 miles. Here is determined the first gulf of Europe, wherein be named these
seas. First, Atlanticum (from which the Ocean sea breaks in) called of some
Magnum: the passage whereas it enters, is of the Greeks called Porthmos; of
us, Fretum Gaditanum, i. [The streights of Gebralter] i. [The nether sea.]
Beyond Sicily as far as to the Salentines. Polybius calls it Ausonium: but
Eratosthenes names all the sea Sardonum, that is between the mouth of the
Ocean and Sardinia: and from thence to Sicilie, Tyrrhenum; and from it as far
as to Creta, Siculum: from which it is hight Creticum. The Islands discovered
along these seas, were these: The first of all, those which the Greeks named
Pityusae, of the Pine shrub or plant; but now, Ebusus: they are both a State
confederate, and a narrow arm of There be as it were 20 more little ones among
the shelues of the sea. Now in the maritime

CHAP. VI.
Of Corsica.

IN the Ligurian sea is Corsica the Island, which the Greeks called Cyrnos,
but nearer it is to the Tuscan sea; it lies out from the North into the South,
and contains in length an hundred and fifty miles: in breadth for the most
part it bears fifty: in circuit 322: distant it is from the Washes or Downs
of Volaterrae 62 miles. Cities it has 35: and these colonies, to wit, Mariana,
planted there by C. Marius: Aleria, by Dictatour Sylla. On this side of it is
Oglasa; but within 60 miles of Corsica, there is Planaria, so called of the
form thereof, so flat it is and level with the sea; and therefore deceives
many a ship that runs aground upon it. Bigger than it are Vrgo and Capraria,
which the Greeks called Aegilos. In like manner Aegilium and Dianium, the same
that Artemisia, both lying ouer-against the coast Cosanum. Other small ones
also, as Maenaria, Columbrarie, Venaria, Ilua, with the iron mines, in circuit
a hundred Aeeneas his nource, but because it was broken off by the gushing
between of the sea from Aenaria. Aenaria it self took that name of Aeeneas
his ships that lay in rode there, called by Homer Inarime, of the Greeks
Pithecusa, not for the number of Alps there, as some have thought, but of the
work houses and furnaces of potters that made earthen vessels, as tons and
such like, to furnish Italy with. Between Pausilypus and Naples, Megaris; and
soon after, eight miles from Surrentum, Capraee, renowned for the castle there
of Prince Tyberius; and it bears in compass four hundred miles. Anon you
shall see Leucothea: but

CHAP. VII.
Of Sardinia.

SArdinia on the East side bears 188 miles, on the West, 170, Southward, 74,
and Northward 122: so that in all, it takes up the compass of 560 miles. It
is from the Cape of Caraleis to Afric 200 miles: from Gades it is distant
1400 miles. It has two Islands on Hercules Islands: of Sulsenses cape side,
Enosis; of Caralitanum, Ficaria: some set not far from it the Islands
Belerides, and Collodes: and another which they call Heras Lutra, i. Iunoes
lauer, or Hieraca. The States of greatest name therein, be the Ilienses,
Balari, and Corsi: and of the four towns, the chief are inhabited by the
Sulcitanes, Valentines, Neapolitans, Bosenses, and Caralitani who are Roman
infranchised citizens, and Norenses. One colonie there is in it and no more,
which is called, Ad Turrim Libysonis. This island Sardinia, Timaeus called (of
the fashion of a shoe or slipper) Sandaliotis: but Myrsylus, for the
resemblance of a foots-step, Ichnusa. Ouer-against the creek Paestanum, there
is Leucasia, called so of a Mere-maid or Sirene there buried: against Ulysses.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Sicilie.

But Sicilie excels all other of these Islands, named by Thucydides Sicania;
by many, Trinacria, or Triquetra of the triangle form. It is in circuit (as
Agrippa says) 198 miles. In time past it grew to the Brutians country, but
soon after by the gushing of the sea between, it was plucked from it, and left
a Firth of 12 miles in length, and one and a half in breadth, near unto the
column Rhegium. Upon this occasion of opening and cleaving in twain, the
Greeks gave name to the town Rhegium, scituat in the edge of Italy. In this
narrow sea there is a rock called Scylla, and likewise another named Carybdis:
the sea is full of whirle-pits, and both those rocks are notorious for their
rage and mischief. The utmost Cape or fore-land of Mercury there be 180 miles:
and from the said Lilybaeum to the cape of Caraleis in Sardinia 120. Now these
points and promontories lie asunder one from the other in this distance. By
land from Pelorus to Pachynum, 166 miles: from thence to Lilibaeum 200 miles:
so forward to Pelorum 170 In it, of colonies, towns, and cities, there be 72.
From Pelorum side, which looks toward the Ionian sea, ye have the Ulysses,
the colonie Catanae, the rivers Symethum and Terias: within the Isle by the
plains and champian fields, Laestrigonij. The towns are these, Leontini, and
Megaris: and in it is the river Pantagies: also the colonie Syracusae, together
with the fountain Arethusa. Albe it there be other springs also in the
territory of Syracusa, that yield water for drink, to wit, Temenitis, Aeolus
reigned there in the time that Illium flourished, and about the Trojan war.

CHAP. IX.
Of Lipara.

LIpara with a town of Roman citizens, called so of king Liparus, who
succeeded Aeolus, but before time Melogonis or Meligunis, is 12 miles from
Italy, and is it self somewhat less in circuit. Between this and Sicily there
is another, sometime named Therasia, now Hiera, because it is consecrated to
Vulcan, wherein there is a little hill that belcheth and casts Aeolus reigned)
and differs from Lipara only in this, that it sends forth more clear
flames of fire: by the smoke thereof, the people of that country will tell (by
report) three days before hand what winds will blow: whereupon it is commonly
thought that the winds were obedient to Acolus. A fourth there is besides,
named Didyme, less than Lipara: and a fifth, Ericusa: a sixth, Phaenicusa, left
to feed the rest that are next to it: the last and least is Euonymus. And thus
much concerning the first gulf that diuides Europe

CHAP. X.
Of Locri, the frontier town of Italy.

AT Locres begins the front or forepart of Italy, called Magna Graecia,
retiring it self into three creekes of the Ausonian sea, because the Ausones
first inhabited thereby. It extendes 82 miles, as Varro testifies. But the
greater number of writers have made but 72. In that coast there be rivers
without number. But those things which are worth the writing of near unto
Locres, be these, Sagra the river, and the relics of the town Caulon: Mystia
the castle Consilium, Cerinthus, which some think to be the utmost promontory
of Italy, bearing farthest into the sea. Then follow the creek or gulf
Scylacensu, and that which was called by the Athenians when they built it,
Scylletium. Which place another creek Tirenaeus, meeting with, makes a demie
Island: in which there is a port town called Castra Anibilis: and in no place
is Italy narrower, being but twenty miles broad. And therefore Dionisius the
elder would Homer is supposed to have called Ogygia. Moreover, Tyris, Eranusa,
Meloessa. And this is seventy miles from Caulon, as Agrippa has recorded.

CHAP. XI.
The second Sea of Europe.

FRom the promontory Lacinium begins the second sea of Europe: it takes a
great winding and compass with it, and ends at Acroceraunium, a promontory
of Epirus, from which it is seventy miles distant. In which there shows it
self the town Croto, and the river Naeathus. The town Thurium between the
two rivers, Arathis and Sybaris, where there was a town of the same name.
Likewise between Siris and Aciris there stands Heraclea fomtime called Siris.
Rivers, Acalandrum, Masuentum: the town Metapontum, in which the third region
of Italy takes an end. The Inlanders be of the Brutians, the Aprustans only:
but of Lucanes, Thoatinates, Bantines, Eburines, Grumentines, Potentines,
Sontines, Sirines, Sergilanes Vrsentines, Volcentanes, unto whom the
Numestranes are joined. Besides all these, Cato writes, That Thebes of the
Lucanes, is clean destroyed and gone. And Theopompus says, That Pandosia
Alexander king of the Epirotes was slain. Knit hereunto is the second region
or tract of Italy, containing within it the Hirpines, Calabria, Apulia, and the
Salentines within an arm of the sea, in compass 250 miles, which is called
Tarentinus of a town of the Laconians, situate in the inmost nouke, or creek
hereof: and to it was annexed and lay the maritine Colonie which there was. And
distant it is from the promontory Lacinium 1^6 miles, putting forth Calabria
like a demi Island against it. The Greeks called it Messapia of their captains
name, and before-time, Peucetia of Peucetius, the brother of Oenotrus. In the
Salentine country between the two promontories, there is a 100 miles distance.
The breadth of this demie Island, to wit, from Tarentum to Brindis (if you go
by land) is two and thirty miles, but far shorter if you sail from the Haven
or Bay Sasina. The towns in the Continent is there the town Basta, and
Hydruntum in the space of nineteen miles, to make a partition between Pyrrhus
king of Epirus, was the first, that intending to have a passage over on foot,
thought to make bridges there: after him M. Varro, at what time as in the
Pirates war he was Admiral of Pompeies fleet. But both of them were let and
stopped with one care or other besides. Next to Hydrus there is Soletum, a
city not inhabited: then, Fratuertium: the haven Tarentinus, the garrison
town Lupia, Balesium. Caelium, Brundusium fifteen miles from Hydrus, as much
renowned as any town of Italy for the haven, for the surer sailing, although
it be the longer, and the city of Illyricum Dyrragium is ready to receive the
ships: the passage over is 220 miles. Upon Brundutium bordereth the territory
of the Paediculi. Nine young men there were of them, and as many maids,
descended from the Illyrians, who begat Dedalus his son, who also gave the
name to Iapygia. Rivers, Pactius, and Aufidus issuing out of the Hirpine
mountains, and running by Canusium. Then follows Apulia of the Daunians,
surnamed so of their leader, father in law to Diomedes. In which is the town
Salapia, famous for the love of an harlot that Anniball cast a fancy unto;
then, Sipontum and Vria: also the river Cerbalus, where the Daunians take their
end: the port Agasus, the cape of the mountain Garganus, from Salentine or
Iapygium 234 miles, fetching a compass about Garganus: the haven Garnae, the
lake Pantanus. The river Frento, full of Baies and Havens, and Teanum of the
Apulians. In like manner also, Larinum, Aliturnia, and the river Tifernus. Then
comes in the region Frentana. So there be three kinds of nations, Teani, of
their Calchas, which quarters now the Atinates hold and occupy. Colonies of
the Daunians besides the abouenamed, Luceria, and Venusia: towns, Canusium,
Arpi, sometime Argos Hippium, builded by Diomides, but soon after called
Argyrippa. There Diomedes vanquished and destroyed the whole generation of the
Monadians and Dardians, together with two cities, which grew to a merry jest by
way of a byword, Apina and Trica. The rest be more inward in the second
region, to wit, one Colonie of the Hirpines called Beneuentum, changed into a
more luckie name, whereas in times past it was cleaped Maleuentum: the
Aeculanes, Aquilonians, and Abellinates, surnamed Protropi: the Campsanes,
Caudines, and Ligurians, surnamed Cornelians: as also Bebianes, Vescellanes,
Deculanes, and Aletrines: Abellinates surnamed Marsi, the Atranes, Aecanes,
Afellanes, Attinates, and Arpanes:

CHAP. XII.
The fourth Canton or region of Italy.

NOw follows the fourth region, even of the most hardy and valiant nations
of all Italy. In the coast of the Frentanes, next to Tifernus, is the river
Tirinium, full of good havens and harbors. The towns there, be Histonium,
Buca, and Ortona, with the river Aternus. More within the country, are the
Anxanes surnamed Frentanes: the Carentines, both higher and lower, the
Lanuenses: of Marrucines, the Teatines: of Pelignians, the Corfinienses,
Super-Aequani and Sulmonenses: of Marcians, the Anxantines and Atinates, the
Fucentes, Lucentes, and Maruvij: of Albenses, Alba upon the lake Fucinus: of
Aequiculanes, the Cliternines and Carseolanes: of Vestines, the Augulanes,
Pinnenses, Peleuinates, unto whom are joined the Aufinates on this side the
mountains: of Samnites, whom the Greeks called Sabellians and Saunites,
Treuentinates: of the Sabines, the Amiternines, Curenses, Forum Decij, Forum
Novum, Gellianus writes, that Acippe, a town of the Marsians, built by
Marsyas a captain of the Lydians, was drowned and swallowed up by the lake
Fucinus. Also Valerian reports, that a town of the Vidicines in Picenum was
utterly ruined by the Romans. The Sabines as some have thought were for their
religion and devout worshipping of the gods called Sevini: they dwell hard by
the Veline lakes upon moist and dewie hills. The river Nar draineth them dry
with his hot waters of brimstone: which river running from thence toward
Tyberis fills it, and gliding from the hill Fiscellus, near the groves of
Vacuna and Reate, is hidden in the same. But from another side, the river Anio,
beginning in the mountain of the Trebanes, brings with it into Tiberis three
M. Varro says, is in the very midst and center of Italy. Beneath the Sabines
lies Latium; on the side Picenum; behind, Vmbria; and the hills of the
Apennine on either hand, do enclose as with a rampire, the Sabines.

CHAP. XIII.
The fifth Region.

THe fifth region is Picene, a Nation in times past most populous, 360000 of the
Picentes

CHAP. XIIII.
The sixth Region.

TO these adioyneth the sixth region, comprehending Vmbria and the French pale
about Ariminum. At Ancona begin the French marches, by the name of Togata
Gallia. The Sicilians The Pitualnes, with the addition of Pisuerts, as also
others surnamed Mergentines, and the Pelestines, Cato has left in record, that
it was built 964 years before the war against Perseus.

CHAP. XV.
The eighth Region.

THe eight region is bounded with Ariminum, Padus, and Apennine. In the borders
thereof is the river Crustuminum, the colony Ariminum, with the rivers Ariminum
and Aprusa. Then the river Rubico, the utmost limit sometime of Italy After it
Sapis the river, Vitis, and Anemo, Rauenna a town of the Sabines, with the
river Bedeses, 102 miles from Ancona. And not far from the Vmbrians sea,
Butrium. Within-forth are these colonies, Bononie, usually called Felsina when
it was the head city of Hetruria, Brixillum, Mutina, Parma, Placentia. Cato
says. Likewise the Senones, they that took Rome.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the river Padus.

PAdus, issuing out of the bosom of the mountain Vesulus, bearing up his head
aloft into a mighty height, runs from a marvelous spring worth the seeing, in
the marches of the Phacton. It swells about the rising of the Dog star, by
reason the snow is then thawed: more unruly and rough unto the fields thereby,
than to the vessels upon it, howbeit it steals and carries away nothing as
his own; but when he has left the fields, his bounty is more seen by their
plenty and fruitfulness: from his head he holds on his course 90 miles
wanting twain above 300. In which his passage he takes in unto him not only
the nauigable rivers of the Apennine and the Alps, but huge main lakes also
that discharge themselves into him: so as in all he carries with him into the
Adriaticke sea to the number of 30 rivers. The Claudius Caesar as he came
triumphant out of Britain entered into Adria with that huge Vessel more like a
mighty great house than a Ship. This mouth of it was beforetime called
Eridanum: of others, Spineticum, of the city Spinae near by, built by
Diomedes, (as some think) with the treasures of Delphie. There the river
Vatrenus from out of the territory Metrodorus Scepsius says, That forasmuch as
about the spring and head of this river there grow many pitch trees, called in
French Padus, therefore it took the name Padus. Also, that in the Ligurian
language, the river it self is called Bodincus, which is as much to say, as
bottomless. And to approve this reason and argument, there is a town thereby
called Industria, but by an old name Bodincomacum, where in very deed,
begins the greatest deapth thereof.

CHAP. XVII.
Italy beyond Padus, the eleventh Region.

NExt to it, is the region called Transpadana, and the eleventh in number: all
whole in the mid-land part of Italy, into which the seas bring in all things
with fruitful channel. The towns therein, be Vibi-Forum, and Segusta. The
colonies at the foot of the Alps, Augusta of the Taurines, an ancient descent
from the Ligurians: from whence Padus is nauigable. Then, Augusta Praetoria, of
the Salassi, near unto the twofold gullets or passages of the Alps, to wit,
Graija and Peninae: for men say, that the Carthagineans came through the one,
and Hercules in at the other, named Graijae. There stands the town Eporedia,
built by the people of Rome, by direction and commandment out of the books of
Sibylla. Now the Gauls in their Cato thinks, of the Ligurians: of whom, the
Leui and Marici built Ticinum, not far from Padus: like as the Boij coming
over the Alps, founded Laus Pompeia; and the Insubrians, Millaine. That Comus
and Bergomus, yea and Licini-Forum, with other nations thereabout, were of the
Orobian race, Cato has reported: but the first beginning and original of that
nation of Orobians, he confesses that he knows not. Which notwithstanding
Cornelius Alexander shows to have descended from the Greeks; and this he
guesseth by the interpretation of their name, which signifies, Men living in
mountains. In this tract, Barra a town of the Orobians is clean destroyed;
from whence, Cato says, the Bergomates took their Nepos Cornelius has
written) was by the Insubrians, Doians, and Senones, rased on that very day, on
which Camillus forced Veij.

CHAP. XVIII.
Venice, the tenth Region.

NOw follows the tenth region of Italy, Venice, lying fast upon the
Adriaticke sea: the river whereof Silis, comes forth of the mountains
Taurisani: wherein also is the Town Altinum, the river Liquentia issuing from
the mountains Opitergeni; a haven of the same name: the colonie Concordia.
Rivers and havens, to wit, Romatinum, Tilauentum, the greater and the less:
Anassum, whereunto Varranus runs down: Alsa, Natiso, with Turrus, Cornelius
Nepos also, although he dwelt just by Padus: for there is no river that runs
out of Danubius into the Adriaticke sea. Deceived (I suppose) they were because
the

CHAP. XIX.
Istria.

IStria runs out like a demie Island. Some have delivered in writing, that
it is 40 miles Tuditanus, who subdued the Istrians, upon his own statue there
set this inscription; That from Aquileia to the river Titius, were 200 stadia.
The towns in Istria of Roman citizens, be Aegida and Parentium. A Colony
there is besides, Pola, now called Pietas Iulia; built in old time by the
Colchians. It is from Tergeste 100 miles. Soon after, ye see the town
Nesactium, and the river Arsia, the utmost bound now of Italy. From Ancona to
Pola there is a cut over the sea of 120 miles. In the midland part of this
tenth region, are these Colonies; Cremona, and Brixia, in the Cenomanes Cato
has set down in writing: also, that the Cenomanes near unto Massiles, dwell
in the Volcians country. Fertines, Tridentines, and Barnenses, are towns of
Rhetia. As for Verona, it is of Rhetians, and Euganeans; but Iulienses be of
the Carnians. Then follow these, whom we need to use no curiosity in naming;
Alutruenses, Asseriates, Flamonienses, Vannienses, and others surnamed Gulici:
Foro Iulienses surnamed Transpadani: Forelani, Venidates, Querqueni, Taurisani,
Togienses, Varuani. In this tract there be perished in the borders, Itaminum,
Pellaon, Palsicium. Of the Venetians, Atina, and Caelina: of the Carnians,
Segeste and Ocra: and of the Taurissi, Noreia. Also from Aquileia 12 miles,
there M. Claudius Marcellus, even maugre the Senate, as L. Piso has recorded.
In this region there be also ten notable lakes and rivers, either issuing forth
of them as their children, or else fed and maintained by them, if so be they
send them out again, when they have once received them: as Larius does Aena,
Verbanus Ticinus, Benacus Mincius, Sebinus Ossius, Eupilius Lamber, al
inhabiting and seated in Padus. The Alps reach in length ten miles from the
upper sea to the lower, as Coelius says: Timogenes, two and twenty: but
Cornelius Nepos draws them out in breadth an hundred miles: T. Liuius says,
three thousand stadia: both of them take measure in diverse places: for sometime
they exceed a hundred miles, where they disioyne Germany from Italy, and in
other parts they are so thin, that they make not full out threescore and ten
miles; and that by the providence as it were of Nature. The breadth of

CHAP. XX.
Of the Alps, and Alpine Nations.

MAny nations inhabit the Alps, but those of special name from Pola to the
tract of Tergestis, are these, the Secusses, Subocrines, Catili, Menocaleni:
and near to the Carnians those who in times past were called Taurisci, but now
Norici. Upon these there do confine the Rhetians and Vindelici, all divided
into many States. Men think that the Rheti are the Tuscans progeny, driven
out by the Gauls, with their leader Rhaetus. But leaving these Rhoetians,
turning our breast and visage to Italy, we meet with the Euganean nations of
the Alps, who inioyed the liberty and franchises of the Latins, and whose
towns Cato reckons Cato thinks to be of the Taurick race. But all others
in manner suppose verily that the Lepontians were a residue left behind of
Hercules his train and company; grounding upon the interpretation of the Greek
name, as having their bodies seaged with the Alpine snowes as they passed
through: that the Graij likewise were of the same retinue, planted in the very
passage, and inhabiting the Alps Graiae: also that the Euganei were noblest of
birth, whereupon they took their name. The head city of them is Stonos. Of
those Rhoetians the Vennonetes and Sarunetes, inhabit near the heads of the
river Rhenus. And of the Lepontians, those who are called Viberi, dwell by the
Spring of Rhodanus, in the same quarter of the Alps. There be also inhabitants
within the Alps, endowed with Unto the Emperor Caesar, son of Augustus of
famous memory, Archbishop, General four times, and invested in the sacred
authority of the Tribunes: the Senate and people of Rome. For that by his
conduct and happy fortune, all the Alpine nations which reached from the upper
sea to the nether, were reduced and brought under the Empire of the people of
Rome. The Alpine nations subdued, are these, Triumpilini, Camuni, Vennonetes,
Isarci, Breuni, Naunes and Focunales. Of the Vindelici four nations, to wit,
the Consuanetes, Virucina, tes, Licates, and Catenates. The Abisontes,
Suanetes, Calucones, Brixentes, and Lepontij. Viberi, Nantuates, Seduni,
Veragri, Salaci, Acitauones, Medulli, Vceni, Caturiges, Brigiani, Sogiontij,
Ebroduntij, Nemaloni, Edenates, Esubiani, Veamini, Gallitae, Triulatti, Ectini,
Vergunium, Eguituri, Nementuri, Oratelli, Nerusivelauni, Suetri. Now there were
not reckoned among these the twelve Cottian States which were not up in any
hostility, ne yet those which were assigned to the free towns to enjoy the
burgeoisie of Rome, by virtue of the law Pompeia. Behold this is that Italy
consecrated to the gods, these are her nations, and these be the towns of her
several States. And more than all this, that Italy, which when L. Aemylius
Paulus and Caius Attilius Regulus were Consuls, upon news brought of a sudden
rising and tumult of the Gauls, alone by it self, without any foreign aids,
and even them, without any nations beyond Padus, armed 80000 horsemen and
700000 foot. In plenty of all metal mines

CHAP. XXI.
Illyricum.

THe Nation of the Liburnians ioineth unto Arsia, even as far as the river
Titius. A part thereof were the Mentores, Hymani, Encheleae, Dudini, and those
whom Callimachus names Pucetiae. Now, the whole in general is called by one
name, Illyricum. The names Flanates, of whom the sea or gulf bears the name:
Lopsi, Varubarini, and the Assesiates that

CHAP. XXII
Liburnia.

THe end of Liburnia and beginning of Dalmatia is Scordona, which frontier
town is 12 miles from the sea, situate upon the said river Titius. Then
follows the ancient country of the Tariotes, and the castle Tariota, the
Promontory Diomedis, or, as some would have it the demi island Hyllis, taking
in circuit a hundred miles: also Tragurium, inhabited by Roman citizens, well
known for the marble there: Sicum, into which place, Claudius late Caesar,
sent the old soldiers: the Colony Salona, 222 miles from Iadera. There repair
to it for law those that are described into Decuries or tithings 382: to wit,
Dalmatians 22, Decunum 239, Ditions, 69, and Mezaei 52, Sardiates: in this
tract are Burnum, Mandetrium, and Tribulium, castles of name for the battles of
the Romans. There came also forth of the islands the Issaeans, M. Varro
writes, that 89 States used to repair thither for justice. Now, these only in
a manner be known, to wit, Cerauni in 33 Tithings. Daorizi in 17, Destitiates
in 103, Docleates in 34, Deretines in 14, Deremistes in 30, Dindari in 33,
Glinditiones in 44, Melcomani in 24, Naresij in 102, Scirtari in 72, Siculote
in 24: and the Vardaei, who sometime wasted and forraied Italy, in 20 decuries
and no more. Besides these, there held and possessed this tract Oenei,
Partheni, Hemasini, Arthitae and Armistae. From the river Naron a hundred
miles, is the colony Epidaurum. Towns of Roman citizens be these, Rhizinium,
Ascrinium, Butua, Olchinium, which beforetime was called Colchinium, built by
the Colchi. The river Drilo, and the town upon it, Scodra, inhabited by Roman
citizens,

C XXIII.
Macedonie.

FRom Lissum is the province of Macedonie: the nations there, be the Partheni,
and on their back side the Dassaretes. Two mountains of Candauia 79 miles
from Dyrrhachium: but in the borders thereof, Denda, a town of Roman citizens:
also the Colonie Epidamnum, which for that unlucky names sake was by the
Romans called Dyrrhachium. The river Aous, named of some Aeas. Apollonia,
sometime a Colonie of the Corinthians, situate within the country, seven
miles from the sea, in the marches whereof is the famous Nymphaeum. The
borderers inhabiting thereby, are the Amantes and Buliones. But in the very
edge thereof, the town Oricum built by the Colchi. Then begins Epirus, the
mountains Acroceraunia, at which we have bounded this sea of Europe: as for
Oricum, it is from Salentinum (a promontorie of Italy) 85 miles.

CHAP. XXIIII
Noricum.

BEhind the Carni and Iapides, whereas the great river Ister runs, the
Norici join to the Rhaeti. Their towns be Virunum, Celeia, Teurnia, Aguntum,
Viana, Aemona, Claudia, Flavium, Tolvense. Upon the Norici there lie fast the
Lake Peiso, the deserts of the Boij. Howbeit, Claudius of famous memory,
Salaria and the town Scarabantia Iulia, they be inhabited and peopled.

CHAP. XXV.
Pannonia.

THence begins Pannonia so fruitful in Mast: whereas the hills of the Alps,
waxing more mild and civil, turning through the midst of Illyricum from the
North to the South, settle lower by an easy descent both on the right hand and
the left. That part which regards

CHAP. XXVI.
Moesia.

Unto Pannonia ioineth the Province called Moesia, which extends along
Danubius unto Pontus. It begins at the confluent aboue-named: in it are the
Dardanians, Celegeri, Triballi, Trimachi, Moesi, Thranes, and the Scythians
bordering upon Pontus. Fair rivers, M. Agrippa has set down all the whole
sea comprehending Italy and Illyricum, in the compass of 1300 miles. In it are
two smaller seas or gulfs bounded as I have said: namely, The lower, otherwise
called the Ionian, in the forepart: the inner, called Adriaticum, which also
they name the upper: in the Ausonian sea there be no islands worth the
speaking, but those aboue-named: in the Ionian sea there are but few, to wit,
upon the Calabrian coast before Brundusium; by the object site whereof, the
haven is made: and against the Apulian coast Diomede, famous for the tomb and
monument of Diomedes: another also of that Medeas brother Absyrtes there
slain. Near unto them, they called the Islands Electrides, wherein is
engendered Ambre, which they call Electrum, a most assured argument to prove the
vanity of the Greeks; for that which of them they meant, was never known:
against lader, there is Lissa; and certain other over against the Liburnians,
called Creteae: and as many of the Liburnians, Celadusae: against Surium, there
is Brattia, commended for neat and goats. Issa, inhabited by Roman citizens,
and Pharia with the town. Callimachus testifies) the little dogs Melitaei
took their name: and 12 miles from thence, the three Elaphites. In the Ionian
sea from Oricum 1000 miles, is Sasonis, well known for the Pirates harbor there.

THE FOVRTH BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF NATVRE,
WRITTEN BY C. PLINIVS SECVNDVS.
From whence first arose all the fabulous lies, and the excellent Learning of
the Greeks.
THe third Sea of Europe begins at the mountains Acroceraunia, and ends
in Hellespont: it contains besides nineteen smaller gulfes or creekes, 25
thousand miles. Within it, are Epirus, Acarnania, Aetolia, Phocis, Locris,
Achaia, Messania, Laconia, Argolis, Megaris, Attica, Boeotia. And again from
another sea the same Phocis and Locris, Doris, Phthiotis, Thessalia, Magnesia,
Macedonia, Thracia. All the fabulous vein, and learning of Greece, proceeded
out of this quarter. And therefore we will therein stay somewhat the longer.
The country Epirus, generally so called, begins at the mountains
Acroceraunia. In it, are first the Chaones, of whom Chaonia takes the name:
then the Thesprotians, and Antigonenses: the place Aornus, and the air arising
out of it so noisome and pestiferous for birds. The Cestines, and Perrhoebians
with their mountain Pindus; the Cassiopaei, the Dryopes, Selli, Hellopes, and
Molossi, among whom is the t^mple of Jupiter Dodonaeus, so famous for the
Oracle there: the mountain Tomarus, renowned by Theopompus for the hundred
fountains about the foot thereof.

CHAP. I.
Epirus.

EPirus it self reaching to Magnesia and Macedonia, has behind it the
Dassaretians above named, a free nation, but anon the savage people of the
Dardanians. On the left side of the Dardanians, the Trebellians and nations of
Moesia lie ranged: afront there join unto them, the Medi and Denthelates: upon
whom the Thracians border, who reach as far as to Pontus. Thus environed it
is and defenced round, partly with the high hill Rhodope, and anon also with
Haemus. In the utmost coast of Epirus among the Acroceraunia, is the castle
Chimaera, under Augustus, with the goodly temple of Apollo, and the free city
Nicopolis. When ye are gone out of the Ambrecian gulf into the Ionian sea, ye
meet with the of sand, which place is called Dioryctus, and is in length almost
half a mile. A town in it there

CHAP. II
Aetolia.

THe Aetolian nations, be the Athamanes, Tymphei, Ephiri, Aenienses; Perrhoebi,
Dolopes, Maraces and Atraces, from whom the river Atrax falls into the Ionian
sea. The Town

CHAP. III.
Locri.

NExt to the Aetolians are the Locri, surnamed Ozolae, free States and exempt:
the town Oeanthe: the haven of Apollo Phaestius: the creek Crissaeus.
Within-forth are these towns Argyna, Eupalia, Phaestum, and Calamissus. Beyond
them are Citrhaei, the plains of Phocis, the town Cirrha, the haven Chalaeon:
from which, seven miles within the land, is the free city Delphi, under the
hill Pernassus, the most famous place upon earth for the Oracle of Apollo. The
fountain Castalius, the river Cephissus running before Delphos, which arises
in a city, sometime called Liloea. Moreover, the town Crissa, and together
with the Bulenses, Anticyra, Naulochum, Pyrrha, Amphissa an exempt State,
Trichone, Tritea, Ambrysus, the region

CHAP. IV.
Peloponnesus.

PEloponnesus, called before time Apia and Pelasgia, is a demi Island, worthy
to come behind no other land for excellency and name; lying between two seas,
Aegeum and Ionium: like unto the leaf of a plane tree, in regard of the
indented creekes and cornered nouks Isodorus. The same, if you comprise the
creekes and gulfes, adds almost as much more. The straight where it begins
to pass on and go forward, is called Isthmos. In which place the seas a
bouenamed gushing and breaking from diverse ways, to wit, from the North and
the East, do devour all the breadth of it there: until by the contrary
running in of so great seas, the sides on both hands being eaten away, and
leaving a space of land between, five miles over, Hellas with a narrow neck
does meet with Pel oponnesus. The one side thereof is called the Corinthian
gulf, the other, the Saronian. Lecheum of the one hand, and Cenchraea of the
other, do bound out and limit the said streights where the ships are to fetch a
great compass about with some danger, such vessels I mean as Demetrius the
king, Caesar the Dictator, prince Caius, and Domitius Nero, assaied to cut
through the narrow foreland, and make a channel nauigable with ease: but the
attempt and enterprise was unhappy, as appeared by the issue and end of them
all. In the midst of this narrow straight which we have called Isthmos, the
colonie Corinthus, beforetime called Ephyra, situate hard to a little

CHAP. V.
Achaia.

AChaia, the name of a province, begins at Isthmus, aforetime called it was
Aegialos, because of the cities, situate so orderly upon the strand. The
principal and first there is Lecheae abouenamed, a port town of the
Corinthians. Next to it Oluros, a castle of the Pelleneans. The towns Helice,
Bura, and (into which the inhabitants retired themselves, when these
beforenamed were drowned in the sea) Sicyon, Aegira, Aegion, and Erineos.
Within the country was Cleone and Hysie. Also the haven Panhormus, and Rhium
described before: from which promontorie five miles off stands Patrae above
mentioned, and the place called Pherae. of 9 hills in Achaia, Scioessa is most
known, also the Spring Cymothoe. Beyond Patrae is the town Olenum, the
colonie Dymae. Certain fair places called Buprasium and Hirmene: and the
promontorie Araxum. The creek of Cyllene, the cape Chelonates: from whence to
Cyllene is Homer named Arethyrea, and afterward Asophis. Then the country of
the Elians, who before were called Epei. As for Elis the city it self, it is
up higher in the mid-land parts, 12 miles from Pylos. Within it stands the
Chapel of Jupiter Olympius, which for the fame of the games there, contains
the Greeks and Chaldeans account of years. Moreover, the town sometime of the
Piseans, before which the river Alpheus runs. But in the borders and coast
thereof the promontorie Icthys. Upon the river Alpheus, there is passage by
water in barges to the towns Aulos and Leprion. The promontory Platanestus;
all these lie Westward. But toward the South, the arm of the sea called
Cyparissius, and the city Cyparissa, 72 miles in circuit. The towns upon it,
Pylos, Methone, a place and forest called Delos: the promontorie Acritas: the
creek Asineus of the town Asinum, and Coroneus Aesculapius, the promontorie
Spiraeum, Neptune, famous for the games there represented every five years.
Thus many creekes does scotch and cut Peloponnesus: thus many seas I say do
rore and dash against it. For on the North side the Ionian sea breaks in: on

CHAP. VI.
Of Arcadia.

THe midland parts thereof, Arcadia most of all takes up, being every way far
remote from the sea: at the beginning it was named Drymodis, but soon after
Pelasgis. The towns in it be Psophis, Mantinea, Stymphalum, Tegea, Antegonea,
Orchomenum, Pheneum, Palatium, from whence the mount Palatium at Rome took the
name. Megalepolis, Catina, Bocalium, Jupiter Lycenus, Maenalus, Artemisius,
Parthenians, Lampeus, and Nonacris: and eight besides of base account. Rivers,
Ladon, issuing out of the meeres and fens of Pheneus, Erymanthus out of a
mountain of the same name, running both down into Alpheus. The rest of the
cities to be named in Achaea, Aliphiraei, Abeatae, Pyrgenses, Pareatae,
Paragenitiae, Tortuni, Typanaei, Thryasij, Trittenses. All Achaaea generally
throughout, Domitius Nero endowed with freedom. Peloponnesus from the
promontorie of Malea to the town Lechaeum upon the Corinthian

CHAP. VII.
Greece and Attica.

AT the streights of Isthmus begins Hellas, of our countrymen called
Graecia: the first tract thereof is Attica, in old time named Act. It reaches
unto Isthmus on that part Liber and Hercules. Also they attribute the birth of
the Muses in the wood Helicon. To this Thebes, is assigned the forest
Cithaeron, and the river Ismenus. Moreover fountains in Boeotia, Oedipodium,
Psammate, Dirce, Epigranea, Arethusa, Hippocrene, Aganippe, and Gargaphiae.
Mountains over and besides the forenamed, Mycalessus, Adylisus, Acontius. The
rest of the towns between Megara and Thebes, Eleutherae, Haliartus. Plateae,
Pherae, Aspledon, Hyle, Thisbe, Erythrae, the very mouth of Euripus, which the
Island Euboea makes by the opposite site thereof, Aulis, Graecus, of whom
Greece bare the name: there also was Hellen borne, from whence came the
Hellenes. These being but one people, Homer has given three names unto, that
is to say, Myrmidones, Hellenes, and Achaei. Of these, they be called Phthiotae
who inhabit Doris. Their towns be Echinus, in the very gullet and entrance of
the river Sperchius: and the streights of Thermopylae, so named by reason of
the waters: and four miles from thence Heraclea, was called Trachin. There is
the hill Callidromus: and the famous towns, Hellas, Halos, Lamia, Phthia, and
Arne.

CHAP. VIII.
Thessalie.

Moreover in Thessalie, Orchomenus, called before-time Minyeus; and the town
Almon, or after some Elmon; Atrax, Pelinna, and the fountain Hyperia. Towns,
Pherae, behind which Pierius stretches forth to Macedonie: Larissa, Gomphi,
Thebes of Thessalie, the wood Pteleon, and the creek Pagasicus. The town
Pagasa, the same named afterward Demetrias; Tricca, the Pharsalian plains with
a free city; Cranon and Iletia. Mountains of Phthiotis, Nymphaeus, most fair
and sightly for the natural arbors and garden works there: Buzigaeus,
Donacesa, Bermius, Daphissa, Chimerion, Athamas, Stephane. In Thessaly there be
34, whereof the most famous are, Cerceti, Olympus, Pierus, Ossa: just against
which, is Pyndus and Othrys, Homer says:) within a while after that he has
carried him a small way, lets him go again and rejects him, as refusing
to mingle with his own silver streams, those poenall and cursed waters
engendered sor the infernal Furies of hell.

CHAP. IX.
Magnesia.

TO Thessaly, Magnesia is annexed: the fountain there is Libethra. The towns,
Iolchos, Hirmenium, Pyrrha, Methone, Olizon. The promontorie Sepias. Towns
moreover, Castana, Sphalatra, and the promontory Aenantium. Towns besides,
Meliboea, Rhisus, Erymne.

CHAP. X.
Macedonie.

MAcedonie, so called afterward (for before-time it was named Emathia) is a
kingdom consisting of 150 several States, renowned for two kings above the
rest, and ennobled fometime for the Monarchy and Empire of the world. This
country lying far in behind Magnesia and Thessaly toward the nations of
Epirus Westward, is much troubled and infested with the Dardanians. The North
parts thereof are defended by Paeonia and Pelagonia, against the Triballi. The
towns be these, Aege, wherein the manner was to interre their kings: Xerxes
king of the Persians cut the hill Athos from the Continent) in length a mile
and a half. The mountain it self shoots out from the plain into the sea,
75 miles. The compass of the foot thereof takes 150 miles. A town there was
in Liber and Hercules. This is the very same Macedonie, of which in one day
Paulus Aemilius our General, sacked and sold 72 cities. See the difference of
fortune in two men.

CHAP. XI.
Thracia.

NOw follows Thracia, among the most valiant nations of Europe, divided into
52 regiments of soldiers. Of those States in it, the Denseletes and Medi, whom
it grieves out the river Hebrus to the neighbour-borderers, the Carbiletes,
Pyrogeris, Drugeri, Caenicks, Orpheus descended, do inhadite. Thus Ister
boundeth it on the North: in the East, Pontus and Propontus: Southward, the sea
Aegaeum, in the coast whereof from Strimon, stand Apollonia, Oestima, Neapolis,
and Polis. Within-forth, the Colonie of Philip, and 325 miles from Dyrrhachium,
Scotusa, Topiris, and the mouth of the river Nestus. Diomedes that stabled
there. Now at this day, Diceae, Ismaron, the place Parthenion, Phalesina,
Maronea called Ortagurea before-time. The mountain Serrium and Zonae: then,
the plain Doriscus able to receive Or 100000.
^0000 men: for so Xerxes took a just account of his army and numbered it. The
mouth of Hebrus: the haven of Stentor: the free town Aenea, together with the
tomb of Polydorus, the region sometime of the Cicones. From Doriscus, the
coast bends crookedly to Macron-Tichos, for 122 miles. About which place the
river Melas, whereof the creek be areth name. Towns, Cypsella, Bisanthe, and
that which is called Macron-Tichos, what way as stretching forth the walls
along Agrippa has set to 40 miles more. And from thence to the wall
aboue-named 150: and so from it to Chersonesus 126. But near to Bosphorus is
the arm of the sea Gasthenes. The haven surnamed of old men, and another
likewise of women. The promontory Chrysoceras, whereupon stands the town
Bizantium of free estate, called before-time Lygos. From Dyrrachium it is 711
miles. Thus much lies out the main in Tereus. The region Camica: the colonie
Flauiopolus, where before-time the town was called Zela. And 50 miles from
Byria the Colony Apros, which is from Philippi 188 miles. But in the borders,
the river Erginus, where was the town Gonos. And there you leave the city
Lysimachia, also now in Chersonesus. For another land passage or Isthmus there
is of like streightnes, alone in name, and of equal breadth with that of
Corinth. Likewise on both sides two cities do beautify and set out the
stronds, which they take up not unlike to the other, to wit, Pactiae from
Propontis and Cardia from the gulf Melane: as for this, it takes the name of
the form and proportion Macron-Tichos.
long walls abouesaid. Chersonesus from Propontis side, had Tiristasis and
Crithotes, also Cissa fast upon the river Aegos: now it has from the colony
Apros 32 miles Resistos, oueragainst the colony Pariana. And Hellespontus,
dividing Europe from Asia, seven stadia asunder Hecubaes tomb named, the very
rode of the Athenians navy. The town and chapel of Protesilaus: and in the
very utmost forefront of Cherronesus, which is called Aeolium, the town
Elaeus. After it, as a man goes to the gulf Melane, the havens Caelos,
Panhormus, and the aboue-named Cardia. The third sea of Europe, is in this
manner bounded and limited. Mountains of Thrasia over and above those before
rehearsed, Edonus, Gigemorus, Meritus, and Melamphyllon. Rivers falling into
Hebrus, be Bargus, and Suemus. The length of Macedonie, Thracia and
Hellespontus, is set down before. Some make it seven hundred and twenty miles.
The breadth is three hundred and eighty miles. The sea Aegium took that name
of a rock,

CHAP. XII.
The Islands between those lands, among which, Creta, Euboea, Cyclades, and
Sporades: also of Hellespont, Pontus, Moeotis, Dacia, Sarmatia and Scythia.

ISlands over against Threspotia, Corcyra: 12 miles from Buthrotus, and the
same from the cliffes Acroceraunia 50 miles, with a city of the same name,
Corcyra of free condition, also Jupiter Cassiopeus: it lies out in length 97
miles. Homer called it Scheria and Phaeacia: Callimachus also, Drepane. About
it are some others: but bending toward Italy, Thoronos: and toward Leucadia the
two Paxae, five miles divided from Corcyra. And not far from them before
Corcyra, Ericusa, Marate, Elaphusa, Malthace, Trachiae, Pytionia, Ptychia,
Tarachie. And from Pholachrum a promontory of Corcyra, the rock into which
their goes a tale, that the ship of Ulysses was turned, for the resemblance it
has of such a thing. Before Leucadia, Sybota. But between it and Achaia there
be very many: of which Teleboides the same that Taphiae: but of the inhabitants
before Leucadia, they be called Taphias, Oxie, and Prinoessa: and before
Aetolia, the Echinades, Aegialia, Cotonis, Thyatira, Geoaris, Dionysia, Cyrnus,
Chalcis, Pinara and Mystus. Before them in the deep sea, Cephalenia and and
against the territory Hermonium, Typarenus, Epiropia, Colonis, Aristera: over
against Dosiades says it took that name of the nymph Creta daughter of
Hesperis: but according to Anaximander, of a king of the Curetes. Philistides,
Mallotes, Crates, have thought it was called first Aeria, and afterward
Agrippa reports, is distant from Phycus, a promontory of the Cyrene 225 miles.
Likewise from Capescum point, it is from Malea in Peloponnensus 80 miles. From
the Island Carpathus, which lies Westward from the cape Sammonia, 60 miles.
This Island aforesaid lies between it and Rhodos. The rest about it be these:
before Peloponnesus two Coricae, and as many Mylae: and on the North side, when
a man has Creet on the right hand, there appears Leuce just against Cydonia,
together with the two Budorae, against Matium, Cia: against the promontory
Itanum Onisa and Leuce: against Hierapytna, Chrysa, and Caudos. In the same
coast are Ophiussa, Butoa, and Rhamnus: and when men have fetched about and
doubled the point Criu-Metopon, Varro says, came the fine linen cloth that
women use: yea, and Euboea it self has been plucked from Boeotia, and divided
Dionysius Ephorus do say: but Macra, according to Aristides: and as Callidemus
would have it, Chalcis, for the brass there first found: and as Menoecmus
says, Abantias: and last of all Asopis, as the Poets commonly name it. Without
in the Myrtoum sea be many Isles, but of greatest Myrsilus says it was called
Cauros, and afterward Antandros. Callimachus names it Lasia: others Nonagria,
Hydrussa and Epagris: it takes in compass 93 miles. A mile from the same
Andros, and 15 from Delos, lies Tenos, with a town fifteen miles in length:
which for the plenty of water Aristotle says was called Hydrussa, but others
name it Ophiussa. The rest be these, Myconos with the hill Dimastos, 15 miles
from Delos. Scyros Syphnus, before-time named Heropia and Acis, in circuit 28
miles about: Seriphus 12 miles, Praepesinthus, Cythnus, and Delos it self, of
all others most excellent by far, as being the midst of all the Cyclades, much
frequented for the temple of Apollo, and for merchandise and trafique. Which
having a long time floted M. Varro. Mutianus has recorded that it was twice
shaken. Aristotle gives a reason of the name in this sort, because it was
discovered and appeared on a sudden. Aeglosthenes terms it Cynthia: others
Ortygia, Asteria, Lagia, Chlamydia, Cynethus, and Pyrpile, for that in it fire
was first found out. It is but 5 miles about, and rises up by the ascent of
the hill Cinthus. Next it is Rhene, which Anticlides called Celadussa, and
Helladius Artemite. Moreover, Syros, which ancient writers have said to be in
circuit 20 miles, and Mutians 160. Oliaros, Paros, with a town, 38 miles from
Delos, of great name for the white marble there, which at first men called
Pactia, but afterward Minois. From it seven miles and a half is Naxus (18
miles from Delos) with a town which they called Strongyle, afterward Dia,
within a while Dionysias, of Homer: it is in length 25 miles, and in former
time called Phaenice. Odia, Letandros, Gyaros with a town, Callimachus calls it
Agathussa. Donysa, Pathmos, in circuit 30 miles. Corasiae, Lebinthus, Leros,
Cynara, Sycinus, which before-time was Oenoe, Heratia the same that Onus, Casus
otherwise Astrabe, Cimolus, alias Echinussa, Delos with a town, which
Aristides names Byblis, Aristotle Zephyria, Callimachus Himallis, Heraclides
Syphnus and Acytos, and this of all the Islands is the roundest. After it
Machia, Hypere sometime Patage, or after some Platage, now Amorgos, Potyaegos.
Phyle, Thera; when it first appeared it was called Calliste. From it afterward
was Therasia plucked: and between those twain soon after arose Automate, the
same that Hiera: and Thia, which in our days appeared new out of the water
near Hiera. Ios is from Thera 25 miles. Then follow Lea, Ascania, Anaphe,
Hippuris, Hippurissusa. Minerua. Athos before it has four, Peparethus with a
town sometime called Euonos, 9 miles off, Scyathus 5 miles, and Iulios with a
town Callimachus calls it by the old name Dardania. Betwixt Cherrhonesus and
Samo-Thrace is Halomesus, about 15 miles from either of them: beyond lies
Gethrone, Lamponia, Alopeconesus

The fourth of those great seas in Europe, beginning at Hellespont, ends in
the mouth of Moeotis. But briefly we are to describe the form of the whole
sea, to the end the parts may be sooner and more easily known. The vast and
wide Ocean lying before Asia, and driven out from Europe in that long coast of
Chersonesus, breaks into the maine with a small and narrow issue, and by a
Firth of 7 stadia, as has been said, divides Europe from Asia. The first
streights Xerxes the King made a bridge upon ships, and so led his army over.
From thence there is extended a small Euripus or arm of the sea for 86 miles
space to Priapus a city of Asia, whereas Alexander the great passed over From
that place the sea grows wide and broad, and again gathers into a straight:
the largeness thereof is called Propontis, the streights Bosphorus, half a
mile over; and that way Darius the father of Xerxes made a bridge over and
transported his forces. The whole length of this from Hellespont is 239 miles.
From thence the huge main sea called Pontus Euxinus, and in times past Axenus,
takes up the space between lands far dissite and remote asunder, and with a
great winding and turning of the shores bends back into certain horns, and
lies outstretched from them on both sides, resembling evidently a Scythian
bow. In the very mids of this bending it ioineth close Polybius says, of 500
miles. Now the whole circuit of all this sea, as Varro and all the old writers
for the most part do witness, is 2150 miles. Nepos Cornelius adds thereto 350
miles more. Artemidorus makes it 2919 miles. Agrippa, 2360 miles. Mutianus,
2865 miles. In like sort some have determined and defined the measure on Europe
side to be 4078 miles and a half: others, 1172 miles. M. Varro takes his
measure in this manner: from the mouth of Pontus to Apollonia 188 miles and a
half: to Calatis as much. Then to the mouth of Ister 125: to Boristhenes 250:
to Cherrhonesus a town of the Heracleates, 375 miles. To Panticapaeus, which
some call Bosphorus, the utmost coast of Europe, 222 miles and a half, which
Agrippa measures thus: From Byzantium to the river Ister 560 miles: then to
Panticapaeum 630: from thence the very lake Moeotis taking into it the river
Tanais, running out of the Rhiphaean hills, is supposed to bear the compass
of 1306 miles, being the farthest bound between Europe and Asia. Others again
make 11025 miles. But surely from his mouth to the mouth of Tanais, and take a
straight course, it is 375 miles without question. The inhabitants of that
coast have been named in the description and mention of Thrace, as far as to
Istropolis: now from thence the mouths of Ister. This river arising among the
hills of Abnoba a mountain of Germany, over against Rauricum a town in
Gaul, passing many a mile beyond the Alps, and through innumerable Nations
under the name of Danubius, with a mighty increase of waters, and where he
first begins took name, and is swallowed up of a great miere of 19 miles.
Out of the same channel and Agrippa has set down that whole tract from Ister
to the Ocean, to mount unto 2000 miles, and 400 less in breadth, to wit, from
the deserts of Sarmatia to the river Vistula. The name of Scythians every where
continually runs into Sarmatians and Germans. Neither has that old
denomination remained in any others but those, who (as I have said) live
farthest off, and in the edge of these nations, unknown in manner to all men
besides. But the towns next to Ister are Cremniscos, and Aepolium: the
mountains Macrocrenij: the noble river Tyra, giving Achilles, famous for the
tomb of that worthy wight. And from it 135 miles, there is a demi Island lying
out acrosse in fashion of a sword, called Dromos Achilleos, upon occasion of
his exercise there of running: the length whereof Agrippa has declared to be
80 miles. All that tract throughout, the Taurisci, wall of five miles about.
Then, the promontory Parthenium. A city of the Tauri, Placia. The Apollo, whom
above all others they honor. And virgins they were that had the carriage of
this present; who for certain years were venerable, and courteously
entertained of all nations, until such time as upon breach of faithful
hospitality, they took up an order to bestow those sacred oblations in the
next marches of their neighbor borderers: and they again to conueigh the same
to their neighbors that confined upon them, and so forward as far as to Delos.
But soon after, this custom was for-let and clean given over. The length of
Sarmatia, Scythia, M. Agrippa has cast it. But I for my part suppose, that the
measure of this part of the earth is uncertain: but after the order which we
have begun, let us go forward with the rest behind of

CHAP. XIII.
The Islands Pontus.

HEllespont has no Islands to be spoken of, in Europe. In Pontus are two, a
mile and half from Europ, and 14 miles from the mouth of the river, to wit,
Cyaneae, of others called Symplegades; and by report of fables they ran one
into another: the reason was, because they being severed by a small space
between, to them that enter the sea full upon them, they seemed twain: but if
they turned their eye a little aside from them, they made a show as if they met
together. On this side Ister there is one, pertaining to the Apolloniates, 80
miles M. Lucullus brought Apollo Capitoli^us. What are within the mouths of
Ister we have declared already. Before Borysthenes is the above named Achillea,
called Leuce and Macaron. This, our modern Cosmographers in these days do
set 140 miles from Borysthenes, from Tyra 120: from the Island Peuce 50. It is
in compass about ten miles. The rest be in the gulf Carcinites, namely
Cephalonnesos, Rhosphodusa, and Macra. I cannot pass by the opinion of many
writers, before we depart from Pontus, who suppose all the inland seas or
Mediterranian arise from that head, and not from the streights of Gades: and
they lay for their ground an argument not without some good probability,
because out of Pontus the sea always flows, and never ebbeth again.

But now we are to depart from thence, that other parts of Europ may be spoken
of: and when Tymaeus reports, there is one before Scythia called Bannomanna,
distant from Scythia one days sailing: into which, in the temperate season of
the spring, Amber is cast up to the shore by the waves of the sea. All the
other coasts are no otherwise marked and known but by uncertain hearsay. The
North Ocean from the river Paropamisus, whereas it dasheth upon Scythia,
Hecataeus names Amarchium, which word in the language of that nation
signifies, Frozen. Philemon writes, that the Cymbrians call it Morimarusa, i.
mortuum Mare, the dead sea, even as far as to the promontorie of Rubeae: but
all beyond forward, Cronium. Xenophon Lampsacenus says, That three days
sailing from the Scythian coast there is the Pythias name Basylia. There be
also named the Isles Oonae, wherein the Inhabitants live of birds eggs and
otes. Others also, wherein men are born with horse feet, called thereupon
Hippopades. Others again of the Panoti, who being otherwise naked, have mighty
great ears that cover their whole bodies. And now forward we begin at the
nation of the Ingevoni, the first of all the Germans in those parts, to
discover all upon more sure and evident report. There is the exceeding great
mountain Sevo, not inferior to the high hills Riphaei, which makes a mighty
huge gulf, even as far as the Cimbrians promontory, called Codanus: it is full
of Islands, of which the goodliest of all is Scandinavia, the bigness whereof
is not yet discovered. A part only thereof, as much as is known, the nation of
Heleviones does inhabit in 500 villages, who call it a second world. And as it
is Agrippa again joining with it Rhetia and Noricum, says that it is in length
886 miles, and in breadth 268. And verily of Rhoetia alone, the breadth
well-neere is greater, at leastwise at Agrippa.

CHAP. XIV.
Germany.

OF Germans there be five kinds: the Vindili, part of whom be the
Burgundians, Varini, Carini, and Gurtones. A second sort, the Ingaevones, part
of whom be the Cimbri, Teutoni, and people of thc Cauchi. The next to them be
the Istaevones, and part of them be

CHAP. XV.
Islands in the Gauls Ocean.

Upon the very Rhene it self, for 100 miles almost in length, lies the most
noble Island of

CHAP. XVI.
England and Ireland.

OVer against this tract lies Britannia, between the North and West, being an
Island renowned M. Pitheas and Isidor report, it contains 3825 miles. And now
for these thirty years well-neere, the Roman Captains grow into farther
knowledge thereof, and yet not beyond the forest of Caledonia, as near as it
is. Agrippa supposes that it is in length 800 miles, and in breadth 300. Also
that Ireland is as broad, but not so long by 200 miles. This Isle is seated
above it, and but a very short cut or passage distant from it, to wit, 30 miles
from the people Silures. Of other Islands in this Ocean there is none by report
in circuit more than 125 Timaeus the Historiographer

CHAP. XVII.
Gallia.

ALl Gallia, by one name called Comata, is divided into three kinds of people,
and those severed one from the other by rivers especially: to wit, Belgica,
from Scaldis to Sequana: Celtica, from it to Garumna; and this part of Gallia
is named Lugdunensis. From thence to the lying out of the mountain Pyrenaeus,
Aquitania, formerly called Aremorica. Agrippa has made this reckoning and
computation of all Gaul generally, to wit, lying between Rhene, Pyren^us, the
Ocean, and the hills Gebenna and Iura; whereby he excludes Narbonensis
Gallia, that is in length 420 miles, and in breadth 313. Next to Scaldis there
inhabited the utmost borderers, the Toxandri, under many names: then the
Menapij, Morini, and Oromansici, joining upon the tract or territory called
Gessoriacus: the Brinnani, Ambiani, Bellonici,

CHAP. XVIII.
Lugdunensis Gallia.

LVgdunensis Gallia contains the Luxovij, Velocasses, Galleti, Veneti,
Abricatui, Osismij, and the noble river Ligeris: but a more fair and goodly
demy-Island, running forth into the Ocean, from the very marches of the
Osismij, having in circuit 625 miles, with the neck thereof 125 miles broad.
Beyond it dwell the Nannites. Within-forth, the Hoedni confederats, the Carnuti
likewise confederats, the Boij, the Senones, the Aulerici, syrnamed Eburovices,
and the Cenomannes and Meldi, free States. Parrhisij, Trecasses, Andegani,
Viducasses, Vadicasses, Vnelli, Cariosvelites, Drabhudi, Rhedones, Turones,
Itesui, and Secusiani, free States, in whose country stands the Colonie
Lugdunum.

CHAP. XIX.
Aquitania.

TO that province of Gaul which is called Aquitania, belong the Ambilatri,
Anagnutes, Pictones, the Santones, Bituriges, named also Vibisci Aquitani,
whereof the Province took name, and the Sediboniates. Then such as were
enrolled into towneships from diverse parts, to wit, Begerri, Tarbeli, who came
under four ensigns, Cocossati under 6 ensigns, Venami, Onobrisates, Belendi,
and the forest Pyrenaeus. Beneath them, Monesi, Osquidiales, Mountainers,
Sibillates, Camponi, Bercorates, Bipedimui, Sassumini, Vellates, Vornates,
Consoranni, Ausci, Elusates, Sottiates, Osquidates in the champion and plain
country, Succasses, Latusates, Basabocates, Vassei, Sennates, Cambolectri,
Agesinales, joining to the Pictones.

CHAP. XX.
The hither Province of Spain.

AT the Promontorie of Pyrenaeus begins Spain, narrower not only than Gaul,
but also than it self (naturally) so huge a quantity is wrought into it,
while the Ocean of one coast, the Iberian sea on the other, do cling and press
the sides together. The very hills of Pyrenaeus, which from the East spread all
the way to the Southwest, make Spain shorter on Augustus, Coepori, and the
town Noela. The Celtici, syrnamed Praesamarci, and Cileni. Of Isles worth the
naming, Corticata and Aunios. From the Cileni, the county town of the Bracae,
Heleni, Gravij, the castle Tide, all descended from the Greeks: the Islands
Cicae, the fair town Abobrica, the river Minius, with a broad mouth 4 miles
over, the Leuni, Seurbi, Augusta a town of the Bracae: and above them also,
Gallaecia, the river Limia. Also the river Durius, one of the greatest in
Spain, springing in the Pelendones country, and running hard by Numantia, and
so on, through the Arevaci and Vaccaei, dividing the Vetones from Asturia, and
the Gallaecians from Lusitania: and there also it keeps off the Turduli from
the Bracari. All this region aboue-said from Pyrenaeus, is full of metal
mines, to wit, gold, silver, iron, lead, as well black as white, i. tin.

CHAP. XXI.
Lusitania.

AT the river Durius begins Lusitania, wherein are Turduli the old, Pesuri, the
river Vacca, the town Talabrica, the town and river Minium. Towns,
Conimbrica, Olisippo, Eburo, Britium: from whence there runs out into the sea
with a mighty cape, the promontorie which some have called Artabrum; others,
the Great; and many, Olissoponense, of the town, making a division of land,
sea, and air above. In it is the side of Spain determined and bounded, and
from the compass of it begins the forefront thereof.

CHAP. XXII.
Islands in the Ocean.

ON the one hand is the North and the Gauls Ocean: on the other, the West and
the Atlanticke Ocean. The shooting forth of the promontorie aforesaid some have
reported to be 60 miles, others 90. From thence to Pyrenaeus there be writers
not a few, who say it is 1250 miles, and that there is a nation of the Atabri,
which never was, with a manifest error. For they have set in this place by
exchanging some letters, the Artotrebae, whom we named Varro says, Aeminius
is 200 miles distant (which some men take to be elsewhere, and call it Limaea)
named of men in old time Oblivionis, and whereof goes many a tale. From Durius
to Tagus is 200 miles, and comes between. This Tagus is a river much renowned
for the sand that yields gold. 160 miles from it the promontory Sacrum runs out
from the middle front in manner of Spain: and 14 miles Varro says it is from it
to the mids of Pyrenaeus. But from Ana, by which we have separated Lusitania
from Baetica, 226 miles, adding thereto from Gades 102 miles. Nations, Celtici,
Varduli, and about Tagus, the Vettones-From Ana to Sacrum the Lusitanes.
Memorable towns, from Tagus in the coast side, Olisippo, of good note for the
Mares that conceive there by the West wind. Salatia, with addition of Vrbs
Imperatoria, and Merobrica: the promontory Sacrum, and another called Caeneus:
towns, Ossonoba, Balsa, and Myrtius. The whole province is divided into three
counties or judicial with the liberties of old Latium. Stipendiaries or
Tributaries 36. Moreover, the Colonies M. Agrippa has written, that Lusitania,
together with Asturia and Gallaecia, is in length 540 miles, and in breadth 526.
But all Spain from [i. of the gods] which some have called Fortunatae. But in
the very point or cape of Baetica, from the mouth of the firth 75 miles, lies
the Island Gades, 12 miles long, as Polybius writes, and three miles broad. It
is from the maine, where it is nearest, Iesse than Iesse than 3 quarters of a
miles.
700 paces, in other places above seven miles. The whole Isle it self
contains the space of 15 miles in circuit. It has within it a town of Roman
citisens named Augusta, Vrbs Iulia Gaditania. On that side that regards Spain,
within 100 paces lies another Island three miles long and one broad, wherein
formerly was the town Gades. The name of this Island, Ephorus and Thilistides,
is Erythia: but according to Tymaeus and Silenus, Aprodisias: the natural
homebred inhabitants call it Iunonis The bigger of these two Gades, as says
Tymaeus, was by them called Cotinusa, our countrymen name it Tartessos, the
Carthaginians Or Gadiz.
Gadir, which in the Punicke language signifies the Septem, or a^ some r^ad,
Sep^um, i. a park or enclosure.
number of seven. Erithia the other was called, because the Tirians, who were
the first inhabitants, were reported to have had their first beginning out of
the red sea Erythraeum. Some think that Geryon here dwelt, he whose droues of
cattle Hercules had away. Some again think it is another, over against
Lusitania, and there sometime so called.

CHAP. XXIII.
The measure of all Europe.

Having finished our circuit about Europ, we must now yield the total sum
and complete measure of it in the whole, that such as are desirous of knowledge
be not to seek in any one thing. Artemidorus and Isidore have set down the
length thereof from Tanais to Gades, 84014 miles, Polybius has put down the
breadth thereof, from Italy to the Ocean 1150 miles, for as then the largeness
thereof was not known. Now the very breadth of Italy alone by it self (as we
have showed) is 1220 miles to the Alps: from whence by Lions to the Britain
part of the Morini (which way Polybius seems to take his measure) is 1168
miles. But the more certain measure and the longer is directed from the said
Alps to the West, and the

THE FIFTH BOOK OF
WRITTEN BY C. PLINIVS SECVNDVS.
The description of Afric.
Afric the Greeks have called Lybia, even all that tract from whence the
Lybian sea before it begins, and ends in the Egyptian. No part of the
earth receives fewer gulfes and arms of the sea, in that long compass of
crooked coasts from the West. The names as well of the Nations as towns there
be of all others most hard to be pronounced, unless it be in their own
tongues, and again they be castles and forts for the most part that they dwell
in.

CHAP. I.
Mauritania.

AT the beginning, the lands of Mauritania until the time of C. Caesar, [i.
Caligula] son of Germanicus, were called kingdoms: but by his cruelty
divided it was into two provinces. The utmost promontorie of the Ocean is named
of the Greeks Ampelusia: the towns therein were Lissa and Cotes, beyond
Hercules pillars. Now in it is Tingi, sometime built by Antaeus: and afterward
by Claudius Caesar when he made a Colonie of it, it was called Traducta Iulia.
It is from Belone a town in Baetica by the next and nearest passage over sea
thirty miles. Five and twenty Augustus, now Iulia Constantia, exempt from the
dominion and jurisdiction of the Kings of Zilis, and commanded to go for law
and justice as far as Baetica. And two and thirty miles from it, Lixos, made a
Colony by Claudius Caesar; whereof in old time there went many fabulous and
loud lying tales. For there stood, they say, the royal palace of Antaeus:
there was the combat between him and Hercules: there also were the gardens and
hort-yards of the Hesperides. Now there flows thereinto out of the sea a
certain creek or arm thereof, and that by a winding channel, wherein men now
take it that there were Dragons serving in good stead to keep and guard the
same. It incloseth an Island within it self, which, notwithstanding the Tract
thereby be somewhat Hercules: and setting aside certain wild Olives, nothing
else is to be seen of that goodly grove, reported to bear golden Apples. And
in good faith less may they wonder at the strange lies of Greece, given out of
these and the river Lixus, who would but think how of late our countrymen
have delivered some fables of the same things as monstrous well-neere: to wit,
That this a most strong and mighty city, and bigger than great Carthage:
moreover, that it is situate right against it, aad an infinite way well-neere
from Tingi: and other such like, which Cornelius Nepos has been most eager to
believe. From Lixus forty miles in the midland part of the main stands Babba,
another Colony of Augustus, called by him Iulia in the field or champian: also
a third 75 miles off, called Banasa, but now it has the addition of Valentia.
35 a river of the same name, near now unto the wilderness, much infested and
annoied with whole Hercules and Perses there; and to conclude, that the way
unto it is exceeding great, and not certainly known. Books there were
besides of Hanno, a great captain and commander among the Carthaginians, who in
the time of the most flourishing state of Carthage, had a charge and commission
to discover and survey the whole compass of Africa. Him, most of the Greeks as
well as our countrymen following, among some other fabulous stories, have
written that he also built many cities there; but neither memorial upon
record, nor any token of them at all is left Scipio Aemylianus warred in
Africa, Polybius the writer of the Annals, received of him a fleet: who having
saled about of purpose to search into that part of the world, has put thus
much down in writing, that from the said mountain West, toward the forest
full of wild beasts which Africa breeds, unto the river Anatis, are 485 miles.
And from thence to Lixus 205. Agrippa says, that Lixus is distant from the
streights of Gades 112 miles. Then, that there is an arm of the sea called
Saguti. Also a town upon the promontory, Mutelacha. Rivers, Subur and Sala.
Moreover, that the haven Rutubis is from Lixus 313 miles. And so forward to the
Promontorie of the Sun. The port or haven Risardir; the Gaetulians, Autololes,
the river Cosenus, the nation of the Scelatites and Massalians. The rivers
Masatal and Darat, wherein Crocodiles are engendered. Then forward, that there
is a gulf of 516 miles, enclosed within the [i. Waterhorses.] From which, he
says, That there is nothing but mountains all the way as far as to that which
we call Theon-Ochema (The gods chariot.) Then, in sailing nine days and nights
to the promontorie Hesperium, he has placed the mountain Atlas in midway
thereof, which by all other writers is set down to be in the utmost marches of
Mauritania. The first time that the Romans warred in Mauritania, was in the
time of prince Claudius Emperor: at what time as Aedemon the freed servant of
king Ptolomaeus, by C. Caesar slain, went about to revenge his death; for It
seems that this clause is to be set in the beginning of the next chapter.
Five Roman Colonies, as we have said, be in that prouince] and by that
common fame and report, there may seem to lie a through fair thither. But that
is found for the most part by daily experience, most deceivable of all things
else; because persons of high place and great worth, when they are loath to
search out narrowly into the truth of matters, stick not for shame of
ignorance, to give out untruths: powerful it is and forcible, is seen by this
most of all, when forests are sought out far and near Suetonius Paulinus (a
Consul in our time) who was the first Roman leader, that for certain miles
space went over Atlas, also has reported verily as touching the height
thereof, that with the rest: and moreover, that the foot thereof toward the
bottom, stand thick and full of tail woods, with trees therein of an unknown
kind, but Iuba the father of Ptolomaeus, who before-time ruled over both
Mauritanes, a man more memorable and renowned for his study and love of good
letters, than for his kingdom and royal port, has written the like
concerning Atlas: and he says moreover, that there is an herb growing there
called Euphorbia, of his Physicians name that first found it: the milkie juice
whereof he praises wondrous much, for to clear the eyes, and to be a
preservative against all serpents and poisons whatsoever; and thereof has he
written a treatise, and made a book by it self: thus much may suffice, if it
be not too much, as touching Atlas.

CHAP. II.
The province Tingitania.

THe length of the Province Tingitania takes 170 miles. The nations therein be
these: the Mauri, which in times past was the principal, and of whom the
province took name: and those most writers have called Marusij. Being by war
weakened and diminished, they came in the end to a few families only. Next to
them were the Massaesuli, but in like manner were they consumed. Now is the
province inhabited by the Getulians, Bannurri, and the Autololes, the most
valiant and puissant of all the rest. A member of these were sometime the
Vesuni, but being divided from them, they became a nation by themselves, and
bounded upon the Syphax, and now the other Mauritania. For a long time they
kept the names of KK. so as the utmost was called Bogadiana: and likewise
Bocchi, which now is Caesarienses. Next unto it is the haven, for the
largeness thereof called Magnus, with a town of Roman citizens. The River
Muluca, which is the limit of Bocchi and the Massaesuli. Quiza Xenitana, a
town of strangers: Atsennaria, a town of Latins three miles from the Sea:
Carcenna, a Colonie of Augustus, Apollo. And a most famous town there
Caesarea, usually before-time called Iol, the Royal Seat of King Iuba: endowed
by Claudius the Emperor of happy memory, with the franchises and right of a
Colonie, at whose appointment the Vespasian the Emperor, with the same
donations. The colonie of Augustus Rusconiae, and Ruscurium, by Claudius
honored with the free burgeoisie of the city. Rusoezus, a colonie of
Augustus. Salde, a Colonie of the same man. Igelgili also, and Turca, a town
seated upon the sea and the river Amsaga. Within the land, the Colonie Augusta,
the same that Succubar; and likewise Tubrisuptus. Cities, Timici, Tigauae.
Rivers, Sardabala and Nabar. The people Macurebi; the river Vsar, and the
nation of the Nabades. The river Ampsaga is from Caesarea 233 miles. The length
of Mauritania both the one and the other together,

CHAP. III.
Numidia.

NExt to Ampsaga is Numidia, renowned for the name of Masanissa; called of the
Greeks the land Metagonitis. The Numidian Nomades, so named of changing their
pasture, who carry their cottages or sheds (and those are all their dwelling
houses) about with them upon waines. Their towns be Cullu and Rusicade, from
which 48 miles off within the Midland parts, is the colonie Cirta, surnamed of
the Cirtanes: another also within and a free borough town, named Bulla Regia.
But in the utmost coast, Tacatua, Hippo Regius, and the river Armua. The town
Trabacha, of Roman citizens: the river Tusca, which boundeth Numidia.

CHAP. IV.
Africa.

FRom Tusca forward, you have the region Zeugitana, and the country properly
called Africa. Three promontories; first the White; then anon that of Apollo
ouer-against Sardinia: and a third of Mercury opposite to Sicilie; which
running into the sea make two creekes: the one Hipponensis, next to the town
which they call Hippo rased; the Greeks name it Diarrhyton, Apollo. And in the
other creek, Vtica, a town of Roman citizens, ennobled for the death of Cato,
and the river Bagrada. A place called Castra Cornelia: and the colony Carthago,
among the relics and ruins of great Carthage, and the colony Maxulla: towns,
Carpi, Misna, and the free borough Clupea upon the promontorie of Mercury.
Item, free towns, Curubis, and Neapolis. Soon after ye shall meet with
another distinction of Afric indeed. Libyphoenices are rhey called, who
inhabit Byzacium; for so is that region named; containing in circuit 250 miles,
exceeding fertile and plenteous, where the ground sown yields again to the
husbandman 100 fold increase. In it are free towns, Leptis, Adrumetum,
Ruspina and Scipio Africanus the second, caused to be made, and bare half the
charges together with the KK. The third gulf is parted into twain, cursed and
horrible places both, for the ebbing and flowing of the sea, and the shelues
between the two Syrtes. From Carthage to the nearer of them, which is the
less, is 300 miles by the account of Polybius: who says also, that the said
Syrte is for 100 miles forward dangerous, and 300 about. By land also thither,
the way is Above them was the nation of the Psylli. and above them the lake of
Diomedes environed with Callimachus calls it Pallantias, and says it is on
this side the lesser Syrtes; but many place it between both Cyrtes. The
promontory that encloses the bigger, is named Boryon. Beyond it is the province
Cyrenaica.

CHAP. V.
Cyrene.

THe region Cyrenaica, called also Pentapolitana, is famous and renowned for
the Oracle of Hammon, which is from Cyrenae 400 miles, for the fountain of the
Sun, and principally Alele and Cillaba. In like manner Dydamum ouer-against
Sabrata. Next to whom there Cornelius Balbus triumphed, the only man of
forreiners that was honored with the triumphant chariot, and endowed besides
with the freedom of Roman citizens. For why, being borne at Gades, he and his
uncle both, Balbus the elder, were made free denizons of Rome. And this is
marvel that our writers have recorded, that besides the towns Tit^ has
reported that precious stones were engendered. Hitherto the way to the
Garamants, was intricat and impassable, by reason of the robbers and thieves of
that country, who used to dig certain pits in the way (which to them that know
the quarters of the counttey, is no hard matter to do) and then cover them
Vespasian the Emperor, there was found a short and near way of four days
journey; and this way is called Praeter caput Saxi (besides the rocks head) The
frontier town of Cyrenaica is called Catabathmos, which is a town and a veil
all on a sudden falling with a steep descent. To this bound, from the less
Syrtis, Cyrenaica Africa lies in length 1060 miles, and in breadth, for so much
as is known, 800.

CHAP. VI.
Lybya Maroeotis.

THe country following is named Mareotis Libya, and boundeth upon Egypt,
inhabited by the Marmaridae, Adyrmachidae, and so forward with the Mareotae.
The measure of it from Catabathmos to Paretoninm, is 86 miles. In that tract
there lies in the way between the village. Apis, a place renowned for the
religious rites of Egypt. From it to Paraetonium are 12 miles. From thence to
Alexandria 200 miles: the breadth thereof is 169 miles. Eratosthenes has
delivered in writing, that from Cyrenae to Alexandria by land is 525 miles.
Agrippa says, that the length of all Africa from the Atlanticke sea, together
with the inferior part of Egypt contains 3040 miles. Polybius and
Eratosthenes, reputed to have bin most exact and curious in this kind, set
down, from the Ocean to great Carthage 1600 miles. From thence to Canopicum
the nearest mouth of Nilus, they make 1630 miles. Isidore reckons from Tingi
Artemidorus forty less than Isiodorus.

CHAP. VII.
Islands about Afric, and oueragainst Afric.

THese seas have not very many Islands within them. The fairest of them all is
Meninx, 35 miles long, and 25 broad, called by Eratosthenes Lotophagitis. Two
towns it has, Meninx on Afric side, and Thoar on the other: it self is
situate from the right hand promontorie of the less Syrtis Or 1500 paces, i.
a mile and a half:
200 paces. A hundred miles from it against the left hand is Cercina, with a
free town of the same name, in length it is 25 miles, and half as much in
breadth where it is creature, and noisome to Afric. Men say also that they will
die in Clupea, over against which

CHAP. VIII.
The Aethyopians.

But within the inner compassc and hollow of Afric toward the South, and
above the Gaetulians, where the deserts come between, the first people that
inhabit those parts, be the Libij Aegyptij, and then the Leucaethiopes. Above
them are the Aethyopian nations, to wit, the Nigritae, of whom the river took
name: the Gymetes, Pharusi, and those which now reach Homer, who says, that
the Aethyopians are divided 2 ways, namely, East and West. The river Nyger is
of the same nature that Nilus. It brings forth Reed and Papyr, breeds the
same living creatures, and rises or swells at the same seasons. It springs
between the Tareleia Aethyopians, and the Oecalicae. The town Mavin belonging
to this people, some have set upon the wilderness; as also, near unto them,
the Atlantes, the Aegipanes, half wild beasts, the Blemmyi, the Gamphasants,
Satyrs, and Himantopodes. Those Atlantes if we will believe it, degenerate
from the rites and manners of all other men. Hercules, as he went to the
Hesperides. More of Afric worth the noting, I have not to say.

CHAP. IX.
Of Asia.

Unto it ioineth Asia, which from the mouth of Canopus unto the mouth of
Pontus, after Timosthenes 2639 miles. From the coast of Pontus to that of
Maeotis, Eratosthenes says, is 1545 miles. The whole, together with Egypt unto
Tanais, by Artemidorus and Isidorus, takes and Lycopolites. The country about
Pelusium, these town-ships with their several jurisdictions, Pharboetites,
Bubastites, Sethroites, and Tanites. The rest have these following, the
Arabicke, Jupiter Hammon, Oxyrinchites, Leontopolites, Atarrabites,
Cynopolytes, Hermopolites: Xoites, Mendesins, Sebennites, Capastites,
Latapolites, Heliopolites, Prosopites, Panopolites, Busirites, Onuphites,
Sorites, Ptenethu, Pthemphu, Naucratites, Nitrites, Gynaecopolites, Menelaites,
in the country of Alexandria. In like manner of Libya Mareotis. Heracleopolites
is in the Island of Nilus, fifty miles long, wherein also is that which they
call Hercules his town. Two Arsinoites there be they, and Memphites reach as
far as two the head of Delta. Upon it there do bound out of Africa the two
Ouafitae. There be that change some names of these, and set down for them other
jurisdictions, to wit, Heroopolites, and Crocodilopolites. Between Arsinoites
and Memphites there was a lake 250 miles about, or as Mutianus says, 450,
fifty paces deep, [i. 150 foot,] and the same Hammon is twelve days journey,
and so to the division of Nilus, which is called Delta, fifteen miles. The
river Nilus rising from unknown springs, passes through deserts and hot
burning countries: and going thus a mighty way in length, is known by fame
only, without arms, without wars, which have discovered and found out all
other lands. It has his beginning, so far forth as Iab^ was able to search and
find out, in a hill of the lower Mauritania, not far from the Ocean, where a
lake presently is seen to stand with water, which they call Nilides. In it are
found these fishes called Alabetae, Coracini, Siluri, and the Crocodile. Upon
this argument and presumption Nilus is thought to spring from hence, for that
the pourtract of this source is consecrated by the Homer altogether Aegyptis:
and of others, Triton: here and there, and ever and anon hitting Timaeus the
Mathematician, alleged an hidden reason thereof, to wit, that the head and
source of Nilus is Timaus a man would think it possible that the water should
be drawn up, the want of shadows during those days, and in those quarters,
continues still without end. For the river begins to rise and swell at the
next change of the Moon after the Sun-steed, by little and little gently, so
long as he passes through the sign Cancer, but most abundantly when he is in
Leo. And when he is entered Virgo, he falls and settleth low again, in the
same measure as he rose before. And is clean brought within his banks in
Libia, which is, as Herodotus thinks, by the hundredth day. All the whiles it
rises; it has been thought unlawful for kings or governors to sail or
pass in any vessel upon it, and they make conscrence so to do. How high it
rises, is known by marks and measures taken of certain pits. The ordinary
height of it is sixteen cubits. Under Claudius Emperor: and the least, in the
Pharsalian war, against the death of Pompey: as if the very river by that
prodigious token lothed to see the same. When at any time the waters seem to
stand and cover the ground still, they are let out at certain Artemidorus
delivered, and withal, that within it were 250 towns. Iuba seteth down 400
miles. Aristocreon says, that from Elephantis to the sea is 750 miles. This
Elephantis being an Island, is inhabited beneath the lowest cataract or fall of
water 3 miles, and above Syene 16: and it is the utmost point that the
Egyptians sail unto, and is from Alexandria 586 miles. See how far the
Authors above written, have erred and gone out of the way: there meet the
Ethiopian Amasis, there were inhabited in it and peopled twenty thousand
cities. And even at this day full it is of them, such as they be, and of base
account. Howbeit, that of Apollo is much renowned, as also near unto it
another of Leucathea, and Diospolis the great, the very same that Thebes,
famous for the 100 gates in it. The city ^piter.
Also, Captos, a great mart town next to Nilus, much frequented for
merchandise and commodities out of India and Arabia. Moreover the town of
Venus, and another of Jupiter, and Tentyris, beneath which stands Abydus, the
royal seat of Memnon, and Osiris renowned for Venus. Also in the Lybian
coast, Lycon, where the hills do bound Thebais. Soon after, these towns of
Mercury, Alabaston, Canum, and that of Hercules spoken of before. After these,
Arsinoe, and the aboue-said Memphis, between which and the diocese
Arsinoetis, in the Lybian coast, the towers called Pyramides, the Labyrinth

CHAP. X.
Alexandria.

But right worthy of praise is Alexandria, standing upon the coast of the
Egyptian sea, built by Alexander the Great on Afric side, 12 miles from the
mouth of Canopus, near to the lake Mareotis; which was before-time called
Rachobe^.
Arapotes. Danochares the Architect (a man renowned for his singular wit many
waiesl) aid the model and platform thereof by a subtle Claudius Caesar) it is
thirty miles over. Others say, that it lies in length 40 Schoeni, and so,
whereas every Schoene is 30 stadia, it comes by that account to be 150 miles
long, and as many broad. Over and besides, there be many goodly fair towns of
great importance, standing upon the river Nilus where he

CHAP. XI.
Arabia [the Desert or Petraea.]

BEing once past that arm of the river Nilus, which enters into the sea at
Pelusium, you come into Arabia, confining upon the red sea; and that other
Arabia, so rich and odoriferous, and therefore renowned with the syrname of
Happy. As for this desert Arabia, possessed it is by the Catabanes, Esbonites,
and Screnite Arabians: all barren and fruitless, save whereas it meets with
the confines of Syria, and setting aside the mountain Casius, nothing
memorable. This region confronteth the Arabians Canchlei on the East Side, and
the Cedraei Southward, and they both confine together afterward upon the
Nabathaees. Moreover, 2 Baies there be, the one called the gulf of
Heroopolis, and the other of Elani; both in the red sea on the Agrippa counts
from Pelusium to Arsinoe, a town situate upon the red sea, an hundred and
five and twenty miles. See how small a way lies between two Climates so
different in Nature.

CHAP. XII.
Syria, Palestine, Phoenice.

Upon the coast of the said Arabia, confineth Syria; a Region in times past,
the chief and most renowned upon earth; and the same distinguished by sundry
names. For where it of Mesopotamia. Beyond the mountain Taurus, it is Sophene;
but on this side the hill, they call Comagene. The country beyond Armenia, is
Adiabenae, named before-time Assyria: but Jupiter Casius: also the tomb of
Pompeius Magnus; and last of all to the city Ostracium. To conclude, from
Pelusium to the frontiers of Arabia the Desert [alongst the coast of Syria] are
65 miles.

CHAP. XIII.
Idumaea, Syria, Palestina, Samaria.

SOon after begins Idumaea and Palestina, even from the rising up of the
lake Sirbon, which some have reported to carry a circuit of 150 miles.
Herodotus says, it is hard under the foot of the hill Casius: but at this day
it is but a small lake. As for the towns there, they be Rhinocolura,
Andromedaes prison where she was bound. Within a chapel there, the Siren
Decreto, whereof the Poets tell such tales, is worshipped. Being past Ioppe,
you meet with Apollonia: the town of Strato, called also Caesarea, founded by
K. Herod: it bears now the name of Prima Flauia, a colony there planted and
endowed with privileges by Vespasian the Emperor. The bounds of Palestina be
180 miles from the confines of Arabia: and there enters Phoenice. Within-forth

CHAP. XIIII.
Jury and Galilaea.

Above Idumaea and Samaria, Iudaea spreads out far in length and breadth.
That part of it which ioineth to Syria, is called Galilae: but that which is
next to Syria and Egypt, is named Peraea, [i. beyond Io^dan.] Full of rough
mountains dispersed here and there: and

CHAP. XV.
Iordane the River.

THe river Jordan springs from the fountain Paneades, which gave the Syrname
to the city Caesarea, whereof we will speak more. A pleasant river it is, and
as the site of the country will permit and give leave, winding and turning in
and out, seeking as it were for love and favor, and applying it self to
please the neighbor inhabitants. Full against his will,

CHAP. XVI.
Asphaltites.

ASphaltites, or the lake of Sodom, breeds and brings forth nothing but
Bitumen; and thereupon it took the name. No living body of any creature does
it receive into it: bulls and camels swim and flote aloft upon it. And hereupon
arises that opinion which goes of it, That nothing there will go down and
sink to the bottom. This lake in length exceeds 100 miles, 25 miles over it
is at the broadest place, and six at the narrowest. On the East, the Arabian
Nomades confront it; and on the South side, Machaerus regards it: in time
past, the second fortress of Iudaea, and principal next to Jerusalem. On the
same coast, there is a fountain of hot waters, wholesome and medicinable, named
Callirhoe, and good against many diseases. The very name that it carries,
imports no less praise and commendation.

CHAP. XVII.
The people Esseni.

ALong the West coast inhabit the Esseni. A nation this is, living alone and
solitary, and of all others throughout the world most admirable and
wonderful. Women they see none: carnal lust they know not; they handle no
money; they lead their life by themselves, and keep company only with Date
trees. Yet nevertheless, the country is evermore well peopled, for that daily
numbers of strangers resort thither in great frequencie from other parts: and
namely, such as be weary of this miserable life, are by the surging waves of
frowning

CHAP. XVIII.
Decapolis. [i. Coele-Syria.]

THere joins to it on Syria side, the region Decapolis, so called of the
number of towns and cities in it. Wherein, all men observe not the same, nor
make like account: howbeit most men speak of Damascus and Opotos, watered with
the river Chrysorrhora. Also, Philadelphia, renowned for the fruitful
territory about it. Moreover, of Scythopolis, taking name of the Scythians
there planted: and before-time Mysa, so named of Prince or Father Bacchus, by
reason that his nource there was buried. Also Gadara, situate on the river
Hieromiax, running even before it. Besides, the aboue-named Hippos Dios.
Likewise Pella, enriched with the good fountains: and last of all, Galaza and
Canatha. There lie between and about these cities, certain Royalties called
Triarchies, containing every one of them as much as an whole

CHAP. XIX.
Tire and Sidon.

Return now we must to the seacoast of Phoenice. A river runs there called
Crocodilon, whereupon stood a town in times past bearing the name. Also there
remain in those parts the bare relics still of cities, to wit, Dorum,
Sycaminum, the cape or promontory Carmelum; and a town upon the hill so named;
but in old time called Ecbatana. Near thereto Getta and Iebba; the river Pagida
or Pelus, carrying crystal glass with his sands upon the shore. This river
comes out of the mere Ceudeuia, from the foot of mount Carmel. Near unto it
is the city Ptolemais, erected in form of a colony, by Claudius Caesar; in
ancient time called Are. The town Ecdippa, and the cape Album. Then follows
the noble city Tyrus, in old time an Island, lying almost 3 quarters of a mile
within the deep sea: but now, by the great Alexander the Great at the siege
thereof, joined to the firm ground: renowned, for that out of it have been
three other cities of ancient name, to wit, Leptis, Vtica, and that great
Carthage, which so long strove with the Empire of Rome for the monarchy and
dominion of all the whole world: yea, and Gades, divided as it were from the
rest of the earth, were peopled from hence. But now at this day all the
reputation and glory thereof, stands upon the die of purple and crimson colors.
The compass of it is 19 miles, so ye comprise Palaetyrus within it. The very
town it self alone, takes up 22 stadia. Near unto it are these towns,
Luhydra, Sarepta, and Ornython: also Sydon, where the fair and clear glasses
be made, and which is the mother of the great city Thebes in Boeotia.

CHAP. XX.
The mount Libanon.

BEhind it, begins the mount Libanus, and for 1500 stadia reaches as far
as to Smyrna, whereas Coele-Syria takes the name. Another promontory there is
as big ouer-against it, called Antilibanus, with a vallie lying between, which
in old time joined to the other Libanus with a wall. Being past this hill, the
region Decapolis shows it self to you within-forth, called Decapolis; and
the aboue-named Tetrachies or Realms with it, and the whole largeness that
Palestine has. But in that coast and tract still along the foot of the mount
Libanus, there is the river Magoras: also the colonie Berytus, called Foelix
Iulia. The town Leontos; [i. Byblos the old.] Then ye come upon the river
Adonis, and so to these towns, Byblos [the new,] Botrys, Gigarta, Trieris,
Calamos, and Tripolis, under the Tyrians, Sydonians, and Aradians. Then meet
you with Orthosia, and the river Eleutheros. Also these towns, Simyra,
Marathos; and ouer-against, Aradus, a town of seven stadia: and an Island
less than a quarter of a mile from the Continent. When you are once past the
country, where the said mountains do end, and the plains lying between,
then begins the mount Bargylis: and there, as Phoenice ends, so begins
Syria again. In which country are Carne, Balanea, Paltos, and Gabale: also
the Promontorie, whereupon stands the free city Laodicea, together with
Diospolis, Heraclea, Charadrus, and Posidium.

CHAP. XXI.
Syria, Antiochena.

GO forward in this tract, and you shall come to the cape of Syria Atiochena:
within-forth is seated the noble and free city it self Antiochena, surnamed
Epidaphne: through the mids whereof runs the river Orontes. But upon the
very cape, is the free city Seleucia, named also Pieria.

CHAP. XXII.
The mount Casius.

Above the city Seleucia, there is another mountain named Casius, as well as
that other, which confronterh Arabia. This hill is of that height, that if a
man be upon the top of it in the dark night season, at the relief of the
fourth watch, he may behold the Sun arising. So that with a little turning of
his face and body, he may at one time see both day and

CHAP. XXIII.
Coele-Syria, [or high Syria.]

IT remains now to speak of the towns and cities in the midland parts
within the firm

CHAP. XXIV.
Euphrates.

ANd here methinks is the fittest and meetest place to speak of Euphrates.
The source of Domitius and Corbulo, who say, that it springs in the mountain
Aba. But Licinius Mutianus affirms, that it issues from under the foot of
the mountain which they call Capotes, 12 miles higher into the country than
is Simyra: and that in the beginning it was called Pyxirates. It runs first
directly to Derxene, and so forth to Ana also, excluding the regions Armeniae,
the greater as well as the less, from Cappadocia: The Dastusae from Simyra are
75 miles: from thence it is nauigable to Paestona, 50 miles: from it to
Melitene in Cappadocia, 74 miles. So forward to Elegia in Armenia, ten miles;
where he receives these rivers, Lycus, Arsania, and Arsanus. Near to Elegia
he meets afront with the hill Taurus: yet stays he not there, but prevails
a pierces through it, although it bear place stands Samosata the head city
of Comagena. Now has Arabia beside the towns aforesaid, Crassus and his army.
Hereunto ioineth the government and territory of Mesopotamia, which also
takes the first beginning from the Assyrians, in which stand the towns
Anthemusa and Nicephorium. Having passed this country, ye straitway enter upon
the Arabians called Rhetavi, whose capital city is Singara. Now to return to
Samosatae, from it in the coast of Syria, the river Marsyas runs into
Euphrates. As Gingla limiteth Comagene, so the land of the Meri begins
there. The towns Epiphania and Antiochia have the river running close to them,
and hereupon they have this addition in their names, Standing upon Euphrates.
Zenyma likewise, 72 miles from the Samosatae, is innobled for the passage over
Euphrates: for joined it is to Apamia, right against, by a bridge, which
Seleucus the founder of both caused to be made. The people that join hard to

CHAP. XXV.
Palmyra.

THe noble city Palmyra is passing well seated, as well for the riches of the
soil, as for abundance

CHAP. XXVI.
Hierapolis.

BEneath the deserts and wilderness of Palmyra lies the country Stelendena,
wherein are the cities named at this day Hierapolis, Beroea, and Chalcis.
Beyond Palmyra also, Hemesa takes up some part of those said deserts: and
likewise Elutium, nearer to Petra by one half than is Damascus. And next to
Afura stands Philiscum, a town of the Parthians upon Euphrates: from which
by water it is a journey of ten days to Seleucia, and from thence as many
likewise to Babylon: for Euphrates, 83 miles from Zeugma, about the village
Massice, divides it self into two arms. On the left side he passes into
Mesopotamia, even through Seleucia, and about it enters into the river Tygris,
which runs hard by: but on the right hand he carries a current in his
channel toward Babylon, the chief city sometime of Chaldaea,

CHAP. XXVII.
Cilicia, and the nations adjoining, to wit, Isauricoe, Homonades, Pisidia,
Lycaonia, Pamphylia, the mountain Taurus, and Lycia.

But time it is to return now to the coasts of Syria, and to Cilicia that
confronts it. Where in the first place we meet with the river Diaphanes, the
mountain Crocodilus, the streights and passages of the mount Amanus: more
rivers also, to wit, Andricon, Pinarus, and Lycus, as Venus, the very next
harbor from whence men pass into the Isle Cypres. But in the maine land you
shall find these towns, Myanda, Anemurium, Coracesium: and the river Melas,
the ancient bound that limiteth Cilicia. Farther within-forth are to be spoken
of, the Anazarbenes, at this day Caesar Augustani; Castabla, Epiphania,
before-time Eniandos, Eleusa, and Iconium: Seleucia upon the river Calicadmus,
surnamed also Trachiotis, a city removed backward from the sea, where it was
called Hormia. Furthermore, within the country, the rivers Liparis, Bombos, and
Paradisus. Last of all, the mountain Iubarus. All Cosmographers have joined
Pamphylia to Cilicia, and never regarded the Nation of Isaurica, being a
country by it self, having within it these towns, Isaura, Clibanus, Lalassis.
And it shoots down to the sea side, full upon the frontiers of the country
Anemurium aboue-said. In like sort, as viz. 44, lie hidden close among the
hollow valleys and hills of that country. There inhabit the mountainers over
their heads, the Pisidians, sometime called Sobymi, whose chief colony is
Caesaria, the same that Antiochia. Their towns be Oroanda and Sagalessos. This
nation is enclosed as it were within Lycaonia, lying within the jurisdiction of
the less Asia, and even so together with it, the Philomelians, Timbrians,
Leucolithi, Pelteni, and Hyrienses resort thither for law and justice. There is
a government or Tetrarchy also, out of the quarter of Lycaonia, on that side
that bordereth upon Galatia; unto which belong 14 States or cities, the chief
whereof is called Iconium. As for the nations of Lyconia, those where he is
highest, and as it were ouer-reacheth himself, there they name him Caucasus:

To return then to Lycia, being past the foresaid cape there, Chelidonium, ye
come to the town Simena, the hill Chimaera, which casts flames of fire every
night, the city Hephaestinm,

When you are beyond Telmessus you meet with the Asiaticke sea, otherwise
called Carpathium, and this coast is properly called Asia. Agrippa has divided
it in two parts, whereof the one by his description confronteth upon Phrygia
and Lycaonia Eastward: but on the West side it is limited with the Aegean sea.
Southward it bounds upon Egypt, and in the North upon Paphlagonia: the length
thereof by his computation is 470 miles, the breadth 300. As for the other he
says, That Eastward it confineth upon Armenia the less: Westward upon
Phrygia,

CHAP. XXVIII.
The river Indus.

THe river Indus, arising from the mountains of the Cybirates, receives into
it 60 other running rivers, maintained with springs, of other small rivers and
brooks fed with land floods, above 100. Upon it stands the free town
Caunos, and a little off, Pyrnos. Soon after ye meet with the port Cressa, over
against which is discovered the Island Rhodus, within the kenning of twenty
miles. Being past that haven, you shall enter upon the plain Loryma, upon
which are seated the towns Tysanusa, Tarydion, Larymna. Then meet you with the
Doris. But before we pass farther, meet it were to speak of those cities and
States which are

CHAP. XXIX.
Laodicia, Apamia, Ionia, Ephesus.

THe principal city in those quarters (of the Cibirites) is Laodicia. Seated
it is upon the river Lycus: and yet there run hard to the sides thereof two
other rivers, Asopus, and Caper. This city in times past was called Diospolis,
and afterward Rhoas. The other nations belonging to that jurisdiction of the
Cibirates, worth the naming, by the Hydrelites, Themisones, Marsyas the
musician strove with Apollo in playing upon the flute) shows himself again
in Aulocrenae, for so is the vallie called, ten miles from Apamia, as men
travel the high way to Phrygia. Under this jurisdiction, we should do well to
Alexander the great, six other towns, namely, Theangela, Sibde, Medmossa,
Euranium, Pedasium, and Telnessum: which towns are inhabited between the two
gulfes, Ceramicus, and Iasius. From thence ye come to Myndus, and where
sometime stood Palaemindus, Neapolis, Nariandus, Carianda, the free city
Termera, Bergyla, and the town Iasus which gave the name to the gulf Iasius.
But Caria is most renowned and glorious for the places of name within it in the
firm land: for therein are these cities, to wit, Mylasa free, and Antiochia,
now standing the river Maeander. Furthermore, the Apollonos-Hieritae,
Mysotmolites, and others of small

Ionia begins at the gulf Iasius, and all the coast thereof is very full of
creekes and reaches. The first gulf or creek therein is Basilicus; and over
it the cape Posideum, and the town called sometime, the Oracle of Branchidae,
but at this day, of Apollo Didymaeus, 20 stadia from the sea side. Beyond which
180 stadia, stands Milletus, the head city of Ionia, named in time past
Lelegeis, Pityusa, and Anactoria. From which, as from a mother city, are
descended more than eighty others, all built along the sea coast by the
Millesians. Neither is this city to be defrauded of her due honor, for
bringing forth that noble citizen Cadmus, who devised and taught first to write
in Prose. Concerning the river Maeander, it issues out of a lake at the foot
of the mountain Aulocrene: and passing under many towns, and filled still with
as many rivers running into it, it fetches such windings to and fro, that
oftentimes it is taken for to run back [i. rough] Samornium, and Ptelea.
Mounted it is upon the hill Pione, and has the river Caystrus under Diana.
After you have been at Ephesus, you come to another Manteium, inhabited by the
Colophonians: and within, the country Colophon it self, with the river Halesus
under it. Then meet you with the noble temple of Apollo Clarius, and Lebedos.
And in this quarter sometime was to be seen the town Notium. The promontory
also Coryceon is in this coast: and the mountain Alexander the Great commanded
a trench seven miles long and an half to be cut through the plain, for to
join two gulfes in one, and to bring Erythree and Mimas together for to be
environed round therewith. Near this city Erythree were sometimes the towns,
Pteleon, Helos, and Dorion: now, there is the river Aleon, and the cape
Corineum: upon the mount Mimas, Clazomene, Partheniae, and Hippi called
Chytophoria, having been sometime Islands: the same, Alexander caused to be
united to the firm land for the space of two stadia. There have perished
within-forth and been drowned, Daphnus, Hermesia, and Sipylum, called
before-time Tantalis, notwithstanding it had been the chief city of Moeonia,
situate in that place, where now is the mere or lake Sale. And for that cause
Alexander the Great. Situat it is pleasantly upon the river Melis, which has
his head and source not far off. The most renowned hills in Asia for the most
part, spread themselves at large in this tract, to wit, Mastusia,

CHAP. XXX.
Aeolis, Troas, and Pergamus.

Aeolis, in old time Mysia, confronts upon Ionia: so does Troas, which bounds
on the coast of Hellespontus. Being then past Phocaea, you meet with the port
Ascanius, and the place where sometime Larissa stood: and now Cyme, and Myrina
which loves to be called Sebastopolis. Within the firm land, Aegae, Attalia,
Posidea, Neon-tichos, and Temnos. But upon the coast, the river Titanus, and a
city taking name thereof. The time was when a man might have seen there the
city Grynia: but now there is but an haven and the bare ground, by reason that
the Island is taken into it, and joined thereto. The town Elaea is not far
from thence, and the river Caicus coming out of Mysia. Moreover, the town
Pytane, and the River Canaius. Other towns there were in old time, but they
are lost and perished, namely, Canae, also Palae-Scamander, but first it makes
a lake. The rest that Homer so much speaks of, namely Achilles; founded first
by the Mityleneans, and afterward re-edified by the Athenians, upon the Bay
Sigaeum, under which his fleet rode at anchor. There also was Acantium, built
by the Rhodians, in another coin or canton of that coast, where Ajax was
interred, a place thirty stadia distant from Sigaeum, and the very Bay wherein
his fleet also lay Eratosthenes mine Author says, That the cities of the
Solymi, Leleges, Bebrices, Colycantij and Trepsedores sometime flourished, but
now are utterly perished. Isidorus reports as much of the Arymeos and
Capretae, the very place where Apamia was built by Seleucus, between Cilicia,
Cappadocia, Cataonia, and Armenia: and for that he had vanquished most fierce
and cruel nations, at the first he named it Damea.

CHAP. XXXI.
The Islands lying before little Asia, and in the Pamphylian sea. Also Rhodus,
Samus, and Chios.

THe first Island of Asia is just against the mouth or channel of Nilus,
called Canopicus of Canopus, (asmen say) the Pilot of K. Menelaus. The second
is Pharus, which is joined to Alexandria by a bridge: in old time it was a
days sailing from Egypt to it: and now by fires from a watchtower sailers
are directed in the night along the coast of Egypt. Caesar Dictator erected
therein a colony. And in truth it serves in right good stead as a Lantern:
Andromeda was exposed and cast out to a monster. Moreover, Aredos, the Isle
before named, between which and the Continent there is a fountain, as Mutianus
writes, in the sea where it is fifty cubits deep, out of which fresh water is
drawn and conueighed from the very bottom of the sea, through pipes made of
leather. As for the Pamphylian sea, it has some small Islands of little or no
reckoning. In the Cicilian sea there is Cyprus, one of the five greatest in
those parts, and it lies East and West full against Cilicia and Syria. The
Seat Timosthenes says, That it contained in circuit four hundred and
nineteen miles and an half: but Isidorus is of opinion, that it is but three
hundred seventy five miles about. The full length thereof between the two
capes, Dinaretas and Acamas, which is Southward, Artemidorus reports
Timosthenes two hundred; who says besides, that sometime it was called
Acamantis: according to Philonides, Cerastis: after Xenagoras, Aspelia,
Amathusia, and Macatia: Astynomus calls it Cryptos and Colinia. Towns there
be in it fifteen, Paphos, and Palepaphos (that is, Paphos the new, and Paphos
the old,) Curias, Citium, Corineum, Salamis, Amathus, Lepathos, Soloe,
Tamaseus, Epidarum, Chytri, Arsinoe, Carpasium, and Golgi. There were in it
besides, Cinirya, Marium and Idalium: but now are they come to nothing. And
from the cape Anemurium in Cilicia, it is fifty miles distant. All that sea
which lies between it and Cilicia, they call Aulon Cilicium; that is to say,
The plain of Cilicia. In this tract is the Island Elaeusa: and four others
besides, even before the cape, named Clides, ouer-against Syria. Likewise one
more, named Stiria, at the other cape or point of Cilicia. Moreover, against
Neampaphos, [i. new Paphos] Antiochus founded: and toward the river Glaucus;
Lagusa, Macris, Didymae, Helbo, Scope, Aspis, and Telandria: howbeit, the town
in it is sunk and gone: last Isidorus, an hundred and three. Three great
towns there be in it well peopled, Lindus, Camirus, and Ialysus, now called
Rhodes. By the account of Isidorus it is from Alexandria in Egypt, five
hundred seventy and eight miles: but according to Eratosthenes five hundred
sixty and nine: after Mutianus five hundred, and from Cyprus four hundred and
sixteen. Many names has it been known by in times past, to wit, Ophyusa,
Asteria, Aethraea, Trinacria, Corymbia, Poeessa, Atabyria of king Atabyris and
finally, Macaria, and Oloessa. Many other Islands be subject unto it, and
namely Carpathus (which gave name Staphylus says, Cos: but according to
Dionysius, Meropis: and afterward Nymphaea. This Isle is fortified with the
mount Prion: and as some think, Nisyris the Island, named before-time
Porphyris, was of old united to this, and afterward dismembered from it. Beyond
this Island ye may discover Carianda, with a town in it: and not far from
Halicarnassus, Pidosus. Moreover, in the guife Ceramicus, Priaponnesus,
Hipponesus, Psyra, Mya, Lampsemandus, Passala, Crusa, Pyrrhe, Sepiussa, Melano.
And within a little of the maine, another called Cinedopolis, by occasion of
certain Catamites and shameful baggages that king Alexander the Great left
there. The coast of Ionia has in the sea the Islands Aegeae and Corseae,
besides Icaros, spoken of before. Also Lade, before-time Isidorus thinks, a
hundred. Aristotle writes, how at the first it was called Parrhania,
afterward Dryusa, and then Anthemu^a. Aristocritus gives it moreover other
names, to wit, Melamphyllus, yea, and Cyparissia: others Ephorus by the ancient
name calls it Aethalia: Metrodorus and Cheobulus, Chia, of a certain lady
Nymph, whose name was Chio: others supposed it was so called of Chion, i. Snow:
and some would have it to be Macris and Pityusa. An hill there is in it called
Pellenaeas, where the good marble is dug, called Chium. The ancient
Geographers have written, That it is a hundred twenty and five miles about; and
Isidorus adds nine more. Situate it is between Samos and Lesbos, full
opposite unto the cape Erythrae. Pisistratus, so called: and those which are
named Anthinae, to wit, Myonnesus, and Diareusa. In both these the towns that
were, be lost through water. Furthermore, the Island Poroselenae with a town
in it, Cerciae, Halone, Commone, Illetia, Lepria, and Rhespheria, Procusae,
Bolbulae, Phanae, Priapos, Syce, Melane, Aenare, Sidusa, Pela, Drymusa,
Anydros, Scopelos, Sycussa, Marathussa, Psile, Perirheusa, and many others of
no reckoning. But among the Isles of name, is that of Teos, lying farther in
the deep sea, which has a town in it: and lies from Chios fourscore and
one miles, and as much from the Bay Erythrae. Near unto Smyrna are the Islands
Peristerides, Catieria, Alopece, Elaeussa, Bachina, Pystira, Crommyonnesus, and
Megale. And just Natoli^
Asia the less. As for the towns Agamede and Hiera which were in it, gone
they be now and utterly perished. Yet there remain Eresos, Pyrrha, and
Mitylenae, which has continued for five hundred years, mighty and puissant.
Isidorus says, That this Island is in circuit

CHAP. XXXII.
Hellespontus, Mysia, Phrygia, Gallatia, Bithynia, Bosphorus.

LEt us now leave the Isles in the sea Aegeum, and come to Hellespont, now
called the Archipelago.
streights of Callipolis: whereinto the maine sea gushes with a mighty force
and violence, with his gulfes and whirlepooles, digging before him a way, until
he have limited and divided Asia from Europe. The promontory first appearing
there, we named Trapeza. From which ten miles off, stands the town Abidum,
where the streights are but seven stadia over. Beyond it is Percote the town:
and Lampsacum, called before-time Pityusa. Moreover, the Colonie Parium, which
Homer named Adrastia. Moreover, the town Priapos, the river Aesepus and the
cape Zelia. Then come ye to Propontus, for so is the place called where the sea
Alexander the Great joined to the Continent [by two bridges, according to
Strabo] in which stands the town Cyzicum, founded by the Milesians, called
heretofore Arconnesos, Dolionis, and Dindymis, near Homer named Halizones, for
that they be environed with the sea. Therein stood in old time a mighty great
city named Attusa. At this day it has 15 cities, amongst which is Gordiu-come,
now called Iuliopolis: and in the very coast upon the sea, Dascylos. Go further
on and ye meet with the river Gebes: and within the main, the town Helgas, the
same

And even here I think it good to write also of Galatia, which lying higher
than Phrygia, yet possesses a greater part of the plain country thereof, yea
and the capital place of it, sometime called Gordium. They that inhabited and
held that quarter of Phrygia were Gauls, called Cybelae, mother of the gods,
were named Galli. Now it rests to speak of the towns upon the sea coast. Yet
I cannot ouerpasse Prusa near to Cios, which lies far within the country
of Bithynia, which Anniball founded at the foot of the hill Olympus: from Prusa
to Nicaea are counted 25 miles: in which way lies the lake Ascanius between.
Then come you to Nic^a in the very utmost part of the gulf Ascanium, which
before was called Olbia: also to another Prusa, built under the mountain
Hippius. Once there were in this coast Pythopolis, Parthe^opolis, and
Coryphanta. And now there be upon the sea side these rivers, Aesius, Bryazon,
Plataneus, Areus, Siros, Gendos, named also Chrysorrhoas. The promontory also,
upon which stood the town Megaricum. Then the gulf or arm of the sea which
was called Craspedites; for that that town before named stood as it were in a
fold, plait, or nouke thereof. Sometimes Anniball. But in the inmost part of
the Gulf, where it ends, there stands the goodly fair City of Bithynia
called Nicomedia. The cape Leucatas, which incloseth the gulf Astarenus, is
from Nicomedia 42 miles Neptune: and the Bosphorus, Isidor, are 372 miles and a
half. Islands lying in Propontis before Cyzicum, are these, Elaphonnesus, from
whence comes the Cyzicen marble; and the same Isle was called Neuris, and
Proconnesus. Then follow Ophyusa, Acanthus, Phoebe,

THE SIXTH BOOK OF
WRITTEN BY C. PLINIVS SECVNDVS.
CHAP. 1.
Pontus Euxinus.

THe sea called Pontus Euxinus, and named by the Greeks in old time, Axenos,
for the hard usage that passengers found at the hands of those savage Nations
upon the coasts thereof, is spread also betwixt Europ and Asia, upon a very
spite and special envy of Nature, as it seems, to the earth, and a wilful
desire to maintain the sea still in his greatness, and to fulfill his greedy
and endless Mouth of libral^ar.
have swallowed up much more by far than is left behind to be seen: no nor to
have let Propontis

Well, the measure some have taken of the sea, from Bosphorus Thracius to the
lake of Moeotis, and have accounted it to be 1438 miles and a half. But
Eratosthenes reckons it less by one hundred. Agrippa says, that from
Chalcedon to Phacis, is a thousand miles, and so to Bosphorus Cimmerius 360
miles. As for us we will set down summarily and in general, the distances of
places, according to the modern knowledge of our nation in these days,
forasmuch as our armies have warred in the very straight and mouth of this
Cimmerian straight.

Being passed then from the straight of Bosphorus Thracius, we meet with the
river Rhebas, which some have called Rhoesus; and beyond it Psillis another
river; then come we to the port of Calpas, and Sangarius one of the principal
rivers of Asia; it arises in Phrygia, it receives other huge rivers into it,
and among the rest Tembrogius and Gallus. The same Sangarius was called also
Coralius. After this river, begin the gulfes Mariandini, upon which is to be
seen the town Heraclea, situate upon the river Lycus. It is from the mouth of
Pontus 200 miles. Beyond it is the port Acone, cursed for the venomous herb
and poisonous Aconitum, which takes name thereof. Also the hole or cave
Acherusia. Rivers also there be, Pedopiles, Callichorum and Sonantes. One
town, Tium, eight and thirty miles from Heraclea: and last of all, the river
Bilis.

CHAP. II.
The nation of the Paphlagonians and Cappadocians.

BEyond this river Bilis, is the country Paphlagonia, which some have named
Pylemerina, and it is enclosed with Galatia behind it. The first town ye meet
in it, is Mastya, built by the Milesians: and next to it, is Cromna. In this
quarter the Heneti inhabit, as Cornelius Nepos says. Moreover, from thence the
Venetians in Italy, who bear their name, are descended as he would have us
believe. Near to the said town Cromna, is another called Sesamum in times
past, and now Amastris. Also the mountain Cytorus, 64 miles from Tium. When
you no more than three nations which justly and by good right, may be called
Greeks, to wit, the Mithridates; and after that he was vanquished, both
together took the name of Pompeiopolis.

CHAP. III.
Cappadocia.

IN Cappadocia, there is a city well within the land, called Archelais,
situate upon the river Halys: which Claudius Caesar the Emperor erected as a
colony, and peopled it with Roman soldiers. There is besides a town which
the river Sarus runs under: also Neo-caesarea, Semiramis, not far from
Euphrates: also, Dio-Caesarea, Tyana, Castabala, Magnopolis, Zela, and under
the mountain Argaeus, Mazaca, which now is named Caesarea. That part of
Cappadocia which lies before Armenia the greater, is called Melitene: that
which bordereth upon Comagene, Cataonia: upon Phrygia, Garsauritis: upon
Sargaurasana, Cammaneum; and finally upon Galatia, Morimene. And there the
river Cappadox separateth the one from the other. Of this river the
Cappadocians took name, whereas beforetime they were called Leucosyri: as for
the less Armenia, the river Lycus divides it from Triarius, whom C. Caesar
defeated with his whole army. But in the coast again you shall encounter the
river Thermodon, which issues from before a castle named Phanaroea, and
passes beside the foot of the mountain Amazonius. In which place there stood
sometime a town of that name, and other five, namely, Phamizonium, Themiscyra,
Sotira, Amasia, Comana, at this present called Manteium.

CHAP. IV.
The people of the region Themiscyrene.

Moreover, in Pontus ye have the nations of the Genetae and the Chalybes,
together with a town of Cotyi. People besides called Tibareni, and Mossyni, who
brand and mark their body with hot searing yrons. Also the nation of the
Macrocephali, with the town Cerasus, and the port Cordulae. Beyond which you
come to a people named Bechires, and Buzeri, and to the river Melas. And so
forward to the quarter of the Macrones, Sideni, and so to the river Sydenum,
upon which is scituat the town Polemonium, distant from Amisum 220 miles: where
ye shall find the rivers Iasonius and Melanthius; and a town 80 miles from
Amisum, 120 bridges. Beautified it was sometimes with many fair towns upon
the banks thereof on

CHAP. V.
The region of Colchis, the Achaei, and other nations in that tract.

NExt follows the region of Colchis, which is likewise in Pontus: wherein the
mountain Caucasus winds and turns toward the Rhiphaean hills, as has been
said before, and that mountain of the one side bends down toward Euxinus,
Pontus, and Maeotis; and of the other, enclineth to the Caspian and Hircane
seas. When ye are descended to the maritime coasts, ye shall find many
barbarous and savage nations there inhabiting, to wit, the Melanchlaeni, and
the Choruxi, where sometimes stood Dioscurias a city of the Cholchians, near
unto the river Anthemus, which now lies wast and dispeopled, notwithstanding
it was so renowned in times past, that by the report of Timosthenes, there
repaired thither and inhabited therein 300 nations of diverse languages. And
even afterward our Romans were forced to provide themselves of 130
interpreters, when they would negotiate and traffic with the people in and
Amphitus and Telchius, who had the charge of the chariots of Castor and Pollux:
for certain it is, that the fierce and wild nation of the Heniochi, are from
them descended. Being past Dioscurias, you come up the town Heraclium, which
from Sebastopolis is 80 miles distant: and so forward to the Achaei, Mardi and
Cercetae: and after them to the Serri, and Cephalotomi. For within that tract
stood the most rich and wealthy town Pitius, which by the Heniochians was
ransacked and spoiled. On the back part thereof inhabit the Epagerites [a
nation of the Sarmatians] even upon the mountain Caucasus: and on the other
side of that hill, the Sauromatae (the country is at this day called Tartaria
the great.) Hither retired and fled king Mithridates in the time of Claudius
Caesar the Emperor: who made report, that the Thali dwell thereby, and confine
Eastward upon

CHAP. VI.
Maeotis, and the streights thereof called Bosphorus Cimmerius.

FRom the said river to the very entrance of the Cimmerian Bosphorus are
counted 88 miles and a half. But the length of the very demi Island, which
extends and stretches out between Pontus and Maeotis, is not above 87 miles
and a half, and the breadth in no place less than two acres of land. This the
paisants of that country do call Eione. The very coasts of

CHAP. VII.
Nations about Moeotis.

BEing passed Cimmerium, yon come to the very broad lake Moeotis, whereof we
spoke before i. (as one would say) subject to women* from whence the Amazones
are provided and furnished of men to serve their turn in stead of husbands,
Next to them, are the Euasae, Cottae, Cicimeni, Messeniani, Costobocci,
Choatrae, Zigae; Dandari, Thussagerae, and Turcae, even as far as the
wildernesses, forests chases, and rough valleys. But beyond them are the
Arnuphaei, who confine upon the

CHAP. VIII.
Cappadocia.

HItherto have we treated and gone through the nations and inhabitants of the
coasts upon the Mediterranian sea. Now are we to speak of the people
inhabiting the very midland parts of the maine within: wherein I protest, and
deny not, but that I will deliver many things otherwise than the ancient
Geographers have set down: forasmuch as I have Domitius Corbulo (who lately
went with an army through those quarters (as of diverse kings and princes, who
made repair to Rome with suits and supplications, but especially of those
kings sons that were left as hostages in Rome. And first to begin with the
nation of the Cappadocians. This is a country that of all others which bound
upon Pontus, reaches farthest within the firm land; for on the

CHAP. IX.
Armenia the greater and the less.

THe greater Armenia, beginning at the mountains Pariedri, is divided from
Cappadocia by the river Euphrates, as has bin said before: and where the river
Euphrates begins to turn his course from Mesopotamia, by the river Tigris
as renowned as the other, both these rivers is it furnished withal, which is
the cause that it takes the name of Mesopotamia, as being situate between
them both. The main land which lies between, is possessed by the mountains of
Arabia called Orei: howbeit, it extends until it confine upon Adiabene. Being
past it once, it is hemmed in with mountains that encounter it overthwart,
which cause it to enlarge it self into a breadth on the left hand, as far as to
the river Cyrus: and then it turns ever cross, until it meet with the river
Araxes: but it carries his length into the less Armenia, confining still upon
the river Absarus, which falls into the Ponticke sea: and the mountains
Aufidius says, that both the Armeniae contain Claudius Caesar reports, that
in length from Dascusa to the confines of the Caspian sea, it takes 1300
miles, and in breadth half so much, to wit, from Tigranocerta to Iberia. This
is well known, that divided it is into certain regiments, which they call
Strategians; and yet some of them in old time, were as large each of them as
realms and kingdoms: and to the number they were of 120, but such barbarous
names they had, that they cannot well be set down in writing. Enclosed it is
Eastward with the mountains, but neither the hills Ceraunij, nor yet the region
Adiabene, do presently and immediately confine thereupon: for the country of the
Sopheni lies between: then you come to the mountains aforesaid, and being
past them, you enter into the country of the Adiabenes. But on that coast
where the plains lie and the flat valleys, the next neighbors to Armenia, be
the Menobardi and Moscheni. As for Adiabene, environed it is partly with the
river Tigris, and partly compassed with an inaccessible

CHAP. X.
Albania, and Iberia.

ALl the plain country between Armenia and the river Cyrus, the Albanois of
Asia do inhabit. Being past it, you enter anon into the Iberians region, who
are separated from the Partedori. And when you are past them, you enter into
the deserts of Cholchis: and on the side of them which lies toward the
Ceraunij, the Armenochalybes do inhabit: and so forward

CHAP. XI.
The gates and passages of the mountain Caucasus.

WHen ye are beyond the Sodij, you come to the Streights of the hill Caucasus,
which many have erroniously called Caspiae Portae. And certes, Nature has
performed a mighty piece of work, in cleaving asunder at one instant those
mountains, where the gates were barred up as it were with iron portculleises,
whiles under the mids thereof, the river Dyriodorus runs: and on this side of
it, stands a strong fort and castle called Cumania, situate upon a rock,
able to impeach an army never so puissant and innumerable that would pass
thereby; in such sort, as in this place by means of these bar-gates, one part
of the world is excluded from the other: and namely most of all they seem to
be set opposite as a rampart against Harmastis a town of Iberia. But being
passed these said gates, you come to the mountains Gordyei, where the Valli and
Suarni, barbarous and savage nations, are employed only Cornelius Nepos says
it is but 150. See into what great streights between both seas Asia is driven
again, and as it were thronged. Claudius Caesar has reported, that from
Cimmerius Bosphorus to the Caspian sea, it is 150 miles, and that Seleucus
Nicator purposed if he had lived, to cut the land through from the one side to
the other: but in this purpose of his, himself was cnt short and slain by
Ptol^maeus Ceraunus. To conclude, it is in manner held for certain, that from
those gates of Caucasus unto the Pontick sea, it is 200 miles, and no less.

CHAP. XII.
The Islands in the Ponticke sea.

IN the Pontick sea lie the Islands Planctae, otherwise Cyaneae or Symplegades.
Then Apollonia, named also Thynnias, for distinction sake from that other so
named in Europe: it is from the continent one mile, and is in circuit three.
Just ouer-against Pharnacea, is the Isle Chalceritis, which the Greeks called
Aria, consecrated as it were to Mars; wherein they say the fowls that are,
used to fight and flutter with their wings against all other birds that come
thither.

CHAP. XIII.
The Regions and people confining upon the Scythian Ocean.

Having thus sufficiently discoursed of all the countries within the firm land
of Asia, let us now determine to pass over the Rhiphaean hills, and discover
the coasts of the Ocean which lie on the right hand of those hills. Wherein we
have to consider, that Asia is dashed and beaten upon by this maine sea on
three parts: to wit, on the North side, and there it is the North-point, and
came to the North-East where the Sun arises at midsommer, then you come to the
Scythians. Beyond whom, and the very point of the North Pole and the wind At
this day, the Moschouites, white and black Rusians, Georgians, Amazonians, and
the less Ta^tatie,
Scythians indeed, the Cimmerij, Cicianthi, Georgi, and the nation of the
Amazons, and these confront the Caspian or Hircan sea: for it breaks forth of
the deep Scithian Ocean, toward the back parts of Asia, and takes diverse names
of the inhabitants coasting upon it, but especially above all other of the
Caspians and Hircaneans. Clitarchus is of this opinion, that this sea is full
as great and large as Pontus Euxinus. And Eratosthenes sets down the very
measure and pourprise thereof: namely, from East to South along the coast of
Cadusia and Albania, 5400 stadia: Artemidorus counts less by 25 miles.
Agrippa in bounding out and limiting the circuit of the Caspian sea, and the
regions coasting upon it, together with them Armenia both the greater and the
less, namely, Eastward with the Ocean of the Seres, Westward with the
mountains of Caucasus; on the South side with the hill Taurus, and finally on
the North with the Scithian Ocean, has written, That the whole precinct and
compass of these parts may contain in length [so far as is known and
discovered of those countries] 590 miles, and 290 in breadth. Yet for all this,
there want not others who say, That the whole circuit of that sea, and begin at
the very mouth and firth thereof, arises to 2500 miles. As for M. Varro says,
it winds along from his mouth toward the lake Moeotis. The first gulf that it
makes is called Scythicus; for the Scithians inhabit on both sides, and by
means of the narrow straight between have commerce and traffic one with
another: for of the one side are the Nomades and Sauromatae, comprising under
them many other nations of diverse names: and on the other, the Abzoae, who have
no fewer states under them. At the very entry of this sea on the right hand,
the Vdines, a people of the Scithians, dwell upon the very point of this mouth:
and then along the coast, the Albanois, a nation descended (as men say) from
Jason; where the sea lying before them Agrippa writes, that this whole coast of
Albanie (fortified with those high and inaccessable mountains of Caucasus)
contains 425 miles. Now when you are past the river Cyrus, the Caspian sea
begins to take that name, for that the Caspians do inhabit the coasts thereof.
And Corbulo in Armenia with the Roman army: for they took it, that those
gates of Caucasus whereof we spoke before, were the Caspian gates, and so
called them: and the very mappes and descriptions which are painted and sent
from thence, bear that name and title. Likewise the menacing commandments,
and threatening commissions sent out by Nero the Alexander the Great in his
voyage and expedition to those parts. For the realm and kingdom of the
Persians, which at this day we take that the Parthians hold, lies aloft
between the Persian and Hircane seas upon the mountains of Caucasus, in the
very hanging and descent thereof, on both sides confining upon Armenia the
greater: and on that part which lies to Comagene, confronteth and joineth (as
we have said) upon Sepheniae and upon it again bordereth Adiabene, where the
realm of the Assyrians does begin: whereof Arbelitis, which boundeth next upon
Syria, takes up a good Alexander the Great discomfited and vanquished Darius.
All this tract, the Macedonians who entered with Alexander, surnamed Mygdonia,
for the resemblance of that in Greece from which they came. Towns of name
there be in it, Alexandria, and Antiochia, which they call Nisibis: and from
Artaxata it is 750 miles. There was also another city called Ninus, or Niniue,
seated upon the river Tygris, which regarded the West, which in times past was
highly renowned. But on the other side, where it lies toward the Caspian sea,
lies the region Atropatene, separated by the river Araxes, from Otene in
Armenia: wherein is the city Gazae, 450 miles from Artaxata: and as many from
Ecbatana in Media, whereon some part the Atropatenes doehold.

CHAP. XIIII.
Media, and the gates Caspiae.

AS for Ecbatana the head city of Media, Seleucus the king founded it: and it
is from Seleucia the great 750 miles, and from the Caspian gates 20. The other
great towns of importance in Media, be Phausia, Agamzua, and Apamia, named also
Rhaphane. And as for the streights there, called the Caspian gates, the same
reason is there of that name, as of the other by Caucasus; by reason that the
mountain is cloven and broken through, and has so narrow a lane, that hardly
a waine or cart is able to pass by it; and that for the length of 8 miles: all
done by the picke-axe and man's hand. The rocks and cliffes that hang over on
the one side

CHAP. XV.
Nations about the Hircanesea.

Unto Adiabene, joyneth the country of the Carduchy, so called in times past,
and now Cordueni, by which the river Tigris runs: and upon them the Pratitae
do confine, called Alexander to make the account and reckoning of his iournies,
in that voyage of his to India, saying, that from those gates to the entrance
of India, it was 15680 stadia: from thence

CHAP. XVI.
Other Nations also.

FRom the Caspians country Eastward, lies the region called Zapanortene, and
in it the land Daricum, the most fertile tract of all those parts. Then come
you to the Tapyrians, Anariaci, Stauri and Hircani, at whose coasts the same
sea begins to take the name Hircanum, even from the river Syderis. About it are
other rivers, to wit, Mazeras and Stratos, all issuing out of Caucasus. Out of
the realm of Hircania, you enter into the country Margiana, so commendable
Alexander the Great sometime had built Alexandria, which being rased and
destroyed by the Barbarians, Antiochus the son of Seleucus re-edified in the
same place upon the river Margus, which runs through it, together with another
river Zodale, and it was called Syriana [or rather Seleucia.] Howbeit, he
desired rather that it should be named Antiochia. This city contains in
circuit 70 stadia: and into it, Orodes after that he had defeated Crassus and
his host, brought all the Romans whom he had taken prisoners. Being past the
high country Margiana, Alexander the Great, which afterward was subverted and
overthrown: but when it was repaired again by Antiochus, he named it Achais.
Beneath in the country, the Derbines do inhabit, thorough whose marches in the
very midst runs the river Oxus, which has his beginning out of a lake
called Oxus. Beyond them are the Syrmatae, Oxij, Tagae, Heniochi* Bateni,
Saraparae, Alexander the Great, wherein are to be seen the altars and columns,
erected by Hercules, prince Bacchus, Cyrus, Semiramis, and Alexander: supposed
and taken to be the very end of all their voiages in that part of the world,
resting within the river Iaxartes, which the Scythians call Silys. For
Alexander and his soldiers thought it had bin Tanais. Howbeit, captain Demonax,
who served under the kings Seleucus and Antiochus, passed over that river with
an army; and at the end of his voyage set up altars unto Apollo Didymaeus. And
the Demonax

CHAP. XVII.
The Scythian Nation.

BEyond the realm Sogdiana, inhabit the Nations of the Scythians. The Persians
were wont to call them in general Sacas, of a people adjoining unto them, so
named. In old time they were known by the name of Arameans. And on the other
side, the Scythians for their part used to term the Persians, Chorsari: and the
hill Caucasus, they called Graucasus, that is to say, white with snow. The
principal nations of Scythia, be the Sarae, Massagetae, Dahae, Essedones, and
disagree more than in this: and as I take it, this comes of the infinite
number of those Alexander the Great and M. Varro make report, that the water of
the Scythian sea is fresh in taste, and potable. And in truth Pompey the great
had such water brought unto him from thence to drink, when he waged war thereby
against Mithridates: by reason no doubt of the great rivers that fall into it,
which overcome the saltness of the water. Varro says moreover, That during
this expedition and iourny of Pompeius, it was for certain known, that it is
but seven days journey from out of India to the Bactrians country, even as
far as to the river Icarus which runs into Oxus: and that the merchandise of
India, transported by the Caspian sea, and so to the river Cyrus, may be
brought in five days by land as far as to Phasis in Pontus. Many Islands there
lie all over that sea: but one above the rest, and most renowned, is Tazata;
for thither all the shipping from out of the Caspian Even at this day they set
abroad their wares with the prices upon the shore, and go their ways: the^
the for^in merchants come and lay down the money, and have away the
merchandise: and so depart without any communication at all.
traffic Amonetus has written a several book of purpose: like as Herataeus
has compiled such another treatise of the Hyperboreans. Beyond the Attaci or
Attacores, the Thyrians and Tocharians do inhabit; yea, and the Casirians, who
now by this time belong to the Indians, and are a part of them. But they
within-forth that lie toward the Scithians, feed of man's flesh. As for the
Nomades of India, they likewise wander to and fro, and keep no resting place.
Eratosthenes has collected and set down) even unto the river Indus, which is
the utmost limit of India Westward. But many other writers have set down the
whole length of India in this manner, namely, that it requires 40 days and
nights sailing, with a good gale of a forewind: also, that from the North to
the South coast thereof, is 2750 miles. Agrippa has put down in writing that
it is 3003 miles long, and 2003 broad. Posidonius took measure of it from the
Northeast to the Southeast: and that by this means it is directly opposite unto
Gaul, which he likewise measured along the West coast* even from the North
west point where the Sun goes down at Mid-summer, to the South-west where it
sets in in the midst of Winter. He adds moreover and says, That this West
wind which from behind Alexander the great his mighty and puissant army, and by
other kings his successors (and namely Seleucus and Antiochus, and their
Admiral Patrocles, who sailed about it even to the Hircane and Caspian seas:)
but also by diverse other Greek Authors, who making abode, and sojourning with
the kings of India (like as Megasthenes and Dionysius sent thither of purpose
from Alexander the great in his Indian voyage, have testified in their
writings, that in one quarter of India which he conquered, there were of towns
500 in number, and not one less than the city Cos: of several nations nine.
Also that India was a third part of the whole earth: and the same so well
inhabited, that the people in it were innumerable. And this they said (believe
me) not without good appearance of reason; for the Indians were in manner the
only men of all others that never went out of their own country. Moreover, it
is said, That from the time of Bacchus unto Alexander the Great, there reigned
over them sucessiuely 154 kings, for the space of 5402 years Alexander sailed
every day at the least 600 stadia upon the river Indus, and yet in less than
five months and some few days over, he could not come unto the end of that
river; and less it is than Ganges by the confession of all men. Furthermore,
Seneca a Latin writer, assaied to write certain commentaries of India: wherein
he has made report of 60 Rivers therein, and of nations 120 lacking twain. As
great a labor it were to reckon up and number the mountains that be in it. As
for the hills Imaus, Emodisus, Paropamisus, as parts all and members of
Caucasus, but one upon another, and conioine together. And being past them ye
go down into a mighty large plain country, like to Egypt. It remains now to
show the continent Alexander the great, and his Historiographers. Diogneus and
Beton, who set down all the geasts and iournies of that prince, have left in
writing, That from the Caspian ports unto the city Hecatompylos which is in
Parthia, there are as many miles as we have set down already. From thence to
Alexandria in the Ariane country (which city the same king founded) 562 miles:
from whence to Prophthasia in the Dranganes land, 199 miles: and so forward to
the capitol town of the Arachosians, 515 miles. From thence to Orthospanum,
250 miles: last of all, from it to the city of Alexandria in Opianum, 50 miles.
In some copies these numbers are found to vary and differ. But to return to
this foresaid city, scituat it is at the very foot of Caucasus. From which to
the river Chepta and Pencolaitis, a town of the Indians, are counted 227 miles.
From thence to the river Indus and the town Tapila, 60 miles: and so onward to
the noble Alexanders voyage: howbeit, he passed over the river, and on the
other side of the bank, he erected certain altars and pillars, and there
dedicated them. The letters also of the king himself, sent back into Greece,
do carry the like certificate of his iournies, and agree just herewith. The
other parts of the country were discovered and surueied by Seleucus Nicator;
namely from thence to Hesudrus 168 miles: to the river Ioames as much: and some
copies add 5 miles more thereto: from thence to Ganges 112 miles: to Rhodapha
119, and some say, that between them two it is no less than 325 miles. From it
to Calinipaxa, a great town, 167 miles and an half: others say, 265. And so the
confluent of the rivers Iomanes be these: the Isari, Cosyri, Izgi, and upon the
very mountains, the Ghisiotosagi: also the Brachmanae,

CHAP. XVIII.
The river Ganges.

MAny have bin of opinion, and so have written, that the spring of Ganges is
uncertain, like as that also of Nilus: and that he swells, ouerfloweth, and
waters all the countries [i. a 100 foot.]

CHAP. XIX.
The nation of India, beyond the river Nilus.

WHen ye are over Ganges, the first region upon the coast that you set foot
into, is that of the Gandaridae and the Calingae, called Parthalis. The king of
this country has in ordinance for his wars 80000 foot, 1000 horse, and 700
Elephants, ready upon an hours warning to march. As for the other nations of
the Indians that live in the champion plain countries, there be diverse states
of them, of more ciuility than the mountainers. Some apply themselves to
tillage and husbandry: others set their minds upon martial feats: one sort of
them practice merchants trade, transporting their own commodities into other
countries, is most rich in gold mines, and the Selian in silver. But above all
the nations of India thorowout Beton reports. But Megasthenes writes, that
this is usual in other parts of India. The Antarctique or South pole the
Indians Artemidorus writes, that between these two rivers there is a distance
of 21 miles.

CHAP. XX.
The river Indus.

THe great river Indus, which the native people call Sandus, issues out of a
part or dependence of the hill Caucasus, which is called Paropamisus: he takes
his course and runs full against the Sun rising, and makes 19 rivers more to
lose their names, which he takes in unto him: among which the principal are
these, Hydaspis one, bringing with him 4 more: and Cantabra another,
accompanied with 3 besides. Moreover, of such as are of themselves nauigable,
without the help of others, Acesines, and Hypasis. And yet for all their
additions, the river of Indus (such a sober and modest course as it were his
waters keep) is in no place either above 50 stadia over, or 15 paces, i. 75
foot, or 12 fathom and half deep. This river incloseth enclosed within the
highest mountain of all the Indian hills, Capitalia. On the other Hercules, in
which regard she was the better accepted, and had the prerogative of the
regencie over the greatest kingdom. From her the other Queens fetch their
pedigree, and have the domiminion and rule over 30 great towns, and the
command of 150000 foot, and 500 Elephants. Beyond this realm you come to the
nation of the Syrieni, containing ^00 Cities: and from them to the Deraugae,
Posunge, Bugae, Gogyarei, Vmbrae, Nereae, Brancosi, Nobundae, Cocondae, Bab^l.
Patale: from the utmost point of which I hand unto the gates Caspiae, are
reckoned 18025 miles. Now on this side the river Indus, just against them, as
appears by evident demonstration, there dwell the Amatae, Bolingae,
Gallitalutae, Dimuri, Megari, Ordabae, and Mesae. Beyond them the Vri and
Sileni, and then you come to the deserts for 250 miles: which having passed
over, you shall meet with the Organages, the Abaorts, Cibarae, and the Suertae:
and beyond these, a wilderness again as great as the former. Pass on
farther, you come among the Sarophages, Sorgae, Baraomatae, and the Gunbretes,
of whom there be 13 several nations, and each one has two great cities
apiece. As for the Aseni* they people three cities: their capital city is
Bucephala, built in the very place where king Alexanders horse called
Bucephalus was interred. Above

CHAP. XXI.
The Arij, and other nations depending unto them.

OTher writers are of opinion, that the utmost frontier and limit of India is
the river Cophetes, and both it and all those quarters are included within the
territory of the Arij; yea and most of them affirm, that the city Nysa, as
also the mountain Merus consecrated to god Bacchus, belong unto India as
parcels thereof. This is that mountain whereof arose the poetical fable, That
Bacchus therein was borne and issued out of Jupiters thigh. Likewise they
assign and lay to India the country of the Aspagores, so full of vines,
laurel, and box, and generally of all sorts of apple trees and other fruitful
trees that grow within Greece. Many strange, wonderful, and in manner fabulous
things they report of the fertility of that land, of them in their due and
several places. And as for those 4 provinces which I touched

CHAP. XXII.
The Island Taprobane.

IT has been of long time thought by men in ancient days, That Taprobane was
a second world, in such sort as many have taken it to be the place of the
Antipodes, calling it the Antichthones world. But after the time of Alexander
the Great, and the voyage of his army into those parts, it was discovered and
known for a truth, both that it was an Island, and what cmpasse it bare.
Onesicratus the Admiral of his fleet has written, that the Elephants bred in
this Island be bigger, more fierce and furious for war service than those of
India. Megasthenes says there is a great river which parts it in twain, and
that the people thereof dwelling along Eratosthenes also took the measure
thereof, and says, that in length it bears 7000 stadia, and in breadth 5000:
that in it there be no cities or great towns, but villages to the number of
700. It begins at the Levant sea of Oriental Indians, from which it stretches
and extends between the East and West of India; and was taken in times past
to ly out into the sea from the Prasians country 20 days sailing. But
afterward, for that the boats and vessels used upon this sea in the passage
thither, were made and wound of paper reeds like those of the river Nilus, and
furnished with the same kind of tackling, the voyage thither from the foresaid
country was gaged within a less time: and well known it was, that according
to the sail of our ships and galleys, a man might arrive there in 7 days. All
the sea lying Claudius Gaesar the Emperor: which happened upon this occasion,
and after this manner; It fortuned that a free slave of Annius Plocamus, (who
had farmed of the Exchequer the customs for impost of the red sea) as he made
sail about the coasts of Arabia, was in such wise driven by the North winds
besides the realm of Carmania, and that for the space of 15 days, that in the
end he fell with an harbor thereof called Hippuros, and there arrived. When he
was set on land, he found the King of that Country so courteous that he gave
him entertainment for six months, and entreated him with all kindness that
could be devised. And as he used to discourse and question with him about the
Romans and like weight, notwithstanding that the sundry stamps and images upon
the pieces showed plainly Rachias was the chief and principal personage. By
these Ambassadors we are informed of the state of that Island, namely, that it
contained five hundred great towns in it: and that there was a haven therein
regarding the South coast, lying hard under Palesimundum the principal city
of all that realm, and the kings seat and palace: that there were by just
account 200000 of commoners and citizens: moreover, that within this island
there was a lake 270 miles in circuit, containing in it certain Islands good
for nothing else but pasturage, wherein they were fruitful; out of which lake
there issued 2 rivers, the one, Palesimundas, passing near to the city
abouesaid of that name, and running into the haven with three Vergiliae in
Latin, as if it had been another heaven. They confessed also they never saw
with them, the Moon above the ground before it was 8 days old, nor after the
16 day. That the Canopus, a goodly great and Rachias his father used many times
to travel thither. Affirming moreover, that if any strangers came thither,
they were encountered and assailed by wild and savage beasts: and that the
inhabitants themselves were giants of stature, exceeding Hercules was the only
god whom they worshipped. Their king was invested, has thirty other
governors assigned unto him by the people: neither can any person Bacchus went
in old time: but the subjects and common people are clad in the habit of
Arabians. If it fortune that the king offend, death is his punishment: howbeit,
no man takes in hand to do execution. All men turn away their faces from
him, and deigne him not a look nor a word. But to do him to death in the end,
they appoint a solemn day of hunting, right pleasant and agreeable unto Tygres
and Elephants, before

CHAP. XXIII.
Capissene, Carmania.

BEyond those nations that confine hard upon the river Indus, as ye turn
toward the mountains, ye enter upon the realm of Capissaene, wherein
sometime stood the city Capissa, which Cyrus the king caused to be rased. At
this day there stands the city Arachosia, with a river also of that name in
the country Arachosia: which city some have called Cophe, founded by queen
Semiramis. There likewise is to be seen the river Hermandus, which runs by
Abeste, a city of the Aracosians. The next that confront Aracosia Southward,
toward part of the Arachotes, are the Gedrosi: and on the Northside, the
Paropamisades. As for the town Cartana, named afterward Tetragonius, situate
it is at the foot of the mountain Caucasus. Alexander the founder thereof:
upon the marches whereof are the Syndrari, Dangulae, Porapiani, Cantaces, and
Maci. Moreover, upon the hill Caucasus stands the town Cadrusi, built
likewise by the said Alexander. On this side all these regions lies the coast
of the river Indus. Then follows the region of the Arianes, all scorched and
senged with the parching heat of the Sun, and environed about with deserts:
howbeit, many shadowie valleys lie between to allay the exceeding heat. Well
peopled it is about the two rivers especially, Tonderos and Arosapes. Therein
stands the city Artaccana. Being past it, the river Arius runs under the
city Alexandria, built by Alexander the Great. The town contains in compass
30 stadia. Then come you to Artacabane, a city as it is much more ancient, so
it is also Antiochus the king was walled the second time, and enlarged to 50
stadia. The next in order is the nation of the Dorisci. The rivers Pharnacotis
and Ophradus. Prophtasia, a town in Zarasparia. The Drangae, Argetae,
Zarangae, and Gedrusij. Towns moreover, Peucolais and Lymphorta. After you are
past their territory, you enter into the deserts of the Mithoricanes, and so to
the river Mauain, and the nation of the Augutturi. The river Borru, the people
called Vrbi, the nauigable river Ponamus, which passes through the marches of
the Pandanes. Over and besides, the river Ceberon within the country of the
Sorates, which in the mouth thereof where it falls into the sea, makes many
baies and harbors. As you go farther, you come upon the town Candigramma,
with the river Cophes: into which there run other rivers that carry vessels,
to wit, Sadarus, Paraspus, and Sodinus. As for the country Daritus quarters,
you enter into the region of the Ichthyophagi, surnamed Oritae or mountainers
(who Alexander by an express edict for bad them all to feed on fish. Being
past them, you are in the deserts: and beyond them you come into Carmania,
Persis, and Arabia. But before that we treat distinctly of these countries, I
think it meet to set down what Onesicritus (who having the conduct of a fleet
under Alexander the great, sailed from off India, about the Southerly coasts of
Persis) reports according to those intelligences which came lately from king
Iuba. In like manner those voiages of ours for these years past, performed, by
which even at this day we are guided. Howbeit, in the reports made by
Onesicritus and Nearchus, of their nauigations, we find neither the distance,
ne yet the names of the several resting places, after every days journey. And
to begin with the city Xylenepolis Alexander, from which they entered first
into their voyage, it is not put down by them, either in what place it is
situate, nor upon what river. Yet these particulars following are by them
reported worth remembrance: to wit, that in this voyage Nearchus founded a
town in those parts: that the river Nabrus runs thereby, and is able to bear
great vessels: ouer-against which there is an Island 70 stadia within the sea.
Moreover, that Leonatus caused Alexandria to be built in the frontiers of that
region, by direction and commandment from king Alexander, where the river
Argenus enters into the sea, and yields a safe and commodious haven. Also that
the river Tuberum is nauigable, along the banks whereof the Parites inhabit.
And after them the Ichthyophagi, who took up so long a tract, that they were
20 days sailing by their coasts. Arcturus, they affirmed, that they saw it not
every night, nor at any time all night long. Furthermore, that the country of
the Achaemenides in Persea, reached thus far. Over and besides, that as they
traveled, ordinarily they found good store of mines, wherein was dug for
brass, iron, Arsenicke or Sardaracha and Vermilion. And then they came to the
cape of Carmania: from which to the coast ouer-against Onesicritus and
Nearchus. For after they had been three Alexander at Susa (wherehe feasted and
made solemn bankets) and that was 7 months after he parted from them at
Patalae. And thus much concerning the voyage of Alexander his fleet. Now
afterward from Syagrus, a Promontory in Arabia, it was counted unto Patale
1332 miles, and held it was for certain then that the West wind with the people
of that country call Hypalus, was thought most proper i. fifty millions of
Sesterces. For which the Indians sends back again commodities and
merchandise of their own, which being at Rome, are sold for an hundred times
as much as they cost, or yield in the price an hundred fold gain. But to
return again to our voyage, from Alexandria in Egypt, it is two miles to
Iuliopolis: from whence upon the river of Nilus, they sail 303 miles to
Coptus, which may be done in 12 days space, having the Etesian winds at the
poupe. From Coptus they travel forwards upon Cammels backs: and for great
default of water in those parts, there be certain set places for bait, lodging,
and watering. The first is called Hydreuma 32 miles from Coptus. The second one
days journey from thence Apollo, from Coptus 184 miles. Beyond which, the
resting place is upon another hill. And then to Hydreuma So as it appears
that every dais journey was above 32 miles.
the new, from Coptus 234 miles. Another water town there is, called Hydreuma
the old, named also Trogloditicum, where two miles out of the port way lies a
garrison, keeping watch and ward both day and night: and four miles distant it
is from new Hydreuma. From whence they travel to the town Berenice, an haven
town standing upon the red sea, 258 miles from Coptus. But for as much as the
journey all this way is for the most part performed in the night season, by
reason of the excessive heat, and the travelers are forced to rest all the day
long, therefore twelve days are set down for the whole voyage between Coptus
and Berenice. The time Celebothras. But another haven there is more commodious,
belonging to the Necanidians, which they call Becare: the kings name at this
present is Pandion: not far off is another town of merchandise within the firm
land, called Madusa. As for that region, from whence they transport pepper, in
small punts or troughes made of one piece of wood, it is named Corona. And yet
of all these nations, havens, and towns, there is not a name found in any of
the former writers. By which it appears, that there has been great change
and alteration in these places. But to come again to India, our merchants
return from thence back in the beginning of our month December, South or
Southwest. Now will we return to our purposed discourse as touching Carmania.
The Niccarchus may take in circuit 12050 miles. From the first marches thereof
to the river Sabis is counted 100 miles. From whence all the way as far as to
the river Andaius, the country is rich and plenteous, for in it are vineyards
and corn fields well husbanded. This whole tract is called Amuzia. The chief
towns of Carmania be Zetis and Alexandria. Upon the marches of this realm the
sea breaks into the land in two arms, which our countrymen call the red sea,
and the Greeks Erythraeum, of a king named Erythras: or as some think,
because the sea by reason of the reflection and beating of the Sun beams,
seems of a reddish color. There be that suppose this redness is occasioned
of the sand and ground which is red: and others again, that the very water is
of the own nature so colored.

CHAP. XXIV.
The Persian and Arabian gulfes.

THis red sea is divided into two arms: that from the East is named the
Persian gulf, being in compass 2500 miles, by the computation of
Eratosthenes. Over against this gulf, in Arabia (which lies in length 1200
miles) on the other side another arm there is of it called the Arabian gulf,
which runs into the Ocean Azanius. The mouth of the Persian gulf where it
makes entrance is 5 miles over, and some have made it but 4: from which to the
farthest point thereof, take a direct and straight measure by a line, and for
certain it is, that it contains 1225 miles: and is fashioned directly like a
man's head. One sichritus and Nearchus write, That from the river Indus to the
Persian gulf, and so from thence to Babylon by i. such as feed upon the flesh
of Tortoises, and the shells of them serve for roofes to cover their cottages.
They inhabit all that coast along the river Arbis, even to the very cape: rough
they are, hairy all their body over but their heads, and wear no garment but
fish skins.

CHAP. XXV.
The Island Cassandrus: and the kingdoms under the Parthians.

WHen you are past this tract of the Chelonophagi, directly toward India, there
lies Alexander erected upon the very promontorie and utmost cape. Where also
be the rivers Saganos, Daras, and Salsos. Beyond which is the cape Themisceas,
and the Isle Aphrodisias well peopled. Then begins the realm of Persis,
which extends Neptune. The very kingdom of Persis Westward has the coasts
lying out in length 450 miles. The people are rich, and given to royal and
superfluous expense in all things: and long since are become subject to the
Parthians, carrying their name. And seeing we are come to speak of them, we
will briefly now mention their dominion and empire: the Parthians have in all
18 realms under them; for so they termed all their provinces as they lie
divided about the two seas, as we have before said: namely the red sea
Southward, and the Hircane sea, toward the North. Of which, eleven that lie
above in the country, spoken, which do enuirone and enclose all those nations.
It confineth Eastward upon the Arij, Alexander the first founder.

CHAP. XXVI.
Media, Mesopotamia, Babylon, and Seleucia.

Requisite now it is and needful in this place to describe the positure and
situation of the Medians kingdom, and to discover all those countries round
about, as far as to the Persian sea, to the end that the description of other
regions hereafter to be mentioned, may the better be understood. Wherein this
first and foremost is to be observed, that the kingdom of Media on the one side
or other confronteth both Persis and Parthia, and casting forth a crooked and
winding horn as it were toward the West, seems to enclose within that
compass both the said realms. Nevertheless, on the East side it confineth
upon the Parthians and Caspians: on the South, Sittacene, Susiane, and Persis:
Westward, Adiabene: and Northward, Armenia: as for the Persians, they always
confronted the red sea, whereupon it was called the Alexander the great caused
to be rased. Moreover in the frontiers of this Realm, stands the city
Laodicea, built by king Antiochus. From whence as you turn into the East, the
strong fort or castle Passagarda is seated, which the sages or wise men of
Persia called Magi, do hold, and therein is the tomb of Cyrus. Also the city
Ecbatana belonging to these sages, which Darius the king caused to be
translated to the mountains. Between the Parthians and the Arians lie out in
length the Parotacenes. These nations and the Nicanor, governor of Mesopotamia,
is called Arabis. Upon these join the Arabians, but well within the country
are the Eldamarij. And above them is the city Bura, situat Alexander the great
caused it to be unto which from all quarters men resorted to pay their imposts,
customs, and tributes; but now Pompey the Great, the limits and bounds of the
Roman empire were extended; and is from Zeugma 250 miles. Some writers report,
that the river Euphrates was divided by a governor of Mesopotamia, and one arm
thereof brought to Gobaris, even in that place where we said it parted in
twain: which was done for fear lest one day or other the river with his
violent stream should endanger the city of Babylon. They affirm also, that
the Assyrians generally called it Or rather Nahal Nalca, i. the kings river.
Armalchar, which signifies a royal river. Upon this new arm of the river
aforesaid, stood sometime Agrani, one of the greatest towns of that region,
which the Persians caused to be utterly rased and destroyed.

As for the city of Babylon, the chief city of all the Chaldaean nations, for
a long time carried a great name over all the world: in regard whereof all the
other parts of Mesopotamia and Assyria was named Babylonia: it contained within
the walls 60 miles: the walls were 200 foot high, and 50 thick, reckoning to
every foot 3 fingers breadth more than our ordinary measure. Through the midst
of this goodly great city passes the river Euphrates: a wonderful piece of
work, if a man consider both the one and the other. As yet to this day the
temple of Jupiter Belus there stands entire. This prince was the first inuenter
of Astronomy. It is now decayed, and lies waste and unpeopled, for that the
city Seleucia stands so near it, which has drawn from it all resort and
traffic; and was to that end built by Nicator within 40 miles of it, in the
very confluent where the new arm of Euphrates is brought by a ditch to meet
with Vologesus their king founded another city hard by called Vologeso Certa.
Moreover, other cities there are besides in Mesopotamia, namely Hipparenum, a
city likewise of the Chaldaeans, and innobled for their learning as well as
Babylon; situate upon the river Narragon, which Nearchus and Onesicratus, who
registered the voyage of Alexander the Great into India, report, That from the
Persian sea to the city Babylon by the river Euphrates, is 412 miles. But the
later and modern Writers do count from Seleucia to the Persian gulf 490
miles. K. Iuba writes, That from Babylon to Charax is 175 miles. Some affirm
moreover, That beyond Babylon the river Euphrates does maintain one entire
course, and keeps one channel 87 miles, before he is divided into several
branches here and there, for to water the country: and that he holds on his
course from miles: and from the red sea, if you go by the river Tigris, 320
miles: from Zeugma 527 miles:

CHAP. XXVII.
The river Tigris.

MEet also and convenient it is to say somewhat of the river Tigris. It begins
in the land Claudius Caesar reports, that in the country Arrhene, the river
Tigris runs so near the river Arsania, that when they both swell, and their
waters are out, they join both their streams together, yet so, as the water is
not mingled: for Arsanias being the lighter of the twain, swimmeth and floteth
over the other for the space wel-neere of 4 miles: but soon and pear trees,
and generally with all sorts of fruit. Unto this country extends the mountain
Antiochus the king so called after his mothers name. This City is environed as
it were with the river Tigris, and divided with the river Archous which passes
through it. Somewhat lower than these countries lies the region Susian, wherein
stood the ancient royal palace and seat town of the Persian kings, Susa,
founded by Darius son of Hystaspes; and from Seleucia Babylonia it is 450 miles
distant: and as much from Alexander the Great came Diana, which is had in great
reverence and honor above all other Temples in those parts: yea, and the very
river it self is in much request, and the water thereof ceremoniously M.
Agrippa, which he has delivered as touching these quarters: for he has
written, Taurus, and on the South the Persian sea: lying out in length 800
miles, and in breadth 360: now i. happy, begins and runs forth in length;
situate it is upon a mount artificially reared by man's hands between the
confluents of Tygris on the right hand, and Eulaeus on the left; and yet
notwithstanding it carries a pourprise or precinct of three miles compass.
Founded first it was by Alexander the great, who having drawn Coloners to
inhabit it out of the kings city Durine (which then was ruinat) and leaving
there behind him those soldiers which were not fit for service, nor able to
follow in the march, ordained, that this town should be called Alexandria: and
the territory about it Pellaeum, of the town where himself was born: and
withal appointed, that it should be peopled only with Macedonians. But this
town of his by him founded, was overthrown and destroyed by the two rivers
aforesaid. Afterward K. Antiochus Spasines, son of Sogdonacus, who held
Arabia, bordering near by as an absolute king, and not (as Iuba reports) as
a duke or governor under Alexander, raised great wharfes, and opposed mighty
dams and causies against those rivers, and so re-edified the town a third time.
Which done, he called it after his own name Charax of Spasines: and verily he
fortified thus the site and foundation thereof, three miles in length, and
little less in breadth. At the beginning it stood upon the seacoast, and from
the water side not above ten stadia, and even from thence it has certain false
bastard galleries: but by the report of Iuba in his time, 50 miles. Howbeit, at
this day both the Arabian Ambassadors, and also our merchants that come from
thence, say it is from the sea shore 125 miles. In such ^ort, that it cannot be
sound in any place of the world again, where the earth has gained more, nor in
so short a time, of the water, Dionysius the latest of our modern Geographers
was born, whom Augustus the Emperor sent of purpose beforehand into the East
countries to discover those parts, and record faithfully in writing whatsoever
he there found, for the better advertisement of his elder son, who was upon his
voyage and expedition of Armenia, to war against the Parthians and Arabians.
Neither have I forgotten, that in my first entrance into this work in hand, I
made some protestation to follow those who had written of their own countries,
as men lightly most diligent and of best intelligences in that behalf.
Howbeit, in this place I choose rather to follow our martial captains Iuba,
who has written certain books to C. Caesar Caligula, as touching the
occurrences in the Arabian voyage.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Arabia, Nomades, Nabataei, and Omani: Tylos and Ogyris two Islands.

ARabia comes behind no country in the world, for largeness and greatness,
especially reaching out in length a mighty way. For it begins at the fall
and descent of the mountain Amanus ouer-against Cilicia and Comagene, as we
have before said: where it is peopled with many nations brought from thence
thither by Tigranes the great, to inhabit Foelix, i. Happy. The nations
therein dwelling, from our seacoasts to the deserts of Palmyreum, we have
treated of already. Therefore ouerpassing them, we will discourse of the rest
forward. Now they make of hair clothes, and encamp under them when and where
they list. Being past them, Semiramis, namely, Abesanius, and Soractia. But now
all is but a wilderness. Then come you to a town named Forath, scituat upon
the river Pasitigris, and subject to the king of the Caracins or Zarazins: to
which town there is much resort from Petra, as to a Epiphanes. And to begin
with the place where sometime the mouth of Euphrates was. When you are once
past it, you meet with a river of salt brackish water, and the promontory or
cape Chaldonum: where the sea is more like a deep pit or whirlepoole than a
sea, for 50 miles. Upon this coast you find the river Achana, and beyond it,
deserts for 100 miles, until you come to the Island Ichara. Then shows it
self the gulf or arm of the sea named Capeus, upon which inhabit the
Gaulopes and Chateni. Beyond them another creek called Gerraicus, and the
town Gerrae upon it, five miles large; and fortified with Iuba says, there is
no more discovered upon this sea of that side, by reason of the dangerous
rocks therein. And I marvel Item, he says not a word of Omne and Athanae,
which our merchants report to be at this day 2 famous mart towns, much
frequented by those that traffic from the Persian gulf. Beyond the river
Caius, as K. Iuba writes, there is an hill, which seems all scortched and
burnt. Past which, you enter into the country of the Epimaranites: and anon
after into the region af the Ichthyophagi: and past them there is discovered a
desert Island, and the Bathymians country: and so forward, the mountains
Eblitaei are discovered, and the Island Omoenus, the haven Machorbae, the
Islands Etaxalos, Onchobrice, and the people the region Dabanegoris, the
mountain Orsa with an haven under it: the gulf or arm of the Numenus lord
deputy under K. Antiochus, over Mesena, and general of his army, defeated the
navy of the Persians in sea fight, and the same day with the opportunity of the
tide returned to land again, and gave their horsemen an overthrow to it:
whereupon, in memorial of a twofold victory in one day achieved, he erected 2
triumphant trophies, the one in honor of Jupiter, and the other of Neptune
Far within Erythra, who there was enterred. Another likewise there is of no
less account, called Dioscoridu, lying in the sea Azanium and is from Syagrum,
the utmost point or cape of the main, 280 miles. But to return to the
Continent: there remain yet not spoken of, the Antarides toward the South, as
you turn to the mountains, which continue for 7 days iourny over: then these
nations, Larendanes, Catabanes, and Gebanites: who have many towns, but the
greatest are Nagia and Tamna, with 65 churches or temples within it, whereby a
man may know how great it is. From thence you come to a promontory; from which
to the continent of the Troglodites it is 50 miles. And in those quarters
remain the Toanes, Acchitae, Chatramotitae, Tomabei, Antidalei, Lexianae,
Agrei, Cerbani, Artemidorus, Aleniticum; and king Iuba, Laeniticum. Arabia is
reported to take in circuit from Charax to Leana, 4870 miles. But Iuba thinks
it somewhat less than 4000. Widest it is in the North parts between the
towns Herous and Chrace. Now it remains that resort of merchants. Moreover,
the Hemnates and Analites, whose towns are Domada and Erage: Minos king of
Crete: whose city Charmaei has 14 miles in compass. Other towns likewise be
there standing a far off, and namely, Mariaba, Baramalacum, a town ywis of no
mean account* likewise Carnon, and Ramei, who are thought to come from
Rhadamanthus the brother of Minos. Over and besides, the Homerites, with their
town Massala: the Hamirei, Gedranitae, Anaprae, Ilisanitae, Bochilitae,
Sammei, and Amathei; with these towns Nessa and Cennesseri. The Zamanenes,
with these towns, Saiace, Scantate, and Bacasmani: the town Rhiphearma, which
in the Arabian tongue signifies Barley: also the Antei, Rapi, Gyrei, and
Marhataei. The Helmadenes, with the town Ebode. The Agarturi in the
mountains, having a town 20 Aelius Gallus a knight of Rome. As for Caius
Caesar the son of Augustus the Emperor, Gallus wasted towns that were not once
named by Authors that wrote before, namely Egra, Annestum, Essa, Magusum,
Tamuracum, Laberia, and the aboue-named Marieba, which was in circuit six miles
about: likewise Caripeta, the farthest that he went unto As for all other
matters, he made report unto the Senate of Rome, according as he had found and
discovered in those parts; to wit, that the Nomades live of milk and venison:
the rest of the Arabians press wine, like as the Indians do, out of dates: and
oil of Sesama, a kind of grain or pulse in those countries. That the
Homerites country of all others is most populous and replenished with people:
the Minaeans have plenteous and fruitful fields, full of date trees and goodly
hortyards stored with all sorts of fruit: but their principal riches lies in
cattle. The Cembanes and Arians are good warriors and martial Timosthenes
has set down, that the whole gulf or arm of the sea called Red, was from one
end to the other four days sailing: and from side to side, two days: that
the streights of the firth were seven miles over. But Eratosthenes says, that
taking the measure at the very mouth, it is every way 1300 miles.

CHAP. XXIX.
The gulf of the Red Sea: likewise of the Trogloditick and Ethiopian Seas.

ARtemidorus avouches, that the Red Sea toward Arabia side, is 1450 miles: but
on the coast of the Troglodites 1182, until you come to the city Ptolemais.
Most Geographers have set down the breadth thereof to be 462 miles: and that
the mouth of it, where it opens wide, full against sunrising in winter [i.
South-west] some say, is 7 miles broad; Sesostris a king of Egypt, was the
first that imagined and devised to draw one arm of it with a channel
nauigable, into Nilus, in that part where it runs to the place called Delta,
and that for 62 miles space, which is between the said river and the red sea.
This enterprise of his was followed by Darius king of the Persians: yea and by
Ptolomaeus king of Egypt, second of that name, who made a channel 100 foot
over, and 30 deep, for Ptolomaeus Philadelphus, and bare his sisters name: and
verily he was the first that discovered those parts, and searched narrowly
into the region Trogloditicum: and the river that passes by Arsinoe, he called
Ptolomaeus. Within a little of this place, there is a little town named Aennum;
for which, some there be that write, Philotera. Beyond them, are the Azarei:
Arabians of the wilder sort and half Troglodites, by reason they marry their
wives from out of the Troglodites country. Being past these coasts, you shall
find the Islands Sapyrene and Scytala: and within a little thereof, deserts
Ptolomaeus Philadelphus, to which there is a way lying from Coptos, as we have
said: and last of all the Arabians called Autei, and Gnebadei. Now it remains
to speak of the region Trogloditicum, which the ancient men of old time called
Michoe, and others Midoe: and therein stands the mountain Pentedactylos.
Upon the coast of this country, there lie to be seen certain Islands called
Stenae-deirae: and others no fewer in number named Halonnesi: also Cardamine,
and Topazos, which Island gave the name to the precious stone called the
Topaze. Then come you to an arm of the sea between two lands, full of petty
Islands, whereof that which is called Mareu, is well served with water
sufficient: another, Eratonos, is altogether dry Iuba who seems to have taken
great pains in the diligent perusing and discovery of these parts, omitted in
all this tract (unless there be some fault and defect in them that copied out
his first original) to speak of a second city named Berenice, with the
addition of Panchrysos; as also of a third called Epidires, and yet renowned it
is in regard of the place whereupon it is seated: for scituat it is upon a knap
of land bearing far into the red sea, even where the mouth of it is not above 4
miles and an half, from Arabia. Within the prospect of this tract there is the
Island Cytis, which also brings forth good store of the Ptolomaeus surnamed
Philadelphus built the city Ptolemais, only for to chase and hunt the
Elephant, near to the lake Monoleus; and in regard of his game there, he named
it Epi-theras. This is the very country mentioned by me in the second book:
wherein for 45 days before Mid-summer, or the entrance of the Sun into Cancer,
and as many after, by the sixth hour of the day, that is to say, Eratosthenes
upon this undoubted argument and demonstration of the diversity of shadows,
set in hand hereupon to take Sesostris with his army. Some writers make mention
of one town more in Aethiopia beyond all this, upon the sea side, called
Baradaza. K. Iuba would have the Atlantic sea to begin at the promontorie or
cape aboue-named, Mossylites: on which sea (as he says) a man may sail very
well with a West-north-west wind, by the coasts of his kingdoms of Mauritania
or Maroccho, as far as to the coasts of Gibralter called Gades: and sure he
speaks so confidently thereof, as I will not altogether discred it his
resolution in this behalf. From a promontorie of the Indians called Iuba
writes moreover, that there be certain people of the Troglodites, named
Therothoes, for their hunting of wild beasts, of their exceeding and wonderful
swiftness in chasing of Dear upon land: as the Ichthyophagi for coursing of
fish in the sea, swimming as naturally as if they Bion digested and set them
down. But king Iuba has raunged them otherwise in this manner. First,
Megatichos a town situate upon a hill between Egypt and Aethiopia, which
the Arabians use to call Myrson: next to it Tacompson: then Aranium, Sesanium,
Pide, Mamuda, and Corambis; near unto it a fountain of liquid Bitumen:
Hammodara, Prosda, Parenta, Mama, Thessara, Gallae, Zoton, Bion wrote his
Geography. See what cities and towns of name were recorded in times past to
have bin in those parts, until you come to the Isle Meroe. And yet at this day
there is neither stick nor stone to be found of any of them in a manner on
neither side. Only deserts and a vast wilderness in stead of them, by report
made unto Nero the Emperor by the Praetorian soldiers, sent thither from him
under the leading of a Tribune or Colonel, to discover those quarters of
Aethiopia, and to relate accordingly: at what time as among other his designs,
that Prince intended an expedition with his army against the Aethiopians. And
yet before his time, even in the days of Augustus Caesar of happy memory, the
Romans pierced thither with a power of armed men under the conduct of Pub*
Petronius, a knight of Rome, and governor of Egypt, deputed by the said
Emperor. Where Memnon, who ruled at the time of the Trojane war: Cephas days,
as appears by the fabulous tales that go as touching Andromeda. Semblably the
Geographers vary and disagree much about the measure and dimension of
Aethiopia. And first of al others, Dalion, albeit he passed far beyond Meroe:
after him, Aristocreon, Bion, and Basilis. As for Simonides (the Timosthenes
the Admiral of Ptolomaeus Philadelphus his navy, has left in record, that
from Syene to Meroe is 60 days iourny, without any further particularizing of
the measure by miles. But Eratosthenes precisely notes, that it is 625 miles.
Artemidorus but 600. Sebostus affirms, That from the frontiers of Egypt it is
1675 miles. From whence, the last rehearsed Writers count forward but 1270. But
all this difference and dispute about this point, is lately determined and
ended by the report of those travelers whom Nero sent of purpose to discover
those countries; and they made relation of the truth upon their certain
knowledge, that it is 874 miles from Syene in this manner particularly by
iournies. Namely, from the said Syene to Hiera-Sycaminon 54 miles: from thence
to Tama 75 miles: from Tama to the Euonymites country, the Candace, a name that
for many years already went from one queen to another successively. Within this
town there is the temple of great holiness and devotion in the honor of
Jupiter Hammon: and in all that tract many other chapels. Finally, so long as
the Ethyopians swaied the scepter and reigned, this Island was much renowned
and very famous. For by report, they were wont to furnish the Ethyopian king
with armed men 250000, and to maintain of Artisans 400000. Last of all there
have bin counted 45 kings of the Ethyopians, and so it is reported at this day.

CHAP. XXX.
The manifold, strange, and wonder full forms and shapes of men.

ALl Ethyopia in general was in old time called Aetheria: afterward Atlantia*
and finally of Vulcans son Aethiops, it took the name Ethyopia. No wonder it
is, that about the coasts thereof there be found both men and beasts of strange
and monstrous shapes, considering the agilitie of the suns fiery heat, so
strong and powerful in those countries, which is able to frame bodies
artificially of sundry proportions, and to imprint and grave in them diverse
forms. Certes, reported it is, that far within the country Eastward there are a
kind of people without any nose at all on their face, having their visage all
plain and flat. Others again without any upper lip, and some tonguelesse.
Moreover, there is a kind of them that want a mouth, framed apart Ptolomaeus
Lathyrus king of Egypt, knew no use at all of fire. Furthermore, writers there
be, who have reported, that in the country near unto the meeres and marshes
from whence Nilus issues, there inhabit those little dwarfes called Pygmei.
But to return again to the utmost coasts of Ethyopia, where we left: there is
a continual raunge and course of mountains all of gold mines. All beyond this
region is inhabited by the Atabuli, a people also of Ethiopia. Apollo. Among
them are certain Nomades encamping under tents and tabernacles, who live of
Elephants flesh. Just against them in a part of Afric are the long living
Macrobians. Again, being past the Megabarenes, you come unto the Memnones and
Daveli: and 20 days iourny from them, to the Critenses. Beyond whom you meet
with the Dochi, and the Gymnetes who are ever naked. Soon after you shall find
the Anderae, Mathitae, Mesagebes, Hipporeae, who be all over black, and
therefore they color and paint their bodies with a kind of red chalk or rudle
called Rubrica. But upon the coast of Africa are the Medimni. Beyond whom you
shall come to another sort of Nomades living under tents, who feed of no other
thing but the milk of certain creatures headed like dogs, called Cynocephali:
also to the Olabi Aristocreon says, that on Libya side, five days iourny from
Meroe, there is a town called Tole: and 12 days iourny from thence, there
stands Esar, a town built by the Egyptians, who fled thither to avoid the
cruelty and tyranny of K. Psammeticus. And reported it is, that the Egyptians
held it for 300 years. Also, that the same fugitives founded the town Daron on
the contrary side in the coast of Arabia. But that which Aristocreon names
Esar, Bion called Sapa, and says withal, that the very word Sapa signifies
in the Ethyopian language, strangers or aliens come from other parts. He
affirms besides, that their capital city is within an Island, Sembobitis,
and that Sai within Arabia, is the third city of that nation. Now between the
mountains and the river Nilus, are the Symbarians and the Phalanges: but upon
the very hills live the Asachae, who have many other nations under them: and
they are by report seven days journey from the sea. They live upon Bion
affirms, That beyond Psembobitis, there be other towns in the Islands of
that coast, toward Bion affirms moreover, That from that clime of the heaven
which bears Agrippa says that all Ethiopia, and take the land with it of
Prester Iehan bordering upon the red sea, contains i. The chariot of the
gods: from the which it is counted four days iourny by sea to the promontory
or cape called Hesperion-Ceras, which confines upon Africa, near to the
Hesperian Ethyopians. Some writers hold, that this tract is Cap. de bonne
Esperance
beautified with pretty little hills, and those pleasantly clad and garnished
with shadowie groves, wherein the Aegipanes and Satyrs do converse.

CHAP. XXXI.
The Islands in the Aethyopian Sea.

EPhorus, Eudoxus, and Timosthenes, do all agree in this, that there be very
many Islands in all that sea. Clitarchus witnesses, that report was made to
Alexander the Great, of one above the rest, which was so rich and well monied,
that for an ordinary horse the inhabitants would not stick to give a talent of
gold: also of another, wherein was found a sacred hill adorned with a goodly
wood upon it, where the trees distilled and dropped sweet water of a wonderful
Ephorus writes, that they who would sail thither from the red sea, are not
able for extreme heat to pass beyond certain columns or pillars, for so they
call the little Isles there. Howbeit Polybius avouches, that this Island Cerne
where it lies in the utmost coast of the Mauritanian sea ouer-against the
mountain Atlas, is but 8 stadia from the land. And Cornelius Nepos affirms,
that likewise it is not above a mile from the land, over against Carthage: and
besides, that it is not above two miles in circuit. There is mention made also
by authors, of another Isle before the said mountain Atlas, named also thereupon
Atlantis. Xenophon Lampsacenus reports, lie the Islands called Gorgates,
where sometimes the Gorgones kept their habitation, and 2 days sailing they
are thought to be from the firm land. Hanno, a great commander and general of
the Carthaginians, landed there with an army: who made this report from thence,
That the women were all over their bodies hairy: as for the men, he could not
catch one of them, so swift they were of foot that they escaped out of all
sight: but he flead two of these Gorgone women and brought away their skins,
which for a testimonial of his being there, and for a wonder to posterity, he
hung up in Iunoes temple, where Statius Sebosus affirms, that it is 40 good
days sailing from the Islands of these Gorgones along the coast of Atlas, unto
the Isles of the Hesperides; and from thence to Hesperion-Ceras, but one. As
little resolution and certainty there is, as touching the Islands of
Mauritania. In this only they all jumpe and accord, that K. Iuba discovered
some few of them ouer-against the Autolotes, in which he meant and purposed to
die Gaetulian purple.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of the Islands Fortunatae, or Canarie.

SOme Authors there be who think, that the Islands Fortunatae, and certain
others besides them, are beyond the Antolotes: among whom, the same Sebosus
above rehearsed was so bold, as to speak of their distances: and namely, that
the Island Iunonia is from Gades 750 miles: and that from it Westward, the
Isles Pluvialia and Capraria, are as much. Also that Iuba learned thus much by
diligent inquisition, that they lie from the South near to the West 625 miles
from the Islands Purpurariae, where they die purple; so as to come thither, a
man must sail 250 miles above the West, and then for 75 miles more bend his
course Eastward: he says also, that the first of these Islands is called
Ombrion, wherein ate to be seen no token or show at all of houses. Also that
among the mountains, it has a lake or mere: and trees resembling Iuba brought
away two; and in this Island there are some marks remaining of buildings which
give testimony that sometime it was inhabited and peopled. And as all these
Islands generally do abound plentifully in fruitful trees, and flying fouls

CHAP. XXXIII.
A summarie of the earth, digested according to the dimensions thereof.

POlybius says, that from the streights of Gibralter, unto the very mouth and
firth of Moeotis, it is found by a direct and straight course to be 3437 miles
and an half. Begin there again, and hold on a right course Eastward to Sicily,
it is 1260 miles and an half. From thence forward to the Island Creta, 375
miles: forward to Rhodes, 146 miles and an half: to the Chelidoni^e Isles as
much, and so to Cyprus 325 miles: from whence to Seleucia Pieria in Syria 115
miles. Which particulars being laid together, make by computation the gross
sum of 2340 miles. Howbeit, Agrippa counts 3440 miles for all this distance
aboue-said, beginning Artemidorus adds thereto 756 miles. And the same
Geographer writes, that take the lake Moeotis to the rest, all comes to
17390 miles. Lo, what the measure is of the seas taken by Philosophers and
learned men, without armor and weapon in hand; of men I say, who have not
feared to hazard themselves boldly and provoke Fortune, in traversing the seas
Europe, it may well contain in largenes 8148 miles. Africa (taking the middle
and mean computation Agrippa would have it to contain 910 miles in breadth,
beginning at the bounds of Cyrene, and so comprehending in this measure the
deserts thereof as far as to the Garamants, so far as is known and discovered,
and then the whole measure collected into one general sum, amounts to 4608
miles. As for Asia, confessed it is and resolved upon by all Geographers, that
in length it carries 63750 miles: and verily in breadth (if you account from
the Ethiopian sea to Alexandria situate upon Nilus, so as your measure run
through Meroe and Syrene) it takes 1875 miles: whereby it appears evidently,
that Europe is little wanting of half as big again as Asia: and the same
Europa, is twice as much again as all Africa and a sixth

CHAP. XXXIV.
The division of the earth into Climates or lines Parallele, and equal
shadows.

FOr to make an equal partition of the world, begin we will at the Meridionall
Indians, and go directly as far as Arabia, and the inhabitants of the red sea
Under this climat are compreprised the Gedrosians, Persians, Carmanes, and
Elimaeans: Parthyene, Aria, Susiane, Mesopotomia, Seleucia syrnamed Babylonia,
Arabia, so far as Petrae inclusiuely, Coele-Syria, and Pelusium Hercules
pillars. In all the circumference of this climat and parellele, at noon tide
upon an Equinoctial day, the style in the dial which they call Gnomon 7 foot
long, casts a shadow not above 4 foot. The longest night or day in this
climate, is 14 hours: and contrariwise the shortest, ten. The second circle or
parallele line, begins at the Indians Occidentall, and passes through the
mids of Parthia, Persepolis, the hithermost parts of Persis (in respect of
Rome) the hither coast of Arabia, Iudaea, and the borders near unto the
mountain Libanus. Under the same are contained also Babylon, Idumaea, Samaria,
Jerusalem, Ascalon, Ioppe, Caesarea, Phoenice, Ptolemais, Sardis, Smyrna,
Sipylus, the mountain Tmolus in Lydia, Caria, Ionia, Trallis, Colophon,
Ephesus, Languedoci
Narbonensis Gallia toward the East, the maritime parts of Spain beyond new
Carthage, and so into the West. To a Gnomon of 21 foot, the shadows answer of
17 foot. The longest day is fourteen Aequinoctiall hours, and two third parts
of an hour. The 5 division contains under it, from the entrance of the
Caspian sea, Bactra, Iberia, Armenia, Mysia, Phrygia, Hellespontus, Troas,
Tenedus, Abydus, Scepsis, Ilium, the hill Ida, Cyzicum, Lampsacum, Sinope,
Anisum, Heraclea in Pontus, Paphlagonia, Lemnus, Imbrus, Thasus, Cassandria,
Thessalia, Macedonia, Larissa, Amphipolis, Thessalonice, Pella, Edessa, Beraea,
Pharsaliae, Carystum, Euboea, Boeotia, Chalcis, Delphi, Acarnania, Aetolia,
Apollonia, Brundisium, Tarentum, Thurij, Locri, Rhegium Nigidius is of opinion.
The 7 division begins at the other coast of the Caspian sea, and falls upon
Callatis, Bosphorus, Borysthenes, Tomos, the back parts of Thracia, the
Tribals country, the rest of Illyricum, the Adriaticke sea, Aquileia, Altinum,
Venice, Viceria, Patavium, Verona, Cremona, Ravenna, Ancona, Picenum, Marsi,
Peligni, Sabini, Vmbria, Ariminium, Bononia, Placentia, Mediolanum, and all
beyond Apenninum: also over the Alps, Aquitane in Gaul, Vienna, Pyraeneum, and
Celtiberia. The Gnomon of 35 foot, casts a shadow 36 foot in length; yet so,
as in some part of the Venetian territory, the shadow is equal to the Gnomon.
The longest day is 15 Aequinoctiall hours, and three fifth parts of an hour.
Hitherto have we reported the labors in this point of ancient Geographers, and
what they have reported. But the most diligent and exactest modern Writers

Thus much of the Earth.

THE SEVENTH BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF NATVRE,
WRITTEN BY C. PLINIVS SECVNDVS.
The Proeme.
THus, as you see, we have in the former books sufficiently treated of the
universal world; of the Lands, Regions, Nations, Seas, Islands, and renowned
Cities therein contained. It remains now to discourse of the living creatures
comprised within the same, and their natures: a point doubtless that would
require as deep a speculation as any part else thereof whatsoever, if so be
the spirit and mind of man were able to comprehend and compass all things in
the world. And to make a good entrance into this treatise and history, me
thinks of right we ought to begin at Man, for whose sake it should seem that
Nature made and produced all other creatures besides: though this great favor
of hers, so bountiful and beneficial in that respect, has cost them full
dear. Insomuch as it is hard to judge, whether in so doing she has done the
part of a kind mother, or a hard and cruel step-Dame. For first and foremost,
of all other living creatures, man she has brought forth all naked, and
clothed him with the good and riches of others. To all the rest she has given
sufficient to clad them every one according to their kind; as namely, shells,
cods, hard hides, pricks, shag, bristles, hair, down feathers, quills,
skales, and fleeces of wool. The very trunkes and stems of trees and plants
she has defended with bark and rind, yea and the same sometimes double,
against the injuries of heat and cold: Man alone, poor wretch, she has laid
all naked upon the bare earth, even on his birth day, to cry and wraule
presently from the very first hour that he is borne in such sort, as among so
many living creatures there is none subject to shed tears and weep like him.
And verily to no babe or infant is it given once to laugh before he be forty
days old, and that is counted very early, and with the soonest. Moreover, so
soon as he is entered in this manner to enjoy the light of the Sun, see how
he is immediately tied and bound fast, and has no member at liberty: a thing
that is not practiced upon the young whelps of any beast among us, be he never
so wild. The child of man thus untowardly borne, and who another day is to
rule and command all other, lo how he lies bound hand and foot, weeping and
crying, and beginning his life in misery, as if he were to make amends and
satisfaction by his punishment unto Nature, for this only fault and trespass,
that he is borne alive. O folly of all follies, ever to think (considering
this simple beginning of ours) that we were sent into this world to live in
pride, and carry our heads aloft! The first hope that we conceive of our
strength, the first gift that Time affourdeth us, makes us no better yet than
four footed beasts. How long is it ere we can go alone? how long before we can
prattle and speak, feed our selves, and chew our meat strongly? what a while
continues the mould and crown of our heads to beat and pant, before our
brain is well settled; the undoubted mark and token that bewraieth our
exceeding great weakness above all other creatures? What should I say of the
infirmities and sicknesses that do soon seize upon our feeble bodies? what
need I speak of so many medicines and remedies devised against these maladies:
besides the new diseases that come every day, able to check and frustrate all
our provision of physic whatsoever? As for all other living creatures, there
is not one, but by a secret instinct of nature knows his own good, and whereto
he is made able; some make use of their swift feet, others of their flight
wings; some are strong of limne; others are apt to swim, and practice the same:
man only knows nothing unless he be taught; he can neither speak, nor go,
nor eat, otherwise than he is trained to it: and to be short, apt and good at
nothing he is naturally, but to pule and cry. And hereupon it is, that some
have been of this opinion, That better it had been, and simply best for a man,
never to have been borne, or else speedily to die. None but we do sorrow and
wail, none but we are given to excess and superfluity infinitely in every
thing, and show the same in every member that we have. Who but we again are
ambitious and vainglorious? who but we are covetous and greedy of gathering
good? we and none but we desire to live long and never to die, are
superstitious, careful of our sepulture and burial, yea and what shall betide
us when we are gone. Man's life is most frail of all others; and in least
security he lives: no creature lusts more after every thing than he: none
fears like unto him, and is more troubled and amazed in his fright: and if he
bese^ once upon anger, none more raging and wood than he. To conclud, all other
living creatures live orderly and well, after their own kind: we see them
flock and gather together, and ready to make head and stand against all others
of a contrary kind: the lions as fell and savage as they be, fight not one
with another: serpents sting not serpents, nor bite one another with their
venomous teeth: nay the very monsters and huge fishes of the sea, war not among
themselves in their own kind: but believe me, Man at man's hand receives most
harm and mischief.

CHAP. I.
The strange and wondrous shapes of sundry nations.

IN our Cosmographie and reports of nations and countries, we have spoken in
general of all mankind, spread over the face of the whole earth: neither is it
our purpose at this present to decipher particularly all their customs and
manners of life, which were a difficult enterprise, considering how infinite
they be, and as many in manner as there be societies and assemblies of men.
Howbeit

CHAP. II.
Of the Scythians, and the diversity of other nations.

THat there be Scythians, yea, and many kinds of them that feed ordinarily of
man's men, namely, the Cyclopes and Lystrigones: nay, if we were not credibly
informed, that even of late days, and go no farther than to the other side of
the Alps, there be those that kill men [i. the cloister or key of the earth]
the Arimaspians by report do dwell, who as we have said before, are known by
this mark, for having one eye only in the mids of their forehead: and these
maintain war ordinarily about the metal mines of gold, especially with
griffons, a kind of wild beasts that fly, and use to fetch gold out of the
veins of those mines (as commonly it is received:) which savage beasts (as
many authors have recorded, and namely, Herodotus and Aristeus the
Proconnesian, two writers of greatest name) strive as eagerly to keep and hold
those Alexander the great: as Beton has reported, the marshall of that princes
camp, and who also put down his gests and iournies in writing. The former
Anthropophagi or eaters of man's flesh, whom we have placed about the
North Pole, ten days journey by land above the river Borysthenes, Isogonus the
Nicean witnesses. The same writer affirms moreover, That in Albanie there be
a sort of people borne with eyes like owls, whereof the sight is fire red: who
from their childhood are gray headed, and can see better by night than day. He
reports also, that ten days iourny beyond Borysthenes, the Sauramates
never eat but one meal of meat in three days. Crates of Pergamus says, That
in Hellespont about Parium there was a kind of men (whom he names Ophiogenes)
that if one were stung with a serpent, with touching only, will ease the pain:
and if they do but lay their hands upon the wound, are wont to draw forth all
the venom out of the body. And Varro testifies, that even at this day there be
some there who warish and cure the stinging of serpents with Agatharcides
writes, that in Afric the Psyllians (so called of king Psyllus, from whose
race they were descended, and whose sepulcher or tomb is at this day present
to be seen in a part of the greater Syrtes) could do the like. These men had
naturally that in their own bodies, which like a deadly bane and poison would
kill al serpents: for the very air and sent that breathed from them, was able
to stupifie and strike them stark dead. And by this means they used to try the
chastity and honesty of their wives. For so soon as they were delivered of
children, their manner was to expose and present the silly babes newborn,
unto the most fell and cruel serpents they could find: for if they were not
right, but gotten in adultery, the said serpents would not avoid and fly from
them. This nation verily in general Circes son, the people in this regard do
highly esteem, and are verily persuaded, that they have in them the same
faculty by kind. And what great wonder is this, considering that all men
carry about them that which is poison to serpents: for if it be true that is
reported, they will no better abide the touching with man's spittle, than
scalding water cast upon them: but if it happen to light within their chawes,
or mouth, especially if it come from a man that is fasting, it is present
death. Calliphanes reports. Aristotle says moreover, that on the right side of
their breast they have a little teat or nipple like a man, but on the left they
have a full pap or dug like a woman. In the Isogonus and Nymphodorus do
avouch, there be certain houses and families of sorcerers: who, if they chance
to bless, praise, and speak good words, bewitch presently withal; insomuch as
sheep therewith die, trees wither, and infants pine and winder away. Isogonus
adds furthermore, That such like there be among the Triballians and Illyrians,
who with their very eiesight can witch, yea, and kill those whom they look
wistly upon any long time, especially if they be angered, and that their eyes
bewray their anger: and more subject to this danger be men grown, than
children under fourteen years of age. This also is in them more notable and
to be observed, that in either ere they have two sights or apples. Of this kind
and property, as Apollonides mine author says, there be certain women in
Scythia named Bithyae. Philarchus witnesses, That in Pontus also the whole
race of the Thibians, and many others besides, have the same quality, and do
the like: and known they are (says he) by these marks, In one of their Cicero
a Roman writer here among us testifies, that generally all women that have
such double apples in their eyes, have a venomous sight, and do hurt
therewith. See how nature, having engraffed naturally in some men this unkind
appetite (like wild beasts) to feed commonly upon the bowels and flesh of men,
has taken delight also and pleasure to give them inbred poisons in their whole
body, yea and venom in the very eyes of some; that there should be no
naughtiness in the world again, but the same might be found in Apollo upon
the mount Sorecte, walk upon the pile of wood as it is on fire, in great
iolity, and never a whit are burnt withal. For which cause it is ordained by
an express arest or act of the Senate, that they should be privileged, and
have immunity of warfare and all other services whatsoever. Some men there be
that have certain members and parts of their bodies naturally working strange
and miraculous effects, and in some cases medicinable. As for example, king
Pyrrhus, whose great toe of his right foot was good for them that had big,
swelled, or indurate spleenes, if he did but touch the parties diseased, with
that toe. And they say moreover, that when the rest of his body was burnt
(after the manner) in the funeral fire, that great Megasthenes does report.
And in many other hills of that country, there is a kind of men with heads like
dogs, clad all over with skins of wild beasts, who in lieu of speech use to
bark: armed they are and well appointed with sharp and trenchant nails: they
live upon the prey which they get by chasing wild beasts, and fowling. Ctesias
writes that there were discovered and known of them above 120000 in number. By
whose report also, Tauron writes, That the Choromandae Eudoxus says, That in
the Southern parts of India, the men kind have feet a cubit long, but the women
so short and small, that thereupon they be called Struthopodes, i. sparrow
footed. Megasthenes is my Author, that among the Indian Nomades there is a kind
of people, that in stead of noses have only two small holes, and after the
manner of snakes they have their legs and feet limmer, wherewith they crawle and
creep, and named they are Syrictae. In the utmost marches of India, Eastward,
about the source and head of the river Ganges, there is a nation called the
Astomes, for that they have no mouths: all hairy over the whole body, yet
clothed with soft cotton and down that come from (...).
or three (...).
shaftments (or spannes) high, that is to say, three times nine inches. The
clime wherein they dwell is very wholesome, the air healthy, and ever like to
the temperature of the Spring: by Homer also has reported to be much troubled
and anoied by cranes. The speech goes, that in the Spring time they set out
all of them in battle array, mounted upon the back of rams and goats, armed
with bows and arrows, and so down to the sea side they march, where they
make foul work among the eggs and young cranelings newly hatched, which they
destroy without all pity. Thus for three months this their journey and
expedition continues, and then they make an end of their valiant service: for
otherwise if they should continue any longer, they were never able to withstand
the new flights of this foul, grown to some strength and bigness. As for
their houses and cottages, made they are of clay or mud, fouls feathers, and
birds egg shells. Howbeit, Aristotle writes, That these Pygmaeans live in
hollow caves and holes Isogonus says, that certain Indians named Cyrni, live a
hundred and forty years. The like he thinks of the Aethyopian Macrobij, and
the Seres: as also of them that dwell on the mount A those: and of these last
rehearsed, the reason verily is rendered to be thus, because they feed of vipers
flesh, and therefore is it that neither lice breed in their heads, nor other
vermin in their cloths, for to hurt and annoy their bodies. Onesicritus
affirms, That in those parts of India where there are no shadows to be
seen, the men are five cubits of stature, and two hand breadths over: that
they live 130 years, and neuerage for all that and seem old, but die then, as
if they were in their middle and settled age. Crates of Pergamus names those
Indians who live above an hundred year, Ctesias says there is a race or
kindred of the Indians named Pandore, inhabiting certain valleys, who live two
hundred years: in their youthful time the hair of their head is white, but as
they grow to age, waxes black. Contrariwise, others there be near neighbors
to the Macrobij, who exceed not forty years, and their women bear but once in
their life time. And this also is avouched by Agatharcides, who affirms
moreover, that all their feeding is upon locusts, and that they are very
Clitarchus and Megasthenes both name them Mandri, and think they have 300
villages in their country. Moreover, that the women bring forth children at
seven years of age, and wax old at forty. Artemidorus affirms, that in the
Island Taprobana the people live exceeding long without any malady or
infirmity of the body. Duris makes report, That certain Indians engender
with beasts, of which generation are bred certain monstrous mungrels half
beasts and half men. Also, that the Calingian women of India conceive with
child at five years of age, and live not above eight. In another tract of
that country there be certain men with long shagged tails, most swift and
light of foot: and some again that with their ears cover their whole body.
The Orites are neighbors to the Indians, divided Clitarchus reports. Crates
of Pergamus says likewise, that the Troglodites above Ethyopia be swifter than
horses: and that some Aethiopians are above eight cubits high: and these are a
kind of Ethiopian Nomades, called Syrbotae, as he says, dwelling along the
river Astapus toward the North pole. As for the nation called Menismini, they
dwell from the Ocean sea twenty days journey, who live of the milk of certain
beasts that we call Cynocephales, having heads and snouts like dogs. And whole
herds and flocks of the females they keep and feed, killing the male of them
all, save only to serve for maintenance of the breed. In the deserts of
Afric ye shall meet oftentimes with Fairies, appearing in the shape of men
and women, but they vanish soon away like fantastical delusions. See how
Nature is disposed

CHAP. III.
Of prodigious and monstrous births.

THat women may bring forth three at one birth appears evidently by the
example of the three twins Horatij and Curiatij. But to go above that number is
reputed and commonly spoken to be monstrous, and to portend some mishap: but
only in Egypt, where women are more than ordinary fruitful, by drinking of
Nilus water, which is supposed to help generation. Of late years, and no longer
since than in the later end of the reign of Aug. Caesar, at Ostia there was a
woman (a Commoners wife) delivered at one birth of two boys and as many
girls, but this was a most prodigious token, and portended no doubt the famine
that ensued soon after. In Peloponnesus there is sound one woman that brought
forth at four births 20 Children, and the greater part of them all did well
and lived. Tregus says, that in Egypt it is an ordinary thing for a woman to
have seven at a birth. It falls out moreover, that there come into Pompey the
great, in his Theater which he adorned and beautified with singular ornaments
and rare devices of antique work, as well for the admirable subject and
argument thereof, as the most curious and exquisit hand of cunning and skillful
artificers, among other images and pourtracts there set up, represented one
Eutiche a Woman of Tralleis, who after she had in her life time borne thirty
births, her corpse was carried out by twenty of her children to the funeral fire
to be burnt, according to the manner of that country. As for Alcippe she was
delivered of an Elephant, marie that was a monstrous and prodigious Claudius
Caesar writes, That in Thessalie there was borne a monster called an
Hippocentaure, that is, half a man and half a horse, but it died the very
same day. And verily after he came to wear the Anabal, which so soon as it
was come forth of the mothers womb presently returned into it again.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the change of one Sex to another, and of Twins borne.

IT is no lie nor fable, that females may turn to be males: for we have found
it recorded, that in the yearly Chronicles called Annals, in the year when
Publius Licinius Crassus, and C. Cassius Longinus were Consuls, there was in
Cassinum a maid child, under the very hand and tuition Licinius Mutianus
reports, that he himself saw at Argos one named Arescon, who before time had
to name Arescusa, and a married wife: but afterward in process of time came
to have a beard, and the general parts testifying a man, and thereupon wedded
a wife. Likewise (as he says) he saw at Smyrna a boy changed into a girl. I
my self am an eye witness, That in Afric one L. Cossicius a citisen of
Tisdrita, turned from a woman to be a man upon the very marriage day, who lived
at the time I wrote this book. Moreover, it is observed, that if women bring
twins, it is great good hap if they all live, but either the mother dies in
childbed, or one of the babes, if not both. But if it fortune that the twins
be of both sexes, the one male, the

CHAP. V.
The Generation of Man, the time of childe-birth from seven months to eleven,
testified by many notable examples out of history.

ALiother creatures have a set time limited by Nature, both of going with their
young, and Vestilia (the widow of C. Herditius, wife afterward to Pomponius, and
last of all married to Orfitus, all right worshipful citisens, and of most noble
houses) had 4 children by her three husbands, to wit Sempronius, whom she bare
at the seventh month, Suillius Rufus at the eleventh: and seven months also
she went with Corbulo, yet they lived all, and these two Iast came both to be
Consuls: After all these sons, she bare a daughter, namely Caesonia (wife to
the Emperor Caius Caligula) at the eighth months end. They that are borne thus
in this moves have much ado to live, and are in great danger for forty days
space: yea, and their mothers are very sickly, and subject to fall into
untimely travel all the fourth month and the eighth, and if they fall in
labor and come before their time they die. Massurius writes, that L. Papyrius
the Praetor or Lord chief Justice, when a second heir in remainder made claim,
and put in plea for his inheritance of the goods, made an award, and gave
judgment against him, months after the death of the Testator: the reason was,
because there is no definite time certain

CHAP. VI.
Of Conceptions: and signs distinguishing the sex in great bellied women
before they are delivered.

IF ten days after a woman has had the company of a man she feel an
extraordinary ache in the head, and perceive giddiness in the brain as if all
things went round; find a dazzling and mistiness in the eyes, abhorring and
loathing meat, and withal a turning and wambling

CHAP. VII.
Of the conception and generation of Man.

I Am abashed much, and very sorry to think and consider what a poor and
ticklish beginning man has, the proudest creature of all others, when the smell
only of the snuff of a candle put out is the cause often times that a woman falls
into untimely travel. And yet see, these Anacreon, which cost him his life.
Fabius a Senator of Rome, and Lord chief Justice besides, who in a draught of
milk fortuned to swallow a small hair, which strangled him. Well then, think
better of this point, for he verily that will evermore set before his eyes and
remember the frailty of man's estate, shall live in this world uprightly and in
even balance, without inclining more to one side than unto another.

CHAP. VIII.
Of those that be called Agrippae.

TO be borne with the feet forward is unnatural and unkind: and such as come
in that order M. Agrippa (as they say) came forth of his mothers womb, the
only man almost, known to have brought any good fortune with him, and prospered
in the world of all that ever were in that sort borne. And yet as happy as he
was, and how well soever he chieued in some respects, he was much pained with
the gout, and passed Agrippinae both, who brought forth those wicked Imps so
pernicious to the whole earth, namely C. Caligula and Domitius Nero, two
Emperors, but two fiery flames to consume and waste all mankind. Moreover,
his infelicitie herein appeared, that he lived so short a time, dying as he
did a strong and lusty man, in the 51 year of his age, tormented and vexed
with the adulteries of his own wife, oppressed with the heavy and intolerable
servitude that he was in under his wives father. In which regards it seems he
paid full dear for the presage of his untoward birth and nativity. Moreover,
Agrippina has left in writing, That her son Nero also, late Emperor, who all
the time of his reign was a very enemy to all mankind,

CHAP. IX.
Births cut out of the womb.

But more fortunate are they a great deal whose birth costeth their mothers
life, parting from them by means of incision: like as Scipio Africanus the
former, who came into the world in that manner: and the first that ever was
surnamed Caesar, was so called for the like cause. And hereof comes the
fore-name also of the Caesones. In like sort also was that Manlius

CHAP. X.
Who are Vopisci.

THe Latins were wont to call him Vopiscus [or rather Opiscus] who being one
of two twins, happened to stay behind in the womb the full term, when as the
other miscarried by abortiue and untimely birth. And in this case there chance
right strange accidents, although they fall out very seldom.

CHAP. XI.
Examples of many Infants at one birth.

FEw creatures there be besides women, that seek after the male, and can skill
of their company after they be once conceived with young: one kind verily or
two at the most there is known to conceive double one upon the other. We find
in books written by Physicians, and in their records who have studied such
matters, and gathered observations, that there have passed or bin cast away
from a woman at one only slip, 12 distinct children* but when it falls out
that there is some pretty time betwixt two conceptions, both of them may carry
their full Hercules and his brother Iphiclus; as also in that harlot who was
delivered of two infants, one like her own husband, the other resembling the
Adulterer: likewise in a Proconnesian bond-seruant, who was in one day gotten
with child by her master, and also by his Baily or Procurator; and being
afterward delivered of two children, they bewrayed plainly who were their
fathers. Moreover, there was another who went her full time, even nine months
for one child, but was delivered of another at the five months end.
Furthermore in another, who having dropped down one child at the end of seven
months, by the end of the ninth came with two twins more. Over and besides
it is commonly seen, that children be not always answerable to the parents in
every respect: for of perfect fathers and mothers who have all their limbs,
there are begotten children imperfect and wanting some members: and
contrariwise, parents there are maimed and defective in some as like as may be.
Among the people called Dakes the children usually bear the marks imprinted

CHAP. XII.
Examples of many that have been very like and resembled one another.

IN the race and family of the Lepidi it is said there were three of them (not
successively one after another, but out of order after some intermission) who
had every one of them at their birth a little pannicle or thin skin growing
over their eye. Some have bin known to resemble their grandsires, and of two
twins one has been like the father, the other the mother; but Nicaeus a
famous Wrestler of Constantinople, having to his mother a woman begotten in
adultery by an Ethiopian, and yet with white skin nothing different from
other women of that country, was himself black, and resembled his grandsire
the Ethiopian abouesayd. Certes, the cogitations and discourses of the mind
make much for these similitudes and resemblances whereof we speak, and so
likewise many other accidents and occurrent objects are thought to be very
strong and effectual therein, whether they come in sight, hearing, and calling
to remembrance, or imaginations only conceived Artenon a mean man amongst the
Antiochus King of Syria, that Laodicea the Queen, after that Antiochus her
husband was killed, served her own turn by the said Artenon, and made him
play the part of Antiochus, until she had by his means, as in the Kings
person, recommended whom she would, and made over the kingdom and crown in
succession and reuersion to whom she thought good. Vibius a poor commoner of
Rome, and Publicius one newly of a bondslaue made a freeman, were both of them
so like unto Pompey the Great, that hardly the one could be discerned from the
other, so lively did they represent that good visage of his so full of
honesty, so fully expressed they and resembled the singular majesty of that
countenance which appeared in Pompeius his forehead. The like cause it was that
gave his father also the syrname Menogenes, his Cook, albeit he was syrnamed
already Strabo, for his squint eyes: but he would needs bear the name of a
defect and infirmity even in his bond-seruant, for the love he had unto him by
reason of his likeness. So was one of the Scipio's also syrnamed Serapius upon
the like occasion, after the name of one Serapia, who was but a base slave of
his, and no better than his swine heard, or dealer in buying and selling of
swine. Another Scipio after him of the same house came to be syrnamed Salutio,
because a certain jester of that name was like unto him. After the same manner
one Spinter, a player of the second place or part, and Pamphilus another player
of the third part, or in the third place, gave their names to Lentulus and
Metellus, who both were Consuls together in one year, for that they resembled
them so truly. And certes me thinks this fell out very untowardly, and was
but a ridiculous pageant, and a very unseemly Rubrious the stage player was
surnamed Plancus, because he was so like to Plancus the Orator. Again,
Burbuleius and Menogenes, both players of Enterludes, resembled Curio the
father or the elder, and Messala Censorius, for all he had been Censor that the
one could not shift and avoid the syrname of Burbulcius, and the other of
Monogenes. Suria the Pro-consull, not only in visage and feature of the face,
but also in mowing with his mouth when he spoke, in drawing his tongue short,
and in his huddle and thick speech. Cassius Seuerus that famous orator was
reproched for being so like unto Mirmillo a drouer or keeper of kine and oxen.
Toranius a merchant slaue-seller, sold unto M. Antonius (now one of the two
great Triumvirs) two most beautiful and sweet faced boys, for twins, so
likewere they one to the other, albeit the one was borne in Asia, and the other
beyond the Alps. But when Antony afterward came to know the same, and that
this fraud and cousenage was bewraied and detected by the language and speech
of the boys, he fell into a furious fit of choler, and all to berated the
foresaid Toranius. And when among other challenges he charged him with the high
price he made him pay (for they cost him two hundred Sesterces, as for twins,
when they were none such) the wily merchant being Antonie the great man, who
never was well but when he outlawed citisens of Rome, and did confiscat their
goods, he I say that erewhile was all enraged and set upon reuiling and
reproachful terms, was not only appeased, but also contented so with his
bargain, that he prised those two boys as much as any thing else in all his
wealth.

CHAP. XIII.
The cause and manner of generation.

SOme bodies there be by a secret of nature so disagreeing, that they are unfit
for generation one with another. And yet as barren as they be so coupled
together, fruitful they are enough being joined with others. Such were
Augustus the Emperor and his wife Liuia. In like manner some men there be as
well as women, that can skill of getting and breeding none but daughters: and
others there be again that are good at none but sons: and many times it
falls out that folk have sons and daughters both, but they by turns, this
year a son, the next year a daughter, in order. So [Cornelia] the mother of
the Gracchi, who for twelve childbeds Agrippina, the wife of Caesar Germanicus,
for nine, ever changing from the male to the female. Some women are barren all
their youth; and others again bear but once in their whole life. Some never go
their full time with their children; and such women, if peradventure by help
of physic or other good means, and choice keeping, they overcome this
infirmity, bring daughters ordinarily and no other. The Emperor Augustus among
other singularities that he had by himself during his life, saw ere he died
the nephew of his niece, that is to say his progeny to the fourth degree of
lineall descent: and that was M. Scyllanus, who happened to be borne the same
year that he departed out of this world. He having been Consul, and afterward
Lord Governor of Asia, was poisoned by prince Nero, to the end that he might
thereby attain to the empire. Qu. Metellus Macedonicus left behind him six
children, Augustus Caesar's acts for his time, we find upon record, that in his
twelfth Consulship, when L. Sylla was his companion and colleague in government,
upon the eleventh day of April, C. Crispinus Helarus a gentleman of Fesulae,
came with solemn pomp into the Capitol, attended upon with his nine
children, seven sons and two daughters; with 27 Nephews the sons of his
children, and 29 nephews more, once removed, who were his sons nephews, and
twelve Neeces besides that were his childrens daughters, and with all these
solemnly sacrificed.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of the same matter more at large.

A Woman commonly is past childe-bearing after 50 years of her age. And for
the most part their monthly terms stay at forty. As for men, it is clear and
well known, that king Massinissa when he was above 86 years old, begat a son
whom he called Methymathmas: and Cato Censorius that famous Censor begat
another upon the daughter of Salonius his vassal, when he was past 80 years
of age. And hereof it comes, that the race which came of his other children
were surnamed Liciniani, but the offspring of this last son, Salonini, from
whom Cato Vticensis (who slew himself at Vtica) is lineally descended.
Moreover, it is not long since, that Cornelia of the house and lineage of the
Scipio's, bare unto Lu. Saturninus her husband (who died whiles he was Provost
of the city of Rome) a son named Volusius Saturninus, and who afterward lived
to be Consul, who was begotten when his father was 62 years old with the
better. To conclude, there have been amongst meaner persons very many known
to have gotten children after fourscore and five.

CHAP. XV.
Of Women's monthly sickness.

OF all living creatures a woman has a flux of blood every month: and
hereupon it is, that in her womb only there are found a false conception
called Mola, i. a Moone-calfe, that Scirrhus i. an hard wedge and cake under
their short-ribs. And such an one had Oppius Cato a nobleman of Rome, late
Pretour. But to come again to women, hardly can there be found a thing more
monstrous than is that flux and course of theirs. For if during the time of
their sickness, they happen to approach or go over a vessel of wine, be it never
so new, it will presently sour time quickneth and grows to the form of a body;
which is the cause that if women with child Nigidius writes.

CHAP. XVI.
In like manner, of births: and infants in the mothers womb.

THe same Nigidius is of opinion, that a woman's milk, nource to her own child
and giving it suck, will not corrupt and be naught for the babe, if she
conceive again by the same man to whom she brought the former child. Also it
is held, that in the beginning and end of the foresaid menstruall fleures, a
woman is very apt to conceive. Moreover, it is commonly received for an
infallible argument in women, that they are fruitful and with child, if when
they anoint their eyes with their own spittle as with a medicine, the same
appear infected M. Curious, who thereupon was surnamed Dentatus, and Cn.
Papyrius Carbo, both of them very great men and right honorable personages. In
women the same was counted but an unlucky thing, and presaged some misfortune,
especially in the days of the KK. regiment in Rome: for when Valeria was borne
toothed, the wizards and Soothsayers being consulted thereabout, answered out
of their learning by way of Prophecy, That look into what city she was carried
to Cornelia the mother of the Gracchi is sufficient to prove by her own
example, that women are never borne for good whose genitall parts for
procreation are grown together, and yield no entrance. Some children are borne
with an entire whole bone that takes up all the gum, instead of a row of
distinct teeth; as a son of Prusias king of the Bythinians, who had such a bone
in his upper chaw. This is to be observed about teeth, that they only check
the fire and burn not to ashes with other parts of the body: and yet as
invincible as they are and able to resist the violence of the flame, they rot
and become hollow with a little catarrhe or waterish rheum that droppeth and
distilleth upon them: white they may be made, with certain mixtures and
medicines called Dentifices. Some Agrippina the mother of Domitius Nero: but
contrariwise, the same teeth double in the left side above, is a sign of evil
luck. It is not the custom in any country to burn in a funeral fire the
dead corpse of any infant before his teeth be come up; but hereof will we write
more at large in the Anatomy of man, when we shall discourse purposely of
every member and part of the body. Zoroastres was the only man that ever we
could hear of, who laughed the same day that he was borne: his brain did so
evidently pant and beat, that it would bear up their hands that laid them upon
his head: a most certain presage and fore-token of that great learning that
afterward, he attained unto. This also is held for certain and resolved upon
that a man at three years of age, is come to one moitie of his growth and
height. As also this is observed for an undoubted truth, that generally all men
come short of the full stature in time Orion; others, of Otus. We find in
chronicles and records of good credit, that the body of Orestes being taken up,
by direction from the Oracles, was seven cubits long. And verily that great and
famous poet Homer, who lived almost 1000 years ago, complained * Ten foot and
an half.
and gave not over, That men's bodies were less of stature even then, than in
old time. The Annals set not down the stature and bigness of Naevius Pollio;
but that he was a mighty giant, Gabbara, who in the days of prince Claudius
late Emperor, was brought out of Arabia; nine foot high was he, and as many
inches. There were in the time of Augustus Caesar 2 others, named Such an one
as little John, for so the nickname signifies.
Pusio and Secundilla, higher than Gabbara by half a foot, whose bodies were
preserved and kept for a wonder in a charnell house or sepulcher within the
gardens of the Salustians. Whiles the same Augustus sat as president, his
niece Iulia had a little dwarfish fellow not above 2 foot and a hand breadth
high, called Conopas, whom she set great store by and made much of: as also
another she dwarf named Andromeda, who sometime had been the slave of Iulia the
princess, and by her made free. M. Varro reports, that Manius Maximus, and
M. Tullius, were but two cubits high, and yet they gentlemen and knights of
Rome: and in truth we our selves have seen their bodies how they lie embalmed
and chested, which testifies no less. It is well known that there be some
that naturally are never but a foot and a half high; others again somewhat
longer; and to this height they came in three years, which is the full course
of their age, and then they die. We read moreover in the Chronicles, that in
Salamis one Euthimenes had a son, who in three years grew to be three cubits
high, but he was in his gate slow and heavy, and in his wit as dull and
blockish; howbeit in his time vndergrowne he was, and his voice changed to be
great, and at three years end died suddenly of a general crampe or
contraction of all the parts of his body. It is Cornelius Tacitus, a Roman
knight, and a procurator or general receiver and Treasurer for the State in
Gaul Belgique; such the Greeks call (...), i. Ectirapelos; we in Latin have
no name for them.

CHAP. XVI.
Certain notable observations in bodies of men and women.

WE see tried by experience, that take measure of a man from the sole of the
foot up to the crown of the head, so far it is between the ends of his two
middle and longest fingers, when he stretches out his arms and hands to the
full. As also, that some men and women be stronger of the right side than of
the left: others again that be as strong of

CHAP. XVIII.
Examples of diverse extraordinary cases in man's body.

WE have heard, that some men's bones are sollid and massy, and so do live
without any marrow in them: you may know them by these signs, they never feel
thirst, nor put forth any sweat; and yet we know that a man may conquer and
master his thirst if he list: for so a gentleman of Rome one Julius Viator,
descended from the race of the Vocontians

CHAP. XIX.
Strange natures and properties of diverse persons.

IT is said, that Crassus (grand father to that Crassus who was slain in
Parthia) was never known to laugh all his life time, and thereupon was called
Agelastus; and contrariwise, many have bin Socrates, was seen always to carry
one and the self-same countenance, never more merry and cheerful nor more
solemn and unquiet, at one time than at another. But this obstinate constancy
and firm carriage of the mind, turns now and then in the end into a certain
rigor and austerity of nature, so hard and inflexible that it cannot be ruled,
and in very truth despoileth men of all affections; and such are called of the
Greeks, Apathes, who had the experience of many such: and (that which is a
marvelous matter) those especially that were the great pillars of philosophy
and deep learned Clerks; namely Diogenes the Cinicke; Pyrrho, Heraclitus and
Timo; and as for him he was so far gone in his humor, that he seemed
professedly to hate all mankind. But these were examples of a corrupt,
perverse, and froward nature. As for other things, there be sundry notable
observations Antonia the wife of Drusus, who as it was well known, never spit:
in Pomponius the poet, one that had sometimes bin Consul, who never belched.
But as for such as naturally have their bones not hollow, but whole and solid,
they be very rare and seldom seen, and called they are in Latin Cornei, i.
hard as horn.

CHAP. XX.
Of bodily strength and swiftness.

VArro in his treatise of prodigious and extraordinary strength, makes report
of one Tritanus, a man that of body was but little and lean withal, how beit
of incomparable strength, Pompeius the Great, who had all over his body, yea
and throughout his arms and hands, some sinews running straight out in
length, others crossing overthwart lattise-wise; and he says moreover of him,
that when an enemy out of the camp gave him defiance and challenged him to a
combat, he would neither put on defensive harness, ne yet arm his right hand
with offensive weapon; but with naked hand made means to foil and overcome
him, and in the end when he had caught hold of him, brought him away perforce
into his own camp with one finger. Iunius Valens a captain, pensioner or
centurion of the gard-souldiers about Augustus Caesar, was wont alone to bear
up a Varro) being called Hercules Rusticellus, he took up his mule upon his
back and carried him away. Fusius Saluius having two hundred pound weights at
his feet, and as many in his hands, and twice as much upon his shoulders, went
withal up a pair of stairs or a ladder. My self have seen one named
Athanatus, do wonderful strange matters in the open show and face of the
world, namely, to walk his stations upon the stage with a cuirace of lead
weighing 500 pound, booted besides with a pair of buskins or greiues about his
legs that came to as much in weight. As for Milo the great wrestler of
Crotone, when he stood firm upon his feet, there was not a man could make him
stir Philippides ran 1140 stadia, to wit, from Athens to Lacedaemon in two
days, until Lanisis a courtier of Lacedaemon, and Philonides Alexander the
great, ran between Sicyone and Olis in one day, 1200 stadia. But now verily at
this day we see some in the grand cirque, able to endure in one day the running
of 160 miles. And but a while ago we are not ignorant, that when Fonteius and
Vipsanus were Consuls, a young boy but 9 years old, between noon and evening ran
75 miles. And verily a man may wonder the more at this matter, and come to the
full conceit thereof, if he do but consider, that it was counted an exceeding
great iourny that Tiberius Nero made with three chariots (shifting from one to
the other fresh) in a day and a night, riding post haste unto his brother
Drusus then lying sick in Germany, and all that was but 200 miles.

CHAP. XXI.
Examples of good Eie-sight.

WE find in histories as incredible examples as any be, as touching quickness
of Eiesight. Cicero has recorded, that the whole Poem of Homer called Ilias,
was written in a piece of parchment, which was able to be couched within a nut
shel. The same writer makes mention of one that could see and discern
outright 135 miles. And M. Varro names the man, and says he was called
Strabo; who affirms thus much moreover of him, that during the Carthaginian
war he was wont to stand and watch upon Lilybaeum, a cape in Sicily, to
discover the enemies fleet loosing out of the haven of Carthage, and was able
to tell the very just number of the ships. Callicrates used to make Pismires and
other such like little creatures, out of yvorie so artificially, that other men
could not discern the parts of their body one from Myrmecides, excellent in
that kind of workmanship: who of the same matter wrought a chariot with four
wheels and as many steeds, in so little room, that a silly fly might cover
all with her wings. Also he made a ship with all the tackling to it, no bigger
than a little be might hide it with her wings.

CHAP. XXII.
Of Hearing.

AS for hearing, there is one example wonderful. For the bruit of that
battle, whereupon Sybaris was forced and sacked, was heard the very same day
as far as Olympia [in Greece.]

CHAP. XXIII.
Examples of Patience.

MAny are the calamities of this life, incident to mankind, which have
affoorded infinite Leaena the courtisan, is most rare and singular, who for all
the dolorous tortures that could be devised, would never bewray Harmodius and
Aristogiton, who slew the tyranous king. And for men, Anaxarchus did the like,
who being for such a cause examined upon the rack, in the midst of his
torments bit off his own tongue with his teeth, the only means whereby he might
happily reveal and disclose the matter in question, and spit it in the face of
the ty rant that put him to his torture.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Examples of Memory.

AS touching memory, the greatest gift of Nature, and most necessary of all
others for this life; hard it is to judge and say who of all others deserved
the chief honor therein: considering how many men have excelled, and won much
glory in that behalf. King Cyrus was able to call every soldier that he had
through his whole army by his own name. L. Scipio Cineas, Ambassador of king
Pyrrhus, the very next day that he came to Rome, both knew and also saluted by
name all the Senate, and the whole degrees of Gentlemen and Cauallerie in the
city. Mithridates the king, reigned over two and twenty nations of diverse
languages, and in so many tongues gave laws and ministered justice unto them,
without truchman: and when he was to make speech unto them in public assembly
respectively to every nation, he did perform it in their own tongue without
interpretor. One Charmidas or Charmadas, a Grecian, was of so singular a
memory, that h^ was able to deliver Carneades, according to Cicero and
Quin^ilian.
by heart the contents word for word of all the books that a man would call for
out of any library, as if he read the same presently within book. At length
the practice hereof was reduced into an art of Memory: devised and invented
first by Simonides Melicus, and afterward brought to perfection and consummate
by Metrodorus Sepsius; by which a man might learn to rehearse Messala Corvinus
the great Orator, upon the like occasion, forgot his own proper name. So fickle
and slipperie is man's memory: that oftentimes it assaieth and goes about to
leese it self, even whiles a man's body is otherwise quiet and in health. But
let sleep creep at

CHAP. XXV.
The praise of C. Julius Caesar.

FOr vigor and quickness of spirit, I take it, that C. Caesar Dictatour, went
beyond all men besides. I speak not now of his virtue and constancy, neither
of his high reach and deep wit, whereby he apprehended the knowledge of all
things under the cope of heaven; but of that agilitie of mind, that prompt and
ready conceit of his, as nimble and active as the very fire. I have heard it
reported of him, that he was wont to write, to read, to indite letters, and
withal M. Marcellus, who was seen 40 times save one in the field. Besides the
carnage of citizens that he made in the civil wars when he obtained victory,
he put to the sword 1192000 of his enemies, in one battle or other. And certes
for mine own part, I hold this for no special glory and commendation of his,
considering so great injury done to mankind by this effusion of blood; which
in some part h^ has confessed himself, in that he has forborne to set down
the overthrows and bloodshed of his Pompey the great deserves honor more
justly for scouring the seas, and taking from the rouers 846 sail of ships.
But to return again to Caesar, over and above the qualities of worth before
rehearsed, an especial property of his own he had, for clemency and mercy,
wherein he so far forth surmounted all other men, that he repented thereof in
the end. As for his magnanimity, it was incomparable, and he left such a
president behind him, as I forbid all men to match or second it. For to speak
of his sumptuosities, of his largesses, of the magnificent shows exhibited to
the people, the exceeding cost and charges therein bestowed, with all the
stately furniture thereto belonging, were a point of him that favored such
lavish expense and superfluities, But herein appeared his true hautinesse of
mind indeed, and that unmatchable spirit of his, that when upon the battle at
Pharsalia, as well the cofers Pompey, as also those of Scipio's before Thapsus,
came into his hands, he was most true to them, and burnt all without reading
one scrip or scrol.

CHAP. XXVI.
The commendation of Pompey the great.

AS concerning all the titles and victorious triumphs of Pompey the great,
wherein he was equal in renown and glory, not only to the acts of Alexander
the great, but also of Hercules in a manner, and god Bacchus: if I should make
mention thereof in this place, it would redound not to the honor only of that
one man, but also to the grandeur and Majesty of the Roman empire. In the
first place then, after he had recovered Sicily, and reduced it under obeisance
(where his first rising was, and where he began to show himself in the
quarrel of the Common weal, and to side with Sylla) having also conquered and
subdued Afric, and raunged it under the obedience of Rome, where he acquired
the surname of Magnus, by reason of the Sertorius, so brave a mind he carried
with him. And after the civil troubles and broiles appeased and quenched
(which drew after them all foreign wars) he triumphed again the second time,
being as yet but a knight of Rome: so oftentimes a general of command and
conduct; before he ever served as soldier in the Olympia Nemaea, Pythia,
Isthmia.
names, but to be crowned therewith in the behalf of their native countries;
even so, Pompeius, in that temple which he caused to be built of the booty and
pillage won from the enemies, and dedicated to Or Victory.
Minerva, entitled the city with the whole honor, and attributed all to them
in an inscription or table engraven in this manner: Pompeius the Great, Lord
General, having finished the wars which continued thirty years, during
which he had discomfited, put to flight, slain, or received to mercy upon
submission 2183000 men: sunk or taken 846 sail, won and brought to his
devotion, of cities, towns and castles, to the number of 1538: subdued and put
under subjection all lands and Nations, between the lake Maeotis and the red
sea, has dedicated of right and good desert this temple to Minerva. This is
the brief and summarie of his service in the East. As for the triumph, wherein
he rode the third day before the Calends of October, in the year wherein M.
Messala and M. Piso were Consuls, the tenure and title ran in this form:
Whereas Cn. Pompeius has cleared all the sea coasts from Pirates and rouers,
and thereby recovered unto the people of Rome the lordship and soueraignetie of
the seas; and withal subdued Pontus, Armenia, Paphlagonia, Cappadocia,
Cilicia, Syria, the Scythians, Iudaea, and the Albanois: the Island Creta, and
the Bastarnians, has triumphed over them all, as also for the vanquishing of
the 2 kings Mithridates and Tigranes. But the greatest glory of all glories in
him was this (as himself delivered openly Caesar on the other side against
him, and likewise rehearse his noble acts, who indeed of the two seemed greater
in the sight of the world, he had need verily to fetch a circuit about the
world, and comprehend the whole globe thereof, which were an infinite piece of
work, and in all reason impossible.

CHAP. XXVII.
The praise of Cato, the first of that name.

IN sundry other kinds of virtues many men have diversely excelled. But Cato,
the first of the Porcian house, was thought to be the only person who was able
to perform three things in the highest degree that are most commendable in a
man. For first and foremost he was a singular good Orator: secondly, a most
brave captain and renowned commander in the field: and last of all, a right
worthy Senator and approved counselor. And yet in my conceit, all these
excellent Scipio Aemylianus. To say nothing of this blessed gift besides, that
he was not hated and spighted of so many men, as Cato was. But if you will
seek for one especial thing in Cato by himself, this is reported of him,
That he was judicially called to his answer 44 times, and never was there man
accused oftener than he, yet went he ever clear away and was acquit.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of Valor and Fortitude.

AN endless piece of work it were to know and set down who bare the prize
for valiancy, Ennius, he had in greatest admiration. T. Caecilius Teucer, and
especially his brother: and in regard of those two, he compiled the sixth book
of his Annals to the rest. But L. Siccius Dentatus, a Tribune of the Commons,
not long after the banishment of the kings, when Sp. Tarpetus and A. Aeterinus
were Consuls, by most voices surpasses in this kind, if it be true that a
number of men report of him: namely, that he served in 120 foughten fields: 8
times maintained combat with his enemy, giving defiance, and evermore got the
upper hand: carrying before him the glorious marks of 45 skarres received by
wounds, and never a one in the back parts of his body, Moreover, he won the
spoil of 34 several enemies: and had given him of his captains, for his
prowess and good service, 18 headless spears, 25 caparisons and furnitures
of great horses, 83 chains, 160 bracelets T. Romulus (notwithstanding he had
bin a Consul) and convicted him for his ill management and conduct of the wars.
As for Manlius Capitolinus, he wan as many P. Seruilius, General of the Roman
Cauallerie, and in the rescue was himself wounded for his labor, in shoulder
and thigh both. Above all other hardy acts, he alone guarded and defended the
Capitol, and thereby the whole State of Rome, against the Gauls: a brave
piece of service, but that he marred all again in aspiring to be king over the
same. In these above rehearsed M. Sergius; albeit Catiline his nephews son
discredited that name of his, and derogated much from the honor of his house.
The second time that he went into the field and served, his had was to lose his
right hand: and in two other services he was wounded no fewer than 23 times:
by means whereof he had little use of either hand, and his feet stood him in
no great stead. Howbeit, thus maimed and disabled as he was for to be a
soldier, he went many a time after to the wars, attended with one slave
only, and performed his deuoire. Annibal (for he dealt not I may tell you with
ordinary enemies) and twice brake he prison and made escape, notwithstanding,
that for twenty months space he was every day ordinarily kept bound with
chains and fetters. Four times fought he with his left hand only, until
two horses one after another, were killed under him. Then he made himself a
right hand of iron, which he fastened to his arm, and fighting with the help
of it, he raised the siege from before Cremona, and saved Placentia. In France
he forced 12 fortified Annibal; Certes, to know a man of worth indeed, much
material it is to consider in what time he lives, and is employed, for the
proof of his valor. For what store of ciuick coronets and garlands, yielded
either the battle of Trebia and Ticinus, or of Thrasymenus the lake? What
crown could have bin gained and won at the journey of Cannae, where the best
service was by good footmanship to fly and run away? To conclude, all others
may vaunt verily, that they have vanquished men; but Sergius

CHAP. XXIX.
The commendation of some men for their quick wits.

WHo is able to make a muster as it were of them that have been excellent in
wit: so difficult a matter it is to run through so many kinds of sciences, and
to take a survey of curious handi-workes in such variety, of most rare and
singular artisanes? Unless happily we agree upon this, and say, that Homer the
Greek poet excelled all other, considering either the subject matter, or the
happy fortune of his work. And hereupon it was, that Alexander the Great (for
in this so proud a censure and comparison, I shall do best to cite the judgment
Darius the king, his perfumier or casket of sweet ointments, and the same
richly imbellished with gold and costly pearls and precious stones, when his
friends about him showed him many uses whereto the said coffer or cabinet might
be put unto, considering that Alexander himself could not away with those
delicate perfumes, being a warrior, and slurried with bearing arms, and
following warfare: when, I say, his gallants about him could not resolve well
what service to put it to: himself made no more ado but said thus, I will have
it to serve for a case of Homers books: judging hereby, that the most rare and
precious work proceeding from that so admirable a wit of man, should be
bestowed and kept in the richest box and casket of all others: the same prince,
in the forcing and saccage of the city of Thebes, caused by express
commandment, Pindarus the Poet should be spared. He built again the native
city wherein Aristotle the Philosopher was borne: and in so glorious a show of
his other worthy deeds, would needs intermingle this testimony of his bounty,
in regard of that rare clerk who gave light to all things in the world. The
murderers of Archilochus the poet, the very Oracle of Apollo at Delphi
disclosed and revealed. When Sophocles the prince of all tragical Poets was
dead in Athens, at what time as the city was besieged by the Lacedaemonians,
god Bacchus appeared sundry times by way of vision in a dream to Lysander
their king, admonishng him to suffer his delight, and him whom he set most
store by, for to be enterred. Whereupon the king made diligent inquiry who
lately was departed this life in Athens: and by relation of the citizens soon
found it out and perceived who it was that the foresaid god Sophocles in peace,
and to perform his funerals without any molestation or impeachment.

CHAP. XXX.
Of Plato, Ennius, Virgil, M. Varro, and M. Cicero.

DEnis the tyrant, borne otherwise to pride and cruelty, being advertised of
the coming and arrival of Plato, that great clerk and prince of learning,
sent out to meet him a ship Isocrates sold one Oration that he made for 20
talents of gold. Aeschines that famous orator of Athens in his time, having at
Rhodes rehearsed that accusatorie oration which he had made against
Demosthenes, read withal his adversaries defense again; by occasion whereof he
Aeschines) you would have marvelled much more at it, if you had heard the man
himself pronouncing it, and pleading Viua voce: yielding thus as you see a
notable testimony of his adversary, in the time of his adversity. The
Athenians exiled Thucidides their General Captain: but after he had written
his Chronicle, they called him home again, wondering at the eloquence of the
man, whose virtue and prowess they had before condemned. The KK. of Egypt and
Macedonie gave a singular testimony how much they honored Menander the
Comicall poet, in that they sent Ambassadors for him, and a fleet to waft him
for his more security: but he wan unto himself more fame and glory by his
own settled judgment, for that he esteemed more of his own private study and
following his book, than of all those favors offered unto him from great
princes. Moreover, there have bin great personages and men Cn. Pompeius, after
he had dispatched the war against Mithridates, intended to go and visit
Posidonius, that renowned professor of learning; and when he should enter into
the man's house, gave straight commandment to his Lictors or Huishers, that
they should not (after their ordinary manner with all others) r^p at his door;
and this great warrior, unto whom both the East and West parts of the world
had submitted, veiled bonet, as it were, and based his arms and ensigns of
state which his officers carried, before the very door of this Philosopher.
Cato, syrnamed Censorius, upon a time when there came to Rome that noble
embassage from Athens, consisting of three, the wisest sages among them; when
he had heard Carneades speak (who was one of those three) gave his opinion
presently, That those ambassadors Cato, the renowned Censor, both now and at
all times else, could not abide to have any Grecian within Italy, but always
gave judgment to them all in general to be expelled: but after him there
comes his nephew once removed, or his nephews son, who brought one of their
Philosophers over with him, when he had bin military Tribune or knight
marshall: and another likewise upon his embassage to Cypres. And verily a
wonder it is and a memorable thing to consider how these two Catoes differed in
another point: for the former of them could not away with the Greek tongue; the
other that killed himself at Vtica, esteemed Scipio Africanus the elder, gave
express order, and commanded, That the statue of Q. Ennius the poet should be
set over his tomb, to the end, that the great name and style of Africanus, or
indeed the booty rather that he had won and carried away from a third part of
the world, should in his monument upon the relics of his ashes be read
together with the title of this poet. Augustus Caesar late Emperor, expressly
forbad that the Poem of Virgil should be burned, notwithstanding that he by
his last will and testament on a modesty, gave order to the contrary: by which
means there grew more credit and authority unto the Poet, than if himself had
approved and allowed his own verses. Asinius Pollio was the first that set up
a public Library at Rome, raised of the spoil and pillage gained from the
enemies. In the Library of M. Varro, even whiles he lived: a thing that won as
great honor to M. Varro in mine opinion (considering that amongst those fine
wits, whereof a great number then flourished at Rome, his hap only was to have
the garland at the hands of a noble citizen and an excellent Orator beside:) as
that other nauall crown gained him, which Pompey the Great bestowed upon him
for his good service in the pirates war. Infinite examples more there are of us
Romans, if a man would seek after them and search them out: for this only
nation has brought forth more excellent and accomplished men in every kind,
than all the lands besides of the whole world. But what a sin should I commit,
if I proceeded farther and speak not of thee, O M. Cicero? and yet how should
I possibly write of thee according to thy worthiness? would a man require a
better proof of thy condign praises, than the most honorable Agraria, as
touching the division of Lands aamong the commons, albeit their greatest
maintenance and nourishment consisted therein. Roscius, the first author of
that seditious bill and law, whereby the States and degrees of the city were
placed distinctly in their seats at the Theater: they were content I say, and
took it well, that they were noted and pointed at for this difference in
taking place and rowms, which he first brought in. By means of thy orations,
the children of proscript and outlawed persons were ashamed and abashed to sue
for honorable dignities in commonweal: thy witty head it was that put
Catiline to flight, and banished him the city: thou, and none but thou did
outlaw M. Antonius, and put him out of the protection of the State. All hail
therefore, O M. Tullius, fair chieue thee, thou that first was saluted by the
name of Parens patriae, i. Father of thy country: first that deserved triumpth
in thy long robe, and the laurel garland, for thy language: the only father
indeed of eloquence and of the Latin tongue: and (as Caesar Dictator sometime
thine enemy has written of thee) have deserved a crown above

CHAP. XXXI.
Of a certain Majesty in behavior and carriage.

THose, who among other gifts of the mind have surpassed other men in sage
advise and wisdom, were thereupon at Rome surnamed Cati, and Corculi. In
Greece, Socrates carried the name away from all the rest, being deemed by the
Oracle of Apollo Pythius, the wisest man of all others.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of Authority.

Again, Chilo the Lacedemonian was of so great reputation among men, that his
sayings were held for Oracles; and three precepts of his were written in
letters of gold, and consecrated in the temple of Apollo at Delphi: where the
first was this, Know thy self: the second, Set thy mind too much on nothing.
The third, Debt and Law are always accompanied with misery. His hap was to die
for joy, upon tidings that his son wan the best prize, and was crowned victour
at the solemn game Olympia; and when he should be interred; all Greece did him
honor, and solemnized his Funerals.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Persons of a divine spirit and heavenly nature.

AMong women, Sybilla was excellent at divination, and for a certain
fellowship and society with celestial wights, of great name. As for men,
among the Greeks, Melampus: and with us Romans, Martius, carried as great an
opinion.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Scipio Nasica.

SCipio Nasica was judged once by the Senate (sworn to speak without passion
and affection) Socrates the wisest man (so deemed by the Oracle of Apollo)
should die out of prison:

CHAP. XXXV.
Of Chastity.

SVlpitia, daughter of Paterculus, and wife to Fulvius Flaccus, by all the
voices in general of Roman dames, carried away the prize for continency, and
was elected out of the hundred principal matrons of Rome to dedicate and
consecrate the image of Venus, according to and ordinance out of Sybils books.
Claudia likewise, was by a religious and devout experiment Cybele to Rome.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Of Piety or kindness.

IN all parts verily of the world, there have been found infinite examples of
natural love and affection, but one example thereof at Rome has been known
singular above all others, and incomparable. There was a poor young woman of
the common sort, and therefore base and of no account, who lately had been in
childbed, whose mother was condemned to perpetual prison, and there lay, for
some great offense that she had committed: this daughter of hers and young
nource aforesaid, obtained leave to have access unto her mother, and evermore
by the Piety: in so much, as when C. Quintius and M. Acilius were Consuls,
there was a temple to her built, in the very place where this prison stood,
just whereas now stands the Theater of Marcellus. The father of the Gracchi
happened to light upon and take two serpents within his house, whereupon he
sent out to the Soothsayers for to know, what this thing might presage? who
made this answer, That if he would himself live, the Cornelia is young enough,
and may have more children. This said he, meaning to spare his wives life, in
consideration of the good she might do to the commonweal. And in truth; like
as the wizards prophesied, so it fell out soon after, and their words took
effect. M. Lepidus so entirely loved his wife Apuleia, that he died for very
thought and grief of heart, after she was divorced from him and turned away.
P. Rutilius chanced to be somewhat ill at ease and sickish, but hearing of his
brothers repulse, and that he was put by his Consulship (for which he stood in
suit) died suddenly for sorrow. P. Catienus Philotimus so loved his Lord and
master, that notwithstanding he was by him made his sole heir of all that ever
he had, yet for kind heart, cast himself

CHAP. XXXVII.
Of diverse excellent men in many Arts and Sciences, and namely in Astrology,
Grammar, and Geometry.

IN the skill and knowledge of sundry Sciences, an infinite number of men have
excelled; howbeit, we will but take the very flower of them all, and touch those
only whom meet it is to be named for their special desert. In Astrology,
Berosus was most cunning; in so much as the Atheniens for his divine
predictions and prognostications, caused his statue with a golden Apollodorus
was singular, and therefore was highly honored of the States of Greece, called
Amphictyones. In Physic, Hippocrates excelled, so far forth as by his skill
he foretold of a pestilence that should come out of Sclauonia; and for to cure
and remedy the same, sent forth his disciples and scholars to all the cities
about. In recompense of which good desert of his, all Greece by a public
decree ordained for him the like honors, as unto Hercules. For the very same
cunning and science, king Ptolomae gave unto Cleombrotus of Cea (at the solemn
feast holden in the honor of the great mother of the gods) a hundred talents,
and namely for curing the king Antiochus. Critobulus likewise acquired and got
himself a great name, for drawing an arrow forth of king Philips eye, and
curing the wound when he had don, so as the sight remained, and no blemish or
deformity appeared. But Asclepiades the Prusian, surpassed all others in this
kind, who was the Mithridates: found out the way and means to make wine
wholesome and medicinable for sick folk* and recovered a man to his former
state of health, who was carried M. Marcellus gave unto Archimedes that notable
Geometrician and Enginer of Syracusa, who in the saccage and rifling of that
city gave express commandment concerning him alone, that no violence should
be done unto him: howbeit he will failed of his execution, by occasion of a
soldier, who in that hurly-burly slew him, not knowing who hewas. Much
commended and praised is Ctesiphon of Gnosos, for his notable knowledge in
Architecture, and namely for the wonderful frame of Dianaes Philon likewise was
highly esteemed for making the Arsenall at Athens, able to receive 1000 ships.
Ctesibius also was much accounted of for devising wind Instruments; and by
means of certain engines to draw and send water to any place. Dinocrates also
the enginier eternised his name for casting the plot and devising the model of
Alexandria in Egypt, at what time as Alexander the great founded it. To
conclude, this mighty prince and commander Alexander straightly forbad by
express edict, That no man should draw his pourtrait in colors but Apelles
the painter: that none should engraue his personage but Pyrgoteles the grauer:
and last of all, that no workman should cast his image in brass but Lysippus a
Founder. In which three feats many Artisans have excelled for their rare
workmanship.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Singular works of Artificers.

KIng Attalus cheapned one picture wrought by the Aristides Theban, and 100
talents for it. Caesar the Dictator offered to Timomachus eight talents for two
pourtraits, to wit, of Medea and Ajax, which he meant to set up and consecrate
in the temple of Venus Genetrix. King Candaulas bought of Butarchus a painted
table, wherein was drawn the defeature and destruction of the Magnetes, which
took up no great room, and weighed out the poise thereof in good gold. King
Demetrius, surnamed Expugnator, [i. the conqueror and great forcer of cities]
forbear to set Rhodes on fire, because he would not burn one painted table the
handiworke of Protogenes. Praxiteles was innobled for a rare Imager and cutter
in stone and marble: he eternised his memorial by making one image of Venus
for the Gnidians, so lively, that a certain young man became so amorous of it,
and so doted thereon, that he went beside himself: which piece of work was
esteemed of such worth by Nicomedes, that whereas the Gnidians owed him a great
sum of money, he would have taken it for full payment of the whole debt. The
statue of Jupiter Olympius is to be seen, and daily commends the workman
Phydias. Jupiter likewise Capitolinus, and Diana in Ephesus yield good
testimonies of Mentors cunning: and the tools or instruments of the said
workman were consecrared (for their exquisit making) unto them in their
temples, and there remain.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Of Servants and Slaves.

I Have not known or heard to this day, of a man borne a slave, that was
prised so high as Daphnis the Grammarian was: for Cn. Pisaurensis held him at
300700 Sesterces to M. Sca^rus a great and principal man of Rome. Howbeit in
this our age certain stage players have gone beyond this price, and that not a
little: mary they were such as had bought out their freedom before, and were
not then slaves. And no marvel, for we find upon record, that the great Actor
Roscius in former time might yearly dispend by the stage 500000 Sesterces.
Unless a man desire in this place to hear of the Treasurer and purueior
general of the army in Armenia Tyridates, who was infranchised by means of
Nero, for 120000 Sesterces, but it was the war that cost thus much, and not the
man. Like as Sutorius Priscus gave unto Seianus 3500 Sesterces for Poezon one
of his gelded Eunuchs: For a man would say that this was more to satisfy his
filthy lust, than for any special beauty to be seen in the said Poezon. But

CHAP. XL.
The excellency of Nations.

Doubtless it is, and past all question, that of all Nations under the Sun,
the Romans excel and are the only men for all kind of virtues. But to
determine who is the happiest man in all the world is above the reach of humane
wit; considering that some take contentment

CHAP. XLI.
Of the highest tipe and pitch of felicity.

LAmpido the Lacedemonian Lady is the only woman that ever was known to have
been daughter to a King, a Kings wife, and mother to a King. Also Pherenice
was known alone to be the daughter, sister, and mother to them that wan the
victory and carried away the best prise at the Olympian games. In one house
and race of the Curices there were known three excellent Orators one after
another by descent from the father to the son. The only family and line of the
Fabij affoorded three Presidents of the Senate in course, one immediately under
another, M. Fabius Ambustus the father, Fabius Rullianus the father, Fabius
Rullianus the son, and Q. Fabius Gurges the nephew.

CHAP. XLII.
Examples of Fortunes mutabilitie.

INfinite other examples we have of the variety and inconstancy of Fortune:
for what great joys to speak of, gave she ever, but upon some mishap or
other? Again, the greatest miseries and calamities that have bin, have they not
ensued upon the most joys and contents.

CHAP. XLIII.
Of one twice outlawed and out of protection: as also of Q. Metellus and L.
Sylla.

FOrtune preserved for 36 years M. Fidustius a Senator, outlawed by Sylla: yet
happened he Sylla, and continued unto the time of Marcus Antonius: and for
certain it is known, that by him he was banished and outlawed again, for no
other reason but because he had been so before-time. So kind was Fortune to P.
Ventidius, as that she would have him to triumph alone over the Parthians: but
she had before time so good as played with him, when she saw him led (being a
boy) as prisoner in Cn. Pompeius Strabo his triumph for the defeature and
overthrow of the Asulanes. Although Massurius testifies, that he was so led in
triumph as a slave twice: Cicero says, that he was at first but a Mulitier,
and drove mules laden with meal for the oven, to serve the camp. Many other
affirm, that in his youth he was a poor soldier, and served as a footman in
his single Balbus Cornelius, as to the senior Consul and declared Elect before
his fellow: but before time he had been in trouble, and iudicially accused,
yea and a Jury was impanelled to go upon him, so as he was in danger to be
whipped, upon their verdict. Well, this man's hap for all this was to be the
first Roman Consul of Forreiners, and namely Islanders within the main Ocean:
he (I say) attained to that honor, which our forefathers denied flatly to the
Latins their neighbors. Among other notable examples, L. Fulvius may go for
one, who was Consul of the Tusculans when they revolted and rebelled against
the Romans: howbeit forsaking his own citisens, and returning to Rome, was
presently by the whole people advanced to the same honor amongst them, and he
was the man alone known to have triumphed in Rome over them whose Consul he
was, even the same year that L. Sylla was the only man until our time that
challenged unto himself the syrname of Foelix. But how was he adopted as it
were into this name, forsooth even by shedding and spilling so much innocent
blood of Roman citisens, and by waging war against his native country? And
whereupon I pray you grounded he this happiness of his, and had so great an
opinion thereof, if this were not it, that he was able to banish, that he was
able to banish, confiscate, and put to death so many thousand citisens? O false
and deceitful interpretation, dangerous, unhappy, and pernicious even to
posterity and the time to come! For were not they more blessed and happy, who
then fortuned to lose their lives, (whose death at this day we pity, and whom
we take compassion of) than Sylla, whom all men at this day hates and
abhors? Moreover, was not his end more cruel and horrible than the Q.
Metellus in that funeral oration of his which he made in praise and
commendation (as the manner was) of L. Metellus his father, gave these laudable
reports of him, that he had been the sovereign Pontifie or whereof and in
attaining thereunto, all the great Sages of the world spend their whole life:
for Metellus became blind in his old age, for he lost his eyes in a
skare-fire, at what time he would have saved and got away the Palladium, i.
Image of Minerua, out of the temple of Vesta. His act I confess was virtuous
and memorable, but the event was ill for him and miserable. In regard whereof I
know not how he should be called unhappy

CHAP. XLIV.
Of another Metellus.

ASonne likewise of this Q. Metellus, who gave out those commendations
aforesaid of his Macedonicus, which he got in Macedonie; when he was dead,
there attended upon his dead corpse at his funerals to inter him, four of his
sons; the one Praetor for the time being; the other three had been Consuls in
their time: and of these three, two had triumphed in Rome, and the third had
been Censor. These were points, I may tell you, of great note and regard, and
few men are to be found in comparison, that can come to any one of them. And
yet see! in the very prime and flower of all these honors, it fortuned that
Catinius Labeo, syrnamed Macerio, a Tribune or protector of the Commons (whom
he before by Mars field, and seeing no man stirring in the market place, nor
about the Capitol, took him away perforce to the cliffe Tarpeius, with a full
purpose to pitch him down headlong from thence and to break his neck. A
number came running about him, of that crew and company which was wont to
salute him by the name of Father; but not so soon as such a case required,
considering this so sudden an occurrent: and when they were come, went but
slowly about any rescue, and kept a soft pace, as if they had waited upon some
corpse to a burial; and to make resistance and withstand perforce the Tribune,
armed as he was with his sacrosanct and inviolable authority, they had no
warrant by Law: insomuch as he was like to have perished and come to a present
mischief, even for his virtue, and faithful execution of Africanus
Aemylianus, even by the testimony and confession of Macedonicus himself: for
after the death of the said Africanus, these were his words unto his own
sons; Go your ways sirs and do honor to his Obsequies, for the funeral of
a greater personage, and a better Citisen, shall you never see. And this spoke
he to them when as they had conquered Creta and the Baleare Islands, and
thereof were syrnamed Creticus and Balearicus, and had worn the laurel diadem
in triumph; being himself already entitled with the style Macedonicus, for
the conquest of Macedonie. But if we consider and weigh that only wrong and
injury offered him by the Tribune, who is it that can justly deem him happy,
being exposed as he was to the pleasure, mercy, and force of his enemy, far
inferior to Africanus, and so to come to confusion? What were all his victories
to this one disgrace? what honors and triumphant chariots struck not Fortune
down with her foot, and ouerturned all again, or at least wise set not back
again with this her violent course, suffering a Roman Censor to be haled and
tugged in the very heart of the city (the only way indeed to bring him to his
death) to be harried I say up to that capitol hill there to make his end,
whither aforetime he ascended t^iumphant, but never committed that outrage
upon those prisoners and captives whom he lead in triumph, and for whose
spoils he triumphed, as to hale and pull them in that rude sort? And
Macedonicus was in danger to have lost so great an honor as he had in his
solemn and stately sepulture, namely when he was carried forth to his funeral
fire by his triumphant children, as if he had triumphed once again at his
burial. In sum, that can be no sound and assured felicity that is interrupted
with any indignity or disgrace whatsoever: much less by such an one as this
was. To conclude, I wot not well whether there be more cause to glory for the
modest carriage of men in those days, or to grieve at the indignity of the
thing, in that among so many Metelli as there were, so audacious a villainy as
this was of Catinius was never revenged unto this day.

CHAP. XLV.
Of Augustus Caesar late Emperor.

AS touching the late Emperor Augustus, whom all the world rangeth in this
rank of men fortunat: if we consider the whole course of his life we shall find
the wheel to have turned often, and perceive many changes of variable fortune.
First, his own uncle by the mothers side put him by the Generalship of the
horse; and notwithstanding all his earnest suit preferred Lepidus to that place
before him: secondly, he was noted and thought hardly of for those outlawries
of Roman citisens, and thereby purchased himself much hatred and displeasure:
tainted also he was for being one of those three in the Triumvirate, yoked and
matched with wicked companions and most dangerous members to the weal public:
and this galled Antonie went away with the greatest share by odds. Also his ill
fortune was in the battle before Philippos to fall sick, to take his flight,
and for three days, diseased as he was, to lurk and lie hidden within a
marish: whereupon (as Agrippa and Mecoenas confess) he grew into a kind of
dropsy, so as his belly and sides were puffed up and swelled with a waterish
humor, gotten and spread betwixt the flesh and the skin. Furthermore, he
suffered shipwrecke in Sicily, and there likewise he was glad to skulk within a
cave in the ground. What should I say, how when he was put to flight at sea,
and the whole power of his enemies at his heels, he besought Proculeius in
that great danger to rid him out of his life: how he was perplexed for the
quarrels and contentions at Perusium: in what fear and agony he was in
Marcellus: the reproach and shame he sustained for confining and banishing
Agrippa: his life so many times laid for by poison and other secret trains:
the death of his children, suspected to have bin by indirect means: the double
sorrow and grief of heart thereby, and not altogether for his childelesse
estate. The adultery of his own daughter, and her purpose of taking his life
away, detected and published to the World: the reproachful departure and
slipping aside of Nero the son of his Wife: another adultery committed by one
of his own Neeces. Over and above all this, thus many more crosses and
troubles coming one in the neck of another: namely, want of pay for his and
resolution of his to famish and pine himself to death, having to that end
fasted 4 days Varius his forces, the foul stain and blemish to the touch of
his honor and majesty very near: the putting away of Posthumous Agrippa after
his adoption, and the miss that he had of him after his banishment: then, the
suspicion that he conceived of Fabius for disclosing his secrets: add hereto
the opinion and conceit be took of his own wife and Tiberius, which surpassed
all his other cares. To conclude, that god, and he who I wot not whether
obtained heaven, or deserved it more, departed this life, and left behind him
as heir to the crown his enemies son.

CHAP. XLVI.
Whom the gods judge most happy.

I Cannot ouerpasse in this discourse and consideration the Oracles of Delphos,
delivered from that heavenly god to chastise and repress as it were the folly
and vanity of men: and two there be which give answer to the point in question
after this manner: First, that Phedius, who but a while before died in the
service of his country, was most happy. Moreover, Gyges (the most puissant
king in those days of all the earth) sent a second time to know of the Oracle,
who was the happiest man next him: and answer was made, That Aglaus Psophidius
was happier than the former. Now this Aglaus was a good honest man well stepped
in years, dwelling in a very narrow corner of Arcadia, where he had a little
house and land of his own, sufficient with the yearly commodities thereof to
maintain him plentifully with ease, out of which he never

CHAP. XLVII.
Who was canonised a god here upon earth living.

BY the ordinance and appointment of the same Oracle, as also by the ascent and
approbation of Jupiter the sovereign god, Euthymus the famous wrestler (who
always wan the best prize at Olympia save once) was reputed and consecrated a
god whiles he lived, and knew Callimachus wondered, as if nothing else were
worthy admiration, and gave order that he should be sacrificed unto as a god:
which was performed accordingly both whiles he lived, and after he was dead. A
thing that I marvel more at than any thing else, That the gods were therewith
contented, and would permit such a dishonor to their majesty.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Of the longest lives.

THe term and length of man's life is uncertain, not only by reason of the
diversity of climats, but also because Historians have delivered such variety
of men's ages, and every man by himself has a several time limited unto him
at the very day of his birth. Hesiod (the first writer, as I take it, who has
treated of this argument, and yet like a Poet) in his fabulous discourse
touching the age of man says forsooth, that a crow lives nine times as long as
we; and hearts or stags 4 times as long as he, but Ravens thrice as long as
they. As for his other reports touching the Nymphs and the bird Phoenix, they
are more like poetical tales, than true relations. Anacreon the Poet makes
mention, that Arganthonius king of the Tartessians, lived 150 years: and
Cynaras likewise King of the Cyprians ten years longer. Theopompus affirms,
that Epimenides the Gnossian died when he was 157 years old. Hellanicus has
Damases: adding moreover, that there was one Pictoreus among them, a man of
exceeding stature, mighty and strong withal, who liuedthree hundred years.
Ephorus testifies, that ordinarily the kings of Arcadia were 300 years old
ere they died. Alexander Cornelius writes of one Dando a Sclauonian, who lived
500 years. Xenophon in his treatise of old age, makes mention of a King of the
Latins, or as some say, over a people upon the sea coasts, who lived 600
years; and because he had not lied loud enough already, he goes on still and
says, that his son came to 800. All these strange reports proceed from the
ignorance of the times past, and for want of knowledge how they made their
account; for some reckoned the Summer for one year, and the Winter for
another. There were again that reckoned every quarter for a year, as the
Arcadians, whose year was but three months. Ye shall have some, and namely
the Egyptians, that count every change or new Moon for a year: and therefore
no marvel if some of them are said to live 1000 years. But to pass from
these uncertainties, to things confessed and doubtless. Held it is in manner
for a certain truth, that Arganthinus King Masanissa ware the crown 60 years.
As also that Gorgias the Sicilian lived until he was 108 years old. As for Q.
Fabius Maximus (a Roman) he continued Augure 63 years. M. Perpenna, and of
late days L. Volusius Saturninus, out lived all those Senators which sat in
council with them when they were Consuls, and whose opinions they were wont to
ask. As for Perpenna, when he died, he left but 7 of those Senators alive,
whom he had either chosen or re-elected in his Censorship: and he lived
himself 98 years. Where by the way one thing comes into my mind worth the
noting, That one Lustrum or 5 years space there was, and never but one, in
which there died not a Roman Senator, and that Flaccus and Albinus the Censors
finished their survey, and solemnly purged the city after the order, to the
coming in of the next new Censors; being from the foundation of Rome 579
years. M. Valerius Corvinus lived 100 years complete: between his first and
sixth Consulate were 46 years; he took his seat upon the yuorie chair of
estate, and was created a magistrate Curule 21 times, and no man else so often.
Metellus the Pontifie or sovereign priest lived full as long as he.

To come now to women: Liuia the wife of Rutilius lived 97 years with the
better. Statilia a noble lady of Rome, in the time of Claudius the Emperor, was
known to be 99 years of age. Ciceroes wife Terentia out-liued her husband
until she was 103 years old. Clodia wife to Ofilius, went beyond her, and saw
115 years, and yet she had in her youth 15 children. Luceia a common Galaria
Copiola, was brought again roact her feats upon the stage, when Cn. Pompeius
and Q. Sulpitius were Consuls, at the solemn plays vowed for the health of
Aug. Caesar the Emperor, in the 104 year of her age: the first time that ever
she entered the stage, to show proof of her skill in that profession, was 91
years before, and then she was brought thither by M. Pomponius an Aedile of the
Commons, in the year that C. Marius and Cn. Carbo were Consuls. And once again
Pompeius the Great, at the solemn dedication of his stately Theater, trained
the old woman to the stage for to make a show; to the wonder of the world.
Moreover, Asconius Paedianus is mine Author, that one Samula lived 110 years;
and therefore I marvel the less, that one Stephanio (who was the first of the
long robe that brought dancing and footing upon the stage) played his part and
danced in both the Secular Augustus late Emperor, as which Claudius exhibited
in his 4 Consulate, considering that between the one and the other there were
but 63 years: and yet lived Stephanio many a day after. Mutianus witnesses,
that in Tempsis (for so is the crest or pitch of the mountain Tmolus called)
folk lived ordinarily 150 years. At that age T. Fullonius of Bononia entered
his name into the Subsidy book, at the time that Cl. Caesar held the general
tax: and that he was so old indeed, appeared truly as well upon record in the
registers office, by conferring and laying together several paiments by him
made from time to time, as also by certain things he had seen and known done in
his life time (for the Emperor had a special care and regard, that way to find
out the truth.)

CHAP. XLIX.
Of diverse Horoscopes or Natiuities of men.

THis point would require the conference and advice of Astrologers: for
Epigenes says, it is not possible for a man to live 122 years: and Berosus is
of opinion, that one cannot pass 117. The proportion and reckoning holds
still for good, which Petosiris and Nesepsos calculated and grounded upon their
Quadrant, which they call Tetartemorion, that is to say, the Asclepiades and
his sect affirm, that the length of our life proceeds from the influence of
the [fixed] stars: but as touching the utmost term thereof they set down
nothing definitiuely: mary thus much they say, That the fewer sort of men live
any long time; for that the greatest number by far have their nativity Caesar's
Vespasians, the father and the son, both Emperors and Censors. And here we
need not to search every corner, and to ransacke every place very narrowly; we
will only give instance L. Terentius the son of Marcus; and at Ariminum, M.
Aponius, reckoned each of them 150 years. Tertulla was known to be 137 years
old. About Plaisance there is a town situate upon the hills, named
Velleiacium, wherein six men brought a certificate, that they had lived an
hundred years apiece: four likewise came in with a note of an hundred and
twenty years: one, of an hundred and fourteen, namely M. Mutius, son of
Marcus, named Galerius foelix. But because we will not dwell long in a matter
so evident and commonly confessed: in the review taken of the eighth region of
Italy, there were found in the roll Homer reports, that Hector and Polydamas
were borne both in one night, men so different in nature and quality. Whiles
C. Marius was Consul, and Cn. Carbo with him, who had been twice before
Consul, the fifth day before the calends of June, M. Caecilius Ruffus and C.
Licinius Calvus were borne upon a day, and both of them verily proved great
Orators: but they sped not alike, but mightily differed one from another in the
end. And this is a thing seen daily to happen throughout the World, considering
that in one hour kings and beggars are borne, likewise lords and slaves.

CHAP. L.
Sundry examples of diverse Diseases.

PVb. Cornelius Rufus, who was Consul together with M. Curious, dreamed that he
had lost his sight, and it proved true indeed, for in his sleep he became blind
and never saw again. Contrariwise Phalereus, [or Jason Phereus] being given
over by the Physicians for an impostume Q. Fabius Maximus being long sick of a
quartane Ague, struck a battle with the People of Sauoy and Auvergne near
the river Isara, upon the sixth day before the Ides of August, wherein he slew
of his enemies 13000, and therewith was delivered from his fever, and never
Xenophilus the musician lived 105 years, without any sickness or defect in
all his body. For all other men, believe me, are vexed at certain hours (like
as no other creatures besides) with the pestiferous heats and shaking colds of
the fever in every joint, sinew, and muscle of the body, which go and come,
keeping their times in their several fits, not for certain hours in the day
only, but from one day to another, and from night to night; one while every
third day or

CHAP. LI.
Of the signs of death.

NOw let us take a view of deadly tokens in sickness: in rage and furious
madness, to laugh is a mortal sign: in frenzy, wherein men are bestraught
of their right wits, to take care Hipocrates the prince and chief of all
Physicians has very well observed and set down. Now whereas there be an
infinite number of signs that presage death; there is not one known than can
assure a man certainly of life and health. For Cato that famous Censor, writing
to his son as are so innumerable, that Pherecydes of the Island Syros died of
a great quantity of Lice that C. Mecoenas. The same man for three years before
he died never laid his eyes together for sleep a minute of an hour.
Antipater Sidonius the Poet, once a year during his life had an ague fit upon
his birth day: he lived for all that to be an old man, and upon the day of his
nativity died in such a fit.

CHAP. LII.
Of such as were carried forth upon the Biers to be buried, and revived again.

AViola, one that had bin Consul, came again to himself when he was cast or
put into the Lu. Lamia, Praetor lately before. As for C. Aelius Tubero, that he
was brought alive again from the like fire, after he had bin Praetor of Rome,
both Messala Rufus and many besides constantly affirm. See how it goes with
mortal men: see, I say, our uncertain state and condition, and how we are
born, exposed, and subject to these and such like occasions of fortune:
insomueh as in the case of man there is no assurance at all, no not in his
death. We read in Chronicles, that the ghost of Hermotimus Clazomenius was
wont usually to abandon his body for a time, and wandering up and down into
far countries, used to bring him news from remote places, of such things as
could not possibly be known unless it had bin present there: and all the
while his body lay as half Aristaeas in the Island Proconnesus, was seen
evidently to fly out of his mouth in form of a Raven; and many a like tale
follows thereupon. For surely I take it to be no better than a fable, which
is in like manner reported of Epimenides the Gnosian, namely, that when he was
a boy, he being for heat and travel in his journey all weary, laid him down
in a certain cave, where he slept 57 years. At length he wakened as it were
upon the next morning, and wondered at such a sudden change of every thing he
saw in the world, as if he had taken but one nights Heraclides, where he
writes of a woman that for a seuen-night lay for dead, and fetched not her
breath sensibly, who in the end was raised again to life. Moreover Varro
reports, that upon a time when the twenty deputy Commissioners were dividing
lands in the territory of Capua, there was one there carried forth upon his
bier to be burnt, and came home again upon Corfidius, who had married his own
Aunt by the mothers side, after he had taken order for his funerals, and set
out a certain allowance therefore, seemed to yield up his ghost and die:
howbeit he revived again, and it was his chance to carry him forth indeed
unto burial, who had provided the furniture before for his funeral. This
Varro writes besides of other miraculous matters, which verily are worth the
rehearsal at large. One of them is this: Two brethren there were, by birth and
calling gentlemen of Rome; whereof the elder, named Corfidius, happened in all
appearance to die: and when his last will and testament was once opened and
published, the younger brother (who was his heir) was very busy and ready to
set forward his funeral. In the mean time gold under the ground, without the
priuity of any man; requesting him withal to employ that Gabienus, one of the
brauest seruitors that Caesar had at sea, was taken prisoner by Sex. Pompeius,
and by commandment from him his head was stricken off in a manner, and scarce
hung to the neck by the skin, and so lay he all day long upon the sands in the
shore. When it grew toward evening, and that Pompetus would come unto him, or
at leastwise send some one of his dear familiars that were near unto him. And
why? Come I am (quoth he) from the infernal spirits beneath, and have a message
to deliver unto him. Then Pompey sent diverse of his friends to the man, unto
whom Gabienus related in this manner; That the infernal gods were well pleased
with the just quarrel and cause of Pompey, and therefore he should have as
good issue thereof as he could wish. This, quoth he, was I charged and commanded
to deliver. And for a better proof of the truth in effect, so soon as I have
done mine errand I shall forthwith yield up the ghost. And so it happened indeed.
Histories also make mention of them that have appeared after they were
committed to earth. But our purpose is to write of Natures works, and not to
prosecute such miraculous end prodigious matters.

CHAP. LIII.
Of sudden Deaths.

AS for sudden death, that is to say, the greatest felicity and happiness that
can befall man, many examples we have thereof that always seem strange and
marvelous; howbeit they are common. Verrius has set forth a number of them,
but I will keep within a mean, and make choice of them all. Besides Chilon
the Laced emonian, of whom we spoke before, the died suddenly for very joy,
Sophocles the poet, and Denis a king or tyran of Sicily: both of them upon
tidings brought unto them, that they had won the best prise among the tragical
Diodorus a great professed Logician, for very shame that he could not
presently assoile a frivolous question, nor answer to some demands proposed by
Stilbo, swouned and never came again. Without any apparent cause at all that
could be seen, diverse have left their life: namely two of the Caesar's, the one
Praetor for the time being, the other who had borne that dignity, the father of
Caesar the Dictator: both of them in the morning when they were new risen, and
putting on their shoes, the one at Pisae, the former at Rome. In like manner Q.
Fabius Maximus in his very Consulship, upon the last day of December, [which
was the last also of his magistracy, had he lived longer] in whose place
Rebilus made suit to be Consul for a very few hours that remained C.
Vulcatius Gurgius a Senator. All of them in perfect health, so lusty and well
liking that they thought to go forth presently, and of nothing less than to die
before. Q. Aemylius Lepidus, even as he was going out of his bed chamber, hit
his great toe against the door sill, and therewith died. C. Aufidius was gotten
forth of his house, and as he was going to the Senate, stumbled with his foot in
the Comitium or common place of assemblies, and died in the place. Moreover, a
certain Ambassador of the Rhodians, who had to the great admiration of all that
were present, pleaded their cause before the Senate, in the very entry of the
Council house, as he was going forth, fell down dead and never spoke word.
Cn. Boebius Pamphilus, who had bin Praetor, died suddenly as he was asking a boy
what it was a clock. A. Pom^s, so soon as he had worshipped the gods in the
Capitol, and said his Orasons, immediate^ M. Iuventius Talva the Consul, as
he was offering sacrifice. And Caius Ser^ Pa^sa, a^ he stood at a shop in the
market place about eight of the clock in the more* ^ning upon his brother P.
Pansa his shoulders. Boebius the Judge, as he was adiourning the day of ones
appearance in the court. M. Terentius Corax, whiles he was writing letters
Apollo, which stands in the Forum of Augustus. But above all others it is
strange, that C. Julius a Surgeon should die as he was dressing of a sore eye
with a salve, and drawing his instrument along the eye. What should I say of L.
Manlius Torquatus, a man who had bin sometime Consul, whose hap was to die
sitting at supper, even in reaching for a cake or wafer upon the board. L.
Durius Valla the physician died whiles he was drinking a potion of mede or
sweet honied wine. Appius Aufeius being come out of the Baine, after he had
drunk a draught of honied wine, as he was supping off a rere egg died. P.
Quintius Scapula as he was at supper in Aquillius Gallus his house. Decimus
Saufeius the Scribe, as he sat at Cornelius Gallus, one who had bin Lord
Praetor, and T. Aetherius a Roman Knight, died both in the very act of Venus,
whiles they lay upon women. The like befell in our days to two gentlemen of
Rome, who died both as they were dealing contrary to nature with one and the
same counterfeit Iester named Mithycus, a youth in those days of surpassing
beauty. But of all others, M. Ofilius Hilarus, an actor and plaier in comedies,
as it is reported by ancient writers, died most secure of death, and with the
greatest circumstances about it: for after he had much delighted the people,
and made them sport to their contentment on his birth day, he kept a feast at
home in his house; and when supper was set forth upon the table, he called for
a mess of hot broth in a pottinger to drink off; and withal casting his eye
upon the mask or visor he put on that day, fitted it for his visage, and took
off the chaplet or garland from his

These examples all be of happy deaths: but contrariwise there be an infinite
number that are as miserable and unfortunate. L. Domitius, a man descended of a
m^st noble house and parentage, being vanquished by Caesar before Marseils, and
taken prisoner a^ Corfinium by the same Caesar; for very irksomeness of his
tedious life, poisoned himself: but after he had drunk the poison, repented
of that which he had done, and did all that ever he could to live still, but
in vain. We find upon record in the public registers, that when Felix one
of the carnation or flesh-coloured livery that ran with chariots in the great
cirque or shew-place was had forth M. Lepidus, a gentleman of Rome descended of
a most noble family, who (as is above said) died for thought and grief of
heart that he had divorced his wife, was by the violent force of the flame
cast forth of the funeral fire; and because of the extreme heat thereof, no
man could come near to lay his corpse again in the place where

CHAP. LIIII.
Of Burial or Sepulture.

TO burn the bodies of the dead has bin no ancient custom among the Romans:
the manner was in old time to inter them. But after they were given once to
understand, that the corses of men slain in the wars afar off, and buried in
those parts, were taken forth of the earth again, ordained it was to burn
them. And yet many families kept them still to the old guise and ceremony of
committing their dead to the earth: as namely the house of the Cornelij, L.
Sylla the Dictator, and he willed it expressly, and provided for it before
hand, for fear himself should be so served as C. Marius was, whose corpse he
caused to be dug up after it was buried. Now in Latin he is said to be
Sepultus, that is bestowed or buried any way, it makes no matter how: but
humatus properly,

CHAP. LV.
Of the Ghosts, or spirits of men departed.

AFter men are buried, great diversity there is in opinion, what is become of
their souls and ghosts, wandering some this way, and others that. But this is
generally held, that in what estate they were before men were born, in the same
they remain when they are dead. For neither body nor soul has any more sense
after our dying day, than they had before the day of our nativity. But such is
the folly and vanity of men, that it extends still even to the future time;
yea, and in the very time of death flattereth it self with fond imaginations,
and dreaming Democritus is no less, who promised a resurrection thereof, and
yet himself could never rise again. And what a folly is this of all follies to
think (in a mischief) that death should be the way to a second life? what
repose and rest should ever men have that are borne of a woman, if their souls
should remain in heaven above with sense, whiles their shadows tarried beneath
among the infernal wights? Certes, these sweet inducements and pleasing
persuasions, this foolish credulity and light belief, marreth the benefit of
the best gift of Nature, to wit,

CHAP. LVI.
The first inuenters of diverse things.

BEfore we depart from this discourse of men's nature, me thinks it were meet
and convenient Bacchus brought up buying and selling: he it was also that
devised the diadem that royal ensign and ornament, and the manner of triumph.
Dame Ceres was the first that showed the way of sowing corn, whereas
before-time men lived of mast. She taught also how to grind corn, to knead
dough, and make bread thereof, in the land of Attica, Italy, and Sicily; for
which benefit to mankind, reputed she was a goddess. She it was that began
to make laws, howsoever others have thought* that Rhadamanthus was the first
law giver. As for Letters, I am of opinion, that they were in Assyria from the
beginning time out of mind; but some think, and namely Gellius, that they were
devised by Mercury in Egypt: but others say Cadmus brought with him into
Greece from Phoenice to the number of sixteen, unto which, Palamedes in the
time of the Trojan war added four more in these characters following, (...).
And after him Simonides Melicus came with other four, to wit, (...), the force
of all which letters we acknowledge and see evidently expressed in our Latin
Alphabet. Aristotle is rather of mind, that there were 18 letters in the Greek
Epicharmus, and not by Palamedes. Anticlides writes, That one in Egypt named
Menon, was the inuentor of letters, fifteen years before the time of
Phoroneus, the most ancient king of Greece; and he goes about to prove the
same by ancient records and monuments out of histories. Contrariwise, Epigenes,
an author as renowned, and of as good credit as any other, shows, That among
the Babylonians there were found Ephemerides containing the observation of the
stars, for 720 years, written in bricks and tiles: and they that speak of
least, to wit, Berosus and Critodemus, report the like for 480 years. Whereby
it appears evidently, that letters were always in use, time out of mind. The
first that brought the Alphabet into Latium or Italy, were the Pelasgians.
Euryalus and Hyperbius, two brethren at Athens, caused Gellius is of opinion,
that Doxius the son of Coelus, devised the first houses that were made of
earth and cley: taking his pattern from Swallows and Martins nests. Cecrops
founded the first town that ever was, and called it after his own name
Cecropia: which at this day is the castle or citadell in Athens. Some will have
that Argos was built before it, by king Phoroneus. And others again, that
Syci^ne was before them both. And the Egyptians affirm, That long before
that, their city Diospolis was founded. Cinyra, the son of Agriopa devised
tiling and slating of houses first, as also found out the brass mines; both
within the Isle Cyprus. He invented also pinsers, hammers, iron crows, and the
Anuil or Stithe. Danaus sunk the first pits for wels in Greece, which then was
called Cadmus at Thebes (or, as Theophrast. says) in Phoenice, found out stone
quarries first. Thrason was the first builder of town walls: of towers and
fortresses, the Cyclops, as Aristotle thinks: but the Tyrinthians according
to Theophrast. Weauing was the invention of the Egyptians: and dying wool, of
the Lydians in Sardis. Closter the son of Arachne taught the first making of
the spindle for woollen yearne: and Arachne her self was the first spinner of
flax thread, the weauer of linen, and of nets. Niceas the Megarean devised the
fullers craft. Boethius showed the art of sowing, as well for tailors as
Corviners and shoomakers. The Egyptians would have the skill of physic to
have bin first among them: but others affirm, That Arabus the son of Babylon
and Apollo, was the author thereof. The first Herbarist and Apothecarie,
renowned for the knowledge of simples, and composition Chiron, son of Saturn
and Phyllira. Aristotle thinks, that Lydus the Scythian taught the feat of
casting and melting brass, with the tempering also of the same: howbeit,
Theophrastus says it was Delas the Phrygian. As for the forges and furnaces of
brass, some think the Chalypes devised, others attribute that to the Cyclopes.
The discovery of the iron and steel mines, as also the working in them, was the
invention (as Hesiodus says) of those in Creet, who were called Dactyli Idaei.
Likewise of silver, Erichthonius the Athenian bears the name, or (after some)
Aeacus. The gold mines, together with the melting and trying thereof, Cadmus the
Phoenician first found out near the mountain Pangaeus: but there be that give
the praise hereof to Thoas and Aeaclis in Panchaia: or else to S^l the son of
Oceanus, to whom Gellius attributes the invention of Physic, and making honey.
Midacritus was the first man that brought lead out Coraebus the Athenian
devised the potters craft, showing how to cast earthen vessels in moulds, and
bake them in furnaces. And therein, Anacharsis the Scythian, or after some,
Hyperbios the Corinthian, invented the cast of turning the roundel or globe.
Carpenters art was the invention of Daedalus, as also the tools thereto
belonging, to wit, the saw, the chip-axe, and hatchet, the plumb line; the
augoer and wimble, the strong glue, as also fish-glew, and stone-Saudre. As for
the rule and square, the level, the turners instrument, and the key, Theodorus
Samius devised them. Phidon the Argiue, or Palamedes as Gellius rather
thinks, found out measures and weights. Pyrodes the son of Cilix, devised the
way to strike fire first out of the flint; and Prometheus, the means to
preserve and keep it in a stalk of Ferula, or Fennel giant. The Phrygians
invented first the wagon and chariot with four wheels. As for traffic and
merchandise, the Carthaginians had the first honor thereof. Eumolpus the
Athenian was of name for planting, pruning, and cutting vines: also for setting
and graffing trees. Staphylus the son of Silenus taught men how to delay wine
with water. Aristaeus the Athenian invented the making of oil olive, as also
the press and mill Buzyges the Athenian, or as others would have it,
Triptolemus, yoked oxen first for tillage of the ground, and devised the
plough. The Egyptians were the first of al men that were governed by the
monarchy; and the Athenians, by a popular state. After the reign of Theseus,
the first king or tyrant was Phalaris, at Agrigentum in Sicily. The
Lacedaemonians brought in bondage and slavery, first. The first judgment that
passed for life and death, was in the court Ariopagus at Athens. The first
battle that ever was fought, was between the Africanes and Egyptians; and the
same performed by bastons, clubs, and coulstaues, which they call Phalangae.
Shields, bucklers, and targets were devised by Praetus and Anisius, when they
warred one against the other: or else by Calchus the son of Athamas. Midias of
Messene made the first cuirace. And the Lacedaemonians, Scythes the son of
Jupiter, devised bow and arrows: although some say that Perses the son of
Perseus invented arrows. The Aetolians invented the lance and the pike: the
dart with a loup, Aetolus the son of Mars, devised. As for the light iauelins,
and the Partuisanes, Tyrrhenus brought them first intovse: and Penthesilea the
Amazon-queene, the gleiue, bill, battell-axe, and halbard. Piseus found out the
bore-speare and chasing staff. Among engines of artillery, the Cretes invented
the Scorpion or crosse-bow: the Syrians, the Catapult: the Phoenicians the
balist or brake, and the sling. Pyseus the Tyrrhenian brought up the use of the
brazen trumpet: and Artenon Clozomenius of the pauois, mantilets,
targuet-roofs, for the assault of cities. Epeus at Troy. Bellerophon showed
first how to ride on horseback. Pelethronius invented saddle, bridle, and other
furniture for the horse. The Thessalians called Centaures, inhabiting near to
the mountain Pelius, were the first that fought on horseback. The Phrygians
devised first to drive and draw a chariot with two horses; Erichthonius, with
four. Palamedes invented (during the Trojan war) the manner of setting an army
in battle array: also the giving of signal, the privy watchword, the Corpse
de guard, the watch and ward. In the time of the said war, Sinon devised the
sentinels and watch-towers, as also the espiall. Lycanor was the first maker of
truce. Theseus of leagues and alliances. Car, of whom Caria took the name,
observed first the flight and cry of birds, and thereby gave presages and
fore-tokens. Orpheus went farther in this Delphus pried into beasts inwards,
and thereby foretold things to come. Amphiaraus was the first that had knowledge
in Pyromancie, and gathered signs by speculation of fire: like as Tyresias the
Thebane, by the feeding and gesture of birds. Amphictyon gave the
interpretation of strange and prodigious sights, as also of dreams. Atlas the
son of Libya (or as some say, the Egyptians; and as others, the Assyrians)
invented Astrology: and in that science Anaximander devised the Sphere. As for
the knowledge and destinction of the winds Aeolus the son of Hellen, he
professed it first. Amphion brought music first into the world. The flute and
the single pipe or recorder were the inventions of Pan, the son of Mercury.
The crooked cornet, Midas in Phrygia devised. And in the same country, Marsyas
invented the double fluit. But Amphion taught first to sing and play to the
Lydian measures: Thamyras the Thracian to the Dorian: and Marsyas of Phrygia to
the Phrygian. Amphion likewise (or, as some say, Orpheus, Linus) played first
upon the Citterne or the Lute. Terpander put seven strings more unto it:
Simonides added thereto an eight: and Timotheus the ninth. Thamiras was the
first that played upon the stringed instrument, Lute Cittern, or harp, without
song: and Amphion sung withal, or according to some, Linus. Terpander was the
first that set songs for the foresaid stringed instrument. And Dardanus the
Troezenian began first vocal music to the pipe. The Curets taught to dance
in armor; and Pyrrhus the Morisk, in order of battle: and both these were
taken up first in Crete. The heroic or hexametre verse we acknowledge to have
come first from the Oracle of Pythius Apollo. But about the original of Poemes
and Poetry, there is a great question among authors. And it is probably
gathered by histories, that there were Poets before the time of ths Trojane
war. Pherecides of Syros, in the days of king Cyrus, invented Cadmus the
Milesian wrote Chronicles, and compiled the first history. Lycaon has the
report of setting out the first public games, and proving of masteries and
fears of strength of actiuity, in Arcadia. To Acostus in Iolcum we are beholden
for the first solemnities and games at funerals: and after him to Theseus, in
the streights of Isthmus. Hercules instituted the exercise of wrestlers and
champions at Olympia: and Pythus was the first plaier at tennise. Gyges the
Lydian gave the first proof of painting and limning, in Egypt: but in Euchir
a cousin of Daedalus was the first painter, as Aristotle supposes; but after
Theophrastus, it was Polygnotus the Athenian. Danaus was the first that sailed
with a ship, and so he passed the seas from Egypt to Greece; for before that
time they used but troughs or flat planks, devised by K. Erythra to cross from
one Island to another in the red sea. But we meet with some writers who
affirm, that the Trojans and Mysians were the first sailers, and devised
navigations before them in Hellespont, when they set out a voyage against the
Thracians. And even at this day in the British ocean, there be made certain
wicker boats of twigs covered with lether and stitched round about: in Nilus,
of paper, cane-reed and rushes. Philostephanus witnesses, that Jason first
used the long ship or gally: but Egesias says, that it was Paralus: Ctesias
attributes it to Samyras; Saphanas to Semyramis: and Archimachus, to Aegeon.
Damastes testifies, that the Erythraeans Thucydides writes that Aminocles the
Corinthian built the first Trireme with three rows of oars to a side. Aristotle
says, that the Carthaginians were the first that set to sea the Quadrireme
with 4 ranks of oars to a side: and Nesichthon the Salaminian, set aflote the
first Quinquereme with 5 course of oars on either side. Zenagoras of Syracusa
brought up those of six; and so from it to those of ten, Mnesigeton was the
inuenter. It is said, that Alexander the Great built galleys for 12 banks to a
side: and Philostephanus reports, that Ptolemae syrnamed Soter, rose to
fifteen: Demetrius the son of Antigonus, to thirty; Ptolomae Philadelphus, to
forty: and Ptolomae Philopator syrnamed Tryphon, to fifty. As for ships of
burden and merchandise, as hoyes, etc. Hippus Tyrius invented them. The
Cyrenians made fregates; the Phoenicians, the bark; the Rhodians, the Pinace
and Brigantine: and last of all the Cyprians made the hulke and great carrack.
The Phoenicians were the first Icarus the sails: Daedalus the mast and the
cross saileyard. The vessels for transporting of horses, were the invention of
the Samians, or else of Pericles the Athenien. The Thasij had the honor for
framing the long ships covered with hatch: for before-time they fought only
from out of the hin-decke in the poupe, and the fore-castle in the proe. Then
came Piseus the Tyrrhene, and armed the stem and beake-head of the ship with
sharp tines and pikes of brass: Eupalamus devised the anchor: Anacharsis made
it first with two teeth or floukes: the grapling hooks and the iron hands were
the devise of Pericles the Athenien; and finally, Typhis invented the help of
the helm, for the Pylot to steer and rule Minos. The first that killed beasts
was Hyperbius the son of Mars: and Prometheus ventured to slay an ox or a
Boeufe.

CHAP. LVII.
Wherein appeared first the general agreement of all Nations.

THe secret consent of all countries was showed first in this, That they should
universally in all places use the Ionian letters.

CHAP. LVIII.
Of Antique Letters.

THe old characters of Greek letters, were the same in manner that the Latin
be in these days; and this appears sufficiently by an antique table of
brass which came from the temple at Delphos, the which at this day is in the
great library of the Palatium dedicated to Minerua, by the liberality of the
Emperors, with this or such like inscription upon it, (...), i. Nausicrates
(the son) of Tisamenus an Athenien, caused this table to be made and set up to
the noble virgin Minerua.

CHAP. LIX.
When Barbers were first seen at Rome.

THe next thing that all people of the world agreed in, was to entertain
Barbers, but it was late first ere they were in any request at Rome. The first
that entered Italy came out of Sicilie, and it was in the 454 year after the
foundation of Rome. Brought in they were by P. Ticinius Mena, as Varro does
report; for before-time they never cut their hair. The first Scipio Africanus;
and after him comes Augustus the Emperor, who evermore used the rasor.

CHAP. LX.
Of Horologies or Dials, when they were first devised.

THe third universal accord of all nations, was in the observation how the
hours went; and this was a point grounded upon good reason: but at what time,
and by whom this was devised in Greece, we have declared in the second book of
this work; and long it was before Fabius Vestalis writes, that L. Papyrius
Cursor, 12 years before the war with Pyrrhus, was the first, that Quirinus at
the dedication thereof, when his father had vowed it before him. Howbeit mine
aurhor shows not either the reason of the making of that dial, or the
workman; ne yet from whence it was brought, nor in what writer he found it so
written. M. Varro reports, that the first dial was set up in the common
market place, upon a column near the foresaid Rostra, in the time of the
first Punicke war, by M. Valerius Messala the Consul, presently after the
taking of Catana in Sicily; from whence it was brought; thirty years after the
report that goes of the foresaid quadrant and dial of Papyrius; namely in the
year after the foundation of the city 477. And albeit the strokes and lines of
this Horologe or dial agreed not fit with the hours, yet were the people
ruled and went by it for an hundred years save one, even until Q. Martius
Philippus (who together with L. Paulus was Censor) set another by it, framed
and made more exquisitly according to Art. And this piece of work among other
good acts done by the Censor during his office, was highly accepted of the
people as a singular gift of his. Yet for all this, if it were a close and
cloudy day wherein the Sun shone not out, men knew not what it was a clock
certainly; and thus it continued five years more. Then at last, Scipio Nasica
being Censor with Laenas, made the devise first to divide the hours both of
day and night equally, by water, distilling and dropping out one vessel into
another. And this manner of Horologe or water-clocke, he dedicated in the end
within house, and that was in the 595 year from the building of Rome. Thus you
see how long it was, that the people of Rome could not certainly tell how the
day passed. Thus much concerning the Nature of man: let us return now to
discourse

THE EIGHTH BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF NATVRE,
WRITTEN BY C. PLINIVS SECVNDVS.
CHAP. I.
Of landbeasts. The praise of Elephants: their wit and understanding.

Pass we now to treat of other living creatures, and first of land-beasts:
among

CHAP. II.
When Elephants were put to draw first.

THe first time that ever they were known to draw at Rome, was in the triumph
of Pompey the Great, after he had subdued Afric, for then were two of them
put in geeres to his triumphant chariot. But long before that, it is said that
Father Bacchus having conquered India, did the like when he triumphed for his
conquest. Howbeit, in that triumph of Pompey, Procilius affirms, That
coupled, as they were, two in one yoke, they could not possibly go in at the
gates of Rome, In the late solemnity of tournois and sword-fight at the sharp,
which Germanicus Caesar exhibited to gratify the people, the elephants were
seen to show pastime with leaping and keeping a stir, as if they danced, after
a rude and disorderly manner. A common thing it was among them to fling weapons
and darts in the air so strongly, that the winds had no power

CHAP. III.
The docilitie of Elephants.

THis is known for certain, that upon a time there was an Elephant among the
rest, not so good of capacity, to take out his lessons, and learn that which
was taught him: and being beaten and beaten again for that blockish and dull
head of his, was found studying and conning those feats in the night, which he
had bin learning in the day time. But one of the greatest wonders of them was
this, that they could mount up and clime against a rope; but more wonderful,
that they should slide down again with their heads downward. Mutianus, a man
who had in his time bin thrice Consul, reports thus much of one of them,
that he had learned to make the Greek characters, and was wont to write in
that language thus much, Thus have I written, and made an offering of the
Celticke spoils. Likewise he says, that himself saw at Puteoli, a certain
ship discharged of Elephants embarked therein; and when they should be set Iuba
calls them their horns: but Herodotus, who wrote long before him, and the
custom of speech, has termed them much better, teeth. And therefore when
they are shed and fallen off, either for age, or by some casualtie, the
Elephants themselves hide them with in the ground. And this in truth is the
only yuory: for all the rest, yea, and these teeth also so far as lay covered
within the flesh, is of no price, and taken for

CHAP. IIII.
The elemencie of Elephants: their foresight and knowledge of their own
dangers: also the fell fierceness of the Tygre.

A Wonder it is in many of these creatures, that they should thus know
wherefore they are hunted, and withal take heed and beware of all their
dangers. It is said, that if an elephant stay from farther following the sent,
look about him every way, snuff and puff for very anger.

CHAP. V.
The understanding and memory of Elephants.

THe Elephants march always in troops. The eldest of them leads the vaward,
like a captain: and the next to him in age, comes behind with the conduct of
the arrereguard. When they are to pass over any river, they put for most the
least of al their company, for fear, that if the bigger should enter first,
they would, as they trod in the channel, make the water to swell and rise, and
so cause the fourd to be more deep. Antipater writes, that K. Antiochus had
two Elephants, which he used in his wars above all the rest; and famous they
were for their surnames, which they knew well enough, and wist when any man
called them thereby: and verily, Cato reciting in his Annals the names of the
principal captain Elephants, has left in writing, That the Elephant which
fought most lustily in the point of the Punick war, had to name Surus, by the
same token, that the one of his teeth was gone. When Antiochus on a time
Aristophanes the excellent Ptolomaeus, that scarce had never an hair upon his
face, and so entirely he loved him, that what day soever he saw him not, he
would forbear his meat, and eat nothing. K. Iuba likewise reports also of an
Elephant that made court to another Iuba says, That an Elephant took
knowledge and acquaintance of one man in his old age, and after many a year,
who in his youth had bin his ruler and governor. He affirms also, that they
have by a secret divine instinct, a certain sense of justice and righteous
dealing. For when K. Bacchus meant to be revenged of 30 Elephants, that he had
caused to be bound unto stakes, and set other 30 to run upon them, appointing
also certain men among to prick and provoke them thereto; yet for all that,
could not one of them be

CHAP. VI.
When Elephants were first seen in Italy.

THe first time that Elephants were seen in Italy, was during the war of K.
Pyrrhus; and they called them by the name of Lucae boues, i. Lucane oxen,
because they had the first sight of them in the Lucans country, and it was in
the 472 year after the cities foundation. But in Rome it was seven years after
ere they were seen, and then they were showed in a triumph. But in the year
502, a number of them were seen at Rome by occasion of the victory of L.
Metellus P^ntifex over the Carthaginians: which Elephants were taken in
Sicilie. For 142* of them were conveyed over upon planks and flat bottomes,
which were laid upon ranks of great tuns and pipes set thick one by another.
Verrius says, that they were caused to fight in the great cirque or show
place, and were killed there with shot of darts and iauelins for want of better
counsel, and because they knew not well what to do with them: for neither were
they willing to have them kept and nourished, ne yet to be bestowed upon any
kings. L. Piso says they were brought out only into the show place or cirque
aforesaid, and for to make them more contemptible were chased round about it by
certain fellows hired thereto, having for that purpose certain staves and
perches, not pointed with iron, but headed with bals like foiles. But what
became of them afterward, those Authors make no mention: who were of opinion
that they were not

CHAP. VII.
Their fights and combats.

MVch renowned is the fight of one Roman with an Elephant, at what time as
Annibal forced those captives whom he had taken of our men, to skirmish one
against another to the utterance. For the only Roman that remained unslain at
that un natural conflict, he would needs match with an Elephant, and see the
combat himseife, assuring him upon his word, that if he could kill the beast,
he should be dismissed and sent home with life and liberty. Anniball then sent
him away indeed according to promise and covenant; but considering better the
consequence of this matter; and namely, that if this combat were once by him
bruted abroad, the beasts would be less regarded, and their service in the
wars not esteemed; made after him certain light horsemen to overtake him upon
the way to cut his throat, so making him sure for telling tales. Their long
snout or trunk which the Latins call Proboscis, may be easily cut off, as it
appeared by experience in the wars against K. Pyrrhus. Fenestella writes, That
the first fight of them in Rome, was exhibited in the grand Cirque, during the
time that Claudius Pulcher was Aedile Curule, when M. Antonius and A.
Posthumous were Consuls: in the 650 year after the city of Rome was built. In
like manner, 20 years Luculli were Aediles Curule, there was represented a
combat between bulls and Elephants. Also in the second Consulship of C.
Pompeius at the dedication of the temple to Venus Victoresse, 20 of them, or as
some write, 17 fought in the great Cirque. In which solemnity the Gaetulians
were set to lance darts and jauelins against them. But among all the rest, one
Caesar the Dictatour, when afterward he was to exhibit the like show before
the people, cast a ditch round about the place, letting in the water and so
made a mote thereof: which prince Nero afterward stopped up, for to make more
room for the knights and men of arms.] But those Elephants of Pompey being
past all hope of escaping and going clear away, after a most pitiful manner
and rufull plight that cannot be expressed, seemed to make moan unto the
multitude, craving mercy and pity, with grievous plaints and lamentations,
bewailing their hard state and woeful case: in such sort, that the peoples
hearts earned again at this piteous sight, and with tears in their eyes, for
very compassion, rose up all at once from beholding this pageant, without
regard of the person of Pompey that great General and Commander, without
respect of his magnificence and stately show, of his Caesar the Dictatour in
his third Consulship exhibited another fight of them, and brought forth 20 to
maintain skirmish against 500 footmen: and a second time he set out 20 more,
with wooden turrets upon their backs, containing 60 defendants apiece: and he
opposed against them 500 footmen, and as many horse. After all this, Claudius
and Nero the Emperors brought them forth one by one into single fight, with
approved, expert, and accomplished fencers, at the end of all the other
solemnity when they had done their prizes. This beast, by report of all
writers, is so gentle to all others that are but weak, and not so strong as
himself, that if he pass through a flock or heard

CHAP. VIII.
The manner of taking Elephants.

THe Indians are wont to take Elephants in this manner: the governor drives
one of them that are tame, into the chase and forests, and when he can meet
with one of them alone, or single him from the heard, he all to beats the
wild beast till he has made him weary, and then he mounteth upon him and
rules him as well as the former. In Africa they catch them in great ditches
which they make for that purpose: into which, if one of them chance to wander a
long way in a certain lawn or valley, made by man's hand for the nones, ere they
were aware, and

CHAP. IX.
The manner of taming Elephants.

AS furious and raging mad as they be sometime, they are tamed with hunger and
stripes: but men had need to have the help of other Elephants that are tame
already, to restrain the unruly beast with strong chains: of all times, when
they go to rut they are most out of order and stark wood; down go the Indian
stables and beast stals then, which they ouer-turne

CHAP. X.
How they breed and bring forth their young: and of their nature otherwise.

THe common sort of men think, that they go with young ten years: but
Aristotle says that they go but two years, and that they breed but once and
no more in their life, and bring not above one at a time: also that they live
commonly by course of nature 200 years, and some of them 300. Their youthful
time and strength of age begins when they be 60 years old: they love rivers
above all things, and lightly ye shall have them evermore wandering they drink
oil, the arrows and darts which stick in their bodies will come forth and fall
off: Polybius reports, from the testimony of king Gulussa.

CHAP. XI.
Where the Elephants are bred: how the Dragons and they disagree.

ELephants breed in that part of Afric which lies beyond the deserts and
wilderness of the Syrtes: also in Mauritania: they are found also amongst the
Aethyopians and Troglodites, as has been said: but India brings forth the
biggest: as also the dragons that are continually at variance with them, and
evermore fighting, and those of such greatness, that they can easily clasp and
wind round about the Elephants, and withal tie them fast with a knot. In this
conflict they die, both the one and the other: the Elephant he falls down dead
as conquered, and with his heavy weight crusheth and squeaseth the dragon that
is wound and wreathed

CHAP. XII.
The wittiness and policy in these creatures.

Wonderful is the wit and subtilty that dumb creatures have, and how they
shift for themselves and annoy their enemies; which is the only difficulty that
they have to arise and grow to so great an height and excessive bigness. The
dragon therefore espying the Elephant when he goes to relief, assaileth him
from an high tree and launceth himself so stop their wind, and withal fret
and gnaw the tenderest parts they find there. Now in case

CHAP. XIII.
Of Dragons.

IN Aethyopia there be as great dragons bred as in India, namely 20 cubits
long: but I marvel Iuba should think they are crested. They are bred most in a
country of Aethyopia where the Asachaei inhabit. It is reported, that upon
their coast they are inwrapped four or five of them one within another, like
to a hurdle or lattise-worke, and thus pass the seas to find out better
pasturage in Arabia, cutting the waves, and bearing their heads aloft, which
serve them in stead of sails.

CHAP. XIV.
Of monstrous great Serpents, and namely of those called Boae.

MEgasthes writes, that there be serpents among the Indians grown to that
bigness, that Metrodorus says, that about the river Rhyndacus in Pontus,
there be serpents that catch and devour the fowls of the air, be they never
so swift winged, and soar they never so high. Well known it is, that Attilius
Regulus, General under the Romans during the wars against the Carthaginians,
assailed a Serpent near the river Bagrada, which carried in length 120 foot;
and before he could conquer him was driven to discharge upon him arrows,
quarrels, stones, bullets, and such like shot, out of brakes, slings, and other
engines of artillery, as if he had given the assualt to some strong warlike
town: the proof whereof was to be seen by the marks remaining in his skin and
chawes; which until the war of Numantia remained in a temple or conspicuous
place of Rome. And Claudius there was one of them killed in the Vaticane,
within the belly whereof there was found an infant all whole. This serpent
lives at the first of kines milk, and thereof takes the name Boae. As for
other beasts which ordinarily of late are brought from all parts into Italy,
and oftentimes have there been seen, needless it is for me to describe their
forms in particular curiously.

CHAP. XV.
Of Scythian beasts, and those which are bred in the North parts.

VEry few savage beasts are engendered in Scythia for want of trees and
pasturage. Few likewise in Germany bordering upon it. Howbeit that countr^
b^ings forth certain kinds of goodly great wild boeufs: to wit, the Bisontes,
mained with a collar like Lions: and the Vri, a mighty strong beast and a
swift, which the ignorant people call Buffles, whereas indeed

CHAP. XVI.
Of Lions.

THe Lions are then in their kind most strong and courageous, when the hair of
their main or collar is so long that it covers both neck and shoulders. And
this comes to them at a certain age, namely to those that are engendered by
Lions: for such as have Pards to That Afric evermore brings forth some new
and strange thing or other. The Lion knows by sent and smell of the Pard,
when the Lioness his mate has played false, and suffered her self to be
covered by him; and presently with all his might and maine runs upon her for
to chastise and punish her. And therefore when the Lioness has done a fault
that way, she either goes to a river and washes away the strong and Aristotle
writes otherwise, a man whom I cannot name but with great honor and
reverence, and whom in the history and report of these matters I mean for the
most part to follow. And in very truth King Alexander the Great, of an ardent
desire that he had to know the natures of all living creatures, gave this
charge to Aristotle, a man singularly accomplished with all kinds of science
and learning, to search into this matter, and to set down the same in writing:
and to this effect commanded certain thousands of men, one or other, in mew:
those that fed poultry in barton or coup: to the end that he should be ignorant
of nothing de Animalibus, i. of Living creatures, to the number almost of 50.
Which being couched by me in a narrow room and brief summary, with addition
also of some things which he never knew, I beseech the Readers to take in good
worth: and for the discovery and knowledge of all Natures works, which that
most noble and famous King that ever was desired so much to know, to make a
short start abroad with me, and in a brief discourse by mine own pains and
diligence digested, to see all. To return now unto our former matter: That
great philosopher Aristotle therefore reports, That the Lioness at her first
litter brings forth five whelps, and every year after fewer by one: and when
she comes to bring but one alone, she Aristotle says moreover, That they
live very long: and he proves it by this argument, That many of them are
found toothlesse for very age. Polybius, who accompanied [Scipio] Aemylianus in
his voyage of Afric, reports of them, That when they be grown aged they
will prey upon a man: the reason is, because their strength will not hold out
to pursue in chase any other wild beasts: then they come about the cities and
good towns of Afric, lying in wait for their prey, if any folk Scipio, he
saw some of them crucified and hanged up, to the end that upon the sight of
them other Lions should take example, and be skarred from doing the like
mischief. The Lion alone of all wild beasts, is gentle to those that humble
themselves unto him, and will not touch any such upon their submission, but
spares what creature soever lies prostrate before him. As fell and furious as
he is otherwhiles, yet he discharges his rage upon men, before he sets upon
women, and never preyeth on babes unless it be for extreme hunger. They are
verily persuaded in Lybia, that they have a certain understanding when any man
does pray or entreat them for any thing. I have heard it reported for a truth,
by a captive woman of Getulia (which being fled was brought home again to her
master) that she had pacified the violent fury of many Lions within the woods
and forests, by fair language and gentle speech; and namely, that for to
escape their rage, she has he beats the ground with his tail: when he
grows into greater heats, he flappeth and jerketh i. se defendendo, and at
length makes head again, not as compelled or driven thereto for any peril
that he sees, but angered at their folly that assail or set upon him: but
herein also is seen rather his noble heart and courage, That be there never so
many hounds Q. Scaevola the son of Publius was the first at Rome that in his
Curule Aedileship exhibited a fight and combat of many Lions together, to
delight the people: but L. Sylla, who was afterward Dictator, was the first of
all others that in his Pretorship represented a show of 100 lions with maines
and collars of hair: and after him, Pompey the Great showed 600 of them
fighting in the grand Cirque, whereof 315 were male Lions with mane. And Caesar
Dictator brought Claudius his days it chanced, that a shepherd or heardsman
who came out of Gaetulia taught the manner of catching them: a thing otherwise
that would have been thought incredible, and altogether unbeseeming the name
and honor of so goodly a beast. This Getulian, I say, fortuned to encounter a
Lion, and when he was violently assailed by him, made no more ado but threw his
mandilion or cassocke full upon his eyes. This feat or cast of his was soon
after practiced in the open Shew-place, in such sort that a man would hardly
have believed but he that saw it, that so furious a beast should so easily be
quailed, and daunted so soon as ever he felt his head covered, were the
things never so light; making no resistance, but suffering one to do what he
would with him, Lysimachus strangled a Lion, when as by the commandment of
Alexander the Great he was shut up alone together with him. The first man that
ever yoked them a Rome, and made them to draw in a chariot, was M. Antonius.
And verily it was in the time of civil war, after the battle fought in the
plains of Pharsalia; a shrewd and unhappy Anthony rode in that wise with the
Courtesan Cytheris a common Actresse in Interludes upon the stage? To see such
a sight was a monstrous spectacle, that passed all the calamities of that time.
It is reported that Hanno (one of the noblest Carthaginians that ever were) was
the first man that durst handle a Lion with his bare hand, and show him gentle
and tame, to follow him all the city over in a slip like a dog. But this
device and trick of his turned to his great damage and utter undoing: for the
Carthaginians hereupon laid this ground, that Hanno, a man of such a gift, so
witty and inuentiue of all devises, would be able to persuade the people to
whatsoever his mind stood; and that it was a dangerous and ticklish point, to
put the liberty of so great a state as Carthage was, into the hands and
managing of him who could Mentor the Syracusian fortuned in Syria to meet with
a Lion, who after an humble manner in token of obedience and submission, seemed
to tumble and wallow before him: he astonished for fear started back and began
to fly; but the wild beast followed him still, and was ready at every turn to
present himself before him, licking the very tracks of his footsteps as he
went, in flattering manner, as if he would make love unto him. Mentor at length
was ware that the Lion had a wound in his foot, and that it swelled therewith:
whereupon he gently plucked out the spill of wood that had gotten into it, and
so eased the beast of his pain. This accident is for a memorial represented
in a picture at Syracusa. Elpis a Samia^ being arrived and landed in Africa,
chanced to espy near the shore a Lion gaping wide, and seeming afar off to whet
his teeth at him in menacing wise: he fled apace to take a tree, calling upon
god Bacchus to help him (for then commonly we fall to our prayers when we see
little or no hope of other help:) but the Lion stopped him not in his flight,
albeit he could have crossed the way well enough, but laying himself down at
the tree root, with that open mouth of his wherewith he had skared the man,
made signs to move pity and compassion. Now so it was, that the beast having
lately fed greedily, had gotten a sharp bone within his teeth, that put him to
exceeding pain: besides that, he was almost famished: and he looking
pitifully up to the man, showed how he was punished himself among those very
weapons wherewith he was wont to anoy others, and after a sort with dumb and
mute prayers Elpis avised him well a pretty while; and besides that he was not
very forward to venture upon the wild beast, he stayed the longer and made the
less have, while he considered rather this strange and miraculous accident,
than otherwise greatly feared. At last hecomes down from the tree and plucks
out the bone, whiles the Lion held his mouth handsomely to him, and exposed
himself to his helpful hand as fitly as he possibly could. In requital of
which good turn, it is said, that so long as this ship of his lay there at
anchor, the Lion furnished him and his company with good store of venison ready
killed to his hand. And upon this occasion Elpis after his return dedicated a
temple to Bacchus: which upon this reason the Greeks called (...), i. of gaping
Bacchus (...) or (...), i. the chapel of Bacchus the Savior. Can we marvel
any more from henceforth, that wild beasts should mark and know

CHAP. XVII.
Of Panthers.

Demetrius the philosopher, so well seen into the speculation of Natures works,
and the causes of Philinus the Philosopher, who travailed that way. The man
(for fear) began to retire and go Democritus reports, namely, that Thoas in
Arcadia saved his life by means of a dragon. This Thoas being but a very
child, had loved this dragon when he was but young, very well, and nourished
him: but at last, being somewhat fearful of his nature, and not well knowing
his qualities, and fearing withal the bigness that now he was grown unto, had
carried him into the mountains and deserts: wherein it fortuned that he was
afterward set upon and environed by thieves: whereupon he cried out, and the
dragon knowing his voice, came forth and rescued him. As for babes and infants
cast forth to perish, Romulus and Remus our first founders, who were suckled by
a she wolf; such things in mine opinion are in all reason to be attributed
more to fortune and fatal destinies, than to the nature of those beasts. The
Panthers and Tigers are in a manner the only beasts (for the variety of spotted
skins and i. The Lubernes or Luzernes.
furs which they yield) in great request, and commendable: for other beasts
have each one a proper color of their own, according to their kind: Lions
there be all black, but they are found in Syria only. The ground of the
Panthers skin is white, beset all over with little black spots like eyes. It is
said, that all foure-footed beasts are wonderfully delighted and enticed by the
smell of Panthers; but their hideous look and crabbed countenance, which they
bewray by showing their heads, skareth them as much again: wherefore their
manner is to hide their heads, and having i. Luzernes or Libards.
Variae and Pardi, and great abundance there is of them in Afric and Syria.
Some there be again that make no other difference between the Luzernes and
Leopards, and these Panthers, but only this, that the Panthers are white: and
as yet I know no other marks to descry them by. There passed an old Act and
Ordinance of the Senate, forbidding expressly that any Panthers of Afric
should be brought into Italy. Against this edict, Cn. Aufidius a Tribune of the
commons put up another bill unto the people; and granted it was, That for the
solemnity Soaurus was the first man who in his Aedileship exhibited a show
unto the people of 150 Luzernes together. After him Pompey the Great brought
forth 410. The Emperor Augustus 420: who also in the year that Q. Tubero and
Fabius Maximus were Consuls together (upon the 4 day before the Nones of May,
at the dedication of the Theater of Marcellus) was the first of all others that
showed a tame Tiger within a cage: but the Emperor Claudius four at once.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Tiger and his nature: of Camels, Chamelopardales, and when they were
first seen at Rome.

Tigers are bred in Hircania and India: this beast is most dreadful for
incomparable swiftness, and most of all seen it is in the taking of her young:
for her litter (whereof there is a great number) by the hunters is stolen and
carried away at once, upon a most swift horse for the

As for Camels, they are nourished in the Levant or East parts among other
herds of great cattle: two kinds there be of them, the Bactrians and the
Arabic: differing herein, that the Bactrians have two bunches upon their
backs; the other but one apiece there, but they have another in their breast,
whereupon they rest and ly. Both sorts want the upper row of teeth in their
mouths, like as bulls and kine. In those parts from whence they come they
serve all to carry packs like laboring horses, and are put to service also in
the wars, and are backed of horsemen: their swiftness is comparable to that of
horses; they grow to a just measure, and exceed not a certain ordinary
strength. The Camel in his traveling will not go a jot farther than his
ordinary journey; nether will he carry more than his accustomed and usual
load. Naturally they do hate horses. They can abide to be four days together
without drink: and

Two other kinds of beasts there be that resemble in some sort the Camels: the
one is called of the Aethiopians, the Nabis, necked like an horse, for leg and
hoof not unlike the boeufe, headed directly like a Camel, beset with white
spots upon a red ground, whereupon it takes the Caesar Dictator. Since which
time he comes now and then to Rome, to be looked upon more for sight, than for
any wild nature that he has: whereupon some call her the savage Sheep.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the Chaus and Cephus.

THe Hinde-wolfe, which some call Chaus, and the Gauls were wont to name
Rhaphius, resembling in some sort a Wolf with Leopards spots, were showed
first in the solemnity Cn. Po^npeius the Great. He also brought out of
Aethyopia other beasts named Cephi, i. Semivulpes, whose forefeet were like to
men's hands, and the hind feet and legs like those of a man. He was never seen
afterward at Rome.

CHAP. XX.
Of the Rhinoceros.

IN the same solemnities of Pompey, as many times else was showed a Rhinoceros,
with one horn and no more, and the same in his snout or muzzle. This is a
second enemy by nature

CHAP. XXI.
Lynces or Onces, and Marmozets or Apes, called Sphinges: of Crocutes, Monkies,
English boeufes, Leococrutes, Eale: Ethiopian bulls, the Mantichore and
Lycornes: of the serpents called Catoblepes, and the Basiliske.

ONces are common, so are Marmozets, with a brown duskish hair, having dugs
in their breast. Aethiopia breeds them, like as many other monstrous beasts,
to wit, horses with wings, and armed with horns, which they call Pegasi. Also
the Crocutes [a kind of mastiue dogs] engendered betwixt a dog and a Wolf:
these are able to crash with their teeth all they can come by: and a thing is
no sooner down their swallow, and got into their stomach, i. Monkies with
black heads, otherwise haired like Asses, differing from other Apes in their
cry. The Indians have certain boeufs with one horn, and others with 3. Also
the Leocrocuta, a most swift beast, as big almost as an he Ass, legged like an
Heart, with a neck, tail, and breast of a Lion, headed like these grayes or
Badgers, with a cloven foot in twain: the slit of his mouth reaches to his
ears, in stead of teeth an entire whole bone. They report that this beast
feigneth a man's voice. They have also among them another beast named Eale, for
bigness equal to the riuer-horse, tailed like an Elephant, either black or
reddish tawny of color: his mandibles or chawes resemble those of the Bore, he
has horns above a cubit long, which he can stir or move as he list: for being
in fight he can set them both or one of them as he will himself, altering them
every way, one while Ciesias writes, that in Aethiopia likewise there is a
beast, which he calls Mantichora, having three ranks of teeth, which when they
meet together, are let in one within another like the teeth of combs, with the
face and ears of a man, with red eyes, of color sanguine, bodied like a Lion,
Bacchus, and under his protection. The Orsians of India hunt Apes, and take a
number of them white all over. But the most fell and furious beast of all other
is the Licorne or Monoceros: his body resembles a horse, his head a stag, his
feet an Elephant, his tail a bore; he loweth after an hideous manner, one
black horn he has in the mids of his forehead, bearing out two cubits in
length: by report, this wild beast cannot possibly be caught alive. Among the
Hesperian Aethiopians there is a fountain named time was killed with a lance
by an horsman from his horse* back, but the poison was so strong

CHAP. XXII.
Of Wolves.

IT is commonly thought likewise in Italy, that the eye sight of wolves is
hurtful; in so much, as if they see a man before he espy him, they cause him
to lose his voice for the time. They that be bred in Afric and Egypt, are
but little, and withal nothing lively, but without spirit. In the colder clime,
they be more cruel and eger. That men may be transformed into wolves, and
restored again to their former shape, we must confidently believe to be a loud
lie, or else give credit to all those tales which we have for so many ages
found to be mere fables. But how this opinion grew first, and is come to be so
firmly settled, that when we would give men the most opprobrious words of
defiance that we can, we term them i Turn coats.
Versipelles, I think it not Euanthes (a writer among the Greeks, of good
account and authority) reports, that he found among the records of the
Arcadians, That in Arcadia there was a certain house and race of the Antaei,
out of which one evermore must needs be transformed into a wolf: and when they
of that family have cast lots who it shall be, they use to accompany the party
upon whom the lot is fallen, to a certain mere or poole in that country: when
he is thither come, they turn him naked out of all his clothes, which they
hang upon an oak thereby: then he swimmeth over the said lake to the other
side, and being entered into the wilderness, is presently transfigured and
turned into a wolf, and so keeps company with his like of that kind for nine
years space: during which time, (if he forbear all the while to eat man's
flesh) he returns again to the same poole or pond, and being swomme over it,
receives Fabius adds one thing more and says, That he finds again the
same apparel that was hung up in the oak aforesaid. A wonder it is to see, to
what pass these Greeks are come in their credulity: there is not so
shameless a lie, but it finds one or other of them to uphold and maintain
it. And therefore Agriopas, who wrote the Olympionicae, tells a tale of one
Daemoenetus Parrhasius, That he upon a time at a certain solemn sacrifice
(which the Arcadians celebrated in the honor of Jupiter Lycaeus) tasted of the
inwards of a child that was killed for a sacrifice, according to the manner of
the Arcadians (which even was to shed man's blood in their divine service) and
so was turned into a wolf: and the same man ten years after, became a man
again, was present at the exercise of public games, wrestled, did his deuoir,
and went Pompey showed in the grand Cirque, brought out of France. This beast
(they say) be he never so hungry when he

CHAP. XXIII.
Of Serpents.

AS touching serpents we see it ordinary, that for the most part they are of
the color of the earth, wherein they lie hid: and an infinite number of sorts
there be of them. The serpent Cerastes has many times four small horns,
standing out double; with moving whereof she amuseth the birds, and traineth
them unto her for to catch them, hiding all the rest of her body.

Amphisbaena has two heads as it were, namely one at the tail; as if she were
not hurtful enough to cast her poison at one mouth only. Some are scaled,
others spotted and painted, but generally the venom of them all is deadly.
There be of them that from the boughs of trees

CHAP. XXIV.
Of the Rat of India called Ichneumon.

BEsides the foresaid infirmity, there is mortal war between them and the
Ichneumones or Rats of India. A beast this is well known to the Aspis, in this
regard especially, that it is bred likewise in the same Egypt. The manner of
this Ichneumon is, to wallow often times within the mud, and then to dry it self
against the Sun: and when he has thus armed himself as it were with many coats
hardened in this manner, he goes forth to combat with the Aspis. In fight he
sets up his tail, and whips about turning his tail to the enemy, and therein
latcheth and receives all the strokes of the Aspis, and takes no harm
thereby: and so long he maintains a defensive battle, until he espy a time,
turning his head a to-side, that he may catch the Aspis by the throat, and
throtle it. And not content thus to have vanquished this

CHAP. XXV.
Of the Crocodile, Scinke, and Riuer-Horse.

THe river Nilus nourishes the Crocodile; a venomous creature, four footed,
as dangerous on water as land. This beast alone, of all other that keep the
land, has no use of a highest and without it will she be sure to sit. There
is not another creature again in the

Within the river Nilus there breeds another Serpent called Scincos, like in
form and proportion somewhat to the Crocodile, but not all so big as the
Ichneumon: the flesh whereof serves for a singular Antidote or countre-poison;
as also for to provoke the heat' of lust in men.

But to return again to the Crocodile: the mischief that he does is so
great, that Nature is not content to have given him one mortal enemy and no
more; and therefore the dolphins also

The same river Nilus brings forth another beast called Hippopotamus, i a
Riuer-horse. Taller he is from the ground than the Crocodile: he has a cloven
foot like a boeufe: the back, maine and hair of an horse, and he has his
neying also. His muzzle or snout turns up: his

CHAP. XXVI.
Who first showed the riuer-Horse and Crocodiles at Rome. Also the medicinable

MArcus Scaurus was the first man, who in his plays and games that he set out
in his Aedileship, made a show of one water-Horse and four Crocodiles,
swimming in a poole or mote made for the time during those solemnities.

The riuer-Horse has taught physicians one device in that part of their
profession called Surgerie: for he finding himself ouer-grosse and fat by
reason of his high feeding so continually, gets forth of the water to the
shore, having spied before where the reeds and rushes have bin newly cut: and
where he sees the sharpest cane and best pointed, he sets his body hard unto
it, to prick a certain vein in one of his legs, and thus by letting himself
blood makes euacuation:

CHAP. XXVII.
What physical Herbs certain creatures have showed us, to wit, the hearts and
stags, the Lizards, Swallows, Torteises, the Weasell, the Storke, the Bore,
the Snake, Dragon, Panther, Elephant, Bears, stocke-Doues, house Doves,
Cranes, and Ravens.

THe like device to this, namely of clisters, we learned first of a Foul in
the same Egypt,

There is a certain herb called Calaminth, most sovereign and singular
against the biting of serpents: wherewith the Lizards, when soever they have
fought with them, cure their wounds by applying it thereto.

Celendine [the greater] a most wholesome herb for the eye sight, Swallows
taught us how to use: for with it they help their young ones when their eyes be
^ore and put them to grief.

The land Torteise by eating of a kind of Sauorie or Marjerome, called Cunila
bubula, arms himself against poison when he should fight with serpents.

The Weasell uses Rue as a preservative when he purposes to hunt for Rats,
in case he should fight with any of them.

The Storke feeling himself amiss, goes to the herb Organ for remedy. And
the Bore when he is sick is his own physician, by eating iuy and crab fishes,
such especially as the sea casts up to shore.

The Snake by restinesse and lying still all Winter, has a certain membrane or
filme growing over her whole body; but having recourse to Fennel, with the
juice thereof she casts that

The Dragon finding a certain lothing of meat, and ouerturning of her stomach
in the spring time, cures and helps the same with the juice of the wild
Lectuce.

The barbarous people when they hunt the Panthers, rub the gobbets of flesh,
which they lay i. Libard baine, or choke Libard. But the wild beast has a
remedy against this, namely, the ordure and excrements of a man: yea, and at
other times also, when he is not thus poisoned, so eager he is thereof, that
when the shepherds for the nonce have hanged them up aloft in some vessel
above their reach, although they leap up at them, he is ready to faint with
mounting on high, and straining to get the same, and in the end kills
himself therewith, and lies dead on the ground. And yet otherwise he is too
untoward for to be killed, and so long it is ere he will die, that when he is
panched, and his very guts come forth of his belly, he will live still, and
fight.

The Elephant if he chance to let the [Lizard] Chameleon go down his throat
amongst other herbs or leaves (which this Lizard always is like unto in
color) he goes straightwaies to the wild Olive, the only remedy he has of
this poison.

Bears, when they have eaten Mandrage apples, lick up pismires to cure
themselves withal.

The Stag and Hind feeling themselves poisoned with some venomous weed among
grass where they pasture, go by and by to the Artichoke, and therewith cure
themselves.

The Stock-doues, the Iais, Merles, Blackbirds, Ousels, recover their appetite
to meat, which once in a year they lose, with eating Bay* leaves that purge
their stomach. Partridges, Housedoues, Turtledoues, and all Pullein, as Hens,
Cocks, and Capons, do the like with Parietarie of the wall. Ducks, Geese, and
other water fouls purge with the herb Endive or Cichory. Cranes

The Raven when he has killed the Chameleon, and yet perceiving that he is
hurt and poisoned by him, flies for remedy to the Laurel, and with it
represseth and extinguisheth the venom that he is infected withal.

CHAP. XXVIII.
The Prognostication of weather, taken by the observation of dumb creatures.

Moreover, the same universal Nature has given a thousand properties besides
unto by his ear, and otherwise it is a beast most quick of hearing. And
observed it is, that men never

CHAP. XXIX.
What cities and nations have been utterly destroyed by little beasts.

NOthing is more certain and notorious than this, that much hurt and damage
has been known to come from small contemptible creatures, which otherwise are
of no reckoning and account. M. Varro writes, That there was a town in Spain
undermined by Connies: and another likewise in Thessalie, by the Moldwarpes. In
France the inhabitants of one city Theophrastus reports, the Treriens were
chased by certain worms called Scolopendres. But now let us return to other
kinds of wild beasts.

CHAP. XXX.
Of the Hyaena, Crocuta, Mantichora, Bieuers, and Otters.

AS touching Hyaenes, it is commonly believed, that they have two natures, and
that every second year they change their sex, being this year males, and the
next year females. Howbeit, Aristotle denies it. Their neck and the mane
therewith, together with the back, are one entire bone without any joint at
all, so as they cannot bend their neck without turning the whole body about.
Many strange mattes are reported of this beast, and above all other, that he
will counterfeit man's speech, and coming to the sheepheards cottages, will
call one of them forth, whose name he has learned, and when he has him
without, al to worrie and tear him in pieces. Also it is said that he will
vomit like a man, thereby to train dogs to come unto him, and then will devour
them. Also, this beast alone of all others, will search for men's

Iuba reports that the Mantichora also in Aethiopia resembles men's language.
Great store of

The Bieuers in Pontus gueld themselves, when they see how near they are
driven, and be in danger of the hunters: as knowing full well, that chased they
be for their genetoires: and these their stones, Physicians call Castoreum. And
otherwise, this is a dangerous and terrible beast otherwise he resembles the
Otter. Both these beasts live in the water altogether, and carry an

CHAP. XXXI.
Of Frogs, Sea-calues, and star-Lisards called Stelliones:

THe venomous frogs and todes called Rubetae, which live both on land, and also
in the water, yield many good things medicinable. It is said, that their manner
is to let go and cast from them all that is good within them, reserving only
to themselves all the poison: and when they have bin at their food, take the
same up again. The sea calfe likewise lives both in the sea, and upon the
land: and has the same nature and quality that the beiuer is, for he casts
Theophrastus writes, That the Lisards called Stelliones, cast their old coat,
like as Snakes do, but when they have so done, they eat it up again, and so
prevent men of the help thereby for the said falling evil. He reports
besides, that their stings and bitings in Greece be venomous and deadly: but in
Sicily harmless.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of red and fallow Dear.

THe Bucke or Stag, albeit that he be the most gentle and mild beast in the
world, yet is he his very bow, and shei^e of arrows, as at strange and wondrous
things. They pass the seas, swimming Q. Sertorius had about, which he
persuaded the people of Spain to be his Sooth-sayer, and to tell him of things
to come. This kind of Dear maintain fight with serpents, and are their
mortal enemies: they will follow them to their very holes, and there (by the
strength of drawing and snuffing up their wind at the nostrils) force them out
whether they will or no: and therefore there is not so good a thing again to
chase away serpents, as is the smoke and smell of an Hearts horn burnt. But
against their sting or biting, there is a singular remedy, with the runnet in
the maw of a fawn or Hind-calfe killed in the dams belly. It is generally held
and confessed, that the Stag or hind lives long: for an hundred years after
Alexander the great, some were taken with golden collars about their necks,

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of the shag-haired and bearded Stagge like to a Goat: as also of the
Chameleon.

OF the same kind is the Goat heart, and differing only in the beard and long
shag about the shoulders, which they call Tragelaphis: and this breeds no
where but about the river Phasis. Afric in a manner is the only country
that breeds no stags and hinds: but contrariwise, it brings Chamaeleons,
although India has them ordinarily in greater number.

CHAP. XXXIIII.
Of the Buffe, or Tarandus: the Lycaon, and the Those.

IN Scythia there is a beast called Tarandus, which changes likewise color as
the Chamaeleon: and no other creature bearing hair does the same, unless it
be the Lycaon of India* which (by report) has a maned neck. As for the Thoes
(which are a kind of wolves somewhat longer than the other common wolves, and
shorter legged, quick and swift in leaping, living altogether of the venison
that they hunt and take, without doing any harm at all to men) they may be
said; not so much to change their hew, as their habit and apparel: for all
winter time they be shag-haired, but in summer bare and naked. The Tarandus is
as big as an ox, with an head not unlike to a stags, but that it is greater,
namely carrying branched horns: cloven hoofed, and his hair as deep as is the
Bears. The hide of his back is so tough and hard, that thereof they make
brest-plates. He takes the color of all trees, shrubs, plants, flowers, and
places

CHAP. XXXV.
Of the Pork-pen.

THe Porkpens come out of India and Afric: a kind of Vrchin or hedgehog they
be: armed

CHAP. XXXVI.
Of the Bears, and how they breed and bring forth their young.

THey engender in the beginning of winter, not after the common manner of other
fourefooted lump of white flesh without all form, little bigger than rattons,
without eyes, and wanting hair: only there is some show and appearance of claws
that put forth. This rude lump, with licking Theophrastus believes it, That
if a man take bears flesh during those days, and sees or bake the same, if it
be set up and kept safe it will grow nevertheless. All this time they dung
not, neither does there appear any token or excrement of meat that they have
eaten: and very little water or aquositie it found within their belly. As for
blood, some few small drops lie about the heart only, and none at all in the
whole body besides Now when spring is come, forth they go out of their den, but
by that time the males are exceeding i. Wake-robin, and that they do to open
their guts, which otherwise were clunged and grown together: and for to prepare
their mouths and teeth again to eat, they whet and set the edge of them with
the young shoots and tendrons of the briers and brambles. Subject they are many
times to dimnesse of sight: for which cause especially they seek after honey
combs, that the bees might settle upon them, and with their stings make them
bleed about the head, and by that means discharge them of that heaviness which
troubles their eyes. The Lions are not so strong in the head, but bears be
as weak and tender there: and therefore when they be chased hard by hunters, and
put to a plunge, M. Piso and M. Messala were Consuls, Domitius Aenobarbus and
Aedile Curule, upon the 14 day before the Calends of October, exhibited 100
Numidian bears to be baited and chased in the great Cirque, and as many
Ethiopian hunters. And I marvel much, that the Chronicle names Numidian,
since it is certain, that no b^rs come out of Afric.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Of the Rats of Pontus, and the Alps: also of Vrchins and Hedge-hogs.

THe Rats of Pontus, which be only white, come not abroad all winter: they
have a most i. Marmottanes, which are as big as Brocks or Badgers, keep in,
during winter: but they are provided of victuals before hand which they gather
together and carry into their holes. And some say,

Hedgehogs also make their provision beforehand of meat for winter, in this
wise. They wallow and roll themselves upon apples and such fruit lying under
foot, and so catch them up with their prickles, and one more besides they take
in their mouth, and so carry them into hollow trees. By stopping one or other
of their holes, men know when the wind turns, and is changed Or rather
instead of taz^ that sharemen use.
clean our garments. And in very truth, many have gotten great gain and profit
by this commodity and merchandise, and namely, with their crafty devise of
monopolies, that all might pass through their hands only: notwithstanding
there has not bin any one disorder more repressed and reformation sought by
sundry edicts and acts of the Senate in that behalf: every prince has been
continually troubled hereabout with grievous complaints out of all provinces.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Of the Leontophone, the Once, Badgers, and Squirrils.

TWo other kinds there be of beasts, whose urine works strange and wonderful
effects. The one is called Leontophonos, and he breeds in no country but where
there be lions: a little creature it is, but so venomous, that the lion (king
of beasts, before whom al others tremble) for all his might and puissance,
dies presently if he taste never so little thereof. And therefore they that
chase the lion, get all the Leontophones that they can come by, burn their
bodies, and with the powder of them bestrew and season as it were the pieces of
other flesh that they lay for a bait in the forest, and thus with the very
ashes (I say) of his enemy, kill him: and deadly and pernicious is it to the
lion. No marvel therefore if the lion abhor and hate him, for so soon as he
espieth him, he crushes him with his paws, and so kills him without setting
tooth to his body. The Leontophone for his part again, is as ready to bedrench
him with his

In those countries were the Onces breed, their urine (after it is made)
congealeth into a certain y^ie substance, and waxes dry, and so it comes to be
a certain precious stone like a carbuncle, glittering and shining as red as
fire, and called it is Lyncurium. And upon this occasion many

The Grayes, Polcats, or Brocks, have a cast by themselves, when they be
afraid of hunters: for they will draw in their breath so hard, that their skin
being stretched and puffed up withal, they will avoid the biting of the hounds
tooth, and check the wounding of the hunter; so as neither the one nor the
other can take hold of them.

The Squirrils also foresee a tempest coming, and where the wind will blow:
for look in what corner the wind is like to stand, on that side they stop up
the mouth of their holes, and make an ouerture on the other side against it.
Moreover, a goodly broad bush tail they have,

CHAP. XXXIX.
Of the Viper, Land-winkles or Snailes, and Lizards.

OF all other serpents, it is said, that the Viper alone lies hidden in the
ground during winter, whereas the rest keep within cranies and c^ifts of
trees, or else in the hollow chinkes of stones: and otherwise they are able to
endure hunger a whole year, so they be kept from extreme cold: All the while
during their retreat and lying close within, they sleep as if

In like manner do Perwinkles and Snailes; but not only in the winter season,
but in Summer again they lie still, cleaving so hard to rocks and stones, that
although by force they be plucked off and turned with their bellies upward, yet
they will not out of their shell. In the Baleare Istands there be a kind of
them called Cauaticae, which never creep out of their holes within the ground,
neither live they of any grass or green herb, but hang together like
clusters of grapes. Another sort there is of them, but not so common, hiding
themselves within the cover of their shell, sticking ever fast unto them: these
lie always under the ground, and were in times past dug up only about the
Alps, along the maritime coasts: but now of late they be discovered in
Veliternum also, where men begin to get them out of the earth. But the best of

As touching Lisards (deadly enemies to the Snailes or Winkles aboue-named) men
say they live not above six months. In Arabia, the Lizards be a cubit in
length: and in the mountain Nisa of India, they be four and twenty foot long;
some tawnie, some light red, and others blew of color.

CHAP. XL.
Of Dogs.

AMong those domestical creatures that converse with us, there be many things
worth the knowledge: and namely, as touching dogs (the most faithful and
trusty companions as to call for pay. In a battle when the Cimbrians were
defeated and put all to the sword, their Jason the Lycian had a dog, who
after his master was slain, would never eat meat, but pined himself to death.
Duris makes mention of another dog, which he named Hircanus, that so soon
as the funeral fire of king Lysimachus his master was set a burning, leapt
into the flame. And so did another at the funerals of king Hiero. Moreover,
Phylistus reports as strange a story of king Pyrrhus his dog: as also of
another belonging to the tyrant Gelo. The Chronicles report of a dog that
Nicomedes king of Numidia kept, which flew upon the queen Consingis his wife,
and al to mangled and worried her, for toying and dallying ouerwantonly with
the king her husband. And to go no farther for examples, even with us here at
Rome, Volcatius a noble gentleman (who tought Cecelius the civil law) as he
returned home one evening late, riding upon an hackney from a village near the
city, was assailed by a thief on the high way, Caelius likewise, a Senator of
Rome, lying sick at Plaisance, chanced to be assailed by his enemies, well
appointed and armed; but they were not able to hurt and wound him, by reason of
a dog that he had about him, until such time as they had killed the said dog.
But this passes al, which happened in our time, and stands upon record in
the public registers, namely, in the year that Appius Iunius and P. Silus
were Consuls, at what time as T. Sabinus and his servants were executed for an
outrage committed upon the person of Nero, son of Germanicus: one of them
that died had a dog which could not be kept from the prison door, and when his
master was thrown down the stairs (called Scalae Gemoniae) would not depart
from his dead corpse, but kept a most pitteous howling and lamentation about it,
in the sight of a great multitude of Romans that stood round about Alexander
the Great made into India, the king of Albania gave him a dog of an huge and
extraordinary bigness. And Alexander taking great delight and contentment to
see so goodly and so fair a dog, let loose unto him first Bears, afterward
wild Bores; and last of all, fallow Dear. But this dog making no reckoning of
all this game, Alexander, a man of mighty spirit and high mind, offended at the
laziness and cowardice of so great a body, commanded that he should be
killed, and so he was. News hereof went presently to the king of Albanie.
Whereupon he sent unto him a second dog, with this message, That he should not
make trial of this too against such little beasts, but either set a Lion or an
Elephant at him: saying moreover, that he had in all but those two of his
kind: and if he were killed likewise, he were like to have no more of that
race and breed. Alexander made no stay, but presently put out a Lion, and
immediately he saw his back broken and all to rent and torn by the dog.
Afterward he commanded to bring forth an Elephant, and in no sight took he
greater pleasure, than in this. For the dog at the first with his long rough
shagged hair, that ouerspread his whole body, came with full mouth thundering
(as it were) and barking terribly

CHAP. XLI.
Against the biting of a mad Dog.

THe sure and sovereign remedy for them that are bitten with a mad dog, was
revealed lately by way of Oracle: to wit, the root of a wild rose, called the
sweet brier or Eglantine. Columella writes, That when a whelpe is just forty
days old, if his tail be bitten off at the nethermost joint, and the sinew or
string that comes after, be likewise taken away, neither the tail will grow
any more, nor the dog fall ever to be mad. I have my self observed, that among
the prodigies it is reported, how a dog sometime spoke, as also that a serpent
barked, Tarquine the proud was deposed and driven out of Rome.

CHAP. XLII.
Of Horses, and their nature.

THe same Alexander the Great, of whom ere-while we spoke, had a very strange
and rare horse, whom men called Bucephalus, either for his crabbed and grim
look, or else of the mark or brand of a bulls head, which was imprinted upon
his shoulder. It is reported, that Alexander being but a child, seeing this
fair horse, was in love with him, and bought out of the breed and race of
Philonicus the Pharsalian, and for him paid sixteen talents. He would
Alexander; and namely, when he had the kings saddle on, and was also trapped
with royal furniture: for otherwise he would admit any whomsoever. The same
horse was of a passing good and memorable service in the wars: and namely,
being wounded upon a time at the assault of Thebes, he would not suffer
Alexander to alight from his back, and mount upon another, Many other strange
and wonderful things he Caesar Dictator likewise had another horse that would
suffer no man to ride him but his master: and the same horse had his forefeet
resembling those of a man: and in that manner he stands pourtraied before the
temple of Venus, Mother. Moreover, Augustus Caesar, late Emperor of famous
memory, made a sumptuous tomb for an horse that he had, whereof Germanicus
Caesar compiled a poem. At Agrigentum there be seen Pyramides over many places
were horses were entombed. Iuba reports, That queen Semiramis loved a great
horse that she had, so far forth, that she was content he should do his kind
with her. The Scythians verily take a great pride and glory much in the
goodness of their horses and Cauallerie. A king of theirs happened in combat and
single fight upon a challenge to be slain by his enemy, and when he came to
despoile him of his Sibaritanes, the whole troup Nicomedes was slain, the
horse for his own saddle, would never eat meat after, but for very anguish
died with famine. Philarchus reports, That king Antiochus having in battle
slain one Centaretus, a brave horsman of the Gallogreeks or Galatians, became
master of his horse, and mounted upon him in triumphant wise: But the horse of
him that lay dead in the place, and upon whom Antiochus was mounted, for very
anger and indignation at this indignity, passed neither for bit nor bridle, so
as he could not be ruled; and so ran furiously among the cragges and rocks,
where both horse and man came down head long, Philistus writes, That
Dyonisius was forced to leave his horse sticking fast in a quaue-mire, and got
away: but the horse after he had recovered himself, and was gotten forth,
followed the tracts of his master, with a swarm or cast of bees settling in his
mane: and this was the first presage of good fortune that induced Denis to
vsurp the kingdom of Sicilie. Of what perceiuance and understanding they be,
it cannot be expressed: and that know those light horsemen full well that use to
lance darts and iauelines from horseback, by the hard service that they put
their horses to; which they do with great dexterity and resolution in
straining, winding, and turning their bodies nimbly every way. Nay, ye shall
have of them togather up darts and iauelines from the ground, and reach them
again to the horsman. And commonly we see it to be an ordinary matter with
them in the great race or show place, when they are set Claudius Caesar, in the
Circensian games, the horses with the white livery (notwithstanding their
driuer and governor, the charioter, was cast and flung to the ground even
within the bars) wan the best prize and went away with the honor of that day.
For of themselves they brake and bare down whatsoever might impeach them of
running the race thoroughout: they did all that ever was to be done against
their concurrents and adversaries of the contrary side, as well as if a most
expert chariot-man had been over their backs to direct and instruct them. At
the sight whereof, men were ashamed ta see their skill and art to be ouermatched
and surmounted had stood still in his place, and conducted them; and there
fetched three turns round about the Jupiter. But the greatest of all was this
which I shall now tell, That the horses of Ratumenus, who had won the price in
the horse-running at Veij, threw their Mr. down; and came from thence, even out
of Tuscane, as far as to the foresaid Capitol, carrying thither the Palm
branch and chaplet of Victory won by Ratumenas their Mr. of whom the gate
Ratumena took afterward the name at Rome. The Sarmatians minding to take a
great journey, prepare their horses two days before, and give them no meat at
all, only a little drink they allow them, and thus they will ride them gallop
150 miles an end, and never draw bridle. Horses live many of them 50 years, but
the mares not so long. In five years they come to their full growth, whereas
stone horses grow one year longer. The making of good horses indeed, and their
beauty, such as a man will choose for the best, has bin most elegantly and
absolutely described by the Poet Virgill. And somewhat also have I written of
that argument, in my book which I lately put of the bladder: like as all other
beasts that labor either in draught or carriage.

CHAP. XLIII.
Of Asses.

VArro writes, that Q. Axius a Roman Senator bought an Ass which bought him
400000 Sesterces, a price in my conceit above the worth of any beast
whatsoever: and yet (doubtless) he was able to do wondrous good service in
carrying burdens, plowing of ground, and principally in getting of mules. The
chapmen that use to buy these Asses have a special regard to the place from
whence they come, and where they be bred: for in Achaia or Greece i. about
mid-March, but in mid-Iune, about the time of the Sun-stead, when days be at
the longest. He Asses, the more you spare them in their work, the worse they
are for it. The females are at the least 30 months or two years and half old
before they bring any young; but 3 years is the ordinary and due time indeed.
They go as long as mares, and just so many months, and after the same manner do
they fool. But after they be covered, they must be forced to run presently,
with beating and laying on them, or else they will let go their seed again, so
slippery is their womb, and so unapt to keep that which once it has
conceived. They are seldom seen to bring forth two at once. The she Ass when
she is about to fool seeks some secret blind corner to hide her self, that
she might not be seen of any man. She breeds all her life time, which commonly
is until she Mecoenas was the first, that at feasts made a dainty dish of
young Ass foles, and preferred their flesh in his time before the venison of
wild Asses. But he being dead, they were not thought so good meat, nor accepted
at all. If an Ass be seen to die, look soon after that the whole race and
kind of them will follow to the very last.

CHAP. XLIV.
Of Mules.

BEtween the he Ass and a Mare is a Mule engendered, and foled in the 12
month; a beast of exceeding strength to bear out all labor and travel. For
breeding of such Mules, Mares purpose they use to steal away either the young
Ass foles, and set them in the dark to the teats Theophrastus says, that in
Cappadocia ordinarily they do bear and bring forth foles: but they are a kind
by themselves. Mules are broken of their flinging and wincing, if they use
often to drink wine. It is found written in many

CHAP. XLV.
Of Bulls, Kine, and Oxen.

THe Boeufs of India are as high by report as Camels, and four foot broad they
are betwixt the horns. In our part of the world those that come out of Epirus
are most commended, and bear the greatest price above all others, and namely
those which they say are of the Pyrrhus, who that way was very curious. For
this prince because he would have a principal good breed, would not suffer the
Bulls to come unto the kine and season them before they were both four years
old. Mighty big they were therefore, and so they continue of that kind unto
this day. How beit, now when they be but heifers of one year, or two years at
the most (which is more tolerable) they are let go to the fellow and breed.
Bulls may well engender and serve kine when they be 4 years old; and one of them
is able all the year long to go with ten kine and serve their turn. They say
moreover, that a Bull after he has leapt a Cow, and done his kind, if he go
his way toward the right hand, he has gotten an ox calfe, but contrariwise a
cow calfe if he take the left hand. Kine commonly take at their first
seasoning, but commonly continues 30 days, namely from the rising of the
Dolphin star, unto the day before Caesar Dictator. The Bull yields the
principal and most sumptuous sacrifice of all other unto the gods, and
therewith are they best pleased. This beast alone, of all that are long tailed,
when it first comes into the world, has not the tail of the full measure and
perfect length as others, but it grows still, till it reach down to the very
heels, and touch the ground. And hereupon it is, that in choosing calves for
sacrifice, those are allowed for good and sufficient, whose tail reaches to
the joint of the haugh or gambrill: for if it be shorter, they will not be
received and accepted of the gods. This also is noted by experience, that
calves so little, that they be brought on men's shoulders to the altars to be
killed, lightly are not sufficient to appease the gods. Neither are they
pacified and well pleased with a beast that is lame or maimed; nor with that
which is not appropriat unto them, but to some other gods; ne yet with it that
r^cules from the altar,

CHAP. XLVI.
Of the Boeufe or Ox named Apis.

IN Egypt also they had an Ox which the people of that country adored and
worshipped as a god, under the name of Apis. This beast was marked in this
manner; with a white spot on his right side, like to the horns or tips of the
new moon croissant; a knot or bunch under the tongue, which they called
Cantharus: by their religion it was not lawful to suffer him to live above a
certain number of years, at the end of which term they drown him in a certain
Well or fountain of their priests, and so shorten his life: and then with great
sorrow fall to seek another to substitute in his place; until they find him
they mourn and wail, and in token of grief and i. bed-chambers; out of which
all the people of Egypt, as from an Oracle, are informed truly of things to
come. For if this Ox enter into the one of them it is a good luckie sign; but
if he go into the other, then it portendeth great mishap and infortunitie. And
these be general presages to the whole nation. As for private persons, he
foretells them of things to come by the manner of taking meat at their hands,
who come to know what fortune they shall have. He turned away his head from the
hand of Germanicus Caesar, and would eat no meat when he offered it him; but he
died for it, and that not long after. He is kept secret and close for the most
part: but if at any time he get forth and come abroad to be seen of the
multitude of people, Apis. And this is one thing to be wondered

CHAP. XLVII.
The nature of Sheep, and their breeding.

Sheep likewise are in great request, both in regard they serve as sacrifices
to pacify the gods; and also by reason their fleece yields so profitable an
use: for even as men are beholden to the boeufe for their principal food and
nourishment which they labor for, so they must acknowledge, that they have
their clothing and couerture for their bodies from the viz. upon the third day
before the Ides of May; and their heat lasts unto the full of the Aegle
star, namely the tenth day before the Calends of August. They be with young
150 days: if any take the Ram after that time, the fruit they bear comes to
no good, but proves weak. And such lambs as fall after that season they
called in old time Cordos, i. later lambs. Many men do prefer these winter
lambs before those that come in spring: the reason is, because it is much
better they should be strong before the heat of summer and the long days, than
against the cold of winter and the shortest days: and they think that this
creature only takes good by being yeaned in bore his horn about the root
near unto his ears. If his right cullion orstone be tied up, he

CHAP. XLVIII.
Diverse kinds of wool and clothes.

THe best wool of all other, is that of Apulia: then, that which in Italy is
named the Greek sheep wool, but in other countries is named Italian. In the
third rank, the Milesian sheep and their wool, carry the prize. The wool
of Apulia is of a short staple, and specially in request for cloaks and
mantles, and nothing else. About Tarentum and Canusium, the richest of this
kind are found: as also at Laodicea in Asia. As for whi^nesse, there is none
better i. growing upon the sheeps back. For black fleeces, Spain is chief;
Pollentia for white; and g^ey, the tract of Piemont near to the Alps: Asia
for red has no fellow, and such kind of wools are called Erythraeae, In Boetia
likewise, that is to say, in the kingdom of Granade and Andalusia, the same
color is to be found. Near to Canusia, the sheep be deep yellow or tawnie:
and about Tarentum, they are of a brown and duskish color. Generally, all
kind of wools newly shorn or plucked, unwashed and i. Languedoc in France: and
such is found in Egypt: the cloth made thereof, after it is worn bare, is
then died and serves new again, and will wear still and last a man's life.
The course rough wool with the round great hair, has been of ancient time
highly commended and accounted of in tapestrie work: for even Homer himself
witnesses, that they of the old world used the same much, and took great
delight therein. But this tapestry is set out with colors in France, after
one sort, and among the Parthians after another. Moreover, As touching the
manner how to die other wools, we will speak in convenient place, namely, M.
Varro writes, That within the temple of Sangus, there continued unto the time
that he wrote his book, the wool that lady Tanaquil, otherwise named Cata
Caecilia, spun: together with her distaffe and spindle: as also, within the
chapel of Fortune, the very royal robe or mantle of Estate, made with her
own hands after the manner of water-chamlot in wave work, which Seruius
Tullus used to wear. And from hence came the fashion and custom at Rome, that
when maidens were to be wedded, their attended upon them a distaffe, dressed and
trimmed with kembed wool, as also a spindle and yearn upon it. The said
Tanaquil was the first that made the coat or cassock wouen right out all
thorough, such as new beginners (namely, young soldiers, barristers, and fresh
brides) put on under their white plain gowns, without any guard of purple.
Fenestella writes, That in the latter time of Augustus Caesar they began at
Rome to use their gowns of cloth shorn, as also with a curled nap. As for
those robes which are called Crebrae and Papaueratae, wrought thick with
floure-worke, resembling poppies; or pressed even and smooth; they be of
greater anti quitie: for even in the time of Lucilius the Poet, Torquatus was
noted and reproved for wearing them. The long robes embrodered before, called
Praetextae, were devised first by the Tuscanes. The Trabeae ware royal robes,
and I find that kings and princes only ware them. In Homers time also they used
garments embrodered with imagerie and flower work: and from thence came the
triumphant robes. As for embroderie it self and needle work, it was the
Phrygians invention: Phrygiones. And in the same Asia, king Attalus was the
first that devised cloth of gold: and thence come such clothes to be called
Attalica. In Babylon they used much to weaue their cloth of diverse colors, and
this was a great wearing among them, and clothes so wrought were called
Babylonica. To weaue cloth of tissue with twisted threeds both in woofe and
warp, and the same of sundry colors, was the invention of Alexandria, and such
clothes and garments were named Polymita. But France devised the scutchion,
square, or lozenge damask-worke. Metellus Scipio, among other challenges and
imputations laid against Capito, reptoched and accused him for this, That his
hangings and furniture of his dining chamber, being Babylonian work or cloth
of Arras, were sold for 800000 sesterces: and such like of late days stood
prince Nero in 400 hundred thousand sesterces, i. 40 millions. The Seruius
Tullus, wherewith he covered and arraied all over the Image of Fortune, by him
dedicated, remained whole and sound unto the end of Seianus. And a wonder it
was, that they neither fell from the image, nor were moth-eaten in 560 years.
I have my self seen the sheeps fleeces upon their backs while they be alive,
died with purple, with scarlet in grain, and the violet liquor of the fish
Murex: by the means of certain barks of a foot and a half long dipped in
these colors, and so imprinted and set upon their fleeces: as if riotous
wantonness and superfluity should force Natures work, and make wool to grow of
that color. As for the sheep it self, she is known to be kindly enough by
these marks, If she be short legged, and well woolled under the belly; for such
as were naked there and pilled, they condemned and held for naught, and those
they called Apicae. In Syria, sheep have tails a cubit long, and they bear
most wool there. To lib lambs before they be five months old, it is thought
to be with

CHAP. XLIX.
Of a beast called Musmon.

THere is in Spain, but especially in the Isle Corsica, a kind of Musmones,
not altogether unlike to sheep, having a shag more like the hair of goats,
than a fleece with sheep wool. That kind which is engendered between them and
sheep, they called in old time Vmbri. This beast has a most tender head, and
therefore in his pasture he is forced to feed other countries of the world, for
the most part, they pass not eight. And both sorts, as well the one as the
other, be sped within four leapings.

CHAP. L.
Of Goats, and their breeding.

GOats bring forth four kids otherwhiles, but that is very seldom. They go
with young five months as ewes do. She goats wax barren with fatness. When
they be come once to be three years old, they are not so good to breed: ne yet
when they be elder, and namely, being past four years of age. They begin at
the seventh month, even whiles they suck their dammes. And as well the bucke
as the Do are held the better for breed, if they be not, and have no horns.
The first time that the she goats are leaped, they stand not to it: the second
Mutianus reports, that he had occasion upon a time to mark the wit of this
creature: It happened, that upon a narrow Mutianus (I say) affirms, that he
saw one of them to lie flat down, and the other to go over his back. As for
the male goats, they are held for the best which are most camoise or snout
nosed, have long ears, and the same slit in, with great store of shag hair
about their shoulders. But the mark to know the kindest female is this, they
have two lappets, locks, or plaits as it were of hair, hanging down along
their body on either side from their neck. They have not al of them horns,
but some are not; but in those which are horned, a man Archelaus writes, that
they take their breath at the ears, and not at the nostrils: also that they be
never clear of the ague. And this happily is the cause, that they are hotter
mouthed, and have a stronger breath than sheep, and more egre in their rut.
Men say moreover, that they see by night as well as by day: therefore they that
when evening is come see nothing at all, recover their perfect sight again by
eating ordinarily the liver of goats. In Cilicia and about the Syrtes, the
people clad themselves with goats hair, for there they shere them as sheep.
Furthermore it is said, that goats toward the Sunsetting, cannot in their
pasture see directly one another, but by turning tail to tail: as for other
hours of the day, they keep head to head, and range together with the rest of
their fellows. They have all of them Minerua.

CHAP. LI.
Of Swine, and their natures.

SWine go a brimming from the time that the Western wind Fauonius begins to
blow, Nigidius says, that those pigs which are farrowed ten days under or ten
days over the shortest day in the year, when the sun Gornucanus says, That
all beasts for sacrifice which chew cud, are not pure and right for that
purpose, until they have teeth. Swine having lost on eye, are not thought to
live long after; otherwise they may That their life is given them in stead of
salt. This is known for a truth, that when certain thieves had stolen and
driven away a company of them, the swinheard having followed them to the water
side (for by that time were the thieves imbarged with them) cried aloud unto
the swine, as his manner was: whereupon they knowing his voice, learned all to
one side of the vessel, turned it over and sunk it, took the water, and so
swam again to land unto their keeper. Moreover, the hogs that use to lead and
go before the heard, are so well trained, that they will of themselves go to
the swine-market place within the city, and from thence home again to their
masters, without any guide to direct them. The wild bores in this kind, have
the wit to cover their tracks with mire, and for the nones to run over marish
ground where the prints of their footing will not be seen; yea and to be more
light in running, M. Apicius) namely, to feed them with dry figs, and when
they have eaten till they be full, presently to give them mead or honied wine
to drink, until they die with being ouercharged. There is not the flesh of any
other living creature, that yields more store of dishes to the maintenance of
gluttony, than this; for fifty sundry sorts of tastes it affords, whereas
other have but one a piece. From hence came so many edicts and proclamations
published by the Censors, forbidding and prohibiting to serve up at any feast
or supper, the belly and paps of a sow, the kernels about the neck, the brizen,
the stones, the womb, and the forepart of the bores Publius the Poet and maker
of wanton songs, after that he was come to his freedom, never (by report) had
supper without an hogs belly with the paps: who also to that dish gave the
name, and called it Sumen. Moreover, the flesh of wild bores came to be in
great request and was much set by: in such sort, as Cato the Censor in his
inuectiue orations, challenged men for brawne. And yet when they made three
kinds of meat of the wild bore, the loine was always served up in the mids.
The first Roman that brought to the table a whole bore at once was P.
Seruilius Rullus, father of that Rullus, who in the time that Cicero was
Consul, published the law Agraria, as touching the division of lands. See how
little while ago it is since these superfluities began, which now are taken up
so ordinarily every day. And yet the

CHAP. LII.
Of Parks for wild beasts.

THe first man of the long robe that devised parks as well for these bores, as
for other dear and savage beasts, was Fulvius Lippinus, who in the territory
of Tarquinij began to keep and feed wild beasts for his game. And long it was
not but others followed his steps, to wit, L. Lucullus and Q. Hortensius. Sowes
of the wild kind bring forth pigs but once a year; and the bores in briming
time are exceeding fierce and fell: then they fight one with another, they
harden their sides, rubbing them against the bodies of trees, and all to wallow
themselves in the mire, coating their backs with dirt. But they are not so
raging then, but the sowes in their* farrowing are much worse, and lightly it
is so in all other kind of beasts. Wild bores are not fit

CHAP. LIII.
Of Beasts half savage.

THere is no creature ingenders so soon with wild of the kind, as does swine:
and verily such hogs in old time they called Hybrides, as a man would say,
half wild; insomuch as this C. Antonius, colleague with Cicero in the
Consulship, nicknamed. And not in swine only, but also in all other living
creatures, look where there be any tame and domestical, you may find also wild
and savage of the same kind: seeing that even of wild men there be also many
sorts in diverse places, as we have before said. As for the goats kind, how
many and how sundry resemblances are to be found in them of other beasts? for
among them you shall have the roe bucke, the shamois, the wild goat called the
Eveck, wonderful swift, albeit his head be laden with huge horns like sword
scabberds: by these they hang and poise themselves from rocks, namely, when
they mind to leap from one to another, for by swinging to and fro they skip
and jump the more nimbly, and fetch a jerk out to what place they list, as it
were forth of an engine. Of this kind be the Origes,

CHAP. LIVE.
Of Apes and Monkies.

ALl the kind of these Apes approach nearest of all beasts to the resemblance
of a man's Mutianus says, that he has seen Apes play at chesse and table: and
that at first sight they could know nuts made of wax from others. He affirms
also, that when the moon is in the wain, the monkies and Marmosets (which in
this kind have tails) are sad and heavy, but the new moon they adore and joy
at, which they testify by hopping and dancing. As for the eclipse of Sun or
Moon, all other four footed beasts also do greatly dread and fear. The she
Apes of all sorts are wondrous fond of their in the end with very clasping and
clipping they kill them many times. Apes that be headed

CHAP. LV.
Of Hares and Connies.

OF Hares also there be many sorts: upon the Alps and such high mountains they
be while of color so long as the snow lies; and it is verily thought, that
all Winter long they Augustus Caesar, for a power of soldiers to destroy the
infinite increase of Connies among them. Ferrets are in great account for
chasing and hunting these Cuniculi: and when they are within, they so course
the poor Connies out of their earth, that they are soon taken above ground at
the mouth of their holes. Archelaus writes, that look how many receptacles and
ways of passage the Hare has for his dung and excrements, so many years old
he is just. And verily some have more than others. The same writer is of
opinion, that every hare is both male and female, and that any of them can
breed without the bucke. Certes herein Nature has showed her bounty and
goodness, in that she has given this creature (so good to eat, and so
harmless otherwise) the gift of fertility and fruitful womb. The Hare,
naturally exposed to be a prey

CHAP. LVI.
Of Beasts half tame.

AS for Hares, seldom be they made tame and to come to hand; and yet justly
they cannot be simply called wild: for many other such creatures there be
besides, that neither are savage, nor tame and gentle, but of a middle nature
betwixt both: as namely among flying fowls in the air, the Swallow: likewise
the Be: and among fishes the Dolphin in the sea.

CHAP. LVII.
Of Mice and Rats, Dormice, Reer-mice, and Bats.

IN the rank of those that be neither tame nor wild, many have ranged the Mice
and rats that Carbo the L. General, by eating of his hose garters and
shooe-strings at Clusium they prognosticated his death. Many sorts there be of
them in the country of Cyrene, some with a broad flat forehead, others with a
sharp Theophrastus reports, That these vermin having dispeopled the Isle
Gyaros, and driven away the inhabitants, gnawed and devoured every thing they
could meet withal; even to their very iron. And surely it seems that is their
nature so to do: for even amongst the Chalybes they serve them so, in eating
their iron and steel within their very forges: yea, and in gold mines they
play the like part: and therefore being caught, their bellies be ripped by the
pioners in the mine, where they evermore find their stolen gold again. See
what delight this creature takes in theeuing. We read in the Chronicles, that
whiles Annibal lay in siege before the town Casilinum, a rat was sold within
the town for 200 Sesterces: the man who bought it at that price lived; but the
party who sold it through greedines of money died for hunger. By the learning of
Soothsayers observed it is, that if there be store of white ones bred, it is a
good sign and presageth prosperity. Nigidius says, that rats lie close
hidden all winter, like as Dormice. By the Edicts of the Censors, and
principally by an Act of M. Scaurus in his Consulship, provided it was, and
straight order taken, that no Rats, Mice, or Dormice should be served up to the
table at their great suppers and feasts: like as all shell fish or foul fet
out of foreign countries far remote. Counted are Dormice between tame and
wild: and verily he that first devised to keep wild bores in parkes, found
means also to nourish and feed these creatures in great tuns, pipes, and
drifats. In the experiment and trial whereof this has bin found and observed,
That willingly these little creatures will not sort together unless they were
countrymen as

CHAP. LVIII.
What Creatures live not but in certain places.

A Wonderful thing it is to see, that Nature has not only brought forth
diverse creatures in sundry Countries, but also in one region under the same
climate has denied some of them to live in every corner thereof. And namely in
the forest of Moesia in Italy, these Dormice are found but only in one part
thereof. And in Lycia, the wild goats, roe-buckes, and Does never pass the
mountains that confine upon the Syrians: no more than the wild Asses
transmount that hill which diuides Cappadocia from Cilicia. Within Hellespont
the Stags and Hinds never go forth and enter into the marches of other
countries: and those about Arginussa pass not the mountain Elatus: which may
be known by this, that all upon that hill other places, they will keep a
singing as well as the res^. And (by report) the like happened in a Phalangium,
whereof we will speak more in due time and place. And that which is more
wonderful, in the same Isle there are no stags or hinds, save only in the
region and quarter of the Cydoniates: no wild bores likewise, nor the foul
called the Godwit or Attagene, ne yet Vrchins. To conclude, in Africa ye shall
find no wild bores, no Stags and Hinds, no roe-bucks and Does, ne yet Bears.

CHAP. LIX.
What Creatures are hurtful to strangers.

NOw, some living creatures there be that do no harm at all to the inhabitants
of the same countries, but kill all strangers. Namely, certain serpents in
Tirinthe, which are supposed to breed of themselves out of the very earth.
Semblably, in Syria there be snakes, and specially along the banks of
Euphrates, that will not touch the Sirians lying along asleep: nay, if a man
that leans upon them be stung or bitten by them, he shall find no hurt or
mischief thereby. But to men of all other nations whatsoever they are most
spightfully bent, them they Aristotle reports, That in Latmos (a mountain in
Caria) the Scorpions will do no harm to strangers, marie the inhabitants of the
same country they will sting to death. Now let us proceed to other living
creatures besides those of the land, and discourse of their sundry sorts and
kinds.

THE NINTH BOOK OF
WRITTEN BY C. PLINIVS SECVNDVS.
CHAP. I.
The nature of water Creatures.

I Have thus showed the nature of those beasts that live upon the land, and
therein have some society and fellowship with men. And considering, that of
all others besides in the world, they that fly be the least, we will first
treat of those fish that keep in the sea, not forgetting those also either in
running fresh rivers or standing lakes.

CHAP. II.
What the reason is why the sea should breed the greatest living creatures.

THe waters bring forth more store of living creatures, and the same greater
than the land. The cause whereof is evident, even the excessive abundance of
moisture. As for the fouls and birds, who live hanging, as it were, and
houering in the air, their case is otherwise. Now in the sea, being so wide,
so large and open, ready to receive from heaven above the genitall

CHAP. III.
Of the monstrous fishes in the Indian sea.

THe Indian sea breeds the most and biggest fishes that are: among which, the
Whales and Whirlepooles called Balaenae, take up in length as much as four
acres or arpens of land: likewise the Pristes are two hundred cubits long: and
no marvel, since Locusts are there to be found of four cubits in length: and
yeeles within the river Ganges of thirty foot Alexander the great, seeing them
coming like to an army of enemies in order of battle, was driven to range
and make head against them, close united together: for otherwise, if they had
sailed scattering asunder, there had bin no way to escape, but ouerturned they
had bin, with such a force and sway came these Tunnies in a skull upon them.
And verily, no voice,

In the red sea there lies a great demie Island named Cadara, so far out into
the sea, that it makes a huge gulf under the wind, which king Ptolomaeus was
12 days and 12 nights a rowing through: forasmuch as there is no wind at all
uses to blow there. In this creek so close and quiet, there be fish and Whales
grow to that bigness, that for their very weight and vnweldines of their body,
they are not able to stir. The Admirals and other captains of the fleet of
the foresaid Alexander the great, made report, That the Gedrosi, a people
dwelling upon the river Arbis, use to make of such fishes chawes, the doors of
their houses; also that they lay their

In those parts there be found in the sea certain strange beasts like sheep,
which go forth to land, feed upon the roots of plants and herbs, and then
return again into the sea. Others also which are headed like Horses, Asses,
and Bulls: and those many times eat down the standing corn upon the ground.

CHAP. IIII.
Which be the greatest fishes in any coast of the Ocean sea.

THe biggest and most monstrous creature in the Indish Ocean, are the whales
called Pristis [i. a Whirlepoole] rising up aloft out of the sea in manner of a
column or pillar, higher than the very sails of the ships: and then he
spouteth and casts forth a mighty deal of water, as

CHAP. V.
Of Tritons, Nereides, and sea-Elephants, and their forms.

IN the time that Tiberius was Emperor, there came unto him an Ambassador from
Vlissipon, sent of purpose to make relation, That upon their seacoast there
was discovered within a certain hole, a certain sea goblin, called Triton,
sounding a shell like a trumpet or cornet: and that he was in form and shape
like those that are commonly painted for Tritons. And as for the Meremaids
called Nereides, it is no fabulous tale that goes of them: for look how
painters draw them, so they are indeed: only their body is tough and skaled
all over, even in those parts wherein they resemble a woman. For such a
Meremaid was seen and beheld plainly upon the same coast near to the shore:
and the inhabitants dwelling near, heard it a far off when it was a dying, to
make pitteous moan, crying and chattering very heavily. Moreover, a lieutenant
or Augustus Caesar in Gaul, advertised him by his letters, That many of these
Nereides or Mearmaids were seen cast upon the sands, and lying dead. I am able
to bring forth for mine authors diverse knights of Rome, right worshipful
persons and of good credit, who testify, that in the coast of the Spanish
Ocean near unto Gades, they have seen a Mere-man, in every respect resembling a
man as perfectly in all parts of the body as might be. And they report
moreover, that in the night season he would come out of the sea abord their
ships: but look upon what part soever he settled, he waied the same down, and
if he rested and continued there any long time, he would sink it clean. In
the days of Tiberius the Emperor, in a certain Island upon the coast of the
province of Lions, the sea after an ebb left upon the bare sands 300
seamonsters and above, at one flote together, of a wonderful variety and
bigness, differing asunder. Turanius has reported, That a monster was driven
and cast upon the coast of Gades, between the two hindmost fins whereof in the
tail, were 16 cubits: it had 122 teeth, whereof the biggest were a span or
nine inches in measure, and the least half a foot. M. Scaurus among other
strange and wonderful sights that he exhibited to the people of Rome, to do
them peasure in his Aedileship, showed openly the bones of that sea monster,
before which lady Andromeda (by report) was cast to be devoured: which were
brought to Rome from Ioppe, a town in Iudaea: and they carried in length forty
foot: deeper were the ribs than any Indian Elephant is high, and the

CHAP. VI.
Of the Balaenes and Orcae.

THese monstrous Whales named Balaenae, otherwhiles come into our seas also.
They say that in the coast of the Spanish Ocean by Gades, they are not seen
before midwinter when the days be shortest: for at their set times they lie
close in a certain calm deep and large creek, which they choose to cast their
spawn in, and their delight above all places to breed. The Orcae, other
monstrous fishes, know this full well, and deadly enemies they be unto the
foresaid newly spawned, or yet great with spawn, they all to cut and hack them
with their trenchant teeth: Claudius the Emperor. It chanced to come as he was
making the said harbor or pere, drawn and trained thither with the sweetness
of certain beasts hides that were brought out of Gaul, and were cast away and
perished by the way. Of them for certain days she had fed, and still
following them, with the weight of her heavy body had made a furrow and
channel (as it were) with her belly in the bottom among the shelues: and by
reason of the flowing of the sea she was so invested and compassed in with the
sands, that by no means possible she could turn about: but still while she goes
after these hides whereof she fed, she was by the billows of the sea cast
aflote on the

CHAP. VII.
Whether fish do breath and sleep, or no.

ALl writers are fully resolved in this, That the Whales abouesaid, as well the
Balaenae as the Orcae, and some few other fishes bred and nourished in the sea,
which among other inward bowels have lights, do breath. For otherwise it were
not possible* that either they or any other beast, without lights or lungs
should blow: and they that be of this opinion, suppose likewise, that no fishes
having guils, do draw in and deliver their wind again to and fro: nor many
other kinds besides, although they want the foresaid gils. Among others, I see
that Aristotle they yawne and gape when the weather is calm and the sea still.
And they themselves also who Phocae, do both breath and sleep upon the dry
land. So do the sea Tortoises also, whereof we will write more anon.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Dolphins.

THe swiftest of al other living creatures whatsoever, and not of seafish
only, is the Dolphin; quicker than the flying foul, swifter than the arrow
shot out of a bow. And but that this fish is mouthed far beneath his snout, and
in manner toward the mids of his belly, there Simo, and take great pleasure
that men should so call them. The Dolphin is a creature that carries a loving
affection not only unto man, but also to music: delighted he is with harmony
in song, but especially with the sound of the water instrument, or such kind of
pipes. Of a man he is nothing afraid, neither auoides from him as a stranger:
but of himself meets their ships, plaieth

In the days of Augustus Caesar the Emperor, there was a Dolphin entered the
gulf or poole Lucrinus, which loved wondrous well a certain boy a poor man's
son: who using to go every Simo, Simo, and many times would give him fragments
of bread, which of purpose he ever brought with him, and by this means allured
the Dolphin to come ordinarily unto him at his call. [I would make scruple and
bash to insert this tale in my story and to tell it out, but that Mecenas
Fabianus, Flauius Alfius, and many others have set it down for a truth in
their chronicles.] Well in process of time, at what hour soever of the day,
this boy lured for him and called Simo, were the Dolphin never so close hidden
in any secret and blind corner, out he would and come abroad, yea and skud
amain to this lad: and taking bread and other victuals at his hand, would
gently offer him his back to mount upon, and then down went the sharp pointed
prickles of his fins, which he would put up as it were within a sheath for fear
of hurting the boy. Thus when he had him once on his back, he would carry him

Another Dolphin there was not many years since upon the coast of Affricke,
near to the city Hippo, called also Diarrhytus, which in like manner would
take meat at a man's hand, suffer himself gently to be handled, play with them
that swom and bathed in the sea, and carry on his back whosoever would get
upon it. Now it fell out so, that Flauianus the Proconsull or lieutenant
General in Afric under the Romans, perfumed and besmeered this Dolphin upon

The like is reported in the city Iassos, long before this time: for there was
seen a Dolphin many a day to affect a certain boy, so as he would come unto
him wheresoever he chanced to Alexander the Great ordained that the said young
boy should afterward be the chief priest and sacrificer to Neptune in
Babylon: collecting by the singular fancy that this Dolphin cast unto him,
That it was a great sign of the special love of that god of the sea unto him,
and that he would be good and gracious to men for his sake.

Egesidemus writes, that in the same Iassus there was another boy named
Hermias, who having used likewise to ride upon a Dolphin over the sea, chanced
at the last in a sudden storm to be ouer-whelmed with waves as he sat upon
his back, and so died, and was brought back dead by the Dolphin: who
confessing as it were that he was the cause of his death, would never retire

The semblable happened at Naupactum, by the report of Theophrastus. But there
is no end of examples in this kind: for the Amphilochians and Tarentines
testify as much, as touching Dolphins which have bin enamoured of little
boys: which induces me the rather to believe the tale that goes of Arion.
This Arion being a notable musition and plaier of the harp, chanced to fall
into the hands of certain mariners in the ship where he was, who supposing that
he had good store of money about him, which he had gotten with his instrument,
were in hand to kill him and cast him over board for the said money, and so to
intercept all his gains: he, seeing himself at their devotion and mercy,
besought them in the best manner that he could devise,

To conclude and knit up this matter: In Languedoc within the province of
Narbon, and in Simo, Simo, to help to make an end of this their game and
pastime of fishing. The Dolphins soon get the ear of their cry, and know what
they would have; and the better, if the North-winds blow and carry the sound
unto them: for if it be a Southern wind, it is later ere the voice be heard,
because it is against them. Howbeit, be the wind in what corner soever, the
Dolphins resort thither flock-meale, sooner than a man would think, for to
assist them in their fishing. And a wondrous pleasant sight it is to behold the
squadrons as it were of those Dolphins, how quickly they take their places and
be araunged in battle array even against the very mouth of the said poole,
where the Mullets use to shoot into Mutianus makes mention of the semblable
manner of fishing in the gulf of Iassos: but herein is the difference, for that
the Dolphins come of their own accord without calling, take their part of the
booty at the fishers hands: and every boat has a Dolphin attending upon it as
a companion, although it be in the night season and at torch light

Over and besides, the Dolphins have a kind of commonwealth and public
society among themselves: for it chanced upon a time, that a king of Caria had
taken a Dolphin, and kept him fast as a prisoner within the harbor: whereupon a
mighty multitude of other Dolphins resorted thither, and by certain signs of
sorrow and mourning that they made, evident to be perceived and understood,
seemed to crave pardon and mercy for the prisoner: and never gave over until
the king had given commandment that he should be enlarged and let go. Also
the little

CHAP. IX.
Of Porpuisses.

THe Porpuisses, which the Latins call Tursiones, are made like the Dolphins:
howbeit they differ, in that they have a more sad and heavy countenance: for
they are nothing so gamesome, playfull, and wanton, as be the Dolphins: but
especially they are snouted like dogs when they snarle, grin, and are ready
to do a showed turn.

CHAP. X.
Of sea Tortoises, and how they are taken,

THere be found Tortoises in the Indian sea so great, that one only shel of
them is sufficient for the roufe of a dwelling house. And among the Islands
principally in the red sea, they use Tortoise shells ordinarily for boats and
wherries upon the water.

Many ways the fishermen have to catch them; but especially in this manner:
They use in the mornings when the weather is calm and still, to flote aloft
upon the water, with their backs to be seen all over: and then they take such
pleasure in breathing freely and at liberty, that they forget themselves
altogether: insomuch as their shell in this time is so hardened and baked with
the sun, that when they would they cannot diue and sink under the water
again, but are forced against their wills to flote above, and by that means
are exposed as a prey unto the fishermen.

The Tortoise has no teeth, but the sides and brimmes of his neb or beck, are
sharp and

The Troglodites have among them certain Tortoises, with broad horns like the
pegs in a Lute or Harp, and the same will wagge and stir so, as in swimming
they help themselves therewith, and are guided and directed by them. And this
kind of Tortoise is called Celtium: of exceeding great bigness, but rare to be
found, and hard to come by: for their exceeding sharp pricks like rocks,
among which they keep, fright the Chelonophagi (who delight to feed upon them)
that they dare not search after them. And the Troglodites, unto whom these
Tortoises use to swim, adore them as holy and sacred things.

There be also land Tortoises (called thereupon in the works that are made of
them in pannell wise, Chersinae) found in the deserts and wilderness of
Afric, and principally in that

CHAP. XI.
Who first devised the cleaving of Tortoise shells into thin plates like
pannell.

THe first man that invented the cutting of Tortoise shells into thin plates,
therewith to seele beds, tables, cupbords, and presses, was Carbilius Pollio, a
man very ingenious and inuentiue of of such toies, serving to riot and
superfluous expense.

CHAP. XII.
A division of water beasts into their several kinds.

THe creatures that breed and live in the water, be not all covered and clad
alike: for some

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Sea-^alfe* or Seal.

THe great Whales, called Pristis and Balaena, bring forth their young alive,
and perfect living creatures: likewise all those that are covered with hair,
as the Sea-calfe or Seal. She calueth on the dry land as other cattle, and
whenever she calves, she gleans afterward as kine do. The female is tied and
lined to the male, like as bitches to dogs: she never brings more than two
at once; and she gives milk at her dugs and paps, to her young. She brings
them to the sea not before they be twelve days old, and ^en she trains and
acquainteth them to swim and keep the water ordinarily. These Seals be hardly
killed, unless a man dash out their brains. In their sleep, they seem to
low or blea, and thereupon they be called Sea-calues. Docible they be and apt
to learn whatsoever is taught them. They will salute folk

CHAP. XIIII.
Of fishes that be without hair, how they breed, and how many, sorts there be
of them.

OF such creatures as want hair, two only there be that bring forth their
young with life: and namely, the Dolphin and the Viper. Of fishes, properly so
called, there be 74 kinds: besides those that have rough crustie skins, which I
count not; whereof there be 30 sorts. Of every one of them in particular, we
will speak elsewhere, and at another time: for now we are to treat of the
natures of the chief and principal.

CHAP. XV.
Of the names and natures of many fishes.

THe Tunies are exceeding great fishes: we have seen some of them to weigh 15
talents. and the tail to be 2 cubits broad and a span. In some fresh rivers
also, there be fish found full as big: and namely, the riuer-Whale called
Silurus, in Nilus; the Lax, in the Rhene; the Attilus, in the Po. This fish
grows so fat with ease and lying still, that otherwhiles it weighs

As for the Silurus, a cutthroat he is where soever he goes, a great
deuourer, and makes foul work: for no living creatures come amiss unto him;
he sets up all indifferently. The very horses oftentimes as they swim, he
deuoures, and specially in Moenus, a river of Germany near to Lisboa or
Erlisbornis.

Moreover, in the river Donow, there is taken the Mario, a fish much like to a
ruff or Porpuis,

Within Ganges a river of India, there be fishes snouted and tailed as
Dolphins, 15 cubits long, which they call Platanistae. And Statius Sebosus
reports as strange a thing besides, namely, that in the said river there be
certain worms or serpents with two finnes of a side, sixty cubits long, of
color blew, and of that hew take their ^ame [and be called Cyonoeides.] He
says moreover, that they be so strong, that when the Elephants come into the
river for drink, they catch fast hold with their teeth by their trunks or
muzzles, and mauger their hearts force them down under the water; of such
power and force they are.

The male Tunies have no finnes under their bellies. In the spring tim^ they
go out of the great [Mediterranean] sea, and by whole flotes and troops enter
into Pontus; for in no other sea do they bring forth their young. Their young
fry, which accompany their dams (when they are lightened of their burden)
into the sea again in the autumn, are called Cordylae. Afterward, they begin
to call them Pelamides, and in Latin Limosae, of the mud wherein they are
kept: and when they be above one year old, then they be Tunies indeed, and so
called. These Tunies are cut into pieces, whereof the nape of the neck, the
belly, and the flesh about the canell bone of the throat, are most commendable
for meat, but these parcels only when they be fresh and new killed, and yet
then will they rise in a man's stomach, and make him belch sower. The other
parts being full of good meat and oleous withal, are laid in salt, and so put
up in barrels*

All kind of fishes grow exceeding soon to their bigness, and especially in
the sea Pontus: the reason is, because a number of rivers bring fresh water
into it, and in some sort make it sweet: and namely in it, there is one called
Amia, which grows so fast and so evidently, that a man may perceive how it
waxes from day to day. These fishes, together with the old Tunies and the over
against Bizantium, which cape thereupon bears the name of Auricorum. And
therefore it is, that the Bizantines make great gain by fishing for them:
whereas the Chalcedonians In the beginning of May.
Vergiliae, to the setting of Arcturus. All the winter time besides they lie
hidden in the deep, at the bottom of pits and gulfes within the sea, unless
they come forth to take their pleasure in some warm season, or otherwhiles
when the Moon is at the full. They grow sometime so fat, that their skins will
not hold, but they are ready to cleave and burst withal. The longest time that
they live is 2 years and not above. Moreover,

CHAP. XVI.
Of presages and foretokenings by fishes, and of their diversity.

NAture willing to endue this Element also of the water with some Auguries,
has given to fishes likewise a kind of prescience and foreknowledge of things
to come. And verily during the Sicilian war, as Augustus Caesar walked along
the shore upon the sands, there was a certain fish leapt forth of the sea, and
light at his very feet. The Soothsaiers and wisards upon this occurrent, being
sought unto, gave this construction thereof, and presaged thereby. That they
who at that time were lords of the sea, and held it in subjection, should be
ranged under the obedience of Caesar, and at his devotion. And yet at that
present it is thought and said, That god Neptune had adopted Sex. Pompeius for
his son, so fortunate he was, and such exploits had he achieved upon the sea.

The female kind of fishes are commonly bigger than the males. And there are
some sorts of

Fishes that be skaled, for the most part swim in troops, and sort together.
The best fishing is before the sun be up: for then fishes see least or not at
all. For if the nights be clear and Moonshine, they see as well by night as
day. Moreover, they say that it is good fishing twice in one

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Mullet and other fishes: and that the same in all places are not of
like request.

THe Mullets have a natural ridiculous quality by themselves, to be laughed
at: for when

In old time our ancestors set more store by the Sturgeon, and it carried the
name above all other fishes. He is the only sish that has the scales growing
over the head: he swims against the stream. But now adays there is no such
reckoning and account made of him: whereat I marvel much, considering he is so
hard and seldom to be found. Some call him Elops: afterward Cornelius Nepos,
and Laberius the Poet and maker of merry rimes have written, that the sea Pikes
and the cods got away all the credit from the Sturgeon, and were of greatest
request. As for the Pikes aforesaid, the best and most commendable of all
others be they which are called Lanati, as a man would say cotton Pikes, for
the whiteness and tenderness of their flesh. Of cods there be two sorts,
Callariae, or Haddocks, which be the less: and Bacchi, which are never taken
but in the deep, and therefore they are preferred before the former. But the
Pikes that are caught in Tiberius Claudius the Emperor, Optatius his freed man
(who sometime had bin a slave of his) and then Admiral and Lieutenant
Fenestella gave them the name Mulli, of certain moyles or fine shoes, which
in color they do resemble. They cast spawn thrice in one year at the least:
for so often their young Fry is seen. Our great belligods say, that a Barbell
when he is dying, changes his hue, and turns into an hundred colors: the
proof and experience whereof may be seen if he be put into a glass: for
through it, it is a pretty sport to see how he alters and changes his skales
being ready to die, one way into a pale and wan color, otherwhiles into a
reddish hue, one after another for many times together. M. Apicius (who was a
man of all others most inuentiue and wonderful for his witty devises to
maintain riot and excess) thought it was a singular way to stide and kill
these Barbels in a certain pickle, called the Roman Allies sauce (see how even
such a thing as that, has found a syrname for sooth and a proper addition.)
And he also went about to provoke men to devise a certain manger or broth made
of their livers, like to that dripping or grauie called Alec, that comes of
Fishes when they pine and corrupt. For surely it is more easy for me to say
who set men a work that way first, than set down who won the best game in the
end, and was the greatest glutton. Asturius Celer, a man of great calling and
high place, who sometime had bin Consul, showed his prodigality in this Fish,
and it was when C. Caligula was Emperor: for he gave for one Barbell eight
thousand Sesterces. Certes, the consideration hereof rauisheth my mind, and
carries it away to behold and wonder at those, who in their reproofs

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Barbil, the fish Coracinus, Stock Fish, and Salmon.

LIcinius Mutianus reports, That in the red sea there was taken a Barbell
that weighed 80 much called for; whereas in other places it is counted but a
base muddy and filthy fish; and

Of fish, some have many folds of guils, some single, others double. At these
guils they deliver again and put forth the water that they take in at the
mouth. You may know when fish be old by their hard scales: and yet all fishes
are not scaled alike. There be two lakes in Italy at the foot of the Alps,
named Larius and Verbanus, wherein fishes are to be seen every year at the
rising of the star Vergiliae, thick of scales, and the same sharp pointed like
to the tongues of buckles, wherewith horsemen or men at arms do fasten their
greiues: and never else but about that month do they appear.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the fish Exocoetus.

THe Arcadians make wondrous great account of their Exocoetus; so called, for
that he goes abroad and takes up his lodging on the dry land to sleep. This
fish (by report) about the coast Clitorius has a kind of voice, and yet is
without guils. And of some he is named Adonis. But besides him, the sea
Tortoises also, (called Mures Marini) the Polypes and Lampreies use to go forth
to land. Moreover, in the rivers of India there is one certain fish does so,
but it leaps back again into the water: for whereas many other fishes pass out
of the sea into rivers and lakes, there is great and evident reason thereof,
namely, for that they are in

CHAP. XX.
A division of fishes according to the form and shape of their bodies.

OF sea fishes some be plain and flat, as Byrts or Turbots, Solds, Plaice, and
Flounders. And these differ from the Turbots only in the making of their body:
for in a Turbot the right side turns upward, and in a Plaice the left. Others
again be long and round, as the Lamprey and Congre. And hereupon it is that
they have a difference in their fins, which Nature has given to fish in stead
of feet. None have above four, some two, some three, others none at all. Only
in the lake Fucinus there is a fish which in swimming uses 8 fins. All that be
long and slipperie, as Eeles and Congres, have ordinarily two in all, and no
more. Lampries have none to swim with, ne yet perfect guils: all of this kind
wind and wriggle with their bodies within the water, and so erche forward like
as serpents do upon the earth. They creep also when they are upon dry land,
and therefore such live longer than the rest out of the water.

CHAP. XXI.
Of Yeeles.

YEeles live 8 years. And if the North wind blow, they abide alive without
water 6 days, but not so long in a Southern wind. But yet in Winter time they
may not endure to be

CHAP. XXII.
The manner of taking them in the lake Benacus.

THere is a lake in Italy called Benacus, within the territory of Verona,
through which the river Mincius runs: at the issue whereof every year about
the month of October, when the Autumn star Arcturus arises, whereby (as it
evidently appears) the lake is troubled as it were with a winter storm and
tempest, a man shall see rolling amongst the waves a wonderful number of these
Yeels wound and tangled one within another: insomuch as in the leapweeles and
weernets devised for the nonce to catch them in this river, there be found
sometime a thousand of them wrapped together in one ball.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the Lamprey.

THe Lamprey spawneth at all times of the year, whereas all other fishes are
delivered of their young at one certain season or other. The eggs or spawne grow
to a great pass exceeding soon. If they chance to slip out of the water to dry
land, the common sort is of opinion that they engender with serpents. The male
or milter of this kind Aristotle calls Myrus. And herein is the difference,
that the spawner, properly called Muraena, is of sundry colors, and withal but
weak: but the Mylter or Myrus is of one hue, and withal very strong, having
teeth standing without his mouth. In the North parts of France all the Lampreis
have in their right jaw seven spots, resembling the seven stars about the North
pole, called Charlemaines Waine. Vedius Pollio, a gentleman of Rome by calling,
and one of the great fauorits and followers of Augustus Caesar, devised
experiments of cruelty by means of this creature: for he caused certain slaves
condemned to die, to be put into the stews where these Lampreies or Muraenes
were kept, to be eaten and devoured by them: not for that there were not wild
beasts ynow upon the land for this feat, but because he took pleasure to
behold a man torn and plucked in pieces all at once: which pleasant sight he
could not see by any other beast upon the land. It is said, if they taste
vinegar, of all things, they become enraged and mad. They have a very thin and
tender skin: contrariwise, Yeels have as thick and tough. And Verrius
writes, that boys under 17 years of age were wont

CHAP. XXIV.
Of flat and broad Fishes.

OF flat and broad fishes there is another sort, which in lieu of a chine or
back bone have a gristle. As the Ray or Skait, the Puffin like unto it, the
Maids or Thornbacke, and the Crampfish: moreover, those which the Greeks have
termed by the names of their sea Cow, their Dog-fish, their Aegle and Frog of
the sea. In this rank are to be ranged the Squali Aristotle has called in
Greek Selache, and he was the first that gave them that name: we in Latin
cannot distinguish them, unless we call them all Cartilaginea, that is to say,
Gristly fish. But all the sort of them that devour flesh are such: and their
manner is to feed lying backward, like as we observed in the dolphins. And
whereas other fishes cast spawn which resemble knots of eggs; these gristly
fishes only, as also those great ones which we call Cete, i. Whales, bring
forth their young alive. And yet I must except one kind of them which they call
Rana, i. sea Frogs.

CHAP. XXV.
Of Echeneis [i. the Stay-ship.]

THere is a very little fish keeping usually about rocks, named Echeneis: it is
thought, that if it settle and stick to the keele of a ship under water, it
goes the slower by that means: whereupon it was so called: and for that cause
also it has but a bad name in matters of love, Aristotle thinks, that it
has a number of feet, the fins stand so thick one by another.

As for the shell fish Murex, Mutianus says it is broader than the Purple,
having a mouth neither rough nor round, ne yet with a beck pointed
cornered-wise, but plain and even, having a shell on both sides winding and
turning inward. These fishes chanced upon a time to cleave Periander, with
commission to gueld all the Noblemens sons in Gnidos, and stayed it a long
time, notwithstanding it was under sail, and had a strong gale of a fore-winde
at the poupe. And hereupon it is, that these Shell fishes for that good service
are honored with great reverence in the Temple of Venus among the Gnidians.

But to return again unto our Stay-Ship Echeneis, Trebius Niger says it is a
foot long, and five fingers thick, and that oftentimes it stays a ship. And
moreover, as he says, it has this virtue being kept in salt, to draw up gold
that is fallen into a pit or well being never so deep, if it be let down and
come to touch it.

CHAP. XXVI.
The changeable nature of Fishes.

THe Cackarels change their color: for these fishes being white all Winter,
wax black when Summer comes. Likewise the Mole or Lepo called Phycis, does
alter her hue: for howsoever all the year besides it be white, in the Spring
it is speckled. This is the only fish that builds upon the reites and moss of
the sea, and lays her eggs or spawneth in her nest. The sea Swallow flies, and
it resembles in all points the bird so called. The sea Kite does the same.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of the fish called the Lantern, and the sea Dragon.

THere is a fish comes ordinarily above the water, called Lucerna, for the
resemblance that it has of a light or lantern: for it lilleth forth the tongue
out of the mouth, which seems to flame and burn like fire, and in calm and
still nights gives light and shines. There is another fish that puts forth
horns above the water in the sea, almost a foot and half long, which
thereupon took the name Cornuta. Again, the sea Dragon if he be caught and
let go upon the sand, works himself an hollow trough with his snout
incontinently, with wonderful celeritie.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of bloudlesse fishes.

SOme fishes there be which want blood, whereof we now will speak. Of them
are three sorts: first, those which be called Soft: secondly, such as be
covered within crusts: and in the last place, they that are enclosed within
hard shells. Of the first sort, counted soft, be reckoned the sea Cut or
Calamarie, the Cuttle, the Polype, and the rest of that sort. These have their
head between their feet and the belly, and every one of them have 8 feet. As
for the Cuttil and Calamarie, they have two feet apiece longer than the rest,
and the same rough, wherewith they convey and reach meat to their mouths: and
with those they stay themselves

CHAP. XXIX.
Of the Calamaries, Cuttles, Polypes, and Boat-fishes called Nautili.

ALso the Calamarie lanceth himself out of the water, as if he were an arrow;
and even so does little Scalops. The male of the Cuttles kind are spotted with
sundry colors more dark and blackish, yea and more firm and steady than the
female. If the female be smitten with a Trout-speare, or such like three-forked
weapon, they will come to aid and succor her: but she again is not so kind to
them, for if the male be stricken she will not stand to it, but runs away. But
both of them, the one as well as the other, if they perceive that they be taken
in such

Of Polypes or Pourcontrels there be sundry kinds. They that keep near the
shore are bigger than those that haunt the deep. All of them help themselves
with their fins and arms, like as we do with feet and hands: as for their
tail, which is sharp and two forked, it serves them in the act of generation.
These Pourcontrels have a pipe in their back, by the help whereof they swim all
over the seas; and it they can shift one while to the right side, and another
while to the left. They swim awry or sidelong with their head above, which is
very hard and as it were puffed up so long as they be alive. Moreover, they have
certain hollow concauities dispersed within

CHAP. XXX.
Of the many-foot fish called Ozaena, of the Nauplius, and

OF the Polypus or Pourcontrell kind with many feet, is the Ozaena, so called
of the strong savor of their heads, for which cause especially, the Lampreys
follow in chase after him. As for the Many-feet or Pourcuttels, they lie hidden
for two months together: and above two Trebius Niger, one of the train and
retinue of L. Lucullus Proconsull in Boetica, which he upon his knowledge
delivered as touching these Many-feet fishes called Polypi, namely, That they
are most desirous and greedy of cockles, muscles, and such like shell-fishes:
and they again on the contrary side, so soon as they feel themselves
touched of the Polypes, shut their shells hard, and therewith cut asunder their
claws or arms, that were gotten within: and thus fall they to feed upon
those, who sought to make a prey of them. [Now in very truth these shel-fishes,
all of them see not at all, neither have they any other sense, but tasting of
their meat, and feeling of their drink.] These Polypi foreseeing all this, lie
in wait to spy when the said cockles, etc. gape wide open, and put in a little
stone between the shells, but yet beside Trebius Niger affirms, that there is
not any other beast nor fish in the sea more dangerous to do a man a
mischief within the water, than is this Pourcuttle or Many-feet Polypus: for
if he chance to light on any of these diverse under the water, or any that have
suffered shipwreck and are cast away, he assailes them in this manner:

The rest which mine author has related as touching this fish, may seem rather
monstrous lies and incredible, than otherwise: for he affirmed, that at Carteia
there was one of these Polypi, Lucullus for a wonder, and as big it was a as
good round hogshead or barrel that would take and contain 15 Amphores: and his
beards (for so Trebius termed his claws and longstringed feet) carried such a
thickness and bulk with them, that hardly a man could fathom one of them
about with both his arms, such knockers they were knobbed and knotted like
Trebius affirms, that Cuttels also and Calamaries have been cast upon that
shore, full as big. Indeed in our sea there be Calamaries taken of 5 cubits
long, and Cuttels of twain, in length: and these live not above two years

Mutianus reports, that himself saw in Propontis another kind of fish
carrying as it were a ship of his own, and making sail with it like to some
galley: and a shel-fish it was fashioned with a keele like to a barge or bark,
with a poupe embowed and turned up: yea and armed as it were in the proe with a
three-forked pike. Within which lay hidden (as he says) another living

The Lobsters (being of that kind which wants blood) have a tender and
brittle crust to cover and defend them. For five months they lie hidden. The
Crabs likewise, who at the same time keep close and secret: and both of them in
the beginning of every spring cast their old coats or shells as snakes do their
skins, and take them that be new and fresh. Al others of this kind swim within
the water: but the Lobsters flote aloft, and creep as it were upon the water.
So long as they are secure of any fear and danger, they go directly straight,
letting down their horns at length along their sides, which naturally by
themselves have a round point or bob at the end: but if they be in any fear,
go up those horns straight, and then they creep byas and go sidelong. With
these horns they oftentimes maintain battle one with another. Of all
creatures, this only has a tender and short kind of flesh, which in the
seething will not hang togerher,

CHAP. XXXI.
Of Sea-crabs, Vrchins of the sea, and great Vrchins called Echinometra.

AS for the Lobsters, they love rocks and stony places: but Crabs delight in
soft and delicate places. In winter, they seek after the warm or sunshine
shore: but when summer is come, they retire into the cool and deep holes in
the shade. All the sort of them take harm and pair by winter: in autumn and
spring, they battle and wax fat: and especially when called Pinnnotheres [or
Pinnoteres] and for his smalnesse most subject and exposed to injury.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of Winckles and sea Snailes.

IN the same rank are to be reckoned the Winkles as well of land as water.
When they put themselves out of their shells they thrust out two horns that
they have, and will pluck them in again when they list. Eyes they have none to
see withal, and therefore these little horns serve them in good stead to
sound, as it were, and try the way as they go.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of Scallops: of the greatest Winkle called Murex, and other

THe great Scallops in the sea are counted for the same race which lie hid also
in the time as well of great heat as cold. They have certain nails as it were
shining like fire in the night season; yea in their very mouths that eat them.
As for the Pourcelanes or Murices, they have a stronger skaled shell; as also
all the kind of Winkles great and small. Wherein a man may see the wonderful
variety of Nature in this play and pastime of hers, giving them so many and
sundry colors, with such diversity of forms and figures; for of them ye
shall have flat and plain, hollow, long, horned like the moon croissant, full
round, half round, and cut as it were just through the mids, bow-backt, and
rising up, smooth, rough, toothed and indented like a saw, ridged and chamfered
between, wrinkling and winding upward to the top like Caltropes, of the Scalops
is to skip, and otherwhiles they will leap forth of the water. They also can
find

CHAP. XXXIV.
The riches of the sea.

But what mean I all this while to stand upon these small trifling matters,
when as in very truth the overthrow of all honesty, the ruin of good manners,
and in lieu thereof all riot and superfluity proceeds from these shel-fishes,
and from nothing so much? for now the world is grown to this pass, that there
is nothing in it whatsoever so chargeable to mankind, nothing so hurtful and
dangerous as is the very sea, and that so many ways; namely, in furnishing the

CHAP. XXXV.
Of Pearls, how and where they be found.

HOwbett all that before named is nothing in comparison of the Purples, precious
Coquils and Pearls that come from thence. It was not sufficient belike to bring
the seas into the are kept hungry and fasting, and so the pearls keep at a
stay and prosper not accordingly i orient and clear as Alume. They that be
goodly great ones, are commendable in their degree. As for those that are long
three of them together pendant at their ears. And names they have forsooth
newly devised i. Cymbals: as if they took delight to hear the sound of their
pearls rattling together. Now adays also it is grown to this pass, that
mean women and poor men's wives affect to wear them, because they would be
thought rich: and a byword it is amongst them, That a fair pearl at a woman's
ear is as good in the street where she goes as an huisher to make way, for
that every one will give such the place. Nay, our gentlewomen are come now to
wear them upon their feet, and not at their shoo latchets only, but also upon
their startops and fine buskins, which they garnish all over with pearl. For
it will not suffice nor serve their turn to carry pearls about them, but they
must tread upon pearls, go among pearls, and walk as

Pearls were wont to be found in our seas of Italy, but they were small and
ruddie, in certain little shell fishes which they call Myae: but more plenty of
such were taken up in the streights of Bosphorus near Constantinople. Howbeit,
in Acarnania there is a little Cochle called Pinna, [i. a Nacre,] which
engenders such. Whereby it may appear, that there be more than one sort of
Mother-pearles. For king Iuba likewise has left in writing, that in Arabia
there is a kind of shell fish like unto a Scallop, save that it is not
chamfered, but thick and rough like a sea Vrcheon, which bears Pearls within
the very flesh of the fish, like unto hail stones. But now adays there be no
such mother-pearles come to our coasts. Neither be there found in Acarnania any
of value and reputation. For why they are all in manner without proportion,
neither round nor weighty, and of a marble color. They rather about the cape
of Actium are Alexander Polyhistor, and Sudines, are of opinion that they will
age, and in the end lose their color. That they be sollid and not hollow
within, is evident by this, that with no fall they will break. But they be not
always found in the midst of the flesh within the motherpearles, but here
and there, sometime in one place, and sometime in another. Verily I have seen of
them about the brim and edges of the shell, as if they were ready to go
forth: and in some 4, in others five together. Unto this day few of them have
been known to weigh above half an ounce and one scriptule. In England.
Britain it is certain that some do grow; but they be small, dim of color,
and nothing orient. For Julius Caesar (late Emperor of famous memory) does
not Venus mother within her temple, was made of English pearls.

I my self have seen Lollia Paulina (late wife, and after widow, to Caius
Caligula the emperor) when she was dressed and set out, not in stately wise,
nor of purpose for some great solemnity, but only when she was to go to a
wedding supper, or rather unto a feast when the assurance was made, and great
persons they were not that made the said feast: I have seen her, I say, so
beset and bedeckt all over with hemeraulds and pearls, disposed in rewes,
ranks, and courses one by another: round about the attire of her head, her
cawle, her borders, her peruk of hair, her bondgrace and chaplet; at her ears
pendant, about her neck in a carcanet, upon her wrest in bracelets, and on 40
millions.
400 hundred thousand Sestertij: and offered openly to prove it out of hand by
her books of accounts of reckonings. Yet were not these jewels the gifts and
presents of the prodigal prince her husband, but the (...) and ornaments from
her own house, fallen to her by way of inheritance from her grandfather, which
he had gotten together even by the robbing and spoiling of whole provinces. See
what the issue and end was of those extortions and outrageous exactions of his:
this was it, That M. Lollius slandered and defamed for receiving bribes and
presents of the kings in the East; and being out of favor with C. Caesar, son
of Augustus, and having lost his amity, drank a cup of poison, and prevented
his judicial trial: that forsooth his niece Lollia, all to be hanged with
jewels of 400 hundred thousand

If a man would now of the one side reckon what great treasure either Curious or
Fabricius carried in the pomp of their triumphs; let him cast a proffer and
imagine what their shows were, what their service at the table was: and on the
other side, make an estimate of Lollia, one only woman, the dowager of an
Emperor, in what glory she sits at the bourd; would not he wish rather,

Two only pearls there were together, the fairest and richest that ever have
been known in the world: and those possessed at one time by Cleopatra the
last queen of Egypt; which came into her hands by means of the great kings of
the East, and were left unto her by descent. This princess, when M. Antonius
had strained himself to do her all the pleasure he possibly could, and had
feasted her day by day most sumptuously, and spared for no cost: in the hight
of her pride and wanton bravery (as being a noble curtezan, and a queen
withal) began to debase the expense and provision of Antonie, and made no
reckoning of all his costly fare. When he thereat demanded again how it was
possible to go beyond this magnificence of his, she answered again, 10
millions*
100 hundred thousand Sestertij. Antonie, who would needs know how that might
be (for he thought it was impossible) laid a great wager with her about it,
and she bound it again, and made it good. The morrow after, when this was to
be tried, and the wager either to be won or lost, Cleopatra made Antonie a
supper (because she would not make default, and let the day appointed to pass)
which was sumptuous and roial enough: how beit, there was no extraordinary
service seen upon the board: whereat Antonius laughed her to scorn, and by
way of mockery required to see a bill with the account of the particulars. She
again said, that whatsoever had been served up already, was but the overplus
above the rate and proportion in question, affirming still that she would yet
in that supper make, up the full sum that she was seized at: yea, her self
alone would eat above that reckoning, 60 millions*
600 hundred thousand Sestertij, and with that commanded the second service to
be brought in. The seruitors that waited at her trencher (as they had in charge
before) set before her one only crewet of sharp vinegar, the strength whereof
is able to resolve pearls. Now she had at her ears hanging these two most
precious pearls, the singular and only jewels of the world, and even Natures
wonder. As Antonie looked wistly upon her, and expected what she would do,
she took one of them from her ear, steeped it in the vinegar, and so soon as
it was liquified, drank it off. And as she was about to do the like to the
other, L. Plancius the judge of that wager, laid fast hold upon it with his
hand, and pronounced withal, That Antonie had lost the wager. Whereat the man
fell into a passion of anger. There was an end of one pearl: but the fame of
the fellow thereof may go with it: for after that this brave queen Venus at
Rome, in the temple of Pantheon. And yet as prodigal as these were, they shall
not go away with the prize in this kind, but shall lose the name of the chief
and principal, in superfluity of expense. For long before their time, Clodius
the son of Aesope the Tragedian Poet, the only heir of his father, who died
exceeding wealthy, practiced the semblable in two pearls of great price: so
that Antonie needs not to be over proud of his Triumuirate, seeing that he
has to match him in all his magnificence, one little better than a
stage-plaier: who upon no wager at all laid, (and that was more princely, and
done like a king) but only in a bravery, and to know what taste pearls had,
mortified

Fenestella writes, that after Alexandria was conquered and brought under
obedience to the Romans, Pearls were rise at Rome, and commonly used of every
man: also, that about the trouble some time of Sylla they began first to be in
request: and those were but small ones, and of no price. Howbeit, he is
grossly deceived, and in a great error. For Aelius Stilo does report in his
Chronicle, that in the time of war against Iugurtha, the fair and goodly
great pearls began to be named Unions.

These Pearls (to say a truth) are of the nature (in a manner) of an
inheritance to descend by perpetuity. They follow commonly in right the next
heirs. When they pass in sail, they go with warrantize, in as solemn manner
as a good lordship.

As for the rich Purples, and the precious Conchyles, every coast is full of
them. And yet to that excess and prodigality we are now grown, and out want
on roiot (the mother of all inordinate

CHAP. XXXVI.
The nature of purple fishes, and the Murex or Burret.

PVrples live ordinarily seven years. They lie hidden for 30 days space about
the dogdaies, like as the Murices or Burrets do. They meet together by troops
in the spring, and with rubbing one against another, they gather and yield a
certain clammie substance and moisture in manner of wax. The Muribes do the
like. But that beautiful color, so much in request for dying of fine cloth,
the Purples have in the midst of the neck and jaws. And nothing

CHAP XXXVII.
How many sorts there be of Purples.

PVrples have another name, and be called Pelagiae, as one would say, Fishes of
the deep sea. But in truth there be many sorts of them, and those diffring
either in place where they keep, or in food whereof they live. The first
Lutense, i. muddy, because it is nourished of the corrupt and rotten mud: the
second Algense (the worst of all) feeding upon reits or sea weeds named. Alga:
the third, Taeniense (better than the former twain) for that it is gathered
and taken up about the brims and borders of the sea, called for the resemblance
of fillets or lists in a cloth, Taeniae. And yet this kind ye eldeth but a
light color, and nothing deep: there be of them also, which they term.
Calculosae, of the sea gravel, which is wondrous good for all these kind of

CHAP. XXXVIII.
The fishing time for Purples.

THe best time to take Purples, is after the dog star is risen, and before the
Spring: for, when they have made that viscous muscilage in manner of wax, their
juice and humor for color is over liquid, thin, and waterish. And yet the
purple diers know not so much, nor take heed thereof, whereas indeed the skill
thereof is a special point of their art, and wherein lreth all in all. Well,
when they are caught, as is abouesaid, they take forth that vein before
mentioned; and they lay it in salt, or else they do not well: with this
proportion ordinarily, namely, to (i. which contains about eight wine
gallons) they put one hundred pound and a half just, of the color so
prepared. Boil it ought with a soft and gentle fire, and therefore the tunnel
or mouth of the furnace must be a good way off from the lead and c^awdron.
During which time, the workmen that tend the lead, must eftsoons skim off and
cleanse away the fleshie substance, which cannot choose but stick to the veins
which contains the juice or liquour of purple beforesaid. And thus they
continue 10 days, by which time ordinarily the lead or vessel will show the
liquour clear, as if it were sufficiently boiled. And to make a trial
thereof, they dip into it a fleece of above all other. But the Tyrians make
their deep red purple, by dipping their wool first Homer calls blood, Purple.

CHAP. XXXIX.
When they began at Rome to wear Purple first.

I Find in Chronicles, that Purple has bin used in Rome time out of mind.
Howbeit, K. Romulus never ware it but in his roial habit or mantle of estate,
called Trabea. And well known it is, that Tullus Hostilius was the first Roman
king, who after he had subdued the Tuscanes, put on the long purple robe named
Pretexta, and the cassock broched and studded with scarlet in broad guards.
Nepos Cornelius who died in the days of Augustus Caesar the Emperor, When
(quoth he) I was a young man, the light violet purple was rife and in great
request, and a pound of it was sold for a 3 lib. 2 shil. (...)* d. ^erl.
100 deniers: and not long after the Tarentine red purple or skarlet was much
called for, and of the same price. But after it, came the fine double died
purple of Tyros, called Dibapha: and a man could not buy a pound of it for a 31
lib. 5. shil.
1000 deniers, which was the price of ten pound of the other. P. Lentulus
Spinther in his Aedileship of the chair, first ware a long robe embroidered
Nepos) what is he that will not hang his parlour and dining chamber therewith,
and have carpets, cushins, and cupbord clothes thereof. And it is no longer ago
when Spinther was Aedile, than in the seven hundredth year after the foundation
of Rome, even when Cicero was Consul. This purple in those days was called
Dibapha, i. twice died: and that was counted a matter of great cost, and very
stately withal and magnificent. But now ye shall have no purple cloths at all
of any reckoning, but they have their double die. As for the cloth died with
the purple of the shel-fish Conchylia, the manner of making the color, and
dying in all respects is the same, save that there be no sea Cornets used
thereto. Moreover, the juice or liquor for that color, is tempered with water
in

CHAP. XL.
The prices of wool died with these colors.

AS for these colors, they are valued dearer or cheaper, according to the
coasts where these fishes are gotten more or less. Howbe it, it was never
known that in any place, a pound of the right purple wool, died with the
Pelagian color, or of the color it self, was more 3 lib. 18 shil. 2. d.
(...).
500 Sesterces: nor a pound of the Cornets purple cost above one hundred. I
would they knew so much that pay so dear for these wares by retaile here at
home, and cannot have them, but at an excessive rate. But here is not all,
neither is this anend of expense that way, for one still draws on another:
and men have a delight to spend and lay on still one thing after another: to
make mixtures and mixtures again, and so to sophisticate the sophistications of
Nature: as namely to paint and die their seelings, even the very embowed roofs
and arches in building: to mix and temper gold and silver together, therewith
to make an artificial metal Electrum: and by adding brass or copper thereto,
to have another metal, counterfeiting the Corinthian vessels.

CHAP. XLI.
The manner of dying the Amethyst, Violet, or Purple, the Chrymson and Scarlet
in grain, and the light Stammell or Lustie-gallant.

It would not suffice our prodigal spend thrifts to rob the precious stone
Amethyst of his name, and to apply it to a color; but when they had a perfect
Amethyst die, they must have it to be drunken again with the Tyrean purple,
that they might have a superfluous and double name Alluding to the word
Amethyst, which resists drunkenness.


As touching the Grain, serving to this tincture, it is red, and comes out
of Galatia, (as we shall show in our story of earthly plants) or else about
Emerita in Portugal, and that of all other is of most account. But to knit up
in one word these noble colors, note this, That when this Grain is but of one
years age, it makes but a weak tincture; but after four years, the strength
thereof is gone. So that neither young nor old it is of any great virtue. Thus
I have sufficiently and at large treated of those means which men and women
both, so highly esteem, and think to make most for their state and honorable
port, and setting out of themselves in

CHAP. XLII.
Of the Nacre, or his guide and keeper, Pinnoter: and the perceiuance of fishes.

THe Nacre also called Pinnae, is of the kind of shell-fishes. It is always
found and caught in muddie places, but never without a companion, which they
call Pinnoter, or Pinnophylax. And it is no other but a little shrimpe, or in
some places, the smallest crab; which bears the Nacre company, and waits
upon him for to get some victuals. The nature of the Nacre Diable de Mer.
sea-Frog, (and of others the sea-Fisher) is as crafty every whit as the other:
It puddereth in the mud, and troubles the water, that it might not be seen:
and when the little seely fishes come skipping about her, then she puts out her
little horns or Barbils which she has bearing forth under her eyes, and by
little and little tilleth and tolleth them so near, that she can easily seize
upon them. In like manner the Skate and the Turbot lie secret under the mud,
putting out their finnes, which stir and crawle as if it were some little
worms; and all to draw them near, that she might entrap them. Even so does the
Ray-fish or Thorn-back. As for the Puffen or Fork-fish, he lies in await like
a thief in a corner, ready to strike the fishes that pass by with a sharp
rod or prick that he has, which is

CHAP. XLIII.
Of the Scolopendres, the sea-Foxes, and the Glanis.

THese Scolopendres of the sea, are like to those long earewigs of the land,
which they call Centipedes, or many-feet. The manner of this fish is this, when
she has swallowed an hook to cast up all her guts within, until she has
discharged her self of the said hook, and then she sups them in again. But the
sea-Foxes in the like danger have this cast with them, namely to gather in and
let it go down into the throat more and more still of the line, until he come
to the weakest part thereof, which he may easily fret and gnaw asunder. The
Glanis is more sly and wary than they both: for his property is to bite at
the back of the hook, and not to goble it up whole, but nibble away all the
bait, and leave the hook bare.

CHAP. XLIIII.
Of the Ram-fish.

THis fish is a very strong thief at sea, and makes foul work where he comes:
for one while he squats close under the shade of big ships that ride at anchor
in the ba^, where he lies in ambush to wait when any man for his pleasure would
swim and bath himself, that so he might surprise them: otherwhiles he puts out
his nose above the water, to spy any small fisher boats coming, and then he
swimmeth close to them, ouerturneth and sinketh them.

CHAP. XLV.
Of those that have a third or middle nature, and are neither living creatures

I Verily for my part am of opinion, that those which properly are neither
beasts nor plants, but of a third nature between or compounded of both (the
sea-Nettles I mean, and Sponges) have yet a kind of sense with them. As for
those Nettles, there be of them that in the night raunge too and fro, and
likewise change their color. Leaves they carry of a fleshie substance, and of
flesh they feed. Their quality is to raise an itching smart, like for all the
world to the weed on the land so called. His manner is, when he would prey, to
gather in his body as close, straight and stiff as possibly may be. He spieth
not so soon a silly little fish swimming before him, but he spratdeth and
displaieth those leaves of his like wings; with them he claspeth the

Of Spunges, we find three sorts: the first thick, exceeding hard, and rough;
and this is called Tragos: a second, not all so thick, and somewhat softer;
and that is named Manon: the third is fine and yet compact, wherewith they make
sponges to cleanse and scour withal, and this is termed Achilleum. They grow
al upon rocks: and are fed with wilkes or shel-fish, with naked fish and mud.
That they are not senseless, appears hereby, for that when they feel that one
would pluck them away, they draw in and retire back hard, so as with greater
difficulty they are pulled from the rock. The like do they when they be
beaten upon with waves. That they live upon some food, it is manifest by the
little coquill and muscle shells that be found within them. And some say, that
about Torone they continue still alive after they be pulcked frow the rocks:
the deep gulfes, where least wind or none is stirring. The rough kind are in
Hellespont: and the

CHAP. XLVI.
Of Hound-fishes or Sea-dogs.

THe diverse that use to plunge into the sea, are annoied very much with a
number of Seahounds that come about them, and put them in great jeopardie. And
they say, that these fishes have a certain dim cloud or thin web, growing and
hanging over their heads, resembling broad, flat, and gristly fishes, which
clingeth them hard, and hinders them from retiring back and giving way. For
which cause the said diverse (as themselves say) carry down with them certain
sharp pricks or goads fastened to long poles: for unless they be proked at and
pricked with them, they will not turn their back; by reason (as I suppose) of
a mist before their

CHAP. XLVII.
Of those fishes that lie within a stony and hard flintie shell: also of those
that have

THe greatest security that fishers and diverse have of safety, is when they
see the broad flat gristly fishes; for certain it is, that they be never in any
place where hurtful and noisome beasts do haunt: which is the cause that these
diverse which ducke and plunge for sponges, call

We must needs confess, that fishes within stone shells, have small or no
sense, as namely oisters. Many are of the nature of very Plants, to wit, those
that they call Holothuria: also Pulmones, resembling the lungs of a beast: and
Star-fishes, made in form of stars (such stars I mean as it pleases the
Painter to draw.) In sum, what is there not bred within the sea? Even the very
fleas that skip so merrily in summer time within victualling houses and Ins, and
bite so shroudly: as also lice that love best to lie close under the hair of
our heads, are there engendered and to be found: for many a time the fishers
twitch up their hooks, and see a number of these skippers and creepers settled
thick about their baits which they laid for fishes. And this vermin is
thought to trouble the poor fishes in their sleep by night within the sea, as
well as us on the

CHAP. XLVIII.
Of venomous Sea-fishes.

Moreover, the sea is not without her deadly poisons: for the Sea-hare, which
keeps in the Indish sea, is so venomous, that the very touching of him is
pestiferous; and presently causes vomiting and ouerturning of the stomach,
not without great danger. They which be found in our sea, seem to be a piece
or lump of flesh without all form or fashion, in color only resembling the
land Hare. But with the Indians they be full as big, and resemble Pastinaca, i.
the Puffin or Fork fish of the sea; the which pike is five inches long. So
venomous it is, that if it be struck into the root of a tree, it kills it:
it is able to pierce a good cuirace or jack of buffe, or such like, as if it
were an arrow shot or a dart lanced: but besides the force and power that it
has that way answerable to iron and steel, the wound that it makes is
therewith poisoned.

CHAP. XLIX.
Of Fishes diseases.

WE do not hear or read, that all sorts of fishes in general be subject to
maladies and diseases, as other beasts, and even those that are wild and
savage. But that this or that fish in every kind may be sick, it appears
evidently, that some of them mislike and come to be carrion lean; whereas
others of the same sort, be taken, not only in good plight, but exceeding fat.

CHAP. L.
The wonderful manner of their generation.

IN what sort fishes do engender, if I should not in this place show, but put
it off farther, I should do great wrong to mankind, who desire to know it, as
much as they wonder how it should be. In one word, fishes engender by the
friction and rubbing of their bellies one against another: which they perform
with such celeritie, that no eye is so quick as to note and observe it.
Dolphins, and other great whales, have no other way but that, mary they are
longer somewhat about their business. The spawner, when the time serves for
generation, follows to breath a lively spirit into it, and as it were
besprinkle it with a vital dew, as it floteth upon

CHAP. LI.
More as touching the generation of fishes, and which they be that do spawne in
manner of eggs.

THe spawne or eggs of Fishes in the sea, do grow unto perfection, some of them
exceeding scon, as that of the Lampreies: others are later ere they do so. All
flat and broad Fishes, [i. the Shad:] the Carp 6 times: the Scorpenes and Sargi
twice, namely, in Spring and Autumn. Of flat broad Fishes, the Skate only
twice in the year, to wit, in Autumn, and at the setting or occultation of the
star Vergiliae. The greatest number of Fishes engender for 3 months, April,
May, and June. The Cods or Stockfishes in Autumn. The Sargi, Crampfishes, and
Squali about the equinoctial. Soft skinned Fishes in the spring: and the
Cuttel in every month. The branches and tendrils of a vine branch; and that in
such plenty, that when they are killed they

CHAP. LII.
Of fishes wombes.

THe shel-fishes Erythini and Chanae, have their wombs or matrices. As for that
fish which in Greek is called Trochos [i. the top] is thought to get it self
with young. The fry of all

CHAP. LIII.
Of the exceeding long life of fishes.

IT is not long since that we heard of one fishes memorable example, which
proved the long life of fishes. There is a fair house of retreat and pleasure
called Pausilupum, in Campaine not far from Naples; where (as Anneus Seneca
writes) there died a fish in the fish-pooles of Caesar, 60 years after that it
had bin put in by Pollio Vedius: and there remained two more of that

CHAP. LIVE.
Of Oyster pits, and who first devised them.

THe first that invented stews and pits to keep oysters in, was Sergius Orata,
who made such about his house in Baianum, in the days of L. Crassus that
famous orator, before the Marsians war. And this the man did not for his belly
and to maintain gourmandise, but of a that the same kinds of fishes, in one
place are better than in another. As the Pikes in the river Orata brought those
of the Lucrine lake into request, for as yet the British coasts were not ours;
which indeed have the best oisters of all other. But afterward it was thought
it would quit the cost and pay for the pains, to fetch oisters from the
furthest part of Italy, even as far as Brundisium. And because there should
grow no quarrel, nor controversy arise, whether these or the former had the
more delicate and pleasant taste, it was of late devised that the hungry
oisters (which in the long carriage from Brundise were almost famished) should
be fed with the rest in the Lucrine Lake, and so taste alike. In those very
days, but somewhat before Orata, Licinius Murena devised pools and stews for to
keep and feed other fishes: whose example noblemen followed and did the like
after them; namely, Philip and Hortensius. Lucullus cut through a mountain
near unto Naples for this purpose, namely, to let in an arm of the sea into
his fish pooles: the doing whereof cost him more money, than the house it self
which he there had built. Hereupon Pompey the great gave him the name of Roman
Xerxes, in his long robe. The fishes of that poole of his, after his death,
were sold for thirty hundred thousand Sesterces, i. three milions of Sesterces.

CHAP. LV.
Who invented the stews for Lampreyes.

Caius Hirtius was the man by himself, that before all others devised a pond
to keep Lampreys Caesar Dictator for to furnish his feasts and great suppers
during the time of his triumph, 600 Lampreys, to be paid again by weight and
tale in the same kind: for sell them he would not right out for any money, nor
exchange them for other commodities. A house he had for his pleasure in the
country, and but a very little one, yet the ponds and fishes about it sold the
house for four milions of Sesterces. In process of time folk grew to have a
love and cast a fancy to some one several fish above the rest. For the
excellent Orator Hortensius had an house at Bauli, upon the side that lies to
Baiae, and a fish pond to it belonging: and he took such an affection to one
Lamprey in that poole, that when it was dead (by report) he could not hold but
weep for love of it. Within the same poole belonging to the said Antonia the
wife of Drusus (unto whom they fell by inheritance) had so great a liking to
another Lamprey, that she could find in heart to deck it, and to hang a pair
of golden earings about the guils thereof. And surely for the nouelty of this
strange sight, and the name that went thereof, many folk had a desire to see
Bauli, and for nothing else.

CHAP. LVI.
The stews of Winkles, and who first was the deviser.

FVlvius Hirpinus was the first inuentor of warrens as it were for Winkles,
which he caused to be made within the territory of Tarquinij, a little before
the civil war with Pompey the great. 3 wine gallons and three quarts: for
Quadrans is 3 Cyathi, i. the 4 part of Sextarius, and Sextariusis a win^ pint
and a half, or 18 ounces.
80 measures called Quadrants, if M. Varro say true, who is mine Author.

CHAP. LVII.
Of Land-fishes.

THeophrastus also tells strange wonders of certain kinds of fishes, which
are about Babylon, where there be many places subject to the inundations of
Euphrates and other rivers, and wherein the water stands, after that the
rivers are returned within their banks: in which the fish remain in certain
holes and caves. Some of them, says he, use to issue forth aland for food and
relief, going upon their fins in lieu of feet, and wagging their tails ever
as they go. And if any chase them, or come to take them, they will retire back
into their ditches aforesaid, and there make head and stand against them. They
are headed like to the Or the sea diue^.
sea Frog, made

CHAP. LVIII.
Of the mice of Nilus.

But the inundation of Nilus clears all these matters: the ouerflowing
whereof is so admirable, and so far passes all other wonders, that we may well
believe these things. For when

CHAP. LIX.
Of the fish Anthias, and how he is taken.

I Think it not meet to conceal that, which I perceive many do believe and
hold, as touching the fish Anthias. We have in our Cosmographie made mention of
the Isles Cheldoniae in Asia, situate in a sea full of rocks under the
promontory of Taurus; among which are found fish Anthias is so crafty and
wary, that whatsoever is thrown forth, he suspecteth it evermore, Mutianus
says moreover, That the plaintiff was awarded to have for recompense, 10
pounds of the defendant. The same fishes, if they chance to see one of their
fellows caught with an hook, by report, with their sharp fins which they have
upon their back like sawes, cut the line in two: for he that hangs at it,
will of purpose stretch it out straight, that it may be cut a sunder more
easily. But the Sargots have another trick for that: for he that finds himself
taken, fretteth the

CHAP. LX.
Of the Sea fishes called Stars.

OVer and besides all these, I see that some deep clerks and great Philosphers
have made a wonder at the Star in the sea. And verily it is no other than a
very little fish, made like a star (as we see it painted.) A soft flesh it has
within: but without forth an hard brawnie skin. Men say it is so fiery hot,
that whatsoever it touches in the sea, it burns: and look what meat it
receives, it makes a hand with it, and digesteth it presently. What proof
there is hereof, and how men should come to the knowledge and experience of thus
much, I cannot readily

CHAP. XLI.
Of the Dactyli, and their wonderful qualities.

OF the shell fish kind are the Dactyli, so called of the likeness of men's
nails, which they resemble. The nature of this fish is to shine by themselves
in the dark night, when all other light is taken away. The more moisture they
have within them, the more light they

CHAP. LXII.
Of the enmity and amity which is between fishes and other water beasts.

SVch concord there is in some, and such discord in others, as is wonderful.
The Mullet and the sea-Pike hate one another, and be ever at deadly war:
likewise the Congre and the Lamprey: insomuch as they gnaw off one another
tail. The Lobster is so afraid of the Polype or Pourcuttell, that if he spy
him near, he evermore dies for very woe. The Lobsters are ready to scratch
and tear the Locustae Congrum, ex Arist. lb. 8. c. 2. histor. animal.
Congre: the Congres again do as much for the Polype. Nigidius writes, That
the sea-Pike biteth off the Mullets tail: and yet the same fishes in certain
set

Thus much of fish. Hence forward will we write of Fowls.

THE TENTH BOOK OF
WRITTEN BY C. PLINIVS
CHAP. I.
The nature of Birds and Fowls.

IT follows now that we should discourse of the nature of Fowls. And first
to begin with Ostriches. They are the greatest of all other fowls, and in
manner of the nature of four footed beasts: (namely, those in Afric and
Aethiopia) for higher they be than a man sitting on horseback is from the
ground: and

CHAP. II.
Of the Phoenix.

THe birds of Aethiopia and India, are for the most parr of diverse colors,
and such as a man is hardly able to decipher and describe, But the Phoenix of
Arabia passes all others. How beit, I cannot tell what to make of him: and
first of all, whether it be a tale or no, that that there is never but one of
them in all the world, and the same not commonly seen. By report he is as big
as an Aegle: for color, as yellow and bright as gold, (namely all about the
neck;) the rest of the body a deep red purple: the tail azure blew,
intermingled with feathers among of rose carnation color: and the head bravely
adorned with a crest and penach finely wrought; Manilius, the noble Roman
Senator, right excellently seen in the best kind of learning and litterature,
and yet never taught by any, was the first man of the long Robe, who wrote of
this bird at large, and most exquisitely He reports, that never man was known
to see him feeding: that in Arabia he is held a sacred bird, dedicated unto the
Sun: that he lives 660 years: and when he grows old, and begins to decay,
he builds himself with the twigs and branches of the Canell or Cinnamon, and
Frankincense trees: and when he has filled it with all sort of sweet
Aromaticall spices, yields up his life thereupon. He says moreover, that of
his bones and marrow there breeds at first as it were a little worm: which
afterward proves to be a pretty bird. And the first thing that this young
new Phoenix does, is to perform the obsequies of the former Phoenix late de
ceased: to translate and carry away his whole nest into the city of the Sun
near Panchea, and Manilius affirms, that the revolution of the great year
so much spoken of, agrees just with the life of this bird: in which year the
stars return again to their first points, and give significations of times
and seasons, as at the beginning and withal, that this year should begin at
high noone that very day when the Sun enters the sign Aries. And by his
saying, the year of that revolution was by him showed, when P. Licinius and M.
Cornelius were consuls, Cornelius Valerianus writes, That whiles Q. Plautius
and Sex. Papinius were Consuls, the Phoenix flew into Egypt. Brought he was
hither also to Rome in the time that Claudius Caesar was Censor, to wit, in the
eight hundredth year from the foundation of Rome: and showed openly to be seen
in a full hall and general assembly of the people, as appears upon the
public records: how beit, no man ever made any doubt, but

CHAP. III.
Of Aegles.

OFall the birds which we know, the Aegles carry the price both for honor and
strength. Six kinds there be of them. The first named of the Greeks The Saker
as some think.
Melaenaetos, and in Latin, Valeria: the least it is of all others, and
strongest withal, black also of color: In all the whole race of the Aegles,
she alone nourishes her young birds: for the rest (as we shall hereafter
declare) do beat them away: she only cries not, nor keeps a grumbling and
huzzing as others A k^ (...) F^l (...)
Pygargus. It keeps about towns and plains, and has a whitish tail. The
third is Morphnos, which Homer calls also Per^nos: some name it Plancus and *
Anataria: and she is for bigness and strength, of a second Fot king of Du^kes
and Malla^ds.
degree: loving to live about lakes and meeres. Lady Phoemonoe, who was
supposed and said to be the daughter of Apollo, has reported, that this Aegle
is toothed: otherwise mute, as not having any tongue: also, that of all other
she is the blackest, and has the longest tail. With her accorcordeth Boethus
likewise. Subtle she is and witty: for when she has seized upon Tortoises and
caught them up with her tallons, she throws them down from aloft to break
their shells. And it was the fortune of the Poet Aeschylus to die by such a
means. For when he was foretold by wizards out of their learning, that it was
his destiny to die on such a day by some thing falling Of the fourth knid is
Percnopterus, the same that The mountain Storke.
Oripelargus, fashioned like to a Geire or Vulture: Gnesios, as one would say,
true and kindly, as descended from the gentle and right airie of Aegles. This
Aegle roial, is of a middle bigness and of a reddish color, a rare bird to be
seen. There remains now the sixth and last sort, and that is Some take it for
the Ospray
Haliartos. This Aegle has the quickest and clearest eye of all other, soaring
and mounting on high: when she spieth a fish in the sea, down she comes with a
power, plungeth into the water, Haliartos, or the Osprey, she only before her
little ones be feathered, will beat and strike them with her wings, and thereby
force them to look full against the sun beams: now if she see any one of them
to wink, or their eyes to water at the rays of the Sun, she turns it with the
head forward out of the nest, as a bastard, and not right, nor none of hers;

But of the six kinds before rehearsed, the 3 first, and the fifth, have in
their nest a stone found named The precious stone Aeetites.
Aeetites, which some call Gagates, and it is therein engendered. This stone is
medicinable, and singular good for many diseases, and if it be put into the
fire it will never a whit consume. Now this stone, as they say, is also with
child: for if a man shake it, he shall hear another to rattle and sound
within, as it were in the belly or womb of it. But that virtue medicinab^
abouesaid is not in these stones, if they be not stolen out of the very nest
from the airie. (...) they do and make their nests upon rocks and trees. Three
eggs commonly they lay, whereof two only they use to hatch: howbeit sometimes
they have bin seen to have 3 young ones. But lightly one of them they turn out
of the nest, because they would not be troubled with feeding and nourishing it.
And verily Nature has well provided, that at such a time the old Egles should
not be able to puruey sufficient for meat: for otherwise, if they should rear
their birds, they were enough to destroy the young breed of dear and wild
beasts in a whole country, that there should be no venison nor game at all for
gentlemen. Moreover, by the same providence of Nature, all that while their
tallons or clees hook and turn inward very much: also for very hunger their
their prey. And were it not so, certainly one airie of Egles needs the reach of
a whole country Jupiter in place of his squire or armor-bearer.

CHAP. IV.
When Egles began to be the Ensigns and standards of the Roman legions: and
what fowls they be that war with Egles.

Caius Marius in his second Consulship ordained, that the legions of Roman
soldiers only should have the Egle for their standard, and no other ensign:
for before-time the Egle marched foremost indeed, but in a rank of four
others, to wit, of Names of Ensigns.
Wolves, Minotaures, Horses, and Bores, which were borne each one before their
own several squadrons and companies. Marius rejected them altogether, and had
no use of them at all. And ever since this is observed ordinarily, that there
was no standing camp or leaguer wintered at any time without a pair of Egle
standards.

Of Egles, the first and second kind prey not only upon the less four footed
beasts, but also maintain battle with the red Dear, even the stag and the
hind. The manner of the Egle is, after she has wallowed in the dust, and
gathered a deal thereof among her feathers, to settle upon the horns of the
Dear aforesaid, to shake the same off into his eyes, to flap and beat him
about the face with his wings, until she drive him among the rocks, and there
force him to fall down from thence headlong, and so to break his neck.
Moreover, the Egle has not enough of this

CHAP. V.
A strange and wonderful accident of an Egle.

THere happened a marvelous example about the city Sestos, of an Egle: for which
in those parts there goes a great name of an Egle, and highly is she honored
there. A young maid had brought up a young Egle by hand: the Egle again to
requite her kindness, would first when she was but little, fly abroad a
birding, and ever bring part of that she had gotten unto her said nurse. In
process of time, being grown bigger and stronger, would set upon wild beasts
also in the forest, and furnish her young mistress continually with store of
venison. At length it fortuned that the damsel died: and when her funeral
fire was set a burning, the Egle flew into the mids of it, and there was
consumed into ashes with the corpse of the said virgin. For Jupiter and the
virgin, for that the Egle is a bird consecrated unto that god.

CHAP. VI.
Of Vultures or Geires.

THe black Vultures are the best of that kind. No man ever could meet with
their nests: whereupon some have thought, but untruly, that they fly unto us
out of another world, even from the Antipodes, who are opposite unto us. But
the very truth is, they build in the highest rocks they can find, and their
young ones have many times bin seen, two together, and no more. Vmbricius, who
was counted the most skillful Aruspex of our age, says, they usually lay three
eggs, whereof they take one of them to sacre and bless (as it were) the other
eggs and the nest, and then soon after they cast it away. Also that the manner
of the Geires is to foresee

CHAP. VII.
Of the Sangualis and Immussulus.

AS touching the Sangualis and the Immussulus, our Augurs at Rome are in a
great doubt and make much question, what they should be. Some are of opinion,
that the Immussulus is the chicke of the Vulture; and the Sangualis likewise
the young Ossifraga. Massurius says, that the Sangualis and Ossifraga be both
one: and as for the Immussulus, it is the young bird of the Egle before it come
to have a white tail. Some have affirmed confidently, Mutius the Augure there
was never any of them seen at Rome. But I rather am of this mind (and me
thinks it sounds more like a truth) such is the supine negligence and
carelessness of men in all things else, that no marvel it is if they know them
not although they see them.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Hawks.

WE find in Faulconrie 16 kinds of Hawks or Fowls that prey. Of which the
Circos Phemonoe has given unto it the honor of the best simply and most
fortunate. The Romans call it Buteo, i. a Buzzard; and there is a worshipful
house and family in Rome of that syrname, by occasion that a Buzzard settled and
perched himself upon the Admiral ship where Fabius himself, one of that
house, was, presaging a boone-voyage and happy success, according as it fell
out indeed. As for the Hauk which the Greeks name Aesalo, i. the Merlin, she
alone is ever seen at all times of the year, whereas the rest are gone when
winter comes. In general, Hawks are into the air, and then are the hawks
ready to catch them for themselves. Moreover, when the

CHAP. IX.
Of the Cuckoo, which usually is killed by birds of her own kind.

AS touching the Cuckoo, it seems that he comes of some hawke changed into his
shape at one certain time of the year: for then those other hawks are not to
be seen, unless some very few days. He shows himself also but for a small
season in summer time, and afterward appears no more. It is the only hawke
that has no talons hooked downward, neither is he headed as other hawks, nor
like unto them, but in color: and for bill, he resembles rather the dove. Nay
more than that, the hawke will prey upon him and devour him, if happily they be
seen both together: and it is the only bird of all other that is killed by
those of the own kind. He alters his voice also. In the spring, he comes
abroad, and by the beginning of the dog-daies, hides himself. These lay
always in other birds neasts, and most of all in the Stockdoues,

CHAP. X.
Of Gleedes, Kites, or Puttocks.

THe Kites or Gleeds are of the same kind of Hawks or birds of prey, only they
be greater. This has been noted and observed in them: that being a most
ravenous bird, and evermore hungry, yet were they never known to snatch any
viands ordained at funeral feasts for the dead, out of the platters; ne yet
the flesh of beasts slain in sacrifice, from off the altar of Jupiter in
Olympia. Nay, it was never seen that a Puttocke would catch flesh out of their
hands that served at such feasts: but if it did, a great presage it was of some
doleful and heavy misfortune which should fall upon the whole town, that made
these solemn sacrifices. These Gleeds or Puttocks, seem by the winding and
turning of their tails to and fro as they fly, to have taught pilots the skill
of steering, and use of the helm. See how Nature has showed that in the air
above,

CHAP. XI.
A general division of Fowls.

THe first and principal difference and distinction in birds, is taken from
their feet: for they have either hooked tallons, as Hawks; or round long
claws, as Hens; or else they be broad, flat, and whole-footed, as Geese and
all the sort in manner of water-foule. Those that have hooked tallons, for the
most part feed upon flesh and nothing else.

CHAP. XII.
Of unlucky birds, and namely, the Crow, Raven, and

THe Crow lives not altogether of carrion, for the Rooke eats of other food.
The Crows and Rookes have a cast by themselves: for when they meet with an hard
nut which they be not able to crack, nor break their shales with their bills,
they will fly aloft and fling it against some rock or tile house once or
twice, yea and many times together, till it be so crushed and bruised, that
they may easily break it quite, and then they eat up the kernel. These birds
all of them keep much prattling and are full of chat; which most men take for an
unlucky sign and presage of ill fortune: although some there be who think
otherwise, that it is a good bird, and highly esteem of her. Observed it is,
that from the going down or occultation of the star Minerua (and that is but
very seldom) and namely, near to Athens. Moreover, this bird only feeds her
young cadowes for a good while after they are able to fly. She is most unlucky
at breeding time and coouing, that is to say, after the Sunsted in summer. All
other birds, which be as it were of the same race, drive their young ones out of
the nest when they be once flidge, and put them to it, forcing them to fly
abroad: like as the Ravens also, who likewise feed not on flesh only: and they
likewise when they perceive their young, once to be strong, chase and drive them
away far off. Therefore about little villages and hamlets, there commonly be
not above two pair of them at once. And about Cranon verily in Thessalie, ye
Aristotle denies this, and says, that the Ravens conceive by the mouth, no
more than the Egyptian

The night birds have also crooked tallons, as the Owls, Scritch-Owle, and
Howlets. All these see but badly in the day time. The Scritch-Owle always
betokens some heavy news and is most execrable and accursed, and namely, in
the presages of public affairs: he keeps ever in and yet no deadly accident
followed thereupon. He never flies directly at ease, as he would Sex.
Papellio Ister, and L. Pedanius were Consuls: whereupon at the Nones of March,
the city of Rome that year made general processions to appease the wrath of
the gods, and was solemnly purged by sacrifices.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the bird Incendiaria.

THis fire-bird Incendiaria is likewise unlucky, and as our Chronicles and
Annals do witness, L. Cassius and C. Marius were Consuls: in that very year
when by occasion of a Scritch-Owle seen, the city likewise was purged by
sacrifice, as is above said, and the people fell to their prayers and
devotions. But what bird this should be, neither do I know, nor yet find in
any writer. Some give this interpretation of Incendiaria, to be any bird
whatsoever, which has been seen carrying fire either from altar or chapel
of the gods. Others call this bird Spinturnix. But hitherto I have not found
any man that would say directly, That he knew what bird this should be.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the bird Cliuina or Cluina.

LIkewise the bird named in old time Clivina, or Cluina, which some call
Clamatoria, and which Labeo describes by the name of Prohibitoria, I see is as
little known as the other. Nigidius also makes mention of a bird called Subis,
which uses to squash Egles eggs.

CHAP. XV.
Of other unknown Birds.

IN the Augures books which the Tuscanes have composed, there be many birds
described and set out in their colors, which have not been seen some hundreds
of years past. And I muse and marvel much, that they should be now extinct,
and the race of them clean gone,

CHAP. XVI.
Of night-flying Birds.

OF strangers and foreign writers, Hylas is thought to have written best and
most learnedly as touching Auguries and the nature of birds. He reports in his
book, that the Howlet, Scritch-owle, the Spite that pecketh holes in trees,
the Trogone, and the Chough or Crow, when they be hatched come forth of their
shells with their tail first: and that by reason

CHAP. XVII.
Of Owls or Howlets.

IT is a pretty sight to see the wit and dexterity of these Howlets when they
fight with other birds: for when they are ouerlaid and beset with a multitude
of them, they lie upon their backs, and with their feet make shift to resist
them: for gathering themselves into a narrow fray. Nigidius writes, that
Howlets for sixty days in winter, keep close and remain in covert,

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Spite or Woodpecker.

SOme little birds there are also that have hooked clees, as the Spights, which
are known by the surname of Martius, and be therefore called Pici Martij. These
are of great account in Auspices and presage good. They that job and pecke
holes in trees, and will climb upright like cats, are of this race. As for
them, they will rampe up with their bellies to the tree, bending backward, and
when they peck with their bills against the bark, they know by the sound Trebius
writes, that let a man drive a spike or great nail, or else a wedge or pin
of wood, as hard as ever he will, into that tree wherein this bird has a nest,
incontinently as she percheth and setleth upon the tree, it will presently fly
out with such a force, that the tree will give a crack again therewith.
Throughout all Latium these birds bear the name for effectual signification of
good or bad fortune, by reason of that king or prince [i. Picus] who gave them
that name. And one presage of theirs above the rest I cannot pass over: It
fortuned that one of L. Tubero L. chief Justice of the city of Rome, as he
was sitting upon the judgment seat in the open face of the Court ministering
justice, and there rested so gently, that it suffered him to take it with his
hand. The Sooth sayer being asked his advice in this case, answered by book,
That if the bird were let go, it would portend the ruin and overthrow of the
whole state and empire: but if it were killed, it de nounced the death of the
said Praetor or L. chief Justice then in place. But the Praetor Tubero
immediately upon this answer, plucked the bird in pieces. It was not long after
but the presage of this bird took effect indeed, and was fulfilled in his
person. Moreover there be of this kind many that feed on mast, acorns, nuts,
apples, and such like fruits; but they be such as live in manner upon flesh
only. And yet I

CHAP. XIX.
Of Birds that have hooked talons and round long claws like fingers.

WHat fowls soever have crooked claws sort not together in flocks, but prey
each one apart for it self; and lightly all such fly aloft, unless it be the
night birds aforesaid: and the greater sort especially. They are all of them
great winged, little bodied, and heavy in their gate upon the ground. Seldom or
never they sit and perch upon a rock: for why,

CHAP. XX.
Of Peacocks, and who was the first that killed them for the table.

THe Peacock far surpasses all the rest of this kind, as well for beauty, as
also for the wit and understanding that he has; but principally for the pride
and glory he takes in himself. shells, he gives a certain shadow to the rest of
his feathers, which seem the brighter when they

The first that killed Peacocks to be served up as a dish at the table, was
Hortensius that great Orator, in that solemn feast which he made when he was
consecrated high priest: and M. Aufidius Lurco devised first to feed them fat:
by which invention of his, he might dispend by yearly revenue, 60000 Sesterces.
And this was about the time of the last Pirates war. 468 lib. 15. sh.


CHAP. XXI.
Of Cocks, how they be cut and made Capons: also of a dunghill Cock that spoke.

NExt to Peacocks, these birds about our houses which are our sentinels by
night, and whom Nature has created to break men of their sleep, to awaken
and call them up to their work, have also a sense and understanding of glory;
they love (I say) to be praised, and

Now of these Cocks, some of them are made for nothing else but war and
fighting, and never are they well but in quarrels, brawles, and fraies; and
these be cocks of kind: and the countries from whence they come are grown into
name, being much renowned for their breed: as namely Rhodus and Tenagra in the
first and highest degree. In a second rank and place be those of Melos and
Chalcis. Unto these birds (for their worth and dignity) the purple robe at
Rome, and all magistrates of state disdain not to give honor. These be they,
that by their tripudium solistimum [i. hearty feeding] observed by the
pullitiers, show good success. These rule our great rulers every day: and
there is not a mighty L. or state of Rome, that dare open or shut the door of
his house, before he knows the good pleasure of these fowls: and that which
more is, the sovereign stay and keep within the camp. These were they that
gave the signal, and foretold the issue of Marcus Lepidus and Quintus Catulus
were Consuls, there was a dunghill cock did speak: and it was about a
ferme-house in the country belonging to one Galerius.

CHAP. XXII.
Of Geese, and who first eat the Goose liver. Also of the leaf of a Goose of
Comagena.

THe Goose likewise is very vigilant and watchful: witness the Capitol of
Rome, which by the means of Geese was defended and saved: whereas at the same
time, through the default of dogs (which should have given warning) all had
like to have bin lost. Wherefore Olenus: as also of a damosel whose name was
Glauce, who used to play on the lute before king Ptolomaeus: and by report at
the same time a Ram made court unto the said wench, and was in love with her.
It may be credibly thought also, that this creature has some sparks (as it
were) of reason, understanding, and learning, for Lacydes the Philosopher had
one of them about him, which would never leave him night nor day, neither in
the open street abroad, nor in private house at home; but would follow him even
to Scipio Metellus, a man who lately was called to be Consulior M. Sestius, who
in those days was by his birth a gentleman of Rome. But to leave that still
undecided, this is certainly known that Messalinus Cotta, son to that Messala
the Orator, found out the secret to broile and fry the flat broad feet of
Geese, and together with cocks combs, to (...) a sauory dish of meat thereof
between (...)
weary and lagged behind, into the vaward and forefront: and so the rest by a
certain thick united squadron (which naturally they make going together) drive
the others before them. A second commodity that Geese yield, (especially those
that be white) is their plume and down. For 3 sh. i. d. ^b.
5 deniers. Hereupon it is, that so many complaints are made of Colonels and
Captains over companies of auxiliarie soldiers for their disorders. For
whereas they should keep them together in a standing corpse de guard, to watch and
ward night and day: they license many times whole bands to straggle abroad, to
hunt and chase Geese for their feathers and down. And now forsooth the world
is grown to be so delicate and dainty, that not only our fine smooth dames,
but also our men, cannot take their repose and sleep without this ware, but
complain of a pain in their necks and heads, unless they

Now, to that part of Syria called Comagena, we are beholden for another proper
invention of theirs. They take me the leaf and grease of Geese and Cinnamon
together, which they put into a brazen pot, and cover it all over with good
store of snow, wherein they let it lie in steep, well infused in this cold
humor, to use in that notable composition and sweet ointment, which of that
country is called Comagenum.

Of the Geese kind are the Birganders named Chelanopeces: and (than which there
is not a daintier dish known in England) the Chenerotes, less than wild Geese.

As for the phesant Bustards, they have a trim shining brightness that
becomes and graceth them exceeding well in their perfect and absolute black
hew: and their eie-browes painted

Another kind there is of them, bigger than Vultures, but in feather and color
much resembling them. And there is not a Foul (setting the Ostrich aside) that
poiseth and weighs more heavy than they: for they grow to that bigness, that a
man can hardly lift them from the ground. These breed in the Alps and the
North countries. If they be mued up and kept in a pen, they lose their pleasant
taste, and are no good meat: nay, they grow so sullen and self-willed, that
they will die with holding their breath. Next to these are those which in
Spain they call the Slowbirds, and in Greece Otides: but their meat is naught:
for the marow in their bones, if it be let run out, has such a stinking smell,
that a man cannot abide it, but shall be ready to vomit.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of Cranes, Storkes, Swans, Quails, the Glotis, and strange birds of other
countries.

THe nation of the pretty Pigmies enjoy a truce and cessation from arms,
every year (as we have said before) when the Cranes, who use to wage war with
them, be once departed and come into our countries. And verily, if a man
consider well how far it is from hence to the Leuant sea, it is a mighty great
journey that they take, and their flight exceeding long. They put not
themselves in their journey, nor set forward without a counsel called before,
and a general consent. They fly aloft, because they would have a better
prospect to see before them: and for ballaise themselves with stones in their
feet, and sand in their throats, that they fly more steadie

Cornelius Nepos, who died in the days of Augustus Caesar Emperor, in that
chapter where he wrote, That a little before his time men began to feed and
cram Blackbirds and Thrushes in coupes, says moreover, That in his days
Storks were holden for a better dish at the bourd than Cranes. And yet see, how
in our age now, no man will touch a Storke if it be set before him upon the
bourd: but every one is ready to reach unto the Crane, and no dish is in more
request. From whence these Storks should come, or whither they go again, is
not yet known. No doubt from far remote countries they visit us, and in the
same manner as the Cranes do: only this is the difference, that the cranes are
our guests in Winter, and the Storks in Summer. When they

Some affirm constantly, that Storkes have no tongues. But so highly regarded
they are for ^aying of Serpents, that in Thessalie it is accounted a capital
crime to kill a Storke, and by law he is punished as a Fellon in the case of
manslaughter.

After the same manner wild Geese and Swans do sort together, when they be
passengers from country to country: but all these are seen when they fly.
They make way forcibly in a pointed squadron, like as it were the stem of a
foist at sea, armed with a sharp beakehead (for by this means they break and
cut the air better, than if they drove it before with a straight, even, and

Some say that the Swans sing lamentably a little before their death, but
untruly, I suppose: for experience in many has showed the contrary. Howbeit,
these fowls use to eat and devour one another.

But since we are entered into this discourse of those fowls that make voiages
by whole flocks over sea and land to see strange countries, I cannot put off to
speak of lesser birds also, which are of the like nature. For those beforenamed
may seem in some sort to be induced to such great travel, so big they are
of body, and so strong withal. As touching Quails therefore, they always
come before the Cranes depart. A little bird it is, and whiles she is among us
here, mounteth not aloft in the air, but rather flies below near the ground.
The manner of their flying is like the former, in troops: but not without some
danger of the sailers when they approach near to land. For oftentimes they
settle in great number on their sails, and there perch, which they do
evermore in the night, and with their poise bear down barks and small
vessels, and finally sink them. These Quails have their set gists, to wit,
ordinary resting and them up: and besides, their strength is but small. And
hereupon it is, that as they fly, they seem The Bistard or Horn-owle
Otis, and the Cychramus. As for the Glottis, he puts forth a long tongue,
whereupon he has that name. This bird is very forward at the first setting out
(as being desirous to be a traveler, to see far countries, and to change the
air:) and the first days

CHAP. XXIV.
Of Swallows, Ousles, or Merles, Thrushes, Stares or Sterlings, Turkies, and
Stockedoues.

THe Swallows likewise (the birds alone of all those that have not crooked
claws, which feed upon flesh) are gone from us all Winter time. Howbeit, they
depart not far off, but seek only the Sunshine noukes, between hills near at
hand, and follow the warmth. Where Taereus there. Cecina of Volaterrae, a
Gentleman of Rome by calling (governor and master of the coaches and
coach-horses that used to run for the prise and best game) was wont to bring
with him into the city, a number of these Swallows, which he had gotten in
diverse places where he came, out of his friends houses wherein they were bred.
And when the horses which he had in charge obtained at any time victory in
the race, he would take the birds, and paint them with that color which
betokened victory, and so with that liuerie (as it were) let them fly to his
friends, for to carry tidings unto them of the good Fabius Pictor reports in
his Annals, That when a fort (which the Roman garrison held) was besieged by
the Ligustines; there was a she Swallow newly taken out of her nest within
that fort, from her little ones as she sat over them, and brought to him with
this watchword, That by a linen thread tied to her foot in stead of a letter,

Ousles, Throstles, Blackbirds, and Stares, after the same manner depart aside
from us, but go not far. Howbeit, these cast not their feathers, nor lie
altogether hidden: but are seen oftentimes in places, from whence they fetch
meat to serve them in the Winter. And therefore it is, that Blackbirds are
common in Germany, and specially in Winter time.

The Turtle more properly and truly is said to hide her self, and to shed her
plume and moult.

Stockdoues likewise depart from us, but whether they go no man knows.

As touching Sterlings, it is the property of the whole kind of them to fly by
troops, and in

Of all birds, the Swallow alone flies bias, and windeth in and out in his
flight: he is most swift of wing, and flies with ease: and therefore not so
ready to be surprised and taken by other birds. To conclude, he never feeds
but flying, and so does no other bird besides.

CHAP. XXV.
What birds continue with us all the year long: which be half years birds,
and which be but for three months.

GReat difference there is in the seasons and times of birds. Some abide the
whole year, as

CHAP. XXVI.
Strange stories of birds.

WRiters there be who affirm, That every year certain birds come flying out
of Ethyopia to Ilium, and there, about the tomb or sepulcher of Memnon,
skirmish and fight Cremutius avouches upon his own knowledge, That every
fifth year the same birds do the like in Aethyopia, even before the royal
palace sometime of the said king Memnon.

Semblably, the birds named Maleagrides, do fight a field in Boeotia. Now are
these Meleagrides a kind of Turky-cocks, and hens of Africa, having a bunch on
their back, and bespotted with feathers of sundry colors. Of all strange
birds, coming out of foreign parts, these are last received and admitted to
serve the table, by reason of a certain harsh and unpleasant strong taste that
they have. But it is the monument and tomb of Meleager which has given them
that name and credit which they have.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of birds syrnamed Seleucides.

THe birds called Seleucides, come to succor the inhabitants of the mountain
Casius, against the Locusts. For when they make great waste in their corn and
other fruits, Jupiter at the instant prayers and supplications of the people,
sends these fouls among them to destroy the said Locusts. But from whence
they come, or whether they go again, no man knows: for never are they seen
but upon this occasion, namely, when there is such need of their help.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of the bird Ibis.

THe Egyptians likewise have recourse in their prayers and inuocations to
their birds named Ibis, what time as they be troubled and annoied with serpents
coming among them: and in like case the Eleans seek unto their god Myiagros,
for to be rid of a multitude of flies which

CHAP. XXIX.
What birds they be, which will not abide some places: also which be they that
change color and voice: and then of the Nightingale.

But that which we should have said when we wrote of the departure and going
aside of birds: the How lets also are reported to lie hidden some few days.
Moreover, this is known Lumbardie
Insubrians near adjoining, ye shall have infinite and innumerable flocks and
flights of choughes and jack-dawes: the veriest thieves, nay the only thieves
of all other birds, especially for silver and gold, that it is a wonder to see
what means they will make to steal and filtch it. Men say that in the
territory of Tarentum there be no wood-pecks or tree-jobbers. It is but of late
days since that from the mountain Apennine toward the city of Rome there have
been seen Pyannets Achilles was buried, that will pass beyond the temple
consecrated unto him. In the territory of Fidenae near to Rome, Storkes build
no nests, neither shall a man find a young Storke there. But into the parts
about Volaterrae, there is not a year but one shall see a world of Stockdoues
flying from beyond sea. At Rome ye shall not have a fly or dog that will enter
into the chapel of Hercules standing in the beast market. In a word, I could
allege many such like examples; which of purpose I pass over, because I would
not be tedious in my discourses: Theophrastus reports, how all the Doves,
Peacocks, and Ravens, which are in Asia, have been brought thither from other
parts: like as all the Frogs in Cyrenaica, which do cry, whereas their own be
mute all.

As for singing birds, this is another strange and wondrous thing observed in
them. For at certain times of the year they change their color in feathers,
and alter their voice in singing and that in such sort, as of a sudden a man
would say they were other birds. A thing that happens not to the great fowls
aboue-said, save only unto Cranes: for they with age wax black. And to begin
with the Merle or blackbird, which naturally is black, he turns to be
reddish. In Summer he sings clear and tunably, in winter he stutteth and
stammereth: but about the sun-stead in December he is mute and dumb
altogether. After they be once a year old, I mean

The Nightingale for fifteen days and nights together, never gives over but
chaunteth continually, namely, at that time as the trees begin to put out their
leaves thick. And surely this bird is not to be set in the last place of those
that deserve admiration: for is it not a wonder Stesichorus the Poet, and there
sung full sweetly: who afterward proved to be one of the most rare and
admirable musicians that ever was. And Agrippina, wife of Claudius Caesar late
Emperor of Rome. And now of late we have known many of them taught to begin to
sing, only when a man would have them: and keep their responds

The Gnatsnapper, Ficedula, a bird somewhat like unto the Nightingale, does
otherwise: for at one time it changes both color, form, and song. They have
not that name Ficedulae properly but in the Autumn, as one would say,
fig-feeders: for when that season is once past, they i. Black-heads.

In like sort, the bird which is named Erithacus (i. Robin, or Redbrest) in
winter; the same is Phoenicurus [i. Red-taile] all summer long.

The Houpe or Vpupa (as Aeschilus the Poet says) changes also her hew, voice,
and shape. This is a For as Arist. reports, it nestleth in man's doung.
nasty and filthy bird otherwise, both in the manner of feeding, and also in
nestling: but a goodly fair crest or comb it has, that will easily fold and
be plaited: for one while she will draw it in, another while set it stiff
upright along the head.

As for the bird Oenanthe, it also for certain days lies close and unseen;
and namely, when the Dog Star arises, it is hidden: but after the occultation
thereof, comes abroad and shows her self: a strange thing, that in those
days it should do both. Last of all, the Chlorion.
Witwall or Lariot, which is all over yellow, being not seen all winter time,
appears about the Sun-steads.

CHAP. XXX.
Of the Merles.

ABout Cyllene in Arcadia, and no where else, ye shall find white Merles or
Ousles. And Ibis, about Pelusium only in Egypt, is black; in all places else
of Egypt, white.

CHAP. XXXI.
The kind of birds breeding and hatching.

ALl singing birds, save only those that are excepted before, lightly breed not
nor lay their (i. Mid-Iune) hardly come to any perfection: but after that time,
they do well enough and live.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of the Halcyones, or Kings-fishers: and the days good for navigations which
they show. Of the Sea-guls and Cormorants.

ANd in this regard especially, namely for breeding after the summer Sunstead,
the Halcy. ones are of great name and much marked. The very seas, and they that
sail thereupon, [i. the Brood-hen:] or else near Mid-summer or Mid-winter: for
otherwhiles they will fly about a ship, but soon are they gone again and
hidden. They lay and sit about Mid-winter when days be shortest: and the time
whiles they are broody, is called the Halcyon days: for during that season,
the sea is calm and nauigable, especially in the coast of Sicilie. In other
ports

As touching the Guls or Sea-cobs, they build in rocks: and the Cormorants both
in them, and also in trees. They usually lay four eggs apiece. The Guls in
summer time, but the Cormorants in the beginning of the spring.

CHAP. XXXIII.
The industry and wit of birds in building their nests. Of the Swallow, the
Argatilis, Cinnamologi, and Partridges.

THe Architecture and building of the Halcyones nest, has put me in mind of
other birds dexterity in that behalf: and surely in no one thing is the wit
of silly birds more admirable. The swallows frame their nests of clay and
earth, but they strengthen and make them fast with straw. In case at any time
they cannot meet with soft and tough clay, for want thereof they drench and wet
their feathers with good store of water, and then bestrew them over with dust.
Now when they have made and trimmed their bare nest, they floor it in the
bottom within, and dress it all over with down feathers or fine flox, as well
to keep their eggs warm, as also

Another kind there is of Swallows, that keep in the country villages and the
fields, which seldom nestle under men's houses: and they likewise build of the
same matter as the former do, namely, of clay and straw, but after another
fashion: for their nests are made turning all upward, with the hole or mouth
that leads unto it, stretched out in length straight and narrow, but the
capacity within is very large, in such sort, as it is a wonder to see how
provident and skilful they Isis, which every year these Swallows do rampire and
fortify, for fear lest the same Nilus should eat the banks thereof and break
over into it. In the beginning

A third sort there is of these Swallows and Martinets, which hollow the banks
of rivers, and so nestle within between. The young birds of these Martins, if
they be burnt into ashes, are a singular and sovereign remedy for the deadly
squinancy, and help many other diseases of man's body. These build not at all,
but if they perceive that the river Nilus when it swells, will rise

There be certain birds of the kind of Parrae, which of dry moss make a
nest, resembling so perfectly a round ball, that uneath or hardly a man can see
which way they should go in. And another there is called Argatilis, which
contriueth her nest after the same form, but it is of hurds and flax.

There is a kind of Woodpecker, makes a nest in manner of a cup or goblet, and
hangs it at a twig upon the uppermost boughs and branches of a tree, that no
four footed beast should reach it. And as for the birds called Galguli, men
say for a truth, that they take their sleep hanging all by their legs to some
branch, thinking by that means they are in more safety. True it is indeed and
commonly known, that all these birds in great forecast and providence, choose
some

A bird there is in Arabia called Cinnamologus, which with the twigs and
branches of the Cinnamon tree builds her nest. The inhabitants of that country
being ware thereof, shake the

No less industrious are they that make their nests in the ground, as being
not able to fly into the air by reason of their weighty bodies. Among which
there is one called Merops, that uses to feed her parents, lying hidden within
the earth. The inside of her feathers in the wing is pale, the outside blew;
and yet those above about their neck, are somewhat red. She makes her nest in an
hole six foot deep within the ground. Again, the Partridges do so fortify and
impale their nests with thorns and twigs of shrubs and bushes, that they be
sufficiently fenced against the invasion of wild beasts. They cover their eggs
with a soft carpet or hilling as it were of fine dust: neither do they sit
where they laid them first, nor yet in a place which they suspect to be Trogus
verily reports the very same of the Quails, yea and of dounghill cocks
otherwhiles. He says moreover, that tame Partridges use to tread the wild:
also that those which are new taken or beaten, be trodden of others
indifferently one with another. This libidinous heat of theirs is such, and
makes them so quarrelsome, that oftentimes they are taken by that means. For
when the fouler comes with his pipe or call (resembling the female) to allure
and train them forth, out fear, and freed of the motherly care she had of her
young ones, then will she get into the furrow

CHAP. XXXIV.
Of House-doues.

NExt after Partridges, the nature of Doves would be considered, since that
they have in a manner the same qualities in that respect: howbeit, they be
passing chaste, and neither male nor female change their mate, but keep
together one true unto the other. They live

CHAP. XXXV.
Of Stockedoues.

SOme authors we have, who affirm that Stockdoues live ordinarily 30 years,
and some until they be 40 years old. In which time they find no infirmity
nor discommodity at all but only this, That their claws be ouergrowne, which
is a sign of their age: howbeit they may be pared without danger. They have
all of them one and the same manner of tune in their singing; and commonly they
make three rests in their song, besides the fa-burden in the end, Nigidius is
of opinion, that if a man call unto a Stockdoue within-house as she is sitting
upon her eggs, she will leave her nest, and come at the call. They do lay after
Midsommer. These do^es and Turtles live eight years.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Of Sparrowes.

COntrariwise, the Sparrow is but short lived, howbeit as lecherous as the
best. The cock Sparrow (by report) lives but one year; the reason why men so
think, is, because in the looks upon them and as they stand. Moreover, they
seem to take a pride in their flying, whiles

CHAP. XXXVII.
Of the Kestrell.

TO prevent this danger therefore, the Doves need to have with them the bird
which is called Tinnunculus, i. a Kestrill, or Stannell: for she defends
them, and (by a certain natural power that she has) skareth and terrifieth
all other hawks: insomuch, as they cannot abide either to see her, or to hear
her cry. Whereupon Doves above all others, love these birds. And (as men say)
pigeons will not leave their own douecoat to fly to another, if in the four
corners thereof there be enterred four Kestrils above said, in four new
earthen pots well nealed, and never used before. But others have used means to
keep pigeons in their dove house (for Decimus Brutus sent out of the town
letters tied ^o their feet, as far as to the camp where the Consuls lay, and
thereby acquainted them with news, and in what estate they were within. What
good then did the rampire and trench which Antonius cast before Brutus had his
posts to fly in the air over all their heads? To be short, many men are
grown now to cast a special affection and love to these birds: they build
Turrets above the tops of their houses for doue-coats. Nay they are come to
this pass, that they can reckon up their pedigree and race, yea they can tell
the very places from whence this or that pigeon first came. And indeed one old
example they follow of L. Axius a Gentleman somti^e of Rome, who before the
civil war with Pompey, sold every pair of pigeons for 12. lib. 19. s^.
400 deni^s, as M. Varro does report. True it is, that there goes a great name
of certain countries where some of these pigeons are bred: for Campanie is
voiced to yield the greatest and fairest bodied

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Of the gate and flight of birds.

ALl other living creatures have one certain manner of marching and going,
according to their several kind, unto which they keep and alter not. Birds
only vary their course, whether they go upon the ground or fly in the air.
Some walk their stations, as Crows and hanging and houering with them all the
while [as Kites:] others again ply them as fast; but the

CHAP. XXXIX.
Of Martinets.

MArtinets, which the Greeks call Apodes (because they have little or no use of
their feet) and others, Cypseli; are very good of wing, and fly most of all
others without rest. And in very truth, a kind of Swallows they be. They build
in rocks and stony cliffes. And these be they and no other, that are seen
evermore in the sea: for be the ships never so remote from the land, sail they
never so fast and far off, ye shall have these Martinets always flying about

CHAP. XL.
Of the bird Caprimulgus, and the Shouelar.

THe Caprimulgi (so called of milking goats) are like the bigger kind of
Owsels. They be night-theeues; for all the day long they see not. Their manner
is to come into the sheepheards coats and goat-pens, and to the goats vdders
presently they go, and suck the milk

There be other birds named Plateae, i. Shouelars. Their manner is to fly at
those foul that use to diue under the water for fish: and so long will they
peck and bite them by the heads, until they let go their hold of the fish they
have gotten, and so they wring it perforce from them. This bird when his belly
is ^ull of shell fishes that he has greedily deuou red, and has by the
natural heat of his craw and gorge in some sort concocted them, casts up all
up again: and at leisure picketh out the meat, and eats it again, leaving the
shells behind.

CHAP. XLI.
The uaturall wit of some birds.

THe Hens of country houses have a certain ceremonious religion. When they
have laid an egg, they fall a trembling and quaking and all to shake
themselves. They turn about also, as in procession, to be purified, and with
some festue or such like thing, they keep a ceremony

CHAP. XLII.
Of the Linnet, Poppinjay or Parrat, and other birds that can speak.

THe Linnets be in manner the least birds of all others: howbeit they be very
docible. Do they will whatsoever they are taught and bidden, not only in their
voice, but also with their feet and bills, as if they were hands. In the
territory about Arelate, there is a bird called Tautus (because it loweth like
a bull or cow, for otherwise a small bird it is.) There is another also named
Anthus, which likewise resembles the neighing of horses: and if happily by the
approach of horses they be driven from their grass whereof they feed, they will
seem to neigh; and (...).
good morrow: yea, and to p^onounce what words she hears. She loves wine
well, and when she has drunk freely, is very pleasant, plaifull, and wanton.
She has an head as hard as is her beak: when she learns to speak, she must be
beaten about the head with a rod of iron: for otherwise she cares for no
blows. When she takes her flight down from any place, she lights upon her
bil, and rests thereupon, and by that means favors her feet, which by nature
are but weak and feeble, and so carries her own weight more lightly.

There is a certain Pie, of nothing so great reckoning and account as the
Parrat, because she is not far fet, but here-by near at hand: howbeit, she
pronounces that which is taught her more plainly and distinctly than the other.
These take a love to the words that they speak: for they not only learn them as
a lesson, but they learn them with a delight and pleasure. Insomuch that a man
shall find them studying thereupon, and conning the said lesson: and by their
careful thinking upon that which they learn, they show plainly how mindful
and intentive they be thereto. It is for certain known that they have died for
very anger and grief that they could not learn to pronounce some hard words:
as also, unless they hear the same words repeated often unto them, their
memory is so shittle, they will soon forget the same again. If they miss a
word, and have lost it, they will seek to call it again to remembrance; and if
they fortune to Agrippina the Empress, wife to Claudius Caesar, had a
Blackbird or a Throstle, at what time as I compiled this boook, which could
counterfeit man's speech; a thing never seen nor known before. The two Caesar's
also, the young princes (to wit, Germanicus and D^usus) had one Stare, and
sundry

CHAP. XLIII.
The understanding and wit that Ravens have.

LEt us not defraud the Ravens also of their due praise in this behalf,
considering, that the whole people of Rome has testified the same not only by
taking knowledge, but also by a public revenge and exemplarie punishment. And
thus stood the case. In the days of Tiberius the emperor, there was a young
Raven hatched in a nest upon the church of Castor and Pollux; Tiberius Caesar,
and after him, to Germanicus and Drusus the young princes, both Caesar's, every
one by their names: and anon the people of Rome also that passed by. And when
he had so don, afterward would fly again to the shoomakers shop aforesaid.
This duty practiced, yea and continued for many years together, to the great
wonder and admiration of all men. Now it fell out so, that another shoemaker
who had Scipio Aemylianus, after he had won both Carthage and Numantia. This
happened the fifth day before the Calends of April, in the year when M.
Seruilius, and C. Cestius were Consuls of Rome. Moreover, even at this very
present, when I wrote this history, I saw my self a Craterus Monoceros: that
used to hunt by the means and help of Ravens. His manner was to carry with
him these Ravens into the Forest, perching upon his shoulders and his hunting
horns: and these would seek out and put up other wild ones, and bring them
to him. Thus by custom and use he brought his hunting to this good pass, that
when he returned homeward out of the forest, the wild as well as the tame would
accompany him. Some have thought

CHAP. XLIV.
Of Diomedes his birds.

NEither will I ouerpasse the birds called Diomedeae, which K. Iuba names
Cataractae. artificially, and then cover the same over with the earth they cast
forth before, under which Diomedes, and it lies upon the coast of Apulia.
These birds are like unto the white sea Mewes with a black cop. Their manner
is to cry with open mouth incessantly at any strangers that come aland, save
only Grecians, upon whom they will seem to fawn and make signs of love and
amity in all flattering wise. A wonderful thing that they should discern one
from another, and give such friendly welcome to them, as descended from the
race of Diomedes. Their manner is every day to charge their throat and wings
full of water, and all to drench therewith the said Diomedes, in token of
purification. Whereupon arose the fable, That the companions of Diomedes were
turned into these birds.

CHAP. XLV.
What Birds are not apt to learn, and will not be taught.

ANd now that we are in this discourse of wit and capacity, I must not omit to
note, That of birds the Swallow; and of land beasts the Mouse and the Rat, are
very untoward, and cannot be brought to learn. Whereas we see great Elephants
ready to do whateuer they are commanded: the furious Lions brought to draw
under the yoke: the Seals within the sea,

CHAP. XLVI.
The manner of Birds in their drinking.

BIrds drink sucking, and those that have long necks make stays between, and
every while hold up their bil from the water, as if they would pour the water
down their throat. The bird Porphyrio alone seems to bite the water as he
drinks. And this bird has this property by himself, to dip and wet all his
meat ever and anon in water, and then with his foot in

CHAP. XLVII.
Of the Foul Himantipus, the Onocrotali, and other strange fowls.

LIke in that respect unto the Porphyrio, is the Himantipus, a bird far less
in body, but full as long legged, and stalking as high. They are bred in
Egypt, and go upon three toes to a foot. Their most feeding is upon flies. In
Italy they live not many days. All great and heavy birds live on seeds and
corn: they that fly on high prey upon flesh. Among water fouls the

CHAP. XLVIII.
The names and natures of many Birds.

OF water fowls, the Phalerides are thought in Seleucia of the Parthians, and
also in Asia, to be the daintiest. Likewise the Fesant hens of Colchis, which
have two ears as it were consisting of feathers, which they will set up and lay
down as they list. The Ginnie or Turkey hens in a part of Afric called
Numidia, be in great request, as also throughout all Italy now adays. Apicius,
the most riotous glutton and belly-god of his time, taught men first, that the
tongue of Phoenicopterus was a most sweet and delicat piece of meat. The
Moore-hen of Ionia is much commended and highly esteemed. This bird so soon as
she is taken prisoner, [i. the red Rauen] with the yellow bill, was supposed to
breed only among the Alps: and with it the Lagopus, a dainty bird, and most
pleasant in the dish. And this name it took in Greek, because it is rough
footed and haired like the hairs foot: otherwise all over white, and as big as
a pigeon. Have her out of the ground, under which she breeds, you shall
hardly get her to feed, neither will she be made tame, live she never so long:
kill her once, the body presently will rot and putrify. There is another
besides of that name, and differs from Quails only in bigness, for it is
greater M. Egnatius Calvinus governor of the parts about the Alps, reports,
that he has seen there the Ibis a bird proper to the land of Egypt.

CHAP. XLIX.
Of new Birds, and such as are holden for fabulous.

DVring the civil wars between Otho and Vitellius, and namely about the time of
the journey or battle of Bebriacum beyond the Po, there were these new birds
(for so they be called still at this day) brought into Italy. Like they be to
Thrushes or Mavisses, somewhat cap. 46. Where the Buzards also a kind of Hawk
are held for excellent meat, and served up at the table. Likewise the Vipio,
for so they call the lesser Crane. As for the fowls called Pegasi, headed like
horses; and the Griffons, which are supposed to have long ears and a hooked
bill, I take them to be mere fables: and yet they say that the Pegasi should
be in Scythia, and the Griffons in Ethyopia. Moreover, I think the same of the
Tragopanades, which many men affirm to be greater than the Egle, having crooked
horns like a ram on either side of the head, of the color of iron, and the
head only red. As touching the Birds Syrenes, I will never believe there be any
such, let Dino the father of Clitarchus that renowned writer say what he will:
who avouches for a truth, that they be in India, and that with their singing
Melampus by licking his ears, how to understand the language of birds when
they chaunt and sing upon trees, or cry and chirp in the air. Likewise the
tales that Democritus tells, who names certain birds, of whose blood mingled
together and suffered to corrupt, there is engendered a Serpent, which whosoever
eats shall know what birds say one to another in their speech: and namely the
strange things he tells of the Lark above the rest. For verily without these
fabulous lies, men's heads be occupied enough, and too much to, about the
Auguries only and presages of birds, that they have no need to busy and
trouble their brains about those toies. Homer makes mention of certain birds
called Scopes: but I cannot conceive those satirical gesticulations of theirs
like Antikes when they are perched, which so many men talk of, neither do I

CHAP. L.
W^o first devised to cram Hens. Wbo invented Mues and Coupes to keep foul in.

THey of the Island Delos began the cramming of Hens and Pullein first. And
from them arose that detestable gourmandise and gluttony to eat Hens and
Capons so fat and enterlarded with their own grease. Among the old statutes
ordained for to repress inordinate feasts, I find in one act made by C.
Fannius, a Consul of Rome, eleven years before the third Punick war, an
express prohibition and restraint, That no man should have his table served
with any foul, unless it were one hen, and no more, and the same a runner
only, and not fed up and crammed fat. The branch of this one statute was
afterward taken forth and inserted in all other acts provided in that behalf,
and went current thorough all. Howbeit, for all the law so well set M. Lenius
Strabo, a gentleman of Rome, who made such an one at Brindis, where he had
enclosed birds of all kinds. And by his example we began to keep fowls within
narrow coups and cages as prisoners, to which creatures Nat^re had allowed the
wide air for their scope and habitation.

CHAP. LI.
Of Aesopes proud platter.

But in the relation and report of this argument, notorious above all the rest
in our memory Clodius Aesopus, the plaier of Tragedies, which was esteemed
worth i 60000^ Sestert^ 150000 (...)
six hundred Sestertia. In this one charger he served up at the table all kind
of birds that either could sing or say after a man: and they cost him six
hundred Sesterces apeece. And surely it was no delight and pleasure that he
sought herein to content the tooth, but only that he would have the name to eat
the resemblers of man's voice: without any consideration and regard that he had
of all that great riches and revenues of his own, which himself had gotten by
his tongue, and by counterfeiting the speech of others. A father verily worthy
such a son, who as we said before, devoured those precious pearls. And to
speak a truth, it is hard to judge whether of them twain played the beast
more, the father or, the son. But that it seems less pride and
prodigality to swallow down the throat the greatest riches of Nature, than to
chew and eat at

CHAP. LII.
The engendring of birds: and what foure-footed beasts lay eggs as well as
they.

THe generation of birds seems always to be after one and the same manner.
And yet therein is to be found some strange and extraordinary work. Like as
there be four footed beasts known also to have eggs, namely, the Chamaeleons,
Lizards, and such as we named among the manner of their engendring, it is
performed two ways: for either the female couche th

All birds eggs within the shell, are of two colors. In water-foules, the
yolke is more than the white, and the same is more wan and duskish than in
others. The eggs of fishes are of one color, and therein is no white at all.
Birds eggs are brittle shelled, by reason of their heat. Serpents eggs are more
tough because of cold: but they of fishes are more soft and tender, for that
they be so liquid. Those of fishes and such creatures as live in water, have
round eggs ordinarily: others be long and pointed at one end in the top. Birds
lay their eggs with the rounder end Horatius Flaccus is of opinion, that the
longer the egg is, the better taste it has. The rounder egg proves to be the
hen commonly, the rest will be ^ockes. There is found in the Or ^ather in the
crown and broader end, as our Wives say.
top or sharper end of an egg within the shell, a certain round knot
resembling a drop or a nauil, rising above the rest, which they call a Kinning.

CHAP. LIII.
The engendring of eggs: the sitting of birds: and their manner of generation.

SOme birds there be, that tread all times of the year; and lay eggs but only
two months in

All eggs have within them in the mids of the yolk, a certain drop as it were
of blood, which some think to be the heart of the chicken, imagining that, to
be the first that in every body is formed and made: and certainly a man shall
see it within the very egg to pant and leap. As for the chick, it takes the
corporal substance, and the body of it is made of the white waterish liquor
in the egg, the yellow yolke serves for nourishment: whiles the chick is
vnhatched and Cornelius Cels^ writes. but the one of them is bigger than the
other. Howbeit, others say, it is impossible that one egg should come to two
chickens. Moreover, it is held for a

CHAP. LIVE.
The infirmities and impediments incident to brood hens, and the remedies.

THe best eggs that can be put under hens when they sit, are they that were laid
ten days before at the utmost; for neither old eggs, nor yet very new laid are
good for that purpose. After that a hen has sitten 4 days, take an eg from
under her, hold it in one hand by the narrow end, and look between you and the
light, with the other over it; if it be clear through and of one color, it is
supposed to be naught, and will never prove a chicke, and therefore put another
in place thereof. Another experiment there is by water: the addle egg will flote
above as empty, the sound and good will sink to the bottom: and such therefore
being full are to be

CHAP. LV.
The Auguries and presages of Eggs.

LIvia Augusta the Empress, wife sometime of Nero, when she was conceived by
him, and went with that child [who afterward proved to be Tiberius Caesar]
being very desirous (like a young fine lady as she was) to have a jolly boy,
practiced this girlish experiment to foreknow what she should have in the end:
she took an egg, and ever carried it about her in her warm bosom; and if at
any time she had occasion to lay it away, she would convey it closely out of
her own warm lap into her nurses, for fear it should chill. And verily this
presage proved true, the egg became a cock chicken, and she was delivered of
a son. And hereof it may well became the device of late, to lay eggs in some
warm place, and to make a soft fire underneath of small straw or light chafe
to give a kind of moderate heat: but evermore the eggs must be turned with a
man's or woman's hand, both night and day; and so at the set time

CHAP. LVI.
Which be the best hens.

A Man shall know a good and kindly hen by her comb, when it is strait and
upright: otherwhiles also double crested: also by the pinion feathers black,
the upper plume reddish. Such a hen will be red also about her head and bill,
and have an odd toe to her feet, yea and sometime that od one to lie cross
overthwart the other four. In case of sacrifices and religious use they are
not thought good nor allowable that have beck and feet yellow. For divine
service and secret mysteries celebrated in covert to the goddess Ops, the
black are allowed for good. There is also a dwarfish kind of hens, [i. grig
hens] that are extraordinary little, and yet fruitful, a thing not seen in any
other kind of foul: they lay and miss not, but seldom sit they

CHAP. LVII.
The maladies that hens be subject unto, and the remedies.

THat which troubles all the kind of them is a certain distillation of a
phlegmatic humor, which causes the pip, the most of all between harvest time
and vintage. The cure is, to keep them hungry and long fasting: also to let
them lie or perch in a smoky place, especially where the fume is made of Bay
leaves and the herb Sauin. It is good moreover, to draw a little quill or
feather through their nosthrils acrosse, and to remove or shift it every day.
As

CHAP. LVIII.
The manner how fowls do conceive, and what number of young ones commonly they
hatch.

Doves have this property by themselves, to bill one another and kiss before
they tread. They lay for the most part two eggs. Thus Nature has disposed, that
some should breed Vrinum. The female Ringdoue sits ever from noon until the
next morning; the male makes up the rest of the day. House-doues breed evermore
one cock pigeon, and another hen. The male is hatched to day, and the female
tomorrow. In that kind they sit both, the cock all day, and the hen by night:
and usually upon the 20 day they hatch. They lay within five days after they
be trodden, and in summer time verily you shall have them in the space of two
months bring three pair of pigeons; for then they use to hatch by the 18 day:
and presently they conceive again. i. wind-egs.

CHAP. LIX.
Of the Peacocke and Geese.

THe Pea-hen falls to lay and breed after she is 3 years old. In the first year
she begins with from her, and put under hens to be fitten upon: for why, the
Peacocks will break them if they

Ganders and Geese engender together in the very water. Geese lay ordinarily in
the spring: or if they were trodden about mid-winter, then ye shall have them
lay after the Winter Sunnestead

CHAP. LX.
Of Herons and Bittours, and the best way to keep eg^ long.

OF Herons be three sorts, A Criell, or dwarf Heron.
Leucon, Bittor.
Asterias, A Carrion Heron
and Pellon: these last engender with much pain and difficulty; as for the
males verily they cry again for anguish, and the [i. West-wind eggs.] And
verily such eggs are seen only in the spring, when that wind blows. Addle eggs,
which some called Cynosura, are they that chill upon the rest, when the hen is
gone and gives over sitting. Eggs steeped in strong vinegar will come to be so
soft, that they will pass and be drawn through the ring of a man's finger. The
best way to keep eggs is in bean meal or flower; and during winter in
chafe, but for summer time in bran. It is thought if they lie in salt their
substance will waste and consume to nothing within the shell.

CHAP. LXI.
What Bird alone brings forth a living creature, and feeds it with milk.

THe Rere-mouse or Bat alone of all creatures that fly, brings forth young
alive, and none but she of that kind has wings made of panniclcs or thin
skins. She is the only bird that suckleth her little ones with her paps, and
gives them milk: and those she will carry about her

CHAP. LXII.
Of Vipers: their manner of generation and bringing forth young: and what land
beasts do lay eggs.

Moreover, among creatures of the land, serpents lay eggs: whereof as yet we
have not written. As they engender together they clip and embrace, and so
entangled they be and inwrapped one about the other, that a man who saw them
would think they were one serpent

CHAP. LXIII.
The generation of living creatures upon the land.

OF all living creatures two footed, a woman only brings forth her young
quick. Men and women both, and none but they, repent at first the loss of
their maidenhead. A very presage (no doubt) of a life to ensue full of trouble
and misery, that thus should begin with repentance. All other creatures have
their set times and certain seasons in the year when they engender, as has
bin showed before: but all is one with us, and no hour of day or night comes
amiss. Other creatures know when they have enough, and rest satisfied: we only
are insatiable that way, and cannot see to make an end. The Empress Messalina,
wife of Claudius Caesar, Hesiod writes, that men are more given to lust in
winter than in summer, and women contrariwise. Elephants, Camels, Tigers,
Onces, Rhinoceros, Lions, Hares, Connies, and generally all beasts which have
their genitall parts from-ward, turn tail to tail to the female in the act of
generation. fruitful they are of their body. Elephants, Camels, and Horses,
get but one at once, neither do

Of Dogs and Bitches there be many kinds. They of Resembling our English
mastiues.
Laconia, as well the male as the female, be apt to engender after they be
eight months old. They be with whelp threescore days and three ordinarily. As
for other Bitches, they go proud at six months, and may be lined. They be
all the sort of them, sped at the first lining, Bitches that go assaut and take
the dog before the full time, namely when they be very young, such bring a
litter that will be longer ere they see: neither go they: but all the whelps
will not be blind so many days. Dogs commonly when they be half year old,
are thought to lift up their leg when they piss; and that is a sign

Cats and Rats of Inde, called Ichneumones, in all other respects follow the
Nature of Dogs, save that they live but six years. Conies kindle every month:
and albeit they be bagged, yet will they take the bucke again, and conceive
upon it; like as the Hares also will do the same: for as soon as ever they
have kindled, they go to bucke and are presently sped: and say that the
Leuerets or Rabbets lie sucking at them yet will they be with young. When they be
new kindled, they cannot see.

Elephants (as we have already said) never bring but one at once, and that
commonly is as big as a Calfe a quarter old. Camels go a whole year. After
they be 3 years old, they are sufficient for to engender: and commonly they
come in the spring: and it is a year after before steal a foling, before
their master beware that they are with fool. We have read in Chronicles,
Echecratides the Thessalian had a Mare, which even then when she was gone far
with fool, woone the best game in the Olympian race. They that have sought more
narrowly into the secrets of Nature, say, That stone-Horses, Dogs, and Bores,
desire the females in a morning: but Mares, Bitches, and Sowes make means to
the male after noone. Mares that are kept within house at rack and manger with
hay and prouender, desire to be covered threescore days before those that go
abroad in the heard. Swine alone of all creatures when they be brimming, froth
and foam at the mouth. And as for the Bore, if he hear the grunting of a Sow
that seeks to be brimmed, unless he may come to her, will forsake his meat,
until he be lean and poor: and she again will be so far enraged, that she
will be ready to run upon a man and all to tear him, especially if his cloths
be white. But this rage and woodnesse of hers is assuaged and allaied,

CHAP. LXIIII.
The variety in living creatures, as touching their coming into the world.

Whatsoever have quick creatures within them, bring the same forth with the
head forward. For when the time is come, the young thing turns about a little
before, which otherwise lay straight out at length in the belly. Four-footed
beasts, whiles their dams go with them, lie with their legs stretched along,
close unto their own bellies. An infant whiles it is in the mothers womb,
gathers round into a ball, and has his nose lying just between his two
knees. As for false conceptions or Moone-calues (whereof we spoke before) some
think they are engendered of the woman's seed only: namely, when she is not
conceived by a man, but

CHAP. LXV.
The breed of Mice and Rats.

OF all creatures that bring forth their young perfect, Swine only farrow one
Pig and two Pigs at a time, yea, and sometimes a number of them. Also they alone
contrary to the nature Aristotle for mine Author, and the report withal of
the soldiers that served under Alexander the great. It is said that they
engender by licking, without any other kind of copulation: and that one of them
has brought six-score at a time: also that in Persia there have been young
Mice found with young, even in the belly of the old dam. And some are of
opinion, that they will be bagged, if they taste but of a little salt. Why
should we then wonder any more how such multitudes of field-Mice and Rats
should come to devour whole fields of corn? Howbeit, the reason is not yet
known, how such numbers of them should al of a sudden consume away and come and
agreeable for their breeding in such abundance, is a great drought: also, that
when they Aristotle flatly denies it. Howbeit they sit not upon them when they
have so done, as being forgetful where they laid them, so little or no memory
at all have they. And therefore the young Lizards of themselves break forth out
of the shell.

CHAP. LXVI.
Of a Serpent engendered of the marrow of a man^ back bone.

I Have heard many a man say, that the marrow of a man's back bone will breed
to a Snake. And well it may so be, for surely there be many secrets in Nature
to us unknown, and much may come of hidden causes, as we may see even among
four footed beasts.

CHAP. LXVII.
Of the Salamander.

AS for example, the Salamander made in fashion of a Lizard, marked with spots
like stars,

CHAP. LXVIII.
Of those that breed of others which never were engendered. Also of those that

SOme creatures there be that breed of those that never were engendered
themselves; and yet not according to those natural means as others which we
have showed before; and such also as either the Summer or Spring, or some
certain season of the year do breed. Among which some engender not at all, as
the Salamander: Which is found vnt^ue by experience.
for there is no more distinction of sex in them, than in Yeeles, and in all
those which neither lay eggs, ne yet bring forth any living creature. Oisters
likewise and all such creatures as cleave fast either to rocks or to the
shelues, are neither male nor female. As for such as come of themselves, if
there be seen in them any distinction of male and female, something verily they
engender between them; but an imperfect

CHAP. LXIX.
The outward senses of living Creatures.

MAn excels all other Creatures, first in the sense of feeling, and then of
tasting: In the heavy, so thick and deaf an element as it is) yet their ear
is far better than ours. Moreover, albeit

CHAP. LXX.
A discourse, That fishes both hear and also smell.

FIshes verily have no ears, ne yet any holes to serve for hearing; and yet
plain it is that they do hear, as we may daily see in certain fish ponds and
stews where fishes be kept: for when those that have the charge of them make a
noise with clapping of their hands, as wild as they be otherwise, they shall
have them come in great flocks to take their meat that is thrown in to them:
and this are they wont to do daily: and that which more is, in Caesar's
Fishpooles a man may see whole skuls of fishes to repair at their call: yea,
and some will part from the rest of their company, and come alone to land when
they be named. Hereupon it is, that the Mullet, sea-Pike, Stock Fish, and
Chronius, are thought to hear best of all others, and therefore live very ebb
among the shelues and shallowes. That fishes have the sense of smelling it is

CHAP. LXXI.
That the sense of feeling is common to all living creatures.

THere is not a living creature throughout the world but has the sense of
feeling, though it have none else: for even oisters and earth-wormes, if a man
touch them do evidently

CHAP. LXXII.
What creatures live of poison, and what of earth.

ROe Bucks and Does, yea, and Quails (as we have said before) will feed fat
with poisons, and yet they are the most meek and gentle creatures living.
Serpents have a great desire and love to eggs; wherein the subtilty of Dragons
is worthy to be considered. For either they swallow them down whole (if their
throat will receive them) and after they be within their body, break and
squize them in pieces with rolling and winding themselves round together, and
then c^st up the shells again: or if they be but young ones yet, and not so
strong as to

Scorpions feed upon earth. And Serpents again, if they may come handsomely to
wine, will make means to drink their fill of it, howsoever otherwise they have
but little need of any drink. They eat no meat at all, or very little, when
they be kept close within any thing: like as the spiders also, which otherwise
naturally live by sucking. And therefore you shall not lightly see any venomous
creature die either of hunger or thirst. For neither have they store of heat,
nor

CHAP. LXXIII.
The meat and drink of some creatures.

OF all living creatures that have many toes in their feet, the Hare alone
feeds upon grass and green corn in the blade. As for those that be whole
hoofed, they live both of the blade, and also of the fruit thereof. Also of
such as be cloven footed, Swine will eat all kind of food, yea, and live of
very roots. It is the property of whole hoofed beasts alone, to wallow and turn
over and over. All that have teeth indented in like saws, be naturally
deuourers of flesh. Bears will feed of corn, brouse trees, eat grapes, live of
apples and other fruits, feed upon bees, creifishes, and pismires. Wolves (as
we said before) if they be very hungr, eat earth: sheep seed the better and
grow fat, if they may drink; and therefore salt is very good for them, because
it makes them thirsty. Draught beasts, and such as are used for carriage,
albeit they live of corn and grass, ^et according to their drinking they do
feed. Besides those mentioned hertofore, of thereof without drink; for they
use to stanch and quench their own thirst, with a certain moist

CHAP. LXXIIII.
What beasts accord together, and which they be that disagree one

BEsides these outward senses above named, evident it is also, that brute
beasts have other instincts of nature. For they entertain friendship and enmity
one with another (which cannot be without affection and passion) over and
besides those other wars and amities which we have observed in their several
places. Swans and Aegles jar and war one with another: so does the Raven and
the Witwall or Loriot, which seek after one another eggs in the night.
Likewise the Raven and Kite: for the Raven is evermore ready to catch the Kites
meat from him. Crows and Owls are at mortal feaud one with another. The
royal Aegle hates the Wren, and why? because (if we may believe it) he is
named Regulus (i. the petty king.) Howlets also Philarchus tells a strange
history of it. For hewriteth, that in Egypt there was an Aspis used ordinarily
to come to the table of a

CHAP. LXXV.
The sleep of living creatures.

THe question, Whether living creatures sleep or no? is not very difficult, but
soon decided: For plain it is, that of land creatures, all that wink and close
their eyes do sleep. As for pro and contra, grounded upon many experiments of
both sides: namely, whether the soul of man while the body is at rest,
foreseeth things to come? and how it should so do? or whether this be a thing
of mere chance and altogether coniecturall, as many others be? And surely if
we go by histories,

THE ELEVENTH BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF NATVRE,
WRITTEN BY C. PLINIVS SECVNDVS.
The Proeme.
IT remains now to write of those liu^g creatures, which are the most subtle
of all others that Nature has brought forth: forasmuch as some are of opinion,
That they breath not, ne yet have any blood at all.

CHAP. I.
Of Insects in general.

MAny and sundry sorts there be of Insects, as well among land creatures as
those that fly Insecta: by reason of those cuts and divisions, which some have
about the neck; others in the breast and belly; the which do go round and part
the members of the body, hanging together only by a little pipe and fistulous
conueiance. There be of them, that have not the body divided entire, one part
from the other by these incisures, cuts, and wrinckles; but they appear only
either under the belly, or upon the back above, and go no deeper, neither yet
round the whole compass of the body. But a man shall perceive in them certain
rings or circles, apt to bend and wind to and fro, and those so plated and
plaited one over another, that in

CHAP. II.
The industry and subtlety of Nature inframing these Insects.

IN bodies of any bigness, or at leastwise in those of the greater sort, Nature
hadno hard pie^e of work to procreate, form, and bring all parts to
perfection; by reason that the matter whereof they be wrought, is pliable and
will follow as she would have it. But in these so little bodies (nay pricks and
specks rather than bodies indeed) how can one comprehend the reason, the and
convey the blood through it. Come to the Wood-worme, what manner of teeth has
Nature

CHAP. III.
Whether Insects do breath, and whether they have blood or no?

Diverse have denied that they breath at al; and upon this reason they ground
their position, Because they have no artery or windpipe annexed or reaching
to any instrument within of respiration. And they be of opinion, that they live
indeed as plants, herbs, and trees: howbeit (say they) there is a great
difference between having life, and drawing wind or vital breath. And by the
same rule they affirm, that they have no blood, which is in none that be

CHAP. IIII.
The substance of the body in these Insects.

THese Insects, so far as a man may perceive, seem not to have either sinews
or bones, no chine nor gristle, no fat, no flesh, ne yet so much as a tender
and brittle shell, as some Seafishes than hard. This is the very substance
whereof they consist, and nothing have they besides. For

CHAP. V.
Of Bees.

But among them all, Bees are principal, and by good right deserve especial
admiration, as being the only Insects ordained by Nature for man's use. They
gather honey, a most sweet, pleasant, fine, and wholesome liquor. They frame
the honey combs, and work the wax, which serve for a thousand turns in this
life. They endure pains continually, and dispatch their work and business.
They have a policy and Commonwealth among themselves. They hold their several
counsels: and there is not a swarm or cast that they have, without a king and
captain of their own: and that which is most admirable of all, there be
civil fashions and customs among

CHAP. VI.
The natural order and regiment that is in Bees.

BEes all winter time keep close within their hiues: and good reason; for how
possibly should they endure hard frost and chilling snow? how should they abide
the piercing blasts of the North winds? And verily it is the manner of all
these Insects so to do, but yet they keep not in so long. For why? being
nestled warm as they are within our houses, they sooner do recover their
vigor, and come abroad betimes. But as concerning Bees, either the times have
changed, and places altered their course, or else the writers beforetime of this
argument have greatly erred. They begin to retire themselves and take up their
wintering harbor, presently upon the withal other juices that are more
unsavory, gathered from the bitterest herbs they can

CHAP. VII.
The proper terms belonging to their work.

THe first foundation of their work, skillful hony-masters do call Commosis:
the second Pissoceros: the third Propolis, which lies between those former
coats and the wax of the honey comb, whereof there is so great use in Physic.
Commosis is the first coat or crust Rore (...) or Sea-dew, Rore mari^.
Spring-dew, and the moisture issuing out of trees in manner of gum: in less
abundance ever, when the South-west wind blows: but when it is full South, more
black: and in the Northerly constitution, far better and more red withal.
Great store hereof, Bees meet with upon Almond trees. Menecrates says, That it
is a flower foreshewing what harvest shall ensue: Being dec^ued with the
Homony^ of the word Cerinthus, which has a double signification.
but no man says so besides him.

CHAP. VIII.
What flowers they be which Bees serve themselves most withal for their work.

AS for wax, Bees gather and make it of the flowers of all trees, herbs, and
plants, saving the docke and Chenopode^
Goose-foot, which are two kinds of herbs. Some except also a kind of Broom
called Spart, but untruly: for in Spain (where there be many places full of
that shrub) the honey carries the strength thereof in the taste. I am besides
of opinion, that they be deceived who think that bees gather not of Olive
trees. For we see it ordinary, that there be more casts and swarms of Bees
where Olives grow in greater abundance. These pretty creatures hurt no fruit
whatsoever. They will not settle upon a flower that is faded, and much less of
any dead carcass. They use not to go from their hiue about their business above
60 paces: and if it chance, that within the precinct of these limits they find
not flowers sufficient: out go their spies, whom they send forth to discover
forage farther off. If in this expedition, before they come

CHAP. IX.
Those that have taken a special pleasure in Bees.

SVch is the industry of this creature, that no man need to wonder at those
two persons who delighted so much in them, that the one (namely Aristomachus of
Soli) for threescore years lacking but twain, did nothing else but keep bees.
and Philiscus the Thasian employed Agrius. And both these upon their knowledge
and experience, wrote of Bees.

CHAP. X.
The order that they keep in their work.

THe manner of their business is this. All the day time they have a standing
watch and ward at their gates, much like to the corpse de guard in a camp. In
the night they rest until the morning: by which time, one of them a waketh and
raises all the rest with two or three big hums or buzzes that it gives, to
warn them as it were with sound of trumpet. At which signal given, the whole
troop prepares to fly forth, if it be a fair and calm day toward, for they
do both foresee, and also foreshew when it will be either windy or rainie,
and then will they keep within their strength and fort. Now when the weather
is temperate (which they foreknow well enough) and that the whole army is on
foot and marched abroad, some gather together

CHAP. XI.
Of the drone Bees.

THe houses and habitations that Bees build first, are for the Commons: which
being finished, they set in hand with a palace for their king. If they foresee
that it will be a good season, and that they are like to gather store of
provision, they make pauilions also for the Drones. And albeit they be of
themselves bigger than the very bees, yet take they up the least lodgings. Now
these drones be without any sting at all, as one would say imperfect bees, and
the last fruit of such old ones as are weary and able to do no more good; the
very later brood and increase, and to say a truth, no better than slaves to the
right bees indeed. And therefore the others

If one pluck off the wings from a drone, and put him again within the hiue, he
will never lin until he have done the like by all the rest of the same kind.
As touching the royal palaces for the kings and captains that shall be,
built they are all most stately, great of receipt, in show magnificent, seated
by themselves apart, and like citadels raised upon some high knap or tuft of a
mountain. If one of these castles chance to be pressed or crushed, there will
no more come of that princely race. All the lodgings and rooms where the bees
abode is, are six cornered, according to the number of feet employed in that
work. None of all this is done at any set time or day appointed: but they take
the opportunity when they can epsy fair weather to fit their business, and
so do these things by snatches. And surely within a day or two at the most,
they fill their storehouses with honey.

CHAP. XII.
The Nature of Honey.

THis pleasant and sweet liquor which we call honey, is ingendered naturally in
the air, and especially by the influence and rising of some stars: but
principally during the fervent heat of the canicular days, even when the
Dog Star is in his full power and force: never before the appearing of the star
Virgiliae, but always before day. For so about the day break betimes in the
morning, the leaves of trees are found bedewed with honey: and look whosoever
they are, that have occasion to be abroad in the air about the dawning of the
morrow,

CHAP. XIII.
The best kind of Honey.

THe best honey is ever there, where the best flowers are, within the
receptacles whereof, it lies. As we may see in the counrry about Athens, which
carries the name for honey: also in Sicilie within those territories about
Hymettus and Hybla: and lastly, in the Isle Calydna. Now this honey, whereof we
treat, is at the first clear and thin as water; and for certain days in the
beginning, it works and boiles like to new wine, and so purges it self. By
the 20 day it gets a certain consistence and thick substance, and soon
after gathers a thin cream or skin over it: which in the very heat of working,
is raised of a scum, and so thickneth. The best simply that bees can suck, and
least infected with the corruption of 3 branches, is that which [i. Linden
tree] and Canes.

CHAP. XIIII.
The sundry sorts of honey, according to diverse regions.

Honey (as we said before) is better or worse, according to the region where it
is gathered, and that in many respects. For in some place ye shall have goodly
combs: howbeit, more commendable for wax than the honey in them: as in the
Pelignians country, and Sicily. In others, and namely in Candie, Cypres, and
Africa, the combs yield more honey than wax. Some countries there be, especially
in the North parts, where the combs pass for bigness: insomuch Venus,
Jupiter, or Mercury be Oriental, then shall ye have so heavenly a sweet
liquor, and divine Nectar, which immortalizeth the gods above.

CHAP. XV.
The marks of good honey.

MOre plenty of honey is gathered in the full of the Moon, than at any other
time: and if therewith the weather be fair, the same will be more vncteous and
fattie. In all kinds, the best honey is that, which runs of it self as new
Wine and Oil; and called it is Acedon, as a man would say, gotten without care
and travel. All Summer honey is red, as being made in the driest season of the
year. The honey which comes of Time, is held to be the best and most
profitable; in color like gold, in taste right pleasant; evident to be known
by the little leaves therein: and the same is likewise fattie. That which is
made of Rosemary, or within the Thasius Dionysius is of opinion, that the tenth
part thereof should be left for the bees, namely, if they were full: if not, then
according to the proportion: but if they were but light and very thin, he would
not have them to be touched at all. The Athenians go Vulcan: for then they
ever begin to drive their hiues for this kind of honey.

CHAP. XVI.
Of a third kind of Honey: and how a man should know good Bees.

THere is a third sort of wild honey, which the Greeks call Ericaeum [i. Heath or
Ling hony] and is of least reckoning. It is gathered after the first rain in
Autumn, when the heath and lings only bloom in the woods, whereupon it seems as
if it were sandy. This kind of honey is engendered for the most part after the
rising of Arcturus, much about the Ides of September. of them thus now and
then, makes them more fresh to go about their work. For when they [i. without
smoke.] The honey gathered of both sorts of Thyme, called thereupon Bithymum, is
not white: howbeit, very good it is for eyes and to cleanse ulcers.

Now as touching the generation of Bees, and how they multiply and increase,
much dispute there has bin among the learned, and a nice question this is. For
first and foremost, bees were never seen to engender one with another: and
therefore most men have bin of opinion, that young bees must needs be made of
flowers fitly and hand somely laid together and composed, according [i. the
gad-bee or horse fly.] Now if those little worms or grubs from whence the
bees come, were made of flowers, which they themselves formed and brought into
fashion, how comes this gad-bee, and whereof is he made? This is certain,
that bees couvy and sit as hens do: and that which is (after a sort) by them
hatched, seems at the first to be a little white grub or magot, lying cross
overthwart the honey, and so fast sticking thereto, as if it seemed to feed
thereupon. The king that shall be, at the very first is yellow, and of the
color of honey: as if he were made of the most choice and excellent flower of
all the rest: nothing like to a grub as the other, but presently has wings.
The rest of the multitude, when they begin to take some shape, are called
Nymphae: like as the Drones at the beginning, be termed Sirenes or Cephenes. If
a man take their heads from either sort, before they be winged, it is a most
pleasant

There is found in some combs, a certain bitter thing and hard like to wax,
which the Latins Clerus. This is as it were the abortiue and untimely fruit of
the bees, to wit, when either by malady or idleness, or rather upon some
barrenness and unfruitful disposition by nature, bees are not able to bring
the same to perfection.

As for the young bees, they are not so soon abroad, but they begin to labor
with their mothers, and are trained by them to learn how to gather honey. This
young people have a young king also: unto whom they make court, and whom they
follow. And many such kings are bred at first, for fear lest they should want:
but when the bees are grown big, they all agree with one accord and voice, to
kill those that be most untoward among them, for fear they should make
divisions, factions, and siding to parts. These kings be of two sorts: those
that are red all over, be better than

CHAP. XVII.
The regiment of Bees, and their government.

WHat shall a man now dispute about Hercules, whether there was but one of that
name or many? Likewise as touching the Sepulcher of Prince Bacchus, where and
which it is? As also trouble his head in many other such like antiquities,
buried by long continuance of time. For behold, in one small matter that is
daily seen in our country houses, in a thing annexed to our fermes, and
whereof there is such store, all Authors who have written of Agricult^e are not
yet resolved: namely, Whether the king of Bees alone has no sting, and is
armed only with majesty? or, whether Nature has bestowed a sting upon him,
and denied him Plato, when he was but a very babe and infant; foreshewing (no
doubt) that singular eloquence of his, and sweet utterance that afterward he
had. Another cast of Bees settled within the very Drusus, the very same day,
when he obtained that notable victory at Arbalo. By which examples we may see,
that this conjecturall skill and learning of these Soothsayers holds not
always, nor proves ever true: for they forsooth suppose this to be evermore a
portenteous sign of some fearful event and misfortune. To return again to
our captain Be: if he chance to be entrapped and surprised by the enemy, the
whole army is sure withal to be taken with him. If he be defeited and slain,
the field is lost: all the rest be scattered, and seek their fortune to serve
some other prince: for without one king or other, live they cannot. Sometime
they are driven to kill those of the kings race, and namely when there be many
kings together: but this they do perforce and full against their wills: and
before they will so do, they choose rather be called Thieves, because they come
stealing and eat up their honey. Certain it is, that these

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the sundry sorts of Bees in general: and what things be contrary and
hurtful unto them.

THere is a kind of rusticall and wild Be: and such are more rough and hideous
to see to: the king be dead of some pestilent malady, the commons and subjects
mourn, they take thought

CHAP. XIX.
Diseases of Beees.

THere be diseases also and imperfections in their work: and namely when they
fill not their combs, or bring not to perfection their young Bees. The first is
called Cleros, like as the other Blapsigonia. Moreover, the sound made by
reuerberation of the air, which men call Echo, is hurtful unto them, for
they fear mightily that resounding noise coming with a double stroke. Mists
and fogs also trouble them much: as for spiders, they be their greatest enemies
of all others, in case they can prevail so much as to enter into the hiue and
weaue a copweb within it: for they kill all the Bees, and there is no remedy
against it. Again, that Moth or Butterfly which uses to fly about the snuff
of a candle burning, (a poor silly fly otherwise, and of base account) here
does much hurt, and that in diverse sorts; for not only it self

CHAP. XX.
How to keep Bees to the hiue: and the manner of repairing them.

BEes joy in the clapping of hands, and ringing of brazen basins: at the sound
thereof they will assemble and come together: whereby it is plain, that they
have the sense of hearing. When they have done their task of work; when they
have brought forth their young ones, and fully accomplished all their deuoir,
then they perform a solemnity of exercise: wherein after they have flown abroad
in the open air at liberty, fetched their compass about on high, gathered
into rings and rounds in manner of tournament for their pleasure: then at last
when it is time of repast they return home again. The longest time that they
can live (say that they pass through all dangers, and no misfortune light upon
them, but every thing that is adverse Sun to fry, and one whole day be kept
covered all over with fig tree ashes, they will revive and Virgil affirms, that
the carcasses of any young steers will do the same: like as dead horses will
bred waspes and hornets: and Asses carrion turn to be Beetle flies, by a
certain metamorphosis which Nature makes, from one creature to another. And
yet there be none of all these but are seen to engender: howbeit the manner of
their breed is much after the nature of Bees.

CHAP. XXI.
Of Wasps and Hornets.

WAsps use to build them nests on high of earth and clay, and therein make
their rooms and cells of wax. Hornets, in caves and holes under the ground. All
these verily have their chambers made with six corners, and yet their nests
consist of some bark and substance like cobwebs. And as they be a barbarous
and savage kind of creatures, so their young is not uniform: one is ready to
fly abroad, while another is but young and not fledge, and a third a mere worm
and grub still. All these breed in Autumn, and never in the spring. When the
Moon is in the full they increase maruellously. As for the little waspes,
called Ichneumones (and less they be than others) they use to kill one kind of
spiders, called Phalangia, and carry

CHAP. XXII.
Of Silk-wormes: the Bombylius, and Necydalus. And who first invented silk
cloth.

AFourth kind of fly there is breeding in Assyria, and greater than those
above named, called Bombyx [i. the Silke-worme.] They build their nests of
earth or clay, close sticking to some stone or rock, in manner of salt; and
withal so hard, that scarcely a man may enter them with the point of a spear.
In which they make also wax, but in more plenty than bees: and after that,
bring forth a greater worm than all the ^est before rehearsed. These flies
engender also after another sort; namely, of a greater worm or grub, putting
forth two horns after and to weaue the same again, was a woman in Coos named
Pamphila, daughter of Latous:

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the Silkeworme in Cos.

IT is commonly said, that in the Isle Cos there be certain Silkwormes
engendered of flowers, which by the means of rain-showers, are beaten down and
fall from the Cypres tree, Terebinth, Oak, and Ash: and they soon after do
quicken and take life by the vapor arising out

CHAP. XXIV.
Of Spiders, and their generation.

IT were not amiss to join hereunto a discourse of Spiders, for their
admirable nature, which Democritus says:) or that within it there is a certain
bed (as it were) which engenders the substance of silk. But surely whatsoever
it is, so sure and steadie nails the Spider has; so fine, so round, and even
a thread she spinnes, hanging thereunto herself, and using the weight of her
own body in stead of a wherue; that a wonder it is to see the manner thereof.
She begins to weaue at the very mids of the web, and when she has laid the
warpe, brings over the woofe in compass round. The mashes and marks she
dispenses equall^ by even spaces; yet so, as every course grows wider than
other: and albeit they do increase still from narrow to be broader, yet are
they held and tied fast by knots that cannot be undone. Mark, I pray you, how
artificially she hides the snares in that net of hers, made into she intends.
See withal, how slack and hollow the net is made to abide the wind, for fear
of

Moreover, there be many presages and prognostications depend upon these
Spiders: for against any inundations and ouerflowings of rivers, they weaue and
make their cobwebs higher than they were wont. In fair and clear weather,
they neither spin nor weaue, upon thick and cloudie days, they be hard at
work: and therefore many cobwebs be a sign of rain. Some think, it is the
female that spins and weaues; and the male, which hunts and gets in the
provision

CHAP. XXV.
Of Scorpions.

SEmblably, the land Scorpions do lay certain little worms or grubs in manner
of eggs: and when they have so done, perish likewise for their labor, as the
Spiders. Their stings be as venomous and dangerous, as those of serpents: and
albeit there ensue not thereupon so present death, yet they put folk to more
pain a great deal; insomuch as they languish and lie drawing on three days
before they die. If a maiden be stung with one of them, she is sure to die of
it: other women also for the most part catch their death thereby, and hardly
escape. Yea and men also find their poison to be mortal and deadly, if they be
stung in a morning by them when unto them. They strike both sidelong or byas,
and also crooked and bending upward, with their Apollodorus says, who also
has set down 9 sorts of them, and distinguished them by their colors, which
me thinks, was but superfluous, and more than needed; considering that a man
cannot know by his discourse, which of them he would have to be least hurtful
and noisome. He affirms, that some have double stings, and that the males are
more cursed and cruel than the females: for he auouches, that they do engender
together, and that the males may be known by this, That they are long and
slender. Moreover, that they be al of them venomous about midday, when they be
enchafed and set into an heat, by the scalding and scorching sun: also when
they be dry and thirsty, they cannot drink their full and quench their
drought. This is well known, that those which have seven joints in Apollodoru^
before-named auouches plainly, that some of them have very wings indeed. The
people called Psylli (who making a gainful trade and merchandise of it, to
bring in hither unto us the poisons of other countries, and by that means have
filled Italy with foreign venomous beasts) have many times assaied to bring
them hither; but never would they abide so much as the air of Sicilie, nor
live in that tract. Howbeit we see of them now and then in Italy, but
harmless they be all: like as in many other places besides, and namely about
Pharus in Egypt. In Or rather in Caria.
Scythia they be so dangerous, that they kill their hogs; which otherwise be
creatures that

CHAP. XXVI.
Of Stellions and Grasshoppers.

THe Stellions after a sort be of the nature of Chamaeleons, living only upon
dew and Spiders. Grasshoppers live also much after the same manner. And they be
of two sorts, namely, the lesser, which come first, and die last: but those be
mute. The latter breed, seldom or never fly: and those likewise are of two
kinds. Shch as sing aloud be named Echetae; and the empty and has nothing in
it. When a man raises them, so as they be thereby forced to fly,

CHAP. XXVII.
Places wherein there be no Grasshoppers: also where they are mute.

IN countries bare and naked of trees and wood, there breed no Grasshoppers: and
therefore ye shall have them at Cyrene, about the town, but not in the plains
and fields thereof. Neither shall a man meet with them in woods that be cold and
full of shade. It seems also, that they take a liking to some one quarter more
than another: for in the region of the Milesians, few places there be that have
them: but in Cephalenia, there is a river that does limit and bound them: for
of the one side there be plenty of them; and on the other, few or none. In the
territory of Rhegium they be all mute. Pass the river once and come into the
Locrians country ye shall hear them chaunt lustily. Wings they have like to
those of Bees, but larger, to the proportion

CHAP. XXVIII.
Tbe wings of Insects, and sundry kinds of Beetles.

OF Insects, some carry two wings about them, as the flies: others four, as
Bees. As for Grasshoppers, they fly with wings made like pellicles or fine
skins. In sum, all Insects which be armed with a sting in their body or
tail, have four apeece: and none again have above twain that carry their
offensive weapon in their mouth. To the former, Nature has given it for to
revenge; to the other, only to feed themselves, and content their appetite.
Nigidius calls Lucanes. Over and besides, there is another sort, which
tumbling upon their back in dung, do roll it into great round balls with their
feet; and therein do make nests for to bestow their little grubs

The Glo-wormes, are named by the Greeks Lampyrides, because they shine in the
night like a spark of fire: and it is no more but the brightness of their sides
and tail: for one while as they hold open their wings, they glitter; another
while when they keep them close together, they be shadowed and make no show.
These Glowbards never appear before hay is ripe upon the ground, ne yet after
it is cut down. Contrariwise, the flies called Blattae, live and be nourished
in darkness: light is an enemy unto them, and from it they fly. They breed
commonly in all for a kind of bastard honey, whereof yet there is some use in
Physic. In Thrace near to Olynthus, there is a little territory or plot of
ground; where this one creature (among all other) Asilus or Tabanus, whether
you will. Likewise Gnats also, and some kind of flies. And these pricks serve
them in good stead both for mouth and tongue. Some of these are but blunt, and
not good for to prick, but only handsome to suck withal, as flies, which
have all of them a tongue, being evidently fistulous and like a pipe. And none
of all these have any teeth. There be Insects with little horns proaking out
before their eyes, but weak and tender they be, and good

CHAP. XXIX.
Of Locusts.

THe Locusts lay eggs in Autumn, by thrusting down into the ground the
fistule or end of their chine, and those come forth in great abundance. These
eggs lie all winter long in the earth; and at the end of the spring the year
following, they put out little Locusts, black their flight out of Afric, and
with whole armies to infest Italy: many a time have the people

CHAP. XXX.
Of the ordinary Pismires of our country in Italy.

MOst part of Insects do breed a grub or little worm. For even the very Ant in
the Spring time does bring forth such worms like eggs. These silie creatures
labor and travel in common, as the Bees do: this only is the difference, that
Bees do make their own meat; whereas these store up only their food and
provision. As touching their strength, if a man would

CHAP. XXXI.
Of Indian Pismires.

IN the temple of Hercules at Erythrae, there were to be seen the horns of a
certain Indian Ant, which were there set up and fastened for a wonder to
posterity. In the country of the Northern Indians, named Dardae, the Ants do
cast up gold above ground from out of the holes and mines within the earth:
these are in color like to cats, and as big as the O^ For.
wolves of Egypt. This gold before said, which they work up in the winter
time, the Indians do steal from them in the extreme heat of Summer, waiting
their opportunity when the Pismires lie close within their caves under the
ground, from the parching Sun. Yet not without great danger: for if they happen
to wind them and catch their sent, out they go, and follow after them in great
have, and with such fury they fly upon them, that oftentimes they tear them in
pieces; let them

CHAP. XXXII.
The diverse generation of some Insects.

MAny Insects there be that breed after another sort than the former above
specified: and principally of dew which settles upon the radish leaf in the
beginning of the Spring. For being made thick, and hardened with the heat of
the Sun it grows to the bigness

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of Insects that breed in wood, and of wood.

SEmblably there be some Insects engendered of rain drops standing upon the
earth, and others also of wood: for not only the ordinary wood-wormes breed in
timber, but also c^tain Sylla the Dictator, and also Alcman (one of the most
renowned Greek Poets) perished. Moreover, birds are much infested and troubled
therewith. And as for Feasants, they will die thereof unless they bestrew
themselves with dust. Of such beasts as carry hair, it is verily thought that
the Ass alone and sheep are free from this kind of vermin. Some kind of cloth
likewise is apt to engender lice, and especially those which are made of wool
that sheep bare which

CHAP. XXXIV.
Of one kind of creature that has no passage to void excrements.

THere is a creature as foul and ill-fauoured as the rest, which has evermore
the head fast sticking within the skin of a beast, and so by sucking of blood
lives, and swells withal: the only living creature of all other that has no
way at all to rid excrements out of the body: by reason whereof when it is too
full, the skin does crack and burst, and so his very food

CHAP. XXXV.
Of Moths and Gnats.

Wool and cloth when they be dusty breed moths, especially if a spider also be
gotten within them. For the Spider is very thirsty; and by reason that he
drinks up all the moisture of the cloth or wool, he increases the dryness
much more. In paper also they will engender. A kind of them there is which
carry their coats and cases with them, as cockles and snailes do; but they have
feet to be seen. If they be turned out of their coats or husks, they presently
die. If they grow still they will prove to be Chrysalides. The wild fig tree
breeds certain Gnats called Ficarij. As for the Cantharides or French green
Flies, they be bred of little worms in Fig trees, Pear trees, wild Pines, or
Pitch trees, the Eglantine Brier,

CHAP. XXXVI.
Of the fire-Fly called Pyralis, or Pyrausta.

THe fire also, a contrary element to generation, is not without some living
creatures engendered therein. For in Cypres, among the forges and furnaces of
copper, there is to be seen a kind of four-footed creature, and yet winged (as
big as the greater kind of flies) to fly out of the very midst of the fire,
and called it is of some Pyralis, of others Pyrausta. The nature o^ it is this;
so long as it remains in the fire it lives: but if it chance to leap forth of
the Furnace, and fly any thing far into the air, it dies. There is a river
in the kingdom of Pontus called Hypanis, which about the summer Sunstead uses
to bring down the stream thin pellicles or bladders like to grape kernels: out
of which there breaks forth and issues a four footed fly, like unto those
above named; and it lives not above one day, whereupon it is called [i. a
day-fly.] All other Insects of like sort may continue and live a seuen-night.
The Gnat and the little worms three weeks: but such as bring forth their young
alive may endure a full month. As for the metamorphosis of these creatures
from one form to another, it is most commonly performed in three days, or
four at the most. All the rest of the winged kind lightly die in Autumn:
among which, the brees and horse-flies are ordinarily blind first. To be short,
those flies which have bin drowned, and so come to their death, if they be laid
and kept in hot cinders or ashes, will come again to themselves and revive.

CHAP. XXXVII.
A discourse Anatomicall, of the nature of living creatures part by part,

IT remains now to treat of the several parts of the body, and over and above
the former descri^ion, to particularize and set down the story of one member
after another. First therefore ^he head.
this is general, that all living creatures whatsoever having blood, have also
heads: and few of them have cops or crested tufts upon their heads, unless it
be birds, and those be of diverse Crests, tuf^s, and combs.
midst of which grows another little pennache. Peacockes carry upon their
heads a tuft (as it were) of little hairy trees: and the Stymphalides a lock of
crisped and curled hairs. Feasants have feathers standing up like horns. The
pretty Titmouse or Nonett is filletted or coifed upon the head: and in lieu
thereof, the Lark has a little peruke of feathers, whereupon at first it was
called Galerita, but afterward after the French word Alanda, and of it one of
the Roman legions took the name, because of their pointed Morions. We have
written already of the Ginny or Turkey cocks and hens, upon whom Nature has
bestowed a folding crest, lying from the very bill, over the midst of the head,
unto the nape of the neck. She has given also unto all the sort of Seamewes,
Fen ducks, and Moore-hens, certain cops and crisped tufs: to the Woodpeck also
and Baleare crane. But above all others, the house dunghill cocks carry upon

To come now to Horns, there be many fishes, as well of the sea as fresh
waters, and also Serpents, Horns.
that have horns in diverse and sundry sorts. But to speak a truth and properly,
they be no horns indeed, for those pertain only to four-footed heasts. As for
Actaeon and (...), of whom we read in our Latin story that they had horns, I
take them to be mere fables and no better. Certes in nothing more has Nature
taken her pleasure than in this, as if she had meant to delight and sport her
self in these arms and weapons of beasts. For in some she has made them
Subul^.
them be called Platycerotes, [i. broad horned.] Roe bucks have by nature
branched heads, but they are small: and these do not mew and cast them yearly,
as the stag and bucke. All the sort of rams be armed with crooked horns,
turning and winding with certain revolutions as if they were gantlets or
whorlebats, given them by nature to thumpe and jurre withal. Bulls horns be
strait and upright, ready always to do a mischief. The females of this kind,
to wit, Cowes, are make the candle within enclosed to cast the greater light,
and farther off. Nay, they are good With us it is ^therwise.
Ewes have none at all: ne yet Hinds and Does: no more than the beasts that
have feet cloven and divided into many toes: or those that be whole hoofed,
except the Indian ass, who is armed with one horn and no more. Beasts cloven
footed in twain have likewise two horns: but none at all have they which are
toothed in the upper mandible. They that make this reason, because the matter
of their teeth runs al into the horn, and so contrariwise, are deceived, and
soon convinced by this, That Hinds and Does are toothed no more than Stags and
Bucks, and yet are not horned. In other beasts the horns grow to the very bone
of the head, in

Mankind of all living creatures has most hair on the head, even men as much
as women, Hair.
as we may see in those countries where they never cut their hair, but let it
grow. And namely in Sauoy, Dauphine, and Languedoc about the Alps, where men
and women both wear long hair; and thereupon that part of France is called
Comata. And yet this is not so general, but Or rather Alpine.
water Ravens, which of the Greeks are named thereupon Phalacro-coraces. Seldom
do women shed their hair clean, and become bald: but never was any guelded man
known to be bald: nor any others that be pure virgins, and have not sacrificed
unto Venus. The hair growing beneath the ventricles of the brain, and under
the crown of the head, like as also about the temples and ears, falls not off
quite. Man alone of all creatures grows to be bald, I speak not of those
that are so by nature. Men, women, and horses wax gray haired. Men and women
both begin at the forepart of their heads to be grisly, and afterward behind.
Men and women alone be double crowned.

Some creatures have the bones of their skull flat, plain, thin, and without
marrow, and the same united or joined together by certain sutures or seams
indented and toothed on either side, Brain pan.
which run one into another. The ruptures and cracks of the brain pan cannot be
consolidated and saundred perfectly again: but if the spells and pieces be
gently taken out, and but small, there is no danger of death: for in their place
there will grow a certain callous cicatrice or fleshie substance that will
supply in some sort that defect. Bears of all others have the tendrest suls;
and Parrats the hardest, as we have said before in place convenient.

Moreover, all living creatures that have blood have likewise brains: yea, and
those in the sea Brains.
which we call Soft-fishes, although they have no blood at all, as namely the
Pour-cuttles or Polypes. But man for his bigness and proportion has most brain
of all other, and the same is Piamater] there is no way but present death.
Also, men commonly have more brains than women. And both of them have neither
blood nor veins therein: as for that which is in other creatures, it wants
all kind of fat. The learned Anatomists, who have searched diligently into the
nature Ossicula, some read Oscul^, holes.
bones. Man alone in his infancy has his brain to pant and beat: and fully
settled it is not, nor confirmed, before that he begins to speak. Of all parts
necessary for life, it is placed highest, and next unto the cope of head and
heaven both: without flesh, without blood, without filth and ordure. And in
truth, it is the fort and castle of all the senses: unto it all the veins from
the heart do tend: in it they all do likewise end. It is the very highest keep,
watchtower, and sentinel of the mind: it is the helm and rudder of
intelligence and understanding. Moreover, in all creatures it lies forward in
the front of the head: and good reason, because all our senses bend that

Man alone has not the power to shake his ears. Of flaggie, long, and hanging
ears, came Ears.
the syrnames first of the Flacci (families and houses in Rome.) There is no
one part of the body costeth our dames more than this, by reason of their
precious stones and pendant pearls thereat. In the East countries, men also as
well as women, think it a great grace and bravery to wear earings of gold. As
touching their proportion, some creatures naturally have bigger or lesser

Man only of all creatures has a Face and Visage: the rest have either muzles
and snouts, or Face or Visage.
else bills and beakes.

Other creatures have Foreheads also as well as men: but in man's alone we may
see and read sorrow and heaviness, mirth and joy, clemency and mildness,
cruelty, and severity; and in one Forehead.


In the ascent or rising of the forehead, man has Eie-brows set, like to the
eaues of an house; Eie-browes.
which he can move as he list, either both at once, or one after another: and
in them is showed part of the mind within. By them we deny, by them we grant.
These show most of all others, pride and arrogancy. Well may it be that pride
does appear and settle in some other part, yet here is the seat and place of
residence. True it is, that in the heart it begins, but hither it mounteth
and ascends, here it rests and remains. No part can it find in the whole
body more eminent and hauty, and withal more steep than the brows, wherein
it might rule and reign alone without controlment.

Next under the brows is the Eye, the most precious member of the whole body;
which by The Eye.
form they have of eyes to be seen, if a man take off the skin that lies over
the place. Moreover, Nigidius affirms, That neither Locusts nor yet
Grasshoppers have eyes. As for snailes and such like, the two little horns that
they put forth, serve them in stead of eyes, as they sound or try the way
before them. The earth-mads and all the sort of worms and grubs, are without
eyes. Men alone of all living creatures have eyes of diverse colors, some of
one, and some of another. For all other creatures of one and the same kind, are
eied alike. Howbeit, some horses there be that extraordinarily have (...).
red eyes. But in men it is hard to set down the infinite variety and difference
in them: for some have great gla^ing eyes: others again as little and as
pinking. Tiberius Caesar the Emperor Augustus Caesar of famous memory, had ^uci.
red eyes like to some horses: and indeed wall-eied he was, for the white
thereof was much bigger than in other men: which also was the cause, that if a
man looked earnestly upon him, and beheld him wistly (and a man could not anger
him worse) he would be displeased, and highly offended. Claudius Caesar had a
fleshy substance about the corners of his eyes, that took up a good part of
the white, and many times they were very red and blood fhotten. C. Caligula the
Emperor, his eyes were ever set in his head, and stiff again. Nero had a very
short sight; for unless he winked (as it were) and looked narrow with his
eyes, he could not well see ought, were it never so near. Twenty couple of
professed masters of C. Caligula the Emperor maintained: and among the rest two
there were and no more, whom a man could not make to wink, or once to twinckle
with their eyes: present before them what weapon he would, or make offer to
strike, so steady and firm were they: and therefore they evermore carried the
prize, and were invincible. So hard a matter is it for a man to keep his eyes
from twiring: and many men naturally cannot choose but be evermore winking and
twinkling with their eyes: but such are holden for fearful and timorous
persons. None have their eyes all of one color: for the bal or apple in the
midst is ordinarily of another color than the white about it. Neither in any
one part of the body are more signs and tokens to be gathered of the affection
and disposition of the heart, than in the eye, of man especially above all
other creatures. By it we may know whether one be modest, cannot be denied,
That with the Soul we imagine, with the mind we see, and the Eyes as vessels
(...).
like horn, to withstand the injuries of heat and cold: and those she has
ordained eftsoons to be cleansed and purified with the moisture of tears; to
the end that they should be slipperie and moveable, for to turn quickly and to
shift from all that may offend. As for the middle part and membrane (...)
grape:] the little compass whereof contains all the sight of the Eye, and
suffers it not to wander and roll here and there, but directs it as it were
within a certain pipe or small conduit: by which means also (to note by the
way) the apple being gathered into so narrow a circ^e, does easily avoid all
inconveniences that are incident unto it, for to annoy the same. This ball and
point of the sight is compassed also round about with other circles of sundry
colors, black, bluish, tawny, russet, and red; to the end that by this medley
and temperate mixture of colors environed with the white besides, the light
might be let in and represented to the Optick-sinew: and also by a temperat
reuerberation and beating back from those other colors; it should not dazzle
or offend the apple with the exceeding brightness thereof. In sum, this mirror
or glassewindow, is so perfect and so artificially contrived, that as little as
the ball of the sight is, a man Strabones and Poeti: for that Coclites: as also
them that were pinke-eied and had very small eyes, they termed Ocellae. As for
such as came by those infirmities by some injury or mischance, they were
surnamed Lucini. Moreover, we see that those creatures which ordinarily do see
by night (as Cats do) have such ardent and fiery eyes, that a man cannot
endure to look full upon them The eyes also of the Roe-bucke and the Wolf are
so bright, that they shine again. and cast a light from them. The sea-calues or
Seals, and the Hyenes, alter eftsoons their eyes into a thousand colors.
Over and besides, the eyes of many fishes do glitter in the night, when they be
dry: like as the putrified and rotten wood of some old trunk of an oak or
other wood. We have said before, that those wink not nor shut their eie-lids,
who cannot roll their eyes brittle and tender shell, have their eyes inflexible
and stiff. Lobsters and Shrimpes for the most

Men and women have hair growing on the brims of both Eie-lids: but women do
color Eie-lids.
them every day with an ordinary painting that they have: so curious are our
dames and would Cilium, and thereof came the name of the brows, to be
Supercilium in Latin. This brim of the eie-lid, if it be divided by any wound,
cannot be drawn together again: like as some few parts besides of man's body.

Under the eyes, are the balls of the Cheeks, which men and women only have;
which in old Genae in Latin. And by the law of the twelve Tables, women were
expressly Bals of cheeks
forbid not to tear, rent, or scratch them in any case with their nails. This
is the feat of bashfulnesse and modesty: hear appears most of all the
redness of blushing. Under them, are the hollow pits of the cheeks, wherein
mirth and laughter do lodge and inhabit.

Man only has his Nose standing forth aloft, which now adays they dedicate to
sly scoffing and derision, in so much as they attribute that term do dry
mockers and flowters. And verily Nose-thrils.
there is not a creature besides, that has his nostrils so bearing out. [As
for birds, serpents, and fishes they have holes only to smell at, without any
other nosthrils to be seen:] and hereof come the surnames of Simones and
Silones, whereof the former have flat noses, the other are hooked and camoise
nosed upward. Infants have bin known man^ times when they are seven months

Then follow the Lips: some men there be that put them far out, by reason that
they are gagtoothed Lip^.
or tut-mouthed, and those are called Brocci. Others again who are
blabber-lipped, are named in Latin Labeones.

As for the mouth, all creatures have it that bring forth their young alive: and
either it is gentle and pliable, or else hard and unruly; as we see horses;
that either willingly receive, or else refuse Mouth.
the bit. By which also we give to men, the term either of modest and good
countenance, or else of shameless and untoward. But in stead of mouth and lips
both, Nature has given to all fowls sharp Bills of an horny substance and as
many of them as live upon rauin and prey, Bills.
those that either grase, root, or pudder in mud, like to swine, they are broad
and flat billed. As for horses, mules, and such like, they use their mouths in
stead of hands, to gather in their food as they either seed in pasture, or be
at rack and manger. And the wider mouths have they that live of killing and
devouring other beasts.

No creatures living, but man and woman, have Chins and Iaws. The river
Crocodile alone The Chin and Iaw.


Of Teeth, there be three sorts: for either they be framed like saws, or else
set flat, even, and level: The Teeth.
or last of all, stand gabbing out of the mouth. The saw teeth run one between
another, as if two combs grew together, because they should not wear if they
met one with another, as we see in serpents, fishes, and dogs. Horses and men
have their teeth of one even level. The bore, the water horse, and the
Elephants, have their tusks and fangs sticking forth. Of those teeth which are
smooth and meet just one against another; such as divide and cut the meat, be
broad edged, as the fore-teeth: those that grind and chew, be double, and stand
within the chaw: but such as sever and part the meat in the mouth, be sharp
pointed: and we call them our eie-teeth; the Latins Caninos, or Dog-teeth. And
these are they, that of saw teeth be the longest. Even and leuel-ranged teeth,
be either in both chaws alike, as in an horse; or else they be wanting before
Canini in Latin. The eietooth of a Wolf (so it grow on the right side of the
head) is thought to do strange matters. The great grinders which stand beyond
the Eye-teeth, in no creature whatsoever do fall out of themselves. As for the
farthest cheek-teeth in a man's head, which be called Genuini, [(...) Mutianus
has reported, That he saw one Zancles a citizen of Samothrace, who had new
teeth coming up after he was an 104 years old. Moreover, males ordinarily
have more teeth than the females: as we may see in mankind, Sheep, goats, and
Swine. Timarchus the son of Nicocles the Paphian, had a double course of teeth
in either jaw. He had a brother also who never cast his foreteeth, and
therefore he wore them before to the ver^ stumps. We read in Chronicles of
one man that had a tooth growing out of the very pallat of his mouth. As for
the eye-teeth, if they be lost by any mischance, there never grow again any
other for them. In horses only, of all other creatures, teeth wax whiter by

Now as concerning Tongues, we observe much diversity in them: for all
creatures are not The Tongue.
tongued alike. First and foremost, Serpents have very thin tongues, and the
same three-forked; black of color, ^ing, and ready to pierce; and if a man
take them forth, very long. Lizards have tongues two-forked and full of hairs:
so have the Seals or Sea calves a double tongue: but the tongues of these
beforenamed, are as small as hairs: as for the rest, their tongues serve them
to lick their muffles and lips all about. Fishes have their tongues for the
greater part thereof, cleaving fast to their pallat; and in Crocodiles they are
so, clean throughout. But as well fishes as other creatures of the water, have a
fleshy palate, which serves them in stead of a tongue have pricks and stings in
their hin-parts, are furnished also with tongue and teeth. As for Bees,
Metellus the high priest and chief sacrificer at Rome, had such a stutting and
stammering tongue (by report) that against he should dedicate the temple of the
goddess Opifera, he labored so with his tongue for utterance, for certain
months together, and took such pains, as if he had bin upon the rack. All
children, by that time that they be seven years old at the farthest, speak
readily, so as they be not by some unnatural cause impeached. But

Under it, there is a little tongue (which the Greeks call Epiglossis) at the
root of the other The flap Epiglossis.
and the same is not to be found in any creature that lays eggs. A twofold use
it has, lying as it The Windepipe, and Wezand pipe.
swallow down his meat, this foresaid little flap does cover it, for fear
lest as the spirit, breath, and voice passes that way, the meat or drink (if
it should go wrong to the other conduit or passage) might endanger a man and
put him to great trouble. The other is more inward, called properly the Gullet,
or the Wezand, by which we swallow down both meat and drink, and it goes to
the stomach first, and so to the belly. This also the said flap does cover by
turns, to wit, as a man does either speak or draw his breath, lest that which
is already passed into the stomach, should come up again, or be cast up
unseasonably, and thereby impeach a man in his speech: the Windpipe consists
of a gristly and fleshie tunicle: the Wezand of a membranous or sinewie

There is no creature having a neck indeed, but it has also both these pipes.
Well may they The Neck:
have a gorge or throat, in whom there is found but the gullet only: but nape
of neck behind, they can have none. As for those upon whom Nature has bestowed
a neck, they may with ease turn their head about too and fro every way, to
look about them, because it is composed of many spondyles, or turning round
bones, tied and fastened one unto another by ioints and knots. The Lion only,
together with the Wolf, and the Hyaena, have this neck bone of one entire and
straight piece, and therefore stiff that it cannot turn. Otherwise it is
annexed to the chine, and the chine to the loins.

This Chine likewise is a bony substance, but made round and long, and
fistulous within, to The Chinebone.


Under the Artery or windpipe, is the mouth of the stomach; of a callous or
gristly substance, The Stomach


Now are we come to the Heart, which in all other living creatures is situate
in the very The Heart.
midst of the breast: in man only it lies beneath the left pap, made in manner of
a pear, and with the pointed and smaller end bears out forward. Fishes alone
have it lying with the point upward, to the mouth. It is generally received and
held, that it is the first principal part which is formed in the mothers
womb: next unto it the brain, and the eyes last of all. And as these be the
first that die; so the Heart is last. In it (no doubt) is the most plenty of
heat, which is the cause of life. Surely it ever moves and pants, like as it
were another living creature by it self: covered Aristomenes: the Messenian,
who slew with his own hands In th^ee ^undry battles.
300 Lacedaemonia^. Himself being sore wounded and taken prisoner, saved his
own life once, and made an escape out of the cave of a stone quarrie, where he
was kept as in a prison: for he got forth by narrow Fox-holes under the
ground. Being caught a second time, whiles his keepers were fast asleep, he
rolled himself to the fire, bound as he was, and so without regard of his own
body, burnt in sunder the bonds wherewith he was tied. And at the third
taking, the Lacedaemonians caused his breast to be cut and opened, because they
would see what kind of Heart he had: and there they found it all ouergrown
with hair. Moreover, this is observed in perusing the inwards of beasts, That
when they be well liking, and do presage good, the Heart has a kind of fat in
the utmost tip thereof: howbeit, this would be noted, That according to the
Soothsaiers learning, Pyrrhus king of Epyrus was departed out of Italy, what
time as L. Posthumous Albinus was king sacrificer at Rome, the Soothsaiers and
Wisards began first to look into the heart, among other inwards. That very day
when as Caesar Dictator went first abroad in his royal purple robe, and took
his seat in the golden chair of estate, he killed two beasts for sacrifice,
and in both of them the intrailes were found without any Heart: whereupon arose
a great question and controversy among the Augures and Soothsaiers, How it
could be, that any beast ordained for sacrifice should live without that
principal part of life? or whether possibly it might lose it for that present
only? Over and besides, it is held for certain, that if any dye of the
trembling and ache of the heart, or otherwise of poison, their heart will not
burn in the fire. And verily, an Oration Vitellius, wherein he challenges
Piso, and charge him directly with Poisoning of Germanicus Caesar, upon this
presumption; for he openly protested and proved, That the heart of Germanicus
would not consume in the funeral fire, by reason of poison. But contrariwise,
Piso alleged in his own defense the foresaid disease of the Heart called
Cardiaca, whereof Germanicus died.

Under the Heart lie the Lights, which is the very seat of breathing: whereby
we draw and The Lights or Lungs.
deliver our wind. For which purpose, spungeous it is and full of hollow pipes
within. Few fishes, as we said before, have any Lungs: other creatures also
that lay eggs, have but small, and the same full of froth, and without blood:
whereupon they be not thirsty at all: which is the cause likewise that Seals
and Frogs can diue so long under the water. The Tortoise also, albeit he have
very large Lungs, and the same under his shell, yet there is no blood therein.
And verily, the lesser that the lungs be, the swifter is the body that has
them. The Chamaeleons lights be very big, for the proportion of his body, for
little or nothing else has he within it.

Next follows the liver, which lies on the right side. In that which is
called the head of the The Liver.
Liver, much variety and difference there is. For a little before the death of
Marcellus (who was Anniball) as he sacrificed, there was found a Liver in the
beast, without that head or fibers aforesaid: and the next day after, when he
killed another for sacrifice, it was seen with two. When C. Marius sacrificed
at Vtica, the same was likewise wanting in the beast, being opened. Semblably,
when prince C. Caligula the Emperor sacrificed upon the first day of January,
at his entrance into the Consulship, the Liver head was missing: but see what
followed! in that year his hap was to be slain. Moreover, his successor
Claudius within a month before he died by poison, met with the like accident in
his sacrifice. But Augustus Caesar, late Emperor of famous memory, as he killed
beasts for sacrifice, the very first day that he entered upon his imperial
dignity, found in 6 of them 6 livers, which were all redoubled and folded
inward, from the nethermost lobe or skirt beneath: whereupon answer was made by
the Soothsayers, That within one year he

Fast to the Liver hangs the Gall; yet all creatures have it not. And about
Chalcis, in Euboea, The Gall.
the sheep are quite without Gall. But in Naxus they all have two Gals, and the
same very big. The strangers that come into both those parts, think the one as
prodigious and monstrous whose Gall is singular good for many purposes. Ox
Gall in limming gives a golden color. Neptune, and the mighty power of water.
Augustus the Emperor found two Galls in a beast that he killed for sacrifice,
upon that very day whereon he obtained that famous victory at Actium. Some
say, that the lobes or fibers in the small Livers of certain Mice and Rats, are
commonly found to be as many as the Moon is days old in every month: and
look how many days you reckon of her light, so many may you count the fibers
aforesaid. Also, that their liver grows at mid-winter, when days be at
shortest. In the kingdoms of Grenada and Andalusia in Spain, Connies are many
times found with double Livers. The land Frogs of Toads kind, have one lop or
lappet of the liver, which Ants will not touch; because of the poison therein,
as is supposed. Liver of all things may be kept and preserved longest: and we
read in chronicles, that there have bin found in some cities long besieged,
Caesina Volaterranus killed, Dragons were seen to issue from among the Entrails
and the Liver; and this turned to be a lucky presage. And verily, why should
we think this report or any other in sacrifices, to be incredible? considering
that upon the very day that K. Pyrrhus was slain, the heads of the beasts being
slain for sacrifice (notwithstanding they were cut off from the bodies) moved
forward upon the ground, and licked up their own blood.

The vpmost inwards of a man, to wit, the Heart and Lungs, are divided from the
other entrails The Midriffe
beneath, by certain pellicles or rims of the Midriffe, which the Latins call
Proecordia, (because they are drawn and set before the Heart as a defense:)
and the Greeks Phrenes: true it is, that Nature in great providence has
enclosed all the noble and principal parts within several

To proceed in our Anatomy, all creatures having a Stomach or Read, are not
without a belly The Belly or Paunch, with the Guts.
under it. As many as chew cud, have the same Aristotle says four fold.
double or two fold, the rest one and no more: and look who want blood, are
without it also. For some there be that have one entire gut, that begins at
the mouth, and by a certain way redoubleth and returns back again thither,
and namely, the Cuttill and the Polype. In man it is annexed to the bottom of
the Stomach, like as in a Dog. And in these twain only, narrower it is in the
lower part: which is the cause that none but they do vomit; for when their
bellies be full, the straight passage beneath keeps the meat from descending,
and so it returns upward: which cannot happen to them that have have neither
one nor other, but be far different from the rest, and these have their belly
hard to their gorge: and especially such as have long necks and narrow, as the
bird Porphyrio. The The Cawle or Kell.


Unto this Cawle, is fastened the Spleen on the left side of the belly just
against the liver. The Spleen.
And otherwhiles these two shift their places, and one lies where the other
should; but that is ever held as a prodigious token. Some are of opinon, that
those creatures which lay eggs have a Spleen, but it is very small: as also the
Serpents. And surely such an one appears plainly in the Tortoise, Crocodile,
Lizards, and Frogs. Certain it is, that the bird Aegocephalus has none at
all, no more than others that want blood. This member has a property by it
self sometimes, To hinder a man's running: whereupon professed runners in the
race that be troubled with the spleen, have a devise to burn and wast it with
an hot iron. And no marvel: for why? they say

But about Briletum and Tharne (the hills abouenamed) the Deer have four
Kidneys apeece: whereas on the contrary side, neither feathered foul nor
skalie fish, have any. Moreover, the Kidneys.
Kidneys stick close unto the bones. The right Kidney in all creatures is the
bigger, less fat, dryer of the twain: how beit in both of them, there is a
fat issues out of the mids, save only in Seals. All living creatures are
fattest about the raines of the back: and sheep may be so far

Nature has embarred the Breast-parr (wherein lie the vital members) with ribs
round about: Breast and ribs.
but toward the belly (which needs must grow and stretch) she has not so done,
but has given it liberty: for no living creature has bones to compass the
panch. Man's Breast only is broad and square: in all others it is framed
otherwise, like the keele of a ship: which is more evidently to be seen in
birds and in water-fowles most of all others. As for Ribs, man only has eight
that be full and whole: Swine have ten: horned beasts thirtene: Serpents
thirty.

Under the belly and paunch in the forepart of the body, hangs the bladder:
which no The Bladder:
creature laying eggs has, save only the Tortoise. It is found in none but such
as have a pair of lungs, and the same with blood: neither in any creeping
creature without feet. Between it and the belly be certain canals or
arteries, reachiug to the groine, which by the Greeks are named Ilia [i. the
Flanks.] In the bladder of a Wolf, is found a little stone called Syrites. But
in some men's bladders, ye shall see otherwhiles certain gross hairs to
engender, like to bristles; also gravel and stones, which put them to
intolerable pain. This bladder consists of a certain tunicle or skin,
which if it be once wounded, cannot again be consolidated; no more than those
fine pellicles or rinds that enwrap the brain and the heart. For you must
think, that there be many sorts of these membranes or filmes serving to
sundry uses.

As for women, their inward parts are answerable to men's in all these respects
abouesaid: and The Matrix
besides, they have by themselves adjoining close unto the bladder, another
little bag or purse; whereupon it is called in Latin Vterus: and it has
another name beside, to wit, Loci; which we call the Matrice, the Mother, or
the Womb: and in other creatures it is termed Vulua. In Vipers, Abdomen, and
before it was grown hard and brawnie, they never were wont willingly and
wittingly to kill Sowes, Incientes.
even upon the point of their farrowing, and being ready to Pig [as our
monstrous gluttons do now adays, because they would have the teats

All horned beasts having teeth growing but in one jaw, and pasterne bones
about their feet, Tallow and grease.
do bear tallow or sewet, and feed fat. Those that be clouen-footed, or
otherwise have feet divided into many toes, and bear no horns; have no tallow,
but grease or fat. The tallow or sewet grows to be hard, and when it is
thoroughly cold, is brittle and apt to crumble and break; and is ever found in
the edge and extremities of the flesh: contrariwise, the seam or grease is
enterlarded between the flesh and the skin; liquid it is, and easy to melt.
Some creatures there be that will never be fat, as the Hare and Partridge.
Generally, whatsoever is barren, be it male or female, will soon feed fat.
Sooner grow they to be old which are ouer-fat. No living creatures there are
but have a certain fat in their eyes: and the tallow in any thing whatsoever,
is sensllesse: Lucius Apronius sometimes Consul, had a son so fat that he
could not go, so heavy was he laden with grease; insomuch, as he was feign to
take some of his grease forth of the body, and so discharge himself and
become lighter.

Marrow seems to be much of the same natnre: in youth it is red, and in age
waxes white. Marrow.
This is never found but in hollow bones: and yet not in the legs of Horse,
Ass, Mule, or Dog. And therefore if they chance to be broken, they will not
sowder and unite again, which happens when the Marrow runs out to the place of
the fracture. In those that carry grease or sewet, strike fire, as it were an
hard flint. The Marrow is hard in them that gather no grease, but rather

The bones of Ass legs are good to sound shrill, and to make pipes of.
Dolphins have very Boues and Gristles.
bones, and not prickie chines: for they bring forth their young alive. Serpents
have only prickie ridges. Fishes that be soft have no bones: but their body is
bound with certain hoopes or circles of flesh, as the Cuttill or Calamarie.
Neither have Infects any bones at all. Those fishes which be not soft, but
gristly, have a kind of marrow in their ridge bone. Seals have gristle, and no
bone. The ears and nosethrils of all creatures, if they bear up but a little,
have a soft tender gristle apt to bend and wind: such is the goodness of
Nature, providing that they should not break. A gristle if it be broken, will
not close together and be sound. Neither will bones, if ought be cut from them,
grow again: unless it be in horses and such beasts of carriage, and

A man Grows in height and length until he be one and twenty years of
age: then begins Growth.
he to spread and burnish in squarenesse. As well men as women-kind, shute up
most and undo the knot that hindered their growth, when they are come to
fourteen years of age, and be vndergrowne: and most is this seen, if some
sickness happen about that time.

As for the Sinews, Ligaments, and Cords, which take their beginning at the
heart, be covered Sinues, Cord and ligaments
(as it were) with a certain white and glutinous substance; and the like cause
and nature they have. These in all bodies, are tied to the slipperie bones: the
knitting of the bones together, which be called joints, they fasten and bind
together, some by coming between, others by clasping round about, and others
again, by passing cross over: in one place they be twined round, in another
broad, according as the figure of each part does require. Be they cut a two, as
they

Among these are hidden the Arteries, that is to say, the passages of the
spirit and life. And Veins and Arteries.
over them ride the Veins, even the very conduits and channels that carry the
blood. The Pulse or beating of Arteries, is most evident in the extremities or
ends of any members; and for the most part bewraies hidden diseases. Herophilus
that renowned Poet and interpreter of Physic,

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Of Blood, as well that which soonest waxes dry, as that which will not
thicken at all. Also, which is the grossest blood, and heauiest, which the
lightest and thinnest:

THose that have much blood, and the same fat and gross, are angry and
chollericke. The blood of males is commonly blacker than that of females: yea,
and more in youth than in old age: and the same in the bottom and lower part,
setleth fatter and grosser than above. In Macrinus Viscus, late praetor of Rome:
and usually every year Volusius Saturninus, Provost of the city; who
notwithstanding lived until he was above fourscore and ten years old. Blood
is the only thing in the body that increases presently. For so we see, that
beasts killed for sacrifice will bleed most freshly and in greater abundance, if
they drank a little before. Those creatures that lie hidden in the earth at
certain times, (as we have said before) have no blood in all that while;
unless it be some few, and those very small drops gathered about their hearts.
A wonderful work of Nature, that it should be so: as also that in a man it
should alter and change ever and anon, so as it does upon every small occasion:
and the force and strength thereof vary, not only for defect and want of
matter to disperse abroad, but also for every little motion and passion of the
mind, as shame, anger, and fear. For

CHAP. XXXIX.
Whether in Blood rests the soueraignetie or no? Also of the nature of Skin
of Hairs, and the Paps.

Some measure not the finenesse of spirit and wit by the purity of blood: but
suppose that creatures are brutish, more or less, according as their Skin is,
thicker or thinner: and as the other couertures of their body be either gross
and hard, or thin and tender: as we see for example in Oisters and Tortoises.
They affirm moreover, that the thick hide in Kine and Oxen, and the hard
bristles in Swine, impeach the entrance of subtle air and fine spirit into
their bodies: in such wise, that nothing can pierce and pass through, which is
pure and fine, as it should be. And hereto they bring men also, as a proof,
who are thick skinned, and more brawnie; for The sea Swallows have them
evermore moist and drenched in the sea. As for the Bat, he is afraid Trogus:
who thereby collecteth, that hairy men likewise are more letcherous than other.
The hairiest creature of all other is the Hare. In mankind only there grows
hair about the privy parts: and whosoever wants it, man or woman, is holden
for barren, and not apt for generation. Hairs in men and women are not all of
one sort: for some they bring with

CHAP. XL.
Notable observations in living Creatures as touching their paps.

She Asses are much pained with the ache of their vdders, when they have
foled; and therefore after six months they will not give them any more suck:
whereas mares do suckle their colts a whole year almost. Those beasts which
be whole hoofed, and have not above first appointed for that one pig. She
Bears have four paps apiece. Dolphins have no

CHAP. XLI.
Of Milk: and of what milk Cheese cannot be made.

THe milk that comes from a woman before she has gone 7 months with child is
not good: but from that time forward it is wholesome, because the infant may
live and do well after Poppaea, wife to Domitius Nero, had always wheresoever
she went, 500 she Asses milch, in her train: and in their milk she bathed and
washed her whole body, as in an ordinary bain, supposing that thereby her skin
was not only whiter, but also more neat, smooth, and void of riuels. All sorts
of milk will thicken with fire, and turn into whey with cold. Cowes milk
makes more cheese than Goats milk, by twice as much almost, although you take
no more of the one than the other. The milk of those that have above four
paps is naught for cheese: but theirs

CHAP. XLII.
Cheeses of sundry sorts.

AT Rome (the only place that has best means near at hand, to judge of the
fruits and commodities of all nations in the world) the cheeses which come out
of the provinces of Nemausium, and from the villages of Laeso and Baux, are
highly praised for the best; but they last not long: their commendation is for
the present season while they be green and new. There are brought good cheeses
from two coasts of the Alps, which greatly praise the pasture thereabout. Also
dainty cheeses are made in Dalmatia, from whence we have passing good; and
namely from Drinaldi. Moreover, the province of Ceutronia sends us excellent
cheese from Vatusium. But the great store and plenty of cheese comes from the
Apennine pounds. Next to these in goodness be those that are made near the
city of Rome about Vestinum: Zoroastres lived in the

CHAP. XLIII.
The difference between the members of Man and other Creatures.

OF living creatures upon the land, Man alone is two footed. He only has a
cannell bone and shoulders, arms also to embrace: whereas others have
shoulders only and forelegs to rest upon. In all creatures that have hands,
they be fleshy within-forth only: for the back part consists of skin and
sinews. Some men there be with six fingers to one hand. We have heard, that
M. Curiatius a Nobleman of Rome had two daughters so handed: whereupon
Sedigitae. Also there was a man named Volcatius, who was an excellent poet, and
had six fingers to an hand, whereupon he was named Sedigitus. Every finger of a
man's hand has three joints; the thumb twain, and it bends and boweth full
opposite to all the rest of the fingers: and yet by it self it stretches awry
from the others, and is thicker than the rest of the fingers. The little finger
is equal in length to the thumb: the forefinger and the fifth (or ring
finger) are just of one size: between which the middle finger is the longest.
Those four footed beasts that live of rauine and prey have five toes to their
fore-feet, whereas others have but four: Lions, Wolves, and Dogs, and some few
others, have likewise 5 toes or paws in their hin-feet, and one like a spur,
which bears forth behind, and hangs down from the pastern bone of the foot.
All other smaller beasts have five to a foot. The arms of all men be
Studiosus, belonging to the fence-schoole of C. Caligula the Emperor, whose
right arm was longer than the left. Certain beasts without reason use the
ministry of their fore-feet in stead of hands, and as they sit on their rumpe
reach meat therewith to their mouth, as squirils.

CHAP. XLIV.
The resemblance that Apes have to men.

AS for all the race and kind of Apes, they resemble the proportion of men
perfectly in the face, nose, ears, and eyelids; which eyelids these
creatures alone (of all foure-footed)

CHAP. XLV.
Of Nails.

Nails are taken and reputed for the extremities and utmost ends of the
sinews: and ye shall find them in as many as have fingers and toes. But in
Apes they are channelled half round like a gutter tile, whereas in man they be
flat and broad. When one is dead they

In the knees of men there is generally reposed a certain religious reverence,
observed even in all nations of the world: for humble suppliants creep and
crouch to the knees of their superiors: their knees they touch, to their knees
they reach forth their hands: their knees (I say) they worship and adore as
religiously as the very altars of the gods: and for good reason happily Nemesis
(which goddess could never yet find a Latin name, so much as in the very
Capitol) and that place are we wont to touch with the fourth finger (which is
next the least) in token of repentance, when we have let fall some word rashly,
and would crave pardon of the gods therefore. The crooked and swelling veins in
the legs man alone has, and women very seldom. Oppius writes, that C. Marius
(who had bin Consul of Rome 7 times) endured, without sitting down for the
matter, to have those veins taken forth of his legs, a thing that never any was
known to abide before him. All foure-footed beasts begin to go ordinarily on
the right hand, and use to ly down on the right side: others go as they list.
Lions and Camels only have this property by themselves, to keep pace in their
march, foot by foot, that is to say, they never set their left foot before
their right, Planci [i. flat footed:] Plauti [i. splay footed:] Scauri, [i.
with their ancles standing overmuch out:] Pausi, [i. broad footed.] Like as of
their misshapen legs some have bin named Vari [i. wry legged:] others, Vatiae,
and Vatinij, [i. bow-legged:] which imperfections beasts also are subject unto.
Whole hoofed are all they that bear the partition be very little, and hardy
discerned under the foot, but seems flesh all over the

CHAP. XLVI.
A discourse of beasts houfes.

THe Houfes of Horses, Mules, Asses, and such like beasts of carriage only, if
they be pared and cut, will grow again. In some parts of Sclauonia, the Swine
are not clouen-footed, but whole hoofed. All horned beasts in manner be
clouen-footed: but no beast bears two horns, and has withal the houfe of
one entire piece. The Indian Ass has only one horn. The wild Goat also
called Oryx, is cloven houfed, and yet has but one horn. The Indian

CHAP. XLVII.
Of Birds feet, and their Claws or Tallons.

OF Fowls, some have their feet divided into clees and toes; others be broad
and flat footed: and some are between both; which have indeed their toes
parted and distinct, and yet their feet be broad between. But of all them that
have four toes to a foot: to wit, 3 in the forepart, and one behind at the
heel in manner of a spur: howbeit this one is wanting in some; that are long
legged. The Wrinecke or Hickway, with some few others, have two before and
other two behind. The same bird puts out a tongue of great length, like to
serpents. It turns the neck about and looks backward: great claws it has
like those of Choughes. Some bigger birds have in their legs one other
shanke-bone more than ordinary. None that Apodes.
Martinets have feet: like as also the swift Swallow called Oce, and the sea
Swallow Drepanis. And yet such birds come so little abroad, that they be
seldom seen. To conclude, there have been now os late, Serpents known
flat-footed like Geese.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Of the feet of Insects.

ALl Insects having hard eyes, have their fore-legges longer than the rest, to
the end that otherwhiles grow no more in length. And therefore when they be
young sucking foles, a man shall see them

CHAP. XLIX.
Os Dwarfes: and genitall parts.

THere are no living creatures in the world (even the very fowls of the air
not excepted) but in each kind there be dwarfs to be found. As for those males
which have their instruments Cybele (the great mother of the gods) use to cut
off their own members and to gueld themselves, without danger of death. On the
contrary side, some few women there be, monstrous that way, and in that part
resemble men: like as we see there are Hermaphrodites, furnished with the
members Nero the Emperor, the like accident was seen (and never before) in some
foure-footed beasts. For he, in very truth, exhibited a show of certain mares
that were of the nature of those Hermaphrodites, found in the territory of
Treuiers in France: and they drew together in his own coach. And verily a
strange and wondrous sight this was, To see the great monarch of the world, sit
in a chariot drawn by such monstrous beasts. As touching the stones of Rams
Buckes, and greater beasts, they hang dangling down between their legs: but in
Bores, they be thrust together, and knit up short close to the belly.
Dolphines have these parts very long, and the same lying hidden within the
bottom of their bellies. In Elephants likewise they be close and hidden. In as
many creatures as do lay eggs, the stones stick hard to their loins within
the body: and such be ever most quick of dispatch in the act of generation,
and Triorchis.
by some extraordinary accident, or naturally: and such as be thus burst, are
counted but half men, and of a middle nature between Hermaphrodites and
guelded persons. To conclude, in all living creatures whatsoever, the males be
stronger than the females, setting aside the race of Panthers and Bears.

CHAP. L.
Of Tails.

THere is not a living creature, excepting men and Apes (take as well those
that bring forth their young alive, as others that lay eggs only) but is
furnished with a tail, for the necessary use of their bodies. Such as be
otherwise rough-haired and bristly, yet have naked tails, as Swine: those that
be long shagged and rugged, have very little and short skuts, as Bears: but as
many as have long side hairs, be likewise long tailed, as Horses. If Lizards
or Serpents have their tails cut off from their bodies, they will grow again.
In fishes they serve in good stead, as rudders and helmes to direct them in
their swimming: yeathey fit their turns as well as oars, to set them forward
as they stir them, to this or that hand. There be Lizards found with double
tails. Kine and Oxen have the longest rumpe for their tails of any other have
shag tails like sheep, but that they be longer. Swine carry their tails
turned and twined

CHAP. LI.
Of Voices.

Aristotle of opinion, That no living creature has any voice, but such only as
are furnished with lungs and wind-pipes: that is to say, which breath and draw
their wind: and therefore he holds, that the noise which we hear come from
Insects, is no voice at all, but a very sound, occasioned by the air that gets
within them, and so being enclosed, yields a certain Croesus had a son, who
lying swoddled in his cradle, spoke by that time he was 6 months old: but this
was a prodigious sign, and presaged the final ruin of that kingdom. Those
children that begin with their tongue betime, are later ere they find their
feet. The voice in man or woman begins to walls round about or empty
drie-fats and tuns set, the voice will be taken up in them, and

CHAP. LII.
Of the excrescence and superfluity of some members. Also the discourse and
sayings of Aristotle as touching man's life

Look what part is more than ordinary by nature, in any living creature, the
same ^erues to no use. As for example, the sixth finger in a man's hand is
evermore superfluous, and therefore fit for nothing. It was thought good in
Aeg^pt once to nourish and keep a monstrous Aristotle not only believed, but
also sticked not to set down in writing, that there were certain signs in
man's body, whereby we might foreknow whether he were long lived or no. Which,
albeit I take to be but vanities, and not rashly to be uttered without good
aduisement (because I would not have men amused, and busily occupied in
searching Prognostications in themselves, as touching their own life) yet will
I touch the same, and deliver them in some sort, since so great a clerk as
Aristotle was, held them for Resolutions, and thought them worth the penning.
He puts down therefore, as signs of short life, thin teeth, long fingers,
a leaden hew, many lines in the palm of the hand, with cross bars or short
cuts. Contrariwise, he says, That those who are Lute backed, thick
shouldered, Trogus, a most grave and renowned Author among us, is of opinion
moreover, That there is judgment to be given, not only of men's complexions, but
also of their conditions, by their very sight and countenance: and surely, I
think it not amiss to set down his very words. A large and broad forehead
(says he) is a token of a dull conceit and heavy understanding: and
contrariwise, they that have a little Trogus.

CHAP. LIII.
Of the Spirit and breath of living creatures: also what things be venomous in
taste, and do kill. Of men's food. And last of all, what hinders digestion and
concoction of meat.

THe breath of Lions has a very strong deane and stinking smell with it: but
that of a bear is pestilentiall and deadly: insomuch, as no beast will touch
where a bear has breathed and blown upon: for surely such will sooner corrupt
and putrify than others, as if they were blasted. As for the breath of a man,
Nature has suffered it to be infected many ways, namely, by the viands and
meat that he eats; by faulty and rotten teeth; and most of all by old age.
Rubeta [i. the toad that lives in bushes.] See how many ambushes our life is
subject unto! Waspes feed greedily upon Serpents, and upon that food their
stings be deadly. And Theophrastus wrote of the Ichthyophagi that live of fish:
where he has set down, That Kine and Oxen does eat fish, but they must in any
case be alive.

To come now unto men's diet: their best and most wholesome feeding is upon one
dish and no more, and the same plain and simple: for surely this hudling of
many meats one upon another of diverse tastes is pestiferous: but sundry sauces
are more dangerous than that. As touching our concoction: all tart and sharp
meats are of hard digestion: also fullness and surfeting: has^v and greedy
feeding likewise be enemies to digestion, and hurtful to the stomach. In sum,
we digest our meat more hardly in Summer than in Winter, and in age worse than
in youth. to digest in sleep, is better to make a man fat and corpulent, than
strong and lusty. And therefore

CHAP. LIIII.
Of making bodies fat or lean. Also, what things being tasted, do allay
hunger, and quench thirst.

BOdies grow to be burly and gross, with sweet meats, fat feeding, and much
drink: contrariwise, dry diet, actually cold, and thirst withal, make a body
lean. There be beasts in Africa, and especially the lesser sort, which drink
not above once in four days. A man may well live 7 days without any food
whatsoever: and well is it known, that many have continued more

THE TWELFTH BOOK OF
WRITTEN BY C. PLINIVS SECVNDVS.
The Proeme.
THus you see by that which has bin written before, what are the natures as
well in general, as particularly in parts, of all living and sensitive
creatures within the compass of our knowledge. It remains now to discourse
of those which the earth yields: and even they likewise are not without a
soul in their kind (for nothing lives which wants it:) that from thence we
may pass to those things that lie hidden within the earth, and are to be
dug out of it: to the end, that no work and benefit of Nature might
ouerpasse our hands, and be omitted. And in truth, these treasures of hers lay
long covered under the ground, insomuch as men were persuaded, that Woods and
Trees were the last and only goods left unto us and bestowed upon us by Nature.
For of the fruit of trees had we our first food: their leaves and branches
served to make us soft pallats and couches within the caves: and with their
rinds and bark we clad and covered our nakedness. And even at this day, some
Nations there be that live still in that sort, and no otherwise. A wonderful
thing therefore it is, that from so small and base beginnings we should grow
to that pass in pride, that we must needs cut through great mountains for to
meet with marble: send out as far as to the Seres for silk stuff to apparel
us: diue down into the bottom of the red sea for pearls: and last of all
sink deep pits even to the bottom of the earth, for the precious Hemerauld.
For this pride and vanity of ours, we have devised means to pierce and wound
our ears: because, forsooth it would not serve our turns to we are costly
pearls and rich stones in carkanets about our neck, borders upon the hair of
our head, bracelets about our arms, and rings on our fingers; unless they were
engraven also, and cut into the very flesh of our bodies. Well then, to follow
the course of Nature, and the order of our life (as meet it is we should) we
will treat in the first place of Trees, and lay before men's faces the life of
the old world, and what was their behauior and demeanure at the first, in their
manner of living.

CHAP. I.
The honor done in old time to Trees. When the Plane-trees were first known
in Italy, and of their nature.

IN old time, Trees were the very temples of the gods: and according to that
ancient Jupiter; the Laurel to Apollo; the Olive tree to Minerua; Venus; and
the Poplar to Hercules. Moreover, it is received and believed generally, That
the Syluanes and Faunes, yea, and certain goddesses, are appropriate and
assigned to woods and sorrests; yea, there is attributed unto those places a
certain divine power and godhead, there to inhabit: as well as unto heaven the
proper seat for other gods and goddesses. Afterward, in process of time men
began to taste also the fruit of Trees, and found therein a juice (without all
comparison) more lenitiue and pleasant to the contentment of their nature than
that which came of corn and grain: for thereof made they Oil, a singular liquor
to refresh and comfort the outward members and parts of the body: out of it
they pressed wine, the only drink that gives strength within, and fortifieth
the vital powers. From thence gather we so many fruits, yearly growing and
coming of themselves without the labor and industry of Elico, a Swisser or
Heluetian, who had made long abode at Rome (where he was entertained for his
skill in Smiths work and Carpentry) at his return home again into his country,
brought over with him dry figs and Raisons: the first fruits also as it were of
oil and wine for a taste, to set their teeth a watering. And therefore the
French had good reason, and might well be born withal For surely, of fruitful
trees Italy has store enough: and what tree should that be, but the Diomedes:
from thence translated into Sicily, and so bestowed at length upon Italy, and
there planted as a most singular, rare, and special tree. But now is it
carried as far as Terwin and Tournay in France, where it is counted an
appertenance to the very soil that paieth tribute: insomuch, as people that
will but walk and refresh themselves under the shadow of it, must pay a custom
therefore unto the people of Rome. Dionysius king of Sicily, and the first of
that name, caused them to be brought from Rhegium in Calabria to his Roial
city, where his palace was, only of a singularity, because they should be seen
to give a shade before his house, where afterward was made the College or
place of public exercise. But these trees did not greatly like the soil, for
they never grew big, nor prospered to any purpose. How beit, I find in writers,
that Licinius Mutianus thrice Consul, and lately Lieutenant general and
Governor of that Province, thought this one thing worthy to be recorded as a
memorial to posterity, That he and 18 more persons of his company, used to
dine and sup within the hollownesse of that tree: where the very leaves yielded
of the own sufficient bed and bench-room to rest and repose themselves: where
they might sit secured from danger of wind to blow upon them: where Caligula
the Emperor had such another Plane tree growing in the country about Velitrae,
most artificially: wherein he used to take great pleasure, with admiration of
the sundry lofts and planks one over another, the large settles also and
spacious branches that the boughs yielded, where he was wont to sit at repast,
making one of the 15 guests. For the room was of that capacity, that it would
not only receive so many to sit with ease at the table, but also the gentlemen
and seruitors that waited and ministered Jupiter under that tree defloured the
young lady Europa: as if (forsooth) there were no other tree but it of the same
kind and nature, in Cyprus. But as the nature of man is evermore curious, and
seeks after novelties) the Candiotes desirous to have of the same race within
Creet, set many slips thereof in sundry places, as if they longed to have more
such vicious fruit (as is before-named:) for in very deed that Tree is in no
one thing more commendable, than for excluding the heat of the Sun in Summer,
and admitting Claudius Caesar, late Emperor, there was an enfranchised slave
belonging to Marcellus Eserninus, a dainty guelded Eunuch of Thessalie, and
exceeding rich, who caused certain Plane trees to be brought out of Candie into
Italy, for to plant them at a manor which he had in the the territory near
unto Rome. This freed Eunuch for to grow into more power and favor with Caesar,
had ingraffed himself, as adopted among his freed men: and Dionysius, who was
the first that transplanted these kind of trees. Thus you see, that over and
above those monstruosities which Italy has devised of it self, we have
remaining and reigning among us those also of strange and foreign nations
abroad in the world:

CHAP. II.
Of the low or dwarf Plane tree. And who first devised to clip and shred
Arbours.

AS big as these Plane-trees, are yet there be those of a forced smalnesse to
the other, called Cn. Martius, a gentleman of Rome, and a fauorit of the
Emperor Augustus; and this invention has not bin known above 80 years.

CHAP. III.
Of Trees that be strangers in Italy: and namely of the Citron or Limon Tree.

CHerry-trees, Peach-trees, and generally all that either have Greek names or
any other but Latin, are held for aliens in Italy. Howbeit, some of them now
are infranchised and taken for free denizens among us: so familiar they be made
unto us, and they like the ground so well. But of them, we will speak in the
rank of those trees that bear fruit. For this present we are to treat of
those that be mere forrainers: and for good luck sake, begin we will with
that which of all others is most wholesome; to wit, the Citron tree, called the
Assyrian tree; and by

CHAP. IV.
Of Indian Trees: and when the Ebene was first known at Rome.

IN like manner, discoursed we have of the tallness and greatness of Indian
trees. Of all those trees which be appropriate to India, Virgil has highly
commended the Ebene above all the rest: and he affirms, That it will not grow
elsewhere. But Herodotus assigns it rather to Aethyopia; 200,
100 billets of the timber of that tree, together with gold and yuory.
Moreover, I must not forget (since that mine author has so expressly set it
down) that the Ethyopians in the same regard were bound to pay in like manner,
twenty great and massy Elephants teeth. In such estimation was yuorie then,
namely in the 310 year after the foundation of Rome; at what time as Herodotus
put forth that history at Thurij in Italy. The more marvel it is, that we
give so much credit to that writer, saying as he does, How that in his time and
before, there was no man known in Asia or Greece, nor yet to himself, who had
not so much as seen the river Po. The Card or Map of Ethiopia, which lately was
presented and showed to the Emperor Nero (as wc have before said) does
sufficiently testify, That from Syene (which confines Pompey the Great, in
that solemnity of triumph for the victory and conquest of Mithridates, showed
one Ebene tree. Fabianus is of opinion, that it will not burn: howbeit,
experience shows the contrary, for take fire it will, yea and cast a pleasant
and sweet perfume. Two kinds there be of Ebene: the one, which as it is the
better, so likewise it is rare and geason; it carries a trunk like another
tree, without knot, the wood thereof is black and shining, and at the very
first sight, fair and pleasant to the eye, without any art or polishing at
all. The other is more like a shrub,

CHAP. V.
Of certain Thorns, and Fig Trees of India.

THere grows also among the Indians, a Thorn resembling the later kind of
Ebene: and found to serve for the use of candles: for no sooner comes it
near unto the fire, but it catches a flame, and the fire leaps presently unto
it. Now it remains to speak of those trees, which set Alexander the Great into
a wonder, at what time as upon his victory he made a voyage for to discover
that part of the world. First and foremost, there is a fig tree there, which
bears

CHAP. VI.
Of the tree named Pala: of other Indian trees, whereof the names be unknown.
Also of those that bear wool or Cotton.

ANother tree there is in India, greater yet than the former, bearing a fruit
much fairer, bigger, and sweeter than the figs aforesaid; and whereof the
Indian Sages and Philosophers do ordinarily live. The leaf resembles birds
wings, carrying three cubits in length, and two in breadth. The fruit it puts
forth at the bark, having within it a wonderful pleasant juice: insomuch as
one of them is sufficient to give 4 men a competent and full refection. The
trees name is Pala, and the fruit thereof is called Ariena. Great plenty of
them is in the country of the Sydraci, Alexander the Great his expeditions and
voiages. And yet is there another tree much like to this, and bears a fruit
more delectable than this Ariena, howbeit, the guts in a man's belly it
wringeth, and breeds the bloudy-flix, Whereupon Alexander made open
proclamation and straightly forbad, That no man should taste thereof. As for the
Macedonian soldiers, they talked much of many other trees, but they described
them in general terms only, and to the most of them they gave no names at
all. For one tree there is besides, in other respects resembling the Terebinth,
and it carries a fruit much like to Almonds; only it is less, but of a most
sweet and toothsome taste. In Bactriana verily, some take it to be a special
kind of the Terebinth indeed, rather than a tree like unto it: but that tree
which carries a fine flax, whereof they make their dainty linen and lawn, it
has leaves like to those of the Mulbery

CHAP. VII.
Of Peppertrees: of the Cloue tree, and many other.

THe trees that bear Pepper every where in those parts, be like unto our
Juniper trees. And yet some have written, That they grow only upon the front of
the hill Caucasus on that first to bite of pepper and use it in his meats? Who
might he be, that to provoke his appetite

Over and besides, there is another fruit that comes out of India, like unto
pepper corns, and it is called Cloves, but bigger somewhat and more brittle.
And they say, that it grows in a certain grove consecrated to their gods in
India. Transported over it is unto us for the sweet smell that it casts.

Moreover, the Indians have a thorny and pricky plant, which bears a fruit
like to pepper, and passing bitter: the leaves be small and grow thick after the
manner of Priuet: it puts forth branches 3 cubits long: the bark is pale, the
root broad and of a woody substance, resembling the color of box. Of the
infusion of this root in fair water, together with the seed, in a brazen
vessel, is made that medicine or composition which is called Lycium. A bush
there grows i. the Berberrie bush] whereof is made a counterfeit Lycium. In
like manner, the root of the Asphodill, with an Oxe-gal, Wormewoot,
Frankincense, and the mother and lees of oil, will do the same: but the best
Lycium, and most medicinable, is that which does yield a great froth or scum.
The Indian merchants do send it over in bags made of the skins either of Camels
or Rhinocerotes. In some parts of Greece they name the very bush whereof this
Lycium is made, Pyxacanthum Chironium.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Macir, Sugar, and the trees of the region Ariana.

THe Macir likewise is brought out of India. A reddish bark or rind it is, of a
great root; and White sugar candy.
A kind of honey it is, gathered and candied in certain Canes: white this is
like gum [Arabick] and brittle between a man's teeth. The grains hereof when
they are at the bigst, exceed not a filberd nut, and serve only for physic. In
the realm of Ariana (which confineth and boundeth upon the Indians) there is a
certain thorny plant, so full of sharp pricks, that it is comberous to them who
come about it; which yeeldes a precious liquor issuing out thereof, like to
Myrrh. In the same province there grows a pestilent venomous shrubbe called
Rhaphanus, bearing leaves like the bay tree, which with their fragrant smell
train horses thither Alexander the Great scarce one horse of all his
Cauallerie, they died so fast of that food at his first entrance into the
country. The like accident befell to him also among the Gedrosians. In like
manner, there is another thornie plant (by report) in that region, leaued like
the Laurel: the juice and liquor whereof, if it be sprinkled or dashed in the
eyes of any living creature whatsoever, puts them quite out and makes them
blind. Moreover, they have an herb there, of a singular pleasant savor, but
covered all over it is with little venomous serpents: their sting is present
death. Onesicritus reports, That in the vales of Hircania there be trees like
fig trees, which the Hircanians call Occhi, out of which there distills or drops
honey every morning for the space of two hours.

CHAP. IX.
Of Bdellium: and the trees growing by the Persian gulf.

Near to these parts lies Bactriana, wherein is the most excellent Bdellium.
The tree that bears it is black, of the bigness of an Olive, with leaves like
an Oak; and the fruit resembles wild figs, and is of the same nature. The gum
thereof, some call Brochos; others, Malachra:

Upon these regions aboue-named, confineth Persis, whereas the red sea (which
we named in our Geographie, the Persian gulf) flows at certain tides far
into the land, and in these sands and downs are to be seen diverse trees of
strange natures: for when the tide is past, you shall see at a low water some
trees with their roots bare, as if they were eaten with the salt water; and a
man

CHAP. X.
The Trees of the Island Tylos within the Persian sea. Moreover of those trees
that bear Wool or Cotton.

WIthin the same gulf of Persia, there lies an Isle full of woods to the East
side, even upon that coast which is ouerflowed with the tide. Every tree
within, is equal in bigness to the fig tree: the blossoms that they carry,
are so sweet, as it is wonderful and unspeakable: the fruit like a Lupine, yet
so rough and prickly, as no beast will gladly touch it. In the highest part and
knap of the same Island, there be trees bearing wool, but not in such sort as
those of the Seres: for whereas the leaves of those do carry a down or cotton,
these are altogether

CHAP. XI.
Of the Gossampine trees: as also of other Cotton or Bombase trees, whereof
clothes be made. In what manner diverse trees do yield their fruit.

THere is a lesser Isle named Tylos, ten miles from the other, where be trees
called Gossampines, which yield more cotton than those in the greater. King
Iuba says, that this cotton grows about the branches of the said trees, and
that the linnens made thereof be farbetter than those of the Indians. As for
those trees in Arabia whereof they make their linen cloth, he affirms that
they be called Cynae, and have leaves like the Date tree. Thus you see, how the
Indians be clad with trees of their own. In those Islands called Tyli, there is
another tree which bears a blossom much like the flower of a White Violet,
or Scock-gillofre, but four times as big, which may seem strange in that
tract. And yet there is another Tree not unlike to it,

CHAP. XII.
Of Costus, Spike-nard, and the diverse kinds of Nard.

But the root and leaf be of greatest price in India. And first and foremost
the root of Costus bites and burns in the mouth; and is of a most excellent and
sovereign smell: for otherwise the branches or body of the shrub is good for
little or nothing. In the Island Patale (which lies at the very first fosse
and mouth where the river Indus falls into the sea) there be found two kinds
thereof: namely, the black, and the white, which is counted the better. A pound
of Costus is held at 16 Roman deniers.

As touching the leaf of Nardus, it were good that we discoursed thereof at
large, seeing that it is one of the principal ingredients aromaticall that go
to the making of most costly and precious ointments. The plant it self Nardus,
has a massy, heavy, and thick root; but short, black, and brittle,
notwithstanding that it be fatty and oleous. Soon it vinoweth and catches a
kind of mustinesse: and like to the Cypress [or Cyperus] it has a sharp taste,
rough and small leaves, but coming thick. The head of Nardus spreads into
certain spikes or ears, whereby it has a twofold use, both of spike and also
of leaf; in which regard it is so famous. A second sort there is of it growing
along the river Ganges, condemned altogether as good for nothing, for it has a
strong and stinking savor: whereupon it is called Ozaenitis. There is an herb
growing every where called Pseudonardus, or bastard Nard, which is obtruded
unto us and sold for the true [i. the wild] others Phu: and this has a leaf
resembling Loueach or Alesanders, a stalk a cubite long full of ioints and
knots, of a weak whitish and light purple color; the root grows crooked,
full of strings and hairs hanging to it, and is much like to birds claws or
feet. As for Baccharis, it is called likewise Rustick-nard: but of it will we
speak among other flowers. Al these kinds of Nardus are to be reckoned herbs,
save that only of the Indians: lighter it is than that of Syria. A pound of it
is worth at Rome 13 deniers. The only proof

CHAP. XIII.
Of Asara-Bacca, Amomum, Amomis, and Cardamomnm.

ASarum or Fole-foot, called otherwise, Asara-Bacca, has the very properties
and virtues of Nard: and therefore some have called it Wild Nard. An herb it
is, carrying leaves like to Iuie, save that they be more round and softer: it
puts forth a purple flower, and has a root like unto the French Nard. The
flower is full within of seeds like grape kernels, of an hot taste, and
resembling wine. In shadowie mountains it flowers twice a year. The best
grows in Pontus, the next to it for goodness is found in Phr^gia: that of
Illyricum is of a third rank. The root is dug up when it begins to put
forth leaves. They use to dry it in the Sun: soon it will vennow and be moldy;
quickly also it waxes old, and loses the strength. Of late days there was an
herb found in Thracia, the leaves whereof differ in nothing from the Indian
Nard.

As for the grape of Amomum, which now is in use and much occupied, some say it
grows upon a wild vine in India. Others have thought, that it comes from a
shrubbe like Myrtle, and carries not above a hand-bredth, or 4 inches in
height. Plucked it is together with the root: and gently must be laid and
couched in bunches by handfuls, for if great heed be not taken, it will soon
burst and break. The best Amomum and most commendable, is that which carries
leaves like to those of the Pomegranate, without riuels and wrinckles, and
besides, of a red color. The next in goodness is that which is pale. The
green or grass colored is not all out so good, but the worst of all is
white: and that color comes by age, and long keeping: a pound of these grapes
entire and whole in the cluster, is worth 60 Roman deniers. But if they be
crumbled and broken, it will cost but 48. This Amomum grows likewise in a
part of Armenia named

Now as touching that which is called Amomis, it is less full of veins, and
nothing so sweet smelling, but harder than Amomum: whereby it appears, that
it is either a diverse plant from it, or else if it be the same, it is gathered
before it be full ripe.

Cardamomum is like to these above rehearsed, both in name, and also in making
and ferme: but it bears a longer grain for seed. The manner also of gathering
and cutting it down, in Arabia, is the same. Four kinds there be of it. The
first is most green and fatty withal: having four sharp corners, and if a man
rub it between his fingers, he shall find it very tough and stubborn:

The great affinity or kindred rather in name, that Cinnamon has with these
spices before rehearsed, might induce me to write thereof in one suit, even in
this place: but that more meet it is to show first the riches of Arabia, and to
set down the causes why that country should be syrnamed Happy and Blessed. We
will begin therefore with the chief commodities thereof,

CHAP. XIV.
Of Happy Arabia, that yields plenty of Frankincense.

THere is no region in the whole world that brings forth frankincense but
Arabia: and yet is it not to be found in all parts thereof, but in that quarter
only of the Atramites. Now these Atramites inhabit the very heart of Arabia,
and are a county of the Sabaei. The capital city of the whole kingdom is
called Sabota, seated upon a high mountain: from whence unto Saba, the only
country that yields such plenty of the said incense, it is about 8 days
journey. As for Saba (which in the Greek tongue signifies, a secret mystery)
it regards the Sun rising in Summer, or the North-East, enclosed on every
side with rocks inaccessible: and on the right hand it is defended with high
cliffes and crags that bear into the sea. The soil of this territory, by
report, is reddish, and inclining to white. The forests that carry these
Incense Eratosthenes, contains forty stadia, that is to say, five miles: how
soever some have allowed but 32 stadia to every Schaenus. The quarter wherein
these trees grow is full of high hills: howbeit, go down into the plains and
valley beneath, you shall have plenty of the same trees, which come up of their
own accord, and were never planted. The earth is fat, and stands much upon a
strong clay, as all writers do agree. Few Springs are there to be found, and
those that be are full of Nitre. There is another tract by it self confronting
this country, wherein the Minaeans do inhabit: and through them there is a
narrow passage, whereby the frankincense is transported into other parts. These
were their first neighbors that did C. Caesar the adopted son of Augustus wan
great honor and glory from thence: and yet verily, to my knowledge, there was
never any Latin Author, that has put down in writing the form and fashion of
the tree that carries incense. As for the Greek Writers, their books do
vary and differ in that point. Some give out, that it has leaves like to a
Pear tree, only they be somewhat less, and when they come forth they be of a
grass green color. Others say that they resemble the Lentiske tree, and are
somewhat reddish. There be again who write, that it is the very Terebints and
Antigonus was, who had one of these shrubs brought unto him. King Iuba in those
books which he wrote and sent to C. Caesar, son to the Emperor Augustus, (who
was inflamed with an ardent desire to make a voyage into Arabia, for the great
fame that went thereof) says, That the tree which bears Frankincense has a
trunk or body writhen about, and puts forth boughs and branches like for
all the world to the Maple of Pontus. Item, that it yields a juice or liquour
as does the Almond tree; and such are seen commonly in Carmania: as also those
in Egypt which were planted by the careful industry of the Ptolomees, Kings
there. Howeuer it be, this is received for certain, that it has the very
bark of a Bay tree: Some also have said that the leaves be as like. And verily
such kind of trees were they which were seen at Sardis: for the Kings of Asia
likewise were at by the veiw of which impes, we may judge what the Mother is:
namely, even and round in the

They used in old time to gather the Incense but once a year; as having little
vent, and small return, and less occasion to sell than now adays: but now,
since every man calls for it, they feeling the sweetness of the gain, make
a double vintage (as it were) of it in one year. The first, and indeed the
kindly season, falls about the hottest days of the Summer, at what time as the
Dog days begin: for then they cut the Tree where they see the bark to be
fullest of liquor, and whereas they perceive it to be thinnest and strut out
most. They make a gash or slit only to give more liberty: but nothing do they
pare or cut clean away. The wound or incision is no sooner made, but out there
gusheth a fat some or froth: this soon congeales and grows to be hard:

A second Vintage and gathering there is in the Spring: against which time,
they cut the bark before in the Winter, and suffer it to run out until the
Spring. This comes forth red, and is nothing comparable to the former. The
better is called Carpheotum, the worse, Dathiathum. Moreover, some say, that
the gum which issues out of the young trees is the whiter: but that which
comes from the old, is more odoriferous. There be others also of opinion, that
the better Incense is in the Islands. But King Iuba does avouch constantly,
that there is none at all in the Islands. That which is round like unto a drop,
and so hangs, we call the male Incense; whereas in other things lightly we
name the male, but where there is a female. But folk have a religious [i.
Thuris.] And yet there be found at this day drops of Incense that weigh the
third part of a pound, that is to say, about * 39 Roman or rather 3^ and a
seruple.
deniers. It happened on a time, that king Alexander the Great being then but a
very little child, made no spare of Incense, but cast still upon the altar
without all measure when he offered sacrifice. Whereupon, Leonides his tutor
and schoole-maister, by way of a light reproof, said unto him thus, Sir you
should in that manner burn Incense when you have once conquered those nations
where there grows Incense. Which rebuke and check of his took so deep a
print in Alexanders heart, and so well he carried it in memory, that after he
had indeed made conquest Leonides his Tutor, a ship full fraught and charged
with Incense; willing him not to spare, but liberally to bestow upon the gods
when he sacrificed. To return again to our history. When the Incense is
gathered (as is beforesaid) conueighed it is to Sabota, upon Cammels backs, and
at one gate (set open for that purpose) is it brought into the city. For by
law forbidden it is on pain of death, to take any other way. Which done, the
Priests there of the god whom they call Sabis, take the disme or tenth part of
the Incense, by measure, and not by weight, and set it apart for that god.
Neither is it lawful for any man to buy or sell, before that duty be paid:
which serves afterward to support certain public expenses of the city. For all strangers and travelers within the compass of certain days journey, if
they come to the city, are courteously received, and liberally entertained at
the cost and charge of the said Sabis. Carried forth of the country it cannot
be, but thorough the Gebanites: and therefore there is a custom paid to their
king. The head city of that kingdom, Thomna, is from Gaza (the next
port-towne in Iudaea toward our coast) seven and twenty miles fourscore times
told: and this way is divided into 62 days journey by Camels. Moreover, besides
the tyth aforesaid, there be measures bestowed upon the Priests to their own
use: and others likewise to the kings Secretaries and Scribes. And not only
these have a share, but also the Keepers, Sextons, and Wardens of the temple,
the Squires of the body, the Guard and Pensioners, the kings officers, the
Porters, Grooms, and other seruitors pill and poll, and every one has a
snatch. Moreover, all the way as they travel; in one place they pay for their
water, in another for fodder and prouender, or else fortheir lodging and
stable-room, and every where for one thing or other they pay viz. If it be
white, large, brittle, and easy to take a flame when it comes near a coal of
fire; last of all, if it still not abide the dent of the tooth, but fly in
pieces and crumble sooner than suffer the teeth to enter into it.

CHAP. XV.
Of Myrrh, and the Trees that yield it.

SOme have written, That the Trees which bear the Myrrh, do grow confusedly
here and there in the same woods, among the Incense Trees: but more there are
who affirm, That they grow apart by themselves. And in truth, found they are
in many quarters of Arabia, as shall be said when we treat of the several
species of Myrrh. There is very good Myrrh brought out of the Islands: and the
Sabaesns pass ahe seas, and travel as far as to the Troglodites country for
it. There is a kind of Myrrh tree planted by man's hand in Hort-yards, and much
preferred it is before the wild that grows in the woods. These Trees love to
be raked, bared, and cleansed about the roots: they delight (I say) to have the
superfluous spurns rid away from Iuba writes, that it bears the lease of
Loueach or Alisanders. There be who write, that it resembles the Juniper, save
only that it is more rough and beset with sharp pricks And some let not to
dream and talk, that both Myrrh and also Incense came from one and the frank
and garden myrrh tree, as of the wild in the woods, the Myrrh is better that is
gathered Sabis, as there was of Incense, because it is found in other
countries. Howbeit the King of the Gebanites has paid unto him for toll and
custom a fourth part of all that passes through his kingdom. To conclude,
whatsoever is bought in any market or place abroad, they put and thrust it hard
together in leather bags one with another: but the Druggists and Apothecaries
can soon separate the better from the worse, and be very cunning and ready to
digest them according to the marks that they go by, as well of smell as
fattinesse.

CHAP. XVI.
Diverse kinds of Myrrh: the nature, virtue, and price thereof.

MAny sorts there be of Myrrh. Of all the wild kinds, the first is that which
grows in the or Adorarld. i. (...), which serves for perfuming in temples.
Odoraria is sold for 14. All kinds of Myrrh be mingled and sophisticated with
pieces of Masticke coming from the Lentiske, and with other gum: Item with
Elaterium [i. the juice of the wild cucumber] to make it more bitter: as also,
that it might seem weightier, with the some of lead, or litharge of silver. And
surely setting aside these two corruptions, all the rest are found by the very
taste of the gum. which also will stick unto the teeth in the chewing. But the
craftiest and finest device to counterfeit it, is with Indian myrrh, gathered
there from a certain thorny plant which grows among them. This is the only
thing that India brings forth worse than other countries. And verily so bad
it is, that soon it may be known from other myrrhes.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Mastick, Ladanum, and Brut a of Enhaemus, Strobus, and Styrax.

FRom the foresaid Myrrh therefore last named, let us for the affinity pass
to Mastick: which comes also of another thorny tree in India, as also in
Arabia, called Lama. Howbeit of Mastick there be two sorts: for both in Asia
and also in Greece there is found an herb, which directly from the root
puts forth leaves, and it bears a but or thistle head like an apple, full
of seeds. Cut the top of this herb, and there will issue forth a certain
liquor so like forth as a gum out of the Lentisk tree. Mingled this is also
like as frankincense, with rosin.

Moreover, Arabia does glory even yet in their Ladanum. And many have reported,
that this comes by fortune or chance, and by occasion of violence and wrong
done to an odoriferous plant that yields it in this manner following: The
Goats they say, harmefull creatures as they be to all plants, but more desirous
to be brousing of sweet and aromaticall shrubs (as if they knew how precious
they were) use to crop the sprouts and sprigs of this plant which bears
Masticke; which being so full of this odoriferous and sweet liquor, that they
smell again, does drop and distill the said moisture, which the shrewd and
unhappy beast catches among the shag long hairs of his beard. Now by reason
that dust gets among, it baltereth and cluttereth into knots and balls, and
so is concocted into a certain consistence in the Sun. And hereupon it is,
that in Ladanum are found goats hairs. But this happens by their saying, in no
other place but among the Nabataeans in the frontiers of Arabia toward Syria.
The later modern Ptolomaes, kings of Egypt: or as some say it is the Incense
tree that brings it forth: and is gathered after the manner of a gum issuing
out of the tree by incision made in the bark, and is received in goat skins.
The best Ladanum is worth forty Asses a pound. Sophisticated it is with Myrtle
berries, and with other filth of beasts. The good Ladanum indeed, which is of
it self without other mixture, ought to have a wild and savage smell with it,
as if it came out of a wilderness. Greenish it is, and dry to see to: but
handle it never so little, and presently it does relent and wax soft. Set it on
fire, and it burns bright and clear, and then it casts a sweet and pleasant
odor. But all that is counterfeit and mixed with myrtle berries may soon be
known, for they will crackle in the

In Arabia, the Olive tree also has a kind of liquour which issues out of it:
and thereof is compounded a certain soueraign salve named of the Greeks
Enhaemon, which is singular good to draw up wounds and heal them clean. In the
maritime parts and sea coasts the said Olive trees at some tides are ouerflowed
with the waves. Yet receive the Olive berries no hurt thereby: notwithstanding
it be certain, that the sea does leave salt upon the leaves. Thus you see what
be the peculiar commodities as touching trees, proper unto Arabia. True it is
that it has others besides, but because they be found elsewhere, and known to
be better in other places than in Arabia, I will treat of them in their course
and rank when it comes. And yet Arabia

They send therefore as far as the Helymaeans, for a tree named Bruta, like to a
spreding cypres, Claudius Caesar for strange virtues and wonderful properties.
For he writes, That the Parthians use to put the leaves thereof in their
drink, for to give it a good taste and odoriferous smell. The odor thereof
resembles the Caedar very much: and the perfume is a singular remedy against
the stinking and noisome fumes of other wood. It grows beyond the great
channel of the river Tigris, called Pasitigris, upon the mount Zagrus near
unto the city Citaca.

They send moreover to the Carmanians for another tree called Strobos, and all
to make sweet perfumes: but first they infuse the wood thereof in Date-wine,
and then burn it. This is an excellent perfume: for it will fill the whole
house, rising up to the chambers aloft to the arched seelings of the roufe, and
returning down again to the very floor and ground beneath, most Iuba says)
they began to go to Charace, and to the kingdom of the Parthians, for the same
purpose. For mine own part, I think rather with Herodotus, That the Arabians
transported these odours and spices to the Persians first, before that they
went therewith either into Syria or Egypt: and I ground upon the testimony of
Herodotus, who affirms, That the Arabians paid every year unto the KK. of
Persia the weight of a talent in Frank incense, for tribute.

Out of Syria they bring back Storax, with the acrimonie and hot smell whereof,
being burnt upon their herths, they put by and drive away the loathsomeness of
their own odors, wherewith they are cloyed: for the Arabians use no other fuel
at all for their fires; but sweet wood. As for the Sabaeans, they sees their
meats in the kitchen, some with the wood of the Incense tree, and others with
that of Myrrh: insomuch as both in city and country their houses be full of
thesmoke and smell thereof, as if it came from the sacrifice upon the altars.
For to qualify therefore this ordinary sent of Myrrh and Frank incense
wherewith they are stuffed, they perfume their houses with Storax, which they
burn in Goats skins. Lo, how there is no pleasure whatsoever but breeds
lothsomnesse, if a man continue long to it. The same Storax they use to burn
for the chasing away of Serpents, which in those forests of sweet trees, are
most rife and common.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the felicity of Arabia.

NEither Cinnamon nor Casia do grow in Arabia, and yet is it named Happy:
unworthy country as it is, for that surname, in that it takes it self
beholden to the gods above therefore, whereas indeed they have greater cause to
thank the infernal spirits beneath. For what has made Arabia blessed, rich,
and happy, but the superfluous expense thnt men be at, in funerals; employing
those sweet odors to burn the bodies of the dead, which they knew by good
right were due unto the gods. And verily it is constantly affirmed by them who
are acquainted well with the world, and know what belongs to these matters,
That there comes Nero spent in one day, when he burnt the corpse of his wife
Poppea. Cast then, how many funerals every year after were made throughout the
world: what heaps of odors have been bestowed in the honor of dead bodies:
whereas they offer unto the gods by crumbs and grains only. And yet when as men
made supplication to them with the oblation of a little cake made with salt,
and meal, and no more; they were no less propitious and merciful, nay they
were more gracious and favorable a great deal, as may appear by histories.
But to return again to Arabia, the sea enricheth it more than the land, by
occasion of the orient pearls that it yields and sends unto us. And surely
our pleasures, our delights, and our women together, are so costly unto us,
that there is not a year goes over our heads, but what in pearls, perfumes,
and silks; India, the Seres, and that Spice and Odors, how much (I pray you)
comes to the service of the celestial gods, in

CHAP. XIX.
Of Cinnamon, and the wood thereof called Xylocinnamomum. Also of Canell or
Casia.

FAbulous antiquity, and the prince of liars Herodotus, have reported, That in
that tract where Bacchus was nourished, Cinnamon and Canell either fell from the
nests of certain fowls, and principally of the Phoenix, thorough the weight
of the venison and flesh which they had preyed upon and brought thither whereas
they builded in high rocks and trees; or else was driven and beaten down, by
arrows headed with lead. Also that Canell or Casia was Alexander the Great
sailing with his fleet, by the very smell alone discovered Arabia a great way
into the maine sea. Lies all, both the one and the other: for Cinamone or
Cinnamon, call it whether you will, grows in Aethiopia, a country near unto
the Jupiter; and this patron of the Cinnamon tree, they call Assabinus. To
obtain leave and license so to do, they are glad to sacrifice the inwards of
44 Kine or Oxen, Goats also and Rams: and when they have all done, yet
permitted they be not to go about this business either before the Sun rising,
or after his setting. Now when these twigs and branches be cut, the Sacrificer
or Priest diuides and parts them with a jauelin, and sets by one of these trees
several bundles or parcels of Cinnamon sticks; and that which falls to the
Vespasian Augustus the Emperor was the first that dedicated in the Temples of
the Capitol and goddess Peace, garlands and chaplets of Cinnamon enclosed
within fine polished gold. In that temple which the Empress Augusta caused to
be built in the palace upon Mount Palatine, for the honor of Augustus Caesar
late Emperor, her husband, I have my self seen a Cinnamon root of great weight,
set in a cup of gold, which yearly did put forth certain drops which congealed
into hard grains. That monument remained there to be seen, until the Temple
and all was consumed by fire.

As concerning Casia or Canell, a plant it is, which grows near to the plains
from whence the Cinnamon comes; but it loves to live upon mountains, and
bears a bigger and rounder

CHAP. XX.
Of Isocinnamon, Cancamum, and Tarum.

THe Hucksters and regraters that buy and sell again have another kind, which
they call Daphnoides, and they syrname it Iso-cinnamon: and surely they hold it
at 300 deniers a pound. Mingled it is and made counterfeit with Storax; with
the smallest and tendrest branches also of Laurel, for the likeness it has
to the bark thereof. Moreover, it is set and planted in our part of the world
here in Italy, also in the utmost marches and confines of our Empire, along
where the river Rhine runs, it lives, being set near unto Bee-hiues. Howbeit,
because it wants the parching heat of the Sun, it is nothing so deep
colored; and rhereupon

CHAP. XXI.
Of Serichatum, Gabalium, and Myrobalanum, [i. Ben.]

IN the same country, the Arabians come charged also with Serichatum and
Gabalium: but they make an hand with it among themselves, and spend it quite:
in such sort, as their drugs

As for Myrobalanon, [i. Behen] it grows ordinarily in the region of the
Troglodites, about Thebais, and that part of Arabia which divides Jury from
Egypt: a drug that Nature has brought forth only for ointment, as the very
name gives it. Whereby it appears also, that it is a very nut of a certain
tree, which bears leaves like to Heliotropium: whereof we will speak among
other herbs. The fruit that this plant bears is about the bigness of a filberd
nut. That which grows in Arabia, and yet called Syriaca, is white: but
contrariwise that about Thebais

CHAP. XXII.
Of Phoenicobalanus, Calamus odoratus, and Squinanth.

THe Date in Egypt called Adipsos has the like use in ointments, and is next
in request for such odoriferous compositions, as the Myrabalanus, or Ben
aforesaid. Green it is in pound. The occupiers and shopkeepers call the very
settling and grounds of their ointment and

Moreover, within Arabia there grows also the sweet Calamus, which is common
to the Indians and Syrians likewise. That of Syria passes all the rest, and
comes up in a tract of that country, distant from the coast of our Sea fifty
stadia. Between mount Libanon, and another mountain of no account [for it is
not Antilibanon as some have thought] in a little vale beneath near unto a
lake, the marshes and flats whereof are dry in Summer for the space of thirty
stadia, there grow both sweet Calamus, and also Sqinanth or Iuncus Odoratus,
[i. the Sweet-rush.] For let us speak also in this place of the said Scaenanth:
and although it be but a rush, and another book is appointed for the treatise
and history of such Herbs, yet because we handle the Species that go to the
composition of sweet Perfumes, Pomanders, and ointments, I cannot pass it over.
Well then, neither the one nor the other of these twain, differ in sight from
the rest of

CHAP. XXIII.
Of Hammoniacum, and Spagnum.

TO begin withal, in the sands of those parts of Afric, which lie under
Aethiopia, there is a liquor distilleth, called in Greek Hammoniacum, of
Hammon, which signifies Sand, and the Oracle of Jupiter Hammon, for near unto
the temple where the said Oracle returns Answers,

Beneath these quarters, and within the province Cyrenaica, there is found a
passing sweet Moss, called Sphagnos; and of some Bryon [aromaticum.] Of all
such Mosses, this is thought to be the best. Next unto it, is that of Cyprus:
and in a third rank, the moss which grows in Phoenicia. There is such Moss
(by report) in Egypt, and likewise in France: whereof, for my

CHAP. XXIIII.
Of Cyprus, Aspalathus, and Marum.

THere is a tree in Egypt called Cypros, bearing leaves like to Ziziphus or
the Iujube tree, and a grain resembling Coriander seed, with a white flower
very pleasant and sweet. These flowers be steeped and sodden in common oil:
out of which is afterward pressed medicinable oil called Cyprus, or Cyprinum.
A pound of it will cost five Roman deniers. The best [i. Priuet.]

In the same tract grows Aspalathus: a white thornie shrub it is, of the
bigness of a small tree, and bears a flower resembling a rose. The root of
it is in request for the making of sweet perfumes and ointments. There goes a
common speech, That every plant over which the rainbow is seen bent, will cast
the same sent that Aspalathus does: but if it chance that the rainbow settle
over Aspalathus, then it will yield a sweet savor incomparable, and such as
cannot be expressed. Some call it Erysiceptrum, others Sceptrum, simply. The
good Aspalathus is red, or rather of a fiery color, massy and heavy in
hand, with a smell of Castoreum. It is sold for fifteen

In Egypt likewise there grows Marum, but it is not so good as that of
Lydia; for it has greater leaves, and those spotted with sundry colors;
whereas the other has little short leaves, but they smell passing sweet.

CHAP. XXV.
Of Baulme, as well the liquor thereof called Opobalsamum, as the wood named
Xylobalsamum. Also of Storax [Calamita] and Galbanum.

But the Baulme is that sweet and odoriferous liquor that goes beyond all
others. The tree Vespasians, both father and son, brought one of those little
Balm trees to Rome, and showed it openly to the whole city. Pompey the Great
likewise made proud boast and vaunted much, when he said, That trees also by
him were borne in triumph. Now this Balm tree serves and does homage, yea is
tributarie with the whole nation where it grows: but it is of a nature far
different from that which both our Latin writers, and those also of foreign
countries, have described: for more like it is to a vine than a Myrtle. It is
planted by slips and branches, as the vine: and of late bound and tied also
like a young vine. It spreads and fills the hills where it is set, after
the [i. easy to be cut or lopt.] The second, rough and rugged to see to,
bowing and bending forward, full of twigs and branches; sweeter also than the
other to smell to, and this they name Trachy in Greek, which is as much to say
as Rough. The third they call Eumeces, because it is higher than the rest, and
it has besides a smooth bark: this in goodness is the second; and the first,
named Eutheristos, is the worst. The fruit or seed that the Baulme tree bears
resembles wine in taste, of color red, and it is not without a certain vein
of fat. The worst part of the grain or fruit, is the lighter in weight, and
the greener. It is clad with boughs and leaves thicker than the Myrtle. Now,
for to draw the precious liquor out of it called Baulme, superfluous boughs
and branches to be cut off and pruned. But he that launceth and makes
Alexander the Great waged in Jury, it was ordinary in a Summers day to gather
one spoone full of this liquor, and that was all that might be done. And when
the season served best for this purpose, and that it was counted a plentiful
year, the greater hort-yard or park of the i. S. John^ wort.
Hypericum, that comes from the city Petra. But the deceit is soon detected
and found, for that seed is not so big, so massy and full, nor so long as the
true grain of Baulme: besides, it has but a dull savor or none at all, and in
taste resembles pepper. The liquor is known to be right or good, if it be
oileous and fat, thin, and sheere, somewhat inclining to red; and, if in rubbing
between your fingers, it renders a pleasant savor. The white Baulme may be
raunged in a second place of goodness: the green and of the factors under the
Emperor, who sold it first. Whereby a man may see how gainful it is

Now it remains to speak of Storax [Calamita] coming out of that part of
Syria, which above Phoenice, confronts and borders next to Jury: and namely,
about Gabala, Marathus and the mount Casius in Seleucia. The tree that yields
this gum or liquor, is also named Styrax, like unto a Quince tree. It has
first a rawish austere taste, which afterward turns to be more sweet and
pleasant. There is sound within a resemblance of canes and reeds, full of this
juice. Howbeit, about the rising of the Dog star there be certain winged worms
settle upon the said reeds, creep in and eat away the marrow (as it were)
which lay within: so as a man shall find naught left behind but a moldy dust
or rotten powder, good for nothing. Next to this Storax of Syria, great account
is made of that which comes out of Pisidia, from Sidon, Cypres, and

Moreover, we have from Syria out of the same mountain Amanus, another kind of
gum called

CHAP. XXVI.
Of Panaces, Spondylium, and Malobathrum.

THe same perfumers seek also into the same Syria for Panaces growing there,
and yet it is to be found also about Psophis, a city in Arcadia; and the
fountains from whence flows the river Erymanthus: yea, and in Affricke
besides, and Macedonie. This Panax is an herb with a tall stalk and round
tuft in the head like Fennel, and yet it is a plant by it self, growing to
the height of five cubits. At the first it puts out four leaves, and
afterward six. They be very large and round withal, lying upon the ground:
but toward the top they resemble the leaves of an Olive: it bears seed in the
head hanging within certain round tufts, as does the Ferula. Out of the stalk
of this herb there there is drawn a liquor by way of incision, made in harvest
time: and likewise out of the root in Autumn, or the fall of the leaf. And
this is called

Another herb there is of this Fennel kind, namely Spondylium, somewhat
different from the former, but in leaves only; because they be less than those
of Panax, and divided after the manner of the Plane leaves. This Spondylium
grows no where but in cold and shadowie places. It carries a fruit or grain
called also Spondylium, which resembles the form of Sil or Siler montanum,
and serves for no use but Physic.

We are beholden moreover to Syria for Malobathrum. This is a tree that bears
leaves rolled up round together, and seeming to the eye withered. Out of which
there is drawn and pressed an Oil for perfumers to use. Egypt is more
fruitful of this herb than Syria. And yet salt or brackish. The white is not
so well esteemed. It will soon be mouldie when it is stale. The Folium.
Malobathrum or the leaf yields when it is boiled in wine, passes all
others. It is strange and monstrous, which is observed in the price: for it
has risen from one denier to 300 a pound, whereas the Oil it self does cost
60.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of Oil Olive, made of green Olives, likewise of Grape Veriuice.

FOr the mixture and composition of ointments, the Oil of unripe Olives and
Veriuice is very good: and verily, made it is in two kinds, and after two
sorts, to wit, of the Olive, and the Vine. Of the Olives, if ye would have
good, they ought to be pressed whiles they be yet

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of Bryon and Oenanthe: of the tree Elate, and Cinnamon Cariopus.

THe moss of the white Poplar or Asp, which is reputed as the grape thereof, is
used likewise in these odoriferous and sweet compositions. The best grows about
Cnidos or Caria, in thirsty, dry, and rough places. A second sort is that which
is found upon the Cedar of Lycia. [i. the Fir] others Palma or the Date, and
some again Spathe. That which grows about the sands of Africa, where Jupiter
Hammons temple stands, is highly commended [i. 2 shil. 6. d.]

THE THIRTEENTH BOOK OF
WRITTEN BY C. PLINIVS
The Proeme.
THus far forth the woods and forests are of estimation, in regard of the
pleasure they do unto us for perfumes and sweet odors: and in truth, if we
consider duly these aromaticall plants, admirable they be cuerie one in their
kind, even as they be weighed apart by themselves alone. But such is the riot
and super fluitie of man, that being not content with that perfection of Nature
shining in those plants and trees above rehearsed, he has not ceased to mingle
and compound them, and so of them all together for to make one confused smell:
and thus were our sweet ointments and precious perfumes devised, whereof we
purpose to write in this book next ensuing.

CHAP. I.
Of Ointments, Perfumes, and their compositions: and when they came into
knowledge first at Rome.

AS touching the invention of Ointments, it is not well known who was the
first Darius, among whose coffers (after that Alexander the Great had defeated
him and won his camp) there was found with other royal furniture of his, a
fine casket full of perfumes and costly ointments. But afterward they grew
into so good credit even among us, that they were admitted into the rank of
the principal pleasures, the most commendable delights, and the honestest
comforts of this life. And more than that, men proceeded so far, as therewith
to honor the dead: as if by right that duty belonged to them. And therefore

First and foremost therefore, all perfumes took their names either of the
country where they [i. Vermillionor Sanguis Draconis] and Orcanet. The salt
moreover that is strewed among, serves to repress and correct the nature of
the oil that unites all the ingredients besides. But those that have the root
of Orcanet in them, needno salt at all to be put in besides. As for Rosin and
Gum, they are mingled with the rest to incorporat the drugs and spices, and to
keep in the sweet odor thereof, which otherwise would of all: considering, that
nothing grows more rife in all places. Which was the cause, that the Samsuchus.
Majoran grows. There be other oiles likewise which are not of so good
reckoning, namely, of Myrtles, and Bays, which receive a mixture with the
addition of Majoran, Lillies, Feni-greek, Myrrh, Casia, Spikenard, Squinanth,
and Cinnamon. Moreover, of great quinces and the less called Mala Struthea, is
made Susinum.
Lillies, which is the most subtle and thinnest of all other, it is made of
Lillies, Ben, sweet Calamus, Honey, Cinnamon, Saffron, Myrrh, and Aspalathus.
Also the foresaid oil Cyprinum is made of the flowers of Cypros, of Veriuice,
Cardamonum, Calamus, Aspalathus, and Sothernwood. Some there be that put
moreover unto this oil, Myrrh and Panace. The Sidonians are excellent at the
making of this composition: and after them the Egyptians, so that they put not
in Sesamium oil: for it will last and keep good full four years: and if it begin
to lose the smell, it is quickened and refreshed again with Cinnamon. Now as
touching the ointment of Telinum.
Feni-greek, it is made of fresh oil, Cyperus, Calamus, Melilot, Feni-greeke,
Menander the comicall poet. But long after there succeeded into the same place
of credit, the ointment Megalium: so called for the great glory that it carried:
and this was compounded of the oil of Ben, of Baulm liquor, sweet Calamus,
Squinanth, Balm-wood, Casia, and Rosin. In the making hereof, this property it
had by it self, that all the while it was a compounding and seething, it
should ever and anon be vented, and shifted out of one vessel into another,
until the smell of it were gone. Which nevertheless it would recover again
after it was once cold. Moreover, some liquors there be of themselves, that
without any other mixtures may serve and go for noble sweet ointments. Among
which, that of Malabathrum is the chief: Xylobalsamum Carpobalsamu^
fruit or seeds of Balsamanum, Myrrh, and Honey Aromatical. This is of all
other the thickest ointment in substance. The price of this, is from 35 deniers
to 300 the pound. As for the ointment Nardinum or Foliatum, it is composed of
the oil of green Olives or grape veriuice, of the oil of Ben, of Squinanth,
Costus, Spikenard, Amomum, Myrrh, and Baulme. Howbeit, this point would not
with the oil Cyprinum, it looks green; if with the oil of Lillies, it will
be fatty and unctuous;

CHAP. II.
Of the Ointment called Royal: of dry Perfumes, Pouders, and Pomanders: and
how they be kept.

THe Royal Ointment therefore (which the Parthian kings used ordinarily, and
of whom

As for those mixtures which be called Diapasmata, they consist of dry spices
and drugs. Also the dregs or grounds of Ointments, they call Magma. Moreover,
this is to be observed in the mixture and composition of those Ointments, That
the drugs which be put in last, are ever the strongest and most effectual.

Now as touching the keeping of Ointments, they are best preserved in pots or
vessels of Alabastre: and Odors are surest maintained and continue longest,
being incorporate in oil: which the fatter that it is, serves better for a
continuance of their sent; as a man may see very well in the Oil of Almonds.
And to say a truth, the older that an ointment is, and the longer fermented,
the more virtue it has for the age. The sun is an enemy unto them, and
therefore they must incorporate and unite together in the shade, and be put up
in vessels of lead. The trial of them

CHAP. III.
Of the Superfluity in expense at Rome, about these Ointments: and at what
time they were first used there.

AT this day there is not in Rome any thing wherein men more exceed, than in
these costly and precious ointments: and yet of all other, they are most
superfluous and may be best spared. True it is, that much money is laid out
upon pearls and precious stones; but these M. Cicero, that he made more
account of those ointments that sauored of the earth, than those which smelled
all strong of Saffron: as if he meant thereby, That in this excessive disorder
and most corrupt enormitie of all others, a certain moderation yet and sad
delay would do well; and that a severity (if I may so say) in the vice it self,
were better to be liked. But M. Otho that first taught the Emperor Nero this
wanton delicacie. But I would gladly know, and some good body tell me, I pray,
how he could feel the smell thereof, and what delight or contentment it might
yield from that part of the body? I have heard say besides, by some of the
inward familiars and special fauorits of this prince, That he commanded the
very walls of his baines and stouves to be perfumed with precious ointments:
and that C. Caligula the Emperor, caused the very vessels and seats wherein he
used to sit when he bathed or swet in his hot-house, to be in that manner
anointed. And because this might not seem to be a special pleasure fit for
an Emperor only, I knew one of Neroes servants afterward, who

To say for certainty and precisely, when this enormity entered first into Rome
and began there to reign, I am not able. Sure it is, as appears upon record,
That after the subduing of K. Antiocus and the conquest of Asia, which was
about the 565 year from the foundation of Rome, P. Licinius Crassus, and L.
Julius Caesar the Censors, published an edict, prohibiting and forbidding to
sell any foreign or strange ointments within Rome: for so they termed these
sweet mixtures and compositions. But (believe me) now adays, some there be so
wanton and delicat, L. Plotius, brother to L. Plancus, a man of great credit
and authority, as having bin twice Consul, and Censor besides, being outlawed
and proclaimed a banished person by the decree of the * Trium virs, was
discovered within a certain cave at Salernum, Antonie, Le^dus, and Octa^ius.
where he lay close hidden and sure enough otherwise, by the very smell only of
a precious ointment that he had about him: and so by that means (besides the
shame and disgrace that he received, thus to detect himself and be found of
his enemies) the rigor of the act and arrest that

CHAP. IIII.
Of Dates, and Date trees: their nature and several kinds.

THe land of Jury is as much renowned, or rather more, for the abundance of
Palms or Date trees which it affourdeth: the discourse whereof we will now
enter into. True it is, and it cannot be denied verily, that there be of them
found in Europe, and namely, every where in Italy; but such, be all of them
barren. Also in the maritime parts and seacoasts of Spain, ye shall meet with
Palms that bear Dates, but they are buttart and unpleasant, and indeed never
come to their maturity and ripeness. Those of Africa, I must needs say, bring
forth a sweet and string: and yet there be other pellicles that cleave fast and
stick to the substance of the Date Iuba makes greatest account of those which
the region of the Scenites in Arabia does yield, where they be called Dabula:
and he commends them for their delicate and pleasant taste, before all others.
Moreover, it is constantly affirmed, That the females be naturally barten, and
will not bear fruit without the company of the males among them to make them
for to conceive: yet grow they will nevertheless a thing that ye shall not
lightly see in any others of that kind. As for those Date trees which Nicolas,
and were called Nicolai: passing fair and great they be above all others by
far; for four of them laid in a rank one at the end of another, will make a
cubit in length. Other Dates there be, not so fair to the eye as these
Caryotae, but surely for pleasant taste they may be well their sisters, like as
they be called thereupon Adelphides. And a third kind there be of the same
Caryotae, which they commonly call Pateton: over full they are of liquor, and
so drunk (as a man would say) with their own juice, that they burst even which
we dedicate to holy uses, and namely, when we sacrifice and offer oblations to
the gods, [i. vile and of no price.] The Dates in Egypt called Thebaides, as
also those in Arabia, be all ouer-drie and withered, poor, lean, and thin.
Parched as they be continually with the heat of the sun, a man would deem they
were covered with a crust or shell, rather than with a skin or pill. Go further
into Aethiopia, there they be so dry that they will soon crumble into powder
like meal; and indeed they make thereof their bread, when it is tempered and
wrought with water. These Dates be round, and bigger than a good apple; and
they grow upon a plant or shrub which spreads branches of a cubit length: and
the Greeks call them Cycae. They hang 3 years before they be ripe: and evermore
you shall see upon the tree Dates ripe, when others come new forth green and
small. As for the Dates of Thebais in high Egypt, so soon as they be gathered,
presently they are put up into barrels, whiles their natural Iuba, hold them
for junkets and banketting dishes. For as in some part of Phoenice, and Cilicia
they be called Balani, [i. glandes or mast] so we at Rome term them by the
very name of their own country Phoenice, and by no other. And even of them
there be many kinds; and those different one from another, either in form,
for that some be round, others long, or else in color, whiles there be of them
red and black: in which regard, a man may observe in them, (by report) as great
variety as in figs: howbeit the whitest be the best and most commended.
Alexanders army, who with eating of green dates new ripe, were choked, and so
died. In the Gedrosians

CHAP. V.
Of the trees in Syria.

BEsides the Date tree, there be other especial trees in Syria proper unto
that country: for in the first place there are a kind of Nuts there growing,
commonly known and called Fisticks. called Lenten figs.
Figs, and a lesser sort than they named Cottana come from thence. Also the
Damascene prunes, growing upon the mount Damascus; as also the fruit Sebesten
are the commodities of Syria: how soever they are now familiar here with us in
Italy. As for Sebesten, there be wines in Egypt made thereof. Also the
Phoenicians have a less kind of Cedars much like to the Juniper: and two sorts
there be thereof, the Lycian and the Phoenician, which differ in the leaf: for
that which has an hard, sharp, and prickie leaf, is called Oxycedrus: full
of branches it is besides, and so knurrie, that it is troublesome to the hand.
As for the other Cedar, it has an excellent smell. Both twain do bear a
fruit of the bigness of Myrtle leaves, and sweet in taste. Moreover, of the
greater Cedar there be two Cedar, Cedrelate: whereof comes the best Rosin.
And the timber of it is everlasting: wherefore Apollo Sosianus, made of Cedar
wood, brought from Seleucia. In Arcadia there is a tree like the Cedar, but in
Phrygia it is called a shrub.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Terebinth.

Moreover, in Syria grows the Terebinth or Terpentine tree. The male bears no
fruit. The females be of two sorts: the one carries red grains of the bigness
of Lentils, the other bring forth pale seeds. This fruit of the Terebinth
ripeneth with grapes. Upon the mountain Ida near Troas, it is as big as a
bean, more pleasant to smell to, and glutinous like

Also the male Rhus or Sumach of Syria does bear fruit: whereas the female is
barren. This plant puts forth leaves like to the Elm, but that they be
somewhat longer, and full of hairs, and evermore the steles of the leaves grow
contrary one against the other. As for the branches,

CHAP. VII.
Of the Egyptian and Cyprian Sycomores or Fig Trees.

IN Egypt likewise there be found many trees which grow not els-where: and
principally the Sycomore, which thereupon is called the Egyptian Fig Tree. The
tree for leaf, bigness, and

Like to this Sycomore in some sort is a certain tree in Candy, which is
called the Cyprian fig tree. For this likewise bears fruit coming out at the
very stock, or the maine arms and boughs thereof, when they be grown to any
thickness: but it puts forth certain sprigs without any leaves at all, and
they resemble-roots. Now this tree is in body much like to the Poplar,

CHAP. VIII.
Of the cod or fruit called Ceraunia Siliqua [i. Carob.]

THere is a kind of coddy shrub which the Ionians call Ceraunia, not unlike to
the Egyptian Sycomore abouesaid, for the fruit thereof comes likewise forth of
the stock, but yet is contained within a cod: and thereupon it is that some
have called it the Egyptian fig tree, but they are grossly deceived: for it does
not so much as grow in Egypt, but in Syria and Ionia, also about Gnidos and
Rhodes. The tree has green leaves all the year long: it puts forth white
flowers of a strong smell. From the root there spring shoots, and about the
foot of the tree it bears many young imps, which are such suckers of the sap,
that they draw away all the

CHAP. IX.
Of atree in Egypt called Persica: of Cucus, and the Egyptian thorn Acacia.

THere is sound in Egypt a certain kind of tree by it self called Persica, like
to a pear tree,

A tree this is not unlike to the Date tree, in this regard especially, that
the leaves be good to twist and plait for mats and such like: herein is the
difference, for that it spreads into arms and great boughs. The fruit which it
bears is as much as a man may well hold in his hand, of color reddish or
deep shining yellow, and the taste very commendable; for it yields a juice
between sour and sweet, and therefore wholesome for the stomach. The woody
stone within is great, massy, and exceeding hard, whereof they use to turn
for curtain rings and sail pullies.

In the same country there grows a thorny plant which the inhabitants make
great account of: and especially that which is in color black; because it will
abide the water, and never rot nor putrify in it, and therefore excellent good
for the ribs and sides of ships. As for the white thorn of this kind it will
soon corrupt and be rotten. But both the one and the other is full of pricks
even to the very leaves. The seed lies in certain cods or husks, wherewith
curriers use to dress their leather in stead of galls. The flower this thorn
bears is beautiful, whereof folk make grows plentifully about Thebes in
Egypt, among Oaks, Olives, and Peach trees, for the space

CHAP. X.
Of the Egyptian Plum tree, and other trees about Memphis.

IN those quarters grows likewise the Egyptian Plum tree, not unlike to the
thorn of Acacia next before described: and this brings forth a fruit as big as
a Medler, which never is ripe before mid-winter, when the days be at shortest.
The tree is always green, and sheds not the leaves all the year long. Within
the fruit aforesaid there is a big stone; but the substance

CHAP. XI.
Sundry sorts of Gum. Also of the Cane Papyrus.

THe best gum in all men's judgment is that which comes of the Egyptian thorn
Acacia, having veins within of checker work, or trailed like worms, of color
greenish, and clear withal, without any pieces of the bark intermingled
among, and sticking to the teeth as a man cheweth it. A pound thereof is
commonly sold at Rome for three deniers. The gum that issues from the bitter
Almond trees and Cherry trees is not so good: but the worst of all is that
which the Plum tree yields. There runs likewise out of vines a certain
gum that

Now albeit we are not entered yet into the treatise of those plants and shrubs
which grow either in marish grounds or by rivers sides; yet before we depart
out of Egypt we must not forget M. Varro writes, that the first invention of
making paper was devised upon the conquest of Egypt, achieved by Alexander the
Great, at what time as he founded the city Alexandria in Egypt, where such
paper was first made. For before that time there was no use at all (says he)
of paper, but men used to write in Date tree leaves first, and afterward in
the (...) and barks of certain trees. Then in process of time they began to
register public records in rolls and sheets of lead: and soon after private
persons set down their own affairs in linen books, or else in tables covered
with wax. For we read in Homer, that before the war of Troy writing tables were
used. And at the very time when he wrote, Egypt was not all continent and firm
by a bridge or narrow causey between, it was a day and nights sailing with a
good fore wind Homer has reported. But afterward, as Varro has written, by
occasion of a certain envious strife and emulation which arose between one of
the Ptolomees K. of Egypt, and Eumenes K. of Pergamus, about the erecting of
their great libraries; when Ptolomaeus suppressed and kept in all the paper
made in Egypt, there was parchment devised by the said Eumenes to be wrought at
Pergamus of skins. And finally, the use was commonly taken up of both, to wit
Paper and Parchment, which continues the perpetuity and everlasting
remembrance of men and their affairs. But to return unto our plant Papyrus,
it grows in the marshes of Egypt, or else in the dead standing waters of
Nilus, namely in certain plashes and pits whereas the water did ouerflow, and
remained still after the river was fallen and down again: and namely such
holes and ditches which are not above two cubits deep. The root is wrythen
Antigonus any other ropes about the tackling of his ships, but such as were
made hereof. For as yet the use of Spartum was not common. Moreover, it is not
long since that there was found growing in Euphrates about Babylon, this plant
Papyrus, and known to serve for paper as well as the other in Egypt. And yet
for all that, the Parthians will not leave their old custom to weaue and
purfle letters in their clothes, after the manner of embroderie. Now (...)
touching the writing paper made of Papyrus: after they have cut it into
certain trunkes, as long or as short as the size of their paper, they divide
or sliue it with the point of a needle or bodkin for the purpose, into very
thin plates or leaves, but they drive them as broad and large

CHAP. XII.
Of diverse kinds of Paper, and how writing Paper is made: also the trial of
good or bad Paper: and the glue or past belonging thereto.

THe best sheets or leaves of paper be those which are set out of the very
midst or heart of the stem or stalk of Papyrus: and so consequently better or
worse, according as they be nearer or farther from it. In ancient time the
principal paper and the largest was called Hieratica, [i. sacred or holy] as
being employed only about religious and divine books. But afterward the
flatterers of the Emperor Augustus named those of the best sort Augustae: like
as Fannius undertook, who set up a shop in Rome for the selling of it: and so
skillful was he and curious in the handling and dressing thereof, that by the
time he had done withal and brought it to a perfect finenesse, he made the
same of a course and common paper, to be royal, and fit for the best persons
that should use it: in such sort, as there was none in any request to speak of,
but it: and called after his name it was Fanniana. As for that which passed not
through his hands, nor had his workmanship, it retained still the old bare name
Amphitheatrica. After this kind of paper followed that which they called
Saitica, of a town or city in Egypt, was not for to write in, only it served
as wast Paper for sarplers to wrap and pack up wares in: Claudius Caesar the
Emperor abated the credit of the Paper Augusta, that it was no more accounted
the best: for indeed so thin it was, that it would not abide the dent of the
pen: besides, it would not hold ink, but show the letters on the other side;
and was evermore in danger of blurring and blotting, specially on the back
part: and otherwise, unsightly it was to the eye, for that a man might so
easily see thorough it. And therefore he devised to fortify and strengthen the
said Paper, and laid another course or coat (as it were) over the former, in
manner of a double woofe. He enlarged also the breadth of the Paper: for he
caused it to be a foot broad, yea, and some a foot and an half, I mean that
kind which was called Macrocola, or large Royal Paper. But herin was a fault,
and reason found it out: for if one leaf of this large Paper were plucked off,
the more pages took harm thereby, wrinkles, and finally beaten even with the
hammer, and driven out in length and breadth. After Gracchi, Tiberius and
Caius, with their own hands, long ago: the which I saw in the house of
Pomponius Secundus, a noble citizen of Rome, and a renowned Poet, almost two
hundred years after their death. As for the writings of Cicero, of Augustus
late Emperor of famous memory, and of Virgill, we daily see and handle them,
by the means of Paper so good and durable.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the books of Numa.

WE find many examples in stories, which very directly and mightily do testify
against M. Varro, as touching Papers. For Cassius Hemina (a most faithful and
ancient writer) L. Petilius. Liuie.
Cn. Terentius a scribe or public Notarie, as he dug and delued in a
ground which he had near to Ianiculum, light upon a chist, where in lay the
body of Numa, sometime king of Rome. In the same also were found the books of
the said king. And (as he affirms) this happened in that year, when Pub.
Cornelius the son of Lucius, surnamed Cethegus, and M. Boebius son of
Quintus, surnamed Pamphilus, were Consuls of Rome: between which time and the
reign of Numa, by just computation are reckoned 535 years. He says moreover,
That those books were made of the Paper abouenamed. The greater wonder it was,
how such kind of books should last s^ long, especially within the earth, and
not putrify? The thing therefore being so strange, and in manner miraculous,
Hemina likew ise, as he delivers them. The world made a wonder (quoth he) how
these books could possibly endure so many years? but the party who found them
yielded this reason: That within the said coffer about the mids of it, there
was a stone foure-square: lapped all about and bound every way with [waxe]
candles in manner of a serecloth: upon which stone, the foresaid books were
laid: and therefore it was (as he supposed) that they did not rot. Moreover,
the books also were embaulmed with the rosin or oil of Cedar, which might be a
good reason in his conceit, that the moths came not to them. Now these books
contained the Philosophy and doctrine of Pythagoras: and for that they treated
of that Philosophical argument, burnt they were, by order from Q. Petilius the
Praetor for that time being. The same story in effect does C. Piso Censorinus
(a man who had been Censor) report in the first book of his commentaries:
howbeit, Pythagoras his Philosophy. But Tuditanus in the thirteeneth book of
the Annals affirms, That they were the decretals only of Numa, and contained
his ordinances. As for Varro himself, he writes in the fifth book of Humane
Antiquities, that they were in all but twelve. And Antias in his second book
reports, That two of them were written in Latin, and contained the
Pontificial divinity and church matters: and other twain penned in Greek,
were full of precepts in Philosophy. He also affirms in his third book, for
what cause the said books by virtue of a public decree were consumed with
fire. But all Historiographers agree in this, That one of the Sibyls brought
unto Tarquinius the proud three books: of which, two were burnt by her own
self: Sylla. Over and besides, Mutianus, a man who had been thrice Consul of
Rome, has left on record, that of late, while he was lord governor or Lycia,
he read in a certain temple an Epistle written by prince Sarpedon in Paper, and
bearing date from Troy. And I wonder the rather at this, if so be that when
Homer lived and wrate his Poem, there was no land of Egypt as now there is:
or why, in case there was such use of Paper then, himself should write, that in
the very same Lycia, Bellerophon had writing tables given him to deliver as
touching his own death, and not rather letters missiue wrote in Paper? Well,
howeuer that be, this is certain, that there is a scarsitie otherwhiles of
Paper also, as well as of other commodities: and this cane or reed Papyrus does
many times fail. For not long since, even in the days of Tiberius the
Emperor, in a dearth and

CHAP. XIIII.
Of the trees in Aethiopia.

AS touching Aethiopia, and namely that quarter which confineth upon Egypt, it
has in manner no trees at all of any name, save those that bear wool or
cotton, concerning the nature of which trees, we have sufficiently spoken in
the description of the Indians, and of Arabia: and yet in very truth, the
cotton that is brought from these trees in Aethiopia, comes nearer to wool than
any thing else; howeuer the trees be otherwise like to the rest of that kind:
and the burse or cod wherein this woollie substance lies, is greater, and as big
as a Pomegranat. Besides these, there be Date trees also, like to such as we
have before described. As touching other

CHAP. XV.
Of the trees growing in mount Atlas: of Citron tables: of the commendable
perfections, and contrariwise of the defaults thereof.

THe mountain Atlas (by report) has a wood in it of peculiar trees that
elsewhere grow not, whereof we have already written. The Mores that border upon
it, are stored with abundance of Citron trees: from whence comes that
excessive expense and superfluity about Citron tables made thereof. And our
dames and wives at home (by way of revenge) use M. Tullius Cicero, which cost
him ten thousand Sesterces: a strange matter, considering he was no rich man:
but more wonderful, if we call to mind the severity of that age wherein he
lived. Much speech there is besides of Gallus Asinius his table, sold for
eleven thousand Sesterces. Moreover, there are two other, which K. Iuba sold:
the one was prised at 15000 Sesterces, and the other held little under. Not
long since, there was one of them chanced to be burnt, and it came with other
household stuff but from the cottages in Mauritania, which cost 140000
Sesterces: a good round sum of money, and the price of a fair lordship, if a
man would be at the cost to purchase lands so deer. But the fairest and largest
table of Citron wood, that to this Ptolomaee king of Mauritania, the which was
made of two demie-rounds or half circles, joined together so artificially,
that for the closeness of the joint (which could not be discerned) it was more
admirable than possibly it could have been if it had been naturally of one
entire piece: the diameter of it carried four foot and a half, and three
inches thick it was. Likewise another such table there was, surnamed Nomien,
of one Nomius a slave, enfranchised by Tiberius the Emperor: the square or
diametre whereof, was four foot within 3 quarters of an inch; and the
thickness half a foot lacking so much. And here I cannot forget and
ouerpasse, how that the Emperor Tiberius himself had a table, which being two
inches and three quarters above 4 foot in the diametre, and an inch and an half
thick throughout, he caused to be plated all over, for that Nomius his
freed-seruant had one so rich and magnificent, [i. Tigre-tables.] In the other,
there be represented sundry tufts as it were enfolded and enwrapped round, and
those they call Pantherinae, [i. Panther or Luzerne tables.]

CHAP. XVI.
Of the tree Thya, what it is.

WEll known unto Homer was this tree, which in Greek is named * (...), but
some call it Thya: for among other dainty odors and sweet woods, he reports,
That dame Circe (whom he would have to be reputed as a goddess) burnt of this
Thyon. And therefore much deceived are they, who understand by that word Thyon,
perfumes and lodoriferous spice, considering that in one and the very same
verse, the Poet makes mention of the Cedar and Larch tree together with Thyon,
whereby it appears plain, that he spoke of trees only. Theophrastus, who
after the days of Alexander the Great, was the first that wrate the history
of Jupiter Hammon: and some of them also within the country Cyrenaica toward
the inland parts. But all this while not a word of the foresaid costly tables
speaks he in his whole history: and verily before that of Ciceroes, there is
no record in writers of any such tables: whereby it appears, that they become
up but of late days. Another

CHAP. XVII.
Of the tree Lotus.

IN the same coast of Africa which regards Italy there grows Lotos, which they
call Celtis. A notable tree it is and of special mark: found also here among
us now in Italy, but together with the soil it has changed the nature. The
fairest and goodliest of them be about the Syrtes and the Nasamones: they be as
big and tall as Pear trees, howsoever Nepos Cornelius says they are but
little and low. The leaves be thick cut and indented: otherwise they are like
to those of the Ilex or Holme tree. Many sorts there be of the Lote tree, and
those for the most part according to their diverse and several fruits. Howbeit
ordinarily the fruit is as big Nepos says will not last above ten days: who
reports besides, that the inhabitants do stamp the berries thereof with wheat

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the very stalk, escape or stem, and root of Lotus.

IT is said moreover as touching this Egyptian Lotus, That in Euphrates the
very head of the stalk together with the flower, uses in the evening to be
plunged and drowned under the water until midnight, and so deep to settle
toward the bottom, that a man with his hand cannot reach thereto, nor find any
part of it: but after that time it begins to rise by little and little, and by
Sunrising appears above water and opens the flower, and still mounteth higher
and higher a good height from the water. This Lotos has a root as big as a
Quince, covered with a black rind or bark much like to the husk of a
Chestnut. The substance within is white and delectable to eat, but more
pleasant being either sodden in water, or roasted under embers, than

CHAP. XXI.
Of Paliurus, the Pomegranate, and the flower of the Pomegranat.

THe region of Cyrenaica in Africa makes more account of their Paliurus than of
Lotus: for the Paliurus shoots forth more twigs and branches, and has a redder
fruit than the Lotus: besides, the fruit and the kernel be eaten apart; and in
truth pleasant it is of it self alone, but more pleasant with wine; yea, and
the juice thereof gives a better taste to wine if it be put into it. The inland
parts of Africa, as far as to the Garamants and the deserts, be well planted
with Date trees fair and great, bearing goodly and pleasant dates, and those
especially in that quarter of Barbary which lies about the temple of Jupiter
Hammon. But the territory [i. a light red, or a bay] taking the name of the
apple Punicke, or Pomegranat.

CHAP. XX.
Of the Shrubs in Asia and Greece.

IN Asia and Greece there grow certain shrubs, to wit, Epipactis, which some
call Elleborine, with small leaves, which being taken in drink are good against
poison, like as the leaves of Erice [i. Heath or Lings] withstand the stinging
of serpents.

CHAP. XXI.
Of Thimelaea or Chamelaea, Tragacanth: of Tragium or Scorpio. Also of Myrice,
Brya, and Galla.

THe shrub or bush which bears the grain Gnidium, that some call Linum, is
after some writers named Thymelaea, according to others Chamelaea: there be
that call it Pyrosachne: some again give it the name of Cneston, others of
Cneoros. This plant how soever it be named resembles the wild Olive, but that
the leaves be narrower and gummy to the

As touching the plant Tragium, it is to be found in the Isle Candy only. It
has a resemblance of the Terebinth, like as the seed also, which, by report,
is most excellent and effectual to heal wounds made by darts and arrows. The
same Isle has the bush Tragacanth growing in it, the root whereof is like to
that of Bedegnar: and the same Tragacanth is much preferred before that which
grows either in Media or Achaia. A pound of Tragacanth is worth 30 deniers
Roman. As for the plant Tragium or Scorpio, it grows likewise in Asia. A kind
of bramble or brier it is without any leaves, bearing fruit of berries much
like to red grapes, whereof

Touching Myrice, which others call Tamarix; and Achaia Brya the wild; Italy
brings it forth: this special property it has, that the tame kind thereof
only, namely that which grows in gardens, bears fruit like galls. In Syria
and Egypt this grows plenteously, and the wood thereof we call Unhappy: but
the more unlucky and unfortunate be those of Greece: for there grows Ostrys,
named also Ostrya, a solitary tree about watery and moist rocks, having bark
and branches like to the Ash, but Peare-tree leaves, save that they be somewhat
longer and thickker,

CHAP. XXII.
Of Euonymus or the Spindle tree of Adrachne, Congygria, and Thapsia.

IN the Island Lesbos, there grows a tree named Euonymos, no better nor more
lucky than

Alexander Cornelius called that tree Or (...)
Eone, whereof the famous ship Argo was made; and like it was (by his saying)
to the Oak that carries Misselto, the timber whereof neither water will
putrify, nor fire consume, no more than the Misselto it self. But so far as
ever I could learn, no man knew that tree but himself.

As for the tree Adrachne, all the Greeks in manner take Porcellaine for it;
whereas indeed Porcellaine is an herb, called in Greek Andrachne; so as they
differ in one letter: but Adrachne is a tree of the wild forests growing upon
mountains, and never in the plains beneath; resembling the Arbut or
Strawberrie tree, save that the leaves be less, and never fade nor fall. And
for the bark, rough and rugged indeed it is not, but a man would say it were
frozen and al an ye round about, so unpleasant it is to the eye.

Like in leaf to Adrachne, is the tree Congygria, but otherwise it is less
and lower. This property it has, To lose the fruit wholly, together with the
soft down that it bears, which they call Pappus; a quality that no other
tree has, beside it. Like to Andrachne also is Apharce,

As touching the Ferula, it will not be amiss to speak thereof among sorrain
plants, yea and to range it among trees: for (as herafter we will distinguish in
the division of trees) some plants are of this nature, To s^ew all the wood they
have, where the bark should be; that is to say, without sorth: and where the
heart of the wood ought to be, they have naught but a light and spongeous pith,
as the Elder; or else nothing at all, as Canes and Reeds. But to come to our
Ferula above named, it grows in hot countries beyond sea, with a stalk or stem
full of knotty joints. Two kinds be known of them: for that which the Greeks
call Marthex, grows tall; but Narthecia is always low. The leaves that put
forth at the joints, be ever biggest toward the ground: of Thapsia is singular
good for the shedding and falling of the hair, also against the black and
Nero Caesar the Emperor in the beginning of his Empire, gave great

CHAP. XXIII.
Of Capparis, or Cynosbatos, or Opheostaphyle: and of Sari.

LIkewise in Egypt grows Capparis, a shrub of a harder and more woody
substance: well known for the seed and fruit that it carries, commonly eaten
with meats, and for the most part the Capres and the stalk are plucked and
gathered together. The outlandish Capres (not growing in Egypt) we must take
good heed of and beware: for those of Arabia be pestilentiall and venomous:
they of Affricke be hurtful to the gumbs, and principally the Marmarike are
enemies to the matrice, and breed ventosities. The Apulian Capres cause vomit,
and make lubricitie both of stomach and belly. Some call the shrub Cynosbatos:
others Opheostaphyle. Moreover, there is a plant of shrubs kind, called Sari,
it grows along Nilus, almost two cubits high, it bears an inch in
thickness, and has leaves like to Papyr-reed, and men do chew and

CHAP. XXIIII.
Of the Royal thorn of Babylon: and of Cytisus.

I May not ouer-passe that plant, which about Babylon is sowed upon Thorns
only: for otherwise it knows not how to live no more than Misselto, but on
trees: howbeit this plant that I speak of, is sowed upon that Thorn alone
called the Royal Thorn. And a strange thing it is of this plant, That it
springs and grows the very same day that it is set or sowed. Now the

Noreouer, a shrub there is, called Cytisus, highly commended and wondrous much
praised by Aristomachus the Athenian, for feeding of sheep; as also for fatting
of swine, when it is dry: and he promises and assures, That an acre of land
sowed therewith, although it be none of the best soil, but of a mean and
ordinary rent, will yield yearly [communibus annis] 2000 Sesterces to the
master. As great profit comes thereby, as of the pulse like Vetches, called
Ervum: milk than it: but that which passes all, the pasturage of Cytisus,
preserves sheep, goats, and Aristomachus prescribes her to take Cytisus dry,
and sees it in water, and so to drink it in wine, whereby not only her milk
will come again in great plenty, but the babe that sucketh thereof will be the
stronger and taller. He gives it also to hens and pullein whiles it is green,
or steeped and wet if it chance to be dry. Democritus and Aristomachus both do
promise and assure us, that Bees will never miscarry nor fail, if they may
meet with Cytisus to seed upon. And yet there is not a thing of less charge to
maintain than it. Sown it is commonly in the spring with barley, I mean the
seed thereof, as they mean to sow Leekes or Porret seed: or else they set plants
and slips thereof from the stalk, in Autumn before mid-winter. If the seed be
sown, it ought to be steeped and moistened before: yea, and if there fall no
store of rain after it is in the ground, it had need to be watered. As for the
plants when they be a cubit long, are Hyginus says, it is not afraid so much
as of the enemy; the reason is, because the wood thereof is nothing beautiful
to the eye.

CHAP. XXV.
Of shrubs and trees growing in our Mediterranean sea, in the red sea, and in
the Indian sea.

EVen the very sea affords shrubs and trees: but those of the Mediterranean
sea be far less than of other seas; for the red sea and all the Levant Ocean
is full of woods. That which the Greeks call (...), has no other name in any
language. As for Alga, is a word appropriate rather to weeds or sea-herbs,
called Reik: but this Phycos is a very shrub, bearing broad leaves of a green
color, which some call Prason, others Zoster. A second kind there is of
Phycos, with an hairy leaf like to Fennel, and grows upon rocks. As for
the former called Zoster, it is found among the shelues and shallow waters not
far from the shore: both the one and the other appear in the Spring, and be
gone in Autumn. That of this kind which grows in Coich, or Dent-de-chien,
having a root full of joints, and a stalk likewise in manner of a reed.

Another shrub there is in that sea called Bryon, with leaves like Lettice,
save only they be more wrinkled and crumpled together: but this grows more
inward and farther into the sea. Mary in the deep grows both Fir and Oak to
the height of a cubit. Among these branches, the Cockles and Muskles, and such
like shell fishes do settle and stick unto them. As for that kind of sea-Oke,
some say it is of good use to dye wool withal: as also that it bears Mast
or in the sea, but as little as shrubs. Without Hercules pillars, or the
straight of Gebraltar, there Alexander the Great who sailed into India made
report, That the branches and leaves of the Iuba reports, That about the
Islands of the Troglodites, there grows a shrub within the sea, called Isidos
Plocamos, [i. Isis haire] resembling coral, and void of leaves: cut a branch of
it from the stock, it becomes hard, changes color, and is black: if it fall
it is so tender that it will break like glass. He speaks moreover of another
called Charito-blepharon, which is of great force in amatorious matters

THE FOVRTEENTH BOOK OF
WRITTEN BY C. PLINIVS SECVNDVS.
Containing the Treatise of Trees bearing Fruit. The Proeme.
THus far forth have we discoursed of all foreign and strange trees in a
manner, such I mean as know not how to live in any other places but where they
naturally first did grow, and which willingly go not into other countries, nor
can abide their soil or air. Good leave may I now have to write of Plants and
Trees common to all lands, and namely, to ours of Italy, which may seem to be
the very Hort-yard and natural garden that bare them all. This only would I
advertise the Readers and Learners to remember, that for this present we
purpose to describe their natures and virtues only, leaving out the manner of
husbandry that belongs unto them: albeit in their tending and keeping
appears the greatest part of their properties, and of Natures works. And
verily, I cannot choose but marvel still and never give over, how it comes to
pass, that the remembrance, yea, and the very names of some trees which
ancient Writers have delivered in their books, should be quite gone and
abolished. For who would not think, that our life should ere this have gained
much by the Majesty of the Roman Empire; have discovered all things by the
means of the commerce we have had with the universal world, by the ^fick,
negotiation, and society I say that we have entered into during the blessed
time of peace whichwe have inioyed? considering that by such trade and
intercourse, all things heretofore unknown, might have come to light. And yet
for all this, few or none (believe me) there are who have attained to the
knowledge of many matters which the old writers in times past have taught and
put in writing. Whereby we may easily see, that our ancestors were either far
more careful and industrious, or in their industry more happy and fortunate.
Considering withal, that above two hundred years past Hesiodus (who lived in
the very infancy of Learning and good letters) began his work of Agriculture,
and set down rules and precepts for husbandmen to follow. After whose good
example, many others having traveled and taken like pains, yet have put us
now to greater labor. For by this means we are not only to search into the
last inventions of later writers, but also to those of ancient time which are
forgotten and covered with oblivion, through the supine negligence and general
idleness of all mankind. And what reasons may a man allege of this
drowsinesse, but that which has lulled the world asleep? the cause in good
faith of all, is this and no other, We are ready to forgo all good customs
of old, and to embrace novelties and change of fashions: men's minds now a days
are amused and occupied about new fangles, and their thoughts be rolling; they
wander and roue at randon; their heads be ever running; and no arts and
professions are now set by and in request, but such as bring pence into our
purses. Heretofore whilst Kings and Potentates contained themselves within the
Dominion of their own Nations, and were not so ambitious as now they be, no
marvel if their wits and spirits kept still at home: and so for want of wealth
and riches of Fortune, were forced to employ and exercise the gifts of their
mind: in such sort as an infinite number of Princes were honored and renowned
for their singular knowledge and learning. Yea, they were more brave in port,
and carried a goodlier show in the World for their skill in Liberal Sciences,
than others with all their pomp or riches: being fully persuaded and assured,
that the way to attain unto immortality and everlasting Fame, was by
literature and not by great possessions and large seignories. And therefore as
learning was much honored and rewarded in those days, so arts and sciences
tending to the common good of this life daily increased. But afterward when
the way was once made to enlarge their territories farther in the world, when
princes and states beg anne to make conquests and grow rich and mighty, the
posterity felt the smart and loss thereby. Then began men to choose a Senator
for his wealth; to make a judge for his riches; and the election of a civil
magistrate and martial captain, to have an eye and regard only to goods and
substance, to land and living: when rents and revenues were the chief and
only ornaments that made men seem wise, just, politic, and valiant. Since
time that childlesse estate was a point looked into, and advanced men into high
place of authority and power, procuring them many favorites in hope of
succession; since time I say that every man aimed and reached at the readiest
means of greatest lucre and gain, setting their whole mind, and rep^sing
their full content and joy in laying land to land, and heaping together
possessions; down went the most precious things of this life, and lost their
reputation: all those liberal arts which took their name of liberty and
freedom (the sovereign good in this world which were meet for princes,
nobles, gentlemen and persons of great state) forwent that prerogative, and
fell a contrary way, yea, and ran quite to wrack and ruin: so as in stead
thereof, base slavery and servitude be the only ways to arise and thrive by:
whiles some practice it one way, some another, by flattering, admiring,
courting, crouching, and adoring: and all, to gather good and get money. This is
the only mark they shoot at, this is the end and accomplishment of all their
vows, prayers and desires. Insomuch, as we may perceive every where, how men
of high spirit and great conceit are given rather to honor the vices and
imperfections of others, than to make the best of their own virtues and
commendable parts. And therefore we may full truly say, that life indeed is
dead; Voluptuousness and Pleasure alone is alive, yea and begins to bear
all the sway. Nevertheless, for all these enormities and hindrances, give
over will not I to search into those things that be perished and utterly
forgotten, how small and base sceuer some of them be; no more than I was
affrighted in that regard, from the treatise and discourse of living creatures.
Notwithstanding that I see Virgil (a most excellent Poet) for that cause only
forbear to write of gardens and hortyards, because he would not enter into such
petty matters: and of those so important things that he handled, he gathered
only the principal flowers, and put them down in writing. Who albeit that he
has made mention of no more than 15 sorts of grapes, three kinds of Olives,
and as many of Pears, and setting aside the Citrons and Limons, has not said
a word of any apples; yet in this one thing happy and fortunate he was, For
that his work is highly esteemed, and no imputation of negligence charged upon
him. But where now shall we begin this treatise of ours? What deserves the
chief and principal place, but the vine? in which respect Italy has the name
for the very sovereignty of Vine-yards: insomuch, that therein alone, if there
were nothing else, it may well seem to surpass all other lands, even those
that bring forth odoriferous spices and aro^call drugs. And yet to say a truth,
there is no smell so pleasant whatsoever, that out-goeth Vines when they be in
their fresh and flouring time.

CHAP. I.
Of Vines, their nature and manner of bearing.

VInes in old time were by good reason for their bigness reckoned among trees.
Jupiter made of the wood of one entire Vine, and yet continued it has a world
of years vncorrupt, and without worm. Likewise at Massiles there is a great
standing cup or boll to be seen of Vine-wood. At Metapontum there stood a
temple of Juno, bearing upon pillars of Vine wood. And even at this day there
is a ladder or pair of stairs up to the temple of Diana in Ephesus, framed of
one Vine-tree, brought (by report) out of the Island Cypres, for there indeed
vines grow to an exceeding bigness. And to speak a truth, there is no wood
more dureable and lasting than is the vine. Howbeit, for my part I would think
that these singular pieces of work before-named, were made of wild and savage
unto them: and so being suffered to wind and claspe about them as their
husbands, yea, and with their wanton arms or tendrils to climb aloft, and
with their ioints to run up their boughs, Valerianus Cornelius making mention
of many properties and singularities of a vine, thought this among the rest
worthy of especial note and remembrance, that one only stock of a vine was
sufficient to compass and inuiron round about a good fermehouse or country
message, with the branches and pliable shoots that it did put forth. At Rome
Liuia, which running and trailing upon an open frame of railes, covers and
shadoweth the ouvert allies made for to walk in: and the same Vine yields
one year with another a dozen Amphores of good new wine yearly. An ordinary
thing it is, that Vines will surmount any Elms wheresoever, be they never so
tall and lofty. It is reported, that Cyneas the ambassador of K. Pyrrhus,
wondering at the vines of Aricia, for that the grew and mounted so high; would
needs taste of the wine that came of their grapes: and finding it to be hard
and tart, merrily scoffed and said, That by good right and justice they had
done well, to hang the mother that bare such unpleasant wine upon so high a
gibbet. Beyond the river Po in Italy, there is a tree growing which the
peasants there call Rumbotinus, and by another name Opiet^
Opulus; it puts forth great arms and boughs, and those spread abroad and
bear a round compass; howbeit, the vines that Quasi duris acini^.
Duracina (i. having hard skins.) For infinite sorts there be of grapes,
according to the difference observed in their quantity and bigness, in their
color, taste, stones, or kernels: and yet more still, in regard of the diverse
wines made of them. In one place they are of a fresh and bright purple, in
another, of a glittering, incarnate, and rosate color: and ye shall have them
of a fair and lively green. As for the white and black grapes, they be common
every where. The grapes Bumasti have their name, for that they be so swelling
and round, like st^utting paps or dugs. The Date-grapes Dactyli, are long, both
grape and kernel, fashioned in manner of fingers. Moreover, Nature seems to
take her pleasure and make arch-wise in manner of a vault: with others they
make no more ado, but put them up presently Tiberius Caesar the Emperor gave
especial credit and name by his example to such grapes dried in the furnaces of
Africa. For before his time, the Rhetian grapes and those that came out of the
territory of Verona, were ordinarily served up to the table first, for the very
best. As for the Raisins called Passae, they took that name in Latin of their
patience to endure their drying and confiture. Some grapes there be that are
condite in Must or new wine, and so they drink their own liquor wherein they
lie soking, without any other seething. Others again (...). Plutarch.
Pitch wine, brought the territory about Vienna into great name reputation: and
before that this vine was known, those of Auern, Burgundy, and the Heluij, were
in no request at all. But these devises Virgil, who died about 90 years past.
But behold what I have to say more of the Vine tree: the vine wand is now
entered into the camp, and by it our armies are ranged into battalions: nay,
upon the direction thereof depends the main estate of our sovereign Empire:
for the Centurion has the honor to carry in his hand a Vine-rod: the good
guidance and ordering whereof aduanceth after long time the centeniers (for a
good reward of their valorous and faithful service) from the leading of
inferior bands, to the captainship of that regiment and chief place in the
army, unto which the maine standard of the Aegle is committed: yea, and more
than that, the Vine wand chastises the trespasses and lighter offenses of the
soldiers; who take it for no dishonor nor disgrace to be thus punished at
their Centurions hand. Over and besides, the planting of Vineyards has taught

CHAP. II.
Of the diverse kinds of vines.

DEmocritus was the only Philosopher ever known, who made profession to reduce
all the sorts and kinds of vines to a certain number, and indeed he vaunted
and made his boast when they be planted to run up a tree, rather than to creep
upon a frame. A third sort are called Gemellae, for that their grapes grow
double like twins. and they be very harsh and in taste

The rest be strangers come out of Chios or Thasos. As for the Greek grapes of
Corinth, they be not in goodness inferior to the Aminean aforesaid. They have a
very tender stone within: and the grape it self is so small, that unless the
soil be exceeding fa^ and battle, there is no profit in planting and tending
such vines. The quick-sets of the vine Eugenia were sent unto us from the
Taurominitane hills in Sicily, together with their syrname pretending a noble
and gentle race. Howbeit, they are never in their kind with us, but only in the
Alban country: for if you transplant them, they prove very bastards and
changelings presently. And in faith, some vines Howbeit, in choosing of a fit
soil for this vine, it is much ado to please and content it: in a fat

Now there are besides certain notable grapes of a middle color between black
and purple, and they alter their hue oftentimes; whereupon some have named*
them Varianae: and yet the blacker they be, the more they are set by: they
bear grapes but each other year, that is to say, this year in great plenty,
the next year very little: howbeit, their wine is the better when they
Amethystos, Cg^mell,
for never makes it any man drunk: and this property has it alone by it
self. As for other vines, their fruitfulness does commend them; and namely
above all, that which is called Heluenaca; whereof be two kinds; the greater,
which some name The long: and the smaller called Graecinus (who otherwise
compiled his work out of Cornelius Celsus in manner word for word) is of this
opinion, That this Vine could love Italy well enough, and that of the own
Nature it mislikes it grows: howbeit those that grow about Surrentum, have
the most strength, and are excellent

CHAP. III.
Of the diverse kinds likewise of Vines, according to the property of the
places and regions where they grow.

HItherto we have treated of the sundry sorts of vines in general: now will we
write of them according to the nature of the places and regions, which are
proper and familiar unto them; or, as they be mingled one with another, by
transplanting or graffing. And first and foremost, the vine Tudernis; also
Florentia (bearing the name of the city Florence) are peculiar to the Tuscans:
but about Aretium, there is no talk both for plenty and goodness, but of the
Talpana, Etesiaca, and Conseminia. The Talpane grape is black as the
Mouldwarpe, whereof it takes the name, but yet does it yield a white wine. The
Etesiacke vine (so called of Virgil has made mention of other grapes, namely,
Thasiae, Mareotides, and Lageae, besides many other outlandish plants, not at
this day to be found throughout al Italy: howbeit there be yet many vines of
good forkes to support it, but is able to maintain and uphold it self upright.
But the Dactylides (so Item, the grape Pucina, the blackest of all others: the
Stephanitis also, wherein Nature has seemed to disport her self, for the
leaves run among the grapes in manner of a garland plaited with them. Moreover,
the market-grapes called Forenses, they grow and are ripe with the soonest;
vendible at the very first sight, and sold with the best, and most easy to be
carried from market to market. But contrariwise, the ash-colored grape
Cinerea, the silk-russet grape Ravuscula, the asse-hued grape Asinisca, please
not the eye, but are presently rejected: and yet the Fox-tailed grape Alopecis,
(for that it resembles Rainards tail) is not so displeasant nor so much
discommended as the

CHAP. IIII.
Notable considerations about the husbandry and ordering of Vineyards.

THat noble and worthy Cato, the first of that name, renowned among other
dignities for his honorable triumph, and the incorrupt administration of his
Censorship, and yet more famous and renowned to posterity for his singular
knowledge and learning: and namely for the good precepts and ordinances tending
to all virtues and commendable parts, which he left in memory for the people of
Rome: and principally touching agriculture [as he was by the common voice and
general accord of that age wherein he lived reputed for an excellent
husbandman, Cato (I say) has in his works made mention but of a few kinds of
vines: and yet some of them already be grown out of knowledge, so as their
very names are quite forgotten. Yet nevertheless his opinion and judgment
would be set down in particular, as it may be gathered out of his whole
treatise: to the end that we might both know in every kind of vine which were
of most account in his days (to wit, in the 600 year after the foundation of
Rome, about the time that Carthage and Corinth were forced and won, when he
departed this life:) and Cato delivered in writing, and in this manner
following. All places or grounds (quoth he) exposed to the Sunshine, and which
in other regards shall be found good for to plant vineyards in, see they be
employed for the less Aminean, for both the Eugenian Vines, and the smaller
Heluine. Item, In every tract that is more gross, thick, and mistie, look
that you set the greater Aminean, or the Murgentine: the Apician also, and the
Lucane Vine. All other vines, and the common mingled sort especially, will
agree well enough with any ground. The right keeping of grapes, is in a small
thin wine of the second running. The grapes Duracinae, and the greater
Amineans, are good to be hanged, or else dried before a blacke-smithes forge,
and so they may be well preserved and go for Raisins of the Sun. Lo what the
precepts of Cato be; neither are there any of this argument more ancient, left
unto us written in the Latin tongue. Whereby we may see, that we live not long
after the very first rudiments and beginnings of knowledge in these matters.
[But by the way, the Amineans last named, Varro calls Scantians.] And in very
truth, few there be even in this our age, who have left any rules in form of
Art, as touching the absolute skill in this behalf. Yet such as they be, and
how few soever, we must not leave them behind, but so much the rather take
them with us; to the end it may be known, what reward and profit they met
with, who traveled in this point of husbandry: reward, I say, and profit,
which in every thing is all in all.

To begin therefore with Acilius Sihenelus [or Stelenus,] (a mean commoner of
Rome, descended from the race of Libertines or Slaves newly infranchised) he
attained to the highest glory Verulenus Aegialus, in his time a man but of base
condition by birth, and no better than the former, (namely, come of the stock
of freed-men) who by his labor and husbandry, greatly enriched a domain or
living at Liternum in Campaine: and the more renowned he was by occasion of the
favor of so many men affectionate unto Africanus, whose very place of exile he
held in his hands and occupied so well: for unto Scipio, the above said
Liternum, appertained. But the greatest voice and speech of men was of Rhemnius
Palaemon (who otherwise by profession was a famous and renowned Grammarian) for
that he by the means and help of the Sthenelus, bought a ferme within these
twenty years for 600000 Sesterces in the same territory of Nomentum, about
ten miles distant from Rome, lying somewhat out of the high way. Now is it well
known far and near, of what price and account all such fermes are, and how
cheap such ware is lying so near to the city side: but amongst the rest, this
of Palaemons in that place was esteemed most cheap and lowest prised, in this
regard especially, That he had purchased those lands, which through the
carelessness and bad husbandry of the former owners, lay neglected and
fore-let, and were not of themselves thought to be of the best soil, chosen
and piked from among the worst. But being entered once upon those grounds as his
own liuelode and possession, he set in hand to husband and manure them, not so
much of any good mind and Sthenelus to do with his before: but what with
digging, stirring, and meddling therewith, following the good example and
husbandry of Sthenelus, he brought his vineyards to so good a pass within one
eight years, that the fruit of one years vintage was held at 400000
Sesterces, and yielded so much rent to the lord: a wonderful and miraculous
thing, that a ground should be so much improoued in so small a time! And in
very truth, it was strange to see what numbers of people would run thither,
only to see the huge and mighty heaps of grapes gathered in those vineyards of
his: and ill idle neighbors about him, whose grounds yielded no such increase,
attributed all to his deep learning, and that he went to it by his book, and
had some hidden speculation above other men; obiecting Annaeas Seneca, esteemed
in those days a singular clerk, and a mighty great man (whose overmuch
Learning and exceeding power cost him his overthrowing in the end) one who had
good skill and judgment in the world, and used least of all others to esteem
toies and vanities, brought this Palaemon, and was not ashamed to let him go
away with the prick and praise for good husbandry, and to remove him into
other parts where he might show the like cunning: and in one word, paid for
these foresaid vineyards of his fourfold as much as they cost, not above ten
years before this good husbandry was bestowed upon them. Certes, great pity it
is, that the like industry was not showed and employed in the territories about
the hills Cecubus, and Setinus, where (no doubt) it would have well quit all the
cost, considering that many a time afterward, every acre of vineyard there,
yielded seven Culei, that is to say, 140 Amphores of new wine one year with
another. But lest any man should think, that we in these days have surpassed
our ancestors Cato has left in writing, How of an acre of vineyard there has
arisen ordinarily 15 according to Full. Vrsinus.
ten Culei of wine by the year. Certainly these be effectual examples and
pregnant proofs, that the hardy and aduenturous voiages by sea, are not more
aduantageous; ne yet the commodities and merchandise, and namely Pearls, which
be fet as far as the red sea and the Indian Ocean, are more gainefull to the
merchant, than a good ferm and homestall in the country, well tilled and
carefully husbanded.

As touching the wines in old time, Homer writes, that the Maronean wine made
of the grapes growing upon the sea coasts of Africa, was the best, and most
excellent in his days. But my meaning is not to ground upon fabulous tales and
variable reports, as touching the excellency or antiquity Aristaeus was the
first, who in that very nation mingled honey with wine; which must needs be a
passing sweet and pleasant liquor, made of two natures so singular as they be
of themselves. And yet to come again to the foresaid Maronean wine, the same
Homer says, That to one part thereof, there would be but 20 parts of water: and
even at this day, that kind of wine continues in the said land of the same
force, and the strength thereof will not be conquered nor allaied. For Mutianus
who had bin thrice consul of Rome, and one of those that latest wrote of this
matter, found by experience (being himself personally in that tract) that
every sextar or quart of that wine, would bear 8 of water: who reports
moreover, that the wine is of color black, of a fragrant sweet smell, and by
age comes to be fat and unctious. Moreover, the Pramnian wine (which the same
Homer has so highly commended) continues Cybele the mother of the gods. As
for other wines, no one kind apart excelled other.

One year there was, when all wines proved passing good; to wit, when L.
Opimius was Consul, at what time as C. Gracchus a Tribune of the Commons
(practicing to sow sedition within the city among the common people) was
slain: for then such seasonable weather happened, and so favorable for ill
fruit, that they called it (Coctura) as a man would say, the ripening time; so
beneficial was the Sun to the earth: and this fell out in the year after the
nativity and foundation of the city of Rome, 634.

Moreover, there be some wines so durable, that they have been known to last
two hundred Opimius, every Amphore were set but at an hundred Sesterces, yet
after the usury of six in the hundred yearly (which is the ordinary proportion
and a reasonable interest among citizens, for the principal that lies dead
and dormant in stock) by the hundred and sixtieth year after the said Amphor
was bought (which fell C. Caligula Caesar the son of Germanicus was Emperor) no
marvel if an ounce in measure of the same wine (to wit, the twelfth part of a
Sextarius) cost Bud. 22. Sest.
so many Sesterces: for as we have showed by a notable example, when we did set
down the life of Pomponius Secundus the Poet, and the feast that he made to
the said Prince Caligula, there was not a i. an ounce and a half:
Cyathus of that wine drawn, but so much was paid for it. Lo what a deal of
money lies in these winecellars, for keeping of wine! And in very truth, there
is nothing more gainful nor grows to a better reckoning than it, for twenty
years space after it is laid up: neither is there greater loss

CHAP. V.
Of the Nature of Wine.

THe nature and property of wine, is to heat the bowels within, if it be
drunk; and to cool the exterior parts, if it be applied outwardly. And here
it shall not be amiss to rehearse in this very place, that which Androcydes
(the noble, sage, and wise Philosopher) wrote unto K. Alexander the Great, for
to correct and reform his intemperate drinking of wine, whereto he was very
prone and overmuch given. My good Lord (says he) remember when you take your
wine, that you drink the very blood of the earth: Hemlock (you know sir) is
poison to man, even so is wine to Hemlock. Now if that Prince had bin so wise
as to have obeyed these precepts of his, certes, he could never have killed his
best friends as he did, in his fits of drunkenness. In sum, this may be truly

CHAP. VI.
Of kindly Wines made of the best Grapes.

WHo doubts, that some Wines be made more pleasant and acceptable than
others? nay out of the very same vat ye shall have wines not alike in
goodness, but that some go before their brethren, pressed though they be at
one time, and from the same kind Iulia Augusta would commonly say, That she
was beholden to the Pucine wine for living as she did 82 years: for she never
used to drink any other. This wine came of the grape that grew along the
Adriaticke sea, or Venice gulf, upon a stony and raggie hill, not far from the
source or spring of the river Timavus, nourished with the vapors breathed from
the sea; and many Amphores there were not drawn thereof at a vintage: and by
the judgment of all men, there is not a wine more medicinable than it is. I
would think verily therefore, that the wine Pyctanon (which the Greeks so
highly praise) is the very same; for it comes from the coasts of the
Adriaticke sea. The Emperor Augustus Caesar preferred the Setine wine before
Nero caused to be made nauigable, beginning at the lake or gulf Baianus, and
reaching as far as to Ostia. In the second degree of excellency, are ranged the
wines of the Falerne territory, and principally that which came from the
vineyards Faustian: and this excellency it grew unto by passing good order and
careful husbandry. How be it this wine also in these days begins to grow
out of name and Sylla, and lately laid to Capua, and under the jurisdiction
thereof. But the Faustian vineyards lie about 4 miles from a village near
Cediae, which village Tyberius Caesar was wont to say, That the Physicians had
laid their heads together, and agreed to give the Surrentine wine so great a
name; for otherwise it was no better than a very mild and pleasant vinegar: and
C. Caligula (his successor in the Empire) used to say of it, That for a wine
that had lost the heart and was a going, it was very good. The Massike wines,
which come from the Gaurane hills looking toward Puteoli and Bajae, come nothing
behind the rest, but strive to match them every way. For as touching the
Statane vineyards, that confine and border upon the Falerne, their wines
doubtless are now come to be the principal and chief of all the rest:
whereby it is Julius Caesar (late Emperor of famous memory) has raunged, (for
to serve the public and solemn feasts of the city) the Mamertine wines, from
about Messana in Sicily: for he was the first (as appears by his letters
missiue) that gave credit and authority unto them. And of those, the Potulane
wines (so called of them who first planted the vines Virgill ranged next after
the Falerne wines. Anon you come to the wines Adriane, and those that grow far
within the tract of the Venice gulf. Now from the nether sea about Lions, ye
have the Latiniensian, the Grauiscane, [i. full of juice and liquor] good to
season other wines, and to give them a pretty taste. When ye are passed once into
France or Gaul, the wine of Beterrae is in chief request. As for the rest
within Languedoc and the Province of Narbon, I am not able to avouch any thing
for certainty, such a brewing and sophistication of them they make, what with
fuming, perfuming, and coloring them: and would God they put not in some
herbs and drugs among, that be not good for man's body. For certain it is that
they them all. As for the wines of Lagaria, which be made of the grapes not
far from Grumeritum, Messala used ordinarily to drink thereof, and thereby
was supposed to preserve his health so well. Of late days there be certain
wines in Campaine grown into credit (like as they have gotten new names) by
good ordering and husbandry, or by chance, I know not whether; namely, those
of Tribellia, four miles from Naples, of Caulium near to Capua: and last of
all, the Trebulaine wines within theirown territory: for before time they were
ever counted no better than common wines for every man to drink, no more than
the Trifolines, from whence they vaunt of their descent. As for the wine of
Pompeij, a town in the kingdom or Naples, neither it nor the vine whereof it
comes, will last above ten years at the most: after which term, the elder
they both be, the worse they are. Besides, they are found by experience to
cause the headache, insomuch, as if a man drink

I am not ignorant, that most men who shall read this Treatise, will think
that I have omitted Augustus Caesar's freed men (reputed for the finest taster
that he had about his court, and who knew best what would content his pallat,
and please his tooth) upon a time when he tasted the wine that was for the
Emperors bourd, at what time as he made a feast, said to one of the guests at
the table, That the said new wine indeed had a new and strange taste, and was
none of the best, and those that were inname, howbeit (quoth he) this is for
the Emperors cup, and willingly will he drink of no other, notwithstanding it be
but a homely wine made hereby in the country, and not far fetched. And now for
a final conclusion of this matter, I cannot deny but that there be other

CHAP. VII.
Of Wines beyond sea.

IT remains now to speak of outlandish Wines beyond the sea. First and
foremost therefore next to those wines renowned by the Poet Homer, and whereof we
have written before, best esteemed always were the wines of the Islands Thasos
and Chios: and namely that of Chios Erasistratus the most famous Physician of
his time, matched with these the Lesbian wine; and his authority gave credit
unto it: and this was much about the six hundred year after the foundation of
Rome. But in these days there is nowine to that of Clazomene, ever since that
they began to put thereto less seawater for to season it, than their custom
was. As for the wine of Lesbos, it has a sent and relish of the salt water
naturally of it self. Neither is the wine that comes from the hill Tmolus in
any regard, as a wine to be drunk alone, but it serves as a sweetcuit to
mingle wiith other wines that be hard: for thereby their green verdure will
seem more mild and pleasant, yea, and withal to have their ripeage: for no
sooner is it tempered therewith, but they taste presently elder than they be.
Next to these in goodness, follow in their course the wines of Sycione, Cypres,
Telmessus, Tripolis, Berytus, Tyrus, and Sebennys. As for this wine last
rehearsed, it is made in Egypt, a country much renowned all burnt; of Petra,
and Mycone. As for the wine Mesog^es, it is known to make headache: Asclepiades
his sect and school, gave praise unto it next the Italian wines. The learned
Physician Apollodorus, in his treatise that he compiled of good wines, which he
recommended unto King Ptolomaeus for to drink, as meet for the health of his
person, (for default of Italian wines then unknown) highly praised the wines in
Pontus, and principally that which is called Naspercenties: next to it the
Oroeotik; the Oeneates, that of Leucadia, of Ambracia;

CHAP. VIII.
Seven kinds of salt wine.

THus far forth have we discoursed of the very flower of good wines, according
to the regions where naturally they come of the grape. Now are we to treat of
wines compounded. And first, among such wines is that, which they call Biaeon
(an invention of the Greeks) Cato also here among us has showed the way how to
make the Greekish Wine Coum, of our own Italian Wine: but above all he has
set down an express rule, to let it first take the maturitie and perfection 4
years in the Sun. As for the wine of Rhodes, it is much like to that of Coos.
But the Phorinean wine is more salt than the wine of the Isle Coos. Finally,
all transmarine or beyond sea wines are thought in seven or six years at the
least, to come unto their middle age.

CHAP. IX.
Fourteen sorts of sweet wines.

Always the sweeter that they be in taste, the less fragrant and odoriferous
they be: the thinner [i. Cuit] it is a mere artificial thing, the devise of
man's wit, and no work of Nature: namely, when new wine is sodden away a third
part: for when it boiles to the half, we then call it Defrutum. And in very
deed, all these be inventions to sophisticate and counterfeit honey. But those
before named retain the natural taste of the grape and the soil whereof they
do consist. Next to these [i. the Muscadell] and of another named Scirpula:
the which have been suffered a long time to hang in the Sun upon the Vine
until they be scorched and parched: or [i. sweet] and namely, in the
territory of the Vocontians. For this purpose they let the grapes hang a long
while upon the Vine, but first they wryth the steel that the bunch hangs to.
Some make an ounce and a half.
cyath of salt, and so boiled all together. But I must not forget to place
among these sundry kinds of drink, the liquor Protropum, for so some call new
wine running it self from the grapes, before they be trodden and pressed. But to
have this good, and so to serve the turn, so soon as it is put up into proper
vessels for the purpose, it must be suffered to work: and afterward to
reboile and work again for forty days space the Summer following, even from
the very beginning of the dog days, and so forwards

CHAP. X.
Of weak and second Wines, three kinds.

THe second wines, which the Greeks call Deuteriae, Cato and we Romans name
Lora) cannot properly and truly be called Wines, being made of the skins and
seeds of grapes steeped in water: howbeit, reckoned they are among course
household wines for the hines and meinie to drink. And three kinds there be of
them. For sometime to the tenth part of the new wine that has been pressed
out, they put the like quantity of water, and suffer the foresaid refuse of the
grapes to soke therein a day and a night: which done, they press it forth
again. A second sort there is, which the Greeks were wont to make in this
manner: They take a third part of water in proportion of the wine that was
pressed forth, and after a second pressing, they sees Cato calls Phoecatum, [i
Wine of lees.] But none of these wines or drinks will endure above one year.

CHAP. XI.
What neat wines began of late to be in request in Italy.

IN this treatise of wines I cannot omit this observation: That whereas all the
good wines, properly so called and known in the whole world, may be reduced in
fourscore kinds or therabouts; two parts of three in this number, may well be
counted wines of Italy: which in this regard far surpasses all other
nations. And hereupon arises another thing more deeply to be noted, That
these good wines were not so rife nor in such credit from the beginning, as now
they be.

CHAP. XII.
Observations touching wine.

TO say a truth, Wines began to grow in reputation at Rome, about six hundred
years after the foundation thereof, and not before. For king Romulus used milk
when he sacrificed to the gods, and not wine: as may appear by the cerimonial
constitutions by him ordained, as touching religion; which even at this day be
in force, and are observed. And king Numa his successor made this law Posthumia
in his later days, Let no man besprinckle the funer all fire with wine. Which
edict no man doubts, but he published and enacted in regard of the great want
and scarsitie of wine in those days. Also by the same Act he expressly did
prohibit to offer in sacrifice to the gods, any wine coming of a Vine plant
that had not been cut M. Varro writes, That Mezentius the king of Tuscane
aided the Rutilians of Ardea in their wars against the Latins, for no other
hire and wage but the wine and the vines which then were in the territory of
Latium.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the ancient usage of wine: and the wines in old time.

IN ancient time, women at Rome were not permitted to drink any wine. We read
moreover in the Chronicles, That Egnatius Mecennius killed his own wife with a
cudgel, for that he took her drinking wine out of a tun; and yet he was
cleared by Romulus, and acquit of the murder. Fabius Pictor in his Annals
reports, That a certain Roman dame, a woman of good worship, was by her own
kinsfolk famished and pined to death, for opening a cupbord, wherein the keis
of the wine-sellar lay. And Cato does record, that hereupon arose the manner
and custom, That kisfolk should kiss women when they met them, to know by
their breath whether they smelled of Temetum: for so they used in those days
to term Wine: and thereof drunkenness was called in Latin Temulentia. Cn.
Domitius (a judge in Rome) in the like case pronounced sentence judicially
against a woman defendant, in this form, That it seemed she had drunk more
wine without her husbands knowledge, than was needful for the preservation of
her health, and therefore afterward definitiuely, That she should lose the
benefit of her dowry. Certes, the Romans for a long time made great spare of
wine. L. Papyrius lord General of the Roman army, when he was at the point
to join battle with the Samnites, made no other vow, but this, That he would
offer unto Jupiter a little cup or goblet of wine, in case he achieved the
victory and won the field. Over and besides, we find in histories, that among
donatiues and presents, certain sextars or quarts of milk have been many
times given, but never any of wine. The fame Cato abouenamed, after his voyage
into Spain (from whence he returned with a notable victory, and in a
triumphant manner) in a solemn speech that he made unto the people, protested
in these words and said, No other wine I have drunk since I went, than the
very mariners hauc. How far unlike was he to men in these days, who sitting
at the table, have their cup of strong wine by themselves, and give unto their
guests, for the most part, other small wines to drink: or if they suffer them
to drink all one and of the best at the beginning of the feast, they will be
sure to change and to serve them with worse soon after. In old time, the best
wines used Plautus, entitled Persa. And yet it should seem there, that sweet
Calamus was to be added besides. And hereupon it comes, that some have
thought, how our forefathers in times past took most delight in such spiced
cups and Ippocras wines. But Fabius Dorsenus the Poet sufficiently declares
and decideth this point in these verses, when he says, Mittebam vinum
pulchrum, Murrhinum.
I sent neat wine,
Which hight Myrrhine.


And again in his Comedy Acharistio: Panem and Polentam, vinum Murrhinam.
Both bread and grewell I did present,
And Myrrhine wine of pleasant sent.


I see moreover, that Scaevola, Laelius, and Atteius Capito were of the same
mind. For in the Comedy of Plautus entitled Pseudolus, thus it is written:
Quod si opus est vt dulce promat
Indidem, ecquid habet? (Char.) Rog as?
Murrhinam, passum, Defrutum, mella.
Of dulcet wine if there be need,
What hope is there from thence to speed?
Char. Why ask you that? he furnished is
With Murrhin, Cuits, and Meade ywis.


By which a man may see evidently, that Murrhina was not only counted a wine,
but reckoned also among the sweet and delicate wines.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of wine storehouses: and of Opimian wine.

THat there were wine sellars at Rome, and that they used there to tun up Wine
in the 633 year after the foundation thereof, appears plain by a good
proof of the Opimian wine: and even in those days Italy knew her own good,
and what it was to maintain vineyards. Howbeit, as yet were not those wines in
credit, which now are so rife and in so great account. And therefore it is, that
all the wines of that time bear the only name of that one Consul, and be
called Opimian. And thus afterward also in process of time, the wines that
came from beyond the seas for a long space, were in much request, even until
our grandfathers days: yea, and after that, the Falern wines were in name and
called for, as may appear by that Verse Quinque Thasij vini inde depromam,
Falerni bina.
To measures five of Thacian wine,
I will draw twain of Falerne fine.


In the 675 year after the foundation of Rome, Pub. Licinius Crassus, and L.
Julius Caesar, Censors for the time being, published an Edict, and proclaimed,
That no man should sell any Greek wine, or Aminean, but after eight Asses the
Amphor or Quadrantum. For these be the very express M. Varro does show in
these words: L. Lucullus (quoth he) while he was a boy, never saw at his
fathers board Greek wine served up but once at a meal, how good soever the
fare was otherwise. Howbeit, C. Sentius, whom of late days we saw Praetor of
Rome, testified, that he never saw any wine of Chios brought into his house,
before the Physician prescribed and set it down for the Cardiaca passio, or the
trembling of the heart, whereto he was subject. But contrariwise Hortensius
when he died left above ten thousand barrels full of that Wine unto his heir.
And thus much out of M. Varro.

CHAP. XV.
Of Caesar's bountic and liberality in Wine.

But what should we say of C. Julius Caesar Dictator? In that solemn feast of
his which he made at his triumph, did not he distribute among his guests
Falerne wines by whole barrels, and Greek wine of Chios by the rundlets? After
his return out of Spain with victory and triumph, he likewise gave away a
largess of wine as well Chian as Falern. But at the royal dinner which he
made when he entered upon his third Consulship, he caused all the Hall to be
served thorowout with Falern, Chian, Lesbian, and Mamertine wines: which was
the first time that ever any man saw the service of 4 several wines at one
feast. Now in farther process of time, and namely about 700 years after Rome
cities foundation, all other Wines began to bear a name and come in request.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Artificial or made Wines.

COnsidering all that has bin written, I nothing marvel at such an infinite
number of compound and artificial wines devised in old time, all for the use
of Physic, whereof we will now treat in more ample manner. To begin therefore
with wine-Verjuice, called Omphacium, how it should be made, for perfumes and
odoriferous ointments, we have showed in the former book. As for the wine
named Oenanthinum, it is made of Labrusca, that is to say, the wild Vine, in
this wise: Take two pound of the flowers of the wild vine aforesaid, let the
same be steeped in a measure of new wine containing about 12 12 congios.
gallons, for the space of 30 days,

To come now unto the artificial wines beforenamed: the first of them, namely
that which [i. without strength] is made of very wine in this sort: Take of new
white wine 20 Sextars [i. quarts:] of water half as much: let them boil
together until the measure of water beforesaid be consumed. Some take of sea
water ten Sextares, of rain water as much: and when they be mingled together,
suffer them to work in the hot Sun for the space of forty days. This drink
they use to give unto patients, for such maladies as they fear wine would be
hurtful to. A second made wine there is called Millet Wine, after this sort:
Take of Millet feed that is ripe, husk, head, and all, a pound and a quarter,
put it into two gallons of Must, or new wine: after that it has lien there
infused seven months, let the liquor run from it into another vessel, and
keep it for your use. As touching the wines of Lotus, as well the tree and
shrub, as the herb, we have showed sufficiently how they ought to be made.
Moreover, there do ordinarily use. A Modius or pecke of ripe and sweet dates,
which they call Chideae, Cato, we will declare soon hereafter. For the Greeks
have another way of their own, to wit, when they have sodden in white Must or
new wine the tender branches of the Myrtle, together with the leaves, and then
stamped the same, they put a pound thereof in three gallons more of Must, and
cause it to boil until such time as a third part of the wine be consumed. Now
that which is made after the same manner of the wild Myrtle berries, they call
Myrtidanum; and this will color and stain ones hands black.

Furthermore, the herbs of the garden do afford us many wines, namely Radish,
Sperage, Savory, and Majoran, Origan, Smallach seed, Southernwood, wild Mints,
Rue, Nep, or Calaminth,

To proceed unto wine made of flowers, you have first and foremost wine Rosat,
after this manner: Take the weight of 40 deniers [i. five ounces] of Rose
leaves well stamped, put them into a linen cloth, together with a little
weight, that they may settle downward, and not flote aloft; let them hang thus
in 20 Sextars [i. three gallons] and two wine quarts of Must; keep the vessel
Cato teaches us to make Elleborewine, of black Ellebore or Beare-foot growing
at the Vine root. And in like manner also is made the Scammonite wine. A
wonderful nature and property these vines have, to draw and suck into them
the very taste of other herbs and plants

As touching wines made of trees and shrubs, their manner was to sees the
berries of the green wood of both the Cedars, the Cypres, the Bay, Juniper,
Terebinth, Pine, Calamus, and Lentisk, in new wine. In like manner, the very
substance of Chamelaea, Chamaepithys, and Germander. Last of all, the flowers
also of the said plants serve to make wines, namely, by putting into a gallon
of new wine in the vat, the weight of ten deniers or drams of the flowers.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Hydromel and Oxymel, [i. Honied water, and Honied vinegar.]

THere is a wine called Hydromel, made of water and honey only: but to have it
the better,

Moreover, Vinegar was wont to be tempered with honey, [See how curious men have
bin to try conclusions in every thing!] which they called Oxymel; and that in
this manner: Recipe, of honey ten pounds or pints: of old vinegar five pints; of
sea salt one pound; of rain water five Sextares [i. a gallon within one quart:]
boil them al together at a soft fire, until they have had Themison (an Author
highly renowned) has condemned and forbidden expressey to be used. And to say
a very truth, it seems that the use of them was never but in case of necessity:
unless a man would believe and say, that Ipocras, spiced wines, and those that
be compounded of ointments, are Natures work; or that she brought forth plants
and trees to no other end, but that men should drink them down the throat.
Howbeit, the knowledge surely of such experiments be pleasant and delectable
unto men of great wit and high conceit, whose noble spirits cannot be at rest,
but ever inuentiue and searching into all secrets. Now to conclude this point,
certain it is and past all question, that none of all these compositions, unless
it be those which come to

CHAP. XVIII.
Certain strange and wonderful sorts of wine.

WIne also has prodigious and miraculous effects: for, by report, in Arabia
there is a wine made, which being drunk will cause barren women to bear
children; and contrariwise drive men into madness. But in Achaia principally
about Carynia, the wine makes women fall into untimely travel: nay if a woman
great with child do eat but the very contrary operations; the one procures
sleep, the other causes watching. Among them there

CHAP. XIX.
What Wines they be that may not be used in sacrifices: and what ways there
are to sophisticate new wines.

FOrasmuch as our life stands much upon religion and divine service, we are to
understand, That it is held unlawful to offer unto the gods before sacrifice,
the Wine of any vine that has not bin cut and pruned; or that has bin smitten
or blasted with lightening, or standing near to a jebbit or tree whereon a man
has hanged dead; or the grapes whereof have bin Euphronius, Aristomachus,
Coniades, and Hicesias, are therein great professors. The Africans use to
mitigate and

CHAP. XX.
Of diverse kinds of Pitch and Rosins: the manner of the seasoning and
confecture of new Wines. Also of Vinegar and salt.

AMong trees that yield from them a liquid substance, some there be in the East
countries, they call Mastick. After which, the Cipres brings forth a third
rosin, but it is of a most sharp

In some countries, if new wine work of it self a second time, it is thought
to be a fault and means to corrupt it: and indeed upon such a chance and
unhappy accident, it loses the verdure and quick taste: whereupon it gets the
name of Vappa, and is clean turned to be dead or sour: in which regard also we
give a man that name by way of scorn and reproach, calling him Vappa, Virgil
commends that of Narycia before all.

But to return again to our brewing and sophistication of wines, they that
would seem to Cato sets down a receipt to trim and concinnate wine (for that
is the very term which he uses) in this manner: Take of lie ashes sodden with
cuit boiled to the half; one fortieth part, temper it with a pound and a half
of penniroyall, or salt: and otherwhiles with marble braied and beaten into
powder among. He makes mention also of brimstone, but rosin he names with the
last. But above al he wills to refresh and renew the wine when it now begins to

CHAP. XXI.
Of wine-cellars.

NOw when wine is made and tunned up in manner aforesaid, there is as great
difference and diversity in the bestowing of it in cellars. They of Piemont
about the Alps, do put up their wines in wooden barrels, bound well with
hoopes, for warmth: and moreover, if the Item, that there be no muckhils nor
priuies near: no roots of trees, nor any thing of a strong and stinking savor:
for that wine is of this nature, to draw any smell very quickly into it: and
above all, Fig trees (as well the wild as the tame) be hurtful to
wine-cellars. Item, as touching the order of placing the wine-vessels, they
ought to stand a pretty distance one from another: for fear of contagion, for
that wine is always most apt to catch infection very soon. Moreover, it
matters much of what proportion and fashion the pipes, tubs, and such vessels
be made. Those with great bellies and wide mouths, are not so good. Also they
must be nealed with pitch, presently upon the rising of the dog star:
afterward doused and washed all over either in the sea or else ground in the
open air. Provided always, that wine vessels be never filled top full: but the
void

CHAP. XXII.
Of avoiding Drunkenness.

IF a man mark and consider well the course of our life, we are in nothing
more busy and curious, Vide lib. 36. Cap. 21^
pumish stone, and such like stuff, which I am abashed to rehearse and teach
those that be ignorant of such lewdness. And yet we see these that be
stoutest and most redoubted drinkers, even those that take themselves most
secured of danger, to lie sweating so long in the baines and brothel-houses for
to concoct their surfeit of wine, that otherwhiles they are carried forth dead
for their labor. Ye shall have some of them again when they have been in the
hot house, not to stay so long as they may recover their beds, no not so much
as to put on their shirts: but presently in the place, all naked as they are,
puffing and laboring still for wind, catch up great cans and huge tankards of
wine (to show what drunkard most, shall have the greatest reward. But what shall
we say to those (would a man think Venus delights, defiled with filthy and
abominable pollutions: and thus both sleeping and waking they sin with
pleasure. Well, what becomes of them the morrow after? they Tiberius Claudius
the Emperor, about 40 years since, certain outlandish Physicians and
Monte-banks, who would seem to set themselves out by some strange novelties of
their own, and so get a name, brought up at Rome a new devise and order, to
drink fasting, and prescribed folk to take a good hearty draught of wine before
meat, and to lay that foundation of their dinner. Of all nations, the Parthians
would have the glory for this goodly virtue of wine-bibbing: and among the
Greeks, Alcibiades indeed deserved Nouellius Torquatus a Millanois, wan the
name from all Romans and Italians both. This Lombard had gone. through all
honorable degrees of dignity in Rome; he had bin Praetor, and attained to the
place of a Proconsull. In all these offices of state he won no great name: but
for drinking in the presence of Tiberius, three gallons of wine at one draught
and before he took his breath again, he was dubbed knight by the syrname of
Tricongius, as one would say, not the thrice gallant knight
The three gallon knight: and the Emperor, stern, severe, and cruel otherwise
though he was, now in his old age (for in his youthful days he was given
overmuch to Whereupon he was called Biberius Mero, for Tiberius Nero.
drinking of wine) would delight to behold this renowned and worthy knight,
with great wonder and admiration. For the like rare gift and commendable
quality, men think verily that C. Piso first rise; and afterward was advanced
to the Prouostship Tiberius; and namely, for that in his court being now
emperor, he sat 2 days and 2 nights drinking continually, and never stirred
foot from the board. And verily Drusus Caesar (by report) in nothing more
resembled his father Tiberius, than in taking his drink. But to return again to
noble Torquatus, herein consisted his excellency, That he did it according to
art (for this you must take withal, there is an art of Drinking, grounded upon
certain rules and precepts.) Torquatus (I say) drank he never so much, was not
known at any time to falter in his tongue, never eased himself by vomiting,
never let it go the other way under board: how late soever he sat up at the
wine over night, he would be sure to relieve the morning watch and sentinel. He
drunk most of any man at one entire draught before the pot went from his head:
to prevent the deceit of those that drink for a wager. A singular glory no
doubt in him, and a Tergilla challenged M. Cicero the younger, son to that M.
Cicero the famous Orator, and reproched him to his face, that ordinarily he
drunk 2 gallons at once: and that one time above the rest when he was drunk,
he flung a pot at M. Agrippa his head. And truly this is one of the fruits and
feats of drunkenness. But blame not young Cicero, if in this point yet he
desired to surmount him that slew his father, M. Antonius I mean; for he before
that time strained himself, and strove to win the best game in this feat,
making profession thereof, as may appear by a book that he compiled and set
forth with this title, Of his own drunkenness: wherein he was not ashamed to
avow and justify his excess and enormities that way: and thereby approved
(as I take it) under pretense and color of his drunkenness, all those
outrages of his, all those miseries and calamities that he brought upon the
whole world. This treatise he vomited and

As touching the nations in the West part of the world, they have their drinks
also by themselves made of * corn steeped in water, whereof they will drink to
the utterance, and be drunk: i. Malt.
and namely in Spain and France, where the manner of making the same is all
one, how soever Z^us and ^urm, Ale and Beer.
will abide age, and continue stale. In Egypt likewise they have invented such
kind of drinks made of corn: so that no part or corner of the world there is,
but drunkenness reigns. And verily these liquors how soever they be named,
they use to drink entire as they be, and made of the very strength of Malt:
never delaying the same with water, as we dowines. But it may be said, That
Nature has endowed and enriched those countries with abundance of corn, and
therefore they may well do it. Oh how industrious we are to maintain our vices!
There is a devise found, (would ever any man have thought it?) how water also
should make men drunk. Two liquors there be, most pleasing and acceptable to
men's bodies, wine within, and oil without. Both proceed from two special
trees, howbeit, of the twain, Oil is necessary, and Wine may be better

THE FIFTEENTH BOOK OF
WRITTEN BY C. PLINIVS
CHAP. I.
The natures of trees that bear Fruit.

THere were no olive trees grew in Italy, but upon the coast side, and that
within 40 miles of the sea, about the 440 year after the foundation of the city
of Rome; if it be true that Theophrastus says, who was one of the most famous
and renowned Authors among the Greeks. Fenestella writes moreover, and
affirms, that during the reign of Tarquinius Priscus (which was much about
the 183 year Appius Claudius, the nephew of that great Appius Claudius
syrnamed the Blind, and L. Iunius were Consuls together) a pound of the oil
was sold for twelve Asses: and not long after (namely, in the 680 year) M.
Seius the son of Lucius (one of the Aediles Curule for the time being) brought
down the market so well, that a man might have bought ten pound for one As;
and at that price he served the people of Rome throughout all that year. Less
cause therefore a man has to marvel hereat, who knows how not past 22
years after that (namely when Cn. Pompeius was the fourth time Consul) Italy
was able to furnish other nations and provinces with oil of Olives. Hesiodus
also (who was especially addicted to the study of husbandry, and of all things
thought it most necessary to be taught and published for the good of mankind)
wrote thus much concerning the Olive, That never a man was known to that day
for to have gathered the fruit of that Olive tree, which himself had planted:
so late of growth were those trees in his time, and so slowly came they
forward. But now adays they come up of kernels and stones set in plots of
ground for the purpose: and being transplanted again, they bear Olives the
second year after. Fabianus says, That Olives love not to grow either in the
coldest or the hottest grounds.

Virgill has set down 3 kind of Olives, to wit, Orchitae [i. the great round
Olives:] Radij, [i.

The time of gathering Olives ensues presently upon the vintage of grapes; but
greater industry and skill is required to the making and tempering of good oil,
than about new wine: for oil is drawn before or after, out of the press: or,
according to a late invention, by treading them

CHAP. II.
Of Oil.

OIle-Oliue comes to have a rank and unpleasant taste if it be old kept and
stale, contrary to the nature of wine, which is the better for age. And the
longest time that oil will continue good, is but one year. Wherein surely if a
man would well consider, he may observe the great providence of Nature. For
seeing that wines are made to seruefor intemperance and drunkenness, there is
not that necessity to drink much thereof, and to spend them out of hand: and
more than so, the dainty taste that they have when they be stale, induces men
to lay them up and keep them long. But contrariwise, she would not have us make
such spare of oil: and therefore by reason of the general use and need
thereof, she has made it vulgar and common

As touching this benefit and gift of Nature bestowed upon mankind, Italy of
all other nations in the world carries the name for the goodness thereof: but
principally the territory or county of Venafrum, and namely, that quarter lying
toward Licinia, which yields the oil called Licinianum: whereupon there be no
olives comparable to them of Licinia, both for to serve the perfumers, in
regard of the pleasant smell which that oil does give, so appropriat unto their
ointments: as also to furnish the kitchen and the table (as they say that be
fine-toothed, and have a delicate taste:) which is the cause (I say) that this
oil carries the only name. And yet these olives of Licinia have this
privilege besides, that birds love not to come near them. Next to these
Licinian olives, the question is between them of Istria and Baetica, whether of
them should go away with the price for their goodness? and hard it is to say,
which is the better of the two.

CHAP. III.
The nature of the Olive berries: also of young Olive Plants.

THis fruit called the Olive, consists of a stone or kernel, of oil, a fleshy
substance, and the lees or dregs: now by these lees (called in Latin Amurca) I
mean the bitter liquor of the grounds that the oil yields. It comes of
abundance of water: and therefore as in time of drought there is least thereof,
so in a rainy and watery constitution, you shall have store and plenty. As for
the proper juice of the olive, it is their oil; and the chief is that which
comes of those that are unripe, like as we have showed before, when we treated
of Ompharium, or the Olive verjuice. This oilie substance does increase and
augment within the Olive until the rising of the star Arcturus, to wit, 16
days before the Calends of October; after which time, their the Olive berrie
to look black. And therefore when this blackness begins to appear, it
Theophrastus says) which ingendreth oil: and therefore both about the press
at first, and also in the very garners where Olives be laid after, they use to
keep good fires, by that means to draw the more oil forth. A third default
there is in oil, and that comes of two much sparing and niggardise: for some
men there are, who being loath to be at cost to pluck and gather Olives from the
tree, wait still and look that they should fall of themselves. And such folk
as would seem yet to keep a mean herein, namely, to take some pains and be
at a little cost; beat and pell them down with perches and poles: whereby they
do offer wrong to the poor trees, ^ea, and hinder themselves not a little the
year following, when they shall find how much it is out of their way, thus to
break their boughs and branches. Whereupon the law in old time provided well
for this inconvenience, by an express inhibition No man so hardy as to
break, strike, and beat the Olive tree. But they that go most warily and
gentl^ to work, stand under the tree, and with some canes shake the boughs
and branches therewith, or lightly smite them: but in no case let drive and lay
at them either with full downright or crosse-blowes. And yet as heedfull as
they be in so doing, this good they get by striking and knapping off the young
shootes and sprigs which should bear the next year, that they have the trees
carry fruit but once in two years for it. The like happens also, if a man stay
till they fall of themselves: for by sticking on the tree beyond their due
time, they rob the olives to come after, of all their nutriment wherewith they
should be fed, and detain the place likewise where they should come forth and
grow. An evident proof hereof is this, That olives unless they be gathered
before the ordinary and yearly of some are called Royal, of others Majorinae,
and Phauliae, which every man knows, are the [i. proud.] Also there are
Olives to be found, which being dried by themselves only, are passing sweet,
yea, and more delicate than raisins: mary these are very geason, and yet such
are in Afric and about the city Emerita in Portugal.

As touching the very oil it self, the way to preserve it from being ouerfat
and thick, is with salt. If the bark of an Olive tree be slit and cut, it will
receive the rellice and smell of any medicinable spice, and the oil thereof
will seem aromatized: otherwise pleasant in taste it is not, like as wine is:
neither is there such difference in so many kinds of olives as there is in
wine: for surely we cannot at the most observe above three degrees in the
goodness of oiles, namely, according to the first, second, and third running
out of the press. Finally, the thinner that oil is, and the more subtle, the
finer and daintier is the smell thereof: and yet the same same sent, in the
very best of them all, continues but a small time.

CHAP. IIII.
The nature of Oil Olive.

THe property of oil is to warm the body, and to defend it against the
injuries of cold: and yet a sovereign thing it is to cool and mitigate the
hot distemperature of the head. The Greeks, whom we may count the very
fathers and fosters of all vices, have perverted the true and right use
thereof, to serve for all excess and superfluity; even as far as to the
common anointing of their wrastlers with it, in their public place of
exercise. Known it is for certain, that the governors and wardens of those
places, have sold the oil that has been scraped from the bodies of the said
wrastlers for 80 Sesterces at a time.

But the stately majesty of Rome contrariwise has done so great honor to the
Olive tree,

CHAP. V.
The manner how to order Olives.

NOw will I report the precepts and rules set down by Cato, as touching olives.
His opinion is, that the greater long Olive Radius of Salentum, the big
Orchites, the Pausia, the Sergiana, neighbor territories and places adioining,
were taken for the best. As for the Licinian Olives,

CHAP. VI.
How to keep Olives, and the way to make oil of them.

CAto allows of no other means to keep and preserve olives (and specially the
great ones

CHAP. VII.
Of Oil Artificial

IN Cato his time there was no artificial Oiles, I mean, no other but that of
the Olive; and t^refore I suppose it was, that he made no mention thereof: but
now adays there be many kinds. First will we treat of those that are made of
trees, and principally before all the rest, of the oil of the wild olive: thin
it is, and much more bitter than that of the other gentle and true Olive, but
good for medicines only.

Very like to it, is that which is made of Chamelaea, an herb or shrub growing
in stony places to the height of a span and no more, with leaves and berries
resembling those of the wild olive.

The next is that which comes of Cici, or Ricinus, [i, Palma Christi] a plant
which grows plentifully in Egypt, which some call Croto, others Trixis or
wild Sesam; but long it has not been there. In Spain likewise this Ricinus is
found of late to rise suddenly to the height of which is a vermin that annoies
sheep. For to gather an oil thereof, the manner is to sees the

The oil of Almonds, which some call Metopium, is made of the bitter Almonds,
dried stamped, and reduced into a mass or lump, which being sprinkled and
soked with water, and then beaten again in a mortar, is put into a press or
mill, and the oil drawn therout.

There is an oil made also of the Bay, together with the oil of ripe olives
ready to drop from the tree. Some take the Bay berries only, and thereout
press oil de-Baies: others use the leaves and nothing else: and there be
again, who with the leaves take also the rind of the Bay berries; yea and put
thereto Storax Calamita, and other sweet odors. Now for this purpose, the
Laurel

Like unto this oil, is that which they make of the black Myrtle; and the
broad leafed kind thereof is the better: the berries of it ought to lie infused
first in hot water, and afterward to be boiled. Some sees the tenderest
leaves that it has in Oile-Oliue, and then press them forth. Others put the
leaves first in the oil, and then let them stand confected in the sun, and
there take their ripening.

After the same manner is the oil made of the garden Myrtle; but that of the
wild which has the smaller seed is the better: and this Myrtle some call
Oxymyrsine, others Chamaemyrsine; and some again name it for the smalnesse, i.
Indivisible, of, ^o small that it cannot be cut.
Acaron, for short it is and full of little branches.

Moreover, there be oiles made of the Citron and Cypress trees: likewise of
wall nuts which they call Caryinon: also the fruit of the Cedar, named
Cedrelaeon.

Semblably of the grain called Gnidium, to wit, the seed of Chamelaea and
Thymelaea, well elensed and stamped. In like manner of the Lentisk. As for the
oil Cyprinum, how it should be made of the Egyptian nut and of Ben for to
serve perfumers, has bin showed before. The Indians (by report) do make of
Chest-nuts, of Sesame seed, and Rice. The people Ichthyophagi as they live by
eating fish only, so they make oil of fishes. And in case of necessity,
otherwhiles men use to draw an oil out of the berries of a Plane tree also,
being steeped in water and salt, which serves for lamp oil. Yea and there is
an oil made of the wild vine Oenanthe, as we have said already in the treatise
of Ointments.

As touching the oil which the Greeks call Gleucinum, it is made with new wine
and oileoliue, boiled at a soft fire. Others there be that let the wine consume
all into oil, and without any fire at all, do compass the vessel wherein
this composition is made, with the cake and the refuse of grapes when they be
pressed, and cover it all over for the space of 22 days, so as twice a day
they be all mixed thoroughly together. Some there be who put thereto not only
Majoram, but also the most precious and exquisite odors that they can meet
withal: and our common fencing-halls, and places of public exercises be
perfumed with these sweet oiles, and do smell of them; but such they be as are
the cheapest of all other.

Over and besides, there is made an oil of Aspalathus, sweet Calamus, Balm,
Iris or Flourde-lis, Cardumome or grains of Paradise, Melilot, French Nard,
Panace, Marjoram, Elecampane, and the root of Cinnamon, taking all these and
letting them lie infused in oil, and so pressing

They that inhabit between Cappadocia and Galatia, do compound a certain oil
of herbs growing among them, which is a sovereign remedy for sinews either
wounded or otherwise

Now for the oil of Pitch, which they call Picinum, it is made of the vapors
and smoke that arise from Pitch whiles it boileth, and received in fleeces of
wool spread over the pots mouth wherein the said Pitch is sodden: which
fleeces afterward are well wrung, and the oil is pressed

Upon the coasts and maritime parts of Syria, there is an oil engendereth of
it self, which the Greeks call Elaeomeli: a fatty and greasy substance it is,
thicker than honey, and thinner than Rosin, of a sweet taste, issuing out of
trees; and is only medicinable and good in Physic.

As touching old oil, it serves in right good stead for sundry sorts of
maladies. It is thought also very singular for to preserve Iuory from
putrefaction, for this is certain, that the image of Saturn at Rome is full
of oile-oliue all within.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the lees or dregs of Oile-oliue, called Amurca.

CAto has highly commended above all, the lees of Oile-oliue: for he would
have the barrels, hogsheads, and other vessels which hold oil, to be therewith
besmeared, that they should not drink up the oil. He devised also, that the
threshing floors should be wrought and tempered with oil lees, that they might
not chawn and gape, nor no Ants breed within the chinks and cranies thereof.
Moreover, he thinks it very good that the mortar, plaster, and parget used
about the walls of corn barns, as also their floors, should be well sprinkled
and tempred with the said lees; yea, and the presses and wardrobes where
apparel is kept, ought to be rubbed therewith to keep out mothes, worms,
spiders, and such vermin that do hurt to cloths. He

M. Varro affirms, that if a Goat chance to lick with his tongue, or to
brouse an olive when it buddeth the first spring, the same tree will surely be
barren and lie in great danger to miscary and die. Thus much of the Olive tree,
and of the oil of Olives.

CHAP. IX.
All kinds of Fruit good to eat, and their Nature.

AS for all other fruits of trees, they are hardly to be numbered and reckoned
by their form and figure; much less by their sundry tastes and diverse juices
that they yield, so intermingled they are together by variety of graffing one
into another.

CHAP. X.
Of Pine-nuts, or Pine-apples, four sorts.

THe Pine nuts (which are tht biggest of that kind and hanging highest upon the
tree) do contain and nourish slender kernels enclosed within certain hollow
beds full of holes, and besides clothed and clad with another coat or husk of a
dark murrey color: wherein may be seen the wonderful care and providence of
Nature, to bestow the seeds so soft. A second kind there be of these Nuts
called Terentines, having a shell or husk very brittle and easy to be
crushed between ones singers; and as soon are they pecked through with birds
bills, who after that manner filch and steal them from off the tree. A third
sort yet there is of them, that come and these be singular good against the
cough. The Taurines in Calabria, have a device to

CHAP. XI.
Of the Quince.

NExt to Pine apples, for big and large, are the Quinces which we call Cotonea,
the Greeks Cydonea, because they were first brought out of Candy. So heavy and
massy they be, that they bend the boughs to the ground as they hang upon the
tree, and will not suffer their mother to grow.

Many kinds there be of Quinces, to wit, Chrysomela, of a color inclining to
gold, and divided by certain cut lines. Secondly, there be the quinces of our
own country, and so called: these be whiter, and of an excellent smell. They
also that come out of the realm of Naples, be highly esteemed. Now there be a
smaller sort of the same kind called Struthea (i. the Peare-quince) and those
do cast a more odoriferous smell: late they be ere they come to ripeness or
perfection; whereas contrariwise the green quinces called Mustea, be as hasty
and soon melow. Now if a man do graffe the great quinces upon the Struthea, the
tree will bring forth a kind of quinces by themselves called Muluiana; and these
are the quinces alone of all other that may be eatenraw. In sum, all the sort
of these are come now adays to be entertained within the waiting or presence

There are besides small wild quinces, next to the Pear quince Struthea, for
pleasant and odoriferous smell; and they grow commonly in hedge-rowes.

Moreover, as well Peaches as Pomegranats, notwithstanding they be of a diverse
kind, yet we call Mala (i. apples.) As for the Pomegranats, we have spoken of
nine sorts of them in our treatise of their trees, and others in Africa: and
these are full of certain grains or kernels lying enclosed under their rind;
whereas Peaches have in stead thereof, a gross stone or woody substance
within the carnous pulpe of the fruit. To conclude, there be certain pears
weighing a pound, in regard of which poise and bigness that they bear, called
they are Libralia.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Peach, and four kinds thereof.

OF all Peaches, the principal be those which are named Duracina, for the
solid substance of the meat within them. As for the French and Asiaticke
Peaches, they bear the name of the regions and nations from whence they come.
This fruit ordinarily waxes ripe after the fall of the leaf, or Autumn: but
the Abricocts are ready to be eaten in Summer. These have not bin known full 30
years, and at their first coming up, were sold for Roman deniers apeece,
whereof there be two sorts; Supernatia, which we have from the high countries,
and namely

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Plum-tree, eleven kinds of them.

TO come now to Plums, there is a world of them: some of sundry colors, others
black, and and for that they be of small reckoning, named they are As^ina [i.
As our horse plums:
Asse-plums.] Ye shall have

It is not long since, that in the realm of Granado and Andalusia, they began
to graffe plums

As for the Damascene-plums (taking name of Damasco in Syria) we have
sufficiently spoken thereof in our treatise of strange trees: and yet long
since they have bin known to grow in Italy: which although they have a large
stone and little carnosity about them, yet they never wither into wrinkles and
riuels when they be dry, for that they want the full strength of the kind Sun
which they had in Syria.

We should do well to write together with them, of the fruit Sebesten, which
also come from Cato made no mention thereof, considering that of purpose he
showed the manner, how to preserve and keep diverse wild fruits, till new came:
for long it was first ere Peach trees came into these parts, and much ado
there was before they could be brought for to prosper with us, seeing that in
the Island Rhodes (which was their place of habitation next to Egypt) they
bear not at all, but are altogether barren. And whereas it is said, That
Peaches be venomous in Persia, and do cause great torments Perseus at Memphis.
Whereupon it came, that Alexander the Great ordained, That all victors who had
won the Cato's time they were not known in Italy, but all the Plum-trees which
we now have, are come since he died.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of nine and twenty kinds of Fruits, contained under the names of Apples.

OF Apples (that is to say, of fruits that have tender skins to be pared off)
there be many well as the rest; and long it is not since they arrived first in
Italy; the one sort out of Africa, Sextus Papinius (whom my self in my time saw
Consul of Rome) was the first man that brought them both into these parts;
namely in the later end of Augustus Caesar the Emperor, and planted them about
the rampires of his camp, for to beautify the same. Howbeit, to say a truth,
their fruit resembled rather berries than apples; yet they make a goodly show
upon the rampires: and no marvel, since that now adays whole groves of trees
begin to ouertop and surmount the houses of private persons.

Concerning the fruit Tuberes there be two sorts thereof, to wit, the white and
the reddish, called also Sericum, of the color of silk.

The Apples named Lanata are held in manner for strangers in Italy, and are
known to grow but in one place thereof, and namely within the territory of
Verona. Covered they be all over

A number of apples there are besides, that have immortalised their first
founders and inventers, who brought them into name, and caused them to be known
abroad in the world; as if therein they had performed some worthy deed
beneficial to all mankind. In which regard, why should I think much to
rehearse and reckon them up particularly by name? for if I be not much
deceived, thereby will appear the singular wit that some men employed in
graffing trees; and how there is not so small a matter, so it be well and
cunningly done, but is able to get honor to the first author, yea, and to
eternise his name for ever. From hence it comes, that our best apples Matius,
Cestius, Manlius, and Claudius. As for the quince-apples, that come of a quince
graffed upon an apple stock, they are called Appiana, of one Appius who was of
the Claudian house, and first devised and practiced that feat. These apples
carry the smell with them of quinces: they bear in quantity the bigness of the
Claudian apples, and are in color red. Now lest any man should think that this
fruit came into credit by reason only of partial favor, for that the first
inuentor was a man descended from so ancient and noble a family, let him but
think of the apples Sceptiana, which are in as great request as they for their
passing roundnesse; and they bear the name of one Sceptius their first
inuentor, who was no better than the son of a slave lately infranchised. Cato
makes mention of apples called Quiriana, as also of Scantiana, which he says
the manner is to put up in vessels and so keep them. But of all others,

Other apples there are that have ennobled the countries from whence they came,
and carried their names, to wit, Camerina and Graecula. All the rest took name
either upon some occasion or property that they have: to wit, of brotherhood,
as the twin-apples Gemella, which hang one to another by couples, and never are
found single, but always grow double: of their color, as the Serica, which for
their fresh hew are so called: of kindred and affinity, as the Melapia: for
their resemblance and participation of apples and pears together, as a man
would say, Peareapples, or pom-poires: of their hasty ripeness, as the Mustea
[i. hasty apples;] which now of their sweet taste of honey, are called Melimela
[i. honey apples:] also of their exquisit roundnesse [i. the round apples.] That
these apples came first from their native country Epirus, appears by the
Greeks, who call them Epirotica. Again, some there be that take their
denomination of their form, resembling women's paps or breasts, as namely
Orthomastica, [i. the Brest-apples.] Others, for that their condition is to
have no pepins or seed within them, be called of the Belgians, Spadoma, as one
would say, Guelded apples. As for the Melofolia, [i. the leaf apples] they be
so called, because they have one leaf and otherwhile twain breaking forth of
their side in the very mids. The ragged apples Pannucea take this name, for
that of all others they soonest be riueled. The Puffes named Pulmonea are houen
foolishly, and swell I cannot tell how, with little or nothing in them. Some in
color resemble blood, they are so red, because at first they were graffed upon
a mulberry. But all apples ordinarily are red

As for wildings and crabs, little they be all the sort of them, in comparison:
their taste is well enough liked, and they carry with them a quick and sharp
smell: howbeit this gift they have for their harsh soreness, that they have
many a foul word and shrewd curse given them, and that they are able to dull
the edge of any knife that shall cut them. To conclude, the Dacian Apples

CHAP. XV.
Of Pears. And of the variety of graffing.

Upon the same cause there be Pears also reproched with the name of Pride, and
are called the Proud-peares: little they are, but quickley ripe, and as soon
gone. Of all others the Crustumine pears be most delicate and pleasant in
taste. Next to them in request are the Falern pears, so called for their great
abundance of liquor, as it were wine, whereof they be full. Decimus, a known
citizen of Rome: of which is also a bastard kind which they call
Pseudodecimiana. Likewise, the Dolobellian pear, of one Dolobella: and those
are of all other the longest tailed. As touching the Pompeian pears, which be
also called the Pap or Teat-peares, the Licerian, the Seuerian, and of their
race the Tyrannian, they differ one from another in the length of their steal.
The red Fauonian pears be somewhat greater than the abouenamed Proud-pears. As
for the Laterian and Anitian, which be not gathered nor ripen until Autumn be
past, they have a pretty tart and sourish taste, but nathelesse pleasant
enough. The Tyberian pears bear Tiberius the Emperor, for that of all others
he loved that fruit best: they might go for Lycerians well enough, so like they
be unto them, save only that they grow big, and are more deeply colored with
the Sun.

Moreover, there are pears which are known by no other name than of the
countries where they grow, namely, those of Ameria which be more lateward than
any other: the Picentine, Numantine, Alexandrine, Numidian, Grecian, and among
them the Tarentine. Also the Signine pears, which many call Testacea, of the
color of earthen pots that they resemble; like as others be named Onychium, for
that they represent the Onyx stone, or a man's nail; as likewise those which be
called Purple-peares.

Furthermore, pears take their name of the odor which they yield: thus there
be Myrapia,

Many sorts of pears there are, whereof we can give no certain reason for
their denomination, namely, the Barbarian and Venerian pears, which also be
called Colored: likewise, the royal pears, which hang or rather stick flat
to the tree, so short a steel they have. The Patritian also and Voconian
pears, which are both green and long. Moreover, Virgil has spoken of the
Volemian pears or wardens, which he had from Cato, who also names the
Sementine or the hasty and soon ripe pears. So as in this point verily the
world is grown already to the highest Virgils days the devise of graffing
strange fruits, was very rife: considering that he speaks of the Arbute tree
graffed on Nut-trees, the Plane upon Apple Trees, and the Elm upon Cherrie
stocks. In such sort, as I see not how men can devise to proceed farther. And
certes for this long time, there has not been a new kind of Apple or other
fruit heard of.

And yet as industrious as men have been that way, they are not permitted to
graffe all manner of trees indifferently one in another, no more than it is
lawful to graffe upon bushes and thorns: seeing that it is not so easy a
matter to appease lightenings: for look how many sorts of trees are thus
engraffed contrary to nature, so many kinds of lightenings and thunderbolts by
report, are flashed and shot at once.

Pears naturally are more sharpe-pointed at one end than Apples. And among
them, the Greek pears, the Gourd and Laurel pears are last of all others
ripe, for they hang upon the tree until Winter, and they mellow with very
frost: like as the Amerine and Scantiane apples.

Furthermore, pears are kept and preserved as grapes, and after so many ways:
but none of them are put in barrels as plums be. Finally, Pears and Apples
both, have the properties of

CHAP. XVI.
The manner how to preserve Apples.

THe general rules to keep and preserve Apples, are these, Imprimis, That the
solars be well planked and boorded in a cold and dry place; provided always,
that the windows to the North do stand open, especially every fair day. Item,
to keep the windows into the South Item, That Apples be gathered after the
Aequinox in the Autumn: and neither before the full of the Moon, nor the
first hour of the day. Moreover, that all the Apples which fell, be severed
from the other by themselves, and laid apart: also that they be bedded upon
straw, mats, or chafe under them: that they be so couchedas that they touch
not one another, but have spaces between to receive equal air for to be
vented. To conclude, this is well known, that the Amerine Apples do last and
keep good long, whereas the honey Apples will abide no time.

CHAP. XVII.
How to keep Quinces, Pome-granats, Pears, Sorvises, and Grapes.

FOr the good keeping and preserving of Quinces, there must be no air let into
them where they are enclosed: or else they ought to be confected in sodden
honey, or boiled therein. Pomegranats should be plunged into seawater boiling,
and so hardened therein: and after that they be dried in the Sun three days,
(so as they be not left abroad in the night to take dew) they would be hanged
up in a solar, and when a man list to use them, then they must be well washed in
fresh water. M. Varro sets down the manner to keep them within great earthen
vessels, in sand. And if they be not ripe, he would have the earthen pots
bottomes broke off, and so the Pomegranates to be put in, and covered all over
with mould: but the mouth thereof must be [i. that are ripe] they may be wrapped
and lapped one by one in fig-leaues, such as are not fallen, but plucked from
off the tree green, and then to be put into twigge paniers of oisiers, or else
daubed over with potters blay.

He that would keep Pears long, must put them in earthen vessels turned with
the bottomes upward, well varnished or annealed within, covered also with saw
dust or fine shauings, and so enterred. As for the Tarentine Pears, they abide
longest on the tree ere they be gathered. The Anitian Pears be well preserved
in cuit-wine.

As for Soruisses, they are kept also in trenches within the ground, but the
cover of the vessel

Some of our modern writers handle this argument more deeply than others, and
fetch the matter far off, giung out rules in this manner, saying, That for to
have Apples or Grapes de guard, that is to say, fit to be preserved, and to
last long; the trees that bear the one and the other, ought to be pruned and
cut betimes, in the waine of the Moon, in fair weather, and when the winds
blow dry. Likewise they affirm, That fruits to be preserved, would be chosen
from pair of sheers, or plucked out with pincers: then to be hung up within a
great new earthen vessel

Columella mine Author reports, That fruits will keep well in earthen pots
thoroughly pitched, and afterward set in pits, and drenched in cesternes of
water. In the maritime coasts of Liguria next to the Alps, they use to take
Grapes after they be dried in the Sun and wrap them within bands of rushes and
reeds, put them up in little barrels, and stop them close with plaster. The
Greeks have the same fashion: but they take for that purpose, the leaves of the
Planetree, of the vine it self, or else the fig tree, after they be dried one
day in the shade: and when they be in the barrel, between every bed of grape
clusters, they couch a course of grape kernels

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Figs, 29 sorts of them.

OF all other fruits that have tender pills or skins, and are called in Latin,
Poma, Figs are the biggest: for some of them are found to be as great as
Pears. As touching the Sycomores of Egypt and Cypres, and of their admirable
fruit we have written enough in the treatise of foreign Trees. The Idaean Figs
that come from the mountain Ida, are of color red, of the bigness of Olives,
only rounder they be, and in taste resemble Medlars. In the region about Troas
near to the said hill Ida, they call that fig tree Alexandrina. It is as
thick as a man's arm about at the cubite or elbow, and full of branches: the
wood thereof is tough and strong, Onesicritus writes, that the Fig Trees in
Hyrcania bear more pleasant fruit than ours in Italy, without all comparison:
also that they carry a greater burden, and be far more plentiful, insomuch,
as one of them ordinarily yields 270 Modij of Figs. We have here also in Italy
many Fig Trees brought out of other foreign countries, to wit, from Chalcis and
Chios: whereof there be many sorts. For both our Lydian Figs which are of a
reddish purple color, and also the Mamillane or teat-Figs, have a resemblance
of the said Chalcidian and Chian Figs, yea, and the Calistruthion Figs beyond
others not a little, in goodness of taste: and these of all the rest are the
coldest. As touching the Affricane Figs, which many men prefer before all
others, they hold

Moreover, there be certain Figs which bear the names of those that brought
them first into Italy: namely, the Liuian and Pompeian, and such are fittest to
be dried in the Sun and so to be kept all the year long for a man's use: like
as the illfauoured, foolish and gaping Figs Mariscae: as also those that are
speckled with spots like the leaves of Laconian reeds.

There are besides the Herculanean, Albicerate and Aratian white Figs, which
of all other are most flat and broadest, and withal have the least tail or
steel whereby they hang. The Porphyrite Figs first show upon the tree, and
ordinarily be longest tailed. The smallest Figs called

Moreover, certain Figs there be which are both early, and also lateward:
namely, such as bear twice a year: and be both black and white: for they are
ripe first in harvest, and afterward, in time of vintage. Late also it is
before the Duracinae be ripe, so called of the hard skin which they have. Also
some there be of the Chalcidian kind which bear thrice a year. At Tarentum
there grow none but such as are exceeding sweet, and those they call Omas [or
rather Oenadas, tasting of wine.]

Cato in his treatise of Figs writes thus, The unsavory Fig dotes, Mariscae,
would be sown in an open, light, and chalkie ground. But the Affricane,
Hirculane, and the Winter Saguntine Figs, as also the Telliane (which are
black and long tailed) love a fatter soil, or else well dunged.

After this, Figs have changed into so many kinds, and altered their names
very often: in such sort that by this point it is evident, how the world is
altered, and to what variety this life is subject. In some provinces, as
namely in Moesia, there be winter Figs that hang all Winter long: but they come
to be such, more by art and cunning, than naturally of themselves. For so soon
as Autumn is passed, and Winter approches, they use to cover with dung
certain little Fig Trees which they have, and together with them the green
young Figs that they find on them in Winter: and when they have continued so the
sharp time of dead Winter, so soon as the to light; they no sooner find the
fresh air, and another kind of nourishment differing from that,

Now forasmuch as we are fallen to mention the figs in Africa, which were in so
great request in the time of Cato, I am put in mind to speak somewhat of that
notable opportunity and occasion which by the means of that fruit he took for
to root out the Carthaginians, and raze their very city. For as he was a man
who hated deadly that city, and was otherwise careful to provide for the quiet
and security of his posterity, he gave not over at every sitting of the
Senate, to importune the Senators of Rome, and to cry out in their ears, That
they would resolve and take order to destroy Carthage: and in very truth one
day above the rest, he brought with Cato suruiued not the rasing and saccage of
Carthage, for he died the year immediately following this resolution* But what
shall we say of this man? whether was more admirable in this act, his provident
care and promptness of spirit; or the occasion presented by the sudden Cato,
more effectual to this enterprise? Certes, somewhat there is above all, and
nothing in mine opinion more wonderful, that so great a signiory and state as
Carthage, which had contended for the Empire of the world for the space of 120
years, and that with the great conquerours the Romans, should thus be ruined
and brought utterly to naught, by occasion of one fig. A design that neither
the fields lost at Trebia and Thrasymenus, nor the disgrace received at the
battle of Canna, wherein so many brave Romans lost their lives, and left their
dead bodies on the ground to be interred, could effect: nay not the disdain
that they took to see the Carthaginians encamped and fortified with in 3 miles
of Rome, ne yet the brauadoes Annibal in person, riding before the gate
Collina, even to dare them, could ever bring to pass. See how Cato by the
means of one poor fig, prevailed to bring and present the forces of Rome to
the very walls of Carthage.

There is a fig tree called Navia, honored with great reverence, in the common
Forum and public place of justice at Rome, even where the solemn assemblies
are held for election of Magistrates, near to the Curia, under the old shops
called Veteres: as if the gods had consecrated it for that purpose: near (I
say) it is to the Tribunal named Puteal Libonis, and there planted by Actius
Navius the Augur, where the sacred relics of his miracle, to wit, the Rasor
and the Whetstone, were solemnly interred: as if it came of the own accord
from the said Curia into the Comitium, and had not bin set by Navius. This tree
if it begin at any time to wither, there is another replanted by the priests,
who that way are very careful and ceremonious. But Romulus and Remus, the two
young princes fondlings, and founders also of the city of Rome: for that under
it was found a she wolf, giving to those little babes the teat (in Latin
called Rumen:) and for a memorial hereof there is a monument of brass erected
near unto it, representing that strange and wonderful story. There grew also
a third fig tree before the temple of Saturn, which in the year 260 after the
foundation of the city of Rome, was taken away, at what time as a chapel was
builded there by the Vestal nuns, and an expiatory sacrifice offered, for that
it overthrew the image of Sylvanus. There is a tree of the same kind yet
living, which came to grow of it self, no man knows how, in the midst of the
Forum Romanum, Curtius filled up with the best things that were to be found in
the city, to wit, his Virtue and Piety incompatable, testified by a most brave
and glorious death. In the very same place likewise there is an Olive and a
Vine, which came thither by as mere a chance, but afterward well looked and
Julius Caesar late Emperor, exhibited to do the people pleasure, which were the
last that played their prizes, and fought at the sharp in the said Forum. To
conclude, wonderful it is to see, how the fruit of this tree makes have to
ripe: a man would say that Nature therein shows all her skill and force to
ripen figs altogether at once.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the wild Fig trees: and of caprification.

THere is a kind of wild Fig trees, which the Latins call Caprificus, that
never brings any

All figs ordinarily are tender and soft in handling. Those which be ripe have
small grains within them: their succulent substance besides, when they begin
to ripen, is white like milk:

The better sort of figs have this honor and privilege, to be kept in boxes
and cases for the purpose: and chiefly those which come from the Isle Ebusus,
which of all others are the very best and largest: yea, and next to them those
that grow in the Marrucines country. But where they are in more plenty they put
them up in great vessels called Orcae, as namely in Asia: also in barrels and
pipes, as at Ruspina a city in Barbary. And in very truth, the people of those
countries make that use of them when they be very dry, that they serve both for
bread and meat. For Cato setting down an order for diet and victuals fit and
sufficient for laborers, ordained, that they should be cut short of their
other pittance, when figs are ripe, and make up their full meals which when M.
Crassus should imbarque in that expedition against the Parthians (wherein he
Cave ne eas [i. Beware of this voyage, and go it not.] All these sorts of
figs L. Vitellius brought out of Syria, into his ferm or manor that he had
near Alba, having L. Governor or Lieutenant general in those parts, namely,
in the later end of Tiberius Caesar the Emperor: and the same Vitellius was
afterward Censor at Rome.

CHAP. XX.
Of Medlars: three kinds of them.

MEdlars and Services may well and truly be ranged in the rank of Apples and
Pears: [i. the French Medlar] which is of a bastard nature, yet it resembles
the Anthedon rather than the other. As for the Setanian Medlar, the fruit is
greater and whiter than the rest; also the kernels or stones within are of a
more soft substance, and not altogether so woody and hard. The rest are
smaller than these Setania or common Medlars, but they have a better smell and
more odoriferous, and withal will last longer. The tree it self that bears
Medlars is reckoned among the greatest sort: the leaves before they fall wax
red: the roots be many in number, and run down right deep into the ground: by
which means, uneath or very hardly they be quite rooted up. This tree was not
known in Italy by Cato's days.

CHAP. XXI.
Of Services, four kinds.

OF Services there be four sundry sorts, differing one from another: for some
of them are round like apples, others pointed at the end as Pears; a third
kind are fashioned like eggs, as some long or tankard apples: and these are apt
to be soon sour. For sweet sent and pleasant taste the round excel all others:
the rest have a relish of wine. The best kind of them are they that have soft
and tender leaves about their steles whereby they hang. The fourth sort they
call Torminale, allowed only for the remedy that they afford to mitigate the
torments Cato would have Seruises to be preserved and condite in Cuit.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the Wall-nut.

THe next place to these for bigness, the Walnuts do challenge, which they
cannot claim for their credit and authority; and yet they are in some request
among other licentious strong smell. Their outward husk serves to die wool:
and the little nuts when they come new

Walnuts be the fruit alone that Nature has enclosed with a cover parted in
twain, and so is joined and set together; for the shell is divided and cleft
just in the middle, and each half resembles a little boat. The kernel within
is distinguished into four parts, and between every of them there runs a
membrane or skin of a woody substance. As for other nuts, their meat is solid
and compact, as we may see in Filberds and Hazels, which also are a kind of
nuts,

As for Almonds, they are of the nature of nuts, and are reckoned in a third
rank. An upper husk they have like as Walnuts, but it is thin: like as also a
second couerture of a shell. The kernel differs somewhat, for broader it is
and flatter, and their skin more hard, more sharp, and hoter in taste than
that of other nuts. Now whether the Almond tree were in Italy during the life
of Cato, there is some doubt and question made; because he names the Greek
nuts, or Caluae, (...) Bsld.
Galbae, as the Prenestine, commended by him above all others, which he says
are put up in pots, and kept fresh and green within the earth. Now adays the
Thasian and Albeusian nuts be in great account; and two sorts besides of the
Tarentine; whereof the one has a tender and brittle shell, the other as hard:
and those are the biggest of all other, and nothing round. He speaks also of
the soft shaled Filberds Molluscae, the kernels whereof do swell and cause
their shells to break in sunder.

But to return again to our Walnuts: some to honor them interpret their names
Iuglandes, as a man would say, the nuts of Jupiter. It is not long since I
heard a knight of Rome, a gentleman of high calling, and who had bin Consul,
profess and say, that he had certain walnut trees that bare twice a year. As
for Fisticks we have spoken already of them. To conclude, these kind of nuts
the above named Vitellius brought first into Italy at the same time, namely, a
little Tiberius the Emperor: and withal, Flaccus Pompeius a knight of Rome,
who served in the wars together with him, carried them over into Spain.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of Chestnuts eight kinds.

WE entitule Chestens also by the name of Nuts, although indeed they are more
aptly to be called a kind of Mast. This fruit what ever it be is enclosed
within a husk, and the same defended and armed all over with a rampire and
palisade (as it were) of [i. Jupiters nuts] when as men began to graffe them;
for thereby they became more excellent. And this day there be many sorts of
them. The Tarentine be gentle and not hard of digestion, and in form flat and
plain. That which they call Balanitis, is rounder, it will soon be pilled and
cleansed, and of it self will leap out of the skin. And of this kind, the
Salarian is more neat, [i. Chestnuts to be boiled.] The best Chestnuts are they
which grow about Tarentum, and Naples in Campaine. All the rest are good in
manner for nothing but to feed swine, Scrupulosa c^rtic is interioris circa
^ucleos quoque ferruminatione.
so close sticks the pill or inner skin also, as if it were soudered to the
kernel within, and so hard it is to separate the one from the other.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Of Carobes: of fleshie and pulpous fruits: of Mulberries: of liquid kernels

THe fruit called Carobes or Caracts, may seem to come near unto the foresaid
Chestnuts, (so passing sweet they be) but that their cods also are good to be
eaten. They be as long as a man's finger, and otherwhiles hooked like a
faulcheon, and an inch in breadth. As for mast, it cannot be reckoned among
fruit properly called Poma, and therefore we will speak of them apart,
according to their nature.

Now are we to treat of the rest which are of a carnous substance: and those
are divided into fruits that be soft and pulpous, and into berries. The
carnosity in Grapes and Raisons, in Mulberries, and the fruit of the Arbut
tree, differs one from the other. Again, the fleshy substance

There is a kind of Mulberries growing upon the bramble, but their skin is much
harder than

The Arbut tree it self spreads full of branches: the fruit is a whole year
in ripening: by which means a man shall find always upon the tree, young and
old fruit together one under another; and the new evermore thrusts out the old.
Whether it be the male or female that is barren, writers are not agreed. Surely
the fruit is of base and no reckoning at all: no marvel therefore if the
Latins gave it the name Vnedo, for that one of them is enough to be eaten at
once. And yet the Greeks have two names for it, to wit, Comarum and Memecylon:
whereby it appears, Iuba says, that these trees in Arabia grow to the height
of fifty cubits.

As touching Grains and liquid Kernels, there is great difference between
them: for first and foremost, among very grapes, there is no small diversity in
the skin, either for tenderness or thickness: in the inner stones or pepins,
which in some grapes are but single, or one alone; in others double, and those
commonly yield not so much wine as the others do. Secondly, those of Iuie and
Elder differ very much, yea and the grains within a Pomegranat are not like to
others in their form, for they alone be made cornered and angle-wise; and
several as they be, they have not a particular skin of their own, but they
are altogether clad within on, which is white: and yet they stand all wholly of
a liquor and pulpous carnositie, especially those which have

Semblably, there is as much variety in berries: for olives differ much from
Bay berries: likewise those of a Lote tree are diverse from them which the
Corneil tree bears. The Myrtle also differs from the Lentisk in the very
berrie. As for the huluer or hollie berries and the hawes

CHAP. XXV.
Of Cherries, eight kinds.

BEfore the time that L. Lucullus defeated K. Mithridates, there were no
cherrie-trees in Italy: but after that victory (which was about the 680 year
from the foundation of the city of Rome) he was the man that brought them
first out of Pontus, and furnished Italy so well [i. ground cherry-shrubs.]
The Cherry-tree is one of the first that yields fruit to his master, in token
of thankfulness and recognisance of his pains all the year long. It delights
to grow in cold places and exposed to the North. The Cherrie will dry in the
sun, and may be kept in barrels like Olives.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of the Corneile and Lentiske tree.

THe same care is had in conditing the berries of the Corneil and the Lentiske,
as in preserving Olives: so curious are men to content their tooth, as if all
things were made to serve the belly. Thus we see, how things of diverse relishes
are mingled together, and one gives a taste unto another, and causes to be
pleasant at the tongues end. Nay we entermingle all climats and coasts of
heaven and earth to satisfy our appetite: for to one kind of meat we must
have drugs and spices fetched as far as from India: to another, out of Egypt,
Candie, and Cyrene: and in one word, for every dish we have a several land to
find us sauce. To conclude, we are grown to this pass, that we cease not to
sophisticate our viands, even with hurtful things, so they taste well: yea and
to make dishes of very Mushroms:
poisons, because we would devour and send all

CHAP. XXVII.
The diversity of tastes and savors.

IN the mean time, as touching those things which are common as well to all
fruit, as juices and liquors: first and foremost we find of tastes 13 several
kinds; to wit, sweet, pleasant, fattie, bitter, harsh and unpleasant, hot and
burning at the tongues end, sharp and biting, tart or astringent, sour, and
salt. Over and besides all these, there be three others of a most strange and
taste of the own substance, as the Myrtle: for it carries a several taste by
it self, proceeding

Furthermore, a great and principal matter of all these tastes, lies in the
savor and smell; which is connaturall unto the taste, and has a great
affinity with it: and yet in water, is neither one or other to be perceived:
or if any be felt either by tongue or nose, it is faulty, that is certain.
Finally, a wonderful thing it is to consider, that the three principal
Elements whereof the world is made, namely, Water, Air, and Fire, should have
no taste, no savor, nor participation

CHAP. XXVIII.
The juice and sap of Fruits and Trees: their colors and odours: the nature of
Apples, and such soft Fruits: and the singular commendation of all Fruits.

TO begin withal, The Pear, The Mulberry, and the Myrtle-berrie, have a juice
or sap within them, resembling wine, Minimae quod miremur uvis. Others
distinguish thus, Minime (quod miremur) uvis, to this sense: whereas in grapes
(and that may be a wonder) there is none such.
no marvel then, of Grapes, if they have the like. Olives, Bayberries, Walnuts
and Almonds, have a fattie liquor in them. The Grape, the Fig, and the

There is no small difference in the color also that the juice of fruits do
bear: Mulberries, Cherries, and Corneils, have a sanguine and bloody liquor:
so have the black grapes; but that of the white grapes, is likewise white. The
juice of Figs toward the head or neck of the fruit, is white like milk; but of
another color in all the body besides. In Apples, it is in manner of a froth
or some: in Peaches, of no color; and yet the Duracina of that kind, be full
of liquor; but who was ever able to say, what color it was of?

The odor and savor likewise of fruits, is as strange and admirable: for the
smell of Apples is sharp and piercing; of Peaches, weak and waterish. As for
sweet fruits, they have none at all: for verily we see, that sweet wines
likewise have little or no smell, whereas the small and thin are

To begin then with those that are enclosed within cods or husks: ye shall have
some of these cods to be sweet, and the fruit or seed contained within, bitter,
and contrariwise, many of those grains or seeds are pleasant and toothsome
enough; but eaten with the husks, they be stark

As touching berries, there be that have their stone or wooddie substance
within, and the fleshy pulp without, as Olives, and Cherries: and there be
again, that within the said woody stone have the carnositie of the berry as
some fruits in Egypt, whereof we have already written. As for berries carnous
without-forth, and pulpous fruit called Apples, they be of one nature. Some
have their meat within, and their woodie substance without, as nuts: others,
their carnosity without, and their stone within, as Peaches and Plums. So that
in them we may say, That the faulty superfluity is enuiroued with the good
fruit, whereas fruit otherwise is ordinarily defended by the said imperfection
of the shell. Walnuts and Filberds are enclosed with a shell: Chestnuts be
contained under a tough rind, that must be pulled off before they be eaten;
whereas in Medlars as nuts and Dates: others stick close and fast thereto, as
Olives and Bay berries. And there be

As for the singularities and commendable parts in fruits, they be of diverse
sorts, Dates are

CHAP. XXIX.
Of the Myrtle, eleven kinds thereof.

NAture has showed her wonderful power and bounty, especially in the juice of
the Myrtle,

As for the very tree it self, the first that ever was seen within the
compass and precincts of Europe (which begins at the mountain Ceraunia)
was about Circeij, where stood the tomb sometimes of Elpenor; and still it
retains the Greek name: whereby we may well judge, to fight a field, and to
try the quarrel (for the wrong which the Sabines pretended, was done to Venus
Cluacina stands: which thereupon took the name (for that Cluere in old Latin,
signified to purge or cleanse.) Besides, that tree otherwise does afford a kind
of sweet perfume to be burned. Now was this tree chosen for that purpose then
to make atonement and to ratify the marriage between the Romans and the
Sabine Virgins, because Venus is the president and mother of carnal
copulation, and the patroness withal of the Myrtle tree. I will not
confidently avouch, but me thinks I may presume to say, that the Myrtle was of
all other trees first planted in the public places of Rome for some memorable
presage and fore-tokening of future events Q^irinus (i. of K. Romulus) is
reputed for one of the most antique buildings now extant, there grew even
before it for a long time two old and sacred Myrtle trees: the one named
Patritia (i. the Myrtle of the Nobility:) and the other Plebeia; that is to
say, the Myrtle of the Comminalty. The Patritian prospered and flourished many
years together, whiles the Plebeian began to fade and wither. And to say a
truth, so long as the Senate was able to maintain and uphold their authority,
the Myrtle of the Nobles continued fresh and green, and spread her boughs at
large; whereas that other of the Commons seemed as it had been blasted, dried,
and half dead: but after that the state of the Senate began to quail and
droupe (which was about the time of the war with the Marsyans) as their tree
decayed and wasted, so the Plebeians Myrtle held up the head again: and so by
little and little, as Venus Myrtea, whom now at this day they call Murtia.

Cato in his time wrote of three kinds of Myrtle: to wit, the white, the
black, and the Conjugula (so called happily of wedlock or marriage:) and
peradventure it may come of the race of those Myrtles belonging to Venus
Cloacina above named. Howbeit, in these days we distinguish our Myrtles
otherwise; for some we repute wild and savage, others tame and gentle: and
these both are likewise of two sorts, to wit, either broader or narrower
leaued. To the wild kind properly belongs the prickie Myrtle Oximyrsine. As
for the tame and gentle Myrtles, they be those that are planted in hort-yards
and gardens, wherewith gardeners make arbours, knots, and diverse not Fxotica.
Turneb.
Hexastica, which is very full of leaves, and ordinarily each branch has six
ranks thereof. But these are altogether out of request: both the other are
full of boughs and branches. As touching the above named Conjugula, I suppose
it be the same that our common Myrtle here in Italy. But the most odoriferous
Myrtle of all others, is that which grows in Egypt.

Now concerning the wine of Myrtles, Cato has showed us the manner how to make
it: namely, to take the black Myrtle berries, to dry them in the shade until
they have lost all their waterish humidity, and so to put them in Must or new
wine, and let them lie there infused, or in steep. For certainly, if the
berries be not dried before, they would yield an oil from them. Howbeit, i.
wine quart^
Sextares, steep the same in three hemires or pintes of wine, and then strain
and press forth the liquor.

Moreover, the very leaves of the Myrtle tree, being dried and reduced into a
kind of meal, are singular good for to cure the ulcers in men's bodies: for
certain it is, that this powder does gently eat away and consume the
superfluous humors that cause putrefaction. And besides, it serves well to
cool and repress immoderate sweats. Over and besides, the Oil also of
Myrtles (a strange and wonderful thing to tell) has a certain relish and
taste of wine: and withal, the fat liquor thereof is endued with a special
and principal virtue to correct and clarify Wines; if the bags and
strainers where-through the wine runs, be first sooked and drenched
therewith: for the said oleous substance retains and keeps with it all the
lees in his hand a stick or rod of the Myrtle tree, he shall never be weary,
nor think his way long Virgei annuli But Turnebus ^eadeth Uirgae ^aculi, i.
staves or Iauelines made of their ^reit bought. And Exper^es ^erri, i. not
headed with iron.
rings made of Myrtle twigs, without any edged iron tool, keep down and cure
the swelling bunch that rises in the groine. What should I say more? The
myrtle intermedleth in war affairs: for Posthumous Tubertus, being Confull of
Rome (who was the first that entered in a petty triumph, ouant into the city,
because he had easily conquered the Sabines, and drawn in manner no blood of
them) rode triumphant in this manner, to wit, crowned with a chaplet of Myrtle,
dedicated to Venus Victoresse; and from that time forward the Sabines (even his
very enemies) set much store by that tree, and held it in great reverence. And
ever after, they that went but ouant into the city after a victory, ware this
kind of garland only, except M. Crassus, who after he had vanquished the
fugitive slaves, and defeated Spartanus, marched in a coronet of Laurel.
Massurius writes, how Generals when they entered triumphant into Rome, riding
L. Piso reports, That Papyrius Masso (who first triumphed in mount Albanus
over the Corsians) used ever after to come unto the games Circenses, and to
behold them, crowned with a garland of myrtle. This Papyrius was grandfather by
the mothers side, to the second Scipio Africanus. Finally, M. Valerius,
according to a vow that he made in his triumphs, used to wear coronets as well
of Laurel as Myrtle.

CHAP. XXX.
Of the Laurel or Bay tree, thirteen kinds thereof.

Laurel is appropriate unto triumphs, and besides grows most pleasantly
before the gates Cato sets down two kinds of Laurel, to wit, the Delphick,
and the Cyprian. Hereunto Pompeius Lenaeus has joined a third, which he called
Mustacea; because in old time they used to lay the leaves thereof under certain
cakes or March-panes (which in those days they called Mustacea) as they were
in baking: this third kind has leaves of all others largest, flaggy, hanging,
and whitish withal. As for the Delphick, it carries leaves of one entire
color, greener than the rest: the baies or berries thereof likewise are
biggest, and of a reddish green color. With this Laurel were they wont to be
crowned at Delphos, who won the prise at any tournoy or solemn game; as also
the victorious captains who triumphed in Rome. Augustus Caesar, by occasion of
that Laurel which came to him as sent from heaven (as I will show anon more at
large;) and of all others it is for height lowest, in leaf short and frizled,
very geason and hard to be found. Now there is another kind of Laurel named
Taxa, very fit for green arbors, and to be wrought into knots. Out of the
midst of the leaf there grows forth another little one, in manner of a
skirt, tongue, or lappet of the leaf. Also without any such excressence there
is that, which they name Spadonia, as one would say, the guelded Bay, that
cares not how shadowie the place be where it grows: for be it never so remote
out of the Sun, or over shadowed howsoever, yet it ceases not to grow and
ouerspread the ground where it stands. Moreover, [i. Mountain Lawrel] others
Hyppoglottion, [i. Horse tongue] some Daphnitis, others Carpophyllon or
Hypelate. This plant puts forth branches immediately from the root, of a span
or nine inches long: very proper and handsome to

As for the herb Daphnoeides or Laureola, it has many names: for some term it
Pelasgum, others Eupetalon, and there are again who would have it to be
Stephanos Alexandri (i. Alexanders chaplet.) This plant also is full of
branches, carrying a thicker and softer leaf than the common Laurel: and if a
man taste thereof, it will set both the mouth and also the throat on a fire: the
beries that it bears be blackish, inclining to a kind of red. It has bin
noted and observed Jupiter, so often as there comes glad tidings of some late
and fresh victory. And all this honor is don to the Laurel, not because it is
always green, nor for that it pretends and shows Apollo, for which cause
(as may appear by L. Brutus) the Roman kings in old time were accustomed to
send great presents and oblations thither to the temple of Apollo: or
peradventure it was in memorial of that ground that bare Laurel trees, and
which according to the Oracle of Apollo, the said L. Brutus kissed, when he
intended the public freedom of the city, and minded to deliver it from the
yoke and servitude of the kings: or happily, because it alone either set with the
hand before the doors, or brought into the house, is not blasted and smitten
with lightning. And these reasons verily induce me to believe, that in times
past they chose the Bay tree for their triumphs, before any other: rather than
as Massurius would have it, because Tiberius Caesar the Emperor used ever to
wear a chaplet thereof when it thundered, for fear of being stricken with
lightening.

Moreover, certain strange and memorable events as touching the Bay tree, have
happened Augustus Caesar. For Liuia Drusilla (who afterward by marriage with
the said Augustus, became Empress, and was honored with the title of Augusta)
at what time as she was affianced and espoused to Caesar, chanced as she sat
still, to have an exceeding white hen to light into her lap (which an Aegle
flying aloft, let fall from on high) without any harm at all to the said
pullet. Now when this lady or princess advised and considered well the hen,
without being astonished and amazed at so strange and miraculous a sight, she
perceived that the hen held in her bill a laurel branch full of Bay berries.
The Wisards and Soothsaiers were consulted withal about this wonderful
occurrent, and gave advise in the end to preserve the bird and the brood
thereof: likewise to set in the ground the foresaid branch, and duly to tend and
look unto it. Both the one and the other was done and excecuted accordingly,
about a certain house in the country belonging to the Caesar's, seated upon the
river Tyberis, near the causey or port way Flaminia, about Augustus Caesar
when he entered in Triumph into Rome, carried in his hand a branch of that Bay
tree, yea, and wore a Caesar's his successors after him. Hereof also came the
custom to set again and replant those branches of Laurel that emperors held
in their hands when they triumphed; and thereof continue whole woods and groves
distinguished each one by their several names, and perhaps therefore were they
named Triumphall. This is the only tree known in the Latin tongue, whereof a
man bears the name. Again, there is not another tree besides that has the
leaf to carry in the Latin tongue a denomination and name by it self apart,
as well as the tree: for whereas the plant is named Laurus, the leaf we call
Laurea. Moreover, there is a place likewise within the city of Rome on mount
Aventine, retaining still the name Loretum, which first was imposed upon it by
reason of a laurel grove which grew there. The Bay tree also is used in
solemn purifications before the gods: Democritus and Theophrastus make some
doubt thereof. Thus much of Laurels and other domestical and native trees: it
remains now to write of those that be wild and savage, and of their natures.

THE SIXTEENTH BOOK OF
WRITTEN BY C. PLINIVS SECVNDVS.
The Proeme.
HItherto have we treated of those Trees that bear Apples and such like
fruits: which likewise with their mild juice and sweet liquors made our meats
first delight some, and taught us to mingle together with the necessary food
for sustentation of our lives, that which makes it delicate and pleasant to
content our taste: as well those trees that naturally were so in the beginning,
as those which through the industry and skill of man, what by graffing and what
by wedding them (as it were) to others, became toothsome, and delectable to our
tongue: whereby also we have gratified in some sort wild beasts, and done
pleasure to the fowls of the air. It follows now by order, that we should
discourse likewise of trees that bear Mast, those trees (I say) which
ministered the first food unto our forefathers, and were the nources that fed
and cherished mankind in that rude wild age and poor infancy of the world:
but that I am forced to break the course of mine history, and prevented with a
deep study and admiration arising from the truth and ground of experience, to
consider, What manner of life it might be, to live without any trees or shrubs
at all growing out of the earth.

CHAP. I.
Of Nations that have no Trees nor Plants among them. Of wonderful trees in
the Northerly regions.

We have showed heretofore, that in the East parts verily toward the maine
Ocean, there be many countries in that estate, to wit, altogether destitute of
trees. In the (...). The Lowcountries of Zeland, etc.
Cauchi, as well the greater as the less (for so they be distinguished) where
there is no show or mention at all of any tree whatsoever. For a mighty great
compass, their Country lies so under the Ocean, and subject to the tide, that
twice in a day and night by turns, the sea over flows a mighty deal

On the other side, as wonderful it is to see the mighty forests at hand
thereby, which ouerspread all the rest of Germany: and are so big, that they
yield both cooling and shade to the whole country: yea, the very tallest woods
of all the rest are a little way up higher in the country, and not far from
the Cauchi abouesaid: and especially those that grow about the two

CHAP. II.
Of the huge and great Forest Hercynia

IN the same North climat is the mighty forest Hercynia. A huge and large wood
this is, stored with tall and big Oaks, that never to this day were topt or
lopt. It is supposed they have been ever since the creation of the world, and
(in regard of their eternal immortality) surmounting all miracles besides
whatsoever. And to let pass all other reports which happily in many places:
or, where as the earth follows not, a man shall see the bare roots embowed
archwise,

CHAP. III.
Of trees bearing Mast.

MAst tres they were all, for the most part, which the Romans ever so highly
honored and held in best account.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Ciuicke garland: and who were honored with chaplets of Tree-leaues.

FRom Mast trees (and the Oak especially) came the Ciuicke coronets. And in
very truth, these were the most honorable badges and ornaments that could
possibly be given unto soldiers and men of war, in regard of their virtue and
manhood: yea, and now for a good while, our Emperors have had this chaplet
granted unto them, in token and testimony of clemency: ever since that by our
profane and unkind civil wars the world is grown to this pass, that it is
reputed a singular demerit and gracious act, not to kill a citizen of Rome, but
to let M. Varro by Pompey the Great, for defeating the pirates, and for scouring
and clearing the seas of them: the other likewise given to M. Agrippa, by
[Augustus] Caesar, for vanquishing the Sicilians, who also were

Now forasmuch as we are light upon the mention of Naual or Rostrate coronets,
this would be noted, That in old time the said brazen beake-heads of ships won
from the enemies, and set upon the front of the Tribunal or public pulpit in
Rome, served for an ornament to beautify the Forum or common place of the
city; so as the very body of the people of Rome seemed to be crowned and
honored thereby. But after that the Tribunes in making seditious orations began
to stamp and fare like mad men there, to trample (I say) under foot, and to
pollute that sacred place and those goodly ensigns; after that they fell once
every man to make his private and particular profit of the common good, without
regard to advance the weal public; after that each one sought to strengthen
and arm himself by the benefit of authority, and that to the weakening Agrippa,
Augustus Caesar gave unto him a Nauall coronet for subduing the Sicilian
Pirates: and himself received of mankind a Ciuick chaplet, for sparing the
blood, and saving the lives of so many citizens.

In ancient time they used to crown none but the gods. And hereupon it is,
that the Poet Homer speaks of no garlands and chaplets but due to the
celestial and heavenly wights, or at leastwise in the name of a whole army,
for victory achieved in some notable battle: for to one man alone he allows
not any, no not in regard of the better hand in combat or single fight.
Bacchus, and the same was made of Iuie: but afterward, those that sacrificed
to the honor of gods, not only ware chaplets themselves, but also adorned
therewith the heads of the very beasts which were appointed to be killed for
sacrifice. In the end, the custom was taken up to honor them with garlands,
who wan prizes at those sacred and solemn games, Olympia, Isthmia, Pythia, and
Nemoea.

To discourse what Roman citizen received this honor first of a chaplet or
coronet, were a long piece of work, and nothing pertinent to our purpose and
matter in hand; considering that they were acquainted with none at all, but in
regard of service performed in the wars. Yet thus much I may aver for certain,
That no nation under heaven, nay put them all together, can show Romulus
crowned Hostus Hostilius with a garland of bare green leaves, for that in the
forcing and ruining of Fidena, he brake first into the city and made way for
the rest. This man was grandsire to Tullus Hostilius king of Rome. Semblably in
the war against the Samnites, wherein Cornelius Cossus the Consul was L.
General, the whole army crowned P. Decius the father with a chaplet of green
leaves, who then was a martial Tribune or Colonel over a regiment of
soldiers, for that he had saved and delivered the said army.

But now to come again to our Ciuicke garland, it was made at first of the
Ilex or Holme tree leaves: afterward men took a better liking to make it of
the Aesculus, a tree consecrated to Jupiter. They stayed not there, but changed
soon after with the common oak; neither made they any precise choice, but
took the leaves of that which came next hand, wheresoever they Jupiter, and
made of the wild Olive dedicated unto him: comparable (I say) to any crown or
chaplet whatsoever; even to that, for which a city in token of joy, would not
stick to lay open a As the manner was to receive the Hieronic^.
breach in their very wall to receive it when it should enter in. The laws
ordained in this behalf run in this form: Imprimis, He that is to enjoy the
honor of a Ciuicke chaplet, ought, first to have rescued a citizen, and
withal to kill the enemy in whose danger he was. Item, It is required, That
the enemies the same day held the very ground and were Masters hereof, wherein
the rescue was made and the service performed. Item, That the party himself
so saved, do confess the thing, for otherwise all the witnesses in the World
avail not in this case. Item, the man thus delivered, must be a free Citizen
of Rome in any hand: for sit case that he were a King which was thus rescued,
if he were a stranger, and came only amongst the auxiliaries to aid the
Romans, it would not boot, nor gain any man this honor for to save his life.
Item, Say that the General himself were rescued and delivered out of danger,
the party for his good service should have no more honor done unto him, than
if he had preserved but a simple common soldier, so he were a Roman
Citizen* for the makers of these ordinances aimed chiefly at the life of a
Citizen whosoever he was, without regard of any other circumstance. Item, He
that was once crowned with this garland, was endued also with these
privileges: That he might wear it always after, whenever it pleased him:
That so often as he came in place of public plays or games, men should
accustomably rise up unto him, yea, and the very Senators themselves, do him
honor in that sort: That he should have his place allowed him to sit next
unto those of Senators degree: That both himself, and also his father and
grandsire by the fathers side, should ever after be exempt from all civil
charges, and enjoy full immunitie. Thus much concerning the laws and
privileges attending upon the Ciuicke garland. Siccius Dentatus (as we have
specified before) received fourteen of these chaplets for his good service:
[Manlius] Capitolinus six, and he verily had one of them for rescuing
Seruilius being General of the Army. As for Scipio Africanus, he refused
this honor when it was offered and presented unto him, for saving the life of
his own father at the journey and battle of Trebia. O the excellent orders
and customs of those times, worthy of immortality and everlasting memory! O
the wisdom of men in those days, who assigned no other reward for so brave
exploits and profession of our ancestors and predecessors, That it is an
unlawful and shameful thing to seem

CHAP. V.
Of Mast, thirteen kinds.

MAny nations there be even at this day, and such as enjoy peace and know not
what war means, whose wealth and riches lies principally in Mast: yea and
elsewhere in time of dearth and for want of other grain, folk use to dry their
mast, grind it into meal, temper it with water, and thereof make dough for
bread. Moreover, even at this day throughout Spain, the manner is to serve up
acornes and mast to the table for a second service: and sweeter it is being
roasted under the cinders and ashes, than otherwise. Over and besides, provided
it

Diverse and sundry sorts there be of Mast, and their difference consists in
the form and fashion of the fruit, in the site and situation of the place, in
the sex, and in the taste: for the mast of the Beech tree is of one figure and
making, the Acorne (which is the mast of the Oak) another; and the mast of the
Holme or Ilex, differs from them both: yea and in every one of these kinds,
they do vary one from another. Also, some are of trees growing wild; others
more mild and gentle, loving places well tilled and ordered by husbandry. Some
like the hilly countries, others the champaine and the plains. Semblably there
is mast coming from the male trees: there is again that grows on the
female. In like manner, the relish and taste makes a difference Cornelius
Alexander reports, That the inhabitants of Chios, when they were straightly
beleaguered, endured the siege a long time by the benefit and substance only of
that mast. We are not able distinctly to specify name by name, the sundry
sorts of mast and the trees which bear the same, considering that in every
country they alter their names: for we see the Robur and the Oak to grow
commonly every where, but the Esculus is not so rife in all countries. A
fourth sort there is of the same kind, that is not known ordinarily in most
places of Italy. We will therefore distinguish them according to their nature
and properties: yea and when need shall require, by their Greek names also.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Beech mast, and other Masts: of Charcole; and the feeding of Hogs.

THe Beech mast is like to the kernel of a Chestnut, enclosed within a three
cornered skin. The leaf of the tree is thin and very light, resembling that of
the Poplar: it turns yellow passing soon. In the middle whereof, for the
most part, and in the upper side, it brings forth a little green berrie,
pointed sharp at the top. The mast of Beech, Rats and Mice are much
delighted in: mark therefore when there is store of that mast, ye shall have as
great increase of that vermin. It will feed also Reremice or Dormice fat: and
the Ousels or Blackbirds take a great liking thereto, and will fly unto it.
Lightly, all trees are most fruitful one year than another, and bear most
every second year; but above all, Beeches keep this course. As touching

Of the Ilex or mast-Holme tree, there be two sorts. Those in Italy differ not
much in lea^e from the Olive. Some Greeks call them Smilaces, but in other
provinces Aquifoliae. The mast of Ilex, both the one and the other, is shorter
and slenderer than of the rest. Homer calls it Acylon, by which name he
distinguishes it from other mast. The male Holmes (men say) bear to the
Chestnut shell. Among the ver* Acornes, some have a sweeter taste than others:
the female

But to return unto our mast again: that of the Beech tree feeds swine
quickly, makes their flesh and lard fair and pleasant to the eye, tender to
be soon sodden or roasted, light and easy of digestion, and good for the
stomach. The mast of the Holme causes hogs to gather a more fast and compact
flesh, their bodies to be neat, slender, lanke, and ponderous. Acornes do
engender a fleshy substance, more square and spreading, and the same also most
heavy and hardest of digestion, and yet they are of all other kinds of mast,
most sweet and pleasant. Next to Nigidius) is that of the tree Cerrus, neither
is there bred of any other a courser flesh, howbeit hard it is, fast, and
tough. As for the mast of Ilex, hogs are endangered by eating thereof, unless
it be given them warily by little and little. He says moreover, that of all
other it falls last. Moreover, the mast of Esculus, Robur, and the Cork,

CHAP. VII.
Of the Gall-nuts: and how many other things Mast-trees do bear besides Mast.

THe nuts called Galls, do ever break out all at once in a night, and namely
about the beginning

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Catkin called Cachrys: the grain of Scarlet: of Agaricke, and Cork.

THe Oak called Robur, brings forth likewise a certain pendant chat or
catkin, named in Greek Cachrys: for so they term the little pill, which is of
a burning and causticke Nature, and whereof there is use in Physic for
potentiall cauteries. The like grows upon Hesiodus says, that the Oaks
Robora do bear Miselto, and yield honey. True it is indeed, that the hony-dewes
called Manna, falling from heaven (whereof we have spoken before) light not
upon any other leaves more than of those oaks. Moreover, this is known for
certain, that the ashes of this Oak

Howbeit for all the riches and fruit that the Oak affourdeth, the Scarlet gra^
alone which comes of the Ilex, challenges yea and ouermatcheth it. This
grain is no other than a very excrement or superfluity arising about the stem
of the small shrub called Ilex Aquifolia, scraped and pared off from it, like
such refuse as they Cusculium or Quisquilium: but of such price it is, that the
poor people of Spain gather it, and make a good part of their reuenew
thereby, even as much as will pay half their tribute. As touching the
commendable use thereof in dying, we have sufficiently spoken in the discourse
of the purple tincture. This scarlet grain is engendered also in Galatia,
Africa, Pisidia, and Cicilia. But the worst of all other is that which comes
out of Sardinia.

As for Agaricke, it grows in France principally upon trees that bear mast,
in manner of a

Of all Mast-trees, the Oak called by the Greeks Aegylops, bear certain dry
excrescences swelling out like Touch-wood, covered all over with a hoary and
hairy moss, and these not only bear out from the bark of the fruit, but also
hang down from the boughs a cubit in length: and odoriserous they are, as we
have showed in our treatise of Ointments.

Now concerning Cork, the woody substance of the tree is very small, the mast
as bad, hollow, spungeous, and good for nothing. The bark only serves for
many purposes, which will

CHAP. IX.
What trees they be that carry bark good for any use.

THe peisants of the country and the rusticall people employ much, the bark
also of Beeches, Lindens or Tillets, Firs, and Pitch trees; for thereof they
make sundry vessels, as paniers, baskets, and certain broad and wide hampers
for to carry their corn and grapes in time of harvest and vintage, yea and
otherwhiles they cover their cottages therewith. Moreover, spies use to write
in barks (when they be fresh and green) intelligences to their captains;
grauing and drawing their letters so, as that the sap and juice thereof
covers them. To conclude, the bark of the Beech tree is used in certain
religious ceremonies of sacrifice: but when the tree is spoiled of the bark, it
soon fades and dies.

CHAP. X.
Of Shindles: of the Pine tree, the wild Pine, the Fir, Pitch tree, Larch
tree, Torch tree, and the Yew.

THe bourds or shindles of the wild Oak called Robur, be of all others simply
the best: and next to them, those which are made of other mast-trees, and
especially of the Beech. The shindles are most easily rent or cloven out of all
those trees which yield Rosin, but setting aside the Pine-wood only, none of
them are lasting. Cornelius Nepos writes, that the housen in Rome were no
otherwise covered over head but with shindles, until the war with K. Pyrrhus,
^o Jupiter Fagutalis, where sometime stood a ^ust or grove of Beeches: also the
gate Querquetulana, bearing the name of an Oak row: likewise the Q. Hortensius,
Dictator for the time being, (when as the commons arose, and in that mutiny or
insurrection forsook the city and withdrew themselves to the fort Ianiculum)
made a law and published it within a certain grove hard by, called Esculetum,
where there grew a number of trees named Esculi: and the said statute ran in
this form, That whatsoever ordinance should be enacted by the said
Commonaltie, it should bind all Citisens of Rome whomsoever to observe and
keep.

In those days the Pine and Fir, and generally all trees that yield pitch,
were held for strangers and aliens, because none of them were known to grow
near unto the city of Rome: whereof

The Pitch tree loves the mountains and cold grounds, a deadly and mournful
tree it is, for they used in old time to stick up a branch thereof at the
doors of those houses where a dead corpse was, to give knowledge thereof abroad:
and commonly it grew green in churchyards and such places, where the manner was
to burn the bodies of the dead in funeral fires: but now adays it is planted in
courtyards and gardens near our houses, because it may be easily kept with
cutting and shredding, it brancheth so well. This tree puts forth great
abundance of rosin, with

As for the Larch tree, which is the fifth kind of those that bear rosin, like
it is to the rest, and loves to grow in the same places: but the timber is
better by ods, for it rots not, but will last and endure a long time: the tree
will hardly be killed: besides, it is red of color, and caries an hoter and
stronger sme! than the other. There issues forth of the tree as it grows,
good store of liquid rosin, in color like honey, somewhat more clammy, which
will never grow to be hard.

A sixth sort there is of these trees, and it is properly called Teda [(...).
the Torch tree:] the same yields more plenty of moisture and liquor than the
rest: lower it is of growth than the Pitchtree, but more liquid and thin: very
commendable also to maintain fire at sacrifices, and to burn in torches for to
give light. These trees, I mean the male only, bring forth that strong and
stinking rosin, which the Greeks call Syce. Now if it happen that the Larch
tree prove Teda, [i. to

The wood of all these kinds before named, if it be set a fire, makes an
exceeding gross and thick smoke, and presently turns into a cole, spitting
and sparkling a far off; except that only of the Larch tree, which neither
burns in light flame, nor makes cole, ne yet consumes in the fire otherwise
than a very stone.

All these trees whereof we speak continue green all the year long: and very
like they are in leaf, that men otherwise of cunning and good experience, have
enough to do to discern one from the other by it, so near of kin they be, and
their race so much intermingled. But the pitch tree is not so tall as the
Larch: for the Larch is thicker in body, of a thinner and lighter bark, more
shag leaued, and the said leaves fattier, growing thicker, more pliable, and
easier to wind and bend: whereas the leaves of the pitch tree hang thinner,
they be of a drier substance, more

The Larch tree, if it be burnt to the very stumpe of the root, will not spring
again and put forth new shoots: whereas the pitch tree lives still for all the
fire, and will grow afresh: the experience whereof was seen in the Island
Lesbos, at what time as the Forest Pyrrhaeum was set on fire, and clean burnt
to the ground.

Moreover, every one of these kinds differ in the very sex: for the male of
each kind is shorter and harder: the female taller, having fattier leaves, and
the same soft and plain, and nothing stif and rugged. The wood of the male is
tough, and when it is wrought keeps not a direct grain, but windeth and
turns, so as the carpenter must go every way about it with axe and plain:

About the forest Ida within the territory of Troas, there is another
distinction of trees in the same kind: for some grow upon the mountains,
others toward the coast on the sea side. In Macedony, Arcadia, and about Elis,
these trees eftsoons change their names, so that the Greek

Of all the trees above named, the Firs surpass for bigness, and the femals
are the taller. The timber also is more frim and soft, more profitable also,
and easier to be wrought: the tree it self rounder, and so it brancheth
archwise: the boughs as they resemble wings stretched out and displaied, so
they stand so thick with leaves, that they will bear off a good shower,
insomuch as no rain is able to pierce through. In sum, the female Fur is far
more lovely and beautiful every way than the male.

All the sort of these foresaid trees, save only the Larch, bear certain
knobs like Catkins or Chats, composed (as it were) of many scales wrought one
over another, and those hang down

To come now to the Yugh, because we would ouerpasse none: it is to see to like
the rest, but that it is not so green; more slender also and smaller,
unpleasant and fearful to look upon, as a cursed tree, without any liquid
substance at all: and of these kind of trees, it alone bears berries. The
fruit of the male is hurtful: for the berries in Spain especially have in them
a deadly Sestius says, That the Greeks call it Smilax: and that in Arcadia it
is so venomous, that whosoever take either repose or tepast under it, are sure
to die presently. And hereupon it comes, that

CHAP. XI.
How to make all kinds of Pitch. The manner how Cedrium is made. Also, of thick
Pitch, how it is made; and in what sort Rosin is boiled.

THe liquid Pitch or Tar throughout all Europe is boiled out of the Torch tree:
and this Palimpissa, i. Stone-pitch.
consistence: and when it is thus thickened, it takes the name

As for that which comes of the pitch tree, the rosin thereof is drawn with
red hot stones in certain vessels made of strong and thick oken planks: or in
default thereof, the wood is cloven into pieces, and piled together after the
order of a charcole hearth, and so the pitch boiles forth. The use hereof when
it is beaten into a kind of meal or powder, is to be put into wine, and it is
of a blacker color than the rest. The same pitch-rosin, if it be boiled more
lightly with water, and be let to run through a strainer, comes to a reddish
color, and is glewie: and thereupon it is called stilled Pitch. And for this
purpose lightly, is set by the more gross and faulty substance of the rosin,
together with the bark of the tree. But there is another composition and manner

CHAP. XII.
Of the Pitch Zopissa, which is scraped from ships: and of Sapium. Also what
trees are in request for their timber.

IT would not be forgotten, that the Greeks have a certain Pitch, scraped
together with wax from the ships that have lien at sea, which they Zopissa (so
curious are men to make experiments

For to draw rosin out of the * Pitch-tree, it must be opened on the Sun side,
not by giving a (...).
Theopompus wrate, that there is found in the territory of the Apolloniats, a
kind of mineral pitch, called Pis^asphaltum, nothing inferior in goodness to
the Macedonian.

The best pitch in all countries, is that which is gathered from trees,
standing upon the North wind, and in places exposed to the Sunshine. As for
that which comes from shadowie places, it is more unpleasant to the eye, and
carries besides a strong and stinking savor. If it be a cold and hard winter,
the pitch then made is the worse, there is also less store of it, and nothing
is it so well colored. Some are of opinion, That the pitch issues in more
abundance out of

Among these trees, some have reckoned one kind by it self named Sapium,
because it is replanted and grows of some of the sions or imps of the said
trees, in manner as has been showed before in our treatise of nut-kernells. The
nether parts of which tree they call Teda [i. Torch-wood:] whereas indeed this
tree is no other than the Pitch-tree, brought to a more mild and gentle nature
by transplanting. As for that which the Latins call Sapinus, it is nothing
else but the wood or timber of these kind of trees, being hewed or cut down,
as well Chap 39. of his book.
herafter declare in place convenient.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Ash, four kinds thereof.

THere be many trees besides that Nature has brought forth, only for their
wood and timber: and among them the Ash, which of all others, grows most
plentifully in every place. A tall tree this is and grows round, bearing leaves
set in manner of feathers or wings; much ennobled by the praise and commendation
that the Poet Homer gives it, as also for the spear or lance of Achilles,
made thereof. And in very truth, the wood serves right well for many uses. As
for the timber of the ash, growing upon the forest Ida in Troas, it is so like
the citron. wood, that when the bark is off, a man may hardly discern the one
from the other, insomuch, as the merchants and chapmen are deceived therewith.

The Greeks have made two kinds of the Ash: the one runs up tall and even
without a have put a difference between Ashes, according to the places: for
that of the plain and

CHAP. XIIII.
Of the Line or Linden tree, two sorts thereof.

GReat difference there is every way between the male and female Linden tree:
for, the wood Pliny herin is deceived. For the Line Tree with us is co^parable
to the highest Oaks in tallness.
The tree it self is nothing tall, but of a mean height, howbeit the wood is
very commodious.

CHAP. XV.
Ten kinds of the Maple tree.

THe Maple in bigness is much about the Linden tree: the wood of it is very
fine and beautiful, in which regard, it may be raunged in the second place,
and next to the very Citron tree. Of Maples there be many kinds: to wit, the
white, and that is exceeding fair and bright indeed, growing about Piemont in
Italy, beyond the river Po, and also beyond the Alps,

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Bosses, Wennes, and Nodosities, called Bruscum and Molluscum. Of the
wild Fisticke or Bladder nut-tree called Staphylodendron: also three kinds of
the Box tree.

THe bunch or knurre in the Maple, called Bruscum, is passing fair, but yet
that which is named Molluscum, excels it. Both the one and the other swell
like a wen out of the Maple. As for the Bruscum, it is curled and twined after
a more crawling and winding manner; whereas the Molluscum is spread with a more
direct and strait course of the grain. And certes, if there might be plankes
hereof found broad enough to make tables, doubtless they would be esteemed and
preferred before those of the Citron wood. But now it serves only for

Beyond the Alps there is a kind of bladder Nut-tree; whereof the wood is very
like to the white white Maple, and the name of it is Staphylodendron. It
bears certain cods, and within

Now for the Box tree, the wood thereof is in as great request as the very
best: seldom has it any grain crisped damask-wise, and never but about the
root, the which is dudgin and full of work. For otherwise the grain runs
straight and even without any wauing: the wood is sad enough and weighty: for
the hardness thereof and pale yellow color much set by and right commendable.
As for the tree it self, gardeners use to make arbors, borders, and curious
works thereof. Three sorts there be of the Box tree: the first is called the
French Box, it grows taper-wise, sharp pointed in the top, and runs up to
more than ordinary height. The second is altogether wild, and they name it
Oleastrum, good for no use at all, and besides careith a strong and stinking
savor with it. The third is our Italian box, and so called. Of a savage kind I
take

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Elm four kinds.

BEtween these wild trees abouesaid, and those that bear fruit, the Elm is
reckoned of a middle nature, in regard of the wood and timber that it affords,
as also of the friendship and acquaintance that it has with vines. The Greeks
acknowledge two sorts thereof, namely, one of the mountains, which is the
taller and the bigger; and the other of the plains and champion, which is
rather more like a shrub, the branches that it shoots forth are so small and
slender. In Italy men hold the Elmes about Atinum to be the tallest, and of
those they prefer them Elmes above said bear no Samara (for so they call the
seed or grain of the Elm.) All the kind

CHAP. XVIII.
The nature of trees as touching the place where they grow.

Having thus discoursed in particular of the most famous and noble trees that
are, I think it not amiss to say somewhat of their natures in general. And
first to begin with the mountain high countries: the Cedar, the Larch, and
the Torch-tree love to grow among the hills; like as all the rest that engender
rosin: semblably, the Holly, the Box tree, the Mast-Holme, the Juniper, the
Terebinth, the Poplar, the wild Ash Ornus, the Cornell tree, and the Carpin.
Upon the great hill Apennine there is a shrub named Cotinus, with a red or
purple Massurius reports) the Roman shepherds and heardmen who ravished the
Sabine maidens, were furnished every one with a branch thereof to make them
torches. But now adays the Carpine and Hazel are commonly used for such
nuptial lights. The Cypres, walnut, Chestnut trees, and the Laburnum, cannot in

To conclude, this is a general rule, What trees soever will grow
indifferently as well upon

CHAP. XIX.
A division of Trees according to their general kinds.

Moreover, some trees lose their leaves, others continue always green. And yet
there is another difference of trees before this, and whereupon this depends.
For trees there be which are altogether wild and savage: there be again which
are more gentle and civil: and these names me thinks are very apt to
distinguish them. Those trees therefore which are so

CHAP. XX.
Of Trees that never shed their leaves: also of Rhododendron.

AMong these trees and plants which are of the gentle kind, the Olive, the
Laurel, the Date tree, Myrtle, Cypres, Pines, Ivy, and the Oleander, lose not
their leaves. As for the Oleander, although it be called the Sabine herb, yet
it comes from the Greeks, as may appear by the name Rhododendron. Some have
called it Nerion; others Rhododaphne: it continues always green leafed,
bears flowers like roses, and brancheth very thick. Hurtful it is and no
better than poison, to Horses, Asses, Mules, Goats, and Sheep; and yet unto
man it serves for a countrepoyson, and cures the venom of serpents.

CHAP. XXI.
What trees shed not their leaves at all: which they be that lose them but in
part: and in what countries all trees are ever green.

OF the wild sort, the Fir, the Larch, the wild Pine, the Juniper, the Cedar,
the Terebinth, the Box tree, the Mast-holme, the Holly, the Cork tree, the Yew,
and the Tamariske, be green all the year long. Of a middle nature between
these two kinds above named, are the Adrachne in Greece, and the Arbut or
Strawberry tree in all countries: for these lose the leaves of their
waterboughs, but are ever green in the head. Among the shrubs kind also there
is a certain bramble and Cane or Reed, which is never without leaves. In the
territory of Thurium

CHAP. XXII.
The nature of such leaves as fall from trees: and what

ALl trees without the range of those before rehearsed (for to reckon them up
by name particularly were a long and tedious piece of work) do lose their
leaves in winter. And verily this has bin found and observed by experience,
that no leaves do fade and wither, but such as be thin, broad, and soft. As
for such as fall not from the tree, they be commonly thick skinned, hard, and
narrow: and therefore it is a false principle and position held by some, That
no trees shed their leaves which have in them a fatty sap or oleous humiditie:
for who could ever perceive any such thing in the Mast-holme? a drier tree
there is not, and yet it holds always green. Timaeus (the great Astrologer
and Mathematician) is of opinion, that the only, and no leaves upon the tree.
Now as touching those trees that continue ever green, you [i^ est, Ricinus, or
Palma Christi.]

CHAP. XXIII.
Three sorts of Poplar: and what leaves they be that change their shape and
figure.

OF Poplars there be found three sundry kinds, to wit, the white, the black,
and that which Taken by some to be our Aspe.
Lybica, or the Poplar of Guynee: this has least leaves, and those of all
other blackest: but mow commendable they are for the fungous meazles (as it
were) that come forth thereof. As for the white Poplar leaf, the leaves when
they be young, are as round as if they were drawn with a pair of compasses,
like unto those of Citron before named: but as they grow elder, they run out
into certain angles or corners. Contrariwise, the Ivy leaves at the first be
cornered, and afterward become round. All Poplar leaves are full of down: as
for the white Poplar (which is fuller of leaves than the rest) the said down
flies away in the air like to mossie chats or Thistle-downe. The leaves of
Pomegranats and Almond trees stand much upon the red color. But very strange
it is and wonderful which happens to the Elm, Tillet, or

CHAP. XXIIII.
What leaves they be that use to turn every year. Of Palm or Date tree
leaves, how they are to be ordered and used. Also certain wonderful
observations about leaves.

THere is a certain general and universal diversity and difference observed in
the very leaf: hard Oak, waued and indented round about the edges; of the brier
and bramble, sharp like Cato adds moreover and says, That such as fall from
the Poplar or the Oak, may be given as fodder to beasts, but he wills that they
be not over dry: and he says expressly, that for kine and oxen, Fig-leaues,
mast Holm leaves, and Iuie, are good fodder: yea and such kind of beasts may
well brouse and feed of Reed leaves and Bay leaves. Finally, the Seruise tree
loses her leaves al at once, others shed them by little and little one after
another. And thus much for the leaves of trees.

CHAP. XXV.
The order and course observed in Nature as touching plants and trees, in their
conception, flouring, budding, knotting, and fructifying. Also in what order
they put forth their blossoms.

THe manner and order of Nature year by year, holds in this wise: first,
trees and plants do conceive by the means of the Western wind Fauonius, which
commonly begins to blow about six days before the Ides of February: for
this wind is in stead of an husband to all things that grow out of the earth,
and of it they desire naturally to be conceived, like as the Mares in Spain,
of which we have written heretofore. This wind is that spirit of generation a
fauendo, [i. of cherishing and nourishing every thing] as some have thought. It
blows directly from the Aequinoctiall Sunsetting, and evermore begins the
Spring. This time, out rusticall peasants call the Seasoning, when as Nature
seems to go proud or assaut, and is in the rut and furious rage of love,
desirous to conceive by this wind, which indeed does viuifie and quicken all
plants and seeds sown in the ground. Now of all them conceive not at once, but
in sundry days: for some are presently sped in a moment, like as living
creatures: others are not so hasty to conceive, but long it is first ere they
retain, and as long again before their vital seed puts forth; and this is
thereupon called their budding time. Now are they said to bring forth and be
delivered, when in the Spring they bloome, and that blossom breaks forth of
certain [i. the breeding season.] When trees are full of blossoms, it is a
sign that the Spring is at the height, and the year become new again. The
blossom is the very joy of trees, and therein stands their chief felicity:
then they show themselves fresh and new, as if they were not the same; then be
they in their gay coats; then it seems they strive avie one with another in
variety of colors, which of them should excel and exceed in beautiful hew.
But this is not general, for many of them are denied this pleasure, and enjoy
not this delight; for all trees blossom not: some are of an heavy and sad
countenance* neither cheer they at the coming of this new season and gladsome
Spring: for the mast-Holme, the Pitch tree, the Larch, and the Pine do not
bloome at all, they are not arrayed too soon bloomed (if they bloom at all) but
they bring forth their fruit. And a wonderful thing Ex Theophr. (...).
Walnut-trees, or Mast-trees. Apple trees are late ere they bud, but the Cork
tree longest of any other. Trees there be that put forth bud upon bud, by
reason that either the soil is exceeding battill and fat, or else the weather
fair and pleasant: and this happens more to be seen in the blades of corn.
But trees if they happen to be over rank in new shoots and buds, they

Moreover, some trees there be that naturally do sprout at other seasons
besides the spring, according to the influence of certain stars, whereof the
reason shall be rendered more conveniently, in the third book next ensuing
after this. Mean time this would be observed, That the winter spring of trees
is about the rising of the Aegle-star: the Summer budding at the rising of the
Dog Star: and a third, when the star Arcturus is up. And for the two later,
some would have them verily to be common to all trees, but most evidently seen,
in Fig Trees, Vines, Pomegranate trees: and they yield a cause, For that in
Thessalie and Macedonie the Fig tree about these times puts forth most
plenteously: and in Egypt this reason is to be seen most apparently. As for
all other trees, certain it is, that when they begin once to bud, they hold on
and Solstitium.
midsummer, and lasts not above a seuen-night: and even then also may a man
perceive blossom after it, be the Peach Plum-trees of Armenia, then the Iujube
trees called Tuberes,

CHAP. XXVI.
Of the Corneil tree. Also, what is the proper time wherein every tree bears:
which trees be they that bear not, and which be reputed unlucky. Also of
those trees which soonest lose their fruit. Last of all, what trees show fruit
before leaf.

AS for the Corneil tree, it is about mid summer or the summer Sun-stead,
before it puts forth any fruit, which at first is white, afterward red as
blood. But the female of this kind bears after Autumn, sour berries, and
such as no beast will abide to taste. The wood thereof also is spungeous,
hollow, and good for nothing; whereas that of the male is counted among the
hardest that be: so great difference there is in trees of one and the same
kind. Moreover, the Terebinth, Maple, and Ash, yield their fruit or seed in
harvest time: Walnuts, Apples, and Pears (unless they be some winter fruits,
or of the hasty kind) ordinarily are ready to be gathered in the Autumn. All
mast trees be later ere they render their fruit, to wit, about the going down
of the Vergiliae or beginning of the winter, save only the Aesculus, which
passes Cremutius writes, That the (Almond) tree whereon lady Phyllis they
shoot and grow. The Date tree, the fig tree, the Almond tree, the Apple tree,
and the Pyrrie, Homer (...). ^rugiperda.
Loose-fruit, or Spill-fruit. Howbeit the age ensuing (naught as it was) has
interpreted Jupiters cave, which is wont ordinarily to carry the grain or seed
thereof until it be full ripe, and then is it of a rough and writhen shape, of
a wooden and hard substance, and withal, of the bigness of a cich pease.

Moreover, some trees there be that prove barraine and fruitless by the
occasion of the imperfection i. vant-courriers or forerunners, because they be
long ripe before others. The Laconian Fig trees bring the fairest and
greatest

CHAP. XXVII.
Of trees that be are twice and thrice in one year. Also what trees soonest
wax old: and of their ages.

IN the same countries aboue-named, there be Fig trees also that bear Figs
twice in one year. And in the Island Cea* the wild Fig trees bear thrice in
the same year: for the second increase is put forth on the first, and the
third upon the second: and by this third fruit, the Figs of the tame Fig
tree receive their maturitie by way of caprification: and those wild green
Figs of theirs come forth above the leaf. Moreover, there be some Pyrries
and after the midst of September, especially in places lying well upon the Sun.
As touching Vines, there be of them also, that after a sort bear three times
in the year, which thereupon men call [i. The mad or foolish vines:] for
whiles some of the grapes be ripe, others begin to swel and wax big, and a
third sort again are but then in the flower. M. Varro writes, That in Smyrna
by the sea side there was a vine that bare fruit twice a year, as also an
Apple tree in the territory of Consentia. But this is an ordinary thing
throughout all the country about Tacapa in Africa, and never is it seen
otherwise there, so fertile is the soil; but thereof will we write more at
large hereafter in another place. As for the Cypress trees, they fail not but
come with fruit thrice in one year: and their berries be gathered in January,
May, and September, and all of a diverse bigness, one from the other. Over and
besides, the very trees themselves are not laden with fruit after one and the
same manner: for the Arbut or Strawberry tree is more plenteous in the head,
and toward the top: the Oak, the Wal-nut-tree, Fig Tree (and namely that To
wit, by caprification.
Physic to ripen. And this may be noted for a strange and miraculous thing in
them, That the later figs be in more price than the hasty and early ripe, and
that there should be more reckoning made of preposterous and artificial things
beside the course of kind, than of the natural. Also this is a general rule,
Whatsoever tree is exceeding fruitful, and bears most, the same continues
least while, and soon waxes old. Yea and some of them are to be seen to die
out right, and that very quickly, because they inioyed so favorable a season,
to cause them so to spend themselves with bearing; as we may mark

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of the Mulberrie tree.

COntrariwise, the Mulberry tree lasts long, and is very late ere it seems
old. For why? it is not given greatly to bear fruit, neither is ouerloden with
Mulberries. To conclude, look what trees have a curled grain in the wood, as
the Maple, Date-tree, and Poplar, they continue a long time before they decay.
And in one word, such as have their roots dug or delued often and laid bare
about, are not long lived, but soon age and decay.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of wild trees.

AS for wild trees, they endure longest of all others. And generally, as
careful tending and looking to trees, makes them more fertile: so there is
nothing sooner brings age upon them, than fruitfulness and much bearing.
Hereupon it is likewise, that such trees both bud and also blossom sooner than
others, yea, and ordinarily their fruit is ripe before the rest: in regard
whereof, they are more subject to the injury of the time and the weather, which
causes also diverse and sundry infirmities. Moreover, as we have said already
in the chapter of mast trees, there be many that bring forth fruits of
different sorts: among which may be reckoned the and Filbard trees, besides,
their nuts do carry certain chats with a callous substance of skales

CHAP. XXX.
Of the Box-tree: the Greek Bean or the Lotus.

AMong these is to be ranged the Box-tree, which brings forth the most
variety of all others. All this Theophrastus reports of Ilex, and not of
Buxus.
For it puts forth a seed of her own, also, a grain which they call
Carthegon: besides, on the North side Misselto, and on the South Hyphear:
whereof we will write anon more at large: so that otherwhiles a man shall
find four diverse things upon the Box all together.

Moreover of trees, some be simple or single, to wit, such as from the root
have one trunk or

As concerning boughs of trees, some are termed blind, because they put not
forth certain eyes or chits where they should bud: which happens sometime by
a natural defect, when they are not of validity to thrust out a bud;
otherwhiles it is occasioned by some wrong and injury done, namely, when they
be cut off, and in the place of the cut, there grows as it were a callous
skar that dulleth the virtue of the tree. Furthermore, look what is the nature
that forked trees have in their boughs, the same has the Vine in her eyes and
burgeons; the same also have canes and reeds in their joints and knots. Over
and besides, all trees toward their root, and the nearest to the ground, are
thicker than else where. Some run up altogether in height, and therein show
thrir growth, as the Fur or Deal tree, the Larch, Date-tree, Cypress, Elm,
and generally all that rise up in an entire stock, and are not divided. Of
those also that branch and put out many

CHAP. XXXI.
Of the Boughs, Bark, and Roots of trees.

THere are trees, that immediately from the root thrust out boughs and
branches, as do the Apple Trees. Some be covered with a thin rind, as the
Laurel and I^e tree: others with a thick bark, as the Oaks. In some a man
shall find the bark even and smooth, as in the Apple Tree, and fig tree: the
same in others is rough and rugged, as is to be seen in Oaks and Date-trees.
And ordinarily, all old trees have more riueled barks and furrowed, than the
younger. In many trees the bark naturally does break and cleave of the own
accord, and namely in the Vine. From some it shaleth and falls off, as from
the Apple tree and the Arbut. The cork and the Poplar have a fleshie and
pulpous bark: the rind of the Vine and the Reed, is made

There is as great difference in the root. For the fig tree, the Oak, and the
Plane, have great store of roots and large spurns: contrariwise, in the Apple
tree they are short and small: the fur and Larch have one tap root and no
more: for upon that one main master-root they rest and are founded; howbeit,
many small strings and petie spurns shoot out of the sides. In the Bay Tree the
roots be more gross and unequally embossed, and likewise in the olive, which
also spredeth out into many branches. But those of the oak be of a carnous
substance: and verily, all the kind of oaks do root deep into the ground.
Certes, if we give credit to Virgil, that sort of them which are called Esculi,
go down as deep into the earth with their roots, as they arise and mount above
Theophrastus] hold opinion and have put down in their books, that no roots go
lower into the earth, than that the Suns heat may pierce unto them and give
them a kind warmth; the which is more or less, say they, according

Moreover, a common thing it is and ordinary, to replant and recover many trees
that have bin blown down and laid along; for they will reioine, knit again,
and revive, by means of the earth, even as a wound does unite by the solder of
a callous cicatrice. And this is a most usual and familiar practice observed
in the Planes, which by reason of their great heads so thick of boughs,
gather winds most, and are soonest subject to their rage: if any one of them
by that means be fallen, they lop their boughs, and discharge them of their
weighty load, and then set

CHAP. XXXII.
Of certain prodigious trees, and presages observed by them. By what means
trees grow of their own accord. That all plants grow not every where: and what
trees they be that are appropriate to certain regions, and are not elsewhere
to be found.

WE read in Chronicles and records, that many trees have fallen without wind
and tempest, or any other apparent cause, but only by way of prodigy and
presage of some future event: and the same have risen again of themselves
without man's help. This happened during the wars against the Cymbrians, to the
great astonishment of the people of Rome, who thereupon gathered a
fore-tokening of great consequence: for at Nuceria in the Juno, there was an
old Elm fell, and after the head was lopped off, because it light upon the
very altar of Juno, it arose of it own accord; and that which more is,
immediately upon it put forth blossoms and flourished. And this was observed,
That from that very instant, the majesty of the people of Rome began to take
heart, revive, and rise again, which had bin decayed and infeebled by so many
and so great losses that the Romans head received. The like chanced (by report)
near the city Philippi, unto a Willow tree which was fallen down, and the head
of it cut off clean: semblably, to an Aspen tree at Stagyrae, near unto the
college or publik place of Exercise there. And all these were fortunate
presages of good luck. But the greatest wonder of all other was this, of a
Plane tree in the Isle Antandros, which was not only fallen, but also hewed and
squared on* all sides by the Carpenter; and yet it rose again by it self, and
recovered

All trees that we are beholden unto the goodness of Nature for, we have by 3
means: for either they grow of their own accord, or come of seed, or else by
some shoot springing from the root. As for such as we enjoy by the art and
industry of men, there be a great number more of devises to that effect:
whereof we will speak apart in a several book for that purpose. For the
present our treatise is of trees that grow in Natures garden only, wherein she
has showed her self many ways after a wonderful manner, right memorable.

First and foremost, as we have showed and declared before, every thing will not
grow in every place indifferently: neither if they be transplanted, will they
live. This happens sometimes Seleucus made trial thereof: so strange they are
to live in any other country but their own. Certainly, this is a most wonderful
thing to be noted, That many times the trees for their part may be entreated to
remove into a foreign country, and there to live; yea, and otherwhiles the
ground and soil may be persuaded and brought to accord so well with plants (be
they never such strangers) that it will feed and nourish them; but impossible
it is to bring the temperature of the air and the climat to condescend thereto
and be favorable unto them. The Pepper-trees live in Italy; the shrub of Casia
or the Canell likewise in the Northerly regions; the Frankincense tree also
has been known to live in Lydia: but where were the hot gleames of the Sun
to be found in those regions, either to dry up the waterish humor of the one,
or to concoct and thicken the gum and Rosine of the other? Moreover, there is
another marvel in Nature, welneare in her. She has assigned the Cedar tree
unto hot countries: and yet we set it to grow in Mithridates, and also the
inhabitants of those quarters, used all means possible to have the Laurel and
the Myrtle there to grow, only to serve their turns when they should sacrifice
to the gods: it would never be, did they what they could: and yet even then,
there were good store of trees there growing of a warm temperature; there were
Pomegranates and Fig Trees plenty; and now adays there be Apple Trees and
Pyrries in those parts, of the best and daintiest sort. Contrariwise, ye shall
not find in all that tract any trees of a cold nature, as Pines, Pitch-trees,
and Firres. But what need I to go

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of the Cypress tree. That oftentimes some new plants do grow out of the
ground, which were never known to be there beforetime.

THe Cypress has bin counted a mere stranger in Italy, and most unwilling
there to grow, Cato, who has spent more words, and made oftener mention of the
Cypress alone, than of all other trees whatsoever. Much ado there is with it
before it come up; and as hard it is to grow, and when all is done, the fruit
is good for nothing. The berries that it bears, be wrinckled, and nothing
lovely to the eye; the leaves wherewith it is clad, bitter in taste; a strong
and violent smell it has with it, not so much as the very shade thereof is
delectable and pleasant; and the wood but small and not solid, but of an
hollow substance; insomuch, as a man may range it among the kinds of shrubs.
Consecrated is this tree to Pluto, and therefore men use to set a bough thereof
as a sign, before those houses wherein a dead corpse lies under bourd. As
touching the female Cypress, it is long ere she bears. The Cypress

Two sorts there are of the Cypress tree. First that which runs up into a
pyramidal point, winding upward as a round spire, which also is called the
female. A sfor the male, it sends out branches, and spreads broad: it is
lopped also, and serves in frames to bear up vines. Both

The Island Candie is the natural country of the Cypress tree, howsoever
Cato has called it a Tarentine tree: happily, because it came thither first. In
the Isle Aenaria, the Cypress trees spring again after they be cut down to
the roots. But in Candie, look what ground soever a man does break up and
plough, unless he sow or set it with some other thing, Cypresses will always
covered with snow, they are to be seen in greatest plenty. A wonderful thing,
considering

CHAP. XXXIIII.
Of Ivy.

IT is said, that now the Iuie tree grows also in Asia: and yet Theophrastus
in his time delivered the contrary, and a ffirmed, that neither it was to be
found there, nor yet throughout all India, but only upon the mount Merus. Over
and besides, it is reported, that Harpalus did what he could to store the
country of Media therewith, but all in vain. And as for Alexander the Bacchus,
in solemnities and high feasts of which god, the people of Thracia even at this
day are furnished from this tree, and do with Ivy set out and garnish the
heads of their lances, pikes, and iauelins, their mourrons also and targuets.

An enemy is Ivy doubtless to trees, and generally to all plants and sets
whatsoever: it cleaves and breaks sepulchers built of stone, it undermines
city walls; good only to harbor serpents, and most comfortable for their cold
complexions: so that I cannot choose but marvel much that it should be honored
at all, and accounted of any worth. But to enter into a more particular
consideration and discourse of Iuie, two principal kinds are found thereof,
like as of [i. the red;] and the other Chrysocarpos, as one would say, the
golden berry. Iuie. Now as touching the rampant or climbing Iuie, Helix, there
be many and sundry sorts thereof, differing in their leaf especially: for
first and foremost the leaves of this Iuie are small, cornered, and better
fashioned than the rest, which indeed are but of a plain and simple making.
There is a difference likewise in the length between every knot and joint, but
especially in this, that it is barren and bears no fruit at all. And yet some
That of the said clasping Iuie Helix, there be many kinds, and three principal
above the rest. [i. ground Iuie] is never known but to creep along the ground.

CHAP. XXXV.
Of the Bind-weed or Iuie called Smilax.

LIke unto Iuie, is that plant which they call Smilax, or rough Bind-weed. It
came first out of Cilicia, howbeit more commonly it is to be seen in Greece: it
puts forth stalks set Crocus, was turned into this shrub or plant, retaining
still her name: which the ignorant people not knowing, but taking it for a kind
of Iuie, stick not to make coronets thereof; profaning by that means many times
their Bacchus or Silenus used to wear? Of this Smilax are made certain manuell
writing tables. And this property moreover has the wood thereof, That if a man
hold it close to his ear, he shall hear it to give a pretty sound.

But to return again to the Iuie indeed, it has (by report) a strange and
wonderful virtue to try wines, whether they be delaied with water or no: for
make a cup of Iuie wood, and put wine thereinto, all the wine will soke and run
through, but the water (if any be mingled therewith) will tarry behind.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Of Reeds, Canes, and other water shrubs.

IN this discourse touching plants that love cold places, it will not be amiss
to treat of those that grow in waters. Among which, the Reeds and Canes may be
raunged in the first place: for necessary they be in time both of For Arrows
and Darts:
war and For writing pens.
peace: they have their use besides, and are For Flutes and Pipes.
delightsom pleasures of this world. Moreover, in the Northern regions, the
people use therewith to cover and thatch their houses: and this kind of roof
will last many ages, if it be laid with a thick coat, even upon high and
stately houses. In other parts also of the world, they are wont with it to
make their arch-roufes, and hanging floores of most slight work. As for Canes
particularly, and those of Egypt by name, which have a certain resemblance of
the Papyr-reed in Nilus, they serve for writing Paper. Howbeit those of Gnidos,
and which grow in Asia along the lake or mere of Anaia, be held for the best.
As for ours here in Italy, they are of a more spungeous substance and gristly
matter, apt to suck and drink up any liquour. The same within-forth is full
of holes and concauities, but converted aloft into a fine woody rind, and in
time becomes dry, fast, and hard. Apt it is to cleave, and the clifts
evermore into many knottie ioints. Those only of India, have short leaves. But
in all of them, the leaf springs out of the joint, which embracing the Cane,
does clad it round about with certain

Moreover there be many kinds of Reeds and Canes: for some of them stand
thicker with ioints, and those are more fast and solid than others, and small
distance there is between the same:

Moreover, Reeds are distinguished one from another by the leaf not for the
number, but the strength and color. The leaves of those about Lacedaemon,
Varia, or Versicolor, (...), Th^oph. i. of diverse colour^.
are stiff and strong, growing thicker of the one side than of the other. And
such as these are thought generally to grow along standing pooles and dead
waters, far unlike to those about running rivers: and besides, to be clad with
long pellicles, which claspe and climb about the Cane higher above the joint,

Over and besides, there breeds in Italy also among the fens, a certain salt
foam, named Calamach^.
Adarca, sticking to the rind or utmost bark of Reeds and Canes, only under
the very tuft and head: passing good it is for the toothache, by reason of the
hot and caustic quality that it has like to Senuie or Mustard Seed. As
touching the Reed-plots about the Orchomenian lake, I must needs write more
exactly, considering in what admiration they were in times past: for in and
then the Greeks call them Zeugitae. Contrariwise, if the water hold not so
long, but do fall Antigenes (that excellent minstrell and plaier upon the pipe)
all the while that there was no use but of the plain music and single
instrument; the right time of cutting down and gathering these Reeds for this
purpose, was about September, when the sign Arcturus is in force: then were
they to have a seasoning and preparation for certain years, before they would
serve the Cato would have them to be

CHAP. XXXVII.
Of the Willow or Sallow, eight kinds thereof: and what trees besides the
Willow are good for bindings. Also of Briers and Brambles.

Moreover (after the opinion of the said Cato) it is good to plant Withies also
about river sides, and near to Reeds: for surely there is not more profit
arising from any other tree of the waters, than from it; howsoever the Poplars
are well liked and loved of the vines, and other necessary implements for
country houses, and to fit the husbandmen. Being pilled, they Cato, among the
commodities that commend a good ferm or manor, esteems it in the third place,
and prefers the increase and benefit thereby, before the gain that grows
from olive rows, corn fields, and good medows. Vitellinam rather, for the
yellow color of the yolke of eggs,] for the bright hew that it has: the
third that is smallest of all three, is the French willow.

To come now to the brittle Rushes that grow in marish grounds, which serve to
thatch houses and to make mats; and the pith whereof when the rind is pilled,
makes wieke for watchcandles,

As touching Brambles, they may go among the shrubs of the water: so may the
Elders also, which consist of a spungeous kind of matter, and yet cannot well be
counted among those plants which be termed Fenels-gyant: for surely the Elder
stands more upon the wood than they do. The shepherds are verily persuaded,
that the Elder tree growing in a by-place far out of the way, and from whence
a man cannot hear a cock crow out of any town, makes more shrill pipes and
louder trumpes than any other. The Brambles bear certain berries like the
Mulberries, even as the sweet Brier of another kind, which they call Cynosbatos
or the Eglantine, carries the resemblance of a Rose. A third sort there is of
brambles, which the Greeks call Idea, of the mountain Ida. This is the Raspis:
smaller it is and more slender than the rest, with less comfortable to a weak
stomach. The Elder bears certain black and small berries, full of a

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Of the juice or humor in trees. The nature of their wood and timber. The time
and manner of felling and cutting down trees.

TRees have a certain moisture in their barks, which we must understand to be
their very blood, yet is it not the same nor alike in all: for that of the Fig
trees is as white as milk, and as good as rendles to give the form to cheese.
Cherry trees yield a glutinous and clammy humor, but Elmes a thin liquor in
manner of spittle. In Apple trees the same is fattie

All trees whereof the wood is over dry, bear fruit but each other year, or
at leastwise more in one year than another, as namely the Olive tree: a thing
observed more in them than in those that have a pulpous and fleshie substance,
as the Cherry tree. Neither are all trees indifferently furnished with store of
the said fat or flesh, no more than the most fierce and furious beasts. As for
the Box, Cornel, and Olive trees, they have neither the one nor the other, ne
yet any marow at all, and but very little blood. Semblably, the Servis tree
has no heart, the Alder no carnositie,

Some trees there be that have certain hard bunches bearing out and swelling
like to kernels in the flesh of a Swines neck: and these knobs or callosities
have not in them long grain and broad vein, as is above said, but only a
brawny flesh (as it were) rolled round together: And to say a truth, when such
knurres and callosities as these be, are found either in Citron or Maple trees,
men make great account of them, and set no small store by that wood. All other
sorts of Tables, when the trees are cloven or sawne into plankes, are brought
into a round compass with the grain: for otherwise, if it were slit overthwart
to make them round against the grain, it would soon break out. As touching the
Beech, the grain of it runs cross two contrary ways like comb teeth; but
in old time the vessels made of that wood were highly esteemed. As for example,
Manius Curious having subdued his enemies, protested, and bound it with an

There is no wood but floteth aloft the water, and waueth in length: like as
that part which

CHAP. XXXIX.
Of the Larch tree, the Fur, and the Sapine: the manner of cutting or falling
such like trees.

THere is a female Larch tree which the Greeks call Aegis: the wood whereof is
of a pleasant color, like to honey. Painters have found by experience, that it
is excellent good for their tables, both for that it is so even and smooth, not
apt besides to chink and cleave: as also because it will endure and last for
ever. And that part they choose which is the very heart of it, and next the
pith, which in the Fir tree the Greeks call Leuson. In like sort the heart of
Theophrastus writes this of the Cornell tree.
make thereof staves for Bore-speares prefer it before any wood whatsoever. For
it stands only upon skin and bone, that is to say, of the rind and heart.

As touching the falling and cutting down of trees, to serve either in temples
or for other uses, round and entire as they grow, without any squaring; as also
for to bark them, the only time and season is, when the sap runs, and that
they begin to bud forth: otherwise you shall never be able to get off their
bark: for bark them not, they will rot and become worm-eaten under the said
bark, and the timber withal wax duskish and black. As for the other timber
that is Tiberius Caesar the Emperor gave order to fell the Larch trees that came
out of Rhoetia, to repair and re-edifie the bridge that served to represent
the show of a naual battle upon the water (which fortuned to be consumed with
fire) just at the change of world of years. Next unto it is that timber which
is fallen in the days and signs above rehearsed. Augustus. Moreover, for to
have good and profitable timber, the trees would be cut down that are of a
middle age, for neither young poles nor old runts are fit for durable building.
Furthermore, there be that hold opinion, that for to have the better timber,
the trees should have a kerfe to the very heart and pith round about, and so
let it stand an end still, that all the humor by that means might run out,
before they be overthrown and laid along. And verily a wonderful and
miraculous thing is reported in old time, during the first Punicke war against
the Carthaginians, namely, that all the ships of that fleet which was conducted
by General Duellius the high Admiral, were shot into the sea and under sail,
within sixty days after L. Piso has left in writing, That against king Hiero
there were 220 ships made and furnished in 45 days after the timber grew. Also
in the second Punick war, the Armado which Scipio employed, was set aflote and
bare sail forty days after the fall of the timber. See how forcible and
effectual in all things is the season and opportunity of time duly taken,
especially when need drives to make speed and hasten apace.

Cato the chief and only man of all others for experience and knowledge in
every thing, in his treatise of all kind of timber to be employed in building,
gives these rules following, Make thy pressing plank especially of the black
Sapino or Carpine.
Sapine or Horn-beam tree. Item, Whenever thou meanest to storke up either
Elm, Pine, Walnut tree, or any other whatsoever for timber, see Item, The
right season to fell a tree for timber, is when the fruit is full ripe. Item,
Beware in any case, that thou neither draw forth of the ground, nor yet square
a tree when the dew falls. And a little after: Beware thou meddle not with
timber trees but either at the change or full of the Moon. And in no hand,
neither stork it up then, nor hew it hard to the ground. But within four days
after the full Moon, pluck up trees hardly, for that is the best time. Item,
Be well advised, that thou neither fell, square, nor touch with the ax, any
timber that is black, unless it be dry. And meddle not with it, if either it
be frozen or full of dew. Tiberius the Emperor above named observed likewise
the change of the Moon, for cutting the hair both of head and beard. And yet
M. Varro gave a rule, That to prevent baldness

But to come again unto our timber trees: The Larch and Fir both (but the Fir
especially) if they be cut down, bleed a long time after, and yield abundance
of moisture. Indeed, these twain of all others be the tallest, and grow most
straight and upright. For Mast-poles and cross saileyards in ships, the Fir or
Deal is commended and preferred before all other, for the smoothnes and
lightness withal. The Larch, the Fir, and the Pine have this property common
to them all, To show the grain of their wood running either parted in four,
forked in twain, or single one by one. For fine carpentry and Ioiners seeling
within house, the heart of the tree would be cloven or rent. The quarter
timber, or that which runs with four grains, is simply the best, and more
pleasant to be wrought than the rest. They that be skillful woodmen, and have
experience

Moreover, there is great ods between Fur trees, in regard of diverse
Countries and Nations where they grow. The best are those of the Alps and the
Apennine hills. Likewise in France there are excellent good Firs upon the
mountains Iura and Vogesus: as also in Corsica, Bithinia, Pontus, and
Macedonia. A worse kind of them grow in Arcadia and about the mountains near
Aenea. The worst be those of Pernassus, and Euboea: for in those parts they be
full of boughs

As for Cedars, the best simply be those that grow in Candy, Affricke, and
Syria. This virtue has the oil of Cedar, That if any wood or timber be
thoroughly anointed therewith, it is subject neither to worm nor moth, ne yet
to rottenness.

The Juniper has the same property that the Cedar. They prove in Spain to be
exceeding big and huge, the Berries also greatest of all others. And
wheresoever it grows, the heart thereof is more sound than the Cedar.

A general fault and imperfection there is common to all wood, When the
grain, and the knots run into round balls; and such they call in Latin Spirae.
Also in some kind of timber, like as in marble also there be found certain
knurs like kernils, as hard they be as nail heads, and

CHAP. XL.
Of diverse sorts of timber. Of ^aine trees of extraordinary bigness. What
trees they be that never be worme-eaten, nor decay and fall. What wood does
endure and continue always good.

THe greatest tree that to this day had ever been known or seen at Rome, was
that, which being brought with other timber for the rebuilding of the foresaid
bridge called Naumachiaria, Tiberius Caesar commanded to be landed and laid
abroad in view for a singular and miraculous monument to all posterity: and it
remained entire and whole, until the time that Nero the Emperor built stis
stately Amphitheatre. This piece of timber was of a Larch tree: it contained in
length 120 foot, and carried in thickenesse every way two foot, from one end to
the other. Whereby a man may guess and judge the incredible height of the
whole tree besides, to the very top. Such another tree there was to be seen in
our days, which M. Agrippa left for the like singularity and wonder of men, in
those stately porches and cloisters that he made in Mars field: and it
continued still after the building of the muster place and treasurers ha^l
named Diribitorium. Shorter it was than the former by 20 foot, and carried a
foot and half in thickenesse. As for the Fir tree, which served for a mast in
that huge ship, which by the commandment and direction of C. Caligula the
Emperor transported and brought out of Egypt, Claudius the Emperor caused it
there to be sunk, together with three mighty great piles or dams founded upon
it, and mounted to the height of towers, for which purpose there was brought a
huge quantity of earth or sand from Puteoli. The maine body of this mast
contained in compass 4 fadom full. And a common byword it is, current in
every man's mouth, that Fir mast for that purpose, are usually sold for eight
hundred Sesterces apeece, and more money: big one which grew in Cyprus, and was
cut down for a mast to serve that mighty galleace Demetrius, that had eleven
banks of oars to a side; a hundred and thirty foot it was high, and three
fatham thick. And no marvel, since that the pirates and rouers, who haunt the
coasts of Germany, make their punts or troughs of one entire piece of wood and
no more, wrought hollow in manner of a boat, and some one of them will hold
thirty men.

To proceed now unto the sundry natures of wood. The most massy and fast wood,
and therefore the weightest of all other, by judgment of men, is that of the
Ebene and the Box: both small trees by nature. Neither of them twain swims
above the water, no more will the Cork wood, if it be barked, nor the Larch.
Of all the rest, the saddest wood is that of Lotus, I mean that which at Rome
is so called. Next to it, is the heart of Oak, namely, when it is rid of the
white sappie wood: the heart (I say) which comes near to a black color: and
yet the Cytisus or Thericles a famous Turner, who was wont to make drinking
cups, mazers, and bowls of the Terebinth; which is a sufficient proof, that
the wood is fine and hard. This wood alone of all others, loves to be oiled,
and surely the better it is for the oil. But a marvelous pretty device there
is to set a passing fair black color, and a shining gloss upon it; with
Walnuts and wild Pears, namely, boiling these together, and making thereof a
mixture and composition to give the said tincture. All these trees abouenamed
have a sad and fast wood. Next to them in that respect is the Cornell tree: and
yet I cannot properly range it in the order of timber trees, so small and
slender it is. Neither is the wood thereof in manner good for naught else but
for spokes in cartwheeles, also to make wedges to cleave wood, and tough pins,
that will hold as fast well near as iron spikes. In

The trees that grow in waterie grounds be coldest of all others: but such be
toughest and therefore best to make bucklers and targuets, the wood whereof, if
it be cut, comes quickly together, and closes up the gash again, and in that
regard, much ado there is to pierce it thorough and tough, the wild and the
male of the same kind, have their wood more churlish than otherwise

It is commonly thought, that the Box, the Ebene, the Cypress, and the Cedar
wood, is everlasting and will never be done. An evident proof thereof as
touching all these sorts of timber, by the judgment and choice of so many men,
was to be seen in that famous temple of Diana in Ephesus: for all Asia set to
their helping hand and contributed toward that work, which in four Diana, it
is not certainly known of what wood it was: all writers, save only Mutianus,
report that it was of Ebene. As for him, a man who had been thrice Consul of
Rome, and one of the last who upon their own sight of the said thing, wrate
thereof, avouches that it was made of Vine wood; and that, howsoever the temple
was ruined and rebuilt again no less than seven times, yet the foresaid image
was never altered nor changed. Who says moreover, that Canetias chose that
wood for the best (for so he named the workman that cut and carved it.) And I
much marvel thereat, considering that by his saying this image was of greater
antiquity than that of lady Minerua, much more than of Bacchus. He adds
moreover and says, that this statue was embau^ed within, by reason of the
precious oil of Spiknard, which was distilled into it at many holes: by means
of which medicinable liquor, the wood was nourished, and the joints held close
and fast together whereat I cannot choose but marvel again very much, that
considering the statue was so small, it should have any piece or joint at all.
Now as touching the leaves of the doors belonging to this temple, they were by
his report, of Cypress wood: and continued still fresh and new to the eye,
notwithstanding it is four hundred years well near since they were made.
Where, by the way this is to be noted, that these doors stood four years
glewed in the claue. And verily, this wood was chosen for that purpose, because
among other properties, the Cypress alone has the gift, to look always
shining and polished, and never loses the gloss and beauty. And for to prove
Or, Iupit^r.
Vejouis, in the Capitol, made of Cypress wood, does it not endure still fair
and trim? and yet was it dedicated and consecrated in that temple, in the year
after the foundation of Rome, 551.

A famous and memorable temple there is of Apollo at Vtica, where the beams
and maine pieces of timber, made of Numidian Cedars, remain as whole and
entire as at the first day when they were set up, which was when the city was
first founded: by which computation, they have continued already 1188 years.
Moreover, it is said, that at Saguntum a city of Spain, there is a temple of
Diana still standing, a little beneath the city: and yet as king Borchus mine
Author says, 200 years before the ruin and destruction of Troy, the same men
that brought the image of the said Diana from the Island Zacynthus, founded the
temple above said. For the Anniball made some conscience to demolish it, and
would not once touch it: and therein are to be seen at this day the beams and
rafters of Juniper, sound and good But above all other, memorable is the temple
of the said goddess Diana in Aulis, which was built many hundred years before
the Trojane war: but what kind of timber was employed about the Carpentrie
thereof, is not well known. Howbeit, this we may boldly resolve upon, that the
more odoriferous any wood is, the more durable also it is and everlasting.

Next to these trees above rehearsed, the wood of the Mulberrie tree is most
commended, which in tract of time as it grows to be old, waxes also black.
Moreover, some kinds of wood as they be more lasting than other, so they
continue better being employed in one kind of work, than they do in another.
The Elm timber will well abide the air and the wind. The wild Oak Robur, it
will corrupt and rot in the sea. The Beech will do well in water, and the
Walnut tree

CHAP. XLI.
Of worms that breed in wood.

OF vermin that eat into wood, there be 4 kinds. The first are called in
Latin Teredines: a very great head they have for the proportion of the body,
and with their teeth they gnaw. These are found only in ships at sea, and
indeed properly none other be Teredines. A second sort there be, and those are
land worms or mothes, named Tineae. But a third kind resembling gnats, the
Greeks term by the name of Thripes. In the fourth place be the little
worms: whereof some are bred of the putrified humor and corruption in the very
timber: like Alexander the great in his voyage into the East, that in the Isle
Tylos lying within the red sea, there be certain trees that serve for timber to
build ships, the which were known to continue two hundred years: and being
drowned in the sea, were found with the wood nothing at all perished. They
affirmed moreover, that in the same Island there grew little plants

CHAP. XLII.
Of timber good for Architecture and Carpentrie: what wood will serve for this
or that work: and which is the strongest and surest timber for roufes of
building.

We have here in Italy, wood and timber that will cleave of it self. For
which cause our Master Carpenters give order to besmeare them with beasts
dung, and so to lie a drying, that the wind and piercing air should not hurt
them. The joists and plankes made of Fur and Larch, are very strong to bear
a great weight, although they be laid in length overthwart. Contrariwise, the
Rafters made of the wild Oak Robur, and Olive wood, will bend, and yield under
their load: whereas the other named before, do resist mainly and withstand,
neither will they easily break, unless they have much wrong: nay sooner do
they rot, than fail otherwise in strength. The Date-tree wood also is Valida,
ex Theophrast.
tough and strong, for it yields not, but curbeth the contrary way. The
Poplar sets and bends downward: whereas the Date-tree contrariwise rises
upward archwise. The Pine and the Cypres are not subject either to rottenness
time as being within the common baines, they were skared with the crack that
the floor gave,

CHAP. XLIII.
Of glewing timber: of rent, cloven, and sawen painell.

GReat cunning there is in making strong glue, and in the feat of joining with
it, as well in regard of seelings and wainscot made of thin bourd and painell,
as of marquetry and other inlaid works: and for this purpose, Ioyners do
choose the mistress threadie grain that is Thus it has been known that
doore-hinges and hooks made of Olive wood (which otherwise Cato would have
them made of Holly, Bay Tree, and Elm. The handles and helues of rusticall
tools, mattocke steeles, and spade trees, Hyginus wills they should be
either of Hornebeame, Holme, or Cerrus. For fine painell in fret-worke, for
seeling also and ouerlaying other wood, these are the chief, the Citron,
Terebinth, Maple of all sorts, Box, Date tree, Huluer, Holme, Elder root, and
the Poplar. The Alder tree likewise (as has been said) affords certain
swelling bunches and hard knots, which may be cut and cloven into most dainty
flakes and precious leaves, as fair and pleasant to the eye for their damask
branch, as either Citron or Maple: setting which three aside, there be no knurs
and nodosities in any tree worth

Moreover, ye shall have trees ordinarily in the mids toward the heart, carry
a more crisped and curled wood; and the nearer it is to the but or root end,
the finer is the grain, more branching also, and the streaks winding in and
out. Lo, from whence first came the superfluous expense to cover and seele one
wood with another! See how those trees which for their very wood were of no
price, are become more costly and dearer, when they serve as a bark to cla^
others! that one tree forsooth by this means, should be so sold many and sundry
times at a several price. Thus have been devised (I would not else) thin leaves
of wood, like gold or siluer-foile. And yet that is not all: for there is come
up of late a devise, to paint and die in sundry colors the horns of beasts,
to cut and saw their teeth into thin plates: and whereas at first there was
fret-works only Nero, have found out a devise to disfigure the Tortoise shel
also with paintings, that it might be sold the dearer when it looked like wood.
Thus means are wrought, that the price of beds should be raised and set up by
this means: thus they would have the Terebinth wood to be excessive dear and
above the worth: thus must the Citron wood be enhaused to an higher rate: and
thus the Maple is counterfeited, Tortoise shells are foisted in the place and
bought

CHAP. XLIIII.
The age of trees: what kind of trees they be that are of least continuance.
Semblably, of Misselto, and the Priests called Druidae.

IF a man would consider the hidden corners of the world, and the inaccessable
deserts that be in it, he might by infallible arguments conclude and resolve,
that there be some trees that Scipio Africanus (the first of that name) planted
long since with his own hand. In the same place also there is a Myrtle tree,
of a rare and admirable greatness; and under it, a cave or hole in the ground,
wherein (by report) there lies a dragon that keeps the ghost and soul of the
said Scipio. And at Rome, in the courtyard belonging to the chapel of
goddess Diana Lucina, there is yet to be seen a Lote tree standing before the
said chapel, built in the year of the Anarchie, what time as Rome stood
desolate of all magistrates, and that was 369 years after the foundation of
the city: but how much more ancient this tree is than the said temple, God
knows: for elder it is without all question, considering that of the grove or
tuft Diana took her name Grati^ Lucin^ dedit haec tibi nomina Lucus. Ovid.
Lucina. Now it is 450 years or thereabout, since that time, and so old it is
doubtless. Another Lote tree there is and elder than that, but the age thereof
is likewise uncertain: known it is by the name Capillata, [i. hairie:] so
called, because the hair of the vestall Nuns heads is usually Vulcan, which
Romulus built for a perpetual monument and memorial of a victory, and
defraied the charges out of the tenths of the pillage and spoil that he woone
from his enemies; and this tree is at least full as old as the city of Rome,
if it be true that Massurius writes. The roots thereof, passing along the
street where the Burgeoises use to keep their residence, do reach as far as
the stately marketplace or Hall of Caesar. There grew by it a Cypress tree
also of the same age, the which by an oversight and carlesse neglect, fell
down no longer since then the last year of Nero the Emperor. But why stand
we long hereupon? there is an Holme growing in the Vatican, elder than Rome it
self, with a plate of brass upon it engraven in Tuscan letters, containing an
inscription or title: whereby it appears, Tyburtus himself, their first
founder: upon which trees (as the voice goes) he observed the flight of birds,
and thereby took his auspices and warrant from the gods to build the said
city. And (by report) the son he was of Amphiaraus, who died at Thebes an
hundred years before the Trojane war. Writers therebe who affirm, that both
that Plane tree which grows before the temple of Apollo at Delphos, was set
by king Agamemnons own hand: as also another in the second grove of Caphys in
Arcadie. Furthermore, at this day, there be trees near unto the straight of
Callipolis, sometime called Hellespontus, Protesilaus: which every fourteen
years so soon as they are shot up so tall only as they may seem to discover
and see the city Ilium, immediately begin to wither and fade, and afterward
spring again and grow anew unto that age and height aforesaid. Hard by the
city of Ilium, there be certain Oaks also (as folk say) near unto the tomb of
Ilus, which were then planted or set of acornes, when Troy began to be called
Ilium. It is reported moreover, that the Olive tree remains yet alive at
Argos, unto which* Argus tied lady Io, after she was transformed or turned into
an Heifer. About Heraclea in Pontus, there be certain altars erected to the
honor of Jupiter surnamed Stratius, over which there stand two Oaks, both set
by the hands of Hercules. In the very same tract there is an haven, ennobled
and renowned by the name of Amycus Marsyas the musician hung himself in a
melancholy mood for that he was ouermatched in his own cunning and professed
skill, by Apollo: and surely like it is, that even then he made choice of that
tree for the bigness: over and besides, in the Isle Delos, Apollo was borne and
reared there. The wild Olive tree at Olympia (whereof Hercules ware the first
coronet or guirland) is kept and tended still with great devotion. The very
same Olive tree also (by folks saying) continues this day at Athens, which
sprung up at the very time that Minerua and Neptune strove together about
giving the name to the city Athens. And thus much of long-liued trees.

Contrariwise, Pomgranat trees, Fig trees, and Apple trees, live a very short
time: and of these, the hasty kind or Ienitings, continue nothing so large as
those that bear and ripen later: neither yet those that carry sweet fruit, last
so well as they that bring' forth sower. The Pomgranat tree also with the more
pleasant fruit, is shorter lived than the other. The like is to be said of
Vines, Graecinus says, That there have been vine trees known to live
threescore years. It seems also, that trees which come up in waterish and moist
places, are not of any long continuance, but soon die. In deed Bay trees,
Apple trees, and Pomgranat trees, do age and look old quickly; howbeit they
spring fresh again from the root. Well then, the Olive trees hold out life and
live very long: for after Diana, by the common consent of al Latium, which did
their devotions there. In it there was one especial fair tree above the rest,
which Passienus Crispus, a man in our days of great authority (as having been
twice Consul in his time, and reputed an excellent Orator, who also afterward
mounted to higher place of reputation by marrying Agrippina the Empress, by
which match he became father in law to Nero the Emperor) cast a fancy and
extraordinar ie liking unto: insomuch as he was wont not only to take his
repose and lie under it, to sprinckle and cast wine plentifully upon it, but
also to clip, embrace, and kiss it otherwhiles.

Moreover, there is nothing more certain than this, that Iuie kills trees.
The like is to be said (in some sort) of the Misselto, although it is
generally thought, that the harm thereby is not so soon seen. And this you
must think, that this Misselto is not to be taken for the fruit of a tree, and
therefore as great a wonder it is in nature, as any other: for some things there
be, that not willing to grow out of the earth, engender in trees; and having no
proper place of their own Some take this for Cassutha, or Cuscuta i Doder.
Cadytas; which windeth about, not trees only, but also very bushes and
thorns: likewise, all about the pleasant vale Tempe in Thessalie, you shall
have a kind of Fern ealled Polypodie, to do the same: also, the Pulse named
Dolychos, which is Fasels or Kidney beans, and the wild running-laced Thyme,
Serpillum. Semblably, that which the Greeks call Phaunos: the very same, that
after a man has cut and proined the wild Olive, engenders thereupon. The like
is to be said of Hippopheston which grows upon the Fullers thorn or thystle:
it bears certain little heads and hollow knobs with nothing in them, small
leaves, and a white root; the juice whereof is singular good to euacuate and
purge the body, for the diuersion of ill humors, in the falling sickness. But
to return

Now as touching Birdlime, it is made of the berries of Misseltoe, gathered in
harvest time

And forasmuch as we are entered into a discourse as touching Messelto, I cannot
ouerpasse one strange thing thereof used in France: The Diuidae (for so they
call their Diuinors, Wisemen, and the state of their Clergy) esteem nothing
more sacred in the world than Misselto, and the tree whereupon it breeds, so it
be on Oak. Now this you must take by the way, These priests or Clergy men chose
of purpose such groves for their divine service, as stood only upon Oaks; nay,
they solemnise no sacrifice, nor perform any sacred ceremonies without branches
and leaves thereof, so as they may seem well enough to be named thereupon
Dryidae in Greek, which signifies as much as the Oak priests. Certes, to say a
truth, whatsoever they find growing upon that tree over and besides the own
fruit, be it Misselto or any thing else, they esteem it as a gift sent from
heaven, and a sure sign by which that very god whom they serve gives them to
understand,

THE SEVENTEENTH BOOK
WRITTEN BY C. PLINIVS SECVNDVS.
CHAP. I.
The wonderful prices of some Trees.

AS touching the nature of all those trees which of their own accord do grow,
as well upon the main land as the sea coast, we have already treated
sufficiently. It remains now to discourse of those which (to speak more
properly) are made rather and forced by art and wit of man, than otherwise come
by nature and of themselves. But before I enter into this treatise, I cannot
choose but marvel how it is come to pass, That those trees which for necessity
and need we having taken L. Crassus and Cn. Domitius Aenobarbus. This L.
Crassus (a right renowned Orator of Rome as any one of his time) had a stately
and sumptuous dwelling upon mount Palatine: howbeit that house of Q. Catulus
(who defeated in battle the Cimbrians, together with C. Marius) went beyond it
a fair deal in magnificence, and stood likewise within the pourprise of the
same mount. But the goodliest and fairest Palace known in that age, was that
of C. Aquilius a Gentleman or Knight of Rome, situate upon the Crassus only
was challenged and reproched for that foresaid house of his. And in this manner
is the story delivered: Crassus and Domitius (great personages both, and
descended from most noble Houses in Rome) after they had been Consuls,
happened also to be chosen Censors together: and this fell out to be in the six
hundred sixty two year after the foundation of the city: but during this
Magistracy of theirs there passed many a foul day and bitter fit between
them; so dissonant were their natures, and their conditions so far unlike.
Now it fortuned upon a time, that Cn. Domitius (as he was hot and hasty man by
nature, and carried an inward hatred besides in his heart, which soon is
kindled and set on fire, yea and most insatiable, upon Crassus very sharply
for his excess in expense, and namely, That any Censor of Rome should dwell in
so stately and sumptuous a Palace as he did; and ever and anon made offer to
buy the House, and pay him downright for it an Millies Sester ^ium. An
incredible price for a dwelling house: and therefore as Budaeus thinks, this
place must be corrected, by conference with Val. Max. who for (millie^) has
(sexagi^s) which amounts little more than to the 20 part of the other (...).
hundred Millions of Sesterces: whereat Crassus (being a man quick of spirit,
and of a prompt and present wit, finely conceited withal, and not to seek for
a ready answer) took him at his word, and accepted of the offer; reserving
only six trees that grew about his house. Tush (quoth Domitius, replying
again) take those Trees away, and take all; if they be gone, I will none of
the house though I might have it for a single denier. Then Crassus having
gotten the vantage and start of him, rejoyned and came upon him thus: Tell me
now I pray you good Domitius, whether of us twain gives a scandalous example
father; or you rather, that for six trees bid 100 millions of Sesterces? Now,
if a man be desirous Caecina Largus, a Nobleman and principal citizen of Rome,
used many a time and often (I remember well) to show me when I was a young man,
those trees about his house. And since our speech has bin of such trees as
live very long, these I wot well, continued for the space of 180 years after
Crassus death, to the great fire that Nero caused to be made for to burn
Rome; fresh and green they were with good keeping, and looked young still, like
to have lived many a fair day more, had not that prince hastened the untimely
death even of trees also [as well as of citizens.] Now lest any man should
think, that all the sumptuositie of Crassus consisted only in those trees, and
that the furniture otherwise of his house was but mean and simple, and could
minister unto Domitius no matter of such contesting and reproof, disposed
Crassus had before that time set up in the open hall of that house, four
goodly pillars of Hymettian marble; which in the y^re of his Edileship were
brought abroad to rich and beautify the Theater, the Stage and Shew-place of
the solemn plays by him set out: for as yet there had not bin in public
place at Rome any marble pillars seen: ^o how lately is come up this excessive
expense in rich and glorious building, so common in these days. See (I say)
how in those times, fair trees beautified palaces more than any thing else;
insomuch, as Domitius for the want of six trees only, would not stand to the
price that himself first made, no not to buy his very enemy out of house and
home with it: but no marvel if trees were accounted of so highly, seeing that
our ancestors in old time thought not scorn to take otherwhiles their syrnames
from them. Thus that brave and valiant Fronditius, who (maugre the bear^ of
Anniball) swum over the river Vulturnus, with a chaplet of green leaves
(answerable to his name) set upon his head, and performed many feats of arms
and worthy exploits against him. Thus they of the noble Licinian family had
for their addition Stolons (i. the unprofitable water-shoots that put forth
from the root or tree it self, and never prove or come to any good.) And why
so? For that one of the said house devised the means to cleanse trees and vines
of such superfluous twigs (the practice and feat of cutting which a way, is
called Pampinatio) and thereupon was one Licinius first surnamed Stolo.
Moreover, our predecessors in ancient time made good statutes and ordinances
for the maintenance of trees: and expressly provided it was by the laws of the
12 Tables at Rome, in these words, That whosoever made wilful waste, and cut
down any trees growing in another man's ground, should be peined in the court
for a trespass don; and forfeit for every such tree, 25 pound of brass money.
But what should we think of this? Did these lawmakers trow ye, suppose or
imagine that other wild trees would ever have grown to that high reckoning
above named, and which now they are come unto, who valued fruitful trees at no
greater price, and set the penalty for the trespass, so low? But never marvel
we any more hereat, considering to what a proportion Apple Trees, and such like
are risen unto. For there be many of them here about the city of Rome, in the
villages near adioining, which are set for a yearly rent of 2000 Sesterces;
and one of them yields more profit and revenue by the year to the owner, than
a pretty ferm in times past of good domaine, to the landlord. Hereupon came
the invention of graffing trees: for this purpose have we such bastard fruits
intermingled one with another, of sundry kinds; as if Apples and other

CHAP. II.
Of the nature of the Sky respective unto trees: and what quarter thereof they
should regard.

TRees generally do like best that stand to the Northeast wind: for it
nourishes them well, causes them to spread thick and grow every way in length
and breadth, and withal makes the timber more fast and strong. But in this
rule most men do e^e, and be much deceived; for in underpropping vines, the
forkes would not be set opposite against that wind to hinder the blast thereof;
a point that is to be observed in regard of the North wind only. Moreover we
find by experience, that if trees have a kindly winter and cold season in their
due time, their wood will be more firm, and so likewise will they bud and
shoot out best: otherwise, if the Virgil.
whosoever he was that said, Husbandmen were to wish for fair winters: surely
he was no friend therein to trees, nor never prayed for them: neither are wet
Mid-summers good for Vines. But in truth, That winter dust should cause
plentiful harvest, was a word spoken in a bravery, and proceeding from a
pregnant wit and jolly spirit: for otherwise, who knows not, that every man
(wishing well to trees and corn indifferently) prays, that snow might lie
long upon the ground? The reason is, for that not only it keeps in and
encloseth the^ vital breath and soul

By this means especially, we see how corn likes well upon the ground, and
thriueth apace

As touching trees which be late-ward and keep their fruit long ere they ripen,
such also as require store of nourishment and more food still, as namely, the
Vine, the Olive, and Pomgranat trees; it is good for them to be watered with
rain in the later end of the year. And to say a truth, every kind of tree
requires a several rain by it self, in due season, sor that some ripen their
fruit at one time, and some at another: so as a man shall see ordinarily the
self same showers,

Hereunto onght to be annexed the consideration of Vine-yards, hort-yards, and
Groves, as touching their situation, and namely, what part of the heaven they
should regard. Virgil condemned altogether the planting of any trees,
respective to the West: some have chosen that quarter before the East. And this
have I observed, that in most men's opinion, the South is best. But if I should
speak what is mine own conceit indeed, there can no general and infallible
rule be given concerning this point, for to hold always. All our skill and art
herein must be directed by the nature of the soil, the disposition of the
climat and temperature of the air. In Afric although it be nothing
profitable for Vine-yards to be planted so as they look into the South, yet
kind it is and wholesome for the Vine-planter and husband man, by reason that
all Afric lies Virgil allows not of the West) shall make an excellent,
medley between the temperature of that air and the nature of soil together.
As for the North no man seems to make any doubt or question, but that vines
so planted, will prove right well. And verily there are not found any vines to
prosper better, or to bear more fruit in all Italy tha nin that tract which
lies on this side, and under the Alps: and there for the most part the
Vineyards are so planted.

Moreover in this case the winds would be much considered; for in Languedoc or
the province of Narbone, in Liguria and part of Tuscane, they are reputed
unskillful husbandmen that plant any vine-yards directly upon the Northwest
wind: but it is counted contrariwise a special point the roof of many a house,
and carries it clean away.

CHAP. III.
The society of the sky and air with the earth, respective to trees.

SOme men do force the sky for to be obedient and conformable to the earth: as
namely, when planting in dry grounds, they have regard to the East and North:
and contariwise, when in moist places they respect the South. Moreover, it
falls out, that they be driven otherwhiles to follow the nature of the very
Vines, and thereby to be ruled: whereupon, in cold ground they plant such as be
of the hasty kind, and soon ripen their grapes; to the end that they may come
to their maturity and perfection, before cold weather comes. As for such Vines
and trees bearing fruit, as cannot abide dews, those they set in to the East,
that the Sun may soon dispatch Democritus verily is of this mind, that such
fruits will be more pleasant and odoriferous.

CHAP. IIII.
The quality of sundry regions.

AS touching the proper seat of the Northeast wind, and of all other winds, we
have spoken already in the second book: and our purpose is in the next
following, to treat of the rising

First and foremost, all grounds are not alike good for trees and most kinds of
corn. For neither the black mould (such as Campain stands upon much) as in
all places best for Vines; or that which ^umeth and sends up small and thin
mists: neither is the red vein of earth any better, how soever there be many
that commend it. The white earth or chalkie marle, the clay also within the
territory of Alba and Pompeij, for a vineyard, are generally preferred before
all i Pauie.
many places, as also the red sandy ground, although it be well mingled and
tempred with fat earth are all of them nothing to the purpose for increase and
fruitfulness. And herein must men take heed, because oftentimes their
judgment may fail when it goes but by the eye: for we must not straight
ways conclude, that the ground is rich and battle, whereon we see goodly fair
and tall trees to grow, unless it be for those trees only: for where shall we
meet with any, higher than the Fir? and is there a tree again that possibly can
live where it does? No more is rank grass and plentiful forage a true token
always of a good ground: for there is no better pasture nor grasing to be
found than in Almaine; and yet dig but up the green sourd and the thinnest
coat of turfe and rich soil is known by sticking to one fingers; as appears
plainly in all sorts of clay. And Virgil, he finds no fault with the ground
that bears fern and brake, for a Vineyard. The earth that is brackish, and
stands much upon salt p^tre, is thought to be more found for many plants than
others; and in regard of vermin that use to breed therein, much safer also.
Neither do high banks and hills remain untilled Caesar (...) being conuented
before the Censors, and there pleading his cause, affirmed openly, that the
plains of Rosea were the very fat of Italy, and resembled the kell or leaf

CHAP. V.
Sundry sorts of earth.

IF a man would know which is a lean, hungry, and bitter ground, there is no
better experiment

Cato sets down briefly, as his manner is, all the defects and faults of
ground in these words: Take heed (quoth h^) of a rotten ground, and see that
you stir it neither with cart, nor touch it with beast. What should we think
was his meaning by this term of his, that he should fear rotten ground so
much, as to forbid in a manner to tread and go thereupon? Let us call to mind
the rottenness that is in wood: and thereby shall we find those faults that he
abhors and detesteth so much in the earth. In good faith, by rotten earth
he understands dry, spungeous, and full of holes, rugged, hoary, eaten, old,
and hollow. So as in that one significant word (Cariosa) he said more than
could be expressed possibly by any multip icity of language whatsoever: for if
a man would rip up to the quick the imperfections that are in grounds, he
should find, that some pieces there be of it that may be termed truly old and
ouerworne, not for any age (for who can say Cato judges, That ground to be
principal which lies at the foot of an hill, and runs forth in manner of a
plain, into the South, which is the very situation of all Italy: and by a
blackish and swart earth, which he calls [Pulla] he means a gentle, tender,
and mellow soil. And this we will determine to be the best simply both for
work or tillage, and also for gain and increase: now let us (if ye please)
stand a little upon this word Tenera [i. Tender] which he uses in this sense:
you shall find a marvelous signification thereof: and that he implies
thereby, as much as your heart can wish to be in a ground. That is it, which is
so temperat in fertility, that is it which to be wrought is so gentle, soft,
pliable, and mellow; neither wet, nor yet dry and Homer, the very fountain and
spring of all good wits, reported to have bin engraven by a Vulcan.
god, in the armor (of Achilles:) adding moreover, that the said earth looked
black withal: wherein he observed a wonderful piece of workmanship,
notwithstanding it was wrought in gold. This is that ground, I say, which
being new broken and turned up with the plough, the shrewd and busy birds
seek after, and go under the plough-share for it: this is it, that the very
Ravens follow the plough man hard at heels for, yea, and are ready for
greediness to pecke and job under his very feet. And here, in this place I
cannot choose but relate the opinion that is current among our roiotous and
delicate gallants: which some other thing also making for our purpose, in the
discourse of this argument which we have in hand. Certes Cicero, a man reputed
(as he was no less indeed) for a second light of all good learning and
literature. Better are esteemed (quoth he) the sweet compositions and
ointments which taste of earth, than of saffron: where note by the way, that
this great Clearke chose to use the word of taste rather than of smell, in such
odoriferous perfumes and mixtures. Well, to speak at a

CHAP. VI.
Of the earth which Britain and France love so well.

THe Britains and Frenchmen have devised another means to manure their
ground, by a kind of limestone or clay, which they call Marga [i. Marle.] And
verily they have a great opinion of the same, that it mightily inricheth it and
makes it more plentiful. This marle is a certain fat of the ground, much like
unto the glandulous kernels growing in the bodies of beasts, and it is thickened
in manner of marrow or the kernel of fat about it.

CHAP. VII.
The discourse of these matters continued according to the Greeks.

THe Greeks also have not ouerpassed this in silence: for what is it that they
have not meddled withal? The white clay or earth wherewith they use to marle
their grounds in the territory of Megara, those only I mean which are moist
and cold, they call Leucargillae. These marles (all the kind of them) do
greatly enrich France and Britain both, and therefore it would not be amiss
to speak of them more exactly. In old time there were two sorts thereof, and no
more: but of late days (as men's wits are inuentiue every day of one thing or
other) they have begun to find out more kinds, and to use the same: for there
are now diverse marles, the white, the red, the Columbine, the clay soil, the
stony, and the sandy: and all these are but two withal, and the pit thereof
found among springs or fountains, it will cause the ground to be infinite

CHAP. VIII.
Sundry sorts of Earth and Marle.

OF those marles which are found to be fat, the white is chief; and thereof be
many sorts. The most mordant and sharpest of them all, is that whereof we
spoke before. A second kind there is of chalkish clay, which our goldsmiths
use (called Tripela:) this lies a great depth within the earth, insomuch as
many times men are driven to sink pits 100 foot deep, for it; and those have a
small and narrow mouth above, but within-forth and under the ground they be
dug wider, by reason that the vein thereof runs many ways, in manner of
other metal mines. This is the marle so much used in Britain: the strength
thereof being cast upon a land, will last 80 years; and never yet was the man
known that herewith marled the same Cymini. Turneb. reads Signini, and mea
neth thereby shards of potters work and such like rubbish.
Cumine. The Columbine marle, the Gauls call in their language, by a name
borrowed of the Greeks, Pelias, (i. Dove or Pigeon marle:) it is fetched out of
the ground in clots and lumpes, like as stones be hewed out of quarries: with
Sun and the frost together, it will resolve and cleave into most thin slates
or flakes. This marle is as good for corn as for herbage. As for

The Vbians, upon my knowledge, use to enrich their ground and make itmore
battle (though their territory otherwise be most fertile) with any earth
whatsoever; provided always that it be dug up three foot deep at least, and
laid a foot thick; a devise that no other country does practice: howbeit this
soil and manner of manuring, continues good not above ten years: the Heduans
and Pictones, have forced their grounds and made them most plentiful, with
limestone; which is found also by experience to be passing profitable for vines
and olives.

To come now to the ordering of this piece of husbandry: the ground ought to be
ploughed first, before marle of any sort be cast upon it; to the end that the
medicinable virtue and substance

CHAP. IX.
The use of ashes upon lands: of Dung: what grain or pulse sown, does make
the ground more plentiful, and what burns it.

THe people dwelling beyond the Po, make such account of ashes for to enrich
the grounds withal, that they prefer it before hors-muck, and such like: which
dung (because they take it to be very light) they burn also into ashes for
that purpose. Howbeit (as we have said before) in one and the same corn-land,
they use not ashe^ and mucke both at once: no more do they cast ashes in
hortyards for to nourish young trees, nor in fields, for some kind of corn. Some
are of judgment, that grapes are fed with dust: who also do cast dust upon
them when they begin to bloome, yea and bestrew dust upon the roots as well of
Vines as other trees. Certain it is,

As for mucke, there be diverse sorts thereof, and in old time much use there
was of it: for in Homer we read, that long ago the good old king [(...)] was
found laying soil and dung upon his land with his own hands. The first that
devised mucking of grounds, was (by report) Augea^ a king in Greece: but
Hercules divulged the practice thereof among the Italians, who in regard of
that invention immortalized their K. Stercutius the son of Faunus. M. Varro
esteems the dung of Blackbirds (gathered out of their bartons where they be
kept in mew) above al others. He highly magnifieth and extolleth it also, for
that it brings forth so good forage to feed Columella rangeth Pigeons dung
gathered out of Doue-cotes: the third place he gives to that of Hens, and
other land pullen, rejecting altogether the dung of water-foule. Howbeit all
other Authors (setting these two aside) attribute with one voice and consent
unto the excrements of man's body, the greatest praise for this purpose. Some of
them prefer man's urine, and namely, when the hairs of beast-hides have bin
soked therewith and quicke-lime together in the Tanners pits. Others use urine
alone by it self, only they mingle water with it again, Columella condemns
it. Some praise the mucke of any foure-footed beasts whatsoever, so they were
fed with Tree-trifolie, called Cytisus. Others prefer the doung of Pigeons
before any other; in the second place that of Goats; thirdly of sheep; then of
kine and oxen; and lastly of cart-jades, mules, asses, and such like. Thus you
see as well what difference there was Varro, among many other precepts, adds
and says, That corn grounds would be manured with hors-dung, because it is
the lightest; but meadows require compost that is heavier, and namely, made by
they eat and chew their meat most leisurely. But daily experience teaches the
contrary, and testifies

Furthermore, all men are of opinion, that nothing is better for the ground,
than to sow Lupines thereupon; provided always, that before it cod, it be
turned into the ground by the plough, spade, or two-piked iron forke: also when
it is cut down, to make it into wads or bottles, and so to bury them at the
roots of trees, and vines especially. In countries where there are no cattle
to better the lands, it is thought good to manure the same in stead of beasts
dung, with very hawme, straw, and fern. Cato has a devise to make an
artificial mucke or compost of litter, lupine straw, chafe, bean stalks,
leaves and branches both of Mast-holm and oak. He says moreover to the same
purpose: Weed out of the standing corn Herba Acten.
Walwort [otherwise called Danewort] and Hemlock; also from about o^er-plots,
pluck up rank weeds, or ground Elder; also Reeke or Sea-grasse, and dead
leaves or branches lying rotten under trees: when thou haste so done, strew,
and lay a course of them under sheep where they be folded. Item, If the Vine
begin Item, where thou meanest to sow any wheat or such like breadcorn, draw
thy sheep thither, and there fold them. He says moreover, that the sowing of
some grain is as good as a dunging to the ground: for these be his very words,
The fruit it self of the earth is a batling to the earth; and namely, Lupines,
Beans, and Vetches, for they muck the lands: like as on the contrary side,
Chiches do burn the ground, both because they are plucked, and also for that
they stand upon salt. Semblably does Barley, Foenigreeke, Eruile, and generally
all kind of pulse which are pulled and not mowne down. Item, Take heed (quoth
Cato) that you set no pepins or kernels, where you mean to sow corn. As for
Virgil, he is of opinion, that

CHAP. X.
The planting and setting of trees: the manner how trees do grow, by a Sion
sliued and plucked from the root.

NOw that we have already sufficiently treated of the considerations as well of
the air and Trogus, who was verily persuaded, That about Babylon the leaves
only of Date trees being set or sown, would prove trees. Now whereas there
be so many devises abouesaid for to nourish trees, this you must understand,
that some trees there be which will grow by many of these ways before
specified, and others by them all. And verily the most part of this knowledge
has been taught by [i. the fruit] are sown. Medlars likewise may come up of
seed. But all the sort of these that spring after this manner, be late ere they
be come forward, and slow in growth: they turn also to a degenerat and bastard
nature, and had need to be graffed anew ere they be restored to their
Democritus shows another devise also to increase Myrtles, namely, to take the
fairest and biggest berries thereof, and lightly to bruise or bray them in a
mortar, so that the grains or kernels within be not broken; and then to besmere
with the batter or stamped substance thereof, a course cord made of Spart or
Spanish broom, or else hempen hurds, and so lay it along within the ground.
Thus there will spring thereof, a marvelous thick hay or wall (as it were) of
young Myrtles: out of which, the small twigs you may draw which way you will,
yea, and plant them elsewhere. After the like manner, folk use to sow thorns or
brambles for to make hedges and mounds, namely, by anointing such another
hempen rope with bramble blacke-berries, and interring the same. As for Bays
thus sown, when they come once to bear a dark and blackish leaf: Myrtles
also, when their leaves be of a wine color, to wit, of a deep red (which
commonly happens when they be three years old) it will be time

Among those plants and trees that are sown of seeds, Mago makes much ado,
and is foully troubled about those trees that bear nuts, and such like fruit
in shells: for to begin with almonds first, he would have them to be set in a
soft clay ground that lies into the South: and yet he says again that Almond
trees love a hot and hard soil; for in a fat or moist ground, they will either
die or else wax unfruitful. But above all, he gives a rule to choose Almonds for
to set or sow, that be mo st^oked, and especially such as were gathered from a
young tree: also he ordains, that they should be well soked or infused in
soft beast sherne or thin dung, for three days together: or at leastwise in
honied water, a day before they be put into the ground. Item, they ought (by
his saying) to be set charil^ with the sharp and pointed end pitched downward,
and the edge of walnuts, they be laid along within the earth, with this regard,
that they do ly upon their ioints.

The Citron tree will grow of seed, and may be set also of sprigges or twiggs
drawn to the ground from the tree, and so couched. Servis trees come of the
grains thereof sowed of a quickset plant also with the root, or of a slip
plucked from it. But as the Citron trees live in hot grounds, so these Servises
love cold and moist.

As concerning seminaries and nourse-gardens, Nature has showed us the reason
and manner thereof, by certain trees that put forth at the root a thick spring
of young shoots or sions; but lightly the mother that bears these imps,
kills them when she has done, with her shade and dropping together. And this
is evident to be seen in Laurels, Pomegranate trees, Planes,

For to make a good pepinnier or nource-garden, there would be chosen a
principal and special piece of ground* for oftentimes it falls out, yea and
meet it is, that the nource which gives suck should be more tender over the
infant, than the own natural mother that bare it. In the first place
therefore, let it be sound and dry ground, how be it furnished with a good and
succulent elemental moisture, and the same broken up and afterwel dug over
and over with mattock and spade, and brought to temper and order, so as it be
nothing coy but ready to receive al manner of plants that shall come, and to
entertain them as welcome guests; and withal, as like as may be to that ground
unto which they must be removed at last. But before al things this would be
looked to, that it be rid clean of all stones; surely fenced also and paled
about, for new roots: and last of all, these pepins or kernels ought to stand a
foot and a half asunder: for Cato gives counsel to stick forks about their
beds a man's height, and lay hurdles over them, so as the Sun may be let in
underneath: and those hurdles to cover and thatch over with straw or holme, for
to keep out the cold in winter. Thus are young plants of Pear trees and Apple
trees nourished: thus Pine nut trees, thus Cypresses which do likewise come up
of ^eed are cherished.

As for the grains or seeds of the Cypres tree, they be exceeding small, and so
small indeed; that some of them can scarce be discerned well by the eye.
Wherein the admirable work of Nature would be considered, to wit, that of so
little seeds should grow so great and mighty trees, considering how far bigger
are the corns of Wheat and Barley (to make no reckoning nor speech of Beans)
in comparison of them. What should we say to Pear trees and Apple trees? what
proportion or likeness is there between them, and the pretty little pepins
whereof they take their beginning? Marvel we not, that of so slender and small
things at the first, they should grow so hard, as to check and turn again the
very edge of ax and hatchet? that frames and stocks of presses should be made
thereof so strong and tough, as will not shrink under the heauiest poise and
weights that be? that Mast-poles coming thereof should be able to bear

CHAP. XI.
The manner of translating or replanting out of one seminary or nource-garden
unto another. How Elmes are to be planted. Also as touching trenches.

SOme would have us to remove plants out of one seminary into another, before
they be set indeed where they should be for to continue: which me-thinkes is a
matter of more toil and curiosity than necessity, howsoever they make
promise, that by such transplanting, the leaves will prove larger and broader.

Now for Elms, their seed or grain is to be gathered about the The first of
March.
Calends of March, when it begins to turn yellow, and before the leaves
break forth. After it has bin dried in the shadow for two days, it is to be
sown thick in a plot of ground well broken up and laid hollow beforehand, Nine
foot distant every way from another, for trees were planted ordinarily with
that space between: as may appear in the next chapter.
Novenarius, 3 foot deep in the ground, and as many broad, or rather more, they
are set: which done, for three foot in height every way about the foot of each
tree from the ground as it stands, there must be banks raised of some earth,
after the manner of those seats which they call Arulae in Campanie. As for the
spaces between tree and tree, they ought to be set out and disposed according
to the nature and situation of the place, and as the ground will give leave. In
the champion and plain country, those would be planted that are of a drier
nature, and likewise in a thinner course. As for Ashes and Poplars, because
they make have to spring, leaf, and bud out betimes, it is meet that their
plants likewise were set and ranged with the first, that is to say, about the
The 13 day of February.
Ideas of February; for they also grow of plants, and may well be replanted.

Now for the order of setting trees either in groves, hort-yards, or
vine-yards, we ought to

The Opiets or Wich-Hazels are sown of seed after the same manner as Elm: in
like sort also are they to be removed and transplanted out of their
nource-plots, as if they were wild, drawn from the very forests.

Moreover, above all things this would be considered, that a tree to be removed
ought to be translated either into the like ground from whence it came, or else
into a better. For we must take heed how we remove plants out of warm grounds,
and where the fruit is early ripe, into others Item, if it be possible, let the
trenches be cast and dug so long before, that a good thick green sourd be
ouergrowne against the time that you mean to plant. Mago is of opinion, That
the said trenches should stand made a year before at the least, that they
might be fully seasoned with the Sun, and receive all rain, wind, and weather
thoroughly. But in case it fall out otherwise, that the opportunity thereof be
ouerslipt, o^ our leisure will not serve, he would have fires to be made in the
midst of them two months before, and in no case any trees to be set but after
showers of rain. And if the ground be tough or hard, and standing upon the
cley, the ditches ought (according to Mago) for to be three cubits deep every
way: and if they be toplant plum trees, he would have them be a hand-bredth
more, or of a quadrangle. In the measure and proportion of these ditches, the
Greek writers do accord Cato is of another judgment, If (quoth he) the place
be waterish, let the trenches be three foot broad in the mouth, but in the
bottom not above a foot and a hand-breadth, but see they be four foot deep:
provided always, that they be It seems that Cato meant of trenches to drain
water out of low grounds: and not as Pliny mistaketh.
paued beneath with stone: and for want thereof, laid with green willow
bastons, and for default of them, with vine cuttings, or such trousse, so that
they lie half a foot thick. But considering the nature of trees whereof we
have before written, I think it not amiss to add somewhat of mine own,
namely, The more ebb that any roots of trees creep under the ground, the
deeper they must be set into the earth, as for example, the Ash and the Olive
tree: for they and such other like ought to stand four foot deep. As for all
Papyrius Cursor a Roman in General, in a bravery, when he meant to terrify the
Praetor of the Praenestines.) Whereby it is plain that the more secure and safe
way in his judgment was rather to cut the stock and master Root indeed, than
slightly to pare away those bare roots that appear naked above ground; for
that might be done, and the tree never the worse for it.] Some there be that
would have round peble stones laid in the bottom of such ditches, which might
as well contain and keep water, as let it forth and give issue thereto: whereas
broad flat stones would not so do, but besides, hinder the root that it should
not go down and take hold of the earth. For to keep therefore a mean
between, it were good in mine opinion, to lay gravel under the root.

Moreover, there be diverse men of this mind, that a tree should not be removed,
either under two years old, or above three: whereas others make no question to
transplant them after the first year* without more ado. Cato allows not of
translating a tree, unless it bear in thickness more than 5 fingers. And
verily, so exactly has he written hereof, that he would not have forgotten, to
mark in the bark of trees the South side, before they were taken up, in case,
he had thought that it was material to the replanting of them, that they
should stand just in the same position and accustomed coast of the heaven, as
they did before; for fear least that side which regarded the North, if now it
should be opposed against the South, might cleave and rift with the heat of the
Sun, not used thereto: and contrariwise, the parts which looked Southward,
Scanfile^, reading it (...), (...) for (...), ou^ (...), (i.) more (...) and
fruitful.
more easy to climb. Most men take great heed of this only, that when they
prune trees, and cut off the top ends of boughs, the cut may be toward the
South; without any regard or consideration, that in so doing they expose the
boughs to the danger of cleaving, by reason of the hot Southern wind which
lies incessantly beating upon them. Yet hold I rather with them, that would
have branches cut Southeast or Southwest, namely, toward the points where the
Sun is, at the fifth and eight hours of the day. Another secret there is
besides, whereof they are as ignorant, howbeit, not to be neglected, namely, to
beware that the roots of such trees Cato utterly condemns al manner of winds
whatsoever, yea, and rain too, all the while that trees be in remoouing.
Moreover, in this case it is singular good, that there hang to the roots of
these trees, when they be translated, as much of the old earth wherein they
lived and grew before, as may be, yea, and (if it were possible) to bring them
away with the turfes whole and entire, lapped fast about the roots. And
therefore Cato provided well, that such young plants should be carried in baskets,
earth and altogether with the roots. Doubtless, not without very great reason
there is one Author says, That it is suffi^nt that the uppermost course of the
old mouth that lay at the foot of the tree should be put (...) the root thereof
now when it is replanted. Some write, that if the bottom of the hole or grave
be paued with stone where Pomegranate trees should stand, the Apple or fruit
that they Cato judges to be a principal

CHAP. XII.
Of the spaces and distances that ought to be between trees planted: of their
shadows and droppings: of the place where they should be planted.

IT belongs to this place properly for to speak of the distances between tree
and tree, in the setting. Some writers are of opinion, That Pomgranat trees,
Myrtle trees, and Laurels, should be planted thicker than ordinary, howbeit,
with this regard, that they be set 9 foot a sunder Atticus is of opinion, That
the shadow of Elmes is one of the thickest and most hurtful: neither do I
make any doubt thereof, if they be let to spread into great arms and boughs
at liberty: marie, if the branches thereof, or if any tree within-forth be
shrigged, I think that the shade will do no harm at all. The Plane tree
carries a heavy head, and therefore casts a thick shade, howbeit, pleasant
it is, and refreshes those that sit under it: safe resting there is upon the
grass, rather than the bare ground: and there is not a tree again where
grass grows thicker and longer, to cover the banks and seats under it. As
for the white Poplar or Aspen tree, it makes little or no shade at all, the
leaves keep such a wagging and trembling, and never hang still: the shadow of
the Alder have their leaves hanging by a long tail, cast but a light and
slender shadow. And truly the

As touching the dropping of trees, a man may conclude in one word all that
belongs thereunto. For look what trees soever be so defended and clad with
thick leaued branches, that the rain cannot pass readily through them, be sure
the dropping and distillation of such is naught and dangerous. And therefore it
skilleth very much in this matter and question now in hand, Cato following the
judgment of all Italy, ordaines in these words, That they should stand asunder
five and twenty foot at the least, and thirty at the most: but this rule
holds not always; for herin guided we must be by the nature and site of
places, which vary and differ much. For in Boetica, which is a part of Spain,
there is not another tree growing, bigger than the Olive: and if we may give
credit to authors that have written hereof, there be in Affricke, by their
report many of them called Milliariae, for that every year they yield a
thousand pound weight of oil; apeece. And therefore Mago allowed threescore and
fifteen foot every way, for distance between

Now of all other follies this is one, and bewraieth shameful blindness and
ignorance, To be driven to make glades between trees when they be grown to a
good bigness: and namely, either by lopping their boughs too much for to let in
light between, and so by this means to hasten their age and decay; or else to
draw them by cutting them down clean: wherein oftentimes they that did set
them at first, take themselves in the manner, and blame their own want of skill.
Considering therefore, that there is no greater shame can happen to husbandmen
then to repent

CHAP. XIII.
What trees grow but slowly: and which they be that soon come forward: also,
of the Sauine.

SOme trees by nature are slack of growth, and principally those that come of
seed, and live longest. But such as soon decay and die, are quick of growth,
as the Fig tree, Pomegranat tree, Plumme-tree, Apple Tree, Peare-tree, Myrtle,
and Willow: but they make amends for their short life in this, that they go
before others in fruit, and enrich their masters quickly, for

The work of Nature in sending out these sprigs, taught us the feat to couch
and lay sets in the ground by way of propagation: and even after the same
manner briers and brambles do of themselves put forth a new offspring: for
growing as they do, small and slender, and withal running by good husbandry.
The consideration whereof makes me to enter into this conceit. That Catoes
saying, not only the Vine, but Fig trees and Olives also, will grow and
increase of cuttings couched in the ground; likewise Pomegranate trees, all
kinds of Apple Trees, Baies, Plum-trees, Myrtles, Filberds, Hazels of
Praeneste, yea, and Plane-trees. Now be there two ways to increase trees by
way of propagation or enterring their twigs. The first is, to force a branch of
a tree as it grows, down to the ground, and so to couch it within a trench
four foot square every way; and after two years to cut it atow, where it bent
from the tree: and after three years end to transplant it. But if a man list

CHAP. XIIII.
Of increasing trees by seed: the manner of graffing one in another: how the
fine devise

NAture not willing to conceal any thing from man, has also taught him to
engraffe trees with their seed and grain. For oftentimes it happens, that
birds being hungry, have greedily gobled up seed and fruit whole and sound,
which after they have moistened in their gorge, and tempered it also with the
warmth and natural heat of their stomach, they send forth and squirt out again
when they meute, together with their dung, that gives unto it a virtue of
fecunditie, and so lay it upon the soft beds of tree leaves, which many a time
the winds catch and drive into some clifts and cranies of the bark, by means
whereof, we have seen a Cherrie tree upon a Willow, a Plane tree upon a
Laurel, a Laurel upon a Cherrie trre: and at Virgil teaches us to open a
concauity in the knot or joint of a bud that drives out the bark, and within
it to enclose the gem or bud taken out of another tree. And thus much for the
graffing that Nature has showed.

But there is another way of graffing, which casualtie and chance has taught.
And to say a minding to mound and empale his cottage round about with a fence
of an hedge; to the

To come then unto our graffing, which we have learned by this occasion: first,
the head or upper part of the stock must be sawed off very even, and then pared
smooth with a sharp gardenhook or cutting-knife: which don, there offers unto
us a twofold way to perform the rest of the work: The first is, to set the
graffe or Sion between the bark and the wood: for in old time truly, men were
afraid at first to cleave the stock; but soon after they ventured to bore a
hole into the very heart of the wood: and then they set fast into the pith just
in the mids thereof, but one Item, That the clift be not above 3 fingers deep;
that it be straight and direct; and lastly, that the impe stand so close bark
to bark in the socket, that a man may not see between it and the stock.
Virgil will in no wise have a Sion or graffe to be taken from about the top of
a tree, for such are all naught. But this one thing is generally held for
certain, That the good imps to be graffed are those, which be gathered from
those arms of the tree that regard the Sunrising in summer: Item, That all
such graffs come from the boughs that bear well: also that they be new tender
shoots of the last year (unless they are to be graffed in the stock of an old
tree, for then there should be chosen such as are stronger:) moreover, this is
to be regarded, that they be in water. Moreover, we ought be well advised,
that we sharpen not the end of a graffe in the Cato wills us to take cley,
or the sandy grit of chalk, mixed together with ox or cow shearn, to work
and temper all these together in manner of a tough past or cataplasme, and then
to lay the same within the clift, and round about to daube all. And verily by
this and other such rules which he has left in writing, it appears plainly,
that in those days the manner was to graffe between the bark and the tree,
and not otherwise; as also to set the sions in the stock, not above two
fingers deep. As for Apple trees and Pyrries, he prescribes Cato, who not
content to have defended the graft with clay or past aforesaid, yea and to
preserve it with turfe and moss against the injury of rain and cold, to have
bound it about also with little knitches of soft osier twigs sliued in twain;
must give charge besides to cover it with Oxe-tongue (a kind of herb there is
so called) i. Buglosse: and yet he has not done, but the same must be bound
with wispes and wreaths of straw and litter aloft. Now adays men make no more
ado, but think it sufficient to stop and close up bark and al, out of a
sudden, unless it be the Olive, the oilets or eyes whereof be longest while in
coming

CHAP. XV.
The manner how to graffe a Vine tree.

AS for the cuttings or sets of vines, they may be kept well a long time,
covered all over with Cato graffeth a vine stock three manner of ways: First,
he wills that the mother stock should be cut overthwart, and then cloven
through the very pith or heart in the mids, wherein he would have the young imps
(thwitted and sharpened as is beforesaid) to be set and ingraffed so, as the
marrow of the one and the other may join and meet just together. The second
manner is, when two vine stocks do reach one to the other, for to cut byas or
aslaunt (after the manner of a goats foot) two twigs or branches, of either
one, with this regard, that these cuts be of a contrary side the one unto the
other, and withal so deep, as that they come unto the pith or heart: then to
fit one to the other, joining

CHAP. XVI.
Of Emplastration or graffing with the Scutcheon.

THe manner of graffing by way of emplaistre or scutcheon, may seem also to
have come from inoculation: and this devise agrees best with those trees that
have thick barks, as namely Fig trees. To go therefore artificially to work,
the mother stock or tree to be graffed, must be well rid and cleansed from the
branches all about the place where you mean to Cato also our own Countryman,

Some there be who have intermingled and comprehended under this kind of
graffing with the scutcheon, that devise of making in the side a cleft, and
namely in vines; for they take forth a little square piece with the bark, and
then set in an impe very hard and close, on that side where it is plain and
even, to the very marow or pith. Certes, near to Thuliae in the Tyburtines
country,

CHAP. XVII.
An history showing the example and proof hereof.

IN this discourse and question concerning grafts, I cannot pass over the rare
observation of one example, practiced by Corellius a Knight of Rome, borne at
Ateste: This Gentleman of Rome, in a ferme that he had within the territory of
Naples, chanced to graffe a Chestnut with an imp cut from the same tree: This
graft took and bare fair Chestnuts and pleasant to the taste, which of him
took their name. After the decease of this gentleman, his heir (who had bin
sometime his bondslaue, and by him infranchised) graffed the foresaid Corellian
Chestnut tree a second time: and certainly between them both was this
difference, The former Corellian bare the more plenty, but the nuts of the
other twice graffed were the better. As for other into the earth, took root.
Many trees are planted after that manner, and especially the Fig Item, That the
bark be not broken or rased; that the nether end of the cut be set into the
ground, and namely, that part always which grew next the root; and last of al,
that they be banked well with earth about the place where they spring and bud
forth, until such time as the plant have gotten strength.

CHAP. XVIII.
The manner of planting, ordering, and d^essing Olive trees. Also which be the
convenient times for graffing.

WHat rules (by the judgment of Cato) are to be observed in the dressing and
husbanding of Olives, I think it best to set down here word for word, as he
has delivered them. Thus he says therefore: The trunches or sets of Olive
trees which thou meanest to lay in trenches, make them 3 foot long; handle them
gently and with great care, that in cutting, sharpning, or squaring them, the
bark take no harm nor pill from the wood. As for such as thou do purpose to
plant in a nourse-garden, for to remove again, see they be a foot in length,
and in this manner set them: Let the place be first dug thoroughly with a
spade until it be well wrought, lie light, and brought into temper: when thou
put the said truncheon into the ground, bear it down with thy foot; if it
go not willingly deep enough by that means,

Now if a man demand and would gladly know what is the fittest time for
planting olives, in one word I will tell him, Let him choose a dry ground in
seed time [i. in Autumne] and a fat or battle ground in the spring:
furthermore, begin to prune thy Olive tree 15 days before the Aequinox in the
spring, and from that time forward for the space of sorty days, thou can not
do amiss. The manner of pruning or disbranching them, shall be thus, Look
where thou see a place fertile, if thou spy any dry or withered twigs, or
broken boughs that the wind has met withal, be sure thou cut them away every
one: but if the plot of ground be barren, ear it up better with the plough,
take pains (I say) to till it well, to break all clots and make it even, to
cleanse the trees likewise of knurs and knots, and to discharge them of all
superfluous wood: also they will run within the ground, which is not good for
the trees; for in case they spread aloft,

As touching all the kinds of Olive trees, how may they be; also in what ground
they ought to be set, and wherein they will like and live best; likewise what
coast of the heaven they should regard; we have showed sufficiently in our
discourse and treatise of Oil. Mago has given order in his books of
husbandry, that in planting them upon high grounds, in dry places, and in a
vein of clay, the season should be between Autumn and mid-Winter: but in case
you have a fat, moist, or waterish soil, he sets down a longer time, namely
from harvest to mid-winter. But this rule of his you must take to be respective
to the clymat of Africa only: for in Italy at this day verily men use to plant
most in the Spring: howbeit if a man has a mind to be doing also Vergiliae.
Brood-hen star, there are no more but 14 days ill for planting. In Barbary
the people have this practice peculiar to themselves, For to graffe in a wild
Olive stock, whereby they continue a certain perpetuity: for ever as the boughs
that were graffed, and (as I may say) adopted first, wax old and grow to decay,
a second quickly puts forth afresh, taken new from another tree, and in the
same old stock sneweth young and lively; and after it a third successively, and
as many as need; so as by this means they take order to eternise their Olives;
insomuch as one Olive plant has bin known to have prospered in good estate a
world of years. This wild Olive aforesaid may be graffed either with sions
set in a cliffe, or else by way of inoculation with the scutcheon aforesaid. But
in planting of Olives this heed must be taken, that they be not set in a hole
where an Oak has been stocked up by the root: for Mago says, that almond
trees ought to be planted between the setting of Arcturus and the shortest day
in the year. As for Pear trees, they are not to be set all at one and [i. the
Shaft.] The Laurel would be put in the ground, from the Egle-star, unto the
fall of the Shaft aforesaid: for certainly the observation of the time,
pertinent to the planting of trees, agrees much-what after this manner; and for
the most part, men do accord and ordain, That it should be done in the spring
and Autumn especially. Another season there is about the rising of the
Dog-starre, which few men take knowledge of, because it is not so generally
practiced, nor found alike profitable to all beasts and other living creatures
have an appetite to engender, but the earth also, and all the

CHAP. XIX.
What trees they be that love to sort and keep company together. The skill
and feat of baring the roots of trees, and also of hilling or banking them
about.

THere is besides a new manner of grafting trees, which I will not ouerpasse:
for my purpose is not willingly to omit ought, that I have found in any book
as touching this argument. And Columella, as himself affirms, was the first
deviser thereof, namely, to conioin trees of diverse natures, and such as
otherwise cannot abide society and fellowship together, as for example,
Fig Trees and Olive trees. He, I say, would have a Fig Tree to be planted near
unto an Olive, and so near indeed, as that a bough or branch of the olive may
reach unto the Fig Tree at ease, considering that it is very supple and pliable
otherwise, and ready to follow and be led as are grown and united together.
But in the fourth year it is cut wholly from the own

Moreover, the same regard and consideration above rehearsed, as touching the
nature of grounds, whether they be hot, cold, moist, or dry, has showed us
also the manner of digging furrows and ditches. For in watery places it will
not be good to make them either deep or large: whereas contrariwise, in a hot
and dry soil they would be of great capacity, both to receive and also to hold
store of water. And verily, this is a good point of husbandry for to preserve
not only young plants* but old trees also: for in hot countries, men use in
Summer time to raise hillocks and banks about their roots, and cover them all
therewith, for fear lest the extreme heat of the Sun should scoreh and burn
them. But in other parts the manner is to dig away the earth, and

CHAP. XX.
Of Willow and Osier plots: of places where reeds and Canes are nourished: also
of other trees that be usually cut for poles, props, and stakes.

IT remains now to speak of those trees which are planted and nourished for
others, and for Vines especially: to which purpose, their wood is usually
lopped to serve the turn. Among which, Willowes and Oisiers are the chief,
and to be placed in the foremost rank: and ordinarily they love to grow in moist
and watery grounds. Now, for the better ordering of the Oisier, the place would
be well dug before, and laid soft two foot and a half deep, and then
planted with little twigs or cuttings of a foot and a half in length, and
those pricked in: or else stored with good big sets, which, the fuller and
rounder they be in hand, so much better they are for to grow, and sooner will
they prove to be trees. Between the one and the other, there ought to be

To the same purpose men are wont to plant the white poplar or Aspe, in manner
following. First, a piece of ground, or a quarter, must be dug and made
hollow two foot deep: and therein ought to be laid cuttings of a foot and a half
in length, after they have had two days drying: but so, as they stand one from
another, a foot and a handbreadth, and be covered over with mould two cubits
thick.

As touching canes and reeds, they love to grow in places more wet and waterish
than either the Willows and Oisiers above said, o^ the Poplars. Men use to
plant their bulbous roots, which some call their oilets or eyes, in a trench of
a span depth: and those two foot and an half asunder.

The best stays to bear up Vines, are made of the Chestnut tree: for why? the
wood is gentle and tractable; tough withal, and enduring long: besides, it
has this property, that cut it when you list, it will spring again more
plentifully than any willowes. It loves to grow in a gentle

Moreover, the Mast-tree called Esculus, is planted and comes up in like
sort: howbeit, passing untoward and unwilling they are to grow, and therefore
they stand ten years at least before they be cut and lopped. Set Acorns of this
tree Esculus whersoeuer you please, they will surely Sarr^ie.
of this wood, lasts very well and rotteth not: and in very truth, the more
that the tree it self is cut and mangled, the better it springs and puts
forth new shoots.

Over and besides these trees abouenamed, there be others that use to be cut
and lopped for Vine props and stays; to wit, the Ash, the Bay tree, the Peach
and Hazell tree, yea, and the Apple tree: but these are all of them lateward
and slow of growth: neither will they endure so well without rotting, if they
stand any time in the ground, and much less will they abide any we^. But on
the other side, the Elder tree of all others is most firm for to make poles and
stakes of. It will grow of sions and imps even as the Poplar. As for the
Cypress tree, we have of it spoken

CHAP. XXI.
The manner and skill of husbanding and dressing Vineyards.

NOw that we have treated sufficiently of the instruments, furniture, and
tackling as it were belonging to Vineyards, it remains to speak of the
nature of vines, and to deliver with especial regard the manuring and dressing
them. According therefore as we may see in Vines and some other trees, which
have within them a spungeous matter and light substance, their twigs and
branches do contain a kind of marrow or pith enclosed between certain knots
[i. Oilets or Eyes:] marie in the very top they be named by them Germina [i.
Sprigs or Burgeons.] After this order are ingendered the maine branches, the
smaller Nepotes.
sprigs yearly cut away, the grapes, leaves, and young tendrils of Vines. But
hereat I wonder most, that the burgeons coming forth on the right side, be
always more tough and firm than those of the left. To come now unto the
planting of these vines: the shoots or branches must be cut just in the midst
between the foresaid knots or ioints,

As for the Vine, there is not a tree that is planted more sundry ways, nor
affourdeth greater store of sions or sets than it. For first and foremost,
nothing thereof is planted, but that which is [i. Shafts:] for the same sions
only cut off and not

Now, when you have gotten such sets as be meet for planting; let them be a
foot long at the

Besides all this, there is another pretty and wanton devise, more curious ywis
than needful, to plant Vines, and ^mely, after this manner. Take four
branches of four vines growing together, and bearing sundry kinds of grapes;
bind them well and strongly together in that part where they are most rank and
best nourished: being thus bound fast together, let them pass along Columella
holds it for certain, and assures us upon his word, That the grapes coming
of such a vine will have no stones or kernels at all within them. A strange
thing and passing wonderful, that the very set it self should live; and that
which more is, grow and bear, notwithstanding the pith or marrow is taken
quite away.

Furthermore, since we are entered thus far into this discourse and argument, I
cannot pass by but I must needs speak of such twigs and branches of trees as
will knit and grow together even to a tree. For, certain it is, that if you take
five or six of the smallest sprigs of box, bind them

It remains now to speak of the manner of Vineyards and Vines themselves.
Where in the first place, there offer unto us five sorts thereof. For some
train and run along upon the ground spreading every way with their branches:
others grow upright and bear up themselves without any stays. Some rest upon
props, without any traile or frame at all: others be bornvp with Compluviata
vitis, because it resembles the hollow course of gutter tiles, that in houses
receive all rain water and cast it off. For as the cross dormant in building
shuts off the rain by four gutters, even so is this Vine led and carried
four ways, upon as many trailes. Of this Vine and the manner of planting it,
we will only speak, for that the same ordering will serve well enough in every
kind besides: marie there be far more

CHAP. XXII.
Of furrows and trenches wherein vines are planted: also of pruning vines.

IT suffices that the furrow or trench wherein a vine is to be planted, be a
spade or shouels bit breadth: but ditches would be three foot long every way.
Be it furrow, trench, or ditch, wherein a vine is to be replanted, it ought to
be three foot deep; and therefore no plant thereof should be removed so
little, but that it might over and besides stand above ground, and show two
buds at the least in sight. Needful it is moreover, that the earth be well
loosened and made more tender and gentle, by small furrows ranged and trenched
in the bottom of the ditch; yea and be tempered sufficiently with dung. Now if
the vineyard lie pendant upon the hanging of

As touching the bounding and limitation of a vineyard, the Decumanus. Limes.
principal way which runs straight East and West, ought to carry 18 foot in
breadth, to the end that two carts may pass easily one by another, when they
meet; the other cross allies, dividing every acre just into the mids, must be
ten foot broad: but if the plot or model of the vineyard will bear it, these
Cardi^es.
allies (i.) that at every fifth perch or pole that shoreth them up, there be a
path dividing every range and course, and one bed or quarter from another. If
the ground be stiff and hard, it must of necessity be twice dug over, and
therein quick-sets only that have taken root, must be replanted: marie in case
it be a loose mould, light, and gentle, you may set very cuttings and sions
from the stock, either in furrow or in trench, choose you whether. But say it be
a high ground and upon the hill, better is it to cast it into furrows
overthwart, than to dig it; that by this means the perches or props may keep
up the ground better, which by occasion of rain water would settle downward.
When the weather is disposed to rain, or the ground by nature dry, it is good
planting vine-sets, or sions Cato his mind, who expressly excepteth and
rejects them. If the ground be of a middle temperature, there ought to be a
space of five foot distance between every vine: and in case it be a rich and
fertile soil, there would be four foot at least from one to another; but in
a lean hungry piece of light ground, there should be eight foot at the most:
for whereas the Vmbrians and Marsians leave twenty foot void between every
range of vines, they do it for to plough and sow in the place, and therein
they have quarters, beds and ridges, called Porculeta. If the place where you
plant a vineyard be subject to thick and dark mists, or to a rainie
disposition of the weather, vines ought to be set the thinner: but in a dry
quarter, it is meet they should be planted thick. every such rooted plants,
with vine cuttings for store, so as the quicksets may grow in his

As touching props and shores to support vines, the best, (as we have said) are
those of the Oak or Olive tree; for default whereof, ye may take good stakes
and forks of Juniper, Cypress, Laburnium, and the Elder. As for those perches
that be of other kinds, they ought to be cut and renewed every year. Howbeit,
to lay over a frame for vines to ^un upon; the best poles are of Reeds and
Canes, for they will continue good five years, being bound many of them
together. nourished, and permitted to grow on end, unless her feebleness be
against it: but when the third [i. the Keeper, or Watch:] a young branch this
is, and no longer than it may well carry three buds: which the next year is
like to bear wood and repair all, in case the old vine stock should miscarry
and spend it self by carrying too great a burden. Also another

Moreover, a vine if it be suffered to bear before the seventh year after it
was first set of a cutting or sion, decaieth sensibly and soon dies: neither
is it thought good to let the old wood run on still in length upon the frame,
as far as to the fourth forke that vnderproppeth it, (such old crooked branches
some call Dracones, others Iuniculos) to make thereof huge and great trailes of
vines termed Masculeta. But worst of all it is, to seem for to propagate or
draw in a long traile within the ground vines in a vineyard, when they be
grown hard with age. When the vine is five years old, a man may boldly wind
and twine the very branches, so as out of every they must be writhed and
twisted in manner aforesaid, so as the vine stock may put forth no more Quinis,
rather B^nis, i. twain.
five, if it be light and lean And in one word, better it is without all
question, that they be left many, than long. As for those points which we have
delivered heretofore, as touching the nature of the soil, they will be more
effectually seen to prove either the goodness or the contrary, in the grapes
of this vine, by how much nearer they lie to the ground than others. Wherein
consideration is to be had of the sundry sorts of vines; namely, that they be
severed apart; and nothing is better, than to sort every one with the tract or
region that agrees best with it, and therein to plant them accordingly: for
these mixtures of diverse kinds are never good, but always discordant: naught
in old wines that come to our table, much worse then you may be sure, in those
that be new and not yet tunned up. But if a man will intermingle plants of
sundry

For frames and trailes wherein vines are to run, the better and more battle
that the ground of the vineyard is, the plainer and euener that it lies, the
higher they would be from the ground; likewise if the place be subject to dews,
fogs, and mists, and nothing exposed to the winds: contrariwise, if the ground
be lean and dry, hot, and open to the winds, they must be the lower and nearer
the earth. As concerning the rafters, that lie over and reach from prop to
prop, they ought to be tied and fastened thereto with as straight and sure a
knot as is possible; whereas the Vine would be bound unto them, but slack. Of
the sundry sorts of Vines, as also which were to be planted in this or that
soil, and what coasts and climats each one of them loves, we have showed

Touching all other points of husbandry that remain behind; much doubt and
diverse questions are made: for many there be that fear not all Summer long to
be digging in the vineyard about vine-roots, after every little rain. Others
again forbid to meddle and be lusty therein, in the budding time: for it cannot
be avoided, but that the young oilets will either be smitten off clean, or else
galled or bruised one time or other, with their gate that go in and out
between: which is the cause, that they would have all kind of cattle to be
kept out that they come not near, and especially such as bear wool on their
backs; for sheep of all others soonest rub off the buds as they pass by, with
their shag coats. Moreover, they are of opinion, that all manner of raking and
harrowing, is an enemy to vines when they be in their flower, and putting
forth between vintage and mid-winter; howsoever some be of this mind, That it
suffices them

As for disburgening of vines, and clensing them of their superfluous leaves,
all men accord, that it should be done once in the Spring; to wit, after the
Ides of May, for the space of eleven days following; and in any hand before
they begin to put forth flower. And how much thereof must be thus diffoiled for
the first time? even all that is under the traile or frame, and no more. As for
the second, men be not all of one mind; some would have the leaves to be
disbranched when the vine has done flouring: others expect, until the grapes
begin to be ripe. But as touching these points, the rules that Cato gives, will
resolve us: for we are now also to show the manner of cutting and pruning vines.
Many men begin this work immediately after vintage, when the weather is warm
and temperat: but indeed (by course of Nature) this should never be done

As for the manner and fashion of the cut, it ought always to be aslant, like
a goats foot, that no drops of rain may settle and rest thereupon, but that
every shower may soon shoot off: also the hard wood, are so stiff and tough
also, that uneath a man may pluck them off with his fingers,

As for the pitching of props into the ground, some are of opinion that the
best way is to set them between two vines: and indeed that were the easier way
to come about the vines, for to lay their roots bare when time serves. Also,
better it is far so to do, in a vineyard where the vines run upon one single
traile, in case the said traile be strong enough, and the vineyard not subject
to the danger of winds: but where a vine runs four ways, it must be
relieved with prop and stays as near as may be, to support the burden; yet so,
as they be no hinderance when as men should come about the foot to lay the root
bare: and therefore they would be a cubit off, and no more. Moreover, this is a
general rule, that a vine be cleansed about the root beneath, before that it be
pruned above.

Cato treating generally of all matters concerning vines, writes thus by way of
rule and precept; Let your vine (quoth he) be as high as possibly you can:
fasten it to the frame decently, but take heed you bind it not too hard. Dress
and order it after this manner: After you have cut away the tips and tops
thereof, dig round about the roots, and be* in then to ear up and plow the
vineyard: draw furrows and ridges too and fro throughout. Whiles vines be young
and tender, couch the branches within the ground for propagation, with all
speed: as for old vines, geld them as little as you can, and keep them with a
good head; rather if need require, lay them along on the ground, and two years
after cut them hard to the root. If it be a young vine, attend until it be of
strength sufficient; then will it be time and not before to prune it. If happily
the vineyard be bare and naked of vines, and that they grow but thin here and
there, make furrows and trenches

As for graffing of vines, there are two seasons of the year meet therefore:
the one in the spring, the other when the vine does flower; and this is held
for the best. If you purpose to translate an old stock of a vine into another
place, and there to replant it, cut off the first thick arm only, leaving
behind two buds and no more. In taking of it up, be careful that you do it
with such dexterity, as that you race not nor wound the root. This done, look
how it grew before, so set it now, either in trench or furrow: couch it well and
close, and cover it thoroughly with good mould. After the same manner as is
beforesaid underset and prop it up, bind it, turn and wind it; but above all
be every while digging about it. As touching the drage called Ocymum, the which
Cato wills to be sowed in a vineyard, it is a kind of forage or prouender for
horses, which the Latins in old time named Pabulum; it comes up very
speedily and grows fast, and

CHAP. XXIII.
Of Trees ranged in rewes for to support Vines.

IT remains now in this discourse and treatise of Vines, to write of the
manner of trees planted of purpose for to serve their turn. And here I cannot
choose but call to mind, first, how this point of husbandry has bin judged
naught, and altogether condemned by the two Sarsennae, both father and son;
but contrariwise held for good, and highly commended by Scrofa: whereas all
three were reputed the most ancient writers, and skilfullest in this kind next
to Cato. Scrofa, as great a patron as he is thereof, allows not this device
in any clymate else but only in Italy. Howbeit, gone this has for current many
years past, and time out of mind, That the best and most dainty Wines came of
those grapes only which grew upon such Haut^ins or trees beforesaid. Yea, and
it was thought generally, that the higher a Vine climbed upon these trees, the
better grapes it bare, and yielded more commendable wine: and again, the

In Piemont, Lombardie, and those parts of Italy beyond the river Po, they use
for this purpose to plant their grounds with these trees over and besides those
aforenamed, to wit, the Cornell, the Opiet or Wich-hazell, the Teil or Linden,
the wild Ash Ornus, the Carpin Carme or Horn-beame, and the Oak. About Venice
and all that tract, the Willowes serve the turn and none else, by reason that
the whole soken stands so much upon water.

As touching the Elm, named in the first place, it must be kept plain and
bare, and the great

As touching the space or distance between one tree and another, the ordinary
proportion is, that afront and behind, in case the ground be erable, it bear
forty foot: but aflanke, or on the side, twenty. Marie, if it be not well
tilled and husbanded, so much will serve every way, to wit, twenty foot and no
more. Commonly every one of these trees maintains ten Vines at the foot
thereof: and a bad husband he is who has fewer reared about it than three. But
by the way, it is no good husbandry to suffer a tree thus to be coupled (as it
were) in marriage to so many Vines, before that it be of sufficient strength to
entertain them: for there is nothing so hurtful, by reason that the Vines will
choke and kill them; so quick they be of their growth, and so ready to
ouercharge them.

As for planting of Vine-sets to the root of trees, needful it is to make
therefore a ditch three foot deep: and they ought to be distant one from another
a full foot, and so much likewise from the tree. This don, there is no question
thereof the small twigs or shoots what to do with them? neither is there any
charge or expense required for digging and deluing: for this is the manner of
it, and this peculiar gift have these tree-rows, That in the same ground where
they grow, the sowing of corn is nothing hurtful, nay, it is profitable and
good for the Vines. Moreover, this commodity and easement comes of their
height, that they be able to save themselves: neither is there any such need,
as in other Vineyards, to be at the coast of walls, of mounds, pales, or hedges
ne yet of deep ditches or other fences, to keep off the violence or injuries of
beasts. Of all other toiles before rehearsed, there is no more required but to
look unto only the getting

But of couching sions and that kind of propagation, there be two devises.
First within paniers or baskets upon the boughs of the tree, and that is the be
best way, because it is safest from the danger of cattle. The second is, to
bend the Vine, or a branch thereof, close to the foot of her own tree, or else
about the next unto it: if it stand single and have no Vine joined unto it. As

Of late days devised was the manner of couching or planting by a trees side a
Vine Dragon (for so we use to call the old branch of a Vine past all service,
which has done bearing many a year, and is now grown to be hard.) And verily,
they use to make choice of the biggest they can find, which when they have cut
from the stock, they scrape and pil the bark, three four parts in length, so
far forth as it is to lie within the ground [wherupon they name it in Latin
Rasilis:] when it is thus couched low within a furrow, the rest that is above
the earth they rear up against language called Ampelodesmos [i. Vine-bind.] But
throughout all Greece they tie their vines

The manner of the Gauls in Lumbardy, in training of Vines from tree to tree,
is to take two boughs or branches of both sides, and draw them over, in case
the stock Vines that bear them be sorty foot asunder: but four, if they are
but twenty foot ^istant. And these meet one with

A Vine branch drawn thus along in a traile, they were wont to cut when it had
grown two years: for in such Vine stocks as by reason of age are charged with
wood, it is the better way to give time and leisure for to grow and fortify
the said branch that is to pass from tree to tree, so as the thicknes thereof
will give leave: yea and otherwise it is good for the old main bough

Yet is there one manner besides of planting and maintaining Vines, of a mean or
middle nature between couching or interring a branch, by way of propagation,
and drawing them thus in a traile from one to another: namely to supplant, that
is, lay along upon the ground the whole stock or main body of a Vine; which
done, to cleave it with wedges, and so to couch in many furrows or rays, as
many parcels thereof, coming all together from one. Now in case each one of
these branches or arms proceeding from one body, be of it self small, weak
and tender, they must be strengthened with long rods like staves bound unto them
round about; neither ought the small sprigs and twigs that spring out of the
side, be cut away.

The husbandmen of Novaria rest not contented with a number of these trailed
branches,

Our husbandmen moreover here about us, near unto the city of Rome, commit the
like fault, and find the same defect thereupon, in the Varracine Vines, that be
pruned but once in two years: a piece of husbandry by them practiced, not for
any good that it does unto the vine, but because the wine thereof is so cheap,
that oftener pruning would not quit cost, neither does the revenue answer the
labor and the charges.

In the territory of Carseoli (a champion and plain country about Rome, the
peasants take a better order, and hold a middle and temperat course. For their
manner is to proin and cut away from the Vine those parts only that are faulty
and rotten, when they begin once to dry and to wither, leaving all the rest
for to bear Grapes: and thus discharging it of the superfluous burden that it
carried, they hold opinion, that it is not good to wound it in diverse places:
for by

But to return again unto our plots planted with Trees and Vines coupled
together: such grounds when they be plowed require a good deep stitch, although
the corn therein sown need it not. Also it is not the manner to disburgen or
deffoile altogether such trees, and thereby a great deal of toil and labor is
saved: but when the Vines are a pruning, they would be disbranched at once with
them, where the boughs grow thickest; and to make a glade only through, the
superfluous branches would be cut away, which otherwise might consume the
nutriment of the grape. As for the cuts and wounds remaining after such pruning
and debranching,

Furthermore, a Vine has not the same liberty in a vineyard that it has upon
a tree: for better means there are, and easier it is to hide the said wounds
from the weather flanked as they be within those close sides; than to wryth and
wrest them to a man's mind to and fro. In lopping and shredding of trees, when
the cut stands open, there would be no hollow places made like cups, for
fear that water should stand therein. Last of all, if a Vine be to climb
Trees that are of any great height, there would be stays and appuies set to
it, whereupon it may take hold, and so by little and little arise and mount up
aloft.

CHAP. XXIIII.
The manner of keeping and preserving Grapes. Also the maladies whereto Trees be
subject.

IT is holden for a rule, That the best Vine-plants which run upon a frame of
rails, ought to be pruned in mid-March about the feast of Minerua, called
Quinquatrus: and if a man would preserve and keep their grapes, it would be
done in the wane of the Moon. Also, that such vines as be cut in the change of
the Moon, will not be su^iect to the injury and hurt of any noisome vermin.
Although in some other respect men are of opinion, that they should be cut in
the

And now that I have discoursed at large as touching the manner of planting,
graffing, and dressing of Trees, I purpose not here to treat again of Date
Trees and Tretrifoly, whereof I have sufficiently written already in the
Treatise of strange and foreign Trees: but forasmuch as my meaning is to omit
nothing, I will proceed forward to decipher those matters which concern
principally the nature of Trees, and namely their maladies and imperfections,
whereto they also as well as beasts and other living creatures, are subject.
And to say a truth, what creature is

Now concerning the diseases that haunt Trees: some there be that are common
unto all; others again, that extend peculiarly to some certain kind or other.
As for the former sort general

Now as touching the Worm, some trees are more subject unto it than others:
and to say a truth, in manner al, more or less; and that, the birds know well
enough, for with their bills they will job upon the bark, and by the sound
try whether they be worm eaten or no. But what say we to our gluttons and
belly gods in these days, who make reckoning among their dainty dishes, of
worms breeding in trees; and principally of those great fat ones bred in Oaks,
which

As for the misliking of trees [calsed Sideratio] whereby they consume, wither
away, and crumble [i. a Mieldeaw.] As for the Frost at such a time, it is far
worse than the blasting aforesaid, for when it falls upon any trees or
plants, it there rests and remains still, it congealeth all into an ye, and
no puff of wind there is to remove and dislodge it: for why? such frosts
commonly are not but in time of a still, clear, [i. a Knur, Puff, Meazil or
Blister] choose ^ou whether: and nothing is it but a very sendge or burn by the
sun.

Furthermore, Cato says, That the red Moss is hurtful unto trees. Oftentimes
also we find that as well Olives as Vines, take harm by overmuch fertility and
fruitfulnes. As sor scab and skurfe, what tree is clear of it? The running
mange or tettar, is a mischief peculiar unto the Fig tree: as also, to breed
certain Hoddy-dods or shell-Snailes sticking hard thereto and eating as well as
they: for either does the disease take the way to the feet, that is to say, to
the roots, and

Now as touching the scab or scurfe incident unto trees, it comes of certain
foggie mists and clammie dewes, which light softly and leisurely after the
rising of the Brood-hen star Vergiliae, for if they be thin and subtle, they
drench and wash the trees well, and do not infect them with the scab: howbeit in
case they fall down right, or that there be an over great glut of showers and
rain, the Fig tree takes harm another way, namely, by soaking of too much
moisture into the root.

Vines, over and above the Worm and the Blast, have a disease proper unto
themselves, called Articulatio, which is a certain barrainesse of theirs when
they leese their spring in the very joint. And this may come upon three
causes: the first, when by unseasonable and ill weather, as Theophrastus has
well noted) if in pruning of them, the cut stand upward and open to the
weather: the third, when they be hurt by those that have the dressing of them,
for want of skill and taking good heed: for all these wrongs and inconveniences
they feel in their joints or knots. A several kind of blasting or
mortification there is besides in vines, after they have done blooming, which
is called Roratio; namely, when either the grapes do fall off, or before they
come to their full growth, be baked (as it were) into a thick and hard
callositie. It happens also that they be otherwhiles sick, in case after their
pruning, their tender oilets or buds be either bitten with the frost, or
sindged with some blast. The same befalls likewise to them upon some untimely
or unseasonable heat: for surely in all things, a certain measure and moderate

Moreover, it falls out otherwhiles, that the Apples only or other such
fruits, as they hang are diseased, when as the tree aileth nothing; to wit, if
in due trme they wanted rain, warmth, or winds that were needful; or
contrariwise, if they had too much of every one: for by such means they either
fall from the tree of themselves, or else they are the worse for it, if they
prove worth ought at all.

The greatest displeasure that can happen to Vine or Olive tree, is, when in
their very blooming they be pelted with violent showers of rain; for, together
with the blossom, down goes the fruit of them both. From the same cause,
proceed the cankerwormes or caterpillars (a most eye. These worms do breed in
moist and warm weather, and especially if there be thick and [i. the Spider]
when cobwebs (as it were) do enfold and wrap their fruit, keeping them from
growing, and so in time killing them. Over and besides, there be certain winds
which sindge and burn Olives and grapes principally, yea and all sorts of
fruits whatsoever. In some years also ye shall see all ^uits worm-eaten, and
especially Apples, Pears, Medlars, and Pomegranats, without any such hurt and
offense to the trees that bear them. As for Olives, the worm sometimes does
them harm, otherwhiles good: for if the worm be engendered and formed before

Over and besides, there is a certain kind of fly resembling the Gnat, which
annoieth some trees and their fruits, and namely, Mast and Figs: and it seems
that this fly is engendered of a certain sweet humor that lies under their
barks. Thus much as touching all diseases to

As for the impressions of the Air at certain seasons, as also of other
accidents occasioned by the climat, they are not properly to be called
Maladies, because they kill trees suddenly: as namely, when a tree is blasted
outright, or all at once does wither and dry away: like as when some puff of
an untoward wind peculiar unto any region, does smite them: such as in Apulia
they call quasi (...)* i. cala^itatem, aut (...) inferens
Atabulus, and in Euboea is named Olympias: For if this wind chance to blow in
mid-winter, it biteth, burns, and dries up trees with such cold blasts, as
afterward no heat of the Sun is able to recover again. In this sort
likewise, al trees growing in valleys or standing along rivers sides, be
endaungered: and above all others, Vines, Olives and Fig trees. This

In a second rank of causes that may kill trees, are to be ranged the injuries
and wrongs that

Some trees there be, which naturally have their bark full of chaps and rifts,
as the Planes for example. As for ^he Line or Linden tree, if it chance to
leese the bark, it will come in manner whole and entire again. In such
therefore the manner is, by way of cure to close up again with clay and dung,
the naked and bare place, and so to bring it to a cicatrize: and, I assure you,
this practice sometimes speeds well, and does the deed; provided always, that
the naked place

The like may be said of the topping or beheading the Cypress, the Pitch tree,
and the Cedar: for let these have their heads either cut off with an axe, or
burnt by fire, they will die, there is no remedy. As much also is to be said,
when beasts do brouse and eat them. As for the Olive tree, if a Goat chance
but to lick thereof, it will thereupon prove barraine and bear no more
Olives; so says Varro, as we have noted heretofore, But as some trees upon the
like injury done unto them, will die, so others again will be but the worse
for it, and such are the Almond

Most trees, and in manner all (except the Vine, Apple tree, Fig tree, and
Pomegranate tree) will die, if their stock or body be cloven: and some be so
tender, that upon every little wound or race that is given them, ye shall see
them to die: howbeit, the Fig tree and generally all such trees as breed
Rosin, defy all such wrongs and injuries, and will abide any wound or bruise
whatsoever.

That trees should die when their roots are cut away, it is no marvel: and yet
many there be of them, that wi live and prosper well nevertheless, in case
they be not all cut off, nor the greatest

Moreover, it is often seen, that trees kill one another when they grow too
thick; and that either by ouershadowing, or else by robbing one another of
their food and nourishment. The Iuie also, that with clipping and clasping
binds trees too hard, hastneth their death. Misselto likewise does them no
good; no more than Cytisus, or the herb Auro, which the Greeks name Alimus,
growing about them. The nature of some plants is, not to kill and destroy trees
out of hand, but to hurt and offend them only, either with their smell, or else
with the mixture and intermingling of their own juice with their sap. Thus the
Radish and the Laurel do harm to the Vine if they grow near unto it: for
surely the Vine is thought to have the sense of smelling, and wonderfully to
sent any odours: and therefore it is observed in her by experience, Androcides
the Physician devised a medicine against drunkenness, and prescribed his
patients to eat Radish if they would not be overcome with wine. Neither can the
Vine away with Coleworts or the Cabbage, nay it hates generally all worts or
pot-hearbs: it abhors also the Hazell and Filberd tree; in such sort, as a
man shall sensibly perceive it to look heavily and mislike, if those plants
aforesaid grow not farther off from it. And now to conclude and knit up this
discourse, would you kill a Vine out of hand? lay to the root thereof nitre or
saltpeter, and alumne, drench it with hot seawater: or do but apply unto it
Bean cods, or the shales or husks of the pulse Eruile, and you shall soon see
the operation and effect of a most rank and deadly poison.

CHAP. XXV.
Of many and sundry prodigies or strange tokens and accidents about trees. Also
of an Olive plot which in times past was transported all and whole, from one
side of an high port way, to another.

IN this Treatise of the faults and imperfections incident to Trees, me thinks
I should do well to say somewhat of the supernatural occurrences in them
observed: for we have known some of them to grow up and prosper without any
leaves at all. And as there have bin Vines and Pomegranats seen to bear fruit,
springing immediately from the trunk, and not from branch or boughs: so there
have bin vines charged with grapes, and not clad with leaves: and Olives

Moreover, strange wonders and miracles have happened about trees by mere chance
and fortune: for there was an Olive once, which being burnt to the very stump,
revived and came again: and in Boeotia, certain Fig Trees, notwithstanding they
were eaten and gnawn most piteously with Locusts, yet budded anew, and put
forth a fresh spring. Also it has bin marked, that trees have changed their
color from black to white. And yet this is not always a monstrous thing
beyond natural reason, and specially in such as come of seed, as we may
observe in the Aspe, which eftsoons turns to be a Poplar. Some are of
opinion, That the Servise Tree if it be transplanted, and come into a hoter
ground than is agreeable to the nature thereof, will leave Xerxes, a Plane tree
was turned into an Olive. But if any man be desirous to know more of these and
such like miracles, for as much as I love not to run on still and make no
end, I refer him over to Aristander a Greek writer, who has compiled a whole
volume, C. Epidius, a Countryman of ours, whose Commentaries are full of such
stuff: where he shall find also, that trees sometimes spoke.

A little before the civil war brake out between Julius Caesar and Pompey the
Great, there was reported an ominous and fearful sight presaging no good, from
out of the territory of Cumes, namely, That a great Tree there sunk down into
the earth so deep, that a very little of the top boughs was to be seen.
Hereupon were the prophetical books of Sibylla perused, wherein it was found,
that this prodegie portended some great carnage of men; and that the nearer
that this slaughter and execution should be to Rome, the greater should the
blood shed be.

A prodigious sign and wonder it is reputed also, when trees seem to grow in
places where they were not wont to be, and which are not agreeable to their
natures; as namely on the chap^ers of pillars, the heads of statues, or upon
altars: like as to see one tree of a diverse and contrary kind growing upon the
top of another; as it befell about the city Cyzicum hard before the streit
siege that was laid unto it [by Mithridates] both by sea and land, where a Fig
tree was seen to grow upon a Laurel. Likewise at Tralleis, about the time of
the foresaid civil war, a Date tree grew out of the base or foot of a Column
that Caesar Dictator caused there to be erected. Semblably at Rome also, twice
during the war between the Romans and K. Perseus, there was a Date tree known
to grow Or as some read, the head of Jupiter within the Capitol.
upon the lantern or top of the Capitol temple, foreshewing those victories
and triumphs which afterward ensued, to the great honor of the people of Rome.
And when this was by storms and tempests overthrown and laid along, there
sprung up of it self in the very same place a Fig tree, at what time as M.
M^ssala and Caius Cassius the two Censors, Piso (a renowned Historiographer and
Writer of good credit) has noted, that the Romans were given over to
voluptuousness and sensuality, and that ever since all chastity and honest
life has bin exiled. But above all the prodigies that were ever seen or heard,
Nero the emperor came to his unhappy end and fall: for in the Marrucine
territory there was an olive garden belonging to Vectius Marcellus a right
worshipful knight of Rome, which of it self removed all and whole as it
stood, over the broad highway, to a place where lay tillage and earable ground:
and the corn lands by way of exchange crossed over the said causey again, and
were found in lieu of the Olive plot or hortyard aforesaid.

CHAP. XXVI.
The remedies for the maladies and diseases of Trees.

NOw that I have declared the diseases of Trees, meet it is that I should set
down the cure To bare and cleanse the roots, to hill and bank them again; that is
to say, to give air unto the roots, and let the wind into them: and
contrariwise to cover them, and keep both wind and weather from them: to water
them, or to derive and divert water from them: to refresh their roots with the
fat liquor of dung: to discharge them of their burden by pruning their
superfluous branches. Item, to give their humors issue, and as it were by way
of phlebotomie to let them blood, and to skice and scrape their bark round
about, in manner of scarification. To take down their strength and keep them
under that they be not too lusty and proud. Also, if the cold has caught As
for example, the Cypres tree cannot abide either to be dunged or watered, it
hates all digging and deluing about it, it may not away with cutting and
pruning, it is the worse for all good physic, nay, all remedies to others are
mischiefs to it, and in one word, go about to medicine it you kill it. All
Vines, and Pomegranat trees especially, love alife river sides, and desire to
be watered, for thereby will they thrive and prosper. The Fig tree also it
self is nourished and fed in waterie grounds: but the fruit that it bears is
the poorer by that means. Almond trees if they be plied with digging, will
either not bloome at all, or else shed their flowers before due time. Neither
the river over flowing the lands, is as good as a weeding. In the same country
the manner is in [i. to give them a kindly warmth as in a stouve:] see the
memorable nature of this only river, to be warm in winter; and yet the same in
summer is so cold, that hardly a man can endure his hand in it.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of caprification or scarifying trees: also the manner of dunging them.

TOuching the remedies for blasting as well by heat as cold, I will treat in
the book next

Generally, what trees soever bearing Apples or such like soft fruit without,
if they chance trees when they begin to put forth leaves. Among wild Fig
trees, the best be the black and those

As great consideration there would be had in the manner of mucking them. No
doubt, they love dung well: but careful heed would be taken first, that none
be laid to the roots in the hotest season of the year. Item, That it be not
green, but thoroughly rotten: lastly, that it be not over rank nor stronger
than is needful, Swines dung burns the root of vines, unless it be five
years old, or the vines stand in some place where water is at commandment
for to cool the excessive heat thereof. Also the filth of Tanners oose and
Curriers scrapings do the like, if they be not well delaied with water.
Likewise it must not be laid too thick. The ordinary proportion is thought to
be for every ten foot square, three Modij of dung. But herein no certainty can
be set down: for the nature of the soil must rule all. With Swines and
Pigeons dung, they use to soulder the cuts and wounds that are given to trees.
In case the Pomegranats

CHAP. XXVIII.
. Many and sundry medicines serving for trees, to wit, remedies against
venomous vermin and Pismires, likewise against all hurtful beasts.

SOme trees there be which are the better for wrong and injury done unto them:
yea, and if they be pinched or bitten, they shoot up the rather, as Date trees
and the Lentisks, for even the very salt water nourishes them. And true it is,
that ashes has the like nature and virtue that salt, how beit, more mild and
gentle. Hereupon it comes also, that Fig trees use to be strewed therewith,
yea, and to be wet with the juice of Rue, to the end, that neither their fruit
should prove worm-eaten, nor their roots putrisie and rot. Moreover, if vines
be too full of moisture and apt to bleed overmuch, it is an ordinary thing to
pour salt water to their roots. Also, in case their grapes be apt to fall, folk
use to take ashes and be sprinckle them with vinegre, and so to be smear the
roots therewith: or else with red Orpiment, in case the grapes be given to
putrefaction. be wet and soked in sharp vinegar, and stale chamber-lee, and
then they should be well covered

In all these remedies, proceed we must according to the course of the year:
for sometime the season requires, that the means should be sooner used, and
otherwhiles later. Some plants there be that fire is good for, and namely,
canes and reeds: for if they be burnt, they will come up again the thicker and
more smooth. As for Cato, he has certain compound medicines for trees,
distinct by sundry measures by him prescribed: for he has ordained to the
roots of the greater trees an Amphora, or Quadranta, was a measure Roman of
liquor, containing 16 Congij which is about 16 wine gallons.
Amphore, but of the less an Vrna, is half Amphora, to wi^ 8 (...), or
thereabout:
Vrna only, of Oil dregs, with an equal quantity of water: all which being
tempered together, he would have to be poured by little and little Vine
sre^tar, or the Devils gold-ring.
Convolvulus bred not in a vine, he appointed two gallons of oil dregs or
lees, to be boiled first to the thick consistence of honey, and then afterward
to take a third part of the slime Bitumen, and a fourth part of brimstone, and
sees all together again in the open air; for within doors there would be some
danger of setting the house a fire. With this mixture, if a vine be well
anointed about the ioints, and under their hollow Cato has prescribed.
Another kind of vermin or worm there is, that gnaweth the tender buds or
burgeons of the vine, and the same is called Volvox: to preserve vines from
this harmefull creature, men are wont to take their vine-hooks when they be
newly ground and sharpened, then to scour them with a Beauers skin, and with
them to prune the vines: or else after they be pruned, to anoint them with
bears blood. Moreover, Ants or Pismires make foul work otherwhile among Cato
has done it before me. Who also speaks of another spell for dislocations or
members out of joint (an accident happening to trees) which he would have to be
joined close within the clift of canes. The same writer has permitted men to
cut down sacred groves, trees also dedicated for religion and sequestered from
profane use (after a solemn sacrifice to the gods first performed:) the reason
and manner whereof he has put down in a certain treatise, which he

THE EIGHTHTEENTH BOOK
WRITTEN BY C. PLINIVS
CHAP. I.
Of the exceeding love and affection of our ancestors in old time to
Agriculture and Husbandry. Also, of their singular pains and diligence about
Gardens.

NOw follows the treatise of corn, of Gardens, and Flowers, and generally of
al things else, that by the goodness of Nature the Earth brings forth
bountifully, besides from birds of the day, yet they bewray their spite and
envy even to the night and the quiet repose

CHAP. II.
Of the first guirland or chaplet made of herbs and flowers at Rome.

THe first order that K. Romulus instituted in Rome city newly built, was the
guild or fraternity Acca Laurentia, the nource or foster-mother of this
Prince, bestowed upon him a garland of corn ears, twisted and tied together
with a white ribband, as the most sacred badge and ensign of this new
Priesthood, which he and his brethren should wear with great reverence and
devotion: and this was the very first chaplet known at Rome. Now the honor of
this ornament was perpetual, and continued for term of life; so as a man once
invested therein, could not be degraded and deprived thereof, though he were
banished or taken prisoner; it accompanied him ever to his dying day. Then, and
in those days, every man within the whole body of the people of Rome,
contented himself with two acres of land, and King Romulus Nero (despising as
not sufficient, green enclosures and gardens of that compass) must have
fish-pooles also bigger than so: and well it were if they would stay there and
go no further, for shortly we shall see some one or other of them, never rest
until he have kitchins also more than two acres wide. And thus much for king
Romulus.

King Numa his successor, ordained to worship the gods with an oblation of
corn, yea and to offer prayers and supplications unto them by no other means,
than cakes made of salt and meal: yea and as Hemina mine author says, for to
induce the people of Rome the better unto it, he allowed them to parch their
corn in their sacrifices; for that corn thus partched, was supposed Seia, so
called a serendo: [i. of sowing corn and setting plants:] and Segesta, which
name they gave her a segetibus, [i. of corn fields:] whose images we at this
day do see in the grand Cirque or Shew-place at Rome. A Tertiam, to wit,
Tutelina, ^or preserving of trees planted, and corn sown: or as some read
(Tertium) meaning Terminus.
third goddess there is among them, whom to name and invoke within-house,
they might not with safe conscience. Lastly, so religious and ceremonious

CHAP. III.
Of Iugerum, and Actus. Of the ancient Laws ordained for Cattle in old time.
How often and at what time Corn and victuals were exceeding cheap at Rome.
What noble and famous persons addicted themselves wholly to Husbandry and
Tillage.

AN Acre or Arpen of ground, called in Latin Iugerum, was as much as might be
eared up or ploughed in one day with a yoke of Oxen. And Actus in Latin is a
Land, or so much just as two Oxen are driven and occupied in, whiles they
plough in one tract without any rest. This contained by the old time, 120 foot
in length: and being doubled in length, made the Acre or Iugerum abouesaid.

In ancient time of the old Romans, the greatest Present that could be given to
captains and soldiers who had borne themselves valiantly in the service of
their country, was as much Pilumni, who devised first the pestill to bray
corn withal in their mils and backhouses: also, the family of the Pisenes,
who took their name, a pisendo, [i. of stamping or pounding corn in a
mortar.] The Fabij in like manner, the Lentuli, and the Ciceroes, each one
according to the several pulse that they skilled best to set or sow. Moreover,
to the house of the Iunij, they gave the syrname of Bubulcus, by occasion of
one of their ancestors, who knew passing well how to use and order oxen. Over
and besides all this, that you may know what regard was had of corn, among
other sacred and holy ceremonies, there was nothing Cato reports, if men
called one by the name of a good husbandman, they were thought to have praised
and commended him in the highest degree: hereupon also it came, that rich and
substantial men were termed in Latin, Locupletes, as one would say,
Loci-pleni, [i. well landed.] And as for the very word Pecunia in Latin, which
signifies money, it took the name of Pecus, (i.) cattle. And even at this day
(as appears in the Registers of the Censors, and the accounts of the city
Chamber) all their rents, revenues, and customs growing unto the Seruius at
the first when he made brazen coin, stamped the pieces with the portraiture
of Sheep, Kine, and Oxen. By the laws of the twelve Tables, all persons
whatsoever above foureteen years of age, were forbidden under pain of death,
either by stealth, Ceres: and in one word, to be more grievously punished than
in case of manslaughter. But if the offender were under that age beforesaid,
the same law provided, that he should be whipped at the discretion of the
Praetor or Lord chief Justice for the time being: or, if this punishment were
remitted by the party who sustained the damage, then he should satisfy unto
him for the trespass as a slave, and pay double the meaner in degree, was
named the Vrbane Tribes; consisting of Artisans and such like as For the
Augurie or solemn sacrifice called Made with a red dog to pacify the
Dogstarre.
Canarium, let there be certain days appointed; to wit, before the corn show
ear out of the hose, yea, and before that it come into it. But to return
again to the praise of Husbandry. When the world was thus addicted and given
to Agriculture, Italy was not only well provided and sufficiently furnished of
corn, without any help from out provinces; but also all kind of grain and
victuals were in those days so exceeding cheap, as it is incredible: for
Manius Martius a Plebeian Edile of Rome, was the first man that served the
people wheat at one Ass the Modius: and after him Minutius Augurinus, the
eleventh Tribune of the commons (even he who indicted that mutinous and
seditious citizen Sp. Melius) brought down the price of wheat for 3 market
days to an Ass the Modius. The people therefore of Rome, in regard of Trebius
also in the time of his Aedileship, caused wheat to be sold unto the people at
the same rate; to wit, one Ass a Modius. For which cause, there were 2 statues
also in memorial of him set up, both in the Capitol and also in Palatium: and
himself when he was departed this life, had this honor done unto him by the
people, at his exequies, as to be carried on their shoulders to his funeral
fire. It is reported moreover, That in the very same year wherein the great
goddess Cybele (called also the mother of the gods) was brought to Rome, there
was a more plentiful harvest that Summer, and corn was at a lower price than
had bin known in ten years before. Likewise, M. Varro has left in writing,
That when L. Metellus made show of so many Stolo Licinius, provided it was,
that no Roman citizen should hold in private above five hundred acres. The rigor
of which law or statute was extended and practiced upon the Lawmakers himself,
and by virtue thereof he was condemned: who, for to possess above that
proportion, and to defraud the meaning of the said Act, purchased more lands in
the name of his Son. Lo what might be the proportion and measure of
possessions allowed even then, when as the State and Commonwealth of Rome
Manius Curious after such triumphs of his, and when he had subdued and brought
under the obeisance of the Roman Empire and laid to their dominion so many
foreign nations; what it was, every man knows, wherein he delivered this
speech, That he was not to be counted a good man, but a dangerous citizen, who
could not content himself with a close of seven acres of ground. And to say a
truth, after that the kings were banished out of Rome, and their regiment
abolished, this was the very proportion of land assigned to a Roman Commoner.
If this be so, What might be the cause of so great plenty and abundance
aforesaid in those days? Certes, this and nothing else, great LL and generals
of the field (as it should seem) tilled themselves their ground with their own
hands: and of their lands, as in pitching of a field: and commonly every thing
that comes under [C. Attilius] Serranus (when the honorable dignity of
Consulship was presented unto him, with commission to conduct the Roman army)
found sowing his own field and planting trees, whereupon he took that syrname
Serranus? As for Quintius Cincinnatus, a purseuant or messenger of the Senate
brought unto him the letters patents of his Dictatorship, at what time as he
was in proper person ploughing a piece of ground of his own, containing four
acres and no more, which are now called Prata Quintiana, [i. Quintius his
medowes] lying within the Vaticane: and (as it is reported) not only
bare-headed was he and open breasted, but also all naked and full of dust. The
foresaid officer or sergeant taking him in this manner, Do on your cloths sir
(quoth Where, note by the way, that such Pursevants and Sergeants in those
days were named Viatores; for that eftsoons they were sent to fetch both
Senators and General captains out of the fields where they were at work:
but now, see how the times be changed! They that do this business in the
field, what are they but bond-slaues fettered, condemned malefactors manacled,
and in one word, noted persons, and such as are branded and marked in their
visage with an hot iron? Howbeit the Earth, whom we call our Mother, and whom
we would seem to worship, is not so deaf and senseless, but she knows well
enough how she is by them deprived of that honor which was done in old time
unto her: insomuch, as we may well weet, that against her will she yields
fruit as she does; howsoever we would have it Hiero, Philometor, Attalus, and
Archelaus: and also martial captains; to wit, Xenophon, and Mago the
Carthaginian. As for Mago verily, our Senate did him that honor after Carthage
was won, that in sacking it and giving away among diverse LL. of Affricke, the
Libraries there found; they thought good to reserve only 28 volumes of his, and
penned by M. Cato had already beforetime put out in writing and set forth
certain rules and precepts thereof:) giving order for this translation, to
those that were well seen in the Punicke or Carthaginian language: in which
business, D. Syllanus a Roman gentleman of a right worshipful house, went
beyond all others. As for great scholars and men of profound and deep
learning, a number there were besides that traveled in this matter, whom we
have named already in the forefront; and eftsoons shall mention in the
discourse of this volume. In which range we must nominate not unthankfully
among the meanest writers, M. Varro, who being fourscore years old and one,
thought it not amiss to compile a special book and treatise of Husbandry.

CHAP. IIII.
The manner of Husbandry in ancient time.

LAte it was ere the Romans began to set their minds upon Vines and Vineyards:
for at first they tilled only corn fields for very necessity, even as much as
might suffice to serve the city. The order and manner whereof, I will set in
hand to treat of; not after a vulgar and common sort, but according to my
usual manner hitherto more soundly: as having sought out with all care and
diligence, not only the ancient practice in times past, but the inventions also
of late days; and withal searched into the causes and reasons of every thing,
and found them out. My purpose is besides, to speak in this treatise of the
fixed Stars; their rising and setting, penned it with so high a style, as
they may seem to any man for to have written books for Orators Cato first.

CHAP. V.
The pra^se and commendation of Husbandmen: what things are to be required in
the

THe children (says Cato) that are begotten by husbandmen, prove most valiant,
the hardiest soldiers, and such as think least harm of all others. In buying
of land, take heed you be not too hot and eager upon the purchase. In the
husbanding of ground, spare for no pain and travel; but in the purchasing
thereof be you nothing forward: a thing ouer-bought, has evermore repentance,
and had I wist, attending upon it. They that are about a purchase, ought above
all, to see how the ground is watered, what ways and auenues be about it, and
what neighbors be near unto it. Out of every one of these points, matters of
great importance and deep conclusions may be picked, and those most certain
and infallible. Cato adds moreover and says, That there would be good regard
had of the people confining, and other grounds bounding Attilius Regulus (he
who during the first Punicke war was twice Consul of Rome) was wont to say,
That a man should not purchase an unwholesome piece of land, were it never so
rich and fruitful; nor make choice of a barren soil, were it never so
healthie. Now as touching the healthfulnesse of a place, a man may not always
conclude thereof by the color and fresh hue of the inhabitants: for many times
it falls out, that those who be used to pestilent places, hold out well and
have their health; yea and by their looks bewray no harm that they take.
Moreover, some quarters and coasts there be, which at some times of the year
stand sound Cato would have this point especially to be considered, that the
soil of a ferme (scituat as has bin said) be good of it self, and fertile:
also, that near unto it there be store of laborers: and that it be not far
from a good and strong town: moreover, that it has sufficient means for
transporting of the commodities which it yields, either by vessels upon
water, or otherwise by waines upon the land. Furthermore, that the manor house
be well built, and the land about it as well husbanded. Howbeit, herein I see
many men to err much, and greatly to be deceived: for they hold opinion, that
the negligence and il husbandry of the former lord, is good for him that shall
purchase land and come after him. But I say, there is nothing more dangerous
and disaduantageous to the buyer, than land so left wast and out of Cato gives
good counsel, to purchase land of a good husband, and not rashly and hand over
head to despise and set light by the skill and knowledge of another. Who says
moreover, That as well land as men (which are of great charge and expense) how
gaineful soever they may seem to be, yield not much profit in the end to the
master declaro, when all counts be cast and reckonings made. He therf^re
judges, that the Vine yields the best revenue, of all commodities belonging
to a ferme: and good reason he has so to say, because above all things he
takes order to cut off expense as much as may be. Next to it, he reckons
Hortyards, such especially as have water at command: and good cause why,
provided always that they lie under a good town side. [In the third place he
rangeth the O^r plots, and after them Olive rewes*] then he counts of medows,
which our ancestors called Parata, as a man would Cato being asked. What was
the most assured profit rising out of land? made this answer, To feed Cattle
well: being asked again, What was the next? Marie (qu^th he) to feed in a
mean. By which answers he would seem to conclude, That the most certain and
sure revenue was that, which would cost least. Howbeit, this is not so general

CHAP. VI.
How to choose a convenient place for to build a manor house in the country.
Also certain rules observed in ancient time, as touching Husbandry and tilling
ground.

IN building upon a man's land, this mean and moderation is commended, That the
house be answerable in proportion to the ground: for as it is a bad sight to
see a large domain and circuit of ground without a sufficient graunge or
home-stal to it; so it is as great a folly to ouerbuild L. Lucullus and Q.
Scaeuola, for the one was possessed of fair lands without competent building
thereto, whereas Lucullus contrariwise built a goodly house in the country,
with little or no living adjoining to it: in which regard, checked he was by
the Censors, for sweeping more flowers than he ploughed lands. Now in building,
there would be art and cunning showed: for even of late days C. Marius (who
had bin seven times Consul of Rome) was the last man that built an house
within the territory of the cape Misenum, and he seated it so, as if he had
pitched and fortified a camp right skilfully; in such sort, that when Sylla
syrnamed Foelix [i. Happy] saw his manner of building, he gave out and said,
That all the rest in comparison of him, were blind beetles, and knew neither
how to build nor to encamp. Well then, a house in the country would be set
neither near unto Homer besides to this purpose? The air and mists (quoth he,
and that right truly) arising from a great river betimes in a morning before
daylight, cannot choose but be ever cold and unwholesome. How then? mary if the
country or climat be hot, an house must stand into the North; but in case the
quarter be cold, it ought to affront the South: if the tract be temperate
between both, it should lie open upon the East point, where the Sun rises at
the Aequinoxes.

As touching the goodness of the soil; and namely what signs and marks there
be of it; although I may seem to have sufficiently spoken already, in the
discourse which I had of the best kind of ground, yet I am content to subscribe
to other tokens thereof delivered by other men, Cato in these words following:
When you see (quoth he) growing upon any land, store of Walwort, Skeg trees,
Brambles, the little wild Bulbous Crow-toes, [called otherwise our Ladies
Cowslips] Clauer-grasse or Trifo^le, Melilote, Oak, wild Pyrries, and
Crab-trees; know ye, that these do show a ground good for Wheat, and such
like white-corne. So does also the black mould and that of ashes color,
testify no less. Where there is store of chalk or plaster, the ground is
not so fit for corn; for all kind of chalk does heat overmuch, unless the
same be very lean. The like does sand also, if it be not passing fine and
small. And the effects abouesaid are much more seen in the plains and
champaine valleys, than upon the hills and mountains. Our ancestors in old
time thought it a principal point of Husbandry, not to have overmuch ground
about Laudato ingentia rura, E^iguum colit^,
Virgil was. And to say a truth, confess we must needs, That these large
enclosures and great domains held by private persons, have long since bin the
ruin of Italy, and of late days have undone the provinces also thereto
belonging. Six Landlords there were and no more, that possessed the one moitie
of all Afric, at what time as the Emperor Nero defeated and put them to
death. Where, by the way, I may not defraud Cn. Pompeius of the due glory
answerable Mago thought it no reason, but a very ungentle and unkind part for
the buying of land, to sell a mansion house; and in his conceit, it prejudiced
much the weale-publick. And verily this was the principal point that he
recommended in the entrance of his treatise and rules set down for Husbandry,
so as a man might perceive very evidently, that he required continual
residence upon the land. Next to these principles above named, great regard
would be had in choosing of good and skilful bailiffs of the husbandry,
concerning whom Cato has given many rules. For mine own part, it shall suffice
to say thus much only, that the lord ought to love his bayliffe very well, and
set him next to his heart: but himself should not let him know so much.
Moreover, I hold it the worst thing that is, to set slaves and condemned
Nothing is less profitable, and expedient, than to labor a ground exceeding
much, and to ouer-til it. L. Rarius Rufus, a man of very base and low parentage
descended, and yet advanced to the Consular dignity for his prowess in feats
of arms; was otherwise very thrifty and sparing, after the manner of the old
world; insomuch as partly by his niggardise and partly through the liberality
of Augustus Caesar, he had gathered good together amounting to the sum of an
hundred millions of Sesterces: all which mass of money, what with purchasing
land to land in the Picene country, and what with bestowing such a deal

After what manner then shall we proceed in the husbandry of our land to most
benefit and behoof? Learn a rule out of the Oracle or sententious riddle,
which goes in this form, Malis bonis [i. Cheapest, Best.] But herein, me
thinks, good reason it is, that our old great grandfathers should be defended
and excused for holding these strange and obscure paradoxes; they (I say) who
by such rules and precepts, took great care and pains to instruct us how to
live. Would Malis? surely they understood those that were cheapest and stood
them in least. The chief point of all their providence and forecast, was to
go the nearest way to work, and to be at the smallest cost: and no marvel;
for who were they that gave out these thriftie precepts? even those, who
reproched a victorious General (and one who triumphed over the enemy) for
having a cupboord of silver plate weighing but ten pound: those (I say) who if
their bayliffes of husbandry chanced to die, whereby their lands in the
country stood void, would make suit to be gone themselves thither, and to
return to their own fermes; leaving behind them the glory of all their
victories by them achieved: and to conclude, even those who whiles they were
employed in the conduct of armies, had their grounds looked unto and tilled at
the charges of the commonweal, and had no other for their bailiffs does that
upon work-daies which should have bin done on play days or idle holidaies: but
the C. Furius Cresinus, late a bond-slaue, and newly infranchised, who after
that he was set at liberty, purchased a very little piece of ground, out of
which he gathered much more commodity than all his neighbors about him out of
their great and large possessions: whereupon he grew to be greatly envied and
hated; insomuch, as they charged him with indirect means, Spurius Albinus, an
Aedile Curule for the time being: and a day was set him down peremptorily for
his personal appearance to answer the matter. He therefore fearing the worst,
and doubting that he should be cast to pay some grievous fine; at what time as
the Tribes were ready to give their voices, either to acquit or condemn him,
brought into the common place his plough, with other instruments and furniture
belonging to husbandry: he presented likewise in the open face of the court,
his own daughter, a lusty strong less and big of bone; yea, and (as Piso
tells the tale) well fed, and as well clad: he showed there (I say) his
tools and plough yrons of the best making, and kept in My masters (quoth he)
you that are citizens of Rome, behold, these are the sorceries, charms, and all
the enchantments that I use (pointing to his daughter, his oxen and furniture
abouenamed:) I might besides (quoth he) allege mine own travel and toil
that I take, the early rising and late sitting up so ordinary with me, the
careful watching that I usually abide, and the painful sweats which I daily
endure; but I am not able to represent these to your view, nor to bring them
hither with me into this assembly. The people no sooner hard this plea of his,
but with one voice they all acquit him and declared him unguilty, without any
contradiction. By which example verily, a Cato is the Author, and which of all
others I hold to be most profitable and sounding to civility; to wit, that in
all our doings we aim at this, To have the love and good will of our
neighbors: and that for many and sufficient reasons by him alleged, which I
suppose no man will make any doubt of. Imprimis, he gives a good caveat, That
our seruitors and people about us be not shrewd, but well ordered, and that
Item, All good husbands agree in this, that nothing would be done too late and
when the time is ouerhipt. And again, That every work should have the due and
convenient season: to the same effect there is a third admonition, namely, That
when the opportunity is once past, in vain we seek to recall and recover it. As
touching a rotten and putrified ground, we have at large showed already how
much Cato does abhor and curse it. And yet he cease not to forewarne us of
it, and besides, to give us these rules following. What work soever may be
performed by a poor Ass, is thought to cost little or nothing, and to be done
very cheap. Fern or Brake will die at the root in two years, if you will not
suffer it to branch and grow above ground: and this shall you hinder most
effectually, in case you knap off the head of the first spring with a wand or
walking staff: for the liquid juice dropping share. Semblably, for to kill
reeds, they give order to plough them up, with some Fern likewise Democritus
has taught us the means how to kill the same in this manner, Take Lupine
flowers, let them be steeped one whole day in the juice of Hemlock, and
therewith besprinckle and drench the roots of the shrubs that ouerrun the
place, and they will die.

CHAP. VII.
Sundry sorts of corn, and their several natures.

NOw that we have thus showed the way how to prepare a field for to bear
corn, it remaimaineth i. in November, lies all winter long in the ground and
there is nourished, as for example, Wheat, Rye, and barley. Secondly, Summer
corn, which is put into the earth in Summer about the rising of the foresaid
star Virgilia, i. The Brood-hen, Alicas
Fourmenty is made. But Wheat, Barley, Beans, Navews, Turnips, and Rapes, they
hold for Sementina, i. to be sowed at the proper and timely season of seeds,
(...) in Autumn In that kind of corn which comprehends Wheat, there is to
be reckoned that grain which serves for prouender and forage, and is sown for
beasts, and namely, that which they call dredge or ballimong. Likewise, in the
other kind, to wit, of Pulse, the Vetches be comprised: but that which is good
indifferently both for man and beast, is the Lupine. No marvel bring sowed
before winter.
bloometh first. Now, if you would know which end serves for the one and the
other; certain it is, that the bigger and thicker part of the grain yields
root, and the smaller the green blade. In into straw, and to spindle upward
pointwise, I mean all that be of the winter kind. But Millet i. Turkish Millet.
Millet brought out of India into Italy, and the same was of color black, the
seed or grain in quantity big and fair, and for stem like unto a reed. It
rises up in height seven foot: the stalks are mighty and great some call them
Lobae or Phobae. Of all sorts of corn it is most fruitful, and yields
greatest increase: for of one grain a man shall have 3 sextars or quarts again.
But it loves, yea and (...) to be sown in a moist soil.

Moreover, some kinds of spiked corn begin to spindle and gather ear at the
third joint, Varro says, that in four times 9 days this kind of corn comes
to perfection: but it ought to stay nine months before it be ripe for to be
reaped and mowne down. As for Beans, after they be set or cast into the
ground, first they put forth leaf, and afterward stalk, that shoots up even,
without any partition of joints or knots between. All other pulse i. Turkish
corn.
Irio they be red and resemble blood. The Lupines only and the Poppies do shed
their leaves. All pulse is long in the bloom, and namely Ervile and the Cich
pease: but Beans continue longest, [i. a kind of Rice or Amel corn] and Oats
especially. The straw of wheat Verrius reports, That the people of Rome for
300 years together used no other meat than the grotes made of common Wheat.
And as touching Wheat, there be many sorts thereof, distinguished by the names
of the Regions and countries where they be found growing. Howbeit For whereas
of the Athenian Wheat, (...) demi Sextars, (i. two quarts and a half) were but
sufficient, three would serve and content them of the B^ian (i. a quart and
half: whereby it was collected, how much weightier this was than that.
so arose these distinct degrees in the weight above said. The Greeks make
great account of the Wheat growing by Pontus, and highly commend it: but this
never came into Italy, neither know we what it is. The same Grecians preferred
before all other grain, these three sorts, to wit, Dracontias, Strangias, and
Selinusium; esteeming the goodness of the corn by the thickness and bigness of
the straw, and attributing these Alexander the Great, at what time as Greece
was in the flower and height of her glory, as having the monarchy and
sovereignty over the whole world. Howbeit, before his death 145 years or
thereabout, Sophocles the Poet in a Tragedy entitled Triptolemus, praised the
Italian wheat above all other: for in effect thus he says word forword; Et
fortunatam Italiam frumento canere candido.
And Italy, a land (I say) so happy and so blessed,
Where stand the fields all hoare and gray with white Wheat of the best.
And in very truth our Italian wheat at this day carries the name alone in that
regard. I wonder therefore so much the more at the modern Greeks of late time,
who made no mention at all of this ourwheat. Now at this present, of all those
kinds of outlandish wheat which are transported by sea into Italy, the lightest
is that which comes out of France and Chersonesus, [i. the streits of
Callipolis] for a Modius or peck thereof contains not above 20 pound weight,
weigh the very grain it self as it grows, uncleansed, husk and all. The
Sardinian wheat is more weighty than it by half a pound in a Modius. And that
of Alexandria exceeds the i. 4 ounces.
one third part, in every measure before named. And this is the very poise also
of the Sicilian wheat. The Boeotian is yet a full pound heavier: and that of
Africa as much, and i. 9 ounces.
three fourth parts of a pound more. In Lombardy and that tract of Italy beyond
the river Po, I know full well that a Modius of their wheat weighed 25 pounds;
and about Clusium 26. But be the corn whatsoever it will, this is the
ordinary proportion by the course of Nature, that being made into downright
household bread for soldiers, and to serve the camp, it ought to weigh as much
as it did in corn, and one third part over and above. As also this is a rule,
That the best Wheat is that which to every Modius will take and drink up a
gallon of water ere it be made dough. And yet some kinds of Wheat there be
that will yield the full weight aforesaid in bread, and never count the water
going thereto, and namely that which comes out of the Balear Islands; for a
Modius of that wheat yields in bread 30 pound weig^ yet otherwhiles it
falls out in some kinds of wheat (being blended two sorts together, (...)

As for the manner of working and kneading dough, I like not their fashions who
take sea water for that purpose, as most do that inhabit the sea coasts,
thinking thereby to save the charge of salt; for I hold this very hurtful and
dangerous. Neither do I think, that upon any other Zythum and ^urmi.
drink of diverse sorts, as heretofore has bin showed; they take the Yest or
barm
skum or froth that gathers aloft by the working of the wort, and use the
same in stead of leven for to make their bread; which is the reason that their
bread is lighter and more houved up than any other.

Moreover, there is great difference in wheat by reason of the straw or stalk
that bears it: for the thicker that it is and more full, the better is the
corn taken to be. The Thracian wheat is enclosed and well clad (as it were)
with many tunicles and coats; thoroughly provided by that means (and good cause
why) to resist the excessive cold of that climat; which gave the Thracians just
occasion also to cast about and devise to have a kind of wheat that remains
upon the ground not above three months, by reason that the snow ouerspreadeth
the face of the earth well known all the Alps over, and in other cold and
winterly regions, where (by report Columella was deceived, who thought that
there was not to be found so much as any kind of three months wheat; whereas it
is plain, that such has been

But to return again to our husbandry; of all spiked corn, Barley is sowed
first: but I purpose to set down the very just time and season apropriat to
each kind, according to the several nature of every sort, which may meaning
also is to declare. Mean while I cannot omit, that there is among the Indians,
barley both sown and also wild, whereof they make the best bread that they
have. As for us Italians (to say a truth) we set most store by rice, whereof
(being husked and cleansed) we make grotes, like for all the world to those
which other men besides do make of barley husked. The leaves verily that this
grain Rice does bear, be pulpous and fleshy, resembling

Barley [husked] was the most ancient meat in old time, as may appear by the
ordinary custom of the Athenians (according to the testimony of Menander) as
also by the addition or surname given to sword-fencers, who upon their
allowance or pension given them in barley, were called Hordearij, [i.
Barley-men.] The ordinary dry grout or meal also Polenta, which the Greeks
so highly commend, was made of nothing else but of barley: and the preparing
thereof was after sundry ways. The manner that the Greeks used, was first to
steep the barley in water, and give it one nights drying; the morrow after they
parched or fried it, and then ground it in a mill. Others there be, who (when
it is well fried and parched hard) besprinckle it once again (...)
ounces and two drams: and after they have pearched them all well, they blend
them together and grind them in a quem. They that would have this meal to keep
long, put up into new earthen vessels al together both flower and bran. But in
Italy they never use to steep or soke it in water, but presently

As for bread of Barley, so much used of our forefathers in old time, the
posterity that lived after, found to be naught and condemned it: in such sort,
as they allowed it for prouender only to feed their beasts and cattle with. But
in stead thereof came up the use of (...)
husked barley to be sodden for grewell; so highly commended as a most nutritive
and strong meat; and withal, passing wholesome for man's body: insomuch as
Hippocrates (who for skill and knowledge was the prince of all Physicians) has
written one whole book in the praises only of it. Now the best Ptisana or
husked barley, is that which comes from Vtica. As for that which we have
from Egypt, it is made of the flat barley which grows upon the ear in two
ranks or sides only. Turannius

As for Tragum, it is a kind of Ptisane, made of Wheat, after the same order
that the former i. Winter wheat but the principal is that which they make of
the three-month or summer wheat. We are beholden to the Island Chios for the
invention of Starch: and even at this day, the very best is that which comes
from thence: called it is in Greek Amylum, because it never came into the mill,
nor was ground upon stones. The next to it in goodness, is made of a certain
Summer Wheat that is nothing ponderous and weighty. The way to make it, is to
steep the wheat winhin certain cooperie vessels, made of wood, in fresh water
so much as will cover it well. But it would not be forgotten, that the water
must be changed five times in a day: and if it were so served also in the
night, it would be the better, to that end, that being thus Cato set down
already.

To return again unto our Barley: the meal thereof is of great use here with
us in Physic. And that which more is, a strange effect it works in Horses,
Asses, and such like laboring

As for Barley ears, some there be which have but two ranks or rewes: others
again have more, even to the number of six. In the very grain also there is
much difference: for there be many of them longer than other, lighter, shorter,
rounder, whiter, blacker, and last of all, enclining to a reddish or purple
color. This is the worst of all others for to make dry Grout or Polenta: and
as for the white, it is best for that purpose, but wll not abide any
tempestuous or hard weather. And to say a truth, of all corn, Barley is the
softest and tenderest, and will least endure

CHAP. VIII.
That all kinds of Wheat or Fourmenty cornegrow not indifferently in every
place. Also, of other sorts of corn in the Leuant or East countries.

YOu shall not find in all places the same kinds of Wheat: and where you meet
with the very the ordinary white Fourmentie wheat Triticum, are the commonest
of all others. And indeed Homer the poet called the earth, (...), i. yielding
the corn Zea: and not because she gives life to all living creatures, as some
would have to be meant by that Epithete. Thereof is made also a kind of Ennius
a most ancient poet, when he would express the famine of a city that had
endured long siege, reports, that the parents took by force from their
chi^dren their sops, notwithstanding they cried pitteously for i. Lumbardy
Beyond t^ ^s also in Sauoy only, and the territory of the Meninians,

CHAP. IX.
Of Pastry, of Grinding, and of Meal.

THe best manchet bread for to serve the table, is made of the winter white
Wheat Siligo, and the most excellent works of pastrie likewise are wrought
thereof. And yet in Italy it passes all the rest, in case that of Campain be
blended with another sort which does i. well husked and cleansed, a measure named
Modius should yield four Sextars or quarts of fine meal: but of the vulgar and
common grain, which is not so guelded, 5 sextars, and half a Modius besides of
bolted flower: and for a courser household bred, which they call the second
bread, 4 sextars of meal, and as many of brans. Also of the Pisane wheat, one
Modius should yield five sextares of good meal, and the rest equal to the
former. As for the Clusine and Aretine wheat, in every Modius it answers
again six sextars of meal, that is to say, one more than the rest: otherwise
they be all alike. Now if you list to range and boult it for cork flower to
make then shall ye have more go away in brans. As for the word Farina in
Latin, i. meal, it is derived

CHAP. X.
Of the meal called Similago: of the white flower Siligo. Of other sorts of
Meal. and of the manner of baking.

THe best meal of that kind, which they call in Latin Similago, is made of
the common (...). 2 sh. 6 d.
40 Asses: but if the meal be sifted

But to return to our winter white wheat called Siligo, it never ripens kindly
and all together, as other corn does: and for that it is so tender and
ticklish, as that no corn will less abide delay and tarry on worse, great heed
must be taken thereof; for so soon as any is ripe, presently the seed sheds
and falls out of the ear. Howbeit, less danger is it subject unto whiles it
stands Homer says, that they were wont to give it as prouender to horses,
and such laboring garrons; and the very same it is which he calls Olyra.
Howbeit this corn in Egypt goes out easily under the flaile, is better to
grind, and withal yields better, and is more fruitful. Some take it for a
kind of Buley, or rather Oats.
the other of that name) and Tragos: strangers all brought from the Levant or
East parts, and resembling Rice every one. Typhe likewise is of the same kind,
whereof in Italy and this part of the world is made that husked corn which
goes among us for Rice, for it turns into it. The Greeks have a kind of
wheat called Zea or Spelt: and it is commonly said, that both it and Typhae
(considering that they use to degenerate and prove bastard) will turn to their
kind again, and become wheat, if they be husked before a man sow them: howbeit
this change will not be seen presently, nor before the third year. As touching
our common wheat, there is no grain more fruitful than it: this gift has
Nature endued it withal, because she meant thereby hundred and fifty fold
again. The procurator general of that province under Augustus Caesar Nero he
sent 340 strawes out of the same country, rising all from one only corn. But
to go no farther than to Sicilie; within the territory about Leontium, there
have been certain fields known, wherein one grain puts forth no fewer
than a hundred stalks with ears upon them: and not there only, but also in
many other parts of that Island. And this is ordinary throughout all the
kingdom of Granade, and Andalusia in Spain. But above all, the land of Egypt
may make boast in rendering such interest to the husbandmen. Moreover, of all
those kinds of wheat which are so plentiful, there is principal account made of
that which branches; i. the wheat that bears 100 grains.

To leave this kind of grain, and to come to Pulse: there has been found in
Italy, and go no farther, one bean stalk laden with an hundred beans.
Touching Summer corn, to wit, Sesama, Millet, and Panicke, we have already
spoken. As for Sesama, it comes from the Indians, whereof they make a
certain kind of oil. The color of this grain is white. Like unto it there is
another grain called Erysinum, which is rife in Asia and Greece: and I would
say it were the very same, that with us in Latin is named Irio, but that it is
more oileous and fatty; and indeed to be counted a medicinable or Physical
plant, rather than a kind of corn. Of the same nature, is that which the
Greeks call Hormium: it resembles Cumin, aed is usually sowed with Sesama:
how beit no beast will eat thereof while it is green, no more than they do of
Irio

To come now to the manner of husking and cleansing of corn: the feat is not
so easily done in all, as in some; for in Tuscane, they take the ears of their
red wheat called Far, when they be parched and dried at the fire, they pound or
bray them with a pestill headed at the nether end with iron, or else fistulous
and hollow within, yet bound about with a hoop or ring of iron, and the same
within forth toothed in manner of a star; so as if they be not heed full in the
stamping, the yron-work at the pestill end will either cut the corns in two,
or else bruise and break them clean. In Italy (for the most part) they use a
reed or plain pestill, not headed with iron, to husk and dress their corn; or
else certain wheels that are turned and driven apace with water, which going
very swift do also grind the said corn. But since we are fallen into this
treatise concerning Mago in this behalf: First, for common wheat he gives
order, that it be well steeped and soked in good store of water; afterward, to
berid from the hulls and eiles that it has, in a mortar: which done, it ought
to be dried in the sun, and followed a second time with a pestil. In like
manner (says he) should barley be used: how beit, two Sextars or quarts of
water will be sufficient to besprinckle and wet twenty Sextars of barley. As
for Lentils, he would have them first parched and dried, and then lightly
punned or stamped together with brans; or else to put unto twenty Sextars
thereof, a fragment or piece of a broken semeld brick, and half a Modius or
peck of sand. Eruile would be cleansed or husked as Lentils be: but Sesama,
after it has bin infused or soked in hot water, he says, ought to be laid
abroad a sunning; then to be rubbed hard together; and afterward to be put
into cold water and therewith covered, so as the huls or

To speak more particularly of Millet, there is great store thereof in
Campaine, and there they set much by it, for of it they make a kind of white
grewel or pottage: also the bread thereof is passing sauorie and sweet. The
Tartarians also and nations in Sarmatia, feed most of this water gruell made
with Millet: as also with the crude and raw meal thereof vnsodden and vnbaked

CHAP. XI.
Of Lenains: the manner of making bread: sundry kinds of bread: about what
time Bakers were first known at Rome: of Sieues and Serces, of Rangers and
Bulters. Last of all, of the Frumentie called Alica.

THe meal of Millet is singular good for Leuains, if it be wrought and
incorporat in new wine, for so it may be kept a whole year. The like is made
of the better brans of wheat, so quinque sedeos.
two peckes and an half of meal: but now adays the order of our huswiues is,
to make leuaines of the very same meal which is kneaded and wrought into
dough, before salt be put thereto, which they sees to the consistence of a pulp
or thick batter, and so let it lie until it become sour. And yet commonly
they do not boil their leuains but only reserve some of the past or dough,
whereof they make their bread the day

Concerning the sundry sorts of bread that is made, it seems a needless
piece of work to set them down every one in particular: for sometimes bread
takes the name of the meats and viands that be eaten therewith: as for
example, Oister-bread, so called for that it was good with oisters: otherwhiles
it bears the name of some dainty cates, as Artologanus, [i. pancake, fritter,
or fine cake bread.] As for the bread called Speusticus, [i. Hastie] it is so
called, because it was made in have. The manner also of the baking gives
denomination to some bread; as to Furnaceus panis, which wa^ ^ade in a furnace;
to Artoptitius, made in a baking-pan called Artopta: of Parthicke bread. But
howsoever it be, the best bread is of the finest wheat flower, that

There were no Bakers known at Rome for the space of 580 years after the
foundation of the city, until the Persian war. Before that time every Roman
citizen had his own bread baked at home, and women's work commonly it was, like
as at this day it is in most countries: for this appears by Plautus, who in
his Comoedy entitled Aulularia, makes mention of Ego hanc Artoptamex proximo
vtendam puto.
Artopta, a baking pan [which men have usually in their houses:] and hereupon
is grown much dispute and controversy between learned men about this
Question. Whether that verse were of that Poets making or no? for certain it is
(acording to the opinion of A. Atteius Capito) that at such men's bourds as kept
great houses and delicate fare, there was no other bread eaten but such as
Cooks were wont to make them, after the manner of simnels: for Pistores were
those only then called, who husked and cleansed the bearded red wheat named in
Latin Far; and others Bakers than they, were there none. Neither had the Roman
citizens in ordinary, any Cooks as their

Diverse sorts of sieues and bulters there be. The Sarce made of horse hair,
was a devise of the Frenchmen: the tamis raunger for course bread, as also the
fine flower boulter for manchet, (made both of linen cloth) the Spaniards
invented. In Egypt they made them of Papyr reed and rushes. But now that we
are entered so far into this matter as touching corn, I think it not amiss
before I proceed any farther, to speak (with the first) of the frumentie called
Alica, and the manner thereof being (as it is) so excellent and wholesome to be
eaten; and which, no doubt, throughout all Italy, bears the name for the very
best of all corn whatsoever. No question, but there is made thereof in Egypt;
howbeit nothing to the other. In Italy, many places there be where it is to be
had, as namely in the territories of Verona and Pisae: but that of Campain
carries That greater store is there to be found of sweet perfumes and
odoriferous ointments, than of simple oil in other countries whatsoever. And
look how much this tract of Campaine surpasses all other lands in goodness
and fertility, so much excels one quarter thereof (called in Latin Laboriae,
and by the Greeks Phlegraeum)

But to come again unto our Frumentie Alica, made it is of the grain Zea,
which before we

When all this is done, yet have they not that whiteness of their own, for
which cause they [i. white earth.] And in truth when Augustus Caesar, late
Emperor of Rome, erected a colonie at Capua, and peopled it with Roman
citizens, he assigned unto the Neapolitanes (by virtue of a decree, now extant)
an yearly rent or pension of twenty thousand deniers to be paid out of his
own treasure, in regard of the chalk which came from the hill aforesaid, being
within their territory and siegnorie. He rendereth also a reason inducing him
thus to do, Because the inhabitants of Capua, alleged, that they

As touching a bastard kind of Frumenty, it is made verily for the most part of
a Speltor Zea in Afric, which there does degenerat and grow out of kind. The
ears that it carries, are broader and blacker than the other, and the straw is
but short. They use to cleanse and husk it by stamping or braying it together
with sand, and for all that devise, much ado they have to fetch off the huls
and husks wherein the grain lies enclosed: now when it is thus cleansed and
naked, it is not past half as much in measure as it was before. Which done,
there is a fourth part

CHAP. XII.
Of Pulse.

IT follows now to write of the nature of Pulse, among which, Beans do
challenge the first rank and principal place: for thereof men have assaied to
make bread. The meal of Beans is called in Latin Lomentum. There is not a
Pulse weighs more than it, and Bean meal makes every thing heavier wherein
it is. Now adays they use to sell it for prouender to feed horses. dainty way
is to break and bruise it first. Moreover, by ancient rites and religious
ceremonies, Pythagoras expressly forbad to eat Beans: but as some have
thought and taught, it was because folk imagined, that the souls of such as
were departed, had residence therein: which is the reason also, that they be
ordinarily used and eaten at the funerals and obsequies of the dead. Varro also
affirms, That the great Priest or Sacrificer called the Flamine, abstains
from Beans both in those respects aforesaid, as also for that there are to be
seen in the flower thereof certain letters or characters that shewheauines and
signs of death. Further, there was observed in old time a religious ceremony
in [i. the Brood-hen] the first of al other Pulse, because they might take root
betimes and prevent the Winter. And yet Vere fabis s^tio. Georg. lib. 1.
Virgill would have them to be put into the ground in the Spring: like as the
manner is in Piemont

But the greater part of good Husbandmen are of this opinion, That the stalk
or straw of Beans sown early or set betimes, are better than the very fruit
it self, which has had but Much like to the proverb here in England, Mar^
Ot^ straw i^ better than April Otes.
three months being in the ground. For the cods and stalks only of Beans are
passing good fodder and forage for cattle. Beans when they are blouming, and
in their flower desire most of al to be refreshed with good store of rain: but
after they have don flouring, they care for little: the sowing of this Pulse in
any ground, is as good as a mucking unto it, for it enriches it mightily. And
therefore toward Macedonie and about Thessalie, the manner is when Beans
begin to blossom, for to turn them into the ground with the plough. Beans come
up and grow in most

As touching other Pulse, Lentils be sown in November, and so are Pease, but in
Greece only. Lentils love a light ground better than a fat and heavy: they
like also dry and fair weather. Two kinds thereof be found in Egypt: the one
more round and black than the other; the rest be fashioned as common Lentils.
According to the manifold use and diverse effects of Lentils, there have sundry
names and denominations been borrowed from them: for I find in writers, that
the eating of Lentils makes men to be mild and patient, whereupon they be
called Lenti and Lenes. As for Pease, it ought to be sowed in warm places lying
well upon the Sun: for of all things it cannot abide the cold. Which is the
cause, that in Italy and in other countries

To come now to the Ci^h pease, the nature of it is to be nitrous and saltish,
and therefore it burns the ground where it grows. Neither must it be sown,
unless it were well steeped and soked in water the day before: many sorts
there be of these cich-pease, different in bigness, form,

The Pulse called Phas^oli, [i. Kidney Beans] use to be eaten cod and al
together. These may be set or sown in what ground you list, from the Ides of
October to the Calends of November. Finally, all kinds of Pulse, so soon as
they begin to ripen, are to be gathered or plucked hastily: for stay never so
little, they leap out of their cods, and shed, and being once fallen, they lie
hidden in the ground, like as the Lupine also.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Rapes or Neuewes of Amiternium Turnips.

NOw let us proceed and pass to other matters: and yet in this discourse, it
were meet to write somewhat as touching Rapes or Nauews. The Latin writers, our
countrymen, have mundisieth the eyes, and clears the sight, especially being
tempered with brest-milke. If the

As for the Turnips of Amiternum, they be in a manner of the same nature that
the Rapes aforesaid, and cold they love as well. Sown they are before the
Calends of March; and four quarts of their seed will take up a whole acre of
ground. The best Husbandmen, and such as are more exquisite in their practice
of Agriculture, give order, That the ground for Turnips should have five
tilthes, whereas Rapes or Nauewes are content with four: but both the one and
the other Neptune and Vulcan.

To conclude, there is a subtle and curious observation that many go by and do
hold, namely this, To mark how many days old the Moon was, when the first
snow sell the winter next before; for if a man do sow Rapes or Turnips, within
the foresaid compass of that time, the moon being so many days old, they will
come to be wondrous great, and increase exceedingly. Men

CHAP. XIIII.
Of Lupines.

AFter Rapes and Turnips, the Lupines have greatest use, and serve to be
raunged next: for that they indifferently serve both men and also all four
footed beasts that be houfed, either whole or cloven. Now for that the stalk
is very shittle in mowing, and therefore flies from the edge of the sith, the
only remedy therefore (that the mower may catch it) is to go to work
presently after a good shower. And verily there is not a plant growing upon the
after the third flouring; but in case it be grauelly or sandy, it will serve to
do it after the second.

CHAP. XV.
Of Vetches and Eruile.

VEtches also do manure and fat the ground where they be sowed; neither be they
chargeable or stand the husbandman in much: they be sown with one tilth;
otherwise there needs no harrowing nor weeding: there is required no mucking;
only they would be covered with mould and the clods broken; for sowing of
vetches, there be three sundry times; first, about the setting of the star
Arcturus, that by the month of December it may get a good head for to be eaten
with beasts; and it is generally holden, that being sown in this season, it
will bring the

As touching Eruile, it asks no great hand or travel about it: yet thus much
more attendance it requires than Vetches, for that it must be weeded and
grubbed about the roots. Besides, this kind of Pulse is of great use in
Physic; for Augustus Caesar was cured of a disease that

CHAP. XVI.
Of Foenigreeke: of Rye: of Dredge: of the prouender corn or Bolimong Ocymum:
of Spanish Trefoile or horned Clauer-grasse, called in Latin Medica: of the
shrub Trifoile, named Cytisus.

FOr the sowing of Silicia or Siliqua, otherwise called Foenigreeke, there
needs no more but to scarrifie or scrape it lightly up with a furrow not above
four fingers breadth deep; for the less cost and husbandry that is bestowed
about it, and the worse that it is used, the better it prospers and yields
greater increase: a strange thing to be spoken and seldom verified, That
Negligence should be any ways profitable; and yet herein it proves true.
That which is called Secale and Farrago in Latin, (i. Rye) needs no more
ado but to be harrowed and the clods well broken. There is a kind of Secale
or Rye, which the people called Taurines dwelling under the Alps do call
Asia: it is simply worst of all other, and good for nothing but only to drive
away hunger: plentiful enough this corn is and yields good increase, but
the straw is slender: black it is and of an unpleasant color, howbeit
exceeding weighty and ponderous: ordinarily; neither does it eat the ground
out of heart, but rather makes it more battle, and serves in stead of compost
or mucke.

As for that kind of dredge of farrage which comes of the refuse and light
corn purged from the red wheat Far, it ought to be sown very thick, with
Vetches otherwhiles mingled among. In Afric, the same mixture is made of
Barley. All these are good only for prouender and beasts forage: as also a
bastard kind of Vetches called Or rather Arachos
Cracca, which pigeons love so well, that if they be fed once therewith, they
will never leave the place where they tasted it, nor fly far from thence. In
time past our ancestors had a kind of fodder or prouender, which Cate called
Ocymum, wherewith they Sistebant Uar^o says (...), which is clean contrary.
used to stay the gurrie in kine and oxen. This forage was made of Fabali
segete antiquam genaret.
bean stalks cut down green as it stood before it was iointed and codded.
But Sura Manlius takes this dredge to be another thing, saying, that in old
time they used to put unto ten Modij Varro says, that it took that name
because it comes up so speedily as being derived from the Greek word (...),
which signifies, Quick, or Swift.

As for the grass or herb Medica (a kind of Clauer or Trefoile) the Greeks
held it in old time for a mere stranger, as being brought into Greece from
Media during the Persian wars, which king Darius levied against Greece:
howbeit, an excellent Simple it is, and worthy to be written of in the first
place. And to begin withal, this singular property it has, That with once
Amphilochus compiled one whole book; howbeit, he wrote of them both confusedly.
The ground wherein it is to be sowed, after it is well rid of stones and
cleansed, must be broken up and well tilled in the fall of the leaf. Soon
after it needs to have another fallow and be harrowed withal, and then
covered with hardles: this would be done two or three times (five days
between) and therewith it ought to be thoroughly dunged. This herb requires a
sound dry ground, and yet such as is full of succulent moisture within, or else
where water is near at hand to command. The ground being thus prepared, ought
to be sowed in the month

As touching Cytisus, [i. the Shrub Trifolie] which is a singular kind of
pasturage, and passes all the rest, I have written at full in my discourse of
shrubs. For now at this present I am to prosecure and go through the treatise
of other sorts of corn and their nature, if I had once written

CHAP. XVII.
The faults incident to corn, and their remedies. Also what corn is
respective to this or that soil, for to be sown therein.

THe first and principal defect observed in bread-corne, and Wheat especially,
is when it does degenerate and turn into Otes: and not only it, but Barley
also does the like. Semblably, Otes otherwhiles serve the turn in stead of
bread corn: as we may see in some countries of Almaine, where they do usually
sow it, and commonly they have no other pottage

A second defect or imperfection there is also incident to corn, which has
some near resemblance to the Otes aforesaid; namely, when the grain being
formed and newly come to the just proportion of bigness (howbeit, not yet full
and ripe) before that it is firm and hard, is smitten

Furthermore, there be certain little worms breeding in the root, that do eat
it: which happens by occasion of much rain falling immediately after the
seednesse, especially, when some sudden heat and drowth ensues thereupon; which
binds the earth above and so encloseth

All kinds of wheat and other bread corn, when they be toward ripeness, catch
hurt by showers, but Barley more than any. Besides all this, there is a
certain white herb or weed resembling Panicke, growing among corn, and
ouerspreading whole fields; which not only hinders corn, but also kills
all the cattle that feeds thereupon. For as touching ray or darnel, burs,
thistles, and brambles, I may hold and reckon them, not so much for faults and
imperfections of corn, as rather the plagues and infections proceeding from the
very earth. And for blasting, which comes of some distemperature of the air
(a mischief common as well to corn, as vines) it is as hurtful as any other
malady whatsoever. This unhappy blast falls most often in places subject to
mists and dewes, and namely, hollow valleys and low grounds lying under the
wind: for contrariwise, windy quarters, and such as are mounted high, are not
subject to a great glut of rain, insomuch as the ground stands with water,
there befalls unto all corn and pulse, yea, and whatsoever is sown, a
certain disease called in Latin Vrica; insomuch, as the i. Choke Eruile.
After the same manner deals Era. 4.
Ray or Darnel by wheat; wild Otes likewise, named by some Aegilops, with
barley; as also the weed Securidaca, i. Ax-fitch, which the Greeks also (for the
resemblance that it has to an axe head (call Pelicinon, (...), but more truly
(...), out of Theophrastus. Thus Pliny mistaketh in many places: and for
example, immediately in the word A^eramnos, which is appropriate to all Pulse
that require much seething or be hard of digestion. The op^rast. c. 1^. and 14.
l. 4. de plant
with Lentils. These weeds (I say) kill corn by winding about it. Another herb
there is, growing near to the city Philippi, which kills Beans: if the
ground be fat and good, they name the said weed Ateramnon; but if it be found
in a hungry and lean soil, and namely, when being wet, some unhappy wind
blows upon it, they call it Teramnon.

As touching the cure of those harms that come by hurtful weeds to the corn in
blade, it consists principally in two things: namely, either in the use of
the weeding knife or hook, when they be newly come up; or else in strewing
ashes when the corn is a sowing. But as for those dangers that touch the seed
or grain in the ear and cod, as also that settle about the root, they must be
prevented by good forecast, even before it be thrown into the ground. It is
generaly thought that if seed-corn lie steeped beforehand in Wine, it will be
better able afterward to resist all diseases whatsoever. Virgil gives order
to infuse or soke the Beans that must be sown, in nitre and oil lees or
dregs; and he assures us, that they will prosper mightily besides, and become
exceeding great. But others are of opinion, that if for 3 days before they be
cast into the earth Democritus had a devise by himself for all seed and corn
whatsoever, namely, to temper and soke the same corn in the juice of the herb
housleeke or Sen-greene, growing upon houses either tiled or shindled; which in
Greek is called Aizoon, and in Latin Sedum or Digitellum; for this medicine
will serve for all maladies. The common practice of our husbandmen is this: in
case through the ouersweet sap or juice in green corn, worms take to the
roots: for to sprinkle them with simple oil lees pure and clean without any
salt, and afterward to rake it in. Also, when the corn begins to joint and
gathet into knots, then to cleanse the much harm; nay I will speak a greater
word and which may seem wonderful, There is not a Foelic^as soli
so fertile is the soil: and if the owner be a good husband besides, and use
the ground accordingly, he shall reap thrice as much,

Seeing then there is so great difference in the soil, I am put in mind
thereby to fit every ground with seed respectively, according to the nature and
goodness thereof. This therefore is the opinion of Cato, that in a gross and
fat soil, there would be wheat and such like hard corn sown; and if the same
be subject also to mists and dews, there may be sown therein raddish, millet,
and Panick, must be sown first in a cold and waterish ground; and afterward
for change in a hot soil. Item, the red bearded wheat Far or Adoreum,
requires a chalkie and sandy ground, and namely if it be well watered. Item,
the common wheat loves a dry soil, exposed to the Sun, and not given much to
breed superfluous weeds. Item, Beans will do well in a sound and fast soil.
As for Vetches, they care not how little they be sowed in a moist piece of
ground, and such as is apt to run to grass. Moreover, for the fine winter
wheat Siligo, whereof the best manchet (...). Plutarch.
Barley would gladly grow upon a restie ground new broken up, or else such as be
in heart to bear every year. And as for Summer (barley) of three months, it
would be sown in a ground where it could not have an early or timely Seednes,
and which is so fat and rich, as it may afford to bear crop, year by year:
finally, to speak to the purpose indeed, this also is Catoes witty resolution
in one word for all: if the soil be light and lean, seed it with such grain or
forage seed, as require no great nourishment, as for example, with Cytisus; and
excepting the Cich-pease, with all pulse that are used to be plucked out of the
earth, and not mowed down: and thereupon indeed are these pulse called in
Latin lean and hungry soil will well agree with barley, for the root is
contented with less nutriture:

CHAP. XVIII.
Of strange prodigies and wonders observed in corn: the knowledge and skill of
earing and tilling the ground: also diverse sorts of plough-shares.

ALbeit I have in the title of this chapter purposed to write of prodigies seen
in corn, yet to my knowledge, there never happened but once the like wonder
and portenteous sight to this which I shall tell, and which befell in the time
that P. Aelius and Cn. Cornelius were Consuls of Rome, that very year wherein
Annibal with his whole army was defeated and vanquished: for then (by report)
there was corn grew upon trees.

But forasmuch as I have discoursed at large of the sundry kinds as well of
corn as of ground. I will proceed now forward and come to the manner of
ploughing the earth, after I have first set down before all things else, how
easy the husbandry is in Egypt: for there the river Nilus serving in stead of
a good plough man, begins to swel and ouerflow (as we have before rehearsed)
at the first new Moon after the Summer Sunstead. He begins fair and
softly, and so Be ruled by the nature of every country, and see what each
ground will abide. To come now unto our ploughes. Of Dentali.
plough head and shooing it to the full, but turning up like a snout with a
small point sharp at the end. This neb is somewhat broader in a fourth kind of
or as some think, Pflugradt.
Planarati: the head of their share is broad, fashioned like unto the bit of a
spade: and thus they sow their grounds for the most part, new broken up and not
tilled nor eared before. And for that their plough-shares be large and broad,
so much the easier turn they up good turfs of earth and make broad furrows.
Presently after the plough, they throw in their seed, and mould or cover it
afterward with yron-toothed harrows drawn aloft. Lands in this manner sown,
need no other raking

CHAP. XIX.
The seasons that be proper for tilling the ground: also the manner of coupling
oxen in yoke.

IN this operation of ploughing ground, I am of mind to follow that Oracle or
Aphorism of Cato, who being asked which was the first and principal point of
Agriculture, answered thus, Even to husband, order, and tend ground well: being
demanded again, what was the second, he * Been col^re.
made answer, To plough well. And when the question was propounded concerning
the third point * Been arare.
of husbandry, he said, That it consisted in manuring and dunging it well.
There be other necessary rules besides, set down by him as touching this
matter; namely, Make no unequal furrows in * Been stercorare.
ploughing, but lay them alike with one and the same plough. Pass not the
kindly season, but care the ground in due time. In the warmer countries, lands
would be broken up and fallowes made, immediately after the Winter Solstice or
Sun-stead. In colder regions, touch them not before the spring Aequinox or
Mid-march. In a dry quarter, plough more early than in a moist: sooner also in
a fast and compact soil, than in a loose and light ground: in a fat and rich
field, than in a lean and poor land. Look in what climat the Summer is
ordinarily dry and hot, it is thought more profitable to ear up a chalky or a
light and lean ground, between the Summer In the spring
seednes. Here also be other proper rules set down by Cato, pertinent to
Agriculture: Touch not (quoth. he) in any hand a piece of ground that soon will
turn to dust and mire. When thou do plough indeed for to sow, employ thy
whole strength thereto: but before thou take a deep stitch for all give it a
pin-fallow before; this commodity comes thereof, that by turning up the turfe
with the bottom upward, the roots of weeds are killed. Some are of this
opinion, that howsoever we do else, a ground should have the first br^aking up
[i. spring.] Indeed ley grounds and such as rest each other year, must be in
this wise followed. Now if you would know what the Latins

To come now unto our draught oxen that must labor at the plough: they ought
to be coupled in yoke, as close together and as straight as is possible, to the
end that whilst they be at work and ploughing, they may bear up their heads;
for by that means they least do gall or bruise their necks. If they chance to
go to plough among trees and vines, they must be muzled with some frailes or
devises made of twigs, to the end they should not brouse and crop off the young
springs and soft tendrils. Moreover, there ought a little hatchet to hang
evermore fast to the plough beam before, therewith to cut through roots within
the ground, that might break or stay the plough: for better is it so to do,
than to put the plough to it, to keep a plucking at them or to force the poor
oxen to lie tugging and wrestling with them. Also in ploughing, this order
Versum peragi
gone down with one furrow to the lands end, they turn and go up again with
another; so that in ploughing of a land they Stigare.
rest between whiles as little as may be, but evermore go forward in their
labor until they have made an end of their Ac^.
half acre, or half days work: and verily it is thought sufficient for a
teem of oxen to break up (at the first tilth) in one day of restie or ley
ground, one acre, taking a furrow or stitch of nine inches; but at the second
tilth or stirring, an acre and a half; which is to be understood of an easy
and mellow soil to be wrought; for if it be tough and churlish, it is well if
they ear up at the first, half an acre; and at the next time they may go
through with one whole acre, how hard soever the ground be; for thus have poor
beasts their task set, and their labor limited by Natures lore and
appointment. Every field to be sown must be eared at first with straight and
direct furrows; but those that follow after, ought to go byas and winding. If a
ground upon the pendant

CHAP. XX.
Of harrowing and breaking clods. Of a certain kind of ploughing used in old
time. Of the second tilth or fallow called Stirring: and of cutting.

AFter the second fallow called Stirring, done with cross and overthwart
furrow to the first* then follows clodding, if need be, either with rakes or
great harrowes: upon which insueth sowing: and when the seed is in the ground,
harrowing a second time with the small harrow. In some places, where the manner
of the country does so require, this is performed with a

It should seem that Illa s^ges dem^m vo^is respondet a^ari. Agr^olae, bis quae
soli bis sri^ra sensit.
Virgil prescribed, that the ground should have four tilthes in all, by 1
Breaking. 2 Stirring. 3 Crushing. 4 Setting up. 5 Cast^g down.

fifth tilth before sowing, and in Tuscan verily they give their ground,
otherwhiles no fewer than nine fallowes, before it be brought into tillage. As
for Beans and Vetches, they may be sowed under furrow, without breaking up the
ground before; for this is a ready way, gaining time, saving charges, and
sparing labor.

And here I cannot ouerpasse one invention more as touching earing and
ploughing the ground, devised in Piemont and those parts beyond the Po, by
occasion of some hard measure and wrong offered to the people and peisants of
that country during the wars. And thus stood the case. The Salassians making
rodes into the vale lying under the Alps, as they forraied and

Neither will I conceal from you another new devise, practiced and invented
first, not above

CHAP. XXI.
Of the tillage and ordering of the ground.

THe fine Wheat Siligo, the red bearded Wheat Far, and the common Wheat
Triticum; (i. Spelt) and Beans, would do the better if they were thus sarcled,
and the earth laid i. For so he in^e ^eteth it h^self ^n the ^hap. of this
book.
Fenigreeke, and Fasels, i. Kidney-beans, they care only for clodding, and
there

Moreover, there be certain grounds so fertile, that the corn coming up so
thick and rank in the blade, ought then to be kembed (as it were) and raked
with a kind of harrow set with teeth or spikes of iron: and yet for all this,
they must be grased or eaten down besides nevertheless with

Virgil is of opinion, That fallowes would be made every year, and that our
corn field should rest between whiles, and bear but each other year. And
surely, I do find this rule of his most

CHAP. XXII.
Of certain countries exceeding fertile and fruitful. Of a vine bearing
grapes twice in one year. Of the difference and diversity observed in waters.

THere is in Afric or Barbary a city called Tacape, situate in the midst of
the sands, as men go to the Syrts and Leptis the great: the territory lying
about which city, by reason that it is so well watered, is marvelous
fruitful, and indeed passes a wonder and is incredible. Within this tract
there is a fountain, which serves abundantly for three miles well near, every
way; the head thereof verily is large enough otherwise, howbeit the inhabitants
about it are served with water from thence by turns, and dispensed it is among
them at certain set hours, 2. sh. 6. d. ster^. By which reckoning one acre
would cost above 20: pound sterling so much in pro portion of the whole, as
this cubit is under our half yard or 18 inches.
4 deniers Roman: but this one surpasses all the rest. The vines in the said
territory bear twice a year, and yield their grapes ripe for a double
Vintage. So exceeding fruitful is the soil, that unless the rankness
thereof were abated and taken down, by bearing sundry fruits one under and
after another, so that it were employed

Moreover, all kinds of water are not of like nature nor of equal goodness,
for to drench and refresh the ground. In the province of Narbon, now Languedoc,
there is a famous well or fountain named Orge, within the very head whereof there
grow certain herbs, so much desired and sought for by kine and oxen, that to
seek and get a mouthfull of them, they will thrust in their whole heads over
their ears, until they meet therewith: but howsoever these herbs seem to

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the diverse qualities of the soil. Also, the manner of dunging or manuring
grounds.

IF you meet with a ground of your own, which we called heretofore by the name
of Tenera, the flower indeed and principal of all others; after you have taken
off a crop of Barley, you may very well sow Millet thereupon: and when that is
inned and laid up in the barn, proceed to Raddish. Last of all, after they be
drawn, there may be barley or common wheat sowed in the place, like as they do
in Campaine; for surely such a piece of ground needs no other tillage, but
often sowing. Another order there is besides this in sowing of such soil;
namely, that where there grew the red wheat Adoreum or Far, there the ground
should rest all the four winter months,

Howeuer it be, the principal thing in this part of Agriculture, consists in
dunging, whereof I have written already in the former book next to this. This
one point only is resolved upon

To the end now that we may determine fully as touching this care also,
belonging to dung, every sheep or goat and such small cattle, should by right
yield ordinarily in dung one load in or rather (after Columella) 39 days.
ten days: and every head of bigger beasts ten load; for unless this
proportion and quantity of muck be gathered, plain it is, that the granger or
master of husbandry, has not don his part, but

CHAP. XXIIII.
Of good seed-corne. The manner of sowing ground well. How much seed of every
kind of grain an acre will take. The due seasons of Seednesse.

THe best corn or Zea for seed, is of one years age, two years old is not
so good: that of three, is worst of all: for beyond that time, the heart is
dead, and such corn will never spurt. And verily this that is said of one sort
may be verified of all kinds. The corn that setleth to

Furthermore, this is certain, that some grounds take more seed, and some
less. And hereby verily do husband men gather their first presage religiously,
of a good or bad harvest; for when they see the ground swallow more seed than
ordinary, they have a ceremony to say and believe

Now as touching the quantity of seed that must be given, according to the
variety both of ground and grain, these principles following are to be
observed: in a reasonable good ground of a mean temperature, an acre in
ordinary proportion will ask of common wheat Triticum, or He means Zea or
Spelt.
seed [for so we call a kind of bread corn] ten Modij; of Barley six; of Beans as
much as of common wheat, and a fifth part or one Modius over; of Vetches 12; of
Cich pease the greater, Cichlings the less, and of pease three; of Lupines
ten; of Lentils 3; [as for these, folk would have them sowed together with dry
dung] of Ervile six; of Silicia or Feni-greek six; of Phaseols or Kidny beans
four; of Dradge or Balimong for horse prouender, 20; but of Millet and Panick
4 Sextars. Howbeit herein can be set down no just proportion, for the soil may
alter all. And in one word, a fat ground will receive more, and a lean less.
Besides, there arises a difference another way, in this manner; if it be a
massy, fast, chalky, and moist ground, you may bestow in one acre thereof six
Modij, either of common wheat or of fine Siligo; but in case it be loose and
light, naked, dry, and yet in good Accius in his Treatise called Praxidicus,
comes in with one more of his own: Sow your ground (says he) when the Moon is
in any of these signs, Aries, Gemini, Leo, Libra, and Aquarius. And Zoroastres
has another Astronomicall observation by himself, That the Sun should be
entered into Scorpio, and past twelve degrees thereof, the Moon being at the
same time in

Now follows the deep question to be discussed and determined, As touching
the fit time and season of sowing corn: which I have put off and deferred to
this present place. And this would be handled and considered upon with
exceeding great care and regard, as depending for the most part of Astronomy,
and requiring good insight in the course and motion of the Planets, in the
order also and influence of the fixed stars: and therefore I purpose to lay
abroad the opinions and judgments of ancient writers principally in that
behalf. To begin therefore with Hesiod, esteemed the prince and chief of all
those that gave precepts of Agriculture; he has set down one certain time of
Seednes, to wit, presently after the fall or occultation of the Star Vergiliae,
i. the Brood-hen: and no marvel, for he wrote that book of his in Boeotia, a
country in Virgil gives a precept to sow the common wheat Triticum, and the
red bearded wheat Far, after the retrait or departure aforesaid of the
Brood-hen Vergiliae. As for Barley, he would have it cast into the ground
between the Aequinox in Autumn, and the winter Sun-sted: but Vetches,
Kidney-beans, or Lentils, at the setting Well may ouertimely and hasty sowing
oftentimes fail, but late sowing shall ever miss and deceive the master.
Contrariwise, others there are of this mind, That it were better stay until
the spring to do it well and surely, rather than to sow in a bad Autumn, and
hasard the losing of all. If there be no remedy therefore but to take the
spring season, a man must make choice of the time between the midst of
February [at what time as the Minerva, called Quinquatrus; like as at this day
throughout all Lombardie and beyond the Po, they go by no other rule. As for
Beans and the fine wheat Siligo, put them into the ground in the month of
November. Let the winter red wheat Far take his fortune and be interred, from
the end of September, until the midst or fifteenth day of October. Others go
beyond that day, and continue their seednesse unto to the Calends or first day
of November. Now as these men have no regard at all to the speculation of these
matters must pass through the hands of rustical peasants, who are so far off
from Virgill says very well, That before all other things, a husbandman should
be skillful in the winds and have the foreknowledge and prediction of them:
also to have an insight into the nature and influence of the stars, and in
one word, to observe both the one and the other, as well as the Sailers and
mariners at sea. Certes, a hard piece of work it is, and infinite; and small
hope I have that ever I shall be able to drive into their heads that are so
ignorant and gross of conceit, this high learning and heavenly divinity, as
touching the Planets, the fixed stars, together with the reason of their
orderly motions and celestial powers: howbeit considering

CHAP. XXV.
The times and seasons of the rising and setting of Stars, digested into
order, as well by i. Evening and morning.
day as night,

IN the first place, there offers it self unto us one difficulty above the
rest, so intricate, as hardly is it possible to resolve upon it; namely, as
touching the very days of the year, how many they be, in number; and the
revolution of the Sun, how and when he returns again to to the same point?
For whereas some do account the solare year to be 365 days just, others add
thereunto certain quadrants or four parts of day and night together, to wit,
six hours every year, which being put together, make the fourth year
Bissextile or Leap year: so as it is in manner impossible to assign the
certain days and hours of the Stars apparition or occultation. Virgil
expressly wills us to learn thoroughly the skill of the wandering Stars or
Planets also, and principally gives us warning to mark the course of that
cold Planet Saturn.

But now to come more particularly to the signs which fore-token the Spring:
some there be Caesar the Dictatour first erected: who observing the course of
the Sun, and taking with him also the advice of Sosigenes (a learned
Mathematitian and skillful Astronomer in his time) reduced the year unto the
said revolution. Howbeit, in this calculation of his, there was found an error,
and short he came of the mark, which he aimed at, by reason that there was no
Bissextile or leap year by him inserted, but after 12 years. Now, when it was
observed by this reckoning, that the sun had performed his revolution sooner
than the year turned about, which before was wont to prevent the course of the
Sun, this error was reformed: and after every fourth year expired, came about
the Bissextile aforesaid, and made al straight. Sosigenes also himself, albeit
he was reputed a more curious and exquisite Mathematician than the rest, yet in
three several treatises that he made, retracting or correcting that in one
book that he had set down in another, seemed evermore to write doubtfully, and
left the thing in as great Hesiodus the Poet (for under his name also there
goes a Treatise of Astrology) has put down in writing the matutine setting
of the star Vergiliae (which is the occultation thereof by the rays and beams
of the Sun toward morning) Thales the Milesian says, That it falls out
upon the five and twentieth after the said Aequinox. Anaximander writes, That
it is nine and twenty days after: and finally, Euctemon has noted the 48 day
following the said Aequinox, for the retrait or occultation of the forenamed
Brood-hen star Vergiliae. Lo what variety there is among these deep clearkes
and great Astrologers.

For mine own part I hold well with Caesar's calculation, and will keep me to
his observations as near as I can, for that the same will fit best with our
meridian here in all Italy. Yet nevertheless I will not stick to set down
the opinions of others, because my desseigne tends not to one particular
place alone, but I purpose and profess to represent unto the reader the
universal history of Nature, and the whole world. But my meaning is not to
rehearse the names of every Author one by one (for that were a tedious piece of
work, and would require a long train understand the Islands Cyclades: when I
name Macedonie, I comprehend therewith Magnesia Item, In making mention of
Hellespontus only, I take together with it, Chersonesus, and all the continent
or main firm land, as far as to the mountain Athos: in naming Ionia, I reckon
also Asia the less or Natolia, and the Isles thereto adjoining: under the name
of Peloponnesus I count Achaia, and other lands in that climat lying to the
West. Finally, the Chaldaeans shall make demonstration, as in a map, of Assyria
and Babylonia. As for Afric or Barbary, Spain and France, marvel not if I
pass them over in silence: for there is not a writer in all these Nations, one
or other, who has either observed or penned down the time when these fixed
stars rise or fall. Howbeit it were no hard matter to come to the knowledge
thereof in those climats and countries also, by the meridionall lines and
conformity of

Now all the knowledge of the heavens pertinent to Agriculture, stands
principally upon three sorts of observations, to wit, the rising of the fixed
stars, the setting of the same, and the four cardinal points, to wit, of the
two Tropicks or Sunsteads, and the double Aequinox, which divide the whole
year into four quarters and notable seasons. Where note, that the rise and
fall of those stars beforesaid is to be considered and taken two ways. For
first when the Sun approaches unto them with his beams, they be hidden and no
more seen: likewise after his departure they show themselves again: and as the
one, me thinks, might have bin more aptly called an Apparition than a Rising,
so we should have framed our tongue in common speech to have Ortus and o^casus
Heliacus.
ortus and occasus Cosmicus.
Oriental or Occidental, according as the one or the other happens unto them
in the twilight, morning, or evening. Certes, when they are to be seen
Matutine or Vespertine, it must be at the least three quarters of an hour
either before the Sun is up, or after he is down: for within that space there
is no looking after them. Moreover, some stars there be that rise and fall
twice. But take this with you, ere I proceed further, that all this speech of
mine is to be understood of the fixed stars, which being settled fast in the
sky, move not of themselves: and in no wise of the planets.

As touching the four cardinal seasons of the year, whereby it is divided
into four quarters; limited they be according to the light more or less, and
as the days be longer or shorter: for so soon as the winter Sunsted is past,
the days do lengthen; and by that time that 90 days and three hours be gone
and past, they be just as long as the night, and this is called the spring
Aequinox. From which very day, for ninety three days together and twelve
hours, namely unto the summer Sun-stead, the days be longer than the night,
and so continue until the Autumn Aequinox, at what time the days and nights
be equal again; from which time they shorten and decrease as they grew in
length and increased before, for eighty nine days together, and three hours,
until the foresaid winter Sunstead, when as the days be shortest. And here
you must note, that in all these additions of hours at this present, I mean
those only that be Aequinoctiall, of the year, called in Latin Bruma, falls
out in the eight degree of Capricorn, which lightly 15 of December.
18 day before the Calends of January. The Spring Aequinox, when nights and
days be of a length, in the eight degree of Aries. Semblably, the summer
Sunstead, or longest day of the year, is always when the Sun is entered eight
degrees into Cancer. Last of all, the other Aequinox in Autumn, when day and
night is equal, lights upon the eight degree of Libra. And certes, seldom or
never shall you see any of these four days without evident show of some
notable change in the weather. Again, these cardinal seasons or quarters of
the year admit also their sub-diuisions still into some notable and special
times, observed in the Called Interualla afterward in this chapter: and contain
much about six weeks.
very middle space from the one and the other. For between the summer Sunstead
and the Aequinox in Autumn just upon the five and forty day after the same
Sunstead, the retrait or setting of the star called in Latin Fidicula, i. the
Harp, begins the Autumn. Likewise, between

But to return again to our Agriculture, begin I will at the Seednes of
Frument corn, that is to say, at the rising or apparition of the star
Vergiliae in the morning, without making any mention at all of other pety
stars, for to interrupt the train and course of our treatise, and to heap i.
the Crown; promising themselves assuredly to have rain upon it for certain
days together. Xenophon would not have us begin to sow before that God give us
some good sign and token so to do. And Cicero our countryman expounding this
saying of Xenophon, takes the raines in Called by our Husbandmen Gore-moone.
November to be that sign which God gives: whereas in very deed the true and
undoubted rule to go by, is to make no great have into the field for to sow,
before the leaves begin to fall: and this every man holds to be at the very
occultation or retrait of the star Vergiliae. Some, as we have before said,
have observed it about 3 days before the Ides of November. And for that the
said star is so evident teach and counsel us but to have our eye upon the
ground, and to cast seed into it, assuring us of Varro, he is of the same
opinion for beans also, and wills us to observe the said rule in sowing them
at the fall of the leaf. Others are of this mind, that the best sowing thereof
is in the full Moon. But for Lentils, we should attend the last quarter toward
the change, to wit, from the 25 day to the thirtieth. Also, that Vetches must
be sowed at the said age of the Moon: for in so doing we shall preserve such
pulse from the naked snaile. Howbeit, some others there be that indeed would
have these kinds of Pulse to be sowed at this time of the year and age of

Besides those rules and tokens above specified, there is one more, which
Nature upon an extraordinary providence over us, has presented unto our eyes
after a wonderful manner, which Cicero expresses in these terms Iam vero
semper viridis, semperque gravata
Lentiscus, triplici solit a est grandescere foetu:
Ter fruges fundens, tria tempora monstrat arandi.


The Mastick tree
All times, you see,
Is clad and richly dight,
With green in cold,
With fruit threefold,
A fair and goodly sight.
As she therefore,
By Natures lore,
Does fruit thrice yearly bear:
So thereby we
Know seasons three,
Our land to duly ear.
Of which three seasons, one is appropriate for the sowing both of Poppy and
also of Lineseed. But since I have named Poppy, I will tell you what Cato says
as touching the sowing thereof: upon that land (quoth he) where you mean to sow
Poppy, burn your winding rods, the cuttings also and twigs of vines, which
remained and were left at the pruning time: when you have burned them, sow wild
Poppy seed in the place; for it is a singular medicine being boiled up to a

CHAP. XXVI.
A summarie or recapitulation of all points of Husbandry: and to what outworks
in the field a husbandman should be employed, respectively to every month of
the year.

But now to compass under a certain brief Abridgement or Breviarie, all
points of husbandry Item, after the Calends or first day of November, let him
set no hens upon eggs until the winter Sunstead be past: when that time is come
and gone, set Hens hardly, and let them couve 13 eggs; marie

Democritus gives a guess what Winter we shall have, by the very day of the
Winter Sunstead: for look what weather is then and for threedaies about it, the
like winter (he supposes) will ensue. Semblably, for the Summer he goes by
the other Sunstead or longest day of the

Moreover, in mid-winter meddle not at all with vines, touch them not in any
hand, but let them alone. What then is the husbandman to do? Mary then (quoth
Hyginus) after seven days be once past from the Sunnestead, he is to refine
his wines from the lees, and let them settle, yea and to pour them out of one
vessel into another, provided withal, that the Moon be a quarter

But now to come to Caesar's reckoning of the times and digestion of the
celestial signs: these be the notable stars which are significant and do rule
that quarter which is between the winter Sunstead and the rising of the Western
wind Favonius. Upon the third day (says he) before the Calends of January,
which is the 30 day of December, the Dog-starre goes down in the morning:
upon which day in Attica and the whole tract thereto adjoining, the star
Aquila, [i. the Aegle] sets (by report) in the evening, and loses her
light. The even before the Nones i. the fourth day thereof, by Caesar's account
[I mean for the meridian of Italy] the Dolphin star rises in the morning, and
the morrow after, the Harp-star Fidicula; upon which day, in Egypt, the star
Sagitta [i. the Arrow] sets in the evening. Item, from that time to the sixth
day before the Ides of January [i. the eighth day of that moneth] when as the
same Dolphin goes down or retireth out of sight in the evening, usually we
have in Italy continual frost and winter weather: as also when the Sun is
perceived to enter into Aquarius, which ordinarily falls out sixteen days
before the Calends of February [i. the seventeenth of January.] As for the
clear and bright star, called the star Royal, appearing in the breast of the
sign Leo, Tubero mine Author says, that eight days before the Calends of
February, to wit, the 25 day of January, it goes out of our sight in the
morning: also ouer-night before the Nones of February [i. the fourth day of
the same moneth] the Harp-star Fidicula goes down and is no more seen. Toward
the later end of this quarter, it is good and necessary to dig and turn up
fresh mould with mattock and spade, against the time that roses or vines shall
be set, wheresoever the temperature of the climat will bear it: and for an
acre of such work, sixty laborers in a day are sufficient to do it well. At
which time also old trenches and ditches would be scoured or new made. For
morning work before day the Husbandman must look to his iron tools, that they
be ground, whetred, and sharpened; that their steles, helues, or handles, be
fitted and set to their heads; that shaken tubs, barrels, and such like
vessels, be new cowped, bound with hoops, and calfretted; that their staves ^e
well scraped and cleansed, or else new set into them. And thus much of this
Winter Quarter, as far as to the coming of the Western wind Favonius.

Now as touching the entrance of the new Spring, which is from the rising of
the said wind to the Equinox in March; Caesar sets down for it the time,
which for three days together is variable and inconstant weather, to wit,
seuenteen days before the calends of March, which is the Whereupon the said
wind Fauonius, is called Ch^idonias and Ornethias.
first Swallow; and the morrow after, upon which day the star Arcturus rises
Vespertine, i. appears in the ^ning. In like manner, Caesar has observed,
that the said wind has begun to blow three days before the Nones of March, to
wit, the fifth of March, just with the rising or apparition of the Crab-star
Cancer. Howbeit most writers of Astrology do assign the first entry of the
Spring and the coming of this wind, to the 8 day before the Ides of March,
which is the eight of that month, when as the star Vin^emiator, id est, the
Grapegatherer, begins to appear: at what time also the Northerly star
called the Fish, arises: upon the morrow whereof, to wit, the ninth day, the
great star Orion shows himself in his likeness. In the region At^ica
where Athens stands, it is observed, that the star Milvus, i the Caesar
moreover noted, that the star Scorpio rises upon the 13 of March: for upon that
day was he murdered.
Ides of March, those fatal Ides (I say) that were so unfortunate unto
himself: also, that upon the 15 Calends of April, which is the 18 of March,
the foresaid Milvus, i the Kitestar, appears to them in Italy, and three
days after, the Horse-star is hidden toward the morning. This is the freshest,
the most busy or stirring interual or time between that husbandmen have; and
yet therein they be oftenest deceived, for commonly called they are not to their
work the very same day that the wind Fauonius should by course blow, but when
it begins to be aloft; which is a point to be considered and observed with
right great regard: for if a man would take heed and mark well, this is that
month wherein God gives us that sure and infallible sign which never fails.
Now from what quarter or coast this wind does blow, and which way i the seventh
of Februario.
sixth day just before the Ides of February) from that time, I say, must the
rustical paisants settle to their work, then are they to go about a world of
toilesome labor, then must they plie their business and make speed to
dispatch those things first that may not be deferred and put off, then or never
would their summer three month corn be sown, their vines be pruned in manner
abouesaid, their Olive trees dressed and trimmed accordingl^: Apple Tree stocks
and such like fruits, are then to to be set and graffed; then is the time to be
digging and deluing in vineyards, to remove some Sarrito.
sarcled or raked, Virgil especially, to the end that the Sun might thoroughly
parch and concoct the clots, and thereby make it more mellow for the Seednes.
Howbeit I do like better of their opinion (as the more thristie and profitable
of the two)

When thou have found out in this manner the North-east wind Aquilo, be sure
that the wind

The third line from the North point (which we drew first through the latitude
of the shadow before said, and which we called Decumana) points out the
Equinoctial Sunrising in March and September; directs thee also to the East
wind under it, called in Latin Subsolanus, and in Greek Apeliotes. Where the
climat is healthful and temperat, let vineyards be planted and arranged into
this wind: let ferm-houses also in the country be so built, as the doors and
windows (...). Homer.
Zephyrus. Upon this Western wind Olive rows should stand, according to Catoes
mind. This wind is he that begins the Spring: this wind opens the veins
and pores of the earth, and with his mild coldness is healthful and
wholesome for all plants, for man also and beast. This wind governs this
whole season, and prescribes the time for pruning Vines, for sarcling and
dressing corn, for planting trees, for graffing fruit, for trimming and
ordering Olives; and to say all in one word, so kind he does breath, that he
cherishes and fostereth the earth and all things thereupon.

The fourth line in your quadrant or compass (reckoning from the North point,
which also

As touching the Southeast wind Vulturnus, if the coast be clear where and
when he begins to rise, it will not be long ere he lie, and commonly he is
down before night; but the East wind indeed continues most part of the night.
But be the wind what he will be, if he blow sensibly hot, you shall have him
hold many days together. And to conclude, would you know when to have a
North-west wind? mark when the earth dries suddenly at one instant, it will
not be long but he will be with you: contrariwise, when you see the ground moist
and wet with a kind secret dew unseen and unknown, reckon upon it that shortly
you shall have a South wind to blow. And thus much for winds.

CHAP. XXXV.
Signs to prognosticate what weather is toward.

Having thus set down sufficiently a discourse of the winds, because I would
not re-iterate one thing often, what remains now, but in good order to pass
and proceed to the prognostication and foreknowledge of the weather? and the
rather, for that I see that Virgil took great pleasure herein, and stood much
upon this point: for thus he relates unto the rude and ignorant men of the
country, That oftentimes in the very mids of harvest he has seen
whirle-puffs and contrary winds encounter and charge one another as it were in
battle, doing much harm to corn. Moreover it is reported, that Democritus at
what time as his brother Damasus was entered well into harvest work, taking the
opportunity (as he thought) of a most hot season, besought him earnestly to let
the rest of his corn stand still a while longer, and to make Democritus to be a
wise man and a true prophet. Moreover, it is a rule commonly given and
observed,

And first begin I will at the Sun, the best prognosticator of all others: When
he rises clear and not fiery red, it is a sign that the day will be fair;
but if he show pale and wan, it presages a cold winter-like haile-storme that
very day: but in case he went down ouer-night clear and bright, and so rose
the next morning, so much surer may you be of fair weather. If the Sun in
rising seem hollow, he foretells rain: and when before his rising, the
clouds be red, the winds will be aloft that day: but in case there be some
black clouds intermingled among, you shall have rain withal. If the rays
and beams of the Sun be red, both when he rises and when he

Now by right, the Moon challenges the next place for her presages of weather
to come. First and foremost, the Egyptians observe most her prime: or the
fourth day after the change: for if she appear then, pure, fair, and shining
bright, they are verily persuaded that it will be fair weather: if red, they
make no other reckoning but of winds: if dim and blackish, they look for no
better than a foul and rainie month. Mark the tips of her horns when she is
five days old, if they be blunt, they foreshew rain; if pricking upright and
sharp pointed withal: they always tell of winds toward: but upon the fourth
day especially, this rule fails not, for that day tells truest. Now if that
upper horn of hers only which bends Northward, appear sharp pointed and
stiff withal, it presageth wind from that coast: if the nether horn alone
seem so, Varro he (treating of the presages gathered from the Moon) writes
thus: If (quoth he) the new moon when she is just four days old, put her
horns direct and straight forth, she presages thereby some great tempest at sea
presently Varro) it will pour of rain in the very full. A full moon having
about her a round circle, shows that there will be wind from that part, where
the said circle is most splendant. If her horns appear when she rises, more
gross and thick than ordinary, look soon after for a terrible tempest and
and stormy weather. If she show not in our Horizon before the prime or fourth
day after the change, and the West wind blow withal, then that moon
throughout threatens cold and winter weather: and if the day after the full
she seem extraordinarily enflamed, she menaceth unto us sharp showers and
bitter tempests. Finally, in every moon there be eight points and so many days
(according as she lights upon the angles of the Sun) which most men observe
only, and take their presages

In the third hlace, a man may know the disposition of the seasons by the fixed
stars, and therefore it behooves to observe and mark them. They seem
otherwhiles in the sky to flit and run too and fro and then we shall not be long
without great winds, rising from that quarter where such appeared and gave
token.

The starrie sky, if it show clear and bright al over, and in every part
alike, during that particular season [namely, between the occultation of the
Harp-star, and the Aequinoctiall point] which I proposed and set down
heretofore, it is a fore-token of a fair and dry Autumn, but yet cold.

If the Spring add Summer both, passed not clear without some rain and wet
weather, it will be an occasion that the Autumn following shall be dry, and
less disposed to wind; howbeit, thick, muddy, and inclined to mists. A fair
and dry Autumn, brings in always a windy winter.

When all on a sudden the stars lose their brightness and look dim, and that
neither upon a cloud nor a mist in the air, it signifies either rain or
grievous tempests.

If the stars make semblance as if they flew up and down many together, and
in their flying seem whitish, they denounce winds from that coast where they
thus do shoot. Now if it seem to the eye, as if they ran and kept one certain
place, those winds will hold and sit long in one corner: but in case they do so
in many quarters of the heaven, they betoken variable and inconstant winds,
going and coming, and never at rest. [When you see a circle about any of the
other [i. little Asses] between which there seems to be a small cloud taking
up some little room, and this they name in Latin Praesepia, [i. a Crib,
Cratch, Bowzey, or Manger:] now if it chance that this Rack or Crib appear
not, and yet the air be fair and clear otherwise, a sign it is of cold,
foul, and winter weather. Also if one of these two little stars, to wit, that
which stands Northerly, be hidden with a mist, then shall you have the South
wind to rage; but in case the other which is more Southerly, be out of sight,
then the Northeast wind will play his part.

As touching the Rainbow, if it appear double as if there were two of them at
once, it tells of rain toward. A Rainebow presently after rain, is a sign
of fair weather: but this is not so certain, neither will it hold long. Also,
when a man sees new circles still about any planets,

In Summer time, if there chance to be more thunder than lightning, it
threatens winds from that coast where it thundreth: contrariwise, if it
lighten much and thunder little, look for rain plenty: when you see it
lighten, and the sky otherwise clear and fair, it is a token that rain and
thunder will follow thereupon, yea and rigorous cold weather besides: but the
cruellest and most bitter impressiions of the air, ensue upon such lightnings
as come from all the four quarters of heaven at once: if it lighten from the
Northwest only it betokens rain the day following; if from North, it is a sign
of wind from thence: if from the South, Northwest, or full West, it happen to
lighten in the night and the same be fair, it shows wind and rain from out
of those coasts: morn thunders foreshew winds, but if they be heard at noon,
they presage rain.

As touching clouds, if you see the rack ride apace in the air, the weather
being fair and dry, look for wind from that quarter whence those clouds do
come; and if they seem to gather thick in that place, dispearsed they will be
and scattered when the Sun approaches: but more Some call them Towers.
constitution of the air is called commonly the white weather) there is an
haile-storme at hand: moreover, be the sky never so clear, the least cloud
appearing therein, is enough to engender and foreshew wind

Leaving the stars and clouds above, let us come to our fires that we make and
keep in our houses here beneath, for they are to be raunged in the next place
of our prognostication. If the fire then burn in the chimney pale, and keep
there with a huzzing noise, we find by experience it foreshewes tempest and
stormy weather: as also we may be sure of rain, in case we see a fungeous
substance or foot gathered about lamps and candle snuffs: if you see the flame
either of fire or candle mount winding and wauing as it were, long you shall
not be without wind. The like is to be said of fire and candle light, if either
they seem to go out of themselves, or to kindle and take fire with much ado.
Also, when we discern in the fire a number of sparkles gathered

Go we a little lower to the water, for that element also gives signs of the
weather: and first of all, if you see the sea within the haven, after the flood
is gone, in a low and ebb water to be calm, and yet hear it keep a rumbling
noise within, it foreshews wind: if it do thus by times and fits one after
another, resting still and quiet between whiles, it presages cold weather and
rain. Item, if in calm and fair weather the sea strond or water banks resound
and make a noise, it is a token of a bitter tempest: so it fares also with the
very sea it self; for if it be calm, and yet make (...) [i. fishes named in
Latin Pulmones] if they appear swimming above water, foresignifie cold weather
for many days together: oftentimes the sea being otherwise calm, swells, and
by hoouing higher than ordinary, shows she had wind good store enclosed
within her, which soon after will break out into a tempest.

Let us come aland again, and mark the disposition of woods and hills: you
shall hear the mountains and forests both, keep a sounding and rumbling
noise, and then they foretell some change of weather, nay you shall mark the
leaves of trees to move, flicker, and play themselves, and yet no wind at all
stirring; but be sure then you shall not be long without. The like prediction
is to be gathered by the light down of either poplars or thistles flying too
and fro in the

Moreover, the very bruit and dumb creatures presage and give warning what
weather there

And no marvel that these riuer-foules, or generally any other birds of the
air whatsoever, should have a secret presage and foreknowledge of the
disposition of the air; for the very fourfooted beasts of the earth do make
show thereof by their behavior. The sheep and such small cattaile, leaping and
playing wantonly, dancing also as untowardly without measure, do testify

What should I say more? It is known for certain, that Clauer-grasse or
hearbe-Trefoile will look rough against a tempest, yea and the le^ues thereof
will stand staring up as if it were

An Index pointing to the principal matters contained in the first Tome of
Plinies Natural History,
A B
ABdace, a roe-bucke in Affricke. 331. d Abdomen, what it is. 344. i Abricots.
436. k. of two sorts. ibid. goodfor sick folk. 436. f. must be soon spent.
ibid. Absides what they are. 10. k Abstinence of Julius Uiator. 166. g
A C
Acacia Egyptian thorn. 390. l. m Acacia, a gum. 391. g Acapnon the best
kind of honey. 478. 7 Acarnania drowned. 40. l Acca Laurentia, nource to
Romulus, and his foster-mother 549. c. Accord among beasts. 308. l. m Acedon, a
kind of good honey. 317. b Achaia the description thereof. 74. h. drowned in
Corinth gulf. 40. l Achilles Island famous, and why. 83. c Achilleum, a kind
of sponge. 262. b Acilius Sthenelus a good husband. 411. c Acontias a kind of
comets. 15. c Acorne the best mast. 458. m. of diverse sorts. 459. a Acre what
it was at Rome. 550. g Actus what measure in Rome. 565. e Acylon, what it is.
458. m
A D
Adarce what it is. 483. d Adlipsos, the Egyptian Date. 344. l. m Ad-Gallinas,
what place. 553. f Adelphides, Dates, why so called. 387. e Adorea, glory, why
so called. 551. a Adoreum. 562. m Adrachne, a tree. 541. e. 399. c Adulteries
imagined among the gods. See gods. Adonis, a fish. 247. b
A E
Aegilops, an oak. 459. e Aegis what it is. 487. h Aegle, free from the stroke
of lightning. 27. e. her nature. 273. d. burns her self. ibid. f. of six
kinds. 271. d. quicker of sight than men. 305. f. how they build, breed, and
hatch. 172. l. their manner of pr^ying. 273. a. they die for famine ib. their
feathers devour other birds feathers. 273. b. they prey upon dear. 273. c.
they be at mortal war with dragons. 273. d. an Aegles love unto a virgin.
ibid. e. f Aegle, the chief standard of a Roman legion. 273. c Aegle imagined
to be Jupiters armor-bearer, and why. ib. b Aegocephalus, a bird without a
spleen. 343. c Egypt not subject to earthquakes, and why. 38. h. brag of
antiquity, and wherein especially. 98. l. Egypt a mighty country. 545. l.
free from lightning, and why. 25. d
AE
Aemylius Paulus sacked in one day 702 cities in Macedonie. 77. e Aeolus how he
is said to govern the winds. 63. a Aequinox of spring. 581. c. of Autumn.
ibid. Aesalo a kind of Hawke. 274. k Aethiopians, why black. 26. m Aethiopia
the description. 96. their manners. ibid. g Aeschylus the Poet killed with a
Tortoise shell. 271. f Aetites a precious stone. 272. k. medicinable. ibid. l
Aetna the hill always burning. 47. b
A F
Affricke full of strange beasts. 200. k. plentiful in corn 430. k.
description thereof. 93. d Affricus wind. 22. l
A G
Age unmeet for generation. 303. a Agelastus, who so called, and why. 166. h
Agrophagae, what kind of people. 147. (...) Agriculture. See Husbandry.
Agrion. 364. (...) Agrippae who so called. 159. (...) Agrippa his infortunitie.
160. g Agrippinae, two unhappy imps of his. ibid. Agaricke, where it grows.
461. b. how it is gathered. ib. for what it is good. ibid. Ague of Antipater
the Poet yearly on his birthday, whereupon he died. 184. g. C. Mecaenas never
free of an ague. ib.
A I
Air, element. 2. l. gives life for all things. ib. by the power thereof the
earth hangs. ib. the properties thereof. 18. m no Airie of aegles in Rhodes.
285. c Ajax, the name of an Elephant. 194. k. he died for shame of a disgrace.
ibid.
A L
Alauda, a legion of the Romans. 331. a Albanes, people eied like owls,
always gray headed, and see better by night than day. 154. (...) Alce, what
kind of beast. 200. d Alcibiades, a stout wine-knight. 427. (...) Alcippe
delivered of an Elephant. 157. f Alcman a Poet in Greece died of lice. 329. d
Alec, a kind of dripping. 246. k Alexandria the description thereof. 99. b. who
built it. 123 b. called Seleucia, and why. ibid. K. Alexander the great his
victory at Arbela. 35. a. his care to know the nature of living creatures. 200.
l. how he honored Homers books. 108. l. 171. c. he spared the family of
Pindarus the Poet. 171. d. his commandment for his statue. 175. b Alburnum in
wood, what it is, 486. i All-heale, what it is, 497. c Alica of three sorts.
568. g Alica Exceptitia, Secundaria, Crebraria. ib. k. where and how it is
maa^. ibid. g Almonds described. 446. h Almond trees having no green leaves.
473. f. when to be planted. 522. k. how sweet Almonds are made bitter. (...). c
(...)
Am^ (...) 259. f Amphisbaena, a serpent. 208. g. Amalchium, what it is. 85. c
Ambre, where engendered. 86. l. Ambracia the haven, left dry land. 39. e Amia a
kind of fish. 243. d Ammoniacum a gum, why so called. 375. c. the kinds
thereof. 375. d. the best and the price, ibid. how it is sophisticated. ibid.
Amomis. 365. d. Amomum. 395. c. the price. ibid. d. sophisticated. ibid.
Amomum, why it enters into aromatical ointments. 382. l. Amomum, why it will
not live in Arabia. 478. l. Amurca, what it is. 430. l Amylum how it is made.
562. g. why so called. ibid. sundry sorts thereof. ibid. h
A N
Anataria. See Morphnos. Andrachne an herb. 399. e Androcides his sage
counsel to Alexand. the Great. 413. b Androgini, who they be. 154. m where
lady Andromeda was exposed to a monster. 110. l Angeroha, a goddess. 59. c
Anthus, a bird neighing like an horse. 293. a Antigenes, a famous minstrell.
484. g Anticht^ones. 129. b Anniball his falsehood. 195. e Antei, transformed
into wolves. 207. c Anthiae fishes how they be caught. 268. m. 269. c C.
Antonius nicknamed Hybrida. 231. c Ants, their common weal. 338. k. their
forecast. ibid. how they live. ibid. their passage wears pibble stones. 328.
l they only bury their dead. 328. a. they fly not in Sicilie. ibid. they
cast up gold in India. 329. a. where, as big as wolves. ibid. they devour men.
329. b. love gold w^ll. ibid. they will not touch some kind of liver. 342. g.
hurtful to trees. 547. d. gather about fishes. ibid. Anthropophagi, what they
are. 154. h Antipodes, whether there be any such. 31. b
A P
Apath^s, who they be. 166. h Apes most like to mankind. 231. e. differ from
monkies. ib. crafty to beguile themselves. ibid. play at chesse or tables.
ibid. shee-apes fond over their little ones. 231. f Apes store up victuals
within their cheeks. 207. c Aphaerema what it is. 568. g Apicius a famous
glutton. 296. g Apis, the Aegiptian boeufe. 226. g. honored among them. ibid.
serves as an oracle. ibid. h Apharce a tree. 399. d Aplusiae, the worst
spunges. 263. a Apogaei, what winds. 21. c Apolecti, what they be. 243. b
Apothecaries craft who first practiced. 188. k Apuae, a kind of fish. 265. d
Apparition of fixed stars at set times. 587. d Appluda what it is. 556. f
Apples bear names of countries. 438. k. Camerina, Graecula. ibid. Gemella*
(...) ib. Serica, why so called. (...), why so called. ibid. hasty Apples
Mustea. 438. l. Melimela, Orbiculata, Epirotica, Orthomastica, Spadonia,
Melofolia, Pannucia, Pulmonea. ibid. all Apples red on the Sun side. 438. m
Apples Dacian. 439. a. winter apples. ibid. f Apples de guard. 440. l. how to
be kept. ib. g. h what Apples will last, and what will not. ibid. Apple trees
bearing fruit twice a year. 474. m quince Apples. 438. i. Apples Appian,
Matian, Sectian, Manlian, Claudian, Scantian, Sceptian, Quirian, Petisian,
ibid. Apples what fruit properly. 437. f Apples have eternized the name of
their first inuentors and graffers. 438. i. Apple trees dearly rented at Rome.
499. d. tendrest of all other trees. 540. k. diseased. ib. how they be made
fruitful. 545. d. apples how kept from rotting. 574. d. apple trees when to be
graffed. 518. l Apyrinon, a hind of Pomegranat, 398. b
A Q
Aquiceti, pine nuts confected. 436. g Aquifoliae. 458. l Aquitania described.
87. d
A R
Arabia, why called Happy. 365. f. 371. d Araneus, an imperfection in wines and
olives. 540. a Aratrare, what point in husbandry. 580. h Araxi, or Oraxi,
springs medicinable. 568. i Arbute tree described, and the fruit. 447. d
Archers and arrows have conquered half the world. 482. k Candiots excellent
archers. ibid. Arcturus the star cause of tempests. 19. e Arethusa a strange
lake. 137. b Argatilis a bird. 288. l Argo a ship, of what wood it was made.
399. b Architecture, who excelled therein. 175. b Arimaspians, with one eye in
their forehead. 154. h Arinca, a grain all one with Olyra. 568. k. it makes
sweet bread. ib. hard to be cleansed. ib. what kind of corn. 559. c Aristaeus
mingled honey with wine. 412. h Arion mounted upon a dolphins back. 239. f
Aristomenes the Messenian had a hary heart. 340. k. slew three hundred
Lacedaemonians alone. ibid. Aristotle employed by K. Alexander the Great about
the living creatures. 200. m Arms of men not all of a just measure. 549. d
Arnupheae, people, their life and strange manners. 121. a Armeniaca. See
Abricocts. Armor heard rustling in heaven. 28. g Artabitae, men wandering like
foure-footed beasts. 147. (...) Artenon, a man like to Antiochus K. of Syria.
161. d Arteries from the heart minister vital blood to all parts. 340. h. how
to observed in their pulse or beating. 345. b Articulatio, a disease proper to
vines. 540. h Artisans excellent. 175. b Artolaganus. 566. l Artopta, what it
is. 567. b Artoptitius panis. 566. m Aruncus, what it is. 229. e
A S
Asarum or Asara-bacca described. 365. b Ascia, places where no shadows be
yielded. 36. h Ascitae, Arabians, why so called. 144. m Asclepiades recovered
one that was carried forth as dead. 175. a Ash-tree, where it is always
green. 48. g. ash tree described. 465. e. commended by Homer. ibid. the wood
of the ash in Ida like to Citron. ibid. ash of two kinds. 465. f. the leanes
hurtful to what beasts. 466. g. the juice of the leaves medicinable. ib. the
shadow skareth serpents. ibid. the leaves drive away serpents. 466. h Asia a
kind of Rye. 572. l Asia, the description thereof. 96. a great part thereof
uninhabitable by reason of cold. 120 m Asiae. See Otys. Aspalathus, a shrub. 376.
g. the price. ibid. h Asphaltites, lake of Sodom. 101. e. no living creature
therein. ibid. Aspe trees turn to be Poplar. 543. c Aspis the serpent has her
affection, and is a just revenger. 309. a. discharges her poison by the teeth.
337. c. the nature of Aspis. 208. h Assabinus, the god of Cinnamon plants. 372.
l Ashes of fuel burnt, much set by beyond the Po. 507. a. serve to enrich
ground. ibid. of ^he same nature that salt. 546. l. Ashes of lime-kils increase
olive trees. 507. e Asses cannot away with cold. 223. b. when they shed teeth.
338. h their jealousy and leachery. 212. l. of great price. 223. a. their
manner and time of generation. ib. b. the gain that they bring by breeding.
ibid. c. their foles good meat. ibid. e. their other properties. ibid. c Asses
of India with one horn. 351. b Asses wild. 20. g Assyrian tree. See Citron
tree. Astomes, people without a mouth. 156. i Astronomers their commendation.
8. m. 9. a. who most excellent. 174. l. their three sects. 586. h Astronomy
necessary for agriculture. ibid. a Astrology who first devised. 189. d
Astrologers opinion touching the length of man's life. 181. f Asturcones, what
horses. 222. m Asturius Celer, a prodigal spender. 246. k
A T
Atabulus, an unlucky wind in Apulia. Ateramum. 575. b Atlas hill. 92. g. the
strange trees thereon growing. 92. h Atlantes people, their strange manners.
96. i. they dream not in sleep. ibid. Atlanticke sea sometime the continent.
40. l Atomus, what it is. 367. e
A V
Augurie and Auspices by birds, who first invented. 189. c honored in Rome.
211. f Augustus Caesar, whether he were happy. 179. c. his fortunes compared.
ibid. he desired Proculeius to kill him. 179. e. fasted four days and four
nights. ibid. he saw his lineall descent unto the fourth degree. 162. l. his
conduct discovered many seas. 32. k. superstitious in presaging that his left
foot shoo was put on before the right. 4 l Augytae, people worshipping only
the devils beneath. 96. i Auiola burnt quick. 184. h. he revived in the
funeral fire. ibid. Auleticus Calamus, a kind of reed. 483. b. e
A X
Axis, an Indian beast. 206. k
B A
BAbylon territory exceeding fruitful. 576. i Babylon the city described.
136. h Babylonicae vestes, what they are. 228. i Baccharis. 364. l Bacchi, a
kind of codfish. 245. e Bacchus, when borne, how. 128. l Bacchus first wore a
coronet or garland. 456. m Backebiters have venomous tongues. 548. m Bactrian,
a plentiful country for corn. 581. a Bactrian corn exceeding big. 561.
Bagous what he is. 387. b Bailiffes of husbandry. 555. a Bakers when they began
in Rome. 557. b Balaustia. See Pomegranate flowers. Bald-rauens. See Plugeons.
Balena what fish. 235. f. 236. l Balena and Pristis, greatest fishes in Indian
ocean. 235. f Balls of the cheeks forbidden by law to be scratched. 336. i the
seat of bashfulnesse and modesty. ibid. Balm trees of three sorts. 376. l
Balm tree grows no where but in Jury. 478. k Balm trees brought to Rome.
376. i. how they are planted and ordered. ibid. k. their description. ibid.
Balm trees saved by the Romans at the destruction of Jerusalem. 376. k Balm
fruit or grain. 377. e Balm grain how sophisticated. ibid. Balm bark.
ibid. Balm liquor most precious. 376. i. balm liquor how sophisticated, and
how discerned. 377. e. balm liquor how it is drawn. 376. m. balm liquor
which is best. 377. c Balsamodes Cassia. 373. e Bands or bindings in husbandry,
of what trees and plants they are to be made. 445. b Barbatae, a kind of hawke
or aegle. 272. k Barbers first entertained in Rome. 190. m Barble fishes. 246.
h. their description and nature. ibid. why called in Latin. Mulli. 246. i
Bark of trees is their hide. 486. h the bark moisture of trees is their
blood. 486. g Bark of trees how to be used. 541. e Barking of trees. 487. d
Barks of sundry trees, (...) employed. 461. d Barks of trees different. 477.
(...) Barley a tender corn. 562. h. how to be cut down, and at what time.
ibid. Barley how it is cared and iointed. 558. k Barley where it grows twice
a year. 503. e Barley does degenerate into oats. 574. g Barley a most ancient
meat. 561. c. condemned. ibid. e Barley used in Physic, and to feed cattle.
562. h. i Barley different in ear and otherwise. 562. i Barnes, how and where
to be built. 603. b Barraine beasts soon fat. 344. k Barrainesse of earth, how
it is found. 504. i the Basiliske. 196. l. his properties. ibid. his venom.
207 a killed by the weazill. ibid. Battle first fought. 189. a. battle at
Sibaris. 197. d. in two battles in one day, both on sea and land, Numenus
defeited the Persians. 140. h a Bat or winged mouse only amongst the fowls,
has teeth. 337. d. Bats bring forth young alive. 301. f. the only bird that
gives milk. 302. g Bay trees: see Laurel. Bay leaves purge the gorge of
birds. 211. c.
B D
Bdellium. 362. m. sophisticated. 363. a. See Brochos. the trial. 363. b. the
price. ibid.
B E
Beans principal of all pulse. 568. l. bean meal. ibid. bean stalks in
Egypt full of pricks. 569. d. beans how to be prepared before they are set or
sown. 575. d. beans and vetches sown under furrow. 580. g. beans yielding
great increase. 565. b. beans forbidden by Pythagoras to be eaten. 569. a. the
arch Flamin abstaineth from beans, wherefore. 569. b. beans used in
portsales. 569. b when they are to be set or sown. ibid. b. kidnie beans.
570. l. beans sowing does enrich a ground. 569. c. beans growing of their own
accord, ibid. d Bears only have no marrow at all. 344. m. how they engender.
302. l. bears have the tenderest sculls. 332. l. bears cure themselves with
pismires. 211. c. bears, their manner of generation. 215. f. their young
imperfect. 216. g. they grow exceeding fat. ibid. h. their fat medicinable.
ibid. they seek to the herb Wake-robin. ibid. i they are subject to dimnesse
of sight. ibid. i. weak in the head. ibid. k their brain venomous. ibid.
hunted in the shew-place at Rome. ibid. l Beasts accounted for gods. 3. e.
beasts of India very big. 155. b. beasts engendered in the uninhabitable places
of the earth, and the reason. 11. b. beasts that drank lastly, bleed most at
their death. 346. h. beasts bring forth young according as they are whole hoofed
or cloven. 303. a. beasts, which bring their young perfect, which imperfect.
ibid. beasts will not touch where bears have breathed. 356. a. beasts
foure-footed commonly rest on their right side. 350. k. beasts by whom first
killed. 190. k. Beech wood highly esteemed. 486. m. a beech grove finely kept
and consecrate to Diana, 496. g Bees, their order and nature. 312. i. when they
go abroad. ibid. l. their first work. ibid. their care of their kind. ibid.
their regard of their work. 313. a. their munition. ibid. b. their greatest
swarms among olive trees. ibid. d. they hurt no fruit. ibid they wander not
from their hi^e above sixty paces. ibid. they send out spies. ibid. e. how
they watch. ibid. their foresight. 314. g. how they lade themselves. ibid. h.
their several offices. ibid. bees of two sorts in one hiue. ibid. k. they go
with the wind. ibid. l. their policy against the wind. ibid. they punish
slothfulness. ibid. their cleanelinesse. ibid. their silence toward night.
their hatred to the drones. 315. b. their buildings for their captains. ibid.
c. how they are driven away. 316. k. bees, when they are nourished with sleep
only. 317. e. they abhor a thief. ibid. their fidelity to their king. 319.
c. bees settled on Plato his mouth. ibid. d. bees in the camp of General
Drusus. ibid. why sometimes they fight. 320. g. bees after they have stung, be
no better than drones. ibid. k. drone bees are biggest. 315. a. they take up
least lodgings. ibid. Of bees work, three foundations. 313. b. whom they will
sting. 320. k. bees are often sick. 320. m. bees sorrow for their dead king.
321. a. bees perform a solemnity of exercise. ibid. e. they live not above
seven years. ibid. how they ere repaired. 322. g. bees will not touch a dead
carcass. ibid. i. bees only make their own meat. 328. i Beetles have no
sting. 326. k. they are remedies for children. ibid. they are delighted in
roses.. 355. e Bellerophon his letters in tables. 394. l of the Belly. 342. k
Bellies that be fattest, cause grossness of capacity. ibid. l Belus,
inuentor of Astronomy. 136, h Ben, or Behen. 374. f. a nut only for sweet
ointments. ib. Benacus a lake in Italy. 248. g Beotia river. 51. f Berenice
hair, a star. 34. l Berries different. 447. f Besbicus Island sometimes
joined to Bithinia. 40. i
B I
Bills given to birds in stead of mouths, and their use. 336. l. m. Biaeon, a
kind of wine medicinable. 416. i Bieuers gueld themselves. 212. m. where they
breed, their nature. 213, a Birch tree described, and how it is employed. 468.
i Bird-ga^ders. 281. b Bird^me how it was made. 497. a Birds singing when they
ordinarily do breed. 287. c. birds very few have gawles in the livers. 341. f.
birds hatched with their ta^les forward. 272. e. birds having neither ve^es nor
ar^es. 345. c. birds with hooked talons prey all. 278. k. birds how they
translate their eggs from place to place having no hooked tallons. 289. a.
birds differ (...) from another in flight and gate. 291. f. birds how they
drink. 295. c. birds of diverse feedings. ibid. (...). birds singing, alter
their notes. 285. e. new birds. 296. k. birds there be none without feet. 351.
d. birds language how to be understood. 296. l. birds of prey least fruitful.
297. f. birds that lay most. ibid. birds how they engender. 298. g. birds how
they differ in laying and couving. ibid. i. 300. k. birds small be fruitful.
301. d. blackbirds counterfeiting man's speech. 293. d. blackebirds are gone for
a time. 284. g. blackebirds change both hew and tune. ibid. Births strange for
number, for defects and superfluity. 164. h. i. Births of children uncertain.
158. k Birth at seven months live: also at the eleventh. ib. A child legitimat
borne within thirteen months, after the supposed father deceased. 159. a
Bisontus or Boeufos of Germany. 199. f Bissextile year. 585. b Bitches differ
in their litters. 303. c. bitches engender with Tigres. 219. e. with wolves.
ib. how long they go with young. 220. h. their whelps blind. ibid. h. i
Bithyae, Women witches, who have a double sight in their eye. 155. a Biting if
a mad dog cured by Eglantine. 220. k Bitumen comparable to the water of Styx.
47. d Bitumen a strange slime. 163. e
B L
Bladder where it is placed. 343. f. bladder nut tree. 467. c. bladder only
there found, where is lungs and blood. 343. f. of the bladder in man and beast.
343. f. bladder being wounded cannot be cured. 344. g Blasted corn, 574. i
Blasts how they be occasioned. 574. l m. blasts sudden their names and
nature. 24. k Blattae, flies are nourished in darkness. 326. m Blazing
stars. See comets. Volusius Saturnius how he used to bleed. 346. h
Blossoming time of trees how long it lasts. 473. b Blood apples. 438. l.
blood ained. See Rain. blood fat and gross breeds anger and choler. 345.
f. of blood a discourse. ibid. blood of males blacker than of females. ib.
blood contains a great portion and treasure of life. 346. g. it is without
sense and feeling. ibid. blood that is thinnest, causes strength in creatures.
ibid. blood that is thinnest makes men wise. ibid where it is but little
makes men fearful. ib. blood of bulls soonest congealeth. ib. it is poison
to be drunk. ibid. blood of Asses most fattie and gross. ib. blood of man
thinnest and best. ibid. blood is but little in those that be fat. ib. blood
cast up by many at the mouth. ib. h. blood quicliest increases of all parts of
the body. ib. blood changes with anger and fury. ibid. in Blouming time rain
hurtful to corn. 574. k
B O
Boae, mighty great serpents. 199. e. why so called. ib. Bodies of men and
women different beside the distinct parts of sex. 165. e Boats of one entire
piece of wood. 490. g Boetica, so called of Boetis. 51. c Boeufes of India.
224. k. bred by king Pyrrhus. ibid. l. their manner of engendring and breeding.
ibid. of feeding. 224. a. when they are to be drawn and yoked. ibid. b.
sufficient for sacrifice. ibid. e. known to speak. ibid. Bolides, flaming
lances in the sky. 17. b Bombyceae, reeds or canes. 484. g Bombycina,
garments of silk. 322. m Bombyly, the greater kind of Bombyces. 322. l
Bombyx, a fly breeding in Assyria. ibid their hard neasts. ibid. how they
engender. ibid. of Bones. 345. a Bonasus, what manner of beast, and his
properties. 200. h Bondwoman brought forth a serpent. 157. f Bones of Asses
legs sound shrill. 345 a. bones in some men without marrow. 165. f. bones
sometime found in the hearts of beasts. 340. i Bore, his own Physician. 210.
m. bore served whole unto the bourd. 230. l Bore as wind. 23. a Borystenes
river. 154. i Bosphori the streights (Thracius and Cimmerius.) 117. f. why so
called. 115. a. Bosphori, sometime land. 40. l Botanismos, what it is. 577. a
Boulters and Raungers. 567. c Box tree wood commended in the root most. 467. c.
box tree serves for arbours. ibid. of box tree three kinds. ibid. c. where it
delights to grow. ibid. d. the nature of the flower and wood. ibid. box tree
bears variety of fruits. 476. g
B R
Brake, see Fern. Brain of a Date tree. 386. m Brambles of three sorts. 485.
e. with a black berry, with a rose, and a red berry. ibid. f. the bramble
Idaea, which is Raspis. ibid. Brance, what corn. 559. d people Branded with
hot yrons. 116. h Brass, where first found. 80. m. brasse-founders the first.
188. k. brass forges and furnaces, who devised. ibid. k. Brawne of wild bores
in great request. 230. l Brains the coldest part of man's body. 332. m. they
are without blood or veins. ibid. by seething they wax hard. 333. a. without
flesh, blood, filth or ordure. ibid. brains, the fort and castle of the
senses. ibid. brains and eyes die first. 340. g. of brains and the
braine-pan. 332. l. m. Bread of sundry sorts, according to the meat eaten
therewith. 566. l. bread Parthicke or water-bread. 567. a Breadth of the earth.
48. i Breath of Lions stinketh. 255. a. breath of bears pestilen (...) and
deadly. ibid. breath of men by what means it is insected. ibid. b. breath of
man shall return into the air. ibid. it is corrupted by much drinking of
wine. ib. breath of Elephants, what virtue it has. 355. c Breeding time in
plants. 471. e of the Breast in man and beast. 343. e. f Breast apples. 438. l
Brick and tile who devised. 188. k Brickes and tiles reigned. See Rain
Brimstone mine. 568. i Brim of the eie-lids being wounded, cannot be drawn
together. 336. i Britain, an Island renowned 86. k Brocci, who they were.
336. l Brochos what it is. 363. a Brood-hen star, Uirgiliae. 588. h setting
of brood-hens. 589. f Broom, where and when to be set. 523. c Bruscum in
maple. 467. a Bruta, what tree. 371. a Brutium a promontory. 51. b Bryon
(Aromaticum) what it is. 375. d Bryon a weed in the sea. 401. c
B V
Bubetij, what plays they are. 550. k Bubulcus, surname to the house of Iunij,
whereupon. ib. h Bucephalia the city. 221. a Bucephalus King Alexanders horse.
220. l. his description and rare qualities. ib. m Bucklers of what wood they be
made. 590. k Buffles horn of eight gallons. 331. f. buffles horn how it is
used. 332. g Building upon land in the country. 554. g. h Bull baiting. 225. e
Buying and selling who devised, 187. e Bulls wild untameable. 206. i Bullais.
437. a Bumasti grapes. 405. a Bumelia, a kind of Ash-tree. 465 f Bunches in
wood. 487. l Bura city. 41. a Burning and burying of dead-bodies after diverse
sorts. 186. l. m. Butter has the virtue and properties of oil. 340. k
Butterfly how it is bred. 329. e Butterflies no good sign of the Spring. 586.
g Buteo. See Triorches. Buteo gave the name to the house of Fabij in Rome. 274.
k Buzzards good meat. 296. k Buzzard. See Buteo.
B Y
Byzacium territory of Affricke. 505. e. most fruitful ground. ibid. Byzia a
castle of Thracian kings, hated of Swallows, and why. 278. l
C A
CAchrys in an Oak, what it is. 400. l. the use and manner thereof. ibid.
Cadytas, what it is. 496. i Cadmus, whore borne. 108. g. first found out for to
write prose. ibid. Casias wind. 23. a Caecina his practice by Swallows. 283. a
Caesares and Caesones, why so called. 160. i. such commonly fortunate. ibid.
Caesar his breast plate made of English pearl. 256. k Caesar Dictator his
liberality in wines. 420. h Caesar ripped out of his mothers belly. 160. i C.
Caesar his quickenesse of spirit. 168. k Caesar repented him of his clemency.
ibid. l Caesar his fidelity concerning writing. 168. m Caesaris Thronos, a
star. 34. l Caesaria, a city in Mauritania. 53. d Caius Hirtius invented
stews for Lampries in Asia. 267. c. Caius Marius first advanced the Aegle in
the Roman ensign. 273. c Caius Caligula the Emperor his saying of Surrentine
wines. 414. h Caia Cecilia. Leoke Tanaquill. Calpe, a Promontory. 51. b Calpe,
a mountain. ibid. e Calculosae, a kind of Purples. 259. b Calydna Island.
316. b Calamus Aromaticus. 375. a Calculation of the year by Caesar the Author
follows, 586. l. Calamaries, fishes. 244. b Calaminth first used by Lizards.
210. l sea-Calfe his qualities. 213. b Calves chosen for sacrifice. 235. e
Callithriches, a kind of Apes. 225. b Camalodunum, a town in Britain. 36. k
Cammell has no fore-teeth in the upper iaw. 337. b Cammels how they engender.
302. l Cammels their diverse kinds. 205. b Camelopardalis, what kind of
beasts. 205. d Campaine in Italy a most fruitful country. 567. e. f Canell.
See Casia. Canes. See Reeds. Canes of India serve between ioints, for boats
482. m Canes of diverse sorts. 483. b Canes and reeds how they grow. ibid. a
Canarium what sacrifice. 551. b Caucamum. 374. b Canetias, the workmen that
made the stature of Diana at Ephesus. 491. c Canopus the name of a star,
where and in what manner it appears, and where not. 34. l Canopus, a goodly
star seen in Taprobane about the pole Antarticke. 130. i Canterius in a
Vineyard, what it is. 528. i. k Cantharolethus in Thrace. 327. a. why so
called. ibid. Capnumargos, a kind of red marle. 506. b Capparis, the plant of
the fruit capres. 400. i Caprification to be practiced after rain. 546. b
Caprification what it is. 444. k Caprificus what it is. ibid. (...)
Cappadocians how they took their names. 116. h Caprimulgi, what birds. 292. i
Carambis promontory. 49. a Carbunculus, burning earth. 503. b Carbunculus in
corn, what it is. 598. i Cardamomum, four kinds. 365. (...) Cardiaca, disease
of the heart. 341. a Cardo, what it is. 598. i Carpinus, what manner of trees.
466. m Carginon, what it is. 476. g Carpheotum. 367. d Caryo^a dates, why so
called, and the wine thereof. 387. d Caryopon. what drug. 397. e. the worth.
ibid. Carob-tree, 390. g Carobs or caracts, what kind of fruit, 447. b
Carpentry and the tools, whose invention. 188. l Carpophilon. 452. m Carseoly
territory. 537. f Carthegon, what it is. 476. g Casia. 372. i Casia, the sweet
spice where it grows. 373. e, the plant described. ibid. Casia the best.
ibid. Casius a mount of admirable height. 102. g Caspiae, gates so called. 122.
g Caspia part not the streights of Caucasus: they be described 455. a. b.
Castor and Pollux star, what is to be thought of them. 18. k wherefore men
invocate them at sea. ibid. l Castoreum what it is. 212. m Cat of gold
worshipped as a god. 546. b Cats how they engender. 302. l. Cats how subtle in
hunting. 308. g. Catacecaumene, a region. 415. f. why so called. 416. g
Caligula his eyes stiff in his head. 334. k Cataractae. See Diomedian birds.
Cato Censorius commended. 410. l. his precepts touching Uines. 411. a Cato
persuaded the Senate of Rome to destroy Carthage, by occasion of a fig. 443.
a. b. c Cato his praise and commendation. 169. f Catorchites, what kind of
Dates. 421. a Catoblephas, what kind of beasts. 206. l Cati and Corculi, why
so called. 173. b Cause of vomit. 342. l Caunians naturally subject to the
swelling of the spleen. 331. k. Cauneas presaged ill fortune to M. Crassus.
445. a Cauchi, a people without trees, their habitation and country described.
455. a. b Cauaticae, a kind of Snailes. 218. i
C E
Cea Island. 41. a Cedar gum. 424. g Cedars, which be best. 489. a Cedar oil.
ibid. Cedar for Masts. 490. g Cedars of dwarf kind. 388. l. m Cedrelate. 389.
a. the timber thereof everlasting. ibid. Cedrelaeon. 434. h. i Cedrium, what it
is. 46. h Celendine revealed by Swallows. 210. l Celtium, a kind of Tortoise.
241. e Celtie. See Lote-tree. Centigranum wheat. 565. b Cepphus a beast. 205. e
Cephenes or Serenes, young dron^ Boes, and how they be fed. 318. i Ceratias, a
kind of Comet. 15. e Cervus a Mast-tree. 458. m. the mast thereof. ibid.
Cerastes what worm. 492. g. worms in figge-trees. 539. c Cerastae serpents.
208. g. Cerastae serpents have horns of flesh. 331
C H
Cheapenesse of all victuals in Rome. 551. d. the cause thereof. ibid. f
Chalcedon, why called the city of the blind. 114. g Chamaedaphne. 452. m
Chamecerasti. 448. h Chameleons lights are very big. 341. a Chameleons roll
their whole eyes. 331. f Chamelaea. 398. k Chamaeropes, what they be. 387. a
Chamaemyrsine. 434. h Chani fishes without males. 244. m Characias, a kind of
reed or cane. 483. e Charit oblepharon, a shrub within the sea. 402. k
Charcoale of Oke-wood. 459. c Charcoale of young tree best. ibid. Charcoale how
it is made. 459. d Charcoale worst, made of the Oak Hatiphleos. ibid. Charm to
drive away hail. 547. f Charmidas his memory. 168. g Chasma what it is. 17. h
of Chastity rare examples. 173. f Chats or Catkins upon diverse trees. 459. d
Chaus a beast. 205. e Chalenophagi hairie all but head. 134. i Cheiidoniae,
Islands in Asia. 368. l Chelidony, stones in mawes of young birds. 343. b
Chenelopes. See Birganders. Chenerotes. 281. b Cheese unknown to barbarous
nations. 348. k Cheese of the best sort made in Dalmatia. ibid. l Cheese
excellent at Vatusium. ibid. m Cheese of diverse sorts. 349. a of Cheese a
discourse. 348. l a Cherrie tree bearing arms of a mighty bigness. 476. m
Cherrie trees when to be grafted. 523. b Cherries of a middle kind between
berries and grains. 448. g Cherrie trees brought into Italy. ibid. h. they will
not grow in Egypt. ibid. Cherries, Apronian, Actian, Caecilian, Julian,
Duracin, Plinian, of Portugal, Laurean, Macedonian. 448. h Cherries how they
be kept. ibid. i Chestnuts rather no be called Mast than nuts. 446. l Chestnuts
described, ibid. their kernils ground into meal for bread, ibid. how to be
eaten. ibid. Chestnuts called Sardinian nuts, and why. ibid. named (...). ibid.
u^ Chestnuts, Tarentine, Balanitis. ibid. Chestnuts, Salarian, Corellian,
Meteran, Coctiua. 447 a Chestnuts which be best. ibid. Choughs filch money. 285.
c Chine-bone. 339. e. the use of it. ibid. Chin, man only has. 337. a
Chickins how they be hatched. 298. l Children begotten and borne, at what age
of the parents. 163. a. b. Children not always answerable to their parents in
every respect. 160. l Children twelve distinct cast away at one slip from a
woman. 160. k Children of the Dakes carry the mark of their parents to the
fourth generation. 161. a children changelings. 158 h Children breed their
teeth in the seventh month of their age. 164. b Children above three at a
birth, is monstrous. 157. d a Child returned into the mothers womb. 158. g
Chimaera, a hill in Phoselis, burning both night and day. 47. b. black Choler
cause of fury. 341. e. cast up by vomit deadly. ibid. Choromandae, what people.
156. h Chilo his sayings counted Oracles. 173. c. how he died and was honored.
ibid. d Chronicles who first devised. 189. f Chrysomela, a kind of Quince.
436. h Chydaei, certain Dates. 388. g
C I
Cich-pease and the nature thereof, how to be sown. 569. f 570. g. sundry
kinds of ciches. 370. g Cich-pease how codded. ibid. M. T. Cicero the elder his
praise. 172. m M. Cicero the younger challenged for a drunkard. 428. g
Cicercuta. 370. g Cicero his commendation, 272. m Cici. Look Ricinus.
Cichorie, medicinable to diverse birds. 211. d Cilicia, the description
thereof. 104. m Cinnamologus a bird. 288. m Cinnamon. 372. f. g Cinnamon
grows in Aethyopia. 372. i. exchanged for what commodity. 372. k Cinnamon
plant described. ibid. Cinnamon the best. 373. a. b. Cinnamon of two kinds.
ibid. b Cinnamon the price. ibid. Cinnamon root set into the ground in the
temple of Augustus. ibid. c Cinnamon garland dedicated by Uespasian. 373. d
Cinnamon shrub will not prosper in Syria. 478. l Circos, a kind of Hawke. 274.
k Circei, Islands (by the retiring of the sea) joined to the continent. 39. e
Circeus, the name of a wind. 23. b Circumference of the world. 49. e Citron
tree. 359. c. the fruit a counterpoison. ibid. Citron tree fruitful. 359. d.
it likes not to be in strange countries. ibid. pome-Citron kernils good
against a stinking breath. ibid. e Citron tree. 395. c Citron tables. ibid.
Citron tree bears not but in Assyria. 478. k Ciuicke coronets six, given to
Manlius Capitolinus. ibid. Ciuicke coronets. 456. h. compared with all others.
ibid. Ciuicke coronets fourteen given to Siccius Dentalus. 454. e Ciuicke
coronet or garland, whereof it was first made. 457. b laws appertaining to
Ciuicke coronets. ibid. d Ciuicke coronet at Rome comparable to the best among
the Greeks. ibid. c
C L
Clamato ria, a bird. 277. c Clapping of hands rejoice Bees. 231. e of Claws a
discourse. 351. c Cleopatraher lavish expense. 257. a Q. Cleopatra her rich
pearls. ibid. Cleostratus found out the signs in the Zodiake. 5. e Clerus a
bitter thing found in honey combs. 318. l Climastericke years. 182. h Clodding
of lands. 579. e Clodeus the son of Aesope, his expense and riot in pearls.
257. d. Clogs hanging from Rosin trees all but the Larch. 463. Cloth of gold
when it was invented. 226. i Clothes of diverse colors wouen. 228. i Clouds,
their shapes. 29. c Cloves, a spice. 362. h Cluina or Cliuina, a bird. 277. c
Clupea, a fish, kills another called Attilus. 243. a
C N
Cneston, Cneros. 398. k
C O
Cocks go about with chickens when the hen is dead. 299. e Cocks watchful and
desirous of glory, 279. c. Astronomers. ibid. Sentinels. ibid. they love
sovereignty and win it by fight. ibid. c. d Cocks dreadful to the Lion. ibid.
e Cocks of kind fighters. ibid. Cocks bear great sway in Auspices. 279. f
Cocks carved and made capons. 280. h Cock fighting. ibid. a Cock spoke.
ibid. Cocolobis. See Vine Basilica. Coctura, what it was. 412. k Coclites, who
they were. 335. b Cod-fish. 245. b Coggygria a tree, the proprieties of it.
399. c Coin stamped with the image of sheep, kine, and oxen. 550. l.
Colariae, a sort of cod-fish. 245. e Colon, a gut so called. 343. a. in it is
the pain of the collicke. ibid. Colostratia, a disease that comes of
Bee-stings. 348. h Columbinum Cicer. 570. g Color of the king of Bees. 318. i
Colors in the eye, why they are. 335. b Colymbades, what Olives. 432. g
Comagenum, a precious composition. 381 Comata, part of France. 332. i Comarum,
what it is. 447. e Comets white with silver hairs. 15. f. shaggie and like a
mane: when such a one appeared, and the continuance of such when they do
appear. 16. g Comets what they do fore-token. ibid. g Comets never lightly
seen in the West part of the heaven. 16. h. were worshipped for gods. ibid. i
Combat between Bulls and Elephants. 195. f Cambat between an Elephant and a
Roman. ibid. d. e Commodities in a farm, which be most gainefull. 553. e. f
Commosis, first foundation of Bees work. 313. g Conception, at what time. 164.
h signs of Conception. 159. a. of a boy and a girl distinst. ihid. d.
Conception double. 160. l Conchylium, a shellfish. 246. i Conchylia, what
fishes. 258. i Conger, a fish. 246. b Conferration what it was. 550. i Connies
kinnle every month. 303. d. they admit superfoetation. ibid. Connies exceeding
fruitful. 232. h. why they be called in Latin Cuniculi. ibid. i Connies hair
employed for cloth. ibid. k Connies admit superfoetation. ibid. Connies
undermine a town. 212. g Connies with double livers at Grenada in Spain. 342.
g Cooks in price. 246. l Conopas, a dwarf. 165. c Conuolvulus, a worm that
breeds in a Vine. 547. b how it is remedied. ibid. Cophantus, a hill in
Bactriana, burning by night. 47. c Coracinus, the best fish in Egypt. 246. m
Coracini, fishes. 245. b Corellius his graffing. 520. l Cordi, what they be.
226. l Corfideus his recovery from death. 184. l Cordylae sishes, a kind of
Tunies. 243. c Cordum, what kind of hey. 596. g Cork tree. 461. e. the bark
thereof. ibid. the use it is put unto. ibid. Cornei, who they be. 166. i
Corneill tree, how it bears. 473. c. the wood how to be employed. 490. h
Corneill berries preserved. 449. k Corn offered to the gods in Numa his time.
546. d Corn parched for sacrifice. ibid. e Corn sowing, grinding, and
kneading who devised. 187. e Corn gave names to families in Rome. 550. h Corn
given as a reward to worthy warriorrs. ibid. Corn cheap at Rome. 551. b Corn
divided into two general heads, Fourment and Pulse. 557. c Corn of all sorts
when it comes after it is sown. ibid. e Corn how it bears head and
carries seed. 558. g Corn spiked what leaf it bears. ibid. m Corn spiked
blows at once. 559. a Corn differing in ripening. ibid. a. b Corn differing
in stalk and ear. ibid. Corn how to he threshed and cleansed. ibid b. c
Corn how it differs in weight. ibid. c. d bread-Corne does degenerate into
Oats. 574. g Corn in the field how to be preserved and kept from fieldmice.
576. g Corn how to be sown respective to the soil. ibid. k Corn growing
upon trees. 577. b Corn how to be laid up for store. 603. a. b. what corn
will keep best. ibid. d. c. how corn may be kept sweet and good long. ibid.
e. cutting of corn after diverse sorts. 602. h Coronets Murall. 456. i.
Uallare. ibid. Nauale. ibid. Rostrate. ibid. k Coronets how they came first.
456. l Coromandae, a savage sort of people. 156. g. without speech. ibid.
toothed like dogs. ibid. Corus wind. 22. l Coos Island. 323. a Cosei, worms
bred in oaks. 539. c. they be dainty meat. ibid. Costus a spice. 384. h. the
kinds and price thereof. ibid. Cotinus, what tree. 468. h Cotton trees. See
Gosampine. Cotton trees in Aethyopia. 395. a
C R
Crab-fishes their nature. 252. k. l Crab-apples. 438. m Crab-trees bearing
twice a year. 474. m Crabs only foure-footed among fishes. 351. l Croesus his
sons untimely speech. 353. e. it was prodigious. ibid. Cranes how they fly.
281. c Cranes tamed, very plaifull. ibid. f Cranes a dainty dish. 282. g
Crapula what it is. 464. k Crapula, what mixture it is, and what effects it
works. 424. h. Crassus Agelastus was never known to laugh all his life time.
166. h Crassiuenium, a kind of Maple. 466. m Crater Nymphaei, a hollow burning
furnace, and unfortunate to the Apolloniates. 47. d Craterus Monoceros, a most
excellent Hunter, or Hawker. 294. k. Creatures that lie hidden in the earth, at
times have no blood at all. 346. h Creatures are not all hairie that bring
forth quick young. ibid. m. Creatures none of them have an odd foot. 351. e
Creatures which only be round. ibid. Creatures whole houfed, their legs grow
not in length. ibid. f what creatures will not live nor breed within some
countries. 234. g Creatures hurtful to strangers and none else. ibid. h
Creatures without blood have no livers. 341. d C. Crispinus Hilarious his train
of children and issue in lineall descent living. 162. m Critobulus healed king
Philip his eye. 174. m. his reward. ibid. Crocodile of the river. 337. a.
moves the upper iaw. ibid. Crocodiles male and female sit by turns. 302. h
Crocodiles wily and industrious. 346. l Crocodiles their description. 208. m.
they haunt both land and water. 209. a Crocutae, what kind of beasts and their
nature. 206. g Cromes, a kind of fish. 245. a Crotalia, what pearls. 256. g
Crow, a subtle bird. 276. h. she feeds her young being fledge. ibid. i a
Crow taught to speak. 294. k
C T
Ctesias of Gnidos. 47. b Ctesiphon framed Dianaes temple at Ephesus. 175. b
C V
Cuckoo reckoned a Hawke. 275. b. his time of appearance. ibid. killed by his
own kind. ibid. Cuckowes lay in other birds nests, and why. 275. c they
devour the young birds of their nource. 275. d young Cuckowes fat and delicate
meat. ibid. Cuckoo checketh the idle husband that is behind hand with his
work. 593. b Cucus, a tree. 390. k Cuit wine, Melampsithium, Psithium. 416. l
Cuits of sundry sorts. 416. m. 417. a Culeus, the biggest measure of liquors
that was among the Romans. 606. g Countries, the variety and diverse
disposition thereof. 36. m Curites town. 40. m Curtius, a noble knight of Rome.
443. f Cusculium, what it is. 461. a Cutting of corn after diverse sorts. 602.
h Cuttle fish. 256. g. their nature. 250. g
C Y
Cybia, quarters of Pesaurides. 243. d Cycae, certain Dates. 388. g Cyclopes,
monsters of men. 154. g Cychramus, what bird. 283. a Cyneas his merry scoff
at a Uine that bare hard wines. 405. b. his memory. 168. g Cynae trees. 363. f
Cynobatos. 401. i Cynosura, what kind of addle egg. 301. c Cyonoides,
water-serpents. 243. b Cynocephali, a kind of Apes or Monkies. 232. g Cypress
tree will not be dunged nor watered. 544. i it is worse for good Physic.
ibid. Cypress trees bear ordinarily thrice a year. 475. a Cypress tree
described at large, with the properties thereof. 479. c. consecrated to Pluto,
and why. ibid. Cypress tree good to make vinets and borders. 479. d Cypress
woods gainefull to the Lord. ibid. c Cypress trees love the Isle Candy best.
ibid. Cypress wood fair and shining. 491. d Cypress tree Rosin. 424. g
Cyprinum oil. 376 g. 382 h Cypros, an Aegiptidn tree. 375 f Cyprus Island. 48
k. joined sometimes to Syria. 40 (...) the compass and length thereof. 110 m
Cyrene, the description thereof. 94 k. famous, and why, ibid. Cytisus highly
commended for feeding sheep and other cattle. 400 l. m. it increases nurses
milk. 401. a. b. c how it is to be planted and ordered. ibid. c
D A
DAbula what they be. 386 g Dactyli, certain grapes 405 f. why so called ibid.
Daffodill floureth thrice, and shows three seasons of plowing. 592 h
Daphnoeides Isocinnamon. 374 g Daphnoeides. 453 a Daphnitis. 452 m Date trees
their sundry kinds. 384 m. 385 b Dates how they be employed. ibid. Of a date
tree and other plants prospering under it, a wonder incredible. 581 d Date
trees described. 385 c. d Distinguished by sects evidently. ibid. d Jack
Dawes. See Choughs. Dates how they are to be set. 385 e Daemaenetus turned into
a Wolf. 207 d Date in Egypt. 374 l Dates conceive by the presence of the
male. 386 g. h Date trees corn of flips and branches, as well as of kernils.
ibid. i Date trees spring of their own leaves. 508 m Dates guelded. 386 l Date
tree growing in the Capitol of Rome. 143 e Dates of 49 sorts. 387 b Dates
Royal. 161 d Dates of Jury best. 387 e Dates of sundry sorts. 388 h Dates
serve to frank Swine. ibid. i Damascene prunes. ibid. l Date tree leaves serve
for cordage. 470 l. how to be pulled and ordered. 470 l Date trees like not in
a strange country. 478 k Date tree of great antiquity. 495 e Dathiathum what
it is. 367 d Days how they come to be unequal, and not of certain length. 13
f Daylight in the night. 18 g Daylight upon earth, the reason thereof. 35 c Day
where it is longest and where shortest. 36 i continual day for six months.
ibid. how days are observed. 36 l Day for six months together, where. 84 i
the kindness of a Daughter to her mother. 174 h Daughters of Agrippa
delivered of two tyrants. 160 g Daphnis a bondslaue how highly praised. 175 e
Daudo a Sclauonian, lived five hundred years. 181 a Dactyle fishes. 209 f
Daughters of Marcus Curiatius, why they were called Sedigitae. 349 c Dancing
whose invention. 189 c
D E
Death sudden. 185 c. d. etc. Dead supposed recover. 184 h Deal. See Fur.
Deaw when it appears. 29 b signs of Death in sickness. 183 e Dead bodies
weigh more than quick. 156 e Deaf naturally be dumb. 306 g Decumanus lines,
what it is. 609 b Dear, where they have four kidneys apeece. 343 d Decapolis,
why so called. 701 e Defrutum, what it is. 416 l Delos Island. 40 g Delos
Island famous, and why so called. 81 b. the diverse names thereof. 161 d
Demetrius spared to burn Rhodes for the love of a picture. 175 d Democritus
foreseeing by the stars a dearth of oil, bought up all aforehand. 598 g. he
fained two gods, Punishment and Benefit. 3 d Democritus in hot weather foresaw
a shoure of rain and foretold it. 610 m Deuteriae what wines. 417 e
D I
Dials, where first invented. 191 b. not serving for all places. 35 d Dialeta,
a kind of Purples. 29 b Dianitis Murrhe. 369 b Dianaes temple at Ephesus,
four hundred years in building. 491 b. of what timber it was built. 161 d her
image of wood. 491 c. by what means it endured so long. ibid. Dianaes temple
at Saguntum. ibid. d Dibapha, what Purple dies. 260i Dianaes temple in Aulis.
491 e Dia Pasmata, what they be. 383 c Dicaearchus his commission. 31 d
Digestion of meat worse in Summer than in Winter. 355 f Digestion in sleep of
what effect. 356 g Diadem first invented. 187 (...) Divination by beasts who
devised. 189 d Dinochares, a renowned Architect. 99 b Diomedian birds
described, and why so called. 294 m 295 a. b. Dibapha, what dies. 260 i
Dioscurias, a famous city of the Colchians. 117 c. d by whom founded. ibid. d
Diuinors, or men of a prophetical spirit. 173 d Dionysius being deposed from
his kingdom, the seawater grew to be fresh. 44 i Dionysiodorus a
Geometrician. 49 c. and his Epistle found in his sepulcher, and the contents
thereof. ibid. Diomedes his lake. 94 g Diomedes his horses. 78 h Diribitorium.
489 d Discord between beasts. 308 h Diuersitte of childrens resemblance of
their parents. ibid. b Division of fishes. 247 d Difference between brains and
marrow of the bones. 333 a Difference of eie-sight in men. 334 Diversity of
mouths in creatures, 336 l Diversity of teeth in creatures. 337 a Diseases
strange incident to men and women. 182. l. as strangely cured. 183. a. who
lived long without disease. ibid. b. Diseases of sundry sorts. ibid. c. d
Diseases ihat haunt trees. 538. m Distances in planting how to be observed.
514. l
D O
Docus, shining beams in the sky. 17. b Dogs loving and faithful to their
masters. 218. l Dogs restore a king to ^is crown again. 218. m. their
affection to their master. 219. a Dogs employed in wars. 218. m. their rare
properties. 219. c one Dog overcomes a Lion and an Elephant. 220. g. h Dogs
mad. 220. i. how they be preserved from madness. ib. a Dog speaks. 220. k
Dogs come into Hercules temple in the beast-market at Rome. 285. d Dogs will
not live in the Isle of Sygaros. 141. e Dog-starre his power. 19. f Dog-starre
powerful on the sea. 245. (...) Dog-starre of great effect and precious. 597.
d. highly honored. ibid. Dolphins their nature. 238. h. i Dolphin swiftest of
all fishes and creatures. 238. m. swifter than an arrow out of a bow. ibid.
sort themselves like man and wife. 238. i Dolphins lovingly affect men and
music. ibid. l. they love mankind, diverse examples thereof. 238. m Dolphins
know the name Simo. ib. they help fishers to catch fish. 240. (...). they have
a certain commonwealth. ibid. l Dolphins have no ears. 333. c Dolphins
enemies to Crocodiles. 209. c Dormice kept tame. 233, b. they sleep all
winter. ibid. c kind to their sires. ibid. Doricke tune. 14. l house Doves
chaste. 290. g. hen-Doues meek. ibid h. the cocks jealous. ibid. kind to their
pigions. ibid. i. how they drink. ibid. stocke-Doues live long. 29^ k. their
tune. ibid. Doves wink with both their eie-lids. 336. i house-Doues glorious.
290. m. taken in their pride by the faulcon. 291. b. they love the Kestrell or
Stanell, and wherefore. ibid. doves employed as posts and courriers between.
ib. c. how they be kept to their own doue-cote. ibid. doves and pigeons of
great price. 291. d Doves how often they sit and lay in a year. 298. i.
housedoues hatch a cock and a hen pigeon. 300. k. hen-doues tread one another
for want of a cock. ibid. l Donax, a kind of reed. 485. c. k Dough how it is
made. 560
D R
sea-Dragon. 249. d Dragons in vines what they be. 536. h Dragons fight with
elephants, and their subtlety. 198. k where they breed. 199. c. Dragons
procure appetite to meat with the juice of wild lettuce. 271. a some men never
Dream. 309. c (...) by Dreams who first practiced. 189. d Dreams common to
all creatures that bring forth their young quick. ibid. Drepan^s the
sea-swallow seldom seen. 351. d Drink may be forborne altogether. 166. g
Drupae, what olives. 379. b 30. g Drypetae what olives. 430. g Dryos hyphear.
496. k Dryidae in France. 497. b. why so called. ibid. Dryidae their ceremonies
in gathering of oaks misselto. ibid. c against drunkenness and Drunkards. 426.
i M. Antonius a Drunkard, and maintainer of Drunkenness. 428. g the behavior
of Drunkards. 427. a Parthians great Drinkers of wine. ibid. d Dromiscos
Island. 40. k
D V
Dung of blackebirds for what it is good. 507. c Dunging of land, when and in
what order. 582. l Dunghill cocks best adorned on the heads. 331. b Dung how
it is to be raked. 582. l Dunging of grounds invented by King Augeas. 507. b
Duracina, certain grapes 405. e Duracina peaches. 436. k. why so called. ibid.
D W
Dwarfes in both sexes. 165. c Dwarfes there be in all kind of creatures. 352.
g
D Y
Dying wool who devised. 188. i Dyals by whom devised. 191. b water Dyals or
Clepsidres whose invention. 191. d
E A
EAle what kind of beast it is. 206. h Ears tokens of courage. 333. d Earth,
what portion thereof is habitable. 33. c. how it appears that the earth is in
the mids of the world. 34. h Earth in the midst thereof an wholesome mixture
from both sides. 37. b Earthquakes the reason thereof. 37. c. when they
commonly happen. 38. h. signs of earthquakes coming. ibid. remedies against
it. ib. strange and monstrous earthquakes. 39. a. wonders of earthquakes. ibid.
Earth has devoured her self, and what lands have swallowed up themselves. 40.
m. parts of the earth that ever tremble and shake. 41. e the measure of the
earth in length and breadth. 48. k Earth element. 2. l Earth lowest and in the
midst: earth hangs by the poles of the heavens. 2. m Earth peiseth all other
elements. 3. a. earth immovable. ib. Earth less than the Sun. 8. i Earth no
place thereof inhabited which lies under the Zodiac. 11. b Earth defended by
an apology of the author. 548. i. k. Earth scorneth and repineth to be tilled
by slaves. 552. h Earth engraven in Achilles his armor. 504. l Earth how it is
subject to old age. 504. k Earth, the nature thereof requisite to be known.
515. b Earth desires the act of generation. 523. a Easy is the deliverance of
a man child. 159. a
E B
Ebene, a tree of India. 360. g. the wood paid as tribute. ibid. Ebene of two
kinds. 360. h Ebene a tree showed in a triumph. ibid. Ebene wood makes a
sweet perfume. ibid. Ebrus river. 503. d
E C
Echetae, a kind of grasshoppers. 325. e Echinometrae, fishes. 253. b Echineis
a fish. 248. m. it staieth the flux of women. ib. a Echini, vrchins of the sea.
253. a Echo, and the reason thereof. 21. d Eclipse of the Sun and Moon. 7. d.
why they are not eclipsed at set times. ibid. Eclipse, who were the first
finds out thereof. 8. l Eclipses much feared, and of whom. 9. a Eclipse of the
Moon thought to be by enchantment, and to be helped by dissonant ringing of
basins. ibid. Eclipses, in what time they have their return to the former
points. 9. g Eclipse of the Sun when it happens. 9. g Eclipse of the Moon
always in the full. ibid. Eclipses how often, in what space, and the first
finder out thereof. 9. d Eclipse longer than ordinary when Caesar Dictatour was
murdered. 17. e
E G
Eggs diverse in color. 298. g Eggs of birds of two colors within the shell.
ibid. Eggs of fishes of one color. ibid. Eggs of birds, serpents, and fishes,
how they differ. ibid. Eggs best for an hen to sit upon. 299. a Eggs hatched
without a bird. 299. c. only by a kind heat. ib. Eggs how they be marred under
an hen. 299. b wind-Egs called Hypenemia. 300. l. how they be engendered. 301.
e. wind-Egs Zephyria. ibid. Eggs drawn through a ring. ibid. Eggs how they he
best kept. ibid. Egnat. Mecennius killed his wife for drinking wine. 418. k of
Eye plucking out, vomit follows. 334. d
E L
Elaterium what it is. 369. a Elate. 379. e Electrum a kind of metal. 260. l
Elements three, Water, Air, and Fire, have neither savor nor taste. 449. b
Elenchi, what pearls. 255. f Elaeomeli, what it is. 435. a Elephants cure
themselves by the wild olive. 211. (...) Elephants bring forth but one at once.
303. d Elephants tooth. See Yuorie. Elephants have broad tongues. 339. a
Elephants have four bellies or paunches. 343. b Elephants most industrious and
witty. 346. l how they bend their hams. 350. g Elephants capacity, virtue,
religion, desire of glory. 192. i The biggest of land beasts. ibid. they adore
the new Moon. 192. k. subject to sickness. 197. f. their docilitie. 192. l.
193. b. they plough the ground. ibid. they draw in a chariot. ibid. their
manner of dancing. ibid. their feats of actiuitie and nimblenesse. 193. a. an
Elephant goes up and down ropes. 193. b. writing Greek characters. ibid.
embarked and their manner of landing. 193. c. their arms called horns or
teeth. ibid. they hide their teeth. ibid. Elephants young how they be known.
193. d. how they order their teeth. ibid. what use they make of them. ibid.
they know wherefore they are hunted. 193. e. their clemency to man. 193. f.
their fear of man's footing. 194. g Elephant how he utters his voice. 353. e.
their manner of march. 194. i. their passage over rivers. ibid. Elephants
bashful and shameful. ibid. k. l Elephants two of K. Antiochus. ibid.
Elephants, their time of generatior. 194. l. their affection in love. 194. l.
m. 195. a. both to their own and also to mankind. ibid. their memory. 195. a.
their justice. ibid. when they were first seen in Italy. 196. b. baited in the
cirque of Rome. 195. c Elephants fight in the cirque of Rome. ibid. c an
Elephant of wonderful courage. 196. g. their industry. ibid. move people to
pity. ibid. h. Elephants fight. ib. i. k Elephants gentle to weaker beasts.
ibid. k Elephants harmless, unprovoked. ib. their manner of fight. ibid. how
they be tamed. ib. l. 197. d Elephants how they be taken. 196. l. 197. a. b
Elephants mad in time of rut. 197. c. how they serve in war. ibid. d
Elephants affrighted at the grunting of swine. ibid. Elephants how long they
go with young. 197. e. Elephants in India bigger than African. 197. e. 198. k
they love waters. 191. i. can abide no cold. ibid. their food. 198. g. their
trunk and the use thereof. ibid. they cannot abide a mouse. ibid. they take
harm by swallowing a horse-leech. ib. h. their skin. ib. it serves to kill
flies. ibid. Elephants teeth of great price. ib. and the use of them. ibid.
Elephants trunk used for meat. 198. i. where they breed. ib. k their policy,
and the reason thereof in nature. 199. a Elder tree good for pipes. 485. e. the
berries for what use. 486. g. their stakes best to prop vines. 526. g Elegia.
483. g Elm seed when to be gathered. 512. g. how to be sown. ib. Elmes of
diverse kinds.. 467. e. f Elm Atinia not good for vines. 535. a Elmes
husbands to vines. 512. b Elops, a fish. 245. (...) Elpis takes a bone from
between a Lions teeth. 203. d Elleborine. 398. i. the leaves medicinable.
ibid.
E M
Emperor Nero drawn by monstrous beasts. 352. i Embrodered works, whose
devise. 228. i Emerita, a place in Portugal. 261. b Emplastration, what manner
of grafting. 519. d. e
E N
Endimion, when that fable first sprang up of being in love with the Moon. 7.
(...) what beasts engender backward. 302. k Engines of battery whose
invention. 189. b. c English oysters best of all others. 267. a Enhaemon, a
sovereign salve. 370. l Envious persons are venomous. 548. m
E O
Eone a tree, 399. b
E P
Ephemerides, who first devised. 188. g Epirus description. 72. k Epimenides
his sleep. 184. i Ephesus a famous city of Asia. 109. b Epileps^e, whence it
is. 335. a Epiglossis, a little tongue at the root of the other. 339. b it is
in no creature that lays eggs. ibid. use of it. ibid. it is two fold. ibid.
(...), what it is. 585. d Epipactis. 398. i. the leaves medicinable. ibid.
Ephesus, sometime it was so near the sea that it did beat upon the temple of
Diana. 39. e Epopos hill. 40. h Epidaurus Island. 40. k
E R
Eratosthenes measured the globe of the earth, by what light and direstion. 44.
g Eratosthenes a most cunning clearke. 49. b. 36. h Eratosthenes a writer his
great praise. 49. b Erithace, Sandaracha Cerinthus, food of bees. 313. b
Erithace effected of spring dew. ibid. Erithace. See Robin-redbrest. Ericaeum,
a kind of wild honey. 317. d Eruile not chargeable in sowing. 572. i Eruile
medicinable by the testimony of Augustus Caesar. 572. k. when to be sown.
ibid. Error in numbering of years. 181. a Erysinum, what kind of corn. 565.
b Erythini, fishes altogether female. 244. m Erythraea, myrrh. 369. d
Erysisceptron. See Aspalathus. Erythrocoma, Pomegra^ats. 398. g. h
E S
Esculetum, a grove near Rome. 462. g Esculus the mast thereof. 458. m Esculus
runs as deep into the ground as it rises above the ground. 477. c Esseni,
people throughout the world most wonderful. 101. d carnal lust they know not.
ibid. keep company only with date trees. ibid. continued many thousand years
without generation. ibid.
E T
Etesiae, the name of winds. 23. d Etesiae winds. 97. f. 473. b
E V
Eumecos. 376. l Euonimus, a tree. 399. b Eurotas river flowing over Peneus
river like oil, not mingled therewith. 76. l Europe the measure thereof. 89. d
Euphorbia herb the wonderful ^rtue thereof. 92. i Euphrates a famous river,
the description thereof. 103. d Eupetalon. 453. a Europe not the third part of
the earth. 51. a. but the one half. ibid. Eutheristos. 376. l Eutyche, a woman
of Tralleis delivered in her life time of thirty births. 157. c. carried to
her funeral by twenty of her children. ibid. Euthimin^s hi^ sons growth.
165. c Euthemus a wrestler honored as a god. 180. k
E X
Exacetus what ^sh. 247. b. 488. i Experience best proof. 502. k Excr^ments of
man's body best dung for ground. 507. c (...) pearls of commendation. 255. f
E Y
Eyebrowes of man like the eaues of a house. 333. d Eyebrowes the seats of
pride. ibid. e what living creatures have no Eyes. 333. f one Eye in some
Herons. 334. g Eyes of sundry colors. 334. g. h. i ball or apple of the Eye
different from the other parts. ibid. k Eyes show the affection and disposition
of the mind. 334. k. l membranes of the Eye. 335. a. b opticke nerves of the
Eyes whether they reach to the brain or stomach. ibid. d Eyes why they be
closed ceremoniously in the dead. ibid. Eyes yield forth tears. 334. k Eyes,
sometime why they see not and be well. 335. a Eye sight how it is placed. ibid.
b Eyelids, their use. 336. g. why they shed their hair. ibid. h Eytooth of a
wolf on the right side works wonders. 337. f of Eyesight quick, wonderful
examples. 167. b
F A
FAbaria. 569. a Fabariae certain Islands. 596. d Face proper only to
mankind. 333. d Factus what it is. 433. d Fall of leaf a good rule for
husbandmen to direct them to seednesse. 588. l Falcon helps the owl in
fight. 277. f Fallowing each other year. 581. b Fagutalis, Jupiter at Rome.
461. f Farrago. 572. b Farrage corn or dredge. 573. a Farina, whereof it is
derived. 564. g Fabius a Senator of Rome strangled with a hair. 159. (...)
Fauonius the Western wind, why so called 471. d. why called Chelidonius. 23.
c. why named Orinthius. ibid. highly commended. 569. a Fairies seen oftentimes
in the deserts of Affricke. 157. c they vanish away like illusions. ibid.
F E
Feast Fornacalia instituted by Numa. 549. c Faecatum what it is. 417 f L.
Sylla called Faelix, yet unhappy. 177. c Felicity diversely understood. 276. h
Feeling a sense common to all creatures. 306. (...) Femals may certainly turn
to be males. 158. b Femals have smaller voices than males, except kine. 353. e
Female sirrs taller than the male. 563. h. i Fenigreeke to be sown
negligently. 552. b Ferrets naturally hunt conies. 232. b Ferula, two kinds.
399. d. root of Ferula dangerous. 399. f Ferula makes excellent fin^ matches.
400. h a Ferme house how to be purchased and chosen. 553. b. c. d Fern or
brake how to be killed. 556. m Fesant bastards. 288. c Fesants of Colchis
dainty birds. 296. g Fesant will die of lyee. 329. d Fever, a chapel
dedicated to her. 3. c
F I
Figtree bear fruit contrary to other trees, and why. 474. k Figtrees bear
twice a year: wild fig trees bear thrice a year. ibid. l Figtree milk or
sap serves for rendles. 486. g Figs Liuian. 442. i. Pompeian. ibid. Figs
mariscae. ibid. speckled figs. ibid. Herculanian. 442. i. Albicerate. ibid.
Aratian. ibid. Porphyrite. 442. k. Popular. ibid. Chelidonian. ibid. Figs both
early and lateward. 442. k. Figs Duracinae. ibid. Chalcidian figs bear three
times in one year. ibid. Tarentine figs called Oinae or Oenades. ibid. Figs as
big as pears. 442. g Figs of Ida described. ibid. Figtree Alexandrina. ib.
Figtrees of Hyrcania. 442. h Figs: Chalcidian. 442. h. Chian. ib. Lydian. ib.
Mamillane or teat figs. ib. Callistruthian. ib. African. 442. i. Alexandrine or
delicat. ib. Rhodian. ib. Tyburtine. ibid. Figdates when to be planted. 442. l
Figs African, Saguntine, Tellian. ibid. winter figs. ibid. Figs fall from the
tree, if it thunder at the feast Uulcanalia. 546. k Figs of Moesia ripen when
other blossom, by what devise. 442. m. a Fig the occasion of Carthage
overthrow. 443. b. c Figtree Nauia in Rome. 443. d Figtrees Ruminalis. ibid.
Figtree in the Forum at Rome. ibid. Figtree before the temple of Saturn in
Rome. 443. l Figs ripen altogether on the tree. 444. h wild Figtrees. ibid.
Figs ripen the sooner by the means of wild figtrees. ib. h. i. k Figs of the
Isle Ebusus the best. 444. l Figs how they be put up and kept. ibid. Figs good
victuals. ibid. m Figs: Coctanae, Caricae, Cauniae. ibid. Figtree made
fruitful by the sea onion Squilla. 514. g. it is drier in the mids than at the
head. 517. c Figtree how it is made to bear olives. 524. g Figtree of all
other ageth the soonest. 526. m Figtree grows best by the water side. 544. i
Figs how they are ripened by caprification. 545. e Figs how they are made
smooth and pleasant. 547. b a Figtree of India. 360. k. the description
thereof. ibid. it sets it self. ibid. Aegiptian figtree. See Sycamore.
Syrian figtree. 389. e. f Fields in Aethiopia about the hill Hesperis shine and
glitter like stars. 47. d Filberds called Abellinae, whereupon. 446. h
Filberds: Caluae, Praenestine, Thasian, Albensian, Tarentine, Molluscae. ibid.
i Fines passed under the name of sheep and oxe^ at Rome. 550k Firrs taller than
any rosin tree. 465 Firrs topped die, topped live. 476. i Firtrees how employed
and how to be chosen. 488. l. m Fur masts for shipping. 489. f Fur is good
for plankes. 547. a Fur how it will not putrify in water. 492. i Fur wood
highly commended in carpentry and ioyners work. 493. a. b Fire bird. Look
Incendiaria. Fire in the hill Chimera flamed with water and quenched with
earth. 47. c Fire the maruailes thereof. 46. m Fiery glasses opposite to the
sunbeams sooner inflame than fire. 47. f Fire the highest element. 2. l Fires
about the body of men. 48. h Firmament seen to chinke and open. 17. g Fishes
feed on land. 235. e. divided according to their sundry shapes. 247. d Fishes
of all sorts breath after a manner. 237. e Fishes both hear and sleep. ib.
and 306. h. 309. b Fishes changing color. 249. d Fishes which be bloudlesse.
249. c Fishes esteemed diversely in sundry places. 246. m Fishes are not all
alike covered. 242. h Fishes some mislike in cold, others in heat. 245. b a
Fish leapeth out of the water at Caesar's feet. 244. l Fishes how and where they
like and live best. 245. a Fishes, of what kind they be all spawners and no
milters. ib. Fishes have sense. 261. d Fishes, of all creatures have the
biggect heads. 332. g Fishes their eyes shine by night. 335. c Fishing time
which is best. 244. m Fishes that be soft have no bones. 345. a Fishes female
commonly bigger than male. 244. l Fishes do smell. 306. h Fishes presage
things to come. 244. l Fisticke nuts, and their nature. 388. l
F L
the Flap Epiglossis. 339. c Flies drowned will revive kept in ashes. 330. l
Fleas engendered of dust. 329. (...) Flies enter not into Hercules temple in the
beast-market at Rome. 285. d Flies breed in the fire at Cyprus. 330. i Floor
for threshing how to be tempered. 602. d Floralia a festival holiday. 600. g
Flacci why so called. 333. b Flockeworkes. 277. (...)
F O
Forehead shows the nature of man or woman. 333. e Food of sundry creatures.
307. d Fowls distinguished generally by their feet. 276. g Fowls why they
pecke at the eyes of a man. 335. c Fortune a goddess, her universal power. 4.
k. her mutabilitie. 177. a. variable fortunes of diverse persons. 177. b to
bad-Fortune a temple. 3. e Fowls that have crooked talons be long legged. 351.
d Foliatum ointment. 382. k Fountains of wonderful and strange natures. 45.
a. b Fountain from under the sea yielding fresh water. 110. l Forests in
Germany. 455. c Foxes very quick of hearing. 222. g. how they engender. 302.
m. sea-Foxes. 262. g strange Fowls in the Island Area. 120. l
F R
France not subject to earthquakes, and why. 38. h Fraud of Toranius a merchant
slane-seller. 162. g Frogs force inhabitants to abandon a city. 212. h Frogs
Rubetae. 213. a Frogs how they make their noise. 338. l Frankincense male what
it is. 367. d Frankincense best how it is known. 368. i Frument what it is,
and of how many kinds. 557. c. d Frankincense only in Arabia. 366. g
Frankincense tree described. ibid. k Frankincense gathered. 367. a. the manner
thereof. ibid. b Frankincense paieth much toll. 368. h. high price of Rome.
ibid. i. Frize mantles. 227. f Fronditius passed over the river Vulturnus in
spite of Anniball. 499. c Frost how it is engendered. 29. b Fruits how to be
preserved. 440. m. 441. a. b Fruits grow after diverse sorts. 450. g. h. in
what regard they be set by. ibid. i Frument or spike-corne. 582. h Frumentie
corn. 559. d Frumentie bastard. 568. i
F V
Fullers craft who found out. 188. i C. Furius Cres^us a notable good
husbandman, accused and acquit. 556. g. h. Furlong how many paces. 14. l
Furnaceus panis, what it was. 566. m Furrows direct. 579. e Furrows
overthwart, ibid. l Fusius Saluius his strength. 166. l. m Fusterna in trees
what it is. 488. f
F Y
Fire striking out of a flint, who devised. 188. m
G A
GAbalium. 314. h Gabara. 165. b Gades. 48. i Gagates. See Aetites. Gall in
serpents is their venom. 337. c Gall hangs at the liver. 341. c. it is not in
all creatures. ib. Gall of a Dear where it lies. 341. d Gall infecteth the
body with the yellow iaundise. ibid. e Gall of seals good for many purposes.
342. g Galbanum a gum. 518. i. the best how it is known. ibid. the virtue and
the price. ibid. Galguli what birds, and how they build. 288. l Gallia the
description thereof. 87. a Gall-nuts of the oak Hemeris best for curriours.
460. g Gall-nuts appropriate to mast trees. ibid. Gall-nuts, which be best.
ibid. Gall-nuts break forth all in a night. ibid. Gamale, a territory in
Phoenicia. 40. m Games public who first ordained. 189. f Games solemn:
Olympia, Isthmia, Pythia, Nemea. 457. a Ganders and geese how they do engender.
301. b Ganges the description thereof. 126. h Ganges a river. 48, k. 156. i
Ganzae what geese. 281. a
G E
Geese bashful and modest. 279. a wild-Geese in what manner they fly. 282. k
Geese watchful. 280. i. saved the Capitol. ibid. provided for with the first
state of Rome. ibid. Geese given to love mankind. 280. k Geese seem to have
understanding. ibid. Geese liver is excellent meat as is it ordered. 280. i.
who devised the same dish. ibid. Geese travailed afoot from Terwin and Turney
in France to Rome. 280. m. their feathers and down. ibid. a Geese how they sit
and hatch. 301. b. Geirs exceed us in smelling. 305. f Geirs where they build,
and how they breed. 274. g Geometritian who was excellent. 175. a Generation of
mankind, the reason thereof. 162. i. k Ges-clithron a famous cave. 154. k
G H
Ghost of Aretaeus in form of a raven. 184. i Ghost abandoning the body at
times. ibid. h
G I
Giants in times past. 165. a. b Giddiness in the brain ten days after the
women has had company with the man, shows conception. 159. a Gilthead a
fish. 245. b Ginney or Turkey hens. 296. g
G L
Glandules or kernels in swine. 339. b Glanis a fish, her nature. 262. g Glauce
loved of a goose. 280. k Glaucus a seafish. 245. b Gledes. See Kites. Glue
made of an ox hide sodden. 347. c. what woods will not be glewed. 493. c. the
best glue is made of bulls hides. 347. c. Glo-birds or Glo-wormes, what they
betoken. 593. c Glottis what bird. 283. a Glo-wormes, why they be called
Lamprides. 326. l when they firct appear. ibid. Glynon a kind of Maple. 466.
l
G N
Gnats. 310. l Gnat has all the five senses. ibid. is thirsty of man's blood.
ibid. Gnat-snappers what kind of birds. 286. m. when they be called Ficedulae.
287. a. when they be called Melancoryphi. ibid. Gnesios the royal Aegle. 272.
g Gnomon, what. 35. (...)
G O
God, what he is. 3. d Gods thought to be many, and how this foolish opinion
first sprang. 3. d. To assign any form to God is man's weakness. 3. i.
Plagues accounted as Gods. ibid. Gods more in heaven, than men in earth, if
they should be so many as men do feign. 3. (...) men have accounted beasts,
and other filthy things to be Gods. 3. (...) Gods that they be married, vain
it were to believe. 3. (...) God feigned young and old, winged and lame. 3. f
Gods, in them are feigned adulteries, haired, and wars. ib. Gods worn upon
fingers in rings. 4. b Gods cannot do all things, as to die. 5. a Gods not
innumerable. 3. d Gods, Democritus makes two only. ibid. a God canonized here
upon earth. 180. i Gold, what people has it. 138. h Gold mines who discovered.
188. k Gold melting, trying, and fining, whose devise. ibid. Goats, their
manner of breeding. 229. a. both male and female. ibid. how they help their
eie-sight. 229. b. their wit. ibid. male goats which be best. ibid. female
goats how to be chosen. ibid. Goats ever in an ague. 229. d. their hair in
stead of wool used in cloth. ibid. they bark and kill trees. ibid. (...).
the goats beard. ibid. how they breath. 229. d. they see by night. ibid. they
kill olive trees by licking them only. ibid. e. Goats wild of sundry kinds.
231. c Goats not sacrificed to Minerua. 229. e Goslings stung with a nettle die
upon it. 301. b. greedy feeding the bane of goslings. ibid. Gossampine trees
bearing cotton. 363. e. f Goggle eyes dim-sighted. 334. h
G R
Gray eyes in the dark see better than others. 334. h Graies how they escape
the hunter. 218. g Grains in fruit different. 447. e Grain. See corn. Grain
of three sorts esteemed by the Greeks: Dracontias, Strange as, Selinusium.
360. g Grafting how it is. 517. a Grafts ought to be taken from the top of the
tree. ibid. g Grafts how to be taken from boughs that bear well. ibid. how
they are to be set. ib. how they are to be thwighted. ibid. not to be sharpened
in the wind. 518. b. they are to be set before the moon is in the full. ibid.
Grafting in seutcheon. 519. e. f. 520. g. h. Rules to be observed in grafting.
521. c Grafts of cherrie trees how to be used. 518. i Grafts of vines how to be
used. 519. b Grafts of wild trees will not grow in the tame. 519. e Grafting
more plentiful than sowing of seeds. 520. k Grafts of olives when they are to
be set in dry places. 522. g Grafts of olives how they are to be used in
Barbary. ibid. h Grammarian, who excellent. 174. l Grapes how they are
preserved from pullain. 420. k Grapes that loose the belly. 423. a. grapes that
bind the belly. ibid. Grapes Echoledes, why so called. ibid. Grapes de-guard.
440. i Grape bunches how to be gathered for guard. ibid. m Grapes of diverse
sorts. 45. e Grapes how preserved. 406. g Grapes dried in furnaces. ib. grapes
sodden in wine must. ib. Grapes hanging all winter on the vine till new come.
406. h Greek grapes of Corinth. 407. c Grapes Uarianae, and why so called.
408. g Grapes Inerticulae might be called the sober grapes. ibid i Grapes of
the free town Pompeij. 409. d Grapes Tiburtine. ibid. olive Grapes. ibid.
Grapes Vinaciolae. ibid. Grapes Capciades. 409. k Grapes Bucconiatis. ibid.
Grapes Tarrupiae. ibid. Grapes Phariae. ibid. Grapes Prusiniae. ibid. Grapes
streptos. ibid. Grapes Thasiae. ibid. Grapes Mariotides. ibid. grapes Lageae.
ibid. Grapes Bimammae. 410. g Grapes of Spain. ibid. h Grapes Escariae. ibid.
Grapes Bumasti. ib. Ounce grapes. 410. h Grapes Aegiptian. ibid. Grapes
Rhodian. ibid. Market grapes. ibid. Grapes Cinereae. ibid. Grapes Scirpulae.
416. m Grapes Aegiptian, Thasia, Aethalos, Peuce. 415. f Grasshoppers how they
live. 325. d. their sundry kinds. ibid. d. e. they be dim-sighted. 326. g.
they may be reduced into three kinds. ibid. they be meat to some nations.
ibid. when they fly. ibid. they be not every where. ibid. they have wings
only without mouth. ib. f. where they be mute. ibid. of Grease. 344. k Greeks
full of lies and vanities. 207. d Griffons defend golden mines. 154. h. what
birds. 296. k Grind-stones and whet-stones for sithes. 595. c Gristles broken
will not close together. 345. b. more of gristles. ibid. Grounds ouergrowne
with bushes how to be cleansed, 505. b Ground how to be trenched. 559. a. b to
choose ground, rules infallible. 505. b Grounds which are principal. 504. k
Ground must be bettered by sowing some grain in it. 508. h Ground burned by
cich-pease. ibid. the Growth of man or woman. 345. b
G V
Guarlands given to victors in the four great games. 457. a a Guild instituted
by Romulus over corn fields seege. 549. c Guarlands of corne-eares first known
at Rome. ibid. Guelded apples. 438. l Gueldings cast not their teeth. 338. h
Sea-guls, where they breed. 287. f Gums of diverse sorts. 391. c. d Gum
Arabicke. 424. g Gum of Jury. ibid. Gum Colophonian. ibid. Gum Spagas. ibid.
Gum Cypryan. ibid. Gut Longaon how it makes creatures insatiable. 343. b of
the Guts. 342. k. l. m. 343. a. b
G Y
Gymnosophystes, certain Philosophers of India. 155. e they can look against
the Sun. ibid. Gymnetes, people living above a hundred years. 147. a
Gynacocratumeni, people why so called. 118. h
H A
HAdrosphaeron. 364. k Hadrobolon what it is. 363. a Haddocke, a kind of
cod-fish. 243. e Hail how it is engendered. 29. b Halcyones the name of birds:
their hatching. 287. e Haliattes. 8. l Haliaetos, what kind of aegle. 272. g.
she traineth her young ones to look against the Sun. ibid* Half our time
spent in sleep. 183. a Halcion days. 287. d Halciones of diverse kinds. ibid.
Halciones when they breed. ibid. Haliphleos, a kind of Oak. 450. d.
unfortunate. ibid. Hammoniacum. See Ammoniacum. Hanno banished for taming a
Lion. 203. b Ha^ his book and commission to survey the compass of Affricke.
91. b Ha^ his navigations. 33. a Hangings of exceeding great price. 228. k
Happy is no man in this life. 176. h who was deemed most happy by the Oracle.
180. h Hares admit superfoetation. 303. d Harp star Fidicula. 588. g
Harrowing how it is performed. 579. f Hares sleep open eied. 335. a Hard and
stiff hearted folks are accounted brutish. 340. i Hardishrews if they go over
a cart-tract, straight die. 244. g Hares in some places have two livers. 341. c
being then transported they lose one of them. ibid. Hare will never be fat.
344. k Hares admit superfoetation or double conception. 232. k Hare the
hairiest creature. 347. a Hares how their age is known. 232. i. both male and
female. ibid. the sea-h^re a venomous fish. 191. b. 264. i Hares very
fruitful. 232. k Hares hair very good to make cloth. ibid. Harmony of
Planets. 14. k Hearts showed the use of the herb Dictamnus. 210. k cure
themselves with craifishes. ibid. Hearts and Hinds are cured by the Artichoke.
211. c Hearts. See Stags. 214. g. h Hasty apples. See Apples Mustea. Hasell
nuts. See Filbards. Haulme. See Straw. Hawks. 272 f. their kinds. 274. k.
where they breed on the ground. ibid. l Hawks and men catch birds together.
274. m and part the prey equally. ibid. of Hair. 332. i k Hairs and stones
engender in men's bladders. 344. g Hairs out of a thick skin are gross and
hard. 347. a they grow long upon Horses and Lions. ibid. swallowing down of an
Hair the death of Fabius a Roman Senator. 159. e Hairs of Connies long on
their cheeks. ibid. Hairie men more lecherous than others. ibid. Hairs come
not sometime without the help of art. 347. b Hair of the head in men grows
most. ib. it grows not at the cut end but from the root. ibid. Hair grows
upon dead bodies. 347. b Hairie beasts, except the Ass and the sheep, are
troubled with lice. 329. b Hairs white. 232. h
H E
Heads adorned with crests, tufts, and combs. 331. a Heads cut from the body
licked up their own blood. 242. h. Heart in man and beast how it is situate
and made: also to what use it serves. 340. g. h Heart of fishes points up to
the mouth. ibid, Heart first formed in the mothers womb. 340. a. it dies
last. ibid. h. it pants like a living creature by it self. ibid. h. the
treasure of life. ibid. the seat of the mind and soul. 340. h Heart cannot
abide pain. ibid. pain of it brings present death. ibid. Hearts, they that
have little, are valiant. ibid. Heart of a man how much it grows yearly.
340. f. how long it grows. ibid. when and how much it decreaseth. ibid.
Hearts of some men all hairie. 340. i Hearts hairie show strange and valorous
men. ibid. Heaven full of pourtraits. 2. g Heaven and World all one. 1. c
Heaven in the motion thereof an harmony. 2. h Heaven called Coelum, and why.
ibid. Heaven divided into sixteen parts by the Tuscanes. 7. a See more in
World. Hebre river. 53. b Heouba her tomb and name thereof. 79. a Hedgehogs
how they engender. 302. l Hedysmata. 381. d Helix of three sorts. 481. a Helix,
a kind of Yuie. 480. k Hellenes, whence they took their name. 76. h the three
names Homer gave unto them. ibid. Helena, a Meteor so called. 18. l
Heliotropium turning always with the Sun. 20. h Hellespontias, the name of a
wind. 23. b. the time of it. ibid. Hellespont, sometime a land. 40. l Helix, a
kind of Willow or Oysier, 485. i Heliotropium the herb, a direction unto the
Husbandman. 593. f Hemeris, a kind of Oak. 459. b Heneti, from whence the
Uenetians. 175. b house-Hens seem religious. 292. m Hens or Pullets great
layers. 298. i Hens bring up Ducklings. 299. e Hens which be kindly. 300. g
grig-Hens. ibid. b Hens and Puslein first crammed. 297. a Hens fat how they are
known. ibid. b Hephaestij, mountains in Lycia. 47. c Hepsema, what it is.
416. l Hercules pillars. 48. i Hercules his altar. 96. l Hermotinus Clazomenius
his ghost. 184. (...) Hercules his sphere, the planet Mars so called. 6. g
Hercules Rusticellus, who so called. 166. l Hercynia forest. 455. e. the
wonderful trees that are there growing. 455. f Marcus Herennius a Counselor
struck with lightening in a clear day. 25. f Hermaphrodites. See Androgini.
Hermines. See Menuver. Heroum, what it is. 273. f Herophilus, a renowned
interpreter of Physic. 345. b Herons of three sorts. 301. l. they engender
with great pain. ibid. and lay with as much. ibid. Hesperius, a mountain in
Aethyopia. 47. c Hexametre verse, who first devised. 189. c
H I
Hiera an Island of Aetolia, near Italy. And the burning thereof. 47. d Hiera
Island. 40. g Hierapolis city. 104. l Himantipus, what kind of birds 295. d
Himilco his navigations. 33. a Hinds, their nature and manner of breeding. 213.
d Hinds and stags how they engender. 302. m Hinuti, what they be. 224. h Hinus,
what it is. ibid. i Hippanis, a river in Pontus, it brings down bladders,
330. l. wherein it enclosed the fly Hemerobion. ibid. Hipparchus his
Ephemerides what they contained. 8. l his invention conceruing the Eclipse of
the Sun and Moon. 9. d Hipparchus his opinion of the stars, his praise, and
opinion of the soul. 16. e. he sindeth out a new star rising in his time.
16. m Hipparchus. 49. c Hippaee, a kind of crabsish. 252. l Hippaeus, a kind
of Comet. 15. f Hippocrates honored like Hercules. 17 h. he foretold of a
pestilence. ibid. Hippocentaur borne in Thessalie. 157. f Hippomanes, what it
is. 222. k Hippophestar, good to purge the body for the falling sickness.
496. k Hippoglottian. 452. m Hippuri, a sort of Lobstars. 245. b Hirpiae,
certain families, wherein they be all witches. 155. c 155. e. Hispalis, a
Colonie. 52. h Hiues of Lantern horns. 318. k driving of Hiues. 317. b. what
must be left for the Bees. ibid.
H O
Holmes, three at Tiber very old. 458. l a Holme tree of a wonderful age. 495.
b a Holme tree of a monstrous bigness. 496. h a Mast-Holme tree of two sorts.
458. l Holothuria, fishes of the nature of plants. 264. g Holydaies unto
Uulcan. 48. g Homers Ilias couched within a nut-shell. 167. b thick Honey
nothing commendable. 317. b thin Honey will not thicken. ibid. Honey engenders
in the air. 317. b. when it is engendered. ibid. of what matter. ibid. how it is
corrupted. ibid. it is diverse, according to the tokens of good honey. ibid.
regions. 316. h a Honey-combe eight foot long. ibid. i Honey-combes best about
Sunne-stead in Summer. 316. i Honey when it is most gathered. 317. a Honey in
some sort hurtful for Bees 321. d Hondearia, a kind of Plums. 436. m Honey
apples. See apples Melimela. Honey who made first. 188. l Horns of great
bigness. 331. f How they stand, and to what use they are put. ibid. d. e what
beasts have horns. 331. b Horns of sundry shapes. ibid. Hornets, whether they
have stings or no. 322. k Horologies how devised. 191. b. c. d Horses wild.
200. g Riuer-Horse his description and properties. 209. f invented Phlebotomie
or bloodletting. 210. i Horse of Caesar Dictatour. 221. a Horse entombed by
Augustus Caesar. ibid. Horses entombed at Agragentum. 221. a a Horse loved by
Semiramis. ibid. a Horse reuengeth his masters death. 221. b Horse furniture
and harneis who first invented. 189. c Horses loath to cover their dams. ibid.
Horse-fight, who first devised. 189. c Horces of service used to dance to
Music. 221. (...) their kind affections to their masters. ib. their
docilitie. ibid. their perceiuance. ibid. d. desiring of praise. ibid. e. their
age. 222. h. their breeding. ibid. Horses where they be worth a taelent of
gold. 148. h Horses subject to many diseases. 222. m Horses age how it is
known after their shedding of teeth. 358. i. Horses and men alone have teeth
of one level. 337. a Horses teeth wax white by age. 338. h. their age known
by their teeth. ibid. a Horse where he is worth a talent of gold. 148. h
Horses, where they are thought to have no gall. 341. d Horde arij, who they be.
561. c Horminum. a kind of grain. 565. b Hortensius wept for the death of a
Lamprey. 261. d Hornets are not uniform. 322. h. they die when Winter is come.
ibid. c Horns of a Heart kept as monuments in India. 324. a Horns of Act^on
and Cippas fabulous things. 331. b Hounds. See dogs. Hound-fishes their nature.
263. c a House in the country how to be seated. 554 House leeke medicinable for
all maladies incident to corn: 565. e. Houfes of what beasts will heal being
cut. 351. (...) of Houfes a discourse. ibid.
H V
Huboles or Houps gone so soon as they have hatched. 284. i a filthy bird. 287.
a ill Husbandry censured by the Censors. 550. i to be a good Husbandman, a
credit. ibid. Husbandry in old time, by whom it was performed. 551. f by whom
in later days. 552. h Husbandry, a Prince-like profession and study. ibid. i
Husbandry studied by what kings. 552. i Husbandry professed of what warriors.
ibid. books of Husbandry written by Mago, saved by the Senate of Rome, and
translated into Latin by D. Syllenus. 552. k Husbandmens outworkes after the
fall of the leaf. 589. e the Husbandry in Egypt about sowing and reaping of
corn. 577. d. (...) Husbandmens work in Winter Interuali, what they be. 590.
g. h. their works in the Interuall of the Spring. what they be. 591. e. their
works in the Spring according to Cato. ibid. M. Uarro, a writer of Husbandry.
553. b Husbandry works presently upon the Spring Aequinox. 593. b. Husbandry
works in the Summer Solstice. 594 Husking of corn. 565. c Husbandry after the
Summer Solstice. 594. i Husbandry at the entering of Autumn. 605. d
H Y
Hyades, what stars, and why so called. 562. l Hyaene change their sects.
212. i Hyades, stars called otherwise Suculae. 19. e Hybandia Island. 40. k
Hybridae, what they be. 232. c Hylas, a great writer of Augurie by the nature
of birds. 277. e. Hypelate. 496. c Hyphear, what it is. 476. g Hyphear. 496. c.
the properties it has. ibid. Hyperborei, people so called: blessed, living
long. 84. i strange reports of them. ibid.
I A
Jack Daw. See Chough.
I B
Ibis invented the clyster. 210. k Ibes destroy serpents. 284. m. where they be
black, where white. 287. b
I C
Ichneumones, a kind of Waspe. 322. h Ichneumon, the nature of it. 208. k. his
combat with Aspis. ibid. he kills the Crocodile. 209. a Ichthyophagi, people
that feed of fish, and swim naturally in the sea. 145. a
I D
Ides of March fatal to Caesar. 591. b Idol of the Meremaid where honored.
103. b. the names thereof. ibid.
I L
Ilex. See more in Holme. the Mast of Ilax. 458. m. 100. i Ilium and all the
tract thereabout sometime main sea. 39. e
I M
Imaus, a mountain. 154. h Imageures famous. 175. d Imperfections incident to
corn sown. 574. g. h. i
I N
Incendiaria, a bird unlucky. 277. b. the reason of the name. ibid. Incense.
See Frankincense. India full of strange and miraculous things. 155. d India, by
whom discovered. 152. b. the force of that nation. ibid. the long continuance
of their kingdom. ibid. sixty rivers therein. 125. c Indian trees unnamed.
361. b a hundred and twenty nations of India lacking twain. 125. c the nation
of Indians described beyond Nilus. 126. k India brings forth all things
bigger than other. 155. d the reason thereof. ibid. Indians subject to no
diseases. 155. e. engender with beasts. 157. a. Indian sea fishes bigger than
others. 235. b. c Indus the river. 106. l. receiving into it sixty other
rivers. ibid. more of this river. 127. c Infants borne before the seueth
month, never live. 158. k known oftentimes to want the passages of nosthrils
and ears. 336. l Infants toothlesse, not to be burned in a funeral fire. 164.
l Infants how they lie in the mothers womb. 304. i. they sleep much and
dream, how they be formed there. ^ow they come forward afterward. 164. h
Inoculation. See Graffing in Scutcheon. Inning of corn after sundry sorts.
602. l Insects how winged. 326. i. how they be offensive. ibid. Insects do
breath and sleep. 311. c. none have teeth. 327. a having legs, go not
directly. ibid. how engendered. 329. d what they be and why so called. 310. i.
they have no bones. 345 a. they have no tail save only scorpions. 327. a
Inuentors of sundry things. 187. c. and deinceps.
I O
Ionian characters first used generally. 190. k Jordan river, the praise
thereof. 100. m. etc. Iouis Barba, a plant good for arbors in gardens. 468. k
I R
Ireland the description thereof. 86. k Irio, what kind of grain. 565. b
I S
Isidorus, a writer. 48. i Isidos-Plocamos. 402. i Isis, the Planet Venus. 6. i
Isocinnamum. 374. g Islands that newly appear out of the sea, and the reason
thereof. 39. f when Islands have sprung up. 40. g what Islands have joined to
the maine. 40. k Islands in the Gauls Ocean. 86. i Islands in the Ocean. 88. k
I T
in Italy lightenings be common, and why. 25. d
I V
Iuba, a king memorable for learning. 92. i Iugerum. See Acre. Judicial court
of Capitol matters, who first invented. 189. a Iu iubes, what fruit. 437. f
Iuncus Odoratus. See Squinanth. Iunipers. 489. a Juno the Planet Uenus. 6. i
Juno Lacinia. 48 g Jupiter Planet his color. 13. c. to him lightenings are
attributed. 14. g Jupiter Lycaeus, and his chapel. 75. b Jupiter Olympius,
and his chapel. 74. i. famous for the games there used. ibid. Jupiter
Cassiope^s his temple. 79. d Julius Caesar Dictatour his singular parts. 168. k
Jury renowned for Date trees. 384, m. the description thereof. 100. l. how
divided into ten gouernements. ibid. Iuie unwilling to grow in Asia. 480. h.
employed in solemnities to Bacchus. ibid. i. an enemy to other plants. 480. i
male and female. ibid. k. both male and female of three sorts. 480. k Iuie,
Nysia, Bacchica. ibid. l Iuie Erythranos. 480. l Iuie Chrysocarpos. ibid. Iuie
wood of a wonderful property te try wines delaied with water. 481. e. Iuie
garland the first. 456. m
K E
KErnils in fruit different. 447. e of the Kell in man and beast. 343. c
K I
of Kidneys. 343. d. c Kidneys are in all fourefooted beasts that bring their
young quick. ibid. e Kindness natural examples thereof. 174. g Kings
fishers. See Halciones. Kine and Bulls how they engender. 302. m King of
Taprobane how he is chosen. 130. m. he may be deposed, condemned, and put to
death, the manner of his execution. 131. a. b King of bees described. 318. m.
exempt from labor. ibid. Kinning in an egg, what it is. 298. h in Boeufes,
Kine have bigger voices than Bulls. 353. e Kites reckoned among Hawks. 275. e.
their nature. ibid. they taught the use of the Helm in the ship. 275. f are
troubled with the gout. ibid. Kissing of women by kinsfolk upon what occasion.
418. k
K N
Knees being wounded in their hollowes, bring present death. 350. i of Knees a
discourse. ibid. Knurs in timber. 489. b
L A
LAburnum, what manner of tree. 468. k Labeones who they were. 336. l Laboriae
in Campane, a most fruitful tract. 567. f Labruscae, bastard wild Uines. 538.
g Lacta, the best Casia or Canell. 373. e Lactes placed next to the bag of the
stomach. 342. l Lacydes accompanied with a Goose. 280. k Ladanum the best.
370. k. the price thereof. ibid. Ladanum how it is gathered. 370. g Ladanum of
two kinds. ibid. i Laestrigones, monsters of men. 154. g Laertes, a king
mucked ground with his own hands. 507. b Lagopus, a bird why so called. 296. h
Lalisiones, what they be. 224. i Lama what tree. 369. e Lambs named Cordi.
226. l Lambs how to be chosen. ibid. Lampades, flaming torches in the sky.
17. b Lampadias, a kind of Comet. 15. f Lampido, the only woman known to
have been daughter to a king, a kings wife, and mother to a king. 176. l
Lampries in France how they are marked. 248. i Lamprey, a fish. 245. b
Lampreics of fresh water. 246. g sea Lampreies their nature. 248. h Lampyrides
what they are. 593. c Lanata, what apples. 438. g. why so called. ibid. Lanati,
a sort of Pikes. 245. e Land in the country made distinction of states at Rome.
550. m. Land worth forty denarij, the short cubit. 581. d Land Mediterranean
fittest for fruits. 501. c Land how much assigned by king Romulus to his
subiests. 549. d. Land of whom to be bought. 553. c little Land well tilled.
554. m Lands may be overmuch tended. 555. b Lanisis of Lacedaemon his
swiftness. 167. a Lantern, a sea fish. 249. d Laodicea a city, the
description thereof. 107. a Larch tree. 462. l. the timber and the liquid rosin
thereof. ibid. how it is drawn. 465. b Larch tree female. 487. b Larch tree of
great length. 489. d Lares, a temple to them: near to which an altar erected
to Orbona. See Orbona. Large space between the stomach and the paunch, is
cause of more hunger. 342. l Laws who first invented. 187. c Lawrea, the leaf
of Laurel. 454. g Laurel tree not smitten with lightening. 27. c Laurel
groves, why called Triumphales. 454. g Laurel a medicine for the Ravens. 211.
d the mad Laurel. 495. d Laurel tree how it was employed at Rome. 452. i
Laurel, Delphicke, Cyprian, Mustacea. ibid. Delphicke Laurel described. 452.
k Cyprian Laurel described. ibid. Laurel Tinus or wild Laurel. 452. k
Laurel Augusta or Imperial. ibid. Laurel Baccalia. 452. l Laurel
Triumphall. ibid. Laurel Taxa. 452. l Laurel Spadonia. ibid. Laurel
Alexandrina. 452. m Laurel Idaea. ibid. Laurel, token of peace. 453. b
Laurel much honored at Rome, and why. ibid. c Laurel fairest upon Parnassus.
453. c Laurel not smitten with the lightening. ibid. a Laurel Chaplet used by
Tiberius Caesar against lightening. 453. d Laurel why used in triumph. ibid.
Laurcola. 453. a. described. ibid. Laurices, young Rabbets or Leuerets. 232. h
Laurus, the only tree in Latin that gives name unto a man. 454. g who
laughed the day that he was borne. 164. m Lax, a fish. 243. a
L E
Lead, who first found out. 188. l League who first devised. 189. i Leap
year. 6. h Learned wits honored. 171. f Leaves of Aspen tree never hang
still. 514. l Leaves that alter their shape and form upon the trees. 470. h
Leaves of some trees turn about with the Sun in the Tropicke of Cancer. 407.
i Leaves of the trees how they be framed above and beneath. 470. k. Leaves of
trees distinguished by their bigness, form, and substance. 470. l. m Leaves
distinguished by other qualities, and their order. 471. a. Leaves of trees,
good fodder. 471. b what Leaves are apt to shed, and which are not. 469. d a
Philosophical discourse touching the cause of shedding or holding Leaves. 469.
e. f Leaves of what trees hold their color. 470. g Lectos, a promontory in
Trou^. 471. f Ledon. 370. i Lemnos Island. 378. g. their manner. ibid. Length
of the legs and neck, answerable for the proportion in all creatures. 339. e
Lentill where and when to be sown. 569. e Lentills of two kinds. ibid. Lents
and Lenes in Latin whence derived. 569. e Lentiske berries preserved. 448. k
Lentuli, why so called. 550. h Leococruta, what kind of beast. 206. h. and what
of nature. ibid. how engendered. 212 Lconides rebuked Alexander the Great for
burning too much Frankincense. 367. f Leontophonus, what beast. 217. e. and why
so called. ibid. Leopards how they lie in wait. 308. g Leptorhages, what
grapes. 495. m Lepo or Mole, a kind of fish. 249. c Letters or characters who
invented. 187. f Leuaines. 566. h. i. the nature thereof. ibid. l Leuci, kind
of Herons with one eye. 334. g Lecocomum, a kind of Pomegranats. 398. h
Leucogaeon, a place. 568. h. it yields chalk to make white frumentie, and a
great reuen^e yearly. ibid. Leucosia Island sometimes joined to the promontory
of Syreus. 540. i
L I
Libanus mount, the description thereof. 102. i Liciniani, why so called, 163.
a Licinius Stolo condemned by virtue of his own law. 551. d of man's Life, the
term uncertain. 180. l Life short, a benefit. 183. b Licorne. See Monoceros.
Lignum, a fault in Cytron wood. 396. h Lightenings attributed to Jupiter. 14.
g. the reason thereof. ibid. presages of future things. ibid. Lightenings
seldom in Summer or Winter, and the reason. 25. c. in what lands they fall
not. ibid. the sundry sorts and wonders thereof. 25. e. diverse observations
touching them 26. g. raised by coniuration. ibid. k. general rules of
lightening. ibid. m. it is seen before the thunderclap is heard, and why.
ibid. what things are not stricken with lightenings. 27. e Lights, the seat of
the breath. 341. a. spongeous and full of pipes. ibid. Limosae, what fishes.
243. c Lime at the root of Cberrte-troes hastens their fruit. 546. k Limning.
See Painting. Linden trees differ in sex. 466. i. their fruit no beast will
touch. ibid. the Linden tree yields fine panicles for cordage. 466. i the
timber will not be worme-eaten. ibid. k Linen fine cloth whence. 80. l Linnet
very docible. 293. a Likeness of children to parents, grandsire, or others. 160.
m 161. a. b. the reason in Nature. 161. c Likeness of one man to another
diverse examples. 161. d and deinceps. Lions of the right kind how they be
known. 200. i. k Lions bones will strike fire. 344. m Lions how they will
walk. 350. k Lioness lecherous. 200. k Lionesses engender with Pardes. ibid.
Lion jealous of the Lioness. 200. k Lioness, how often she bears young. 200.
l. and the manner thereof. 201. b of Lions two kinds. ibid. their nature and
properties. ibid. Lions long lived. 201. c Lions crucified. ibid. and why.
ibid. Lions gentle to those that submit themselves. 201. d Lions spare women
and babes. ibid. Lions entreated with fair language, 201. e. their disposition
known by their tails. ibid. f. their generos^tie and magnanimity. 202. g.
whereat they be affrighted. 202. i their diseases and remedies. ibid. Lions
first showed at Rome in the cirque. 202. k. how they be taken. ibid. l Lions
yoked and put to draw at Rome. 202 m a Lions thankfulness. 203. d Lions die
with tasting Leontophonus. ibid. or drenched with the urine. 217. f of Lips.
336. l Liquor falling from heaven. 316. m. how good. ibid. Lisards their
nature. 218. k Lisimachus strangled a Lion. 202. m Liver lies on the right
side. 341. b Livers found in sacrifice without the head or fibers. ibid. seen
with twain. ibid. what they foreshewed. ibid. Livers insacrifice found inward,
to the number of six. 341 b Liver found cut, presageth ill hap. ibid. c Liver
receives blood from the heart. ibid. d Liver of Mice and Rats grows at mid
Winter. 342. g has so many fibers as the Moon is days old. ibid. Livers
continued in salt a hundred years. 342 h who Lived a long time. 180. l Liuia
Augusta made trial by an egg whether she went with a boy or a girl. 299. d
Liuia Drusilla August a presented with a b^y branch in a Hens bill falling into
her lap. 453. c Lizards tender skinned and foure-footed. 336. h Lizards how
they engender. 302. m. they deliver their eggs at their mouth. 305. (...)
L O
Lobae, the stalks of Millet. 558. i. Lobstars want blood. 252. i. they cast
their coats in Spring ibid. dies for woe. 270. g Lobstars their nature. 252. i
Locry, a free state: with the description of their country. 73. c. Locupletes
(i. Rich men) why so called. 550. i Locusts how they utter their voice. 353. a
Locusts and Grasshoppers have no eyes. 334. g Locusts lay eggs in Autumn. 327.
b. their young creep on their wings. ibid. c. the mother of them dies at the
bringing forth of her young. ibid. c. they can kill serpents. ib. d Locusts in
Indaea three foot long. ibid. they are carried away with wind. 327. d. they fly
many days without rest. ib. foresee a famine. ib. e. darken the sun with
their flight ibid. burn corn with their blast. ibid. Lollia Paulina how she
was adorned with pearls. 256. k the price of them. ibid. Lomentum. 568. m
Lora, what it is. 417. e Loretum, a place. 454. g Lote tree Capillata, and why
so called. 495. a Lote trees of long continuance. 494. m. 495. a Lotophagi,
people. 397. b Lots taken for a god. 4. k Lotus tree in Afric. 397. a. the
description thereof. ibid. the fruit. ibid. b. it serves for meat and drink.
397. c Lotus the herb. ibid. Lotus tree wood. ibid. Lotus of Egypt. 397. c.
d. the strange nature of the head and flower. ibid. e. the root feeds hogs.
ibid. f Lotus tree why it is regarded much at Rome. 476. k. the description
thereof and the uses. ibid. of the Lousie disease, Pherecides died. 184. g
L V
Luceia acted on the stage a hundred years. 181. c Lucentum a town of the
Latins. 53. d Lucerna, a shining fish. 249. d Lucifer, why so called. 6. i
Lucina, the name of Diana, and whereupon. 494. m Lucini, men so called. 335. e.
why so called. ibid. Lucius Martius. 48. h Lucius Cossitius turned from a woman
to a man on the very marriage day. 158. h Lucius Sylla unworthily named Foelix.
177. d Lucius Metellus only suffered to ride in his coach unto the Senate. 138.
h. thought most happy. ibid. g Lucius Apronius his son how fat he was. 334.
l Lucius Opimius and Quintius Fabius, when they were Consuls an arch seen about
the Sun. 17. e Lucius Portius and Marcus Acilius when they were Consuls, a
round circle about the Sun. ibid. Lucullus resisted by the muddie slime
Maltha at Samosatis. 46. m Lungs are but in few fishes. 335. e Lungs that are
little cause the body to be swift. 341. a Lupi, a sort of spiders. 323. d. they
spin not. ibid. Lupine a direction to the husbandman. 594. g Lupine meat
medicinable. 272. g Lupines not easily mowed down. 571. c simpathie betwixt
Lupines and the Sun. ibid. d. wonderfully affectionat to the earth. ibid.
Lupines sow themselves. ibid. e Lupines sowing is as good as soil or compost.
571. f. 572. g Lupines steeped men's meat. ibid. Lupines how to be kept. ibid.
Lupines profitable to be set in ground. 508. g Lucae-bones what they be. 195. b
Lusitania whence it has the name. 51. f Lusitania, the description thereof.
88. i Lutarius, a kind of Barble. 246. h Lutense, a kind of Pelagiae purples.
259. a
L Y
Lyncurium what it is. 217. f Lycus river. 268. b Lyrare what it is. 579. f
Laestrigones, monsters of men. 154. g. Lycion, what composition it is. 362. h
M A
MAcrobij, and other people living long. 156. l. m Macedonia the description
thereof. 77. a Macer. 362. the medicinable virtue of the rind. ibid. Machlis,
what manner of beast. 200. g Macius Island sometime joined to Euboea. 4. i
Macrinus Vistus how he used to bleed. 346. g Maeander river where it now
runs by goodly meadows, in times past was all sea. 39. e. the description
thereof. 108. h. Maenander how he loved his study. 172. m Magnesiae, the
description thereof. 36. m Magnesia Island. 40. k Magna, what it is. 383. c
Maid child in Rome became a boy. 158. h Males in all beasts stronger than
females. 352. k. some are excepted. ibid. Males have more teeth than females.
338. g Maladies and death consumes blood. 346. i Maldacon. See Brochos.
Malacha. See Brochos. Maleus a mountain. 36. g Maladies of trees what it is.
541. c Malis bonis what it means. 555. d Malobathron, a plant. 378. l. the
description thereof. ibid. and the kinds. ibid. m Malobathrum the leaf. 379.
a Malt made stronger drink in old time. 428. h. i Maltha, a slimie mud so
called. 46. m Maltha, a kind of mud in a pond of the city Samosatis. ibid.
the strange nature of it. ibid. Man how long he grows. 345. b Man's breast
only broad and square. 343. e Man only bleedeth at the nose. 346. g Man only
two footed. 349. b Man only has a cannell bone, and shoulders. ibid. Man
only has palms on his hands. 350. l Man in Egypt has four eyes. 354. h
Man for his proportion has most brain. 352. b. has more brains than woman.
ibid. Man his brains only pants and breaths. 333. a. they are not settled
before he speaks. ibid. Man only wants power to shake his ears. 333. b
Man only has face and visage. 333. d. his forehead declares his nature.
ibid. Man only borne without teeth. 337. e Man, than whom nothing more proud
and wretched. 4. m Man, the best gift he has bestowed upon him, that he can
rid himself by death out of his miseries. 5. a Man's flesh sacrificed and
eaten. 154. g Man to man a god. 4. g Man compared with other creatures. 152. i
Man has no certain time to abide in the womb. 258. k Mankind more inordinate
than other creatures in the act of generation. 302. m the Mani-foot fish
Ozoena. 250. m Manilius wrote of the Phoenix in Arabia, dedicated unto the
Sun. 272. b. the age of this bird and manner of dying. ibid. hence the young
Phoenix is bred. 271. c Mandri people women bring forth children at seven
years of age. 157. a Manlius Capitolinus, first that was rewarded with a
murall crown. 170. k. his deeds and rewards. ib. his praise. ib. Manna, what it
is. 376. h Manna Thuris. 367. e Mantichora, what kind of beast. 206 k.
resembles man's language. 222. l Maples of many kinds. 466. k. the wood
commended for fine grain, and serves in curious workmanship. 466. l
Maquerels. 243. e Cn. Martius first devised to cut out arbors at Rome. 359 b
Marcellus Esurinus brought plain trees into Italy. 358. m Mareolis Lybia
bordering upon Egypt described. 95. d Mares of the nature of Hermophrodites.
352. i. seen they were at Rome. ibid. a Mare in fool wan the prize in the
Olympian race. 304. g Mares better than stallions in war service in Scythia.
222 l Mares conceive by the wind. ibid. Mares how they be brought to admit
Asses to cover them. 303. e. Mares with fool labor as well as before. 303. f.
they steal their foling many times. 304. g Margarides, Dates. 387. b Margo, a
kind of Limestone. 505. d Mario a fish of pleasant taste. 243. b Marioram oil
the best. 382. g C. Marius commended by Sylla Foelix for building a manor
house in the country. 554. i Marmosets where bred. 106. g Marmotanes their
nature. 226. m Maiorinae, what Olives. 432. g of Marrow. 344. l. m Marrow never
found but in hollow bones. 344. l Marrow of the Uine tree and nature thereof.
526. i Marrow of the back descends from the brain. ibid. Marrow of a man's
back proves a snake. 305. b Marsians endued with a virtue against serpents.
154. l Mars his nature and motion. 6. g Mars his course least of all others can
be observed. 12. m his color. 13. c Mars his motion and light. 10. h Marsys
hung himself in a Plane tree. 495. d Marsyans descended from lady Circes
son. 154. l Martia, the name of a lady, which was stricken with lightening,
being great with child, her child killed, and she without harm. 25. f
Martines, enemies to Bees. 292. i Martines called Apodes. ibid. Martines or
Martinets. See Swallows. Martius Musician strove with Apollo. 107. b Martius
in an Oration of his, his head was on a flaming fire. 48. h Massaris, what it
is. 379. d Mast trees honored especially by the Romans. 456. g Mast, a great
revenues in some countries. ibid. ground for bread. ibid. served up to the
table for delicates. ibid. Mast of different kinds. 456. h beech Mast sweetest
of all others. 458. i beech Mast described. ibid. k Mast of sundry trees. ibid.
l Mast differ sundry ways. 459. a Mast which is best for feeding cattle.
459. e. f Mast of a ship of maine bigness. 489. e Mast tree how it grows.
525. f Masticke tree shows three reasons of plowing ground. 599. b. Masticke
the rosin of the Lentiske tree. 424. g Masticke gum. 369. c. the best. ibid. f.
issues of the Lentiske-tree. 370. g of the Matrice. 344. g. h Mattimacians
their presumptuousnesse. 15. b Matutine rising or setting of fixed stars.
587. d Mauises change thelr color. 285. f Mauritania, the description thereof.
90. i
M E
Measure of the sea. 149 d Measure of the parts of the world. ibid. e Meadow
grounds how to be chosen and ordered. 595. b. when to be mowed. ibid. Medaea
burnt her husbands concubine by force of Naptha. 47. a. Meadows called Prata or
Parata. 553. f Media the desc^ption thereof. 122. i Medica described 573. b.
how and where to be sowed. ib. c. d a singular forage. ibid. Medicines not
applied in due season, be mischiefs. 546. g Melampus taught to understand
birds language. 296. l Melitaei, dogs, whence so called. 71. f Meleandrya. 243.
d Mellaria, a town. 51. d Members of men's bodies of miraculous effects. 168. h
Memory lost by sundry occasions, 155. Memory rare examples. 167. f. reduced
into art. 168. g Members genitall of a bonie substance. 352. h. in what
creatures. ib. are medicinable for the disease of the ston. ib Memmonides,
birds. 284. k Memphis, sometime near the sea. 36. e Men slain for sacrifice.
154 g Men conuersing generally with beasts. 154. h. their deformity and
swiftness. ibid. Men headed like dogs, their manners. 155. (...) Men above
five cubits tall, their strong constitution of body. ibid. Men without noses
and mouths in Egypt. 146. l Men that know not the use of fire in Egypt.
ibid. Men that go ever naked. 177. b Men eight cubits high, called Olabij.
147. b Men headed like dogs, called Cynamolgi. ibid. e Men in Aethiopia which
live only on wild locusts. 147. f Men and women greatest footed for their
proportion. 150. l Men surnamed of trees. 499. c Men made to husband the earth.
516. g Men weigh heavier than women. 165. (...) Men have been slain and yet
not bled. ibid. Men canonized, wherefore. 54. g. their strange shapes. 155 f
Menoba, a river. 52. i Mentor plucked a spill out of a lions foot. 203. b
Mercury, so named to express his nature. 4. g Mercury his nature and motion.
6. k. of some called Apollo. ibid. Mercury his stations. 10. i. wherefore his
star differs not from the Sun above three and twenty degrees. 12. h
Mercury his color. 13. c Meremaides. 236. h. no fabulous things. ibid.
Meremen, or Seamen. ibid. i Meroe, an Island. 36. g Merops a bird. 289. b Mese
wind. 23. a Mesopheron. 364. k Messalina, the Empress of insatiable lusts.
302. i Lu. Messalinus Cotta devised a dish of meat made of Geese feet and
Cocks combs. 280. l L. Metellus his rare praises. 177. f Metellus Macedonicus
highly commended. 178. i. his unhappy fortune. ibid. k. l Meteagrides, what
birds. 284. k Motopia, what trees. 375. d
M I
Mice and Rats indocible. 295. b Mice presage the fall of an house. 211. e Mice
forced a people to void out of an Island. 212. h Mice great thieves. 233. a
Mice presage shining things to one. 232. m. they gnaw iron and steel. ibid.
Mice engender more in a drought. 305. a Mice of Aegipt prickely and go on
their hinder feet. 305. a Mice most fruitful. 304. l. they engender by
licking. ibid. young Mice found with young in the belly of the old dam. 304. l
Mice forced the inhabitants of Troas to abandon the region. ibid. m Mice and
rats ominous in some cases. 233. f field-Mice sleep all Winter. ibid. c
against Mice, Rats, and Dormice to be served up to the table, an Act made.
ibid. of the Midriffe. 342. h Miel-dewes remedied in corn. 576. g Miletus, the
head city of Ionia. 108. g. the diverse names thereof in former times. ibid.
it brought forth that noble Citizen Cadmus. ibid. Millet how it grows in the
head and bears fruit. 558. h it makes diverse kinds of bread. ibid. Milk
rained. See Rain. Indish Millet of greatest increase. ibid. i Milk of a woman
before she have gone seven months, is not good. 548. g Millet where it is
much used. 555. f. 556. g Milk used in sacrifice. 418. h of Milk a discourse.
348. h Milk of a woman how it is most pleasant. ibid. Millet how to be ordered
for preventing maladies incident thereto. 575. d Milk that comes first from
a Cow, is called Beestings, it will be as hard as a pumish stone. ibid. Milk
of she Asses when it is not good. ibid. Milk of Cammels most thin. 348. i
Milke-way what circle. 599. c Milk of Asses most thick. ib. it whiteth woman's
skin. ibid. Milk of all sorts will thicken by the fire. ibid. Minutius
Augurius honored with a statue. 551. c Misselto a wonder in Nature. 496. h
Misselto upon the Oak. 460. m Misselto of three kinds. 496. g Misselto of what
tree it grows. ibid. k Misselto how it grows and whereupon it comes.
ibid. m Misselto for what it is thought good. 497. d Mines of brass who first
dug. 188. i Mists when they are seen. 29. b a kind of Mist like unto a
pillar, and so called. 23. a Milo his strength. 166. m Military orders and
discipline who first devised. 189. c
M O
Modenna, a territory. 39. d Mola, a Moone-calfe. 163. c a Monster embaulmed
and preserved in honey. 158. g Molluscum, what it is. 467. a Monstrous births.
157. f Monarchy, who first erected. 189. a Mona an Island. 36. k Monkie. 206.
h Monoceros, what kind of beasts. 212. h Monosceli, what kind of men. 156. g
Moon her nature, motion, and effect. 6. l. the diverse motions hereof observed
first by Endimion, who therefore is said to be in love with her. 7. a. eclipse
thereof in the night only, and why. 7. d. See further in Eclipse. Moon less
than the other Planets, and the reason thereof. 9. f. what difference there is
between the earth and the Moon. 14. i Moon how many furlongs from the cloudy
region t^ her. 14 m Moon in the midst between the earth and the Sun. 15. b
Moon: calfe, what it is. 163. e Moon to be observed in cutting hair of head and
beard. 488 i Moon to be observed in falling timber. 487. e Moons three
appeared. 18. g. by her power grow the bodies of sisters Muskles. 20. i.
foresheweth wind and weather. 611. e Moon with all power it has over things
on earth, and in the sea. 44. c. creatures that have no blood, do most of all
feel her power. ibid. a Planet feminine, and of her nature. 44. k. nourished
by the fresh water. ibid. how to be known croisant, in the wane, full, and
change. 607. d to be observed in some points of husbandry. 607. b Moone-calues
how engendered. 304. a Moramarusa, what. 85. c Morphnos, a kind of Aegle. 271.
e Mosses sweet. 375. e Mouldwarpes undermine a town. 212. h Mouldwarpes pass
us in the sense of hearing. 306. g Mould black and red not always best. 502.
k
M V
Mucke when best to be spread. 508. i Muckhils how made and where. ib. how kept
from snakes. ib. Muing of fowls who first devised. 297. c Mulberry tree
lasts long aad why. 474. g Mulberries described. 447. c. it is of three
colors. ibid. Mulberies of the bramble. 447. d Mulberrie trees the wisest of
all others. 472. l. how to be cut for the liquor thereof. 486. h. they give
sign that cold weather is gone. 494. h Mules how engendered. 223. f. which be
so called properly. 224. h. bearing foles, prodigious. ibid. in Cappadocia they
engender and bear. ibid. Mullets their nature. 245. (...) a Mule eighteen
years old. 224. i Mulvian^ Quinces. 436. h Mures Marini, what they be. 247. b
Murex, what fish, 249. a Munkies and Marmosetes adore the new Moon. 231. e
Muscadell grapes and wines. See Apianae. Music who first invented. 189. d
Musical instruments. ibid. Mushromes. 460. l Mustea, what Quinces. 436. h
M Y
Myagirus, the god of the Elaeans. 285. a Myrobalanus. See Ben. Myrobalanos
Petraea. 374. k Myrtles of sundry kinds. 451. d Myrtle Hexastica. ibid. why so
called. ibid. Myrtle tree lasts long. 494. l Myrtles of three principal
kinds. 451. c Myrtle berries used in stead of Pepper. 450. l Myrtle growing in
the place where Rome stands. ibid. m Myrtle Plebeia and patritia at Rome.
451. b Myrtle Coniugula. ibid. c Myrice. 398. m Myrrhina, what wine. 419. a
Myrrh Atramiticke. 369. b Myrrh Ausaritis. ibid. Myrrh Dusaritis. ibid.
Myrrh trees where they grow. 368. k. their description. ib. l Myrrh of sundry
sorts. 369. b Myrtle berries of diverse kinds. ibid. d. how counterfeit. ib.
Myrtle leaves in powder very good. 451. e Myrtle wine, how made. 451. d Myrtle
oil, the use thereof. ibid. e Myrtle coronets used in triumph. 452. g Myrtle
rods and rings to what use. ibid.
N A
NAcre, a kind of fish. 261. c Naevius Pollio, a giant. 165. h Names of Uine
sprigs or sets. 526. k. 527. a of Nails a discourse. 349. f Naphtha, the
strange nature thereof, and affinity it has with fire. 47. a Naphtha, what it
is. ibid. Nard leaf of three sorts. 364. k Nard the best. ibid. l Nard
Celticke. ibid. m Nard Rusticke. ibid. Narcissimum ointment. 381. d Nardinum
oil. 382. k Nardus sophisticated, and true, how distinguished. 364. k root,
spike, and leaf. ibid. Actius Nauius the Augur. 443. d Nathecusa Island. 40. k
Nature only accounted of divine power. 5. b Nature of wild trees mitigated by
translating them. 510. l. Natures secrets not to be attained unto. ibid. i
Nature or ground diverse. 506. l Navel, the place where veins do meet. 345. e
Nabis, a kind of beast. 205. d Navew. See Rape. Navigation, who devised. 190.
g. Nauigations upon the sea. 32. k. by whom the parts thereof were sailed and
discovered. ibid. Nauplius a fish, how it swimmeth. 252. h Nautilos or
Pompiles, a fish, and wonder of Nature. 150. l Nails grow in dead men. 550. g
Nails are the extremities of the fingers. 345. (...) Nails in creatures
except the Elephant. ibid.
N E
Nea Island. 40. g Neck how it is composed. 339. a Necks of all beasts may
turn about. ibid. Needle fishes Belonae. 266. h Needle work whose invention.
228. i Nemesis her place behind the right ear.. 250. k Neptune his chapel,
famous for the games there used every five years. 74. m Nereides. See
Meremaids. Nerion. See Oleander. Nero how he took out the blew and black
marks in his face, after beating. 400. h Nero borne with his feet forward.
160. h Nero, how much Incense he wasted at the funeral of Poppea. 371. e
Neasts wonderfully made by birds. 288. l sea-Nettle, a fish. 262. i
N I
Nicaeus, borne of his mother afaire woman, resembled his Grandfather a black
Ethiopian. 161. b Nicias over fearful of the Moon Eclipse. 9. a Nicolas
Dates. 287. (...) Nightingales contend who shall sing best and longest. 586. i
Nightingale a wonderful bird for singing. 286. g. presaged singular skill in
Music to Stesichorus. ibid. i Nightingales dearer than men. 286. k. a white
Nightingale. ibid. Nightingales singing counterfeited by men. 286. l. not
tongued like other birds. ibid. m Nightingale parle Greek and Latin. 293.
(...) Niger river and nature thereof. 96. h Nigraee, people whose king has but
one eye, and that is placed in his forehead. 147. (...) Nilus the ploughman of
Egypt. 577. b. his manner of rising. ibid. c Nilus river described. 97. b.
hidden for twenty days journey. ibid. surnamed Astapus, and why. 97. d. the
diverse names thereof. ib. when he rises and when he falls. 98. h the
ordinary height of his rising is sixteen cubits. ib. the greatest eighteen
cubits, in the time of Claudius. ibid. i the least that ever was, against the
death of Pompey and the reason. ibid. Nilus water helps generation and
conception. 157. d
N O
of the Nose and nosthrils. 336. k. man only has his nose bearing forth. ibid
O B
OBeliske in the Uaticane. 489. c Oblivion. See Memory
O C
Ocellae, who they be properly. 335. e Occhi trees. 362. m Occultation of fixed
stars. 587. d Ocymum, a kind of prouender. 573. b
O D
Odoraria, Myrrh. 369. d
O E
Oenanthe, a bird. 287. a Oenanthe, the grape of the wild vine. 379. d Oesypum.
370. b Oestrus, a bad kind of Be. 318. h
O I
Oisters have hearing. 306. g Oister bread. 566. g Oisiers employed in wicker
ware 486. a Ointment or oil of Cinnamon, 382. k Ointments odoriferous, whose
invention. 380. k Ointment of Marioram. ibid. Ointment of Saffron. 381. b
Ointment odoriferous how they be kept and tried. 383. c to what use they serve.
ibid. e. they may be spared. ibid. against ointments an edict. 384. i
O K
Oaks of great age. 495. c Oaks of sundry kinds. 459. a Oak droppings are
hurtful. 51. h Oak Mast. See Acornes. an Oak in Calabria always green. 469.
c Oaks fruitful. 460. l Oak Robur bears Catkins. ibid. Oak ashes. 461. a
mighty Oaks sailing upright in the sea. 455. d Oak Quercus bears berries
like bull heads. 463. i. it bears bals, pills, callosites. ibid.
O L
Olalygones, names of Frogs. 338. l Oleander, what kind of plant. 469. a.
poison to certain beasts. ibid. counterpoison to man. ibid. Oleastrum a kind
of Box tree. 467. c Olenus loved by a Goose. 280. k Old oil of Olives, the use
thereof. 435. a Old form of Spain changed. 53. h an Olive tree made barraine
by the licking of a Goat. 542. h. Olive burnt unto the very stumpe, has
revived again. ibid. Olive garden in the Marrucine territory, crosses the
highway. 544. g. it exchangeth her place with a plot of corn. ibid. Olive
trees require greatest distance. 515. b Olives to be graffed in Autumn. 521.
e. not to be set in a holme, whereout an Oak has been stocked. 522. h. Olive
plot how long it has prospered. ibid. when they are to be cherished. ibid. in
their blouming they are most hurt by violence rain. 540. m Olive chaplets. 432.
l Olive branches. ibid. Olives how to be planted and ordered, according to
Cato. 432. m. Olive Hort-yards where to be made. 433. a Olives how to be
gathered, prepared, and dressed. 433. b Olives how to be kept after Catoes
precepts. ibid. Olives, what fire they require in pressing. ibid. c Olive trees
hurt by the licking of Goats. 435. d Olive in the Forum of Rome. 444. g Olive
trees neither in Italy, Spain, or Affricke, during the reign of the kings of
Rome. 429. c of Olives, the opinion of Hesiodus, where they love to grow. ibid.
d of Olives three kinds according to Virgill. 429. c Olive trees require
pruning and other dressing. ibid. Olives when to be gathered. ibid. Olives
which are best. 430. l Olive dregs or lees. ibid. Olives black, what they
signify. 431. a Olives when they need watering. ibid. Olives to be gathered by
hand, or shaken gently, and not to be beaten down. ibid. b. c Olives of
diverse kinds to be gathered at sundry times. ib. d Olives royal. ibid. Olives
when to be pressed after gathering. ibid. (...) Olives the greatest, not most
oleous. 432. g Olives of Italy fullest of oil. ibid. Olives outlandish kept to
be eaten. 432. g Olives of Decapolis no bigger than Capers. ibid. Olives
confected or condite. ibid. Olive trees of India. 361. (...) Olives how they
are made pleasant to taste. 432. h Olives purple. ibid. Olives pleasant of
themselves. ibid. Olives proud. ibid. Olive trees of long continuance. 449. h
Olive wild of great antiquity. 495. c Olive trees live ordinarily two dundred
years. 446. c Olyra, what kind of corn. 559. d
O M
Omphacium, what it is. 430. (...)
O N
Onces where they breed. 206. g Onesicratus, Alexander his captain and writer.
36. h Onocrotali, what birds. 295. (...)
O P
Opheostaphyle. 400. i Ophiogenes, people, their strange nature. 154. l. they
cure the sting of serpents. ibid. Opinions diverse concerning the generation of
Bees. 318. g Opinion of the learned concerning nature of marrow. 339 (...)
Opinions concerning the damage of cattle. 507. (...) Lu. Opimius and Q.
Fabius, when they were Consuls, an arch seen about the Sun. 17. c Opimian
wines. 419. d Opobalsemum. 377. a. how it was sold. ibid. b Opopanax. 378. l
Opiet, a tree whereunto a Vine is wedded. 535. b
O R
Oracles or sage sentences of Cato and others concerning Husbandry. 555. b
Orbona, an alter erected to her. 3. (...) Orcades Islands. 86. l Orchitae, what
Olives. 429. e. why they are so called. 433. b Orestes his body. 165. a Orge, a
strange fountain. 58. i Oricum Island. 40. k Order of their digesting which
chew not the cud. 343. a Origan found by the storke to be medicinable. 210. m
Orionor Otus. 165. a Orites, people of India. 157. b. eat fish only, roast it
against the Sun. ibid. Oripelargus. See Percnopterus. Oryx, a beast with one
horn in the midst of his forehead. 331. d Oryx, a wild Goat. 231. d Oryx, a
Goat that drinks not. 307. f. a remedy against thirst. ibid. Oryx a wild
beast in Egypt, stands full against the dog star when it arises. 19. f
Orobanche. 575. a Orpheus his descent. 78. g Orphe, a fish. 245. b Ortygometra,
what bird it is. 283. a
O S
Oscines, what birds they be. 278. l Osprey or Orfrey, what kind of foul.
272. k Ostris or Ostria. 398. m Osser, a town. 52. h Ossigi, a town. ibid. g
Ossifragi, a kind of Aegle. 272. k Ossonoba, a city. 51. d Ostippo, a town.
51. i Ostriches naturally bald. 332. k Ostriches the biggest fowls that be.
270. l. their description. ibid. their swiftness on foot. ibid. their eggs
and feathers. ibid. m. their foolishness. ibid. l.
O T
Otis, why so called. 283. c Otes used for bread. 574. h Otides, what kind of
birds. 281. c Otus and like-Owles only have feathers like ears. 33. d
O W
Owls their wit when they fight with other birds. 277. f Owsels depart for a
time. 284. g
O X
Oxen of the Troglodites hang their horns downwards. 331. d. Oxen at two
years age change their teeth. 338. i draught Oxen how to be coupled in yoke,
and how they labor at the plough. 579. a. how much they plough in a day,
according to the ground. ibid. b Ox gall dedicated to Nature. 342 g Oxen how
highly honored in old time. 225. c Oxycedrus. 388. l Oxymyrsinum. 434. h
O Y
Oil, who drew first out of Olives. 189. a Oil of wild Olives. 433. e Oil of
Chamelaea. ibid. Oil of Cicior Ricinus. ibid. how it is made. 434 g. the use
thereof. ibid. Oil of Almonds bitter. 434. g Oil of black Myrtle berries.
ibid. h Oil of garden Myrtle. ibid. Oil of Cypros and Cipresses. 434. i Oil
of Lentiske, Ciprinum, of Chestnuts, Sesame seed, Rice. ibid. Oil Melinum.
382. h Oil of Oenanthe. 434. i Oil of fishes. ibid. Oil of Plane berries.
ibid. Oil of Quinces. 382. g. h Oil de Bais. 382. g Oil of Myrtles. ibid.
Oil of Quinces. See Melinum. Oil of Lillies. 382. h Oil of Fenigreeke. ibid.
Oil of Myrrh. 382. m Oil, an acceptable liquor to be used outwardly. 428. i
Oil, the uses thereof. 432 k Oil Licin anum. 430. i Oil abused by the
Greeks. ibid. Oil de Bays how it is made. 434. g Oil Olive, the price at
Rome. 429. c Oil Olive of green Olives. ibid. f worse for age. 430. g and
why* ibid. it has three degrees in goodness and no more. 432 i Oil of Grain
Gnidian. 434. i Oil Gleucinum. ibid k Oils of Aspalathus. ibid. Oils of
sweet Calamus, Baulme, Iris or Flower de Lis, Cardamomum or grains of
Paradise, Melilot. French Nard, Panax, Maiora^, Elecampane, Cinnamon root. ib.
Oil Rosat. 434. l Oil of Squinanth, of Henbane, of Lupines, of Daffodill.
ibid. Oil of Radish seed. 434. l. the root of Gramen. ibid. Oil Cortinon.
ibid. Oil Cnecinum or Cnidium. 434. l Oil of Lillies. ibid. Selgeticum. ibid.
of Pitch. ibid. Oil liquor w^ll turn into lees. 430 m Oil contrary to venom
of Scorpions. 325. g Oil lees or dregs, wherefore it is good. 435 b Oil
kill^th Insects. 355. e Oil of Saffron. 504. m
O Z
Ozanitis, what it is. 364. i
P A
PActolus, a famous river. 107. e. the names thereof. ibid. Padians, a people
governed by women. 1^8. h Paet^, families in Rome. 335. e. why so called. ibid.
Paezon, an Eunuch how he was sold. 175. f Pagri, fishes. 245. a Pala, a tree of
India. 361. a Palatium, a mount wherein a chapel was dedicated to the
goddess Fever. 3. e Palesimundum, a famous and populous city in Taprobane.
130 g Palilicium, what star. 592. l Palmyra, a noble city, with the
description thereof. 104. i. Paliurus, a thorn plant. 398. g Palma Christi.
See Ricinus. Palm. 379. e Palmestrie frivolous. 354. k Palmiprimum, what wine.
421. a Pamphylia of Coos, inuentresse of weauing silk. 323. a Pa^gouernour of
Lucitania. 51. f Panaces or Panax what manner of plant. 378. k Panathenaicum
ointment. 381. c Pandore, a kindred of Indians that live in valleys until two
hundred years age. 156. m Panicke of many kind^s. 558. h. it yields very
much flower. ibid. Panicke with Beans, much used in Piemont. 566. g Panicke, a
corn, why so called. 558. g Pantheon, a temple of Uenus in Rome. 257. d a
Panther secketh help at man's hand. 204. g. her thankfulness. ibid. i
Panthers skins. ibid. i. their sweet smell and hideous looks. ibid. k.
Panthers marked in their shoulders. ibid. Panthers exhibited in shows at Rome.
ibid. l Panthers how they be poisoned with Aconitum, and cured again. 211. b
Pantherinae, what manner of Tables. 396. g of Paps a discourse. 346. k. 347. d
Paps of a Dolphin placed in the bottom of her belly. 248. g Paps of a Sow
having been newly farrowed, be excellent meat. 344. i Paps how they are
placed in creatures. 347. i Paps of Elephants are under their shoulders. 347. e
Papyr cane in Egypt. 391. e Papyr when it was first made, and where. ibid.
Papyr reed or cane how it grows. 392. g. h the use thereof besides Papyr.
392. h Papyr Hieralica. ibid. k Papyr Augusta. ibid. Papyr Liuia. ibid. l Papyr
Amphitheatrica. ibid. Papyr Fanniana. ibid. Papyr Saitica. ibid. m Papyr
Taniotica. ibid. Papyr Emporetica, or shop-papyr. ibid. Papyr how it was made.
393. a Papyr Macrocola. ibid. c Papyr Claudian. ibid. Parchment devised at
Pergamus, and upon what occasion. 392. g. Pardalium, an ointment. 381. c
Parietarie, a medicine to diverse birds. 211. c Parkes when first devised. 231.
a Parrae, certain birds. 288. l the Parrat what manner of bird. 293. b. named
Sittace. ibid. can prate, and pronounce (...). ibid. hard headed, feeble
footed. ibid. loves wine. ibid. Parrats have the hardest souls. 332. l Parrats
are first seen in the Island Gagandus. 446. h Parts most principal of man,
are skinned by themselves. 342. l. Parts ^all make difference in nations. 352.
h P^ ^all of Herm^phrodites, serve for both sexes. ibid. (...). 40. k (...) to
corrupt breath. 335. b ^o (...). 289. g (...), of (...) have two hearts. 340. i
Partridges will never be fat. 344. k Partridges, how industrious they are in
building their neasts. 289. b Partridges exceeding letcherous. ibid. c
Cock-Partridges tread one another for want of Hens. 289. c Hen-Partridges
conceive with the very air of the Cocks. 289. d. their jealousy. ibid. e. f.
their policy to save their young. ibid. their age. 290. g Pascua the
revenues at Rome. 550. k Passienus Crispus fancied a beech tree. 496. g
Patales, a famous port in India. 36. g Pateton, a kind of Date, why so called.
387. f of Patience sundry examples. 167. e Patroclus, the name of an Elephant.
194. k. his hardy adventure and reward. ibid. Paulinus Suetonius, a Roman
that went first over Atlas. 92. h. Paunches of hoofed beasts hard and rough.
343. a Paunch never compassed with bones. 343. e Pausiae, what Olives. 429.
(...)
P E
Peaches four kinds. 436. b Peaches, why called Persica. 437. c Peaches in
Persia, whether they be venomous or no. ibid. d Peacockes crowned with hairie
feathers. 331. a Peacockes beautiful, witty, and proud. 278. m. his life.
279. a. they be malicious. ibid. made fat and served up to the table first.
ibid. b Peacockes letcherous. 301. a M. Aufidius Lurco fed Peacockes, and made
a gain thereby. 379. b the Pea-hen how she lays. 300. m. and hatcheth. 301.
a Pears more pointed than Apples. 439. f Pears how preserved. 440. g the
properties of Pears and their uses. ibid. Pears how they are kept long. ibid.
k Pears Barbarian, Uenerian or colored, Royal, Patrician, Voconian,
Uolenian. 439. d gourd Pears. ibid. Pears called Libralia. 436. k Pears
proud. 439. a Pears Crustumine. ibid. Pears Falerne, why so called. ibid.
milk Pears. ibid. Syrian Pears, why so called. ibid. b Pears Dicimiana.
ibid. Pears Dolabellian. ibid. Pears Pseudodecimiana. ibid. Pompeian Pears.
ibid. pap Pears. ibid. Tyberian Pears, why so called. 439. c Pears taking
name of countries. ibid. Pears Licerian, Seuerian, Tyrannian, Favonian,
Laterian, Anitian, Amerian, Picentine, Numantine, Alexandrian, Numidian,
Grecian, Tarentine, Signine. ibid. b Pears Testacia, why so called. 439. b.
Onychine. ibid. purple Pears. ibid. Pears Myrapia, Lauret, Nard, Barley,
Bottle, Thickskin, Coriolana. 439. d. Pearls how they be engendered, why they
be called Unions. 254. m. 255. e. Pearls the sovereign commodities of the
world. 254. k the cause of their dimnesse or clearenesse. 254. l Pearls much
in request with the Romans. 256. g Pearls out of Arabia. 371. f Pearls found
in Acarnania will lose their color. 256. i Pearls their price and estimation.
254. k Pease, when to be sown. 569. e. how codded. 570. g Pecunia, whence
derived. 550. h Pegasi, what birds. 296. k Pegasi, winged horses. 206. g.
Peinting who first devised. 190. g Pelagiae, a kind of purples. 259. a
Pelamides, fishes. 243. c Pelasgum. 453. a Pelecinon. See (...). Pelion, a hill
measured and the height thereof. 31. d Peloponnesus, the description thereof.
73. e Peneus a famous river. 76. l Peniroyall flowers in mid-winter. 588. l
Peneroyall floureth fresh in mid-winter. 20. h People of the East feed of
grasshoppers. 325. a People without heads. 156. g People with ^ares that cover
their whole body. 157. a Pepiniers how they are to be made. 510. l Pepper
trees: 361. c. long pepper. ibid. d. white pepper, black pepper. ibid. Pepper
sophisticate. 361. c Peppers their price. ibid. Percnopteros, what kind of
Hawke. 272. g. and her properties. ibid. Percnos. See Morphuos. Perfumes. See
Ointments odoriferous. Periurte even in the very Capitol. 4. i. Perne Island.
40. k Persea, a venomous tree. 437. d Persica, what manner of tree, and the
fruit. 390. i. the wood durable and serves for images. ibid. k Pestilence
beginning in the South goes to the West. 183. d continues but three months.
ibid.
P H
Phalangia, a sort of spiders. 322. h Phalangium engendered in Eruile. 575. b
Phalerides, dainty water-foules. 296. g Pharnaces, a people in Aethiopia. 155.
b. Pharus, an Island cut from Egypt by the sea. 39. e Phauliae, what olives.
432. g Phedius was accounted most happy. 180. h Pherecides, Pythagoras his
master foretelling an earthquake. 37. d Phiala, a place in Nilus. 226. c
Philip of M^cedony (...) against Greece, the sky appears bloody. 17. c
Phil^ppides his swiftness^. 161 m Phil^scus how (...) loved B^es. 313. f
Philomides, the courrier or Post of Alexander, 35. c Ph^monoe male of (...).
322. h Phoenicobala^. 374. i Ph^ (...). 296. g Phoenicurus. S^e (...)
redbreast. Phoenix what manner of bird. 271. e Phoenix the bir^y it took that
name. 387. c Phoenix ad^ed wi^h (...) of feath^s. 331. a Phrygian the ^y w^
^piter ^th. 1^ (...) Phthorium, a wine to cause abortiue fruit, how it is made.
422 g. Phu. 364. l Phycos. 401. d Phygemata, untimely fruits of shell-fishes.
255. a Phyros, what it is. 401. d Physeter, what fish. 235. f Physic, who
devised. 188. i Physicians taxed for dealing with dangerous medicines. 400. g.
Physicians that excelled. 174. l
P I
Piety. See Kindness, Natural. Pia matter, a tunicle of the brain. 332. m
Pictures of great price. 175. c Pics learn to speak. 293. c Pig taken from
the pap, makes it return flat to the belly. 347. f. Pigs know their own
paps. 547. f Pikes of the sea. 245. e Pillars of Crassus did beautify the
theater. 499. b Pilummi, why so called. 550. h Pindarus feared the Suns
eclipse. 9. a Pine tree and Pinaster. 462. h Pine tree chaplets. 434. g Pine
nuts or apples how they grow. 435. e Pine trees ever full of fruit. 473. (...)
Pinna, a cockle in Acarnania. 256. h Pinnotar, what fish. 253. a Pip in hens.
300. h. the cure. ibid. Pipes of Canes, Reeds, Shanke-bones, Silver, Box and
Lotos. 484. i Pipes made of reeds and canes. 844. l Pyrrhus his great toe, and
virtue thereof. 155. c. it was reserved for a holy relic. 155. d Pirrie or
wine of pears. 421. a Pisles of Camels serve for bow-strings. 352. h Pismires
greedy of Cypress seeds. 512. c Pismires show the change and full of the
Moon. 601. c ruled by the power of the Moon. 20. i C. Piso a notable drinker,
advanced therefore by Tiberius Claudius. 427. e Pisones, why so called. 550. h
Piss of Bears hard as horn. 152. h Pissoceros, the second foundation of the
work of Bees. 313. b Pistores, who they were in Rome. 567. b Pitch trees of
six kinds. 462. h Pitch plasters. 424. h Pitch wine. ibid. Brutian or
Calibrian Pitch. 424. l Pitch how it is known good from bad. ibid. Pitch where
it hates to grow. 462. i. the description thereof. 462. k Pitch trees
commended for their rosin. ibid. l timber of Pitch tree for what it serves.
ibid. Pitch tree how it differs from the Larch, 463. b Pitch trees grow
again if they be burnt to the root. ibid. Pitch tree why it is called
Phthiriophoros. 463. e Pitch both liquid and stony, how it is drawn and made.
464. h. i. Palimpissa or stone pitch. ibid. Brutian pitch. ibid. Pitch rosin
out of the pitch tree. 465. a stilled Pitch, what it is. 464. k Pissasphalta,
Pitch. 465. b Pitch, where and when it is gathered best. ibid. Pitch hurtful
to trees. 541. e Pithecusae Islands. 40. h Pithous, a kind of Comet. 15. e
Pitydia, what Pine nuts they be: good for the cough. 435. f Pits for wells who
sunk first. 118. i
P L
Plaice, a fish. 145. b Players upon the stage rich. 175. e. f Plane tree
whereupon Marsyas hung himself. 495. d Plane tree honored for shade only.
358. g Plane trees nourished with wine at the root. ibid. h Plane of admiral
bigness in Lycia. 358. h. i the Plane tree of C. Caligula. ibid. k the Plane
tree of Candie so much renowned. ibid. l dwarf Plane trees. 359. b Plane tree
turned to an olive in Laodicea. 543. d Planets, by whose motions are occasi^ned
the seasons of the year. 19. i Planets keep their power as well under the
earth as above. 42. l Planets and their motions to be considered in
husbandry. 585. f. Planets seven. 3. a Planets their moving: they go a
contrary course to the starry heaven. 5. f Planets fed with earthly moisture.
7. c Planets, touching their motions and lights. 10. c Planets their circles or
angles. ibid. k Planets, why some seem higher, some lower. ibid. m the opinion
of them confuted that think Planets do arise and mount from earth to heaven.
11. d. whence their stations took their name. ibid. f general rules as
touching Planets. 12. h. their several distinct colors. 13. c. their
distances one from another. 14. i Planets of their music and harmony. ibid.
k Plants winding about others and growing upon them. 496. i Plants have an
appetite to incorporat one in another. 523. a Plants in what regard they be
accepted. 450. i. k Plants of pears and apple trees how to be nourished. ibid.
Platanistae, fishes in the river Ganges, 143. b Plato how he was honored of
Denis the tyrant. 171. f Platter of Aesope. 297. d Platycerotes, a sort of
stags, why so called. 331. c Plagues accounted gods. 53. d Plains of Rosea the
very fat of Italy. 504 g Plenty of corn among olive trees in Boetica. 515. c
Plinic confesses himself beholden to former writers. 10. k Plotia a reed.
483. c Plough, who first devised. 189. a L. Plotius found by the smell of a
precious ointment. 384. l Plumgeons, what birds. 296. h Egyptian Plumtree.
391. a Plums of sundry sorts. 436. m ass Plums. 437. a purple Plums. ibid.
wheat Plums or wax Plums. ibid. nut Plums. ibid. apple Plums. 437. b almond
Plums. ibid. damascen Plums. 437. b
P O
Poetry, who invented. 189. f Polenta, how it was made. 561. c Pogoniae a kind
of Comets. 15. (...) Poisons, food to serve creatures. 307. a Poisoning devised
by man only. 548. k Pol^s two, where supposed to be. 84. i Polydorus his
tomb. 78. h Polypes or Pourcuttles. 250. h 251. a Polypi, how they live. 251.
a. one of them robbed the fishers. ibid. b. of a theeuing Polype a wonderful
example. 251. d Pollen. fine flower. 564. h Polybius his search into Afric,
and opinion concerning the description thereof. 91. c Polymita, what kind of
clothes. 228. i Pomecitrons, why called Medica. 437. f Pomegranats, how to be
kept. 440. i. k Pomegranats approppiat to the territory of Carthage. 398. h
diverse kinds. ibid. Pomegranate rindes. 398 i Pomegranate flowers. ibid. Cn.
Pompeius praised. 168. l. 169. a Cn. Pompeius no purchaser of his neighbors
lana. 555. a hated for his cruelty to Elephants. 196. i Pompeius magnus, why
so called. 169. a. compared to Alexander and Hercules. ibid. b Pompey subdued
876 towns of Spain. 169. b how he came to be called Magnus. ib^d. Pompey dis
inscription on the temple of Minerua. ibi^. d his deeds. ib^d. Pompili,
certain fishes. 244. h Pome-poires, or Peare-apples. See apples Melapia.
Ponticke nuts. See Filberds. Pontus, the Islands thereof. 85. b Poplars their
diverse kinds. 470 h Poplar wood good timber but for often lopping. 490. (...)
white Poplar moss. 379. d Poppie-worke cloth. 228. h Poppies both wild and
tame, when to be sown. 589 c. d their medicinable virtues. ibid. Poppaea wife
to Nero, how she bathed her body. 348. i Popular government, who first
erected. 189. a Popularia, a kind of Abricocts. 436. l Porkepines, their
description and nature. 215. e Porphyrio, what manner of bird, and how he
drinks. 295. d. another Porphyrio. 296. k Porpuisses, fishes. 241. a K.
Porsena raised up lightning by coniuration. 26. k Porcius Cato his commendable
parts. 169. f. and deinceps. Posidonius the Mathematician. 14. l Posidonius
honored of Pompeius. 172. h Pottery, whose devise. 188. l a Poulter cunning in
eggs. 299. e Pourcuttle, a fish. 247. e Poison of Scorpions is white. 325. a
Poison of serpents proceeds from the gall. 341. e
P R
Praecordia, the vpmost inwards of man. 342. i they be a defense to the heart.
ibid. Praesages of fortune by the teeth. 164. l Praesage by fishes. 244. l
Praesages by the settling of Bees. 519. d Praesages by weaning of spiders. 324.
i Praesages by slight of Herons. 334. g. hy lightenings, sneesings, stumbling
with the foot. 4. l Praestar, the name of a blast and the nature thereof. 25. a
Praetextae, garments, when devised. 228. h Praeuarication, what it is in
Husbandry. 379 c, a word borrowed by lawyers. ibid. Prason. 401. d Praxitales
his graven image. 175. d Price of Isocrates his oration. 151. f Priests of
Cybele their manner. 352. h Principles about Husbandry. 555. a. b Priests,
fishes two hundred cubits long. 235. c Procella a storm. 25. b Procyon, what
star. 597. b Prochyta Island. 61. c in Prodigies who were first skillful.
189. d Prodromi, what figs. 474. k Prodromi so called, are the Northeast winds,
and why. 23. d. Prognostications of weather and wind. 610. l Prognostications
by the eyebrowes. 354. l Prognostication by the eyes. ibid. Prognostication of
weather and other future things by dumbo beasts. 211. e Prohibitory, what bird.
277. c Promontory Nymphaeum. 48. g Promontory Saturnes cape. 53. d Promontory
Taurus. 268. l Propagation of trees two ways helped. 516. g Propolis the third
foundation of the work of Bees. 313. b (...), what it is. 585. d Protropum,
what it is. 487. d Prusias K. of Bithynians his son was borne having a bone
(...) in stead of a gum in the upper iaw. 164. i Prose, writing and speaking
who invented first. 189. f
P S
Pseudonardus. 364. k Psyllians named of king Psyllus. 154. k Psyllians
venomous by nature. ibid. Psyllians how they make trial of their wives
chastity. ib. their bodies kill serpents. ibid.
P T
Ptaeambati, people which have a dog to their king. 147. c Ptisana, how it is
made. 561. (...). highly commended. ibid. Phthongus, Mercury his tune. 14, l
P V
Publius Catienus Philotimus burned himself for love of his master. 174. k
Publius Rutilius died suddenly. 134. i Puff apples. 438. l Pulmentaria. 563. b
Pulpa in trees, what it is. 486. k Pulse, what it is. 557. c. 558. i. how it is
rooted. 557. e Pulse of all sorts how it grows. 558. l Pulse called in Latin
Legumina, and why. 576. m Pulse of the arteries bewraieth hidden diseases. 345.
d Pulse what kind of leaf they have. 558. m. long in blowing and not at once.
559. a Purple fishes 258. g Purple color from whence it comes. ibid. h
Puteal Libonis. 443. d Puttockes. See Kites. Purple fishes of two sorts,
Purpura, and Buccinum. 258. l their difference. ibid. Purples Pelagiae,
Taeniense, a kind. 259. a
P Y
Pyannets what kind of birds. 285. d they remove their nests. 289. g Pygargi,
a kind of goats. 231. d Pygargos, a kind of Aegle. 271. c Pygmaei Spythamei,
a people in India three handfuls high. 156. i. their war with cranes, ibid. k
Pyraeum, an Athenian haven, by the retiring of the sea left dry land. 39.
(...) Pyromantie whose devise. 189. d Pyrosachne, a plant. 398. k Pyrrhaeum the
forest, burnt and revived. 463. b King Pyrrhus his great toe and other parts
medicinable. 155. d. Pyrrhus bearing twice a year. 474. m Pyrrhus K. of Epirus
intended to join by a bridge Greece unto Italy. 64. g Pyrrocorax, what bird.
296. h Pythagoras first found out the nature of Uenus planet, and when. 6.
(...) Pythagoras found out the distance between the earth and the Moon. 14.
(...) Pythius of Massiles a writer. 43. c Pyxacanthus Chironius. 36.
Q V
QVadrant for an husbandman. 609. c Quails fly by troops. 282. l Quails how
they help themselves by flying. 283. a. (...) they ^eed upon white Ellebore
seed. ibid. they be subject to the falling sickness. ibid. four Quarters
principal in Rome. 551. a Quickenesse of spirit, examples thereof. 168. i
Quick creatures come naturally into the world with their heads forward. 304. i
Querquetulana, a gate in Rome. 462. g Quinces, why called Cydonia. 436. g
Quinces of diverse kinds. ibid. h. how to be kept and preserved. 440. i
Quincius Cincinnatus sent for from the plough to be Dictatour of Rome. 552. g
Quintiana Prata. 552. g Quisquilium. See Cusculeum.
R A
RAdij, what olives. 429. c Radish keeps away drunkenness. 242. l Ragged
apples. 438. l Rain, food of trees. 500. i Rain in midsummer naught for
vines. ibid. k Rain in Winter most in season for plants. 501. b Rain at the
same time helps not all trees. ibid. Rain by night better than by day. 501.
e Rain how it is caused. 20. k Rain strange and prodigious, of milk, blood,
brickes, tyles. etc. 27. f. 28. g Rain not at all in some lands. 42. h Rain
water saved for ordinary use to drink. 146. m Rainbow shows what weather.
612. m Rainebow the nature and reason thereof. 28. l. m Ram-fish his manners.
262. h Rams and their nature. 226. m Rams generally armed with crooked horns.
331. c Rank corn how to beremedied. 576. Rankenesse hurtful to corn. 482. g
Rapes, and their use. 570. i. k. their plentiful commodity, they grow every
where. ibid. k Rapes male and female. 570. l Rapes of three sorts. 570. m wild
Rapes medicinable. 571. a Rapes with what ceremony to be sown. ibid. b Raspis
described. 485. f the flowers of Raspis medicinable. ibid. Ratumena the gate of
Rome, and whence it took that name. 222. g Rats of Pontus their nature. 216. m
a Rat sold for two hundred sesterces. 233. a Ravens taught to speak. 293. f
Ravens their properties. 276. i. how they conceive with young. ibid. k a Raven
saluted the Emperor. 294. g. solemnly interred. ibid. h. his death revenged
by the people of Rome. ibid. Ravens employed by an hawker. 294. k a Raven made
shift to drink at a bucket. ibid. l Ray kills wheat. 575. a
R E
Red Dear. See Stags. Red sea, why so called. 134. g Reeds of strange
bigness. 155. e Reeds where they grow. 524. m. they multiply and increase of
themselves. 515. a Reeds and Canes to be set before the Calends of March. ib.
Reeds cease to grow at mid-winter. ibid. always to be cut in the wane of the
Moon. 525. b Reeds employed to many uses. 482. g Reeds used to calfret ships.
ibid. h Reeds serve Easterlings for arrows. ibid. f Reeds of Italy compared
with those of Candie and Picardie for making of shafts. ibid. k. l Reeds differ
in leaf. 483. c what part of the Reed sit for every pipe. 484. i Reeds for
Faulconers poles. ibid. Reeds for angle-rods. ibid. Reeds for vine pearches.
ibid. Reeds and canes how to be planted. ibid. k Reeds, how to be killed. 557.
a Reremice. See Bats. Refrivae or Refrinae. 569. b Region in Thessalia, how it
grew to be cold. 503. d Attilius Regulus slew a monstrous serpent. 199. d
Religious reverence in the knees of men. 350. h Remedy against stinging of
scorpions. 325. c Remedies of trees common and proper. 546. l Remedies against
sundry maladies in corn. 575. c Rennet of a Rabbet medicinable for the flux of
the belly. 346. k. Report of Hercules and Pyrene or of Laturne is fabulous, 51.
f Residence upon land. 555. a
R H
Rhaphanus, a venomous shrub. 362. l Rhododendron, a beast. 205. e
Rhododendron. See Oleander. Rhemnius Palaemon an excellent good husband. 411. d
Rhinoceros, what beast it is. 205. e, his fight with the Elephant. ibid. horned
in the nose. 133. e Rhododaphnis. See Oleander. Rhodes Island. 40. g
R I
Ricinis. 433. f. why so called. ibid. Rice corn described. 561. b. c. and the
use thereof. ibid. Rye. 572. l Riuer-horse in some sort his own physician.
346. l Rivers of a wonderful and strange nature. 45 a. b a River warm in
Winter, and exceeding cold in Summer. 545. a
R O
Robin Redbreast. 287. a Rock of stone of a strong and wondrous nature. 42. h
Rocks in Syria burn corn. 503. e Royal ointment, what it is. 383. b Roiot
and excess of Roman Senators. 91. f Romans kind and good one to another in
old time. 4. g Romans traffic into India. 133. b Romans excel all nations
in all kind of virtues. 176. h Rome divided into quarters according to woods
adjoining. 461. f Rooke. See Crow. Root of an oak taking an acre in compass.
477. e a Root of a rape weighing four hundred and one pound. 570. l. how
dressed for the table. ibid. how preserved colored artificially. ibid. Roratio
a blasting of vines after their blouming. 540. i Rosat oil in great request.
382. g Rosin trees of six kinds. 462. h
R V
Rubigo in corn, what it is. 598. i Rubigalia, a festival holiday. 600. g Rue
discovered by the Weasill. 210. m Rumbotinus, a tree. 405. b
S A
SAba, and Sabota, the proper place for frankincense. 366 g Sabis a god. 368. g
Sabines called Sevini, and why. ^65. a Sacrifice young beasts when they be in
their season. 230. g Sagunt a child being borne presently returned into his
mothers womb again. 158. g Saltpeter earth good for plants. 503. c Salt
cannot be made without mingling of fresh water. 46. k Salamander his
description and nature. 305. e Salamander not distinguished by sex. 305. d the
Salmon fish. 247. a Sallowes. See Willowes. Samara, what it is. 468. g
Samosatis, a city in Comagene. 46. m Sambri, people where fourfooted beasts
have no ears. 146. k Sandalum, what corn. 559. d Sandalides, Dates. 387. d
Sangualis, what bird. 274. h Sapa, what it is. 416. l Sapa in Aethiopia what it
signifies. 147. b Sap of trees. See Alburnum. Sapium, what it is. 465. d
Sapinus, what it is. ibid. Sapinus in trees, what it is. 488. l Sarcocolla, a
tree and gum. 391. d Sarcling, what it is, and of what use. 580. k Sardis the
capital city of Tydia. 107. e Sardane a shel-fish. 244. i Sargus, what fish.
246. h Sari, a shrub. 400. k Sarpedon his letters written in papyr. 394. l
Saturn what he is, and nature and motion thereof. 5. f Saturn causes rain,
etc. 19. e Saturn color. 13. c Satyrs their shape. 96. i Satyrs haunt
mountains in India. 156. g Satyrs what they are. 156 g Sauces how they be
dangerous. 355. e Sauine how it is helped in growing. 516. i Sauorie or
Cumlabubula found in the land Tortoise. 210. l Sauromates eat but one meal of
meat in three days. 154. i Savors different in fruit. 449 d Sauce, called
Garum Sociorum. 246. k
S C.
Scallops. 253. d Scallop fish like to the sea vrchin. 256 h Scarus, a kind of
fish. 245. f Scaurus Consuil, found out a vain observation of lightening. 27.
c Scenitae, people why so called. 139. f Sceptrum. See Erysisceptrum. Schoenus,
what measure it is. 366. h Sciotericon, a dial, and the finder out thereof.
36. k Scienae, fishes. 244. h Scincus bred in Nilus. 209. b. the virtues
thereof in Physic. ibid. in sundry Sciences excellent men. 174 k Sciopodes, a
people in India. 156. g Scipio Africanus the former cut out of his mothers
womb 160. i. Scipio Africanus the second his trench separating the two
provinces of Afric. 93. e Scipio Nasica his hard hap. 173. e. his praise.
ibid. Scolopendres, fishes. 262. g Scolopendres chase people out of the
country. 212. h Scolopendres without wings. 327. b Scordastus, a tree. 363. a
Scorpions and Solpages depopulate a country. 212. h Scorpious perish by their
young ones. 324. l Scorpions their stings dangerous as serpents. 324. l. how
they exercise them. ibid. they cannot quench their thirst. 325. a. they are
harmless in Italy. ibid. b. they are harmless to things without blood. 325.
c Scorpions, where they be harmless to strangers, and n isome to inhabitants:
they revenge their brethrens death. 325. c. Scutcheons for graffing how to be
made. 520 h Scyros wind. 23. a Scythia free from lightening, and the reason.
23. c Scythian nation, the description thereof. 123. e. called by Persians
Sacas. ibid. Scythian sea the water thereof fresh. 124. g Scythians feed on
men's flesh. 153. f
S E
Sea engenders the like of all that is in the world besides. 235. a. Sea-Rams.
236. k Sea Elephants. ibid. Sea-calues or Seals. 243. a Sea, where it is
deepest. 44. l Sea hotter in winter. 46. k. made calm with oil. ib^d. Seas in
the reflux and ebb thereof living creatures die, and not else. 43. e why the
Sea is salt. 44. h Seas the reason of their reciprocal ebb and flow and where
they keep no order. 42. k maruailes of the Sea. 43. f Sea, what land have been
turned wholly into. 40. i Seas how they have gone back and divided lands. 39.
f what lands they have broken in between. 4. h Seareeds. 401. d Sea trees.
401. d e. f Sea cobs. 287. f Sea water unwholesome to be used in making dough.
560 i Sea about Tabrobane full of trees. 130. h Sea snakes twenty cubits long.
132 k Sea-merle fish. 244. h Sea-thrush fish. ibid. Sea yields precious
coquils and pearls. 254. (...) Sea nettles and Spunges, neither living
creatures nor yet plants. 262. i. their manners. ibid. Sea-hare. 26^ g Sea
Tortoise has neither tongue nor teeth. 339. f Seals have not bones. 345 a
Seal fishes have no ears. 333. g Seasoning time of the year in plants when
it is. 47^. d Sebesten, what fruit. 388. l Sebesten. 437. c Sebesten and
Services may be graffed both in one stock. 511, f. Uolcatius why he was called
Sedigitus. 349. c Seed, what it is. 563. a Seed-corne of all sorts how to be
chosen. 582. m Seed how to be dispensed for sundry grounds. 483. d ground take
Seed, some more than other. 483. b Seed falling from heaven engender all
things. 2. h Segesta, a goddess. 549. e Seia, a goddess. ibid. Selenitium an
Iuie. 480 l Seleucus Nicator purposed to cut the land through between Cimmerius
Bosphorus and the Caspian s^a. 120. (...) Seleucides, birds enemies to locusts.
284 l Sementine or Autumn corn. 557 d Sembracena, myrrh. 369. b Annaeus
Seneca. 411. f Senses wherein men excel other creatures. 305. e Senses wherein
other creatures excel them. ibid. Septentrio, a wind. 22. l Seres a people
described. 130. i. k Seres, people famous for fine silk. 124. i. their nature.
ibid. they cannot abide to merce with others. ibid. M. Sergius (grandsire to
Catiline) his commendation. 170. l Sergius Arata first deniser of oyster pits.
266. l Serichatum. 374. h Serpents having lost their eyes will have new. 336. g
Serpents have but one venomous tooth. 337. d Serpents of great bigness. 199.
d. assail fowls of the air. ibid. Serpents destroy a city. 212. h Serpents
and lizards have long livers. 343. h Serpents have thirty ribs. 343. f
Serpents some of them footed like Geese. 351. d a Serpent barked. 202. k
Serpents how they engender. 301. g. they lay eggs. ibid. chained together about
vipers. 302. h father of the Gracchi found two serpents within his house. 174.
i. what they presaged. ibid. Serpents chased away with the perfume of hearts
horn. 306. k. Serpents love eggs. 307. a. they love wine. ibid. b Servius
Tullius being a child sleeping, had a light fire shone over his head. 48. g
Servants and slaves of great price. 175. e Sesame. See Ricinus. Sestius a
Roman Astronomer foresaw a dearth. 598. i Seseli or Siler-mountaine, helps
hinds to calue. 213. d Senta, a cave in Dalmatia wherein breeds the wind. 21.
e Sewing with the needle or nall who first devised. 188. i Sexes distinct in
all plants. 385. d
S H
Shadow of the walnut tree noisome to men. 514. k Shadows of trees. ibid.
Shadow of the Palm tree pleasant and comfortable. ibid. l Shadows of some
trees no better than poison. 515. a Shadows are not to be seen in some part
of India. 156. l Shadows when and where there be none at all. 35. f. where
twice in the year they fall contrary. 36. h She asses much pained with pain
of their vdders. 347. e suckle their young but six months. ibid. She Bears
have four paps apeece. 348. g Sheep how necessary. 226. k their time of
engendring. ibid. l of Sheep two principal kinds. 227. b Sheep which be
kindly. 228. k Sheep rotten how to be cured. 496. l Sheep without galls in
Euboea. 341. c Sheep in Naxus have two gals. ibid. Sheep good to eat down
rank corn. 576. h Shearing trees when first devised. 359. b Shields burning
in heaven. 18. h Shelfish the occasion of much royot and excess in the world
254. g. Shindles of that wood best. 461. e. f. they covered the houses at Rome
a long time. ibid. Ships with proes at both ends. 129. d Ship that brought the
Obeliske out of Egypt. 489. e. sunk in the haven of Ostia. 14. Ship of K.
Demetrius of a mighty bigness. 490. g Shipping of sundry sorts. 190. g Ship
tackling, cables, ankers, etc. who devised. ibid. i Shouelars what manner of
birds. 292. l
S I
Sicilie sometimes joined to Italy. 4. i Sider or wine of apples. 421. a Signs
of short life. 534. i Signifer circle in heaven. See Zodiac. Signs of the
spring. 586. g Signs of good earth. 505. a Silkewormes how to be ordered. 323.
b Siligo. 562. m. commended. 563. c. the finest wheat for manchet and pastrie
work. 563. d. a fine flower. 564. h the wheat is a tickelish corn. 564. i
Silicia or Siliqua. See Fenigreeke. Silurus, river whale. 243. a Similage a
fine flower. ibid. Simones and Silones, sir names. 336. k. why so called. ibid.
Simach the fruit. 389. c Sinews bind the bones together. 345. b. being cut
cause much pain. ibid. where they are hidden. ibid. c Silver mines who first
found out. 188. k Singing whose invention. 189. e Siphylus. 40. m Silurus a
fish, supposed to be a sturgeon. 243. a. his properties. 245. e of Sinews,
cords, and ligaments. 345. b Sirbon lake carrying a circuit of 150 miles. 100.
i Sithes of two sorts. 395. f
S K
Skarlet grain of the oak Ilex. 461. a Sky, strange sights seen therein in
time of Octanius, Consul. 18. i Skill in planting directed by the nature of
the soil. 501. e of the skin a discourse. 346. k Skin subtle and thin causes
finenesse of spirit. 346. k it has no fellowship with understanding. ibid. l
Skin of Crocodiles hard. 346. k Skin of Riuer-horse turns iauelines and
spears. 346. l Skin of Elephants not to be pierced. ibid. Skins of Gorgon
women hung up in Iunoes temple in Carthage. 148. l Skritchowle flies not
directly. 277. a. one of them entered the sanctuary of the Capitol of Rome.
ibid.
S L
Slavery who brought in first. 289. a Slaves devoured of Lampreys. 348. i
S M
Smell most pleasant that comes from the earth. 505. a Smell of a snuff of a
candle causes untimely birth. 159. c Smilaces. 558. l Smilax one of the names
of Yeugh. 463. f Smilax how it is described. 481. d. supposed to be unlucky
and why. ibid. the name of a young damsel turned into the plant Smilax. 481.
d. the use that the wood is employed unto. ibid. c in Smyrna a boy changed into
a girl. 158. h Shouelars what manner of birds. 292. l Snailes. 218. i Snake
casts her slough, and by what means. 211. a. in Syria they hurt no Syrians,
but deadly to strangers. 234 i Snow falls not where sea is deep. 46. k. how
it is engendered. 29. b. how it is good for trees. 500. i
S O
Socrates kept one countenance always. 166. h Socrates judged the wisest man.
173. c Socrates never known to change countenance. 166. g Soles, fishes. 244.
h Soruises trees how they be kept long. 440. l. of four kinds. 445. c. round
as apples, pointed as pears, long as eggs. ib. Soruise Torminale, why so
called. ib. d. preserved in cuit. ib. e Sosigenes. 6. k South wind when it
blows, causes creatures to be less hungry. 24. g. it raises more surging
waves than the North Wind, and why. ibid. h Souls of men parcello, heaven. 16.
m Souls whether immortal. 187. a. b Southern winds make trees feeble. 600.
h. a rock consecrated unto it. 21. e. rises from midday. 12. l Sowes eat
their own Pigs. 230. g. how they be splaied. ib. k their liver made into a
dainty dish. ibid. they use not their teeth to strike as Bores. 337. b.
enraged when they go a brimming, and how remedied. 304. g. h. that be wild,
breed but once a year. 231. a. raging in their farrowing. ibid. Sophocles
enterred by warning from Bacchus. 171. d Sowing of corn. 579. e. in the right
season. 583. b art in Sowing. ibid. late Sowing more dangerous than early.
584. k in Sowing the Moon and signs to be observed. ibid.
S P
Spadonei Dates. 449. c Spagos. 424. g Spain, the description thereof. 87. f
Spathe, what it is. 379. e Sparrowes short lived and let cherous. 290. m
Sphagnos, sweet. moss. 375. d Sphinges, a kind of Monkey or Marmosets. 232. i
Spikenard. See Nard. Spinturnix, what bird. 277. b Spiders greatest enemies to
Bees. 321. c. where she begins her web. ibid. e. hunt after Lizards. 324. i.
lay eggs. ibid. k being young, eat their mothers. ibid. the use of their web.
323. b. drinks up the moisture of cloth. 330. h Springs colder in Summer than
in Winter. 46. k. leap upward. ibid. l Spittle noisome to serpents. 154. l
Springs entrance when it begins. 590. (...). 591. a Spring corn. 557. d
^piders how they engender. 324. i. why they scatter their ^gges. ibid. i (...)
of sundry sorts. 262. l Sp^ghts, birds called Pici Martij. 278. g. why. h.
effectual ^presages. ibid. i. their admirable nature. ibid. k. no Speights at
Tarentum. 285. c Sp^ Tarpeius served in 120 foughten fields. 170. h Spindle
tree. 399. b. the properties thereof. ibid. S^ado es, certain reeds. 484. g
Sp^lt. 363. a Spiders foreshew the fall of an house. 211. c Spleen fastened in
the left side of the belly. 343. c. thought to be in serpents. ibid. it
hinders the running. ibid. professed runners wast it in a hot iron. ibid. may
be taken out of the body without harm. ibid. being taken away, the laughter
is gone. ibid. Spikenard will not thrive in Arabia. 478. l Spindle and spinning
whose invention. 188. i Spira, fault in wood. 489. a Spirit. See Air.
Spondilium, an herb and fruit. 378. l Spinter and Pamphylus, two players, how
they resembled Lentulus and Metellus Consuls. 161. f Spring when it begins.
23. c fasting Spittle kills serpents. 154. l of the Spleen. 343. c
S Q
Squali, fishes. 248. l Squilla floureth thrice, and shows three times of
ploughing. 592. h Squinanth where it grows. 375. a. the best, and price of
it. ibid. b Squirrils, their properties. 218. g
S T
Stacte, the best Murrhe. 368. m Stadises, a town in Egypt where the fall of
Nilus makes men deaf. 145. e Stagonius. 367. e Stagonitis. 378. i Stag
envious to man. 213. c in danger seeks to man. ibid. white Stags of Q.
Sertorius. 214. k. enemies to serpents. ib. long livers. ibid. l. their flesh
good for the liver. ibid. l. aue under their tongue twenty little worms. 333.
b Stags and Hinds. 213. c. they teach their young to run. ibid. how they behave
themselves when they be hunted. ibid. e their sundry qualities ibid. e. f. how
they swim over sea. 214. g. they cast their horns yearly. ibid. how their age
is known. ibid. h Staphylodendrum, what it is. 467. c Stature of man
decreaseth. 165. a fixed Stars and starrie sky presage future weather, how,
and after what sort. 612. i. k Stars predominate after the Spring of Equinox.
592. k Stars fixed, their rising and setting to be taken two ways. 587. c. d.
Stars none less than the Moon. 19. d Stars seen with the Sun all day long.
17. d Stars fixed which have influence till the coming of Favonius. 590. i
Stars and signs whether to be regarded for Seednes. 584. l. (...) Star fish.
269. e Star-lizards, stellons cast their skins. 213. b. their venomab Stars
wandering. See Planets. to them attributed the event of things when they begin
to govern the seas. 597. (...) Stars or Planets not appointed for every man
according to his state or condition, as some vainly have imagined. 5. c Stars
objected in nanigation first by whom, etc. 190. i. their shooting and falling,
what it is. 5. d. their power and operation. ib. that be fixed, shine as well
by day as night. 9. f their unequal rising. 34. i. whether to be regarded for
seednes. 584. l. m. rising and setting of which be diversely taken. 587. c. d.
predominant after the Spring Aequinox. 592. k. how they presage future weather.
612. i Stelus, what it is. 496. k Stellions live only by deaw and spiders.
325. d Stares could parle Greek and Latin. 293. e Sterlings depart for a
season. 284. g. their manuer of flight. ibid. h Stephanos Alexandri. 453. a
Stesichorus feared the eclipse of the Sun. 9. a Starch. See Amylum. Stars
running too end fro. 18. i Stature in men and women is now decayed. 165. a
Stews for fishes who devised. 266. m Straw served for bedding. 551. a Strength
of body many examples. 166. k Stimmata. 381. d Strabones, who they be properly.
335. e Stimphalides crisped on the head. 331. a Straw how to be used and
ordered. 602. l. m Stones greased and enflamed with fire. 48. g Stones of
beasts how they are placed. 352. k Stone quarries who first dug. 188. i
Stones found in trees. 489. b. c white Stones in the maw of young birds, used
in Magic. 343. b. Stone of a strange power. 42. h Stones raining down. 28. h
Stone in young heifers good for women. 343. c Stones raining down. 19. c
Stomach how it is framed, and the use. 340. g Stockdoues out of the way for a
time. 284. h. sit upon their eggs, Cock and Hen by turns. 300. k Storks
esteemed better meat than Cranes in old time. 282. g their manner of flight.
ibid. h to kill a Storke, fellonie in Rhessalie. ibid. kind to their parents.
ibid. k no Storkes within eight miles of the lake Lurius. 285, c Stars and
other flames seen about the Sun. 17. d Stay-ship fish. See Echeneis. Straw,
how it is a sign of good ground. 503. a Straw of barley, the best. 562. k
Strix, a word of cursing. 347. d Strabones, families in Rome, why so called.
335. e Strategiae, what they be. 119. d Strawberrie tree. See Arbute. Strobos
plant Laedeum. 370. h Strobon in Ceraunia. 321. a. a sweet tree. ibid. Storax,
a sweet odor. ibid. c. the effects thereof. ibid. Storax (Calamita.) 378. g
Styrax or Storax the tree. ibid. Styrax gum of diverse kinds. 378. k Struthea,
what Quinces. 436. h Struthopodes, what people. 156. h Sturgeon fish much set
by of our ancestors. 245. e
S V
Subis, a bird. 277. c Sugar. 362. k Suns motion, what it is. 13. f. wherefore
it burns not the earth. 14. m. what Summer we shall have, Democritus showed
by the Solstice. 590. g. how many furlongs from the cloudie region to the
Sun. ibid. how to know the heights of it from the earth up to the Sun. 15.
a Summan, what kind of dish. 230. l Suns heat causes monstrous shapes in
Aegipt. 146. k Superfluity of meat always dangerous. 356. h Subulones, a
kind of stag. 331. c Subsolanus wind. 22. l Sun, a divine power. 36. c. his
Eclipse. See Eclipse. Sulpitius Gallus first found the reason of the Eclipse.
8. l Sulpetia, a Matron that consecrated Venus image. 173. f Superstition in
choosing Marget. 4. i Superfluity in precious ointments. 384. g. h Superfluous
expense in Seeling and inlaid works. 494. h Sun greatest of the Planets. 3. b.
the soul of the world. ib. Island of the Sun described. 132. i Suns many
seen at once. 17. f. in midwinter makes tempests. 20. g Suns motion, what it
is. 13. f. the strange color appearing therein. 17. g. the signs of weather
depending of his rising or setting. 611. a. b. lends his light to the other
stars. 3. c why the Sun departs from us in Winter. 8. g. h Sunsteads when.
13. i Sun his race. 2. k Sun the greatness thereof. 8. g. by how many
demonstrations it appears bigger than the earth. ibid. Sun, the best
prognosticator of weather. 611. a Signs depending on the Suns rising or
setting. 611. a. b Sunstead of Summer. 587. e. what weather we shall have,
Democritus gesseth by the Solstice day. 590. g Sun his power. 44. h. fed by
the salt sea. ibid. l Sumach, a plant. 389. b Suns Oxen, whence the fable
arose that they were kept in stall. 43. f Supernata, a kind of Abricocts. 436.
l Suculae, what stars. 592. l Surname Stolo, whence it came. 489. c Surus the
name of an Elephant. 194. i Susinum. See Oil of Lillies. Superfitation. See
more in Conceptions.
S W
Sweat of the Pharnaces dangerous to be touched. 155. b Swine when they go a
brimming. 229. f. how long they breed. ibid. eat their own Pigs. ibid. g.
their age. 230. b their diseases. ibid. they know the swinards voice. ibid. i
how they are known sick or sound. ibid. their subtlety and wit. ibid. their
flesh yields variety of dishes. 230. k. have ten ribs. 243. f Swallows feed
flying. 284. h. they are indocible. 295. b of diverse sorts. 288. h. how they
feed and keep clean their young birds. ibid. their neasts make a bank to
Nilus. ibid. i. how they build. ibid. g. they fortify an Island yearly. 288.
i Swallows enemies to Bees. 320. i young Swallows being calcined, does cure
the squinancie. 288. k Swallows having lost their eyes, will have new. 336. g
they are gone in Winter. 283. d. why they build not in the city Thebes. ibid.
l. nor in Byzia. ibid. wild Swans how they fly. 282. i Swans sing not before
they die. 284. l of Swiftness in running many examples. 166. m
S Y
Syrians war against Locusts. 328. h Sylke-wormes how to be used. 323. b
Sylla Dictatour died of lice. 329. d Sybilla excellent at divination. 173. d
Syria, a renowned region, the description thereof. 99. f Syrenes fabulous
birds. 296. k Syagri, kind of Dates. 387. b Sycomore tree. 389. d. passing
fruitful. ibid. Syraeum, what it is. 416. l Sycc, what kind of rosin. 463. a
Syene, a town, at noonetide in the midst of the Summer, no shadow is to be
seen there. 35. f Syringias, a kind of Cane or Reed. 483. b Syrites, a stone
found in a Wolfes bladder. 344. g Syrictae, people that have legs like Snakes.
156. h
T A
TAder river. 53. d of Tails a discourse. 352. l Taprobane Island. 157. a
Taprobane the manner of the people, and their long life. 131. b. Taprobane
thought to be a second world. 129. b Taprobane Island description thereof.
ibid. b. king of Taprobane, admitted the Romans upon relation of their justice
and seeing their pieces of coin all of equal weight. 129. f the manner and
fashions of the Island of Taprobane. 130. k Tamarix. 398. m of Tastes thirteen
kinds. 448. l of Tallow. 344. k Tallow whether it lies in the breast. ibid.
Tales there be of Scritch-owles feeding young infants with their milk. 347. c
Tanaquils distaffe and spindle. 228. g Tar out of what tree it is boiled.
464. h. whereto it is employed. ibid. the manner of drawing it. ibid. Taprobane
and Toidis, countries most fruitful of pearls. 254. k. Tarum. 298. m
Tarandus, what beast. 215. c Tastes of sundry sorts in herbs. 449. b Tasting
equal to all creatures. 306. l Tasting common to all creatures. ibid. Taste of
meats in all creatures but man, is at the lip of the tongue. 339. b Taurus, a
mighty mountain. 105. e. the diverse names thereof. ibid. Taurus a bird
lowing like a Bull. 293. a Tautalus city swallowed up. 40. m Tails of
serpents being cut off will grow again. ibid. Tail in all creatures except
men and Apes. 352. i. serves to necessary use. ibid. Tails of Oxen and Kine
greatest and biggest. 16. m Taygetus, an hill. 37. d
T E
Teeth their nature, sundry kinds and uses. 164. i. k their presages. 164. l
Teeth of Vipers hidden within their gumbes, 337. d Teeth of sundry kinds, and
how they be set, and to what use, etc. 337. c. 338. g Teda or the Torch-tree.
462. m Tepidare river in Italy. 545. it is warm in Winter. ibid. Temple of
Jupiter Hammon in Meroe in Egypt. 146. i Tempests diverse kinds thereof. 25.
e Temetrum. 418. k Tempsis, the pitch of the mountain. 181. e Temerinda the
name of Meotis, and why. 118. i Tenerum, what it is. 2. h Tenthorania, in times
past near unto the seas. 39. e Tenera terra. 582. g Tentyrites enemies to
Crocodiles. 209. d Tennise play whose invention. 190. g Tepidare, what it
signifies. 545. a Terra Tenera, earth as good as can be imagined. 504. k Terra
pulla, a tender and mellow soil. ibid. Teramnon. 575. d. 62. m Terminatra, a
feast instituted by king Numa. 549. e Teredines what worms. 492. h Terebinth
wood fine. 490. h Territory of Mutina. 48. g Territory of Sabines and
Sidicines. ibid. f Terpentine the clearest rosin. 423. f Terebinth or Tepidian
tree. 389. a. the kinds thereof and the fruit. ibid. b Terpentine how it is
drawn from the tree. 465. b Terentine, pine nuts. 435. e. f. wit-teeth. 338. g
Teeth serve not only for grinding our meat. 164. k Tetartemorion, what
quadrant. 182. g Tettigoniae, a little kind of Grasshopper. 325. (...)
T H
Thalis Milesius among the Greeks first found out the reason of Eclipses. 8. l
Theophrastus, one of them that wrote of the Romans. 58. i Thracia the
description thereof. 77. f Thunder and lightening the reason thereof. 20. m
Thorn royal. 400. l Thirsty thorn. 402. g Thrasymenus lake. 48. h Thripes.
492. h Thybians, their strange nature and eyesight. 155. b Thucidides called
from banishment. 172, g Thracians how they prove their fortune. 176. i
Thracians how they measure their happiness. ibid. Thrashing practiced sundry
ways. 602. k
T I
Tibur city founded by Tiburts, more ancient than Rome. 415. b. Tiberius
Caesar his saying of Sarnell in wines. 414. h. he^ could see by night. 334. i
Tib. Caesar wrote a Poem of the comet called Acontias. 15. (...) Tibuli, what
trees. 462. i Tickes want means to avoid excrements. 330. g Tigris, the river
where it begins, and the diverse names it has. 137. a. runs through the
lake Arethusa. ibid. d Tingitania province, the description thereof. 92. k
Tinea, what worms. 492. h Timarchus the Paphian. 338. g. had double course of
teeth in each iaw. ibid. Timber trees in what way severally they are employed.
491 f Tilthes fine. 380. g Tissue cloth whose invention. 228. i
T M
Tmolus the hill well planted with Vineyards. 107. (...)
T O
Tokens of good honey. 317. b Tokens of good Bees. ibid. d Tokens of death.
183. e Tokens of life uncertain. ibid. Tools for smiths who first devised.
188. h Tokens by the ears of beasts. 333. d Torpedo, the Crampefish. 261. d
Nouellius Torquatus Tricongius, a worthy wine-bibber. 427. d. Tortoiser has a
kidnie alone of them that lay eggs. 343. e Tortoises of the sea. 241. b Tortoise
shells as much as will cover houses. 134. i Tortoise his lungs without blood.
341. a Tortivum wine, what it is. 425. b Town, by whom first built. 188. h
Town walls and towers who first reared. 188. h. i of Tongues. 338. m. 339. a
Tongues of serpents and liberds three forked. 338. k Tongues of Lizards two
forked. ibid. serpents Tongues as small as hairs. ibid. Tongues of Crocodiles
cleave to their pallat. ibid. Tongues of Lions and Libards uneven. ibid. l
Tongues of Cats bring madness. ibid. Tongues of Bees very long. 339. a
Tonsillae, spungeous kernils in men. ibid. b
T R
Trabca, K. Romulus his mantill of estate. 260. h Traffic first devised. 187.
e. 188. m Tragelaphis his nature. 214. m Tragum, what it is. 562. g Trees the
temples of the gods. 357. b. how they grow. 508. l Trees that never grow out of
their own kind. 509. b. by what means they grow. 508. l. what trees bring
forth young impes at the root. 510. h. what trees grow by pricking into the
ground. ibid. k. how to be removed. 512. m not in windy weather. 513. (...).
their roots not to be handled violently. 514. g Trees which be slow in growth.
515. e. which be forward in fruit. ibid. their shoots hinder growth. ibid.
would ouerspread the face of the earth, if they were not repressed. ibid. f.
how they grow one upon another. 516. l Trees ought to be planted in Autumn.
522. m Trees of diverse natures how to be conioined. 123. d Trees planted for
the use of Uines. 534. l Trees of much shadow not good for Uines. 535. a Trees
admirable about the sepulcher of Protesilaus. 495. c ^o Trees exempt from the
worm, blasting, and ioint-ach. 539. a. Trees hunger starued, headless. ibid.
Trees more or less subject to diseases. 539. b what Trees soonest be
worme-eaten. ibid. c Trees troubled with certain flies. 541. c Trees when they
are said to die or to be sick. 440. g Trees blasted with certain winds. 541.
c shedding of leaves a sign of their recovery. ibid. d. frozen to death in
Pontus and Phrygia. ibid. soon die having once lost their heads. 542. h Trees
that bear rosin, abide any bruise or wound. ibid. i Trees growing thick, kill
one another. ibid. k Trees prospering without leaves. 543. a Trees changing
their color from black to white. ibid. b Trees changing from better to worse,
are unlucky. signesib. c Trees sunk and swallowed up of the earth. 443. d
Trees yielding many prodigious foretokens. ibid. remedies of Trees diseases.
5^4. h Trees when they desire to be watered. ibid. l Trees turning their leaves
in the Summer Sunstead. 20. h Trees and timber pieces of monstrous length. 489.
d Trees troubled with Ants, how to be remedied. 547. d Trees of India exceeding
high. 155. d Trees forced to grow by art. 498. h Trees standing upon the North,
do like best. 500. g. why sometime they lose their fruit. 500. h. nourished by
rain. 500. i Trees standing Southward, soonest shed their leaves. 502. i no
Trees in some countries. 454. m Trees are not laden with fruit after one and
the same manner. 475. b Trees more fruitful in age than in youth, and
contrariwise. ibid. what Trees live longer than other. 475. e Trees age soon
by bearing. ibid. Trees bearing fruits diversely. ibid. Trees differ in the
manner of their growth, either with single stocks or manifold bodies. 476. h.
i Trees differing in root. 477. b Trees of longest continuance. 494. l. m Trees
replanted that have been blown down. 477. e Trees fallen of themselves rise
of their own accord. 478. g Trees fallen, topped and squared, and yet revive.
478. h Trees grow naturally by three manner of means. ibid. i Trees and shrubs
will not all grow in every place. 478. k the reason thereof. ib. their
Homogenean or substantial parts 486. b. their bonie substance or heart. ibid.
their fat or flesh. ibid. i. their marrow, sinews, blood, and veins. 487. c.
d Trees of what age best for timber. 488. g Trees delivered of a birth of
harneis. 489. b Trees growing in the sea. 402. g. h Trees overthrown by tides.
ibid. Trees male distinguished from the female by the ax. 463. c Trees
distinguished, according to the places where they love to grow. 468. g. h Trees
some savage, others civil. ibid. m Trees that lose not their leaves. 469. a
Trees green always in the head, shead leaves in the water boughs. ibid. no
Tree about Memphis in Egypt sheadeth leaves. 469. e Trees that bud, though
they blossom not. 472. g what Trees have three springs or buddings in the
year. ib. i Trees how they bud, blossom, and bear. 472. l. 473. a. b Trees
bearing no fruit at all. ibid. c Trees unfortunate and accursed. ibid. f Trees
soonest forgoing their blossom, and shedding their fruit. 374. g Trees
fruitless by occasion of the soil. ibid. i Trees male whether they bear not.
ibid. Trees of sbortest life. 495. c a Tree fish. 236. g Trebius honored for
bringing down the corn market. 551c Trenches and ditches for Vines how to be
made. 529. a Tribes Rusticke in Rome. 550. m Tribes Vrbanae. 551. a Trichna a
fisb. 244. i Trimenon wheat, what it is, 561. b Triticum, 563. a Trixis. See
Ricinus. Tritanus, a man of extraordinaris strength. 166. k. his son. ibid.
Triticum. 561 b Tritons, fishes, discovered at Lisbon. 236. h. what they are.
ibid. how they breed. 241. d Troas. 109. c Trochos, a fish. 266. i Troglodytes,
people above Aethiopia swifter than horses. 157. b. eight cubits high. ibid.
Troops of horsemen hidden under the boughs of a figtree. 155. d.
T V
Tuberes of two sorts. 438. g Tuberes, what fruit. 437. f. when they and
Iuiubes were brought into Italy. 438. g Turnips, how, where, and when to be
sown. 571. a. b Tullus Hostilius first ware therobe Pretexta. 260. h Tullus
Hostilius killed with lightening, and why. 26. k Tunies, their history. 242. m
Tunie fishes ready to ouerturne a ship. 235. c Turbo the name of a blast. 25.
a Turbot, a kind of fish. 247. d Tuscanes, their opinion of lightning. 26. g
Turners craft, whose invention. 188. l
T W
Twins dangerous to the mother if they be of both sexes. 158. i.
T Y
Tympania, a kind of pearls. 255. b Typhe. 563. a Tyriamethyst, a double
purple color. 261. a Tyrus, the description thereof. 102. g Typhon, the name
of a whirlepuffe. 24. l. how mariners may prevent the danger thereof. ibid.
Tyrannical rule, who first practiced. 189. a
V A
Valor, sundry examples thereof. 170. h Ualerius Antias a writer. 48. g
Valeria, unfortunate to the place whither she was carried. 164. i. Variety of
men's speech and shape is wonderful. 153. d Vappa, what it is. 424. k Vari, who
they be called properly. 350. k Varices i. swelling, veins more ordinary in
men than in women. 350. k
V B
Vbians fat their ground with any kind of earth. 506. k
V E
Vedius Pollio his pastime to see lampries devour men. 248. i of Ueins and
Arteries. 345. c Vein in timber called Fertile. 493. c Vein in trees what it
is. 486. k Vetouis in the Capitol. 491. d Venetians, from whence. 115. d Venus
Cluacina. 451. a. Venus Murtea or Myrtea. ibid. c Venus planet, her nature,
motion, excellency, and names. 6. h. i her motion making two stations. 10. i.
why she never departs from the^ Sun more than 46 degrees. 12. h her color.
13. c Venerium, Cicer, kind of pease. 570 g Vergiliae, stars in the tail of
Taurus. 20. k. called the garment hanging out at the brokers shop. (...). k
Vermin, as lice, etc. in sea as well as in land. 264 g Vermin hurtful to
trees. 5^0 m Veruectum, what it is. 578 m Verulenus Aegialus, a si^gular good
husband man. 411. c Vespasian Augustus his praise. 4. g. In his Corsuship
either Sun nor Moon seen in twelve days. 9. e Vesper the star, why Venus
so called. 6. i Vespertinus, rising or setting of fixed stars. 587. d Vetches
when to be sown. 572. i. not chargeable. ibid. h
V I
Viatores, what officers at Rome. 552. h Vinalia, a festival holiday. 600. g
Vine the nature thereof. 530. h Vine planting and pruning, who first practiced.
188. m Vine-sets do temper the hot ground Carbunculus. 503. b Vine has the
sense of smelling. 542. l Vine turns away from the Radish and Laurel. ibid.
Vines of five sorts. 528. i Vines take most harm in blouming time by rain.
540. m erected upon trees bear latest. 536. h. wedded to ^rees, when to be
cui. 535. b. ho^ many may be reared to one tree. ibid. when such are to be cut.
535. b. when vines are to be pruned. 533 h Vine leaves to be cleansed once in
the spring. ib^d. Vine frames and trailes how they ought to be made. 5^2. k
Vine bearing before the seventh year dies. 531. e Vines to be repressed und
not cockered. 531. e Vine frames of what best. 530. h Vines to be set in a dry
day. 529. b Vine hates all pot-hearbes or woorts. ibid. Vines in what order to
be planted. 529. c Vine trees how they be killed. ibid. Vines how many in an
acre. 530. c. ought to be prured once a year, 546. g Vines full of cicatrices
not to be trusted. 530 h Vines yielding a double vintage yearly. 581 e they
die with much bearing. 475. d Vines the elder bear the better wine. but the
younger more plenty. 47^. c Vines bearing thrice a year. ibid. a Vines their
diseases. 540. i Vine in the Forum at Rome. 444. g Vine Heluenaca. 408. k. of
two kinds ib. very plentiful. ib. Vine Arca. ibid it loves not Italy. ib.
is never blasted ib. Vine Spionia, or Spinea, 408. l Vine Basilica. ibid. h
Vine Venicula. ibid. m Vine Apiana, why so called. 407. (...) Vines, Stacula,
Sirculus, Numisiana. 408. m Vine Murgentina. 409. a Vine Pompeiana. ibid. Vine
Maerica. ibid. Vine Tudernis. 409. b Vine Florentia. ibid. Vine Talpana. ibid.
why so called. 409. c Vine Etesiaca, 409. b. why so called. ibid. c Vine
Conseminia. 409. b Vine Irtiola. 409. c. Vine Pumula. ibid. d Vine Bananica.
409. d Vine Gaurania. ibid. Vine Falerna. ibid. Vine Tarentine. ibid. Vine
Duracina. 409. f Vine Ambrosiaca. ibid. Vine Orthampelos. ibid. Vines
Dactylides. 410. g. why so called. ibid. Vines Columbine. ibid. Vine
Tripedanea. ibid. Vine Rhetian ibid. Vine Alexandrina. 410. k Vine Narbonica.
ibid. Vine Scantiana. 411. b Vines Fundane. 414. i Vines Taurominitane. 414. k
Vine Theriace. 423. a Vines, Libanios, Aspendros. ibid. Vine compluviata, what
it is. 528. l Vine sets how they may grow without their marrow or pith 528. h.
how they bear grapes without kernels. ibid. their distance one from another.
527. c. full of joints, fruitless. 527. b Vintage time. 605. e rules serving
for Vintage time. ibid. e. f wild Vine Labrusca, the roots and grapes good for
courriours. 420. k Vine props and railes which be best. 525. b Vine tendrils
and burgens how to be ordered for the table. 423. c. Vines afford most plants
of all other trees. 527. a Vine tree how to be graffed. 520. h Vines draw into
them the taste of herbs and plants growing near unto them. 422. g Vineyard how
to be bounded. 529. b. how to be ordered with smallest expense. ibid. f. ought
to be exposed to the Sun. 527. c. Vineyards Statanae. 414. h Vinegre how it is
made, and the uses thereof. 424 k Vinegre of Cypress figs. 412. a Vinegre of
Alexandrine figs. ibid. L. Vitellius stores his ferme with fig trees. 445. a
Vis mayor, what it is. 599. a
V L
Ulysses ship turned into a rock. 79. d
V N
Vnedo, the fruit of the Arbute tree. 447. e
V O
Voluox, a worm hurtful to Vines. 547. c Volta the name of a monster. 26. k
Vopisci, who be so called. 160. h Vortex, the name of a stormy blast. 25. b
V R
Vrchins of the sea. 253. a Vrinum, what kind of addle egg. 300. k
V T
Vtorus or loci in a woman, what part. 344. h
V V
Vulcans temple built by Romulus, 495. a Vulturnus, what wind. 22. l Of Voices,
a discourse, 353. a. b. c
W A
VVAgons and chariots who first made. 188 l Walwort, a weed naught for ground.
508. g Walnuts employed at weddings. 445. e. and why. ibid. Walnut trees
brought out of Persia by commandment of kings. 445. f. Walnut, why called
Persicon and Basilicon. ibid. Walnut named in Greek Caryon, and why. ibid.
Walnut husks and the young nuts how to be used. 446. g Walnuts differ only in
the shell. ibid. Walnut shells divided in twain. ibid. Walnuts called
Inglandes, and why. ibid. i Walnuts brought first into Italy by L. Vitellius.
ibid. k Walnut tree wood cracketh before it breaks. 492. m Water an element.
2. l. the roundnesse thereof. 31. e. the benefit it has by the earth, and the
earth by it. 32. h Water of what taste. 449. a Waters fresh run aloft the sea,
and why. 44. m Watering cherishes corn and kills grass about Sulmo in
Italy. 544. m Water brings forth greater living creatures and more plenty
than the earth. 134. m Water very material for corn fields. 581. f
ouerflowing corn fields as good as a weeding in some place. 545. a Warden
pears. 439. d Wax made of all herbs save Dockes and Goosefoot. 313. d
W E
Weauing whose devise. 188. i Weeding of corn. 580. l Weeds choking corn and
pulse. 545. a Weights and measures whose devise. 188. l Weapons and armor
whose invention. 189. a. b Wesps how to be kept from preserved fruits. 441. f
Wesps feed greedily upon serpents. 355. e Western wind Fauonius a husband to
all plants, and to certain mares. 471. d Wezando, what it is. 339. c
W H
Whales and Whirlepoles. 235. b. c. as long as four acres of land 235. c Wheat
sold at Rome for one As by the Modius. 551. b. c Wheat how it is spiked, eared,
and ioynted. 558. k Wheat of Italy best. 559. e. other countries compared
with. ibid. Wheat of B^otia commended. 559. e Wheat of Italy praised by
Sophocles the Poet. 560. h Wheat esteemed by weight, and so compared. 560. h. i
Wheat different in the straw or stalk. 560. i Wheat of Thrace, a three months
corn. ibid. m Wheat of Thrace, a two months corn. 561. a Wheat subject to
the mieldew. 562. k Wheat of sundry kinds different in name. 562. k Wheat what
proportion it should yield in meal and flower. 563. e. f. common Wheat
Triticum exceeding fruitful. 564. m. the wonderful and incredible increase of
wheat in Afric. 565. a. Wheels, a kind of fishes. 236. g
W I
Wilding apples. 438. m a wedded Wife turned to he a man and a husband, and
contrariwise. 158. h Willowes of many sorts. 484. l. their manifold uses in
pearches, trailes, props, and bindings. ibid. red-Willowes good both to wind
and bind. 484. m Willowes fit for wicker works. ibid. as gainefull to the
master, as corn fields, meadows, and olive rows. 485. b. See more in Withies.
Wings of B^ts divided into ioints. 347. a Winds reign in the region of the
air. 19 c. how they arise and whence. 21. c. their natures and observations.
22. 23. etc. Windpipe, what it is. 339. c the observation of winds good in
husbandry. 608. i Winds who first distinguished. 189. d Winds how they may be
known distinctly one from another. 608. g Wine a most pleasant liquor to be
used inwardly. 428. i of Wines 195 sorts. 428. i Wine who first delaied with
water. 189. m Wine congealed into ye. 425. d Wine lees maintains fire. ibid.
e Wine how it is known to decay. ibid. b Wines how to be seasoned and
medicined. 425. a. b. how to be ordered, prepared, and seasoned. 425. d Wines
allowable for sacrifice and the service of the gods. 423. c. Greek wines
rejected in sacrifice. ibid. Wines when they grew in request at Rome. 418. h
Wines turn sower and recover of themselves. 423. b Wines reduced into 80
kinds. 418. g of Wines four principal colors. 416. l Wine how to be tunned
and kept. 425. c. d Wine-cellers how to be ordered. ibid. e Wine vessels how to
be placed in the cellar. ibid. Wine vessels how to be made and chosen. 427. d
drinking Wine fasting. ibid. Wine of strange and wonderful effects. 422. l
Wine causing women to be fruitful. ibid. procuring madness. ibid. driving
women to slip their birth. 422. m disabling for the act of generation. ibid.
Wines spiced and compound forbidden by Themison. 422. k Wines of trees and
shrubs. ibid. h Wines of sundry herbs and roots. ibid. g Wine Phorinean. 416.
k Wine Cicibeli^es. ibid. l Wine Halyntium. ibid. Wines sweet of diverse sorts.
417. a. b. c. d Wine Aigleuces. 417. b Wine Dulce. ibid. Wine Diachyton. ibid.
Wine Melitites. 417. d. how it is made. ibid. Wines alter according to the
climat and soil where the Vines grow. 415. b Wine spared among the Romans.
418. k. l. Forbidden in sacrifice. ibid. h Women in Rome not allowed to drink
wine. 418. k Women punished for drinking wine. 418. k. l Wines aromatized. 419.
a Wines Greek. 419. f Greek wine given in a congiarie by L. Lucullus at Rome.
420. g. Wine of Chios prescribed for the Cardiaca passio. 420. g left by
Hortensius to the quantity of 10000 barrels when he died. ibid. Wines given in
a congiarie by Iul. Caesar, Dictatour. 420. h Wines artificial. 420. i Wine
Omphacium. ibid. Wine Oenanthinum. ibid. Wine Adynamon. 420. l. how it is made.
ibid. the use thereof. ibid. Wine of Millet. 420. l Date wine. 420. m. how it
is made. ibid. Fig wine, Sycites. 421. a. wine of Lotus. ibid. Wine of Carobs.
ibid. Wine Rhoites, of Pomegranats. ibid. of Gorneil or wild cherries. ibid. of
Medlers. ibid. of Cervoises. ib^d. of Mulberies. ibid. of Pen-nuts. ibid. Wine
of Myrtles how it is made. 421. b Wine Myrtidanum. ibid. Wine of Beterrae. 414.
l. of Tarentum. 414. l. of Servitium. ibid. of Consentia. ibid. of Tempsa.
ibid. of Bavia. ibid. of Lucania. ibid. Wine of Thurium. 415. a Wine of
Lagaria. ib. brought into credit by Messala. ibid. Wine of Trebellia. ibid. of
Cauli^. ibid. Wine Trebulane. ibid. Trifoline. ibid. Wine of Pompeij. ibid.
Wines of Spain. 415. a Wine of Laletatane. ibid. of Tarracon, of Arragon, of
Laur^ne. ibid. Wines of the Balear Islands. ibid. Wine of Thasos. 415. (...).
of Chios. ibid. Wine Ariusium. ibid. Wine of Lesbos ibid. of Clazomene. ibid.
of mount Tmolus. ibid. of Sicyone, Cypress, Telmessus, Tripolis, Berytus,
Tyrus, Sebennys. 415. f Wine Hippodamantian. ibid. Cantharites. ibid. Gnidian.
ibid. Wines of Catacecanment. 416. g. of Petra. ibid. of Mycone. ibid. Wine
Mesogites. 416. g of Ephesus. ibid. of Apamea. ibid. Wine Protagium. ibid.
Wines of Pontus, Naspercenites, Oroeoticke, Oe^ates, of Leucas, of Ambracia, of
Peparethus. 416. g. h Wine Leucochrum. 416. i Wine Tethalassomenum. ibid. Wine
Thalassites. 416. k. why so called. ibid. Wine Greekish. 416. k Wine Scyzinum,
Itaeomelis, Lectispagites. 422. g Wines of garden herbs. 421. b of Radish.
421. c. of Sparage. ibid. of Savorie. ibid. of Maioram. ibid. of Origan. ibid.
of Smallach seed. ibid. of Southernwood, ibid. of wild Mints. ibid. of Rue.
ibid. of Nep or Calaminth. ibid. of running Thyme. ibid. of Horehound. ibid.
Wine of Navews. 421. c Wine Squilliticke. ibid. Wines of flowers. 421, c Wine
rosat, how it is made. 421. d Wine of Celticke spikenard. ibid. Wine Ipocras or
aromatized. ibid. after what sort. ibid. Wines condite, or Pepper wines. 421. e
Wine Nectarites, why so called. ibid. how it is made of Elecampane. ibid.
worme-wood Wine. ibid. hyssope Wine. 421. f ellebore Wine. ibid. Scammonite
Wine. ibid. Winkles or Sea-snailes, what fishes. 253. c. of sundry sorts. ibid.
e. what Winter we shall have, known by Bruma, according to Democritus. 589. f
Witchcraft by praising and eye-biting. 155. a Wi^ (...) examples thereof. 171.
b (...) tree, called Spilfruit. 474. h. it grows quickly if it be pricked
only into the ground. ibid. Withies or willowes where they love to grow. 484.
l exceeding commodious. ibid. compared with poplers and ^lders. ibid.
W O
Women bearing but once in their life time. 156. m Women seldom left handed.
165. e Women with a double apple in their eye witches. 155. b bearing children
at seven years of age. 157. a. at five years. ibid. how many they may bear
at one burden naturally. 157. d Women in Egypt more fruitful than others,
and the reason. ibid. Women's monthly sickness. 163. c. the strange effects
thereof. ibid. d. e. they stay commonly at forty years of age. 163. a a
Woman delivered at once of two boys and two girls. 157. d. it presaged
famine. ibid. Women many times lie for dead and whereupon. 184. k a Woman
delivered of twenty children at four births. 157. e Wood most massy and which
swimmeth not. 490. g Wood serving to strike fire. ibid. k Woods of sundry
natures and for diverse uses. 490. k. l. and 493. d. e. f. Wood-wormes, four
sorts 492. h Wood breeding no worm. 492. i Wood how it is preserved from
cleaving. 492. l Wood of diverse natures. ibid. World, what it is. 1. c.
everlasting and infinite. 1. c. unmeasurable, 1. d Worlds, not innumerable. 1.
d. of a round form. 1. f World visible, a haemisphere. 2. g it turns round
in four and twenty hours. 2. g whether in turning it make an audable sound
or harmony. 2. h. whether the body thereof be all smooth. 2. h World certain
and yet uncertain. 1. c. containing all things within it self. ibid. World and
heaven all one. 1. b World, why called in Greek (...), and Mundus in Latin,
2. k. the geometrical dimension. 14. l Worms hurtful to standing corn. 544.
k
X
XEnophilus lived an hundred and fifty years without sickness. 183. b
Xiphiae, a kind of Comets. ^5. (...) Xylocinnamon. 373. a Xylobalsamum. 377.
b. the price of it. 378. h
Y
YEels, the manner of their engendring. 265. d Yeels, their nature. 247. f.
their life, ibid. how they be taken in Benacus. 248. g of great length. 235. c
Yeeles-skins used to ierke boys. 249. k Yeeles dead, only, flote not above the
waters. 247. f Years diversely reckoned. 181. a Year divided into twelve
months. 7. b Yoking oxen who first began. 189. a Iron and steel who found
first. 188. k Yron-smith forge who first used. 188. l
Z
ZOroastres laughed the first day that he was borne: he lived in a wilderness
20 years with cheese. 349. b Zodiac, a circle in heaven. 2. k. the deuisers
of all the parts thereof. 5. (...)
THE HISTORY OF THE WORLD.

Commonly called, THE NATURAL HISTORY OF C. PLINIVS SECVNDVS.

Translated into English by PHILEMON HOLLAND, Doctor of Physic.

The second Tomb.

PLINIVS PINGIT VTRVMQUE TIBI
AKPOKOSOS
IKPOKOSOS
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by Adam Islip. 1634.

TO THE READER.
FOr as much as this second Tome treats most of Physic, and the terms
belonging thereto (as well concerning diseases as medicines) be for the most
part either borrowed from the Greek, or, such as the unlearned be not acquainted
with (which partly upon ne cessity I was forced, and partly for variety
induced to use) I could not content my self to let them pass without some
explanation: for since my purpose especially is to profit and pleasure the most
ignorant (for whose sake Pliny also himself, as he professes, compiled this
work) I would not be so injurious unto them as to interrupt their reading with
obscurity of phrase, when the matter otherwise is most familiar. In regard
whereof, I thought good to prefix a brief Catalogue of such words of Art, as
ever and anon shall offer themselves in these discourses that ensue, with the
explanation thereto annexed, and the same delivered as plainly as I could
possibly devise for the capacity of the meanest. In the handling whereof, so I
may satisfy my countrymen that know no other Language but English, I shall
think my pains and labor well bestowed, and less fear the censure of those
that happily expect some deeper learning; for ever still the verse of that
Comicall Poet resoundeth from the stage in mine ears, (...).
(id est) Speak with less show of learning, so it be with more perspecuitie.
Vale.

A brief Catalogue of the words of Art, with the Explanation thereof.
A
ABort, or Abortiue fruit, is an untimely birth. Abstersive, i. scouring,
cleansing, or wiping away, such as the Greeks call Smectica, and they enter
into soap and washing balls. Access, i. a fit, whether it be of an Ague,
falling sickness, or any such diseases as return at times. Acetabulum, or
Acetable, a measure among the Romans, of liquour especially, but yet of dry
things also, the same that oxybaphon in Greek: and for that, as both words do
import, they used to dip their meats in vinegre out of such, it may well go for
a saucer with us; for it contains, as some think, fifteen drams, which grow
near to two ounces, of which capacity our small saucers are: but as others
suppose, it receives two ounces and an half, the measure of ordinary saucers.
Acrimonie, i. Sharpness. Actually, i. sensibly and presently, as fire is
actually hot. Aditiales, or Adijciales epulae, were great and sumptuous feasts
or suppers, held by the Pontifices or high Priests in testimony of public
joy. Almonds, see Amygdals. Amphora, a measure in Rome of liquors only: it
seems to have taken that name of the two ears which it had of either side one:
it contained 8 Congios, which are much about 8 Wine gallons, or rather between
seven and eight: so as in round reckoning it may go for a ferkin, half
kilderkin, or half sestern with us. Amygdals be kernils at the root of the
tongue subject to inflammations and swellings, occasioned by deflux or falling
down of humors from the head: they be called Antiades. Paristhmia, and
Tonsillae: the foresaid infirmities also incident unto them, do likewise carry
the same denominations.
A
Antidotes, i. countrepoysons, properly, defensatiues or preservatives against
poison, pestilence, or any malady whatsoever. Antipathie, i. contrariety,
enmity, and repugnancie in nature, as between fire and water, the vine, and the
Colewort, etc. S. Anthonies fire is a rising in the skin occasioned by hot
blood mixed with abundance of choler, and such be the shingles and other wild
fires called in Greek Erysipelas. Aquosities be waterish humors apt to engender
the dropsies called Ascites and Leucophlegmatia. Aromatised, i. Spiced.
Arthriticall griefs, such as possess the ioints, as all the sorts of gout.
Astrictiue or Astringent, be such things as bind the body, or any part thereof.
Attractiue, i. drawing, as the loadstone draws iron, amber straws or bents,
Dictamnus arrow heads or spils out of the body, and cupping glasses (or
ventoses) humors and wind. Austere, harsh or hard, as in fruits unripe, and
hard wines of hedge grapes. Axinomantie, a kind of magic divination by an ax
head red hot.
B
BAsis in a compound medicine is that drug or simple which is predominant, and
carries the greatest force in it, as the ground thereof, whereupon the whole
takes the name; as Poppy in Diacodion, Quinces in Diacydonium, etc. Bole is
the form of a medicine when it may be given in gross manner at a knives point
to the quantity of a nutmeg at a time, until the whole receipt be taken.
Browning, a term usual in the mouths of mariners and winnowers of corn, when
they are calmed and do call for wind. Bulbes, although Pliny seemed to give
that name unto some one special herb, yet it signifies generally all those
as have round roots, as Onions, Squilla, Wake-robin, and such like; whereupon
these and other of that kind are said to have bulbous roots. Cacochynne is that
indisposition of the body in which there is abundance of humors. Calcining, i.
the burning of a mineral, or any thing, for to correct the malignitie of it,
or reduce it into powder, etc. Callositie, thickness and hardness of skin
in manner senseless, as in fistulaes, and under our heels. to Carminat, is to
make more fine and thin the gross humors, by such medicines as by their heat
are apt to cut and dissolve them; whereupon they likewise be called Carminatiue,
a term received by Apothecaries, and borrowed from those that card wool.
Cancer is a swelling or sore coming of melancholy blood, about which the vems
appear of a black or swert color, spread in manner of a Creifish clees;
whereupon it took that name in Latin, like as in Greek Carcinoma. And such
ulcers as in that sort be maintained and fed with that humor, are called
cancerous, and be untoward to heal, worse commonly for the handling.
Carnositie, i. fleshly substance. Cataplasm, a pultesse or gross manner of
plastre Cartilage in man and beast is a gristle; in roots and fruits, that
substance which we observe in the radish root, and the outward part of a
cucumber, as Pliny seems to take it; which thereupon be called Cartilagineous.
Cataract is a dimnesse of sight caused by an humor gathered and hardened
between the tunicle of the eye, called Cornea, and the Crystalline humor; it
is next cousine to blindness. Caustic, i. burning, blistering, or scalding.
to Cauterise, is to sear or burn by a Cauterie. Cauterie actual is fire it
self or scalding liquor: and so a searing iron, gold, or other metal made red
hot. is called an Actual cauterie, which without the help of our natural heat
does work presently. Cauterie potentiall is that which will raise blisters and
burn in time, after it is once set on work by the heat of our body, as
Cantharides, Sperewort, etc. Ceres the first inuentresse of the sowing and use
of corn. Cerote is of a middle nature between an ointment and a plaster, not
so hard as the one, nor so soft as the other. Cicatrices in eyes be whitish
spots, otherwise called pearls: they be the skars also remaining after a sore
is healed up: and so a place is said to be cicatrised, when it is newly skinned
up and healed. Circulation is the devise of subliming or extracting water or
oil by a stillatorie, a lembick, or such, because the vapor before it be
resolved into water or oil, seems to go round circlewise. Clysterized, i.
conveyed up by a clyster into the guts. Caeliaci be those that through
weakness of stomach are troubled with a continual flux of the belly.
Colature, a thin liquour that has passed through a strainer or colander.
Colliquation is a falling away and consumptiof the radical humor or solid
substance of the body. Collyries, are properly medicines applied to the eyes in
liquid form; whereas the dry kind be rather called Sief and Alcohol,
especially in powder: howbeit Pliny attributes this term to all eye-salues
whatsoever. Also it seems that he means thereby, tents to be put in a
fistulous ulcer, as in page 509 b. 510 k. Collution, a liquour properly to wash
the mouth, teeth, and gums withal. Concocted, i. altered to that substance by
natural heat, as either in health may serve to nourish, or in sickness is apt
to be expelled Consolidat, to knit, unite, and make sound again that which was
broken or burst. Concrete, i. hardened and grown thick. Cond te, i. preserved
in some convenient liquor. to Concorporate, i. to mix and unite together into
one mass. Consistence, i. substance or thickness. Constipate, i. to harden
and make more fast and compact. Contraction of sinews a shrinking or drawing,
of them in too short. Contusions, i. Bruises. Convulsions, painful cramps.
Critical days be such, as in short diseases and those of quick motion, do
give light unto the physician of life or death. Pliny observes the od days to
be most significant, and those usually determinof health; and the even days
contrariwise: so that the seventh is Rex, i. a gracious prince; the sixth
Tyrannus, i. a cruel tyrant. Cruditie. See Indigestion. Cyath, a small measure
both of liquid and dry things; the twelfth part of a setarius, which was
twenty ounces: whereby it appears, that a cyath was one ounce, one half
ounce, one dram, and one scruple: it may go with us for four ordinary
spoonfulls. Cubit, a measure from the elbow to the middle finger stretched out
at length, which went ordinarily for 24 fingers breadth, or 18 inches, which is
one foot and a half: yet Pliny in one place makes mention of a shorter cubit,
namely from the elbow to the end of the fist or knuckles, when the fingers be
drawn in close to the hand. Cutanean eruptions be such wheales, pushes, or
scabs as do break out of the skin and disfigure it.
D
DEbilitie, i. weakness or feebleness. Decoction, a liquor wherein things have
bin sodden. Decretorie days, be such as in a sickness show some change or
alteration in the patient, either for good or bad. Defensatiue, in medicines
taken inwardly, are such as resist venom or pestilent humor: in outward
applications, such as defend the sore or place affected from the flux or fall
of humors thither. Denarius, a coin of silver in Rome, and in other countries
of gold, the same that Dram Attica, i. a dram in weight, which is vij. d.
ob. of our money; and the piece in gold answers near to a full French Crown;
in poise it goes for a dram. Dentifrices, are means in Physic to preserve
the teeth, and make them white and fair. Depilatorie are those medicines which
either fetch off the hair, or hinder it from coming up again at all, or at
leastwise from growing thick. They were called in Greek and Latin both,
Ps^lothra. Desiccatiue, i. drying. Digestiues be those medicines which taken
inwardly, help concoction of meat or humors; or applied without unto a sore,
do comfort the place, and make way for speedy healing. Dislocations, when the
bones be either out of joint, or else displaced. to Disopilate, i. to open. to
Dissipate, i. to scatter and dispatch. Distortion, crookedness or turning awry
unnaturally. Diureticall, such things as provoke urine. Dose, i. that weight or
quantity of any medicine that may be given either conveniently or without
danger to the patient. Dram, the eight part of an ounce, which is the weight of
a Roman denier, or Denarius. Dysenterie, is properly the exulceration or sore
in the guts, whereupon ensues besides the painful wrings of the belly, a
flux also of blood at the siege, and therefore it is usually taken for the
bloody flix.
E
EClogues. See Eidyls. Electuaries, be medicinable compositions or confections
to be taken inwardly, made of choice drugs, either to purge humors, to
strengthen the principal parts, or to withstand any infirmity for which they
are made. The substance is between a syrrup and a Conserve, but more inclining
to the consistence of conserues. Eidylls, or Eidyllia, be small poemes or
pamphlets written by Poets, such as Theocritus in Greek compiled, and much
like unto the Pastorals or Eclogues of Virgill in Latin. Embrochation is a
devise that physicians have for to foment the head or any other part, with a
liquor falling from aloft upon it, in manner of rain, whereupon it took the name
in Greek Embroche, and has found none yet in Latin, unless we should use
Superfusio. Emollitiues, medicines that do soften any hard swelling. Empiricks
were those physicians, who without any regard either of the cause in a disease,
or the constitution and nature of the Patient, went to work with those
medicines whereof they had experience in others, fall it out as it would.
Empirick books of Diodorus contained receipts approved and found effectual by
experience. Emunctories be those kernelly places in the body, by which the
principal and noble parts do void their superfluities, or such things as
offend; to wit, under the ears for the brain, the armpits for the heart, and
the share for the liver, etc. Emplastration in the Hortyard, is grafting by
inocelation with a scutcheon in Physic, the applying of a salve or plastre.
Epilepsie, i. the falling sickness. Errhines be devises made like tents,
sharper at one end than the other, to be put up into the nose, either to cure
some ulcer there, or to draw down and void humors out of the head, or to
provoke sneesing, etc. Eschare, is that crust which arises upon a cauterie,
either actual or potentiall, as also the roufe or scab that grows upon a
sore. Euacuation, i. Voidance and riddance of any thing out of the body by
vomit, purging, bleeding, sweating, etc. Excalfactorie, i. Heating or
chaufing. Excoriation, i. fretting the skin off, when a part is made raw: a way
to exulceration. Excresence, i. ouergrowing unnaturally of any thing in man's
body. Exoticall, i. foreign, and brought from other countries. Exorcismes, i.
coniurations by certain charms and spells. Exorcists, they that practiced such
Exorcisms. To Expectorat, i. to rid and discharge out of the breast by coughing
or reaching. Expiatorie, were sacrifices or oblations for to make satisfaction
and atonement. Exiccatiue. See Desiccatiue. Extenuat, i. to make thin.
Exulceration, i. a soreness of any part inward or outward, when not only the
skin is off, but the humor does fret deeper still. Exulceratiue, be such things
as are apt to eat into the flesh and make an ulcer.
F
Fermentation, i. an equal mixture of things working as it were together: a
term borrowed from the leuaine, which disperseth it self into the whole
mass or lump of dough. Filaments be the small strings that hang to a root
like threads or hairs, which some call the beard of the root: and in
resemblance thereof, other things growing likewise, be so called. Fissures,
clifts or chaps, whether it be in the hands, feet, lips, or fundament.
Flatuosities, i. windiness gathered within the body. Flora, the goddess of
flowers among the Painims. Fomentations properly be devises for to be applied
unto any affected part, either to comfort and cherish it, or allay the pain,
or else to open the poores to make way for ointments and plastres. If they be
liquid things they are laid too by the means of bladders, spunges, or such
like: if dry, within bags or quilts. Fractures, i. bones broken. Frictions or
Frications, rubbings of the body upward or downward gently or otherwise, as
the cause requires. Frontall, the form of an outward medicine applied unto
the forehead, to allay pain, to procure sleep, etc. Fukes, i. paintings, to
beautify the face in outward appearance. They are called at this day
complexions, whereas they be clean contrary: for the complexion is natural,
and these altogether artificial. Fumosities be vapors steaming up into the
head, troubling the brain. Fungous, i. of an hollow and light substance like
to Fusses or Mushromes.
G
GArga rismes be collutions of the mouth, and parts toward the throat, either
to draw down and purge humors out of the head, or to repress and restrain
their flux, or to mundifie and heal any sore there growing. Gargarising or
Gargling is the action of using a liquor to the said purpose. Gestation, an
exercise of the body, by being carried in coach, litter, upon horseback, or
in a vessel on the water. Glandulous swellings. See Kings evil. Gleir, i. the
white of an egg. Gymnicke exercises, were those that were performed by men
naked, and the place for such exercises, was thereupon called Gymnasium.
H
HAbit of the body, is taken for the outward parts thereof, opposite unto the
bowels and principal within; which being comforted and fortified, do thrust
forth offensive matters to the habit and exterior skin. Hemine, a measure in
Rome, as well of liquors as dry things: so called, because it was half
Sextarius: it contained ten ounces, and is somewhat under our wine pint, it is
the same that Cotyla in Greek. Humiditie, i. moisture. Hydromantia, a kind of
magical divination or foreknowledge of things to come, by observation of the
water. Hydrophobie, is a symptom or accident befalling to them that are bitten
by a mad dog, whereby they are afraid of water. Hypochondriall parts, be the
flanks or soft parts under the short ribs.
I
I Liacke passion, the wrings and torments of the upper small guts, occasioned
by wind or sharp humors. Some improperly call it the collicke of the stomach.
Imbibition, a drinking or receiving of any liquor into a thing: as when drougs
lie steeped therein until they be thoroughly soaked therewith. Imposthumes
properly be collections or gatherings of wind and humors especially between
parts of the body, whereupon there appears a rising or swelling, and in time
they become corrupt and do rankle, unless by some means they be either drawn
away or dispersed. Some term them wens, howbeit, the word is taken for
inflammations and biles. To Incorporate, is to mix and unite well together. To
Incrassate, is to make thick. Indigestion, i. want of concoction and
digestion, by which means many crudities and raw humors are ingendered, and by
consequence abundance of rheumes. Inflation, i. swelling or puffing up with
wind. Infrangible, i. that cannot be broken. Infusion signifies the
conueiance of some medicinable liquour into the body by clystre or other
instrument. It imports also the steeping of drougs in a convenient liquor:
and the liquor it self, when it is strained from the rest. Ingredients, be
those simples that go unto the making of any medicine compound. Iniection, is
the conueiance of any liquid medicine by syringe or such like instrument into
any part of the body or hollow and fistulous ulcer. Insects, little vermin or
small creatures, which have (as it were) a cut or division between their heads
and bodies, as Pismires, Flies, Grasshoppers, under which are comprehended
Earth-wormes, Caterpillars, etc. Insessions be bathing tubs or vessels half
full, wherein the patient may sit up to the middle or above in some convenient
decoction Intermittent fever, are those which come by fits, and yield some
rest between whiles. Iniunction, i. anointing. Iulebs or Iuleps, be drinks
given commonly as preparatiues for to open the passages of the inward parts,
and to prepare the humors for a purgation, made either of some stilled waters
and syrrups mixed together, or of a decoction sweetened with honey or sugar, or
else mingled with syrrups.
K
KIngs evil, is the hard swelling of the Glandules or Kernels commonly about
the neck: they be called also Scrophules.
L
LAchrymal, is the corner of the eye wherein the tears appear first, and
thereof it takes the name. Lassitude, is weariness or vnlustinesse. Lauature,
Lotion, or Loture, is a liquor to bathe or wash withal: likewise to clenseand
mundifie any part. Ligula, Lingua, or Lingula, a small measure among the
Romans, both of liquour and dry things, containing the fourth part of
Cyathus, to wit, three drams and one scriptule or scruple, somewhat under half
an ounce, and may go well for our Spoonefull. A Liniment is thicker than oil,
and thinner than an ointment, it may be taken for a thin ner kind of ointment.
Lobes and fibers are the lappets and extreme parts of the liver, with the
master veins growing thereto. Local medicines, be those that are appropriat
for the forehead, Errhine or Nasal for the nosthrils, etc. or to be applied
outwardly, ointments, which are not to be used before general or universal
means by euacuation. Loch or Lohoch, is a medicin more liquid than an
electuary, appropriat for the lungs and windpipe, and is to be licked and let
go down leisurely. Longaon, is the nethermost gut reaching unto the very seat
or the fundament. Luted, i. close stopped with clay, dough, or such like.
M
MAturatiues be medicines that help to ripen any swelling impostume, bile, or
botch Maturity, is the ripeness thereof. Membranes, be fine skins which inwrap
other parts, as the brains, eyes, and muscles of the flesh. Metrenchyte, an
instrument serving to infuse or iniect a liquid medicine into the matrice of a
woman, in manner of clystre. Mitigatiues, be such remedies as do assuage pain.
Mna, or Mina, was a Roman weight, which poised twenty ounces, that is to say,
the ordinary pound, called Libra or Pondo, and two third parts: for the common
Libra called Medica, weighed twelve ounces, so that Mina seemed to answer unto
the measure Sextarius. Mollitiue. See Emollitiues. Mordicatiue, is biting and
stinging, as Senuy seed. Mucilage, is a slimy liquor drawn from some roots or
seeds, as from the marsh Mallow or Althea root, the seed of Psillium or Flewort
and others. Muscles be the fleshie parts of the body, contained within their
several membranes or skins.
N
NArcoticke medicines, be those that benum and stupifie with their coldness,
as Opium, Hemlocke, and such like. Nasals be Nose-tents. See Errhina. Nerves,
i. Sinews. Nodosities, hard knubs and knots growing upon the joints in old
gouts, and in other parts.
O
OBolus, half a scriptule, or the sixth part of a dram. Obstructions, i.
Stoppings. Opiats, were properly at the first such electuaries or confections,
which had a good quan titie of Opium, i. the juice of Poppie in them, such as
Philonium and Requies, that were devised to mitigate intolerable pain, and to
bring the patient to sleep: howbeit, in these days all electuaries, even
cordials, in a liquid form be called Opiats, although there be not one grain of
Opium in them. Opilation. See Obstruction. Orthopnoicke, are those that have
the disease Orthopnoea, which is a difficulty of drawing their wind, unless
they sit upright. Osses, be words cast forth at unawares, presaging somewhat.
Otenchyte, an instrument, devised for to infuse or pour some medicinable
liquor into the ears, Oxycrate, a mixture of water and vinegar together.
P
To PAlliat, i. to cover: and such cures be called Palliatiue, which search not
to the root and cause, but give a show only of cure; as when a sore is healed
up aloft, and yet festereth underneath: and so sweet Pomanders do palliat a
stinking breath, occasioned by a corrupt stomach or diseased lungs, and such
like. Paradoxes, strange opinions. Pectorals, i. such medicines as be fit for
the breast and lungs. Pellicles. See Membranes. Penetratiue, i. Percing.
Periodicall, such agues be called, as return at their just course from day to
day, every third fourth, or fifth day, etc. Peripneumony, is the inflammation
of the lungs. Pessary, is a devise made like a finger or suppository, to be put
up into the natural parts of a woman. Phlebotomie, i. bloodletting, or opening
of a vein by incision or prick. Phthysicke, to speak properly, is the
consumption of the body occasioned by the fault of exulcerat and putrified
lungs. But Pliny otherwhiles seems to take it for any other consumption.
Pomona, a devised goddess amongst the Painims, of apples and such fruits.
Prodigies be strange sights and wonderful tokens, presaging some fearful
thing to come. Propinquitie, nearness or affinity. Proscription, was a kind
of outlawing and depriving a man of the protection of the state, with
confiscation of his lands and goods. Propagat, to grow and increase, after the
manner of Vine branches, which being drawn along in the ground from the
motherstock do take root. Propitious, i. gracious and merciful. Proximitie,
near neighborhood or resemblance. Ptisane, the decoction of husked Barley: a
grewell made therewith, or the cream thereof. Pulpous, i. full of pulpe, or
resembling pulpe, which is the soft substance in Apples or such fruits,
answerable to the flesh in living bodies. Purulent, yielding filth and Attyr.
Putrefactiue, such venomous medicines or humors, as do corrupt and putrify the
part of the body, which they possess.
Q
QVindecemvirs, were certain officers, fifteen in number, joined in one
commission.
R
REecptorie, a vessel standing underneath, ready to receive that which
droppeth and distilleth from something above it. Reciproeall, going and
coming, as the tides of the sea ebbing and flowing. To Rectify, i. to set
straight, to reform, or amend. Repercussiue, i. driving or smiting back.
Residence, i. the settling toward the bottom, as in urine. Retentiue faculty,
i. the natural power that each part or member of the body has to hold that
which is committed unto it, the due time, as the stomach, meat, the bladder,
urine, etc. Reuerberation, i. rebounding or striking back. Rhagadies, be
properly the chaps in the fundament or seat. Rubified, i. made red, as when by
application of mustard plastres, called Sinapismes; or beating a part that is
benumbed with nettles, it recouereth a fresh color again, whereupon such
plastres be called Rubificatiue, and the operation is named by the Greeks
Phoenigmos. Rupture, the disease of bursting, as when the guts or other parts
fall down into the bag of the cods.
S
SAliuation, is a drawing of humors to the mouth, and a delivery of them from
thence in manner of spittle. Sarcling is the baring of roots, by ridding away
the earth and weeds from about them, that did clog them. Scarification, is a
kind of pouncing or opening of the skin by way of incision slightly, with the
fleame or launcet, either to give some issue for the blood and humors to pass
forth, or prepare a place for the cuppingglasse to extract more. Schirre, is a
hard swelling almost senseless. Scriptule, or Scruple is four and twenty
grains weight, or the third part of a dram. Scrophules. See Kings evil. Seat,
is the circumference or compass about the tuill or fundament. Secundine, i.
the afterbirth that infolded the infant within the mothers womb. Sege, a
stool of easement, whereupon we sit to discharge the order and excrements of
the guts. Serosities, or Serous humors, be the thinner parts of the mass of
blood, answering to the whey in milk, such as we see to float upon blood that
has run out of a vein Sextarius, a measure among the Romans, whereof six go
to their Congius, whereupon it took that name: it contains two hemines, and is
somewhat less than a wine quart with us, it bears twenty ounces. Sinapisme,
a practice by a plaster of mustard seed, and such like, to revive a place in
manner mortified, and to draw fresh humors and color to it. Solstice, i. the
Sunnestead, as well in winter as Summer, when he is come to his vtermost
points North and South, but usually it is put for Mid-summer only.
Sophisticated, i. falsified and made corrupt, howbeit, going for the right.
Thus drougs and gems are many times thrust upon us. Spasmes, be painful
crampes or pluckings of the sinews and cords of the Muscles. Spasmaticke, are
such as be thus plucked. Species, be either the simple ingredients into a
composition, or else the bare pouders mingled together, ready to be reduced
into an electuarie liquid, or Tables. Speculatiue knowledge, or Speculation, is
the insight into a thing by reading only and contemplation, without practice
and experience. Sperme, is natural seed. Spondyles, be the turning ioints of
the chine or backbone. Stomachicall flux, is the same that Coeliaca passio.
See Coeliaci. Stomaticall medicines, be such as are appropriat for the diseases
incident to the mouth, and the parts adioining. Stypticke, be such things as by
a certain harsh taste, do show that they be astringent, as medlars and alumne,
which thereupon is named Stypteria, and such like. Succedan, that drug which
may be used for default of another. The Apothecaries call such, Quid pro quo.
Suffusion. See Cataract. Suffumigation, is the smoke that is received in to the
body from under a stool, for the diseases of the guts, fundament or matrice.
Suppuration, is when a bile or impostume gathers to an head and must be
broken. Sympathy, i. a fellow-feeling, used in Pliny, for the agreement or
amity natural in diverse senseless things, as between iron and the
loadstone. Symptom, an accident accompanying sickness, as headache the ague,
stitch, shortness of wind; spitting blood, cough, and ague, the pleurisy.
Syringe, an instrument in manner of a pipe to iniect a medicinable liquor into
the blader.
T
TEllus, the earth. Tenacitie, clamminesse, such as is in glue, birdlime, and
Bitumen. Theoricke, or Theoretique, contemplative knowledge without action and
practice. Tinesme, an inordinat desire to the stool without doing any thing to
the purpose. Tonsils. See Amygdals. Transparent, i. clear and bright
throughout; as crystal, amber, air and water. Transvasation, i. the pouring
of liquor out of one vessel into another. Triuial, i. vulgar, common, and of
base reckoning. Triumvirat, the Tripartite dominion of Antonie, Octavius, and
Lepidus, when they held all the world in their hands, each one their third
part. Trochisques, or Trosques, be little cakes or roundles, into which diverse
things medicinable are reduced for to be kept the better, and to be ready at
hand when they shall be used. Tuil, the same that the Fundament or nethermost
gut.
V
Vegetative, that power in nature which God has given to creatures, whereby
they live, are nourished, and grow. Ventositie, windiness. Vicinitie,
neernesse, or neighborhood. Victoriat, a silver coin in Rome, Half a
denarius, so called because it had the image of victory stamped on the one
side: it is somewhat under our groat. Unction, anointing. Unguent, an ointment.
Vreters, be the passages or conduits whereby the water or urine passes from
the kidneys into the bladder. Vulnerarie, i. belonging to a wound; as Sanicle
is a vulnerary herb, and Machaon was a vulnerarie Physician.
THE NINETEENTH BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF NATVRE,
WRITTEN BY C. PLINIVS SECVNDVS.
The Proeme.
TReated we have in the former book, of the stars and signs above, which give
us intelligence as well of the seasons, as the disposition of the weather to
come: and that in plain and easy manner, by so evident and undoubted
demonstrations also, as may content the mean capacity of the unskillful and
ignorant. And verily, if we will rightly weigh and consider the thing, we shall
find and understand, that our country farms and villages stand us in good
stead to know the inclination of the heavens and stars, as the skill of
Astronomy serves our turns for good husbandry. These points now being well
and thoroughly learned, many have bin of opinion, That the knowledge of gardens
and the care thereto belonging, should by good right follow next. Howbeit, I
for my part am of thismind, that there be other matters concerning Agriculture,
deserve to be handled, before we leap thus soon to gardening. And here I
cannot choose but marvel much at some men, who making such profession of
learning, and namely, in the skill and science of Agriculture, as they have
done; yea, and seeking thereby to win all their credit and name of erudition
and literature; have notwithstanding omitted many things requisite thereunto,
without any mention made, or one word spoken of so many herbs and simples
which either come up of themselves, or grow by means of man's hand: considering
that the most part of them are in greater price and reputation, yea, and in
more use and request far, for the maintenance of this our life, than either
corn or Pulse, or any fruits of the earth whatsoever.

And to begin first at those that are known commodities, and so notorious, as
that the use thereof not only reaches all over the maine and continent, but
extends also to the very s^as, and over spreads them: What say we to Line
or Flax, so commonly sowed as it is? yet may it not be ranged either among the
fruits of the field, or herbs of the garden. But what region (I pray you) or
part of the earth is without it; and what is there so necessary for this life
of ours in all respects? Again, is there any thing in the whole world more
wonderful and miraculous, than that there shouldbe an herb found of this
virtue and property, as to bring Egypt and Italy together? insomuch, as
Galerius, Lord Deputy in Egypt under the Romans, was known to set sail from
the firth of Messina in the straits of Sicily, and in seven days to arrive at
Alexandria: Babilius also Governor there likewise, in six; and that by the
means of the said herb? Moreover, what say you to this, which was seen no
longer since than the summer past; when Valerius Marianus, a Senator of Rome,
and late Lord Pretour, embarked and took ship at Puteoli, and in nine days
sailed to the said Alexandria, and yet he had but a very mild and still wind to
help him in that voyage? Is not this a strange and sovereign herb think you,
that in a seuen-nights space can fetch Gades from as far as the straits of
Gilbretar or Hercules pillars, into the harbor of Ostia in Italy? can show (I
say) the kingdom of Catalogne in Spain before the said port-towne in four
days; Province in three, and Barbary in two? for C. Flaccus, lieutenant under
Vibius Crispus the Pro-consull, did as much I speak of, and that with no great
forewind, but a most gentle and mild gale. Oh the audacious boldness of this
world, so rash, so full of sin and wickedness, that a man should sow and
cherish any such thing, as might receive and swallow the Winds, storms, and
tempests; as if the float and tide alone were not sufficient to carry so proud
a creature! But now are we grown moreover to this pass, that sails bigger
than the Ships themselves, will not serve our turns. For albeit one mast be
sufficient to carry the biggest crosse-yard that can be devised, yet are not
we content with a single maine sail thereupon, unless we set up Sail upon
Sail, top and top-gallant: unless (I say) we have for esailes and
sprit-sailes in the Prow, misnes also hoised up and displaied in the Poupe;
besides other trinkets and more cloth still; and all to set us more forward
upon our death, and to hasten our end. Finally, is there ought again so
admirable, as that of so small a grain as is the Line-seed, there should grow
that which is able to carry to and fro in a moment, this round globe of the
earth, the same being so slender a stalk as it is, and not growing high from
the ground? considering withal, that twisted it is not entire and whole in the
stem; but before it can be occupied, it must be watered, dried, braked,
tew-tawed, and with much lab^r driven and reduced in the end to be as soft and
tender as wool: and all to do violence to Nature and Mankind most audaciously
even in the highest degree, in such sort, as a man is not able to proceed so
far in execration, as is due unto this invention. The first deviser whereof I
have inueighed against in convenient place elsewhere, and not without desert;
as who could not be content, that a man should die upon the land, but he must
perish upon the sea, to feed Haddocks there, without the honor of sepulture.
In the book but next before this, I gave warning and advertised men, That for
to enjoy corn and other victuals necessary for this life, in suffisance and
plenty, we should beware of wind and rain: and now behold, man is so wicked
and ungracious, his wit so inuentiue, that he will be sowing, tending, and
plucking that with his own hand, that calls for nothing else at sea but wind;
and never rests till Browning be come. See moreover, how well this unhappy hand
of his speeds: for there is not a plant again comes up sooner, or thriueth
faster than this Flax. And to conclude, that we may know how Nature her self is
nothing well pleasing therewith, and that it grows maugre her will, it burns
the field wherein it is sowed, it eats out the heart of the ground, and
makes it worse where-euer it comes: this is all the good it does upon a land.

CHAP. I.
The manner of sowing Line or Flax: the sundry kinds thereof: the order how to
dress it. Also of Napkins and other Naperie. Of Flax and Linen that will not
burn in the fire. And when the Theaters or Shew-places at Rome were first
encourtained.

LIne-seed loves grauelly or sandy grounds passing well, and commonly is sowed
with one tilth and no more: yet is there nothing makes more haste to be above
ground, For that so quickly it robs her of moisture.
injurious it is still to the earth even this way also! Well, say that the
Egyptians in some sort may be excused, for sowing it as they do, and making
saile-cloath thereof; in regard of the necessary traffic they have into
Arabia and India, for to fetch in the commodities of those countries; what need
or reason, I pray you, has France so to do? Can the Gauls be sorted in the
same range with the Egyptians? Whether would they go? Is it not sufficient that
they see the mighty mountains standing just between them and the
Miditerranean sea? Will not this serve to keep them from Navigations, that on
the huge Ocean side they can discover nothing but the vast Elements of Water
and Air together? Howbeit, for all this restraint, the Cadurci, Caletes,
Rutene, and Bituriges; the Morini also, who are supposed to be It seems that
fine Holland cloth and Cambricke was in request by Plinies time.
: insomuch as the women there cannot devise to go more rich and costly in their
apparel, than to wear fine Linen. The observation whereof puts me in mind
of a thing that M. Varro does report of the whole Race and Family of the
Serrani: in which House this Order was precisely kept, That there was not a
woman amongst them known to wear any Linen about her, no not so much as in a
smock next her bare skin. Now in Germany, the spinners and weauers of
Linen do all their work in shrouds, caves, and vaults, buried, as it were,
under the ground: so do they also in Italy and that part of Lombardie that
lies between Regione Alia^a. Tur^eb.
Country Aliana; where (after the Setabines in Castile, which is the best)
there is very fine workmanship of Linen cloth, and may deserve the third
place for goodness thoroughout all Europe. For the Retovines, bordering hard
upon the foresaid Allianes, and the Faventines, who inhabit the broad port-way
Aemilia, are to be ranged in a second degree and next to the Setabines for the
fine Linen which they make. And in Julius Lupus, who died Lord Deputy or
Governor of Egypt, had such. This may well seem a marvel incredible to those
who neither knew nor saw the net-worke Habergeon, or Curet of Amasis, a king
sometime of Egypt, which was showed of late days within the temple of Minerua,
in the Isle of the Rhodians; every thread whereof According to the days of the
year.
365 double. Certes, Mutianus a man of good credit (as who had bin thrice
confull of Rome) has related so much at Rome upon his own knowledge: for
whereas there remained yet certain small relics and little pieces thereof, it
was his hap of late to meet with some of them and by his own trial to find
that true, which hac bin reported by others. And verily, great pity it is,
that such an excellent, rich, and rare piece of work (as it was) should thus
come to nothing, by men's injurious handling of it, raueling out the threads as
they have don, for to see the proose of the thing.

But to return again to our flax of Italy. That which grows in the
Pelignians country is at this day in great account and request: how beit, none
use it but the Fullers. There is not a whiter flax to be found, and indeed
resembling wool nearer than this flax. Like as, for quilts, ticks

Moreover, in the higher parts of Egypt which bend toward Arabia, there grows
a certain shrub or bush carrying cotton, which some call Gossypium, others
Coton or Bombace.
Xylon, and the linen thereof made they therefore call Linsy-wolsey, or our
Fustians rather.
Xylina. This plant is but small, and brings forth a fruit resembling
Hereupon cotton is called Bombac
Bombyx] there breaks forth a cotton like unto down, so easy to be spun: and
there is no flax in the world comparable to it for whiteness and softness. Of
this cotton, the Egyptian priests were wont to wear their fine surplesses, and
they took a singular delight therein. A fourth kind of linen there is, called
Orchomenium; it comes from a certain fennie reed growing in marshes, I
mean the

In Asia they have a certain kind of broom, the stalk and branches whereof
they water and leave in steep ten days together, and thereof make thread,
passing good for to be twisted and knit into fisher nets, for they will abide
the water very well, and endure without rotting. The Ethiopians and Indians
both, find a stuff in manner of Line or cotton in some apples or such like
fruit: and the Arabians meet with the like in gourds, growing as I have
beforesaid upon trees.

To come again to our country Line or Flax within Italy, we go by two signs,
and know thereby when it is ripe and ready to be gathered; to wit, either by
the swelling of the seed, or the color of the plant it self, leaf and stalk
inclining to yellow. Then is it plucked up and bound

Furthermore, there is a kind of Line found out which will not consume in the
fire: this in Italy they call Quick-line, and I my self have seen
table-clothes, towels, and napkins thereof, which being taken foul from the
bourd at a great feast, have been cast into the fire, and there they burned
before our face upon the hearth; by which means they became better scoured,
and looked fairer and brighter a hundred times, than if they had bin rinsed and
washed in water; and yet no part of their substance, but the filth only, was
burnt away. At the royal obsequies and funerals of KK. the manner was to wind
and lap the corpse within a sheet of this cloth, of purpose to separate fire.
Geason it is to be found, and as hard to be wouen, so short and small it is.
How soever otherwise Anaxilaus says, That if a man would cut down or fall a
tree by stealth and in secret, let him compass the body thereof with a sheet
of this linen, he may hew as long as he will at it, and all the strokes that
he gives will be so drowned, that they shall not be heard again. To conclude,
in all these respects above said, this Line may well be counted for the
principal and best that is in the whole world.

The next to it in goodness, is the Line called Byssus: the fine Lawn or
Tiffany whereof our wives and dames at home set so much store by for to trim
and deck themselves: it grows in 24 grains,
scruple thereof was commonly exchanged for i about three hal^e-pence the
grain, and better.
four deniers Roman.

The lint or nappie down which linen cloth bears in manner of a soft
cotton, especially such as comes of ship sails that have lien at sea, is of
great use in Physic. Hereof were m^de (...)* whereof Galen writes. 3. (...).
with which lint he cured Heraclides and stanched his bleedin^.
The ashes also made thereof, be counted a good Succedane of Spodium, and for
their efficacy may go for it. Moreover, there is a kind of Poppies much sought
after for blanching and bleaching of linen clothes; for being skoured
therewith, it is wonderful how white and pure they will look: and yet for all
the beauty that consists in that color, people are grown to this disorder
and vain enormity, that they have assaied to stain and die their linen and
naperie into other colors, as well as their woollen cloth. Which practice was
first seen in the Armada or fleet of K. Alexander M. Antonius together with
Cleopatra came to Actium, and in which they fled both from thence and escaped.
And indeed heretofore a red purple banner erected on the top of the mast, was
the badge or ensign of the royal Admiral ship: but afterward they began at
Rome to incourtaine their Theater with such vailes dyed in colors, only for
shade: an invention devised by Q. Catulus at what time as he dedicated the
temple of the Capitol. In process of time, Lentulus Spinter (by report) was
the first man that in the solemnity of the games Caesar Dictator caused the
grand Forum or Common place at Rome to be covered all over with such rich
Courtains; yea and the high fair street called Sacra, to be hanged on both
sides from his own dwelling house to the very Capitol cliffe: which
magnificent and sumptuous sight, was more wondered at and seen with greater
admiration, than the brave show and Tourney that he set out at the same time of
Sword-plaiers at sharp and to the utterance. Then followed Marcellus also the
son of Octauia, sister to the Emperor Augustus, who in his own Aedileship and
in the tenth Consulship of his uncle Augustus beforesaid, upon the Calends or
first day of August that year, caused the Roman Forum to be drawn all over
and shadowed with the like courtains, although he represented at that time no
solemnity at all of games and Cato the Censor, who thought it meet and
requisite, yea and gave advise that the said Forum or great Hal of common Pleas
should be paued and laid all over with caltraps under foot, To keep our Lawyers
and busy pleaders from thence. Of late days there were seen in the
Amphitheatres of Emperor Nero, trauerses drawn upon cords and ropes, with
fine courtains of blew azure color like the sky, and those beset with stars;
where the very floor of the ground under men's feet, was colored red. And
wherefore serve these in cloister courts and walks now, but to keep the moss
forsooth upon the ground, or rather the fine fret-worke in pauements, from
sun-burning? But for all these paintings and rich dies, yet when all is done,
the white linen held the own still and was highly esteemed above al colors.
And no doubt in great price such cloth was in the time of the Homer testifies,
that few there were who went to the wars with linen habergeons or curets: but
it should seem that the Poet (as the better learned expositors do terpret)
meant, That ship-tackling, sails, cords, and ropes, were made of this Line,
speaking as Called by Pacuvius, Serilia, as Festus notes.
Sparta, whereby he understands indeed Sata, i. cordage of sown Line or
garden Flax.

CHAP. II.
The nature of Spart or Spanish broom: the manner of handling and dressing it:
when it was first used in cordage: what Plants there be that live and grow
without root.

SPart verily was not in use and request for many hundred years after, neither
was it known before the first voyage and expedition that the Carthaginians
made in warlike manner into [i. the mids] of May unto mid-Iune, it is very
tractable: for this is the time and season when it is ripe, and then commonly
they gather it for their ordinary uses before named. Being once pulled and
sorted, the good from the bad, it is

The Greeks in old time employed their rishes in drawing of ropes: as may
appear by the * Sic Spartum nunc restem nunc plantam ^qua restes fiunt,
significant.
of dressing it.

Theophrastus writes, That there is a bulbous plant, with a root like an
Onion-head growing about the banks of rivers; between the utmost rind whereof,
and that part within, which is good to be eaten, there is a certain cotton or
woolly substance, whereof folk use to make Impilia. (...) vdo^es.
woollen sockes and some such slight pieces of apparel. But he neither named
the country where they be made, nor sets down any other particularities more
than this, That the said plant they called Eriophoron [i. Bearing wool:] so
far as ever I could find in any copies coming to my Theophrastus was otherwise
a diligent and curious writer of plants, and searched deep into the nature of
simples, four hundred and ninety years before my time, yet has he made no
mention at all of Spart, a thing that I have observed and noted in him once
already before now. Whereby evident it is, that the manner of dressing and
using Spart, came up after his days.

And since we are entered into a discourse of the wonders of Nature, I will
follow on still and continue the same, wherein this may be one of the greatest,
That a thing should live and grow as a plant without root. Look but to those
Mushroomes or Toad-stooles, which are called in Latin Tubera: out of the ground
they grow, compassed about on every side with the earth, with out root, without
any filaments, or so much as small strings and beards resembling a root
whereupon they should rest: the place where they breed does not swel or bear up
one jot, nay, it shows Lartius Licinius, sometimes lord Praetor and governor
under the Romans in the province of Spain, chanced (of my knowledge) while he
was there at Carthage, in biting one of these Mushroms, to meet with a silver
Roman denier within it, that turned the edge again of some of his fore teeth,
and set them awry. Whereby a man may perceive manifestly, that they be a
certain excresence of the very earth, gathering into a round form, as all

CHAP. III.
Of the excrescence named or, Mison.
Misy: and of other such like Puffes and Mushroms. Of those flat Fusses and
broad Toad-stooles, called or, Pezitae.
Pezici. Of the plant or herb Laser. wort.
Laserpitium. Of Magydaris. Of Madder. Of Sope-weed, or the Fullers herb
Radicula.

WIthin the province of Cyrenaica in Affricke, there is found the like
excrescence called Misv, passing sweet and pleasant, as well in regard of the
smell as the taste, more pulpous * or Mison, rather, according to Turneb.
also and fuller of carnositie than the rest: likewise, another of that nature
in Thracia, much. Secondly, they will not last above one year. Item, The
tenderest and daintiest be those Item, In some countries the ouerflow of rivers
engender Mushromes, and namely, at Mitylene, where (by report) they will not
otherwise grow but upon floten grounds, and namely, in such places whither the
water has brought from Tiara, a certain vegetative seed to breed them. And
verily, That Tiara is wonderfully stored and replenished with such. As touching
the Truffles or Mushroms of Asia, the most excellent of all others be near unto
Lampsacum and Alopeconnesus: but the best that Greece yields are in the
territory about the city Elis. In this Toad-stoole or Mushrome kind are those
flat Fusses and Puffes to be reckoned, which the Greeks name or Pezici
Pezitae: as they have no root at all, so they be altogether without either
stele or tail.

In the next place to these I must needs speak of the most noble and famous
plant Laserpitium, Some take it for Benioin, or Asa dulcis.
Laser; a drug so magnified, of such singularity and use in Physic
especially, that it was sold by weight, and a dram thereof cost commonly Which
is equiuolent in weight to a dram, i. 7. d. ob English.
Roman denier. For these many years of late, there is none of this plant to
be found in that country of Cyrenaica beforesaid: for that the Publicans and
Farmers of the pastures and grounds there, (under the people of Rome) do put
in their cattle among these plants, and eat al down by that means: finding
thereby a greater gain or commodity, than by letting them stand for the juice
or liquor aforesaid. One only stalk or stem thereof has bin found in our days,
which was sent unto Emperor Nero as a present, for a great nouelty. If it
chance at any time, that either sheep or goat (which commonly bite near to the
ground) Thought to be Asafoetida.
Laser, than that which grows abundantly in Persis or Media, and in Armenia:
but it is far inferior to this of Cyrenaica, and comes short of it for
goodness. And this that we have is no better than it should be, for they
sophisticate and corrupt it with gum, with Sagapeum, or else with bruised
Beans. In regard of which scarsity, I cannot choose but remember that which
befell at Rome in that year wherein C. Valerius and M. Herennius were consuls,
when by great good fortune there was brought from Cyrenae thirty pound weight
of the best Laser, and set abroad to be seen in open place, of all comers. As
also I may not let pass another occurrent, namely, Caesar Dictatour at the
beginning of the civil war, took forth openly out of the chamber of the
city, with other treasure both of gold and silver, an hundred and eleven
pounds of the best Laser. Moreover, this one thing more I cannot forget: the
best and most renowned Greek Authors have left in writing, That 7 years before
the foundation of the city Cyrenae, which was built 143 years after our city
of Rome, this plant Laserpitium that bears the said Laser was engendered at
one instant, by occasion of a certain thick, gross, and black shewer of
rain, in manner of pitch, which suddenly fell and drenched the ground, about
the hortyards or gardens of the Hesperides, and the greater Syrtis: The which
rain was effectual, and left the strength thereof, for the compass of 500
miles.
four thousand stadia within Affricke or Barbary. They affirm moreover, That
the herb Laserpitium, there growing, is of so savage and churlish a nature,
that

Now concerning the juice or sovereign liquor before said, the manner was to
draw it after

Moreover, upon the mount Pernassus there is great plenty found of a certain
herb, which the inhabitants would needs have to be Laserpitium, and so they
call it: wherewith indeed they

Two plants more therebe well known to the common sort and base multitude, and
to say a truth, few else are acquainted with them, notwithstanding they be
commodities of much gain, and many a penny is gotten thereby. The first is
Madder, in great request among diers and curriers: and for to set a color upon
their wool and leather, right necessary. The best of all and most

The second is that which is called in Latin Radicula, [i Sope-wort] an herb,
the juice whereof Fullers use so much to scour their wool withal: and
wonderful it is to see how white, how pure, how neat and soft it will make it.
Being set, it will come up and grow in any place: but of pleasant color to
what meat soever is sodden in the pot with it. It bears a leaf like the
Olive:

CHAP. IV.
The manner of trimming and ordering Gardens: the sorting of all those things
that grow out of the Earth, into their due places, besides corn and

IT remains now to treat of Gardens, and the careful diligence thereto
belonging: a commendable thing in it self, and recommended unto us besides by
our forefathers and ancient writers, who had nothing (to speak of) in more
account and admiration in old time, than the gardens of the Hesperides, of
Adonis, and Alcioniis: as also those pendant gardens upon tarraces and leads of
houses, whether they were those that Semyramis Queen of Babylon, or Cyrus K.
of Assyria, devised and caused to be made. Of which, and of their workmanship,
my intent is to make a discourse in some other book. Now for this present (to
go no farther than Rome) the Roman KK. verily themselves made great store of
gardens, and set their minds upon them: for so we read, that Tarquin surnamed
the Proud (the last king of Rome, was in his garden when he gave dispatch unto
that messenger that was sent from his son about a cruel and bloody errand,
for to know his fathers advise and pleasure as touching the citizens of Gabij.
In all the [i. a Garden] is, comprised Haeredium, that is to say, an Heritage
or Domain: and herupon grew by consequence, a certain religious or rediculous
superstition, rather of some whom we ceremoniously to sacre and bless their
garden and hortyard doors only, for to preserve them against the witchcraft;
and sorcerie of spightful and envious persons. And therefore they use to set up
in gardens, ridiculous and foolish images of Satyrs, Antiques and as Priapus,
Phalli, and Ithyphalli.
such like, as good keepers and remedies against envy and witchcraft, howsoever
Plautus assigns the custody of gardens to the protection of the goddess
Venus. And even in these our days, under the name of Gardens and Hortyards,
there go many dainty places of pleasure Epicurus the doctor and master of all
voluptuous idleness, who devised such gardens of pleasance in Athens: for
before his time, the manner was not in any city, to dwell (as it were) in the
country, and so to make city and country al one, but all their gardens were
in the villages without. Certes at Rome, a good garden and no more, was thought
a poor man's cheiuance; it went (I say) for land and living. The Garden was the
poor commoners shambles, it was all the market place he had for to provide
which they affourd: how cheap be they? how ready at hand? how fitted are they
not only to fill Etiam vno esse venali.
three farthings price, and no better? Surely I see no sense nor congruitie at
all in this. And yet forsooth such herbs there be, that the tribes of Rome
(the greater part I mean of the Roman citisens) may not presume to eat; as if
the earth had brought them forth for rich men only, being no meat yw is for
poor people. Why (say they in scorn and contempt of poverty) here is the
stem of a Wort so well grown, here is a cabbage so thriuen and fed, that a
poor man's board will not hold it. Certes dame Nature ordained at the first,
That Sperage should grow wild and commonly in all places of the field, as if
she meant thereby, that every man that would might gather them for to eat: and
now behold they are cherished carefully in gardens; and from Rauenna you shall
Carduus:
Thistles, when the Commons of Rome are restrained and forbidden to eat
Artichokes, which are no better than Cardui al^iles, i. Garden-Thistles.
Thistles, and dare not once touch them? And yet here is not all: our waters
also be distinguished and set apart for some persons; even the very elements
whereof this world consists, are distinct, severed, and raunged into sundry
degrees, and all at the pleasure of monied men: for some you shall have to
drink snow, others ice: and will you see in one word their folly and vanity?
the very misery that high mountains are punished and plagued with, they make
their pleasure of, and therewith content and delight the throat. These

But now it is time to return again unto our gardening, from which we were
digressed. Certain it is, that in old time there was no market place at Rome
yielded greater impost un to the Cato highly commends the garden Couls or
cabbages; whereby we may know, that in his days gardens were in some respect.
Also in times past, as husbandmen in the country were known especially, and
their wealth valued by their gardens, so when there was a garden plot seen
lying out of order, and not well kept, men judged straitway, that the mistress
or dame there dwelling (for commonly this charge lay upon women) was but an ill
huswife, and thriftlesse in her house: for in default of gardinage what remedy
was there then, but to draw the purse strings, and go for every thing either to
the Butchery or the herbe-market, and so to live upon the penny. Neither were
in those days Coules or cabbages so well esteemed as now they be: Much like to
our Anchoues.
Garum, all those were reproched for gourmandise and gluttony, who could not
eat fish or flesh without it. And therefore men took greatest contentment in
their gardens and garden herbs: those were at hand and ready at all times, no
great cookerie was required to dress such dishes, no need of fire, no expense
of wood and fuel. And hereupon it came, that salads of herbs were called (...).
Acedaria, so little care and trouble went to the provision and making of them.
Beside, light they are of digestion, they breed no heaviness in the head, they
offend not the brain nor any of the senses; and least of any thing make
quarrel to the loaf and spend little bread. That quarter Valerij, some were
not abashed nor ashamed to be called Lactucini, in regard of the best kind of
Lectuce that they either had in their gardens, or affected most. And here I
cannot choose but Pliniana, in testimony of our affection and love to that
fruit. Which I remember the rather, for that Virgil confesses how hard a thing
it is, that so small matters as these be should grow into the name and
reputation of honor any way. And now to the purpose. No man doubts, Item, It
ought to be divided in principal quarters: the same also must be set out into
several beds, raised somwhae high and lying upward. Item, Requisite it is, that
every quarter have as welce^taine open gutttrs or furrows drawn about them,
as convenient allies between to give both passage for men to come and go
gainely; and also a current to the course of water that shall be let in, when
the springs be set open or sluices drawn.

Garden plants and herbs be not all commendable in one and the same respect.
For of some the goodness lies only in their bulbous and round root: of others
contrariwise in their head

Moreover, this I would advertise the Reader, that when I term some herbs
Ferulacea, I mean such as resemble in stalk Dil or the great Mallows. For
some writers do report, That in Arabia there be a kind of Mallows* which
after they have grown six or seven months, come to be in the nature of pretty
trees: insomuch, as their stalks streightwaies serve in stead of walking
staves. But what should I stand upon this? In Mauritania, by report of
travelers, near the Hercules (far more ancient than that temple of his,
which is in the Island Calis) there grows a Mallow, that is a very tree
indeed: in height it is twenty foot, and in body bigger and thicker than any
man can fadome. In this kind I mean for the raunge the Hemp likewise. And as
I purpose to term such Ferulacea; so there be some others, that I will call
Carnosa, such as resemble the river or fresh water Spunges, which commonly are
seen upon ouer-floten meadows, where the water stands. For as touching the
fungous substance or calliositie of some plants, I have already spoken thereof
in the Treatise of Wood and Trees, and of their nature: Likewise in our late
discourse of another sort of Mushroomes

CHAP. V.
Garden plants, their natures, kinds, and several histories.

OF the cartilage and pulpous kind (such I mean only, whereof there is nothing
good but that which is above the ground) I reckon the Cucumber: a fruit that
Tiberius the Emperor much loved and affected: for he took such a wondrous
delight and pleasure therein, that there was not a day went over his head, but
he had them served up to his table. The beds and gardens wherein they grew were
such as went upon frames to be removed every way with wheels: and in winter,
during the cold and frosty days, they could draw them back into certain high
covert buildings exposed to the Sun, and there house them under roufe.
Moreover, Columella tells of a pretty devise that he has of his own, how to
keep of them fresh all the year long: choose (quoth he) the biggest bramble you
can Some take it for Coniza, (...). Fleabane Mullet.
Culix, and then to sow it, persuading us that we shall have fruit thereof
without anyseed.

Of the like nature (I mean for their manner of growing) be the Gourds. Winter
and al cold half deep. But in very deed, the best and meetest time to sow
them is about the feast Parilia, i. the 7 day thereof, or at farthest, by the
feast or holy days of Minerva, named Quinquatrus. They love both alike to
creep and crawle with their winding top branches or tendrels, and gladly they
would be clambering upon walls, and climbing up to the house roof, if they can
meet with any rough places to take hold by; for naturally they are given to
mount on high. Howbeit, their strength is not answerable ^o their will and
desire: for stand they cannot alone without the help of some props, forks, or
railes, to stay them upright. Exceeding forward and swift they be in growth.
They run on end when they are set on it: and if they may be born up and
sustained in manner aforesaid, they will gently ouershade galleries, walking
places, arbors, frames, and allies under them in a garden, and that right
quickly. In regard of which nature and behauior of theirs, two principal
kinds i. the vulgar and common, which creeps along the ground beneath. In
the former kind it is worth the noting, to see how the fruit (heavy as it is)
hangs stiff poised as it were in the wind, and will not stir,
notwithstanding the stele whereto it grows be wondrous fine and small.
Moreover, Gourds also may be fashioned in the head every way as a man will,
like as the Cucumbers or Melons before named: and specially within wicker cases
made of pliable oisiers, into which they are put for to grow and to take their
form, so soon as they have cast their blossom. The nature of them (I say) is to
receive what figure a man will force and put them to: but commonly shaped they
are in their growth like to a Serpent,

Gourds are employed sundry ways, and to many more uses than Cucumbers. For
first, their young and tender stalks be very good meat, and being dressed, are
served up as a dish to the table: but the rind is of a clean contrary nature.
Gourds of late time came to be used in stouves and herbs in manner of the
garden, there be both wild and tame: so is there of Gourds and Cucumbers
Cucumis syluestris. Colocynthis, or, Coloquintida.
savage kind. Such are not for the kitchen, but for the Apothecaries shop, and
good only in Physic: and therefore I will put off for this present the
discourse of them and their nature, reserving them for their several treatises
in other books concerning such medicinable simples.

As touching the rest of garden plants, which are of the like cartilage and
pulpous substance, they be all the sort of them roots growing hidden within the
ground: amongst which, I might seem to have written already fully and
sufficiently of Rapes and Turnips, but that the Physicians have observed in
them both sexes, to wit, masculine and foeminin; for the rounder kind they will
have to be the male, but the broader and flatter sort, which also are somewhat
hollow, they account the female: and these last they hold to be the better far,
and more pleasant, as being easier or rather ^alie.
about Verona yields. As concerning all things else, and namely the manner of
sowing them, I have said enough in the treatise of Rapes or Turnips.

As for Radishes, their roots do consist of a rind without, and a cartilage or
pulpous substance within: and verily many of them are known to have a thicker
skin or rind than the bark is of some trees: bitter such are, more or less,
according to the thicknes of the said rind: otherwhile also the rest is all
pitch and as hard as wood. All Radishes breed wind wonderful much, and provoke
Theophrastus writes all this of Brassica. (...). Colewoort. See how Pliny is
ouerseene: but that is no news with him.
The Greeks have made three sorts of Radishes, differing all in leaf: the
first crisped and curled like a ruff, the second smooth and plain, the third
wild and savage; and these wild ones verily have smooth leaves, but short and
round: plentiful also they be, and otherwise full of branches: Here he seems
to come again to the radish indeed.
Our countrymen here in Italy have made other kinds thereof; to wit, Algiclense,
so called of the place: long they be, transparent and clear, that a man may
see through them. A second sort there be fashioned in manner of a Rape root, and
those they call Syriaca, the sweetest for the most part of all others, and
tenderest, such also as will hold out best against frost and winter weather.
Yet the principal and very best indeed are those, which as it should seem were
but lately brought out of Syria (at leastwise the seed of them) for that in no
writers there is found any mention made of stem or stalk: for such as bite at
the tongues end, have rounder and longer stems than the other 11 C^l. Iu^. or
as some think, 13 Call. Iun, i. the 20 or 22 day of May. This feast was named
also L^ria.
Vulcan, which is indeed the better season for Seednes. Mary there be that put
the seeds into the ground in March, April, and September. When they are come
up and begin to grow to some bigness, it is very good to enterre and cover
with mould round about the leaves, now one, and then another; but in any case
to bank the roots well with earth: for look how much appears bare above
ground, proves either Aristomachus would have them to be stripped from their
leaves in winter, and in any hand to be banked well about, that the water stand
not there in any hollow furrow or hole lower than the other ground; promising
us by this means, that they will prove fair and big against Summer. Some have
reported, that if a man make a hole in the ground with as big a stake as he
will, and strew or lay it in the bottom with a bed of chafe six fingers deep,
and on it bestow his seed, with muck and mould heaped thereupon, the roots will
grow so big as to fill up the said hole full. Howbeit, in brief, Radishes are
best nourished and maintained in salt grounds: and therefore with such kind of
brakish waters they use to be watered, which is the reason, that in Egypt
there are the sweetest Apollo in his temple at Delphos, they dedicated the Beet
in silver, and the Rape or Turnep in lead, they presented a Radish in beaten
gold. A man may know hereby, that Manius Curious the great General of the Roman
army, was not that countreyman borne; whom the Samnite Ambassadors (when they
brought to him a great present of gold [vpon condition to surcease arms] which
he meant to refuse and not accept at their hands) found rosting of a Rape or
Turnep root Moschian the Greek writer so highly esteemed this root, that he
compiled one whole book of the Radish, and nothing else. Indeed Radishes are
thought excellent good with meats in Winter time: howbeit they always wear and
mar their teeth who eat of them: and yet I assure you they will polish Iuorie,
which is nothing else but the Elephants tooth. Here (...) forgets himself
again: for this is verified of the Colewort, and not of the Radish.
Between a Vine and a Radish, there is by nature a secret enmity and exceeding
great hatred, in so much as if Radishes be sowed near unto her, she will writh
and turn away sensibly from them.

Touching other sorts of cartilage or pulpous plants in the garden, whereof I
have before spoken, they be all given to run much to pith, and to be of a more
woodie substance. A man would marvel therefore that they should all taste so
strong and sharp as they do. Of which there is Some call these Mad^ips.
called Staphylinas. A second sort is set of a plant with the root and sowed of
seed, either in the prime of spring, or else in Autumn: howsoever Hyginus would
have them to be put into the ground in February, August, September, and
October; and that the plot where they are to grow, should be dug and delued
Some take it for Al^oea or the marish Mallow.
Hibiscum, it differs from the Parsnip aforesaid only in this, That it is
more slender and smaller, rejected altogether from the table, and condemned for
no good meat; howbeit medicinable, and used much by the Physician. A fourth
kind there is beside, resembling also the Parsnip, which our countrymen the
Latins name the French Parsnip, but the Greeks Daucus, [i. the yellow Douke
or Carot] which they have subdivided into four special sorts. The Siser.
Skirwirt root or white Parsnip, (which indeed would be written among other
Physic Tyberius who was very earnest to have them yearly brought out of
Germany, and ever he would call for them at his own table. And indeed about
Gelduba (a castle situat upon the river Rhene in Germany) there was an
excellent kind of them that grew to be passing fair, from whence he was
served: whereby it appears, that this plant loves cold regions well. These
roots have a string in manner of a pith or sinew, running all the length
thereof, which the cook uses to take forth after they be sodden; yet for all
that there remains still in them a great deal of bitterness: howbeit being
well tempered and delaied with a sauce of mead or honyed wine, and so eaten with
it, even the same bitterness turns to a good and pleasant taste. The greater
Parsnip Pastinaca, has the like nerve or string aforesaid (such only I mean as
are a year old.) The right season to

The Inula.
Elecampane has a root shorter than the Skirwirts or Parsnips aforesaid, but
more musculous and fuller as it were of brawn; bitterer also: in which regards,
if it be taken simply alone, it is adverse and contrary to the stomach; but
joined and confected with some sweet things among, it is very holsom. And many
devises have bin practiced with it to take away that harsh and untoward
bitterness which it has, whereby it is become toothsome and pleasant enough:
for some there be who stamp it dry and so reduce it into a powder: then they
mix it with some sweet liquid syrrup, and being thus tempered, serve it up.
Others sees it in water and vinegre mingled together, and so keep it condite.
Infused also it is many ways, and afterward either * Cariotis, some read
Caricis, (...). Figs.
the Sun, or last of all with fair and fat Dates. Moreover, diverse there be,
who after another sort make a confection thereof, namely with Quinces, with
Soruises, or Plums, mixing therewith one while Pepper, another while Thym. And I
assure you this root thus confected (as is aforesaid) is singular good for
faintings; and especially quickneth the dulnes and defect of the stomach. The
Empress Iulia Augusta passed not a day without eating the Elecampane root thus
confected and condite: and thereupon came it to be in so great name and bruit as
it is. The seed thereof is needless and good for nothing: therefore to
maintain and increase this plant, gardeners use commonly to set the joints cut
from the root, after the order as they do Reeds and Canes. The manner is to
plant them as well as Parsnips, Skirwirts, and Carrots, at both times of
seednes,

It remains now to speak in the next place of plants, with bulbous or onion
roots and their nature, which Cato recommendeth to Gardeners, and he would have
them to be set and sowed above all others: among which, he most esteems them
of Megara. Howbeit, of all this bulbous kind, the Sea-onyon Squilla is reputed
chief and principal, notwithstanding there is no use of it but in Physic,
and for to quicken vinegre. As there is none that grows with a bigger head at
the root, so there is not any more aegre and biting than it. Of these
Sea-onyons, there grow about their sides. And if a man would have the head of
the root wax big, the leaves which Pythagoras the Philosopher wrote one entire
volumne of these onions, wherein he collected their medicinable virtues and
properties, which I mean to deliver in the next book.

As touching other bulbous plants, there be sundry kinds of them, differing all
in color, quantity, and sweetness of taste: for some there be of them good to
be eaten raw, as those of Cherrhonesus Taurica. Next unto them, are they of
Barbary, and most commended for goodness, and then those that grow in Apulia.
The Greeks have set down their distinct kinds in rather, Hemerocalles.
Aegylops, and Sisyrinchios. But strange it is of this Sisyrinchios last named,
how the foot and bottom of the root will grow down still in winter; but in the
Spring when the Violets appear, the same diminishes and gathers short
upward; by which means the head indeed of the root seedeth and thriueth the
better. In this rank of bulbous plants, is to be set that, which in Egypt they
call Aron, [i. Wake-Robin:] for bigness of the head it comes next to Squilla
beforesaid: the leaves resemble the herb Patience or garden Dock: it rises up
with a straight stem or stalk two cubits high, as thick as a good round
cudgel. As touching the root, it is of a soft and tender substance, and may be
eaten raw. If you would have good of these bulbous roots, you had need to dig
them out of the ground before the spring; for if you pass that time, they will
presently be the worse. You shall know

CHAP. VI.
Of the roots, leaves, flowers, and colors of Garden-herbes.

ALl Garden plants ordinarily, put out but one single root apiece; as for
example, the Radish, Beet, Parsley, and Mallow: howbeit the greatest and
largest of all others is the root of the herb Patience or garden Docke, which
is known to run down into the ground three cubits deep. In the wild of this
kind (which is the common docke) the roots be smaller, yet plumpe and swelled;
whereby, after they be dug up and laid above ground, they will live a long
time. Some there be of them that have hairy strings or beards hanging to the
roots, as namely Parsley or Ach, and Mallows. Others there be again, which
have branching roots, as the Basil. As the roots of some be carnous and fl^ie
altogether, and namely of the Beet, but P^rdicium.
Parietarie of the wall, and Saffron. Moreover, a man shall see these herbs,
flower at once together with the Ash, namely, the running or creeping Thyme,
Southernewood, Naphewes, Radishes, Mints, and Rue; and by that time as others
(i. Ruds or Turnsol.) In some the flowers be white, in others yellow, and in
others purple. As touching the leaves of herbs, some are apt to fall from
their heads or tops, as in Origan and Gethy^m.
Chibbols be most hollow. Where by the way I cannot ouerpasse the foolish
superstition of the Egyptians, who use to swear by Garlic and Onions,
calling them to witness in taking their oaths, as if they were no less than
some gods. Of Onions the Greeks have devised sundry kinds, to wit, the Sardian,
Samothracian, Alsiden, Setanian, Schista [i. the cloven Onion] and Ascalonia
[i. little onions or Scalions] taking that name of Ascalon a city in Jury. They
have all of them this property besides, to make ones eyes water, and to fetch
out tears, being smelled to, especially they of Cypros: but the Gnidian onions
least of all others cause one to weep. In all kinds of them the body of the
root consists of a certain fatty pulp or cartilage. For quantity the
Setanian be least, except the Tusculane: howbeit such Item, the red onion is
more keen and angry than the white: the dry, and that which has lien, is more
eagre and sharp than the green newly drawn: the raw also more than the sodden:
and finally, the dry by it self more than that which is condite and preserved
in some liquor for sauce. The Amiternium onion is planted in cold and moist
grounds: and this alone would be set of a head in manner of garlic cloves,
whereas seed when it begins once to wax black, before it fall to wither.

Seeing now that I am entered thus far into a discourse of Onions, I shall not do
amiss to treat of Leeks also, in regard of the near affinity between them:
and the rather, for that it is not long since, that the Porret kind which is
often kept down with clipping and cutting, came into great name and credit, by
occasion of the Emperor Nero; who used for certain days in every month for
to scour his throat, and clear his voice, and to take it with oil; on which
days he did eat nothing else, not so much as bread. We use to sow them of
seed, after the Aequinox in September: and if we mean to make cut Leeks
thereof, the seed would be sowed the thicker. These Leeks are kept down with
clipping and shearing still until the root fail, without removing them out of
the same bed where they were sown: and always they must be plied with dung.
But before they be cut, nourished they ought to be, until they have gotten a
good head. When they are well grown, they are to be translated into another bed
or quarter, and there replanted: M^la a knight or gentleman of Rome by his
place, and Procuratour under Tiberius the Emperor, being for some misgouernment
in that office, brought into question and accused, and thereupon sent for
peremptorily to make his personal appearance, dispairing utterly of life, took
the weight of three Roman silver deniers in the juice of Leeks, and drank

As touching Garlic, it is held for certain, That it is a sovereign medicine
for many griefs and maladies; especially such as are incident to the country
peasants and rusticall people, who hold it to be as good as a Treacle. The
Garlike head is covered and clad all over with certain very fine and thin
pellicles or membranes, which may be parted and divided one from another; under
which you shall see it compact and joined (as it were) together of many cloves
in manner of kernels, and those also enclosed each one apart within their
several skins. Of a sharp and biting taste it is. The more keen and eager also
you shall find it, as it has more of those cloves before o^, Antiscor^don.
Aphroscorodon: so much commended in Afric, that it is held for the most
principal dish of meat that a Husbandman of the country can eat: and bigger
it is than our common Garlic. Being bruised and braied in a mortar together
with oil and vinegar, it is wonderful to see what a foam and froth will arise
thereof, and to what an height it will swell thereby. Some gardeners there are,
who forbid to set once, they would be sarcled, and the mould raised from about
them: for the oftener they be thus Menander, a Greek writer says, That there
needs none of all these ceremonies for the matter: for if a man would not have
his breath stink with eating of Garlic, let him, do no more (quoth he) but
take a Beet root roasted in the embers, and eat it after, it shall extinguish
11. Calend. Ianuar.
Compitalia and 14. Calend. Ianuar. i. Between the 18. and 21 of December.
Saturnalia. As for the vulgar Garlic, it comes up also of seed, but slowly,
and late it will be first ere it attain to the full proof: for the first year
it gets a head no thicker than Leeks; the next year after, it begins to
divide into cloves; and in the third it is consummate and grown to perfection:
and such unset Garlic, some are of opinion to be fairer and better than the
rest. Howbeit, Garlic indeed should not be suffered to bol and run up to
seed, and therefore the blade thereof ought to be wreathed, that it may gather
more and stronger in the head, and that the cloves afterward might be set in
stead of seed for increase. Now if a man have a desire that both Garlic and
Onions may

There is a kind of Garlic growing wild in the fields of the own accord,
which they call in [i. Crow Garlicke] which being boiled that it should not
grow, they commonly Or rather Anguinum.
throw forth in corn fields for the shrewd and unhappy fowls which lie upon
the lands, and eat up the seed new sown: for presently as any of those birds
taste thereof, they will be so drunk and astonished therewith, that a man may
easily take them with his hand: yea, and if one stay a little, he shall see
them fall asleep therewith. Finally, there is another kind of savage or wild
Garlic called Vrsinum (i. Bear Garlic) the head whereof is very small, the
blade or leaves great and large, and the savor or sent mild and gentle, in
comparison of the rest.

CHAP. VII.
In how many days every herb that is sowed will come up and appear above
ground. The nature

AMong all the herbs sown in a garden, these come up soonest; to wit, Basil,
Beets, Navews or Turnips, and Rocket: for by the third day the seed will break
and spurt. Dill seed will chit within four days, Lectuce in five, Radish in
six, Cucumbers and gourds in a seuennight, but the Cucumber first. Cresses and
Mustard seed in five days, Beets in six by Summer time, and by winter in ten.
Orach in eight days, Onions in 19 or 20 at the farthest, Chibols in ten or
twelve at the most. Coriander seed is more stubborn, and will not show so
soon. Sauerie and Origan seed lies thirty days ere it come: but of all
others Parsley seed is latest ere it spring; for when it comes up soonest, it
is forty days first: but for the most part it lies fifty of old seed. But the
Beet seed has a strange and wonderful quality above the rest: for it will

CHAP. VIII.
Of Garden herbs which serve for to season our meats: their diverse natures,
their sundry

FOr, that kind of Ach which grows of it self in moist grounds with (...)
for so it should seem that Pliny read it in Theophrastus: whereas indeed it is
(...)* i. with leaves growing thin
one leaf, and is not rough, but smooth and plain, is called in Greek
Heleoselinon, i. Smallach. Again, there is another sort, with more leaves,
resembling Smallach aforesaid, but that it comes up in dry i. Alisanders. A
third there is besides found in mountains, named by them thereupon Or^oselinum,
i. Mountain Ach, or Parsely of the hills: it bears leaves like Hemlocke, and a
little slender root: the seed resembles Dill seed very much, but only that it
is smaller. And as for the garden Ach, commonly called Parsely, there be many
kinds thereof, differing one from another: first in leaf, whereby you shall
have some leafed thick and full, and the same jagged and curled: others thinner,
and those also more plain, smooth, and broad. Item, in stalk, which in some is
more gross or thin than in other: in one kind white, in another purple, and in
a third of sundry colors.

Of Lectuce, the Greeks have set down three kinds: whereof the first rises up
with so large and broad a stalk, that by their report, little garden wickets
were commonly made thereof, in See Caelius ^hodiginus 27 book and last chap.
antiq. Lectionum: and let him tell you, why women call this Lectuce. Astylis
Astylis [i. the chaste Lectuce, or the civil Lectuce:] howbeit, Venus. And to
say a truth, all Lectuces are by nature refrigeratiue, and do cool the body;
and therefore be they eaten ordinarily in Summer; for they please the stomach
when it is inclined to loath meat, and procures good appetite. Certes,
reported it is of Augustus Caesar late Emperor of famous memory, that he
escaped a dangerous disease, and was recovered by the means of Lectuce,
whereunto he was directed by the discreet counsel of Musa his Physician. And
whereas in times past, folk precisely forbear to eat Lectuce, now there is no
doubt or scruple at all made thereof; nay they are so far from abstinence that
way, that it is a meat generally received and commended; insomuch as they have
devised to keep it in the syrrup of Oxymel, all winter long, for to have it
ready and ever at hand: yea and more than so, men are liquor; as also to dress
and sees them young, fresh, and green, in a kind of broth or

Of all Garden-hearbs, Beets are the lightest. The Greek writers make two
kinds thereof, in Olus, which word (...) uses much for Beets.
the herbage or leaf has one, and the bulbs coming from the head of the
stem, another: but their principal grace and beauty lies in their spreading
and breadth that they bear as they cabbage. And this they come unto (as the
manner is of Lectuces also) by laying some light weight upon the leaves, when
they begin once to gather into a stalk and show their color. And there is not
an

As touching the Beets, as also Colewoorts, which now bear all the sway and
none but they in Gardens, I do not find that the Greeks made any great account
of them; and yet Cato highly extolleth Coules, and reports great wonders of
their virtues and properties, which I mean to relate in my treatise of
Physic. For this present you shall understand, that he puts down three
kinds of them: the first, that stretches out broad leaves at full, and carries
a big stem: the For some resemblance of Parsley.
Apiana: the third is smooth, plain, and tender in leaf, and has but a little
stalk; and these are of no reckoning at all with Cato. Moreover, like as
Coleworts may be cut at all times of the year for our use, so may they be sown
and set all the year long: and yet the most appropriat season is after the
Aequinox in Autumn. Transplanted they be when they have once gotten five
leaves. The tender crops called Cymae after the first cutting, they yield the
Spring next following: now are these Cymae nothing else but the young delicat
tops or daintier tendrils of the maine stem. And as pleasant and sweet as these
crops were thought to other men, yet Apicius (that notable glutton) took a
loathing of them; and by his example Drusus Caesar also cares not for them,
but thought them a base and homely meat; for which nice and dainty tooth of
his, he was well checked and shent by his father Tiberius the Emperor: after
this first crop or head is gone, there grow out of the same colewort other fine
colliflories (if I may so say) or tendrils, in Summer, in the fall of the
leaf; and after them, in winter: and then a second spring of the foresaid
Cymae or tops against the spring following, as the year before; so as there is
no herb in that regard, so fruitful, until in the end her own fertility is
her death; for in this manner of bearing she spends her heart, her self and
all. There is a third top-spring also at mid-summer about the Sunstead, (which
if the place be any thing moist) affoordeth young plants to be set in summer
time; but in case it be ouer-drie, against Autumn. If there be want of
moisture and skant of muck, the better taste Colewoorts have: if there be
plenty and to spare of both, the more fruitful and rank they are. The only
muck and that which agrees best with Coleworts or Cabbages, is Asses dung. I
am content to Such as be reserved to bear seed, ought not to be cut at all.
They also are not without their Apicius his fashion, namely, to steep them well
in oil and salt mingled together, before they be set upon the fire for to be
sodden.

Moreover, there is a way tograffe herbs also as well as trees, namely, by
cutting off the young sions that spring out of the stalk, and therein to
inoculate as it were the seed of another plant, within the pith or marow
thereof. This also may be practiced upon wild Cucumbers. Over and besides,
there is a kind of wild Woorts growing in the fields, called Lapsana, much
named and renowned by occasion of the sonets and carols chanted in the
solemnity of Julius Caesar the Emperors triumph, and especially of the merry
times and licentious broad jeasts tossed by his soldiers, who at every second
verse cast in his teeth, that in Dyrrhachium they lived of nothing else

As touching Sperages, there is not an herb in the garden, whereof there is so
great regard and care taken, as of them. Concerning their first original and
beginning, I have spoken at large in the treatise. Of the manner how to order
the Corrud^.
wild of that kind, and to entertain them in our gardens: as also how Cato
willed us to sow and plant them in plots of Reeds and Canes. Now there is a
middle sort of these Sperages, not so civil and gentle as the Asparagi of the
garden, and yet more kind and mild than the Corrudae of the field: these grow
every where abroad even upon the mountains; and the champion country of high
A^ain is ouerspred and full of them: whereof there goes a pleasant speech and
merry conceit of Tyberius Caesar the Emperor, Cato took not more pains about
any other Imprimis, That the plot wherein they are to sown, be moist, fat, and
well dug. Item, That they be set half a foot every way asunder one from
another, and in no wise the place trodden down with ones foot; moreover, that
two or three seeds be put together in a hole, made before with a dibble
directly by a line: for in those days they set them only of seed. Item, That
this would be done about mid-March, which is the proper season therefore. Item,
That they have their fill of dung; That they be kept clean with often weeding:
but in any case, That great heed be taken in plucking up the weeds, that the
tender buds or croppes new knit and appearing above ground, be not knapt off.
For the first year, he would have them in winter time to be covered will they
come up again and in greater plenty: which is the cause, that they like and
prosper best Cato ordains expressly by name, That sheeps dung should be used
for that purpose, because any other would breed store of weeds. And verily
there was never known any other thing practiced or assaied afterward, to more
gain and benefit about this Garden-herb, unless it were this, That about the
Ides or mids of February, some have let the seeds of Sperage lie well soked in
dung, and then sowed the same by heaps in little trenches or holes made for the
purpose: after which, when the roots are wouen and knit one within another into
a knot, the spurns shooting from them they plant after the Aequinox in Autumn
following, a foot asunder:

A man would think that I had discoursed already of all such Garden herbs as
were of any price and regard: but that there remains one thing yet behind,
whereof the greatest gain of all other is raised, and yet me thinks I cannot
write thereof, but be abashed to range it amongst This is meant of Artichokes.
the better and come on trimly. They are condite also and preserved in vinegar
(or else all were mard) in delicate li^e honey, seasoned also and bespiced (I
may say to you) with the costly root of the plant Laser-woort, yea and with
Cumin; because we would not be a day without Thistles, but have them as an
ordinary dish all the year long.

As for the rest of Garden-herbs behind, they need no long discourse, but a
light running over them may serve well enough. First and foremost men say, That
the best sowing of Basil, is at the 11. Call. May, (...). 21 of April.
Palilia: but some are of mind, that Autumn is as good: and they that would
have it done in winter, give order to infuse and soke the seed first in
vinegar. Rocket also and garden Cresses, are not dainty to grow, but be it
winter or Summer, they will soon come up and prosper at al times. But Rocket of
the twain, stands more at defiance with winter, and scorns al his frowning
looks and cold weather; as being of a contrary nature to Lecture, for it
stirs up fleshly In Greek also (...): (...) (...), qu^ caput tentat, because
it troubles the head with excessive heat: vel potius, (...) qui cordatos and
prudentes facia^: therefore there went a byword or proverb in Greek, applied
to a dull, foolish, and blockheaded fellow, (...): Go, eat some Cresses, learn
more wit
Nasturtium, a narium tormento, as a man would say, Nose-wring, because it will
make one writh and shrink up his nosthrils: which is the reason, that the word
is grown into a proverb, when we would signify a thing which will put life
into one that is dull and unlusty. In Arabia, the Cresses (by report) prove to
a wonderful bigness. Rue also is sowed usually in February when the Western
wind Fauonius blows, and soon after the Aequinox in Autumn. It cannot away
with winter, for it brooketh not cold or rain, nor moist ground, neither will
it abide muck: it likes well to grow in dry places, and such as lie fair upon
the Sunshine; but a clay ground which is good for brick and tile, that is
Cornelius Cethegus, at what time as he was chosen Consul with Quintius
Flaminius, presently upon the said election, gave a largess to the people of
new wine aromatized with Rue. The fig tree and Rue are in a great league and
amity; insomuch as this herb, sow and set it when and where you will, in no
place prospers better than under that tree: for planted it may be of a slip
or sprig. Now if the same be put into a bean which has a hole pierced or bored
through, it will do far better; by reason that the bean clasping the set close,
and uniting thereunto her own sap and moisture, cherishes it therewith and
makes it come apace: moreover, it will propagat and set it own self, for let
the top of any

Now as touching Ach or Parsley, the manner is to sow it immediately after the
spring Equinox in March, but the seed would be first bruised and beaten a little
in a mortar: for some are persuaded, that by this means it grows thicker and
more crispe or curled: which it will do likewise, in case after a bed be sowed
therewith, it be trodden upon with men's feet, or beaten down (...), i.
odorifero^ or sweet senting.
smell that it carries, whereas before time it was called Mintha, whereof we in
Latin derived our name Mentha. A pleasant herb this is, and delectable to smell
unto, insomuch as you shall not see a husbandmans bourd in the country, but all
the meats from one end to the other be seasoned with mints. If it be once set
or sown, and have taken to a ground, it will continue there a long time. It
resembles much the herb Peny-roiall, the nature whereof (as I have often
showed) is to blow her flowers again (upon the shortest day of the year) even
as it hangs pricked upon flesh in the butchery. Much after one sort are kept
and preserved for sauce (as if they were of the same kind) Mint, Peni-roiall,
and Nep: but above all, to a weak and peevish stomach, Cumin agrees most and
is the best to get an appetite. It has a quality to which being bruised or
beaten into powder, and drunk in water, is singular good for the pain of

But A corrupt wo^d from Olus atrum: as if one would say, Olusatres. Some take
this for Louach.
Alisanders, which some Greeks call Hipposelium, others Smyrneum, is of a
strange and wonderful nature above all other herbs: for it will grow of the
very liquor or juice issuing forth of the stalk. It may be set also of a root:
and indeed, they that gather the foresaid juice, use to say, that it has the
very taste and relish of Myrrh: and by Theophrastus his saying, it came first
of Myrrh set into the ground. The old writers ordained, that Alisanders should
be set or sowed in stony grounds, without tending or looking to, near to some
Iuxta maceriam, whereupon some Apothecaries name it Maceranium.
mud wall. But now in our days it is planted in places dug and delued over,
once or twice: yea, and at any time from the blowing

Capers likewise are set and sowed in dry places specially: but the bed must be
dug in some low ground and laid hollow, environed round about with banks,
and those raised with a groundsell of stone work, otherwise it would be
ranging abroad and ouerspread whole fields, and make the ground barren and
unfruitful. It flourishes in Summer, and continues green until the
occultation or setting of the Brood-hen star Virgiliae; and sandy ground is
most familiar and agreeable to it. Touching the defects and imperfections of
that kind which grows beyond sea, I have said enough among the shrubs and
plants that be strangers.

The Caraway also is a stranger, as may appear by the name of Caria, the
native country thereof; it bears one of the principal seeds that comes into
the kitchen. It cares not much

As for Loueach or Liuish, it is by nature wild and savage, and loves alone to
grow of it self among the mountains of Liguria, whereof it comes to have the
name Ligusticum, as being the natural place best agreeing to the nature of it.
Set or sowed it may be in any place wheresoever: howbeit, this that is thus
ordered by man's hand has not the like virtue as the other, although it be in
taste more pleasant, and some call it Panax or Panace: howbeit, Creteuas a
Greek writer, calls the wild Origan or Cunila Bubula, by that name. But all
others in manner, attribute the name of Conyza or Conyzoides to Cunilago, i.
Fleabane Mullet: and of Thymbra, i. winter Sauory, to Cunila, i. garden Sauory;
which among us has another name in Latin, to wit,

This Sauory is commonly sown in the month of February, and has no small
resemblance of Origan, insomuch, as they are never both used at once in sauce
or sallads, their virtues and operations be so like. Andy et the Egyptian
Origanum is preferred before the said Sauory.

To come now to Lepidium, i. Dittander or Pepperwort, it was sometime a stranger
also with us here in Italy. It is usually sown after mid-February when the
Western wind Fauonius has played his part: afterward when it has put forth
branches, it is cut down close to the ground, and then it is laid bare and
sarcled, and the superfluous roots cut away, and so in the end cherished with
muck. Thus must it be served the two first years. For afterward they use the
same in branches at all times, if the cruel and bitter winter kill them not;
for surely this herb is most impatient

Now for Gith or Nigella Romana, as it is an herb that grows for the pastrie,
to fit the Bakers hand; so Annise and Dil are as appropriat to the kitchen for
Cooks, as the Apothecaries shop for the Physician.

Sacopenium likewise is an herb growing verily in gardens, but is used in
Physic only.

Certain herbs there be that accompany others for good fellowship, and grow
with them, as namely Poppy; for commonly sown it is with Coleworts,
Purcellane, Rocket, and Lectuce.

Of garden Poppies there be three kinds, first the white: whereof the This
Iunket or conceit was called Cocetum by Tertullian and Festus.
seeds in old time being made into Biskets or Comfits with honey, were served up
as a banketting dish. The rustical peisants when it was baked. There is a
second kind of Poppie called Black: out of the heads or bolls Corn Rose.
Rhoeas, our countrymen in Latin call the wandering or wild Poppie. It comes
up verily of the own accord, but in corn fields among Barley especially, like
unto Rocket, a cubite high, with a red flower that soon will shed and fall off,
whereupon it took that name of Rhoeas in Greek. Touching other kinds of
Poppie growing of themselves, I purpose to speak in the treatise of physic
and medicinable herbs. Mean while this cannot be forgotten, that Poppies have
always, time out of mind, been highly regarded and honored among the Romans;
witness Tarquine the Proud, the last king of Rome, who when his sons
Ambassadors were come to him for to understand his advise, how to compass the
seignorie over the Gabians, drew them into his garden, and there by
circumstance

Again, there is another sort of herbs, that love for company to be set or
sown together about the Aequinox in Autumn, namely, Coriander, Dill, Orach,
Mallows, Garden dockes or Patience, Cheruill (which the Greeks call Paederos)
and Senuie, which is of a most biting and stinging taste, of a fiery effect,
but nathelesse very good and wholesome for man's body: this herb will come of it
self without the hand of man, howbeit prove it will the better if the plant be
removed and set elsewhere. And yet, sow a ground once withal, you shall hardly
rid the place of it clean: for the seed no sooner sheddeth upon the ground,
but a man shall see it green above

To conclude, as touching the running wild Thyme, and Sisymbrium, i. Horse-mint
or Water-mint, most hills are replenished and tapissed as it were therewith: and
especially in Thracia, where a man shall see a mighty quantity of wild Thyme
branches, which the mountain waters

CHAP. IX.
Of Finkle or Fennel, and Hemp.

IT remains now among garden herbs to speak of those that be of the Ferule
kind, and

There is a plant resembles it much, named Thapsia, whereof because I have
already written among other foreign herbs, I will proceed forward to Hemp,
which is so profitable and good for to make cordage. This plant must be sowed
of seed after the western wind Fauonius blows in February. The thicker that
it grows, the slenderer and finer it is. When the seed thereof is ripe,
namely, after the Aequinox in Autumn, folk use to rub it out and then dry it
either in the Sun, the wind, or smoke. But the stalk or stem of the Hemp it
self, they pluck out of the the Alabandian Hemp for goodness, is that of
Mylasium. But if you go to the tallness, there

As touching the 2 kinds of Ferula, I have spoken of them in my discourse of
foreign plants. the seed of Ferula or Fennell-geant, is counted good meat in
Italy: for it is put up in pots of earth well stopped, and will continue a
whole year. And of 2 sorts is this preserved Compost, to wit, the stalks, and
the Bunches whiles they be knit round and not broken and spread abroad. And as
they call these knobs which they do condite and keep, Corymbi; so that Ferula,
which is suffered to rise up in stem for to bear such heads, they term
Corymbias.

CHAP. X.
The maladies incident to Garden herbs, The remedies against Pismires,
Cankerwormes,

THe herbs of the garden be subject to diverse accidents, and namely,
diseases; as well as corn and other fruits of the earth. For not only Basil
by age degenerats from the own nature into wild creeping Thyme, but Sisymbrium
also into Calaminth. The seed of an old Cole-wort will bring forth Turnips: and
contrariwise, sow the seed of an old Rape and Turnep you shall have Coleworts
come up of it. Cumin, if it be not kept neat and trim with much cleansing, will
begin to decay at one side of the stalk beneath, and die. Now has Cumin but one
only stalk, and a root bulbous in manner of an Onion, it grows not but in a
light and lean soil. Otherwise, the peculiar disease appropriat to Cumin, is
a kind of skurf or scab. Also Basil,

Moreover, there be diverse sorts of little beasts or vermin engendered in the
garden among the good herbs. And namely, upon the Nauewes, you shall have
gnats or flies: in radish Roots cankerwormes, and other little grubs: likewise,
in Lectuce and Olieri.
beet leaves. And as for these Beetworts last named, you shall see them haunted
with snails, as well naked as in shells. In Leeks moreover or Porret there
settle other special vermin that be noisome to them severally, but such are
very soon caught by throwing upon those herbs a little dung, for it will
they gather to shroud and hide themselves. Furthermore, Sabynus Tyro in his
book entitled Of Gardening.
Cepuricon Mecoenas, writes, That it is not good to touch with knife or hook,
Rue, Winter Sauerie, Mint, and Basil. The same Author also has taught us a
remedy against Emmets (that do not the least mischief to gardens, when they
lie not to have water at command) and that is this, to take sea mud or oose and
ashes together, to temper a mortar of them both, and therewith to stop their
holes. But the most forcible and effectual thing to kill them, is the herb
called Ruds or Turn-sol. Some are of opinion, that the only means to chase
these ants away, is, with water wherein the powder of a semi-brick or
halfe-baked tile is mingled. And particularly, for to preserve Nauewes, it is a
singular medicine for them to have Feni-greek sowed among, as also for Beets to
do the like with Cich pease: for this devise will drive away the Cankerworm. But
say, that this practice was forgotten, and that the foresaid herbs be already
come

CHAP. XI.
What garden seeds be stronger, which be weaker than others. Also what plants
prosper better with salt water.

NOw as touching the change and alteration in seeds, occasioned by age and long
keeping some there be that are firm and fast, which hold their own well, as
namely, the seeds of Coriander, Beets, Leeks, garden Cresses, Senvie or Mustard
seed, Rocket, Saverie, and in one word, all such as be hot and bite at the
tongues end. Contrariwise, of a weaker nature are the seeds of Orach, Basil,
Gourds, and Cucumbers. Generally, all summer seeds last longer than winter: and
the Chibbol seed least of any other will abide age. But take the strongest and
hardiest that may be, you shall have none good after four years, I mean only
for to sow. And yet

CHAP. XII.
The manner of watering Gardens. What Herbs will prove the better by removing
and replanting. Of the juices and sauors that garden Herbs affourd.

THe best time of the day to water gardens is morning and evening, to the end
that the water should not be ouerheat with the Sun. Basil only would be
watered also at noon. And moreover some think, that when it is new sown, it
will make have to come up very speedily, sharp, and yet odorant withal. Of
all smacks, the salt taste only is not natural. And yet For some Philosophers
held opinion, That the taste of herbs consisted of a Terrene substance and a
Waterie mixed together: others (as Democritus) ascribed it to their forms and
figures: which Pliny thinks ridiculous.
and foolish opinions in this world. As for Panax, it tastes much like pepper:
but Siliquastrum or Indish Pepper more than it, and therefore no marvel if it
were called Piperitis. Libanotis smells like Frankincense: Myrrhis of Myrrh.
As touching Panace, sufficient has been spoken already. Libanotis comes
naturally of seed in rotten grounds, lean and subject to dews: it has a root
like to Alisanders, differing little or nothing in smell from Frankincense. The
use of it after it be one year old is most wholesome for the stomach. Some
term it by another name, Rosemary. Also Alisanders, named in Greek Smyrneum,
loves to grow in the same places that Rosemary does, and the root resembles
Myrrh in taste. Indish Pepper likewise delights

Thus much may serve concerning garden herbs, such I mean only as be used in
the kitchen about meats. It remains now to speak of the chief work of
Nature contained in them: for all this while we have discoursed of their
increase, and the gain that may come thereof: and indeed treated we have
summarily of some plants and in general terms. But forasmuch as the true
virtues and properties of each herb cannot thoroughly and perfectly be known,
but by their

THE TWENTIETH BOOK
WRITTEN BY C. PLINIVS SECVNDVS.
The Proeme.
SInce we are come thus far, as to treat of the greatest and principal work of
Nature, we will begin from hence-forward at the very meats which men put into
their mouths, and convey into their stomachs, and urge them to confess a
truth, That hitherto they have not well known those ordinary means whereby
they live. And let no man in the mean time think this to be a simple or small
piece of knowledge and learning, going by the base title and bare name that it
caries; for so he may be soon deceived. For in the pursuit and discourse of
this argument we shall take occasion to enter into a large field as touching
the peace and war in Nature; we shall handle (I say) a deep secret, even the
natural hatred and enmity of dumb, deaf, and senseless creatures. And
verily, the main point of this theme, and which may ravish us to agreater
wonder and admiration of the thing, lies herin, That this mutual affection,
which the Greeks call sympathy, whereupon the frame of this world depends,
and whereby the course of all things does stand, tends to the use and benefit
of man alone. For to what end else is it, that the element of Water quincheth
fire? For what purpose does the Sun suck and drink up the water, as it were to
cool his heat and allay his thirst? and the Moon contrariwise breed humors,
and engender moist vapors? and both Planets eclipse and abridge the light one
of the other? But to leave the heaven and those celestial Bodies in their
majesty. What is the cause, that as the Magnet or loadstone draws iron unto
it so there is another Thea^des, cap. 16. lib. 36.
stone abhors the same, and drives iron from it? What should the reason be
of the Diamond, that peerlesse stone, the chief jewel wherein our rich
worldings repose their greatest joy and delight; a stone otherwise Where upon
it is called A^.
invincible, and which no force and violence besides can conquer, but that it
remains still inf^ngible; and yet that the simple blood of a poor Goat is
able to burst it in pieces? Besides many other secrets in nature, as strange,
yea and more miraculous. All which we purpose to reserve unto their sever all
places, and will speak of them in order. Mean while may it please the Reader
to pardon us, and to take in good part the manner of our entrance into this
matter: for albeit we shall deal in the beginning with the smallest and basest
things of all others, yet such they be as are wholesome, and concern much the
health of man and the maintenance of his life. And first will we set in
handwith the garden, and the herbs that we find there.

CHAP. I.
Of the wild Cucumber, and the juice thereof, Elaterium.

THis wild Cucumber, as we have said heretofore, is far less than that of the
Garden. Out of the (...) p^ (...) a^usiue.
fruit hereof there is a medicinable juice drawn, which the Physicians call
Elaterium. For to get this juice, men must not stay until the Whereupon it is
called Touch me not
Cucumber be full^ ripe: for unless it be taken betimes and cut down the sooner,
it will leap and flurt in the handling from the stele whereto it hangs,
against which issues forth in such abundance: which done, they press the said
juice forth, andreceiue

The root of this wild Cucumber, if it be boiled in vinegre and made into a
liniment, and so applied, is singular good for all kinds of gout; but the juice
of the said root helps the toothach. The root being dried and incorporat with
rosin, cures the ringworme, tettar, and wild scab or skurf, which some call
Psora and Lichenes: it discusseth and heals the swelling kernels behind
Theophrastus) Elaterium has bin kept and continued good 200 years. And for
fifty years, it is so strong and full of virtue, that it will put out the
light of a candle or lamp: for [i. an obole or half a scruple] according to the
strength of the patient. Obolus. i. half a Scriptule or Scruple.
A greater receipt than one Obulus, kills him or her that takes it: but being
taken within that quantity above named, in some broth or convenient liquor, it
is passing good for the dropsy, yea, and to euacuat those filthy humors thar
engender the lousy diseas. Being tempered with honey and old oil, and so
reduced into a thin ointment or liniment, it cures the Squinancie, and such
diseases incident to the windpipes.

CHAP. II.
Of the Serpentine Cucumber, called otherwise the Wandering Cucumber: also of
the Garden Cucumbers, Melons or Pompions.

MAny there be of opinion, that the Serpentine Cucumber among us, which others
call consistence of an ointment, is a present remedy to allay the pains of
gout, as well in feet, hands; Phreniticis, some read Nephri^icis, and then it
signifies those that have the stone or pains of the kidneys.
phranticke. Also, the weight of one 15. drams.
Acetabulum, [i. much about two ounces] cures them that have the Dysentery or
bloody flix. Moreover, being taken with a like poise or quantity of Cumin seed
in mead or honyed water, it is singular good for them that reach up filthy
matter from their lungs; as also for those who have Iocinerosi.
weak and diseased livers. If one drink the same with some sweet wine, it
prouokes urine: and being injected by a Clystre together with Cumin, it eases
the pain in the kidneys and reins.

As for the fruit called Pompions or Melons, being eaten as meat, they cool the
body mightily Melicerides.
wens or ulcers gathered in manner of hony-combs: which swellings some call
Cerio. Being dried, it staieth vomits, so it be brought into powder and given
to the weight of two scruples.
four Oboli in honyed water: but the Patient when he has drunk it, must walk
presently up on it half a mile. The same powder is detersiue and scouring, and
therefore put into soap and washing-balls. As for the rind or bark thereof, it
procures vomit indeed, but it cleanses the skin as well as the other. The same
do the leaves of any domestical or garden Cucumbers or Melons, if they be
made into a liniment. The said leaves also stamped with honey and brought to
the form of a cataplasme, cure the bloudy-fals or night-blains, but tempered
with wine, they heal the bitings of dogs, as also,

CHAP. III.
Of the wild Gourd, and the Rape or Turnep,

THere is a kind of wild This is not Colocynthidae.
Gourd which the Greeks call Somphos, as one would say, hollow and empty (for
thereupon it took that name) a finger thick, growing no where else but among
rocks and stony grounds. If a man chew this Gourd and suck out the juice
thereof he shall find it very comfortable to the stomach. There is another wild
gourd called Colocynthis, but that is full within, and less than that of the
Garden. The pale of this kind is the better, for such be used in Physic: and
yet that of grass green color when it is dried, if it be taken alone, does
purge and euacuat the belly. Also being infused into the body by way of
clystre, it cures all diseases of the guts, flanks, reins, and loins: it
helps the palsy likewise, or the resolution of the sinews. After the seeds
be taken forth, some fill the place with honyed water, and so sees all
together, until half be consumed, and give of this decoction the quantity of
four The fleshie pulpe within mixed with wormwood and honey, takes away the
toothache and a collution It may be, he means a number respective to the type
of the ague, that is to say, 3 in a tertian, 4 in a quartan, 5 in a quintan,
etc.
even number and hang them either about the neck or arms of them that have
the ague, they will drive the access or fit away; be it any of those
intermittent fevers which the Greeks call Periodicall. Thus much for the wild
Gourd, Colocynthis.

As for the domestical Gourd of the Garden, after it is scraped and pilled,
take the juice thereof, and distill it warm into the ears, it will ease the
pain. The inner flesh or pulp cleansed from the seed, is passing good for to
be applied to the agnels or corns of the feet: also to be rheum that falls
upon them. The leaves of it, together with the fresh leaves of the Cypress
tree newly gathered, being stamped and applied to wounds, be excellent to heal
them. The Gourd it self enclosed within clay, and so baked or roasted under the
embers, and then stamped and incorporate with goose grease, has the like
effect. Moreover, the scrapings or shauings of the rind, mightily cools the
heat of the gout, if it be not inueterat and old: the heats also of the head
and especially the Sciriasis.
burning therein, which troubles little infants. The said parings being
incorporat Anthonies fire, allaieth the heat and brings the place into
temper: so do the seeds also, used in like manner. The juice or liquor drawn
out of the said parings, being mingled with oil of roses and vinegre, and then
made into a liniment, does mitigate the extreme heat of burning feauers. The
ashes of Gourd parings burnt and strewed dry upon any part of the body that
is burnt or skalded, heals them wonderfully. C hyrsippus the Physician
condemned Gourds, and forbad men to eat of them. Howbeit, all Physicians do
resolutely agree in this, That they be passing good for the stomach: as also
for the exulcerations of the guts and bladder.

As for Rapes or Turnips, they likewise are medicinable, and have their use in
Physic, for to Democritus banished turnips altogether from the bourd, by
reason of the ventosities or windiness that it engender. But Diocles on the
other side extolled and praised them as much; and affirms, That they will
prick forward to Venus. The like Dionysius report of them, and the rather
(says he) if they be condite with Rocket. He writes moreover, That if they be
roasted or baked under the ashes, and so incorporate with grease, will make a
notable good cataplasm for the gout and joynt-ach. The wild rape or turnep
grows commonly every where among corn fields: it brancheth much, carries a
white seed, twice as big as that of the Poppie. This being incorporat with
urine of equal quantity, is much used to take away riuils, and so smooth the
skin both of the face and also of the whole body besides. To conclude, the
roots of Eruile, Barley, Wheat, and Lupines, be good for nothing at all.

CHAP. IIII.
The diverse sorts of Nauewes: of the wild Radish of the Garden Radish, and the
Parsnep.

THe Greek writers observe two kinds of Nauews, (...) for Physic. The first
arises up with Angulosis caulibus, folio ^^ij, flore ane^i. Ex Dioscoride:
a cornered and edged stalk, bears leaves r^g Parsely, and puts out
flowers like Dil: this they call Bunion: the decoction whereof being drunken
with honied water, a Cyath is ten drams.
cyathes, cures the bloody flix: but it stops urine, unless the patient
drink Lineseed withal. The second kind is named Bunias, and resembles both
Rape and Radish: the seed of it is excellent good against poison; and therefore
in antidotes and preservatives it is much used. That there be Radishes wild,
we have showed heretofore. The most commended above all others is that which
grows in Arcadia: although there are of them in other countries, and those
counted better, only for to provoke urine. Otherwise they purge choler, and
namely their rindes infused in wine do the same. Now over and besides their
virtues and properties related hertofore, they discharge and cleanse

There is a kind of garden Radish in Italy which they name Armoracia, used also
in physic: the decoction whereof if a man take a draught of it in the morning,
to the quantity of a cyath, does fret, break, and expel the stone by way of
gravel. Boil the same in water and Vinegre, therewith bathe or anoint the
place stung with any serpent, and it will heal it up. Radish taken with honey
in a morning next ones heart ^asting, is good for the cough. The seed parched,
and so chewed alone without any thing else, asswageth the pain of the small guts,
Ileosis, Hermol. some read Iliosis, and the^ it signifies, Pursiffe.
in the flanks and Laganoponon.
hypocondriall parts. The decoction of Radish leaves sodden in water and so
drunk, or the very juice of the root it self as much as two cyathes, is
thought to be a singular medicine against Nicander affirms, that Radishes be
passing good for them that have eaten either venomous Mushromes or Henbane. The
two Apollodores Citieus, gives the seed stamped, and so to drink it in water:
the other Apollodorus, of Tarentum, ordains the juice of Radish for this effect
and purpose. Moreover, radishes are thought good to diminsh and extenuat the
swelling spleen: they are wholesome for the liver, and mitigate the pain of the
loins. Being taken with Vinegar and Senvy, they help them that are in a
dropsy, or fallen into a lethargy. Praxagoras is of judgment, That Radishes
should be given for to eat, to them that are troubled with the Iliack passion,
to wit, the pain and ringing of the small guts. And Plistonicus appoints
them to be eaten of those that be troubled with a continual flux, by reason of
a feeble stomach, called thereupon Coeliaci. They heal the Dysenterie or
exulceration of the guts: they euacuate also and rid away the filthy matter and
corruption of Medius the physician prescribes them to be boiled and given to
the same purpose; as also to those that spit and reach up blood: yea and to
women in childbed newly laid, for to increase their milk. Hippocrates
counsels women whose The seed bruised and tempered with water, and so laid
as a cataplasm, stays the running Democritus is of opinion, That much feeding
upon Radishes, stirs up lust and makes folk amorous; which peradventure is
the reason, that some have thought they be hurtful to the voice. The leaves of
those radishes only that have the longer roots, are said to quicken the
eyesight: but if a man perceive that he has either inwardly taken for a
medicine, or applied outwardly, a radish root which is over strong, he must
presently have Hyssope given him: for this Antipathy and natural contrariety
there is between these two herbs, That the one corrects the other. For them
that be hard of hearing, Physicians use to instill the juice of the Radish by
drop-meale into the ears. And for them that would perbreake or vomit, the best
way to take it, is at the end of a meal * Summo (...), although Dioscorides
says primo cibo: and himself in the former book Ieiunis,
with the last meat.

As touching Hibiscum, like it is to the Parsnep: some call it Moloche Agria,
others Pistolochia: it cures the sores and ulcers that be in gristles, and
knitteth broken bones. The leaves thereof drunk with water, loosen the belly,
and chase away Serpents. Applied in a liniment or otherwise rubbed upon a place
stung with Be, Waspe, or Hornet, they are a present remedy. The roots thereof
dug out of the ground before Sunrising, and enfolded or wrapped in wool as
it grew upon the sheep back, without any other artificial color, and
namely of an ewe, which has yeaned likewise an ewe lamb, is thought to be a
singular thing for to be bound unto the swelling kernels called the Kings
evil, yea although they were exulcerat and ran. But some are of this mind,
That for to do this deed, it should be gotten up with an instrument of gold;
and great heed should be taken, that after it is once up, it touch not the
earth again. Finally, Celsus gives counsel, to lay the root thereof sodden
in wine to the gouty joints that are without tumor and show no swelling.

CHAP. V.
Of Staphilinus, or the Parsnep. Of Cheruill, the Skirwort: of Seseli.,
Elecampane, and Onions.

THere is a second kind of Parsnep, named Staphylinus, which commonly men call
the Wandering Parsnep. The seed bruised and drunk in wine, is singular good for
them that have swollen bellies, the rising or suffocation of the mother in
women, with the torments Dioches advises to give the root thereof in honyed
water, against the infirmities of liver, spleen, flanks, small guts, loins,
and reins. Cleophantus says, that it will help (in that manner taken) an old
bloody flix, which has continued a long time. Philistio boileth the root in
milk, and gives 4 ounces thereof to them who are troubled with the strangury,
or piss by drop-meale: Orpheus said moreover, That this root had an amatorious
property to win love, happily because much feeding thereof (as it is well known)
does solicit unto the game of love, and makes folk amorous: which is the
reason also that some have put down in writing, That it will help women to
conceive. As for the Garden Parsneps they are in many other respects

The Syrians are great Gardeners, they take exceeding pains and be most
curious in gardening, Many Worts and Pot-hearbes in Syria. They use to plant in
their gardens a certain herb very like to a Parsnep, which some call
Ginidium, i. Tooth-picke Cheruill: more slender and smaller it is only, and
therewith bitterer in taste, but it works the like effects. They use to eat it
both sodden and raw, and find it agree well with the stomach: for it dries up
all the superfluous humors and excrements which be bedded and deeply rooted
within it.

As for the wild Skirwort that grows wandering every where, it is like both in
shape and operation to those of the garden. It stirs up the appetite and
skoureth the stomach of those crudities which caused dullness therein, and
loathing to meat. Opion is verily persuaded, that if one eat it with vinegre
aromatized with Laserpitium, or take it with pepper and honyed wine or else
Diocles. Furthermore, that it is a cordial, and does mightily corroborat and
strengthen the heart, upon the recovery of a long and dangerous sickness; and
is besides singular good to stay the stomach after much casting and vomiting.
Heraclides was wont to give Skirworts to them who had drunk Quicksilver: so
such also as were but cold and could not sufficiently perform the duties of
marriage: finally, to them that being newly crept out of their beds after some
grievous disease, had need of restoratiues. Hicesius was of this mind and said,
they were good for the stomach, because no man could possibly eat 3 Skirwort
roots together: and yet he thinks that they would agree very well with those
weak persons who were lately sick and newly walking abroad, against they should
fall to their old drinking of wine again. Ligula may be taken for (...). (...),
a spponfull: it contains three drams and a scruple. somewhat under half an
ounce, as a good spoone will do with us.
Ligules, it cures those who have their necks drawn backward to their shoulders
with the Spafme; it corects the defects and faults of the liver, it allaies the
wrings and torments of the guts; and brings them to piss with ease and
freely who are afflicted with the Strangurie. The very leaves of siler are also
medicinable, for they procure easy childbirth: yea and in that respect the very
dumb four-footed beast finds the benefit thereof: and that know the Hinds well
enough by a secret instinct of nature, who being near their time and ready to
calue, feed upon this herb most of all others. Good it is against S.
Anthonies fire, Arter^*
the accidents incident to the throat and windpipes. It is a soueraign medicine
against the It is said that they will procure sleep, and heal the cankers or
ulcers of the mouth, being Sic and att^ita samant.
galled places. Being roasted under the ashes, many use to apply them with Barley
flower or meal, as a pultesse or cataplasme to the eyes that be waterie or
rheumatick, as also to the ulcers of the privy parts. The imunction of the
eyes, with the juice thereof, is thought to cleanse their cicatrises or (...)
cloudines of the eyes called the pin and web: as also to cure the pearl there
breeding: moreover, the blood shotting or red streaks, in the white, and the
white spots appearing in the black circle about the apple. Moreover, it cures
bitings and stings of serpents, yea, and heales al ulcers, being emplastred
with honey. Also the exulcerations or impostumes within the ears, are by it and
women's Asclepiades and his sect or followers, contrariwise affirm, That onions
are so wholesome, that they will make them well colored who use to feed upon
them: and more than so, they say that if one in health every day eat of them
fasting, he shall be sure to continue healthful, strong, and lusty: that they
be good for the stomach, in this regard, that they cause rifting and breaking
of wind upward, which is a good exercise of Hydr^pes, some read Hypochyses, i.
Suffusiones; out of Dioscorides, to wit, the Cataract.
dropsy. Item, That their juice being incorporat with Rue and Honey, is
sovereign for the Squinance. As also that they will keep waking those who are
fallen into a Lethargy. To conclude. Varro says, That if Onions be braied
with salt and vinegre, and then dried, no woorms or vermin will come near
that composition.

CHAP. VI.
Of cut Leekes or Porret: of bolled Leeks: and of Garlic.

POrret, otherwise called Cut-Leekes or unset Leeks, stancheth bleeding at the
nose, in case it be stamped and put up close into the nosethrils, or otherwise
mingled with the powder of the Gall-nut, or Mints. Moreover, Porret staieth the
immoderat shift or flux of blood, that follows women upon a slip or abortiue
birth, if the juice thereof be drunk in breast-milke. In the same manner it
helps an old cough and al other diseases of breast and lungs. Burns and
sealdings are healed with a liniment made of Porret or Leek blades: likewise
the Epinyctides, for so in this place I term that ulcer, which in the
lachrymal or corner of the eye runs and waters continually: some call it
Syce, that is to say, a fig. And yet others there be who understand by that
word [Epinyctides] the blackish or blew blistring wheals, the bloody falls I
mean of Leeks and Goats gall, or else a like quantity of honied wine instilled
thereinto. And as for Hemina, i^ much about ten ounces.
Hemine of wine, it cures the pains of the loins or small of the back. Such
as spit or reach up blood, such as be diseased with the Phthisick or
consumption of the lungs, such also as have bin long troubled with the Pose,
the Murre, Catarrhe, and other rheums, find great help by drinking the juice of
Porret, or eating Leeks with their meat. Moreover, Leeks are taken

These headed Leeks that are bolled and replanted, are of the same operation,
but more effectual than the unset Leeks. The juice thereof given with the powder
either of Gal-nuts, or Called Ma^na Thuris.
frankincense or else Acacia, cures those that reject or reach up blood.
Hippocrates would have the simple juice thereof given, without any thing else for
that purpose: and he is of opinion, that it will disopilate the neck of the
Matrice and the natural parts of women; yea, and that they will prove fruitful
and bear children the better, if they use to eat Leeks. Being stamped and laid
to filthy sores or unclean ulcers with honey, it cleanses them. Being taken in
a broth made of Ptisane or husked barley, it cures the cough, staieth the
rheum or catarrh, that distilleth into the chist or breast-parts; it scoureth
the lungs and windpipe, and heals their exulcerations. The like it does if
it be taken raw without bread, 3 bols or heads of them together each other day:
and in this manner it will cure the patient, although he raught up and spit out
putrified and corrupt Venus, and avails much to procure sleep. If Leeke bols
or heads be sodden in two waters, (i.) changing the water twice, and so eaten,
they will stop the Lask, and stay all inueterat fluxes whatsoever. The pillings
or skins of Leek heads if they be sodden, the decoction thereof will change the
hair from gray to black, if they be washed or bathed therewith.

As touching Garlic, it is singular good and of great force for those that
change air, and come to strange waters. The very sent thereof chaseth Serpents
and Scorpions away. And as some have reported in their writings, it heals all
bitings and stings of venomous beasts, either eaten as meat, taken in drink,
or anointed as a liniment: but principally it has a special property i.
Libard bane, which by another name men call Pardalianches, because it strangleth
or choketh Leopards, yea, it conquereth the so poriferous and deadly quality of
Henbane: the bitings also of a mad dog it heals, if it be applied upon the
hurt or wounded place with him. As for the sting of serpents verily, Garlic is
exceeding effectual, if it be taken in drink: but withal, you must not forget
to make a liniment of it, the hairy strings or beard growing to the head, the
skins also or tails and all, whereby it is bunched, tempered all together with
oil, and laid upon the grieved place: and thus also will it help any part of
the body fretted or galled, yea, though it were risen up to blisters.
Hippocrates moreover was of this opinion, that a suffumigation made give it
boiled, others raw, to them that be short-winded. Diocles prescribes it with
Centaurie to In fico duplici.
Garlic taken in good wine, together with Coriander, does the deed more
effectually. Some are wont to minister it to those that draw their wind short,
being stamped and put into milk. Praxagoras the Physician ordained to drink
it with wine, against the Iaundise: also against the Iliack passion, in oil
and thick i. The wringings and torment of the upper small guts.
gruel. And in that sort he used to anoint the swelling kernels called the
kings evil. In old time the manner was to give raw garlic to such as were
bestraught or out of their wits. But Diocles appointed, that it should be
boiled for phrentick persons. Certes, if it be bruised and so laid to the
throat, or otherwise gargled with some convenient liquor, it will do much good
to them that have the squinancie. Take three heads or cloves of Garlic, beat
them well, and together with vinegre apply them to the teeth, they will
mightily assuage Porrigenes, not pr^vigenes, out of Diose.
applied to the place with vinegar and nitre. Sees it in milk, or do but
stamp it and mingle it with soft fresh cheese, and so eat it, you shall see how
it will repress and stay Catarrhes and Rheumes: after which manner it will
make them speak clear that be hoarse, and have a rusty voice. But let a man
who has the Phthisicke, and is far gone into a Consumption of the lungs, drink
it in bean broth ordinarily, he shall recover or find great ease. Generally,
Garlic is better, A great desire to go to the stool, with doing little or
nothing.
Tinesmus. Being sodden to the consistence of an Unguent, and so applied as a
frontal to the temples of the head, it allaieth their pain. Boiled with honey,
then stamped and reduced to a liniment, it represseth red pimples. Sees it
with good old seam or grease, or in milk, it is singular for the Cough. See you
one to reach up blood, or to spit filthy matter? Roast Garlic under the hot
embers, and give it the party to eat, with equal quantity of honey. Being
taken with salt and oil, it is a soueraign remedy for them that be bursten or
Spasmaticke, that is to say, vexed with the Called Mentag^a.
tettar, the red pimples also rising in the skin, Garlic does first fret and
exulcerat; but afterward, with Origanum, it cures and heals the same. ^ea,
the very ashes of Garlic burnt, and so tempered with oil and the pickle,
[Garum] that it may take the form of a liniment, does the like. The wild fire
also, or shingles, Sacros ignes, called otherwise S. Anthonies fire. Erisypelas.
that has gotten to a place, if it be anointed therewith, will be
extinguished. Be any place of the body grown black and blew by stripes or
blows, a liniment made of Garlic burnt to ashes and tempered with honey, will
bring the native and fresh color again quickly. There is a deep Contrary to
Gale^.
causes thirst: but let me not forget among other virtues which it has:
namely, that if it be given to Hens, Cocks, and other Pulleine, among their
corn, it will keep them from the pip. As for Horses, Mares, Asses, and such
like beasts that cannot stale, or be ground and wrong in the

CHAP. VII.
Of wild Lectuce, as well that called Caprina as Esopus. Of Isatis and Garden
Lectuce.

THe first kind of Lectuce that grows wild of it self without man's hand, is
that which is commonly called Caprina, i. Goats Lectuce. This herb has a
property, that if it be It should seem he means here the Tithymates, which
be Lactariae.
thrown into the sea, it will presently kill all the fishes that approach near
unto it. The milkie juice of this Lectuce being turned thick, and soon after
mixed with vinegar, to the weight

A second kind there is of wild Lectuce, which the Greeks name Esopus. The
leaves thereof being beaten in a mortar and with barley flower, applied as a
pultesse, heal all ulcers: this grows ordinarily in corn fields.

A third sort coming up in the woods, is named otherwise Pliny should seem
here to be deceiu^d: for Isat^ is the same the Glastum. i. Woad, and the wild
thereof inde^ is leaued like lectuce which was the occasi on of his error.
Isatis. The leaves whereof being

A fourth kind there is besides of wild Lectuce, named Glastum, i. Woad,
wherewith diverse use to color their wool. It might be likened to the wild
Dock for the leaves, but that they be more in number, and of a blacker green
withal. This herb stancheth blood. It represseth and cures the fiery and
eating tettars, the cankerous and filthy ulcers also which run and spread over
the whole and sound parts: also it dissolueth swellings before theygather to an
head, and tend to suppuration. The root or leaves thereof be good against S.
Anthonies fire, applied in a cataplasme or liniment. It is a singular remedy
also for the swelled and puffed spleen: and thus much for their properties in
particular, respective to each several kind: but to speak generally of them all
that grow wild, they agree all in this, that they be white; that their stem
grows otherwhiles to the height of a cubit; that both it and the leaves be
rough in handling. Of these wild Lectuces, Cratevas prescribes to give the
weight of 2 Oboli of the said juice, in one Cyath of wine, to those that be in
a Dropsy. Some there be who draw the juice out of the garden lectuce also for
the same purpose, but not with like effect. The peculiar properties of which
Lectuces, I have partly written of heretofore, and namely, how they procure

White Lectuce eaten in good quantity, helps the infirmities of the Bladder,
and agree Praxagoras advised also, That they should be eaten for to help the
bloody flix. Moreover, if they be laid presently (in manner of a liniment, with
salt) upon a burn or scald, while it is new, and before the place blister,
they will fetch out the fire and do very much good. They keep down and
repress cancerous ulcers, that would be running and eating into the flesh, if
they be applied at the beginning with falt-petre, and afterward with wine.
Being bruised into a liniment they heal S. Anthonies fire, if the place be
anointed therewith. If their stalks or stemmes be stamped with dry grout or
Barley meal, and laid too as a cataplasme with cold water, they mitigat the
pains that follow dislocations or lims out of joint, they assuage also dolorous
cramps and convulsions. Being applied in manner of a pultesse with wine and dry
Barley groats, they Item, That if any women do eat thereof, they shall have
their monthly sickness come orderly. Also, that the seed of garden Lectuce is
given to very great purpose against the prick or sting of any venomous
Scorpion. Moreover, That if the seed be stamped and taken in wine, it secureth
one from the imaginary fancies of Venus delights, in sleep, and the
pollutions also that thereof do ensue. Finally, that certain waters which use
to intoxicat and trouble the brain, shall never hurt them that eat any
Lectuce. Howbeit, some are of opinion, that the overmuch use of Lectuce at meat

CHAP. VIII.
Of Beets and their sundry kinds. Of Endive. Diverse sorts of Cichorie. Of
garden Endive, and two kinds thereof.

THe Beets of both sorts are not without their medicinable virtues: for be it
the white or the black, if one take the root thereof fresh and new out of the
ground, wet it thoroughly, and soke it well in water, and then carry it about
him hanging by a string or lace, it is a sovereign preservative against the
biting of serpents. The white Beet boiled and eaten with raw Garlic, expels
the broad worms in the belly. The roots of the black, sodden after the same
manner in water, rid away the dandruffe or unseemly skales within the hair of
head or beard. And indeed generally for any use, the black Beet is more
effectual than the white. The juice Anthonies fire. White Beets only stamped,
although there come no oil (...).
Beets and Lentils boiled together, which commonly is eaten with vinegar for to
make the body laxatiue. The same being ouersodden to a thick consistence,
staieth both the turning of the stomach, and flux of the belly.

There is a kind of wild Beet, which some name Limonion, others Neuroides: it
has leaves much less and tenderer than the other, howbeit, growing thicker;
and rises up many times with

Now as touching Endive or garden Cichorie, furnished also it is with many
properties effectual in Physic. The juice thereof mingled with oil Rosat
and vinegar, allaieth the pain in the head. The same if it be drunk with wine,
is good for the liver and bladder. Also, if it be laid to the eyes, it stops
the humor that has taken a course thither. The wild Cichorie, that grows
wandering here and there abroad, some of our Latin writers name or rather (...).
Ambugia. In Egypt they call the wild Endive, Cichoreum; and the tame garden
Endive, Seris: the which indeed

As for another wild kind, some call it For that being eaten with meat, it
makes the breath sweet.
Hedypnois, and that has a broader leaf than the rest.

Touching Cichory of the garden, which is very like unto the Lectuce, there be
two kinds thereof; but the green that seems to be of a wild and savage
nature, is the better: of a more brown and duskish color it is, and a Summer
herb only. The other indeed is whither and continues all winter, howbeit worse
of the twain: and yet both the one and the other, are right comfortable to the
stomach, especially when it is ouercharged with waterish humors. Being
Petronius Diodotus in his book entitled Antilego^tia, some read (...), i.
flower gatherings.
Contradictions, utterly condemned the garden Endive Seris, and alleged many
reasons and arguments to confirm that position of his; howbeit the whole
college of all Physicians besides

CHAP. IX.
Of Garden Coleworts, Lapsana, Sea Coleworts, or Soldanella; of Squilla; of
other bulbous roots, as the Potatoes: and of Bulbium.

THe commendable proprieties of the Colewoort are so many, that it were a long
labor to discipher them all, considering that both Chrysippus and Dieuches, two
Physicians, have compiled each of them a book particularly of this herb,
wherein they have collected their virtues, as they be appropriat and respective
to every part of man's body; yea and before al Pythagoras, and after him Cato,
have as amply set out the praises thereof. As for Catoes opinion and judgment
of the said herb, I am the more willing in this place to set down and follow
diligently, because it might be known what simples and what drugs they were
which the old Romans used for their Physic For about that time Cato lived.
600 years after the foundation of the city. The Greek writers of greatest
antiquity, have made three kinds of Coleworts; to wit, the crisped or ruffed
cole, which they called Selinas or Selinoides, for the resemblance that the
leaves have to Parsley: these Coleworts be good for the stomach, and gently
loosen the belly. The second sort is named in Greek i. Smooth and plain.
Lea, with broad leaves springing forth from a great stem: whereupon some have
given it the name of i. The stemmi^ Cole.
Caulodes: these woorts are to no use at all for Physic. The third is
properly called by the name of Crambe; very well stored with leaves this is,
but those are Cato prefers before all, that which is crisp and frizled: next
unto it, the smooth Cole, with the large leaf and big stalk. He commends the
Colewort (stamped raw together with vinegar, honey, Coriander, Rue, Mints, and
the root of Laser) to be singular good for the hea^-ach, the mist and dimnesse
of the eyes, the appearance of sparkling motes before them, the stomach and
precordiall parts; if a man take fasting 2 Acetables of this composition. And
he says moreover, that this confection is so soueraign, that they who do but
bray and beat the ingredients, shall sensibly find themselves mightily
comforted and fortified thereby. And he concludes withal, that Coleworts may
be either stamped together with the foresaid species, and so taken in a
supping; or else be eaten, first dipped and soked in the if the parts be
tormented therewith. Over and besides, a fomentation made therewith, is
singular

Now concerning the opinion of the Greeks also, as touching Coleworts, I think
it meet to set them down for Catoes sake, I mean touching those points only
that he ouerpassed and omitted. First and foremost therefore, the Greeks hold,
that the Colewort being not thoroughly sodden, purges choler and keeps the body
soluble; howbeit twice sodden, it binds the belly. Item, That it is contrary
to wine, and a very enemy to vines. And more particularly, if it be taken
fasting, or in the beginning of a meal before other meat, it preserves a man
from drunkenness; and eaten after meat when a man is drunken indeed, it
riddeth away the fumosities in the brain and brings him to be sober. Also,
that it is a meat appropriate to the eyes, and clears the sight very much;
insomuch as the juice of it raw is passing sovereign for that purpose, in case
Erasistratus and all his school, does ring and resound again with one voice
and open mouth, That there is nothing in the world better for the stomach,
nothing more wholesome for the sinews; and therefore with one accord they
prescribe the use thereof, for those that have the palsy or resolution of the
nerves; for as many as be troubled with the trembling and shaking of their
lims, to such also as reach and cast up blood. Hippocrates gives counsel to
them that be afflicted with the bloody flix or exulceration of the guts; to
those likewise who be subject to the flux proceeding from the weakness of the
stomach, for to eat it twice sodden with salt. Also he prescribes it in the
cure of Tinesmos (which is a provocation or extraordinary Apollodorus holds
resolutely, That either the seed or juice thereof taken in drink, is a
singular remedy for them who suspect that they have eaten venomous mushrums.
Philistion gives the juice thereof in Goats milk, together with salt and
honey, unto such as have a cricke or cramp drawing their necks backward, that
they are not able to turn their heads. I find moreover, that by eating
Coleworts at meat ordinarily, and by drinking the decoction thereof, many have
been delivered from the gout. It with gargling and drinking juice of Cole-roots
raw. But against the Hocquet or Yex, there is a Cum Sulphur illita.
brimstone together, Magnus evil.] And in that manner prepared, it keeps the
hair fast that is ready to shed. Epicharmus says, That this herb is
sovereign good to be implaistred upon those tumors and swellings that be
incident to the privy members, and the rather, if the said implaister be made
with bean meal. The same being applied with Rue, is good for convulsions or
crampes. Moreover, there is a medicine prescribed to be made of Coleworts and
Rue-seed, against the extreme heat of fevers ardent, as also for the defects
and infirmities of the stomach, and to send out the afterbirth in women newly
laid. The powder of Colewort leaves dry, does expel or euacuate one way or
other, the venom left behind by the Gyma.
Col-flory, although it be counted good for nothing in Physic, and besides
unwholesome, as being hard of digestion and an enemy to the kidneys. Over and
besides, I must not forget this one thing of Coleworts, That the broth or
decoction thereof (so highly praised for many good uses that it is put unto) if
it be poured on the ground, has but a stinking smell with it. Wort-stocks being
dried and burnt into ashes, is thought to be a caustic medicine or potentiall
cautery. The same ashes mingled with old grease and reduced into a cataplasme,
helps the pain of the Sciatica: but with Laser and vinegar, it is a
depilatory, (i.) keeps the hair from growing again where it was once
fetched up by the roots. The said Colestocke ashes set over the fire until it
siuer only, or have one walme at the most, and so drunk with oil, Cato, he
commends the effects of the wild or wandering Colewort infinitely above the
rest; insomuch as he affirms, that the powder of it dried, being gathered and
incorporat with some convenient liquor into the form of a pomander, or
otherwise strewed upon any posie or nosegay, so as it may be received and drawn
up into Some call the Polypi.
filthy ulcers growing therein, and the stinking smell that comes from them.
This Cole-wort, others call Petraea, and this is that which of all the rest is
most adverse and the greatest enemy to wine; this is it that the vine (by a
secret Antipathie in nature) does especially avoid, if it have room to decline
from it; but in case she cannot shift from it, she dies for very grief. This
plant has the leaves growing two by two together, and those small, round,
smooth, and liker indeed to the young plants of Oleris.
Beets than to other Coleworts; whiter also it is, and more rougher clad with a
mossie down, than is the garden Colewort. Chrysippus writes, That it is a
sovereign medicine for flatuosities, and such as be oppressed with melancholy:
that it is a singular salve for fresh wounds, being applied with honey; but with
this charge, That the plaster be not taken off in seven days. Also, if it be
stamped and applied Item, that it does extenuate and resolve all excrescence of
proud, rank, or dead flesh; yea, and it does incarnat, heal up, and skin very
fair without skar, by their saying. Moreover, if it be chewed, or the juice
thereof gargarised with honey, Epicharmus is of opinion, That for the biting of
a mad dog, a man need do no more but lay to the sore a cataplasme of this herb
alone: but surer it were (says he) and more effectual, if Laser and strong
sharp vinegre were joined thereto. He adds moreover and says, That if it be
given to dogs with some piece of flesh it will kill them. And yet the seed
being parched is a remedy against the sting of serpents, and a countre-poison
to venomous Mushroms and Bulls blood. The leaves boiled and given with meat, or
otherwise raw and made into a liniment together with

Among wild worts we may place Lapsana, a plant growing to the height of a
cubit, bearing a furred or hairy leaf, like for all the world to the Navew,
but that the flower is whiter. This herb is commonly sodden and eaten in
pottage; and so taken it moderatly looseneth the belly.

The sea Colewort [otherwise named Soldanella] of all others purges most
forcibly: in regard of which acrimonie that it has to stir the belly, Cooks
use to sees it with fat meat, and yet is it most contrary to the stomach.

Touching Squils of Sea-Onions, Physicians hold that the white is the male, and
the black the female: but the whitest of them be ever best and of most use.
The manner of preparing and dressing them is after this sort: First, the dry
tunicles or skins being pilled off, the rest, which is quick and fresh
underneath, must be cut into slices, and so infiled upon a thread along, with a
pretty distance between every one, and hanged up to dry: afterward, when the
morcels be sufficiently the spleen, or have weak and feeble stomachs, or be
troubled with gnawing and pain there; such Pythagoras was of opinion, and so
reported, that if the Squilla

Moreover, the plants called Bulbs, being applied in form of a liniment, with
brimstone and vinegar, do cure the wounds of the visage: and stamped by
themselves alone, and so laid to, they help the contraction or shrinking of
sinues: and if there be wine added thereto, it cleanses the dandruffe in head,
beard, and eyebrows: but applied with honey it cures the biting of mad dogs:
howbeit Eratosthenes takes pitch in stead of honey for the said purpose: who
writes besides, That a cataplasme of them and honey together, stancheth blood
in a green wound: but others join Coriander and corn-meale to the rest,
properly for bleeding at the nose. Theodorus cures wild tettars and
ring-wormes therewith, being applied with vinegre: and with styptick harsh
wine, or an egg, he uses it for the breaking out in the head. Moreover, a
liniment made of Damion) so they be not removed in five days; and he was wont
therewith to cure cracked ears also, and the flatuous phlegmatic tumors of
the cods. Others there be who apply them with meal mingled among, to assuage
the pain of the gout. Sodden in wine, and so applied as a liniment to the
belly, they mollify the hardness in the precordial parts and midriffe: and
for the bloody flixe, a drink made thereof, together Diocles is of opinion,
that all these bulbous plants do dim the eie-sight: who says moreover, That
they are not so good boiled as roasted: and yet be they all (says he) hard of
digestion more or less, according to the nature of each one that eats them.

There is an herb which the Greeks call Bulbine, with a red bulbous root, and
leaves resembling Porret: of which there is a singular good salve made for to
heal green wounds, but none else. To conclude, as touching the bulb called
Vomitorius (of the effect that it has to provoke

CHAP. X.
Of Garden Sperages, and the wild Sperage Corruda: of Lybicum and Hormenium.

OF all Garden herbs, the Sperages are (by report) the best meat to be eaten,
and agree passing well with the stomach; and verily being taken with Cumin, they
dissolve the ventosities in the stomach, and dispatch the wind cholick, and
withal they clear the sight passing well. Kindly do they mollify the belly
and keep it soluble. If they be sodden in water, and a little wine put thereto
in the boiling, and so given to drink, they are very good for the pain of the
breast and the backbone; for the diseases also within the guts. If one take the
weight of three

The wild Sperage, some name it Corruda, others Lybicum, but the Athenians call
it Hormenium: this herb is more effectual in all those matters above rehearsed
than the former, and the whiter that it is, the greater force it has. The
jaundise it does dissipat and drive away. When it is sodden in water, the
decoction thereof to the quantity of a Hemina.
wine pint or somewhat less, is usually prescribed to them that desire to
perform the act of generation lustily. For the same purpose also, the seed
thereof and Dill, of each three oboli, is counted very good being taken in
drink. The juice thereof boiled, is given against the stinging of serpents. The
root of it and Fennel together, is thought to be most singular and of greatest
efficacy in that case: for pissing blood, Chrysippus prescribes to give in two
cyaths of wine for five days together, three oboli of the seed of Asparagus,
Parsley, and Cumin; but he says withal, That this medicine is nothing Venus,
yea and to the bladder, unless the same ingredients be sodden; and yet will
that decoction kill dogs if it be given to them. To conclude, the juice drawn
out of the root thereof, being first boiled, and so held in the mouth, is good
for the teeth.

CHAP. XI.
Of Parsley, wild Ach, of Smallach, and Ach of the mountains.

PArsley is in great request, and no man lightly there is but loves it: for
nothing is there more ordinary, than to see large branches of Parsley good
store, swimming in their potage: and commonly you have not a sallad or sauce
served to the board, you see not a piece of Chrysippus says, That the female
has more crisp and curled leaves than the male, and those boistrous and hard;
that the stalk is thick, and the taste of the herb biting and hot. Dionysius
describes it to be more blackish, having a more stubbed and short root, and
that it is apt to breed little worms.

As touching our wild Ach, which we call in Latin It seems that he means
by Apiastrum a kind of Rannunculus, i. Crow-foot, called Flammula, our
Speere-wort, or Apium ris^.
Apiastrum, Hyginus verily names it Melissophyllon. A venomous herb this is in
Sardinia, and by all writers confession utterly condemned: for surely I cannot
choose but range together in one rank al such as seem to depend upon one name in
Greek.

But Alisanders, which the Greeks term Hipposelinum is a good counterpoison
against the biting of Scorpions. If the seed be taken in drink, it cures the
wrings and torments of the guts. The same being boiled and drunk with honied
wine, helps the Strangurie and difficulty of making water. The root sodden in
wine, expels stone and gravel by urine: it puts away also the pain of
the loins, flanks, and sides. Taken in drink, or applied as a liniment, it
heals the biting of a mad dog. The juice thereof in drink, heateth them that
are ready to chill and be frozen with cold.

A fourth kind of Ach or Parsley some have made that, which the Greeks call
Oreoselinum. A plant this is, growing to the height of a span, and Whereby,
some read Orthoselinum.
upright. The seed resembles Cumin, and is found effectual to procure urine
and provoke women's terms. Finally, as Smallage has a property and virtue by
it self to heal the prick or sting of the venomous Spiders: so this
mountain Ach or Parsley of the hill, being taken in wine, is as effectual to
bring down the natural purgation of women.

CHAP. XII.
Of Stone-Parsely, named Petroselinum: and of Basil.

THere is another kind of Ach or Parsley growing upon rocks, which some call
Petroselinum. An excellent herb for soul imposthumes and botches, used in this
manner: take 2 spoonfulls of the juice thereof, put it into a Cyathe of the
juice of Horehound, and mingle all together in three Cyaths of water, and so
drink it hot. Some have set in the range of these Aches, that which is called
Buselinon: which differs from the garden Parsley, in that it has a shorter
stalk, and a root of red color: but of the same operation and effect it is.
For both taken in drink, and applied as a liniment, it is of great power
against the stinging of serpents.

Also, Chrysippus mightily cries out upon Basil, as being hurtful to the
stomach, suppressing urine, and an enemy to a clear sight. Moreover, he says,
that it troubles the brains, and puts folk besides their wits: that it
brings the Lithargie upon as many as use it, and breeds opilations stamped
and put under a stone, it will breed to a serpent: if it be chewed in ones
mouth and laid Diodorus in his Empiricks or book of approved receipts and
medicines, says, That the eating of Basil ingendreth lice. Contrariwise, the
later writers and modern physicians defend and maintain the use of Basil as
stoutly as the other blamed it: for first they avouch constantly, That Goats
use to feed thereupon. Secondly, That no man was ever known to go beside
himself who did eat thereof. Thirdly, That Basil taken in wine, with a little
vinegar put thereto, Philistio knew what he did well enough, when he gave it to
those that were troubled with the stomachical flux. As also Plistonicus was
well advised, in ministering it sodden, for the bloody flix, the exulceration of
the guts, and the Collicke. Some there be who give it in wine to them who run
ever and anon to the close stool, sit down and do nothing: to those that
reach and cast up blood, yea, and to mollify the hardness of the precordiall
parts. Being laid as a liniment to the nurses paps, it restrains the
abundance of milk, vea and dries it up. There is not a better thing in the
world for to be dropped into the ears of little babes and sucking children,
and namely with goose-grease. If the seed be bruised, and so snuffed or

CHAP. XIII.
Of Olymoeides* Dioscor.
wild Basil, Rocket, Cresses, and Rue.

WIld Basil is endued with virtues and qualities serving to all the purposes
abouesaid:

As touching Rocket, the seed cures as well the venomous sting of Scorpions,
as the biting of the hardy shrew. The same chaseth all vermin that be apt to
engender in man's body. A liniment made with it and honey together, takes away
all the spots that blemish the skin of the face: and with vinegre represseth
the red pimples whatsoever. The black or swert skars remaining after wound or
sore, it reduces to the former fair white, if it be applied with a beasts gal.
It is said moreover, that a potion thereof made with wine, and given to those
who are to receive moreover, that a fomentation of Rocket, bruised and stamped
somewhat before, quickens and

As for Cresses they have a contrary operation, for they cool and dull the
heat of the flesh, how soever otherwise they give an edge to the wit and
understanding, as heretofore we have declared. Of these Cresses there be two
kinds. The white is purgative, and the Xpondere.
weight of a Roman denier taken in water does euacuate choleric humors. A
liniment thereof together with bean flower applied unto the hard kernils called
the Kings evil, is a sovereign remedy therefore, Sextius adds moreover and
says, that a perfume thereof burnt drives away serpents, and resists the
poison of scorpions: as also that being bruised and applied with Senvie, it is a
singular remedy for the headache, and to make hair grow again where it was
fallen off: also, being stamped into a cataplasme with a fig, and laid to the
ears, it cures the hardness of hearing. Likewise, if the juice thereof be
infused or poured into the ears, it eases the toothache. Moreover, a liniment
made with it and goose-grease, scoures away the skales and dandruf, as also the
scalls of the head. A cataplasme made of it and leuain,. ripeneth fellons,
brings carbuncles to suppuration, and breaks them. With honey it mundifieth

But Rue is an herb as medicinable as the best. That of the garden has a
broader leaf, and brancheth more than the wild, which is more hot, vehement,
and rigorous in all operations. There is a juice usually pressed out of it,
being first stamped and sprinkled a little with water in the stamping, and then
put up into a box of copper or brass, and there reserved for to be used as
occasion serves: this juice taken in a great quantity is a very poison and no
better, especially biting of a mad dog; if it be used in this wise, namely,
to take a saucer full or acetable of the Pythagoras was of opininion, That
there is a distinction of sex in this herb, and namely, that the male has
smaller Al^osis. Some read Alphiosis. [out of Dioscorid.] that is, to them that
ar^ subject to the white Morphew, which is a kind of Leprosy, or S. Magnus
evil.
chill for cold, to be eaten with meat, raw. Rue sends out even the bloody
urine, which is gathered into the blader. And as Hippocrates is of opinion, If
it be drunk with sweet thick, and gross wine, it causes women's flowers to
come down, it expels the afterbirth, yea, and the dead infant within the
womb. And therefore he advises women in travel to Diocles makes a cataplasm
with Rue, Vinegre, Honey, and Barley flower, for faintings, cold sweats, and
tremblings of the heart. Likewise, against the torments of the small guts,
commonly called the or, Domine miserere mei, i. Lord have mercy upon me.
Iliak passion, he appoints to take the decoction thereof in Oil, and to
receive the same in locks of wool, and so to be applied unto the upper region
of the belly. Many do set down two drams thereof dry, and one dram and a
half of Brimstone, as an excellent receipt to be taken by those that reach and
spit up filthy and stinking matter: but if they cast or send up blood, they
should drink the decoction of three branches thereof in wine. It is an
ordinary practice in case of the Dysenterie or bloody Flix, to give it
stamped first with cheese, in wine: but they mingle therewith Bitumen, and so
crum or break it into their drink, against the difficulty of taking Item, Take
one pound or pint of oil, of wine one sextar or wine quart, sees the leaves
of Rue herin: that oil so prepared, is singular good for to anoint parts
which are benumbed, and in manner mortified and black with cold. Moreover,
considering that it is diuretical, as Hippocrates thinks, and does provoke
urine; I cannot but wonder at some, who give it as a thing that staieth vrin,
and therefore appoint it to be drunk by those that cannot hold their water.
The inunction thereof with Alum and Honey, clean seth the dry wild scab and
leprosy. Likewise with Morel or Nightshade, hogs grease and Bulls tallow, it
scoureth the Morphew, takes away werts, discusseth and dispatcheth the Kings
evil and such like tumors. In like manner it kills the fretting hot humor
called S. Anthonies i. white Lead: like as it cures the Carbuncle laid too,
with vinegre alone. Some there be who prescribe Laserpitium also to be joined
with the rest in this liniment: but without it they cure the chilblanes and
bloody falls that be so angry in the night season. Many use to boil Rue, and
together with wax, reduce it into a Cerot; which they apply to the swollen
breasts or paps of women, as also to the breaking out of phlegmatic pustules
or wheales (much like to our measels or small pockes. Also being reduced into
an unguent with the tender sprigs or tops of Laurel, it is a singular remedy
for the flux or fall of humors into the burse of the cods. And verily this Rue
is counted so excellent an herb in operation this ways, and so respective
peculiarly to those parts, that it is commonly holden for a soueraign remedy
to heal all ruptures, if a man take the wild of that Venus. But women with
child must beware how they eat Rue: they especially must forbear this herb:
for I find that it kills the young child conceived within their bodies. Thus
much for the effects that it works in men and women. Over and besides al
which, there is not an herb growing in the garden that is so much used for the
curing of 4 footed beasts, whether they be broken winded and pursiue, or
otherwise bitten and stung with venomous beasts; in which cases, there must be
an injection made up into the nosthrils, of the juice of Rue in wine. Also, if
it chance that a beast has swallowed an Horseleech in drinking, let it be
taken with vinegre. Finally, in every accident of theirs, let Rue be prepared
and ministered respectively unto each grief, according to the manner set down
for men in the semblable case.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of wild Mint: of garden Mint: of Penyroiall: of Nep, and Cumin.

WIld Mint is called in Latin Mentastrum: it differs from the other in the
form of the leaves: All this agrees to our Calaminth: according to Dioscorid^s.
for shaped it is like Basil, how soever in color it resembles Penniroyal,
which is the cause, that some name it the savage Penyroiall. In the time of
Pompey the Great, it was Venus in their dreams, defile and pollute themselves
in their sleep. If one drink it with vinegre, it excludes the flat broad

As touching garden Mint, as the very smell of it alone recouereth and
refreshes the spirits: so the taste stirs up the appetite to meat, which is
the cause, that it is so ordinary in our sharp sauces wherein we use to dip our
meats. Being put into milk, it will not suffer it to turn or sour, it keeps it
from quailing and curding which is the reason, that they who use ordinarily to
drink milk, take Mints therewith, for fear it should coagulate or crudle in
their stomach, and put them in danger of suffocation. Some, for the same
effect use to give it in water or honied wine: and surely it is thought by that
very property to hinder generation, in that it dissolueth the due consistence
and thickness which is required in natural seed. And yet it is a great
stancher of (...)
whites that many times follows women. Being taken with Amydum or starch
powder in water, it restrains the inordinate flux occasioned by the imbecility
of the stomach. Syriation the Physician used ordinarily to cure the apostumes
and sores of the Matrice, with Mint. Also against the obstructions and other
accidents of the liver, he was wont to give 3 Oboles thereof in honied wine.
And for them that raught up blood at the mouth, he prescribes to take Mints in
a broth or supping. The skal that little children be troubled withal, it
heals wonderful well. It is singular to dry up the humors that mollify the
gristly windpipe and the other instruments of the breath and voice; and when
they are dry, knitteth and strengthens them. Taken in water and honied wine,
it cleanses the corruptand putrified phlegmatic humors which be offensive
Democritus says, that to drink it with the juice of a Pomegranat, is a ready
means to stay the yex and vomiting. The juice of green Mints, drawn up with
the wind into thenosthrils, helps the stinking vleers there. The herb it
self stamped, represseth the rage of choler that purges allaieth the swelling
of women's breasts. In case of headache, a liniment thereof does well to be [I
do this to cure the splene] he shall find remedy indeed for the infirmity of
that part: moreover, let one take as much poudred mints dried as he can well
contain with his 3 fingers ends, and drink the same

The branches of Mint and penniroiall both, are usually put into glass viols
with vinegre, for to be iufused therein: and a man would not think how good
this vinegre is for faintings of the heart; so great is the society that these
two herbs have one with the other in this behalf. For which cause, I remember
on a time when diverse learned physicians were met together to confer in my
chamber, they resolved and concluded definitly, That a chaplet of Penniroyal
was without comparison far better for the giddiness and swimming of the head,
than one of roses, for a garland of Pennyroiall, if it be worn only upon the
head, allaieth (by report) the ach thereof. More than it, it is said, That the
very sent of Pennyroiall preserves the brain from the offense that may come by
the distemperature either of heat or cold, yea and from the inconvenience
Xenocrates has left unto us, we find this for one, namely, That a branch of
Pennyroiall wrapped within wool, and given to the patient for to smell unto
before the fit come of a tertian ague, drives it away: as also if it be put
chance that either sheep or goats do taste thereof, it provoke them presently
to blea: whereupon For (...)
(...). This herb is so hot and ardent, that if any part of the body be rubbed
or anointed therewith, it will rise into a blister. If one have taken a
through-cold, and thereby gotten a cough, Physicians have prescribed to use
frictions therewith before the Patient go into the bain for to sweat. Also
their direction is to do the like before the cold fits of agues: as also in
case of the crampe and torments of the guts. Wonderful good it is in all kinds
of gout. If it be taken in drink with honey and salt, it is singular for those
who be diseased in the liver, as also for the lights: for it opens their pipes,
and discharges them of the phlegm that stuffed them, so as they may reach up
and void the same with ease. The decoction thereof with some salt is excellent
good for the spleen and the bladder, yea and for all ventosities and shortness
of breath. Semblably, the juice prepared

Great conformity there is in operation between Peny-royal and or Cal^mintha.
Nep; for being both boiled in water unto the composition of a third part, they
discuss and shake off the cold in Ague fits which causes the Patient to
shake; and besides are of validity to bring down women's monthly sickness.
In summer time they assuage the extremity of heat. Nep also is powerful
Porcius Latro (that famous and great Rhetorician) procured themselves pale
faces, because they would look like their master, who indeed came to that
color by continual study and plying his book. Thus likewise not long since,
Julius Vindex, being desirous to be affranchised by Nero, pretending by his
pale visage and poor look, that he had not many days to live, made fair
semblance unto Nero by his will and testament, that he should shortly be his
heir (which cheat the said Nero gaped after;) and Vindex entered so far within
him, as he obtained whatsoever he would at his hands. Cumin reduced into the
form of trochisks or called Errhina or Nascalia.
nose-tents, put up into the nosthrils, stancheth blood. The like effect it
has, being fresh gathered and applied with vinegre. Being laid it self alone
to watering and weeping eyes, it restrains that humor: and in case the cods
be bolne or swelled, it is good to mix honey withal in manner of an emplastre.
But it suffices to make a cataplasme thereof and lay it to the belly alone, of
little babes and infants so troubled. Finally, to cure the jaunise it is
singular, given in white wine when the Patient has sweat, and is come out of
the Baine.

CHAP. XV.
It seems that this Title is corrupt.
Of Cumin Ethyopick, which restrains the flix of urine: of Capres: of Lovach
or

But for the purpose a foresaid, namely to cure the jaunise, the Ethyopian
Cumin is the best, being taken after a bath with vinegre and water: also licked
in manner of a Loch with honey. As for the Cumin of Africa, it is thought to have
a singular propriety by it self for to help In dul^i: he means passum.
cuit. For the impediments of the matrice it ought to be drunk in pure wine of
the grape, and withal there must be applied to the place offended, a cataplasm
of the leaves upon a lock of wool. Dried against the fire, bruised and beaten
into powder, and so incorporat with oil of roses and wax, and wrought in the
end to the form of a Cerot, and then applied, it abateth the swelling of the
cods. But the wild Cumin is more effectual in all the cases above mentioned,
than that of the garden. Over and besides, it has a special virtue together
with oil, against serpents, scorpions,

An herb there is resembling Cumin for all the world, which the Greeks call
Ammi: although some there are who think it to be all one with the Cumin of
Ethyopia. Hippocrates calls it, the roial Cumin [of Egypt;] the reason was,
no doubt, for that he deemed that of Egypt to exceed all the rest in goodness.
But most writers besides him do think it * an herb altogether of another
nature, because it is smaller and whiter: and yet it serves to the like use:
for at Alexandria Rue^ius takes it for Basil gentle.
in Egypt they put it commonly under their loaves of bread in the bottom crust,
when they go to the oven, and ordinarily it is occupied in the kitchen about
sauces. Be it what it will, it dissolueth ventosities, it pacifieth the
wringing torment of the guts, it prouokes vrin, and brings

As for Capres, we have sufficiently written thereof amongst other shrubs that
be strangers: and yet it will not be amiss to reiterat thus much, That a man
must be well advised how he takes any out landish Capres that come from
beyond sea: but if he will go safely to work, let him It cures also the
infirmities of the liver. The manner is to give the same in vinegre and honey

Touching Louage, which some call Panax, i: is Vtile: na^ concoctione^ i^at. Ex
Dioscor.
wholesome for the stomach. Likewise a proper medicine it is for convulsions and
ventosities. To conclude, there are some who name it Cunila Bubula, as I have
before noted, but they be deceived.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the wild Origan Cunila Bubula: of the Bastard Marjoram, named Gallinacea

OVer and besides the garden Sauorie, there be many kinds of Cunila known in
Physic: and first that which is called Bubula, and has seed like to
Peniroiall, being either chewed in the mouth or applied outwardly, it is a good
wound-hearb, so that it be not removed but every five days. Taken in wine, it
is singular against the poisonous sting of serpents, in case the herb it
self be stamped, and laid withal upon the sore place: and verily it is an
ordinary thing, to rub therewith welland thoroughly, the wounds that they make.
Semblably, the Tortoises, against the time that they should fight with
Serpents, use this herb in manner of a

Another Cunila or Sauorie there is, which our countrymen call in Latin
Gallinacea; the Greeks name it Origanum Heracleoticum. If it be braied and
salt joined thereto, it is sovereign for the eyes: it helps the cough also,
and corrects all faults of the liver. If a thick grewell or sew be made
thereof, together with flower, oil, and vinegre, so tempered as it may be
supped, it cures the pleurisy or pains of the sides: but above all, it is
singular for the stinging of Serpents.

A third kind there is, which the Greeks term the male, but we in Latin
Flea-ba^ei
Cunilago: a stinking [idest, Soft] has leaves and branches more hairie than
the former, and those sharp pointed like pricks. This herb if a man rub
between his fingers, resembles honey in smell, and will stick fast too in
manner of honny. Another sort there is of Cunila, which we, for the smell that
it has of Frankincense, call Libanotis. But both these, the one as well as the
other, taken in wine or vinegre,

CHAP. XVII.
Of Piperitis and Origanum: of Onitis-Prasium: of Tragoriganum, and Heraclium:
of Lepidium and Gith or Melanthium: of Annise.

PIperitis or Calecut Pepper-wort (which before we called Ginney pepper.
Siliquastrum) being taken in drink, is very good for the falling sickness.
Castor has described it after another manner, namely, to be an herb rising up
with a long red stem, thick set with joints or little knees; bearing leaves
resembling those of Laurel; with white seed and the same small, carrying with it
the taste of Pepper. The virtues of which herb be these; To help the gumbs and
teeth, to make a sweet breath, and withstand sour and stinking belches.

Origan or Orgament, which in taste (as we have said) resembles * Sauery, has
many kinds, Cunila.
and all medicinable, for there is one one sort thereof surnamed Onitis or
Prasion, not unlike to hyssope: a peculiar property this herb has being
drunk in warm water, to quiet the gnawings in the stomach, and to concoct
the crudities there: but taken in white wine, to cure the venomous pricks of
Spiders and Scorpions. The same applied outwardly with oil and vinegre upon
wool, is singular good for dislocations, disjointures, spraines, contutions,
and bruises.

As for Tragoriganum, it is more like unto wild creeping Thyme: it has virtue
to provoke vrin, to discuss and resolve all tumors or swellings. And more
particularly, most effectual it is for them that have drunk the gum of
Chamelaeon, called Ixia: also against the Vipers sting: besides, for the
stomach that belcheth sour, and for the midriffe and precordiall parts. It is
an approved medicine for the cough, the frenzy, and inflammation of the
lungs, being with honey

Touching the Origan named Heracleum or Heracleoticum, the same also is divided
into three sorts: For the first is of a blacker and more duskish green, with
broader leaves: also than the rest; and besides is glutinous and will cleave to
ones fingers. A second sort has smaller leaves, softer it is and more tender
in hand, not unlike to Majoram; and this kind some would rather call Prasium.
The third has leaves of a mean bigness between the other two, not so large as
the one nor so slender as the other, but not so forcible in operation as either
of them both: but to return again to our former Origanum: the best is that
which grows in Candy; for the same has a pleasant and sweet sent besides:
the next in goodness is that which comes from Smyrna: then Bugle, or Siaechas
Arabica.
Onitis is sim ply the best of all others to be taken in drink. Howbeit, the
use generally of them all in common, is to chase away serpents: by way of
decoction or pottage made thereof, to cure them that be already stung or
wounded by them: being tnken in drink, to move urine: and, together with the
root of Panace, to help ruptures, convulsions, and spasmes: sodden in certain
Acetables with figs or hyssope, to the consumption of a sixth part, to cure the
dropsy. At the entrance into the stouve or hot-house if it be taken good it is
against the scab, the iteh, and the wild skurf. The juice with milk, is dropped
into the ears, and that with very good success. It helps also the mumps or
inflammation of the Amygdales and Uvula; likewise the ulcers in the head. The
decoction thereof taken with lie ashes in wine, is a countrepoison to kill the
venom of Opium oil, vinegre, and barley meal, softneth and resolves the Kings
evil. A liniment made therewith

As touching Lepidium [i. Passe-rage] it is to be ranged among the burning and
causticke medicines: by which faculty that it has, and by blistering the skin,
it takes away any spot or blemish in the face; yet so, as the exulceration
which it causes, may be soon helped and skinned again with a salve of wax and
oil of Roses. By the same means it serves to cleanse the leprosy and wild
scabs, which it does always with ease and expedition, as also to smooth the
cicatrices or scars after ulcers. Moreover, it is commonly said, that if it be
tied fast unto the arm To wit, by raising a blister, and giving issue.
takes the pain quite away.

Gith or Nigella, the Greek writers some name Melanthion, others Melaspermon:
the best is that which is blackest, and besides of quickest sent. A singular
remedy it is for the sores and wounds occasioned by venomous serpents and
scorpions especially, if a liniment be made of it, vinegre and honey mingled
together. I find also, that if it be burnt, the very smoke and fume of it will
chase away serpents: but particularly against the poison of venomous spiders, a
dram thereof is sufficient to be taken in drink. Being bruised and knit in a
linen cloth, and so smelled unto, it resolves the pose, or breaks the cold
which stuffeth the nosthrils. Applied as a liniment with vinegre to the
forehead, or infused into the nosthrils, it eases the headache. And if it be
so used with the oil of the flower de-lis root, it staieth the waterish humors
that fall into

As for the herb Annise, if it be drunk with wine it is a counterpoison against
scorpions. And Pythagoras has given a special praise and commendation to it
both raw and boiled, as to few other herbs the like: for be it green or dry, it
serves as well for seasoning of all viands, as making all sauces, in so much as
the kitchen cannot be without it. Over and besides, when bakers set into the
oven, they put Annise between the bottom of their loaves and the peele. And for
to commend thereof be drawn up into the nose, it appeaseth the headache.
Iollas says, that the Anni se i, Almonds.
bitter nuts well cleansed and blanched: stamp these all together in a mortar,
and with honey reduce them into the consistence of an Electuarie. And yet there
is one Composition more for this purpose, and of all other the easiest and
soonest made. Recipe, of Annise three drammes, of Poppy seed two drams, temper
these with honey, and for three mornings together take the quantity of a bean
fasting. And this confection is singular besides against sour riftings or
belching: and therefore it cures the ventosities which puff up the stomach:
it asswageth the torments and wrings of the guts, and represseth the continual
flux proceeding from the weakness of the retentiue faculty in the stomach.
But to return again to simple Annise seed, a drink made with the decoction
thereof, or the very smell taken up into the nose, stays the troublesome yex
or hocquet. The decoction of Anise leaves does digest and resolve all
crudities. The juice drawn from it when it is sodden with parsley, if it be
smelled unto, stinteth immoderate Dieuches used commonly the juice of Anise, to
mitigat the pain of the loins: to give also the seed beaten to powder with
mints in wine, for the dropsey and tho defluxion stomachicall: but the root he
thought to be passing good for the kidneyes, used and taken in that manner.
Dalion that famous Herbarist was wont to apply Annise and Parsley together in
form of a cataplasme, to women in labor, for better speed in childbirth:
also for the pain of the Mother, yea, he would give it also to drink with Dill,
unto women when they cried out in travel. He applied it also green, with
barley grotes in manner of a liniment, to the head, for to stay and settle the
brains of phrentique persons. And being so prepared, he found it singular good
for young infants subject to the Falling-sickenesse, or troubled with crampes
and contractions of sinews. As for Pythagoras verily, he says confidently,
That whosoever Sosimenes the Physician was wont to mollify and resolve all
hard swellings with Annise and Vinegre: he used also to give the decoction
thereof in oil, with some sprinckling of Nitre among, to those that felt
weariness in their lims. Moreover, he assured travelers and way faring men,
that if they drank the seed thereof, they should find present help Heraclides
gave ordinarily of the seed as much as might be taken up with three fingers,
together with two oboles of Castoreum, in honied wine, for the hoving and
inflation of the stomach: semblably, for the pussing up and swelling of belly
and guts. Also, to those that were streit winded, and could not take their
breath but sitting upright, he ministered the like proportion; to wit, as much
as three fingers would contain, with equal quantity of Henbane Tlepolemus
prescribed for fevers quartane, as much Annise seed as three fingers might
comprehend, with the like quantity of Fennel seed to be taken in vinegar and
one Cyath of Honey. A liniment made with Annise and bitter nuts, allaieth the
grievous

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Dill: of Sacopenium, and Sagapenum. Of Poppy both white and black. The
manner of gathering and drawing juice out of herbs. Also of Opium.

DIll also has a property to dissolve ventosities, to break wind and cause
rifting; also to assuage any wrings or torments of the belly, and yet it
staieth the flux. The roots being reduced into a liniment with water or wine,
restrains the flux of watering eyes. A perfume made of the seed as it
boileth, received up into the nosthrils, staieth the yex. Taken as a drink in
water, it concocteth crudities, and appeaseth the pain of windiness proceeding
from thence. The ashes of it burned, raise up the Uvula in the throat that is
fallen. Howbeit, Dill dimmeth the eie-sight, and dulleth the vigor of genitall
seed.

As for our Sacopenium here in Italy, it differs altogether from that which
grows beyond

Touching garden Poppie and the several kinds thereof, I have written already:
but besides them there be other sorts also of the wild, whereof I promised to
treat. Mean while, the heads Diagoras gives counsel to cut the stem or stalk
of the black Poppy when it begins to strout and swell toward the flouring
time, out of which there will issue a certain juice called Opium: but Iollas
advises to make that incision when it has bloomed, and to choose a fair
clear day for it, and that hour of the day when as the dew thereon is dried
up. Now would they have them to be cut under the head before the bloom; but in
the very head, after it has don flouring; and verily, there is no other kind
of herb wherein the head is cut, but this only. The said juice of this herb as
well as of all other is received in wool: or else if it run but in small
quantity, they gather it with the thumb nail, as the manner is in Lectuces:
but the morrow after the incision, so much drawn and thus prepared, has power
not only to provoke sleep; but if it be taken in any great Licinius Cecinna
late deceased, a man by calling a Praetor, who not able to endure the
intolerable pains and torments of a certain disease, and being weary of his
life, at Bilbil in Spain, shortened his own days by taking Opium. By reason
whereof, Physicians are grown to great variance, and be of contrary opinions
as touching the use of the foresaid Opium. Diagoras and Erasistratus condemned
it altogether as a most deadly thing, and would not allow that it should be so
much as injected or infused into the body by way of clyster, for they held it
no better than poison: and otherwise hurtful also to the eyes. Andreas says
moreover, That if Opium does not presently put out a man's eyes and make him
blind, it is because they of Alexandria in Egypt do sophisticat Anthonies fire,
and all sorts of wounds. For mine own part I would not have it in any case to
enter into Collyries, much less unto those medicines which be ordained to
drive away ague fits, or into maturatiues, no nor to go among other ingredients
Mnesicles is of opinion, that the best means to keep and preserve Opium, is to
lay it in Henbane seed: but others think it

CHAP. XIX.
Of the wandering Poppy, and the horned Poppy. Of Memithum.
Glaucium or Paralium. Of Heraclium or Aprhum. Of the composition named
Diacodium, and of the Tithymal.

IN a middle nature between the garden Poppy and the wild, is to be ranged a
third kind: which because it comes up in corn fields, but yet vnsown and of
the own accord, we have called Rhoeas, and wandering Poppy. Some there be, who
so soon as it is gathered, chew both herb and head all whole as it grew, and
so eat it. Five heads of this Poppy being sodden in three hemines of wine, and
so taken in drink, do both purge the belly, and also bring the patient

Of these wild Poppies there is one kind called in Greek Ceratitis, of a dark
or duskish green, growing up with a stalk a cub it high; with a gross root,
covered with a thick rind; the heads or cups wherein the seed lies, bend
like unto a little horn. The leaves are less and slenderer

Another kind of these wild Poppies is called of some Heraclion, or of others,
Aphron, with leaves resembling Struthio similibus. ex Diosc. i. like to
Struthium: wherein Pliny is foulely ouerseen to translate it pas sere
presentantibus: because that (...) signifies the herb Struthium, ((...).
Fullers weed) and the bird called a sparrow: upon which one absurdity more
follow still to maintain the same, as commonly it is seen. For that which
follows of bleaching, agreeeth to the foresaid herb in some sort.
Sparrows, if a man look a far off. The root runs very ebb and
superficially

CHAP. XX.
Of the wild Purcellane or Peplium. Of Coriander and Orach.

THere is a wild Purcellane also, which they call Peplium: more effectual,
though not much, than the garden Purcellane; for there be strong and wonderful
properties reported thereof for sundry uses. First it is holden for certain,
that this herb if it be eaten as meat, dulleth So called for that they cause
flux of Blood.
Haemorrhoids and Otherwise named Dipsades, because they set one into a burning
fire, as it were, and an unquenchable thirst: whereupon they took both their
names.
Presters: and being laid to the hurt place, draw forth the said poison. The
juice also of this herb pressed forth and drunk in wine cuit, is a remedy for
those that be poisoned with Henbane. Now if the herb it self is not to be
gotten, the seed has the like effect. Moreover, it is thought to be singular
good for the aquosities gathered within the body, and the diseases caused
thereby, as dropsies, etc. for the headache; for rheumatick ulcers also, if it
be bruised and applied with wine. Al other sores likewise it heals, if it be
chewed and laid too with honey. After the same manner prepared, it is good to
be applied to childrens heads for to temper the heat of the brain, as also to
their nauils when they bear out more than they should. For all vehement
distillations of watery is an excellent remedy. A cataplasme made of it, with
Barley groats, salt, and vinegar, cures angry Anthonies fire. The juice if it
be drunken, helps the reins and the bladder. It expels worms and such
like vermin out of the belly. A good mitigatiue, it is of pain, if it be
applied as a cataplasme to wounds with oil and Barley groats. Metrodorus in his
book entitled the (...).
Abridgement or Breuiary of those roots that are to be cut up or gathered; gave
counsel to give this herb to women, newly laid upon childbirth, for the
immoderate and excessive purgation that many times follows them. It cools
the heat of lust, and represseth dreams of wantonness. I know my self a
grand signior in Spain, father unto a great personage, and one who had bin
advanced to the dignity of a Pretour, who carried ever about him a root of this
Peplium hanging at his neck by a lace or small thread, and that for the
intolerable pains of the Vuvla, whereto he was subject; and never would he
leave it off, but when he went into the stoue or bayne: whereby he found such
ease, that he was never troubled afterward with the said disease. Moreover,

Concerning Coriander, there is none found growing wild of it self without
sowing by the hand. But certain it is, that the very best comes out of
Egypt: a special and peculiar virtue it has against one kind of serpent or
venomous worm, which they call Amphisbaena [for that it seems to have an head
at both ends] whether it be inwardly taken in drink, or outwardly applied. It
heals also other wounds. It cures the night-foes or chilblans, the red angry
pimples also, if it be but only stamped and laid too. There is not a swelling
or apostemation gathering to an head, but a cataplasme made with it, with honey
and Raisins, either resolves them, or quickly brings to maturation. If it be
no more but stamped with vinegar, it eases the pushes Xenocrates tells a
strange thing, if it be true, namely, That if a woman drink one only grain
or seed of Coriander, her menstruall flux will stay one day; if twain, M. Varro
was of opinion, That if flesh meat were poudered or corned with Coriander
gross beaten together with vinegar, it would keep sweet, and it were all the
Summer long.

As for Orach, there is a wild kind of it growing of the own accord: a very
weed it is and no better, utterly condemned by Pythagoras; as if it bred the
Dropsy, ingendered the Iaundise, brought folk to look ill and pale, and were
exceeding hard of digestion: and so far he was out of conceit with it, that he
thought nothing would like well and prosper, no not in a garden, where this grew
near, but that it would sensibly decay and fade. Dionysius and Diocles
approve this judgment of Pythagoras, and say moreover, that most diseases are
bred thereby. Nay, they would Solon of Smyrna should write, that it has much
ado to grow and come up in Italy. As for Hippocrates, he is not so far fallen
out with it; for with it and Beets he makes a decoction (to be injected by the
Metrenchyte) to assuage the inflammation in the matrice and the natural parts
of women. Lycus of Naples was wont to give it to drink as a counterpoyson
against the green flies Cantharides. And he thought that a very good liniment
might be made thereof, either raw or sodden, to lay unto biles, pushes, fellons
a breeding, and all hard tumors whatsoever. Semblably, that if S. Anthonies
fire were anointed therewith, being incorporat with honey, vinegar, and nitre;
or if it were applied unto the gouty parts, there would ensue great easement.
Moreover, in case the nails be grown crooked, uneven, and rugged,

CHAP. XXI.
Of the common Mallow. Of the Mallow Malope. Of the Marish Mallow or Altaea. Of
the common Docke: the sour Docke or Sorrel: of the water Docke: of the tall
Docke called Patience: and lastly of that Docke with the long root, called
Bulapathum.

ORaches were not so much discommended, but on the contrary side Mallows be as
highly praised, as well that of the garden as the wild. Two kinds there be of
the garden mallows; distinguished both by the largeness of their leaves. The
greater of those that grow in gardens, the Greeks call Malopum; the other is
supposed to be named Malachum; for that it does mollify and soften the belly.
Of the wild sort, that which carries a broad leaf and white (...). To cure or
heal.
Althaea, and of some, Aristalthaea, for the excellent virtues that it has in
Physic. This property have Mallows, To enrich and fatten any ground,
whersoeuer they be sown or set. But this marish Mallow Althaea, is more
effectual than the rest against all wounds by sharp pricks or thorns, and
principally against the sting of Scorpions, Waspes, and such like, as also the
biting of the Hardishrew mouse. Nay, whosoever be thoroughly rubbed or anointed
before hand with any Mallow whatsoever, stamped with oil; or do but carry it
about them, they shall not be stung or bitten at all. As for the leaf of
Mallows, if it be laid upon a Scorpion, it will be streightwaies benumbed.
Moreover, good counterpoisons they be all: a liniment made of them being raw,
together with nitre, draws forth all pricks or stings remaining within the
flesh: but if leaf and root be sodden together and so drunk, it represseth the
poison of the venomous woman sup off a small draught (though it were no more but
half a cyath) every day of the juice Sextius Niger says, they be hurtful to
the stomach. And A woman Physician, who writ of Physic, or at leastwise a mid
wife of good authority.
Olympias of Thebes affirms, That if women use it with goose grease, they
shall not go their full time with child. Others do write, That if women take
an handful of Mallow leaves in oil and wine, they shall be thoroughly purged
in their due times. This is known for a truth and resolved by all that write or
make profession of Physic, That a woman in labor, if she sit upon Mallows
strewed under her stool, shall be delivered with greater speed and expedition:
but then must they be taken away presently after that she is laid, for fear
that the very Xenocrates does affirm, That if the seed of that Mallow which
runs up in one stalk, be reduced into powder and strewed upon that part of a
woman which Nature has hidden, she will be so wood after the company of a man,
as she will never be satisfied nor contented with embracing. The like effect
(says he) there will ensue, if three roots thereof be bound near to the place
of Nature. Also, that a decoction of Mallows ministered by way of clyster, is a
singular injection to cure the bloody flixe, or exulceration of Anthonics fire:
also to places scorched, burnt, or scalded: but for the accidents and Symptoms
Hippocrates gave counsel to them that were wounded, and for loss of blood
exceeding thirsty,

Touching the Dock, the properties thereof are not unlike to those of the marsh
Mallow: there is a wild kind thereof, which some call Oxalis in Greek [i. wild
Sorrel or Soure-dock] this herb resembles very near that of the garden, in
regard of the sharp pointed leaves; in color like i. Sharp pointed Docke;
this comes yet nearer to the garden Docke than the former: for it has leaves
sharper at the point and redder, and grows not but in marish grounds. There
is another kind of Dock coming up in the very water (as some say)
Hydrolapathum. Yet is there one more called i. Patience, or Monks Rheu: barb.
Hippolapathum, bigger than the garden Docke or Sorrel; white also, and of a
more fast and pulpous substance. As for all the wild Dockes or Sorrells, they
be holden medicinable to cure the sting of Scorpions; and whosoever has any
Iure, happily for Thure, i. Frankincense, according to Cornari^.
convenient liquor, to incorporat and unite them: and these must be infused
and dissolved in vinegar, at the time that they are to be used. As touching the
garden Sorrel, there Solon has made mention of another Docke, called
Bulapathum, nothing different from other Dockes, but that the root runs
deeper into the ground, which, if it be taken in wine, cures the bloody flix.

CHAP. XXII.
Of three kinds of Senvey: of Horehound, and wild running Thyme: of water
Cresses: of water Mints, otherwise called Thymbraeum: of Lineseed, and Bleets.

THe herb Senvey, whereof there be three kinds (as I have already observed in
my treatise of garden plants) Pythagoras has placed in the highest rank of
those simples that sum up aloft: for there is not a thing that sooner biteth
one by the nose, and pierces and mounteth more quickly into the brains than
does Senvey. The seed thereof [commonly called mustard (...)
legs or the ^d deriuati^.
forehead or region of the brain rather. It has a caustic or burning quality,
and being applied in form of a liniment to

As touching the juice of Scnvie, it is after three sorts drawn; the first,
being pressed forth, it is let to take a heat in the Sun gently by little and
little, within an earthen pot, Secondly, there issues forth of the small stems
or branches that it has, a white milky liquor, which after it is dried and
hardened in that manner, is a singular remedy for the toothache. Where note by
the way, that the seed and root both, after they have bin well steeped and soked
in new wine, are stamped or brayed together: now if one do take in a supping as
much of this juice thus drawn, as may be held in the ball of the hand; it is
very good to strengthen the throat and chaws, to fortify the stomach, to
corroborat the eyes, to confirm the head, and generally to preserve all the
senses

Concerning Horehound, which the Greeks call Prasion, others Linostrophon,
some Phylopes or Philochares, an herb so well known and so common, that it
needs no description; many Physicians have commended to be as medicinable as
the best. And in truth, the leaves and seed both, being beaten into powder, are
excellent good for the stinging of serpents, for the pain of the breast and
sides, and singular for an old cough. Moreover, the juice is right soueraign
Castor puts down two sorts of Horehound; to wit, the black and the white;
but he sets greater store by the white than the other. He prescribes to
take an empty egg-shel, and to put into it the juice of Horehound and honey, by
even portions; and when the said egg is warm, to minister the same by way of
clyster or syringe, promising us that the said iniection

Touching running Thyme, some think it is called Serpyllum in Latin, a
serpendo [i. of creeping] because it runs and creeps by the ground; a
property indeed of the wild kind, and especialy among rocks and stony grounds.
The garden Serpyllum, which comes of seed, creeps not, but grows to the
height of four-fingers breadth. The wild Thyme which comes up of the own
accord, likes and thriueth better, having whiter leaves and branches than the
other: this (I say) is thought to have a special virtue against serpents, and
namely the Cenchris, the Scolopendres also as well of the sea as the land;
likewise the Scorpions, in case the sprigs and leaves thereof be sodden in
wine, and so taken inwardly: if the same be burned, it yields a

The wild Sisymbrium or Cresses, called of some Thymbraeum, grows to a foot
in height Some take it for water Mints or Horse-mint.
and no higher. That which comes up in watery places, is like unto garden
Cresses: but both sorts are effectual against all pricks and stings of
Hornets, and such like creatures. That which springs up in dry ground, has
the narrower leaf of the twain, and carries a sweet smell with

Line-seed is employed with other matters in diverse medicines to many uses, but
of it self alone it clears the skin of women's faces, takes out spots,
freckles, pimples, wems, and molls that be eye-sores, if it be applied as a
liniment thereto. The juice thereof quickneth and helps the eyesight. With
Frankincense and water, or else with Myrrh and wine, it represseth the violent
flux of humors to the eyes. Reduced into a cataplasme, with honey, grease, or
wax, and so Murrha.
Myrrh, and so laid to the cods, it helps their swelling and inflammations:
it is good also for ruptures of all sorts; and with water

Bleets seem to be dull, unsavory, and foolish Woorts, having no taste nor
quickness at all: whereupon Menander the comicall Poet, brings in a husband
upon the stage, who to reproach his wife for her sottishness and want of sense,
gives her the term of Bleet. And in very truth, good it is for little or
nothing, and altogether hurtful unto the stomach. It troubles and
disquieteth the belly, insomuch as it drives some that use to eat it, into the
dangerous disease Cholera, working both upward and downward without any stay.
And yet some say, that if it be drunk in wine, it is good against Scorpions,
and serves for a pretty liniment to be applied unto Hippocrates is of opinion,
that much feeding of Bleets, staieth the monthly course of women's terms.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of Meu, and Fenell, as well Gentle, named Foeniculum; as Wild, which is called
Hippomar at hrum, or Myrsineum: of Hemp, and Fenell-geant: and of Thistles and
Artichoux.

MEu or Spicknell is not found in Italy, unless it be in some Physicians
garden, and those are very few that sow or set it. Howbeit, there be two kinds
thereof; the one, which is the better, is commonly called Athamanticum, of
Prince Athamas the first inventer of this herb, as some think; but according
to other, because the best Meu is found upon Athamas, a mountain in Thessaly.
Leafed it is like to Aniso, rather Aneth^, Dill, after Diosc. whereupon it is
called of some, wild Dil.
Annise, rising up with a stem otherwhile two cubits

As for Fenell, the Serpents have won it much credit, and brought it into
name, in this regard, That by tasting thereof (as I have already noted) they
cast their old skin, and by the juice Such medicines be called (...)*
property to mundifie our sight, and take away the filme or web that
ouercasteth and dimmeth our eyes. Now the only time to gather and draw the said
juice out of Fennel, is when the stalk begins to swell and wax big: which
after it is received, they use to dry in the Sun, and as need requires, make
an iniunction with it and honey together. There is of this juice to be had in
all places: howbeit, the best is made in Iberia, partly of the gum that issues
or frieth (rather) out of the stalk [being brought near to the fire;] or else
drawn from the seed whiles it is fresh and green. There is another making
thereof out of the roots, by way of incision, presently after that Fennel
begins to spring and put forth out of the ground, when Winter is done. There
is another kind of wild Fenell, named by some Hippomarathrum, by others
Myrsineum. Diocles makes mention of another kind yet of wild Fennel, with a
long and narrow leaf, bearing seed resembling Coriander. As touching the
garden Fenell, and the medicinable virtues that it has, it is holden, That the
seed, if it be taken inwardly in wine, is a soueragne drink for the prick of
Scorpions or sting of other Serpents. The juice thereof, if it be instilled by
drops into the ears, kills the worms there. The herb it self carries such
sway in the kitchen, that lightly there is no meat seasoned nor any vinegar
sauce served up without it. Moreover, for to give a commendable and pleasant
taste unto bread, it is ordinarily put under the bottom crust of our loves,
when they be set into either (...), exulcerate, or itching.
privy parts, whether it be by somenting them with a decoction of the roots
boiled in wine, or by applying a liniment to them made with the said roots
stamped and incorporate with oil. Many do make a cerote thereofwith wax, for
ta lay unto tumors to places bruised and made black and blew with stripes.
Also they use the root either prepared Petridius, who wrote the book entitled
Of Serpents.
Ophiaca, and Myction likewise in his Treatise named Of cutting up or gathering
roots.
Rhizotomumena were of opinion, That there is not a better counterpoyson
against the venom of Serpents, than, wild Nicander himself has raunged it,
not in the lowest place of such medicines.

Concerning Hemp, at first it came up without sowing even in the very woods,
and carried a more duskish green leaf, and the same rougher. It is said, that
if men eat the seed, it will extinguish utterly their own seed. The juice of
green Hemp Seed, being dropped into the ears, drives out any worms or vermin
there engendered, yea, and what ear-wigs or such like creatures that are gotten
into them: but it will cause headache withal. So forcible is this plant, that
(by report) if it be put into water, it will make it to gather and coagulat.
Which is the reason, that if horses have the gurry, they shall find help by
drinking the said water. The root if it be boiled in water, does mollify and
softenioints that be shrunk up: it assuageth the pains likewise of the

As for Ferula or Fennel geant, it carries a seed like to Dill. That kind
which rises up in one stem, and then divides it self and brancheth forth in
the head, is supposed to be the female. The stalks are good to be eaten boiled:
and the right sauce wherein they be served up, to give them a more commendable
taste, is new wine and honey tempered accordingly; and so prepared, they be good
for the stomach. Howbeit, if one eat ouer-liberally of them, they cause
headache. Take the weight of one denier Roman of the root, beat it to powder
and drink it in two cyaths of wine, you shall find it a sovereign medicine
against the stinging of serpents: but you must Castor was of opinion, That the

And forasmuch as I have spoken somewhat of Thistles and Artichoux (how they
should be ordered) in my treatise of other garden plants, I will put off no
longer to discourse also of their properties and virtues in Physic. Of the
wild Thistles there be two kinds: the one more full of branches, shooting out
immediately from the root; the other rises up in one entire stem, and the same
is thicker withal. Both of them have but few leaves, and those beset with
prickles: they bear heads pointed with sharp pricks round about in manner of
caltrops. Howbeit, there is one kind, which is the Artichoke, which puts
forth a purple flower amidst those sharp pointed pricks, which very quickly
turns into an hoarie down, ready to fly away with every puff of wind: and
this thistle the Greeks call Scolymos. The juice of the Artichoke stamped and
pressed so appropriate unto the matrice of women, that it disposes and
prepares it to conceive men Chaereas the Athenian, and Glaucias especially,
who seems to be most curious in describing the nature and properties of these
Thistles or Artichokes, give out no less. To conclude, if one chew them in his
mouth, he shall find that they will cause a sweet breath.

CHAP. XXIV.
The composition of a Treacle which was the ordinary and familiar medicine of
King Antiochus.

But before that we go out of the garden, and leave the herbs there growing, I
think it good Aesculapius, in this manner following: Take of wild running Thyme
the weight of two deniers; of Opopanax and Mei^on Milij. ^x Galen.
Meu of each the like quantity; the seed of Dil, Fennel, Ameos, and Parsley, of
each the weight of six deniers; of Ervil flower twelve deniers or drams. Let
these be beaten into powder and finely searced; and when they be incorporat in
the best wine that may be had, they ought to be reduced into the form of
Trosches, every one weighing a victoriat or half denier. When occasion is to
use this composition, dissolve one of these Trosches in three cyaths of wine,
and drink it. This is that famous Treacle or countrepoyson which great
Antiochus

THE TWENTY FIRST BOOK
WRITTEN BY C. PLINIVS SECVNDVS.
The nature of Flowers, and namely those of Chaplets and Guirlands.
CHAP. I.
The wonderful variety of Flowers.

CAto in his Treatise of Gardens ordained as a necessary point, That they
should be planted and enriched with such herbs as might bring forth flowers for
Coronets and Garlands. And in very truth, their diversity is such, that
impossible it is to decipher and express them accordingly. Whereby we may
see, that more easy it was for dame Nature to depaint and adorn the earth with
sundry in this, That whereas she has given unto those fruits of the earth
which serve for necessities and

CHAP. II.
Of Garlands, Coronets, Chaplets, and Nosegaies made of flowers. Who devised
first the sorting and setting of sundry flowers. The first invention of the
Coronet or Guirland, and the name of it in Latin, Corollae: and whereupon it
was so called.

THe Coronets or Garlands used in ancient time were twisted very small, and
thereupon i. Wreaths: from whence came also women's gorgets and stomachers to be
named Strophiola. As for the word Corona, a Coronet or Garland, long it was
first ere it came to be vulgar and commonly taken up, as a term challenged
either by priests and sacrificers in their divine service, or victorious
captains in their glorious triumphs. But those Garlands and nosegaies being
made of flowers were called in Latin Serta, or Seruiae, a serendo, i. of
sorting and settling together. The manner of which plaiting and broiding of
herbs and flowers, the ancient Greeks took no pleasure in: for at the
beginning they used to crown with branches only of trees, those brave men who
had won the prise in their sacred games and solemn Tournies or exercises of
actiuitie. But afterward they began to beautify and enrich their chaplets of
triumph with sundry flowers entermingled together. And, to say a truth, the
Pausias the cunning painter, and Glycera the artificial maker of such Chaplets,
set them first a work. This Painter was wonderfully enamoured upon the said
Glycera, and courted her by all the means he could devise: among the rest, he
would seem to counterfeit and represent lively with his pensil in colors, what
flowers soever she wrought and set with her fingers into garlands; and she
again striued avie to change and alter her handiwork every day, for to drive
him to a nonplus at the length, or at leastwise to put him to his shifts:
insomuch, as it was a very pleasant and worthy sight, to behold of one side
the works of Nature in the woman's hand, and on the other side the artificial
cunning of the foresaid painter. And verily there are at this day to be seen
diverse A Garlandmaker.
Stephanoplocos, wherein he painted his sweetheart Glycera twisting and
braiding Coronets and Chaplets, as her manner was. And this fell out to be
after the hundredth Olympias was come and gone, by just account.

Now when these Garlands of flowers were taken up and received commonly in all
places for a certain time, there came soon after into request those Chaplets
which are named Egyptian; and after them winter Coronets, to wit, when the
earth affourdeth no flowers to make them; and those consisted of horn shauings
died into sundry colors. And so in process of time, by little and little
crept into Rome also the name of Corollae, as one would say, petty Garlands;
for that these Winter Chaplets at first were so pretty and small: and not long
after them, the costly

CHAP. III.
Who was the first that exhibited in public show a Guirlandor Chaplet of gold
and siluer-foile. How highly Coronets were esteemed in old time. Of the honor
done to Scipio. Of plaited Coronets. And one notable Act of Queen Cleopatra.

CRassus the rich was the first man, who at the solemn Games and Plays which
he set out in Rome, gave away in a brave show, Chaplets of gold and silver,
resembling lively flowers and leaves of herbs. Afterward, such Coronets were
adorned with ribband also, and those were added as pendants thereto for more
honor and state: a devise respective to those These Guitlands or Chaplets were
called Hetruscae. For so says Tertullian. Prae feruntur etiam illis Hetruscae.
Hocvocabulu^ est Corna^u (...) i. to be Aedil^
Tuscane Guirlands and Coronets, which might have no such ribbands or lace
hanging unto them but of gold. And in truth those labels a long time were
plain and without any other setting forth save only the bare gold: until P.
Claudius Pulcher came in place, who exhibited in his public shows, the said
labels wrought, chased, and engraven; yea, and he garnished the said plates of
gold with glittering and twinkling spangles besides. Howbeit, were these
Coronets never so rich and precious, yet those Chaplets won and gotten at the
solemn Games for some worthy feats of actiuity performed, carried always the
greater credit and authority. For to gain this prise, the Grand-siegniors and
great men of the city thought it no scorn to enter themselves in proper
person into the public place of Exercise to try mastries: yea, and thither
they sent every man his servant and slave. Hereupon grew these Ordinances,
specified among the Whosoever wins Guirland, either himself in person, or
by his money, goods and chattels, is to be honored in regard of his virtue.
And certes who makes doubt, but what Prise or coronet, either slaves or horses
have obtained, the same by virtue of this law, should be reputed as gotten by
the money and goods of the master or owner of the said horses or slaves? But
what honor might this be which is thus achieved by such a chaplet? mary that
which is right great, namely, that without all fraud and contradiction, not
only the party himself who won it, should be crowned therewith after his
death, both whiles his body lay under bourd within house, and also all the way
that it was carried forth to the place of sepulture or funeral fire; but even
his parents likewise, both father and mother [if they were then living.]
certes, such Guirlands otherwise though they were not won at games or prize,
but only made for pleasure and pastime, might not come abroad ordinarily, nor
be commonly worn; for the law was L. Fulvius Argentarius in the time of the
second Punicke war, upon an information or speech given out, That in the open
day time he only looked forth of a gallerie which he had in the public Forum
or common place at Rome, with a Garland of Roses upon his head; was by
authority of the Senate committed to prison, and was not enlarged before the
end of the war. P. Munatius having taken from the head of Marsyas a Chaplet
of flowers, and set it upon his own; and thereupon being commanded to ward,
by the Triumvirs, called unto the Tribunes of the Commons for their lawful
favor and protection: but they opposed not themselves against this proceeding,
but deemed him worthy of this chastisement. See the disclipine and severity
at Rome, and compare it with the loosenes of the Athenians, where young youths
ordinarily followed reuils and bankets, and yet in the forenoon Augustus Caesar
late Emperor, and cannonised as a god at Rome, who complains of her in some
letters of his yet extant, and that with groan and grief of heart, to be given
to such riot and licentious looseness, that night by night the would seem to
adorn with Guirlands the statue and image of Marsyas the Minstrell. We do not
read in Chronicles, that the people honored in old time any other with a
Coronet of flowers, but only Scipio surnamed Serapio, for the near
resemblance that he had to his baily or servant so called, who dealt under him
in buying and selling of Swine: in which regard he was wondrous well beloved
of the commons in his ^ribuneship, as bearing himself worthy of the famous and
noble house of Scipioes surnamed Africani. Howbeit, as well descended and
beloved as he was, yet when he died, he left not behind him in goods
sufficient to defray the charges of his funerals: the people therefore made a
collection, and contributed by the poll every man one i. three farthings.
As: and so took order by a general expense, that he should be honorably
enterred: and as his corpse was carried in Mars called Salij, were wont in
their solemnities and feasts (which were very sumptuous) to wear Coronets of
sundry flowers sowed together. But afterward, Chaplets of Roses were only in
credit and reputation: until that in process of time, the world grew to such
superfluity and sumptuous expense, that no Mnestheus and Callimachus, two
renowned Physicians, have compiled books of those Chaplets that be hurtful to
the brain and cause headache. For even herin also lies some part of the
preservation of our health, considering Cleopatra, full of fine wit, and as
wicked and mischievous withal: For at what time as Antonie prepared the
expidition and journey of Actium against Augustus, and stood in some doubt of
jealousy of the said Queen; for all the fair show that she made of gratifying
him and doing him all pleasure, he was at his taster, and would neither eat nor
drink at her table without assay made. Cleopatra seeing how timorous he was,
and minding yet to make good sport and game at his needless fear and foolish
curiosity, caused a Chaplet to be made for M. Antonius, having before dipped
all the tips and edges of the flowers that went to it in a strong and rank
poison, and being thus Antonie. Now, when they had sitten at meat a good while,
and drunk themselves merry, the Queen began to make a motion and challenge to
Antonie, for to drink each of them their chaplets; and withal began unto him
in a cup of wine seasoned and spiced (as it were) with those flowers which she
ware her own self. Oh the shrewd and unhappy wit of a woman when she is so
disposed! who would ever have misdoubted any danger of hidden mischief herein?
Well, M. Antonie yielded to pledge her: off goes his own Guirland, and with
the flowers minced small, dresseth his own cup. Now when he was about to set it
to his head, Cleopatra presently put her hand between, and stayed him from
drinking, and withal uttered these words, My dear heart and best beloved
Antonie, now see what she is whom so much thou do dread and stand in fear
of, that for thy security there must wait at thy cup and Antonie had prepared
for himself. No sooner was the goblet from his lips again, but the poor
wretch died presently in the place: but to come again to the Physicians who
have written of flowers besides those abouenamed. Theophrastus among the
Greeks has taken this argument in hand. As for our countrymen, some have
entitled their books Of flower gathe^ing.
Anthologicon: but none of them all, so far as ever I could find, wrote any
Treatise concerning flowers. Neither is it any part of my meaning at this
present to make Nosegaies, or plat any Chaplets, for that were a frivolous and
vain piece of work: but as

CHAP. IV.
Of the Rose employed in Coronets. The diverse kinds thereof: and where it is
set and grows.

THe plant whereupon the Rose does grow is more like a thorn or bush, than a
shrub or any thing else. For it will come of a very Brier or Eglantine also,
where it will cast a sweet and pleasant smell, although it reach not far off.
All Roses at their first knitting seem to be enclosed within a certain cod or
husk full of grains: which soon after begins to swell and grow sharp
pointed into certain green indented or cut buds: then by little and little as
they wax red, they open and spread themselves abroad, containing in the midst of
their cup as it were Vsus eius prope nimius es^.
Used they are exceeding much in Chaplets and Guirlands. As touching the oil
Rosat, made by way of infusion, it was in request before the destruction of
Troy, as may appear by the poet Homer. Moreover, Roses enter into the
composition of sweet ointments and perfumes. Over and besides, the Rose of it
self alone as it is, has medicinable virtues, and serves to many purposes in
physic. It goes into emplastres and collyries or eye-salues, by reason of a
certain subtle mordacitie and penetratiue quality that it has. Furthermore,
many delicate and dainty dishes are served up to the table, either covered and
bestrewed with Rose leaves, or bedewed and smeared all over with their juice;
which does no harm to those viands, but give a commendable taste thereto. We at
Rome make most account of two kinds of Roses above the rest, to wit, those of
Praeneste, and of Capua. R
Spineola. Most leaves in number it has of all others, and those in quantity
smaller. For this would be known, that Roses differ one from another either in
number of leaves, more or less; or else that some be smooth, others rough and
pricky: also in color and smell. The fewest leaves that a Rose has be five:
and so upward they grow ever still more and more, until they come to those
that have an hundred, namely about Campain in Italy, and near to Philippos a
city in Greece, whereupon the Rose is called in Latin Centifolia. How beit,
the territory of Caepio, who lived in the time of Tiberius the Emperor, was
of opinion, That the hundred-leafe Rose had no grace at all in a garland,
either for smell or beauty; and therefore should not be put into chaplets,
unless it were last in manner of a tuft, to make a sur-croist, savor: which is
the reason that the oil Rosat, and ointment compounded thereof, is most
excellent

CHAP. X.
Of Lillies three kinds: and the manner of planting or setting them.

NExt to the Rose, there is not a fairer flower than the Lilly, nor of greater
estimation. The

There is an herb named in Latin Convolvulus [i. with wind] growing among
shrubs and bushes; which carries a flower not unlike to this Lilly, save that
it yields no smell, nor has those chiues within: for whiteness they
resemble one another very much, as if Nature in making

Now Lillies be set and sowed after the same manner in all respects as the
Roses, and grow as many ways. This vantage moreover they have of the roses,
That they will come up of the very liquor that distilleth and droppeth from
them, like as the herb Alisanders: neither is there in the world an herb more
fruitful, insomuch as you shall have one head of a root put forth oftentimes

There is besides a red Lilly, which the Greeks in their language call Crinon:
and some name the flower of it Cynorrhodon. The excellent Lilly of this kind
grows in Antiochia and Laodicea, cities both in Syria: the next to that is
found in Phaselis. In a fourth place, is to be set the Lilly growing in Italy.
There are besides, purple Lillies, which otherwhiles rise up with a double
stem: these differ from the rest only in the pulpous root which they have; and
the same carry a great bulbe in one entire head, and no more: such they call
Daffodills. A second sort there is of these Daffodils with a white flower, and
a purple cup or bell within. Herin differ Daffodils from Lillies, for that the
Daffodil leaves be toward the root, and namely those in the best mountains of
Lycia; whereas in Lillies they put forth in the stalk. The third kind agrees in all points fantastical spirits, that they invented forsooth a new kind of
artificial Inficiendi.
coloring and dying of Lillies: for which purpose, in the month of July they
gather their stems, when they begin to wither, and hang them up in the smoke to
dry. Now when the knobs or heads of their roots look once bare and are shot
out from the said stalks, (which commonly falls out in the month of March)
they infuse and steep them in the lees of deep red wine, or some Greekish
wine, for to suck and drink in the color thereof: which done, they set them
in little trenches, whereinto they pour certain hemines or pints of the said
wine: and by this means become the Lillies aforesaid, purple. A strange and

CHAP. VI.
Of the Violet and the Marygold: of Bacchar, and Combretum: of Azara-bacca, and
Saffron.

IN the third rank of flowers, be ranged the Note that Viola in Pliny and
other authors, reaches to our Stockegillofres, wallfloures and other flowers,
as to the purple March Violet.
Violets: whereof be many kinds: to wit, the purple, the yellow, and the white.
All of them may be set of plants, like as worts, and garden pothearbs. But of
those which naturally come up and grow of their own accord in lean grounds,
and those exposed to the Sun, the purple [March] Violets, they have a broader
leaf than the (...)
Ia; whereupon purple cloth is likewise of them named Ianthina. But of those
which are sown or set by hand, the Ch(...) or Wall flowers.
yellow bear the greatest name above all other. These flowers be distinguished
into diverse kinds, namely, into the Tuscan Violets; and those of the sea, which
have a broader leaf but are not so sweet as others. Some smell not at all, to
wit, the Some take it for a kind of Fox glove.
Calathian Violet with the small leaf, a flower this is that Autumn yields,
whereas the rest do flourish in the Spring.

Next unto the Violet, are the Marigolds, all of one color. In number of
leaves this flower passes the Sea-violet aforesaid, which never exceeds
five: but in recompense of that defect, Which some take for yellow Yarrowe
Scopia regia, it has a smell nothing milder than it; although the leaves (to
say a truth) do smell, and not the flowers.

Bacchar is named by some Rustick-Nard: this plant has nothing in it
odoriferous and senting well, but the root. Of which root, (as Aristophanes an
ancient Comicall Poet testifies in one of his Comoedies) they were wont in
old time to make sweet perfumes and odoriferous compositions for their
ointments: whereupon some there be who call the root Barbarica, but falsely; for
deceived they are. The savor that this root does cast, draws very near to
the sent of Cinnamon. It loves a lean and light soil, and in no wise comes
up in a moist ground.

As touching the herb named Combretum, it resembles the same very much:
howbeit the [i. Asara-bacca, or Fole-foot;] a plant far different from Bacchar,
as may appear by the description thereof, which (...), i. or^are: (...)* because
it adorneth no chaplets.
Asarum, because it is never used in making of guirlands and chaplets.

Concerning Saffron, the wild is the best. To plant it within any garden in
Italic, is held no good husbandry, for it will not quit cost, considering there
is never a quarter set therewith, but it asks a Ad scrupula singula: which if
you refer to a drachme signifies a third part less; but if to an ounce, the
24 part.
scruple more in expense, than the fruit or increase comes to, when all the
cards be told. For to have Saffron grow, you must set the cloves or bulbous
heads of the root: and being thus planted, it proves larger, bigger, and
fairer than the other: howbeit sooner far it does degenerate and become a
bastard kind: neither is it fruitful and bears chiues in every place, no
not about Cyrene, where the goodliest flowers of Saffron in the world are to be
seen at all times. The principal Saffron grows in Cilicia, and especially
upon the mountain Corycus Phlegraeo^ but Turneb. reads Aegaeo, according to
Dioscor.
Phlegra. Nothing is so subject to sophistication as Saffron, and therefore the
only trial of true Saffron indeed, is this. If a man lay his hands upon it, he
shall hear it to crack as if it were brittle and ready to burst: for that
which is moist (a quality coming by some indirect means and cunning cast)
yields to the hand and makes no words. Yet is there another proof of good
Saffron, If a man after he have handled it, reach his hand up presently to his
mouth, and perceive that the air and breath thereof smites to his face and
eyes, and therewith fretteth and stingeth them a little, for then he may be
sure that the saffron is right: there is a kind of garden saffron by it self;
and this commonly is Mutianus writes, that in Lycia the practice is to take it
up every 7 or 8 year, and remove it to a plot of ground well dug and delued
to a fine mould; where, if it be replanted, it will become fresh again and
youg, whereas it was ready before to decay and degenerate. No use thereis in
(any place) of Saffron flowers in garlands; for the leaves are small and
narrow, in manner almost of threads. Howbeit with wine it accords passing
well, especially if it

CHAP. VII.
Of the flowers used in old time about coronets and guirlands: the great
diversity in aromaticall and sweet smelling simples. Of Saliunca and Polium.

SAffron was (no doubt) in great credit and estimation, during the flowring
estate of Troy, for certes, the Poet Homer highly commends these three
flowers, to wit, Melilot, Saffron, and Hyacinth. Of all odoriferous and sweet
senting simples, nay of all herbs and flowers whatsoever, the difference
consists in the color, the smell, and the juice. And note this to begin
withal, that seldom or never you shall meet with any thing sweet in sent, but
it is bitter in was, as namely Violets. A fresh and new gathered rose casts a
better smell afar off than near degard smell better when they be gathered, than
if they hung still upon the tree and so preserved. Others there are, that unless
they be broken, bruised, rubbed, and crushed, have no smell: and ye shall have
those that cast no sent at all, unless their rind or bark be taken off: as
also such as except they be cast into the fire and burnt, yield no savor, as
Frankincense and Myrrh. Furthermore, all flowers being bruised, are more
bitter than they were untouched and unhandled. Some after they be dry retain
their odor longest, as the Melilot. There are that make the place sweeter where
they grow, as the flower de lis, insomuch as it persumeth the whole tree
(whatsoever it is) the roots whereof it touches. The herb Hesperis smells more
by night than day, whereupon that name was devised. Pliny never heard of the
Musk-goats not Ciue^ cats in these days.
There are no living creatures which yield from their bodies a sweet savor,
unless we give credit to

Furthermore this would not be passed over as touching the difference of
odoriferous plants and their flowers, in this respect, that many of them are
never employed to the making of Guirlands and chaplets, as namely the
Floure-de-lis and Nard Celticke, Saliunca, which although they yield both of
them an excellent savor, yet are not used that way. But as for the Commonly
called Ireo (...)*
Flour-delis, it is the root only thereof that is comfortable for the odor: as
if Nature had made the plant it self to serve only for physic uses, and
compositions of sweet perfumes. The best Floure-de-lis is that which grows in
Illyricum or Sclauonia; and not in all parts thereof, not (I say) in the
maritime coasts, but farther up into the main, among the mountains and
forests of Drilo and Narona. The next to it in goodness comes out of Macedon,
and it has the longest root handling it raises pimples and blisters in manner
of a burn, upon their hands that gather it. Another

As for the plant Saliunca or Nard Celtick, full of leaves verily it is, yet
they be so short, that handsomely they cannot be knit and twisted for garlands: a
number of roots it puts forth, to

Another plant there is which the Greeks use likewise in their Wardrobes,
called Polium. This herb Musaeus and Hesiodus the Poets extol and set out to
the highest degree; for they report Diosc. reports this of Tripolium, and not
of Polium: whereby it seems that Pliny is in a fault.
that the leaves thereof in the morning seem white, about noon purple, and at
the Sunsetting blew. Two kinds there be of it; one grows in the plains and
champian grounds, and is the greater: another in the woods, and is the less.
Some call it Teuthrion. The leaves resemble the gray hairs of an old man,
springing directly from the root, and never pass in height a hand breadth. Thus
much may suffice concerning odoriferous flowers.

CHAP. VIII.
The colors of Cloth resembling those of Flowers, and striving with them for
the better. Of

THe excessive riot and prodigal superfluity of men is grown to this pass,
that having taken no small pleasure in surmounting the natural savor of simple
flowers, by their artificial odors and compound perfumes; they cannot rest so,
but must proceed also in the craft and mystery of dying cloth, to challenge
the fairest flowers in the garden, and to match, if not to surpass, the lively
colors of Natures setting. Of these tinctures I find that there be three
principal: the one in grain, which strives with that bright orient color in
Roses: and there is not a more pleasant thing to the eye, than to see the
Scarlet or purple of Tyros, or to behold the double died Dibapha, or the
Laconian purple. The second rich die stands upon the Amethyst the cause that
this color is not reckoned among those that be principal, that is to say,
common

But to come again to our artificial colors, we have one that answers to the
flower named Cyanos, i. blewbottle: likewise to the yellow golden flower
Elichryson. Verily none of all these flowers or colors were in request in the
days of K. Alexander the Great, for the Greek authors who wrote next after his
dicease, have made no mention at al of them, whereby it is plain, that they
grew into a name and liking since their time: howbeit no man needs to make
doubt or question, That found out they were first by the Greeks: for how else
should it be, that their names which be mere Greekish, are current here in
Italy? Howbeit this cannot be denied, that Italy

As touching a dasie, a yellow cup it has also, and the same is crowned as it
were with a garland consisting of five and fifty little leaves, set round about
in manner of fine pales. These be flowers of the meadow, and most of such are
of no use at all; no marvel therefore if they be namelesse: howbeit some give
them one term, and some another. As for Chrysocon or Chrysitis, no Latin
denomination it has at all: an herb it is, growing an hand breadth high,
putting

CHAP. IX.
The excellency of Chaplets and Guirlands': of Cyclaminus, and Melilot: of
Trifolie or Clauer, and three kinds thereof.

NOw that we have gone through in manner the princidall dies and richest
colors that be it remains that we pass to the treatise of those Guirlands,
which being made of diverse colored flowers, in regard only of that variety,
are delectable and pleasing to the eye. And considering that some of them stand
upon flours, others of leaf, they may be all reduced to two Item, the blossoms
of the Iujube tree, which also is called Cappadocia, for they resemble much the
odor of the olive blooms: as for Cyclaminum, i. Sowbreed, it grows among
bushes, whereof more shall be said in another place: a purple Colossian flour
it caries, which is used to beautify and set out game-coronets. To come now to
chaplets made of leaves; the fairest that go unto them be Bindweed.
Smilax and Iuy; and therein also their berries interlaced among, do make a
goodly show above al: of which we have spoken at large in the treatise of
shrubs and trees. Many kinds there are besides of plants proper for this
purpose, which we must be feign to express by Greek names, forasmuch as our
countrymen have not been studious in this behalf, to give any Latin names
to the greatest part of them: besides, Italy. Well then, to begin withal,
Uitis alba, of some: Glycypicron Dodonaei, of others.
Melothron, Spireon, Trigonon, Viburnum Matthioli.
Cneoron, which Hyginus i. Bawme; and Melilot, which we commonly term Sertula
Campana; and good reason, for the best in Italy is that of Campain: and in
Greece, that which grows in the promentory Sunium. Next to these the Melilot
of Chalcis and Candie is well accepted of: but grow it in what country it will,
rough thickets and woods it delights most in. And that of this herb they
were wont usually in old time to make garlands, may appear by the very name
Sertula, which it took thereupon, and retains still. In savor and flower both,
it comes near to Saffron: the herb otherwise of it self is hoary and
gray. The best Melilot is counted that which has shortrst leaves, and those
most plumpe and fattie withal. Semblably, the herb Trifoile or Clauer, has
leaves which go to the making of coronets and

CHAP. X.
Of Orygaunm, and Thyme: of the Athenien honey: of Conyza, and Jupiters.
flower, of Southernewood and Camomile.

AS many sorts also there be of Origanum, serving to make guirlands: as for one
of them, it has no seed; but the other which is sweet, is called Origan of
Candy. In like manner, two kinds there be of Thyme, to wit, the white and the
black: this herb does flourish about the Summer Solstice, at what time as
Bees also begin to gather honey from it: and according

Concerning the herb Conyza, which goes also to the making of Chaplets,
there be two kinds likewise of it, namely, the male and the female. And these
differ only in leaves: for those

As touching these herbs following, or Iouis Flos. which some take to be the
Columbines.
Dios Anthos, Majoran, the day Lilly Hemerocalles, Sothernwood, Elecampane,
water Mints, and wild running Thyme, as also all which do branch and put forth
shoots as Roses do, such serve only in leaf for garlands. As for the said
Jupiters

Elecampane, named in Greek Helenium, sprang first (as men say) from the
tears of Lady Helenium here described agrees not with our Elecampane.
Helena: and therefore the best Elecampane is that which grows in the Island
of Helena. The plant is leafed like unto wild Thyme, spreading and running low
by the ground with little branches, nine inches or a span long.

Sothernwood does flourish in Summer, and carries a sweet and pleasant savor,
howbeit, the head it somewhat stuffeth and offends. The flower is of a golden
color. And say, that it carries neither seed nor flower, yet comes it up of
it self in void and vacant places altogether Adonis gardens, within pots of
earth; and that in Summer time, after the manner of the herb and flower Adonium:
for as well the one as the very tender, and can abide no cold: and yet as chill
as they be, they may not away with overmuch heat of the Sun, for taking harm.
But when they have gotten head once and be strong enough, they grow and branch
as Rutae vice.
Rue does.

Much like unto Sothernwood in sent and smell, is Camomile: the flower is
white, consisting of a number of pretty fine leaves set round about the yellow
within.

CHAP. XI.
Of Marioram, the greater and the less, called in Latin Amaracus or
Sampsuchum. Of Nyctygretum, Melilote, the white Violet of Codiaminum, and wild
Bulbes: of Heliochrysum, and Lychnis or Rose Campain. And of many other herbs
growing on this side the sea.

DIocles the Physician, and the whole nation in manner of the Sicilians, have
called that herb Amaracus, which in Egypt and Syria is commonly named
Sampsuchum. It comes up both ways, as well of seed as of a slip and branch.
It lives and continues longer than the herbs beforenamed, and has a more
pleasant and odoriferous sent. Marjoram is as plentiful

As touching Nyctygretum [or Lunaria] Democritus held it to be a wonderful
herb, and few like unto it; saying that it resembles the color of fire, that
the leaves be pricky like a thorn, that it creeps along the ground: he
reports moreover, That the best kind thereof grows in the lad Gedrosia, That
if it be plucked out of the ground root and all after the Spring Aequinox,
night season it shines and glittereth afar off. As for Melilote, it comes
up every where:

The first flower bringing tidings of the springs approach, is the white bulbous
stock-Gillofre. And in some warmer climates they put forth and show even in
Winter. Next unto it for their timely appearance is the purple March Violet:
and then after them the Panse, called in Latin Flammea, and in Greek Phlox, I
mean the wild kind only.

Codiaminon blows twice in the year, namely, in the Spring and the Autumn:
for it cannot abide either Winter or Summer. Somewhat later than those before
rehearsed, are the Daffodil Pulsatilla or Wind-floure.
Anemone is yet more lateward. Now is this Anemone the flower of certain wild
Bulbes, different from that other Anemone whereof I will speak in the Treatise
of Physick-hearbs. Then follows Filipendula supposed of some.
Oenanthe, and Melanion, and of the wild sort Heliochrysos. After them, a
second kind of Passe-flower or Anemone, called also Leimonia, begins to
blow. And immediately upon it the pety Gladen or sword-grasse, accompanied with
the Hyacinth: and last of all the Rose shows in her likeness. But quickly has
the Rose done, and none so soon, and yet I must except the garden Rose. Of all
the rest, the Hyacinths or Harebels, the or rather the Wall flower.
stock-Gillo flower, and Oenanthe or Filipendula, bear flowers longest. But of
this Oenanthe, this regard must be had, that the flowers be often Apollo made
for his wanton minion Hyacinthus whom he loved, or as others make report,
sprung up of the blood of Ajax who slew himself, and represented the two first
letters of his name AI.

Helyachrysos bears a yellow flower like to gold, a small and fine leaf, a
little stalk also and a slender, but hard and stiff withal. The Magi or Sages
of Persia use to wear this herb and

Now succeed and comeafter in their rank, the summer flowers, to wit, Lychnis,
Jupiters flower or Columbine-and a second kind of Some read Cerynthus rather.
Lilly: likewise Iphyon, and that Amaracus or Marjeram, which they call the
Phrygian. But of all others, the flower Pathos is most lovely and beautiful:
whereof there be two kinds, the one with a purple flower like unto the
Hyacinth, the other is whiter, and grows commonly in churchyards among graves
and tombs, and the same holds on flouring better, and lives longer. The
flower de-luce also is a Summer flower. These Passing good and proper indeed
for vinet and story work in borders, arbors or knots, and meet

The life of the white Violet or bulbous stock-Gillofre, is three years at
most, and so long it holds the own well; after that term it does degenerat
and wax worser. The Rose-bush will continue five years, without cutting down
or burning (which are the means to maintain it in youth still.) But as we
have already observed, there lies very much in the soil, which would be
considered especially in flowers: for in Egypt, none of all these above
rehearsed, have any odor or sent at all; and yet the Myrtle trees there, they
alone carry a most sweet and pleasant savor. Moreover, in some tracts all these
herbs and flowers be sorenamed, do prevent in budding

CHAP. XII.
The order of nourishing and maintaining Bees. What meat is to be given them.
Their diseases, and the remedies to them belonging.

IN this discourse of ours concerning gardens and gay flowers appertaining to
Garlands, requisite

As touching their food and nourishment, I will tell you a wonderful and
memorable thing upon mine own knowledge. There is a town or Burgade called
Hostilia, scituat upon the river Po, the inhabitants of this village, when they
see that their bees meat goes low therabout, and is like to fail, take me
their hiues with bees and al, and set them in certain boats or barges, and in
the night row up the said river Po against the stream five miles forward. The
morrow morning out go the bees to seek food and relief. Now when they have
met with meat, and fed themselves, they return again to the vessels
aforesaid: and thus they continue daily, although they change their place and
haunt; until such time as their masters perceive that the hiues be full, by
the settling of their boats low within the water with their weight, and then
they return

CHAP. XIII.
Of a certain venomous and poisonfull honey. The remedies as well against the
said Honey, as another kind that makes folk besides themselves.

SEmblably in Spain they deal with their Bees and hiues upon Mules backs in
the like case, and carry them up into the country for to be provided of
victuals. But here it would be considered by the way, what pasturage it is that
they be put into; for that there is some kind of food, which poisoneth all the
honey that is gathered from it. At Heraclea in Pontus, in some years, all the
honey that the Bees do make, is found to be venomous and no better than poison;
and yet the same bees in other years gather good and wholesome honey. Howbeit,
those authors Item, Eat much of saltfish, although it come up again, and that
your stomach do cast it. Moreover, this honey is so pernicious, that the very
dogs if they chance to lick up any excrements that pass from the party so
infected (either by reaching, spitting, vomit, or seege) they are sure to be
sped therewith, and honey indeed she had not generally infected with this
hurtful quality, like as she had armed all Marsi and Psylli, she has
imprinted (as it were) a repugnancy in their bodies, to resist the venom of
all Serpents whatsoever.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of a certain kind of honey which Flies will not touch. Of Bee-hiues. How to
order the same, and namely when Bees want meat and are in danger to be
famished. The manner also of making Wax.

THere is in Candy another strange and wonderful thing, as touching honey,
gathered about the mountain Carina, which takes nine miles in compass:
within which space and circuit of ground, there is not a Fly to be had; and
the honey there made, Flies will not touch

As touching Bee-hiues, they ought to stand on the open side upon the
Aequinoctiall Sun rising, that is to say, when the days and nights be
equal. And in any wise, regard would be had, that they open not in the
Northeast, and much less the full West. The best Bee-hiues be made of barks
and rinds of trees: the second in goodness be those of Ferula or Fenell-geant.
In the third placeare such as be wrought of oisier twigs. Many have made them
of Talc, which is a kind of transparent glass stone, because they would see
through them how the Bees do work and labor within. Daubed they should be if
they were well served, both without and within with Ox dung. The cover and
lidde thereof ought to be moveable and have liberty to play up and down behind,
that it may be let down far within-forth, in case either the hiue be too large
and of Considerin^ that of a beasts carcass they will be enge^ dred.
for this is agreeable to their nature. Over and besides, it kills the wicked
verm in that breed in them, Spiders, Butterflies, and Wood-worms; yea, and this
property it has moreover, to stir up and quicken the Bees, and make them more
lively and nimble about their business. As for the Spiders aforesaid, they
verily are not so harmful, and be soon destroyed: but the Butterflies do the
more mischief, and are not so easily rid away. Howbeit there is a way to chase
them also, namely, to wait the time when the Mallow does begin to Item, It were
not amiss to have certain locks of wool well touzed and carded, and those wet
and drenched in cuit either sodden to the thirds, or to two thirds, or else
seked in honied wine, for them to settle upon and suck. Also to set before them
in their way the raw carkases of Hens, naked and pulled to the bare flesh.
Moreover, there be certain Summers so dry and continually without rain, that
the fields want flowers to yield them food, and then must they be served with
the foresaid viands, as well as in Winter season. When honey is to be for fear
lest the Bees depart and fly away. The vessels whereout honey has been
employed, yea,

As touching wax, it is made of the combs after the honey is pressed and wrong
out of them. But first they must be purified and cleansed with water, and for
three days dried in some dark place: upon the fourth day they are to be
dissolved and melted upon the fire in a new earthen pot never occupied before,
with so much water as will cover the combs: and then it should be strained
through a panier of reeds or rushes; which done, the wax is to be set over the
fire a second time in the said pot, and with the self-same water, and sodden
again; and then it ought to run out of it into other vessels of cold water, but
those first should be al about within anointed and besmeared with honey. The
best wax is that which is called Punica, i. of Barbary, and is

CHAP. XV.
Of herbs which come up of themselves, and such especially as be armed with
pricks.

IT remains now to speak of certain wild herbs growing of their own accord,
which in many The fruit or berry whereof is Vv^Taminia
Tanus, Ruscus, Crestemarine or Sampire; as also Batis Hortensiana, which some
call French Sperage: we have also the wild Parsnep of the meadows, and the Hop,
but we use them rather for pleasure and delight, and to give contentment to
ourtast, than for any necessary food to maintain life. But to come again to
Egypt, there is to be found the noblest plant of all others, Colocasia, which
some name Cyamos, [i. the Egyptian bean:] this herb they gather and cut down
out of the river Nilus: it puts forth a main stem, which being sodden,
yields which we call Personata. A wonderful thing it is to see, what store
they in Egypt set by the as Theophrastus says, s^dden in alc: hordeace^ Zytho.
dressed and prepared in the kitchen. They feed likewise upon Oetum, a plant
that has few leaves and chose very small, howbeit a great root. Touching
Aracidna and Aracos, they have many roots verily branching and spreading from
them, but neither leaf nor herbage ne yet any thing else appearing above
ground. And thus much of the chiefest and greatest herbs of Egypt served up to
the table: the rest are common or vulgar, and every man's meat, by name,
Condrylla, Hypochoeris, Caucalis, Authriscum, Scandix (called by some
Tragopogon, which bears leaves like to Saffron;) Parthenium, Strychnum,
Corchorus, and Thought to be Dent de lion
A pace, which shows his head about the Aequinox: also Acinos, and that which
they name Epipetron, and it never bears flower; whereas Aphace contrariwise
never gives over flouring, but when one flower is faded and shed, another
comes up, and this course it holds all Winter long; throughout the Spring
also, even to the heat of Summer. Many other herbs they have of base
Carthamus, or bastard safron: but Turnebus supposes it to be put for Cici,
whereof comes Oleum Cicinum.
Cnicus (an herb not known in Italy) not for any good meat they find in it,
but for the oil drawn out of the seed thereof. Of this herb there be two
principal kinds; to wit, the Wild, and the Tame: the Wild is subdivided into
two special sorts, the one of a more mild and gentle nature than the other,
although the stalks of both be alike, that is to say, stiff and straight
upright: and therefore women in old time used the stems thereof for rocks and
Colu, although some read fusis, i. spindles.
distaffes; whereupon some do call the herb Atractylis: the seed is white, big,
and bitter. The second is more rough and hairy, creeping long on the ground,
with stalks more musculous and fleshy, and carries a small seed. The herb may
be ranged among those that be prickly: for so must herbs be divided into such
general heads; namely, that some be full of pricks, others clean without and
smooth. As for those which stand upon Glycyrrhizon but this agreeeth not with
our Liquorice.
Liquorice, and Nettle: for the leaves of all these herbs be pricky and
stinging withal. Others, besides their leaves, have prickles also, as the
Tribulus.
bramble, and Rest harrow or whin. Some be provided of pricks both in lease and
stalk, as Phleos, which others have called Stoebe. As for Hippophacet, it has
a prick or thorn in every joint: but the bramble Tribulus aforesaid, has this
property by it self, That the fruit also which it bears, is set with pricks.
Of all these sorts, the Nettle is best Ace^abulis.
known, which carries certain goblets and concauities, and the same yielding
a purple kind of down in the flower, and it rises up sometimes above two
cubits high. Many kinds there be of thereupon, as a preservatiue to put by all
diseases for that present year. Also the root of the

CHAP. XVI.
Of Carduus, and Ixine: of Tribulus and Anchusa.

THe common Thistle is full of pricky hairs, both in leaf and stalk: likewise A
kind of thistle: some call it Man's blood.
Acorna, S. Mary histle.
Leucacanthos, Chalceos, Cnicos, Polyacanthos, Onopyxos, Ixine, and Scolymos.
As touching the Thistle Chamaeleon, it has no pricks in the leaf. Moreover,
these pricky herbs are i. Murderer: this quality it has besides that it
senteth strong: the seed also ripeneth late, and not before Autumn: and yet
this is a property common to all plants of this pricky and thistly kind. But
all these herbs will come of seed and root both. As for Scolymus, it differs
from the rest of

Ixine Nonr^ra visum est aeque in omnibus terris nascitur: Ex Theop. which is
clean contrary to Pliny.
is a rare herb and geason to be seen, and not found growing in all countries
alike. Immediately from the root it puts forth leaus plenty; out of the mids
of which root there swells out a bunch like an apple, but the same is covered
with the foresaid leaves: in the very ^p of which fruit there is contained a
gum of a pleasant taste, called the thistle Mastick. Touching the herb Cactos,
which grows also in Sicily and no where else, it has a property by it self;
the stalks whereof shooting from the root, creep along the ground, and it
carries a broad leaf full of pricks and thorns, and indeed these stalks thus
running upon the earth, the Sicilians call Cactos,

The Caltrop thistle Tribulus, grows not but in moory grounds and standing
dead waters. Surely in other places, folk curse it as they pass by, the
pricks and spurs stick out so dangerously: but about the rivers Nilus and
Strymon, the inhabitants do gather it for their meat: the nature of this plant,
is to lean and bend downward in the head to the water. The leaf resembles
(...). for (...), in Theo phrast. i. like the seed of Sesama.
sandy seed. Of these thorny and pricky plants, there is yet one kind more,
namely Ononis, i. Rest. harrow; for it carries pricks close to the very
branches; the leaf is like to Rue: the whole stalk throughout is set with
leaves disposed in manner of a garland. This plant commonly grows after corn,
it And therefore it is called resta bonis or resta arat^i, because it staieth
the draught of the Ox at plough.
plagueth the plough, and yet there is much adoto rid it out of a ground, so
loath it is to die. Of plants that be prickie, i. Hearts horn, or Buck-horne
Plantaine: contrariwise, there stand upright, Orchanet, the root whereof is so
good to color wax and wood red. And of such as be more gentle in handling
Anthenius.
Camomile, Phyllanthus, Anemone, and Aphace. As for Crepis and Deceit: so
called, because the bitterness d^ceiueth many a one, looking like to a kind of
Ci chorie.
Apate, their stalks be all leaf. Moreover, this would be noted, that the
leaves of herbs differ one from another,

CHAP. XVII.
The difference of herbs in their leaf: what herbs they be that flower all
the year long: of the Asphodell, Pistana, and Petie-Gladen or Sword-grasse.

MAny herbs there be as well as some trees, which continue green and hold
their leaves [i. Foxtaile] Stelephuros, which some call Ortyx, others Plantaine
(of which I will write more at large among Physic herbs) and Thryollis. Of
these, Alopecurus carries a soft spike, and a thick mossie down, not unlike to
Fox-tails, whereupon it took that name in Greek: and Stelephurus resembles
it very much, but that the Foxtaile blows not all together, but bears
flowers some at one time and some at another. Cichory and such like, have their
leaves spreading upon the ground, and those put forth directly from the root,
beginning to spring immediately after the apparition of the star Vergiliae. As
touching Parietary, there be other nations as i. the Partridge, that seeks
after it so much, and plucketh it out of the walls where it grows: it has
many roots and the same thick. In like manner, the herb Ornithogale, i. Dogs
onion, has a small stem and a white, but a root, Semipedali, Dioscor. has
Sesquipedali; i. a foot and a half.
half a foot long the same is full of bulbs like onions, soft also, and
accompanied with three or four other spurs growing out of it. This herb they
use to sees among other pot herbs for potage. I will tell you a strange
quality of the herb Lotos and of Aegilops; if their seed be cast into the
ground, it will not come up in a year. As wonderful is the nature also of the
Camomile: for it begins to flower in the head, whereas all other herbs
which blow not all at once, flower at the foot first. Notable is the Bur
likewise and worthy to be observed, I mean that which sticks to our clothes
as we pass by, the flower Cyperi, of rather Xyphij, or Phasgani.
Cyperus, that is to say, of Gladiolus [i. Petie-gladen, Flags, or Sword-wort,]
this is a sweet root, and being sodden or baked with bread, it gives it a more
pleasant taste; and besides, it mendeth the weight of bread well if it be wrought
and kneaded with it in dough. Not unlike to it is that herb which they call
Thesion, but that the root is harsh and unpleasant. Al others of the same kind
differ in leaf: the Asphodell has long and narrow leaves; Squilla is broad
leafed, and may be handled without indeed (according to Hesiodus) is the only
way to dress it. Moreover, it is said, that Asphodels Homer also the Poet has
made mention of the Asphodell. The root resembles Napis: Dioscor. Glandibus,
(i.) nuts or acornes.
Navews of a mean bigness: and there is not another root with more heads, for
oftentimes a man shall see 80 bulbs clustred in a bunch together. Theophrastus
and all Greek writers almost, and namely Pythagoras (the chief prince of
Philosophers) describe this plant to have a stem of of one cubit in length, yea
and oftentimes of two; with leaves like to wild Porret: and the said stem they
called Anthericon; but the root, (i.) those bulbs resembling onions,
Asphodelas: but our countrymen have named in Latin, the stem Albucus; but the
root, Hastula Regia. This is the name also of the stalk, full of grains or
berries; and thereof they would make two kinds [the male and the female.] Well,
the stem of the Asphodell then, is commonly a cubit long, large Mago has
written, and ordained, that it should be cut down in the going out of March and
entrance of April; namely, after it has don flouring, and before that the
seed be swelled and grown to any bigness: then upon the fourth day after, when
the said stems are slit and cloven, they must be laid abroad to dry in the
Sun: when they be dried, they ought to be made up into knitchets or handfuls.
He says moreover, that the Greeks name that herb Pistana, which we call in
Latin Sagitta, growing in marshes and moors among other fenny weeds. This
also would he have to be cut down and gathered, between the Ides of May and
the end of the month of October: then, to be pilled, and so to be dried by
little and little with the moderat heat of the Sun. The same author gives
order likewise, that the other kind of Gladiolus, which they call Cypiros,
which also is an herb growing about lakes and meeres, any time within July
should be cut down to the very root; and the third day after, to

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Rushes, six kinds; and of Cyperus: their medicinable virtues. Of Cypirus,
and the sweet Rush Scoenanth.

MAgo writing of the Rush, commonly called Mariscon, says, That for to twist
and weaue i. the sharp Rush: which also is subdivided into three other sorts;
for there is the barren rush, called also the male, and in Greek Oxys: the
female Rush bearing a black seed, which they call Melancranis. This is thicker
than the other, fuller also of branches and tufts. And the third more than it,
which is named Holoschoenus. Of all these, Melancranis comes up of the own
seed, without any other kinds intermingled with it: but Oxys and Holoschoenus,
grow both together out of one turfe. Of all others, the great Rush Holoschoenus
is best for to be wrought in mats, and such like implements about an house,
because it is soft and fleshy; it bears a fruit hanging and or onion root:
the best of which kind, grows in the Island of Crete: next to it in
goodness, is Cando^: some read Color: ^in color.
whiteness and odor comes near to Nard. The Naxian Cypirus has a quicker
sent: the Phoenician Cypirus smells but a little: as for that in Egypt, it
has no savor at all; for there also grows Cypirus. But now to come unto the
properties thereof, it has virtue to discuss and resolve hard swellings in
the body. For now my purpose is to speak of their medicinable virtues,
forasmuch as there is great use in Physic, as well of such aromaticall
simples, as odoriferous flowers. As touching Cypirus therefore, I profess
verily that I will follow Apollodorus, who forbids expressly to take
Cypirus inwardly in any drink: and yet he protests, that it is most
effectual for them that be troubled with the stone, and full of grauel; but,
by way of fomentation only. He affirms moreover, that without all doubt it
causes women

As for Cyperus, a Rush it is (as I have said) growing square and cornered:
near the ground it is white; toward the top, of a dark blackish green, and
fattish: the under leaves that be lowest, are slenderer than leek-blades; the
uppermost in the head, are small, among which is the seed: the Jupiter Ammon: in
a second rank, is that of Rhodes: in a third place may be ranged the Cyperus
in Thracia: and in the lowest degree, that of Egypt. And hereupon came the
confounding of these two plants, Cyperus and Cypirus, because both the one and
the other grow there. No more has Cypirus in Egypt, by his own saying.
But the Cyperus of Egypt is very hard, and has no smell at all; whereas in
the other, there is a savor resembling the very Spikenard. There is another
herb also coming from the Indians, called This Cyperis is taken to be Curcuma,
or Terramerita, called thereupon corruptly, Turmericke.
Cyperis, of a several kind by it self, in form like unto ginger: if a man
chew it in the mouth, it colors the spittle yellow, like as Saffron.

But to come again to Cyperus, and the medicinable properties thereof, It is
counted to have

As concerning the rushes beforesaid, their root sodden in three hemines of
water, until one third part be consumed, cures the cough. The seed parched
against the fire, and so drunk in water, staieth the flux of the belly, and
stops the immoderat course of women's months; but it procures headache. As
for the rush called Holoschoenos, take that part of it which is next the root,
and chew it; then lay it to the place that is stung with a venomous spider, it
is an approved remedy. I find one sort more of Rushes, which they call
Euripice; and this property withal, That it brings one to sleep: but it must
be used with moderation, for otherwise it breeds drowsinesse, sib to the
lethargy. Now seeing I am entered into the treatise of rushes, I must needs set
down the medicinable virtues of the sweet Rush called Squinanth; and the
rather, because Igneae ^citatis.
taste, biting at the tongues end. The true Squinant indeed which is not
sophisticated, if a man rub it hard, yields the smell of

As concerning Roses, the temperature thereof is hot; howbeit they knit the
matrice by an astrictiue quality that they have, and cool the natural parts
of women. The use of Roses is twofold, according to the leaf of the flower,
and the flower it self (which is the yellow.) The head of the Rose leaf, to
wit, the white part thereof, is called in Latin Vnguis, i. the Nail. In

CHAP. XIX.
The medicinable virtues of Roses: of the Lilly and Daffodill, called Laus
tibi. Of the Violet, of Bacchar, Combretum, and Azarabacca.

HOw wine of Roses should be made, I have showed sufficiently in the treatise
of diverse kinds of wines. The use of the juice drawn out of Roses, is good for
the ears, the cankers, and exulcerations in the mouth, the gums, the Tonsils
or Amygdales, for gargarismes, for the stomach, the matrice, the infirmities
and accidents of the tuil or fundament, and the headache. Taken alone, it is
singular good for the ague; with vinegar, for to procure sleep, and to restrain
Siccis foemina ^sperguntur: I doubt that Pli ny read in Dioscorides, (...) for
(...), (i.) Vnguenta: and then it carries this sense; that dried Roses and
powdered, enter into sweet ointments.
legs, if it be strewed upon the place. Dried Rose leaves do repress and stay
the flux of humors into the eyes. The flower [which is the yellow in the mids]
procures sleep. The same taken inwardly with vinegar and water, staieth the
immoderat flux of women; and the whites especially: also it represseth the
reaching and spitting of blood. The pain of the stomach it appeaseth, being
taken in three cyaths of wine. The seed or fruit of the Rose (which is of a
Saffron color) is best, so it be not above a year old, and the same dried in
the shade. As for the black, it is naught and good for nothing. To rub the
teeth with this seed, eases the toothach: the same provoke urine. Being
applied to the stomach, it is comfortable: and so it helps S. Anthonies fire,
if it has upon the body, and then afterward washed off with cold water. The
wild Rose or rather the spungi^ substance growing upon the C^ncre brier and
wild Rose.
leaves reduced

Lilly roots through their singular virtues and operations many ways, have
ennobled their own flowers: for first and foremost, if they be taken in wine,
they be countrepoysons against the sting of serpents, and the venom of
Mushroms. Sodden in wine, and applied in manner of a cataplasme, and so bound to
the feet, they mollify and resolve the corns; but this must not be undone and
removed in three days. Boiled with grease or oil, they cause hair to come
again even in places that were burnt. If Lilly roots be drunk in honied wine,
they do euacuat downward at the siege with other ordure, the cluttered,
bruised, and hurtful blood within the body. Over and besides, in this manner
they help the spleen, them that are bursten and bruised, and withal, bring
down women's terms orderly. But if they be sodden in wine, and so laid to in
form of a cataplasm, they knit and heal sinues that were cut asunder. They
rectify running tettars and lepries, they scour away dandruf and pilling
skales in the face, they make the skin smooth and take away riuels and
wrinkles. The leaves of Lillies boiled in vinegre are good to be laid to green
wounds: reduced into a cataplasme with Honey, Henbane, and wheat meal,
incorporate and united all together, and so applied to the cods, they repress
the flux of humors falling to those parts. The seed made into a liniment
allayeth the heat of S. Anthonies fire. And in the same sort the flowers and
leaves applied do heal old sores. As touching the juice which is pressed
forth of the flowers, of some it is called Mel [i. honey;] of others Syrium:
singular good

Now for Daffodils, there be two kinds of them admitted by the Physicians for
to be used in medicine; the one with a purple flower, the other of a grass
green. This later Daffodil is adverse and hurtful to the stomach, and therefore
causes it to ouerturn and vomit: it sets the belly also into a flux:
contrary it is to the sinues, and stuffeth the head: for which narcoticke
quality of stupifying and benumming the senses, it took the name in Greek
Narcissus, of Narce which betokens nummednesse or dullness of sense; and not
of the young boy Narcissus, as the Poets do feign and fable. The roots as well of
the one as the other Daffodil, have a pleasant taste as it were of honied wine:
the same is good for burns, applied to the place with a little honey: and so it
helps dislocations and heals wounds. Moreover, a cataplasme made of it,
honey,

Of Violets there be some wild and of the field: others domestical, and
growing in our gardens. The purple violets are refrigeratiue and do cool. And
therefore a good liniment is made of them to be applied unto an hot stomach,
against burning inflammations. A frontall likewise purposes as the dry and old
gathered, and therefore they would have a whole years drying before

Bacchar also is an herb whereof there is good use in physic. Some of our
countrymen have called it in Latin Perpensa. It affourdeth a good remedy
against serpents: it qualifieth the excessive heat of the head, allaieth the
ach, and restrains the flux of humors down into the Anthonies fire. The
very odor thereof is a good inducement to sleep. The root sodden and taken in
drink is singular for them that are troubled with cramps and convulsions; that
have fallen from on high, that be drawn togetther with spasmes; and finally for
such as labor for wind. A decoction made of three or four of the roots, boiled
away to the thirds, is given with good success for an old cough. And this
drink or Iuleb is very convenient for to purge women that have traveled and
bin delivered before their time. It takes away the stitches in the side,
cures the pleurisy, and skoureth the stone. Hereof be bags and quilts made,
and those if they be laid in a wardrobe among clothes and apparel, causes

As for Combretum (which I said was much like unto Bacchar) if it be beaten to
powder and tempered with hogs grease it makes a soueraign salve that heals
wounds wonderfully. Asarum (by report) is an appropriat medicine for the liver,
if an ounce of it be taken in one hemine of honied wine. It purges the belly
as violently as Ellebore. In case of the dropsy it is singular; as also for the
midriffe, precordial parts, the Matrice, and the Iaunise. If it be put into new
wine when it works, and so tunned up, it makes a singular diuretic wine for
to provoke vrin. It must for this purpose be dug out of the ground when the
leaves begin to put forth. Dried it ought to be in the shade; although it be
subject to corruption and mouldeth very soon.

CHAP. XX.
Of French Nard, and Saffron. The medicinable virtues of Saffron, and the cake
or dregs thereof. Of Saliunca, Polium, and Flower de-lis. Of Holochryson,
Chrysocome, and Melilote.

FOrasmuch as some have taken rustick-Nard to be the root of Bacchar, and so
named it: the which has put me in mind of French Nard, and the promise which I
made in my treatise of strange and foreign trees, to put off no longer than
this place for to speak of it, and the properties thereto belong. To acquit my
self therefore, I will here set down the virtues of the said Nard, as touching
the use thereof in Physic. First therefore, if two drammes of French Item, if
one drink it either in wine or water, it eases the passions of the Colic,
proceeding from the inflammation of the gut Colon. In like sort it cures the
inflaammtion of the liver and the reins, the ouerflowing also of the gal, and
the Iaunise thereupon. Taken alone by it self or with Wormwood, it is a good
remedy for the Dropsy. It represseth the immoderat flux of women's fleurs.

As touching Setwall or Valerian, which in the foresaid place we named Phu; the
* root either beaten into powder, or sodden and so given in drink, is
excellent for the rising of the Mother, Zedo^rium.
which threatens suffocation; for the pains of the breast and pleurisy. The
same provoke the course in women's terms, so it be taken in wine.

Saffron will not resolve nor be mixed well with honey or any sweet thing.
Howbeit, in wine or of the stomach, breast, kidneys, liver, lungs, and
bladder: and more particularly, if any of these Nay it is a great enemy unto
it.
somewhat it pricketh forward to wanton lust. The flower of Saffron reduced
into a liniment with white Fullers earth, helps the Shingles and S. Anthonies
fire. And saffron it self enters into very many compositions of Physic. One
Collyrie or Dia crocis. Paul. (...)*
eye-salue there is, which takes the name also of saffron. And when the
ointment made of Saffron called Crocinium, is

As touching the Flower-de-lis, the red is thought to be better than the white.
Certes if little infants do wear it tied about them by way of necklace, collar,
or girdle, it is supposed to be a singular remedy, especially when they breed
teeth or have the chincough. Also if they be troubled with the Tine^rum (...)*
Pliny commonly: takes Tin^as for worms in the belly: although otherwise it
betokens sores and skals in the head.
worms, they hold it good gently to instill the same in the body [either by
drink or clystres.] All other operations that the Flour-de-lis has, differ not
much in effect from honey.

There is a wild kind of Floure-de-lis, which some call Xyris: the root of this
herb is good to Item, that they who gather it do say in the gathering, For
whose sake they pluck it up; and withal, name the person: and here in making
mention of this matter, I cannot but detect the knavery of these Harbarists and
simplers: Their manner is not to employ and occupy all that they have gathered,
but reserve and keep part thereof, as also of some other herbs, as namely of
Plantaine, and if they be not well contented, nor think themselves paid
thoroughly for their pains in the cure, they make no more ado but bury and
cover within the earth that part which they kept by them, in the same place
where it was dug forth. And I believe verily they have an unhappy meaning
and a certain

Musaeus and Hesiodus the Poets have a great opinion of Polium: for they give
counsel to all As namely Dioscorides.
opinion that it is hurtful to the stomach, that the drinking of it stuffeth
the head, and causes women to fall into labor before their time. They say also,
that this cerimonie would be precisely observed, That in the very place where
this plant is found, so soon as ever it is gathered it should be hanged
presently upon the neck of the party, with a special care that it touch not
the ground first, and then is it an excellent remedy for the cataract in the
eye. And these authors describe this herb to have leaves like Thyme, but that
they be softer and covered over with a more hoarie and woollie down. Being
taken with wild Rue in rain water, so that it be

The herb Holochrysos if it be taken in wine, helps the strangury, and such
as cannot piss but by drops. And a liniment thereof is passing good to repress
the flux of humors to the eyes. If it be incorporat with Tartar or wine lees
burnt into ashes, and dry Barley groats; it mundifieth the skin, and riddeth
away ring-wormes, tettars, and such like wild fires.

As for Chrysocome, the root of it is hot, and yet astringent. It is given to
drink for the diseases of the liver and the lights. And being sodden in honied
water, it assuageth the pains incident to the matrice. It provoke women's
monthly purgation: and being given in drink raw,

Touching Baulm, which the Greeks call Melittis or Melissophyllon: if Bee-hiues
be rubbed all over and besmeared with the juice thereof, the Bees will never
away, for there is not a flower whereof they be more desirous and feign, than
of it: and in truth, look in what garden there grows abundance of this
herb, the Bees there when they swarm, will be soon entreated to tarry, and
not be hasty to wander far abroad. The same is a most present remedy not only
against their stings, but also of wespes, spiders, and Scorpions. And being
tempered with a little nitre, it is singular against the Dioscorides has
(...), i. Mushromes: whereof there be some that be dangerous for suffocation.
But Pliny as it should seem; read it (...), and accordingly has translated
it.
strangulation of the mother. Taken in wine, it pacifieth the wrings and
torments of the belly. The leaves thereof being sodden with salt, and brought
into an ointment, are singular good for to be applied unto the scrophules or
swelling kernills called the Kings evil:

Melilot is thought also to be good for the eyes, if it be applied with milk or
line seed. It assuageth also the pain of the jaws and head, if it be laid too
with oil of Roses: likewise it does mitigat the pain of the ears, if it be
instilled or dropped into them with wine cuit. Moreover, affected with other
accidents, Bath the place with a decoction of it, boiled green in water or

CHAP. XXI.
Of Trefoile, and Thyme: of the day Lilly Hemerocalles: of Elecampane, and
Southernewood, and Cypres.

I Am not ignorant that folk are verily persuaded, how that Trefoile or three
leaued grass, is of great force against the stings of serpents and scorpions,
if either 20 grains of the seed be Sophocles, to stand against their opinion;
for he affirms plainly, That Trefoile is venomous. Likewise, Simus the
Physician does report, that

Thyme ought to be gathered whiles it is in the flower, and then to be dried in
the shade: now there are of Thyme two kinds, to wit, the white, which has a
woodie root, growing upon little hills; and this is thought to be the better:
the second, is blacker, and caries besides a black flower. be applied as a
cataplasme with wine, it assuageth all tumors, and brings down swellings: it

The day Lilly Hemerocalles, has leaves of a pale and wannish green color,
otherwise soft and gentle, the root is bulbous or Onion like, and odoriferous:
which if it be laid to the belly in manner of a cataplasme, does euacuat
waterie humors, yea, and thick blood that lies cluttered

Helenium, an herb which sprang first from the tears of lady Helena, as I
have already showed, is thought to have a special virtue to preserve beauty,
and to maintain the skin fair, pure, and delicat, as well in the face of women,
as in other parts of their body. Moreover, a deep opinion there is of this
herb, that whosoever use it shall prove amiable and gracious, they shall I
say, win love and favor whersoeuer they come. Also there is attributed and
prescribed to this herb, if it be taken in wine, a mighty operation to procure
mirth and make the heart merry, and Homer) so called, for that it puts away al
heaviness, sorrow, and melancholy. And in faith the juice of Helenium is So is
not Inula, or our Elecampane. And therefore either it is not Helenium here: or
else Pliny does mistake in this place, as in many others.
passing sweet and pleasant: the root of Helenium taken in water upon an empty
stomach when a man is fasting, is very good for them that are straight winded
and cannot take their breath but upright. Now is the root white within and
which agrees not with ours.
sweet also as is the herb. The same is given to drink in wine against the
sting of serpents. To conclude, being beaten into powder, it is said for to
kill Mice.

As touching Abrotonum, I find that there be two kinds of it. The one of the
plains, which I take to be the male; the other of the mountains, which I
would have to go for the female. Neither of them both there is, but it is as
bitter as Wormwood. The best is that which grows

CHAP. XXII.
The medicinable virtues of Leucanthemum; and Sampsuchum, [i. Marjerom.]

LEucanthemum mingled with 2 parts of vinegre, and so given to drink, is good
for those that be short winded. As for Sampsuchum or Amacacum, that of Cyprus
is most commended, and the sweetest of all other: this herb brought into a
liniment, and applied with vinegre and salt, is good against the venom of
Scorpions. Moreover, if it be put up into the natural parts of a woman in
form of a pessarie, it helps much to bring down their monthly courses: for
if it be taken in drink, it is not so effectual. Appled as a liniment, after
it is incorporat with barley groats, it restrains the flux of humors to the
eyes. The juice thereof when it

CHAP. XXIII.
The virtues and properties of Anemone or Windfloure, requisite in Physic.

When have discoursed of Anemone and those kinds thereof, which go to the making
of chaplets and guirlands: it remains now therefore to speak of those which
serve for good use in Physic. But first as touching Anemone in general: some
there be who call it Phenion; and two principal kinds there be of it: The
first grows wild in the woods: the second comes in places well tilled and in
gardens: but both the one and the other love sandy grounds. As for this later
kind, it is subdivided into many special sorts: for some have a deep red
skarlet flower; and indeed such are found in greatest plenty: others bear a
purple flower: and there be again which are white. The leaves of all these
three be like unto Parsley. None of them Hereupon A^ ^ne is called Rosepa^sl v
ordinarily grow in height above half a foot; and in the head of their stem,
they shoot forth (...), in Gr^k bet* keneth Wind whereupon Ruellius called it
Herba-veati: and Gerard, Wind-sloure mo^ properly.
Anemone in Greek. But the wild Anemone is greater and taller: the leaves also
are larger; and the flowers are of a red color. Many writers, being carried
away with an error, think this Anemone and Argemone to be both one: others
confound it with that wild Poppy which we named Rhoeas: but there is a great
difference between them, for that both these herbs do flower after Anemone:
neither do the Anemonae yield the like juice from them, as does either
Argemone or Rhoeas before-named: they have not also such cups and heads in the
top, but only a certain musculositie at the ends and tips of their branches,
much like to the tender buds of Asparagus.

All the sorts of Anemone or Wind-floure, be good for the headache and
inflammations I gather thee for a remedy against tertian and quartan agues:
which done, the party must lap and bind fast in a red cloth the said flower,
and so keep it in a shady place; and when need requires, to take the same, and
either hang it about the neck, or tie it to the arm or some other place. The
root of that Anemone which bears the red flower, if it be bruised and laid
upon any living creature whatsoever, raises

CHAP. XXIIII.
The virtues of Oenanthe in Physic.

OEnanthe is an herb growing upon rocky and stony grounds. The leaf
resembles those of the Parsnep: roots it has many, and those big. The stem
and leaves of this herb, if they be taken inwardly with honey and thick sweet
wine, do cause women in labor, to have easy deliverance, and withal, do
cleanse them well of the afterbirth. Eaten in an Electuarie, or licked in a
lohoch made with honey, the said leauesdoe rid away the cough, and provoke
urine. To conclude, the root also is singular for the infirmities and diseases
of the bladder.

CHAP. XXV.
The medicines made which the herb Heliochryson.

HEliochryson, which others name Chrysanthemon; puts forth little branches
very fair and white: the leaves are whitish too, much like unto Abrotomum:
From the tips and ends of which branches, there hang down certain buttons (as
it were) like berries round in a circle, which with the repercussion and
reuerberation of the Sunbeams, do shine again like resplendent gold. These
tufts or buttons, do never fade nor wither: which is the cause that the
chaplets wherewith they crown and adorn the heads of the gods, be made
thereof: a ceremony that Ptolomaeus K. of Egypt observed most precisely. This
herb grows in rough places

CHAP. XXVI.
The virtues and properties of the Hyacinth, and Lychnis, in Physic.

THe Hyacinth loves France very well, and prospers there exceedingly. The
French use therewith to die their light reds or lustie-gallant, for default of
grain to color their scarlet. The root is bulbous and Onion-like, well known
to these slaue-coursers, who buy them at best hand: and after, tricking,
trimming, and pampering them up for sale, make gain of them: for being reduced
into a liniment, they use it with wine to anoint as well the share of youths,
as the chin and checks, to keep them for ever being vnder-grown, or having
hair on their face, that they may appear young still and smooth. It is a good
defensatiue against the prick of venomous spiders: and besides, allaieth the
griping torments of the belly. It forciby provoke urine. The seed of this
herb, given with (...) in Dioscorides, it seems he read (...).
Abrotonum, is a preservative against the venom of serpents and scorpions; it
cures the jaundise.

As touching Lychnis, that fllaming herb surnamed Flammea, the seed of it
beaten to powder and taken in wine, is singular good against the sting of
serpents, scorpions, hornets, and such like. The wild of this kind is hurtful
to the stomach, and yet it is laxatiue and purges downward. Two drams thereof
is a sufficient dose to purge choler, for it works mightily. Such an enemy
it is to scorpions, that if they do but see it, they are taken with a
nummednesse that they cannot stir. In Asia or Natolia, they call the root of
this herb Bolites, which if it be laid upon the eyes and kept bound thereto,
takes away the pin and the web, as they say.

CHAP. XXVII.
The medicinable virtues of Pervincle, Rus^us, Batis, and Acinos.

ALso the Peruincle, called by the Greeks o^ rather Daphnocides, out of Dioscor.
Chamaedaphne, if it be stamped dry into powder, and a spoonful thereof given
in water to those that are full of the dropsy, it does euacuat most speedily,
the wa^y humors collected in their belly, or otherwise: the same root roasted in
embres, and well sprinkled and wet with wine, discusseth and dries up all
tumors, being

Concerning Ruscus, the decoction of the root, if it be given in drink each
other day, to them that be tormented either with the stone, or the wringing
pains of the strangurie, or to such as piss blood, it helps them. Now the
preparing of this medicine, and the proportion also of it, is in this wise: The
said root must be taken out of the ground as it might be to day, and tomorrow
morning betimes it would be sodden; and a sextar of this decoction is to be
mingled with two cyaths of wine, and so the Patient is to drink it. Some make
no such ado, but take the root while it is green, stamp it, and in water draw
the juice raw as it is, and so drink it. In sum, it is Taken by the most part
for wild B^sill:
Batis is good for them that be bound and costiue in the belly: and a liniment
of it, after it is roasted in the embres and stamped, is singular for the gout.
Last of all, as touching the herb Acinos, the Egyptians use to sow it, as well
to make guirlands thereof, as to eat it. Surely I would say it were Basil, but
that the branches and leaves be more hairy; for certainly it is very
odoriferous. It has a property to provoke urine, and women's fleures.

CHAP. XXVIII.
The medicines that Colocasia or the Egyptian Bean does afford.

GLausias was of opinion, that Colocasia was good to lenifie or mitigat the
acrimony of humors within the body, and withal to help the stomach.

CHAP. XXIX.
The medicines made of Anthalium.

TOuching Anthalium (whereof the Egyptians use much to eat) I find no other use
of it, but only from the kitchen to the table. Indeed there is an herb much
like to it in name, which Some take it for Kali.
Anthyllion, others Anticellion: whereof be two kind; the one has leaves and
branches like to the Lentill, and grows a hand breadth or span high: it
comes up in (...). Diosco^. somewhat brackish.
sandy grounds exposed to the Sun, and is saltish in taste. The other resembles
Iua muscata, or Arthritica.
Chamaepitys but that it is lower and more hairy: it bears a purple flower,
carries a strong sent, and loves to grow in stony places. The former kind is
a most convenient and proper herb for the diseases of the matrice and the
natural parts of women. Also being applied as a cataplasme with oil Rosat and
milk, it is an vmbretarie medicine. In case of the strangury and pains of the
kidneys it is given with good success to the quantity of three drams. The
other likewise is given to drink the weight of four drams with honey and
vinegre, for to mollify the hardness of the matrice, to assuage the torments
of the belly, and to cure those that be taken with the falling sickness.

CHAP. XXX.
Of Some think it is Motherwoort, others Feuerfew.
Parthenium, and the medicinable virtues that it has.

AS for Parthenium, some name it Leucanthe, others Tamnaum; but our countryman
Celsus the Physician calls it Perdicium and Muralium. It grows in the
mounds and hedges about gardens: it brings forth a white flower, sauouring
like an Surely according to Dioscorid^s, Pliny should have written thus: Flore
per ambitum candido, intus melino; id est, with a flower white round about: but
within of a dark yellow like to honey: and this agrees to Feuerfew.
apple, and having a bitter taste. The decoction of this herb, if a woman sit
over it and receive the fume into her body, is good to mollify the hard
tumors of the matrice and natural parts; as also to discuss all
inflammations. A powder made of this herb dried, and incorporat with honey and
vinegre, [i. Oxymel] and so applied, purges choler adust and melancholy. In
which regard it is good Anthonies fire: likewise for the Kings evil, if it be
incorporate with old swines grease. The Magitians use it much for Tertian
agues: but they lay a great charge, that it should in any wise be plucked up
with the left hand,

CHAP. XXXI.
Of Nightshade or Morell: of Alkakengi and Halicacabus, and their use in
Physic.

NOw concerning Nightshade or Morel, which some name Strychnos, others have
written Alkakengi, or winter-cherry
Halicacabus, others Callion: but our countrymen here in Italy call it or
ather for that the said berry heth within (...) cod like a bladder.
Vesicaria, because it is good for the stone in the bladder. Certes this plant
is more like a shrub, or little tree full of branches, than any herb; bearing
great and large bladders, and those fashioned like a top, broad and flat at one
end, and sharp pointed at another, enclosing within it a great berry, which
ripeneth in the month November. The third kind of Strychnos or Solanum has
leaves like to Basil: but I must but lightly touch this herb, and not stand
long about the Diocles and Euenor have highly commended it: and Tamaristus
verily has not stuck to write verses in the commendation of it: A wonderful
thing, that men should so far ouerpasse themselves, and forget all honesty and
plain dealing: for they say, forsooth, that a collusion made of this herb
confirms the teeth that be loose in the head, if the mouth be washed
therewith. And one only fault they found in Halicacabus (otherwise it might be
praised without exception) that if the said collution were long continued, it
would trouble the brain, and bring them that used it to foolerie and idleness
of head. But for mine own part, my meaning is not to set down any such receipts
and remedies, which may bring a further danger with them, than the very discase
it self for which they were devised. The third kind Xenocrates avouches, That
there is no malady incident to our bod^, but the ^id More is good for it.
Howbeit, I make not so great reckoning and account of all the hel^ that these
and such like herbs may afford, as I do make conscience to deliver them in
writing, especially seeing we have so great store of safe and harmless
medicines,

CHAP. XXXII.
Of Corchorum and Cnicus.

THey of Alexandria in Egypt use to eat ordinarily of Corchorum. This herb has
leaves inwrapped and infolded one within another, after the manner of the
Mulberry. Good it is Nicander verily does report, that it helps the stinging
of serpents, if it be used before it be in the flower. As touching Cnicus,
otherwise called Atractylis (an herb appropriate to the land of Egypt) I would
think it meet not to use many words about it, but that it yields a
sovereign remedy against the poison of venomous beasts; yea, and the
dangerous Mushroms if a man have eaten them. This is certain, and an approved
experiment, That whosoever are wounded by the sting of Scorpions, shall never
feel smart or pain, so long as they hold that herb in their hand.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of Persoluta.

THe Chaplet-makers in Egypt set great store by Persoluta also, which they sow
and plant in their gardens only for to make Coronets and Guirlands. Two kinds
there be of it, the male and the female. It is said, That the one as well as
the other, if it be put under man or woman in bed, they shall have no mind nor
power at all to play at Venus game, and specially the man.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Of Measures and Weights.

ANd forasmuch as we shall have occasion oftentimes in setting down weights
and measures, to use Greek vocables, I care not much even in this place to
interpret those words once for all. First and foremost, the Atticke Dram
[for all Physicians in manner go by the poise of Athens] does peise just a
Roman silver denier: and the same weighs also six Oboli: now one Obulus is as
much in weight as ten Chalci. A Cyathus of it self alone comes to ten drams
in weight. When you shall read the measure of Acetabulum, take it for the
fourth part of Hemina, that is to say, fifteen drams. To conclude, Mna, which
we in Latin call Mina, amounts just to an hundred drams Atticke.

THE TWENTY SECOND BOOK
WRITTEN BY C. PLINIVS SECVNDVS.
The Proeme.
A Man would think who did but read the former Book, That dame Nature and
the Earth both had done their parts, and showed their wonderful perfection
sufficiently; if he considered withal the admirable virtues of so many herbs
which they have brought forth and bestowed upon mankind, as well for pleasure
as profit. But see what a deal of riches more is yet behind; and how the same,
as it is harder to be found, so it is in effect more miraculous! As for those
Simples whereof we have already written, for the most part they are such as
have served our turn at the bourd: or else in regard of their beauty, odor,
and smell, have enduced us to search farther into them, and to make trial of
their manifold virtues and operations in Physic. But yet there remain behind
many more, and those so powerful, that they prove evidently unto us, how
Nature has produced nothing in vain and without some cause: although the same
be occult and hidden many times from us, and reserved only in her closet and
secret counsel.

CHAP. I.
Of certain Nations which use herbs for procuring and preserving of beauty.

CEertes I do find and observe, that there be foreign Nations who time out of
mind have been ever accustomed to anoint their bodies with the juice of
certain herbs, for to imbellish and beautify them, as they thought. And verily
in some of these All such as be neither within Greece nor Italy.
barbarous countries ye shall have the women paint their faces, some with this
herb, and others with that: yea and among the Dakes and Sarmatians, in
Transyluania, Valachia, Tartaria, and those parts, the men also mark their
bodies with certain characters. But to go no farther [i. Woad] with the juice
whereof the women of Britain, as well the married wives, as young maidens their
daughters, anoint and die their bodies all over, resembling by that tincture the
color of Moors and Ethyopians: in which manner they use at some solemn feasts
and sacrifices to go all naked.

CHAP. II.
That Clothes be died with certain Herbs.

ANd now of late days, we know there has been taken up a strange and
wonderful manner of dying and coloring clothes. For (to say nothing of the
groin brought out of Galatia, Skarlet also and Violet in grain; yea, and to
set all other colors that can be devised, with the Portibus augetur
a^ctoritas.
havens abroad where those fishes be taken which furnish them with colors, are
mightily frequented and in greater name and request than ever they were. In
which regard, I cannot choose but show and declare what account we ought to make
of these dumb tinctures in that behalf; I mean such herbs and simples,
whereof there is but base reckoning or none at all made: for those great
princes which were the first founders and establishers of the Roman Empire, did
mighty things therewith, and employed these herbs in the highest matters of
state. For in the affairs of greatest importance, namely, either in public
sacrifice for the auerting of some heavy judgment of the gods threatened: or
in expiation of any grievous sin and offense committed (whether they
performed divine service to their

CHAP. III.
Of grass Chaplets.

NO Coronets verily were there ever at Rome better esteemed, either to testify
the triumphant majesty of that victorious city (the soueraign lady of the
whole world) or to give testimony of honor and reward for some notable service
performed for the Commonweal, than those which were made simply of green
grass. The crowns of beaten gold, and enriched with pearl; the Vallare and
Murall Chaplets bestowed upon brave knights and valiant soldiers, who either
entered the fortified camp of the enemy over trench and rampire, or mounted the
walls in the assault of a city, came nothing near to this: the Nauall garlands
given to admirals and generals at sea, for obtaining victory in that kind of
service: the ciuick coronets also honor, all save these made of grass, were
given many times by some private and particular persons,

CHAP. IIII.
The singularity and rare examples of such Chaplets made of grass.

NOw, whereas other Garlands of honor and Coronets of triumph, were always
either ordained by a decree from the Senate in time of peace, and after the
troubles of war ouerblowne; or granted by an act of the people, being quiet
and ^epose, when dangers were Made of Oak leaves and branches:
the life of one only citizen of Rome (and such an one perchance as was of all
others the meanest) that whose fortune it was to obtain it, he was honored ever
after with many privileges

CHAP. V.
What captains they were, who alone received the honor of a brass Chaplet.

LVcius Siccius syrnamed Dentalus, was crowned but once with this Coronet of
grass: notwithstanding it was his good fortune to deserve and obtain
fourteen Ciuick garlands: to fight with his enemy in a hundred and twenty
battles, and ever to return out of the field with victory: whereby we may see
how rare a thing it was in times past, to see an army thus saved through the
valor of their captain, for to recognize by this public present their only
fauior. And some leaders and captains have bin honored this way oftener than
so: as for example, P. Decius Mus received two such Coronets: for being a
Colonel and knight Marshal of the camp, he behaved himself so valiantly, that
one was given him by the regiment or army which Mars. This was that P. Decius,
who afterward being Consul together with that surly and imperious colleague
of his [T. Manlius] syrnamed Imperiosus, devowed and yielded himself to all
the devils of hell for the safety of his army, and the obtaining of victory.
Moreover, that noble and renowned Fabius, who set upright again the declining
state Annibal, was crowned therefore with such a chaplet, by authority from the
Senate and people of Rome: such an honor in my judgment as no man in this world
can reach and attain to higher. True it is, that beforetime he had performed
good service, and namely, when being Dictator, he rescued and saved his high M.
Minutius.
Constable or grand master of the Cauallery, together with his whole army: and
yet Annibal out of Italy. And in truth, never man yet was in this wise known
to be crowned by the hands (if I may so say) of the whole Empire, but himself
alone. This peculiar honor obtained he above all others, that this Chaplet
alone was offered and presented unto him by all the states of Italy.

CHAP. VI.
What he was, who alone of all Centurions received this Chaplet of grass.

BEsides those abouenamed, I find that M. Calphurnius Flamma, a Colonel of a
regiment of soldiers in Sicily, was in this manner rewarded and honored with a
grass garland. But never was there known to this day any one to have bin
crowned in this wise, of so base degree and condition as C. Perreius A^nas, in
that war wherein the Cimbrians were defeated, who indeed was no better than a
simple Centurion. This Centurion having by his place the conduct of the foremost
band of a regiment of soldiers under Colonel Catulus; seeing upon a time
certain companies excluded out of their own camp, by reason that the enemies
had put themselves between them and home, and there encamped; perceiving his
captain or Colonel Catulus aforesaid, Marius and Catulus, he was allowed to
sacrifice unto the gods with a noise of fifes and haut boys sounding hard by
the hearth or alter fire. Furthermore, Sylla the Dictator has left in writing,
That when he was lieutenant General under the Consuls, and had the leading of
the army in the expedition or journey against the Marsians, the whole army
presented unto him a Chaplet of grass, before the city of Nola. And in very
truth he caused this to be pourtraied in a painted table within a house of M.
Tullius Ciccro was master of. Which if it were true, the more shame deserved he
in my conceit: and I hold and pronounce him so much the more accursed and
detestable, for taking this crown from his own head, and losing such a brave
badge of honor, in proscribing, overthrowing, banishing, and murdering
afterward, a greater number of citizens (without all comparison) than those
soldiers came to, whose lives he saved, at what time as he took that garland
first upon his head. Let him vaunt as much as he will of the said Coronet, as
also of the proud and vain glorious title of Foelix, i. happy (which addition
or syrname he took upon him and caused to be put into his style) yet, when as
through his tyranny he held besieged those Roman citizens whom he had
proscribed and confined into all parts of the world, surely he forewent all and
yielded that crown unto Sertorius.

Moreover, M. Varro does report, That Scipio syrnamed Aemilianus, was honored
with an Obsidionall Coronet in Africa (the same year when as Manlius was
Consul) for saving three cohorts besieged; as also three companies besides
which he led forth to deliver the other, and by whose means he forced the enemy
to break up his siege. This is to be seen and read in a Table, which Augustus
Caesar late Emperor of famous memory, caused to be hanged up at the base or
foot of the said Scipioes statue erected in the Forum or public hall which
himself built. As for Augustus himself, the Senate crowned him with an
Obsidionall Chaplet, upon the thirteenth day of September, that year when he
was Consul with M. Cicero, the son of that great Cicero the Orator. Whereby we
may see, that a Ciuick Chaplet was not thought sufficient nor that very same
they took, were they never so base weeds and of no reckoning: for as
contemptible

CHAP. VII.
The medicinable virtues of other flowers and herbs serving for Chaplets. Also
of Erynge.

AMong those herbs which bear pricks, * Erynge or Eryngion, is singular: for
a sovereign ^ea holly.
herb it is against serpents, and all poisons whatsoever, as if it grew for
nothing else. But to come to particulars, for stings and bitings of venomous
creatures, the root thereof to the quantity Heraclides the Physician is of
opinion, That if the said root be boiled in the broth of a goose, it is of more
efficacy than all other, against the Toxica and Aconita But whereas others do
boil it in sheere water against the poisons Toxica; Appollodorus would have a
frog sodden withal. The herb it self is of substance hard, branching much,
full of leaves, and those beset with pricks. A stem or stalk it carries, parted
by knots and joints, a cubit high and somewhat more. Moreover, as there is white
Erynge, so you shall have of it black: The root is odoriferous. Eryngion verily
comes up ordinarily of seeds and by setting. But it

CHAP. VIII.
Of the herb or thistle commonly called Centum-Capita, i. the hundred heads.

AS for the white Erynge, our countrymen call it in Latin Centum-capita. But
they be all of one and the same operation and effect. And the Greeks verily
make their ordinary meat as well of their stalks as roots, both ways, to wit,
either raw or boiled, as they list. Certes, Sappho was so enamoured on the young
knight Phao of Lesbos. And verily, as touching this herb, not only the
Magitians, but the disciples also and followers of Pythagoras, tell us many
vain and foolish tales.

But to come indeed to the use of it in Physic. Over and besides those virtues
and properties which I have related already, good it is to resolve ventosities:
it eases the gripes and wrings in the belly; it cures the diseases and
debility of the heart; it helps the stomach and liver. For the midriffe and
precordial parts, it is very wholesome taken in honied water: and for the
spleen,

CHAP. IX.
Of Acanus and Liquorice.

SOme there be who take Acanus for a kind of Eryngium. And they describe it to
be a low herb, and yet growing broad and large, full of pricks and thorns,
and those likewise bigger than ordinary; being applied outwardly, wonderful
effectual it is (by their saying) to to be counted among these thorny plants,
for that the leaves stand Echinatis. It seems that Pliny never saw Liquorice,
but read (...) for (...), i. Lentisci: and indeed the leaves are like to those
of the Lentiske tree.
pricking up sharp pointed; Inlinguae suhdit is: such as be our Ecligmata or
Lochs.
held under the tongue, so to resolve and melt leasurely, namely, after it has
bin sodden to the thirds:

CHAP. X.
Of the Caltrop thistle Tribulus. The sundry kinds thereof, and the medicines
which they yield.

SOme of these Thistles come up in gardens: others grow in and about rivers
only. The juice

CHAP. XI.
Of Stoebe, and the medicines which it affoordeth.

SToebe, A kind of Matfellon or Knapweed.
which some call Phleon, boiled in wine, is a sovereign remedy for ears that
run with atter: likewise for blood shotten eyes, especially upon a stripe or
stroke given. Being ministered by way of clyster, it is good for the bloody
flix and the exulceration of the guts.

CHAP. XII.
Of Hippophyes and Hippope, with iheir medicinable virtues.

HIppophyes is an herb growing in grauelly and sandy places, and namely along
the seaside, armed with white pricks or thorns: it bears berries by
clusters after the manner of Iuie, and those be partly white and partly red.
The root is full of a certain juice, which is good Ervifarina:
this being taken to the weight of one Obolus, purges choleric humors; and a
most wholesome medicine it is, especially with honied wine.

Another herb there is, named Hippope, which neither rises up in stalk, nor
bears flower, but has leaves only, and those small. The juice also of this
herb, is wonderful good for those who are in a dropsy. Where it is to be
noted, That these two herbs should have some especial properties respective to
the nature of horses, considering both their names are derived from nothing
else; for in very truth, some things there be which Nature has brought forth
as appropriat remedies for certain particular beasts, whereby we may see her
divine power, and how well appointed she is and provided for to bring forth
medicines of all sorts; so as the depth of her

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Nettle, and the medicinable virtues thereof.

IS there any thing more hated and odious than the Nettle? and yet to say
nothing of the oil Nicander affirms, That it is a very counterpoison against
Hemlock, venomous mushrums, and Quick silver. Apollodorus adds moreover, and
says, That being boiled in the broth of a Tortoise, it is singular good for
the poison of Salamanders: also that it is contrary to the pernicious nature of
Henbane; and the deadly poison of serpents, and namely, of scorpions. Even that
very bitterness and mordacity which the Nettle has, causes the Uvula in the
mouth which is fallen, to knit up again: the matrice also which is ouer-loose
and bears down, to arise into the place, yea and the tuill or fundament in
children hanging forth of the body, to return and abide where it ought to be,
only with touching these parts therewith. If the legs be rubbed, and the
forehead Hippocrates affirms, that the said seed is i. honied water, together
with salt, it expels (by his saying) the worms in the belly. Applied in a
liniment to the bare and naked places of Phanias (the natural Philosopher and
Physician) in a several treatise which he made in the praise of Nettles,
professes, That he knows not the like remedy to the Nettle, boiled first and
then condite, for the windpipe, the cough, the distillation and flux of the
belly, the stomach, the biles and botches in the emunctories, the swelling and
inflamed kernels behind the ears, and kibed heels. The same with oil

CHAP. XIIII.
Of Lamium, and the medicinable virtues thereof.

AS touching that dead-Nettle, which among the other kinds we named before
Lamium, i. Archangell, it is the mildest of all others and most tractable, for
the leaves bite not nor sting at all. The same, if it be applied with some
corns of salt, to contusions and bruises, to Anthonies fire, the shingles, and
such like. Some there be of our Latin writers, who treating of Nettles, have
couched them in their ranks respectively to the time, saying, That the root of
a Nettle which comes in the Autumn, cures the tertian ague; but it must be
tied fast to the Patient: and these ceremonies are to be observed also in the
taking it forth of the ground, That the party be named for whom it is gathered;
the fever also, of what type or kind it is; yea and who be the parents of the
sick person; and then he or she shall be sure to be delivered of that
disease. The said root, with the same circumstances, is of the like operation
to drive away the quartan ague also. The selfsame authors do assirme moreover,
That the root of a Nettle being applied with salt, draws forth all thorns and
shiuers

CHAP. XV.
Of the herb Scorpius: the sundry kinds thereof, and the medicinable properties.

THere is an herb called Scorpiocides.
Scorpius, which took that name of the resemblance that the head has to a
scorpions tail. Few leaves it bears; but (according to the name) it is good
against the sting of scorpions. Another herb there is of the same appellation,
and of like effect to the other; but it shows no leaves at all; the stalk is
smooth, and resembles garden

CHAP. XVI.
Of Leucacantha, and the virtues thereof good in Physic,

THe Greeks, some call this Thistle, Leucacantha, or the white thistle; others,
Phyllon: some Ischias, others, Polygonaton; but be the name what it will, it
has a root resembling that of or Cypirus.
Cyperus, which if it be chewed in the mouth, allaieth the toothache. Hicesius
says likewise, That if either the seed or the juice of the root thereof, be
taken in drink to the weight of eight drams, it assuageth the pain of the
sides and loins. The same also cures ruptures, convulsions and crampes.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Helxine or Perdicium, called also Parthenium or Sideritis, and the virtues
medicinable.

AS for Helxine, some call it Perdicium, because Partridges delight most to feed
thereupon; others name it Sideritis, and many give it the name of Parthenium.
Leaves it carries of * Parietary of the wall.
a mixed form and resemblance, between Plantain and Horehound. The branches or
small stalks grow in thick tufts, and those be of a light reddish color: the
seed in the head, of a Bur kind which sticks to folks clothes, whereupon they
would have it to be called Helxine. But in the former book I have described
the form of the right Where, to say a truth, he describes Helxine for Ixine,
or Chamaeleon the white.
Helxine or Parietarie indeed. The Anthonies fire: it cures swellings, and all
apostemations of humors, yea and also burns. The juice thereof incorporat
with ceruse or white lead, and so applied, serves greatly for biles and
botches, S. Anthonies fire, tumors, gatherings and risings in the flesh; yea
and helps them whose throat begins to swell. Also if a man take the quantity
of one cyath thereof, it cures inueterat and old coughs: it heals all
infirmities either occasioned by phlegmatic humors, or else incident to moist
parts: like as with oil rosat it is a proper medicine for the accidents of the
amygdales about the passage to the throat; and for the swelling of veins.
Moreover, if it be reduced * Diosc. Cerato Cyprine.
into the form of a cerot, with goats suet and wax of Cypres, and so applied,
it cures the gout. Moreover, Perdicium or Parthenium (for Sideritis is another
herb) our countrymen call or Vitraria, because it is used to scour glass and
pipkins withal.
Vrceolaris; of others, Astericum. In leaf it is like to Basil, save only that
it is blacker; it grows upon tile-houses, and old decayed walls, and such
ruinous places. Being beaten into powder and applied with corns of salt, it
has the same operation that the Nettle Lamium, and cures the self same
diseases; and the one is used in like sort as the other: and if the juice be
drunk hot, it is singular for inward and secret imposthumes full of filthy
matter, and drives them outward. Also it is excellent for ulcers, ruptures,
and bruises, whether it be that one has tumbled headlong from some high
downfall, or that he has bin crushed by the overthrow of some wagon or
chariot. It fortuned that a Page of Pericles a prince of the Atheniens (whom he
loved entirely) having climed up to the top of the lantern or spire of a
temple which the said prince built in the castle or citadell of Athens, fell
down from thence; who was cured by the means of Pericles in his sleep by the
goddess Minerva: whereupon it took the name first of Parthenium, and is
consecrat unto the said goddess: this is that Page whose molten statue is to
be seen at this day made of brass: this is (I say) that noble and famous image
called Made with a devise to blow coals and kindle fire for to rest the inwards
of beasts sacrificed: or as some think, it was the proper name of that youth.
Spla^hnoptes.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Chamaeleon the herb, the sundry kinds thereof, and the virtues
medicinable.

COncerning Chamaeleon, some there be who name it Ixias: whereof be two kinds:
the whiter has the rougher leaves: it creeps close by the ground, and
sets up stiff prickles rising of the Dog Star: and for that it is like to a
kind of birdlime, it is called Ixia: our women use

CHAP. XIX.
Of Coronopus or Harts-horne, with the medicinable virtues thereof.

COronopus is an herb bearing long leaves, and those cloven into certain
fissures and knags: and howsoever it grows wild, yet otherwhiles it is set
and sown in gardens, for the excellency of the root; which being roasted under
the ashes, is soueraign for the flux, and weakness

CHAP. XX.
Of Orchanet or Alkanet, as well the right as the bastard, and their properties
in Physic.

THe root of Orchanet is much used about medicines: of the thickness it is of
a finger: it will rend and cleave in manner of the papyr reed: and it coloreth
the hands of as many as handle it, with a red and bloody color: it prepares
wool and woollen cloth for to take rich Happily he means Phoenic^halonos, (i)
the Egyptian Date: or Oxyphoe^ices, our Tamarinds, a kind of Dates appropriat
for agues.
Balanos. In like manner is it to be used in the opilations or obstructions of
the liver, of the spleen, and in the Iaundise. A liniment made of it and
vinegar, cures the leprosy, and the red pimples arising in the face. The
leaves stamped with honey and meal until they be incorporat together, and so
applied as a cataplasme, are thought to be good for dislocations: but if they
be taken inwardly to the quantity of two drams in honied wine, they bind and
knit the belly. The root boiled in water is

Another herb there is much like unto it, and thereupon called Pseudanchusa [i.
bastard Orchanet] of some, but of others Enchusa or Doris; and many other names
it has besides. More full of down or hairy moss it is, and less fatty; but
the leaves are smaller, more rank and feeble. The root yields no oleous
substance, but a reddish juice; wherein it differs from the

CHAP. XXI.
Of Onochiles, Anthemis, Lotos, and Lotometra: of Turnsoll-Tricoccus: of
Adiantum,

ANother herb there is, particularly named Onochiles, which some call Anchusa;
others Arcebion or Onochelis; some Rhexias, and many Enchusa: a small herb this
is, it carries a purple flower, leaves and branches rough: a root in harvest
time as red as blood, otherwise black; and grows in sandy grounds: effectual
it is against serpents, and Vipers most of all others, both in the root and
leaf, as well eaten with meat as taken in drink. In the full strength it is
in harvest. The leaves if it be bruised or stamped, do yield the savor and smell
of a Cucumber. If the matrice of a woman be slipped down, a draught of three
cyaths thereof, does reduce it

As touching Anthemis [i. Camomile] Asclepiades the Physician does highly
praise and commend it. Some name it Leucanthemis, others Leucanthemus; and
there be, who give it the name Eranthemon, because it flourishes in the
Spring: others again name it Chamaemelon, for the Homer, who among other
herbs growing for the delight and pleasure of the gods, has named Lotos as
principal. The leaves of this herb incorporat with honey, and so applied,
cures the cicatrices or scars in the eye; the spots also appearing therein,
and disolueth the cloudy skins which ouercast the sight: there is a kind of
lotos named Lotometra, coming of the garden Lotos: it carries a seed like to
Millet, whereof in Egypt the Bakers make that as many as live thereof are
infested and troubled neither with the dysenterie or bloody flix, This is
verified of the Cichory flour rather, which also does regard the Sun.
it draws in and shuts the blew flower which it bears. Two kinds there
be of this Heliotropium or Turnesol, of which the less is called Tricoccum,
the other Helioscopium: of the twain, this later is the taller (and yet neither
of them both exceeds half a a foot in height) and puts forth branches
from the very root. The seed of this greater sort lies within a little cod,
and is gathered in harvest time: it grows not but in a fat soil well manured,
Apollophanes and Apollodorus do report in their This is called Aerdor copieis
by Pliny himself, and is an hot distemperature of the head.
Siriasis. Likewise it helps contractions of sinues, and the drawing in of
joints, although the patient be taken after the manner of the falling sickness:
and for such as be thus afflicted, a somentation made of the decoction of this
herb, is very wholesome and comfortable: but if one drink the colature thereof,
it thrusts forth the worms in the belly, and scoureth out the gravel in the
kidneys. If Cumin be put thereto, it breaks the stones engendered and confirmed
there already. Boiled it ought to be root and all, the which with the leaves
and goats tallow, being reduced into a liniment, is singular good for all kinds
of gout.

The other kind which we call Tricoccon, and is otherwise named Scorpiurion,
has not only smaller leaves, but also they incline and bend downward to the
ground. A seed it bears resembling the figure of a scorpions tail, whereupon
it took that name. A liniment made therewith

Another property as strange and miraculous is reported of Maidenhair.
Adiantum: in Summer it is green: in winter it withers and decaieth not: it
checketh all water, for being bespreint, dashed, and drenched quite therewith,
yet it looks as if it were dry: so great is the antipathy or contrariety
between them: whereupon the Greeks gave it that name. And otherwise a plant it
is fit for Vinet-workes and knots in a garden. Some call it Callitrichon,
others Polytrichon,

CHAP. XXII.
Of Picris, Thesium, Asphodill, Alimus, Acanthus or Brankursine, Elaphoboscum,
Scandix, Iasione. Of Caucalis, Sium, Silybum, Scolymus, or Zimonium, Sonchus,
Chondrillum or Chodrilles: and of Mushromes.

THe herb A kind of Cichorie.
Picris took the name (as heretofore we have said) of the notable bitterness
So are none of our Cichories.
round. Excellent good it is to take away werts.

Thesium likewise comes nothing behind for bitterness: but it purges the
belly: for which purpose it must be stamped, strained, and taken in water.

As touching the Asphodell, it is one of the soueraign and most renowned herbs
in the world. Some have given it the name Heroion. And Hesiodus has written
that it grows in the woods. Dionysius says, That there is both male and
female of it. Certain it is, that the bulbous roots of the asphodel sodden with
husked barley, is a singular restoratiue for those bodies which are wasted with
a consumption, and especially of the lungs: and bread made of them, wrought
together with corn meal of flower into a dough, is most wholesome for man's
body. As for Nicander, he used to give either the stem which we called
Antherichon, or the seed, or else the Onion bulbous have a wonderf ull spite
against the maine stalk of this herb Asphodel, for they never Chrysermus the
Physician used to boil the root in wine, and therewith cured the swelling
kernills and inflammations behind the ears: also, with an addition of The seed
of a kind of Rosemary.
Cachrys and wine, he healed the kings evil. Some say, that if one take the
Asphodel root, and lay one part thereof to those swelling Sophocles (for the
gout) used the root both ways, as well raw as boiled. In case of humble-heels
he applied it sodden in oil: but to them that were fallen into the jaunise or
dropsy, he gave it in wine. Some writers have set down in their books, that if
either the members of generation be anointed with a liniment made therewith and
wine and honey together, or if the same be taken in drink it will mightily
provoke fleshly lust. Xenocrates affirms, That a decoction of the root in
vinegre takes away the ring-worms, tettars, and running scabs. Item, If the
root be boiled with Henbane and Tar, and therewith the armholes and parts
between the legs be well rubbed, it will rid away the strong and rank savor
which comes from thence, and if the head be first shaven, and Simus the
Physician boileth it in wine, and so gives it in drink, for to scour away
the stones of the kidneys. Hippocrates prescribes to give the seed against the
hardness of the spleen and the flux proceeding from thence: furthermore, the
root being brought to a liniment, or the very juice thereof sodden and used
accordingly, heals the farsins, mange, and scab, in horses, and reduces the
place to bear hair again as fair as before. Asphodel has a property to chase
away mice and rats: and if their holes be stopped up therewith, they die within.

Some are of opinion, that Hesiod. called Asphodel, a limon: which I take to be
a mere untruth: for there is an herb by it self called Alimon: about which
writers have erred not a little: for some say, that it is a shrub growing
thick, of a white color, without any prick or thorn, bearing leaus like the
Olive tree, but they be softer: and this plant is entertained in the kitchen,
there sodden Alyris rather according to ^tius.
Alimon is a sea-wort, of a salt and brackish taste, whereof it had the name.
The leaves be round, and yet after a sort long withal: and the whole herb is
highly commended Cratevas has made mention of a third sort, which has longer
leaves than the rest, and more rough in the hand, in smell resembling the Cipres
tree; who says, that it delights principally to grow under the Yuie tree:
which if it be taken to the weight of 3 oboli in a sextar of water, helps
those that have their heads and bodies drawn far back, and such as be troubled
with the contraction and shrinking of sinues.

As touching Acanthus or Brankursine: an herb it is cherished much is gardens,
proper for vinets and story-workes, bearing upright and long leaves, wherewith
beds-sides and borders of quarters in gardens are decked and beautified. Two
kinds there be of it: one with pricky leaves in manner of thistles, and the same
jagged, which is the less and lower of the twain: but the greater,

The herb Some name it Hares care.
Bupleuron is reckoned by the Greek writers in the number of worts that grow
of themselves: a stem it has of a cubit in height, many leaves, and those
growing long in a spoke-tuft or rundle in the head, in manner of Dill; highly
commended by Hippocrates for good meat; but Glycon and Nicander praise it as
much for the use thereof in Physic: and in very truth

* Buprestis is an herb about which the Greek writers have showed themselves,
namely, how H^sycb (...)* olus (...) sectum venenatum.
inconstant and light of credit they be; in that they have so highly praised it
to be a special wholesome meat, yea and a singular remedy against poisons. For
the very name shows evidently that it is a poison it self, of kine and oxen
at lestwise. And they themselves do confess, that if such cattle taste of But
they mean the venomous Iusect (...).
Buprestis it will make them enraged, and fall a gadding until they burst in In
truth the flies Buprestes, which some take to be C^ntharides, are thought to
have some operation in that kind.
which indeed they say it will provoke no less that way, than if it were taken
in drink.

Which some take for a kind of w^ld angelica or G^lla dei.
Elaphoboscon is an herb growing up with a main stem, after the manner of
Fenel-geant: the same is full of knots and joints as thick as a man's finger.
The seed is made after the fashion of berries hanging down in manner of Sili or
Siler-mountaine; howbeit nothing bitter they are, and the leaves resemble those
of Alisanders. This herb is taken for a commendable meat; and in truth is kept
also and preserved a long time confected and condite, for a singular remedy to
The root also reduced into a liniment with Sal-nitrum put thereto and
incorporate together,

Touching the herb * Scandix, the Greeks have ranged it also among the wild
worts, or potherbs Pecten veneris, wild Cheruile, or Shepherds needle.
good for to be eaten, according to Opion and Erasistratus. The same being
sodden, knitteth the belly and stops a laske. The seed taken with vinegre
presently stays the yox or hicquet: it provoke vrin, and serves well in a
liniment to heal up burns. The juice of it being boiled to a juleb, is good
for the stomach, liver, kidneys, and bladder. This is the herb which
Aristophanes the Comaedian twitted the Tragical Poet Euripides by, obiecting
unto him merrily by way of a scoff, that his mother, who was a gardener, used
to sit in the market and sell never Our Chervile.
praise and commendable property it has, that if the body be ouerlayed and
wearied with the use of women, it restores the spirits and refreshes them
again. Yea and such as be well stepped in years, and begin to droup, it makes
lusty and able to perform the act of generation youthfully. It stays the flux
of the whites in women.

Moreover, * Iasione is counted also a wild wort, coming up of it self and
good to be eaten. A kind of smooth Bindweed.
This herb creeps by the ground, full of milk it is, and bears a white
flower which some call Concilium. The like name and commendation there goes of
this herb for stirring unto letcherie. Being taken raw with meat in a vinegre
sauce, it breeds plenty of milk in women.

As for * Caucalis, an herb like to Fenel, but that it has a short stalk and
a white flower: it Bastard Parsley
is good also to be eaten, and is besides counted a cordial. A drink likewise
is made of the juice thereof, passing comfortable to the stomach, of power to
provoke vrin, to expel grauel and stone, and to stay the itching within the
bladder: it does subtiliat the gross and tough phlegm which causes
obstructions in the spleen, liver, and kidneys. The seed being taken inwardly
helps forward the monthly sickness of women when it stays upon them, and
dries up the choleric Chrysippus is of opinion, that it is singular good to
help women for to conceive, if they be desirous of children. But the manner is
to drink it in wine next the heart fasting. And as Petricus the Poet has
delivered in verse, a liniment of this herb is singular against the poisons of
venomous sea-beasts.

Among these herbs is reckoned * Sion, a plant growing in waters of it self,
with leaves like A kind of water Cresses or Lauer.
Parsley or Smallach, but that they be larger, fatter, and of a deeper blackish
green: it bears seed plentifully, and in taste resembles Watercresses. It is
thought to be excellent good for those that cannot make water, for the diseases
of the reins, and pain of the spleen, yea and for women whose monthly terms
are suppressed; whether the substance thereof be taken as meat, or the

As concerning Silybus, an herb like unto the white Chamaeleon, and as full of
thorns; it grows abundantly in Cilicia, Syria, and Phoenice: and yet in
these countries they make not

The plant * Scolymus is used also much to be eaten in the East parts, where
they call it by Some take these for our Artichokes.
another name Limonia: It never exceeds a cubit in height: the leaves be
crested: the root black, but yet sweet. Eratosthenes commends it as a
principal dish for a poor man's table: and Hesiodus and Alcaeus, if it be taken
in wine, it inciteth to wantonness and fleshly pleasures. These Poets do
write, That when this herb does flourish and is at the best, then grasshoppers
chaunt loudest and sing most shril: and as women at such a time be most
desirous of men's company and hottest in lust, so contrariwise men are most loath
to turn unto them, and least able to content their appetite: as if Nature to
satisfy the pleasure of these good wives, had provided against that faint
season, the help of the Artichoke, as a viand most powerful at this time to set
their husbands in a heat, and to enable them to that business. Moreover, an
ounce of the root cleansed from the pith, sodden to the thirds in three hemines
of the best Falerne wine, and either taken in drink upon Xenocrates affirms
upon his own experience, and promises, That this decoction is of such
efficacy, that it causes the said strong sent to pass away by the urine.

Moreover, the Sonchu^.
Sowthistle is an herb for to be eaten, for we read in the Poet Callimachus,
That the poor old woman Hecale, at what time as prince Theseus fortuned on
necessity to take his repast in her simple cottage, made him a feast, and set
before him a principal dish of Sowthistles. Two kinds there be of them, the
white, and the black: both, like unto lectuce, but that they are full of
pricks. They run up into a stalk of a cubite in height, the same is cornered
and hollow Erasistratus shows plainly, That if it be eaten, it expels
gravel by urine: and chewed only, it corrects the stinking savor of the
mouth, and causes one to have a sweet breath. The juice thereof drawn to the
measure of three ciaths, made hot in white wine and oil, and so taken, helps
women in labor, that they may be soon delivered, but presently after they have
drunk it, they ought to stir their bodies and walk up and down their chamber.
Also it is used to be sodden in broth, and so supped up. The very stalk thereof
being boiled, makes milch nources to have good store of milk, and the children
at their breast to be better colored. But most excellent it is for such
nources as feel their milk to cruddle in their breasts. The juice thereof
dropped into the ears, does them Cleemporus does accord hereunto as touching
the white, but he allows in no wise to eat of the black, for he is of
opinion, that it breeds diseases. Agathocles also prescribes the juice of
the white Sowthistle to them who have drunk Bulls Zenon declares, That the
root of the white Sow-thistle, cures the strangurie.

As for Gum Suc^ie.
Chondrillon or Chondrille, it has leaves like to Endive or Cichory leaves
gnawed or eaten round about: a stem not a foot high, and the same full of a
bitter juice: a root like unto Dios. (...)* i. full and fresh: but it seems
that Pliny read it (...).
Bean, and otherwhile there be many of them together. This herb puts
forth close to the ground a certain kind of gum like Mastick, swelling out to
the bigness of a Bean, which being applied to the natural parts of women, is
said to draw down their monthly courses. The same herb being stamped root and
all together, and digested into trosches, is thought to be singular good
against serpents: and a probable reason hereof is collected, because the field
mice and rats when they are stung by serpents, have recourse to this herb, and
eat thereof. The juice Dorotheus the Poet has delivered in his verses, that it
is good for the stomach, and helps digestion. Some hold opinion, That it is
naught for women and hurtful to the eyes, also

Among all those things which are earen with danger, I take that Mushromes may
justly be ranged in the first and principal place: true it is, that they have a
most pleasant and delicat taste, but discredited much they are and brought into
an ill name, by occasion of the poison which Agrippina the Empress conueighed
unto her husband Tiberius Claudius the Emperor, by their means: a dangerous
president given for the like practice afterward. And verily by that fact of
hers, she set on foot another poison, to the mischief of the whole world and
her own bane especially (even her own son Nero, the Emperor, that wicked
monster.) The venomous quality of some of these Mushromes, may be soon known
by their weak redness, their moldy hew so unpleasant to see to, their leaden
and wan color within-forth, their chamfered streakes full of chinks and chaps,
and finally, their edges round about pale and yellow. For others there be that

CHAP. XXIII.
Of other Mushromes or Tad-stoles called Fungi. Of Silphium, and Laser.

AS touching those excrescenses in manner of Mushromes, which be named Fungi,
they are by nature more dull and slow. And albeit there be many kinds of them,
yet they all take their beginning of nothing else but the slimy humor of trees.
The safest and least dangerous or Puffs, they are of al others most perilous,
and have the best warrant to poison folk. It is Anneus Serenus, captain of the
Emperor Nero his guard, came by his death, with diverse coronels and
centurions, at one dinner. And I wonder much, what pleasure men should take
thus to venture upon so doubtful and dangerous a meat. Some have put a
difference of these mushroms, according to the several Trees from which they
seem to spring, and have made choice of those that come from the Fig Tree, the
Betula, no^ Ferula.
Birch, and such as bear gum. For mine own part, as I have said before, I hold
those good that the Beech, Oak, and Cypress trees do yield. But what
assurance can a man have hereof, from their mouths who sit in the market to
sell them? for all the sort of those Puffes and Toadstooles look with a leaden
hew and wan color. Howbeit, the nearer that a Mushrome or Toadstoole comes to
the color of a fig hanging upon the tree, the less presump tion

Touching the remedies for to help those who suspect they have eaten these
dangerous mushroms, I have said somewhat already, and will say more herafter.
Mean while this would be noted, that as perilous as they be, yet some goodness
there is in them, and diverse medicines they do yield. First and foremost,
Glaucias thinks and affirms, That the Mushromes Boleti be good for the
stomach. As for the swine mushromes, named in Latin Suilli, they are hanged up
to dry infiled upon a rush running through them, as we may see in those that
come out of Bithynia. And these are supposed to be singular for those fluxes
and catarrhs that take a course to Lavantur ve plumbum, some read Linuntur ad
plumbum, (i.) a liniment is m. de of the for lead-shotte^ eyes, etc. vide ^p
1^. lib. 25.
washed as lead, for to enter into collyries and eye-salues: and a liniment is
made thereof, which being applied with water, cleanses filthy sores and
ulcers, cures the skals that break out in the head, and heals the wounds
occasioned by the biting of dogs.

And now for that our fine mouthed and dainty wantons who set such store by
their tooth, take so great delight to dress this only dish with their own
hands, that they may feed thereon in conceit and cogitation all the while they
be handling and preparing the same, furnished in this their business with
their fine knives and rasors of amber, and other vessels of silver plate about

This Silphium came at the first from Cyrenae (as I have before written) but
now adays, since time that all the Cyrenaick Silphium is destroyed and gone (as
has bin said) the greatest store thereof is brought out of Syria: howbeit so
good it is not as that which Parthia yields, though it be better than that
which the merchants bring over with them out of Media: this or Laserpiti^.
Silphium is of great use in Physic; for the leaves are sodden in white
odoriferous wine: of which decoction, there is made a drink for to cleanse and
purify the matrice, and to expel the dead infants therein; so it be takn to
the measure of one Acetabulum, immediately after the woman has bin in the
stouve, and there swet. The root is singular for to clear the windpipes, and
to take away all the asperity and roughnes in those parts; and being applied in
form of a liniment, it helps impostumat inflammations proceeding from the
ranknes and ebullition of the blood: and yet as for the black and blew marks
remaining after stripes: but if the same with some adition of wax,

As for the liquor Laser, issuing from Silphium (in that manner as I have
showed) it is holden for one of the most singular gifts that Nature has
bestowed upon the world, and enters into many excellent confections and
compositions. Of it self alone, it reduces those to their natural heat, who
are staruen and benumbed with extreme cold. Taken in drink, it allaieth the
accidents and griefs of the nerves. It is both given to women in wine, and
applied also in soft locks of wool to their natural parts, for to bring down
their menstrual purgation. If it be mixed and incorporat with wax, it draws
and fetches out by the roots, the agnels or corns in the feet, if so be they
be scarified round about before with the lancer. Being dissolved in some
convenient liquor and taken to the quantity of a cich pease, it provoke vrin.
Andreas the Physician He means by Cauterium, (...), medicame^te (...), or
(...), which does draw humors and the blood to the habit and outward parts: a
necessary course to be taken in Atrophia, and namely after long diseases, that
the body may be equally nourished.
to raise a blister: but better it is for them who are acquainted with it, than
for those who have not bin used to it. Outwardly applied, no man makes doubt
but it is of singular operation, and works many effects: taken in drink, it
extinguisheth the venom left in the body, either by poisoned dart, or
serpents sting: and if the wounds be anointed close with wax, for fear of
that which might ensue thereupon: for I have seen the fearful sequel

CHAP. XXIV.
Of the nature and properties of Honey. Of honied water or Mead called Hydromel.
How it comes to pass that the manners and behauiours of men be altered by
meat and viands. Of honied wine named Melitites, and of Wax. Also against the
abuse in composition of medicines.

Honey, were it not so common as it is, and every where to be had, would be as
high esteemed and of as great price as Laser. As for this drug, Nature has
framed and made it immediately her own self; but for the getting and working of
honey she has created a living creature of purpose, as we have already said: by
means whereof we have this celestial liquor, which serves for an infinite
number of uses, considering how often it enters into mixtures and
compositions. And first to speak of that cereous substance Propolis, which, as
it has bin showed already, offers it self first to be seen at the very
entry of the Bee-hiue. These virtues medicinable it has, namely to draw forth
all pricks, thorns, and what offensive thing soever sticks within the flesh
of a body; to dissolve and dissipate all tumors and swelling bunches, to
concoct and mollify any hardness, to assuage the pains of sinews, and finally
to incarnat,

As touching Honey it self, of this nature verily it is, That it will suffer no
dead bodies to putrify, notwithstanding it be of a sweet and pleasant taste,
far from any aegrenesse, and contrary to the nature of salt: for the throat,
the kernels of each side thereof called the Tonsils or Amygdals; for the
squinancie, and all the accidents befalling to the mouth; as also for the
dryness of the tongue through extremity of heat in fevers, it is the most
sovereign thing in the world. Honey boiled is singular for the inflammation of
the lungs, and for the pleurisy: also it cures the wounds inflicted by the
sting or teeth of serpents; and helps those who have eaten venomous mushroms.
Being taken in dulcet or honied wine, it cures those that lie of a palsy;
although into the virtues and operations of Honey, I must of necessity handle
and declare the quality

Of which there be two kinds: the one is fresh and new made in have upon
occasion, and presently used: the other is kept and preserved. As touching the
former Hydromel, if it be made as it should be of dispumed and clarified honey,
it is of singular use in that exquisit and spary diet fit for sick persons, and
namely in meats of light digestion, such as is a thin gruell made of naked
frumenty washed in many waters: also to be joined in restoratiues for to
recover the Patients strength much enseebled. Moreover, good it is for the
mouth and the stomach, to mitigat the fretting humors settled and bedded
therein, and to cool the extremity of heat: for I find in good authors, that to
ease and mollify the belly, it is better to be given cold than otherwise: a^
also that it is a proper and convenient drink for those who chil and quake for
cold: likewise for Some read (...). out of Dioscor. having a faint and weak
pulse.
Micropsychos.

Moreover, there is a reason rendered full of infinite subtlety, and the same
fathered first upon Cato, Why the same things feel not always bitter or sweet
alike in every man's taste? for he says that this diversity proceeds from
those little motes or Corpusculis rerum.
bodies that go to the making of all things: whiles some of them be smooth,
others rough and rugged; some cornered, others round: in sum, according as they
be more or less respective and agreeable to the nature of each man: this is
the cause, that those persons who are ouer-wearied or exceeding thirsty, be
more choleric and prone to anger. Good reason therefore, that such asperity of
the spirit, or rather indeed of the vital breath, should be dulced and appeased
by the use of some sweet and pleasant liquor which may lenifie the passage, and
mollify the conduits of the said spirit, that they do not cut,

Now to return again unto our Hydromel or honied water; very good, by report,
it is for the cough, and being taken warm it provoke to vomit: put oil
thereto, and it is singular against the poison of Ceruse or white lead. A
countre-poison also it is and a preservative to such as have eaten Henbane and
Dwale, especially taken with asses milk, as I have observed hertofore.
Instilled into the ears, or poured into the fistulous sores of the secret
parts, it is thought to be excellent. Incorporat with the crumbs of soft bread,
and reduced into the form of a pessarie, and

As for honied wine, the best and most wholesome is always that which is made
of the oldest wine, that is hard: and indeed with it you shall have it to
incorporat very easily; which it will never do with any that is new and sweet:
and being made of green, harsh, or austere wine, it does Pollio Romilus, who
being above an hundred years old, bare his age passing well: whereat the
Emperor Augustus of famous memory marvelled much; and being upon a time
lodged as a guest in his house, he demanded of him, what means he used most so
to maintain that fresh vigor both of body and mind? to whom Pollio answered,
By using honied wine within, and oil without. Varro Regius morb^
Kings disease, or a sickness for a King, because it was cured ordinarily with
this honied wine, called Mulse.

As touching another kind of honied wine, named Melitites, how it is made of
Must, or new wine and honey together, I have declared sufficiently in my
treatise of wines. But I suppose there

Next after Honey, the treatise of Wax (which is correspondent to the nature of
honey) by good order follows. Corcerning the original working and framing
thereof, the goodness, the several kinds according to diverse countries, I have
written in convenient place. This is generally observed, that al sorts of wax
be emollitiue, heating, and incarnatiue; but the newer and fresher they are,
the better they are thought to be. Wax taken inwardly in a supping or broth, is

CHAP. XXV.
The medicinable virtues and properties of corn and grain.

FIrst and foremost this is holden for certain, that they be the most ingenious
and wisest creatures of all others, which live of corn. The grains of the fine
blanched wheat Siligo, being burnt, brought into powder, and applied with
Am^nien wine in manner of a liniment, do restrain the flux of humors to the
eyes. Also the corns of the ordinary wheat Triticum, being Sextus Pompetus,
who in his days was one of the principal peers of high Spain, and left a son
behind him, who afterward was lord Pretour of Rome, sitting on a time before
his barnedores to see his corn winowed, was surprised suddenly with a fit of
the gout, and whether it were by chance, or in a rage for the extremity of
pain, thrust his legs above the knees into the heap of wheat lying thereby:
but finding his legs mightily dried hereby, and himself wonderfully Vide
Galen, lib. 1. de Naturalibus facultatibus.
That there is nothing better, than to lay the chafe of wheat or barley hot to
the grieved place; and to soment the same with a decoction wherein it was
sodden.

As for the bearded wheat Far, there is a certain worm breeding in it like to
a moth or the grub that eats wood, which is singular good to make rotten
teeth to fall out of the head; for if the same be lapped within wax, and so put
into the hole of the faulty tooth, it will drop out: or if the sound teeth be
but rubbed therewith, they will shed and fall forth of the head.

Touching the grain Olyra, we have said already that it is called also Arinca.
The Egyptians

Barley meal either raw or boiled, does discuss and resolve, assuage and
ripen, all impostumes engendered either by way of gathering and collection of
humors, or by some deflux and rheumatick descent. The same otherwhiles is
sodden in honyed water, or else with dried figs: but for the pains of the
liver, it had need to be boiled with Oxycatre, i. water and vinegre together,
or else with wine. But when the case stands so, that the tumor must be partly
dissipated, and partly brought to maturation, then it is better that it be
incorporate in vinegre, or the lees of vinegre, or at least ways in sodden
pears or sodden quinces. Being tempered and meddled with honey, it is very good
for the biting of the cheeslips or many-feet worms, called Multipedes: but for
the

Touching * Zea, whereof is made the ordinary frumenty as I have said: the
meal of it is Sp^
counted better in operation than the other of barley, but that of the
three-moneth corn is more moist and emollatiue. Tempered with red wine, and so
applied warm, it is commended for the prick of Scorpions: also for them that
reach and spit up blood: and all accidents happening to the throat and
windpipes: but with goats suet or butter, it is good for the cough. The flower

The meal of Yurain or Darnell, does cleanse old ulcers and gangrenes more than
any other.

Of the sundry sorts of Barley groats or gross meal called Polenta, I have
said enough in my Treatise of corn, which did require also the discourse of
such things as be made of corn. It differs from Barley meal, in that it is
torrified or parched: in which regard it does the stomach good. It binds and
staieth the flux of the belly: it represseth also and smites back the flushing
of humors, to the breeding of red and angry tumors. It serves for a liniment
to the eyes, Cum Menta, rather Melle, i^hony. according to Columella: for Mints
be hot.
Mints, or some other cooling herb. In like manner it cures kibed heels, and
the wounds occasioned by serpents: also it heals burns and scalds if it be
laid too with wine: and in that sort it keeps them from blistering. If meal
be driven through a sercer or boulter, and so reduced to flower, and afterward
made with dough or paste, it is a great drawer of noi some humors to the outward
parts: which is the cause that being applied to such places which look dead and
mortified, by reason of the blood spread under the skin, it draws out the
same, so that the very linen bands wherewith they be lapped and rolled, become
bloody again. But if wine cuit be joined therewith, the operation is more
effectual. Moreover, the said flower is good to be laid unto the callosities
and corns of the feet. For the fine flower of meal being sodden with old oil
and pitch, and applied so hot as the patient may abide it, does wonderfully
cure the swelling piles and all other griefs about the fundament. As touching
the

As for the frumenty called Alica, it is a mere Roman invention, and not long
ago first devised: for otherwise the Greeks if they had known of it, would
never have written as they did in the commendation of husked Barley named
Ptisana, rather than of it. And I think verily, that the use thereof was not
taken up in the days of Pompey the great, and therefore the followers and
disciples of Asclepiades have left little or nothing thereof in writing. That it
is a soueraign and most wholesome thing, no man verily makes doubt or question;
whether it be washed and so given in honied water, or whether it be sodden and
so used in a thin supping, or boiled higher to

To come now to Millet, it is a grain, which being torrified aforehand for the
purpose, stops the lask, and dispatcheth all colic pains and torments of
the belly. Being fried and laid too hot in a bag, there is not a better thing
for the grief of thesinews, or to alay any other pain: for, most soft it is,
and lightest of all other, and nothing in the world retains heat so well. No
marvel then if Millet be used ordinarily in those cases, where heat is to do
good. To conclude, the meal or powder thereof incorporat with tar, is a
singular plaster to be laid upon sores, occasioned by the sting of Serpents or
the prick of the vermin named Multipeda.

As for the Panick, Diocles the Physician called it Mel-frugum. The same
operations and effects

Sesama stamped or beaten into powder, and so taken in wine, restrains
immoderat vomits. i. Morimals. There is an oil made thereof, which as I have
before showed, is good for the ears.

Touching Sesamoeides, which takes that name of the resemblance that it has
to Sesama, but that the grain thereof is bitter, and the leaf less, and it
grows in grauelly grounds: the Anthonies fire, and does discuss and resolve
biles. And yet there is another Sesamoeides growing in Anticyra, which
thereupon some do call Anticyricon: otherwise much like it is to the herb
Groundswell, whereof I will speak in place convenient. The grain or seed of
this Sesamoeides is given in sweet wine, as a purgative of chollerick and
phlegmatic humors; to the quantity of as much as may be contained with three
fingers: but to quicken the same, the Physicians use to put one Obole and an
half of the white Ellebore-root or Neesewort: which purgation they use in case
of madness, the melancholicke disease, the falling sickness, and the gout. By
it self alone, the weight of one dram is a sufficient laxatiue, and does
euacuat the belly.

The best Barley is that which is whitest. The juice of Barley boiled in rain
water, is made up into certain trosches, which is singular good to be either
conveyed into the guts by way of clyster, for the exulceration thereof; or else
injected into the Matrice by the metrenchyte, for the ulcers therein. The ashes
of Barley burnt, are good in a liniment for Burns, for places where the flesh
is gone from the bones, for wheales, and small pocks, and for the biting of the
Hardishrew mouse. The same with a little sprinckling of salt, and some honey
amongst, is counted a good dentifrice, to make the teeth look white, and the
breath to smell sweet. There is an opinion commonly received, That whosoever use
to eat Barley bread, shall not be troubled with the gout of the feet. And they
say, that if a man take nine barley corns, and with every one of them draw three
imaginary circles about a felon with his left hand: and when he has so done,
throw them all into the fire; presently it shall be cured. There is an herb
which the Greeks call Phoenicea, and our It grows indeed commonly upon new
walls, although the name seems to come from Mares, i. Mice and Rats: rather
than Muri, i. Walls.
Murinum. This herb or weed being beaten to powder, and taken in wine, is
singular to bring down the course of women's fleurs.

Hippocrates the famous Physician, has made one This book goes now under
this title, De ratione victus in morbis acutis.
entire book in the praise of Ptisana, which is a groat made of Barley: but all
the virtues and properties thereof are now attributed unto our Frumenty Alica,
and that goes away with all the commendation. Contra, quanto inuocentior est
alica.
And yet a man may see how much more harmless it is than Alica. Hippocrates
commended it only for a supping, as being slippery and easy to be taken, good
to put away thirst, not swelling in the belly, passing quickly and easily
through the body, and such a kind of meat as might alone of all others be
given twice a day in a fever to those who were used to it: so far was he in
opinion from them who would famish all diseases, and cure them by He glanceth
at Diatritos, i. fasting three days together
fasting and utter hunger. Howbeit, he forbad to give

As touching Amylum or starch powder, it dimmeth the eyesight, and is hurtful
to the throat, and is nothing good to be eaten, contrary to the common received
opinion. It staieth the inordinat flux of the belly, represseth the rheum into
the eyes, it heals ulcers, and cures pushes, wheals, and blains, and
restrains fluxes of blood. It mollifieth the hardness growing in the
eyelids. To such as cast up blood, it is usually given in an egg. In pain of
the bladder, half an

The very ordinary bread, which is our daily food, has an infinite number of
medicinable faculties. i. downright made, is better than any other. Moreover, a
liniment thereof applied with vinegar, is good for whitflaws and the
callosities of the feet. Moreover, stale bread and biscuit, such as seafaring
men do eat, being stamped and sod again, is good to bind the belly: for singing
men and choristers who are desirous to have a clear voice, for such also as be
subject to rheums falling from the head, it is the wholsomest thing in the
world, to eat dry bread in the beginning i. that which is made of three months
corn, being incorporat with honey, is a fair medicine to cure either the black
prints remaining after strokes, or the scailing and pilling of the face. White
bread crumbs soked either in hot or cold water, yield unto sick men a meat of
light digestion. The same being applied with wine, cures swelled eyes. And so
it heals the breaking out in the head, especially if dry Myrtles be put
thereto. It is an ordinary thing to prescribe unto them that are given to
shaking, for to eat fasting bread soked in water, presently after they come
forth of the bath. The perfume of bread burnt, takes away all other evil
smells that may be in a bed chamber: and being put into those Hippocras bags
through

Furthermore, even Beans have their properties which serve in Physic: for
being fried all whole as they be, and so cast piping hot into sharp vinegar,
they help the collicke and pangs of the belly. Bruised and so eaten, or sodden
with Garlic, they be excellent good against coughes that were thought past
cure and remediless; yea, and imposthumes in the breast grown to suppuration;
but the patient ought to feed thereof continually every day. Also if one chew
them fasting, and so apply them to a fellon, they are thought passing good
either to ripen or to discuss the same. Boiled in wine, and so laid too, they
assuage the swellings of the cods and privy parts serving to generation Bean
flower sodden in vinegar, does ripen and break all tumors: in like manner it
dissolueth black bruised blood lying under the skin, and heals burns. M.
Varro is of opinion, that it is good for the voice. Bean stalks and bean cods
burnt to ashes, and so incorporat

The best Lentils be they that are most tender, and ask least seething: also
such as drink much water. Lentils verily do dim the eie-sight, and breed
ventosities in the stomach: but taken in meat they stay the flux of the guts,
and the rather if they be thoroughly sodden in rain water: but in case they be
not fully boiled, they do open the belly and make the body laxatiue: the
escares or roofs remaining upon cauterized or blistered sores, they break and
make to fall off: and those ulcers which are within the mouth, they mundifie
and cleanse. Applied outwardly, they appease the pains of all imposthumes,
especially if they be exulcerat and full of chaps: and reduced into a cataplasm
with melilote or a quince, they are singular for to repress the flux of humors
to the eyes: but for to keep impostumes and tumors from suppuration, they are
laid too with Barley downward, Lentils do effectuat their operation much more,
if they be sodden in three waters. Anthonies fire, and the accidents that
befall women's breasts: but if they be boiled in vinegar, they discuss all hard
tumors, and the kings evil. They that have but weak and bad stomachs, use
verily to put Lentils to thicken their pottage and gruels, instead of Barley
groats, and find thereby much ease. If they be half sodden in water,
afterward braied or stamped, and then let pass through a tamise, that the
brans might be

There is a kind of marish or moory Lentils [called Ducks meat] growing of it
self in standing waters. This herb is by nature refrigeratiue. in which
regard, it serves to make a liniment used for inflammations and hot
imposthumes: but principally for all manner of gouts, either alone or mingled
with Barley groats. The same has virtue to knit and consolidat ruptures, when
the bowels are fallen down.

Moreover, there be wild Lentils, called by the Greeks Elelisphacos, by others,
Phacos. These

Our modern Herbarists in these days, do call that in Latin Saluia, (i.)
Sange, which the Greeks name Elelisphacos. An herb it is much resembling Mints,
of a gray and hoary color, and withal odoriferous. Being applied to the
natural parts of women, it fetches away the dead infant within the womb: it
riddeth the ears also and festered ulcers of those worms and vermin which
breed therein.

Moreover, there is a kind of wild Cich-pease bearing leaves like to the other
of the garden, and which be sowed, save that their smell is strong and
unpleasant. If a man feed largely of them,

The Cichling or pety Cich-pease, is thought to be better and more wholesome to
the belly than the other: but the meal as well of the one as the other, does
heal the running sores and scales of the head: howbeit, the wild better than
the rest. Moreover, these ciches are taken to be good for the falling
sickness, the swellings of the liver, and the sting of Serpents. They procure
women's terms, and provoke urine, and especially the grain it self rather than
the leaf. The same are singular for tettars and ring-worms, for inflammations
of the cods, for the jaundise and dropsy. But all the sort of them be hurtful
to the bladder and kidneys, especially if they be exulcerat. For gangrenes and
those morimall ulcers called Cacoethe, they be better, in case they be will be
gone by this means. But our Latin Physicians are of opinion, That the black
ciches

The Columbine ciches sodden in water, are thought to lessen and shorten the
shaking fits in tertian and quartan agues. The black cich-pease being beaten to
powder with half the quantity of gall-nuts, and incorporat with sweet wine
cuit, called Passum, and so applied, cures the ulcers of the eyes.

As touching Eruile, somewhat I have said already touching the properties
thereof, when I made mention of it among other kinds of pulse. And indeed the
old writers have attributed as great power and virtue unto it as to the
Colewort. Being laid to with vinegar, it cures the hurts that come by the
sting of serpents, or the teeth of man and crocodile. There be writers of
approved authority, who assirm for certain, That if a man do eat Eruile
fasting every day, it will diminish and wast the swelling of the spleen. The
meal of Eruile (as Varro reports) takes away the spots and moles of any
part of the body. And in truth, this pulse is singular to repress corrosiue
and eating ulcers: but above all, it is most effectual in the sores of women's
breasts: applied with wine, it breaks carbuncles. Being torrified and
incorporat with honey, and reduced into an electuarie or bole, and so taken as
much as an hazell nut, it amendeth the suppression or difficulty of voiding
urine, dissolueth ventosities, opens obstructions, and helps other
accidents For that color in old time was best esteemed. and thereby chaste
Matrons were known from wanton harlots, who affected yellow hair. Alex. ab
Alex. c. 18. l. 5.
black.

As touching wild Lupines, they be inferior to those which come of seed, in all
respects, but only in biternesse. And verily there is not a thing more
commendable, wholesome, and light of digestion than white Lupines, if they be
eaten dry. They are brought to be sweet and pleasant by hot ashes or scalding
water. Being eaten at meals usually, they make a fresh color and cheerful
countenance. Bitter Lupines are very good against the sting of the Aspides. Dry
Lupins husked and cleansed from their skins and applied to black and mortified
ulcers, full of dead flesh, more smooth and beautiful, taking away all spots
and freckles. But if the same or garden Lupines

Concerning Irio, I said before in the treatise of corn and pulse, that it was
like Sesama, and named by the Greeks Erysimon, whereas the Gauls do call it
Velarum. This plant brancheth very much, and bears leaves like to Rocquet,
but that they be somewhat narrower, and brings forth seed resembling that of
Cresses. This Irio taken with honey in form of a lohoch, is excellent good for
the cough, and those who reach out filthy matter from their chest. Given it is
for

As for the grain Horminum, it has a seed resembling Cumin, as I have said
before: otherwise it is like to (...) for (...), i. Horehound.
Porret: and grows to the height of a span or nine inches. Two kinds there
be of it: whereof the one has a blacker seed than the other, and somewhat
long. He confounds (as it should seem) the virtues of Horminum, i. Clarie
the herb, with the grain called also Horminum.
This has power to provoke lust, and is much used for the pin and web, for the
perle also in the eye: the other has a whiter seed and rounder. Both the one
and the other if they be stamped, draw forth pricks and thorns out of the
body, if a liniment be made of them alone, and applied with water. But a
cataplasme of the leaves with vinegar, or alone by themselves, or else with
honey, discuss and resolve biles without suppuration. In like manner they
dispatch fellons, if they be taken before they grow to any head, and generally
all tumors proceeding from sharp and hot humors. And thus much of grain.

A strange thing that Nature has so ordained, That the very pestilent weeds
which plague Virgill terms Infoelix, i. unhappy, yet if it be ground and
sodden in vinegar, and so applied, it cures tettars and dry scabs joined with
a great itch: and the sooner does it the deed, the oftener it is removed and
changed. Darnell flower laid too, with Oxymell, cures the gout and other
pains. And to say a truth, the manner of this cure differs from the rest. For
the preparing of which medicine, the said flower must be ordered in this
manner, and after this proportion: for every sextar of vinegar, it suffices to
dissolve therein two ounces of honey; take then three sextars of this mixtion,
and put thereto two sextars of Darnell meal, sodden to a thick consistence:
which done, temper all together, and apply this cataplasme to the grieved and
pained members. The same meal draws forth spils of broken and shiuered
bones.

A weed there is, called Miliaria, for that it kills the grain Millet. Beat
this to powder, and mingle it with wine, then pour this drench with an horn
down the throat of laboring jades: they say it will cure their gouts.

As for Bromos [i. wild Otes] which the Greeks take for the seed of a certain
spiked or eared

Thus much as touching all kinds of grain, as far forth as they concern
Physic. But this moreover is to be noted, that of corn there be certain drinks
made; as namely, Zythus in Egypt; Coelia and Ceria in Spain; Ale and Beer and
many more sorts, in Gaul and other provinces. Now the froth or barme that
rises from these Ales or Beers, have a property to keep the skin fair and
clear in women's faces. But for the operation that Ale and Beer has in them
who drink thereof, I mean to pass them over here; for I think it better to
proceed to the treatise of wine; but first I will discipher the medicinable
virtues of trees, and begin with the vine

THE TWENTY THIRD BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF NATVRE,
WRITTEN BY C. PLINIVS SECVNDVS.
The Proeme.
THus far forth have we gone over the upper face of the earth, and showed what
medicinable virtues there be in all kinds of grain, as well corn as pulse: as
also what Physic may be found in woorts and pot-hearbs: yea and in those
garden plants, which by reason of their fair flowers and sweet odours, serve
man's turn for garlands and chaplets. It remains now to speak of lady Pomona
and her gifts, who certes comes not behind dame Ceres with all her riches.
And verily this Nymph and goddess Pomona, not content thus to protect,
maintain, and nourish under the shade of her trees, those fruits of the earth
above named; but displeased rather and taking scorn, that such plants which
grow farther from the Cope of Heaven, and began long after trees to come up and
show themselves, should seem to have so many virtues: has likewise furnished
the fruits hanging upon her trees, with their properties, and those of no small
operation and effect in Physic. And in truth, if we consider and weigh the
cause aright, she it was that affoorded to mankind the first food from those
her trees; inducing us thereby to lift up our eyes and look to Heauen-ward:
yea and she gives the world to understand, that if Ceres and Flora both should
fail, she with her goods only were able even still to sustain and feed us
sufficiently. And to begin with the Vine, which ought by right to be ranged
in the highest rank of all those plants that bear the name of Trees: This
bountiful Lady not satisfied herein, that she had done pleasure unto man in
furnishing him with ^oble perfumes, odours, and delicate Ointments, by means
of the grape verjuice, the Vine-floure Oenanthe, and namely the wild Vine
Massaris in Afric (according as I have discoursed more at large heretofore;)
has therefore bestowed upon Vines those medicinable virtues in greatest
measure, and withal used these remonstrances unto men in this manner: Call to
mind (quoth she) how many benifits and pleasures thou receiuest at my hands;
Who is it but I, that have brought forth Wine, that sweet juice of the Grape?
Who but I, have given thee Oil, that dainty liquour of the Olive? From me,
come Dates and Apples: from me thou haste all Fruits of such variety, that
impossible it is to number them. Neither do I deal by thee as dame The Earth.
Tellus does, who bestows nothing upon thee without labor and sweat of thy
brows; nothing (I say) but before it does thee any good, requires tillage by
Ox and Plough, thrashing with flaile upon the floor, or trampling of beasts
feet upon the mow, and then the Mil-stones to grind it: Such ado there is,
and so long a time first, before thou can enjoy the benifit thereof for thy
food. But contrariwise, whatsoever comes from me, is ready at hand; there
needs no entreating of the Plough, nor any great labor and industry to have
and enjoy my fruits; for they offer themselves of their own accord: yea, and
if thou think much of thy pains to climb, or to put up thy hand and gather
them, lo they are ready to drop down and fall into thy mouth, or else to
lie under thy feet. See how good and gracious Nature has been unto us herein,
and ^ow she has strouen with her self, Whether she should profit, or
pleasure, man more! and yet I take it, that she affected Commodity rather than
Delight.

For to come unto the virtues and properties of the vine, The very leaves and
tender burgeons thereof, applied with barley groats, do mitigate the pain of
the head, and reduce all inflammations of the body unto the due temperature.
The leaves alone of the vine, laid unto the stomach with cold water, allay the
unkind heats thereof: and with barley meal, are singular for all gouts and
diseases of the ioints. The tendrils or young branches of the vine being
stamped and applied accordingly, dry up any tumors or swellings whatsoever.
Their juice iniected or poured into the guts by a clystre, cures the bloody
flix. The liquour concreat (which is in manner of a gum issuing from the
vine) heals the leprie and all foul tettars, scabs and manges, in case the
parts affected were prepared and rubbed before with salniter. The same liquor
or gum is likewise depilatorie; for if the hairs be often anointed with it
and oil together, they will fall of: but the water especially that sweateth
out of green vine branches as they burn, has a mighty operation that way,
insomuch, as it will fetch off Warts also. The drink wherein young vine
tendrils have lien infused, is good for those who reach up and spit blood; as
also for women who being newly conceived and breeding child, have many
swawmes come over their heart, and be ^ft soones subject with faintings. The
vine bark or rind, likewise the dried leaves stanch the bleeding in a wound,
yea and do consolidate and heal up the wound it self. The juice drawn out
of the white-Vine being stamped green, and Frankincense together, take away
shingles, ring-wormes, and such like wilde-fires, if it be applied thereto.
The ashes of the vine-stocke, vine-cuttings, and of the kernels and skins of
grapes after they be pressed, applied with vinegar unto the seat or fundament,
cure the piles, swellings, fissures, chappes, and other infirmities incident to
that part: but incorporate with oile-Rosat, Rue, and vinegar, they help
dislocations, burns, and swellings of the spleen. The same ashes strewed with
some aspersion or sprinckling of wine, upon S. Anthonies fire, without any
oil, do cure the same: as also all frets and galls between the legs, and
besides eat away the hair of any place. The ashes of vine-cuttings,
besprinckled with vinegar, are given to drink for the diseases of the spleen;
so as the Patient take two cyaths thereof in warm water, and when he has
drunk it, lie upon the spleen side. The very small tendrils of the vine
whereby it climbeth, catches, and claspeth about any thing, being punned and
taken in water, staieth and represseth vomiting in those, whose stomachs use
ordinarily to be kecklish and soon to ouerturne. The ashes of vines tempered
with old hogs grease, is singular to abate swellings, to cleanse fistulous
vl^ers first, and soon after to heal them up clean: likewise for the pain
of sinews proceeding of cold, and for contraction and shrinking of the nerves:
also for bruises, being applied with oil. Moreover, they eat away all
excrescence of proud flesh about the bones, being tempered mith vinegar and
niter: and last of all, mixed with oil, they heal the wounds made by
scorpions or dogs. The ashes of the vine-barke alone, cause the hair to come
again in a burnt place.

How grape veriuice should be made, when the grapes are young and nothing ripe,
I have showed in the Treatise of Perfumes and Ointments. It remains now to
discourse of the medicinable virtues thereof: and first to begin withal, It
heals all ulcers that happen in moist parts, and namely those of the mouth,
Tonsils or Almond-kernels on either side of the throat, and of the privy
members: the same is sovereign for to clarify the eie-sight: it cures the
asperitie and roughness of the eie-lids, the fistulous ulcers in the corners
of the eyes, the clouds ar silmes that shadow and cover the sight, the running
sores in any part of the body whatsoever: the corrupt and withered cicatrices
or scars, and the bones charged with purulent and skinny matter. Now if this
veriuice be too tart and eager, it may be delaied with honey or wine-cuit: and
so it is good for bloody flixes, and the exulceration of the guts, for those
who reject and reach up blood, and for the Squinance.

Next after the wine verjuice Omphacium, I cannot choose but write of Oenanthe,
which is the flower that wild vines do bear, whereof I have already made
mention in my discourse of ointments. The best Oenanthe is that of Syria,
especially along the coasts and mountains of Antiochia and Laodicea. That
which grows upon the white vine, is refrigeratiue and astringent: being
powdered and strewed upon wounds, it does very much good: applied as a liniment
to the stomach, it is exceeding comfortable. A proper medicine it is for the
suppression of urine, the infirmities and diseases of the liver, the headache,
the bloody flix, the imbecility of the stomach, and the looseness proceeding
from it: also for the violent motion of choleric humors proceeding upward and
downward. The weight of one obolus thereof taken with vinegar, helps the
loathing that the stomach has to meat, and procures appetite. It dries up
the running scales breaking out in the head: and most effectual it is to heal
all ulcers in moist parts, and therefore cures sores in the mouth, privy
members, and the seat or fundament. Taken with honey and saffron, it knitteth
the belly. The scurfe and roughness of the eie-lids it does cleanse and make
them smooth: it represseth rheum in waterie eyes. Given in wine to drink, it
comfort and confirms feeble stomachs; but in cold water, it stays the
casting and reaching up of blood. The ashes thereof is much commended in
collyries and eie-salues; also for to mundifie filthy and vlcerous sores; to
heal likewise whitflawes rising at the nail roots, and either the going away
of the flesh from them, or the excrescence thereof remaining about them. For to
bring it into ashes, it must be torrified in an Oven, and so continue until
the bread be baked and readic for to be drawn.

As for Massaris, or the Oenanthe in Afric, it is employed only about sweet
odours and pomanders: and both it, as also other flowers, men have brought into
so great name, by making haste to gather them before they could knit to any
fruit so inuentiue is man's wit, and so greedy to hunt after novelties and
strange devises.

CHAP. I.
The medicines which grapes fresh and new gathered do yield. Of Vine branches
and cuttings:

OF Grapes that grow to their ripeness and maturitie, the black are more
vehement in their operation than the white: and therefore the wine made of them
is nothing so pleasant: for in very truth the white grapes be sweeter far, by
reason they are more transparent and clear, and therefore receive the air
into them more easily. Grapes new gathered do puff up Moreover, wine cuit, if
they have come into it, makes them hurtful and offensive to the stomach.

The naked branches and bunches whereupon there were grapes, have an astrictiue
virtue; and indeed more effectual that way be such as come out of the pots
abouesaid. The kernels or stone within the grapes, have the same operation: and
in very truth, these be they and nothing else, whereby wine causes headache.
Being torrified and beaten to powder, and so taken, they be good for the
stomach. Their powder is usually put into the pot in manner of barley groats for
to thicken broth and suppings, which are ordained for them who have the bloody
flix, who are troubled with a continual loosnesse following them by occasion of
the imbecility of the stomach; and for such as are ready to keck and heave at
every little thing. Their decoction serves very

The grape Theriace, whereof we have written in due place, is good to be taken
as a counterpoison against the sting of serpents: and it is a common received
opinion, that the burgeons and branches of that vine, should likewise be taken
inwardly as meat, and applied outwardly for the same purpose: as also that both
wine and vinegar which is made of them, is of singular operation to the same
effect.

The dried grape or raisin, which they call A staphis, would trouble the
stomach, belly, and intrails, but for the kernels that are within the stones,
which serve as a remedy to prevent and cure those inconveniences; which being
taken forth, raisins be thought good for the bladder: but particularly for the
cough, those of the white grapes be the better. Sovereign are they also for
the windpipe and the reins: like as the sweet cuit which is made thereof has
a special power and virtue against the Haemorrhois alone, of all other
serpents. A cataplasme made of them, together with the powder of Cumin or
Coriander seed, applied to the cods, cures their inflammation. Likewise, if
they be stamped without their stones or kernels, together with Rue, they are
singular good for carbuncles and gouts: but before this cataplasm be laid to
any ulcers, they

A staphis agria, or Staphis, which some (though untruly) call Vva Taminia (for
this is a several kind by it self, growing up with straight black stalks, and
carrying leaves like to the wild vine Labrusca) bears bladders or little cods
more like than grapes, of a green color, and resembling cich-pease, within
which is to be seen a three-cornered kernel: it waxes ripe and begins to
change color and look black, at vintage time: whereas we know that the grapes
of the and strangulation: neither for to draw down fleame and waterish humors
into the mouth, for

As for the wild vine Labrusca, it carries also a flower named in Greek
Oenanthe, whereof I have written enough before. The wild vine which the Greeks
name Ampelos Agria, has thick Much like to our (...).
wine of the Island Coos, does euacuat watery humors gathered in the belly, and
by consequence is thought to be an excellent drink for them who are in a
dropsy. And this is the plant, which in my judge meant should be that vine
which commonly is called in Latin Vva Taminia, rather than any other. Used
much it is for a counter-charme against all witchcrafts: and given it is to
gargarise

There is a certain wild white vine, which the Greeks call Some take it for
Bryonie.
Ampeloleuce, some Ophiostaphylon, others Melothron or Psilothrum; some
Archezostis or Cedrostis, others Madon. This plant puts forth long and
slender twigs, parted and divided by certain joints or knots, and (...), ^ther
(...) out of (...)
purges the senses. But the principal and most excellent virtue that it has,
is this, That if it be stamped with water, and so applied, it draws forth
spells of broken and shiuered bones as well and effectually as the very true
Bryonie, which is the cause that some do call it White Bryonie: for there is
another which is black, and of greater efficacy to the same purpose, if it be
applied I see no reason of this clause here, but think it superfluous,
according to some manuscript copies.
where by the way note, that it chaseth serpents away.] Moreover, the very
substance of the root, if it be stamped with fat figs, does lay the riuels and
wrinckles of the skin plain and even, if it be rubbed or anointed therewith:
but then the party must walk immediately upon it, a good quarter of a mile; for
otherwise it will fret and burn the skin, unless presently it be washed off
with cold water. Howbeit the black wild vine does this feat more gently and
with greater ease, for surely the white sets an itch upon the skin. There is
therefore a black wild vine, which properly they call Bryonia, some Chironia,
others Cynecanthe or Apronia, like in all respects to the former, but only in
the color Diocles preferred to be eaten in a sallad or otherwise, before the
very crops and tender shoots of the true garden Sperage; and indeed they
provoke urine and diminish the spleen far better: it grows commonly in hedges
among bushes and shrubs, and most of all in reed-plots. The root without-forth
is black, but within of a pale yellow box color; and this is of much more
efficacy to draw out broken bones than the aboue-named white Briony. Moreover,
this peculiar property it has besides, To cure the farcines or sores in horse
necks and for this, it is thought to be the only thing in the world. Said
commonly it is, that if a man do set an hedge or hay thereof round about a
grange or ferm house in the country, there will no kites nor hawks, nor any
such ravening birds of prey, come near; so as the pullen and other foul

As touching Musts or new wines, the first and principal difference of them
lies in this, that some by nature are white, others black, and others again
of a mixed color between them both. Secondly, some Musts there be, whereof wine
is made; and others, which serve only for cuit: but if we regard the
artificial devises and the careful industry of man about them, there be an
infinite number of musts all distinct and different one from the other. Thus
much may suffice to Likewise, the Must, whereof cuit is made, is pleasanter than
the rest, and causes less headache.

As touching the sundry kinds of wine, which are exceeding many as also the
virtues, and properties of every several sort in manner by it self, I have
sufficiently discoursed in a former Treatise. Neither is there any point more
difficult to be handled, or that affourdeth greater variety of matter. And a
man cannot readily say, Whether wine be more hurtful or wholesome for our
bodies? considering the doubtful event and issue presently on the drinking
thereof, for that sometime it is a remedy and a help, otherwhiles it proves to
be a mischief and a very poison. For mine own part, according to my first
dessign and purpose, I am to treat only of such things as Nature has brought
forth for the health and preservation of man. Well I wot, that Asclepiades has
made one entire volume expressly, of the manner how to give wine in drink.
Upon which treatise or book of his, an infinite number there were who have
written their Commentaries.

To begin first with the wine of Surrentum, our ancients have held it simply
for the best above all others. But our later and more modern writers, have
made greater account of the Albane and Falerne wines. In sum, every one has
judged of the goodness of wine, according to his own conceit and fantasy: a
most unequal course of proceeding, without all reason and congruitie, to
pronounce definitiuely unto al others that for best, that pleased and contented
his own

The Statane wines come not far behind these above named. As for the Signine
wine, out of all question it is simply the best to bind the body, and stop a
vehement flux: thus much for wines and their properties in particular. It
remains now to speak of their virtues in general.

First and foremost, wine maintains and fortifieth the strength of man,
engenders good Asclepiades was so addicted to the praise of wine, that he
bashed not to make comparisons and pronounce, that the power and puissance of
the gods was hardly able to match and counteruaile the might and force of wine.
Moreover, this is to be noted, that old wine will (i.) by smoke: for like as
smoke eats away and consumes the moisture and mouldinesse in timber, which
causes up, and it is most unwholesome for the body, and namely for those who
are to go into the field Homer, how Helena that fair lady, presented a cup
of wine before meat. And hereupon came the proverb, That wine does ouershadow
and darken the light of wisdom and understanding: verily we that are men have
this property above all other living creatures, and we may thank wine for it,
That we drink many times when we be not dry nor a thirst. And therefore
passing good it is to drink fair water otherwhiles between. In like manner such
as use ordinarily to be drunk, and are lightly never sober, shall not do amiss
to take a good draught of cold water presently upon their liberal pouring in
of wine, for it will Hesiodus gives counsel to drink wine somewhat delaied
with water, for 20 days before the rising of the Dog star, and as many after.
True it is indeed, that Mere Merum,
wine not delaied, is a remedy against hemlock; Coriander, the poison Aconite
or Libard-baine, the venomous gum of the plant Chamaeleon, called Ixia, Opium,
or the juice of Poppie, and Quickesiluer: also, for such as have been stung
with Bees Waspes, and Hornets, the venomous spiders Phalangia, Serpents, and
Scorpions, and generally, against all those poisons, which by reason of a cold
quality moritifie natural heat. But particularly it is a special countrepoison
against the venomous worms called Hemorrhoids and Presters, as also the deadly
Mushroms. Over and besides, singular good is wine against ventosities,
gripings, and gnawings about the midriffe and precordiall parts about the
heart: also for those, whose stomachs are ready every while to ouerturne and
cast: and where the belly or entrails of wines thus mixed and sophisticated,
the claret or deep red are more astringent and hot than Circa Ilia.
small guts and hypocondriall parts, the patient must altogether forbear to
drink wine. They are to abstain likewise when there is any hardness felt in
the midriffe and precordiall parts: Especially if it proceed from some hot or
sharp humor.
vexing: and much more they, who in an ague labor for breath, and draw their
wind hardly. But most of all must the sick be kept from wine when their eyes
be set in their head, and their eyelids stand stiff and stark, with their
eyes broad open: or be shut, by reason that they are weak and heavy. Also,
they must avoid wine (if they be wise) who in their sickness, as they wink
or twinckle with their eyes, do imagine that they sparkle and glitter again:
like as those who cannot lay their eyes together and close their lids, but
sleep open have an ey to the danger of the patient, being of this mind, that
it is a more safer course to give

But to retuin again to those artificial and made wines, I have heretofore
showed many sorts thereof: the making of them is at this day given over, as I
suppose, and their use needless and superfluous, considering that now we give
counsel and prescribe, to use the very simples themselves in their own nature,
which go to their composition. Certes, beforetime the Physicians upon a vain
ostentation, because they would seem to have their apothecary shops furnished
with such variety, exceeded all measure in this behalf: insomuch, as they were
provided of a wine, made for sooth of Nauewes, bearing the world in hand, that
it was singular good for military men, if they found themselves ouerwearied
either with the practice or the bearing of arms, or in riding Contrary to
Dioscorides, who gives it Coeliacis and dysentericis.
to ease the costiuenesse of the body, and for such as reach up blood? As for
that which we called or Biaeon.
Bion, I cannot see or say, that it is an artificial wine: for surely, all the
art and cunning that goes to the making of it, lies in this only, That it is
made and huddled up in have: and yet profitable it is for a weak stomach
ready to ouerturn, or that is not able to concoct and digest the meat within
it, wholesome for Troubled with (...) and (...), i. a corrupt and deprauate
appetite, longing after this and that, and not always the best things.
women with child: comfortable to those who be feeble and faint: good for the
palsy, the shaking of the lims, the swimming and giddines of the head, the

Moreover, say that wine be turned, corrupted, and changed from the own nature,
yet it leaves not to retain certain virtues and properties requisite in
Physic: for vinegre also is medicinable. Exceeding refrigeratiue it is, and
cools mightily: howbeit, no less virtue and force it has to discuss and
resolve: an evident proof whereof we may see in this, That if it be poured on
the ground, it will some and cast a froth. Concerning the manifold operations
that it has in composition with other things, I have written oftentimes
already, and will write still as occasion shall Post vredines. Some read
hirudines, i. after the sucking of Horse leeches.
burns, scaldidgs, or rising of the pimples. In like manner it cures the
leprosy, scurfe, and dandruffe, running ulcers and scals, bitings of dogs,
stinging with scorpions, scolopendres, and hardishrews; and generaly, it is
good against Multipeda, c^d otherwise Sep^.
Cheeslip or Many-foot worm. Applied hot with a sponge to the seat, it is
singular for the infirmities of the fundament. But for this purpose there must
be a decoction or fomentation made, with three sextars of vinegre, whereunto
there should be put of Sulphur or Brimstone two ounces, or a bunch of Hyssop,
and then set over the fire for to boil together. For it stirs the cough at
the beginning. Dioscorides.
old cough it restrains: the rheumes also and catarrhes it represseth, which
light on the throat and wind pipe: it opens the passages in them who labor
for breath, and cannot take their wind but sitting upright: it confirms also
the teeth loo^e in the head: mary it hurts the blad M. Agrippa in his
Augustus Caesar, whose daughter he had espoused, he made not acquainted with
the matter;) who gave him counsel to bath his legs with hot vinegre, and to
sit therein above his knees, at what time as his disease tormented him most:
true it is indeed, that he was eased of his pain by this means, for he lost
the very feeling of his feet. Howbeit, Agrippa chose rather to be paralyticke
in some sort, and to want both use and sense of his legs, than to abide the
extremity of his gout.

CHAP. II.
Of vinegre Scylliticke. Of Oxymel. Of the double cuit wine Sapa. The lees of
wine: dregs of vinegre: and of the foresaid cuit.

THe vinegre of Squilla or sea-Onions, called Scillinum, the elder it is and
longer kept, the more is it esteemed. This vinegre, over and above the other
virtues of common vinegre before rehearsed, has this property, To help the
stomach, in case the meats lie souring and corrupting therein: for no sooner
does a man taste thereof, but it dispatcheth and riddeth away the foresaid
inconvenience: moreover, it is good for them that are given to vomit, fasting,
opens the auditory passages of the ears; and so by consequence clarifies the
sight of the eyes.

Touching the syrrup Oxymel, Dieuches says, That the ancients in old time
prepared and tempered it in this manner. They took of honey ten pounds, of old
vinegre five hemines, of bay salt one pound, of Sauerie three ounces, of sea
water five sextars: These together in a kettle they did set to boil, and let
them have ten walms over the fire: then they lifted the pan from Asclepiades
comes after, disproueth all the manner of this composition, and withal
condemns the use thereof: for the physicians before his time, feared not to
prescribe it to be drunk even in fevers; and yet both he and all, do confess
and agree, that this was a good drink against the venomous serpent called Seps:
also for them who were poisoned with Opium, [i. the juice of Poppey] or with
the gum Ixia, which comes from the herb Chamaeleon. Moreover, they all
commend it to be gargled hot for the squinancy, for the pain and deafness of
ears, for the accidents and infirmities of the mouth and throat: like as at
this day we use in all these cases, the sharp brine or pickle called Oxalme;
which if it be made of salt and new vinegre that is fresh and quick, it is
better in operation.

As for the cuit named in Latin Sapa, it comes near to the nature of wine,
and in truth nothing else it is, but Must or new wine boiled til one third part
and no more do remain: and this cuit, if it be made of white Must is counted
the better. Use there is of it against the flies Cantharides and Buprestes:
against the worms breeding in Pine trees, named thereupon Pityocampae, against
Salamanders, and generally all those beasts whose sting or tooth is venomous.
If a woman drink thereof, together with scallions or such bulbs, it sends
down the after-burden, and expels the dead infant out of the womb. And yet
Fabianus mine author says, That it is no better than a very poison, if a man
drink it fasting presently after he is come out of the bain.

A consequent and appendant to these foresaid things, is the lees of wine; that
is to be considered according to the wine from whence it comes: and verily
the lees of wine are so strong, then verily, it has the astrictiue power of
Acacia, and serves for the same use.

The dregs of vinegre, must of necessity be much more sharp, biting, and
vlceratiue, than wine lees, in regard of the matter whereof it comes: it
drives back impostumes or biles, and keeps them from suppuration. A
liniment of it, helps the stomach, belly, and entrails: it staieth the flux
of those parts, and the ouerflow of women's months: it discusseth pushes and
small biles, and squinances, if they be taken betimes before they fester and
impostumat: and a cerot made with it and wax together, is good against S.
Anthonies fire. The same dries up the milk in women's breast, who would not be
nources, or be troubled with overmuch milk. It takes away with ease the
ill-favored rugged nails, and gives roum for new to come up in their place.
Applied with gross barley meal or groats, it is singular and most effectual
against the venom of the horned serpents, called in Greek Cerastae: and with
Gith or Nigella Romana, it is used for the biting both of crocodile and mad
dog. The burning also of these dregs, quickens Serenus Samonitus calls this
ointment Unguentum Cineris. alleging ^lenie for his author.
it colors the hairs of the head in one night red, if they be anointed
withal: The same lapped in a fine linen cloth, and put up in form of a
pessarie, cleanses and mundifieth the secret parts of women.

To conclude with the grounds or lees of the cuit Sapa; vinegre dregs are
known to be very good for to heal burns; and the cure proceeds better, in
case they be mixed with the furry cotton or down of reeds: the same being
sodden, and the decoction thereof taken as drink, cures inueterat coughs.
Sast of all, they use to sees or stew it between two platters with salt and
grease, wherewith they make a liniment or ointment to take down the swelling of
the chaws

CHAP. III.
Of Oliuetrees: of the leaves of Olives: their flowers and their ashes. Of the
white and black Olive berries: and of the mother or lees of Oile-oliue.

NExt after the Vine, there is not a tree bearing fruit, of so great authority
and account as the Olive. The olive leaves, are exceeding restringent, good to
cleanse, good also to restrain or stop any flux: being chewed and applied to
ulcers, they heal them: and reduced with oil into a liniment, they assuage
the pain of the head. A decoction of their leaves, together with honey, is
singular to bath and foment the parts cauterized by the Chirurgian, according
Anthonies fire; heals corrosiue and eating sores, and allaieth the pain of
night-foes or childblanes, called by the Greeks Epinyctides. The same effects
have their flowers. The tendrons or young twigs of Olives being in flower, if
they be burnt, yield a kind of ashes that may serve as a succedan in stead of
Spodium: but the same must be burnt a second time, after they have been well
drenched and soked with wine. These ashes applied as a liniment, or the very
leaves only stamped and tempred with honey, are good for impostumes grown to
suppuration, and for the pushes or biles named Pani: but if they be mixed with
gross barley meal or groats, they are in a liniment comfortable to the

Touching the gum that issues from the olive tree it self, and namely that
wild olive which is

As touching the mother or lees of olive, I might be thought to have written
sufficiently, following the steps of Cato, who delivered no more in writing:
but I must set down also the medicinable virtues observed therein: First and
foremost therefore, it helps the soreness of the gumbs, cures the cankers
and ulcers of the mouth; and of all other medicines it is most effectual
Anthonies fire, and such other corrosiue and fretting ulcers, it is of singular
operation to heal them: but for kibed heels, the grounds or dregs of the
black oile-oliue is the better; as also therewith to foment small children. As
for that of the white olives, women use to apply it with wool to their secret
parts, for some accidents thereto belonging. Be it the one or the other,
generally it is more effectual sodden than otherwise. Boiling it ought to be
in a copper or brass vessel, until it come to the consistence of honey. Used
it is with vinegar, old wine, or with must according as the cause requires, in
curing the infirmities of the mouth, teeth, and ears; in healing running
skalls; and finally, in the cure of the genetoirs or privy members, and of the
fissures or chaps in any part of the body. In wounds it is used with linen
cloth or lint; but in dislocations, it is applied with wool. And

CHAP. IIII.
Of the wild Olive leaves. The oil of the flowers of the wild vine Ocnanthe.
Of the oil Cicinum^ of Palma Christi. The oil of Almonds: of Bays, of
Myrtles, of i. Butche^s broom.
Ruscus or Chamaemyrsine, of Cypress, of Citrons, and of Nuts.

THe leaves of the wild olive have the same nature that the leaves of the tame.
As for Antispodium, eats away, and without mordication, the excrescence of
rank and proud flesh, dries the

As touching oil of olives, the natute and manner of making it I have already
treated of at large. But forasmuch as there are many kinds thereof, I purpose
do set dogn in this place such as serve for physic only. And first to begin
with the oil made of unripe olives, called in Latin

The oil Oenanthemum, made of the flowers of the wild vine Oenanthe, has the
same operations that oil rosat has. (But note by the way, that any oil,
howsoever it does mollify the body, yet it brings vigor and adds strength
thereto.) Contrary it is to the stomach, it increases

The oil of Ricinus or Tickseed, called Cicinum, taken as a drink with the
like quantity of with the ashes of shell-fishes called Burrets, it cures the
inflammation of the fundament, and any scab or mange whatsoever. It gives a
fresh color to the skin of the visage, and causes Anthonies fire: and of
themselves alone being fresh and green, they be applied with good success to
the paps, and any violent fluxion whatsoever: the same, boiled in wine, and
laid too, with gross barley meal or groats and saffron, are singular for all
inflammations: and if they be applied by themselves without any other thing, to
the visage, they do embelish Tegmine.
rind of pomegranats, it is comfortable to the ears, it kills the worms
therein, resolves those gross humors that were the cause of hard hearing, of
the thumping, tinging and other inordinat sounds within the ears; and withal,
eases the headache and cures the dimnes of the eyes. Reduced into a cerot
with wax, it heals felons, and cleereth the skin of those who be tanned and
sunburned: wash the head with it and wine together, it kills the running skall,
and riddeth away the dandruffe: applied with Melilot, it discusseth the
swelling

As for Cypiros, what a plant it is, and how there is an oil made thereof, I
have showed already. By nature it is hot, and softneth sinews which be stiff
and stark. The leaves serve to make a good liniment for to anoint the pitch of
the stomach: and their juice applied in manner of a burns and skals, likewise
for lims out of joint, if they be bathed therein. The very leaves in substance
Some read Melinum.
Gleucinum is astringent; and yet it cools after the same sort that the oil
Oenanthium. The Balsame oil, called Balm, is of all others most precious (as
hertofore I have said in my treatise of odoriferous ointments) and of great
efficacy against the venom of al serpents. It clarifieth the eie-sight
mightily, and dispatcheth mists and clouds which dimmed the same: it eases all
those who draw their breath with difficulty: it assuageth impostumations and
hard swellings: it keeps blood from cluttering, and is excellent to mundifie
foul ulcers: singular comfortable to the ears in

Concerning Malobathrum, the nature and sundry kinds thereof, I have
discoursed heretofore. Now for the virtues which it has in Physic, first, it
provoke urine: being stamped, the Folium Indicum.
Malabathrum, if it be but held under the tongue, causes the mouth and the
breath to smell sweet: like as, if it lie among apparel, it gives them a
pleasant savor. The oil of Henbane is emollitiue, howbeit an enemy to the
sinews: certes, if it be taken in drink, it troubles the brain. The oil of
Lupines, called Therminum, is likewise an emollitiue, and comes nearest of
any to the operation and effects of oile-rosat.

Touching the oil of Daffodills, I have spoken of it in the treatise of the
flowers thereof. Radish oil cures the lousy disease; and namely, when lice
are engendered upon some long and Herbattum.
grasse-green oil, which the Inguinians (dwelling upon the causy or street-way
Flamminia) use to sell. Called likewise Oleum Syriacum.
Elaeomeli, an oil which (as I have declared before) issues from olive trees
in Syria, carries a certain taste of honey: howbeit their stomachs it makes to
rise at it, who lick thereof; and it is of power to soften the belly. It
purges choler Elective,

Next to vines and olives, Date trees are to be raunged in the highest place,
and do carry the greatest name. Dates, if they be fresh and new, do inebriat
and ouerturn the brain: and if they be not very well dried, they do cause
headache: neither are they (so far as I can see) any way good for the stomach:
again, they do exasperat the cough and make it worse, yet they be great
nourishers, before all others. Being eaten as meat especially at meals, they
are good for them who reach up Calli^lephara.
imbelish the eyebrows.

CHAP. V.
Of the Myrabolan Date, and the Date Elate.

THe best Palm or Date tree which bears a fruit like to Myrabolanes, is that
which grows in Egypt. These Dates have no stones, like to others. Being
taken in unripe and hard wine, they stop the flux of the belly, and stay the
extraordinary course of women's fleures, and do consolidat wounds.

As touching the Date-tree, called Elate or Spathe, it affoordeth for use in
Physic, the young buds, the leaves, and the bark. The leaves serve to be
applied unto the midriffe and precordial parts, the stomach, liver, and such
corosiue ulcers, as hardly will be brought to heal and skin up. The tender
rind thereof incorporat with wax and rosin, heals all manner of scales, within
^o days. The same boiled and applied accordingly, cures the accidents
befalling to the cods and Vvularu^ vitijs. Some read vulvarum, i. of the
matrice and natural parts of women.
Uvula and other defects incident to that part.

CHAP. VI.
The medicin able virtues considered in the flowers, leaves, fruit, boughs,
branches, bark, wood, juice,

IT remains now to decipher the manifold medicines which apples and such like
fruits tender skinned, do afford, according to the variety of trees which
bring them forth. Of which, thus much in general is to be noted, That all
fruits which ripen in the Spring, while they be sour and harsh, be enemies to
the stomach; they trouble the belly, disquiet the guts and bladder, and
withal, be offen sieve to the sinews: but if they be full ripe or sodden, they
are the better. But to grow unto particulars. Quinces if they be boiled, baked,
or roasted, are sweeter and more pleasant to the taste, than raw. Yet being
thoroughly ripe upon the tree, although they be eaten raw, they are good for
those that spit and reach blood, and are diseased with the bloody flix: such
also as The juice of raw Quinces is a sovereign remedy for the swollen spleen,
the dropsy, and difficulty

The Pome-Paradise, or honey Apples called Melimela, and other fruits of like
sweetness, do open the stomach, and loosen the belly, they set the body in a
heat, and cause thirstinesse, but offensive they be not to the sinews.

The Orbiculata.
round Apples bind the belly, stay vomits, and provoke urine. Wildings or Crabs
are like in operation to the fruits that be eaten sour in the Spring, and they
procure costiuenesse.

As touching Citrons, either their substance, or their grains and seed within,
taken in wine, are a counterpoison. A collution made either with the water of
their decoction, or their juice pressed from them, is singular to wash the
mouth for a sweet breath. Physicians give counsel to women with child for to
eat the seed of Citrons, namely, when their stomachs stand to coals, chalk,
and such like stuff: but for the infirmity of the stomach, they prescribe to
take Citrons in substance: howbeit, hardly are they to be chewed but with
vinegar.

As for Pomgranats, needless altogether it were now to iterate and rehearse
the Nouem, and y^ heretofore ^ee named but (...).
nine kinds thereof. Sweet Pomgranats, all the sort of them, which by another
name we called Apyrena, are counted Dioscorides af^ me^h the contrary.
hurtful to the stomach: they engender ventosities, and be offensive to the
teeth and For Corium signifies a skin (...) leather.
Malicorium. And they would bear us in hand, That the same does provoke urine:
as also, that the decoction thereof in vinegar, with gal-nuts among, does
confirm and keep the teeth fast, which do shake and are loose in the head.
Women with child, and given to longing after a strange and unreasonable manner,
find much good and contentment hereby: for no sooner taste they of it, but the
child does stir and sprunt in their womb. The Pomgranat divided into quarters
or parcels, and laid to steep and infuse in rain water, for three days or
thereabout, yields a good and wholesome drink for them to take actually cold,
who are troubled with looseness of the body, occasioned by a flux from the
nosthrils and ears, as also for the dimnesse of the eyes, for the trouble some
ouergrowing and turning Florere incipiantis: rather desinentis, according to
Galen: for then the fruit is said to knit, when a tree sheddeth the blossom.
begins to flower, is Ipsa corpuscula. Some read Uascula, meaning the vessels
containing the grains.
young Pomgranats themselves alone newly knit, and making show upon the tree, if
they be stamped to the form of a liniment, are singular for any corrosiue
ulcers, and such as tend to putrefaction. Likewise, they be excellent good in
that sort prepared and applied, for the inflammation of the eyes, and of the
entrails, and in manner for all those occasions wherein the outward rinds and
pills do serve. And here before that I proceed any farther, I cannot sufficiently
admire and wonder at the careful industry and diligence of our ancients before
time, which they employed in the consideration of Natures works, searching as
they did into every secret, and left nothing behind them unassayed and untried:
in so much, as they took regard of those little pretty flowers appearing upon
these Here is Pliny out of the way
are called Balaustia. For even these, as little as they be, our ancestors have
found by their experiments to be adverse unto scorpions. And true it is, that
being taken in drink, they do restrain the extraordinary flux of women's
fleurs: they heal the cankers and sores in the mouth, the diseases of the
Tonsils or Amygdales, and of the Uvula: they do help the spitting and reaching
up of blood: they cure the feebleness both of belly and stomach, with the
fluxes thereupon ensuing: they are singular besides for the grieuances of the
privy members, and for all running ulcers spreading in any part of the body
whatsoever. Moreover, they made proof of the said flowers dried, and see if
they could meet with any goodness therein, for to deliver unto posterity and
the age following. [i. half a denier, or half a dram] kills the worms in the
belly. The same thoroughly sodden in water, is of the same operation that Lycium
is for any purpose that it shall be put unto.

Finally, there is a wild Pomgranat, so called for the resemblance that it has
to the planted Pomgranat: the roots are red without-forth, I doubt that Pliny
mistaketh here: and is carried away with the similitude of two Greek names to
wit, (...), i. the red wandering Poppy; and (...) the Pomgranat. For surely the
properties by him assigned to his wild Pomgranat, in some sort accord with
those of Papauer erraticum, or Corn-Rose.
which being taken to the poise of one denier or dram in wine, do procure
sleep. The grains or seeds in drink, dry up the watery humors that be
gotten between the skin and the flesh, in that dropsy which is called
Intercus. To conclude,

CHAP. VII.
Of Pears, and the properties o^ served in them. Of tame Fig Trees, and their
Figs. Of the wild Fig tree. Of Erineus, and other plants, with the medicines
which they afford.

ALL Pears whatsoever, are but a heavy meat, even to them that are in good
health. And sick folk are debarred for eating them, as well as for drinking
wine. And yet if the same be well boiled or baked, they are marvelous wholesome
and pleasant to the taste, especially Pyroru^ ligni. Quaere, if he mean not the
stony kernels of some Pears, which he uses other whiles to call Lignum.
wood, in case of pestilent Mushroms is of more efficacy than the Pear it
self. Poor iades that carry Apples and Pears upon their backs in paniers, are
shrewdly laden: and wonderful it is to see, how heavy they do weigh, and how a
few of them will make the poor beasts to shrink under their burden: but what is
the remedy? Let them eat some of those Pears before, or do but show them unto
them, they will undergo (as folk say) their load more willingly, and go away
with it more roundly.

The milk or white juice that the Fig Tree yields, is of the same nature
that vinegar: and therefore it will cruddle milk as well as rennet or rindles.
The right season of gathering this milky substance, is before that the figs be
ripe upon the tree, and then it must be dried in the shadow: thus prepared, it
is good to break impostumes, and keep ulcers open: also to bring down the
monthly terms of women, either applied with the yolk of an egg, or taken in
drink with Amylo. Diosc. has Amygdala. i. Almonds.
Amyl or * Starch powder. If the same be tempered with the flower of Foenigreek
seed and vinegar, and so applied in manner of a liniment, it helps the gout.
Also it is depilatory, and fetches off hairs: it takes away the skurfe of
the eie-lids. In like manner it kills tettars, ringworms, and any wild scabs.
It opens the body, and makes it soluble. This fig tree milk is naturally
adverse unto the venomous stings of Hornets, wasps, and such like. But
particularly to the prick of Scorpions. The same if it be incorporat with hogs
grease, takes away watts. Fig tree leaves and green figs unripe, reduced into
a liniment, do discuss and resolve the Scrophules, called commonly the kings
evil, yea, and all such nodosities as are to be mollified. The leaves also of
mad dogs, if they be applied to the skin where it is broken. The same brought
to a liniment i. by caprification, then they are never good:) and these figs
increase the strength of young folk: preserve elder persons in better health,
and make them look more young and with fewer wrinckles. They do quench and
allay thirst, and cool unkind heat. And therefore such must not be denied
unto the patient, in fevers proceeding from the constriction of the pores,
which agues the Greeks call Stegnas. Dry figs offend the stomach: but for the
throat and weasant they are exceeding good. These dried figs are by nature hot
in operation, and therefore engender thirst. They set the belly into a
looseness: in which regard they are not good to be eaten Pythagoras, a great
master and warden of these exercises, was the first man who brought them to eat
flesh meat. Moreover, figs be restoratiue, and the best thing that they can eat
who are brought low by some long and languishing sickness, and now upon the
mending hand and in recovery. In like manner they are singular for the falling
evil and the dropsy. Figs applied as a cataplasme, are excellent either to
discuss or else bring to maturity any imposthumes i. the inflammation of the
lungs. Boiled with Rue, they assuage the ventosities or collicke in the guts.
The same being incorporat with verdi-grease or the rust of brass, cures the
morimals of the legs: and with Pomgranats they heal the rising and
exulceration of the flesh ^stu^t father cient, or vtilessunt. (...). Ex Diosc.
bind the belly. Make a cataplasme of Figs and salt together: the same is
singular for the sting of scorpions. Boil them in wine, and so apply them, you
have an excellent remedy to draw forth carbuncles to the outward parts, and
bring them to an head. Take the fattest and fullest Figs you can get, lay them
upon the ugly and ill favored tumor called Carcinoma, i. the Canker, so it be
not vet exulcerat. I assure you it is a sovereign remedy, and hardly can be
matched again: and so it is also for the festering and eating ulcer
Phagedaena. There is not another tree again growing upon the face of the earth
that yields better or sharper ashes than the wood of the Fig Tree does,
either to cleanse Ulcera, out of Dioscorides, though some read aciem, i. the
sight of the eye: which has no warrant from the author, whom he follows and
would seem to translate.
ulcers, or to incarnat, consolidat, and restrain flux of humors. It is taken
in drink cramps, and namely, in that universal convulsion, which holds the
body so stiff, that it can

Moreover, it is commonly said, That if one come to a Fig Tree, bend a bough or
branch thereof downward to the ground, and bearing up his head without stooping,
reach and catch hold of

The bark of the Fig Tree reduced into powder, mixed with oil, and so applied,
heals the ulcers of the belly. Green Figs taken raw, stamped and incorporat
with niter and meal, take away all warts, whether they be smooth or rough. The
ashes made of those shoots that spring from the root, is a kind of Antispodium,
and may go for Spodium indeed. If the same be twice calcined and burnt, and
then mixed with cerusse or white lead, and so reduced into trochiskes, they
make a good collyrie or eie-salue, to cure the roughness and exulceration of
the eyes.

As many virtues as the mild fig tree has, yet the wild is much more
effectual in operation: howsoever she yields less milk or white juice than
the other does. For a branch only of it, is as good as rennet or rindles to
make milk turn and run to a cheese curd. Howbeit, that milky liquor which it
has, if it be gathered and kept until it be dry and wax hard, serves to
season our flesh meats, and give them a good taste. For which purpose it is wont
to be mixed and dissolved in vinegar, and then the flesh must be well rubbed
and poudred therewith. The same is usually mingled with caustic and corrosiue
medicines, when there is an intention to raise blisters, and make an issue. It
causes the belly to be laxatiue, and opens the matrice, if it be used with
Amyl powder. Being taken in drink with the yolk of an egg, it provoke women's
fleurs. Applied in a liniment with the flower of Feni-greeke, it eases the
pains of the gout: it cleanses the leprosy, and foul wild scab: it kills
ring-worms and fell tettars: it scoureth away freckles applied, bring the Uvula
again into the right place, and assuage the pain thereof. The ashes of

Moreover, since that the Greeks do term this wild fig tree in their language
Erineos, which puts me in mind of a certain herb called Erincos also in
their tongue, I cannot will nor choose but for affinity and neighbor-hood sake,
describe the same in this place, and set down the properties and virtues
thereof. An herb it is, one good handful high, rising up commonly with five or
six little stalks or branches, much like unto Basil; bearing a white flower, a
black seed, and the

To come now to the Plum trees the leaves thereof boiled in wine, are good for
the infirmities incident to the amigdales, the gums, and the Uvula, in case the
mouth be oftentimes washed with a collution made of their decoction Plums
themselves make the body soluble, and very commodious they are to the stomach;
but this benefit continues but a small while.

Peaches are much better than Plums; and so is their juice, principally if it
be drawn in wine or vinegar: and verily for a fruit, there is not in the world
any more harmless than it. You shall

Bulleis, Skegs, and Slone (which are the berries, as it were, or fruit of the
wild Plum tree) or the very bark and rind growing to the root, boi^ed in one
hemine or small pint of some hard and crabbed wine, until a third part only
remain, do veeld a decoction effectual to allay the pains of the cholick, and
to stop the flux of the belly: of this liquor, a cyath is a sufficient draught
to be taken at a time. As well in this wild kind as in planted Plum trees of
the hortyard, there is to be found a certain skinny gum, in Greek called
Lichen, which has a wonderful operation to

In Egypt and Cypres both, there grows the Sycomore, which is a kind by it
self between a fig tree and a mulberry tree, as I have before said; the fruit
or berries where of be full of liquor, which so soon as the uppermost rind or
pill only is pared away, appears in great abundance: cut and gash them deeper
in, they seem dry, after a wonderful and incredible manner. This juice
issuing out of them, is a singular defensatiue against the poison of Serpents:
a whole some medicine for the bloody flix; and * a notable carminatiue to
discuss and resolve pushes, biles, and al impostumations. It soudereth and
heals up wounds, it allaieth headache, and assuageth The like is (...) (...):
(...) by Galen, and ^r bed by Aegineta.
the wens or pains of the ears. Such also as be spleniticke or diseased in the
spleen, find much the juice of Aconit, [i. Libard-bane] or swallowed a
venomous spider. The same does loosen Tingunt capi^ lum: for the black color
was in most request in those days.
color the hair [blacke.] The juice of mulberries does work speedily, and
provoke to the siege: and the very fruit or mulberry it self, for the present
is comfortable to the stomach; it cools for the time, but brings thirst
with it. If a man eat them alone, or last, and lay no other meat upon them,
they swell in the stomach and be very flatuous. The juice drawn out of unripe
mulberries, are of virtue to bind the belly. In sum, there be strange and
wonderful properties worthy to be observed in this tree, which seems to have
some sense and understanding, as if it were a living and sensible creature,
whereof I have already Lib. 16. ca. 25.
written more at large in the description of it, and the nature thereof. There
is a notable Diamorum, or the compound syrrup of mulberries.
composition made of mulberries, respective to the mouth and throat, called
thereupon Panchrestos Stomatice, and by another name, Arteriace: the receipt and
making whereof, is in this manner; Recipe, of the juice drawn out of
Mulberries, three sextars, sees it over a gentle and soft fire [or rather let
it stew in balneo Mariae] until it be reduced to the consistence of honey:
afterward put thereto of veriuice made of dried grapes, the weight of two
Pondus X duorum.
deniers or drams; of myrrh, the poise of one denier; of saffron likewise, one
dram or denier. Let these ingredients (I say) be first beaten to powder (such I
mean as need pulverising) and so mingle them together with the foresaid
decoction, and put it up for your use. A better and more pleasant medicine
there is not, for the mouth, the windpipe, the uvula and the stomach. There is
another way of making it in this sort, Take of the juice aforesaid, the
quantity of Somewhat under two wine quarts with us.
two measures called sextars, of Atticke honey [i. vinegar and water together]
is singular against the prick of scorpions. But here I must set down the
compositions that our ancients devised and made of mulberries: first of the
body: for which purpose, the leaves also they applied alone without more ado.
As touching

Cherries loosen the belly, and be hurtful to the stomach; yet, if they be
hanged up and dried, they do bind the belly, and provoke urine. I find a
notable experiment in some authors, That if a man eat Chery-stones and all in a
morning, new gathered from the tree with the dew upon them, they will purge so
effectually, that he shall find himself clean rid from the gout of the feet,
if he were diseased that way.

Medlars, all of them, except those great ones called Setania (which indeed are
more like to

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Pine-nuts, or Pine-apples: of Almonds, Filberds, and Hazell-nuts: of
Wal-nuts, Fisticks, Chestnuts, Carobs, and Cornoils. Of the fruit of the Arbut
or Strawberry tree, and the Bay.

THe Pine apples or nuts, which have rosin in them, if they be lightly bruised,
and then sodden Balanorum decocto.
gripes within the stomach be exceeding violent and painful, it is good to mix
therewith Cucumber seed and the juice of Pourcellane: likewise in case either
bladder or kidneys be exulcerat

Touching the bitter Almond tree, the decoction of the roots thereof, does
supple the skin and lay it even and smooth without wrinckles; it imbelisheth
the visage with a fresh, lively, and cheerful color. The bitter Almonds
themselves bring folk to sleep, and get them appetite to their meat: they move
urine, and stir the ordinary course of women's monthly fleurs: they serve in a
liniment for the headache, especially in fevers; but if the said headache come
by occasion of drunkenness or a surfeit of wine, they would be applied with
vinegar, oil rosat, and a sextar of water. They have a property to stanch
bleeding, mixed with Amylfloure and mints. They are good in a lethargy, and the
falling sickness, if the head be therewith anointed all over. They cure the
angry night-foes, called chilblanes and bloudy-falls: applied with cold wine,
they cure to eat of them, and cannot come by water near at hand to lap, they
will die thereof. Sweet almonds

Hazel-nuts and Filbirds, otherwise called the Greekish nuts, being taken in
vinegar with wormwood seed, cure the yellow jaunise, as it is commonly said:
and a liniment made with them does help the diseases incident to the seat, and
particularly the piles and swelling bigs there appearing. The same medicine is
good for the cough, and such as spit and cast up blood.

As for Walnuts, the Greeks have given them a * name importing as much as the
heaviness (...), of (...), i. the head: like as in Latin, Nux, a no^a, vel
nocendo
of head, and not without good cause, for the very shade of the tree and the
sent of the leaves, do pierce and enter into the head: so do the kernels also
in less while, if they be eaten: now the newer they be, the more pleasant taste
they have: the dry are more oily and unctious, hurtful to the stomach, hard
of digestion, causing headache, naught for them who have a cough, and for
Mithridates (that most mighty and puissant king) was vanquished, Cneus Pompeius
found in his secret closet or cabinet, among other precious jewels, the receipt
of a certain antidote or preservative against poison, set down under the hand
of the said prince, in a private note-book of remembrances, in this manner
following: Take 2 dry walnutkernels

But to return again to Hazle-nuts and filberds, they do cause headache, they
breed wind in the stomach: and a man would not think nor believe, how soon
they will make one fat, but that experience approves it. If they be roasted or
torrified, they cure a rheum: and if they be beaten to powder, and given to
drink in honied water, they rid away an old cough that has stuck to one a
long time: some put thereto certain pepper corns, and others drink them in
wine cuit

Chestnuts be exceeding astringent, and mightily stay all fluxes both of the
stomach and the belly: for such as scour overmuch and have Alvo citae, and not
(...) cient.
a great lask upon them: also for them who reach up blood, they be passing
wholesome; and withal, nutritive and breeding good fast flesh.

Carobs, which be fresh and green, are hurtful to the stomach, and do loose
the belly; yet the same, if they be dried, do bind, and are more wholesome for
the stomach: diureticall they be also, and provoke urine. As for those Carobs
or Cods of Syria, some use to sees three of them in a sextar of water until
half be consumed, and drink that juice or liquor thereof for the pain of the
stomach. If a man take the green twigs of a Corneil tree, there will (by the
means of a and ringwormes called Lichnes, if they be taken at the first before
they have run far. The and itching, if the body be anointed therewith every
night. Next unto this, the other kinds are

Daphnoides, or the wild Laurel (or call it by any other of those names before
rehearsed) has many good virtues: it purges the belly, if you take the leaf
either green or dry, to the weight of three drams with salt, in hydromel or
honyed water: being chewed, it draws down phlegmatic and watery humors. The
leaf also moves to vomit, and is offensive to the stomach. The berries
likewise be purgative, if a man take five or ten of them at once.

CHAP. IX.
Of the tame or gentle Myrtle tree planted. Of Myrtidanum, and the wild Myrtle.

OF garden Myrtles, the white is not so medicinable as the black: the fruit or
berries of the Myrtle, help those that reach up blood: taken with wine, they
put by the danger of venomous mushrums: chew them in your mouth, your breath
will be the sweeter for it two days after. It appears by the Poet Menander,
that the good-fellows Synaristeusae were wont to eat Myrtle berries: the weight
of one denier in wine, is good for the bloody flix. If they have a little
siuering or waulm over the fire in wine, they make a good water or liquor to
cure untoward ulcers to heal, especially such as be in the extreme parts of
the body. Of them and barley Anthonies fire, and the shingles, being used
thereto in some fomentation; retains and staieth the hairs ready to shed;
scoureth away dandruffe, dries up wheals, pocks, and meazles; and last of all
skinneth burns and scaldings. The powder enters into those vnguinous or
oleous plasters which the Greeks call Liparas. And such a kind of plaster in
like manner as the oven, in a new earthen pot, well covered and close luted:
after which they be reduced into powder,

As touching Myrtidanum, how it is made I have showed already. Applied unto the
matrice or natural parts of a woman either by way of fomentation or liniment,
it does much good. And much better, if it be made with the bark, leaf, and
berry of the Myrtle. Moreover, of the softest leaves braied and stamped in a
mortar, there is a juice pressed forth, by pouring green wine by little and
little among, and otherwhiles rain water: which is used much for the ulcers
and sores of mouth, seat, matrice, and belly: to dye the hair black: to wash
and Alarm perfusiones.
bath the arm-holes with:

The wild Myrtle or Oxymyrsine, called also Chamaemyrsine, differs from the
civil and gentle Myrtle, in the redness of the berries, and the small growth.
The root is highly esteemed: for boiled in wine, and so taken in drink, it
cures the pain in the raines, the difficulty of urine, especially when it is
thick, and of a strong savor. The jaundise also it helps, and cleanses the
matrice, if it be brought into powder, and mixed with wine. The young and tender
buds eaten after the manner of Sperage crops with meat, first roasted in the
embers; the seed likewise taken in wine, oil, or vinegar, break the stone. The
same seed stamped and drawn with vinegar and oil rosat, allaieth the
headache; but in drink it cures the jaundise. Castor called Oxymyrsine (with
the sharp prickie leaves like the Myrtle, and wherew ith beesomes be made) by
the name of

THE TWENTY FOVRTH BOOK
WRITTEN BY C. PLINIVS SECVNDVS.
The Proeme.
CHAP. I.
Medicinable virtues observed in wild trees.

NAture, that sacred and blessed mother of all things, willing and desirous
that man, whom she loves so well, should find every place stored with proper
and convenient remedies for all maladies incident unto him; has so disposed of
her works, and taken that order, that the rough woods and forests, even the
most hideous parts of the earth, and fearful to see unto, be not without
their plants medicinable. Nay, the very wilds and deserts are frame. For first
and foremost, the Oak and the olive tree bear such mutual rancor and malice (as
Bacchus, as well as the foresaid plant Ferula. Over and besides (see the
admirable operation in Nature) the very insensible and liuelesse creatures,
yea, the least that be, meet every one of them with some contrary thing or
other, which is their bane and poison: for as our cooks know well enough, the
inner bark of the Linden tree sliued thin into broad flakes and fine boulted
flower together, do drink and suck up the salt of viands, overmuch poudered,
and make it fresh again. Likewise, salt gives a good relish to any meat that
is over sweet, and and ouerrule our Emperors. But the discourse of this matter
in more ample manner, I will

CHAP. II.
Of Lotos.

AS touching the herb Called otherwise Colo casia. and the Egyptian Bean.
Lotos, the Egyptian plant likewise of that name: as also, of another tree
about the Syrtes so called, I have written sufficiently in their due places: as
for this Lotos, which our countrymen call in Latin the Greekish Bean, has a
property for to bind and knit the flux of the belly, with the fruit or berries
which it bears. The shauings or scrapings of the wood thereof, boiled in wine,
and so taken inwardly, cure the bloody flix and Cohibent c^pillum. Diosc. has
(...), i. Rufant, i. colors them yellow.
keeps the hairs from shedding, if the place be bathed therewith. But
wonderful it is, that these small shauings should be so bitter, as nothing
more, when the fruit it self is as sweet as any other. Moreover, of the fine
dust sawed or filed from this wood, sodden in Myrtle water, then kneaded or
wrought into past, and so reduced into several trochisks, there is a
sovereign medicine made for the bloody flix: if the patient drink the weight
of one Victoriat or half dram of these trosches in three cyaths of water.

CHAP. III.
Of Mast.

ACornes or Mast of the Oak, beaten to powder, and incorporat with Hogs lard
salted, heal all those hard and swelling cankerous ulcers, which they call in
Greek Cacoethe. In all these trees bearing Mast, the very substance of the
wood is more forcible than the fruit; the outward bark more than the wood; and
the inner rind or tunicle under it, more than the bark or all the rest. This
membrane or pellicle if it be boiled, is singular for the flux of the stomach,
proceeding of weakness. The very Mast or Acorne it self reduced into a
liniment and applied, staieth the bloody flix: and the same resists the venom
of serpents stings, restrains rheums, and catarrhs, and namely, that flux of
humors which causes apostemations. As well the leaves, the mast or beries of
this tree, as the bark or juice drawn from it, after boiling, are excellent

CHAP. IIII.
Of the [Scarlet] grain of Holme-oke: of Galls and Misselto: of certain
little balls growing upon the Oak: of Mast: of the root of The great Holm-Oke.
Cerrus: and of Cork.

THe Coccum Ilicis our Kermes or Kutchenel, as some think,
Scarlet grain growing upon the Oke-holm, is very good to be laid to fresh
wounds with vinegar. It is applied with water for the flux of watery humors
unto the eyes: and dropped

As touching the Gal-nuts, I have likewise made of it as many kinds: for some
be solid and massy, others full of holes, as if they were bored through. You
shall have of them white, and black: some great, and others small: but how
different soever they be in substance, color, or quantity, they be all of like
nature. The best are those of Comagene. Gals are good to eat away the
superfluous excrescences in the body. They serve very well for the infirmities
of the gums and uvula; for the cankers and exulcerations breeding in the mouth.
Being first burnt, and then quenched and ulcers in the head: the knobs or
swelling piles in the fundament, and in one word, all those

Concerning Misselto: That the principal and best is found upon the Oak, how
it is cut and in what manner birdlime is made thereof, I have already showed.
Some for to make the said glue Don^c in^tet Some read Donec nihil in^atet: that
is, so long until it settle all to the bottom, which may stand well with the
first reading in this sense, so long as it swimmes aloft:
until it swim aloft. Others use to chew the grains or kernels only which
they bear, and spit out their outward pills or skins. But the very best is
that, which has no husk or skin at all: which also is the Saevissimum.
smoothest: withoutforth of a light tawnie or yellowish red: within, as green
as a leeke: for indeed, there is not a thing more glutinous or glewy than it.
This Misselto is a great emollitiue; for it softeneth, discusseth and resolves
also hard tumors: it is excicatiue besides, and dries up the Scrophules or
swelling kernels, known by the name of the kings evil. If it be incorporat
with rosin and wax, it mitigateth all sorts of impostumes or flat biles
whatsoever. Some put thereto Galbanum also, in equal quantity or weight: and
so use it in the same manner for to heal wounds. It pollisheth

As for the little round bals or apples sound upon the Oak Robur, if they be
incorporat with Bears grease, they cause the hair to come thick again, where
it is shed, in case the bare or bald place be anointed therewith.

Of the great Oak Holm Cerrus, thus much I have to say, That the leaves, the
bark, and mast thereof do discuss and dry up all gathering of impostumations,
even such as grow to suppuration or mattering; and stay the flux of humors
which feed them. A decoction thereof does corroborat any member or part of the
body which grows to be senseless or benumbed, if the same be fomented
therewith. Also for to dry, bind, and confirm any part which is feeble and weak,
it is singular good to sit in a bath of this decoction. The root of this Cerrus
in powerful against the prick of scorpions.

The bark of the Cork tree beaten into powder and taken in hot water, is
excellent for to repress any flux of blood, whether it be upward or downward.
The ashes of the said bark given in wine hot, is greatly commended for the
reaching and spitting of blood.

CHAP. V.
Of the Beech and Cypressetrees. Of the great Cedars and their fruit called
Cedrides: of Galbanum.

THe leaves of the Beech tree being chewed, do much good to the gums and lips,
in any accidents that be fall unto them. The ashes of Beech mast is singular
for the Calculis. Some read, occulis, i. eyes: others, Ca^s, i. hard knots or
callosities: and both to better sense in mine opinion.
stone, if it be applied as a liniment. The same also brings hair again,
when by occasion of sickness it is shed and fallen away, if the place be
anointed with it and honey together.

Cypress tree leaves stamped and so applied, are a convenient remedy for the
sting of Serpents. Also laid unto the head with dried groats of Barley, they
ease the pain thereof, occasioned assuageth the swelling of the cods. Tempered
with vinegar, they will make the hair cole

The great Cedar, called by the Greeks Cedrelate, as one would say, the
Fir-Cedre, yields a certain pitch or parrosin named Cedria, a singular
medicine for the toothache; for it breaks Cedrium:
kind of pitch were excellent for the eyes but for one discommodity, in that it
causes headache. It preserves dead bodies from corruption, a world of years:
contrariwise, living bodies it does putrify and corrupt. A strange and
wonderful property, thus to mortify the quick, and quicken (as it were) the
dead. It marreth and rotteth apparel, as well linen as woollen: and it kills
all living creatures. And therefore I would not advise as some have done, to
taste this medicine and take it inwardly for the squinancie or crudities of the
stomach: neither would I be bold, but fear rather, to prescribe it in a
collution with vinegar to wash the mouth withal for the toothach, or to drop
it into their ears who be hard of hearing or otherwise have vermin within
them. But a monstrous Arborlu^ fieri Gaecoru^ (...).
abortiue slip, if she were conceived before; or hinder conception, if she were
clear. Howbeit, I would not make doubt to anoint therewith the head and other
parts, for to kill lice, or to rid away the scurffe or scaily dandruffe among
the hair, either in head or face. Some give counsel for to drink it in sweet
wine cuit, unto them who are poisoned with the sea Hare. For mine own part, I
hold it a safer way and an easier to anoint therewith the leprosy. But some of
the foresaid authors have applied it to filthy, putrified, and stinking
ulcers, and the excrescences therein: as also to rub or anoint therewith the
eyes against the pin and web, and such accidents as dim and darken the sight.
Moreover, they have prescribed to drink a cyath of it for

As touching Cedrides (i.) the fruit of the Cedar, it is soueraign for the
cough, and prouokes urine, binds the belly, and heals ruptures. It cures
spasmes, convulsions or cramps: yea, and helps the infirmities of the
matrice, if it Admoti: some read poti, i. taken in drink.
be applied accordingly. Also it is a counterpoison

Of Galbanum I have written heretofore. Good Galbanum should be neither moist
nor dry; but such in all respects as I have described already. Being taken of
it self alone in drink, it cures an inueterat cough shortness, and
difficulty of wind, ruptures, crampes, and convulsions. Vino. Rather ac^
vinegar af^ D^r.
wine, it is good against all poisons, and especially those which be called
Toxica. Incorporat Galbanum with oil and Cow (...) o^ (...).
Spondylium together, it will kill any serpents, if they be but touched
therewith. Howbeit, there is an opinion (...) 1. (...) the contrary.
in difficulty of urine it is not good to be used.

CHAP. VI.
Of Gum Ammoniack: of Storax: Spondylium: Spagnos: Terebinth: Chamaepitys: of
Pituysa: of Rosius: of the Pitch tree: and the Lentiske.

SInce we are fallen into the mention of Gums, it will not be amiss to treat
of Ammoniack; being as it is so like in nature (as I have said) to Galbanum:
for it has virtue to mollify, to heat, discuss, and dissolve. Used in
collyries, it is a proper medicine to clarify the eiesight: and serves well to
take away the itch, the spots or cicatrices, the pin and web also of the eyes.
It

Touching Storax and the nature thereof, I have said enough in my Treatise of
strange and forrame trees. But over and above the qualities or properties
before required, I take that for the best Storax, which is fattest, pure, and
clean, and whereof the pieces or fragments do break white. This drug cures
the cough, the soreness of the throat, and the accidents of the breast: it
opens the obstructions of the matrice, and mollifieth the hardness thereof.
Whether it be taken inwardly in drink, or outwardly applied, it provoke
women's fleurs, and moves to the siege. I read in some authors, that if one
drink Storax Calamita, in small quantity, it will procure gladness and mirth
of heart: but if it be taken in greater quantity, it breeds heaviness of the
mind. Instilled or poured into the ears, it riddeth away all the singing
therein: and in a liniment it resolves the wens called the Kings evil, and the
nodosities of the sinews. Soueraign it is against

Likewise of Spondylium, a kind of wild Parsnep or Madnep, I have spoken
thereof heretofore,

Concerning the sweet Moss, called of the Greeks Vsnea.
Sphagnos, Sphacos, or Bryon, growing (as I have showed before) in France, it
is good for the natural parts of women to sit over the decoction of it, in
manner of a bath: likewise if it be mingled with cresses, and so stamped
together in salt water, it serves well to be applied as a cataplasme to the
knees and thighs, for any tumors or swellings in those parts. Taken in wine
with dry per-rosin, it causes one most speedily to make water. Stamped with
Juniper, and drunk with wine, it does euacuat the aquosities

The leaves and the root of the Terebinth tree, applied in form of a
cataplasme, are good for the collection of humors to an impostumation. A
decoction made with them, does comfort and fortify the stomach. In case of
headache, of stopping and difficulty of urine, it is passing good to drink
the seed or grains of the Terebinth tree in wine. The same gently eases and
softeneth the belly; it provoke also carnal lust. The leaves of the Piceae.
Pitch tree and Laricij. It seems that Pliny took (...), which is the Pine,
for Picea; and (...), which is the Pitch tree, for Larix.
Larch tree bruised and sodden in vinegar, do ease the toothache, if the mouth
be washed with the decoction. The ashes made of their barks, skin the places
that be chafed, fretted, and galled between the thighs; and heal any burn or
scald. Taken in drink, they bind the belly, but open the passages of the vrin.
A perfume or suffumigation thereof, does settle the matrice, when it is loose
and out of the right place. But to write more distinctly of these two trees;
the leaves of the Pitch tree i. Into a more gross air.
Egypt, or to go among the cottages in summer time for to drink new milk
coming of the fresh and green grass of the mountains.

As for Chamaepitys, it is named in Latin by some Abiga, for that it causes
women to slip their conception beforetime: of others, Thus terrae [i. ground
Frankincense:] this herb puts or rather, the Pitch tree.
Pine tree. A second kind there is of Chamaepitys, lower than the other,
seeming as though it bended and stooped downward to the ground. There is also a
third sort, of the same odor that the rest, and therefore so named. This last
Chamaepitys, rises up with a little stalk or stem of a finger thickness; it
bears rough, small slender, and white leaves; and it grows commonly amongst
rocks. All these three be herbs indeed, and no other, and should not be ranged
among trees: yet for names sake, because they carry the denomination of Pitys
[i. the Pitch-tree] I was induced the rather to treat of them in this present
place, and to stay no longer. Sovereign they be all against the pricks or
stings of Scorpions: applied in manner of a liniment with dates and quinces,
they be it cleanses the matrice and natural parts of women. If one drink the
same herb, it will dissolve i. half a Roman denier, it warisheth for ever the
pain of the loins, and stops the course of a new cough. Finally, if it be
boiled in vinegar, and so taken in drink, it is said that it will presently
expel the dead infant out of the mothers womb.

For the like cause and reason, I will do the herb Pityusa this honor as to
write of it among trees, since that it seems by the name to come from the
Pitch tree: this plant some do reckon among the i. Spurges.
Tithymals: a kind of shrub it is, like unto the Pitch tree, with a small
flower, and the same of purple color. If one drink the decoction of the root,
to the quantity of one hemina, In balanis: unless we read, Cum
Phaenicobalanis, i. a kind of Date, as some think, Tamarinds.
by suppositories. The decoction of the leaves in vinegar, does cleanse the
skin of dandruffe and scales: and if the decoction of rue be mingled therewith,
it is singular for sore breasts, to appease the wrings and tormenrs of the
cholick, against the sting of serpents, and generally for to discuss and
resolve all apostemations and botches a breeding.

But to return again to our former trees; how Rosine is engendered in them, of
their several kinds, and the countries where they grow, I have showed before,
first in the treatise of wines, and afterward in the discourse and histories
of Trees. And to speak summarily of rosins, they may be divided into two
principal kinds; to wit, the dry and the liquid rosin. The dry is made of the
Pine and the Pitch trees; the liquid comes from the Terebinth, Larch,
Lentisk, and Cypress Which is thought to be our Terpentine.
a subtle and thin liquor, running like to life honey, of a strong and rank
unpleasant smell. Physicians seldom use any of these liquid Rosins, and never
prescribe them but to be taken or supped off with an egg. As for that of the
Larch tree, they give it for the cough and exulceration of some noble parts
within: neither is that per-rosin of the Pine tree much used: as for the rest
they be not of any use unless they be boiled. Touching the diverse manners of
boiling them, I have showed them sufficiently.

But if I should put a difference between these rosins according to the trees
from whence they come; the right Terpentine indeed which the Terebinth
yields, likes and pleases me best, being of all others lightest and most
odoriferous. If I should make choice of them in regard of the countries where
they are found; certes they of Cypress and Syria be best, and namely those
that in color resemble Attick honey: and for the Cyprian rosin, that which is
of a more fleshie substance and drier consistence. Of the dry per-rosins, those
are in most request, which be white, pure, transparent or clear, quite
through. In general, those that come from trees growing upon mountains, be
preferred before them of the plains: also regarding the Northeast, rather than
any other wind. For salues to heal wounds, as also for emollitiue plasters,
rosins ought to be dissolved in oil: for drinks or potions, with bitter
almonds. As touching their medicinable virtues, they be good to cleanse and
close up wounds: to discuss and resolve any apostemes which be in the plant
Chamaeleon. Incorporat with bulls tallow and honey, they cure the biles called
Pani,

CHAP. VII.
Of Stone-pitch: of Tar: of Pitch twice boiled: of Pissasphalt or Mummie: of
Zopissa: of Torch-wood, and the Lentiske.

FRom what tree Pitch comes, and the sundry ways of making it, I have
declared heretofore

Moreover, as touching Pissasphalt, which is of a mixed nature, as if pitch and
Bitumen were mingled together, it grows naturally so, in the territory of the
Apolloniats; yet some there be who make an artificial pissasphalt, and meddle
the one with the other, and hold it for a remedy to cure the farcins and scabs
of cattle; as also when the young sucklings do hurt the teats of Pix naualis.
Zopissa, is that Pitch, which (as I said heretofore) is scraped from ships,
and is confected of wax well soked in the salt water of the sea: the best is
that which comes from ships that have bin at sea and made some voiages: it
goes into emollitiue plasters, for to resolve the gathering of impostumes. As
for Taeda or Torch-wood, if it be sodden in vinegar, it makes a singular
collution for to wash the teeth withal when they ache.

Let us come now to the Lentisk tree: the wood, the seed or fruit, the bark and
gum thereof, do provoke urine, and bind the belly: a fomentation made with their
decoction, is excellent good for eating and corrosiue ulcers: it serves in a
liniment for all sores in moist and phlegmatic parts: likewise to cure S.
Anthonies fire, and to wash the gums withal: chew the leaves thereof and crush
them well between the teeth, the same will ease their ach: wash them with their
decoction, Democritus the Physician, who had in cure Considia, the daughter of
M. Seruilius late Consul of Rome, for an It should seem the ulcer of the
lu^gs o^dnies, or else some outrageous flux of blood.
infirmity or malady of hers (for that this damsel could not abide to hear
of any unpleasant Physic) caused her to be fed a long time with the milk of
goats which were kept with the Lentisk tree leaves, and did eat nothing else,
and sohe cured her of her malady.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Plane tree, the Ash, and Maple: of the white Poplar and Elm, the
Tillet or Linden tree, the Elder, and the Juniper.

THe Plane tree is an enemy to Bats or Reremice: their little bals which they
bear, if they be taken to the weight of four Roman deniers in wine, do cure
all poisons of serpents and scorpions: likewise they heal any burn. Being
braied or stamped with strong and sharp vinegar (which if it be Squilliticum is
the better) they stanch any bleeding whatsoever. Incorporat in honey, they
mundifie and cleanse all cancerous ulcers, the red pimples and specks, with all
black spots and marks in the skin which have remained a long time. The leaves
and bark reduced into a liniment, their decoction also, help to rid away any
gathering of humors to an head,

As touching the Ash tree, of what effectual operation it is against serpents,
I have declared heretofore: it bears a Called Lingua auis. Which are named
Keys.
seed enclosed within certain * cods, which being taken in wine, is an ordinary
remedy for the obstructions and infirmities of the liver; as also for the pain
in the sides. The same also do euacuat the aquosities or waterish humors spread
between the skin and the flesh in the dropsy Leucophlegmatia: the leaves do
take down by little and little and make lean a body ouer-grosse, and do ease it
of the troublesome carriage that it has of so much fat, if the in three cyaths
of wine; but elder folk and of a stronger complexion, may abide seven well
enough

As touching the white Poplar or the trembling Asp, I have showed heretofore
how the perfumers use the berries or And yet heretofore he says that it has
neither the one nor the other.
grapes thereof in their sweet ointments. The bark infused and taken in drink,
is good for the sciatica and the strangury. The juice drawn out of the leaves,
dropped hot into the ears, eases their pain. Whosoever carries a twig of
Poplar in their hands, shall not need to fear any surbating of the feet, or
galling between the legs. The best black Poplar and

Now for the Elm: the leaves, the bark, and the woody substance of the
branches, have a glutinous nature to consolidat, unite, and heal wounds: the
thinner rind or tunicle verily which lies between the outward bark and the
tree, does assuage the leprosy, called of some S. Magnus evil: so do the
leaves also, applied with vinegar. The bark of the Elm puluerized and taken to
the weight of a Roman denier in one hemine of cold water, is a very purgative,
and does euacuat phlegmatic and waterish humors particularly. The liquor that
issues from the tree as a jelly, is singular good for apostemations, wounds,
and burns; but if the places were fomented before with the decoction, it would
be the better. The Elm bears certain small bladders or husks, wherein there
is engendered and contained a waterish humor, which is very proper to imbelish
the skin, and beautify the face. The first tender sprouts of the leaves boiled
in wine, do assuage al tumors, and Extra^unique pus ^istulis.
draw filthy matter and corruption forth of fistulous sores: the same do the
inward

As touching the Tillet or Linden tree, the very wood thereof is used for all
things in a manner that the wild olive is employed unto, if the same be lightly
bruised or stamped: howbeit, the leaves only are occupied; which, if they be
chewed and so applied, do cure the cankers breeding in the mouth of small
infants. Being boiled and their decoction inwardly taken, they provoke

There is a second kind of Elder more wild of nature, which some of the Greek
writers call i. Ground* Elder, Wallwort, or Danewort.
Chamaeacte, others Helion, and it grows much lower than the other. The
decoction of the leaves as well of VValwoort as Elder, boiled in old wine, is
contrary and noisome to the stomach, and purges downward waterie humors:
even so does the decoction either of the seed or the root, if it be taken
inwardly to the quantity of two cyaths: the same is excellent to cool any
inflammation; and namely, to take out the fire of any new burn or scald. The
young and tender leaves, as well of Elder as VVall-woort, reduced into a
cataplasme and laid too with barley of Walwort, are weaker in operation than
the other parts of the tree or plant: howbeit, they serve

The Juniper of all other trees, passes, either for to heat any part, or to
extenuat and make subtle any humors: in operation much like to the Cedar. Of
it there be two kinds; the greater, and the less: a perfume made with the one
as well as the other, drives away serpents: the seeds or berries of Juniper,
assuage the pains of stomach, breast, and sides: the same serve well to break
wind Oxyporis.
penetratiue and of quick operation. It is diureticall and moves urine. In
case the eyes do water much by reason of a continual rheum taking to them, it
is good to apply a liniment unto them made therewith. Four Juniper berries are
given in white wine, or 20 of them boiled in wine, for convulsions, crampes,
ruptures, wrings, and torments in the belly, for the griefs of the matrice and
the Sciatica. To

CHAP. IX.
Of the Sallow, Willow, or Withy: of the twig Withy or Oisier Amerina. Of twigs
or binding rods. Of Heath or Lings.

THe fruit which the willow or Sallow yields, if it be suffered to hang,
before it does ripen is converted into a certain substance resembling a
cobweb; but being gathered ere it be thus transformed, it is singular good for
such as reach or cast up blood. The ashes of the of the gout. The decoction of
the leaves and bark boiled in wine, is passing wholesome to soment Venus: and if
they use to take the same often, they will disable them altogether for the act
of generation. The seed of the black Oisier or willow called Amerina, mixed in
like weight with white litharge of silver, and brought into a liniment, is a
depilatory, and fetches off the hair if the place be anointed therewith
presently after the baine.

There is a kind of tree named Vitex, not much different from the willow, in
regard of the use that the twigs be put unto, and also of the leaves which
resemble those of the willow in outward show, but that their smell is more
pleasant and odoriferous: the Greeks, some call it Lygos i. chaste; for that the
dames of Athens, during the feast of the goddess Ceres, that were named
Thesmophoria, made their pallets and beds with the leaves thereof, to cool the
heat of lust, and to keep themselves chaste for the time. And two sorts there be
of it. The greater rises up to a tree in manner of a willow: the other, which
is less and lower, brancheth thick, bearing white leaves, and those full of
down and cotton. The former of these two, which is called the white Agnus
Castus, puts forth white flowers and purple one with another: whereas
contrariwise, all the flowers of the less, which is called the black, be
purple only. Both the one and the other love to grow in plains and moors. The
seed of Agnus Castus, if it be taken in drink, has a certain relish or taste
of wine, and it is commonly thought that it cures fevers: and whosoever is
anointed therewith, being incorporat into a liniment with oil, shall soon
sweat: and by that means it is good to rid away weariness. Agnus Castus, as
well the one as the other,

As touching Heath or Lings, which the Greeks call Erice, it is a shrub not
much different from Tamariske, in color and form of leaf, such as it is,
resembling Rosemary. The leaf of this plant (they say) is an enemy to serpents.

As for Broom, it serves also very well to make halters and cords of. The
flowers please bees Homer meant it, when he said, that the ship-sparts were
untwisted and loose. For this is certain, that neither the spart of Africa, ne
yet the Spanish spart was as yet in any use: and at what time as barges and
vessels were sowed together with seams, it is well known, that the stitches were
made with linen thread, and not with spart. The seed that it bears, which the
For they call it Sparton, as well as the plant.
Greeks give one and the same name to, growing within small cods in manner of
Phaseols, is as strong a purgative [of Melancholy] as Ellebore; if it be taken
when one is fasting to the weight of a dram and half, in four cyaths of honied
water: the branches and leaves (such as they be) of Genista or Broom, being
stamped after they have lien infused in vinegar,

To come now to Tamarisk, which the Greeks call Myrice, Lenaeus affirms, That
it is used in manner of the Amerian willow for beesomes: and more than so, that
if it be sodden in wine, stamped and reduced into a liniment with honey, it
heals cankerous ulcers: and in very truth, some hold, That the Myrice and
Tamariske be both one. But doubtless, singular it is for the spleen in case
the patient drink the juice pressed out of it in wine. And by report, there is
that the Aspis. The decoction likewise of the seed clysterized, is singular for
the jaundise, it kills lice Venus ever after. And a burning cole of this wood,
when it is quenched in the stale or beasts piss, they use to save and lay up
in the shade for that purpose: but if one list to kindle lust, Ru^sum vritur.
then they set it on fire again. To conclude, the Magitians say, That it would
do as much if the urine only of a gelded man were taken for the said purpose.

CHAP. X.
Of the Bloud-rod. Of Siler. Of Priuet. The Alder tree, and Ivy. Of Cisthus and

THe Plant called the Sanguin-rod, is as unhappy as the foresaid Tamariske. The
inner bark thereof is singular good to open again those ulcers, which are
healed aloft only and skinned before their time.

The leaves of Some think it is the broad. leafed Oisier.
Siler, brought into a liniment and applied as a frontall to the forehead,
allay the pain of the head. The seed thereof driven into powder and incorporat
with oil, is good for the lousie disease, and keeps the body from lice. The
very serpents cannot abide this plant or shrub, but fly from it: which is the
cause, that the peasants of the country make their walking staves thereof.

Our Ligustrum or Priuet, is the very same tree that Cypros is in the East
parts. To good use it serves amongst us here in Europ: for the juice of it is
wholesome for the sinews, the joints, and any extreme cold. The leaves applied
with some corns of salt, heal all inueterat ulcers in any part whatsoever, and
particularly the Cankers in the mouth. The grains or berries that it bears,
are good to kill lice: also for any gal, where the skin is fretted off between
the legs: and so be the leaves likewise. The foresaid berries do cure the pip
in Hens and Pullen.

As for the Alder tree: the leaves if they be applied hot as they be taken out
of scalding water, do cure without fail any tumor or swelling.

As touching the Ivy tree, 20 kinds thereof and no fewer I have already showed;
and of al these there is not one, but the use of it in Physic is doubtful and
dangerous. For first and foremost, cyaths of wine, is a sufficient dose.
Moreover, three berries of the same white Ivy drunk at a Golden berry Ivy.
Chrysocarpos, if one take twelve of the golden yellow berries thereof beaten
to powder, and put them to a sextar of wine, three cyaths thereof given to
drink, according to Erasistratus, purge by urine the watery humors between the
skin and the flesh, which engender the dropsy. The same Erasistratus was wont
to take five such berries stamped into powder and mixed with oil rosat, which
after they were made hot in the rind of a Pomgranat, he used to drop into the
ear of the contrary side, for the toothache: the berries of Ivy which yield a
juice as yellow as Safron, if a man take before he sit down to drink, may be
assured, that he shall not be drunk at that sitting. Likewise, they ease them
much who are given to cast and reach up blood, or be subject to the colic and
wrings of the belly. The white berries of the black Ivy if a man take in
drink, dull the vigor of his general seed, and disable

For the vicinity and likeness of the name of Ivy in Greek, which is Cissos, I
may take occasion to speak in this place of another shrub or plant called
Cisthos, bigger than Thyme, and leaued

Under this plant specially grows Hypocisthis, whereof I have written in my
treatise of Ivies.

Likewise, there is another plant like unto the Ivy, and the Greeks call it
Cissos Erythranos: which being taken in drink, helps the Sciatica, and is
good for the loins: but they say it is so vehement and forcible in operation,
that together with urine it will euacuat blood.

Moreover, there is an Ivy which creeps and traileth always close by the
ground, and the

Furthermore, the Bindweed Smilax, known also by the name of Nicephoros,
resembles Ivy, but that it has smaller leaves. They say, that a chaplet or
guirland made of this Smilax, is singular for the headache; provided always,
That the leaves which go to the making of it, be in number odd. Some have
said that Smilax is of 2 sorts: the one, which continues a world of years,
grows in shadowie valleys, climbing trees, and tufted in the head with clusters
(as it were) of berries in manner of grapes; a sovereign plant against all
poisons; insomuch, as if the juice or liquor of the berries be oftentimes
dropped into the ears of young babes or little infants, no poisons (by report)
will ever hurt them afterward. As for the other Smilax or Bindweed, it loves
close to the ear. Another herb there is like to this, which some have called
Clematis. This

CHAP. XI.
The virtues and properties of Canes or Reeds, of the Papyr reed, of Ebene,
Oleander, Sumach, otherwise called Rhus Erythros, Madder, Allysson, Sopewort or
Fullers-weed, Apocynon, Rosemary, Cachrys, Sauine, Selago, and Samulus. Also of
Gummes.

HEretofore have we showed 29 sundry kinds of Reeds, all endued with their
medicinable [i. Quoich grass, or Parsley seed] it is diureticall and provoke
urine. Applied outwardly, it draws down the desired sickness of women. Taken
in drink to the weight of two oboli, it cures those who are subject to
convulsions or cramps: it helps the liver Anthonies fire, the shingles, and
such like, yea and against all impostumations: the common and

There grows in Egypt a certain plant named Papyrus, which resembles much
the Cane or Reed: a thing of great use and commodity, especially when it is
dry; for it serves as a sponge both to suck up the moisture in Fistulaes, and
also to enlarge them. For swelling as it does, it keeps the ulcer open, and
makes way for the medicines to enter accordingly by that means.

Touching Ebene, it grows not (as I have already said) so near unto us, as
in Egypt. And albeit my meaning and purpose is not to deal with any
medicinable plants growing in the strange and unknown countries of another
world: yet in regard of the wonderful properties that Ebene has, I will not
pass by it in silence. For first and foremost, the fine dust or powder filed
from it, has the name to be a singular medicine for the eyes: as also, that
the wood thereof being ground upon an hard stone, together with wine cuit,
dispatcheth away the cloudy mist which ouercasteth the eyes. As for the root,
if it be used likewise and applied with water, it consumes

Oleander, called in Greek Rhododendros, which some name Rhododaphne, and
others Nerion, has not bin so happy yet, as to find so much as a name among
the Latins. A strange and

Neither has Rhus a Latin name, notwithstanding it be much used in Physic,
and otherwise. For it is a wild plant growing of it self, bearing leaves like
unto the Myrtle, upon short stalks and branches; singular for to expel any
poison and worms out of the body: and besides, called it is, the Curriers
shrub, for that they use to dress their skins with the dry leaves thereof,
instead of pomgranat rinds. Of a reddish color it is, a cubit in height, and a
finger thick. Moreover, Physicians employ the medicines wherinto this Rhus is
put, for bruises: likewise, for the flux proceeding from a feeble stomach, as
also for the ulcers in the seat. But the leaves stamped and incorporat i. of
the Mulberries: but if it have alum joined withal, it is of greater efficacy.
The same being brought into a liniment, is passing good for the swellings in a
dropsy. As for the This kitchen Rhus or meat-Sumach, is all one with the
other: but that the cooks used the seed, and the curriers occupied the leaves
and the branches.
Rhus, which is called Erythros, i. the red, it is a shrub, and the seed
thereof is both astringent and refrigeratiue. Much used is the grain or seed of
this Rhus in stead of salt to powder and season meats. Laxatiue it is, and
gives a pleasant taste to any flesh meats, especially if Silphium be mingled
withal: tempered with honey, it cures and heals all running ulcers: and in

As touching Madder, which some Greeks call Erythrodanus, others, Ereuthodanus,
and we in Latin Rubia, it is an herb different from Rhus Erythros above
named. Diers use it much to color their wool and woollen cloth, so do
curriers about their skins and leather. In Physic it serves to provoke
urine: it cures the jaundise, if it be taken in mead or honied water: and
reduced into a liniment with vinegar, it heals the il-fauored tettars called
Lichenes. Over and besides, it is good for the Sciatica and the palsy, in case
the patient who drinks thereof, do likewise

The herb Some take it to be Asperula i. Wood-Rose.
Alysson differs from this Madder, in regard of the leaves and branches
only; which be less. It took that name Alysson, because those that be bitten
with a mad dog, if they drink it with vinegar, or wear it tied fast about
them, shall not likewise run mad. But it is very strange which is said
moreover of this herb; namely, That the very sight thereof is enought to

As for the Fullersweed, which the Latins call Radicula, and the Greeks
Struthion, as I have beforesaid, it serves to scour and prepare wool and
woollen cloth for the diers hand. In Physic the broth or decoction thereof
drunk, cures the jaundise, and the infirmities or diseases of the breast. It
provoke urine, loses the belly, and cleanses the matrice, which is the
cause, that Physicians call it Aureum poculum, i. the golden cup, or golden
drink. The same taken with honey in manner of an electuary, to the quantity of
one spoonefull at a time, is of singular operation for the cough and shortness
of breath, when the patient cannot draw and deliver his wind but sitting
upright. Reduced into a liniment with parched barley groats and vinegar, it
cures and cleanses the foul leprosy. Drunk with Panaces and Caper roots,
it breaks the cataplasmes, yea, and into collyries ordained for to clear the
eiesight. I know few things

To come now to Apocynon: a shrub it is bearing leaves like unto Ivy, but that
they be softer, and the shoots or tendrils thereof not so long: the seed is
sharp pointed, clift, or divided, full of a soft down, and of a strong or
unpleasant savor. Being given either to dogs or any other fourfooted beasts in
meat, it is their bane, and kills them. Moreover, there is the Rosemary,
whereof be two kinds: the one is barren and bears no seed: the other, which
rises up also in a stem or main stalk, carries seed or a rosinous gummy fruit,
called Cachrys. The leaves in smell resemble Frankincense. The root fresh and
new gathered, reduced into a salve, heals green wounds: applied Aerina. Some
read Ervina, i. of Eruile.
cocle flower, it is applied with good effect unto the gout. It cleanses and
scour eth away morphew: it serves well to bring any part ot heat that has need
of chaufing; yea, and to procure sweat, if the case require, so the place be
anointed therewith: also it helps any convulsion or cramp. Drunk Anthonies
fire, and carbuncles. Drunk with honey and wine, it cures the jaundise. It is
said, that the very fume or smoke of this herb will rid hens and such like
pullen of the pip.

Much like unto this herb Sauine, is that which they call Selago. Many
ceremonies are to be observed in the gathering of this herb: first and foremost,
the party who is to gather it, must be apparelled all in white, as it were in
a surplice; go barefoot he must, and have his feet washed in fair water:
before he comes to gather it, he ought to do sacrifice unto the gods with
bread

As concerning gums, I have heretofore declared how many kinds thereof are to
be sound. Musio, (...) Misto, i. in some made or compound wine.
new wine, they be good for any inueterat cough. Moreover, they be thought to
make the color more fresh, lively, and pleasant; to procure and stir up the
appetite to meat; also to help those who be pained with the stone, in case they
be drunk in sweet wine cuit. And to conclude with some particularity, The
Thought to be Acacia.
gum of the Egyptian thorn is sovereign for wounds, and all accidents of the
eyes.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Arabian Thorn: of Our ladies thistle.
the white Thistle Bedegnar: of Acanthium and Acacia.

TOuching the Arabian Thorn or Bush, and the commendable qualities thereof, I
have sufficiently

The seed of the white Thistle is singular for the sting of scorpions: a
garland made of it and set upon the head, assuageth the pain thereof. Much
like unto this, is that Thistle which the Greeks call Acanthion, but that the
leaves be much smaller, and those are sharp pointed and prickly all about the
edges, and covered with a down resembling a cobweb; which the people of the
East countries do gather, and thereof make certain cloth for garments,
resembling silk.

Moreover, there is a kind of Thorn, whereof comes Acacia, and it is the
juice thereof. It is found in Egypt to issue from certain trees, which be
white, black, and green: howbeit, the best Acacia by far, is that which the
former (that is to say, the white and the black) do yield. There is made
likewise a kind of Acacia in Galatia, which is most soft and tender; and the
tree that affoordeth it, is more pricky and thorny than the rest. The seed or
fruit of all these trees, is like unto Lentils, but only that the grain is
less, and the cod or husk wherein it lies, smaller. The right season to
gather this fruit is in Autumn; for if it be taken before, it is too too
strong. Anthonies fire, and corrosiue sores; yea and all grieuances of the body
that consist in moisture: they cure any impostumes, joints that are bruised,
kibed heels, and the turning up of the skin and flesh from the nail roots.
They repress the exceeding flux of women's

CHAP. XIII.
Of the common Thorn: of the wild or wood Thorn: of Erysisceptrum: of Spina
Appendix: of B^. thorn.
Pyxacanthus, and Some ^all it C^ thorn.
Paliurus: of Hulver or Holly: of Yeugh: and Brambles: with the medicinable
virtues of them all.

THe common Thorn also, wherewith the Fullers use to fill their vats and
caudrons, has the same operation that Radi^, for it (...) Radi^.
Struthium, and is put to the same use. Many there be verily in all

There is a kind of thorny bush called Some take it for the Barbery bush.
Appendix, for that there be red berries hanging thereto, which be likewise
named Appendices. These berries, either raw by themselves, or else dried and
boiled in wine, do stay the flux of the belly, and besides assuage the torments
and wrings thereof. As for the berries of Pyxacanthus, they be drunk to right
good purpose against the sting

As touching the Holly of Hulver tree, if it be planted about an house, whether
it be within a city, or standing in the country, it serves for a countercharm
and keeps away all ill spells or enchantments. Pythagoras affirms, that the
flower of this tree will cause water to stand all upon an ye: also that a
staff made thereof, if a man do fling it at any beast whatsoever, although it
chance to light short for default of strength in his arms who flung it, will
notwithstanding etch forward and roll from the place where it fell upon the
earth, and approach near to the beast aforesaid; of so admirable a nature is
this Holly tree.

The fume or smoke of any Yeugh tree, kills mice and rats. Neither has
Nature produced brambles for nothing else but to prick and do hurt; for such is
her bounty that the berries which they bear are man's meat, besides many other
medicinable properties: for they have a desiccatiue and astringent virtue, and
serve as a most appropriate remedy for the gums, the inflammation of the
Tonsils, and the privy members: the flours also as well as the berries of the
brambles,

Another kind of brier or bramble there is, upon which grows a rose: some call
it Cynosbatos, others Cynospastos: it bears a leaf like to the print or sole
of a man's foot. A little bal or pill it breeds, furred or bristled much after
the manner of the Chestnut, which serves as a special remedy for those that be
subject to the stone. As for Cynorrhonos, it is another plant different from
this; whereof I will speak in the next book.

CHAP. XIV.
Of i. the (...) or ^anker brier.
Cynosbatos, and the Raspice: of the Rhamnos, and of Lycium and Sarcocolla. Of
a certain

AS for the bramble named Chamaebatos, it bears certain black berries like
grapes, within the kernel whereof it has a certain string like a sinew,
whereupon it came to be called New^ospastos: it is a different plant from the
Caper, which the Physicians have named also Cynosbatos. Now the tender stems of
the foresaid Rubus canis.
Cynosbatos or Chamaebatos condite in vinegar, are good for them to eat who are
troubled with the opilation of the spleen, and with ventosities; for it is a
singular remedy for those infirmities. The string or sinew thereof chewed with
Mastick of Chios, purges the mouth. The wild roses that grow upon this brier,
being incorporat with swines grease, are excellent for to make the hair grow
again, when it is shed by O^ how con^ (...) P^y ^eth down the stor^o Cy^ b^to
(...) Cha mae^ o^, (...) the (...), and the bla^k berry bramble.
The beries of these brambles if they be tempred with oil olive made of green
and unripe olives, color the hair black. The proper season to gather the
flowers of these brambles that carry beries like to mulberies, is in harvest
time: the white kind of them drunk in wine, is a soueraign remedy for the
pleurisy, and the flux of the stomach: the root sodden to thethirds. stops
a lask, and staieth the flux of blood: likewise a collution made therewith,
fastneth loose

The Raspis is called in Latin Rubus Idaeus, because it grows upon the
mountain Ida, and not elsewhere Ex Dioscor.
[so plenteously.] Now is this bramble more tender, and less in growth: it
puts forth also fewer stalks upright, and those more harmless and nothing
so pricky as the other brambles before named: besides, it loves well to grow
under the shade of trees. The flowers of this bramble reduced into a liniment
with honey, restrain the flux of rheumaticke humors into the eyes, and keeps
down the spreading of S. Anthonies fire: and given in water to drink, it cures
infirmities of the mouth. In all other cases, it has like operations to the
former brambles

Among the diverse kinds of brambles, is reckoned the Rhamne, which the Greeks
call Rhamnos, notwithstanding that it is whiter and more branching than the
rest. This Rham bears many

But before I depart from this treatise of Trees, and their medicinable
virtues, I must needs say, we are beholden to them yet for one excellent
medicine more, which is called Oporice by one sextar of Seruises, and as much
in quantity of the Sumach which is called Rhus Syriacum,

CHAP. XV.
Of ground-oke, or petie oak.
Chamaedrys, i. Germander: ground-bay, or pety Laurel.
Chamaedaphne, i. Lawrcoll: groundoliue, etc.
Chamelaea: ground figtree, etc.
Chamaesyce: ground Ivy.
Chamaecissos, i. Ale-hooue: ground Poplar.
Chamaeleuce, i. Fole-foot: groud-pine, or P^tch tree.
Chamaepeuce: ground Cypress^.
Chamae-cyparissus, i. Lauander-cotton: Porret vine. or l. eek-vine.
Ampelo-prasos: Stachys: Clinopodium,

GErmander is an herb, called in Greek Chamaedrys, and in Latin Trissago: some
have named it Chamaedrope, others Teucrion: it bears leaves for bigness
resembling mints, in color like unto the oak leaves, cut and indented also
after the same manner. Of some it is called Serrata; and they affirm that the
first pattern of a saw was taken from the leaf of this herb, whereupon it
should be so called. The flower bears much upon the purple color: it loves
to grow in stony places, and would be gathered whiles it is full of juice: and
thus gathered in due season, whether it be taken in drink, or taken outwardly
in a liniment, most effectual it is against the poison of serpents: likewise
it is wholesome for the stomach, good against an inueterat

As touching Lawreol, called by the Greeks Chamaedaphne, it arises up with one
only stem

As for otherwise called Mezereon, Widowwaile.
Chamelaea, it has leaves like unto those of the olive: the same be bitter in
taste, and in smell odoriferous. This plant grows in stony grounds, and
exceeds not in height a handbreadth or span at most; a purgative herb it is;
for thereof is made an excellent syrrup to euacuat

Chamaesyce bears leaves resembling those of the Lentil, but they always
creep along the ground and rise not up. This herb grows in dry and stony
grounds: the same boiled in wine therewith. It is a sovereign remedy also for
those who cannot take their wind but sitting

It is not our ground Iuie or Alcho^.
Chamaecissos grows up spiked with an ear like unto wheat, and ordinarily
puts forth five branches, and those full of leaves. When it shows in the
flower, a man would take it to be the Viola alba.
white Violet or Gillofre. The root is but small. They that are troubled with
the Sciatica, use to drink the leau^ thereof to the weight of three oboli in
two cyaths of wine, for seven days together: but it is an exceeding bitter
potion.

As for Fole-foot, it is called in Greek Chamaeleuce: but we in Latin name it
Farranum or Farfugium. It loves to grow by rivers sides. The leaves somewhat
resemble those of the Poplar, but that they be larger. If the root of Fole-foot
be burnt upon the coals made with Cypres wood, the smoke or perfume thereof
received or drunk through a pipe or tunnell into the mouth, is singular for an
old cough.

Touching Some take i^ for Chamaepitys.
Chamaepeuce, in leaf it is like unto the Larch-tree: a plant very appropriat
to the pain of the back and the loins. The herb Chamaecyparissos, if it be
drunk in wine, is singular good against all the venomous stings of serpents and
scorpions.

The herb Ampeloprasos grows in vineyards, bearing leaves resembling Porret:
but it causes them to belch sour that eat thereof. Howbeit, of great power it
is against the sting of serpents. It provoke urine and women's monthly terms.
And yet whether it be drunk or applied outwardly, it is passing good for them
that piss blood, and represseth the issue and eruption thereof. Our midwiues
use to give it unto women newly delivered and brought to bed: likewise it is
found to avail much unto them that be bitten with mad dogs.

Moreover, the herb called Stachys has a resemblance also to (...). Porri: but
it seems that Pliny should have read (...), i. Ma^ubij. or Horchound, out of
Dioscorides, as R^ndeletius has observed.
Porret, but that the leaves be Whereupon it took the name Clinopodium.
bear up a table or bed. This herb taken in drink is good for convulsions,
ruptures, stranguries, and serpents stings. So is the syrrup or juleb that is
made thereof, by way of decoction. Thus much of those herbs, which in name
carry a show and resemblance of trees.

It remains now to write of some other herbs, which I must needs say are of
no great name

But there be other herbs among the Greek writers, going under the name of
Clematides, and namely one, which some call Echites, others Lagines, and there
are besides who name it Pety Supposito: some read contrariwise, Superposito.
between. The same applied in a pultesse to the wens called the kings evil,
bring them first to suppuration, and afterward having hogs grease put thereto,
heal them thoroughly. if the mouth be washed therewith. To conclude, it
stirs up to fleshly lust.

There is besides another kind of Clematis, known by the name of the Egyptian
Clematis: howsoever some call it Daphnoeides; others, Polygonoeides. Leaued it
is like the Laurel, save that the leaves be long and thin. But against all
serpents, and especially the Aspides, it is a sovereign counterpoison if it be
drunk in vinegar. Egypt brings forth this herb in great abundance.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Aron, Dracunculus, or Dracontium. Of Aris. Of Millefoile. Of another herb
of that name. Of Pseudobunium. Of Myrrhis and Onobrichis: with their
medicinable virtues.

THere is a great difference between * Aron (of which herb I have written
amongst those Wake. robin.
with bulbous roots) and * Dracontium: although writers be at some variance
about this point, for some have affirmed that they be both one. Howbeit
Glaucias has distinguished Dragon.
them, in that the one grows wild, and the other is planted: and he
pronounces and calls Dragon, the savage Aron: others are of opinion, that
there is no other difference between them, but that the onion root is called
Aron, and the stem of the same herb Dracontium: whereas indeed there is no
likeness at all between the one and the other, if so be that Dracontium of the
Greeks be the same that we call Dracunculus in Latin. For Aros has a black
root growing These descriptio^s agree ^ot with our wake Robin and Dragon.
broad, flat, and round, yea, and far greater, insomuch as it is a good
handful: but the root of Dracunculus Cleophantus has given it the praise of an
excellent antidote or counterpoison: prescribing also the use thereof for the
pleurisy and inflammation Dieuches ordained, to take and temper it with meal,
and so to work it into a paste, and to give the bread so made, unto them that
cough: to those who be short winded: such also as cannot breath unless they
sit upright: and lastly, to as many as reach up filthy matter out of their
breast. Diodotus the Physician made thereof an electuary or lohoch with honey,
for them to lick who are in a Phthisick, or otherwise diseased in the lights:
and he appointed it to be laid as a pultesse for fractures of bones. There is
not a beast or living creature whatsoever, but if the shap or natural parts be
anointed therewith, it will fetch away the fruit of their womb. The juice
drawn out of the root, if it be incorporat with Attick honey, scatters the
juice of this root does cure and heal wonderfully. The leaves sodden in wine
and oil, are Hippocrates devised a plaster of them and honey together, which
was singular for all impostumations whatsoever. For to bring down the desired
sickness of women, 2 drams of the root or seeds (it skils not whether) taken
in two cyaths of wine, is a sufficient dose. The same potion fetches away the
afterbirth, in case it make no have to come away after a woman is delivered of
child. And for this purpose Hippocrates appointed the very bulbous root of Aron
in substance to be applied to the nature of a woman in the like case. It is
said, that in time of pestilence it is a singular preservative, if it be eaten
with meats. Certes, it is excellent to keep them for being drunk, who have
taken their liquor liberally;

To come now to Dragons, called in Latin Dracunculus, whereof I have spoken
before: the only time to dig it out of the ground, is when barley begins to
ripen, and within the two first quarters of the Moon, all the while that she
does increase in light. Let one but have the root of

As for tht Dragon which the Greeks name Draconatium, it has bin showed and
described to me in three forms: the one leaued like unto the Beets, growing
with an upright main stem with a flower of a purple color: this Dragon is like
unto Aron. Others brought to me a second kind with a long root (as it were)
marked forth and divided into certain ioints; it puts out three small stems
and no more: and they declared moreover and gave direction to sees the leaves

There is an herb also named Aris, growing in the same Egypt: like unto Aron
abouesaid, save that it is less, has smaller leaves, and not so big a root,
and yet the same is full as great as a good round and large olive. Of these,
there be two kinds: the one which is white, rises up with two stalks: the
other puts forth but one single stem. Both of them have virtue to cure running
scals and ulcers; to heal burns also and fistulous sores, if a collyrie or
tent be made thereof and

Touching Mill foil or Yarrow, which the Greeks call Myriophyllon, and we in
Latin Millefolium: it is an herb growing up with a tender and feeble stalk,
like in some sort unto Fenell, and charged with many leaves, whereupon it took
the name: it grows in moors and fennie grounds; used to very good purpose
and with singular success, in curing of wounds. Over and besides, it is given
to drink with vinegar for the difficulty of urine and the stoppage of the
blader,

In Tuscan they have another herb so called, growing in meadows, which puts
forth on either side of the stalk or stem, a number of pretty leaves as small in
manner as hairs. The same also is a most excellent wound-hearb. And it is
avouched by the people of that country, That if an

Concerning bastard Navew, called in Greek Pseudo Bunion, it has the leaves
of Navew gentle, and brancheth to the height of a hand-bredth or span. The best
of this kind grows in the Isle Candy, where they use to drink five or six
branches thereof for the wringing torments of the belly, for the strangury, the
pain of the sides, midriffe, and precordiall parts.

Myrrhis, which some call Smyrrhiza, others Myrrha, is passing like unto
Hemlocke, in stalk, leaves, and flower; only it is smaller and slenderer, and
has no ill grace and unpleasant taste to be eaten with meats. Taken in wine, it
hasteneth the monthly course of women's fleurs if they be too slow, and helps
them in labor to speedy deliverance. It is said moreover, that in time of

Finally, Onobrychis carries leaves resembling Lentils, but that they are
somewhat longer: it bears also a red flower: but rests upon a small and
slender root. It grows about springs and fountains. Being dried and reduced
into a flower or powder, it makes an end of the strangury, so it be drunk in a
cup of white wine well strewed and spiced therewith It stops a lask. To
conclude, the juice thereof causes them to sweat freely who are anointed all
over with it.

CHAP. XVII.
The medicinable virtues of Coriacesia, Callicia, and Menais, with three and
twenty other herbs, which some hold to be Magical. Moreover, of Considia,
and Aproxis, besides some other which are revived and in request again, having
been long time out of use.

TO discharge and acquit my self of the promise which I made of strange and
wonderful herbs, I cannot choose but in this place write a little of those
which the Magitians make such reckoning of. For can there be any more admirable
than they? And in very truth, Democritus Pythagoras, following the tracts of
the said wise men and Magitians, were the first Philosophers, who in this part
of the world set those herbs on foot, and brought them into a name.

And to begin with Coriacesia and Callicia. Pythagoras affirms, That these
two herbs will cause water to gather into an ice. I find no mention at all in
any other authors, of these herbs, neither does he report more properties of
them.

The same author writes of an herb called Menais, known also by the name of
Corinthas, the juice whereof (by his saying) if it be sodden in water,
presently cures the sting of serpents, if the place be fomented with the said
decoction. He affirms moreover, that if the said juice or liquor be poured
upon the grass, whosoever fortuneth to go thereupon, and touch it with the

The felfe same Pythagoras speaks yet of another herb which he calls
Aproxis: the root whereof is of this nature, to catch fire a far off; like
for all the world to Naphtha, concerning which, I have written somewhat already
in my discourse as touching the wonders of Nature: and he reports moreover,
That if a man or woman happen to be sick of any disease, at what time as this
Aproxis is in the flower, although he or she be thoroughly cured of it, yet
shall they have a grudging or minding thereof as often as it falls to flower
again year by year. And of this opinion he is besides, That Frumenty corn,
Hemlock, and Violets, are of the same nature and Cleomporus, a renowned
Physician: but the current fame or speech holds still so constantly, time out
of mind, that we must needs believe Pythagoras to be the author of the said
book. True it is indeed, that the name of Pythagoras might give authority and
credit unto other men's books attributed to him, if happily any other had labored
and traveled in compiling some work, which himself judged worthy of such a
man as he was: but that Cleomporus As one would say, s^h a ^ook as should be
^lly occup^ and neu^r ^d out of hand.
Chirocineta, was of Democritus his making* and yet therein be found more
monstrous things by a hundred fold, than those which Pythagoras has delivered
in that work of his. And to say a truth, setting Pythagoras aside, there was
not a Philosopher so much addicted to the school and profession of these
Magitians, as was Democritus.

In the first place he tells us of an herb called Aglaophotis, worthy to be
admired and wondered of men, by reason of that most beautiful color which it
had: and for that it grew among the quarries of marble in Arabia, confining
upon the coasts of the realm of Persia, therefore it was also named
Marmaritis. And he affirms, that the Sages or Wise men of Persia called
Magi, used this herb when they were minded to conjure and raise up spirits.

He writes moreover, That in a country of India inhabited by the Tardistiles,
there is another herb named Ach^menis, growing without leaf, and in color
resembling Amber: of the root of which herb there be certain Trochisks made:
whereof they cause malefactors and suspected persons to drink some quantity
with wine, in the day time, to the end they should confess the truth: for in
the night following they shall be so haunted with spirits and tormented with
sundry fancies and horrible visions, that they shall be driven perforce to tell
all, and acknowledge the fact for which they are troubled and brought in
question. The same writer calls this plant o^ Hippophovas.
Hippophobas, because Mares of all other creatures are most fearful and wary
of it.

Furthermore, he reports, That 30 Schoenes from the river Choaspes in Persia,
there grows an herb named Theombrotion: which for the manifold and sundry
colors that it has, resembles the painted tail of a Peacocke, and it
casts withal a most sweet and odoriferous sent. This herb (says he) the
Kings of Persia use in their meats and drinks: and this opinion they have of
it, That it preserves their bodies from all infirmities and diseases, yea, and
keeps their head so stayed and settled, that they shall never be troubled in
mind and out of their right wits: in such sort, that for the powerful majesty
of this plant, it is also called Semnion.

He proceeds moreover to another, known by the name Adamantis, growing only
in Armenia and Cappadocia: which if it be brought near unto Lions, they will
lie all along upon their backs, and yawne with their mouths as wide as ever
they can. The reason of the name is

He goes on still and bears us in hand, that in the realm Ariana, there is
found the herb Arianis, of the color of fire. The inhabitants of that country
use to gather it when the Sun is in the sign Leo: and they affirm, that if it
do but touch any wood besmeared and rubbed over with oil, it will set the same
a burning on a light fire.

What should I write of the plant Therionarca, which whenever it begins to
come up and rise out of the ground, all the wild beasts will lie benumbed and
(as it were) dead: neither can they be raised or recovered again, until they
be sprinkled with the urine of Hyaena.

The herb Aethiopis, by his report grows in Meroe, for which cause it is
called also Merois: In leaf it resembles Lectuce: and being drunk in mead or
honied water, there is not such a remedy

Over and besides, he speaks of the plant Ophiusa, found in a country of the
same Aethyopia, named Elephantine: of a leaden hue it is and hideous to see to:
whosoever drink thereof, shall be so frighted with the terrors and menaces of
serpents represented unto their eyes, that for very fear they shall lay
violent hands on themselves: and therefore church robbers are enforced to drink
it. How beit, if a man take after it a draught of Date wine, he shall not be
troubled with any such fearful visions and illusions.

Moreover, there is found (says Democritus) the herb Thalassegle about the
river Indus, and thereupon is known by another name Potamantis: which if men
or women take in drink, transporteth their senses so far out of the way, that
they shall imagine they see strange sights.

As for Theangelis. which by his saying grows upon mount Libanon in Syria,
and upon Dicte, a mountain in Candy; also about Babylon and Susis in Persia; if
the wise Philosophers (whom they term Magi) drink of that herb, they shall
incontinently have the spirit of prophecy, and foretell things to come.

There is besides in the region called Bactriana and about the river
Borysthenes, another strange

Touching the herb of good fellowship Syssitieteris, found in Persis, it took
that name because it makes them exceeding merry who are met together at a
feast. They call the same herb likewise Protomedia, for that it is so highly
esteemed among kings and princes. And another name it has besides; to wit, As
one would say, without brother or sister.
Acasignete, because it comes up alone and no other herbs near unto it: yea,
and one more yet, namely, Dionysonymphas, because wine and it sort so well
together, and make as it were a good marriage.

The same Democritus talks also of Helianthe: an herb leaued like to the
Myrtle, growing in the country Themiscyra, and the mountains of Cilicia,
coasting a long the sea. And he gives out, that if it be boiled with Lions
grease, and then together with Safron and Date wine reduced into an ointment,
the forefaid Magi and the Persian kings therewith anoint themselves, to seem
thereby more pleasant and amiable to the people: which is the reason, that the
same herb is called Heliocallis.

Over and besides, he makes mention of Hermesias (for so he terms not an
herb but a certain composition) singular for the getting of children, which
shall prove fair, and of good nature besides. Made it is of Pine nut kernels,
stamped and incorporat with honey, Myrrh, Safron, and Date wine, with an
addition afterward of the herb Theombrotium and milk: and this Democritus
his book.

Apollodorus, one of his disciples and followers, comes in with his two herbs
to the other before named. The one he calls Aeschynomaene, because it draws
in the leaves, if one come near unto it with the hand: the other Crocis, which
if the venomous spiders Phalangia do but

Cratevas writes of an herb called Oenotheris, which being put in wine, if any
savage beasts be sprinkled therewith, they will become tame, gentle and
tractable.

A famous Apion called also Pleistonices.
Grammarian of late days made mention of another herb Anacampseros, of this
virtue, That if a man touched a woman therewith, were she departed from him in
all the hatred that might be, she should come again and love him entirely. The
same benefit also should the woman find thereby, in winning the love of a man.
This may suffice for the present to have written of these wonderful Magic
herbs, considering that I mean to discourse more at large of them and their
superstition, in a more convenient place.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Eriphia, Lanaria, and Stratiotis, with the medicines which they yield.

MAny writers have made mention of Eriphia. This herb has within the straw of
the stem a certain fly like a beetle, running up and down, and by that means
making a noise like unto a young kid, whereupon it took the foresaid name. There
is not a better thing in the world for the voice, than this herb, as folk say.

The herb Lanaria, given to ewes in a morning when they are fasting, causes
their vdders to strout with milk. Lactoris likewise is a common herb and as
well known, by reason that it is so full of milk, which causes vomit, if one
taste thereof never so little. Some there be who say, that The soulders herb.
Militaris, is all one with this Lactoris: others would have it to be very like
unto it; and that it should have that name, because there is not a wound made
with sword or edged weapon, but it heals it within five days, in case it be
applied thereto with oil.

Semblably, the Greek writers make great reckoning of their All one with
Millitaris.
Stratiotes: but this hearl (...) grows only in Egypt, and namely in floten
grounds where the river Nilus has ouerflowed: Anthonies fire, and all
apostumes which are broken and run matter: if it be taken in drink with the
male Frankincense, it is wonderful to see how effectual it is to repress the
flux of blood from the reins.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the herbs that grow upon the head and chapter of Images and Statues. Of
herbs found in rivers. Of the herb called Lingua. Of herbs growing through a
sieve, and upon dung hills. Of Rhodora and Impia, two herbs. Of Pecten Veneris.
Of Nodia. Of Clauers, or Goose-grasse, called otherwise Philanthropos. Of the
little Bur named Canaria: of Tordile. Of the ordinary Coachgrasse,

IT is commonly said, That the herbs or weeds growing upon the head of any
statue or Image, presently allay the headache (if they be gathered in the
lappet or any part of some garment) so as the Patient wear them tied about the
neck, by red linen thread, or infolded within some red linen clout. Any herb
whatsoever gathered out of some riueret, brook, or great river, before the
Sunrising, so as no man see the party during the time of the gathering,
provided always that it be tied to the left arm of the sick Patient, and he or
she not know what it is, drives away any tertian ague, if it be true which is
commonly said. There is an herb growing about i. a Tongue: the root thereof
being burnt into ashes, and incorporat with the grease of a swine (but you must
look, say they, that the swine be black and barraine) causes hair to come
again, in case the place which is bare and bald, be anointed therewith in the
sun. Cast a sieve or riddle forth into any beaten path or high way, the grass
or weeds coming up underneath, and growing through the same, if they be
gathered and bound about the neck or any other part of women with child, do
hasten their travel and delivery. Those herbs which be found growing upon
muckhils, about country ferms, are passing good and effectual for the
squinancy, if they be drunk with water. The grass or herb near unto which a
dog lifts up his leg and pisseth, if it be plucked out of the ground without
touching knife or iron instrument, cures any dislocation or bone out of joint,
most speedily.

Touching the tree (in manner of an Opiet or Poplar) called Rumbotinus, I have
described it in my treatise of Hortyards and Tree-plots. Near to one of these
(and namely, when there is no vine coupled or married to it) there grows a
certain herb, which in France they call Rhodora: it rises up with a stem
pointed and knotted in manner of a fig tree rod or wand; bears leaves
resembling nettles, somewhat whitish in the mids, but the same in process of
time become red all over; and a flore of silver color: this herb stamped and
mixed with old hogs grease, makes a sovereign liniment for all swellings,
inflammations, and impostumes gathering to an head; provided always that no
edge tool come near to touch it, and that the party who is dressed or
anointed therewith turn the head to the right hand, and spit thrice upon the
ground on that side. And the operation of this medicine will be the more
effectual, if three sundry men of three

Concerning the herb Impia, which is of a hoary color and white withal, it
resembles in show the Rosemary, rising up with a main stem, leafed and headed
in manner of a Cole-stocke: from which principal body, there grow sorth other
small branches, every one bearing little tufts or heads rising and mounting
above the mother stock (whereupon they called it in Latin Impia, for that the
children ouer-topped their parents) yet there be others who have thought it
rather so called because there is no beast will touch or taste it. This herb, if
it be ground between two stones, waxes as hot as fire, and yields a juice
which is excellent for the squinancy, if the same be tempered with milk and
wine. But this is strange that is reported moreover, namely, pass that the
young birds never be choked, gobble they their meat as greedily as they will.

As touching the herb called Veneris Pecten, which took that name of the
resemblance that the long cods thereof has to comb or rake teeth: the root,
if it be stamped with mallows, and so reduced into a cataplasme, draws forth
all spils, thorns, or whatsoever sticks within the flesh. The herb It
seems by name and effect, to be of so ^e tharpe (...) fretting ^ity.
Exedum, is singular to cure the lethargy, and all drow sinesse.

As for Nodia, it is an herb well known in curriors shops. They call it also
Mularis, and other names besides they have for it: but term it how you will,
it heals corrosiue ulcers: and I find that it is of singular operation
against the poison of scorpions, if it be drunk in wine or oxycrat, (i.)
vinegar and water mingled together. There is a certain rough and pricky herb,
which the Greeks call by a pretty name (...) ^grasse (...).
Philanthropos, for that it sticks to folks clothes as they pass by. A
chaplet or guirland made of this herb, and set upon the head, eases the pain
thereof. As Haec est herba Argemon, quam Minerva reperitsuibus remedium, qui de
illa gustanerint: (i.) This is the herb Argemon, which Minerva invented as a
remedy for diseased swine, as many as tasted thereof.

As for Tordile, some have said that it is the seed of Seseli, or Siler of
Candy: others take it to be an herb by it self, which also they called Syreon:
for mine own part, I find by my reading

The Quich-grasse, otherwise named Dent-de-chien, or Dogs-grasse, is the
commonest herb that grows: it runs and creeps within the earth by many
knots or ioints in the root, from which, as also from the branches and
top-sprigs trailing aboue-ground, it puts forth new roots and spreads into
many branches. In all other parts of the world, the leaves of this grass these
words three times pronounced, Iejunus ieiuno medicamentum do, [i. I being yet
fasting, give

Touching the grass, which by reason of the pricks that it bears is named
Aculeatum, there be three sorts of it: the first is that which ordinarily has
five such pricks in the head or top thereof, and thereupon they call it Penta
Dactylon, i. the five finger graise: these pricks when they be wound together,
they use to put up into the nosthrils, and draw them down again, for Some take
(...) ^be Paro (...), Dios. o^ ^ain ^a kindo A^zoon (...), or Prickma^am.
Sengreen or Housleek: singular good it is for the whitflaws, and excrescences
or risings up of the flesh about the nail roots, if it be incorporat into a
liniment with hogs grease: and this grass they call Dactylus, because it is a
medicine for the fingers. T^is is thought to be g^a Stonccrop, wild Purcellane.
or Wall pepper.
The third kind named likewise Dactylos, but smaller than the other, grows
upon old decayed walls or tyle houses: this is of a caustic and burning nature,
good to repress the canker in running and corrosiue ulcers. Generally, a
chaplet made of the herb Gramen or Dogsgrasse, and worn upon the head,
stancheth bleeding at the nose. The Gramen that grows along the high ways in
the country about Babylon, is said to kill camels that grase upon it.

Fenigreeke comes not behind the other herbs before specified, in credit and
account for the virtues which it has: the Greeks call it Telus and Carphos:
some name it Buceras and Aegoceras, Or rather the cods wherein the seed is
enclosed.
seed resembles little horns: we in Latin term it Silicia or Siliqua. The
manner of sowing it, I have declared in due place sufficiently. The virtues
thereof, is to dry, mollify, and resolve: the juice drawn out of it after the
decoction, is right sovereign for many infirmities and diseases incident to
women, and namely in the natural parts, whether the matrice have a schirre in
it and be hard or swollen, or whether the neck thereof be drawn too straight
and narrow: for which purposes, it is to be used by way of somentation,
incession, or bath; also by infusion or injection with the metrenchyte. Very
proper it is to extenuat the scurf or scales like dandruffe, appearing in the
visage: being sodden and applied together with sal-nitre, it helps the
disease of the spleen. The like effect it has with vinegar: and being boiled
therein, it is good for the liver: for such women as have painful travel in
childbirth, and be hardly Diocles appointed Fenigreek seed to the quantity of
one acetable, to be given in nine cyaths of wine cuit for three draughts: with
this direction, that the woman first should take one third part of this drink,
and then go to a hot bath, and whiles she were sweating therein, to drink one
half of that which was left: and presently after she is out of the bain, sup
off the rest. And he says there is not the like medicine to be found in this
case, when all others will take no effect. The flower or meal of Fenigreek
seed boiled in mead or honied water, together with barley or Lineseed is
singular for the pain of the matrice, either applied to the share in manner of
a cataplasme, or put up into the natural parts as a pessary, according as the
abouenamed Dio^les says: who was wont likewise to cure the lepry or S. Magnus
evil; to cleanse and mundifie the skin, of freckles and pimples, with a liniment
made with the foresaid flower incorporat with the like Theodorus used to mix
with Fenigreek a fourth part of the seed of garden cresses well cleansed, and to
temper them in the strongest vinegar that he could come by, which he took to be
an excellent medicine for the leprosy. Damion ordained to make a drink with
half an acetable of Fenigreek seed put into 9 cyaths of cuit or sheere water,
and so to give it so provoking of women's fleurs: and no man doubts but the
decoction of Fenigreeke is most wholesome for the matrice and the exulceration
of the guts: like as the seed it self is excellent for the ioints and
precordial parts about the heart. But in case it be boiled with Mallows, it is
good for the matrice and guts, so there be put to the said decoction boiled in
hydromell (i. honyed water) and brought into a liniment with hogs grease, it
cures

THE TWENTY FIFTH BOOK
WRITTEN BY C. PLINIVS SECVNDVS.
CHAP. I.
The nature and properties of Herbs growing wild and of their own accord.

WHen I consider the excellency of such herbs, whereof now I am to treat, and
which the earth seems to have brought forth only for the use of Physic, I
cannot choose but grow withal into a wonderful admiration of the great
industry and careful diligence of our Ancients before-time, who have made
experiments of all things, and left nothing untried: neither reserved they
afterward this hidden knowledge to themselves, nor concealed ought, but were
willing to communicate the same unto posterity for their good and benefit: but
we contrariwise in these days, are desirous to keep secret and to suppress
the labors of other men; yea and to defraud the world of those commodities
which have been purchased they spared not to climb up the top of high
mountains, and to rocks inaccessible; to travel

CHAP. II.
The Latin Authors who have written of herbs, and their natures. At what time
the knowledge of Simples began to be practiced and proffssed in Rome. The first
Greek writers who trauel^d ^n this Argument. The invention of herbs. The
ancient Physic, and the manner of curing diseas^s in old time. What is the
cause that Simples are not now so much used for remedies of diseases

WE Romans have bin more slack and negligent in this behalf than was beseeming
us, considering how otherwise, there was not a nation in the world more
apprehen^ of all virtues and things profitable to this life, than ours. For to
say a truth, M. Ca^o (that famous clerk and great professor, so well seen in
all good Arts and Sciences) was the first (and for a long time the only author)
who wrate of Simples: and howsoever he handled that argument but briefly and
summarily, yet he omitted not the leech-craft belonging also to kine and oxen.
Long after him, C. Valgius (a noble gentleman of Rome, and a man of approved
literature) ^ugustus Caesar the Emperor; as may appear by a preface by him
begun, wherein (after a religious and ceremonious manner of supplication) he
seems to beseech the said prince, That it might please his Majesty
especially, to ^ure all the maladies of mankind. And before his time the only
man among our Latins (as far as ever I could find) who wrote of Simples, was
Pom^ us ^aeus, the vassal or freed man of Pompey the Great. And this was the
first time that the knowledge of this kind of learning was set on foot and
professed at Rome. For Mithridates (the most mighty and puissant king in that
age, whose fortune notwithstanding was to be vanquished and subdued by Pompey)
was well known unto the world not only by the fame that went of him, but also
by good proof and evident arguments, to have bin of all other before his time,
a prince most addicted to the public benefit of all mankind: for the only man
he was who devised to drink i. (...).
one retains his name to this day: he it was also and none but he, as men
think, who first mingled in the said antidotes and preservatives, the blood of
Ducks bred in his own realm of Pontus, for that they fed and lived there, of
poisons and veno^ous herbs. Unto him, that famous and renowned professor in
Physic Asclepiades, dedicated his books now extant: for this Physician being
solicited to repair unto him from Rome, sent the rules of Physic digested
into order, and set down in writing, instead of coming himself. And
Mithridates it was (as it is for certain known) w^o alone Pompey the Great,
having under his hands the whole spoil of this mighty Prince, and meeting in
that saccage with those notes abouesaid, gave commandment unto his vassal or
infranchised servant the abouenamed Lenaeus (an excellent linguist and most
learned grammarian) to translate the same into the Latin tongue: for which act
of Pompey, the whole world was no less beholden unto him, than Euax a King of
the Arabians, wrote a book as touching the virtues and operations of Simples,
which he sent unto the Emperor Nero, Crateuas likewise, Dionysius also, and
Metrodorus, wrote of the same Argument after a most pleasant and plausible
manner (I must needs say,) yet so, as a man could pick nothing almost out of
all their writings, but an infinite difficulty of the thing; for they painted
every herb in their colors, and under their pourtraicts they couched and
subscribed their several natures and effects. But what certainty could there be
therein? pictures, you know, are deceitful; also, in representing such a number
of colors, and especially expressing the lively hew of Herbs according to
their nature as they grow, no marvel if they that limned and drew them out,
did fail and degenerat from the first pattern and original. Antonius Castor (a
right learned and most renowned Physician in our days) who had a pretty garden
of his own well stored with simples of sundry sorts, which he Medea queen of
Colchis, and other women; and especially by Circe our famous witch here in
Italy, who for her singular skill that way, was canonized a goddess. And from
hence it came (I suppose) that Aeschylus a most ancient Poet, made report of
(...).
Italy to be furnished with herbs of mighty operation: and many others have
spoken much of the mountain Circeios bearing her name, wherein the said Lady
sometime dwelt and kept her residence. And for a notable proof of her singular
skill in that kind, the same knowledge in some measure continues unto this day
in the Marsians (a nation descended from a son of hers) who are well known to
have a natural Homer verily (the father and prince of all learning and learned
men, and the best author that we have of antiquities) howsoever otherwise he
was addicted to extol and magnify dame Circe, yet he attributes unto Egypt
the glory and name for good herbs; yea though in his time there was not that
base Egypt watered as now it is, with Nilus: for afterward it grew by the mud
left there by the inundation of the said river. Truly this Poet makes mention
of many singular herbs in Egypt, which the Polydam^, (...) i. the wife of King
T^on. Homer. Odyss^. and Diodorus Siculus Antiqui^. lib. 2.
Kings wife of that country gave to that lady of his, Helena, of whom he
writes so much; and namely, the noble Nepenthes, which had this singular
virtue and operation, To work oblivion of melancholy and heaviness, yea and to
procure easement Helena to this end, That she should communicate and impart it
to the whole world for to be drunk in those cases abouesaid. But the first man
known by all records to have written any thing exactly and curiously of
simples, was Orpheus. As for Musaeus, and Hesiodus after him, in what
admiration they held, and how highly they esteemed the herb Polion above the
rest, I have showed already. Certes, Orpheus and Hesiodus both have highly
commended unto us perfumes and suffumigations. And Homer likewise writes
expressly of certain herbs by name, of singular virtue, which I will put down
in their due places. After him came Pythagoras, a famous Philosopher, who was
the first that composed a book, and made a treatise purposely of sundry herbs,
with their diverse effects; ascribing wholly the invention and original of them
to the immortal gods, and namely, to Apollo and Aesculapius. Democritus
compiled a volume of the same argument. But both he and Pythagoras had
traveled before al over Persis, Arabia, Aethyopia, and Egypt, and there
conferred with the Sages and learned Philosophers of that country, called Magi.
In sum, so far were men in old time ravished with the admiration of herbs and
their virtues, that they bashed not to avouch even incredible things of them.
Xanthus an ancient Chronicler, writes in the first book of his histories, of
a Dragon, which finding one of her little serpents killed, raised it to Thylo,
whom the Dragon had slain, was revived and restored to health again. Also
King Iuba does report, That there was a man in Arabia, who being once dead,
became alive again by the virtue of a certain herb. Democritus said, and
Theophr astus gave credit to his words, That there is an herb, with which a
kind of foul (whereof I have made mention before) is able to make the wedge or
stopple to fly out of the hole of her neast, into which the sheepheards had
driven it fast, in case she bring the same herb, and but once touch the
foresaid wedge therewith. These be strange reports and incredible, howbeit they
draw men into a wonderful opinion of the thing, and fill their heads with a
deep conceit, forcing them to confess, That there is some great matter in
herbs, and much true indeed which is reported so wonderfully of them. And from
Herophilus the renowned Physician may be reckoned: who was of this mind and
gave it out in his ordinary speech, That some herbs there were, which were
effectual and did much good, if a man or woman chanced but to tread upon them
under their feet. And verily, this has bin known and found true by
experience, that some diseases would be more exasperat and angry, yea, and
wounds grow to fretting and inflammation, if folk went but over certain herbs
in the way as they passed on foot. Lo what the Physic in old time was! and how
the same lay wholly couched in the Greek language, and not elsewhere to be
found. But what might (...).
dread and fear of water: neither could they abide to drink, or to hear talk
thereof, and then were they thought to be in a desperate case: it fortuned of
late, that a soldier, one of the guard about the or the prince.
Pretorium was bitten with a mad dog, and his mother saw a vision in her sleep,
giving (as it were) direction unto her for to send the root unto her son for
to drink, of an Eglantine or wild rose (called Cymorrhodon) which the day
before she had espied ^or Lusitania.
Lacetania, the nearest part unto us of Spain. Now, as God would, when the
soldier before said upon his hurt received by the dog, was ready to fall into
that symptom of Hydrophobie, and began to fear water; there came a letter
from his mother, aduertising him to obey the will of God and to do according to
that which was revealed unto her by the vision. Whereupon he drank the root of
the said sweet brier or Eglantine, and not only recovered himself beyond all
men's expectation: but also afterward as many as in that case took the like
receipt, found the same remedy. Before this time, the writers in Physic knew of
no medicinable virtue in the Eglantine, but only of the sponge or little ball,
growing amid the pricky branches thereof, which being burnt and reduced into
ashes, and incorporate with honey into a liniment, makes hair to Our common
Dragons.
Dracunculus, which carried a main stem or stalk an inch or thumb thick, beset
with spots of sundry colors, resembling those of vipers and serpents: and I was
told, that it was a singular remedy against the sting or biting of any
serpents. This Dracunculus differs from another herb of that name, whereof I
spoke in the book going next before, for this has a distinct form from that;
and besides, another strange and wonderful property, namely, to show two foot
or thereabout above ground in the Spring time, when serpents first do cast
their sloughes or skins: and the same is no more seen, at the very time that
serpents also retire into their holes and

CHAP. III.
Of a certain venomous fount aine in Germany: of the herb Britannica. What
diseases they be that put men to the greatest pain.

SO unfortunate is our condition, and so much exposed are we to manifold
calamities, that the Caesar Germanicus made into Germany, after he had passed
over the river Rhene, and had given order to advance forward with his army, he
encamped upon the seacoasts along Friseland, where there was to be found but
one spring of fresh water; and the same so dangerous, that whosoever drunk of
that water, within two years lost all their teeth, and were besides so feeble
and loose iointed in their knees, that uneath they were able to stand. These
diseases the Physicians termed Some think this disease to be the Schorbuck or
Scorbute, which reigns yet at this day.
Stomacace and Sceletyrbe: as one would say, the malady of the mouth, and
palsy of the legs. Yet they found a remedy for these infirmities, and that was
a Which is taken to be our Cochlearia, i. Spoonwort, commonly called
Scorbutgrasse or Scoruy-grasse.
Britannica, which is very medicinable, not only for the accidents of the
sinews and mouth, but also for the squinancy and stinging of serpents. It has
leaves growing somewhat long, and those inclining to a brownish or dark green
color, and the root is black; out of which, as also from the leaves, there is
a juice drawn or pressed. The flowers by a peculiar name be called Vibones:
which being gathered before any thunder be heard, and so eaten, do assure and
secure the parties altogether from that infirmity. The Frisians, near unto
whom we lay encamped, showed our men this herb. But I muse much and wonder what
should be the reason of that name, unless the Frisians bordering upon the
narrow race of the ocean, which lies only between them and England (called in
those days Britanica) should thereupon for the neighborhead and propinquity of
that Island, give it the name Britannica. For certain it is, that it took by
their own names, wherein verily men took no small contentment: according as I
purpose to show by the example of certain kings and princes, whose names live
and continue yet in their Marcus Varro reports of one Servius Clodius a
gentleman or knight of Rome who for the extreme pain of the gout, was forced
to anoint his legs and feet all over with a narcotick or cold poison, whereby
he so mortified the spirits of the muskles and sinews, that he became
paralyticke in that part: and ever after unto his dying day, was rid as well of
all sense, as of the pain of the gout. But say, that in these cases Lucullus a
most brave General, and a captain of great execution, lost his life by such a
love potion. Much less

CHAP. IIII.
Of Moly, and Dodecatheos: of Poeony, otherwise called Pentorobus or Glycyside.
Of Panaces, Asclepium, Heraclium, and Chironium. Of Panaces Centarium or
Pharnaceum. Of

HOmer is of opinion, That the principal and sovereign herb of all others,
is Moly; so called (as he thinks) by the gods themselves The invention or
finding of this herb he Odyss 10.
ascribes unto Mercury: and shows that it is singular against the mightiest
witcheraft and enchantments Homers description, with a round and black bulbous
root to the bigness of an onion, and with a leaf or blade like that of
Squilla, grows at this day about the river or lake Peneus and upon the
mountain Cylleum in Arcadia: also that it is hard to be dug out of the
ground. The Grecian Simplists describe this Moly with a yellow flower, whereas
Homer has written, that it is white. I met with one physician, a skilful
Herbarist, who affirmed unto me, That this Moly grew in Italy also: and in
very truth he brought and showed me a plant which came out of Campaine, about
the digging up whereof among hard and stony rocks, he had bin certain days:
but get he could not the entire root whole and sound, but was forced to break
it off, and yet the root which he showed me was thirty foot long.

Next unto Moly in account and reputation, is that plant which they call
Dodecatheos, for

As touching Paeony, it is one of the first herbs that were ever known and
brought to light, as may appear by the author or inuentor thereof, whose name
it bears still. Some call it Pentorobos: others Glycyside. [where by the way
I am to advertise the Reader, of the difficulty in the knowledge of herbs by
their names, considering that the same herb has in sundry places diverse
appellations.] But to proceed forward with our Paeony: it grows among bleake
and shady mountains, rising up with a stem between the leaves, Paeon. who was
equal in time to Herou les, and ^ued long before the Trojan wary.
4 fingers high, and bearing in the top 4 or 5 heads, fashioned somewhat like to
Filberds, within which there is plenty of seed both Scsquip^dali. Diose, ^a
foot and half.
Fauni which appear in sleep. It is said, that this herb must be gathered in
the night season: for if the Rainbird, woodpeck or Hickway, called Picus
Martius, should chance to spy it gathered, he would fly in the face, and be
ready to peck out the eyes of him or her that had it.

The herb I suppose he means the diseases called Ep^ ^es or Incubus the night
Mase.
Panace, promises by the very name a remedy of all diseases. A number there be
of herbs so called: and all ascribed to some god or other for the invention of
them: for one of (...), i. [a medicine for] allg^iefs; as one would say, All.
heal.
them has the addition of Asclepion, for that Aesculapius had a daughter named
also Panacea. As touching the concret juice named Opopanax, it is drawn from
the root of this plant (being of the Ferula or Fennel kind, such as I have
heretofore showed) by way of incision, the which root has a thick rind, and of
a saltish savor. When the root is pulled out of the ground, there is a
religious Hercules. Some there be who call it Origanum Heracleaticum the wild,
because it is like to Origan, whereof I have heretofore written: but the root of
this Panaces is good for nothing. A third kind of Panaces took the name of
Chiron the Centaur, who was the first that gave intelligence of the herb and
the virtues thereof. The leaf is like unto the Dock, but that it is bigger and
more hairy: the flower is of a golden yellow color: the root but small: it
loves to grow in rich, fat, and battle grounds. The flower of this Panaces is
most effectual in Physic: in which regard there is more use and profit thereof
than of all the former kinds. A fourth Panaces there is besides, found out
also by the same Chiron, whereupon it has the denomination of Centaureum:
called also it is Pharnaceum: the occasion of this two fold name is this:
because there is some controversy in the first invention thereof; whiles
Chiron; others to K. Pharnaces. This Panaces is usually set and planted,
bearing leaves indented in the edges like a saw, and those longer than any of
the rest. The root is odoriferous, which they use to dry in the shadow, and
therewith to aromatize their wine, for a pleasant and delectable taste it
gives unto it. Hereof they have made two special kinds: the one with a
Cr^ssioris. (...), Ex Theophrast.
thicker leaf: the other with a thinner and smaller.

As for Heracleon Siderion, a plant it is also fathered upon Hercules. It
rises up with a slender stalk to the height of four fingers, bearing a red
flower, and leaves in manner of the Coriander. Found it is growing near to
pooles and rivers: and for a wound herb there is not the like, especially if
the body be hurt by sword, or any edged weapon made of iron and steel.

There is a wild Vine, named Ampelos Chironia, for that Chiron was the first
author thereof. Of this plant I have written in my discourse of Vines [vnder
the name of Vitis Nigra] like as also of another Matr^caria or Parthenium, i.
Motherwort.
herb, which has the goddess Minerua for the inuentresse.

Moreover, unto Hercules is ascribed Henbane, which the Latins call
Apollinaris; the Arabians, Altercum or Altercangenon; but the Greeks,
Hyoscyamus. Many kinds there be of it: the one bears black seed, flowers
standing much upon purple; and this herb is full of pricks. And in very truth,
such is the Henbane that grows in Galatia. The common Henbane is whiter,
Vini. Seem read Ueneni, i poison.
wine, and therefore offensive to the understanding, and troubles the head:
howbeit, good use

CHAP. V.
Of Mercury, called Linozostis, Parthenium, Hermupoa, or rather, Mercurialis:
of Achilleum, Panaces, Heracleum, Sideritis and Millefoile: of Scopa regia,
Hemionium, Teucrium, and Splenium: of Melampodium or Ellebore, and how many
kinds there be of it: of the black or white Ellebore, and their medicinable
virtues: how Ellebore is to be given, how to be taken, to whom, and when it is
not to be given: and how it kills Mice and Rats.

THe herb Mercury, called by the Greeks Linozostis and Parthenion, was thought
to be first found out by Mercury: whereupon many of the Greeks call it
Hermu-poa: and we all in boil it in a new earthen vessel never used before,
together with the herb Hellotropium or Hippocrates gives wonderful praise
unto Mercury, as well the male as the female, for all those accidents which
follow women: but the manner of using it, which he prescribed, there is no
Physician has skill of. He appointed to make pessaries thereof with honey oil
of Roses, oil of Ireos or Lillies, and so to put them up into the secret
parts: and in this manner he says that the herb is excellent good for to
provoke the monthly terms of women, and to fetch away the afterbirth. He
affirms also, that a potion of fomentation therewith will do as much. Moreover,
by his saying, the juice of Mercury infused into the ears, or

As Chiron the Centaure found out the medicinable virtues of certain herbs,
so we are beholden to his scholar Achilles for one, which is singular to heal
wounds, and of his name is called Achilleos. This is that wound-herb, wherewith
(by report) he cured prince Telephus. Some have thought that he devised first
the rust of brass or verdegreece, which is so excellent for salues and
plasters: and therefore you shall see Achilles commonly painted scraping off the
rust of his spear head with his sword into the wound of the said Telephus.
Others say, that he took both the said rust or verdegreece, and also the herb
Achilleos to work his cure. Some would have this Achillea to be Panaces
Heracleon; and others Sideritis: we in Latin call it Millefolia. An herb it is
growing with a stalk or stem to the height of a cubit, spreading into many
branches,

In the same age wherein Achilles lived, prince Teucer also gave the first name
and credit to one special herb, called after him Teucrion, which some nominat
Hemionium: this plant puts forth little stalks in manner of rushes or bents,
and spreads low: the leaves be small: it loves grew, it took hold of the
spleen or milt, and claue fast unto it, so as in the end it was seen to have i.
Spleenwort: and there goes a common speech of it, That if swine do eat the
root of this herb, they shall be found without a milt when they are opened.
Some there be, who take for Teucrium and by that name do call, another herb
full of branches in manner of hyssop, leafed like unto beans; and they give
order, that it should be gathered whiles it is in flower; as if they made no
doubt but that it would flower. The best kind of this herb they hold to be that
which comes from the mountains of Cilicia and Pisidia.

Who has not heard of Melampus that famous diuinor and prophet? he it was of
whom one of the Ellebores took the name, and was called Melampodion: and yet
some therebe who attribute the finding of that herb unto a shepherd or
heardman of that name, who observing well that his she goats feeding thereupon,
fell a scouring, gave their milk unto the daughters of king Proetus, whereby
they were cured of their furious melancholy, and brought again to their right
wits. This herb then being of so excellent operation, it shall not be amiss to
discourse at once of all the kinds of Ellebore, whereof this makes one. And to
begin withal, two principal sorts there be of it; namely, the white and the
black: which distinction of color, most writers would have to be meant and
understood of the roots only, and no part else: others there be, who would have
the root of the black Ellebore to be fashioned like unto those of the
Plane-tree, but that they be smaller and of a more dark and duskish green,
divided also into more jags and cuts; but those of the white Ellebore, to
resemble the young Beet new appearing above the ground, save only that they be
of a more blackish color, and along the back part of their concauitie
inclining to red. Both the one and the other brings forth a stalk in fashion
like the Ferula or Fenel-geant Where (...) d^ (...) we^e, (...) whi^ (...)
Cr^kes c^ ^yra.
Pyra. The black Ellebore comes up every where; but the best is in Helicon, a
mountain much renowned and praised for other herbs beside it, wherewith it is
well furnished. As touching the white, that of the mount Oeta is counted the
principal: in a second degree, is the white Ellebore of Pontus: in the third
place Carneades the Philosopher purposing to answer the books of Zeno,
prepared his wits and quickened his spirits, by purging his head with this
Ellebore. And Drusus our Countryman, one of the most famous and renowned
Tribunes of the Commons that were ever known at Rome (a man who above all
others won the favor and applause of the comminalty, howsoever the nobility
charged him a verando, vnde veratores and veraculi: and because such prophets
were counted mad and out of their wits therefore it was so called, for that it
cured such.
Veratrum: the powder as well of the one as the other snuffed up into the
nosthrils, either alone by it self, or mixed with the powder of the Fullers
herb Radicula, wherewith they wash and scour their woollen cloth, (...)
tamentu^ facit, amboque somnu^. I doubt whether this be true: I suppose it
should be read according to the old copy (Somnum discutiunt) (i.) they discuss
or shank off sleep, used to that purpose in lethargies and such drowsy
diseases.
provoke sneezing; and yet both of them procure sleep. Now for use in
Physic, there would be chosen the smallest roots of Ellebor, such as be short
also, and as it were curtelled, and not sharp pointed in the bottom: and the
best part is that which is toward the nether end, for the uppermost part of the
besides, for Hippocrates appoints them to ^athe before, who purge not easily
with Ellebore: and in case of convulsions (...) by the taking thereof, ^e prefer
b^th likewise the bain.
bathing either before or after the taking of Ellebore, as occasion best
required; yea Themison used to prescribe two drams, and not above. The
Physicians who followed after, allowed the dose of four drammes; grounding
upon a notable and famous apothegme or speech of Herophylus, who was wont to
say, that Ellebore was like unto a valiant and hardy captain: for when (quoth
he) it has stirred all the As Radish roots and oxymell.
sharp meats and poignant sauces, to abstain from wine altogether; and the
fourth and third day before, to assay by little and little to vomit gently:
last of all, to forbear supper ouer-night, when he is to take his Ellebore
the morrow. As touching the manner of giving Ellebore: the white may be drunk
in some sweet wine; but the best and chiefest way of taking it, is in milk,
grewell, or pottage. Of late days there is come up a pretty invention, To slit
or cut Radish roots, and within those gashes to stick or enterlace pieces of
white Ellebore, which don, to bind them close up again, that the strength and
virtue thereof may be incorporat in the foresaid roots: and thus by the means
of this kind temperature with the Radish, to give it unto the Patient.
Ordinarily this medicine of Ellebore continues not above four hours within
the body, but it comes up again, and within seven Clinicis some read Cy^is,
and then i^ sig^fieth tho^ that have their mouths d^awn (...) their ^ar (...)
diseas^ is c^lled (...) ^pasmus.
bedridden of the dead palsy or such chronicke diseases, encumbered with the
Sciatica, haunted with the quartaine Ague, which Item, to such as be of a
foeminine and delicate body; as also to those that be in mind effoeminate:
likewise to those who are thin and slender, soft and tender: in which
regards, we may not be altogether so bold to give it unto women as unto men.
In like manner, this is a medicine that would not be ministered inwardly to
fearful, timorous, and faint-hearted persons; neither to those who have any
ulcer in the precordiall region about the midriffe, ne yet unto such as usually
be given to swell in those parts; and least of all unto those that spit or
reach up sores remaining after imposthumes suppurate and broken: mixed with
parched or fried braleygroats

CHAP. VI.
Of the herb Mithridation. Of Scordotis or Scordium. Of Polemonia, and
Philetaeria, otherwise

CRatevas has ascribed the invention of one herb to K. Mithridates himself,
called after his name Mithridation: this plant puts forth no more than two
leaves, and those directly and immediately from the root, resembling the leaves
of Branc-vrsin: there rises up a stem between them both in the mids, carrying
an incarnat flower in the head like a rose.

Pompeius Lenaeus (who by the commandment of Pompey the Great translated into
Latin the Physic notes and receipts of K. Mithridates) says moreover, that
the said prince found out another

Touching Of (...), which signifies, war, or debate.
Polemonia, which others call Philetaeria, it took the name upon ocasion of
the i. as one would say, endued with a thousand virtues. This plant has a
thick and gross root, but small and slender branches, from the tops whereof
there hang down certain berries in tufts and clusters, enclosing within them
black seed: in all other respects it resembles rue, and grows commonly upon
mountains.

As for Agrimony, called otherwise Eupatoria, it has gotten credit and
reputation by a Eupator.
king, as it may appear by the name. The stalk or stem of this herb is of a
woody substance, blackish in color, hairy, and of a cubit in height, or
rather more. The leaves grow disposed and distant by certain spaces asunder,
much like unto those of cinquefoile or hemp, snipped and cut about the edges
ordinarily in five parts; the same are of a blackish or dark green, and full of
a kind of

The greater * Centaury is that famous herb wherewith Chiron the Centaure (as
the report Rh^pontick.
goes) was cured, at what time as having entertained Hercules in his cabin,
he would needs be handling and tempering with the weapons of his said guest,
so long until one of his arrows light upon his foot and wounded him
dangerously: whereupon some there be who name it Chironion. The leaves grow
large, broad, and long, indented or cut rather, like a saw round about the
edges: near unto the root they come up very thick: the stems run up three
cubits high, full of knots and joints all the way: knobbed in the top like unto
Poppie heads: the root is of a mighty bigness, inclining to a red color,
howbeit tender and easy to break or knap in sunder: two cubits draw a juice in
manner of Lycium. Of such efficacy it is to incarnat wounds, that (by report)
if

Another Centaury there is, syrnamed also in Greek Lepton (i. Small) for that
it has little leaves in comparison of the other: some name it Libadion, for
that it loves to grow near to springs or fountains: it is somewhat like to
Origan, save that the leaves be narrower and longer: the stalk is cornered,
rising up to a small height; to wit, a hand-breadth or a span at most: the same
also puts forth little branches: the flower has some resemblance of the
Lychnidis.
red-Rose campion: the root is small, and needless for any Physic use: but
the juice of the herb it self, is Our common Centaury.
Centaury, which we here in Italy call Fell Terrae, i. the Gal of the earth, by
reason of the exceeding bitterness which it has: the Gauls term it Exacos,
because if it be drunk it sends downward by seege out of the body, any
hurtful poison whatsoever.

There is a third Centaury named Centauris, known by the addition Triorches:
whosoever comes to cut this herb, he quits himself well and escapes fair,
if he wound not himself. This plant yields forth a certain red juice like
unto blood. Theophrastus has delivered in Our Buzzards (as ^urner thinks)
to encounter and fight with them that come to gather it; whereupon it took the
foresaid name Triorchis. But many ignorant and unskillful persons there be, who
write confusedly of all these Centauries, and attribute this last property and
name, to the first Centaurie the great.

CHAP. VII.
Of Clymenos, Gentian, Lysimachia, Parthenis or Artemisia, Ambrosia, Nymphaea,
Heraclium, and Euphorbium, with their operations in Physic.

THe herb Clymenos bears the name of K. Clymenus, the first inuenter and
finder out thereof:

As for the herb Gentian, we must acknowledge Gentius king of the Illyrians for
the Author and patron thereof, for he brought it first into name and credit:
and howsoever it grow in all places, yet the best is that which is found in
Illyricum or Sclauonia. The leaves come near in fashion and form to those of
the Ash tree, but that they be small in manner of Lettuce: the stem is tender,
of a thumb thickness, hollow as a kex and void with in: leafed here and there
with certain spaces between, growing up other while 3 cubits high. The root is
pliable and will wind every way, somewhat black or duskish, without any smell
at all: it grows in great plenty upon

Lysimachia, the herb so much commended by Erasistratus, bears the name of
king Lysimachus, who first gave light of the virtues that it has: green
leaves it bears like unto those Odore acri: Surely our h^b Willow or
Lysimachia has a kind of sharp cool (...) unpleasant: although P^iny use the
word (acri) for hot and biting, in other places. Hereupon it might well be
called (...), (i.) (...), and not of K. Lysimachus.
sharp smell it carries with it, and delights to live in watery places. Of
so effectual virtue it is, that if it be laid upon the yoke of two beasts
which will not draw gently together, it staieth their strife and makes them
agree well enough.

Not men only and great kings, but women also and queens have affected this
kind of glory, To give names unto herbs. Thus queen Artemisia wife to Mausolus
king of Caria, eternized her own name by adopting (as it were) the herb
Mugwort to her self, calling it Artemisia, whereas before, it was named
Parthemis. Some there be who attribute this denomination unto Diana (called in
Greek Artemis Ilithya) because it is of special operation to cure the maladies
incident to women. It brancheth and busheth thick much like to wormwood, but
that the leaves be bigger, fat and well liking withal. Of this Mugwort there be
two kinds: the one carries broad Or rather Botrys (i oak of I^salem) is of some
called Artemisia, of others Ambrosia, as says Dioscorid^s.
Botrys, others Ambrosia: and of this kind there is great store in Cappadocia.

Water lilly.
Nenuphar is called in Greek Nymphaea, the original of which herb and name
also, arose by occasion of a certain maiden Nymph or young lady, who died for
jealousy that she had conceived of prince Hercules whom she loved: and
therefore by some it is named also Heraclion, of others Rhopalos, for the
resemblance that the root has to a club or mace. But to come again Water-rose.
Nemphar or Nymphaea there is, growing in Thessaly, within the river Peneus,
with a white root, but a yellow flour in the head about the bigness of a rose.

No longer ago than in our forefathers days, Iuba king of Mauritania, found
out the herb Euphorbia, which he so called after the name of his own Physician
Euphorbus, brother to that learned Musa Physician to Augustus Caesar, who saved
the life of the said Emperor, as heretofore I have declared. These two brethren
Physicians, joined together in counsel, and gave direction for to wash the
body all over in much cold water, after the hot baine or stouve, thereby to
knit and bind the pores of the skin: for before their time, the manner was to
bathe in hot water only, Homer. But now to return unto our herb Euphorbia, the
foresaid K. Iuba wrote one entire book (at this day extant) wherein he does
nothing else but expressly set forth the commendable virtues and properties of
this one herb. He found the same first upon the mountain Atlas, where it was to
be seen (says he) bearing leaves resembling Branc-vrsin: so strong and
forcible it is, that those who receive the juice or liquor issuing from it,
must stand a good way off; for the manner is to lance or wound it first, and
then presently to retire back, and so at the end of a long pole to put under
it a paile or trey made of kids or goats leather for a receptory; into which
there runs forth out of the plant, a white liquour like unto milk: which
when it is dried and grown together, resembles in show a lump or mass of
Frank incense. They that have the gathering of this juice called Euphorbium,
find this benefit thereby, Or the upper part of the hurt place.
crown [of the head] and apply thereto this medicinable liquor, it will surely
cure it. But in that country, the Getulians (who commonly do gather Euphorbium,
for that they border upon the mount Atlas) sophisticate it with goats milk.
Howbeit, fire will soon detect this imposure of

CHAP. VIII.
Of Plantain, Buglosse, and Borrage. Of Cynoglossa or Hounds tongue. Of
Buphthalmus, i. Ox eye, or Stetterwoort, or Bears foot, as some think.
Hiberis. Of Celendine the great, Canaria and Elaphoboscos. Of Dictamnum,
Aristolochie or Hertwort: That fish are delighted so much therewith, that they
will make have unto it, and be soon taken. Also the medicinable virtues of
those herbs above named.

THemison, a famous Physician, set forth a whole book of the herb Way-bred or
Plantaine, wherein he highly praises it: and challenges to himself the honor
of first finding it out, notwithstanding it be a triuiall and common herb,
trodden under every man's foot. Two kinds of it be found: the one which is the
lesser, has also narrower leaves, and inclining more to a blackish green,
resembling for all the world sheep * or lambs tongues, the stalk is cornered
Whereupon it seems to be called in Greek (...).
bending downward to the ground, and it grows ordinarily in medows. The other
is greater, with

To Plantain may be joined the herb * Buglossos, so called, for that the leaf
is like an Ox Our Borrage.
tongue. This herb has one special property above the rest, that if it be put
into a cup of wine

Unto this for affinity of name, it were good to annex Cynoglossos, i. Hounds
tongue, for the resemblance that the leaves have to a dogs tongue: a proper
herb for vinet-works and knots in gardens. It is commonly said, That the root
of that Cynoglossos which puts forth 3 stems or stalks, and those bearing
seed, if it be given to drink, cures tertian agues: but the root of that which
has four, is as good for the Quartains. Another * Cynoglossos there is like
to it, which This is our common Hou^d-tongue with little burs.
carries small burs: the root whereof being drunk in water, is a singular
counterpoison against the venom of toads and serpents.

An herb there is with flours like unto ox eyes, whereupon it took the name in
Greek * Buphthalmos: Some call them Moons. Schirrhomata, otherwise Stocomata,
which be hunches or swellings in the flesh full of a greasy matter.
from the root plentifully, which being boiled, are good to be eaten. Some
there be who call it Cachla. This herb made into a salve with wax, resolves
all * schirrous and hard swellings.

Other plants there be, which bear the names not of men but of whole nations,
which first found them and their virtues out. And to begin withal, beholden we
are to Scythia for that which is called Scythica. It grows notwitstanding in
Boeotia, and is exceeding sweet in taste. Also there is another of that name,
singular good for the cramps, called by the Greeks Spasmata. An excellent
property it has besides, for that whosoever holds it in their mouth, shall for
the time be neither hungry nor thirsty. Of the same operation there is another
herb among the Theophrastus writes the like of the sweet root or Liquorice and
Hippace, that is, cheese made of mares milk: but not of any herb Hippice
Hippice, because it works the like effect in horses, keeping them from hunger
and thirst. And if it be true that is reported, the Scythians with these herbs
will endure without meat or drink for twelve days together.

Touching the herb Ischaemon, the Thracians first found out the rare virtue
that it has in stanching blood, according as the very name implies. For (say
they) it will stop the flux of blood

The people in Spain named Vettones, were the first authors of that herb,
which is called in France * Vettonica, in Italy Serratula, and by the Greeks
Cestron or Psychotrophon: Surely an Betony:
excellent herb this is, and above all other simples most worthy of praise. It
comes forth of the ground, and rises up with a cornered stalk, to the heigh
of two cubits, spreading from the very root leaves of the bigness of Sorrel,
cut in the edges, or toothed in manner of a saw, with

In the same Spain grows * Cantabrica, lately found by the people Cantabri,
and no longer A kind of wild Gillofio.
since than in the days of Augustus Caesar. This herb is to be seen every
where, rising up with a benty or rushy stalk a foot high, upon which you may
behold small long flowers, like to cups or beakers, wherein lie enclosed very
small seeds. Certes, to speak the truth of Spain, it has bin Much like to the
Welsh Metheglin.
round about the table, made of honied wine or sweet mead, with a hundred
distinct herbs in it: and they are persuaded that it is the most pleasant and
wholsomest drink that can be devised: yet there is not one amongst them all
who knows precisely what special herbs there be in all that number, in this
only they be all perfect, that there go a hundred several kinds thereto,
according as the name does import.

In our age we remember well, that there was an hero discovered in the Marsians
country: and yet it grows also amongst the people named Aequiccol^, near
unto the borough Neruesia, and they call it * Consiligo: this is a sovereign
plant, as we shall show hereafter in place convenient, Beare-foot:


Of late days Servilius Damocrates, a famous practitioner in Physic, brought
to light an herb which he termed Hiberis, a devised and fained name for his own
pleasure, and nothing significant, as may appear by a certain * Poem that he
made as touching the discovery of that herb. It comes up most willingly
about old tombs and sepulchers, decayed walls, and ruinat buildings, Written in
Iambicke verses as appears in Galen.
in vntoiled and neglected places, and namely, common high ways. It bears
flowers at all times, and is leaued like to Cresses: the maine stalk is a
cubit high: but the seed so fine and small, that hardly they can discern it.
The root also has the very smell of Cresses: it serves to many good purposes,
but with most success in Summer time, and never but when it is green and

Moreover other living creatures also there be besides men, to which we are to
attribute the invention of herbs: as first and principally, the great *
Celendine, called in Greek Chelidonia, our Celendine
for that the old Swallows with the help of this herb help their young ones
to see again, yea though their eyes were plucked out of their head, as some are
of opinion. Of this herb there be two kinds: the greater, which puts forth
many stems, and those full of branches, bears leaves (...). (...) read (...)
C^ ^oot, o^t o^ (...).
Parsnep, but that they be larger. The herb it self grows up to the height
of two cubits. The leaves be whitish or hoary, like as the whole plant it
self, al save the flower, which is yellow. The whole herb yields a biting
and fretting juice, of the color of Safron: and it brings forth seed
resembling that of Poppy. The less (...), i. Pilewort o^ Figwort. This
floureth sooner, to wit, in February.
Celendine is seen with leaves fashioned much after the Ivy, but that they be
rounder. Both Celendines do flower in the spring about the time that the
swallows come abroad and show themselves unto us, and those flowers begin to
fade again upon the departure of that bird from us. The only time to draw or
press their juice from them, is whiles they be in the flower: which if it be
put into a brazen pan, and sees gently upon hot embers or ashes only, together
with the best Atticke honey, is a singular medicine to discuss and scatter the
cloudy filius that dim the eie-sight. The said juice alone

Touching the Dogs grass Canaria, it took that name in Latin, because dogs use
therewith to discharge their gorge and whet their stomachs when their appetite
to meat is gone. A strange thing of these dogs: we see them chew this herb in
our sight ordinarily every day, yet so, as we never can tell which With us they
do^ ^at the (...) Quich grass.
herb it is that they have bitten: for we may perceive it only when it is eaten
down. But no marvel if this creature be so spightful as to conceal from us a
purgative herb, considering a greater malice that he shows in another: for it
is said, that if a dog be bitten by a serpent, he has recourse by and by to a
certain herb that cures him presently; but he will be

Yet the poor hinds (simple and harmless creatures they) are not so coy and
dainty of their knowledge, for they have showed us the plant Gratia Dei.
Elaphoboscon, whereof I have already written: like as the herb Which the old
Romans called (...) wh^ (...) (...) thinks that Silu^ (...). a break fast,
(...) the name: because they used before dinner or noone r^fection, to drink a
draught of wine aromatized with this h^arbe.
Seselialso, which presently after they have calued, they feed upon in our
sight, and make it not strange. Nay, they have not thought much to impart to us
the virtue of the herb Dictamnus (as I have partly declared heretofore) for we
may evidently see them after they be shot or wounded, to go forthwith unto
this herb, and no sooner have they eat of it, but immediately the arrows or
darts wherewith they were hurt and sticking in them, fall out of their bodies.
This plant is found growing no where but in the Island Candy. The branches be
exceeding fine and slender: it resembles in some sort Penyroial. At the
tongues end hot it is and biting. And the leaves only are in use: for In
Dioscor. whom P^y seems here to translate, it should b^ read (...), (...),
no^ (...), that is, (...) nor seed is (...): for that ^t has flowers,
appears by U^rgil 12 Ae^id. (...) these (...): Dictam (...) ^enitrix Cre^a
ca^pit ab Ida, (...) fol^s. and fl^re (...). (...), etc.
neither flower nor seed it has, ne yet any stem or stalk. Yet. (...). faith
that it help^s women (...) sp^edy ch^ldbirth.
needless for any good it does in Physic: a rare plant this Dictamnus is, for
even in Candy, the natural place thereof, it grows not every where, but within
some small compass of ground within that Isle: and there Goats have a
wonderful desire to be feeding upon it. Mary in lieu of this true Dictamnus,
there is a bastard kind found in many countries, called Pseudodictamnum: in
leaf it resembles the other, the branches be less: and some there be who
name it Chondris. That it is of weaker operation, and nothing so effectual as
the former, a man shall soon find by the taste: for take never so little of
the right Dictamnum into the mouth it sets it presently on a fire. They that
use to gather these Dictamnes, bestow them close sirapped within the stems of
Ferula or reeds, and then bind them fast for that those kind of cattle, feed
indifferently in manner of all kind of herbs. Certes, of what Diomedes causey,
there lie certain pastures, wherein all the horses that feed, become enraged,
and stark wood thereby. Semblably, the herbage belonging to Potniae, a town in
Magnesia, drives Asses to a kind of madness.

Leaving now those herbts which took their appellations of beasts, let us
proceed to others. Among which, Aristolochia deserves to be ranged with the
best and principal: an herb which seems to have had that name given it by
great bellied women, for that it is i. Excellent good for women in childbed.
Wh^rein I^ny is s^mewhat ouerseen but h^ error is not great, seeing that women
with child use ordinarily also to b^ brought a bed and lie in.
(...). Our Countrymen of Italy call this herb in Latin Malum terrae, which
is as much to say, as the Meant by Aristolochie or Birthwort the round.
Apple of the earth: and they do make four kinds thereof. The first has a
round root swelling Any herb good to provoke fl^shly lust. For although there
be a special herb of that virtue so called, yet by a kind of Synecdo^he, all
others of like operation may be termed Satyria.
Satyrion.

It remains now to knit up this discourse with a rehearsal of all the
operations and effects of the plants before named. To begin then with the most
dangerous accident of al other; to wit the sting of serpents, these herbs
following are very medicinable and effectual in that case: namely,
Brittannica, and the roots of all the kinds of Panaces taken in wine. The
flower and seed besides (of Chironium especially) if it be drunk, or otherwise
applied as a liniment with wine outwardly applied upon the wound, be it in
juice, substance of leaf, or decoction, it skilleth not

CHAP. IX.
Of Argemonie, Agarick, and Echium. Of Henbane and Veruaine. Of Blattaria and
Lemonia.

THe root of Argemonia taken to the weight of one Roman denier in 3 cyaths of
wine, is singular against the sting of serpents. And since I am come to mention
this herb, I think it convenient to discourse farther thereof: like as of
other simples also, which I mean to name first, before that I treat of their
virtues and effects. And in this course of setting down medicines, ever as I
meet with any herb of any singularity, I will range it there whereas I know it
to be most sovereign and effectual. Well, this An herb like to the wild
Poppie.
Argemony aforesaid has leaves like to Anemony, i. Rose Persly or Windfloure:
jagged they be in manner of garden Parsley. Heads it bears

Touching Agaricke, it is a fungous excrescence growing out of certain trees
near unto the straits of Bosphorus, much like unto a white Mushrum. The
ordinary dose or receipt thereof, to be given, bruised, and beaten small into
powder, is to the weight of two drams in two cyaths of Oxymel or honied
vinegar. That which is found in Gaul or France, is thought to be weaker

Echium is of two kinds. One of them is like to Peniroyall, garnished and
crowned (as it were) with tufts of leaves in the head: which being given to the
weight of two drams in 4 cyaths of wine, is singular good for the venom of
serpents, inflicted by their sting. The like effect has the other also, which
is distinctly known from the other by the rough and prickie down that the
leaves do bear, and it carries in the top little knobs resembling vipers
heads: and this may be taken either in wine or in vinegar, choose you whether.

The great Clot-bur, called in Greek Arcion, some have named in Latin
Personata. There is not a plant in the field that carries a broader leaf, and
besides, furnished it is with as big Burs. The root of this herb boiled, the
Physicians prescribe to be given in vinegar to drink against the sting
ofserpents.

Henbane, stamped leaves and all, singular to be taken in wine, especially
against the sting

But of all other herbs, there is none more honored among the Romans than i.
Vervaine.
Hierobotane, called also otherwise in Greek Peristereon: which we in Latin
name Verbenaca. This is that herb, which (as I have declared heretofore) our
Ambassadors use to carry with them when they go to denounce war, and to give
defiance unto our enemies. With this herb the feastiuall table of Daepalis.
Arnob. lib. 2.
Jupiter is wont to be swept and cleansed with great solemnity; our houses also
be rubbed and hallowed, for to drive away ill spirits. And hereof be two kinds.
That which they take to be the female, is stored well with leaves; the male
has them growing but thin: yet both of them put forth many small and slender
branches, commonly a cubit long, and cornered. The leaves be lesser and
narrower than those of the Oak, but deeper they be indented, and the partition
wider: the flowers be of a Flos Glaucus,
gray color, the root long and small. It grows every where upon

An herb there is much resembling Mullen or Langwort, and indeed so like as
oftentimes one is taken for the other, howbeit, the leaves be not altogether so
white, and more little branches it puts forth, bearing likewise a pale
yellow flower: cast this herb or strew it in any place all the moths there
about will gather to it, whereupon at Rome they call it Blattaria.

The herb Lemonium yields a white juice, much like unto milk, which will
harden and grow together in manner of a gum: and it grows in moist places.
The weight of one denarius given in wine, is a singular preservative against
the dangerous sting of serpents.

As for Cinque soil or five leaued grass, there is not one but knows it: so
common it is, Pliny herein err^th grossly. Indeed the leaves of (...) are much
like to the Strawberrie ^afe: but as the one has no fruit or b^ry at all, so
the other (to wit the strawberrie wire) puts forth but three leaves.
strawberries which it bears. The Greeks call it Pentapetes, Chamaezelon, or
Pentaphyllon: the Latins Quinquefolium. The root when it is new dug,
looks red: but as it begins to dry above ground, so it waxes black, and
becomes also cornered. It took the common name both in Greek and Latin, of
the number of leaves which it bears. This herb herein is of great affinity
with the vine, that they both bud, spring leaf, and shed the same together. It
is used also about purging and blessing of the house, against naughty spirits
or enchantments.

As for Sparganium, an herb so called by the Greeks, the root thereof is good
to be given in white wine against venomous serpents.

Of Carrots, Petronius Diodotus has set down 4 several kinds. But what need I
to go through them all four, seeing they may be reduced well enough into The
^ame and the wild.
twain, and do require no other distinctions. The best and most approved
Carrots be those of Candy: the next to which in goodness come out of Achaia.
But generally in what country soever they grow, the better be such as come up
in the sounder and drier grounds. As touching the Candy Carot, it resembles

Touching the herb Therionarca (I mean not that which the Magitians use) it
grows also

Persolata, which the Greek writers call Some take it to be the Clot bur, or
B^tterbur.
Arcion, there is not one but knows: large leaves it has, and bigger than
the very Gourds; more hairy, blacker also and thicker; a white root and a
great: this root taken in wine to the weight of two deniers Roman, is good
likewise against the venom of serpents. In like manner, the root of Cyclaminus
or Sow-bread is as effectual against them all: leaves it has somewhat
resembling those of Ivy, but that they be of a more duskish and sad green,
smaller also and without corners, wherein a man may perceive certain whitish
(i.) cut into thin slices or roundles, then dried, and so laid up: the same
also is usually sodden to the consistence or thickenesse (...), Dioscor. idest,
I cafed like to Ivy.
Cissanthemos, growing with stems full of knots or joints, hollow within and
good for nothing; far different from the former, winding and clasping about
trees; bearing berries much like to those of Ivy, but they are soft; a white
flower fair and lovely to see too, but a needless root for any goodness in
it: the berries that it bears be only in use, and those are of a sharp and
biting taste, and yet they be viscous and clammy to the tongue: these being
dried in the shadow and stamped, are afterward reduced into to it, most
account is made of that in Samothrace: a slender stalk it carries and a long,
resembling

CHAP. X.
Of ground Elder or Wallwoort. Of Mullen or Taper wort. Of the Aconit called
Thelyphonos. Of remedies against the prick of Scorpions, the venom of
Hedge-toads, the biting of mad Dogs: and generally against all poisons.

THe smoke or perfume also of VValwort (a common herb and known to every man)
chaseth and puts to flight any serpents. The juice of Sauge de bois.
Polemonia, is a proper defensatiue especially against scorpions, if one have
it tied about him or hanging at his neck: likewise it resists the prick of
the spiders Phalangia, and any other of these venomous vermins of the smaller
sort. Aristolochia has a singular virtue contrary unto serpents: so has
Agaricke, if four oboli thereof be drunk in as many cyaths of some
artificial or compound aromatized wine. Vervaine is a sovereign herb also
against the venomous spider Phalangium, being taken in wine or oxycrat, i.
vinegar and water: so is Cinquefoile, and the yellow Carrot.

That herb which the Latins call Verbascum, i. Lungwort or Hightaper is named
in Greek Some take these for the Cowslip and Primrose.
Phlomides, both of them hairy; their leaves be round, and they grow but low. A
third sort there is be sides, named by some Lychnitis, and by others Thryallis:
it shows 3 leaves or four at the most, and those be thick and fat, good to
make wyks or matches for lights. It is said,

There is an herb called by some Aconitum Pardalianches, Libard-baine.
Thelyphonon, by others Scorpion, for the resemblance that the root has to the
Scorpion; and yet if Scorpions be but touched therewith, they will die
thereupon: no marvel therefore if there be an ordinary drink made of it
against their poison: [and here comes to my mind that which I have heard;
namely, that if a dead scorpion be rubbed with the white Ellebore root, it will
revive and quicken again.] The said Thelyphonon has such a spightful nature
against the four-footed beasts [of the female sex] that if the root be laid of
Plantaine likewise, is a singular remedy for their poison.

Moreover, Frogs (such especially as keep in bushes and hedges, and be called
in Latin Rubetae, i. toads) are not without their venom: I my self have seen
these vaunting Montebanks calling themselves Psylli, as coming from the race
of those people Psylli who feared no kind of poison; I have seen them (I say)
in a bravery (because they would seem to surpass all others of that
profession) to eat those toads baked red hot between 2 platters; but what
became of them? they caught their bane by it, and died more suddenly than if
they had bin stung by the Aspis: but what is the help for this rank poison?
surely the herb Some take it for Ru^a m^ralis, or Saluia vita, a kind of (...)
or rather Maiden-haire.
Phrynion drunk in wine. Some call it Neuras, others Poterion: pretty flours it
bears: the roots be many in number, full of strings like unto sinews, and the
same of a sweet and pleasant sent. Likewise Alisura is counted another remedy
in this case: an herb it is, called by some Damosorium, by others Liron: the
leaves might be taken for Planta in, but that they be narrower, more iagged and
plaited, bending also toward

What remains now but in the next place, to treat as well of such sorceries
and maleficiall poisons, as men have devised and practiced to the mischief of
their own kind, as of their remedies? Homer, as a sovereign preservative not
only against all those wicked inventions, but also against the secret and
devilish practices; to wit, charms and enchantments, wrought by Art magic and
witchcraft. Next unto which, the herbs Whereof he writes in the beginning of
the sixth chapter of this book.
Mithridation, Scordotis, and Centaury: also the seed of Betony drunk in honied
wine or sweet cuit: the powder also of the dried herb it self, to the weight
of one dram taken in 4 cyaths of old wine, does expel out of the body and
euacuat by the seege any poison whatsoever; but the patient must be forced to
vomit up the first potion, and then to recharge again and take another draught
of the foresaid medicine. And verily it is a common speech, That whosoever use
to taste every day a little of Betony, Euploea indeed signifies in Homer, a
bon-voiage, or prosp^rous nauigatio^: but what is that to this place? No doubt
P^nie should have read in Theophrastus (...) which is no herb, but the
happiness of a good name among men, whereof ^liny speaks here, and which
Theophrsius attributes to Antirrhinon, as one of the effects of that herb.
But lay the fault (I pray you) as well here as elsewhere, upon Plinies
A^agnosts or Readers, who either read wrong, or pronounced not their words
distinctly and (...) unto him.
Euploea; and they affirm, That if any man or woman be anointed therewith,
they shall grow in great credit and reputation with the people. Moreover, they
say, that the herb Artemisia or Mugwort will preall those who have it about
them, from witchcraft, sorcerie, and poison, from danger by venomous So
called, because the fruit claspeth round about the stem or stalk of the herb.
Pericarpum: whereof be two sorts, the one has a red bark or rind [about the
root;] the other a black, and is like unto the Poppy; of greater operation this
is than the former; but both of them be very hot: which is the reason, they
serve to good purpose for to be given unto them that have drunk Hemlock:
against which venomous herb, Frankincense, and Panaces (especially that which
they call Chironium) be counted singular: and this Panaces also last named, is
an excellent antidote for them that are poisoned with venomous Mushroms.

CHAP. XI.
Proper receipts and remedies for the diseases of the head.

SInce we are waded so far into the deep secrets of Physic, it will not be
amiss to proceed forward and to set down many good medicines for all the
maladies incident either in general to the whole body, or particularly to
every special part and member thereof, beginning first at the head.

There is an unseemly accident happening otherwhiles to the head, and
disgraceth it much, called Because foxes are much subject unto it, who are
c^led in Greek Alopekes
Alopecia, when as the hair unnaturally falls off. The cure of this
inconvenience, is to make a liniment with the roots of Nymphaea and Hemlocke
stamped together, and therewith Capillus veneris, or Maidenhaire.
Lingulaca, which loves to grow about * Adders tongue.
springs or fountains, and is singular for the same imperfection of shedding
hair, if the root together with the leaf burnt and beaten to powder, be
incorporate with the grease of a black sow (but in any wise she must be a young
guilt that never farrowed or had pigs) and so brought into a liniment, and the
head rubbed and anointed therewith: with this charge besides, That after

Touching the scurse or brannie scales called Dandruffe, the root of Veratrum
or Ellebore, sodden either in oil or water, makes a most excellent medicine
to rid it away, and to cleanse the head thereof.

As for headache, the roots of all the kinds of Panaces, stamped and tempered
with oil, do cure the same: so does Aristolochia and Iberis, if they be
applied in manner of a frontall and bound to the forehead, the space of an
hour or longer if the Patient can abide it, so that a bath be used presently
upon it. The yellow carot also called in Latin Daucum, is a good remedy for
the pain in the head. Moreover, the foresaid herb or root Cyclaminos, if it be
mixed with honey

For the lousy disease, wherein lice and such vermin crawle in exceeding
abundance all over the head, there is not a better medicine than an ointment
made of hyssope and oil stamped and incorporat together: the same likewise
kills the itch in the head. Now the best hyssop is that of Cilicia, growing
upon the mountain Taurus: and in a second degree, there is reckoning

Lonchitis is not the same herb (as most men have thought) that Xiphion or
Phasganion, although the seed be pointed like to a spear head; for it bears
leaves resembling leeke blades, which toward the root be red, and more in
number than about the stem it self: it carries little heads in the top, made
after the fashion of maskes or visors, such as players in Comoedies are wont to
wear, lilling out pretty little tongues, and the roots be exceeding long, and
yet it grows in dry grounds far from water. Contrariwise, Our Glader or
Flags.
Xiphion or Phasganion delights in waterish Carpentis.
under cart or wagon wheels: lastly, the same is an effectual remedy against
poisons.

But to return again to the head ach; the said Ellebore boiled either in
common oil, or else [i. Hare-strange] being incorporat in oil of roses and
vinegar. The same also being laid unto the head warm, does mitigat the pain
called the migram, when as the one half of the head does ache; and it cures
beside, the dizzinesse of the brain. The root of Peucedanum made into an
ointment and used accordingly, provoke sweat, by reason of the hot nature
that it has, which is burning and causticke. The herb Fleawort, which some call
Psyllion, others Cynoides, Chrystallion, Sicelion, and Cynomyia, has a small
root, whereof there is little or no use in Physic. The branches that it
brings forth, be slender and pliable in manner of vine shoots, bearing in the
top certain big berries or knobs like unto beans; the leaves not unlike to
Whereupon it is called Cynoides.
dogs heads; the seed resembles dogs fleas, whereupon it has that name
Cynomyia, and the same lies within (...), Dodonae^d ^st Water-parsley
Thysselium, not unlike to garden Parsley:

CHAP. XII.
Receipts for the diseases of the eyes, made of Centaurie, Celendine, Panaces,
Henbane, and Euphorbium.

IT is thought that the Rha-pontick (which is the greater Centaurie) helps
the eie-sight very much, if a fomentation be made therewith and water
together. The juice of the less Centaurie tempered with honey and applied,
helps the imperfections of the eyes; namely, when passes them all, and is a
sovereign medicine for all such imperfections. The root of Panaces Pro
Meconio: and yet in Dioscorides it is (...).
in stead of the foresaid Opium or Poppy juice. Moreover, Euphorbium clarifies
the eie-sight, if there be an inunction made therewith. For bleered eyes, it is
good to drop the juice of Plantain into them. As for the thick mists that
hinder the eie-sight, Aristolochia does discuss and resolve them. The herb
Iberis bound unto the forehead, together with Cinquefoile, stops the fall of
humors into the eyes, and cures all other maladies incident unto them. Mullen
or Lungwort is likewise a great defensatiue against the foresaid rheums which
have taken a course to the eyes and cause them (i. Hare-strange) it is (as I
said before) a notable medicine for to clear the sight, and rid away the muddy
mists before the eyes, if it be laid to with Opium and oil rosat. Finally,
Flea-woort staieth and keeps up the flux of humors into the eyes, if the
forehead be anointed with the mucilage thereof.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Pimpernell, named Anagallis and Corchoros. Of Mandragoras or Circeium. Of
Hemlocke,

THe herb Pimpernell, some call Anagallis, others Corchoros. Of it be found
two kinds; the male with a red flower, the female with a blew: neither of them
both be taller than the hand-bredth or a span at most: tender they be likewise
in all parts: the leaves be very small, round, and lying upon the ground: they
grow as well the one as the other in gardens and watery places: that with the
blew flower blows first: the juice of them both tempered with honey,
dispatcheth [i. the wild and cruel eye, or Margellane.] Some there be, who set
down certain ceremonies and circumstances to be observed by them who are to dig
or pluck up this herb; namely, That they go to this business before the
Sunrising, and salute or bid good morrow to it three times, before they speak
any other word that morning; and then to take it up and cast it on high: which
don, to press forth the juice of it. Thus ordered forsooth, they say it is of
better operation, and will do the deed surely.

Touching Euphorbium, what it is I have sufficiently spoken. The juice thereof
is singular for bleered eyes, especially if they be swelled withal: likewise
wormwood stamped and incorporat with honey: as also the powder of Betony. There
grows many times a fistulous ulcer between the corner of the eye and the
nose, called Aegilops; for to heal which sore, there is a sovereign Aegilops.
Some take it for wild O^s; others for Da^ell.
name growing among Barley: in blade or leaf it resembles that of wheat: the
seed or grain whereof, beaten into powder and mixed with meal or flower, or
the juice drawn out of the herb, they use for the said purpose to apply unto
the affected place in manner of a salve or liniment. Now the said juice must be
pressed out of the stalk and leaves thereof, whiles they be fresh and fullest
of sap: but then the haw or ear that it bears, ought to be taken away, which
being incorporat with the flower of three months corn, is made up into bals or
trosches. Some were wont in this cure to use the juice also of Mandragoras, but
they gave it over afterward. Howbeit, for certain, the root of Mandragoras
bruised or stamped, and tempered with the oil of roses and wine, cures
weeping and watering eyes; yea, and assuageth their pain: and the said juice,
how soever it be rejected in the former case, goes into many collyries or
eye-salues.

This herb Mandragoras, some writers call Circeium; and two kinds there be of
it: the white which is supposed the male; and the black, which you must take
for the female: the leaves of this female resemble those of the Whereupon it is
called Thridacias.
Lectuce, but that they be narrower: hairy also they are, and al of an
Aequalibus, not caulibus, for Mardrage, bears no (...)
equal bigness. Two or three roots it has and those of a reddish or russet
color without, but white within: of a fleshy substance and tender, running
down into the earth almost a cubit in length. A certain fruit or apple they
bear, of the bigness of Filberds or Hazel-nuts, within which there be seeds
like unto the pippens or Pears. The white Mandrage some name Arsen, (i) the
male; others i. Membrum viril^, vel Ceni^ale.
Morion: and there be again who call it Hypophlomos. The white leaves of this
Mandrage be broader than the other, and indeed equal to the garden Docke or
Patience: In the digging up of the root of Mandrage, there are some ceremonies
observed: first they that Other Herbarists describe Mandrages without a stem or
stalk.
stem likewise being first headed or the top cut off; and also of the root,
which sometime they do pounce and prick for to let out the liquor, otherwhiles
they boil it: and the root so prepared, is as good as the juice. The same also
being cut into certain thin rundles they use to Seruator in vi no, according to
^atevas, (...), whereas Dioscorides says, (...), i. (...) lino, that is to
say, they file them up hanging by little th^eds drawn through them.
preserve in wine. Howbeit, Mandrage is not found always and every where full
of juice: but in what place soever such may be gotten, the right season to
seek for it is about vintage time: the sent thereof is strong, but the root and
fruit do smell the stronger. The apples of the white, when they be ripe, the
manner is todry in the shadow;

As touching Hemlock, it is also a rank poison, witness the public
ordinance and law of the Athenians, whereby malefactors, who have deserved to
die, were forced to drink that odious potion of Hemlock. Howbeit, many good
virtues has this herb, and would not be rejected and cast aside for the sundry
uses thereof in Physic. The seed is every way hurtful and venomous. As for
the stems and stalks, many there be that do eat it both green and also boiled
or stewed between ^phoras aestivas, o^ r^ther ae^uosas, i. hot ^heumes.
in summer time, and to assuage their pains if they be anointed therewith. It
enters besides into collyries Anaxilaus mine Author says, That if a pure
maiden do in her virginity anoint her breasts with this juice, her dugs will
never grow afterward, but continue still in the same state. True it is indeed,
that being kept unto the paps of women in childbed, it dries up their milk:
as also extinguisheth natural seed, if the cods and share be anointed
therewith. What remedies they should use to save themselves who are adjudged by
law to drink it, I for my part-purpose not to set down. The strongest Hemlocke
and of speediest operation is that which grows about Susa in the confines of
Parthia. Next to it for fearful working, is that which comes out of Laconica,
Candy, and Natolia. In Greece the Hemlocke of Megara is

Crestmarine or Sampier, called the wild Crethmos, riddeth the eyes of the
gummy and viscous water that sticks in them, if it be applied thereto: and if
it be made into a cataplasme with fried Barley meal, it assuageth also their
swelling.

There grows commonly an herb named in Greek Molybdaena, that is to say in
Latin, Plumbago, even upon every corn land; in lease resembling the Dock or
Sorrel, with a thick root, and the same rough and pricky. Let one chew this
herb first in his mouth, and then eftsoons lick with his tongue the eye, it
consumes and takes away the Some take it for a Cataract.
Plumbum, which is a kind of disease or infirmity incident to the eyes.

As touching the first This Fuchsius thinks to be Pistolochia or our
Aristolochia the rounder.
Capnos, which in Latin is commonly called Pedes Gallinarei, i. hens It seems
to be our Fumitory, called in Greek Capno^.
name, and like in effect, but different in form from it, which does branch
thick, and is of a tender substance: the leaves for shape resembling
Coriander, and those of a wan or ashie color, but it bears a purple flower:
it grows in Gardens, Hort-yards, and Barly-lands. If the eyes be therewith
anointed, it cleanses and clears them: but it causes them to weep and
water, like as smoke does, whereupon it took the name Capnos in Greek. If the
hair of the eie-lids be once pulled forth, and then the edges or brims be
anointed therewith, it will keep them for ever coming

^ngale.
Acorus has leaves like to the Flour-de-lis, but that they be only narrower,
and growing to a longer stele or tail: the roots be black and not so full of
veins nor grained, otherwise they agree well with the Ireos root, hot and
biting at the tongues end. To smell unto they are not unpleasant: and being
taken inwardly, they do gently move rifting, and cause the stomach to break
wind

Cotyled on, named in Latin Vmbilicus Veneris, is a pretty little herb, having
a tender and a small stem, a leaf thick and fatty, growing hollow, like to the
concauity wherein the huckle-bone turns, and thereupon it took the foresaid
name in Greek. It grows by the sea side and in rocky or stony grounds: of a
lively green color, and the root round, much like to an Olive. The juice is
thought to cure the eyes. Another kind there is of Cotyledon, with gross and
(...), out of Dioscor. not (...), as Pliny seems to read, when he translated
it (Sordidis.)
sattie leaves likewise, but broader than the former. Toward the root they grow
thicker, which they seem to compass and enclose, as it were an eye. A most
harsh and unpleasant taste it has: the stem is high, but very slender. This
herb has the same properties which the Flour-de-lis.

Of Sengreen or Housleek, which the Greeks call Aizoon, there be two kinds. The
greater is ordinarily planted in earthen pans or vessels set out before the
windows of houses: which some name Buphthalmon, others Zoophthalmon, and
Stergethron, because it is thought so good in love drinks or amorous medicines:
others again give it the name Hypogeson, for that it is seen to grow under the
eaues of houses. There are also who love to term it Ambrosia and Amerimnos.
Here in Italy they call it Sedum the greater, Oculus also, and Digitellus. For
the second kind is somewhat less, which the Grecians distinguish by the name
Which some take to be Prick-madame of the French Trique-madame.
Erithales or Trithales (because it bears flowers thrice in the year;)
others Chrysothales; and some again, Isoetes. But both the one and the other
they call Aizoon, because they be always fresh and green: according to which
name in Greek, some give it the Latin name Sempervivum. The greater kind
bears

Much like to this is that herb which the Greeks call Andrachne Agria, i. wild
Purcellane;

All the kinds of them are proper remedies for the pain in the ears. Like as
the juice of Henbane also, if it be applied moderatly; of Achillea and the best
Centaury; of Plantaine and Harstrang, Scili^.
pipe for the purpose [called an Orenchyte.] Semblably, the herb Vmbilicus
Veneris or Cotyledon is much commended for mundifying the ears, when they run
with filthy matter especially, if it be tempered with dear sewet, and namely
of a Stag or Hind, and so instilled hot. The juice of the Walwort root
clarified and strained through a fine linen cloth, and soon after dried and
hardened in the Sun, heals the swelling impostumations under the ears, if as
need requires, it be dissolved in oil of Roses, and so applied hot. The like
effect in that case has Veruain and Plantain; Sideritis also being incorporat
in old Hogs grease.

After the same manner Aristolochia together with Cyperus, heals the stinking
and ilfauored ulcer of the nose, called Noli-me-tangere.

The root of Panaces, especially that which is called Chironia, if it be chewed
in the mouth, assuageth the toothache: so does the juice thereof, if there be a
collution made therewith. The root of Henbane has the like virtue, if one chew
it with vinegar, as also of Polemonia or sauge de bois: for which purpose it is
passing good to chew the Plantain root, or to wash the mouth and teeth with the
juice or decoction thereof boiled in vinegar. And the very leaves of Plantain
be singular for the pain of the teeth; yea, though the gums were putrified with
rank and corrupt blood, or in case there owsed or issued out of them filthy
bloody matter. And the seed of Plantain cures the impostumations of the gums,
albeit they gathered to suppuration and ran

This Groundswell is an herb much like in shape unto Germander, as soft also
and tender as it, the small stalks or branches whereof incline to a reddish
color: and it loves to Callimachus calls it Acanthius; and others, Pappos.
But in the farther Description of this Herb, it seems that the Greeks
agreed not: for some have said that it is leafed like to Rocket; others to an
Oak, but that they be much less. There be VVriters also who hold the root to
be good for nothing in Physic: and there be again that commend it to be
singular for the sinews: besides, some others are of opinion, That it
strangleth and choaketh as many as drink it. Contrariwise, certain Physicians
prescribe it for the Iaundise to be taken in Wine: for all the diseases
likewise of of the guts, if it be taken in sweet wine cuit: esteeming it a
singular herb for the grief of the midriffe and precordiall parts about the
heart, if it be eaten with meat in a sallad with

The May-Lillie (called in Greek Ephemeron) is leafed like unto the Lilly,
but that the leaves be less: the stem is semblable and equal unto it, upon
which it bears a Dioscorides says white.
blew flower. The seed which it carries is nothing medicinable. One single
root it has of a finger thickenesse, which is sovereign for the teeth, if it
be cut and minced small, and afterward sodden in vinegar for a collution to
wash the teeth with it warm. The very substance also of the root is singular
good to confirm the teeth standing loose in the head: and to be put into those
that be hollow and worm eaten. Moreover, the root of Celendine is good for the
teeth, if it be bruised or stamped, and so with vinegar held in the mouth. If
teeth be rotten and corrupt, the black Ellebore is singular to be put into
their concauities. And both of them (as well the black as It contains water
indeed within the concauities or arme-pi^s (as it were) of the leaves where
they join to the stem, but surely in rivers it grows not.
waters: within the heads or burs which it bears, there is found a little
worm or grub, which for the toothache they use to bind about the teeth, or
to put it in their holes and close them up with wax. But when that herb is
pulled out of the ground, great heed must be taken that it touch not the earth.
The herb Crowfoot is called in Latin Ranunculs, in Greek Batrachion; whereof
be four kinds: The first bears leaves like unto Coriander, but that they be
farter, and as broad as those of the Mallow, of a swert color: the stalk is
whitish, or grisled and slender, the root also white: it grows ordinarily
along great rode ways, especially in cold, shadowie, and moist places. The
second is better furnished with leaves, and those more cut and indented than
the former, and rises up with greater and higher stalks. The third is the
Lacteo. Diosc. i. white.
and has likewise a yellow flower. They be all of them of a causticke and
burning quality. For lay but the leaves raw and green (as they grow) upon any
place, they will raise blisters in the skin, as well as a light coal of
fire: which is the reason, that they be much used for leprosies and foul
scabs; also to take out any marks imprinted in the skin, or unseemly
scarre. In sum, it is one of the ingredients that go to the making of all
potentiall cauteries or causticke medicines. Where the hair is gone, and the
place bare and naked, they use commonly to apply these herbs for to recover
the hair again: but they must be soon removed. For toothache also it is an
ordinary thing to chew of their roots, but if one continue so long, it will i.
Fleawort, is good for the ulcers thereof.

But since I have named a stinking breath, which is a foul and nastie disease,
putting man or woman to shame, as no infirmity more; I will set down one or
two compound receipts for that imperfection. Take Myrtle and Lentisk leaves, of
each a like weight; of the Gal-nuts growing

THE TWENTY SIXTH BOOK
WRITTEN BY C. PLINIVS SECVNDVS.
The Proeme.
CHAP. I.
Of medicines appropriate and respective to all other parts and members of the
body. Of

LOng is it not since the face and visage of men began to be annoied with
certain new and strange diseases, unknown in our forefathers days, and never
heard of before in Italy, nor almost in any part of Europe. And even of late
days when these maladies first set foot in these parts, they were not seen
for to spread For Mentum i^ ^atine is a chin.
Mentagra. A term given unto it (I assure you) at the first by way of jest
and in a meriment (as commonly we see many are disposed to play and make good
game at other men's miseries) but afterward it went current in every man's
mouth: and by no other name than Mentagra bepainted and beraied with foul
scurfe and filthy scales, as it would have pitied one at the heart to see
them. This contagious disease, our fathers and ancestors in times past never
heard Tiberius Claudius late Emperor of Rome, even about the middle of his
reign; and that was by the means of a certain knight or gentleman of Rome
borne at Perusium, who being secretary or clerk unto the Treasurer under the
Romans in Asia, and giving attendance according to his place, chanced there to
be infected, and so he brought the disease over with him to Rome. But will you
hear the strange nature of this foul evil? women were not subject unto it; no
more were slaves, base and poor commoners, no nor citizens of mean state and
condition: the greatest gentlemen and those of the nobility, it made choice of,
and picked them from among the rest: very catching it was, and soon passed
from one to another, especially by the mouth, and Uel^ci transi^u scu^: ^r men
v^ d^o salute one another by a kiss.
by the means of a kiss were it never so short: foul and ill-fauored enough
was the disease it self, but the Ma^lius Cornutus (late L. Praetor, and
lieutenant general for the state in the province of Guienne or Aquitane in
France) dealt with one of these Egyptian leeches for to be cured of this
disease, and agreed to pay him 200000 Sesterces for his pain. And thus much of

Moreover, what a wonderful thing is this observed in these new kind of
maladies, that many times (contrary to the course of other sicknesses) they
come together in troops; that some of them should all on a sudden light upon a
particular country; that they should take to one certain member of man's body;
assail those of such an age and no other; have a spite to persons of this or
that quality, and spare the rest; as if they made choice, some to plague young
children, others elder folk; some to punish none but the rich and mighty,
others to be doing with the poor and needy? In our Annals or Chronicles we
find upon record, That while Lucius Paulus and Q. Marcius were Censors of Rome,
the pestilent carbuncle (a disease appropriat to Prouance and Languedoc in
France) came first into Italy. Of which malady, there died within the Julius
Rufus and Q. Lecanius Bassus: of which two, the former was cut for it by the
counsel of unskillful Physicians, and Either by some mortification or effusion
of blood.
by that means lost his life. As for the other, having it upon the thumb of his
left hand, he chanced ollic^acu im^u sa.
to prick it himself with a needle; and although the wound was so small, that
hardly it could be seen and discerned, It seems by a (...).
yet it cost him his life. This carbuncle rises ordinarily in the most hidden
and secret parts of the body, and for the most part under the tongue: it is
hard and red in manner of the swelling veins called in Latin Varices: and yet
in the head it looks blackish; the skin also about it seems swert and dead:
it stretches the skin and the flesh in some sort stiff, but Most of these
signe^ show a gangr^ne and canker, rather than our arbuncle.
it so possesses the Patients, that in three days it will make an end of
them. Otherwhiles it causes the party to fall into a quiuering and shaking as
it were for cold, and raises certain blisters or angry pimples round about
it; and very seldom causes an Ague: but look in whomsoever it takes to the
stomach or throat, it quickly dispatcheth and makes an end of them.

As touching the white leprosy, called Elephantiasis (according as I have
before showed) it was not seen in Italy before the time of Pompey the Great.
This disease also began for the most part in the face, and namely it took the
nose first, where it put forth a little specke or pimple no bigger than a small
Lentill; but soon after, as it spread farther and ran over the whole body, the
feet were puffed up and swelled again. A peculiar malady is this, and natural
to the Egyptians; Some think it was an inflammation re^embling our Carbuncle
or Anthrax.
Gemursa, which began between the toes: and so long ago it is since any have
bin troubled therewith, that the very name also is forgotten and grown out of
use. Where by the way, this is to be noted as a strange and wonderful thing,
That some of our diseases should have an end and lose their course for ever;
and others again continue still: as for example, the cholique passion; which
came among us no longer ago than in the days of Tiberius Caesar the Emperor:
and the first that ever felt it, was the prince himself; whereupon arose no
small question throughout the whole city of Rome: for when as the said Emperor
published a certain proclamation, wherein he excused himself for not coming
abroad to manage

CHAP. II.
The praise of Hippocrates, and other Physicians mere Simplests.

HIppocrates verily had this honor above all men, That he was the first who
wrote with most perspicuity of Physic, and reduced the precepts and rules
thereof into the body of an art: howbeit, in all his books we find no other
receipts, but herbs. Semblably, the writings of Diocles the Carystian, were no
less stored with the like medicines, and yet a famous Hippocrates. Praxagoras
also, and Chrysippus, yea and after them Erasistratus held on the same course.
As for Herophylus, although he was the first that went more exquisitly to work
and brought in a more subtle and fine method of Physic, yet none esteemed
better of simples than he. But surely, practice and experience (which as in
all things else is found to be most effectual, so in the profession of Physic
especially) began in his days by little and little to slake, until in the end
al their Physic proved nothing but words and bibble babbles; for believe me,
his scholars and disciples thought it more for their ease and pleasure to sit
close in the schools and hear their doctors out of the chair discourse of
the points of Physic, than to go a simpling into the deserts

CHAP. III.
Of the new practice in Physic* of Asclepiades the Physician: and what course
he took to alter and abolish the old Physic for to bring in the new.

WHat cunning means soever these new Physicians could devise to overthrow the
ancient manner of working by simples, yet it maintained still the remnants of
the former Pompey the Great, at what time Asclepiades a great Orator and
professor of Rhetoric went in hand to pervert and reject the same: for seeing
that he gained not by the said Art sufficiently, and was not like to arise by
pleading causes at the bar, to that wealth which he desired (as he was a man
otherwise of a prompt wit and quick spirit) he resolved to give over the law,
and suddenly applied himself to a new course of Physic. This man having no
skill at i. Riding on ho^sebacke, carrying in coach, litter, barge, etc.
Exercise of gestations. In sum, so far he prevailed with his eloquent speech,
that every man was willing to give ear and applause to his words: for being
ready enough to believe those things for true, which Herophylus before him had
the honor of being the first Physician who searched into the causes of
maladies: and because Cleophantus had the name among the Ancients, for bringing
wine into request and setting out the virtues thereof: this man for his part
also, desirous to M. Varro does report) took pleasure to be called the
Cold-water Physician. He had besides other pretty devises to flatter and please
his patients, one while causing them to have hanging litters or beds like
cradles, by the moving and rocking whereof too and fro, he might either bring
them asleep, or ease the pains of their sickness; otherwhiles ordaining the use
of bains, a thing that he knew folk were most desirous of: besides many other
fine conceits very plausible in hearing, and agreeable to man's nature. And to
the end that no man might think this so great alteration and change in the
practice of Physic, to have bin a blind course and a matter of small
consequence, one thing above the rest that won himfelfe a great fame, and gave
no less credit and authority to his profession, was this, that meeting upon a
time by chance with one he knew not, carried forth as a dead corse in a biere
for to be Asclepiades, which much favored his opinion and new Physic; namely,
the manner of curing diseases in those days, which was exceeding rude,
troublesome, and painful; such ado there was in lapping and covering the
sick with a deal of clothes, and causing

CHAP. IIII.
The foolish superstition of Art-Magicke, which here is derided. Of the tettar
called Lichen: remedies proper for it, and the diseases of the throat.

Above all other things, the superstitious vanities of Magitians made much to
the establishing of Asclepiades his new Physic; for they in the height of
their vanity, attributed so strange and incredible operations to some simples,
that it was enough to discredit the virtues of them all. First, they vaunted
much of Aethyopus, an herb which (by their saying) if it were but cast into
any great river or poole, it would draw the same dry; and was of power (by
touching only) to open locks, or vnbolt any door whatsoever. Of Achoemenis
also another herb, they made this boast, That being thrown against an army
of enemies ranged in battle Lucullus with a small army consisting of some few
legions, overthrew and vanquished their own kings? If herbs were so mighty,
what is the reason (I pray you) that our Roman captains provided evermore
above all things how to be Caesar by the happy having of one herb in his
camp, might have injoied the abundance of all things? Had it not bin better
think ye, for Scipio Aemilianus to have caused the gates of Carthage to fly
open with the help of one herb, than to lie so many years as he did in leaguer
before the city, and with his engines and ordinance to shake their walls, and
batter their gates. Were there such virtue in Ethiopius aforesaid, why do we
not at this day dry up the Pontine lakes, and recover so much good ground unto
the territory about Rome? Moreover, if that composition which Democritus has
set down and his books makes praise of, to be so effectual, as to procure
men to have fair, virtuous, and fortunat children, how happens As^lepiades
which checketh those vanities, is grown to farther abuses and absurdities than
are broched by the very Magitians themselves. But this has been always and
ever will be, the nature of man's mind, To exceed in the end and go beyond all
measure in every thing which at the beginning arose upon good respects and
necessary occasions.

But to leave this discourse: let us proceed to the effects and properties
remaining behind of those herbs which were described in the former book; with
a supplement also and addition of some others, as by occasion shall be offered
and presented unto us. Howbeit, to begin first with the remedies of the said
Tettars (so foul and unseemly diseases) I mean to gather a heap of as many
medicines as I know appropriat for that malady, notwithstanding I have showed
already of that kind not a few. Well then, in this case, Plantaine stamped is
very commendable: so is Cinquefoile and the root of the white Daffodill, punned
and applied with vinegar. The young shoots or tender branches of the fig tree
boiled in vinegar: likewise the root of the Hibisci some take it for the
Hollyho^ke.
Marsh-Mallow sodden with glow in a strong and sharp vinegar to the
consumption of a fourth part. Moreover, it is singular good to rub tettars
thoroughly with a pumish stone first, to the end that Uisci, some read Hibisci.
Miselto tempred and incorporat with quicklime: the decoction likewise of
Tithymale together with rosin, is much praised for this cure: but the herb
Liuerwort excels all the rest, which thereupon took the name Lichen: it
grows upon stony grounds, with broad leaves beneath about the root, having
one stalk and Our common (...) erwort.
Lichen or Liuerwort there is, cleaving wholly fast upon rocks and stones in
manner of moss, which also is singular for those tettars, being reduced into a
liniment. This herb likewise stancheth the flux of blood in green wounds, if
the juice be dropped into them: and in a liniment, it serves well to be
applied unto apostumat places: the jaundise it heals, in case the mouth and
tongue be rubbed and anointed with it and honey together: but in this cure the
Patients must have in charge, To bathe in salt water, to anoint themselves with
oil of almonds, and in any case to abstain from all salads and pothearbs of
the garden. For to heal tettars, the root of Thapsia stamped with honey is much
used.

As for the Squinsie, Which some take to be wild Pop^, called R^as.
Argemonia is a sovereign remedy if it be drunk in wine: Hyssop also

CHAP. V.
Receipts for the scrophules ar wens called the Kings-euill: for the pains and
griefs of

PLantaine is a sovereign herb to cure the Kings evil: also Celendine applied
with honey and hogs lard: so is Cinquefoile. The root of the great Clot-bur
serves for the same purpose, if it be incorporat with hogs grease, so that the
place after it is anointed therewith, be covered with a leaf of the said Bur
laid fast upon it: in like manner Artemisia or Mugwort: also a Mandrage root
applied with water, is good for that purpose. The broad leafed Sideritis or
Stone-sauge, being dug round about with a spike of iron and taken up with
the left hand, and so applied unto the place, cures the kings evil; provided
always, that the Patients when ^lcea in some readings.
Alisma, if it be gathered about the Summer solstead, applied unto the foresaid
wens with rain water, is singular good for them; for which purpose, the leaves
are to be stamped, or the root bru sed and incorporat with hogs grease, and so
applied in a liniment; with charge, That the place be covered with a leaf of
the same: in which manner prepared and used, it serves to allay all pains in
the nape of the neck, and to keep down or dissipat the swelling in any part of
the body.

Touching all the accidents happening to the fingers, and namely the
excrescences and risings of the skin about the roots of the nails, called in
Greek Pterygia, Cinquefoile is a singular good herb for them.

Amongst all the infirmities of the breast, the cough is most troublesome and
grievous, for lohoch, cures the cough. The said herb taken simply by it self
alone, raises tough phlegm out

CHAP. VI.
Of Mullen or Lungwort: of Cacalia: of Folefoot called Tussilago or Bechium;
and of Sauge: herbs all appropriate for the cough.

MVllen or Lungwort with the yellow golden flower, being in like manner taken to
the same quantity, eases the foresaid infirmities. Certes this herb is of that
efficacy in these cases, that if a drench thereof be given to horses, which not
only have the cough, but also be broken winded, it will help them: the same
effects I find attributed to Gentian. The root of Cacalia soked in wine and
chewed, is good not only for the cough but also for the infirmities in the
throat. Take 5 branches or slips of hyssop, and two sprigs of rue, with 3 figs,
sees these together, i. Cough. wort.
Tussilago, does appease the violence of the cough. Two kinds there be of this
herb: the wild, which wheresoever it is seen to grow, shows that there is
water under it: a thing that they know well enough who seek for springs, for
they take it to be an assured sign and direction to water: it bears leaves
like to Iuy, but somewhat bigger, either 5 or 7 in number, which underneath or
toward the ground be somewhat whitish, but above in the upper side, of a pale
color, without flower, stem, or seed, and the root is but small. Some would
have it and Cham^leuce both, to be one and the same herb called by diverse
names: take this herb, leaf and root together, when they be dried, set all on
fire and receive the smoke by a pipe, as if you would suck or drink it down,
it is (they say) a notable medicine to cure an old

CHAP. VII.
For the pain of the sides and breast: for those that cannot draw their wind
but sitting upright:

LVngwort or Mullen drunk in water with Rue, is very good for the pain of the
sides and the breast: for which purpose also, they say, that powder of Betony is
as good, if it be taken in water well warmed. The juice of Scordotis is holden
to be a great corroboratiue of the stomach: so is Centaury also and Gentian,
drunk in a draught of water. Plantain either eaten alone by it self, or with a
gruell and broth of Lentils, or else with a frumenty potage made with wheat, is
comfortable to the stomach. Betony, although otherwise it lie heavy in the
stomach; yet if or Nemphar syrnamed Heraclia, it strengthens the stomach,
applied outwardly in a i. Sengreen, to the same effect. The herb Molon has a
stem Striato happily for stricto, i. slender, as Oribassus describes it. (...).
chamfered or channelled along: soft leaves, and those small: a root four
fingers long, in the Dioscorides describes his Moly with such a head upon the
top of the stem.
end whereof it bears an head like unto Garlic. Some call it Syron. Taken
in wine, it helps the stomach and difficulty of drawing breath: In which
cases the greater Centaury is singular, if it be reduced into a lohoch or
liquid electuary. Plantain also eaten any way, either in a green-sauce or
sallad. This composition is reputed a soueraign medicine, Take of Betony
stamped the weight of one pound, of Atticke honey as much, incorporat them
together, and hereof drink every day the quantity of half an ounce in some
convenient liquor, or in water warm. Aristolochia or Agarick are sovereign
means to be used in these infirmities, By these names he calls also
Horstaile.
Ephedra, and by some Anabasis* grows ordinarily in open tracts exposed to
the wind: it will clime upon trees, and hang down from their boughs and
branches. Leaf it has none, but is garnished with a number of hairs, which
are no other but rushes indeed full of ioints and knots: the root is of a pale
color. Let this herb be beaten to powder, and given in red wine that is green
A kind of Turbit.
Tripolium grows upon the rocks by the sea side, on which the seawater
beats: so as a man cannot say, that it is either in the sea or the dry land:
in leaf it resembles woad, but that it is thicker: the stem is a span or
hand-breadth high, forked, and divided at the point: the root white,
odoriferous, gross, and hot in taste: when it is sodden in a frumenty pottage
of wheat, they give it with good success together. Melandryum is an herb found
growing in cornfieldsd and medows, with a white flower, Or Polemonium.
Molemonium also is of the like effect, if it be taken to the weight of one
denier. Moreover, the herb Silybum has a white juice like unto milk: which
after it is thickened to the substance of a gum, is usually taken to the
foresaid weight, with honey, for a vomitorie; and does euacuat choleric humors
especially. On the contrary side, wild Cumin and the po^der of Betony, if they
be Ceterach.
Hemonium staieth the painful yex o^ hocquet. In like sort Aristolochia.
Clymenos gives liberty to draw the wind more freely. The greater Centaury and
Hyssop are singular in drink for the pleurisy and inflammation of the lungs.
The juice of Harstrang principally is a proper remedy for those that have the
pleurisy. Touching that Plant, which the French call ^gle, o^ Sym^m Petrae^.
Halum: the Venetians Cotonea: it is holden excellent for the grief of the
sides, for the reins, those that be plucked with the cramp, and bursten by any
inward rupture: this herb somewhat resembles wild Origan or Marjeram, save that
in the ^ead it is like rather unto Thyme:

CHAP. VIII.
Of all the infirmities and remedies of the belly, and those parts that either
be adioining

TOuching the panch or belly, much ado there is with it: and although most men
care for nothing else in this life, but to content and please the belly, yet of
all other parts it puts them to most trouble: for one while it is so
costiue, as that it will give no passage to the meat; another while so
slippery, as it will keep none of it: one time you shall have it so peevish, as
that it can receive no food; and another time so weak and feeble, that it is
able to make no good concoction of it. And verily now adays the world is
grown to that pass, that the mouth and panch together are the chief means
to work our death. The womb (I say) the wickedest and put into a cup of wine:
or the herb it self boiled with vinegar, or else frumenty pottage taken

In the disease Tinesmus (which is an inordinat quarrel to the stool, and a
straining upon it, without doing any thing) the root of Nemphar or Nymphaea
Heraclia, is singular good to be drunk in wine: likewise Fleawort taken in
water, and the decoction of Acoru^, which some ^ake for our Calamus Aramaticis.
Galangale root: the juice of Housleeke or Sengreene stops the flux of the
womb, staieth the bloody flix, and chaseth i. Pease Earth-nut, an herb bearing
long leaves, indented with many cuts or jags, and those which be about the root
made bias: rises up with three or four stems full of leaves: carries a flower
like to the Hyacinth or Crow toes: the roots are bearded and full of strings,
enfolded one within another, red of color, and exceeding hard in substance: it
grows in rocks and stony grounds exposed to the Sun, and yet charged or
covered with snow the most part of the year, such as is the mountain Pheneus
in Arcadia. This herb has an astringent power: the Ad bile^: some read no^ile.
to repress choler. Now the herb whereof Ladanum is made is called Lada, and
grows in the Island Cypros, the liquor whereof sticks commonly to goats
Pinguedine roscida.
fattie dew cleaves thereto. Of this Ladanum I have written more at large in my
treatise of ointments and redolent compositions: but this later kind is
strongest in savor and hardest in hand; and no marvel, for it gathers much
gross and earthy substance, whereas indeed the best Ladanum is commended and
chosen, when it is pure, clear, odoriferous, soft, green, and full of rosin.
The nature thereof is to soften, to dry, to concoct, and to procure sleep: it
retains the hair of the head being given to shed, and maintains the same
black still, that it turn not hoary: wholesome it is for the ears, if it be
instilled into them with the herb Lauer; which loves to grow in brooks and
rivers, being either condite and preserved, Castor the Physician describes
this herb Myriophyllon aquaticum. Dodonaei.
Potamogeton after another sort, namely with a small slender long leaf like
unto horse-haires, putting forth a long stem likewise, and the same smooth,
growing also in waters. He used with the root of this herb to cure the Kings
evil, and heal all hard tumors. This Potamogeton has an aduersatiue Dodon.
Ophieg^ of Adders tongue.
Ceratia bears but one leaf, and has a knotty and great root, which is good
to be eaten for to cure the lask, occasioned by the feeble stomach, and the
bloody flix, proceeding from the ulcer of the guts. Lions-paw, commonly called
Our ladies Mantle.
Leontopodion, by some Leuceoron, by others Dorypetron, and Thorybetron, has a
root which Dalechampius maruelleth how this may stand: and yet we see it
ordinary in the cure of dysenteries and outrageous Diarrhaes, to purge choler
with Rubarbe, Myrabolanes, etc. and with them also to bind.
binds the belly, and yet notwithstanding purges choler: if it be taken to
the weight of two denarij Roman, in mead or honied water. This herb grows in
light and lean champian grounds. It is said, that if the seed thereof be taken
in drink, it causes strange visions and fantastical dreams. Harefoot, which
the

Contrariwise, the juice of Centaury the less is a purgative, if a dram
thereof be taken in one hemine of water, together with some few corns of salt
and drops of vinegar; for it does euacuate choler. The greater Centaurie,
commonly called Rhapontick, stilleth the wrings and griping pains of the
belly. Betonie makes the body loose and soluble, taken to the weight of four
drams in nine cyaths of Hydromell or Mead. In like manner Euphorbium is
laxatiue, and so is Agaricke, if two drammes thereof be drunk in water with a
little salt, or to the weight of three oboli in mead or honied water. Sowbread
also, named by the Greeks Cyclaminos, taken inwardly with water, or put up by
suppositories, provoke to the seege: so does a suppository made with the root
of Which some take for ground Iuie.
Chamaecissus. Take a good bunch or handful of Hyssope, sees it in water with
a little salt to the consumption of a third part: it serves to euacuat
fleagme, if it be Here Pliny is deceiu^d: for it is a kind of lace winding
about Thyme, as Doder about Flax.
flower of a kind of Thyme that resembles Sauery: here is the difference only,
that this flower is of a grass green color, but that of the other Thyme is
white. Some call this Epithymum, Hippopheon: a simple not very wholesome for the
stomach, ne yet good to provoke vomit; howbeit, singular to appease the
wringing pains in the belly, and to carminate or dissolve ventosities. The
same may be taken also by way of lohoch or liquid electuarie, confected with
honey, and sometimes with the Ireos root, for the stuffing and other
imperfections of the breast. Epithymum looseneth the belly, if it be taken from
four Nemphar taken in some hard astringent or wine, Cuius contrarium ver^ est,
for it is a binder.
gently purges the belly. Also, Pycnocomon how is it then called Pycnocomon?
grow more thin: it has a round root, and the same yellowish, and senting much
of the earth: the stem is four cornered, of a mean height, small and slender,
and the flower much like to that of Basil. Found it is ordinarily in stony
grounds. The root of this herb drunk in mead, to the weight of 2 deniers, does
euacuat downward by the belly, both choleric and also phlegmatic humors. The
seed causes troublesome and unquiet dreams, if one drink a dram thereof in
wine. Fumiterre also I see not how this should stand here.
consumes and dispatcheth the kings-euill. Polypodium (which we call in Latin
Filicula) because it is like unto Fearn, purges choler. The root, which is
only medicinable and in use, is full of hairs, of a greenish color within, as
big commonly as a man's little finger: full of hollow concauities it is,
representing those holes that the fishes called Polypi have about their feet or
clees: sweetish it is in taste, and grows either upon rocks, or Yea and in the
head of old doddle Oaks.
else at I bears ne^her flour^ not seed.
floureth, but seedeth not. Moreover, Scammonie also ouerturns and hurts the
stomach, unless two drams of Aloe be put unto as many oboli of it: for then it
purges choler, and sends it down by the belly. Now this Scammonie is the
juice of a certain herb (called likewise Scammonea) which brancheth and tufteth
immediately from the root: the i. Goats Lectuce. It is commonly said, that with
the milk or juice of these Tithymals, a man may write upon the skin of the
body: for draw any letters therewith and strew ashes or dust thereupon, when
they be dry, they will appear very legible. And this is a trick practiced by
those that make court unto other men's wives their mistresses, or Spurges.
Tithymals. The first is known by the addition of Characias, which also is
called the male Tithymall: the Ramis, rather caulibus, the stems, out of
Dioscor.
branches be of a finger thicknes, red, Rugosis. Dios^ has succ^s. i. full of
sap.
riueled, 5 or 6 in number, running up to the height of a cubit: and leaued
they be immediately from the root, which hang downward inclining to the earth:
but in the top it has an hairy or rather the seed or milk is to be put into
the ^ulty and ho^low teeth: and the rest which be sound a^e to be defended with
wax, according to Dioscorides.
enclosed within wax, is good to be put into hollow teeth when they ache: in
which case also, a collution made of the root boiled in wine or oil, is
singular good, if they be washed therewith: With the juice of this herb there
is a liniment made for tettars and ringworms: and some there be who drink the
same for to purge both upward and downward, for otherwise an enemy it is to the
stomach: in which potion if there be put some salt, it does euacuat fleagme,
but with salt petre it voideth choleric humors. If the patient have a mind to
purge by seege, he shall do well to drink the juice of Tithymall in water and
vinegar mingled together: but if he be disposed to vomit, Ex Theophrast.
kind is named Helioscopium: the leaves whereof resemble Purcellane, and from
the root it puts forth 4 or 5 small upright branches, which be likewise red and
half a foot high: the same also be full of juice or milk. This herb delights
to grow about town sides, bearing a white seed, wherein Characias. The fifth,
men call Cyparissias, for the resemblance that the leaves have to those of the
Cypress tree: it rises up with a double or threefold stem, and loves to grow
in champian If it be punned into ponder and strewed on ^he wate^, as says
Diose.
kill fish: it purges the belly, if either the root, leaves, or juice, be taken
in honied wine or in mead, to the weight of four drams: a special virtue it
has to draw water downward from all other humors. The seventh is called
commonly Dendroides, and yet some give it the name Cobion, others Leptophyllon:
ordinarily it is found growing upon rocks, and of all others carries the
fairest head: likewise the stems be reddest, and the seed shows in most
plenty: the effects be all one with those of Characias: as touching the plant
called Apios Ischas or Rhaphanos-agria, i. the wild Radish: it puts forth
two or three stalks like bents or rushes, spreading along the ground, and
those be red, and the leaves resemble rue: the root is like an onion head, but
that it is larger, which is the reason that some have called it the wild
Radish: this root has a white fleshie substance within, but the skin or rind
thereof is black: it grows usually upon rough mountains, and otherwise in
fair greens Herbosis: The^rastus has (...): tha^ is to say, cragg^e o^
sl^ntie: it see. m^n that Pun^ ^slated (...)
full of grass. The right season to dig up this root, is in the Spring; which
being stamped and strained, they use to put in an earthen pot, where it is
permitted to stand, and look what it casts up and swimmeth aloft, they scum
off and throw away: the rest of the juice thus clarified, purges both ways,
if it be taken to the weight of one obolus and a half in mead or honied water:
and in that manner prepared, it is given to those A^ (...) me, says Dioscor.
choler upward by vomit, whereas the nether part does it by seege downward.

Now for the pains and wrings which oftentimes torment the poorebelly: all the
kinds of Panaces and Betony are singular to assuage and allay them plain,
unless they be such as are occasioned by crudity and indigestion. As for the
juice of Harstrang, it dissolueth ventosities, for it breaks wind upward and
causes one to rift: so does the roots of Which some take for Ga langale, o^rs
for our Calamus.
Acorus: also carots, if they be eaten in a salad after the manner of (...) With
vinegre and oil.
Lettuce. For the infirmities proper to the guts, and namely the worms there
breeding, Ladanum of Cypress is sovereign to be taken in drink: in like
manner the powder of Gentian drunk in warm water, to the quantity of a bean:
Plantain likewise has the same effect, if there be taken of it first in a
morning to the quantity of 2 spoonfuls, and

For the Midriffe and Hypochondriall parts, or the small guts lying in the
flank under the short ribs, * Radish roots be singular. The seed of water
Betony, if it be drunk thirty days together, Radices.
the weight of one denarius at once in white wine, is singular in that case:
the powder of

Scordum incorporat with wax, and Agarick with the powder or flower of
Fenigreek, help the infirmities of the bladder, and namely, the intolerable
pains of the stone and gravel, as I have beforesaid. Polemonia drunk in wine;
and in like manner Agaricke, is good for that purpose: the root or leaves of
Plantaine taken in sweet wine cuit; also Betonie, prepared in that manner as it
was appointed for the disease of the liver, be remedies for the infirmities of
that part. Betonie also given in drink and applied in a liniment, heals a
rupture; and the same is most effectual in curing the strangury: some
prescribe and give counsel to drink Betony, Veruaine, Yarrow, or Millefoile,
of each a like portion in water, as an excellent remedy for the stone and
grauel. And well known it is, that for to ease the strangury and remove the
cause thereof, Dictamnus is an To wit, when they be hard or swollen.
accidents befailing to the cods. Groundswell, with the powder of Frank incense
and sweet wine reduced into an ointment cures the inflammation of the said
cods. The root of Camfrey brought into a liniment, staieth the rupture whereby
the guts come down: and white Hypocist his, represseth the cancerous sores in
those parts. Semblably Mugwort is singular to be given in sweet wine, for the
stone and strangur. The root of Nenuphar or Nymphaea Heraclia taken in wine,
assuageth the pain and grief of the bladder: of the same Or Crestmarine.
Sampier, so highly commended by Hippocrates: now is this one of the wild
woorts which are usually eaten in salads: and certes, this is that very herb
which the good country wife Hecale forgot not to set upon her board in a feast
that she To prince Theseus.
made (as we may read in Callimachus the Poet:) And what is it but a kind of
garden Batis? It grows up with one stem half a foot high, or a span at most:
the seed is exceeding hot, round and odoriferous like unto Rosemary: if it be
dried, it bursteth, and has within a white kernel, which some call Cachrys.
The leaves be fatty, and of a grayish white in manner of the olive leaf, but
that they be thicker, and saltish in taste: roots it has three or four, of a
finger thickness: it grows upon the sea coast among rocks and clifts. This
herb may be eaten, raw or boiled, it skilleth not how, with Beets, carrying
purple flours, senting strong, and has a root like to Cichory, which is good
in these cases. But it seems that Becabunga.
Brooklime, called otherwise Cepaea (an herb resembling S. John's wort
Hypericon, which some call Chamaepitys, others Corion. This herb Surculac^
fiutice.
shoots forth many branches, which be small and slender, of a cub it in
length, and red withal: in leaf it resembles rue; the smell is quick, hot,
and piercing: the seed which it bears within certain cods, is black, and the
same ripeneth together with barley. The nature of the seed is astringent: it
does incrassat and thicken humors, and stops a lask: vrin it provoke; and
being drunk in wine, scoureth away the stone and gravel in the bladder. A
second Hypericon there is, which some call Coris, in leaf it resembles
Tamaricis: but Dios. says Ericae. l. H^ath.
Tamarix, under which it gladly Pa^umo non altius, ex Diose.
span high: odoriferous to smell unto, and of a mild sweet taste, and yet Acutum.
sharp withal. The seed is hot, and therefore causes ventosities, and
Inflationem facit: aliter ad inflationem facit.
inflation in ruptures: howbeit, unto the stomach it is not hurtful^: and
singular good for the strangury, in case the bladder be not exulcerat: drunk in
wine, it cures the pleurisy. Moreover, for the bladder and the diseases
thereof, Maiden-haire made into powder together with Cumin, and given in white
wine, is a sovereign remedy; also Veruaine, sodden leaves and all, until the
third part of the liquor be consumed or the very root only thereof taken in
honied wine hot, expels the stones and grauel in the bladder. In like manner
the herb Perpressa, which grows at Aretium and in Sclauonia, being boiled in
water from 3 hemines to one, and so taken inwardly as a drink, is an
appropriate medicine for the bladder. Clauer or Potum.
drunk, is good for the same. Moreover, Anthemum expels the stone; an herb
this is, which puts forth immediately from the root five small leaves, and
two long stems, with a red rose color flower: the roots stamped alone, are as
effectual in this case as green Water cresses.
Lauer. As for Silaus, it grows along those rivers which run continually and
be never dry, especially such as glide upon sand and grauel: it rises to the
height of a cub it, and resembles garden Parsley: they use to sees it after
the manner of Olus acidum, or rather, Olus atrum, i. Alisanders.
Soure-docke, and so prepared, it does much good to the bladder, which, if it
be excoriat and scabbed, the root of Panaces will heal it; for otherwise it is
hurtful to that part. The herb called Some take it for Aristolochia the round,
(which in the 8 chap. of the 25 book he named venen^ terrae) others for
wildings or crabs.
Malum Erraticum [i. as one would say, the wandering poison, or apple] it
expels the stone, if one pound of the root be thoroughly sodden in a congius
or gallon of wine, unto the consumption of the half,

Scordium is singular for the swelling of the genetoirs or cods. Henbane is
good for the diseases of the members serving to generation. The juice of
Peucedanum [i. Harstrang] incorporate with honey, like as the seed also taken
inwardly, helps those who are pained with the strangurie; likewise Agaricke,
if three oboli thereof be drunk in one cyath of old wine: the root of id est,
Carot] either the herb, root, or seed, have the like effect.

Such as be troubled with the Sciatica or gout in the huckle-bone, find remedy
by a plaster or cataplasm, made with the seed and leaves both, of Madder; also
with a drink of Panaces: likewise if the place be well rubbed with Polemonia,
and bathed with the decoction of the leaves of Aristolochia, it finds much ease
thereby. The broad sinew or cord at the end of the muscles which is called in
Greek Platys; likewise the shoulders if they be pained, feel sensible
alleviation, by Agaricke, if the weight of three oboli be drunk in one cyath of
old wine. Cinquefoile both taken in drink, and also applied as a plaster,
allaieth the pain of the Sciatica: so does the herb Scammony boiled with
barley meal. The seed of both the Hypericons drunk in wine, is

The accidents of the seat or fundament, especially when that part is fretted
or galled, a salve of Plantaine heals most speedily.

The swellings or blind piles appearing like bigs or knuckles within the
fundament, are cured with fiue-leafe grass: and if the said part be turned the
insight outward, or displaced, there is not [i. Galengale] sodden in wine,
stamped and brought into a liniment, assuageth the tumors or swellings of the
Or Calamus Aromations.
cods. And Cato affirms. That whosoever have the Ponticke wormwood about
them, shall not be galled between their legs.

CHAP. IX.
Of Penyroiall and Argemone.

OThers add moreover Penyroiall to the foresaid wormwood, and say, that if a
man gather Peniroyall fasting and bind it fast to the reins and small of the
back, he shall feel no grief in the share, or if he were pained already in that
part, shall find ease thereby. Some call it (...) wort o^ ^od wort. othe^s take
it to be wild ^ansie, and some for Rhoeas.
Inguinaria, which some name Argemony, is an herb growing every where amongst
bushes, briers, and brambles, which if it be but held in the hand, is thought
to be excellent good for the accidents that befall the groin. Panaces made into
a cataplasme with honey, heals the flat biles and botches that arise in the
emunctories of the share: and the like effect has Plantaine, applied with
salt, fiue-leafe, and the root of the great clot-bur, like as in case of the
kings evil: even so is Some take it for Fistula pastoris.
Damasonium Negat Apollo pestem posse crescere quam nuda virgo restinguat: (i.)
Apollo will never suffer, that a botch which a Pestem, happily (...) ^aneth (...),
a plague so^c.
naked virgin thus cures shall possibly grow farther: which charm she must
pronounce thrice, after she has withdrawn her hand back; and withal, both he
and she are to spit as often upon the floor, that is to say, every time that
she repeateth the foresaid spell. Furthermore, the root

CHAP. X.
Of the water-Rose, otherwise called Nenuphar. Of such herbs as either heat or
cool the aptite to lust and venery. Of Satyrion or Ragwort, * with the red
roots of Crategis and Sideritis. (...).


NYmphaea, which also is named Heraclea, if it be but once taken in drink,
disableth a man altogether for the act of generation (as I have said before) 40
days after: the same if a man drink fasting, or eat with his meat, freeth him
from the dreams of imaginary Venus, which cause pollution. The root applied in
a liniment to the genetoirs, does not only cool lust, but (...).
also keep down and repress the abundance of natural seed: in which regard, it
is thought good to nourish the body and maintain a clear voice. On the
contrary side, the upper root of Glader given to drink in wine, kindles the
heat of lust: like as the herb which they call Sampier Savage: as also wild
Clarie, being stamped and incorporat with parched barley meal. But in this case
wonderful is the herb Orchis both male and female, and few be like unto it,
for two kinds is taken to be the female: the leaves resemble leeke blades, the
stalk is a span or hand-breadth high, and the flours be purple; the root
likewise is bulbous and twofold, fashioned like to a man's Howsoever Dalecampius
and others have labored to restore this place after this manner, yet there
remains some confusion: by intermingling O chis and Satyrion together, both
in their descriptions and properties.


* Chast-tree, or Agnus Castus, but that they be bigger and smooth: the root is
hard and white Vititis. Diosc. has (...), id est, Line or Flax; not (...).
Venus. Theophrastus, a renowned author, and otherwise a grave and modest
writer, exceeds in this point, and tells us of strange and incredible
wonders; and namely, of a man who was able to company with women seventy times

Sideritis the herb, if it be bound to the swelling and painful veins called
Varices in Latin, does not only diminish their tumor, but also appease and
take away their dolor.

Touching the gout, the time has bin when it was not so common a disease as
now it is; and not only in our fathers and grandsires days, but even in our
age and within my remembrance it was no ordinary sickness here in Italy, as
being a foreign malady and come out of strange countries hither to us: for
certainly if it had bin known to the Italians in old time, I doubt not but it
would have found a Latin name to be called by. Neither is the gout a disease
incureable, as ^odagra (used ordinarily in Latin for the gout, is a Greek
name, and signifies the grief or malady of the feet.
some have believed, for known it has bin in some to have worn away of it
self without any Veruaine stamped and incorporat with hogs grease, is good for
the gout: so is the root of Sowbread, Glader or Flags
Xiphion cools the hot gout; the seed of i. Fleawort.
Psyllium does the same: Hemlock also, incorporat with Litharge or hogs grease:
but above all other, Housleek or Sengreen is right sovereign to be applied at
the first assault or fit of the red gout (i.) when it is occasioned by a flux
of hot humors: and whether it be hot or cold gout, Groundswell tempered into a
liniment with swines grease, and so applied, is a very fit and convenient
medicine: as also Plantain leaves stamped, with a little salt mixed among: and
Argemonia punned in a mortar and applied with honey: moreover, Veruain reduced
into an unguent, is singular in that case; yea and if the goutie feet be well
soked in the decoction thereof, much ease will ensue thereupon: also Lappago, an
herb resembling Anagallidi, Diose (...).
Pimpernell, but that it is fuller of branches, and tufted more with leaves,
which also be rough, rugged, and wrinckled, yielding a juice in taste more
harsh, and in smell strong and unpleasant: as for (...)
soft, they call Mollugo: like unto which (but for the leaves that be more
rough in handling) is Asperugo, whereupon it took the name. Now for the gout,
let the Patient take every day 11 deniers weight of the juice pressed forth of
the former Lappago in two cyaths of wine: but for this disease the most
excellent remedy and that which rids it quite, is the sea-weed, which in Greek
they call Phycos Thalassion, and in Latin Fucus Marinus; an herb like unto
Lettuce, and commonly Murets and other shel-fishes lie bedded upon these weeds,
which being applied before they are dried, do cure not the gout of the feet
only, but also any disease of all other joints. Now of this Sea-grasse so
named, there be found three kinds: the first is broad and large; the second
longer, and somewhat red; the third has curled and frizled leaves, which in
Candy they do use in dying of their clothes; but all are of one and the same
operation Nicander was wont to give them in wine, as a counterpoison against
the venom of serpents. Moreover, the seed of that herb which I named Psyllium,
is singular good for the gout, if the same be well steeped in water; so that in
every hemine of the seed there be mingled the quantity of two spoonfuls of
Colophonian rosin, and one of frankincense. Finally, the leaves of Mandragoras
be highly commended in this case, if they be stamped and incorporat with fried
Barley groats into a cataplasme.

CHAP. XI.
General medicines and receipts for all the infirmities incident to the Feet,
the Ankles, Ioints, and Anthonies fire.

IF the feet be swollen about the ankles, the mud that is found in the bottom of
waters, wrought and concorporat together with oil, is of wonderful operation
to allay the same. For the pain in the ioints, or grief of sinews, the juice
drawn out of Centaury is passing good: in like manner, the herb Centauris. As
for Betony, it is comfortable unto the nerves, which run and spread behind over
the shoulder-blades, the shoulders, the backbone, the loins and hanches, if it
be ^
the pain of the joints, if it be applied outwardly: likewise the leaves of
Mandragoras made into a pultesse with parched barley meal; or the root it self
newly drawn out of the ground and stamped with the wild Cucumber; or else boiled
in water; for the chaps that appear in the feet or upon the elbows, the root
of Polypodie is singular good; for the grief of the joints, the juice of
Henbane reduced into an ointment with swines grease, is a proper remedy:
likewise the juice of the herb * Amomum, together with the decoction: also
Cotton-weed or Cudwort, boiled Rose of Iecho.
in water: or fresh gathered moss soked in water and bound to the grieved
place, and there kept fast without removing, until it be dry: as also the
root of the Bur called Lappa Boaria, drunk in wine. Sow-bread sodden in water,
cures the eluish and angry kibes beginning to rise upon the wine. And now that
I have run through those maladies which are offensive to every particular

And first there presents it self unto me the noble herb * Dodecatheos,
whereof I have spoken So called, for that it represents the majesty of the
twelve principal gods and goddesses called Maiorum genti^u, o^ Consentes, whom
the Painims imagined to sit in counsel together with Jupiter their President:
and those has Ennius comprised in this Distichon. Juno, Uesta, Minerua, C^res,
Diana, Venus: Mars, Mercurius, Iovis, (...), (...), Apollo.
before as a sovereign remedy for those universal diseases, if it be taken in
drink. Next to it are the roots of all kinds of the Panaces, which are thought
to be excellent, and principally for long and languishing maladies: like as
their seed for the obstructions of the bowels and the inward accidents of the
guts: for the pains generally of the whole body, the juice of Scordium is right
commendable, and so is that of Betony: which herb taken in drink, has a
peculiar property to mend the wan and leaden hew of body, reducing it to a more
fresh and pleasant color. The herb (...) Robe^t, as some think, or the first
kind by (...).
Geranion, which some call Myrrhis, others Merthrys, is like unto Hemlocke,
save Doves foot or Momordica
it brancheth out big at the distance of every two handbredths, howbeit, full of
leaves between: and among the leaves are to be seen in the top of the branches
and sprigs little buttons or heads like unto Crane-bils. Another kind there is
of them leafed after the manner of passe-floures, or wind-floures, but that they
be intailed or indented deeper: and a round root it has fashioned like an
apple, which is sweet in taste, and is an excellent restoratiue for all such as
have bin weakened and decayed in nature by long sickness: and this I take to
be the true Geranion, which is a rare herb. A dram weight thereof drunk twice a
day [first and last] in three The Carot. (...).
disposition, to be always eating and never satisfied, although otherwise I
use it for cankerous and corroding ulcers) the Tithymalls or Spurges taken
inwardly with Sesama seed, is counted sovereign. Among the maladies which
affect and infest the whole body, want of sleep, or an indisposition thereto,
is by most Physicians counted one: for which defect, they show us these herbs
following; to wit, Panaces, water Betony, and Aristolochia, which they
prescribe to the patient both for to smell too, and also to anoint his head al
over withal. Likewise Housleek called Aeizoon and also Sedum, giving direction
to wrap it within a black cloth, and so to lay it under the pillow or boulster
of the sick person, but in no wise to let him or her know so much. of a Seal,
so as there be in proportion 3 parts of the said root to one of the rennet,
cures the Centunculus.
Cudweed made into powder, and taken with vinegar, honey, or hot water: Veruain
drunk in wine: three beries of Hyssop stamped and drunk in water for 16 days *
Bacca. Some read f^sces, i. bunches: but in mine opinion, cymae, i. tops or
spikes, agree best to the sense.
together: Harstrang, and the rennet in the maw of a Seal, of each a like
quantity taken in drink: the leaves of Cinquefoile, if they be stamped and
drunk in wine for 31 days: the powder of Betony to the weight of 3 deniers,
concorporat with one cyath of Squillitick vinegar, and an ounce

In all He means intermittent, such as begin with cold fits more or less.
cold agues, if the Patient drink Agarick in hot water, the fits will be the
lighter. And more particularly, the herb Sideritis drunk with oil, shortneth
the cold fit in a tertian: so does that Taken for Herba Iudaica
Ladanum which grows among corn, if it be stamped and so given. Likewise,
Plantain, if the patient drink the weight of two drams in mead two hours before
the fit; or the very juice of the root either after it has lien a time
infused, or simply stamped without any such preparation; yea, and the substance
of the root reduced into powder, and given in a draught of water, made hot with
a gad of steel quenched in it. Some have appointed in this kind of ague 3 of
those roots, and 3 cyaths of water precisely: and the same Physicians for a
Quartaine have prescribed Horrore, as Q^artanes
quiuering and quaking. Some are wont to give of Cinquefoile three leaves in a
tertian, and four in a quartan, and so rise to more according to the period or
type of the ^amely quintans, sextanes, Septimanes, and Nonanes, etc.
rest: others ordain indifferently for all agues the weight of 3 oboli, with
some pepper, in mead or honied water. Veruaine verily given in wine as a drench
to horses, cures them of their feauers: but in Harstrang.
by way of imbrocation, or by rubbing the same with it: likewise with the juice
of both the Pimpernels. Contrariwise, there is more ado with those that are in
a lethargy, to awaken them and or rather with Euphorbium, as some have
corrected the place.
powder of Betony in water, heals it: or the Colewort with Frankincense, if
the patient drink often thereof hot. Some take a burning cole of fire, and when
it is extinguished or gone out in the presence of the patient, with their finger
gather up the cindres or light ashes which settle thereupon, and apply them
under the carbuncle: others stamp Plantain and lay it to the sore: the
Tithymall called Characites, cures the dropsy. Also Panaces and Plantaine
taken as a meat in bole, with this regard, That the patient have eaten some dry
bread before, without any drink at all. In which case Betony likewise is
singular, if two drams thereof be given in as many cyaths without any washing
at all: in case as much thereof as two fingers will comprehend, be taken in i.
Bread leafed
is called Coris: Chamaeacte, which some think to be Wall-wort, if either the
root be beaten to powder and ministered in three cyaths of wine, so the patient
have no fever hanging upon him, or the seed given in thick red wine; be
appropriat remedies every one, for a dropsy. In like manner Vervaine, if a good
hand full thereof be boiled in water unto the consumption of the one half. But
principally the juice of Wall-wort is thought to be the meetest medicine for to
fit this malady.

For the bleach or breaking out in wheales, for small pocks, swine pocks, and
such like eruptions of phlegmatic humors, Plantain is a proper remedy to rid
them away: so is the root of sowbread Anthonies fire, are cured by nothing
better than by Housleek, by the leaves of Hemlock stamped into an unguent, or
the root of Mandragoras. Now the manner of pr^paring and ordering it thus: take
the said root, dry it abroad in the open air, like as they do Cucumbers; but
principally let it hang first over new wine; afterward in the smoke: this don,
stamp it and temper it with wine or vinegar. Good it is also in this case to
make a fomentation with wine of Myrtles, and therewith to bathe the grieved
place. Also take of Mints two ounces, of Anthonies fire. And some take soot and
vinegar tempred together for the same purpose. Now of this disease which we
term * S. Anthonies fire, there be many kinds, whereof Erisypelas.
there is one more dangerous than the rest, which is called * Zoster, for that
it coueteth to go i. A girdle, and it is our shingles.
round about the middle of a man or woman in manner of a girdle; and in case
both ends meet together indeed, it is deadly and incureable. To meet with it
therefore by the way and to prevent this extremity, Plantaine is thought to be
a soueraign remedy, if it be incorporate with Fullers earth. Also Veruaine
alone by it self, and the root of the great Bur. Now for other corrosiue
ulcers and tettars, it is very good to use the root of Vmbilicus veneris with
honied wine: Sengreen: Terra Cimolia.
the juice of Mercury also with vinegar.

CHAP. XII.
For dislocations or members out of joint. Against the Iaundise, Felons, hollow
sores called Fistula's. Tumors, Burns, and Scaldings. Against other diseases.
For to comfort the sinews, and stanch blood.

THe root of Polypodium brought into a liniment, is a proper remedy for any
dislocation. The seed of Fleawort: the leaves of Plantaine punned with some few
corns of salt put thereto: the seed of Mullen boiled in wine, stamped and
reduced into a cataplasme: Hemlocke, incorporat with hogs grease. All these
applied accordingly, do assuage pain and bring down any swelling, occasioned
by dislocation. The leaves of Ephemerum brought into a liniment, Some take it
for the May Lilly or ^lly convally.
are good for any bunches or tumors caused by those accidents, if they be taken
betimes whiles they may be discussed and resolved.

As touching the Iaundise, I cannot but wonder at it, especially appearing as
it does in the eyes; namely, how the gall should get under those fine membranes
and tunicles, lying so close couched as they do. Hippocrates has taught us a
rule, That if the jaundise show in a fever Nay rather before the 7 day for then
it i^ Symptomaticall, and signifies irregular humors: whereas upon the 7, 9,
11, and such Decretorie da^es, it is critical, and gi^th hope of recovery. As
Hippocrates himse^fe teaches. Aphoris. 62 and 64, li. 4.
after the seventh day from the beginning thereof, it is a deadly sign.
Howbeit, I my self have known some to have escaped and lived still,
notwithstanding that desperate sign. But this is not always a symptom
incident to an ague, but happens otherwhiles without a fever: and then a
drink made of the greater Centaurie, as I have before showed, does with stand
and stay the course thereof. the weight of three drams: but this care ought to
be had, that the room be hot, and so close that Bacc^, rather cymae, i. the
tops, as before.
all worts or potherbes, so long as he takes it: Capillus veneris given in
wine: and the Fullers herb in wine honied, be all of them good medicines for
the jaundise.

As for the sores called Fellons or Cats-hairs, they will breed every where in
any part of the body, and put folk to great anguish and trouble who have them,
yea, and otherwhiles endanger their life, especially if they meet with lean and
worn bodies. But what remedy? Take the leaves of the herb Pycnocomos, let them
be stamped and incorporate with fried Barley meal, and so Hippuris, Horstaile.
in the beginning.

Moreover, you shall not see a part of the body but it is subject to the
Fistulaes, which creep inwardly and hollow as they go: but especially, when by
the unskillful direction of Physicians, or the lewd hand of chyrurgions there
be an incision untowardly made in the body. The help is to make tents of
Centaurie the less, with honey boiled, and put them into the concauity. Also
to use an injection of Plantain juice. To apply Cinquefoile with salt and honey.
Ladanum also with Castoreum: to lay unto the sore, Vmbilicus veneris, with
dear Marow, especially of Stag or Hind, hot. The string or pith of a Mullen
root fashioned slender to the form of a tent put into

Al inflammations, biles, and impostumes, are healed by a liniment made of
Argemony leaves So be all hard and schirrous tumors, occasioned by the
gathering of humors, with Veruaine or Cinquefoile sodden in vinegar: with the
leaves and roots of Mullen: with hyssope applied in wine: with the root of
Acorus, so that there be a fomentation withal made of the decoction of the
said herb: and finally with Housleek. In like manner, these herbs before
rehearsed do heal bruises, hard tumors, or bunches and hollow sores. The
leaves of * Illecebra draw forth any arrow heads and whatsoever sticks within
the body: so do the leaves of Folefoot: the Carot also, A kind of Housleeke.
and the leaves of * Lions paw, stamped and incorporat with fried Barley meal
in water. The Our Ladies Mantle.
so reduced into a cataplasm, are good to be applied to biles and impostumes
broken and running matter. In like manner the Ragworts are to be used.

As touching the accidents that happen in the bones, the root of Satyrion if it
be laid outward ly upon them, are thought to work a most effectual and speedy
cure. Al cankerous and eating sores, likewise impostumes growing to
suppuration, are healed with the sea weeds, if they be applied before they be
dried and withered. Also the root of marsh Mallow, does dissipate and scatter
all gatherings of humors to an impostume, before it be come to an head and to
suppurat.

Plantain and the Clot Bur are singular for burns or scalds, healing them up so
clean without a skar, that a man shall not perceive the place: the manner is to
take the leaves, sees them in water, Or Coris.
Corion, have the like effect.

For the infirmities incident to sinews and joints, Plantain is a sovereign
herb, if it be stamped with salt: so is Argemonia punned and incorporat with
honey. The juice of Harstrang is singular to anoint those that be sprained,
such also as be stretched with an universal cramp as if they were all of a
piece. For to mollify the hardness of sinews that be shrunk up, there is not
a better thing than the juice of Aegilops: and to assuage their pain, a
liniment made with groundswell Darnell, as some think.
and vinegar, is excellent. For those that be sprained and troubled with that
crampe which draws their neck backward, it is good to rub and anoint them
well with Epithymum; with the seed of S. John's woort, which also is called
Coris, and to drink the same. As for the herb taken, it heals those that
be stiff and stark for cold. Finally, the red seed of the herb Paeony i
Sanchbloud, a kind of Yarrow.
Ischaemon and Achillaea, do stay any issue of blood.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the herb Equisetum: of Nenuphar, Harstrang, Sideritis, and many more
effectual

HOrse-taile, named in Latin Equisetum, and by the Greeks Hippuris, an herb
which heretofore I disallowed to grow in any medows (and it is esteemed the
very hair, proceeding out of the earth, like for all the world to the hair of
an Horse-taile) if it be boiled in a new earthen pot never occupied before, so
as the pot be brim full when it is set on the fire and so to continue seething,
until a third part be consumed, does wast the spleen of lackies and footmen,
if for 3 days together they drink one hemine of the decoction at a time: and
besides, this charge they ought to have in any wise, to forbear all fat and
oily meats for 24 hours before Or rather Ephydros.
and there be again who give it the name Anabasis: because forsooth, as they
say, it climes upon trees, and hangs down from thence, with many blackish
slender hairs in manner of rishes, resembling horse tails. Small branches it
has full of joints, and few leaves, which be also fine and small. The * seed
that it bears is round, like unto Coriander; and the root of a woody And
that is just none.
substance: this kind, say they, grows principally in thickets and groves. An
astringent and binding power it has. The juice if it be conueighed up into the
nosthrils, stenteth bleeding at Dulci: rather austero, i. hard or green wine.
sweet wine to the quantity of 3 cyaths, it helps the bloody flix. Urine it
provoke, the cough it staieth, and cures straitness of wind when the
patient is forced to sit upright for to draw his breath. It heals ruptures,
and represseth those sores that love to spread and run over the body. The
leaves are good to be drunk for the infirmities that offend guts and bladder: a
special virtue it has to cure those that be bursten bellied and have their
guts slipping down in the bag of their cods. The said Greek writers describe
also another Horse-taile, by the name of Hippuris, with shorter, softer, and
whiter hairs than the former; and they commend it as a sovereign herb for the
sciatica and for wounds, to be applied unto the place with vinegar; and namely
Which some take to ^e Argentina, i. white Tansey.
bruised and laid too in a pultesse. The juice of Plantaine is good to be given
them that vomit blood. For a blood that runs up and down, breaking out one
while here and another while there, a liniment made of a Burre root and a
little swines grease, is commended to be excellent.

For such as be bursten or have any rupture within, be plucked with
convulsions, or have fallen Scylla the Dictatour died, who was eaten with lice. A
wonderful thing, that in the very mass of blood there should be ingendered
such creatures to consume man's body. But the juice of the wild vine called He
means (...), although he attribute unto it this wrong name.
Vva Taminia, as also of Ellebore, is sovereign against this foul and filthy
malady, in case the body be anointed all over with a liniment made of it and
oil together. As for the said Taminia, if it boiled in vinegar, it kills
such vermin breeding in clothes or apparel, so they be washed or rubbed
therewith.

CHAP. XIIII.
For ulcers and wounds. To take away werts. Of the herb Polycnemon.

Ulcers as they be of many sorts, so they are cured after diverse manners. If
they be such as run and yield filthy matter, a liniment or salve made of the
root of all kinds of Panaces, and wine together, are thought to be a sovereign
means to heal them. But that Panaces, which they call Chironia, has a
singular property above the rest to dry up such sores: the same root beaten to
powder and incorporat with honey, breaks and opens any swelling impostumes.
This herb tempered with wine, it makes no matter whither you take flower, seed,
or root Sauge de bois.
Polemonia heals those malignant sores which be called morimals, and are hard
to be cured. Centaury the greater reduced either into a powder, and so cast
upon the sore, or brought into a liniment and applied accordingly: the tops
also of the less Centaurie either sodden or beaten to powder, do mundifie and
heal up all inueterate and cankered ulcers. The Coliculi.
tender crops or husks of Some take it for water Betony.
Clymenos, are good to be laid unto fresh and green wounds. Moreover, Mollita.
Why not Mol^a, (i. ground to powder against the fire) since that he uses
farina so commonly for the powder of dry herbs?
made soft and tender at the fire first, it does the cure so much the better:
and being incorporat in some ordinary cerot, it mundifieth and cleanses the
thick edges and swollen brims of any sore, and staieth the canker of corroding
ulcers. But when Plantaine is thus reduced into a powder and strewed upon the
sore, you must not forget to cover the same with the own leaves. Moreover,
Celendine is singular for all impostumes and botches, whether they be broken
and in a liniment outwardly, draws forth the ends of darts, and any spils
whatsoever Fistulae pastoris, or, water Plantaine.
Damasonium, it would be used in these cases, prepared in that manner as it is
ordained for the Kings evil. And the leaves of Mullen serve well for the same
purpose, if they be applied with vinegar or wine. Veruaine is a good herb for
all sorts of wounds and sores, were they ouergrowne with callosities and full of
putrefaction: the root of Nymphaea Heraclea, heals perfectly all running and
filthy ulcers. In like manner, the root of Cyclamin [i. Sowbread] either alone
of it self, or incorporat with vinegar or honey: The Steatomatae.
fat or tallow. Like as Hyssop is an appropriat herb for running ulcers.
Semblably Harstrang.
Peucedanum, which is of that efficacy for the healing of green wounds, that it
will draw corruption from the very bone. The same effects have both the
Pimpernels: and besides, they do repress those cancerous sores that eat
deep: they stay also the flux of a rheum to any sore, which hinders the
healing thereof: they be good also for green wounds, but especially in old
bodies. The fresh leaves of Mandragoras newly gathered, incorporate with the
mass of some cerot, are singular for impostumes and malign ulcers: like as
the root heals wounds being made into a plaster with honey or oil. Likewise
Hemlocke tempered with the flower of fine white wheat, and wrought into a paste
with wine. Housleeke cures shingles, ringwormes, and Orchis.
Ragworts, they cure morimals also, either dry or green, so they be applied
with vinegar and honey: and Oenothera Sanatis, that is to say, when the skar
rises above the flesh and is not even with the rest of the ski^or, if you
rea^e Praesanatis, skinned too soon and healed only in show and appearance
outwardly.
over healed, an Asphodill root boiled, as I said before, then stamped together
with parched barley, and so applied, is singular good to rectify that default:
but for any sore or wound whatsoever, Henbane leaves be singular. The root of
Astragalus beaten into powder, are sovereign for such ulcers as do water much,
and be always moist: likewise the common (...), which is Trichom^nes, or
Capillus Ueneris.
Maidenhaire boiled in water: but more particularly, if the skin be newly
fretted off by wearing some uneasy shoes, there is not a better thing to
heal and skin the place, than a salve made with Veruain: also with herb willow
stamped; or Nenuphardried, made places: it bears in the head certain berries
as it were in bunches and clusters, odoriferous,

CHAP. XV.
Many experiments and approved receipts, for the provoking or staying of women's
monthly terms:

IT is said, That if a traveler or way faring man wear fast tied about him,
Mugwort or Sauge, he shall never be weary nor think his journey long. But to
come now unto the infirmities of women: the black seed of the herb Paeony, is
generally good for all their I^ their matrice, as namely, the rising of the
mother, etc
maladies, if it be taken in mead: the root also is of the same operation, and
besides provoke the ordinary course of their months. The seed of Panaces
drunk with wormwood, moves their fleurs, and procures To wit, the stay of the
after burden, after-throwes, suppression of their purgatio^, or immoderat
shifts, etc.
but especially those that ensue upon their delivery of childbirth. Achillaea
being applied accordingly, staieth the excessive flux of their monthly terms:
for which purpose also, it is good for them to sit in a bath made with the
decoction of the said herb: and in this case, to their breasts or paps, Swelled
and hard.
there would be laid a plaster of Henbane seed tempered with wine: the root
also applied in manner of a cataplasme to their secret parts, is counted
sovereign for that infirmity: like as Celendine the greater laid unto the
foresaid breasts. If the after birth, when the child is borne, be loath to come
away, or if the infant be dead within the mothers womb, the roots of Panaces
Purgat, some read better (in mine opin^on) corrigit, i. redu ceth it into the
right place being unsettled and perverted.
cleanses the same. Sauge de bois taken with wine, expels the afterbirth;
and by a suffumigation, mundifieth the matrice. The juice of Centaury the
less, brings women to their desired sickness, if they drink it, or foment
the parts beneath, therewith. Likewise the root of the bigger Centaury used
after the same manner, appeaseth the pains of the mother. If the same be scraped
smooth, and put up into the right place as a pessary; it draws away the dead
child within her body: for the grief and anguish which women feel in their
womb, there is no better thing than to apply the juice of Plantaine in a lock
of wool: and in danger of suffocation by rising of the mother, to give it in
drink. But Dictamnus is sovereign and has no peer: it provoke monthly
fleurs: drink is it thus effectual, but also in a liniment; yea and the very
perfume and smoke thereof received Clematis.
small kind thereof. But in case a woman be in danger of suffocation by the
ascent of the mother, or otherwise diseased for want of her monthly purgation,
let her drink Agaricke to the weight of three oboli in one cyath of old wine:
make a pessarie of Veruain incorporat with fresh hogs lard, and apply Calves
snout, otherwise called Snap-dragon with oil With (...) yellow fl^
Phessalie, applied unto the natural parts of women, eases the pains
thereof: and if it be drunk in gross red wine, it staieth their shifts or
immoderat flux of the months. Contrariwise, the Sow-bread root, both taken in
drink and also outwardly used, provoke the same, if they do stay upon a
woman. Also a decoction thereof, if a women do sit therein, helps the
accidents of the bladder. Cissanthemos taken in drink, sends out the after
birth, and heals the maladies of the matrice. The upper root of the Flag or
Glader, drunk in vinegar to the weight of one dram, brings women to the
ordinary course of their fleures. The fume of Harstrang burnt, fetches women
again when they lie as it were strangled and dead in a fit of the mother.
Flea-wort taken to the weight of a dram in three cyaths of honied John's woort,
stirs the issue of women's fleurs, only by an outward application. But above
all (in the judgment of Hippocrates) S^ Crest^
Crithmos passes for that, if either the seed or the root be taken in wine. As
for the pill or rind thereof, it fetches away the after birth also: and drunk
in water, it helps the suffocation occasioned by the rising of the mother.
The root of Hab R
Geranium likewise more particularly, is a very convenient remedy for to bring
away the afterbirth, and to cure the inflammation of the matrice. Horsetaile
has a secret virtue to mundifie the natural parts of women, either drunk, or
applied outwardly. Knot-grasse given in drink, Sisti^.
staieth the inordinate and excessive I man how the should consid^ (...) ge^
(...) co^ p^ (...) i to s^ cret virtue.
drive down the same: so likewise Agaricke in honied water. Mugwort stamped
and incorporat with oil of Ireos, Figs, and Myrhe, has the same effect, if
it be applied accordingly: The roo^ of which herb, if a woman take in drink,
is so purgative and will bring her to such a laske, that she shall withal
exclude the dead infant within her body. A decoction made with the branches of
Mugwoort, brings down women's monthly sickness, and fetches away the
afterbirth, if they sit therein: a dram weight of the leaves taken in drink,
is of the like virtue and operation: if they be but laid unto the belly in
manner of a cataplasme, especially with barley meal, they will do as much.
Moreover, Acoron, both the kinds of Conyza, as also Sampier, are singular good
for all the inward griefs and maladies whatsoever of women. Also in the skin
or hair, and to color the same black, if it be brought into powder, and with
oil made

That kind of Housleek which I called Digitellus, is singular for the diseases
incident to women's Breasts. Ground swell brings abundance of milk into women's
paps, if they drink it in wine cuit: so does Sowthistle sodden in frumenty.
The grape called Bumastos, takes away the Some think this is meant of hairs
within the paps, which should be sw^llowed down by (...) in a cup of d^inke,
and so rankle in the br^st, etc. a disease called by Aristotle Trichia And
(...) is or an opinion, that ^ome u^h th^g res^mbling an hair may br^ed w^thin
the breast, ^f putrified humors o^ corrupt m^ke. B^t it seems by that which
fol loweth, that Pl^e meant no such matte^, out rather so^e outward eyesore.
hairs about the nipples of nources breasts, which spring sometime after they
have once born children: which also otherwise is very good to cleanse the
skales and scurfe in the face, and to scour away other spots and pimples
arising upon the skin. Gentian, and Nymphaea called Heraclea, the root also of
Cyclamin, riddeth all such cutanean specks and blemishes. The grains

THE TWENTY SEVENTH BOOK
WRITTEN BY C. PLINIVS SECVNDVS.
The Proeme.
CHAP. I.
CErtes, the farther that I proceed in this discourse and history of mine, the
more am I forced to admire our forefathers and men of old time: for,
considering Hercules pillars and the straits of Gibralter, and those are the
very utmost bounds of the earth: from another coast also, the herb Britannica
we have, transported unto us out of Britain, and the Islands lying without the
continent, and divided from the rest of the world; like as Aethiopis out as far
as Aethyopia, a climat directly under the Sun, and burnt with continual heat
thereof: besides other plants and drugs necessary for the life and health of
man, for which merchants pass from all parts too and fro, and by reciprocal
commerce, impart them to the whole world; and all by the means of that happy
peace which (through the infinite majesty of the Roman Empire) the earth
inioieth: in

CHAP. II.
Of the poison Aconite, and the Panther which is killed thereby.

AConite alone, if there were nothing else, is sufficient to induce any man to
an endless admiration creature of female sex be but touched therewith, it will
not live after it one day to an end. This Calphurnius Bestia killed two of his
wives lying asleep by his side, as appears by that challenge and declaration
which M. Caecilius his accuser framed against him. And hereupon it was, that in
the end of his accusatory inuectiue, he concluded with this bitter speech, That
his wives died upon his finger. The Poets have feined a tale, That this herb
should be ingendered first, of the foam that the dog Cerberus let fall upon the
ground, frothing so as he did at the mouth for anger when Hercules plucked him
out of hell: and therefore it is forsooth, that about Heraclea in Pontus (where
is to be seen that hole which leads into hell) there grows Aconit in great
plenty: howbeit, as deadly a bane as it is, our forefathers have devised means
to use it for good, and even to save the life of man: found they have by
experience, that being given in hot wine, it is a counterpoison against the
sting of scorpions: for of this nature it is, that i. libard-bane: but they
again on the other side, presently have recourse to the excrements

CHAP. III.
That of all Creatures and Inventions in this life, the author is a god.

THis Chance and Fortune then, by means whereof we attain to so many inventions
that we thereof; to the end that a man may know it, and by knowing, take heed
and beware. i. Femalbane.
Theliphonon. And for that the root does turn and crook inward in manner of a
scorpions tail, there be that give it the name Scorpion. There wanted not
others who chose rather to call it or My^phonon
Myoctonon, because with the very sent it is able to kill mice and rats a great
way off. It grows naturally upon bare and naked rocks, which the Greeks call
Aba. priuativapart^ulo, and (...), i. dust: when. upon bare stones without any
mould upon them, be also called in Gr^ek (...) and so be whetstones likewise:
Yet Theophrastus is of opinion, That it took the name Acon^u^ of Aconae, a
certain town, near to which it grows abundantly.
Aconas: which is the reason (as some have said) why it was named Aconitum. And
for that in the place where it grows or near unto it, there is no mould, nor
so much as any dust found for to give

CHAP. IIII.
Of Aethiopis, Ageraton, Aloe, Alcea, Alypon, Alsina, Androsace, Androsaemon,
Ambrosia, Anonis, Anagyron, and Anonymon.

THe leaves of Aethiopis are great and many in number, hairy also near unto
the root, and otherwise correspondent to those of Mullen. It rises up with a
four cornered stem, rough in

As for Ageraton, it is an herb of the Ferula kind, growing up to the height of
2 spans like to Origanum, but that the flowers resemble buttons or brooches of
gold. The fume of this herb when it burns, provoke vrin and mundifieth the
matrice, especially if a woman sit in a bath thereof, and do foment the natural
parts therewith. The reason of the name Ageraton, is this, because Ab (...),
^eretica, and (...), old age.
the flowers continue very long before they seem to fade and wither.

Aloe is an herb which has the resemblance of the sea-onion, but that it is
bigger and the leaves be more gross and fat, chamfered or channelled biais all
along: the stem that it bears, is tender, red in the midst, not unlike to
Anthericon: one root it has and no more, which runs Petronius Niger, as
Dioscorides says in his preface.
Some have written that in Jury above Jerusalem, higher into the country, there
is a certain mineral Aloe to be found, growing in manner of a metal within
the ground: but there is none worse than it, neither is there any blacker or
moister. If you would know the It seems that he means here the concreted
(...) thereon, which we also do call Aloe.
best, choose that which is fat and clear, of a red color, brittle and apt to
crumble, close compact in manner of a liver, easy also to melt and resolve. If
you see any that is black, hard, sandy, or grittie (a thing

Touching Alcaea, it is an herb bearing leaves like unto Veruain, which also is
called Peristereon, rising up with three or four stems, well garnished with
leaves, and carrying flowers in manner

As for Alypon, a pretty herb it is, shooting up with a slender stem adorned
with little soft and tender heads, not unlike to the Beet, quick and sharp in
taste, biting exceedingly and burning, howbeit clammy to the tongue. Taken in
mead with a little salt, it makes the body soluble. The least dose that is
given thereof is two drams, from which they arise to four, which is counted a
reasonable and indifferent potion: but never exceed the weight of six. And
ordinarily

Chickweed.
Alsine, which some call i. Mous^ ear.
Myosoton, is an herb growing among (...), a grove.
groves, whereupon it took that name Alsine. It begins to put forth and
appear above ground about midwinter, and by midsummer it is dried away: when
it traileth and creeps upon the ground, the leaves do represent the ears of
little mice. But another herb there is, as I will show hereafter, which more
The right Mouse a^e.
Myosotis. Surely this might be taken well enough for Parietarie of the wail.
Hexine, but that the leaves be smaller, and those less hairy. It grows
usually in gardens, and most of all upon walls: when it is stamped or bruised,
it senteth of a Cucumber. Commonly used it is in cataplasmes for to be applied
unto impostumes and inflammations: and employed it may be in all those cases
whereunto Parietary serves. For the same effect they have both, but that
Chickweed is weaker in operation. And this particular property it has by it
self besides, to stay the flux of waterie humors into the eyes: also to heal
all ulcers, and those especially which are in the privy parts, being applied
thereto in a pultesse with Barley meal: the juice thereof is good to be dropped
or poured into the ears.

Androsaces is a Alba. Happily Pliny has translat^d (...) for (...) in Dioscor.
which is, h^uing slender stalks like rushes.
white hero, bitter in taste, without any leaves, but in stead thereof it has

Androsaemon, or as some call it Ascyron, is not unlike to Hypericon, whereof I
have already spoken: but that the stalks be bigger, stand thicker together, and
are more inclining to red: the leaves be white or gray, fashioned like unto
those of Rue: and the seed resembles that of black Poppie: crush or bruise the
vpmost crops or heads thereof, they yield from them a bloody juice: in smell it
senteth like unto rosin: and is found ordinarily growing in vineyards. The
proper time

Ambrosia is a name that keeps not to any one herb, but is common to many.
Howbeit, the true Ambrosia runs up from the root into one small stem, which
notwithstanding brancheth thick, rises to the height of three spans or
thereabout, and ordinarily is one third part, shorter than the root: and the
leaves be like Rue. Toward the foot of the said stem it brings forth certain
little grapes with grain or seeds within, and those have a sent of wine, and
hang down from the branches of the said herb: for which cause some th^re be who
call it Botrys, although others give it the name Artem isia. The people of
Cappadocia use therewith to make themselves chaplets to wear upon their heads.
This herb is much used in those accidents that require to be dissolved and sent
out by the pores of the skin.

Anonis (which some choose rather to call Ononis) is an herb full of branches
like unto Fenigreek, Resta bouis. Rest-harrow or petie Whin
smell, and pricky, after the spring. Many use to keep it condite in pickle.
Being applied to any ulcer whiles it is fresh and green, it eats away and
consumes the excrescence of proud flesh in the brims or edges thereof. The
root is good for the pain of the teeth, if it be sodden in vinegar and water
mingled together, and the mouth washed withal: the same taken in drink with
honey, expels gravel and stone: boiled in Oxymell to the consumption of the
one half, it is a singular drink for the falling sickness.

Anagyros, which some call Acopos, is an herb which brancheth thick, of a
strong and stinking smell: it bears flowers like unto those of Beets: in
certain cods like horns, which be of a good length: it brings forth seed
resembling kidneys in shape, the which in harvest time is born: or if a woman
desire to see her monthly sickness, it is good to drink a dram weight

Some take it for Bug^e or (...) heal.
Anonymos, finding no name to be called by, got thereupon the name Namelesse.
Anonymos. a Plant this is brought out of Scythia to us; highly commended by
Hicesius a Physician of great name and authority, also by Aristogiton, for an
excellent vulnerary, if it be bruised or stamped in water, and so applied; but
taken inwardly in drink, it is good for women's breasts and the precordiall
parts about the heart, if they have gotten a stripe, or be bruised: also for
such as reach up blood. Some have ordained a vulnerary drink to be made thereof
for those that be wounded. But what

CHAP. V.
Of Erith or Goosegrasse. Of the Clot-bur. Of or Scolopendrium.
Ceterach: of Asclepias and After or Bubonium. Of Ascyrum or Ascyroides. Of
Aphace, Alcibium, and Alectorolophus.

ERith is by some called in Greek Aparine, by others Omphalocarpos and
Philanthropos. Whereupon they call it Philanthropos, i. a lover of man.
catch hold of folks clothes as they pass by, and to stick unto them. An
effectual herb against serpents, if a dram of the seed be drunk in wine: also
for them who are pricked with the spiders Phalangia. The leaves have a singular
virtue to repress the abundant flux of blood out of wounds, if they be
outwardly applied: like as the juice has a special property to help the
infirmities of the ears, being dropped or poured into them.

Arction, which some rather name Arcturus, is like in lease to the great Mullen
or Taperwort,

As touching Asplenum, some there be who call it Hemionion: an herb putting
forth many leaves Trientalibus.
four inches long: the root is given to have cranks and holes, and those full
of mud or dirt: much-what do the leaves grow like to Fearn: the root is white
and rough. It bears neither stalk, stem, nor seed. It delights to grow
among rocks and stones, upon walls standing in

Asclepias bears leaves resembling Iuie, long branches, many small roots, and
those odoriferous; howbeit the flours have a strong and rank stinking smell
with them, the seed much like to the Axvitch. It loves to grow upon mountains.
The roots of this herb not only taken inwardly in drink, but also applied
outwardly in a liniment, do ease the wrings of the belly, and resist the sting
of serpents. After, is by some named Bubonium, for that it is a present remedy
it must (they say) be gathered with the left hand: nd then kept fast bound
near unto the middle

Ascyron and Ascyroides, be herbs resembling one another, and both like unto
Hypericon: howbeit that which is named Ascyroides, has the bigger branches,
and those straight and direct, much after the manner of Fenell and such like,
red throughout: and in the top thereof appear little heads or knobs, of a
yellow color. The seed contained in certain pretty cups, is small, black, and
gummie: bruise the said tops or knobs between your fingers, they seem to stain
them with blood; which is the cause that some call this herb i. Man's blood
Androsaemon. The seed is singular for the Sciatica, namely if the patient
drink two drams weight thereof in a sextar of Hydromel,

Apace is an herb which has very fine and small leaves: and a little taller it
is than the Lentill; but larger cods it bears, wherein lie three or four
seeds, blacker, moister, and smaller than the grains of the said Lentill. It
grows upon corn lands. More astringent it is by nature than the Lentill, and
binds stronger; for all other matters it works the same effects. The seed
boiled, staieth vomits and lasks.

Touching Pliny has forgotten himself. considering that in the 22 book, and
21 chapter, he describes it (according to Dioscorides) to be like in root and
leaf to Orchanet, etc. and there he^ names it Arcebion.
Alcibion, what manner of herb it should be, I never could yet find in any
writer. But they give direction to stamp the roots and leaves thereof, and so
in a cataplasme to apply them unto any place stung with serpents, and to drink
them also. Now they prescribe for the drink, to take of the leaves one good
handful, and to stamp them, and so to give them in three

Alectorolophos in Greek, called by us in Latin Crista Galli, i. Cocks-comb,
has leaves for all the world resembling the crest or comb of a cock and those
in number many: a slender stem and black seed, enclosed within certain cods. A
soueraign herb it is for them that cough, if it be boiled with bruised beans,
and taken in manner of an electuary with honey. It scatters the cloudy films
that trouble the eie-sight; and the manner is to take the seed whole and sound
as it is, and to put it into the eye: it is nothing offensive nor troubles
that part one whit, but gathers to it self all those gross humors which
impeached the sight. And in very truth, this seed whiles it is within the eye
changes color, and being black before, begins to wax white; it swells

CHAP. VI.
Of Alum.

THe herb which we name in Latin Alum, the Greeks call Symphytum Petraeum, as
if one would say, Comfrey of the rock: and verily like it is to wild Origan.
The leaves be small, and three or four branches spring immediately from the
root: the tops whereof resemble those of Thyme. Much branched it is otherwise,
odoriferous in smell, and sweet in taste: it draws down water into the mouth and
causes spitting. The root which it puts forth is long and red. i. Consound:
finally, it serves to unite again broken bones.

CHAP. VII.
Of Reits or sea-grasse, and Wallwort. Of the wild vine, and Wormwood.

THe sea-weed that looks red, named in Latin Alga, is very proper for the
prick and sting of Scorpions.

Touching Wallwort, it has leaves carrying a strong and stinking smell with
them: the stems be rough and parted into ioints: the seed black like to that of
the Iuy, save that the berries containing the same be soft. This herb
delights in shady, cool, rough, and watery places. Being given to the full
quantity of one Acetabulum, it is singular for the inward maladies which be
proper to women.

The wild Vine, called by the Greeks Ampelos-Agria, is an herb (as I have
sufficiently described

As for Wormwood, there be many kinds thereof. One is named Santonicum of a
city in France called Saints: another, to wit Ponticum, takes that name of the
kingdom Pontus; where the sheep feed fat with it, which is the cause that they
be found without gall: neither is there a better Wormwood than it: much
bitterer than that of Italy, and yet the marow or pith within of that Ponticke
Wormwood, is sweet to ours. Meet and requisite it is that I should set down the
virtues and properties thereof, an herb (I must needs say) as common as any,
and most ready at hand, howbeit, few or none so good and wholesome: to say
nothing of the especial account which the people of Rome make of it about
their holy sacrifices and solemnities: for in those festival holydaies named
Latinae, at what time as there is held a great running Vetustissime in vsu est.
Some read Vetus sieve vsu est, that is, If this drink be stale, and not used
presently, it is good for nothing.
so great antiquity as it, and known to have been used so long. Moreover,
the infusion of VVormewood is in great request, and a common drink: for so we
use to call the liquor wherein it lay steeped a certain time. Now this would be
considered, that be the proportion of water what it will, the said infusion
ought to stand close covered for three days together. Seldom or never is
there any use of wormwood beaten to powder, ne yet of the juice drawn by way
of expression. And yet those that press forth a juice, take the Wormwood when
the seed upon it begins to swell and wax sull, and being newly gathered, let
it lie soking in water three days together: but if it were dry before, to
steep it a whole seven night: which done, they set it over the fire in a brazen
pan, with this proportion, namely, ten hemines of the herb, to five and forty
sextars of water, and suffer it to boil is offensive to the stomach and head
both; whereas that decoction first aboue-named, is most wholesome: for
astringent though it be, and binding the mouth of the stomach aloft, yet it Cum
apio, not opio.
Parsley or Maidenhaire. Supped hot by little and little in water, it breaks
wind and resolves ventosities: and together with French Spikenard, it cures
the infirmities of the liver: and taken with vinegar, or some gruel, or else in
figs, it helps the spleen: given in vinegar, it helps those that have eaten
or the cerot, Cyp^c, after Dioscorides.
Cyprian wax or figs, and so applied to the flanks or hypochondrial parts,
it has a particular virtue by it self to help their griefs. Moreover, it
kills any itch. Howbeit, this would be noted, that wormwood in no case must
be given to those that have an ague. Let a man or woman use to drink
wormwood, they shall not be sea-sicke nor given to heauing, as commonly they
be that are at sea. If wormwood be worn in a trusse to the bottom So called,
because Osyris was ent^ and his sepulcher renewed there.
Taphositis in Egypt. Of this wormwood it is, that the priests of Isis in
their solemn marches and processions, use to bear branches before them. The
Or rather, a kind of sweet cuit called H^p s^ma, by Diosc. which signifies
also a water gruell.
supping or grewell made with the flower of the three month corn. To make the
decoction of wormwood well, there would be taken a good handful of wormwood,
and sodden in

CHAP. VIII.
Of stinking Horehound: of Mille-graine, or Oak of Jerusalem: of Brabyla,
Bryon, Bupleuros, Catanance: of Calla, Circaea, and Cersium: of Crataeogonon
and Thelygonum: of Crocodilium and Cynosorchis: of Chrysolachanon, Cucubalon,
and Conserua.

STinking Horehound, which some Greeks call Ballote, others Melamprasion, i.
Black Horehound, is an herb tufted full of branches: the stems be black and
cornered; the leaves wherewith Porri: but it should be Marrubij, according to
the Greek word (...) not (...).
Horehound, but that they be bigger, blacker and of a stinking savor: but the
leaves stamped and applied with salt, be very effectual against the biting of
a mad dog: also, if they be wrapped in a Colewort or Beet leaf, and so roasted
under the embers, they are commended for the swelling piles in the fundament.
This Horehound made into a salve with honey, cleanses filthy ulcers.

Botrys is an herb full of branches, and those of a yellowish color, and beset
round with seed: the leaves resemble Cichorie. Found it is commonly growing
about the banks of brooks and riuerets. Good it is for them that be straight
winded and cannot draw their breath but sitting upright. The Cappadocians call
it Ambrosia, others Artemisia.

As for Some take them for Damascen plums, or rather for Bullo^s, Skegs, or
such like wild Plums.
Brabyla, they be astringent in manner of Quinces. More than so, I find not any
Author to write thereof.

Bryon no doubt is a Sea-herbe, like in leaves to Lettuce, but that they be
riuelled and wrinkled as if they were drawn together in a purse: no stem it
has, and the leaves come forth at the bottom from the root: it grows
ordinarily upon rocks bearing out of the sea: and ye shall find it also
sticking to the shells of certain fishes, especially such as have gathered any
mud or earth about them. The herb is exceeding astringent and desiccatiue, by
virtue whereof it is a singular repercussiue in all impostumes and
inflammations of the gout especially, and such as require to be repressed or
cooled.

Touching Bupleuros, I read that the seed thereof is given against the sting of
serpents: and that the wounds inflicted by them, are to be washed or somented
with the decoction of the

Catanance is a mere Thessalian herb, and growing no where else but in
Thessalie; and forasmuch as it is used only in amatorious matters, and for to
spice love drinks withal, I mean not to busy my self in the description
thereof: howbeit, thus much it would not be amiss to note, for to detect and
lay open the folly and vanities of Magitians; namely, that they went by this
conjecture only, that it should be of power to win the love of women, because
forsooth when it is withered, it draws it self inward As if it would catch
women and hold them fast perforce.
like a dead Kites foot. For the same reason also, I will hold my tongue and
say never a word of the herb (...) or (...) in Greek signifies a bridle or
bit: and it is thought to b^ Leontopodium, Dioscor. though others take it for
Dode^.
Cemos.

Or rather Calix.
Cala is of two sorts: the one like to Aron, which loves to grow in toiled and
ploughed Rather Orocleia, out of Dioscorides.
Rhinochisia: the leaves resemble Lettuce, but that they be longer, full of
plume or down; the root red, which being applied with the flower of barley
groats, heals shingles, or any other kind of S. Anthonies fire: but drunk in
white wine, cures the infirmities of the liver.

Circaeum is an herb like to winter Cherry or Alkakengi, but for the flours
which are black: be drunk for the pain and other diseases of the matrice: but
of the said root there ought to be

Cirsion comes up with a slender stalk two cubits high, and seems to be
made 3 cornered triangle-wise: the same is beset round about with prickie
leaves: howbeit, the said pricks are but tender and soft. The leaves in form
resemble an ox tongue or the herb Or Borage, called in Greek Bug^osson.
Langue-deboeufe, but that they be smaller and somewhat white; in the top
whereof there put forth purple buttons or little heads, which in the end turn
to a plume like thistle down. Some writers hold, that this herb or the root
only, bound unto the swelling veins called Varices, does allay the

Crataeogonos spindleth in the head like unto the ear of wheat, and out of one
single root ye shall have many shoots to spring and rise up into blade and
straw, and those also full of ioints. It gladly grows in cool and shadowie
places: the seed resembles the grain of the Millet, which is very sharp and
biting at the tongues end If a man and his wife before they company together
carnally, drink before supper for 40 days together the weight of three oboli
of this seed, either in wine, or as many cyaths of water, they shall have a man
child between them, as some say. There is another Some take this for our
Persicorie, or Ars-mert.
Crataeogonos, called also Thelygonos; and the difference from the other may
soon be known by the mildness in taste. Some authors affirm, that if women use
to drink the flowers of Crataeogonos, they shall within 40 days conceive with
child. But as well the one as the other applied with honey, do heal old ulcers:
they incarnat and fill up the hollow concauities Theophrastus would have a kind
of tree to be called Crataegonos or Crataeogon, which here in Italy they call
i. Holly or Huluer: nay rather, Aquifolia is Agria in Greek: and the Crat^gus
of Theophrastus, which he means here, is a kind of Ceruoise tree now called
Torminalis.
Aquifolia.

Crocodilion does in shape resemble the thistly herb or Artichoke called the
black Chamaeleon: the root is long and thick in all parts alike, of an hard
and unpleasant smell: it grows ordinarily in sandy or grauelly grounds. If one
drink of it (they say) it will set the nose a bleeding, and send out a deal
of thick and gross blood, that the spleen will diminish and wear away by
that means.

As touching Testiculus Canis or Dogs-stones, which the Greeks call Cynosorchis,
and others simply Orchis, it has leaves like unto those of the olive; soft and
tender they are, and about half a foot long, and therefore no marvel if they
lie spread upon the ground: the root is bulbous and growing long-wise, in a
double rank, or two together: the one above, which is the harder, the other
under it, and that is the softer: when they be sodden, folk use to eat them
after the manner of other bulbs: and lightly a man shall find them growing in
vineyards. Of these two roots, if a man eat the bigger, it is said, that he
shall beget boys; and if the woman eat the smaller, she shall conceive a maiden
child. In Thessalie, men use for to drink in goats milk, the softer of these
roots, to make themselves lusty for the act of generation; but the harder,
when they would cool the heat of lust: whereby we may see, that they be
contrary, and one hinders the operation

Chrysolachanon comes up like a Lettuce, and commonly grows in plots of
ground set with Pines: the virtue of this herb is to heal wounds of the
sinews thought they were cut quite asunder, if it be presently laid too.
There is another kind of I think he means Orach.
Chrysolachanon, bearing flowers of a golden color, and leafed like unto the
Beet: when it is boiled, folk use to eat it in stead of meat, and it looseneth
the belly as well as Beets, Coleworts, and such like: and if it be true that is
reported, whosoever bear this herb tied fast about any place of their bodies
which is ever in their eye, so as they may see the same continually, it will
cure them of the jaundise. Touching this herb Chrysolachanum, well I wot that
I have not written sufficiently, that that with the (...) terrae Son^n think
(...) place imperfect; but I (...) rather, that Pliny her^ (...) at ^e
obscurity ^ir (...) in (...) sim^ put (...) at (...) any (...) w^ch (...) any
sense (...) mo^e (...) (...). (...).
rennet or rundles of the earth, one might stay a laske, or give free passage
to the

As for Cucubalum, they write of it, That if the leaves be stamped with
vinegar, they heal the stings of serpents and scorpions. Some of them call this
herb by another name, Strumus, and others give it the Greek name Strychnos:
and black berries (they say) it has. The juice thereof taken to the quantity
of one cyath, with twice as much honied wine, is sovereign for the loins or
small of the back: likewise it eases the headache, if together with oil of
roses it be distilled upon the head by way of embrochation. The herb it self
in substance made into a liniment, heals the wens called the kings evil.

Concerning the fresh water Sponge (for so I may more truly term it, than
either moss or herb, so thick of shag hairs it is and fistulous withal) it
grows ordinarily within the rivers

CHAP. IX.
Of the berrie called Coccum Gnidium. Of the Tazill, and Oak fern. Of
Dryophonon, and Elatine. Of Empetrum, otherwise named Calcifraga. Of Epipactis,
or Elleborine. Of Epimedium, Enneaphyllon, and Fern. Of the herb named
Oxe-thigh. Of Galeopsis, otherwise Galeobdolon. Of Glaux, or Eugalactum.

THe berrie Coccum Gnidium, in color resembles the Scarlet grain; in
quantity a pepper corn, but that it is bigger: of an ardent and caustic
quality it is, and therefore they

The Tazill, called in Greek Virga pastoris
Dipsacos, has leaves much resembling Lectuce, saving that in the mids of the
back-part, there are to be seen certain bubbles as it were, or risings, and
those be prickly: the main stem which it bears, is two cubits high, and the
same armed with pricks: at every joint and knot whereof, it puts forth two
leaves which do compass and enclose the same round about in manner of wings,
making thereby a certain Thereupon it is called Labrum Uenerus, Uenus lauer.
concauitie or hollow receptacle, wherein always there stands a This water
is not saltish: but because the name Dipsacos in Greek alludeth to thirst, and
salt things cause thirstinesse. Pliny guess^d this humor to be saltish.
saltish dew or water. In the top of this maine stem and other branches
proceeding from it, it bears certain burry heads, beset all over with sharp

Dryophonon is an herb much like to Dryopteris: the stems whereof be small, yet
growing to the length of a cubit, and those be environed on both sides with
leaves an inch broad: in shape much like to Bruscus or butchers-broom, called
in Greek Oxymyrsine, but they be whiter and softer, bearing a white flower
likewise in manner of the Elder. The young crops and tendrils of

Running Buckwheat or Bindweed, named in Greek Elatine, puts forth small
leaves, round and hairy, much like to those of Parietary of the wall; and
immediately from the root there spring five or six pretty branches half a foot
long, furnished well with leaves. This herb grows among corn: sour it is and
harsh in taste, whereupon it is taken to be very effectual to repress the flux
of humors which cause watering eyes, if the leaves be stamped with barley
groats, and applied with a fine linen cloth underneath. The same boiled
together with Lineseed, cures the bloody flix, in case the patient drink the
broth or decoction thereof.

As for Empetron, which our countrymen in Latin name Calcifraga, it grows
upon mountains regarding the sea, and commonly upon rocks and stony cliffes:
the nearer it is to the sea, * This Empetro^ is thought to be our Saxifrage.
their word, do affirm for the better credit thereof, That if stones do boil
with it in the same pan, they will burst in pieces.

Epipactis, named by some Elleborine, is a little herb bearing small leaves:
soueraign for the diseases of the liver, and against all poisons, if it be
taken in drink.

Epimenidion puts forth no great stem, bearing ten or twelve leaves
resembling the Iuie, but it never shows flower: the root is small, black, and
of a strong and stinking smell: it grows upon moist grounds: of an astringent
nature it is, and cools mightily: an herb that women For it hinders
conception.
must beware of. The leaves stamped and applied to the paps of maids, keep
them down that that they shall not grow.

Enneaphyllon has long leaves, in number nine, neither fewer nor more, and
those be of a burning or causticke nature: a singular herb for the pains of
loins, and the Sciatica, but it ought to be applied enwrapped well in wool,
for fear least it burn the flanks, for presently it raises blisters.

Of Fern be two kinds, and they bear neither flower nor seed. Some of the
Greeks call the Non graui odore: Dioscor. says, Sub graves odore, somewhat
unpleasant in smell.
no unpleasant savor; and this they suppose to be the male. The second kind,
the said Greeks some call Thelypteris, others Nymphaea Pteris: this grows
single, and brancheth not into many stems; shorter it is than the former,
softer also, and thicker of leaves, and those toward the root guttered and
somewhat hollow: there is neither of them both, but their roots will feed swine
fat: and the leaves of the one as well as the other, are disposed on both sides
so, as they do represent birds wings, whereupon the Greeks gave them the name
And in Columella, Filix is called Auia.
Pteris. The roots of both Fernes be long, and those growing bias: in color
black, especially when they be dry: and dried they ought to be in the Sun.
Fern grows every where, but their most delight is in a cold soil. The due
time of digging them up, is Fern kill punaises or wallice, and a serpent they
will not harbor; and therefore it is good for

As touching the herb called in Latin Femur bubulum (i.) Ox-thigh, it is very
good for the sinews, if being new gathered, it be stamped and incorporat in
vinegar and salt.

Many take it for Archangell.
Galeopsis, otherwise called by some Galeobdolon or Galion, has a stem and
leaves like to the nettle, but that they are more smooth and mild in hand;
which being bruised or stamped, yield a stinking smell; and it bears a purple
flower; it grows every where about hedges and path-waies. The leaves and
stalks both, stamped and applied with vinegar, heal all hard tumors

As touching Glaux, in old time called Eugalacton, it is an herb in leaf
resembling Treetrifolie, and the Lentill, but that the back part of the leaf
in Glaux is whiter. The branches, that be in number five or six, and those
springing directly from the root, very small, do creep along the ground: the
flours which it puts forth be of a purple color: and this herb is found
growing ordinarily near the seaside. Being boiled in a gruell made of fine
wheat flower, it causes nources that drink it, to have plenty of milk in
their breasts; but then they must presently go to a baine or hot house.

CHAP. X.
Of Glaucion. Of Paeonie, and Cudwced or Cottonwort, called also Chamaezelon.
Of Galedragon, Holcus, Hyosiris, Helosteon, and Hippophaeston.

GLaucion grows naturally in Syria and Parthia: a low herb, tufted thick with
leaves, much like unto Poppie, but that they be smaller and look more foul
and greasy; of an unpleasant and stinking smell; bitter also in taste,
styptick, and astringent: grains it bears of a Safron color, whereout is
drawn the juice Memithra, called by the Greeks Glaucium also, as well as the
herb. Now for to get this juice, they use to cover the grains in mud or clay,
and put

Paeony, which some in Greek call Glycyside, others Paeonia, or Pentorobos,
has one main stem two cubits high, and the same accompanied with two or three
more less stalks of a reddish color, and the rind resembles that of a Bay
tree: the leaves be very like unto Woad, were they not fatter, rounder, and
smaller: seed it bears in certain husks like grains, and those be partly
drunk to the same number in sweet wine cuit or simple wine, cure the passions
of the matrice, [and namely the rising of the mother.] The root given in wine,
appeaseth all the pains of the

Cudwort or Cottonweed, some there be who call Gnaphalion, others, Chamaezelon.
The white, soft, and delicat down of the leaves, many use in stead of flocks;
and surely it is not much unlike. This herb is good to be given in some austere
and styptick wine, for the bloody flixe. It staieth lasks, and restrains the
immoderat flux of women's sleurs. Being clysterized, it is singular for the
Tinesme, that is to say, the continual prouocations to the seege without any
voidance of excrements. Last of all, in a liniment it serves well to be
applied in ulcers tending to putrefaction.

As touching Galedragon (an herb so called by Xenocrates) it resembles the
Thistle named Leucacanthe [i. S. Mary thystle] and grows full of sharp pricks
in moory grounds. The stem rises up tall, in manner of Ferula or Fennel geant,
in the very head and top whereof it bea^eth a thing resembling an egg, in
which there breed (they say) in process of time certain grubs or little worms,
which are excellent for to ease the toothache, if they be kept in a box with
bread, and as need requires, tied fast unto the arm of the patient on that
side where they ache; for it is wonderful how soon the pain will by this means
cease. Mary they ought to be changed every year, for after one year they be of
no virtue in this case: and in any wise they must at no time touch the ground.

As for Holcus, it grows upon stony grounds and those that be dry. It rises
up with a stem like unto the straw of that Barley which springs every year
without sowing: in the top whereof And therefore it is called Holcus, (...).
draws forth of the body any spils what soever: whereupon some name it
Aristida.

As one would say, swines Endive or cichory
Hyoseris resembles Cichory or Endive, but that it is less, and in handling
more rough: a sovereign vulnerary herb, so it be stamped and laid to a wound.

Holosteon, which the Greeks so call by the (...): for the word signifies, All
bone.
contrary, is an herb without any hardness at all, as if we should term So
in Greek (...) [i. fell] is called (...), as in some part of France (as
Dalechamp. notes) Gallis named le doux.
[Gall] by the name of [Sweet.] So small and slender it grows, that a man
would take it to be all hairs; sour fingers long, in manner of quich-grasse or
stitchwort. The leaves be narrow, and have an a stringent taste. It comes up
ordinarily upon banks and hillocks, which be all earth and nothing stony. Being
drunk in wine, there is great use thereof for

Hippophae ston is a certain pricky bush growing by the seaside, wherewith
Some read (...), i. Diers: others, (...), i. Fullers.
Fullers and Diers fill their leads and coppers; without stem, without flower:
it brings forth certain little knobs or buttons only, and those hollow:
leaves also it has small, and many in number, of a grass green color: the
roots be white and tender; out of which there is a juice drawn by way of
expression in Summer time, which is singular good for to purge the belly, if it
be taken to the weight of three oboli; and principally helps those that be
subject to the falling sickness, trembling of the members, and the dropsy: it
cures also those that be given to the swimming and dizzines

CHAP. XI.
Of Hypoglossa and Hypecoon, Idaea, Isopyron, Lathyris, Leontopetalon,
Lycopsis, Lithospermon. The vulgar stone. Of Limeum, Leuce, and Leucographis.

HYpoglossa has leaves fashioned like unto Butchers broom, and those turning
hollow, and pricky: within which concauities there come forth certain little
leaves resembling Bislingua. Horse-tongue, or Doubletongue.
tongues. A garland or chaplet made of these leaves, and set upon the head,
eases the pain thereof.

Hypecoon grows amongst corn, and is leafed like unto Rue. It has the same
nature and

As for the herb Idaea, the leaves thereof resemble those of ground-Myrtle or
Butchers broom: unto which there grow close certain tendrils, and those carry
flowers. It stops a lask, staieth the immoderat flux of women's months, and
stancheth all unmeasurable bleeding: for by nature a stringent it is and
repercussiue.

Isopyron, some there be who call it Phasiolum, because the leaf (otherwise
like unto Annise) does turn and writh like unto the tendrils of Phasils. In
the top of the stem it bears small heads or buttons full of seed,
resembling Nigella Romana. A sovereign herb, taken either in honey or mead,
against the cough and other infirmities of the breast: likewise for the
accidents of the liver.

Lathyris.
Spurge has many leaves resembling For the milky juicehaply. For Dioscor.
says amygdalae, i. of the Almond tree.
Lectuce: besides which, it puts forth as many other slender and small
branches, containing in little tunicles or husks certain seeds in manner of
capers: which being dried and taken forth, resemble for bigness corns of
Pepper, white in color, sweet in taste, and easy Purgata facilia. Some think
gentle puigatiues.
to be cleansed from their husk. Twenty of these seeds drunk either in clear
water or mead, do cure the dropsy: besides watersh humors, they euacuat
choler. They that desire to be thoroughly purged and would have them to work
strongly, use to take them husk and all; but certainly so taken, they hurt the
stomach: and therefore there is a devise of late found out to give them either
with fish, or else in some broth of a cock or capon.

Leontopetalon, which some call Rhapeion, carries leaves like to Coleworts, and
a stalk half a foot high, garnished with many branches resembling wings: and
seed it bears in the head contained within cods, after the manner of ciches.
The root is made much after the fashion of a

Some take it foe a kind of Orchanet, others for Houndstongue.
Lycopsis has leaves like to Lectuce, but that they be longer and thicker: it
rises up with a long stem, and the same hairv, with many branches growing
thereto of a cubit in length: and bears little Purple flowers. It loves to
grow upon champion plains. A liniment made with it and barley meal, is good
for the shingles and S. Anthonies fire. In agues it procures sweat, so that
the patient drink the juice thereof mingled with hot water.

But of all herbs that be, there is none more wonderful then Greimile: some
call it in Greek Quincuncialis fere: others read Quinque caulibus fere, i.
commonly it bears five stalks.
five inches high: and the leaves be twice as big as those of Rue. The foresaid
stalks or stems be no thicker than bents or rushes, and the same garnished with
small and slender branches. It brings forth close ioining to the leaves,
certain little beards one by one, and in the top of them little stones white
and round in manner of pearls, as big as cich pease, but as hard as very
stones. Toward that side where they hang to their steles or tails, they have
certain holes or This some take to be meant of that Greimile called Jobs
tears.
concauities containing seed within. This herb grows in Italy; but the best
in the Island Candy. And verily of all the plants that ever I saw, I never
wondered at any more: so sightly it grows, as if some artificial goldsmith
had set in an alternatiue course and order, these pretty beads like orient
pearls among the leaves: and so rare a thing it is and difficult to be
conceived, that a very hard expel the same by gravel, and dispatch those
causes that be occasions of strangurie. Certes, a H^termeth te^ta wor^es
C^ntharide and the (...), the wild Wolf.
(...).
That is to say, Cantharides fly apace: for a wild Wolf follows in chase.


The Frenchmen have a certain herb which they call Limeum, out of which they
draw a venomous juice, named by them Stags-poison, wherewith they use to
envenome their Arrow heads when they go to hunt their red Dear: Take of this
as much as goes to the poisoning of one arrow, and put it in three measures or
Modij of a mash wherewith they use to drench cattle: and make sops thereof, and
convey them down the throat of sick oxen or kine, it will recover them. But
presently after the receipt of this medicine, they must be tied up sure unto
their bousies until the medicine have done purging: for the beasts commonly
fare all the while that it is in working, as if they were wood. In case they
fall a sweating upon it, they must be washed all over

Men^ Sarace^ca
Leuce is an herb like unto Mercury; but it took that name by reason of a
certain white struck or line that runs cross through the mids of the
leaf, for which cause some call it Mesoleucas. The juice of this herb heals
fistuloes: and the substance of the herb it self stamped, cures cancerous
sores. It may be peradventure the same herb which is named Leucas, that is so
effectual against all venomous stings proceeding from any sea-fishes. The
herbarists have not described this herb otherwise than thus, That the wild kind
thereof with the broader leaf, is more effectual in the leaves; and that the
seed of the garden kind, has more acrimony than the other.

Touching Leucographis, what manner of herb it should be, I have not found in
any writer: and I wonder thereat the rather, because it is reported to be so
good for them that void and reach

CHAP. XII.
Of Medium, Myosota, Myagros, Nigina, Natrix, Odontitis, Othonne, Omosma,
Onopordos, Osyris,

MEdion has leaves like unto ^idis sativae: others read Se ridis i. Eud^e.
garden Floure-de-lis. A stem three foot ^riped ^m. But D^oscor. says (...).
i. three cubit: high.
high, garnished with fair large flowers, of purple color, and round in
form: the seed is small, and the root half a foot long: it grows willingly
upon stony grounds lying in the shade The root taken in a liquid electuary or
lohoch made with honey to the quantity of 2 drams, for cerdaies together,
staieth the immoderat flux of women's monthly terms. The seed also reduced
into powder and drunk in wine, represseth their extraordinary shifts.

Mouse care.
Myosota, otherwise called Myosotis, is a smooth herb, shooting forth many
stems from one single root, and those in some sort of a reddish color and
hollow: garnished with leaves, which toward the root be narrow, long, and
blackish, having their back part sharp and edged: which leaves grow along the
stems two by two together: and out of the concauities or armpits between the
stalk and them, there put forth other small branches with a blew flower. The
root is

Myagros is an herb growing up with stems in manner of Fenell geant, in leaves
resembling Madder, and rises to the height of 3 foot. The seed which it
bears is oleous, and out of it there is an oil drawn, which is good for the
sores in the mouth, if they be anointed therewith.

The herb called Nigina, has three long leaves like unto those of Succorie;
wherewith if scars (remaining after ulcers and wounds) be rubbed, it will
reduce them to the natural color of the other skin.

There is an herb, which in Latin is named Natrix, the root whereof being
pulled out of the ground, has a rank smell like unto a Goat; with this herb
they use in the Picene country to drive away those hob-goblins which they have
a marvelous opinion to be spirits, called Fatui: but for mine own part, I am
verily persuaded they be nothing else but fantastical illusions of such as be
troubled in mind and bestraught, the which may be chased and rid away by the
use of this medicinable herb.

Odontitis may be reckoned among the kinds of hey-grasse, putting forth many
small stems

Othonne grows plenteously in Scythia, like unto Rocket: the leaves be full
of holes, and the flower resembles Safron: which is the cause that some have
called it Anemone. The juice of this herb enters very well into those
medicines which are appropriate to the eyes; for it is

Onosma bears leaves wel-neare three fingers long, and those lying flat upon
the ground: three in number, and indented or cut after the manner of Orchanet,
without stem, without flour, without seed. If a woman with child eat thereof,
or do but step over it, she shall cast her untimely birth out of her womb.

As for Onopordon, they say if Asses eat thereof, they will fall a fizling and
farting. Howbeit of virtue it is to provoke urine, and the monthly sickness
of women: to stop a laske, to discuss

Linaria or Toads flax.
Osyris puts forth small branches of a brown color, slender, pliable, and
easy to wind; the same be garnished with leaves According to Dioscorides.
resembling those of Line or flax, of a dark and duskish green at first, but
afterward changing color, and inclining to a red color, and the seed is
contained in those branches. Of these leaves are made certain washing balls, to
scour women's skin, and make them look fair. The decoction of the root being
drunk, cures those that have the jaundise. The same roots, gathered before the
seed be ripe, cut into roundles, and dried in the Sun, do stop the laske: but
drawn after that the seed is ripe, they repress all catarrhes and fluxes of
the belly, if the patient drink the supping wherein they are boiled. Also
stamped simply, and so given in rain water, they have the same effect.

Cuckowes meat, or Wood-Sorell.
Oxys bears three leaves and no more. This herb is singular to be given for a
feeble stomach which has lost all appetite to meat. They also who have a
rupture, and whose guts be fallen down, eat thereof to very good success.

Polyanthemum, which some call Batrachion, has a causticke quality, whereby it
does blister any unseemly scars, by means whereof, reduces them to their fresh
and former color: the

Knot grass is that herb, which the Greeks name Polygonon, and we in Latin,
Sanguinaria: in leaf it resembles Rue, in seed common quich grass, and rises
not from the ground but creeps along: the juice of this herb conveyed up into
the nosthrils, stancheth bleeding at the nose. They who set down many kinds of
Polygonon, do hold that this is to be taken for the male, and by reason of the
multitude of seed which it bears is called of (...) many and (...) seeds
Polygonon: or for that it grows so thick in tufts, Calligonon. Others name
it And yet Scribonius says it is called Polygono^, because it grows eeuery
where so common.
Polygonaton, for the number of For (...) signifies a knee or knot.
knots or knees which it carries. There be again, who give it the name
Theuthalis: some call it Carcinetron, others Clema, and many Myrtopetalon: and
yet I meet with some writers, who say this is the Alvum solvunt. If the place
be not corrupt, as I doubt it is.
seed does loosen the belly; which if taken in any great quantity, is
diuretical and represseth any rheums, provided always that the patient be
troubled therewith, otherwise it does no good. The leaves are singular good to
be applied unto the stomach, for to assuage the heat thereof: in a liniment
they mitigat the grief of the bladder, and stop the course of shingles and
such like wilde-fires. The juice is sovereign to be dropped alone by it self
into the ears that run, and into the eyes to abate their pain. It is usually
given to the quantity of 2 cyaths in tertian Agues, and Quartans especially,
before the fit comes: likewise for the feebleness of the stomach when it
will Oreon, ab (...), a mountain. Some read (...), i. fair: others, (...),
for that it grows like to an horstaile, or the herb Hippuris.
Oreon, growing upon the mountains, resembling a tender reed: rising up in one
single stem, but full of little knees or knots, and those Insefarctis.
couched and thrust together. Leafed it is like the Pitch tree: the root
needless, and of no use: and generally the whole herb of less strength and
operation than the former. Howbeit, this singular property has it, to help
the sciatica. A fourth Polygonum there is, called the wild; and this busheth
like a shrub or a pretty tree rather: the root is of a woody substance, and the
stock or plant of a reddish color, resembling the Cedar: it bears branches
much like to Spart or Spanish broom, two spans long, iointed into three or
four knots, and those of a blackish color. This also has an astringent
nature, and tastes in the mouth like to a Quince. The decoction thereof in
water, till the third part be consumed, or the powder of it dried, is commended
for the sores in the mouth,

Pancration, which some choose rather to call the little Squilla or sea-onion,
bears leaves resembling the white Lilly, but that they be longer and thicker;
with a great bulbous root; and the same in color red. The juice of it taken
with the flower of Eruile, makes the belly laxatiue: and outwardly applied,
mundifieth ulcers. For the dropsy and hardness of the spleen, it is given
with honey in manner of a syrrup. Some take the root and boil it in water until
the liquour be sweet, which they pour forth; and then stamp the said root, and
reduce it into bals or trosches, which they lay to dry in the Sun: and use them
afterward as occasion serves for the skals or ulcers of the head, and all
other sores that require mundification. Semblably, they give thereof as much as
one may take up with three fingers in wine, for the cough, and in a liquid
electuarie

A kind of Esula.
Peplos, called by some Syce, by others Meconion i. Frothie Poppie.
Aphrodes, from one small root busheth into many branches; the leaves be like
unto Rue, but that they be somewhat broader: the seed

Wood-bind.
Periclymenos is also a bushie plant, and loves to branch much: it bears
whitish and soft leaves, disposed two by two at certain spaces and distances
very orderly. In the top of the branches it bears hard seeds between the
leaves, which hardly may be plucked off. It grows in

As touching Some take it for Securidaca, i. Axfitch.
Pelecinum, it grows as I said before among corn, branching thick, and
garnished with leaves like unto the cich pease. It bears seed in certain
cods, which crook in manner of little horns, and those be four or five in
number together. The said seed resembles Gith, so far as ever I could see, and
is bitter, but good for the stomach: one of the ingredients that go into
antidotes and preservatives against poison.

Polygala reaches up with a stem a span high, in the top whereof it bears
leaves resembling the Lentils, of an astringent taste, which being drunk,
causes nources to have plenty of milk in their breasts.

Poterion, or as some call it, Phrynion or Neurada, brancheth and spreads
much: armed it is with sharp pricks, and besides, full of a kind of thick down:
the leaves be small and round: the

Phalangites by some is called Phalangion, by others Leucanthemon, or, as I
find in some copies, Leucacantha. Little branches it puts forth, never fewer
than twain, and those tending directly a contrary way. The flowers white,
fashioned like the red Lilly: the seed black, broad, and flat, shaped after
the manner of half a Lentill, but much less: and the root is of a greenish
color. The leaf, flower, and seed of this herb is a singular remedy against
the venomous sting of scorpions, the spiders Phalangia, and serpents; also for
the wringing torments of the belly.

As for Phyteuma, somewhat else I have to do rather than to describe it,
considering there is no use of it but in amatorious medicines to procure women's
love.

There is an herb called by the Greeks Phyllon, growing upon stony mountains
standing and biginneth only to show. But both of them are for the said purpose
to be drunk in wine.

Phellandrion grows in moory grounds, and in leaf comes near unto garden
Parsley: the seed thereof is good to be drunk for the stone, and the
infirmities incident to the bladder.

As for Phalaris, it has a long slender stem like unto a reed, in the top
whereof it bears a flower bending downward; and the seed resembles that of
Sesama: and this also breaks the stone, if it be drunk in wine or vinegar,
or otherwise with milk and honey. The same cures the accidents of the bladder.

Polyrrhizon is leafed like unto the Myrtle, and has many roots, which being
bruised, are given in wine against the poison of serpents; not only if men but
also if fourfooted beasts be stung by them.

Thought to be the same that Polygonu^ or Knot grass abouenamed.
Proserpinaca likewise, being otherwise a common herb, is counted a sovereign
remedy against scorpions: the same stamped and incorporat with fish-pickle and
oil, is (by report) a singular medicine against the prick of scorpions. Over
and besides, it is said, that if it be but held under the tongue, it refreshes
those who be ouertrauelled or any ways wearied, so as they have lost their
speech with very faintness: but in case it be swallowed down the throat, it
procures vomit, which always is good and wholesome for the Patient.

As touching Rhacoma, it is brought unto us out of those countries which are
beyond the kingdom of Pontus: a root it is much resembling the black Costus,
but that it is smaller and somewhat redder; also without any smell; hot at the
tongues end and astringent: being punned, it is of a wine color inclining to
safron: a liniment made of this root, does mitigate all impostumes and
inflammations; heals wounds, and appeaseth the violence of any rheums taking
a

About the town Ariminum there grows an herb commonly known by the name of
Reseda: it resolves and discusseth all impostumes: it reduces also into
temperature any inflammation. But they that use to cure with this herb, must
when they lay it to the place, say withal these words following; Reseda,
morbos Reseda, scisne scisne, quis hic pullos egerit? Radices nec caput nec
pedes habeant. That is to say, Reseda, cause these maladies to cease: know
thou, know thou, who has driven these pullets here? Let the roots have
neither head nor foot. This charm (I say) they must pronounce three times over,
and spit upon the ground as often.

To conclude, Stoechas grows in those Islands only which carry that name and
be called Stoechades: an odoriferous herb it is, bearing leaves like unto
hyssop, and is bitter in taste: taken in drink, it procures women's months, and
does mitigat the pains of the breast. Also it is one of the species or
ingredients entering into the preservative compositions called Antidotes.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Nightshade: of Smyrnium, and Telephium. Of Trichomanes, Thalietrum, and
Thlaspi. Of Tragonia, Tragonis, Tragum, Tragoprgon, and Spondylis, Also, that
some diseases are not incident to certain countries.

NIght shade, called in Latin Solanum, the Greeks name Strychnos, as says
Cornelius Celsus; an herb this is which has a virtue repercussiue and
refrigeratiue.

Loueach, named otherwise Smyrnium, has a stem like unto Persley, and the
leaves be larger: it puts forth many sions or imps from about the stem: and
out of their concauities For Smyrna in Greek is myrrh.
Smyrnium. This herb grows upon hills, as well such as be rocky as those that
be altogether earthy. The nature of it generally, is to heat and extenuat. The
leaves and root both provoke urine, and the monthly terms of women: the seed
knitteth the belly, and staieth a lask. The root used in a liniment, discusseth
all impostumes, as well broken

As touching Orpine.
Telephium, it is an herb in leaf and stem resembling Purcellane: immediately
from the root there spring seven or eight small shoots or branches, and those
garnished with gross and fleshy leaves. It loves to grow in toiled grounds,
but principally among vines: whiles it is green, it serves in a liniment to
fetch out spots and freckles in the visage: for which purpose also, it is good
dry, being brought into powder: it mundifieth the skin also from the morphew,
so that the place be anointed therewith every day or night six hours
together, for the space of three months, and afterward well rubbed with barley
meal. It heals all wounds besides and cures fistuloes.

The Maidenhaire called in Greek Trichomanes, is like unto Adiantum, only it is
more slender and blacker* the leaves grow thick in manner of Lentils, one
ouer-against another, and the thick, where it is thin by occasion of the
infirmity Alopecia. If it be tasted at the tongues end

Thalietrum [otherwise named Thalictrum] has leaves made like unto Coriander,
save that they be somewhat fattier, and in the stem resembles Poppy: it likes
any ground, but loves especially to grow upon plains: the leaves incorporat
with honey, heal any ulcers.

Thlaspi or Thlaspe, is of two kinds: the one with narrow leaves, a finger
long, and as broad as a finger breadth: the same grow inclining toward the
ground, and in the head divided or slit: the stem is but slender and half a
foot high, howbeit not altogether naked and without branches. In form, the
fruit or cod resembles a buckler, enclosing seed within not unlike in shape to
Lentils, but that it seems crushed and broken, whereupon the plant took the
name Thlaspi: the flower which it bears is whitish. This herb grows
ordinarily about common foot-paths and or rather Sinapi, i. Senvic.
Napi, has broad leaves and great roots: this herb also is good to be
clysterized for the Sciatica: and as well the one as the other is sovereign
for the tumors or risings in the share: but the party who gathers it must
have in charge to pluck it up with one hand, and say withal, That he takes it
for the botches in the share, for all impostumes and wounds.

As for Trachinia, I find not in any writer what manner of herb it should be:
and verily, I cannot Democritus reports truly of it as he does: for monstrous
it is and incredible which he promises of it, namely, That in three days it
will wast the spleen, if the patient do but wear it tied to any part of the
body.

Tragonus or Tragion grows upon the seacoasts of the Island Candy only: an
herb, in seed, leaf, and branch, very like unto the Juniper: a juice or liquor
it yields resembling milk, which gathering thick to the consistence of a gum,
with once laying too, draws forth arrow heads, thorns, or whatsoever sticking
within the flesh: for which purpose, it ought to be stamped green, and so made
into a liniment with wine; or else the powder of it dry, must be incorporat
with honey. The same causes nources to have good store of milk in their breasts,
and is besides an excellent medicine for the sores and diseases incident to
that part.

There is another herb called Tragos, which some name also Scorpion: it
grows half a foot high, putting forth many shoots and branches, but without
leaves; in stead whereof you shall see pretty little berries, or grapes (as it
were) of a ruddy color, of the bigness of wheatcorns, and pointed sharp in
the head. This herb likewise grows by the seaside. Of these berries, ten or
twelve kernels dried and beaten into powder, and so taken in wine, do help the
flux proceeding from a weak and feeble stomach; in like manner those also that
have a bloody flix, and that reach up blood. They cure likewise women of the
extraordinary shifts of their monthly fleurs.

Moreover, there is an herb called Tragopogon, which others name Come: the stem
thereof is small, the leaves like unto those of Safron, the root long and
sweet; bearing aloft upon the top

Thus much verily as touching herbs, I thought memorable and worth the writing,
which either I have seen my self, or learned from others; howbeit, for a
farewell to this treatise, I think it not amiss to advertise the reader thus
much more concerning herbs, that some of them keep their strength and virtue
longer than others; for, as I have before noted, Elaterium continues a world
of years: the black Chamaeleon lasts 40 years good: but Ceutaury will not
endure above twelve: Harstrang, Aristolochia, and the wild Vine, may be
preserved sound one year in the shade. Moreover, this would be observed, That
of the herbs above named, there is not a living

As for this one point, namely, that the roots of herbs be less in force and
of weaker operation, in case the seed be suffered to ripen upon the plant, no
man makes any doubt: as also that their seeds be nothing so effectual, if
incision were made in the roots for to draw juice out

Furthermore, this is known and found by experience, that the ordinary use of
all simples does alter their properties and diminish their strength; insomuch,
as whosoever is daily accustomed unto them, shall not find when need requires,
their virtue powerful at all, either to do good or to work harm, as others
shall who seldom or never were acquainted with them.

Over and besides, all herbs be more forcible in their operations, which grow
in cold parts, exposed to the Northeast winds, likewise in dry places, than in
the contrary.

Also there is no small difference to be considered between nation and nation:
for, as I have heard them say who are of good credit, as touching worms and
such like vermin, the people of Egypt, Arabia, Syria, and Cilicia, be troubled
and infested with them: whereas contrariwise, some

THE TWENTY EIGHTH BOOK
WRITTEN BY C. PLINIVS SECVNDVS.
CHAP. I.
The medicinable virtues of living creatures.

Having discovered as well all those things which are engendered between Heaven
and Earth, as also their natures; there remained nothing for me to discourse
of, save only the Minerals dug out of the ground, but that this late
Treatise of mine, as touching the medicinable properties of Herbs, Trees, and
other plants draws me quite a side from my purpose, and haleth me back
again, to consider the foresaid living creatures themselves (even the subject
matter of Physic) in regard of greater means found out even in them, to
advance Physic and cure diseases. For, to say a truth, since I have described
and pourtraied both Herbs and Flowers, since I have discovered many other
things, rare and difficult to be found out; should I conceal such we be free
from pain and sickness? No verily; and far be it from me that I should so do.
But on Democritus one of them have done? there be extant at this day books of
his inditing and penning, wherein you shall read, That the soul of a wicked
malefactor, is in some cases better than that of an honest person; and in
other, That of a friend and guest, preferred before a stranger. As for
Apollonius, another of that brood, he has written, That if the gums be
scarrified with the tooth of a man violently slain, it is a most effectual
Artemon had no better receipt for the falling sickness, than to draw up water
out of a fountain in the night season, and to give the same unto the Patient
to drink it in the brain-pan of a man who died some violent death, so he were
not burnt. And Antheus took the scull of one that had bin hanged, and made
pills thereof, which he ministered unto those who were bitten by a mad dog, for
a sovereign remedy. Moreover, these writers not content to use these sorceries
about men, employed the medicines also of the parts of man to the cure of four
footed beasts; and namely, if kine or oxen were dew-blowne or otherwise puffed
up, they were wont to bore holes through their horns, and so to inlay or
interlard them (as it were) with men's bones: finally, when swine were diseased,
they took the fine white wheat Siligo, being permitted to lie one whole night
in the very place where some men were killed or burnt, Look for no better
divinity in Pliny a mere Pagan, Ep^urean, and ^ssed Atheist.
That in his power it is, and the means he has, to choose what death he list.

CHAP. II.
Whether Words, Spells, or Charms, are available in Physic. Also whether
wonders and strange prodigies may be either wrought and procured, or put by and
avoided by them, or no.

THe first point, concerning the remedies medicinable drawn from out of man,
which moves the greatest question, and the same as yet not decided and
resolved, is this, Whether bare Words, Charms and Enchantments, be of any power
or no? If it be granted Yea, then no doubt ought we to ascribe that virtue unto
man. But the wisest Philosophers and greatest Doctors, take them one by one,
doubt thereof, and give no credit at all thereto. And yet go by the common
voice of the whole world, you shall find it a general belief, and a blind
opinion always received, whereof there is no reason or certain experience to
ground upon. For first and foremost we see, that if any beast be killed for
sacrifice without a set form of prayer, it is to no purpose, and held
unlawful: semblably, if these inuocations be omitted, when as men seek to
Favete linguis, [i. spare your tongues and be silent:] and then the fluits and
haut-boies begin to sound and play, to the end that no other thing be heard for
to trouble his mind or interrupt him the while. And verily, there have been
memorable examples known of strange accidents ensuing both ways, namely, as
often as either the unlucky fowls by their untoward noise Which is called
Obnu^^io dicaru^, as we may read in M. Tull. de Divinatione, (...).
have disturbed and done hurt, or if at any Decij, both the father and son,
betook themselves to all the hellish furies and fiends infernal: moreover,
the imprecation of the vestall Nun Tuccia, when she was put to prove her
virginity, continues extant upon record; by virtue of which charm she carried
water in a sive without shedding one drop: which happened in the year after
the foundation of Rome city 609. And verily, no longer ago than of late time In
whichyere it seems Pliny wrote this work.
eight hundred and thirty years: As for our vestall virgins in these our
days, we are certainly persuaded and believe, that by the virtue of certain
spells and charms which they have, they be able to arrest and stay any fugitive
slave L. Piso reports in the first book of his Annals or yearly Chronicles,
That Tullus Hostilius king of Rome, was stricken dead with Lightening, for that
when he went in hand to call Jupiter down out of heaven, by virtue of a
sacrifice which king Numa was wont to use in that case, he had not observed
exactly all the exorcismes Numa, but swarued somewhat from them. And many other
writers do testify, that by the power of words and osses, the destinies and
prodigies of great importance presaged to one place, have bin clean altered
and transferred to another: as it was like to have happened to the Romans, at
what time as they laid the foundation of Jupiters Temple upon the mount or
rock Tarpeius. For when they dug there for the foundation of the said
Temple, and chanced to find within the ground a man's head: the Senate of Rome
sent certain Ambassadors of purpose to the Sages and VVisards of Tuscane, to
know the signification of this strange sight and miraculous occurrent. Whereof
Olenus Calenus (who was reputed the most famous diuinor and prophet of all the
Tuscanes) Jupiter that most gracions and mighty god: we have light here upon a
man's head. Unto which interrogation of his, the said Roman Ambassadors
according to the instructions which they had received beforehand from the
VVisard or Diuinors son, answered in this manner: No, not here in this very
place, but at Rome (we say) the head was found. And verily, our ancient
Chronicles do all date, when as a certain chariot with four horses, made of
clay, and prepared for to be set upon Olenus did: but the Romans being wise and
wary in their words, saved and retained the same fortune still for the behoof
of Rome, which was presaged unto them by that happy foretoken. These examples
may suffice to show and prove evidently, that the virtues and significations
of these signs and presages do lie in our own power: and are no otherwise of
force and effect, but according as every one of them is so taken Whereupon it
was thought material to speak in this manner Accipi^ o^en. For otherwise it
auailed not.
and accepted. True it is, and held for an undoubted principle in the Augures
discipline and learning, That neither cursed execrations, ominous and unlucky
birds, nor any other presage by their flight singing and feeding, can touch
those persons who take no heed of them, and do protest plainly, that Qui fruges
occentassit, [i. whosoever shall enchant or fore-speake any corn or fruits of
the earth:] and in another place, Quimalum carmen i^cantassit, [i. What person
soever uses pernicious charms to the hurt or mischief of any creature?] Over
and besides, Verrius Flaccus does affirm upon the credit of certain Authors
which be alleges and believes, That the first thing which the ancient
Romans were wont to do at the siege and assault of any town or city, was by
their priests to conjure and call forth that god or goddess which was the
patron or patroness thereof; and withal to promise unto the said As in saying
thus, The Devil take thee, or, the Ravens peck ou^ thine (...), or I had r^er
see thee Pie pekt: and such like.
names of the infernal fiends or unlucky fowls are used in such bannings?
For fear likewise of some harm, see we not that it is an usual thing to
Because afterward no witches might prick them with a needle in the name and
behalf of those whom they would hurt and mischief, according to the practice
of pricking the images of any person in wax; used in the witcheraft of these
dates.
crush and break both egg and fish shells, so soon as ever the meat is supped
and eaten out of them; or else to bore the same through Theocritus among Greek
Poets, of Catullus and Virgil among us, full of amorous charms, in imitation
of such exorcismes and coniurations indeed. I assure you many folk there be of
this belief, That by certain spells and words, in manner of charms, all the
pots and vessels of earth baking in a furnace, may be cracked and broken,
without touching them at all. And there are not a few who are persuaded for
certain, that even the very serpents as they may be burst by enchantment, so
they can vnwitch themselves: and that as brutish otherwise and earthly as they
be, yet in this one thing they have a quick sense and understanding, insomuch,
as at the charms of the Marsians they will shrink from them and draw in their
bodies round into a knot, though it were in the night season when they lie
asleep. Some there be also that when a skare-fire That is to say, Arse verse,
out of Afranius, as Festus notes, which in the old Tus^ane language signifies
Auerte igneum, i. Put back the fire.
words upon the walls, and thereby limit and confine the fire, that it shall go
no farther. Certes, I am not able to say, whether strange, foreign, and
ineffable words hard to be pronounced, are more auailable to the effecting of
these incredible things, or our Latin words, coming out at a venture unlooked
for and spoken at random: which must needs seem ridiculous in our judgment,
seeing that the spirit and mind of man, expects always some great and mighty
matter in these coniurations and exorcismes, which may carry a majesty
therewith to incline and move the gods to mercy and favor, or rather indeed to
command their heavenly power perforce. But to proceed, Homer the Poet has
written, that prince or rather the sons of Auto^cus: in his O^yssaea.
Vlyxes being wounded in the thigh, stanched the blood with a charm. And
Theophrastus testifies, that there be proper spells to cure the Sciatica. Cato
has left in writing, that there is a M. Varro reports the like virtue of
certain good words for the gout. As for Caesar the Dictatour, it is commonly
said of him, that having been once endangered with the fall or overthrow of
his coach wherein he rode, would never afterward ride in coach again, unless
so soon as ever he had taken his place, and before that he set forward upon
his way, he had pronounced a certain i. The first o March.
first day of every year we salute one another for luck sake, with wishing a
good new year? What is the reason, tell me, that in all our public processions
and general solemnities every fifth year for the health and good estate of
the city, they Dicis causa, i. pro forma.
made choice of such persons for to lead the beasts appointed to sacrifice,
whose As Ualesius, Lucius, Salvius Statorius, etc. which are significant, and
import by the very letter., some happiness and prosperity
names were good and fortunat? or how comes it about, that for to prevent or
divert witchcraft and sorcery, we observe a peculiar adoration, and inuocat
upon the Greekish [goddesse of vengeance] Nemesis; in which regard only, we
have her statue or image set up in the Capitol, Tiberius Caesar, who otherwise
was known for a grim sir, and the most unsociable Attalus avouches for a
certainty, that if a man chance to epsy a scorpion, and do no more but say
this one word * Duo [i. two] the serpent will be still and quiet, and never shoot
forth his sting. And now seeing by occasion of mentioning a scorpion, I am put
in mind of Africa, you shall understand thus much, that throughout all that
country there is not one goes about to do any thing, but before he begins he
says this word * Africai. Africa. As for other nations, in every enterprise
that men take in hand, they use the name of their gods, and pray ordinarily,
that it would please them to give a grace and blessing Which fashion was
afterward taken up in doing reverence to princes and great persons.
kiss our right hand and turn about with our whole body: in which gesture
whereas other nations observed to turn to the right hand, as appears by
Plautus, Quo me veria^ n^scio. B. Si d^os salutas, Dextrorsum censeo.
the French observe Poppysmus, in setti^g our lips close together, and drawing
the breath inward, as our manner is in playing with a tame Sparrow, or chearing
up and making much of an horse.
whistling or chirping with the lips. If there be mention made of scarefires at
the table as we sit at meat, we hold it ominous, but we turn away the perilous
presage thereof, by spilling and casting water under the bourd. When one rises
from his meat and is ready to depart, if they of the house go in hand presently
for to sweep the floor and make all clean: as also to take away dishes,
trenchers, etc. upon the bourd; or to remove the cupbourd of plate, and livery
table, whiles one of the guests is a drinking, are thought to be most
unfortunate tokens, and to presage much harm. Servius Sulpitius a principal
person of our city, has written a treatise of this argument, wherein he gives
a reason why we should not and cursed presage on this behalf: like as to sit at
the table and eat nothing at all. Of the special providence of God: Pliny
speaks like himself, a heathenish Infidel.
See how ceremonious ^amae labor est.
shall be in danger to lose or impair his credit, good name, and reputation.
Moreover, if a piece of meat chanced to fall out of the hand down to the
floor, it was taken up and delivered upon the board again, where it passed
from one to another, and went through the table: but in any wise they were
forbidden to blow thereupon, for to cleanse it from the dust or filth that it
caught. Furthermore, proforma, and for order sake, at any solemn feast or
sacrifice, let fall a morcel o^ meat: but if the same were laid upon the board
again, and afterward burnt and sacrificed to the familiar gods of the house
Lares, it was thought a sufficient expiatory satisfaction. Semblably, men are
of opinion, That if any medicines purgative or others, fortune to be set upon a
table before they be given to the patient for to drink, they will do no good at
all, but lose their operation. Also there is a superstitious ceremony in paring
the nails of the fingers, during the market days held at Rome, with this
charge, that the party hold his tongue and be silent all the while, and bigin
at the M. Seruilius Nonianus, (who in his time was a principal citizen of Rome)
to prevent the blearednesse of his eyes which he feared, before that either any
man else foretold him of that disease, or himself once named * Which answer to
our R and A.
he lapped round and fast tied with a linen thread, and so wore it hanging at a
lace about his neck under his throat. Mutianus (who had bin thrice Consul of
Rome) observed the same effect by wearing a fly alive within a little rag of
white fine linen cloth: and both of them did highly commend these medicines of
theirs; reporting, that by those means they were free from bleared eyes.
Finally, we read of certain charms and spells against storms of hail: against
sundry sorts of diseases, and namely for any part that is burnt or scalded, and
verily some of them have been proved by experience to be effectual. But for
mine own part abashed I am and ashamed to put them down in writing,
considering how diversely men are affected in mind. And therefore to conclude
this matter, I leave every man to himself to give credit or otherwise unto
them at

CHAP. III.
Remedies proceeding from man, for the cure of diseases.

IN my former Treatise as touching strange and wonderful nations, I spoke of
certain races of men which were of a monstrous nature, and carried a venomous
regard and look in their very eyes: besides many other properties of beasts,
which here to repeat were needless. Howbeit, in this place I think it not
amiss to note, that so me people there be whose bodies be from top to toe all
medicinable and wholesome to others. As for example, the men of those families
Or Par^s.
Cyprus, whom they call Ophugenes: and of this race and house there came an
Ambassador out of the said Island, whose name was Euegon.
Exagon, who by the commandment of the Consuls

CHAP. IIII.
Of certain Sorceries: and the properties of a man's spittle. Also against
Magitians.

THe inventions of Pithagoras as touching numbers, bear a great stroke in
these matters, and lightly miss not: but principally in this, That the said
Philosopher would give judgment by the vowels contained in the proper name of
any person, concerning their fortunes, for in case the vowels were in number
odd, he pronounced, that if the party ever proved lame of a lim, lost an eye,
or met with any such like accidents, the same should happen upon the right side
of the body: but contrariwise, if the number of vowels were even, then these
infirmities should befall the left side. Furthermore, it is commonly said, that
if one take a stone, dart, or instrument of shot, wherewith a man has killed
these three living creatures, a man, a wild Bore, and a Bear, one after
another, and that with one single stroke to every one of them, and fling the
Ue^ris have, when also wa called ^libaris.
light jauelin or Pertuisan should do this feat, which had bin drawn forth of a
man's body, so as it never touched the ground after; for do but bring this
murdering jauelin into the place where a woman is in labor, it will forthwith
procure her deliverance. Orpheus and Archelaus do write much after the same
manner of arrows pulled out of men bodies, namely, that if care be had that they
touch not the earth, and then be laid under the bed where man or woman lies,
they will cause the parties to be enamored upon them that bestowed the said
arrows there: and these authors report moreover, that the venison of any wild
beast killed with the same weapon which was the death of a man before, is
singular to cure the falling sickness.

As some men there be whose bodies all throughout be medicinable, so there be
others who have certain parts only of the same virtue, according as I have
written already concerning the thumb of king Pyrrhus. In the city Elis also
the inhabitants were wont to show as a wonderful monument the rib of Pelops,
which they avouched to be all of Iuory. And even at this day, many there are
who make great scruple to shave or clip the hair growing in any molle or were
Item, an ordinary thing it is with us to put by the danger of witchcraft, by
spitting in the eyes of a witch: so do we also, when we meet with one that
limpeth, and is lame of the right leg. Likewise when we crave pardon of the
gods for some audacious and presumptuous prayers that we make, we use to spit
even into our bosoms. Semblably, for to fortify the operation of any
medicines, the manner is to pronounce withal a charm or exorcisme three times
over, and to spit upon Marcion of Smyrna, who wrote a Treatise of the virtues
and effects of simples, reports, that the Scolopendres of the sea will burst
in sunder if one spit upon them: and so will hedge toads and other venomous
frogs. Ophilius writes, that spittle will do the like by serpents, if one spit
into their mouths as they gape. As for the learned Salpe, she says, that if
one perceive any member or part of the body be asleep and benumbed, there is
not Mutu^atur, As Turnebius found it in an old copy. And considering the
fooleries both before and after mentioned, this will sort well enough with such
stuff: and namely their Fascinus in the old time (which was turpiculares,
quale membru^ virile) hanging about childrens necks to withstand the mischief
that might come by the eye, called in I atin Fascinum also: for a witch would
not willingly settle her eye long upon such a beastly and filthy object.
Mu, that it is able to defend such young sucklings; as also of the foolish
puppet Fascinus; both which are of power to put back any witchcraft from them,
and return the mischief upon the eie-biting witch. And since I am light upon
this name, I must let you understand that this Fascinus is holden to be a god
forsooth, the guardian and keeper not of infants only, but of great captains and
brave generals of the field; who has divine service done to him at Rome among
other gods, propitious and favorable unto them: Fortune (I say) who ordinarily
comes after to whip and Granius affirmed moreover, that in all these cases it
would do the better, if one were cut for it, and that it were taken forth of
the bladder by way of incision. If a woman be near her time, and looks every
day to fall to labor and cry out, let the man come by whom she is with child,
and after he has ungirt himself, gird her about the middle with his own
girdle, and unloose the same again, saying withal, this charm, I tied the
knot, and I will undo it again, and therewith go his ways, she shall soon
after fall to her business and have more speedy deliverance. Orpheus and
Archelaus both, do affirm, That if the squinancy be anointed with man or
woman's blood (it skilleth not out of what vein or part of the body it issued)
it is an excellent remedy for that disease. The like effect it has, if their
mouths be rubbed with the said blood, who being overtaken with the epilepsie,
are fallen down; for immediately thereupon they will rise and stand upon their
feet. Some write, That if the great toes be pricked until they bleed again,
the drops that come forth work the like effect in the falling sickness, so
that the face of the Patient be sprinkled or besmeared therewith: or if a
maiden touch the parties face that lies in a fit of the said disease, with her
bare thumb or great toe, he shall come again to himself and recover. By
which experiment Physicians going by conjecture, are of opinion, That such
persons subject to that disease, should feed of the flesh of Virgins carnes.
such beasts as never were with young. Aeschines, a Physician

Many maladies there be, that go away the first time that either a man has
carnal knowledge of a woman, or that a maid sees her monthly sickness: but
if they end not at such a time, commonly they prove chronicke diseases and
continue a long time, and especially the falling sickness. It is said
moreover, That the company of a woman eases them very much who are stung with
a scorpion: but women in the same case catch harm by that means. Some say
also, that if the eyes be dipped three times in that water wherein a man or
woman has washed their feet, they shall be troubled neither with blearednesse
nor any other infirmity. And others there effect, so that the dead party and
the Patient be both of one sex. As for the toothache, it is a common that was
scraped and rubbed from the bodies of wrestlers, etc. served to mollify, to
heal, resolve, Specially upon the sea.
water: but in case there be a long disease hanging upon a man, what better
thing in the world than to change the air, and remove from place to place? In
like manner to procure sleep, by lying Aristotle and Fabianus do, say, That we
be given to dream at the Spring and Fall, more than in the other seasons of
the year: also, most when we lie with our face upward, but never groueling. And
Theophrastus affirms, That sleeping upon the right side, helps forward the
concoction of meat in the stomach; whereas they that lie upon their back
shall not have so quick digestion. The manner of bathing also and using the
baine and hot house, (which is one of the chief and principal means of our
health) is in a man's power to order as he list himself: like as he may choose
Item, it is known to be very good and wholesome, to wash ones head with
hot-water, before he enter into the baine or hot-house; and after that he is
out of it, to do the like with cold water: as also to take a draught of cold
water immediately before meat, and to do as much between meals: likewise to
drink the same to bedward, (i) with vinegar and water mingled together, to
preserve them for being bleared, are singular and approved experiments.

CHAP. V.
Observations as touching Diet, and the manner of our feeding, for the regiment
of Health.

LIke to the former rules is this also, as touching our Diet, That it be not
too precise, but so as we may feed indifferently of all viands, and acquaint
our bodies with variety of meats; which is observed to be the best way to
maintain our health; and in very truth, Hippocrates says, That to eat but one
meal a day (i) to forbear dinners, is a diet that will dry up a man's body
within, and bring them soon to age and decay. But this aphorism of his he
pronounced as a Physician to reclaim us from that hungry and sparing diet, and
not as a patron and maintainer of full feeding and gourmandise: for I assure
you, a temperat and moderate use of our meats, is the wholsomest thing that is
for our bodily health But L. Lucullus was so strict herein, that he For every
man is to be his own Physician: whereupon might rise this proverb, A fool or
a Physician.
own self: for was it not (think you) an approbrious and shameful sight, to
see a Thought to be Calisthenes his Physician: for in those days Physicia^s
were reckoned but servants to such persons as Lucullus was.
slave and no better, to put his lords hands from a dish of meat, being an
aged gentleman as he was, and who in times past had rode in triumph; to gage
him thus (I say) and keep him short, though he were set amongst great states
at a royal feast within the capitol of Rome?

CHAP. VI.
Of Sneezing: the use of Venerie: and other means which concern man's health.

SNeezing discharges the heaviness of the head, and eases the pose or rheum
that stuffeth the nose: and it is commonly said, That if one lay his mouth to
the nosthrils of a mouse or rat and touch the same, it will do as much. To
sneeze also, is a ready way to be rid of the yex or hicquet. And Varro gives
counsel, to scrape a branch of a Palma alterna manu scalpere: unless he
means [to scratch the palm or inside of the hand, etc.] which answers
somewhat to the remedies next following.
Date tree with one hand after another by turns, for to stay the said hicquet.
But most Physicians give direction in this case, to shift a ring from the left
hand to the longest finger of the right; or to plunge both hands into very hot
water. Theophrastus says, that old men do sneeze with more pain and
difficulty than others.

As touching carnal knowledge of man and woman, Democritus utterly condemned
it: and Homo alius exiliret ex homine: which Dalc campius expounds thus, For
that a man in that action, goes beside himself.
out of another. And to say a truth, the less one uses it, the better it is
for body and mind both: and yet onr professed wrestlers, runners and such
gamsters at feats of actiuity, when they feel themselves heavy or dull, revive
and recover their lively spirits again by keeping company with women. Also this
exercise cleanses the breast and helps the voice, which being sometime before
clear and neat, was now become hoarse and rusty. Moreover, the temperat sports
of Venus, eases the pain of the reins and loins, mundifie and quicken the
eiesight, and be singular good for such as be troubled in mind and given
overmuch to melancholy.

Moreover, it is held for witchcraft, to sit by women in travel, or near unto
a Patient who For it holds women in pain still, and hinders the operation of
Physic.
with hand in hand, crosse-fingered one between another: the experience whereof
was well seen (by report) when lady There was an old witch that by this means
kept her in a long and tedious travail.
Alcmena was in labor to be delivered of Hercules. And the worse is this piece
of sorcery, in case the party hold the hands thus joined a-crosse one finger
within another about one or both knees. Also to sit crosse-legged, with the ham
of one leg riding aloft upon the knee of the other, and that by

As for veiling bonnet before great rulers and magistrates, or within their
sight, Varro says, it was a fashion at first not commanded for any reverence
or honor thereby to be done unto governors, but for healths sake; and namely,
that men's heads might be more firm and hardy, by that ordinary use and custom
of being bare.

When a mote or any thing else is fallen into one eye, it is good to shut the
other hard. If there be water gotten into the right ear, the manner is to jump
and hop with the left leg, bending and inclining the head toward the right
shoulder; semblably, if the like happen to the left ear; to do the contrary.
If one be fallen into a fit of coughing, the way to stay it is to let the next
fellow spit upon his forehead. If the uvula be fallen, it will up again, if the
Patient suffer another to bite the hair in the crown of his head, and so to
pull him up plumb from the ground. Has the neck a crick or a pain lying
behind, what better remedy than to rub the hams? Be the hams pained? do the
like by the nape of the neck: say the cramp take either feet or legs, plucking
and stretching the sinews when one is in bed, the next way to be used, is to
set the feet upon the floor or the ground where the bed stands: or put case
the crampe take the left side, then be sure with the

To come now unto our speech and exercise of the tongue: in many cases and for
diverse causes Mecaenas Messius inioined himself three years silence, and
during that time never spoke word, for that in a fit of a convulsion or crampe,
he had beforetime cast up blood. In case any thing be ready to fall or rush
violently against us, and that we be in danger of some stroke, say that we be
climbing up hill, or turned down backward, or lying along, there is not the
like means again to preserve our bodies, as to hold our wind: and this
invention we had from a bruit and dumb beast, according as I have showed
before.

Moreover it is said, that to stick down a spike or iron nail in that very
place where a man or woman's head lay during the fit of the falling sickness,
at the very first time that he or she fell, secureth the party that so does,
for ever being troubled with that disease. Also it is holden for a Wherein no
ends are to be seen, they are so close couched, and therefore hardly to be
unloosed.
Hercules knot: and verily it is thought, that to knit our girdles which we
wear about us every day with such a knot, has a great virtue in it, by reason
that Hercules first devised the same.

Demetrius, in a treatise that he compiled as touching the number of four,
affirms that it is of great efficacy; and he alleges reasons why it is not
good to prescribe in any medicine to be drunk, the quantity of four sextars
or four cyaths. To rub the ears behind, is supposed to be very good for them
that are given to be bleare-eied: like as to rub the forehead, forweeping or
watering eyes.

Concerning the signs of life and death which may be found in man, this is one,
That so long as the Patients eye is so clear that a man may see himself in
the apple of it, we are not to despair of life.

As for the Urine of mankind, diverse authors have treated of it; who as I find,
have not only set down their reasons in nature as touching the virtue
thereof, but also have bin very ceremonious Spadonum.
men that are unable for generation, to be singular good by way of injection,
to make women fruitful. But to speak of such remedies as we may be bold to
name with honesty: the urine of young children who be not yet vndergrowne nor 14
years of age, is good against the venomous humor of the Aspides or Adders which
the Greeks name (...), a spuendo, i. of spitting.
Ptyades, for that they spit their poison upon the eyes and faces of men and
women. Also the same is held to be singular for the pearl, the cataract, the
filmes, the pin and web in the eyes; like as for the eie-lids also, and the
accidents happening unto them. Being incorporate with the flower of Eruile, it
is good for sun-burnings: sodden also with bolled leeks to the consumption of
the one Salpe ordains to foment the eyes with the said decoction, for to
fortify the sight, and to strengthen them that they fall not out of the head:
she appoints to make a liniment with it and the white of an egg, but
principally if it be of an ostrich, and therewith to anoint the skin that has
bin tanned and burnt in the Sun, for the space of two hours together: with it
a man may wash away any blots or blurs of ink. Man's urine is much commended for
the gout in the feet, as we may see by Fullers, who never be goutie, because
ordinarily their feet are in men's urine. Stale chamber-lie or vrin long kept
and incorporat together with the ashes of oister shells, cures the

The Magitians expressly forbid in making water, to lay bare the nakedness of
that part against Hesiodus gives a precept, to make water against a wall, or
something standing full before us, for fear least our nakedness being
discovered, might offend some god or Angel. To conclude, Hosthaues does upon
his warrant assure us, That whosoever droppeth some of his own urine every
morning upon his feet, he shall be secured against all charms, sorceries, and
deadly poisons whatsoever.

CHAP. VII.
The remedies that women's bodies do minister.

THe medicines which are said to proceed from the bodies of women be such, and
the operations so miraculous, that they come nearer to the nature of monstrous
wonders than true reports of natural works: to say nothing of much mischief
and many wicked parts committed by the means of their untimely births and
infants still born, which have bin dismembered and cut in pieces for some
abominable practices: to let pass the strange expiations wrought by their
monthly terms, and a thousand more devises which have bin delivered and set
abroad Item, It takes warts away, and cures the red gum and sores that
infants be subject unto, if it be used with honey. The same ashes mingled with
Honey and Frankincense, heals wounds in the head, and does incarnat or fill up
with good flesh hollow ulcers whatsoever they be. And incorporat with swines
lard, it is good for the broad biles called Pani, for the gout, and S.
Anthonies

Touching women's milk, it is holden by a general accord, of all other to be
sweetest and most delicat: whereupon it is prescribed by Physicians unto those
that have lien of a long and languishing fever; as also to such as be troubled
with a flux occasioned by a feeble stomach: but in these cases, that milk is
reputed most wholesome which a nurce gives that has newly weaned her child:
besides, when the appetite of women is given to an inordinate longing after
strange things, in agues also, in gnawings and frettings of the stomach, it is
found by experience to be most effectual. Likewise, being incorporat with
Frankincense, it is singular good for the impostumes breeding in women's breasts.
If the eyes be bloudshotten upon any stripe, if they be in pain Modice admisto
opio.
Opium put thereto: but if so be the ears are pained by reason of some stripe
that they have received, the said milk would have some Goose grease mixed with
it, and so be instilled warm. And say that they have a strong and stinking
smell with them, as commonly it falls out in all long diseases, there is
nothing better than to put Ar^stotle says, with the deadly Dwale called
Dorycnion. In this manner also it cures those whose brains (i) the sweat or
fattinesse of unwashed wool, and Goosegrease: in which manner it serves in a
pessary to be put up in the natural parts of women, to assuage the pain of the
matrice. To drink breast milk is a good mean to stop a laske, as Rabirius
writes, and yet the same does provoke the monthly course of women's fleurs:
what is to be said now or a woman's milk who has born a maid child? surely it
is better than the other in these cases only; to wit, in scouring the skin of
the face, and taking away the pimples, spots and freckles, which be therein.
But I must not forget, that any breast-milke whatsoever, cures the maladies
incident to the lights: and if there be tempered therewith the urine of a young
lad not full fourteen

As touching the fasting spittle of a woman, it is judged to be a proper
medicine for bloudshotten eyes; also for the rheum that has taken a course
thither, if so be the corners of the eyes be ever and anon bathed and wet
therewith when they be hot and inflamed; but more effectually will this remedy
work, in case the woman forbear all meat and wine the day before. I read
moreover in some Authors, That if the head be bound up with a woman's haire-lace
or fillet, it eases the pain thereof. And thus much in some good sort as
touching the medicines proceeding

For first and foremost it is said, that if a woman whiles her monthly sickness
is upon her, be set into the wind abroad with her belly naked, she will scar
away hailestorms, whirlewindes, and lightenings; yea, and a^ert any violence of
the weather whatsoever. And at sea verily, any woman standing openly against
the weather bare, although she have not her fleurs, is enough to secure the
sailers and passengers from all tempests. As for the very monthly flux itself
of women, (a thing in other respects and at all times, as I have showed before,
of a monstrous nature) there be writers who tell and presage wonders thereof,
such as be horrible, abominable, and indeed not to be spoken: and yet some of
these things I hold it no shame to deliver in writing; namely, Scepsius and
Metrodorus, came from the Cappadocians, who being infested with a number of
those green flies called Cantharides, devised this means to be rid of them; for
they caused their women at the time of their monthly terms (saving the
reverence of womanhood be it spoken) to go through the standing corn, with
their cloths tuckt up round about their wast, and all bare beneath. In other
countries yet they are more mannerly, and in a better respect to the honor of
women, put them only to go barefoot for this purpose, with their hair hanging
loose about their ears, ungirt, unlaced, and unbraced. Howbeit, great heed
must be taken, that they walk not thus at the Sunne-rising, for then surelv
all the crop upon the ground will wither and dry away to nothing. Also if a
woman during her natural courses do but touch any young vines, it is enough to
mar them for ever. As for Rue and Iuie, Plants otherwise of themselves most
any skains or slips of linen yearn and set them over the fire to sees, they
will in the boiling turn black. Let her but take a barbers rasor in her hand,
the edge will turn and become blunt: nay Lais and Elephantis, who have written
so contrary one to the other of this argument, and namely, Bythus of
Dyrrhachium says, that for to make a mirror or looking glass clear again,
which was dusked and dimmed by the aspect of a menstruous woman, the next way
is to cause her to cast her eyes backward and to look over her shoulders upon
it again; he says moreover, that if women in that case have about them the
fish called a Barbill, they shall not by that means infect or do hurt at all,
but the same menstruous

Well, as hurtful and mischievous as it is otherwise, yet many there be who
affirm it to be in many diseases medicinable; and namely, for the gout, if the
place be anointed therewith: as also if women while their monthly sickness is
upon them, do handle the wens named the Kings evil, the swelling kernels
behind the ears, the broad tumors or biles called Pani, shingles, S. Anthonies
fire, felons, or violent flux of humors to the eyes or other parts, there will
ensue much ease thereupon. Lais and Salpe, two notable strumpets, have left in
writing, That if the foresaid menstruous blood bestowed within a little lock
of wool that came from a black Ram, be worn enclosed within a silver
bracelet, it is a sovereign remedy against the biting of mad dogs, and
Diotimus of Thebes reports, That any little piece or rag of cloth, yea,
though it were but a thread stained therein, and so set handsomely into a
bracelet, is sufficient to do as much Sotira the renowned midwife affirmed,
That there was not in the world so good a thing against the Tertian and
Quartan, as to rub and anoint therewith the soles of the patients feet: but much
more effectualy would it do the deed, in case the woman her self had the doing
of it with her own hand, so as the sick party know not thereof in any hand. And
this (quoth she) is a sovereign medicine to raise them out of a fit of the
Epilepsie, who are surprised and fallen therewith. Icetidas a worthy Physician
among the Greeks, assures us upon his word, That Quartane agues will make an
end and go away by the act of generation, at what time only as a woman
begins to enter into her fleurs. But this is agreed upon by all authors
professed and seen in this theme, that if one be bitten with a mad dog, and so
far gone, that he is (...)
afraid of water, the Greeks write so much, between mad dogs and the said
blood, considering, as I have beforesaid, I am about a remedy for the Tertian,
Quotidian, or Quartan ague (according as the patient is troubled with the one
or other of these fevers) which done pro certo, shall shake off the disease and
be quite rid of it.

CHAP. VIII.
The medicines that are found in diverse strange and foreign beasts, as namely,
the Elephant, Lion, Cammell, Hyaena, Crocodile, Chamaeleon, Skinke,
Waterhorses, and Ounces.

THese be the remedies which the bodies of men and women do afford: as many I
mean as I may with some honesty relate: and yet ywis many of them be such as
are not to be read out and uttered, but with leave and patience first craved,
for the reverence that we owe to chaste ears. I know full well there is a great
deal more behind that I have not touched, but such

And to begin with the Elephant, The blood of that beast, especially the male,
staieth all fluxes of humors, which the Greeks call Rheumatismes. The shauings
of yvory (which is the Elephants tooth) incorporat with Attick honey, scatter
(as folk say) the duskish spots that appear in the visage: like as the dust
thereof, which the file or saw does make, cures the whitflawes or
impostumations breeding at the nail roots. The trunk or muffle of an elephant
if it be but touched only, allaieth the headache; and the more effectual it
is, in case sneezing come withal. It is said moreover, if one take a piece of
the right side of the same trunk, and carry it fast about him

The grease or fat of a Lion tempered with oil of Roses into an unguent,
preserves the skin of the face from all ilfauord spots, and keeps it white
and smooth. The same ointment heals

As touching the Cammell, his brain (by report) is excellent good against the
epilepsie or falling sic knesse, if it be dried and drunk with vinegar; so does
the gall likewise taken in drink with honey: which also is a good medicine for
the Squinancy. It is said that a Cammels tail dried causes loosnesse of the
belly: like as the dung reduced into ashes and incorporate with oil, does
curle and frizle the hair of the head. The said ashes made into a liniment and
so applied,

As for the Hyaena, there is not a wild beast of the field that the Magitians
have so much in admiration as it: for they hold that in the Hyaena it self
there is a certain magical virtue, attributing a wonderful power thereto, in
transporting the mind of man or woman, and rauishing (i.) to be male this
year, and female next; as also touching other monstrous qualities observed in
their nature; because I have discoursed already of them, it remains now that
I proceed to show the medicinable virtues that are reported to be found in
them: whereof this may be counted for one of the chief, that considering they
be so terrible i. Luzernes,
to Panthers, that they dare not quetch nor make head against them: whosoever
has about him but a piece of the Hyaenes skin may be sure that a Panther will
not set upon him, nor once come near. And that which is a wonderful thing to
be spoken, in case the hides of them both be hung up one against another, the
hair of the Panther will fall off. When the Hyaenaes fly before the hunter
and would not be taken, they wind with a cariere out of the with three cyaths
of Attick honey and one ounce of Safron, to a liniment, it is an excellent
Fell: some read melle, i. Honey.
gall, is passing good for the nerves. The liver of the Hyaene drives away
Quartan agues, in case the patient take three bits thereof one after another

Over and besides, if the said pizzle and shap of this beast be kept in any
house, together with a joint of the ridge bone, skin and al as it grows too,
the whole family shall agree together with anise seed, does mitigat the
quiuering and quaking in a cold ague fit. A suffumigation made in drink, is
available against the dysentery: and the same reduced into a liniment with

For fabulous tales, the Crocodile may challenge the next place: a beast this
is which naturally does live as well on land as in water: for two kinds there
be of them; whereof the former (keeping thus in both elements) has this
especial virtue, if we may believe these Magitians, To provoke unto carnal
lust, if the teeth which grew in the right side of the chaw, be hanged fast
those who be troubled with the Sciatica: the same cures an old cough,
especially the chincough

To this discourse of Crocodiles, we shall not do amiss if we annex other
beasts in some sort resembling them, and which be likewise strangers as well
as they. And to begin with the Chamaeleon, Democritus verily made so great
reckoning of this beast, that he compiled one Democritus Democritus, if we
were so wise as to believe him: who affirms moreover, That whosoever has
about him the right shoulder of the Chamaeleon, shall be able to overthrow his
adversary at the bar, and to vanquish his enemy in the field: but first,
he must be sure to cast away and make riddance of the strings and sinews
belonging thereto, and to tread them underfoot. As for the left shoulder, I am
ashamed to relate, unto what monstrous spirits he does consecrate it; and
namely how by the virtue thereof, a man may cause what dreams and fantastical
illusions he lists, yea, and make those whom he will himself, to imagine
the same apparitions. As also, how the right foot of the said beast drives
away all such strange visions; even as the lethargy will go away by the
means of the left side of this beast, which lethargy was occasioned by the
right. Touching headache, he says plainly, that the next way to cure it, is
that it will rid the pin and web, the cataract also of the eyes, with three
days anointing; chase away Democritus himself had met with one crop of this
branch, to have made him hold in so many lies as he has told, considering he
has reported this quality of it among other, namely, to repress intemperat
speech and inordinat walking of the tongue. But evident it is, that the only
reason why Democritus faulted that way (being otherwise a man of a singular wit
and wholly addicted to the good of mankind) was an excessive and extraordinary
zeal that he had to profit and benefit the whole world.

Much like to this kind is the Skink (whom some have named the land Crocodile)
save that Apelles reports) taken both before and also after meat, is a
singular preservative against invenomed arrows. Besides, it is one of the
ingredients Sestus is of opinion and does write, that if a man drink above one
dram weight of it in a hemin of wine, it is enough to endanger his life.
Moreover, the juice or broth of the Skinks flesh boiled and taken with honey, is
thought to keep down the flesh and to cool lust.

As touching the riuer-horse called Hippopotamus, there is a great affinity or
kindred rather between him and the crocodile, in regard that they both do haunt
the same river, and participat both of land and water. This beast (as I have
showed hertofore) devised first the practice of phlebotomy or bloodletting.
Great store there be of them beyond the Seignory Saitica in Egypt. Take the
ashes of this beasts hide, and reduce them with water into a liniment, it is
singular to cure the broad biles or apostemations called Pani. The grease, and
likewise the dung, is good

The Onces be likewise taken for strange and foreign, and of all foure-footed
beasts they have the quickest eye and see best: by the testimony of all
writers, there is in the Island Carpathos a singular kind of ashes made of
their houfs, burnt together with their hide: and they hold, that if passes by
drop-meale: which property they being by a natural instinct aware of, so
soon as

CHAP. IX.
The common and ordinary medicines drawn as well from wildbeasts as those
which

ANd to begin with Milk: these points following are to be observed: Imprimis,
Each living creature likes best and finds most good by the own mothers milk.
Item, For nources to conceive with child whiles they give suck, is a most hurt
full thing to their babes: for after such a time, their milk will thicken and
cruddle in manner of a cheese (a dangerous matter for sucking infants) who
thereupon be called Colostrati. Now the beestings, called in Latin Colostra,
is that thick and spungeous milk which is drawn first from the teat after the
birth of the young, be it in woman or beast. Also, there is no milk so nutritive
as that of a woman, whatsoever it be: next unto which, goats milk is thought to
nourish most: whereupon happily arose the fable Jupiter was suckled therewith.
Howbeit, setting woman's milk a side, the sweetest of all other is that which
the Camels give: but asses milk is supposed to have most virtue and efficacy
in it. Moreover, this is to be noted, that the bigger bodied beasts be more
glad-milch, and their milk sooner passes away through the belly and is easier
digested than that of the smaller kind. Goats milk agrees best with the
stomach; the reason is this, because they brouse rather than graze: but cow
milk is held to be more aromaticall and medicinable; howbeit ews milk is the
pleasanter, and yields more nourishment; notwithstanding it be not so
wholesome, for that it is more fatty and gross than any other. And generally,
the milk which any beast gives in the Spring, is more waterish and fuller of
whey than in summer time: like as the milk of any young thing is thinner than
other. But simply the take at times, with some rest between, one hemine thereof
in a day; but after the drinking Sulph^r: I marvel hereat, considering that
brimston may be taken inwardly with safety. I ^uppose therefore that for (...),
which is Solanu^ m^con, i. deadly dwale, (a pestiferous and venomous herb ^he
read (...) i. brimstone, in the author whom he followed.
brimstone, or quick silver: also to loosen the belly that is costiue in a
fever: moreover, if the throat be exulcerat within, it is an excellent thing to
gargarize therewith. The same is a very good restoratiue for them to drink, who
after great weakness are upon their recovery and would gather strength again:
such also as the Greeks call Atrophos, who have no feeling nor benefit of
their meat: also it may be allowed in an ague, so that the patient have no
headache. It was held in old time for a notable secret in Physic, to give unto

Of Cheese, and the sundry kinds thereof, I have spoken sufficiently in that
discourse wherein I treated of Vdders, and the several parts or members of
living creatures. And verily Sestius attributes the same effects to the cheese
made of mares milk, as he does to that which is gathered of cow-milk: that kind
of cheese he calls Hippace. Generally, all cheese unsalted (i) fresh
Inu^iliores: ex Dioscor. (...).
hurtful to the stomach. In sum, all salt meats take down those that be
corpulent, whereas soft and tender viands do feed and nourish the body. Fresh
cheese applied with honey, reduces the skin which is black and blew by reason
of stripes, to the fresh and natural color again. (...).
Old cheese makes the body costiue, and assuageth the torments of the belly,
if it be made into trosches, and those sodden in some stypticke or austere
wine, and afterward fried in a pan again with honey, and so applied. There is a
kind of rotten and putrified cheese, which the Greeks call Sapron: the same
being punned with salt and dry Seruoises, and so given in wine to drink,
cures the flux of the belly caused by the infirmity of the stomach. The
cheese made of goats milk, stamped into a cataplasme and so applied, heals
the carbuncles engendered

As touching Butyr, it is made likewise of milk, and among barbarous nations is
held for the daintiest meat, and which does distinguish the Either for that the
rich only are allowed to feed upon butyr, or because they have plenty thereof,
and raise a yearly revenue for that commodity, whereas the rest can spare
none from their own bellies:
rich and better sort from the poor commons. The milk of kine yields most
butyr, whereupon it took that name: but the fattest Butyr is Quo magis virus
resipit. Some would amend this place, and for [magis] put in [minus] in a
cont^arysence: but I suppose he writes in regard of barbarous people who make
more account of such ra^ke butyr: like as the uncivil Irish in these days.
Buttyr the stronger sent or smacke that it Natura eiu^ adstringere, some read
digerere, i. it is digestive.
a stringent, emollitiue, incarnatiue, and mundificatiue. Moreover, there is
another way to make Oxygala, namely, to put sour milk into the fresh and sweet
which you would have to be sour, and this kind of chern milk, sour-milke, or
buttermilk, call it what you will, is thought to be most wholesome for the
stomach. But the properties and effects thereof I will set down in another
place.

Among the medicinable parts which be common to all living creatures, their fat
deserves greatest commendation: bute specially swines grease, which in old
time they used with great ceremony and religion. Certes, even at this day there
is a solemn ceremony, that the bride newly wedded, as she enters into her
husbands house, should strike the side posts therewith for good And yet it is a
Latin name of axis and ungo: because they used to grease axeltrees therewith.
Greeks in their books called it Axungia. But that there should be such
strength in swines grease, it is no marvel: for the reason is plain, because
it is a beast that feeds much of herb roots. Which is the cause also that
their dung is much used for a number of purposes. And therefore take my words
thus, that I mean no other swine but such as Not those that be frank^ed or
kept in stic.
feed and root in the field: among which, the female, especially a guelt that
never farrowed, is more effectual than a [tame] bore, barrow hog, or a
breeding sow. But the grease and dung both, of the wild bore, is preferred
before al. Swines grease then is employed to mollify, to heat, to discuss and
mundifie. And some Physicians there be who prescribe for the brimstone it
cures the raggedness of the nails: it staieth likewise the hair of the head
which

As touching the fat or grease of a Wolf, Massurius writes, that in old time
it was esteemed before any other, and had the price above all. And he says,
that new wedded wives were wont upon their marriage day to anoint the side posts
of their husbands houses therewith at their first entrance, to the end that no
charms, witchcrafts and sorceries might have power to enter in: thus much of
grease. Look what virtue grease has, the same, be sure, is the suet and tallow
endued with which comes from those beasts that chew cud: and although it may
be handled and dressed otherwise, yet in force it is nothing inferior. But what
talow soever it be, the best way of pre paring it, is after the skins or veins
be rid away, to wash it first either in sea water or salt brine, and then
within a while to stamp it in a mortar, eftsoons sprinkling it with seawater:
after which it ought to be sodden in many waters, until it have lost all the
savor and rank taste that it had: and

Concerning marrow, it is a thing common to all creatures, like as the fat
abouesaid. All the I'they come from beasts of hot nature: for o herwise they be
temperat.
heat the body. The best marrow simply is that of Dear, as well red as fallow:
next to it in goodness is calves marrow: and then in a third rank follow kids
and goats marrow. Prepared they ought to be and dressed, before Autumn, when
they be new and fresh washed, and dried in the shadow. But afterward they must
be melted again and run through a finer sercer or pressed through linen
strainers, which done,

But of all those things which are generally to be found in every living
creature, the gall is that which is of greatest efficacy in operation: for
power it has naturally to heat, bite, cut, draw, discuss and resolve. The
gall of smaller beasts is taken to be more subtle and penetratiue than that of
the greater, and therefore supposed to be the better for to go into eie-salues.
Bulls gall is thought to have a special faculty above all others, principally
in setting a golden color upon skins, and brass. What gall soever it be, in
the preparation thereof for any use, regard must be had, that it be taken fresh
and new, and then the orifice of the burse or bag wherein it is contained,
ought to be tied fast with a good round pack thread; thus being bound up close,
it must be cast into boiling water, and there remain half an hour, within a
while after, so soon as it is dried (out of the Sun) it ought to be preserved
and kept in honey. The gal of horses only is utterly condemned, Themistocles
there with poisoned himself. * i. Tell us or Terra the earth.
Bulls blood fresh running out of the body, is reckoned no better than venom:
and yet I must except Aegira, a city in Achaia, where the priestresse of the
goddess * Ops, at what time as she is to prophecy and foretell things to come,
uses by drinking bulls blood to prepare her self before she goes down into the
vault or shrouds out Drusus sometimes a Tribune of the commons in Rome, drank
(as it is reported) Goats blood, to make himself look pale and * wan in the
face, at what time as I^vidia, for Liuor.
he meant to charge Q. Caepio his enemy with giving him poison. And verily, the
blood of a buck goat is so strong, that there is not any thing in the world will
either sharpen the edg of any iron tools sooner, or harden the same when it is
keen, than it. And as for the ruggednes of any blade, it will take it away more
effectually and polish it better than the very file. Considering then this
diversity which is seen in the blood of beasts, I cannot write thereof in such
general terms as of a thing indifferently common to every one of them, but I
must be forced to speak particularly

To begin then with Stags and Hinds: no man there is so ignorant but he
knows, that they plague serpents to the very death, for they pluck them forth
of their holes, and eat them when they have don. And not only whiles they be
alive do they war against serpents with the breath of their nosthrils, but also
when they be dead, every member and piece of their body is contrary unto them.
Burn a piece of an Hearts horn, you shall see how the smoke and smell thereof
will chase away serpents, as I have observed hertofore: and yet they say that
the perfume of the bones which are about the throat of a Stag, has a contrary
property, to gather them together. Let a i Pelitary of Spain.
Pyrethrum, they will scatter asunder again.

I read in Greek writers of a certain beast less than a Stag, but like in
hair, called Ophion,

CHAP. X.
The medicines (against Serpents) found in the wild Bore, in Goats, and wild
horses. Also of other remedies which diverse beasts do yield against all
diseases.

THe brains of a wild Bore is highly commended against the sting and venom of
serpents.

If a man burn the horn or hair of goats, the fume thereof drives away
serpents, as it is commonly said: and the ashes that come thereof either drunk
inwardly or applied in a liniment without, are of great force against their
stings. Moreover, a draught of Goats milk taken with the grape of the vine
Taminia, or of their urine drunk with squilliticke vinegar. Furthermore, it is
said, that cheese made of Goats milk together with Origan used in a cataplasme,
or their tallow incorporat with wax, works the like effect. A thousand
medicines besides are reported to Democritus says, That the Buck which the dam
bare alone, is of greater efficacy than any other: who affirms moreover, that
it is very good to anoint the place stung with serpents, with Goats dung sodden
in vinegar: also with the ashes of the said dung fresh made, and tempered with
wine into a liniment. In sum, as many as hardly are cured of serpents stings,
recover thereof passing well, if they ordinarily haunt Goat-pens and stals where
they be kept. But such as would have a more speedy and assured cure, take the
panch cut out of a Goat newly killed, together with snout of a Wolf kept long
dried, is a countercharm against all witchcraft and sorcery; which

As touching wild horses, the Greeks have written nothing, because throughout
all Greece there are none of them to be seen. Howbeit, whatsoever medicinable
virtues be attributed to horses, the same we must think more forcible in the
wild than in others. Neither had the Greeks any experience of those Neat or
Buffles called Vri and Bisontes: and yet the forest of India be full

There is a kind of Butterfly that uses to fly about candles as they are
burning, which is reckoned among poisons. The aduersatiue remedy against it, is
a Goats liver: like as their gal is sovereign against any venomous drinks
made of the rusticke weazill.

CHAP. XI.
Receipts and remedies for many kinds of maladies, taken from sundry beasts.

But now will I return to the remedies appropriate to diseases respective to
the particular members of the body: and first to begin at the head: Bears
grease mixed with Ladanum, and that kind of Maidenhaire which is called
Adiantum, retains the hair of the head which is given to fall off: also the
places that be already bare, it replenisheth again with new hair: the Creta
Cimolia Hirci^um. ^me read (...), Swines gall.
earth and vinegar, if the head be wa^hed withal, so as the hairs may dry
again by little and little. Semblably, the gall of * Buck-goats tempered with
Bulls stale, kills lice: now if the said gall be old, add thereto brimstone,
and it scoureth besides the dandruffe. It is thought, that the ashes of an ass
pizzle will make the hair to grow thick, and preserve them from being gray, if
the place be first shaven and well rubbed therewith, or anointed with the
liniment made of it

As touching the pain of the head, the ashes of an Hare burnt, mixed with oil
of Myrtles, allay the same: so does the blown water which is left in the trough
after that a boeufe or Ass has done drinking, if the patient take a draught
of it: and if we may believe it, the genitall member

The ashes of an Asses house mixed with Asses milk, takes away the cicatrices
of the eyes, together with the films and pearls that trouble the sight, if they
be anointed therewith. The marrow of a Beef taken forth of the right leg
before, punned with soot, and so incorporat together in manner of a liniment,
rectifieth the disordered hairs, and other accidents of the eyelids and
corners of the eyes: but for to have an excellent soot, proper to make a salve
for to beautify the eyes, it ought to be gathered from a wieke or snuff made
of Papyr reed, and burning with Sesame oil, in such sort as the same may be
wiped away with a wing into a new earthen pot that never was used: and verily,
this is a sovereign soot to hinder the growth again of hairs after they be
once plucked up from the eie-browes. Of an Ox gall tempered with the white of
an egg, are made eie-salues reduced into rolls, which being dissolved in
water, serve to anoint that fall into the eyes, are repressed and allaied with
a cataplasm of tender cheese made of goats (...).
extraordinary moisture appearing in them, the little muscles lying within the
loins of a swine, roasted and afterward punned to a cataplasme, and so applied,
do quite rid away the same bleerednesse. It is commonly said, that goats be
never troubled with bleered eyes, nor yet roe-bucks or does, by reason of
certain herbs which they feed upon: and for that their sight is as good by
night as day, therefore certain pills be ordained for the infirmities of the
eyes, made of their dung, inwrapped within wax, for to be swallowed at the
change of the Moon. Many there be who are of opinion, that such as be
dim-sighted and see little or nothing toward night Nyctalopes, are they also
called, who see better in the night than by day: acco^ding as the word
imports.
Nyctalopes) are cured with goats blood, especially the male: also with the
liver of a goat sodden in some austere or hard wine. Some give direction, to
anoint the eyes all over with the grauie or dripping of the said liver roasted,
or else with the gall of a goat, and to feed of the said flesh; with this
regard, That whiles the same is a seething, the eyes may receive the vapor and
steem thereof. And of this opinion they be, that the said medicine will do the
better, if the goat be of a bright ruddy color. Moreover, they would have the
eyes of the patient to be fomented with the vapor and fume that rises from the
decoction of the liver whiles it boileth: but others there be, that prescribe
to take the smoke thereof as it rosteth or frieth. As for goats gall, there be
that use it many ways prepared; some with honey, against the

For the pain and infirmities incident to the ears, there is not a better nor
more excellent thing than the vrin of a wild bore saved and kept in a glass:
the gall likewise of a wild bore or sow, as also of a boeufe, mixed with Cicinie
oil and oil Rosat, in equal quantity, is a singular remedy: but especially
bulls gall, dropped into the ears warm with the juice of Porret; or else with
honey, in case they be impostumat within and run with water. The same alone by
it self warmed in the rind of a pomegranate, is excellent to take away the
rank and strong savor of the ears: and if any part within be broken, the
said gall instilled with woman's milk, heals it effectually. ears, but they
ought to be well chaufed and set into an heat before. Now are these medicines
to

To come now to the infirmities of the teeth: if they be loose and shake in
their sockets, the ashes of hearts horn will settle them firm and fast again:
if they ache, the same ashes are very good to ease the pain, whether the teeth
be rubbed or washed therewith. But some are of opinion, that the powder of the
said horn not burnt at all, is far better than the ashes in these cases:
howbeit, there be dentifrices made both of the powder and also of the ashes.
Moreover, the ashes of a wolves head is thought to be a sovereign remedy for
the pains incident to the teeth. Now it is well known, that among the
excrements of a wolf, there be many times bones found, which if they be hanged
about the neck, arm, or other parts of the body, have the same effect.
Likewise (...).
sharp bone like unto a needle; herewith, Physicians give counsel to scarrifie
the teeth and let the gums blood, for the toothache. Take the bone of a beast,
set it on fire, and when it is red hot, hold it close to the teeth that be
loose and ache withal, it will set them fast again: the same being reduced into
ashes, and tempered with myrrh, is a proper dentifrice to blaunch the teeth.
The bonie substance likewise of hogs cleyes burnt and calcined, is of the same
force and operation: also the hollow hetchill or whirlebones of their hips,
about which from the mature of a mare after she has been covered by a
stallion, if the wieke of a candle or Anaxilaus has reported: even so will
that of the she Ass, make a show and apparition of Asse-heads. As for
Hippomanes beforenamed, it is so strong and forcible a venom, especially to
incite and stir unto lust, that being upon a time poured into the brazen
metal that was cast into the form and similitude of a mare at Olympia, the
stone-horses which came near unto the said image, were set into such a heat
and so far enraged, that they could not by any means be held back but they
would needs cover the said brazen mare. Moreover, the glue that Carpenters and
Ioyners use, cures the toothache, if the same be boiled in water, and the
teeth anointed therewith; but the same within a little while after must be
removed, and the mouth presently washed with wine, wherein were sodden the pill
of sweet pomegranats.

CHAP. XII.
Remedies observed out of the bodies of beasts, for the accidents that befall

IT is thought generally, that the skin of the face may be made smooth and
without wrinckles tender and delicat, yea and be kept fair and white, with
asses milk: for well known it is, that some dainty dames (forsooth) there be,
that keep and maintain daily in ordinary to the number just of 500 she Asses
for this purpose: according to the first example of the Empress Poppaea, wife
to Nero the Emperor; for she used commonly to bath in Asses milk, and devised
whole baines to swim therewith: and ever as she rode in progress, or removed
from place to place, she had her cuirie of she Asses in her train attending
upon her for no other intent, but only to wash and bath her body in their
milk. As for the pimples and wheales that break out in the Mary thistle
punned all together and reduced into a liniment. The same operation has any
marow, though it be of a cow, and the broth of cow boeufe. The tettars and
wild-fires breaking forth about the mouth and nose, there is not the like
medicine again to be found, to kill and extinguish, than a glue made of a
calves genetoirs, dissolved in vinegar with quick brimstone,

If the tonsils, throat, and windpipe, be either inflamed or exulcerat, they
find much ease by cow milk, or goats milk, so the patient gargarize
therewith warm as it comes new from the beast, or otherwise made warm
again afterward: but goats milk is the better of the twain, if mallows be
sodden therein, and a little salt. For blisters in the tongue and throat, the
broth made of tripes is very good to be gargarised: and more particularly, for
the inflammations and sores incident to the tonsils or almonds of the throat,
the kidneys of a fox dried are singular, if they be beaten into powder and
reduced into a liniment with honey. The gall of a bull or goat mixed with honey,
serves right well for the squinancy. The liver of a gray or badger tempered

The crickes and pains in the neck, are much assuaged by rubbing the nape of
the neck with butter or bears grease: if the same be stark and stiff, there
is nothing in the world better than beasts tallow, the which, together with
oil, is very good for the kings evil beforesaid. The Supinus and
posterganeus, raptus. Aureliano.
cramp that draws a man back, so as he cannot bow his head forward (which
convulsion the Greeks name Opisthotonos) is much eased by infusing into the
ears the urine of a she goat, or with a liniment made with their dung and
bulbe roots.

If the nails be bruised, it is passing good to tie about them the gal of any
beast whatsoever. As for the risings and sore excrescences about their roots,
bulls gall dissolved in hot water, and

Moreover, it is said, that a wolves liver taken in a draught of wine warm,
cures the cough: also a bears gall mingled with honey: or the ashes made of the
uppermost tips of a beasts horn: likewise the froth or slauer of an horse
mouth: and some say, that be the cough never so bad, it will make an end
thereof in three days drinking. Semblably, the lights of a stag, together with
the throat dried in the smoke, and afterward puluerized and brought into a
loch or liquid electuary, is good for the cough, to be taken ordinarily every
day: and for this purpose, the lungs of the spitter in this kind of red dear,
is thought to be more effectual. In case a man spit blood, the ashes of Hearts
is much commended: and the rendles of an hares maw taken in drink to the Which
is ou^ Turpentine.
rosin of the Larch tree. If one do reach or cast up blood, it is said that
cowes blood, taken moderatly and with vinegar, is of great force and efficacy
to stay the same:

CHAP. XIII.
Receipts for the pain of stomach and loins: also for the infirmities of the
reins.

IF there be an ulcer grown in the stomach, drink the milk of an Ass or
Cow, and it will heal it. Stew a piece of boeufe in wine and vinegar among,
the broth thereof is singular for

For the grief of the liver, caused by obstructions, the liver of a wolf
dried and taken in honied wine, is a proper receipt. So is the liver of an Ass
being dried and brought into powder with two parts of stone parsley, and so
incorporat with three nut kernels and honey; which composition, the patient must
use to eat. In which case, goats blood is highly commended, if it be prepared

Moreover, it is said, that for them who be short winded, there is nothing so
good as to drink the blood of wild horses. In the next place to it, great
account is made of Asses milk warm, o^ sodden together with bulbe roots, so
that the patient drink the whey that comes thereof, putting to three hemines
of the blood one cyath of white garden cresses, infused first in water, and
then tempered with honey. The liver also or lungs of a fox, taken in some gross
wine like Alegant: or a bears gall in water, does open the wind-pipes stuffed
with fleame, and gives free liberty for the wind to go and come.

Furthermore, Bears grease is exceeding good for the pains in the reins of the
back, yea and for any place else that has need of emollitiues, in case it be
well rubbed therewith. Also in these

But before I proceed any farther, it is to be noted, that Magitians also have
meddled with this part of Physic, and have devised strange medicines, drawn
from the parts and members of beasts. And first of all they would make us
believe, that be a buck-goat never so much enraged, Caecilius Bion reports
that he learned of the Barbarians, whiles he conuersed among them. In like
manner, a beasts milt whether it be cow or ox, has the same operation, if it
be used in that manner: but say it be fresh and new taken out of the beast,
then it ought to be either roasted or sodden, and so taken as meat. Over and
besides, take 20 heads of garlic, pun them all, and after they be bruised, put
them into a beasts bladder with a sextar of vinegar; apply the same to the
region of the spleen, it assuageth the pain. And if all be true that these
Magitians say, the milt of a calfe is singular good for the malady

CHAP. XIIII.
For to stop a lask and knit the belly: for the flux proceeding from the
imbecilitie of the stomach: for the dysenterie or bloody flix: for the
ventosities and inflation of the belly: for ruptures: the straining upon the
seege without doing any thing: for the worms in the guts, and for the cholique.

TO stay the running out and extraordinary loosnesse of the belly, these
medicines following be convenient: Imprimis, the blood of a stag: Item, the
ashes of an hearts horn: the liver of a bore fresh and without any salt at all,
taken in wine: likewise the liver of a sow roasted bulls horn which grows
next to the head, strewed into a draught of water. In like manner,

Contrariwise, to loose the belly: the runnet found in a Colts maw: the blood
of a femal goat, or else hermarrow or liver, are thought convenient laxatiues.
Item, a plaster made with a wolves gal, together with the juice of a wild
Cucumber, and applied to the nauil. Also a draught either of Mares or Goats
milk, taken with salt and honey. The gall of a she-Goat is good for this
purpose, if it be taken with the juice of Sowbread and a little Alum. But some
there be who think it better to put thereto salnitre and water. Bulls gall
stamped and incorporat with Wormwood, made into a round ball, and so put up in
stead of a suppositorie, will give a stool, and make the body soluble.

Butter eaten in any great quantity, is good for those who have a flux
occasioned by the weakness of the stomach, and a dysenterie or bloody flix: so
is a Cowes liver: the ashes of an Hartshorn, taken to the quantity of as much
as three fingers will comprehend, in a draught of water: likewise the rennet of
an Hare wrought in dough for to make bread: or if the patient do void blood
withal, the same ought to be incorporat in parched Barley meal. The ashes of
a Bores, Sowes, or hares dung, is good to spice a warm potion of wine in these
infirmities. Moreover, an ordinary Veale broth, as it is commonly given, is
counted one of the remedies for these kind of fluxes abouenamed, whether they
come of feeble stomach or exulcerat guts. But if the patient drink Asses milk
for this purpose, it will be the better, if honey be put thereto. Furthermore,
the ashes of an Ass dung taken in wine, is as effectual in operation as the
rest, for both diseases. As bellies with Goats dung sodden with honey. And for
both these fluxions, as well from the stomach i. a blouding.
Sanguiculus. Moreover for the dysenterie, they ordain to iniect into the guts
by a clystre, Bulls glue resolved in hot water.

For any ventosities, Calves dung is holden to be singular good for to resolve
them, if it be sodden in wine and the decoction thereof used. But if the guts
be diseased any ways, the rennet of red Dear is very effectual, sodden with
Lentils and Beets, and so eaten with meat. Likewise the ashes of the hair of
an Hare boiled with honey. Also to drink Goats milk sodden with Mallows and a
little salt put thereto, is good for the said infirmities: but if the rendles
be mixed therewith, the opperation will be the better. Of the same virtue is
Goats suet, taken in any warm

The disease called Tenesmos, which is a desire to go often to the stool
without doing any thing, is cured by drinking of Asses and Cowes milk.

All the sort of worms bred in the guts, the powder of Hearts horn taken in
drink, does expel.

There be, as I said before, certain bones found among the excrements of a
Wolf, which if

CHAP. XV.
For the dolorous torments of the bladder: for the stone and gravel. The
remedies

THe urine of a Bore helps those who be tormented with the pain in the
bladder, and the stone: yea, and the very bladder of the Bore eaten as meat, is
singular good in that respect. Howbeit, if the one and the other were permitted
to be confected before in smoke, you should see a greater operation. Now the
said bladder ought to be first sodden and then eaten: and if a woman be
troubled with the said griefs, she is to choose the bladder of a wild sow. There
be found also in the livers of Swine certain little stones, or else hard
callosities like unto stones, and white of color, such as we may see daily in
our tame swine: which being beaten into powder

As touching the botches and carbuncles which arise in the privy members; the
brains and blood of a Bore or Sow are thought to be proper remedies for them:
and say there be some cankerous Some read Muria, i. in pickle or brine,
Myrrh, to the consistence of honey. Beets also sodden, yea, and their flesh
boiled in wine and so applied as a cataplasme. In case they be running sores:
the suet and marrow of a calfe boiled in wine, or Goats tallow tempered with
honey and the juice of the brier, are reputed to be soueraign. Now if the said
sores spread farther still, it is said, that their dung incorporat with honey or
vinegar, does much good: as also butter and nothing else simply applied to the
grieved place. If the cods do swell, the suet of a calfe made into a liniment,
with sal-nitre

Such as cannot hold their urine, but that it passes from them against their
wills, find great help by eating of a Bores bladder roasted or broiled. And
verily the ashes of a Bores or Sowes cleyes, is singular good against the
involuntary shedding of urine, if a cup or drink be spiced therewith for the
patient to take. Likewise, the bladder of a Sow burnt and given to drink,
serves well in this infirmity: so does the bladder of a kid, or the lungs in
that manner used. Furthermore, it is said, That the brains of an Hare taken in
wine, is singular to help this infirmity. Semblably, the stones of an Hare
broiled and eaten, or the rennet in the Hares maw, incorporat with Goose grease
in Barley groats. The kidneys besides of an Ass, reduced into powder and I do
this, because I would not piss my bed as the dog does his couch. Thus much for
the incontinency of urine. Now if one be pent and would gladly void urine, let
him take the^ bladder of a Swine, so that it never touched the ground, and
apply the same to the share, for it will provoke the water to pass.

But to come unto the diseases of the That is to say, Piles, blind hemorrhoids,
chaps, fissures, and swelling biggs.
seat: there is nothing so good for them as Bears gall, incorporat together
with their grease. Some put thereto litharge of silver and Frankincense: in
which cases butter is very good, if with Goose grease and oil of Roses it be
reduced into a liniment:

For the biles and impostumes rising in any place therabout, there is not a
better medicine to scatter and dissolve them, than Bears blood or Bulls blood,
dried first and so beaten to powder. applied unto the place with wool. As
touching the galls, which by overmuch riding on horseback

It falls out many times that there arise swellings in the very share and
groine, by occasion of some sores or ulcers in other parts of the body; for the
repressing of which, there is a present remedy, namely, to take three horse
hairs, and to tie them in as many knots, and so convey them into the said ulcer
which is the cause of such tumors.

CHAP. XVI.
Proper remedies for the gout: the falling sickness: for such as be taken or
stricken with a Planet

ACerot made of Bears grease, Bulls tallow, and wax, of each an equal
quantity, is singular good for the gout in the feet. And yet some there be who
add unto them Hypoquistis and gall nuts. Others prefer a male Goats tallow,
together with the dung of a female goat, Saffron, or Mustard seed; and the
branches of Yvie stamped with Parietary also of the wall; or else the flowers of
the wild Cucumber, reduced all into the form of a cataplasme and so applied.
In like manner, others use a pultesse made of beasts dung and the mother of
vinegar tempered together. Some magnify and highly commend in this case the
dung of a calfe, which has not as yet tasted of grass, or Bulls blood alone
without any other thing: likewise a wolf sodden quick till all the flesh be
gone and nothing but bones remaining: or else a live Wolf sodden in of calves
dung, of goats treddles likewise, if there be red Arsnick or Orpinent mixed
therewith.

As touching werts, there is not a better thing to take them away than the
ashes of Calves dung tempered with vinegar, or the dirt that is made by the
urine of an Ass.

For those that be subject to the falling evil, it is singular good to eat the
genetoirs of a bear, or to drink the stones of a Bore either out of Mares milk
or plain water: also the urine of a bore mingled with oxymell. But more
effectual in operation is that vrin which has bin suffered to dry as it lies
in the own bladder. The stones likewise of a sow which are taken from her when
she is splaied, if they be kept until they be dried, and so brought into
powder, are excellent in this case taken in the milk of a sow, with this
charge, that the patient abstain from wine for certain days together, both
before and after the receiving of this medicine. For this infirmity also they
use to give the lungs of a hare poudred or kept in salt, with a third part of
frankencense in white wine for 30 days together. Also the rennet or cruds
found in the maw. The brains of an In sol^s: some read so^s, (...). in the
baines or stouves.
within certain leaves, drunk to the weight of half an ounce every day in
honied water; or the ashes of the said beasts houfe, taken to the quantity of 2
spoonfulls daily for a months space, are appropriat medicines for this malady.
In like manner, their stones preserved dry and reduced into powder, serve to
spice their drink, whether it be the milk of Asses (which is the best) or shere
water: the pellicle wherein the young fool was lapped in the dams womb,
specially if it were a male that was foled, is of great force to withstand this
disease, if the patient do but smell thereto when the fit is coming. Some give
counsel to eat the heart of a black he ass, together with bread: but in any
wise it must be done abroad in the open air, and when the moon is but one or
two days old at the most. Others prescribe to eat the flesh; and there
Lichenes: some take the^ for the Malanders
werts growing upon horse legs to be drunk in oxymel. And to this effect the
Magitians would have a dish of meat made with goats flesh roasted against a
funeral fire, where some dead corpse is burnt: who ordain besides their tallow
and bulls gall, of each an equal weight, to be sodden, and then to be put up
again into the bladder or burse of the said gall, that it touch not the ground
in any case; and being thus prepared, the patient forsooth must drink it in
water standing upon the door fill, and under the very lintell thereof. Now, if
you would know whether a man be subject to this

Concerning those that be suddenly taken with a dead palsy of the one side of
their body, it is said that the vrin of an Asse-fole incorporat with Spikenard
into the form of a liniment, is very good for them, if the inunction therewith
be used.

For the jaundise, Hearts horn burnt and reduced into ashes, is a very proper
medicine: so is the blood of an ass fool drunk in wine. Likewise the Called
before Polea.
dung of an asses fool which came first from it after it was foled, given to
the quantity of a bean in a draught of wine, cures the iaundise within three
days. The same operation and effect there is in the first ordure that a colt
makes after it is come into the world.

If any bone be broken or bruised, there is not a more present remedy than the
ashes of a cheek either of a wild bore or tame swine. In like manner, their lard
sodden and tied round about the broken bone, does consolidat and souder it
again wondrous soon. And verily if there be any ribs in the side broken, the
sovereign and only remedy commended, is goats dung tempered with old wine, for
it opens, draws, and heals the fracture thoroughly.

As touching fevers, the feeding upon the venison of red Dear drives them all
away, as I have before showed: but more particularly, if it be any of these
Typicke and Periodicall agues, which be intermittent and return by fits, there
is not a better thing, if we may believe Magitians, than to take the right eye
of a wolf, salt it, and so tie it about the neck or hang it fast to any part
of the patient. Of these fevers, there is one called a quotidian, which the
Greeks name Amphemerinos; Bub^
scriche Owl, but so as they may not fall off nor be removed before seven
fits be past. Now tell me (I pray you) what was he that could find out this

CHAP. XVII.
Proper remedies against the trouble of the brain by reason of Melancholy;
against the lethargy, dropsy, shingles, and S. Anthonies fire. Also for the
pain of the sinews.

THe dung of a Calfe sodden in wine, is an excellent remedy for those who are
given to melancholy. For to raise and awaken them that are in a lethargy,
there is not a bettter thing than the rough werts growing upon an Asses leg, if
the same be tempered with vinegar into a liniment, and the nosthrils anointed
therewith: also the perfume of the horn or hairs of a Goat: yea, and a bores
liver: which is the cause that it is given ordinarily to those that have the

For the phthysick, the liver of a wolf sodden in wine is very good: likewise
the lard of a lean running sow feeding only upon grass: as also Ass flesh
sodden and eaten with the broth: and verily in Achaia this is the principal
course they take for the cure of that disease. Moreover, it is said, that to
receive through a pipe or reed the smoke of the dry dung made by Cow or Ox
lying forth and feeding only upon green grass, is very wholesome for those that
have the phthisick or consumption of the lungs. Also there be who calcine the
tips of Boeufs horns, and taking the measure of two spoonfuls of the ashes,
incorporat the same with honey, make it up into pills, and so swallow them down
for the said malady. Many there are who affirm, That the phthysicke

In case of the dropsy, the vrin of a Bore found in his bladder given to the
patient in drink by i. Sherne.
Bolbiton) is a sovereign remedy for the dropsy. Mary, if the patient be a
woman, there must be choice made of cow dung; but if a man, the dung of the
other sex is to be taken: and this I may tell you is such a secret mystery, that
the Magitians would not have to be revealed and made known. Many other
medicines there be for the dropsy, to wit, the dung of a Bull calfe used in a
liniment: the ashes of a calves dung drunk in wine, with an equal quantity of
the wild parsnep seed: goats blood together with the marrow, eaten with meat:
it is

As touching S. Anthonies fire, the shingles, etc. the means to quench the
same, is to anoint the place with Bears grease, and especially the fat that is
found about the kidneys: also with the green dung of a calfe, cow, or ox.
Some use hard cheese made of goats milk and porret together:

There is not a better thing to bring down any swelling, than a cataplasm of
raw beef: and as for any hard tumors, swines dung made hot and dried in an
earthen pot-sheard, or upon a tile, is excellent to discuss and resolve them:
the grease of a wolf is exceeding good to break any impostumation that is
grown to ripeness: so is neats dung made hot under the embers: or goats
treddles sodden in wine or vinegar: as touching fellons and such like
apostumations, boeuftallow with salt is much commended for to resolve them: and
if the place be much pained, it were good to dip the said tallow in oil, and
to melt the same without any salt: and in like manner is goats seuet to be
used. For a burn or scald, there is a proper salve made of bears grease and
lilly roots:

It is thought, that for the pain of the sinews, goats dung boiled in wine
with honey is sovereign, yea though a nerve began to putrify: convulsions,
crampes, and spreines of nerves upon some violent stroke, are cured with bores
dung gatherd in the spring and so dried. After the same manner, such as be
ouerstrained and plucked with the draught of any chariot, or wounded with the
wheels going over them; and generally, howsoever the blood be settled black
under the skin by contusion or bruise, if the places be anointed with the said
dung, though it were green and fresh, much ease and help insueth thereupon:
howbeit, some think that it were better to sees the dung first in vinegar: and
others reduce the same being dry into powder, and promise them that be either
bursten, wounded and bruised inwardly, or have bin ouerthrown and fallen from on
high if they drink it in vinegar, that they shall have help thereby. But the
better, and those that love Nero was wont in this kind of drink to take great
pleasure, and with it to refresh himself, when his purpose was by that means
to win a name, and approve himself a doubtie wight, in running with coaches in
the great cirque or show place. To conclude, next to the dung of a bore, is
commended that of a sow or any other hog, and thought to be in a second place
of operation.

CHAP. XVIII.
Medicines to stanch blood: to heal ulcers, cancerous sores, and the wild
scab: also what medicines they be that draw thorns, pricks, or whatsoever
sticks within the flesh. Finally, proper receipts to cicatrize and skin a
wound or sore.

THe rennet of any Dear or a Hare, used in vinegar, stancheth blood. The ashes
also of the hair of an hare: likewise of Asses dung: yea and the very ashes of
their hair made into a liniment with any convenient liquor, has the same
effect: but if you would have it work more effectually, choose these excrements
of the male ass, mix the same with vinegar, and apply

If thorns, spills, bones, and such like things have gotten into the flesh and
there stick, cars durg is very good to draw the same forth: likewise the
treddles of a goat with wine. Any rendles also, but especially that which is
found in an hares maw, serve in that case, reduced into a salve, with the
powder of frankincense and oil; or else with the like quantity of birdlime, or
the cereous matter in the Bee-hiue called Propolis.

Furthermore, the grease of an ass is singular to reduce any swert sploches
and black skars to a fresh and native color; which, if they ouergrow the skin
about them, are brought down and made more even and subtle, by an inunction
of calves gall: but the Physicians prepare the said gall with an addition of
myrrh, honey, and safron, and then put it up in a brazen box for their use: yet
some there be, who mingle with the rest verdegris or the rust of brass.

CHAP. XIX.
Receipts appropriat to the maladies of women, and the diseases of sucking
babes: also remedies for them that are unable to perform the act of
generation.

TO begin with the natural course of women's purgation: the gall of a bull or
ox, applied to their sec^et parts in unwashed greasy wool, is very
effectual to bring the same down. The skillful midwife of Thebes, Olympias,
used to put thereto Hyssopum. some read Oesypum, which the Apothecaries call
Hyssopus humida: and is nothng else but the greasy filth and sweat tried out of
the wool growing in sheeps flanks.
hyssope and sal-nitre. For this purpose, hearts horn burnt to ashes is very
good to be taken in drink. But if the matrice be out of order and unsettled, it
is not amiss to apply the same ashes unto the natural parts: yea and bulls
gall together with Opio, some read Apio, i Persley.
Opium to the weigh of two oboli; or else perfume their secret parts with a
suffumigation of deers hair. Moreover, it is said, that the hinds when they
perceiuethemselues to be in calf, swallow down a little stone; which is
singular good for women with child to carry about them, that they may go out
their full time: and therefore much seeking there is after she is with child,
or pained with afterthrows in childbed, she shall find much ease by that potion
Some read, forty.
twenty days together, either before the hair do come, or when it begins
to spurt, it will keep them for ever being vndergrown: of the same operation
is the decoction of a hearts horn; but it will do the feat the better, in case
the said horn be new and green. If the matrice be syringed and washed with
mares milk, it will find much comfort and ease thereby. If a woman perceive
the infant to be dead in her body, let her take the powder of the rugged werts
upon a horse leg, call Lichenes, in fresh water, it will exclude the said dead
fruit of the womb: the perfume also of the houfe will do as much, or the dung
dried. If the matrice be fallen or slipped out of the body, an injection of butter
by the metrenchyte, staieth the same and keeps it up. If there be any hardness
grown in that part, whereby it is stopped, a beasts gall mingled with oil
Olympias the expert midwife of Thebes, affir meth, that there is nothing better
than to anoint the natural parts of a woman with ox gall, incorporat in the
fat of serpents, verdegrece, and honey mixed therewith, before that she medleth
with a man in the act of generation. Likewise, if a woman which is given to
have those natural parts ouer-moist and slippery, by reason of humors purging
immoderately that way, do apply Apij, some read Opij, i. the juice of poppy.
persly seed, with as much of the oil of almonds as is thought sufficient to
incorporat them into a liniment; and this they put up with wool in manner of a
pessarie. The gall of an ox calfe tempered with half as much honey, is a
medicine ordinarily kept in readiness for the diseases of the matrice. Some make
great account of veale, and do promise, that if women about the time that they
conceive do eat it with the root of Aristolochia, i. Birthwort, they shall
bring forth goat or shamois tempered with the Pila m^a* (...) Galen. lib. 1.
(...).
sea-ball, serves to take away hairs: but the gall of other Osthanes says,
that if the loins or small of a woman's back, be anointed with the blood of a
tike taken from a black Bull or Cow that is of a wild kind, it will put her
out of al fancies of venereous sports. He affirms moreover, that if she drink
the vrin of a male goat, with some spikenard among to take away the loath some
taste thereof, she will forget all love that she bare to any man before.

To come now unto little infants: there is not a more proper thing for them
than butyr, either alone by it self, or with honey: and to speak more
particularly, it helps them when they breed teeth, or have their gums sore,
or mouth exulcerat. If there be hung about the neck of a little infant, the
tooth of a wolf, it keeps them from starting or skriching in their sleep for
fear, and allaieth the pain which they feel in toothing: the same does also a
wolves skin. And verily the Cato is of opinion, that whosoever uses to eat
hares flesh, Virgil the Poet describes to drop from Ad coi^equit not according
to the meaning of Vir. 3. Geor. in these words, Scilicet ante omnes furor e^
infignis equar^ etc. and a little after: Hinc demum H ppomanes, etc. Lent^
destillat ab inguine virus.
a mares shap, against the time that within silver and so carried about one, is
of great power in this case, as Osthanes mine author says. Salpe (a famous
courtizan) gives direction to plunge the genitall member of this beast seven
times together in hot oil, and with the said oil to anoint the share and
parts therabout. Bialcon advises to drink the ashes of the said member, or the
stale of a bull presently after he has done his kind to a cow, and with the
earth that is moistened and made mire with the said stale, to anoint the privy
parts. Contrariwise, there is not a thing that cools the lust of a man more,
than to anoint the said parts with the dung of myce and rats. To conclude, for
to avoid drunkenness, take the lungs of an hog, be it bore or sow it matters
not; in like manner of a kid, and roast it, whosoever eats thereof fasting,
shall not be drunk that day, how liberally soever he take his drink.

CHAP. XX.
Strange and wonderful things observed in beasts.

THere be other admirable properties and virtues reported of the same beast,
over and besides those before rehearsed; for it is said, that whosoever do find
and take up an horse shoe shaken from the houfe (an ordinary thing that
happens upon the way when a horse casts his shoe) and lay the same up,
they shall find a remedy for the yox, if they do but call to mind and think
upon the place where they bestowed the same. Also, that the liver of an Hare is
in this regard for curing of the hicket, like to an horse shoe. Moreover, if
an horse do follow in chase after a wolf, and chance to tread upon the tracts
where the wolf has run, he will be broken winded and burst, even under the
man upon his back. It is thought moreover, that the ankle-bones

And to come unto leechcraft belonging to beasts: it is said, that if an horse
void blood excessiuely,

THE TWENTY NINTH BOOK
WRITTEN BY C. PLINIVS SECVNDVS.
CHAP. I.
The Original of Physic. When Physicians began to visit the sick in their
houses. When came up first This course in practice was called Clinice, (...),
i. a lecto, i. the bed or bed. chambe^.
The manner of Iatraleptice, (...), vel (...) quasi med. cina vng^entaria.
curing diseases by outward application of Ointments and by frications. Of
Chrysippus Erasistratus. Of the Empi ^ce, (...). i. Exp^a. When Physicians
cureby exp^iments onl^ of medicines, without regard of the c^use of the disease
or nature of the patien.
Empirick practice of Physic. Of Herophilus and other famous Physicians. How
many times the order of Physic has bin changed. Who was the first profess^d
Physician in Rome, and when he began to practice. What opinion or conceit the
ancient Romans had of Physicians. Finally, the imperfections and defaults in
this art of Physic.

THe admirable nature of a number of medicines, as well those which I have
already showed, as those which remain as yet to be handled, forces me to write
yet more of Physic, and to sound to the very depth and bottom: albeit I know
full well, that there is not a Latin writer who has traveled hitherto in
this argument; and am not ignorant how ticklish and dangerous a point it is at
first to set abroch any new matters, especially such, whereby a man is sure to
reap

But to enter into the discourse thereof, First and foremost, the invention of
this Art has been fathered upon the to wit, Apollo and Aesculapius.
gods, such I mean as are canonized gods in heaven: yea, and even at this day
we have recourse still unto divine Oracles for many medicines. Moreover, the
fabulous tales devised Aesculapius in raising prince Tynda id^n: but out of
Plutarch, and a manus (...) ol^ c^py, should be r^ad (...) t^ son of ^es us wh^
was Hippolytus
Hippolytus again to life: for which bold part of his, Jupiter being highly
displeased, smote him dead with lightning. And yet for all this, Antiquity has
not staid there, but made relation of others, who were revived by the means of
the said Aesculapius or his art: which during the At (...) ^at time and w^, his
2 sons, Po^us and (...) (...). actised Chirurgerie.
Trojan war, whereof the fame and bruit is more certain, grew into much request
and estimation: and yet in those days there was no other part of Physic
professed and practiced, but Surgery; and that in the cure of wounds only.
But in the age ensuing, and for many a year after, wonderful it is, in what
obscurity this noble science lay dead, and as it were buried in darkness and
oblivion, even until the famous Peloponesiacke war: for then arose
Hippocrates, who revived and set on foot again the ancient practice of
Aesculapius, so Aesculapius, he made an extract of all the receipts, which were
found written in the temple of the said god (for the manner was in that Island,
that whosoever were cured and delivered of any disease, registered there upon
record, the experiments of medicines whereby they had remedy, to the end, that
afterward they might have help again by the same in like cases) and thereupon
Varro is persuaded) after that the said temple was burned, he professed that
course of Physic which is called i. Chamber-Physicke. So called, because he
visited his patients lying sick in bed.
Clinice. Whereby Physicians found such sweetness, that afterward there was no
measure nor end of fees: insomuch, as Prodicus, a disciple of Hippocrates, and
borne in Silymbria, erecting that kind of practice in Physic, which is called
The manner of maintaining of health and curing diseases by fr^ctions, and
outward application of oiles and ointments.
Iatraliptice, opened by that means the way to enrich even those, who under
Physicians were employed in rubbing and anointing men's bodies, yea, and
brought gain to other base and servile ministers atending upon their cures.
After them came Chrysippus in place: who through his much babble and prattling,
wherewith he was well furnished, altered the Theoricke and speculatiue Physic
of Who wroght by reasons and rules, and thereupon were called Rationales, and
Dogmatici
Hippocrates and Prodicus, with all their principles: whom succeeded
Erasistratus, Aristotle's sisters son, and he changed also many of Chrysippus
his rules and receipts, notwithstanding Erasistratus for curing king Antiochus,
received of his son Ptolomaeus (king after him) one hundred talents: which to
begin withal, I note by the way, that you may see how (even in those days)
Physicians were well rewarded for their pains and skill. But in process of
time one Acro, a citizen of Agrigentum in Sicilie, much commended by the
authority of Empedocles the famous natural Philosopher, began in that Island
to institute another faction and sect of Physicians, who grounding altogether
their work and operation upon experience, called themselves Empiriques. Thus
there being diverse schools of Physic, the professors in every one of them
entered into contention and variance, some siding this way and others taking the
contrary; until at length Herophilus entered the stage, who reproved and
condemned as well the one as the other: and reduced the pulses or beating
Asclepiades when he began to profess Physic, brought with him an alteration
of all that was before, yet (as I have already related) his Physic continued
no longer than others: for Themison (a scholar and auditor of his) so soon as
ever his master was departed this life, altered quite all that he wrote and
noted at first from his mouth, and betook himself to a new practice,
according to his own head and fantasy. But what became of it? Surely within a
while after, Antonius Musa, Physician to Augustus the Emperor, put down that
which Themison had set up: and that by the authority and warrant of the said
Emperor his patient, whom he delivered Quia calida fomenta non prodera^t,
srigidis curari coactus, auctore Antonio Musa. Sueton. in vita Octav. August.
vsin^ directly a contrary cure to that which had bin practiced beforetime.
Many other Physicians there were of great name, whom I ouerpasse: but the
principal and most renowned of them all, were the Casij, Calpitani, Aruntij,
Albutij, and Rubrij, who in their time might dispend in fees allowed them out
of the Princes and Emperors Exchequer, under whom they lived, 250,000 S^es
apeece, by the year. And as for Q. Stertinius the Physician, he complained of
the E^s whom he served, and challenged them for that he had no greater
revenues than 50000^ S^sterces by the year from them: whereas he was able to
make account, that by his practice i^ ^e city he gained yearly 600,000
Sesterces, being retained Physician to certain houses, which he could readily
name at his fingers ends. A brother of his received no less in fees from (...)
Caesar the emperor. And albeit these brethren spent Sestertium ^ecenties, as
^udaeus ^eadeth.
thirty millions; which was such an estate, that unless it were Aruntius only,
there was never any known before those days to have died so wealthy. After
these men, there arose one Vectius Valens, who over and besides his profession
of Physic and Rhetoric, which he earnestly followed, grew into a greater
name, by reason of the familiar acquaintance he had with Messalina the
Empress, wife to Claudius Caesar. This minion of hers taking his time, and
seeing how mighty he was, followed his fortunes and erected a new sect and
practice of Physic. But within the compass of that age, and namely in the
days of the Emperor Nero, in comes He reduced Physic into a Method: and
from him descended the sect called Methodici.
Thessalus, who won the name from all the Physicians of former times, and
overthrew the precepts or causey Appia, he triumphed over them all, and
entitled himself by the name of i The master and conqueror of all Physicians.
Iatronices. Crinas of Marsiles put him down and outwent him far in credit and
authority: and that by the means of a twofold skill and knowledge wherein he
was seen: For besides his ordinary profession of Physic, he showed himself
more wary and ceremonious in all his practice than any other before him, by
reason of the deep insight that he had in the Mathematics; observing the
course of the stars, choosing good days and hours, and going ever by his
Almanakes and Ephemerides, whenever he ministered unto his patients, insomuch,
as in their very diet he was so precise, that he would not allow them to eat or
drink but with great regard of times and seasons. Whereby he grew to such
wealth, that of late he bequeathed by his Conties H. S.
ten millions of Sesterces unto his native city Marsils toward the
fortifications thereof, besides the walls that he caused to be built and
emmanteled about other towns, which cost him little under the foresaid sum.
Whiles this Crinas, with such other as himself, seemed with their astrology to
command the course of the destinies, and to have men's lives at their own
disposition, all on a sudden one M. Charmis, a Marsilian likewise, put himself
forward and entered the city of Rome, who not only condemned the former
proceedings of the ancient Physicians, but also put down the baines and hot
houses: he brought in the bathing in cold water, and persuaded folk to use
the same even in the midst of Winter: nay, he feared not to give direction
unto his sick patients for to sit in tubs of cold water. And I assure you, my
self have seen ancient Senators, such as had been Consuls of Rome, all
chilling and quaking, yea Annaeus Such as bath in cold water, be called by
Seneca, Psychrolouiae.
Seneca, wherein he approues highly of this course. Neither is it to be
doubted, but such Physicians as these, who having won credit and estimation
once by such novelties and strange devises, shoot at no other mark but to make
merchandise and enrich themselves even with the hazard of our lives. And
hereupon come these lamentable and woeful consultations of their about their
patients, wherein you shall see them ordinarily to argue and disagree in
opinion, whiles one cannot abide that another man's judgment should take place,
and seem to carry away the credit of the cure. From hence also arose that
Epitaph of his (whosoever he was) that caused these words to be engraven upon
his unhappy tomb, Turba medicorum perij, i. The variance of a sort of
Physicians about me,

And to begin withal, Cassius Haemina, an ancient Historiographer, does
report, That the first Physician that ever came to Rome, was one Archagathus,
the son of Lysanias, from out of Peloponnesus, which was when L. Aemylius and
M. Livius were Consuls, and in the year after the foundation of the city of
Rome 535. And this mine Author says, that he was enfraunchised Acilius, bought
at the charges of the city for to entertain his patients, and therein to
exercise his cunning. Called he was (by report) The vulnerarie Physician or
Surgeon: wonderful much seeking and running there was after him, and none
more wealthy than he at his first coming. But soon after, when he was known
once to carry a cruel hand over his poor patients, in cutting, M. Cato, a
worthy personage, and in regard of whose virtues and commendable parts, his
triumph and Censorship, as famous and honorable as they were, deserve the least
part of his authority and reputation; so much was there in himself, above the
gifts and graces of Fortune. I will therefore insert in this place, word for
word, an Epistle of his unto his son Marcus, touching this matter, wherein he
thus writes: Concerning these Greckes (son Marcus) I will write in place and
time convenient, what I have found out and known by them in Athens: and
namely, that it were good to look into their books and read them (as it were)
by the way, but in no wise to study upon them much and learn them thoroughly. I
have already given the attempt, and intend to convince and put down the
wickedest race and most perverse and obstinat kind of them. And learn this of
me, as from the mouth of a true Prophet, That whenever this Greekish Nation
shall bring into Rome their Philosophy, they will corrupt and mar all: but
let them send once their Physicians hither, you shall see a greater wrecke and
confusion thereby. For I assure thee, they have complotted and sworn one to
another for to murder all Thatis to say (...) nations but themselves.
Barbarians by means of their Physic. And even to effect and bring this
about, they will be fed also and take money; to the end, that both we should
trust them the rather, and they also have the better means to work the feat
and dispatch folk with more facility. As for us, it pleases them usually to
name us Barbarians; yea, and they give unto us more filthy terms than any
others, and mis-call us Op^ci, were a certain people of Itali^, infamous for
their dishonest life and filthy language. qua^ (...).
Opiques. Well, remember thou once for all, that I have given thee warning of
their Physicians, and forbidden thee to be acquainted with them. Now Cato, who
wrote this letter, died in the six hundred and fifth year after the foundation
of our city, when himself was fourscore years old and five: whereby a man may
see that he wanted not grounded knowledge when he delivered this speech unto
his son; for he had both the practice of former times in public affairs,
and age sufficient of his own to furnish him with experience of private
examples. What say we then to this resolution of his? Are we to judge and
believe that he has condemned thereby a thing so necessary and profitable as
Physic is? God forbid: for himself sets down a little after, what
Physic, and what medicines both he and his wife were acquainted with, and by
means whereof they came to be so aged as they were: and those were no other
(verily) but the use of simples, whereof we now are in hand to treat. He says
moreover and professes, that he has made one Treatise expressly, Aesculapius
as a canonized god into their Calendar, they built one temple * Why the temple
of Aesculapius stood without the city of Rome? See Plutark 94 Questionum
^manorum.
for him without the city of Rome: yea, and the second which in his honor they
erected, was Cato his time. And here by the way, one word will I speak to the
honor of our Romans for their singular wisdom and providence; namely, That
howsoever they are grown to good proof and be accomplished in all other Arts
and Professions of the Greeks, yet their gravity hitherto has bin such, as
they would not give themselves to the practice of this only Science. And
notwithstanding the exceeding wealth that accrueth by Physic, yet very few or
none of our natural Roman citizens have meddled therewith. And those also that
have betaken themselves unto it, presently have forsaken their native language,
and gone to the Greek tongue. For this opinion verily there is of this Art,
That if the Professors thereof handle it in their vulgar delivered to their
capacity; than in others, which they understand never a whit! And hereupon In
this plac^ he casts in the Romans teeth, their L^cticarij, Anagnostae, and
Nomenclatores.
walk (forsooth) with other men's feet. Agno^cimus, (...).
We read, we look by the M. Cato, whom I have opposed as a shield and buckler
against the envy and spite of this ambitious and vainglorious Art: neither
will I give over the protection of that honorable Senate which has judged no
less: and that without catching advantage of the sinful pranks and lewd parts
which are committed and practiced under the pretense of this art, as some man
happily would look that I should set them abroad: for to Eudemus with Livia the
Princess, and wife to Drusus Caesar: Valens likewise with the Queen or
Empress above named, Messalina. But say that these crimes and odious offenses
are not to be imputed unto the Art it self, but rather to be charged upon the
persons, I mean the corrupt and lewd professors thereof: yet surely I am of
this belief, that in regard of these enormities, Cato was as much afraid of
the entrance of Physic, as of some Queen into the city of Rome. For mine
own part, I mean not to say ought of their extreme avarice; of the merchandise,
spoil, and havoc that they make when they see their patients in danger of
death, and drawing to their sum of money. As for example, that a ^ataract or
pearl in the eye is to be couched rather Charmis the abouenamed Physician that
came from Marsiles, bargainedwith one patient that he had, to have 200,000
Sesterces for his cure, and yet he was but a flranger and a provincial
inhabitant. Also as well known it is, that Claudius Caesar upon a condemnation
and judgment, took at one time by way of confiscation, one hundred thousand
sesterces from one Alcontes, who was no better than a Surgeon or
Wound-healer: who being confined into Cato never thought of these drugs and
mixture^, ^or foresaw these corruptions by them occasioned, when he blamed so
much and condemned this art of Physic. Yet see what account there is made of a
composition called i. Treacle.
Theriace, devised only for excess and superfluity: composed it is of diverse
ingredients far fetched and dear bought: whereas Nature has bestowed upon us
and presented to oureies so many wholesome simples, quid pro quo, and Sanguis
Draconis. Sangdragon Lachryma species, a kind of gum.
Cinnabaris, Metallicum, a mineral Vermilion.
Minium; which is no better than a very poison, as I will prove and show
hereafter in my Treatise of Painters colors: which error proceeds only from
this, that they are not well seen in Grammar, nor in the proper signification of
words. But these and such like errors touch and concern the health of every
one in particular. As for those abuses in the art of Physic, which Cato
feared, foresaw, and would have prevented, they be such as are nothing so
hurtful and dangerous as the rest, and indeed small matters in the opinion of
man: and such as the principal Professors and Masters of this Art do auow and
confess among themselves. Howbeit, even those devises, as harmless as they
seem to be, have been the overthrow of all virtue and good manners in our
Roman State, I mean those things which we do and suffer in our health: our
exercise of wrestling, our greasing and anointing with oil himself feebler
than before he went in: and as for those who have bin more obseruant of their
Cato was a true prophet indeed, and his oracle is verified and fulfilled every
day, when he said, That it was sufficient Virgil Lucifugis congesta cubilia
blattis.
blind beetles also delighting in darkness, and their nests wherein they keep;
of which he wrote, notwithstanding he was not urged theretovpon necessity.
Neither did Homer think it improper, to Iliados (...).
mingle the description of a shrewd and unhappy fly, even with the heroicke
battles of the gods: ne yet dame Nature, who has brought forth and made man,
thought it any disparagement to her majesty for to engender also these silly
and small creatures. And therefore let every man consider their virtues,
properties, and effects, and not regard so much themselves. To come then to
those things that are most common and known, begin I will at sheeps wool, and
birds eggs, to the end that by that means due honor may be yielded to the
chief and principal of all others, as it does appertain. Howbeit, I must of
necessity speak of some other things by the way as occasion shall

CHAP. II.
The virtues and properties of Wool.

THe ancient Romans attributed unto Wool great authority, and had therein a
certain religious honey mingled together, it will cause the breath to be the
sweeter: a suffumigation or perfume Vis ejus smectica est, out of Dios. not
septica, as is commonly read: for how can it be corrosiue if it bite not at all.
scourer and cleanser this is, and therefore most effectual to mundifie the
eyelids. Moreover, the very filthy excrements of sheep, and the sweat sticking
to the wool of their flanks, between their legs and the concauities thereabout
(which they call Oesypum) is thought to have Siccatur, or rather Saccatuu. i.
streine it through a linen bag.
it dry in a linen cloth, expose it to the heat the working look whitish like
unto cruse or white lead: a sovereign thing it is for the inflammation of the
eyes: for the hard callosities also that grow upon the eyelids. Some there be
who *Doloribus c^cis.
which happen unto the privy parts. In sum, of such virtue is wool, that
there is no cataplasme, pultesse, or plaster, in manner applied to a grieved
place, but the same has wool laid over it. The same also has a singular
virtue above all things, to recover the appetite of meat in the very sheep that
bear it, in case they have lost their stomachs and feed not: for pluck the
wool that grows to their tails, and therewith tie the same as hard as is
possible, you shall see them presently fall to their meat: But it is said
withal, that the rest of the tail which is underneath

CHAP. XIII.
The nature and properties medicinable of Eggs.

GReat society and affinity there is between wool and eggs; in this regard,
That if they be applied both together in a frontall to the forehead, they
repress all violent flnxes and rheums falling into the eyes: but you need not
take for this purpose any wool that has bin dressed or cleansed with the
Radicula, called before Struthium.
Fullers scouring weed: neither is it required, that in this case there should
be used any more but the white of an egg, and the same ought to be infused or
spread upon the foresaid wool, with the powder of Frankincense: and in very
truth, the white of an egg alone, if it Anthonies fire, if there be leaves of
beets laid upon the place and kept bound thereto. The white of an egg
incorporat with salhormoniacke finely puluerized, does extend and turn
backward, the hairs of the eielids which grow inward into the eyes: the same
with pine nut-kernels, and a little honey mingled withal, and so reduced into a
liniment, takes away the Anthonies fire, the white of an eg beaten together
with Amydum or starchfloure, is right soueraign. It is said moreover, that the
white of an egg is very good to conglutinat or sowder any wound, yea and two
expel the stone and gravel out of the body,

The yelke of an egg sodden until it be hard, and tempred with a little
saffron, with honey also Which name it has for that it causes flux of blood at
sundry parts.
Haemorrhois, let him both sup off the yelke of an egg raw or soft, and apply
it also to the wounded place. It helps

Take the eggs from under the hen when they be full of chicken, a little before
they spring and Dalechampius would have the same eggs to be dried and reduced
into powder, etc.
a feeble and weak stomach; with this caution, That the patient have eat
nothing in two hours before. And so me do advise for the dysentery or bloody
flix, to give the said chickins sodden egg and all together, putting thereto one
hemine of austere or sharp wine, and an equal quantity of oil and parched
barley groats dry. The fine pellicle or skin that is within the egg-shell,
being taken from it (whether the egg be raw or sodden it skilleth not) heals
the chaps that are in the lips, if it be applied thereto. The ashes of an
egg-shell drunk in wine, stops the issue of blood gushing out at any part:
but the same ought to be burnt, or calcined without the pellicle or skin
aforesaid; and so it makes an excellent dentifrice also to cleanse and scour
the teeth white: a liniment made with the said ashes and myrrh together,
stays the super fluous and bend one way more than another. Eggs entire and all
whole as they be [i. white, yelke, shell [i. Sow-bread] it heals the running
skalls of the head: for those that reach up purulent matter out of the chest,
or spit blood, it is good to sup off a raw egg together with the juice of unset
leeks, and an equal quantity of Greekish wine; but first all must be warmed,
before that it be given to the patient. Against a cough, they ordain eggs
sodden and stamped together with honey, and so to eat them; or else to sup them
off raw, with wine cuit and oil, of each a like quantity. If a man have any
sore or ulcer in his secret parts serving for generation, it were very good to
inject one egg tempered with three cyaths of wine cuit, and half an ounce of
Amylum or starch-floure, presently upon i. about two grains.
two sixty parts of a Roman denier, and one sixty part of Sumach, which I
called Rus, and five oboli weight of honey; with this charge, That they be all
boiled together; and that the patient eat no other meat whatsoever for the
space of four hours after. Many there be, who to cure and ease the wringing
gripes and torments of the belly, taks two eggs and four cloves of Garlic,
which they pun and stamp together; then they heat yield from their mouths, and
the humor that comes from their bodies, there is engendered Claudius Caesar
commanded a man of arms and gentleman of Rome, descended from the Vocantians,
to be killed for no other reason in the whole world, but because he carried one
of these eggs in his bosom, at what time as he pleaded his cause before him in
the court. This winding and mutual enfolding of these serpents one within
another, putting me in mind of one thing worth the observation, That it was not
for naught that foreign nations have ordained, that their Ambassadors who had
commission to treat of peace, should carry with them a certain rod or mace
wherein were pourtraied serpents winding and clasping round about it; to
signify and

As touching geese and their eggs, how good and profitable they are, before I
enter into any discourse (for my purpose is to treat of them also in this very
book) I cannot choose but for the honor due unto the Comagenes, in regard of
an excellent composition by them made, write first of it, being of them called
Comagenum: for that also the principal and best of that kind was most used and
in greatest request in Comagene: which is a region belonging unto Syria. It
consists of goose grease, cinnamon, casia or canelle, white pepper, and an
herb called likewise (...), so called, because they be good against lassitude
or weariness.
A copa: in such sort, as that it serves not only for an outward ointment, but
also for an inward medicine. This Comagenum is made in Syria after another
manner, namely of the fat or grease of birds which is cleansed, tried, and
purified, according as I have before said, with an addition of Erysisceptron,
Xylobalsamum, the bark or young shoots of the Date tree, and sweet Calamus, of
each as much as amounts to the weight of the grease aforesaid; and all these
together must be put into wine And that del^ieth much the odoriferous smell.
wax put into it.

Many other good medicines and ointments there be made of Geese, whereat I
marvel as much as at For Goats are said neve to be clear of the ague.
Goats: for it is said, that all Summer long even unto the fall of the leaf,
Geese

CHAP. IIII.
Medicinable receipts taken from dogs, and other beasts which are not tame, but
wild: also from fowls. Remedies against the prick or sting of the venomous
spiders Phalangia.

Upon the foresaid occasion, for the dogs which had the custom of the
Capitol, barked (...), says coel. Rho. dig cap. 29. lib. 17. i. such as (...)
will not bark and give warning of strangers coming
dogs to forkes, and thus as it were crucified, to hang them alive upon an
Elder tree for examplarie justice: which execution was performed between the
temple of Ieventus and Summanus. But seeing I am thus light upon the mention of
dogs, I must needs discourse of them more at large, and the rather, for that
our ancestors in old time observed many ceremonies about this beast. First and
foremost, the ancient Romans thought the flesh of sucking whelps to be so pure
and fine a meat, that they used to sacrifice and offer them as an expiatorie
oblation to their gods for to appease their indignation. And verily at this day
they make no scruple to sacrifice a young whelpe before it be full a day old,
and especially such an one as the bitch puppied the same morning: yea, and at
the solemn festival suppers ordained for the honor or Adijciales.
Aditiales, it appears plainly by the testimony of Plautus in his Festus
quoteth the place in the Comaedie called Saturio which is not now extant.
Comaedies. Certes, it is generally thought, that for the venom called
Toxicum, there is not a better counterpoyson than dogs blood. It seems also
that this domestical creature taught men first the manner of discharging and
purging the stomach by vomit. In sum, there are a number of other
medicinable virtues in a dog highly commended, whereof I will write as occasion
shall be offered in convenient place. But for this present I will proceed
orderly according to my first intention and purpose.

To return again unto the stinging of serpents, these remedies following are
taken to be effectual,

As touching Weasels, there be two kinds of them: for there be wild sort
different from the rest in bigness, for they be smaller: and those the Greeks
call Which be our Ferrets.
Ictides: their gall is said to be very effectual against the sting of the
Aspis, whereas otherwise it is a very poison it self. As for that kind which
keeps about our houses, wandering here and there in every corner, and Some
take these for our Cats.
uses to carry her kitlings in her mouth to and fro every day, from place to
place and never rests (as mine author Cicero does write) she is an enemy to
serpents and naturally persecuteth them. Their flesh being salted, is given to
the weight of one denier in three cyaths of wine, with great success, unto
those that be stung by serpents: also their maw farced with coriander seed, and
kept in salt or brine, is good for the same purpose if it be drunk in wine.
But the young kitling

Other vile creatures there are besides, which for their baseness I bash to
name and relate in this place; howbeit, because so many authors with one
consent have so constantly commended their medicinable properties, I make it a
matter of conscience to pass them over in silence: considering that all our
medicines proceed from that conuenience and repugnancie which is in

As for the Aspides, look whomsoever they have stung, they die upon it with a
kind of deadly sleepiness and benummednesse in all their lims: and to say a
truth, of all serpents that creep upon the ground, they are most mortal, and
their wounds least curable. Their venom if it enter once so far, that it
come to blood, or do but touch a green wound, there is no remedy but M.
Varro, whom I know to have delivered the same, even when he was At which yers
he would have been ashamed to tell a lie.
fourscore years old and eight: namely, That there is not in the world so
good a thing to cure the bitings of the Aspides, as to give the party who is
wounded thereby, some of their urine to drink.

To come now unto the Basiliske, whom all other serpents do fly from and are
afraid of: albeit A kind of gum, called Sanguis Draconis.
Cinnabaris. Unto it they attribute strange and admirable effects: For
whosoever (say they) carry it about them shall and gracious with princes or
great potentats, yea, and at their hands obtain Saturn.

As for Dragons, they have no venom in them. And if it be true that our
Magicians say, if a Dragons head be laid under the threshold of a door, after
due worship and adoration of the gods, with prayers and supplications unto them
for their favorable grace, that house shall surely be fortunat. The eyes of a
Dragon preserved dry, pulverised and incorporat with honey into a liniment,
cause (by their saying) those who be anointed all over therewith to sleep
securely, without any dread of night-spirits, though otherwise they were
fearful and timorous by nature. Nigidius mine Author affirms, That serpents
after they have stung one, are forced by a certain necessity and instinct of
Nature to return unto the party whom they have hurt. The Scythians yearly use
to slit a viper^ head between the ears for to take forth a little stone, which
she is wont to swallow when she is ^ffrghted. Others make use of the whole head
as it is. Certain trochisks there be, (...). For Theriaci in the primitive and
natural signification is more g^nerall: of (...) or (...), which is any wild
o^ venomous b^st.
Theriaci, yet are they made of vipers flesh only. Some there be, who after a
Viper is the same which gave the wound, applied thereto, will heal it: as
also, that as many as have at

As for Snakes, venomous they are not but at some times of the month, when they
feel themselves moved by the instigation of the Moon: but contrariwise theybe
good for those which chance to be stung by them, if they be taken alive,
stamped, or braied with water, and therewith the affected place fomented.
Certes, they are thought to be medicinable in many respects, as I will
hereafter declare: which is the cause that a Snake is dedicated unto the god of
Physic, Aesculapius. And Democritus verily talks of many strange and
wonderful compositions made of snakes, by means whereof a man may understand
the language of birds, and know what they prattle one to another. But to say no
more, was not Aesculapius brought from Epidaurus to i. water-snakes: but a more
fell and venomous serpent, their lives not upon the face of the earth. Howbeit,
the liver of these water-snakes, if it be kept in salt, or otherwise preserved,
is a sovereign remedy for those that be stung by the same kind.

Now for the spotted Lizard, called Stellions, a Scorpion stamped is singular
good against their poison. For this you must think, that of them there is made
a venomous drink: for let him be strangled or drowned in wine, whosoever
drink thereof shall sind themselves impoysoned,

Of all venomous beasts, there are not any so hurtful and dangerous as are the
Salamanders. had proved true. Sextius affirms, That the body of a Salamander
cleansed from the guts and

Now concerning those birds which yield any help against serpents, the vulture
or Geir deserves to be set in the first rank: but this has bin observed and
found by experience, that the black of this kind are not so powerful as others
in this behalf. It is commonly said, that a perfume made with burning their
feathers, chaseth serpents away. Likewise, it is an opinion generally received,
that whosoever carry about them the heart of this foul, are secured from the
violent assault, not of serpents only, but also of other wild beasts, yea, and
of thieves and robbers by the high way side. The same also assures them to
escape the danger of princes wrath and indignation, Item, It serves very well
to cure long feauers, the trembling also and nummednesse of the lims, it
assuageth the pain of all kinds Hereupo^ peradventure it is that in collices
and Coks broths we use to sees pieces of gold, with an opinion to make them
thereby more restoratiue.
consume it so, as thereupon the said flesh is held to be the poison (as it
were) of gold. Moreover, if you would not have a Cock to crow and chant, put a
wreath or collar of Vine twigs about his neck. But to return again to our
receipts and medicines against serpents: the flesh of young Pigeons newly
hatched, as also of swallows, is very good: so are the feet of a scriche Owl
burnt together Which some take for the less wild Tazell.
Plumbago. But before I write further of this bird, I cannot ouerpasse the
vanity of Magicians which herein appears most evidently: For over and
besides many other monstrous lies which they have devised, they give it out,
That if one do lay the heart of a scrich. Owl on the left pap of a woman as
she liee asleep, she will disclose and utter all the secrets of her heart: also
whosoever carry about them the same heart when they go to fight, shall be more
hardy, and perform their deuoir the better against their enemies. They tell
us moreover, I wot not what tales of their eggs, and namely, that they cure
the accidents and defects befalling to the hair of the head. But I would feign
know of them what man ever found a scrich-Owles nest and met with any of their
eggs, considering that it is holden for an uncouth and strange prodigy to
have seen the bird it self? and what might he be that tried such conclusions
and experiments, counter charm against all sorceries and witchcrafts: and more
particularly, if a Bat be borne

Touching the venomous spider called Yet Matthiolus upon Dioscorides reckons
Tarantula to be a kind of Phalangium, whereof there is great store in Apulia.
Phalangia, they know not in Italy what it is, for all there be many kinds
thereof: for some are like unto Pismires, but that they be far bigger; their
heads be reddish, the rest of their body black, howbeit here and there marked
with white spots. The sting of this spider is more keen and sharp than that
of the wespe. It lives ordinarily about ouens and mils. The best remedy
against the prick of their sting, is to present before the eyes of the patient,
another spider of the same kind: for which purpose folk use to keep them
Cecilius has left in writing) hinder women for conception in case they be knit
within a piece of leather of a red dear skin, and tied to their arms or other
parts of their body before the sunne-rising: but this virtue continues not
above one year. Thus have I showed one receipt only, of all those that called
Alocia
keep women from conceiving; which I may be allowed to do in regard

There is another kind of spiders, which the Greeks call Rhagion, for that it
resembles a black grape kernill: these have a very little mouth under their
belly, and as short legs, as if they were imperfect and not fully made. Look
where they bite, the pain that ensues is much like to that which is occasioned
by the sting of a fcorpion: and their urine who are hurt by them, seems to
show to the eye, cobwebs floting aloft. I would say, that this spide^ were the
same that Asterion, another kind of them, but that these have certaineraies or
streakes of white. Their sting or prick causes looseness and feebleness of
the knees. As for the blew spider, which carries a i. Having four claws.
Tetragnatium, there be two sorts thereof: The one, which is the worst of the
twain, has the head divided directly in the midst with a white line; whereas
in the other, the said line or seame runs cross overthwart. These make the
mouths to swell whom they have bitten. But those that be of a dead ash i. water
and vinegre mingled together, the brains of a Cock or Hen with a little
pepper. Also to take in drink five Pismires, is thought to be a siugular
medicine: and withal to make a liniment of sheeps mucke ashes, tempered in
vinegre, and therewith to anoint the grieved place. Moreover, the said spiders
themselves (of any kind whatsoever) resolved and putrified in oil, serve for
the said purpose.

As for the mischeeuous mouse called the Hardishrew, the runnet found in a
lambs maw taken new killed, with some salt, or else the gall of a Bat with
vinegar. The shrew it self being burst,

As touching Scorpions, the lizard named Stellio (by way of a reciprocal
counterchange) is the greatest enemy they have; insomuch as at the very sight
only of the said lizard, they will be And yet Matt^lus upon Diose. says it is
the Terrantola which is common in Tuscan.
it breeds not in Italy: but call it what you will, and whersoeuer it is to be
found, full it is of little red spots like lentils; a shril noise it makes,
that pierces the ears and goes through ones head; it does eat and graze like
other beasts, which be marks all contrary to our Stellions or starre-lizards
here in Italy. But to come again unto the prick of scorpions: it is thought
good to rub the same with the ashes of hens dung, mixed with the liver of a
dragon: or to take a lizard that is bursten, and the same to apply unto the
affected

For the sting of Bees, Wesps, and Hornets; for the biting also of those
Horseleeches called Bloudsuckers, the Howlat is counted a sovereign remedy,
by a certain antipathy in nature: also whosoever carry about them the bill of
a Woodpecker or Hickway, shall never be anoled with any of the foresaid vermin.
The smallest kind of locusts likewise, which are without wings and be called
Attelabi, be adverse and contrary unto them all.

Over and besides the Insects above named, there be in some places certain
pismires also very venomous, which Cicero calls Solpugae: but they of Grenado
in Spain, Salpugae: howbeit few or none of them are to be found throughout all
Italy. But what help is there for them and their

As for the flies named Cantharides, I have showed before how contrary they be
to the venom of the Salamander: and yet considering how hurtful they be
themselves, and a very poison to the bladder, causing intolerable pain if they
be drunk down, much dispute and question there is among physicians, Namely,
whether they are to be used inwardly at all? whether with their wings, head and
feet* or without them.
how they should be taken and used; for how venomous they be, it may appear by
the practice of a certain Egyptian physician, whom by occasion that one
Cossinus a knight of Rome, a great fauorit of the Emperor Nero, was infected
with the foul tettar called Lichene, the said prince sent for out of Egypt to
cure of that disease: but he prepared such a drink of Cantharides for his
patient Cossinus, that it quickly cost him his life and brought him in what
part that venom lies: for some there be who are of opinion, that their feet
are poison,

Of the like force be the worms Pityocampae, breeding in pitch trees: so is
the venomous fly or beetle called Buprestis: and after the same manner be they
prepared as the Cantharides:

All the sort of them in general be most effectual to kill the leprosy, and
ilfauored tettars called Lichenes. Besides, they have the name to provoke
women's monthly terms, and urine; which is the cause that Hippocrates
prescribed them to be used in a dropsy. To conclude with these Cantharides, I
think it not amiss to note, That Cato syrnamed For that he killed himself at
Vtica.
Vticensis, was accused and endited for felling of poison; because in the
general portsale of the kings goods, amongst other moueables, he held
Cantharides at threescore sesterces a pound, and made so much money of them.

CHAP. V.
Of the Ostrich grease, and of a mad Dog: of Lizards, Geese, Doves, and

I Cannot choose but relate also by the way, upon this occasion ministered, that
at the same time Ostrich grease was sold for Some read thirty.
eighty Sesterces the pound: and in truth it is much better for any use it
shall be put unto, than goose grease.

As touching diverse sorts of venomous honey I have written already: but for to
repress the poison thereof, it is good to use other honey wherein a number of
bees have been forced to die: and such honey so prepared and taken in wine, is a
soueraign remedy for all those accidents that may come by eating or surfeiting
upon fish.

For the biting of a mad dog take the ashes of a dogs head burnt, and apply it
to the sore, it about him a weazils tail, which has been let go again
after it was cut away. There is to be For the manner of a dog is to be angry
with the stone that is thrown at him, without regard of the party that flung
it: whereupon grew the Proverb in Greek. (...).
dog has taken up with his mouth and bitten, will cause debate and dissension
in the company where it is: and yet this is held for a certain truth, insomuch
as it is grown into a common proverb and byword, when we perceive those that
dwell in one house together to be evermore jarring and at variance one with
another, to say, You have a dogbitten stone here among you. Again, whosoever
makes water in the same place where a dog has newly pissed, so as both vrines
be mingled together, shall immediately find a coldness and astonishment in his
loins, as folk say.

That kind of Lizard, which of some Greeks is called Seps, of others
Chalidicum, has a venomous tooth: howbeit, the same worm or serpent taken in
drink, cures the bit which it self inflicted.

If wild Weazils have empoisoned any body, let the patient take a large
draught of the broth of an old Cock, he shall find it to be a very
sovereign remedy therefore: but above all, it is most effectual against the
poison of the herb Aconitum; but then it must be given with a little salt among.

Against the poison of venomous Tadstoles and hurtful Mushromes, hens doung (I
mean that part alone which is white) sodden with In hysopo decoctu^, aut
mulso: some read, cu^ oesypo d^ctum in mulso: i. Boiled with tried grease of
sheeps wool, in honied wine.
Hyssope or honied wine, is singular good, for it represseth and kills the
malice thereof. And the same otherwise keeps down ventosities and stuffing
of the stomach, ready to choke one. Whereat I cannot choose but marvel much,
considering that if any other living creatures do taste never so little of the
said dung (but man or woman only) they shall be exceedingly vexed with wind
in the belly, and other grievous

The Sea-hare is known to be venomous; but goose blood taken with an equal
quantity of oil is a soueraign counterpoison for it. Of this blood, incorporat
with the best Terra Sigillata of the Island Lemnos, and the juice of the S.
Mary thistle called Bedegnar, there be excellent trochischs made weighing five
drams apeece, which are usually kept in a readiness for to be drunk in three
cyaths of water as a counterpoison and countercharme, against all venomous

CHAP. VI.
Medicines to bring hair again in places that by some disease are bald: also
to rid away nits: for to rectify and keep in order the Eyelids, and the
hair growing thereupon: for to cure the pearl in the Eye: and generally for
all the accidents befalling to the Eyes: lastly, for the impostumat kernels
behind the ears.

THe naked places in head or beard, are replenished again with hair by a
liniment made of Varro affirms moreover, That the dung of mice (which he by a
proper name calls The Latins in o^d time after the same analogy called the
dung of swine, Sucerda, of kine and oxen, Bucerda, like as the ordure of men,
Homerda
Muscerda) is a convenient medicine for the said infirmity and defect: he
attributes also the same operation to the heads of flies applied fresh to the
bald place, if so be the same were before rubbed hard, and in some sort fretted
with a figtree leaf. Some use in this case the blood of flies: others mingle
their ashes with the ashes of paper used in old time, or else of nuts; with this
proportion, that there be a third part only of the ashes of flies to the rest,
and herewith for 10 days together rub the bare places where the hair is gone.
Some there be again, who temper and incorporat together This Idol of the
Panims, I take to be called in the holy Scripture, Beel-zebub.
Myiodes, but a man shall see (a wonderful thing to tell) infinite thousands of
flies depart out of that territory by flights, as it were thick clouds. But to
come again to the foresaid infirmity of haire-shedding: the ashes of the heads,
tails, yea and the whole bodies of nice burnt, are very good to make it come
again; especially if the hair went off by occasion of some venomous matter or
poison: so are the ashes of an vrchin or hedgehog meddled with honey: or the skin
thereof burnt and applied with tar. As for to anoint the place once a month,
and no oftener. The ashes of vipers skins does raise hair

The head many times is pestered with nits; but for to rid them away, there is
not a better thing than dogs grease. Some for this purpose make a dish of meat
with snakes, dressing and ordering them as eels and so eat them; or else they
take their slough which they slip off in the spring time, and drink the same.

Otherwhiles there be certain branny scales called dandruffe, which
ouer-spread the head: to cleanse it from this scurfe and deformity, it were not
amiss to anoint the head with sheeps gal tempered with fullers Creta cimol^
Tuckers earth.
scouring clay, and let it remain on the head until it be dry.

For the painful headache, it is commonly thought, that the heads of naked
snails (I mean those that be found without shells, and are imperfect yet and
not fully made) plucked from their bodies are a singular remedy to be hung
about the neck or tied to the head; with this charge, that there be taken forth
of their heads first, a certain stony hard substance, which is made flat and
broad like a thin gravel stone: and if the said snails be but young and small,
they use to stamp them, and in manner of a frontall apply them to the forehead.
In like manner, the bones of a Vultures head, whether it be the common Geire,
or that which the Greeks call Aegypios, hanged (...) constrinarunt sanguine
fisti^ Either when the ba^ber would step the or fice of a vain after blood
letting: or fice one that is newly wounded, comes fresh bleeding to be
dressed: or if his own rasor chance ^o go aw^y and shave to the quick, whiles
he has a (...) under his ^and to trim.
of wounds in a Barbers shop. But say that the blood gush out of the head, and
from the brain, what is to be done in that case? Surely there is not a better
thing to stay the flux thereof, than to instill and drop thereupon the blood of
a goose or ducke, with the grease of the said fouls, sodden together with the
oil of Roses. And to return once again to the cure of the headache: Take
dogs hair down to a bend or piece of cloth, and fasten the same close to the
said forehead.

Let us come lower to the eielids: it is said, that if one do eat the brains of
a crow with meat, it will make the hair there to grow: so does the tried
grease of sweatie wool called Oesypum, if the edges or brims of the eielids be
anointed with it and myrrh hot, with a fine pensill. Many promise the same
effect, if there be taken the ashes of flies and mice dung, of each an equal
portion; so as they both together amount to the weight of half a dram or
denier Roman; adding thereto of Stibi or Antimonium i. One whole scriptule or
scruple.
two six parts of a denier; so as they be all incorporat with Oesypum
aforesaid, and therewith the eielids be anointed. Likewise young mice are
employed to the same purpose, being braied in a mortar with old wine to the
consistence of those medicines which be called Acopa, and prepared to dissolve
lassitudes. If any hairs grow in the eie-lids untowardly and be offensive to
the eyes, or otherwise, pluck them forth, and anoint the

To come nearer to the very eyes: the fiery red spots or pearls appearing in
the chrystalline humor, which the Greeks call Glaucomata, may be cured (as our
Magitians say) with the brains of a young whelp or puppie that is but 7 days
old; so as the Chyrurgian with his probe or instrument, do convey the same
gainly on the right side, if the right eye be amiss; and contrariwise
Apollonius Pitanaeus was of opinion, that for to cure the cataract in the eye,
the gall of a dog was better than that of the Hyaena, so that it were applied
thereto with honey: and he was persuaded, that the same would take away the
white spots or pearls of the eye, called Albugines. It is a general speech,
that to clarify and quicken the eiesight that is dim and ouercast with a mist
or cloud, a collyrie or eiesalue made with the ashes of mice heads and their
tails, mixed with honey, is a singular medicine: but the same would be much
better in case the said salve were made up with the ashes of heads and tails
both, of dormice, or the wild field mice: or at leastwise with the brains or
gall of an Aegle. The grease and ashes of a rat burnt Sicet solatis prosunt.
This scorching and roughness of the skin or face, is called by Physicians
Ephelis.
blasted and blistered with sun-burning. Moreover, there is not of all others a
better medicine to clear the eye and to rid away all thick filmes and mists
that trouble the sight, than to burn the said lizards and swallows alive, and
with an eie-salue made of their ashes and honey of Candy, to anoint them. The
As one would say, made of a viper.
Echion. Moreover, There is a collyrie or special eie-salue made of a viper
suffered to putrify in a pot of earth, so as the grubs or worms that come of
the said carrion be stamped and incorporat in Saffron. Some burn a viper with
salt in an earthen pot; and they are of opinion, that whosoever do lick the
same salt, or let it melt at the tongues end, it clarifieth the eyes: and that
they Stomachi totiusque corporis temperiem, serusque aetates, ex Diosc. (...)
keep the stomach and all the body besides in good temper, yea, and live long
by that means. They use to give also of this salt unto sheep when they are
not well at ease, and it is thought to be very wholesome for their health: yea,
and it enters into many antidotes and counterpoisons devised against the
venom of serpents. Some there be who use to eat vipers ordinarily at their
table, for to preserve their eiesight. But for meat they prepare and order them
in this Haliartos, i. the sea Aegle or Orfray.
Eagle (which I said heretofore, to prove and try her young birds, uses to
force them for to look directly upon the Sun) Hyssope, unless we read
Oesype, which is the tried grease of unwashed wool.
Hyssope and Honey. The gall of a Partridge mixed with honey, of each a like
weight, mightily clears the eiesight: so does the gal of a fallow Dear
applied simply alone, without any mixture or addition at all. But these galls
ought to be kept in a silver box, say they who ground upon the authority of
Hippocrates for their warrant. Partridge eggs sodden with honey in a brazen pan
or posnet, pinion, because that blood is hotter, and therefore by so much the
better. But when the eyes be Because they be found in the fish called Cinaedi.
Cinaedia, (and these are usually applied unto the share for the swelling
glandules and tumors that many times rise there) marking every one of them
respectively by themselves: which being done, they take forth of the pot every
day one; and when the ninth day is come, they let out the Lizard, and then they
keep the said stones thus ordered and prepared, as sovereign remedies to
allay the pain and grief of the eyes. Others get a green Lizard and put out
her eyes, and bestow her in a glass with a bed of earth under her in the
bottom rheumes that have taken to the eyes, but then in any wise the serpent
must be let go alive after that she has lost her eye. As touching those eyes
which be evermore weeping, and do stand full of water continually, the ashes of
the star-lizards head called Stellio, together with Antimonium, helps them
exceeding much. The copweb which the common Spider makes, that uses to catch
flies; but especially that which she has wouen for her nest or hole wherein
she lies her self, is sovereign good for the flux of humors into the eyes,
if the same be applied all over the forehead, so as it meet with the temples on
both sides: but wot you what, none must have the doing hereof, either to get
the said copwebs, or to lay it unto the follow thereupon. Furthermore, it is
said, That these white spiders with the long and slender

As concerning the ears and the infirmities incident un them, there is not a
better thing to Pliuy confounds Oniscos (which we call a Sow or Wood-louse)
with the Cater pillar or woolbead Millepeda.
Oniscos, others Tylos: these Indeed our Sows or woodlice, called otherwise
Porcelliones, and Multipedae, but not Millepedae, and which if one touch them,
draw themselves round, are good for the pain of the ears: but not the foresaid
Wool beads or Caterpillars Mill^pedae, which in their creeping rise and fall,
etc.
worms (I say) are very effectual to assuage the pain of the ears, if they be
sodden with the juice of Porret in the rind of a pomgranat: some put therro
oil of Roses, and give advise to pour this medicine into the contrary ear
that is not pained. As for that worm or vermin which rises not and broad
snailes brought into the form of a liniment with honey, and laid too
accordingly. Nigidius attributes many properties which Pliny takes for a kind
of Scarabaeus or Beetle.
Blatta, when the head is plucked off, which if it be punned and mixed with
oil of Roses, is (as they say) wonderful good for the ears: but the wool
wherein this medicine is inwrapped, and which is put into the ears, must not
long tarry there, but within a little while be drawn forth again; for the
said fat will very soon get life and prove a g^ub or little worm. Some writers
there be who affirm, That two or three of these flies called Blattae sodden in
oil, make a sovereign medicine to cure the ears: and that if they be stamped
and spread upon a linen rag and so applied, they will heal the ears, if they
be hurt by any bruise or contusion: Certes this is but a nastie and ill
favored vermin, howbeit in regard of the manifold and admirable properties
which naturally it has, as also of the industry of our Ancestors in searching
out the nature of Musa and Pycton two famous Physicians, being bruised (after
their heads were gone) and applied to a body infected with the leprosy, cured
the same perfectly. They of a third kind, besides that they be otherwise ill
favored enough, carry a loathsome and odious smell with them: they are sharp
rumped and pin buttockt also: howbeit, being incorporate with the oil of pitch
called Pisselaeon, they have healed those ulcers which were thought, Nunquam
sana, and incurable. Also Diodorus a renowned Physician, reports, That he
has given these four flies inwardly with rosin and honey, for the jaundise,
and to those that were so strait winded that they could not draw their breath
but sitting upright. See what liberty and power over us these Physicians have,
who to practice and try conclusions upon our bodies, may exhibit unto their
Patients what they list, be it never so homely, so it go under the name of a
medicine. Howbeit, some of the more civil sort, and who Orthopnoici: Such as
cannot take their wind but sitting upright.
Orthopnoicke and Rheumaticke. Certes it is well known and confessed, that a
liniment made of them will draw forth pricks,

THE THIRTIETH BOOK
WRITTEN BY C. PLINIVS SECVNDVS.
The Proem.
CHAP. I.
The original and beginning of Art Magic. When it first began, and who were
the Inventors of it. By whom it was practiced and advanced. Also other Receipts
or medicines drawn from Beasts.

THe folly and vanity of Art Magic I have oftentimes already taxed and
confuted sufficiently in my former books, when and wheresoever just occasion
and fit opportunity was offered; and still my purpose and intention is to
discover and lay open the abuse thereof in some few points behind. And yet I
must needs say given to hearken after, on goes the habit also and cloak of
religion: a point I may tell you that K. of the Bactrians, which some take to be
Abraham.
Zoroastres, as all writers in one accord agree. But whether there was but that
one Zoroastres, or more afterward of that name, it is not yet so certainly
resolved upon by all Aurhors: for Eudoxus (who held art Magic to be of all
professions philosophical and learned disciplines, the most excellent and
profitable science) has recorded, that this Zoroastres, to whom is ascribed
the invention thereof, lived and flourished It seems that in thy calculation of
years, Pliny mistakes the number: for Plutarch says he lived 600 years
before the Trojan war, or else that he means Lunares eanos.
6000 years before the death of Plato. And of his mind is Aristotle also.
Howbeit Hermippus, whowrot of that art most exquisitely, and commented upon the
Poem of Zoroastres, containing Vicies centu^, millia versum, i. two millions
of verses.
a hundred thousand verses twenty times told, of his making; and made Hermippus
(I say) reports, That one Azonaces taught Zoroastres Art Magic; which master
of his lived 5000 years before the war of Troy. Certes I cannot choose but
marvel much, first, That this Science and the memorial thereof should so long
continue, and the Commentaries treating of it not miscary and be lost all the
while, during such a world of years: considering besides, that neither it was
ordinarily practiced and continued by tradition from age to age; nor the
successors in that faculty were professors of the greatest name, and renowned
by any writings. For what one is there think you among so many thousands, that
has any knowledge, so much as by bare hearsay, of those who are named for
the only Magitians in their time, to wit, Apuscorus and Zaratus Medians,
Marmaridius of Babylon, Hippocus the Arabian, and Zarmocenidas of Assyria. For
books Homer the Poet in his Ilias (a poem composed purposedly of the Trojan
war) has not so much as one word of Magic; and yet in his Odyssaea, where he
discourses of the adventures, travels, and fortunes of prince Ulysses, such a
do and stir there is with it, as if the whole work consisted of nothing else
but magic. For what is meant by the variable transformations of Diodorus
Siculus says that this was merely a fiction, arising herupon, That Proteus
being a king of Egypt, according to the custom of the Egiptian kings for
greater majesty and state, showed himself abroad adorned with the ensigns,
representing a Bull, Dragon, Lion, tree, fire, and such like: altering
eftsoons those ornaments, which contained some hierogliphycall mysteries
appropriat to the person of a King.
Proteus, or by the songs of the Three daughters of Achelous and Calliope whose
names were Parthenope, Ligia, and Leucosia, reputed witches, and able to do
great matters by charms.
Meremaids, whereof he writes so much; but that the one was a great sorcerer,
the other famous witches or Inchantresses. As for that which he relates of
lady Circe, how she wrought her feats by conjuration only, and raising up
infernal spirits; surely it sauoreth of art Magic and nothing else. I muse^
much also, that after Homers time there is no writer makes mention how this
art arrived For properly the Magi were the wise men of Persia, and yet at Rome
they usually termed Magitians by the name of Thessalians.
that country, and retained the same a long time, notwithstanding that the
word Magic indeed was appropriate unto a strange and far remote Nation. And
verily, considering how about the time of the war and destruction of Troy,
there was no other physic in use but that which Chiron the Surgeon practiced,
and that during the heat and bloody wars only; it seems very strange and
wonderful to me, That the nation of Thessaly, and the native country of
Achilles [and Chiron] should become so famous for magic: insomuch as Menander
also (a Poet by all men's judgment so framed by have thought that Orpheus soon
after and in the age next ensuing, had brought in first these superstitious
Osthanes, who accompanied Xerxes K. of the Persians, in that voyage and
expedition which (in warlike manner) he made into Greece: and to say a truth,
he it was that sowed the seeds of this monstrous Art, and infected therewith by
the way, all parts of the world wheresoever he went and came. Howbeit, those
Authors, and historiographers who have searched more nearly into the matter,
set down another Zoroastres, born in the Isle Proconnesus, who wrote somewhat
before Osthanes, of that argument: nevertheless, Osthanes was the man, who
most of all other set the Greek nations not only in a hot desire, but also in
a madding fit and enraged as it were after Magic. And yet I must needs say
that I have observed, that not only at first, but also from time to time, the
grea test name that went of learned men and great philosophers, for their
singular skill and profound knowledge, arose from the opinion that was of their
insight in this Science. Certain it is, that Pythagoras, Empedocles,
Democritus, and Plato, were so far in lou^e therewith, that for to attain the
knowledge thereof, they undertook many voiages and journies over sea and land,
as exiled and banished persons, wandering from place to place, more like
travelers than students; and being returned again into their own countries,
this Art they blazed abroad and highly praised; this they held as a secret and
divine mystery. As for Democritus, he raised a great name of Apollonices
Captidenes, and Dardanus of Phoenicia, as well by the Books of Dardanus his
master (which he fetched from out of his sepulcher where they were bestowed) as
also by publishing commentaries of his own, which were extracts and draughts
out of those authors and their writings; which afterward, received and learned
by others, so passed from hand to hand, and were so deeply engraven and
imprinted in the minds and memories of men, that I assure you I wonder at
nothing in the world so much; for so full they are of lies, and so little or no
truth, godliness, and honesty is contained in them, that men of judgment and
understanding who approve and esteem his other Books of Philosophy, will not
believe that these works were of Democritus his making: howbeit, this is but a
vain conceit and persuasion of theirs; for well it is known and confessed,
that Democritus led away an infinite number of people by this means, and no man
so much; Hippocrates professed the one, and Democritus for his part published
the other. Now there is another faction (as it were) of Magitians, which took
the first foundation from Moses, It should seem that these were the Magicians
of Pharao; of whom S. Paul 2. Tim. 3. chap. makes mention, who would have
counterfeited the miracles wrought by Moses: where note, that Pliny, ignorant
in the holy Scriptures, and void of true religion, rangeth Moses the prophet
and faithful servant of almighty God, with such sorcerers and enchaunters. For
the Painims, wanting the light of the gospel, attributed all effects and
operations above nature, to Magic: and were not able to distinguish between
miracles done by the finger of God or his ministers, and the illusions
practiced by the devil and his lims.
Iamnes, and Iotapes, Jews; but many thousands of years after Zoroastres: and
yet the Some interpret this to be meant of Christianity, which was received
with the first in Cypros by the preaching o^ the Gospel, and a^ it is thought,
by S. Barnabas: for that during the infanci^ of the primitive Church, many
miracles were wrought by the Apostles and Disciples of our Savior Jesus
Christ, the heathen hold that Religion of Christians to be a kind of Magic.
Other understand this place of the Priest of Cyprian Venus called Cynar^ans.
Cyprian Magic is later than so by as many years. But to come again unto our
Magic abouesaid: there was a second Osthanes in the days of K. Alexander the
Great, who (by reason that he attended upon him in his train, during his
journies and voiages that he made) was himself in great reputation abroad, and
Cn. Cornelius Lepidus and P. Licinius Crassus were Consuls) there passed a
decree and act of the Senate, forbidding expressly the killing of mankind for
sacrifice: whereby we may evidently see, that until this inhibition or
Tiberius Caesar, that their Druidae (the Priests and Wisemen of France) were by
his authority put down, together with all the pack of such Physicians,
prophets, and wizards. But what should I discourse As it appears by our old
English Chronicles, which write o^ K. Arthur, the knights of the round table,
and Merlia the prophet or magitian.
them. See how this Art and the practice thereof is spread over the face of the
whole earth! and how No doubt he means England, Scotland, and Ireland, which
seemed to be seperat from the rest of the world; where, in old time Magic
bare a great sway, and witches still swarm too much.
those nations were conformable enough to the rest of the world in giving
entertainment thereto, who in all other respects are far different and divided
from them, yea and in manner altogether unknown to them. In which regard, the
benefit is inestimable that the world has received by the great providence of
our Romans, who have abolished these

CHAP. II.
The sundry kinds of Magic. The execrable acts of Nero: and the detestation
of Magitians.

Magic may be practiced after diverse sorts, according as Osthanes has set
down in writing: for it works by the means of Hydromantia.
Water, Spharomantia.
Globes or Balls, Aeromantia.
Air, Astrologia.
Stars, Pyromantia.
Fire-lights, Lecanomantia.
Basins, and Axinomantia.
Axes: yea, and many other means there be, that promise Nero: and yet was he
never more addicted to play upon the cythern, nor took greater pleasure to hear
and sing tragical songs, than to study art Magic: and no marvel if he were
given to such strange courses, having wealth and world at will; and his fortunes
besides attended upon and accompanied with many deep corruptions of the mind.
But amid those manifold vices whereunto he had betaken and sold himself, a
principal desire he had, to have the gods (forsooth) and familiar spirits at
his command; thinking that if he could have attained once to that, he had then
climbed up to the highest point and pitch of magnanimity. Never was there man
that studied harder, and followed Nero rejected it. But would to God he had
conferred with familiars and spirits, yea and taken counsel of all the devils
in hell, for to be resolved of those suspicions which were gotten into his
head, rather than given commission as he did to the professed bawds and common
harlots in stinking stews and brothell houses, for to make inquisition from
house to Nero would so fain have learned: what might be the reason that he
could not reach unto it? Surely these Magitians are not without their shifts
and means of evasion to save the credit of their art, if happily they miss and
come short at any time of their purpose: for otherwhiles they bear us in hand,
that ghosts and spirits will not appear, nor yield any service to those
persons who are Lentiginosis.
freckled and full of pimples: and happily Suetonius i^ Ner^ne: corpora fuit
maculoso and foedo. i. His skin was full of foul spots.
Nero the Emperor was such an one. As for his lims otherwise, he had them all,
and sound they were: besides, the set days and times fit for this practice,
and prescribed by Magitians, he might choose at his good will and pleasure.
Moreover, an easy matter it was for him to meet with sheep, cole black, and
such as had not Tyridates, the K. of Armenia, a great Magitian, to give him
instructions. This prince Tyridates being vanquished and subdued by the Roman
captains under Nero, and forced by their capitulations to present himself
Caesar. And why would not this Tyridates pass the seas and sail over into
Italy, the nearest and most expedit way? Forsooth, so precise he was, that he
made a scruple, and thought it unlawful (as all magicians do) either to spit
into the sea, or otherwise to discharge into it the necessary excrements that
pass from man's body, thereby to pollute and defile that Element. Many other
magicians he brought with him in his train. He instructed Nero in the
principles of Magic, yea and admitted him to their sacred feasts, and solemn
suppers, and all to enter him into that profession: but it would not be: for
albeit Nero enthronized and enstalled Tyridates in his kingdom, Apion (that
great and famous Grammarian) tell strange tales of the herb Cynocephalia,
which the Egyptians call Osyrites, and namely that it has a divine and
heavenly virtue, and was a singular preservative Appion reported in my hearing,
that he has conjured and raised up spirits, to Ad sciscitandum Homerum.
enquire and learn of Homer, what countryman borne he was? and from what
parents descended? mary he durst not report what answer was made again,
either unto him or them.

CHAP. III.
Of Mould-warps: and of many other medicines taken from sundry beasts, which
are in their kind either tame or wild: and the same medicines digested
according to diseases as they orderly follow.

ONe special argument this may be, to prove the folly and vanity of
magicians, because of all other living creatures, they do admire and set
greatest store by these wants or mouls, which Nature seems to have condemned
to perpetual blindness and prison, shutting them up as it were evermore in a
dark dungeon, or keeping them rather under the earth, like as they were buried
and enterred. And yet for all this, these Wise men give more belief to those
signs which they spy in their bowels and entrails when they be opened, than
to the inwards of any beast whatsoever. This opinion moreover they have of a
mould-warpe, that there is not a creature more capable of religion, and fitter
to be employed in sacrifice and divine service, than it: nay they bash not to
avouch and warrant, That whosoever swallows down al whole the heart left side
of his head serves well for this grieuance, if the tooth that is in pain be
scarrified round about therewith. Also a bone growing out of the ridge or chine
of a Dragon, will do as much; Veneris Lab^
Venus Lauer, has a wonderful operation to cure the toothache, if it be put
into the hole of a faulty tooth: and no marvel, for the caterpillars that
breed in coleworts, will presently fall off if they be but touched with this
worm. The punaises also or wall-lice that come from mallows, infused into the
ears with oil rosat, assuage the toothache. The small sandy grit that is found
in the horns of shel-snails, conveyed into an hollow tooth, presently allaies
the pain. The bare shells of

CHAP. IIII.
How to procure a sweet breath. Means to take away the spots that blemish the
fac^:

IT is said, that for to rectify the offense of a strong and stinking breath,
and to make it sweet and pleasant, it is good to rub the teeth with the ashes
of mice burnt, and incorporat with honey. Some there be, who mingle therewith
the root of fennel. If the teeth be pricked or scraped with a vulturs quill,
it will cause the breath to be sour: but to do the same with the quill or
prick of a porkepine, is a singular thing to strengthen the teeth and keep
them fast in the head. As touching the sores in the tongue, or the scabs and
little ulcers breaking out about the lips, a decoction of swallows sodden in
honied wine, heals them: but if the lips be chapped, Si feruentia ^s intus
exusserint: peraduen ture he means the hot sores within the mouth, called
(...).
If one chance to burn his month inwardly with some scalding broth or
otherwise, the milk that a bitch gives is a present remedy therefore.

As touching the spots that infect the skin of the face; the foresaid tried
grease of wool unwashed, called oesypum, incorporat with the honey of the Island
Corsica (which of al other is counted most unpleasant and untoothsome) is
proper to subtiliat and scour them: the same also laid to the face upon a lock
of wool, causes the scurfe or scales whereby the skin seems to pill, for to
fall away: howbeit some think it better to put honey thereto. But say there
appear upon [i. ageire] tempered with the root of white Chamaeleon (I mean the
herb so called) and the rosin of cedar, heales the leprosy, so that this
liniment be covered with colewort leaves. Of the same effect are the feet of
locusts braied in a mortar and incorporat with goats tallow. The grease of a
cock, capon, or hen, well stamped and wrought with an Onion, is singular to
scour the spots and specks of the visage: also the honey wherein a number of
bees were stifled and killed is proper for the said purpose: But above all, the
grease of a swan is commended both for to

As touching the uvula and pain of the throat, they may be both of them eased
and cured Multipeda.
Cheeslip, which if it be bruised or stamped, is good for the said infirmities:
so is pigeons dung gargarised with wine cuit, or applied outwardly with
salnitre and dried figs. If the throat be troubled with hoarsnesse, occasioned
by rheum or catarrhe, Ovid. Note that when I speak of any medicine (for what
malady soever) made of swallows, the young wild ones are always the better and
more effectual in operation: For the martinets or swallows called Apodes,
build not, but lay and breed in chinks and cranies of old walls.
and those you may know easily by the fashion of their nests where they do
build: But if you would have the best indeed, the young ones of that kind which
are called Ripariae, pass all the rest for medicinable uses, for so they are
commonly named which build in the holes of bank sides. Howbeit, some there be
who assure us, that we shall not need to fear that disease for a year
together, if we do but eat any young swallow, it skills not of what kind soever
it be. Now the order of calcining them from their ashes, is to strangle them
first, and so to burn them in their blood within an earthen vessel: and the
ashes thus made, is usually given either wrought in past for bread, or else to
be drunk: and some there be who mingle withal,

As touching the cricks of the nerves or sinews that serve the nape of the
neck; as also for the cramps that draw the head backward, they say, that a
twig or branch of a vine taken out of a puttocks nest, and carried about one
hanging to the neck or arm, is a special remedy for the abouenamed
accidents.

CHAP. V.
Medicines for the Kings evil that is broken and does run: for the pains
lying in the shoulders: as also for the grief of the bowels about the midriffe

THe blood of a weazill is good for the wens called the king evil, when they
be exulcerat and do run: so is the weazill it self sodden in wine and applied;
provided always, that they run not by occasion of any launcing or incision
made by the Chirurgions hand. And it is commonly Item, Take a green Lizard and
bind it to the sore; but after thirty days you must do so with another, and
this will heal them. Some make no more ado but in a little box of silver keep
the heart of a Weazil and wear it about them. If women or maids be troubled
with the kings evil, it were good to make choice of old shel-snailes, and to
stamp them shells and all into a plaster or liniment: but especially such as be
found sticking to the roots of shrubs and bushes. The ashes of the serpent
Aspis calcined, are likewise very good for this disease, if they be incorporat
with bulls tallow, and so applied. Some use snakes grease and oil together: also
a liniment made with the ashes of snakes burnt, tempered either with oil or
wax. Moreover, it is thought that the middle part of a snake, i. Bulls: which
name they took of the little horns that they carry; for otherwise (in color)
they resemble tickes; some term them, Pedunculos terrae, earth lice: These
also work under the ground like wants, and cast up mould, which serves in a
liniment for the Kings evil, and such like swelling, as also for the gout in
the feet, but it must not be washed off in three days space. Howbeit, this is
to be noted, that this medicine must be renewed Of which being raised more and
more, come Maure-hils, corruptly called Moulehils: for Ants were in old English
called Maure^: and Moules never cast up such.
mould which ants do cast up. Others for the Kings evil take just as many mads
or earthworms in number as there be wens gathered and knotted together, and
bind the same fast unto them, letting them to dry upon the place: and they are
persuaded that the said wens will dry away and consume together with them.
There be again who get a Viper about the rising of the Dog star, cut off the
head and tail, as I said before of snakes, and the middle part between they
burn: the ashes that come thereof, they give afterward to be drunk for three
weeks together, every day as much as may be comprehended and taken up at three
fingers ends: and thus they

As touching the pains that lie in the shoulders, there is a proper medicine
made in form a liniment, with the ashes of a Weazill tempered with wax, which
eases the same.

To keep young boys from having any hair growing on their face, that they
may seem always young, it is good to anoint their cheeks and chin with Ants
eggs. Also the merchants smell thereof: but first the hair there growing
ought to be pulled up by the roots.

Now that I am come to speak of the precordiall region of the body, know this,
That by this one word Praecordia, I mean the inwards or entrails in man or
woman, called in Latin The bowels, as heart, liver, lights, etc.
Exta, whenever then there shall be pain felt in these parts or any of them,
apply thereto a young sucking whelpe, and keep it hard huggled to the place,
doubtless the said grief will pass away from the part to the puppie it
self, as men say: and this has been found true by experience in one of those
whelps Prscissoque vivo, not prefusoque vino.
ripped and opened alive, and the said bowels taken forth: for look what part
in man or woman was grieved, the very same was seen infected thereupon, in the
puppie. And such whelps thus used for the curing and taking upon them our
maladies, were wont to be enterred with great reverence and ceremonial
devotion. As touching the pretty little dogs that our dainty dames make so
much of, Because they were brought from the Isle Melita, lying within the
Sclavonian sea
called Melitaei in Latin, if they be ever and anon

CHAP. VI.
Of the diseases incident to the lights and liver. Of those that use to cast
and reach up blood at the mouth.

MIce are very good for the infirmities of the lungs, especially those of
Barbary, if they be first flaied, then sodden in oil and salt, and so given
to the patient for to eat: Thus prepared Happily so named, because they have
little or no horns, quasi (...).
Aceratae, of a broad making, and growing in many and sundry forms; of whose
properties, and how they are to be used, I will write elsewhere in place
convenient. The inner skin of a Hen or Capons gesier, preserved till it be
dry, and reduced into powder, and so put into a cup of drink like spice; the
same also eaten fresh, and newly roasted or broiled, is singular for the
catarrhes that fall into the breast, and for a moist cough. Shel-snails punned
raw and given in a supping with three cyaths of warm so be Ferrets roasted in
manner of little pigs. The worms with many feet called sowes or cheselips, are
very proper for them that draw their wind short; but there must be one and
twenty or Troxallis, according to Aelianus.
Tryxalis; a Latin name it has not found yet, as some do think: and writers
there be not a few, who are of opinion, That it is the same that our Gryllus or
criquet. Call it what you will: let there be twenty of them torrified and drunk
in honied wine, it is reported for to be a singular medicine for those that
cannot take their breath but sitting upright: and for such as spit blood. There
is one writer who ordains to take snailes unwashed, and to pour upon them
either the Mere-gout of the grape that runs ont first without

Touching inward impostumes broken, the honey wherein a number of Bees have bin
drowned to death, has a peculiar virtue to heal them. The lungs of a Vulture
burned to powder in a fire made of Vine-cuttings, given in wine morning and
evening, if the patient be free from the ague; so there be put thereto one
moitie of Pomegranat flowers, and the flowers of Quinces and Lillies as much of
each, is a very soueraign remedy for those that cast up blood out of their
body: but if he be in a fever, the same medicine would be taken in the
decoction of Quinces.

As for the pain of the spleen, if we may believe the receipts and
prescriptions of the Magicians, This I do to cure the spleen: Which done and
said, the same milt of the sheep must be laid up close and hidden within the
wall or behind the seeling of the bed chamber where the sick body lies, and
sealed up with a signet, for fear it should be taken away: with this charge,
that he or she that has the bestowing of it, repeat the foresaid charm nine
times thrice over. If a dogs belly be ripped alive, and the spleen taken
forth, whosoever eats thereof, shall find it very good to ease them of the
said malady. But some content themselves with laying it fresh and warm to the
region of the spleen. Others give the spleen of a young whelpe but two days
old, in squillitick vinegre, to the patient, but they make not the patient
acquainted with the medicine what it is; or else they minister

The heart of the bird called a Vpupa.
Houpe, is highly commended for the pain of the sides. Also the ashes of
shell-snailes boiled in Ptisane or husked Barley water: and some in this case
apply the same otherwhiles in a liniment only without any thing else. The
ashes of a dogs head (I

If the loins be pained, it is said, That the starre-Lizards called Stellions,
coming from beyond sea sodden in wine together with the seed of black Poppie
to the weight of half a denier is very good, so the decoction be drunk:
howbeit, this care must be had, that the head be cut off

To conclude with the Sciatica, the magitians give order to put an earth-worm
in a treene or wooden dish, which having bin cleft, was stitched up again with
iron wier, or bound with a plate or hoope of iron: then to lade up some water
therewith, and in it to wash and rince the said worm

CHAP. VII.
Remedies for the dysenterie or bloody flix. And generally for all diseases of
the belly.

THe decoction of a leg of mutton sodden in water with Line seed, is singular
good for to be supped off to stay a bloody flix. So is old Cheese made of Ews
milk: and sheeps suet sodden Or Affricke.
Barbary. Others think it better to take five of the said snailes of Affricke,
or rather as many of the broad and flat sort, and to clysterize them for the
dysenterie. But if the flux be exceeding vehement, then they put thereto of
Acacia the quantity of a bean. It is said moreover, That the spoil or slough
of a serpent boiled with oil rosat in a vessel of tin, is singular for the
Ulcer of the guts or bloody flix.
Dysenterie and A continual desire to the stool without doing ought.
Tinesme, to be injected by a clyster: Or if it be sodden in any other vessel,
yet with an instrument or pipe of tin it is to be conueighed into the
fundament, that the tiwill thereby may be annoinied. The broth of a Cock
cures these infirmities: but if it be of an old Cock, it is the more
effectual. And yet if the Dolores coeliacorum. Some read Colicorum i. of the
Collicke.
wrings caused by the flux of the stomach. But then this regard must be had
before, That neither the Hen have any corn given her, nor the patient feed
upon any grain some time before. Pigeons dung being burnt, and the ashes taken
in drink, is of great effect and virtue in these cases. The flesh of a Quoist
or Stock-doue sodden in vinegre, is good both for the bloody flix, and also
for the looseness, proceeding from the imbecilitie of the stomach. The Thrush
or Mauis roasted with Myrtle berries, is sovereign for the dysenterie: so is
the Merle or blackbird. In which respect, great account also is made of the
honey boiled, where in bees were killed. [Of all the pains that be, the Which
is the torture or inflammation of the upper small guts.
Iliacke passion is most sharp and grievous to be endured. But it ashes (if
they were burnt and calcined alive) taken in some austere or astringent wine.
The liver

Touching those that have feeble stomachs, and cannot concoct and digest their
meat. It is

To stay a flux of the belly, the blood of Mallards or Drakes is thought also
to be singular good. The meat made of shell-snailes, discusseth and scatters
ventosities. The Milt of a Mutton broiled to ashes and given in wine, is
singular good to allay the wrings and torments of the belly. Of the same
operation is the wild Quoist or Ringdoue, sodden in vinegar and water. The
greater kind of Swallows or Martins called Apodes, are no less powerful, if
they be sodden

As for the Colic, there is nothing so good to assuage the pain thereof, as
to eat Larkes, which the Latins name Galeritae. Howbeit, some give advise and
think it better to burn and calcine them in their feathers within a new
earthen vessel, and so to stamp them to ashes or powder, and to drink thereof
four days together in water by three spoonfuls at a time. Others make

CHAP. VIII.
Medicines against the stone and gravel: the pains of the bladder. The
swellings in the cods and the share. Also for the biles and botches called Pani.

FOr them that are troubled with the stone, it is good to anoint the region of
the belly with Mouse dung. It is said, that the flesh of an Vrchin or Hedgehog
is very good meat and pleasant in taste, if so be he were killed outright in the
head at one blow, before that he had time to shed his own urine upon himself:
and look whosoever eat this flesh, shall never be subject to the disease of
the strangury. The flesh of an Vrchin killed in this sort, helps the bladder,
in

Touching the infirmities incident to the seat, the tried grease of unwashed
wool, (whereunto some add Tutie and oil of Roses) the ashes also of a dogs
head are soueraign medicines: the Aeculapius, and is besides most effectual to
take away werts. The ashes of Mice dung, Swans grease, and the tallow of Ox or
Cow, are helpful for this infirmity. If the tuill or gut Longaon be ralaxed
and hang forth, it is good to anoint the same with the moisture issuing forth
of shel-snails that is pricked through with a pin or needle, for it Repellit;
drives it back again to the right place. If the seat be galled, it is thought
that the ashes of the wood-Mouse tempered with honey, cures the same: or else
the ashes of an Vrchin, together with the brains of a Bat, Alum, and the
grease tried out of unwashed wool, will skin it again. In like manner, Pigeons
dung with honey: for the swelling blind haemorrhoids or also are said to heal
the haemorrhoids that run.

For the pain of the Sciatica, it is thought that raw shell-snailes bruised are
good, if they be taken in Amminean wine and pepper: also a green lizard eaten
as meat, without the feet, garbage, and head: so is the starre-lizard Stellio,
but thereto ought to be put the weight of three oboli of black poppy seed.

For ruptures, inward spasmes and convulsions, it avails much to take sheeps
gal with breast milk. In case the priuities have an itch and a fretting humor
upon them, or if some offensive werts arise in those parts, the dripping or
grauie that comes from a rams lights roasted, does much good, if the place be
therewith anointed. As touching other accidents which happen to those parts,
the wool of a ram calcined and reduced into ashes, even with all the
filthiness that is therein, is thought to be very good, so that the ashes be
applied to the affected place with water. Item, the ashes of a mules houfe: and
the powder of caples teeth braied and puluerized, if the grieved place be
strewed therewith.

To come lower to the infirmities of the cods: the powder of the bones of a
dogs head without any flesh upon it, puluerised, is singular therefore. If it
fall out that one of the genitoirs be relaxed and hang down lower than his
fellow, it is good to anoint the same with the waterish slime and some that
comes from shel-snails; so they say it is an excellent remedy: if there be
any foul and malignant ulcers in those parts running with filthy matter, the
ashes of a dogs Hydrocelicis.
waterish rupture, it is thought that the star-lizards Stilliones be wonderful
good, in case their head, feet, and guts, be taken forth, and the rest of the
body roasted; but the patient had need to eat of this meat often, and so it
helps those who cannot hold their water. The like opinion there is of dogs
grease incorporat Alumi^ schist^.
Alume de plume, if the patient take thereof to the quantity of a bean: as also
the snailes of Barbary burnt, flesh, shell and all, so as the patient drink
their ashes. Furthermore, it is said, that the tongues of three geese roasted
and eaten, is a special remedy for this infirmity: and Anaxilaus is he that
devised this receipt.

Touching the biles called Pani, sheep tallow incorporat with salt
torrifacted, is singular good to break them: but mice dung, with the fine
powder of frankincense and orpiment or red Arsenicke, is as proper to resolve
them: likewise the ashes of a lizard, and the lizard it self split alive and
applied hot thereto. In like manner cheeslips or sows stamped and incorporat
with the right terpentine, to the quantity of a third part, and so brought into
a cataplasme. Some there be who to shell-snailes punned, add the common
bole-armoniack. Also the ashes of the void shells

CHAP. IX.
Receipts for the gouts of feet and hands: and generally for the pains or
diseases of ioints what soever.

THe tried grease of unwashed wool incorporat with woman's milk and white lead,
is a very proper liniment to mitigate the pain of the gout: so is the liquid
dung of sheep when they run out behind. Their lights likewise, or a rams gal
incorporat with their suet. Some split mice

If a man have gotten a rap or rush upon any joint, there is not a better thing
for to cure it than copwebs: some choose for this intention, those which be
wouen by the spiders of ash color: like as to use the ashes of Pigeons dung
with parched barley groats and white wine. In any dislocation of joints, the
most present remedy that is known, is sheep suet tempered with the ashes of
of women's hair burnt. This suet likewise serves well to be applied with
alum to the kibes of the heels: so do the ashes of a dogs head, or of mice
dung. But in case there be any Pur^ vlcera.
ulcer there not yet putrified, add wax thereto, and it will skin up and heal
the same: and the like effect is

As for the corns and agnels which arise about the feet, it is good to besmeare
them with the urine of Muli mulaeue: Some take mulus to be the muleingehdred by
a male ass and a mare: but Mula, to be that mule that comes of an horse and
female ass.
Mule or mulet, together with the mire in the very place where they staled:
also with sheeps dung. The liver or blood of a green lizard applied upon some
flock to the place, or upon a lock of wool. Some use in that order,
earth-wotmes stamped with oil, or the head of the star-lizard Stellio,
incorporat in oil with a like quantity of Agnus Castus. Last of all, others
take Pigeons dung sodden in vinegar, and lay the same to the place.

Touching werts, of what sort soever they be, there is not a more proper thing
to make them fall off, than to bathe them well with the urine, dirt and all, of
a dog where he lately pissed: or to apply thereto a salve of dogs dung ashes
and wax: it is not amiss also to lay to them sheep dung, or to rub them well
with Mice-bloud new killed: or to apply a Mouse split along the mids the cure
must be followed with those appropriat means which I have set down before

CHAP. X.
Medicines appropriate for diverse and sundry diseases which possess the whole
body.

Return we now to the cure of those maladies which are incident not to this or
that member, but to the whole body. First and foremost, the Magitians say, that
the gall of a black dog (a dog I say and not a bitch) is a singular
countercharme and preservative against all sorceries, enchantments, and
poisons, which may endanger a whole house, in case there be a perfume Nigidius
has left in writing, that dogs will not all day long come near unto a man nor
abide to see him, who has plucked a ticke from an hog. But to return unto
our Magitians: they affirm, that such as be lunaticke and beside themselves,
shall come again to their right wits and senses, in case they be sprinkled
with the blood of a moule. They avouch moreover and say, that if one sees the
tongue, eyes, gall, and guts of a Dragon in wine and oil, and permit this
decoction to cool all night abroad in the open air, it is a sovereign
medicine to chase away such bugs, spirits, and goblins, wherewith folk be
haunted and affrighted in the night season, if they be anointed therewith all
over their body, morning and evening. Nicander writes, that whosoever carry
about them the serpent Amphisbaena dead, or no more but the very skin thereof
hanging

They say moreover, that the fat which is fleeted or skimmed from the broth
wherein dormice

As for the falling sickness, the tried grease of sweatie and unwashed wool
tempered with a little myrrh, so that the quantity of them both arise to the
bigness of an hazell nut, cures the same, if it be taken infused and dissolved
in two cyaths of wine, presently after the patient have Stellionatus cri^e^ as
much as cousenage, or conycatching.
Stellio is grown to arm the little stones that be taken out of the craw or
gisier of young swallows: for it is said, that

CHAP. XI.
Against the Iaundise and Frenzy. Against Feauers and the Dropsy.

THe excrement engendered in the ears, called commonly Eare-wax, mightily with
stands the jaundise: so does that ordure also which gathers about the
vdders and tears of sheep and goats, if the patient drink thereof to the
weight of one denier in two cyaths of wine, with some myrrh, though it be never
so little the ashes of a dogs head calcined, taken in honied wine: one of these
sows or Cheeslips with many feet, in one hemine of wine earthworms in honied

As for the Frenzy, it seems that the lights of a mutton, applied hot round
about the head, and so kept fast, is sovereign to bring their heads again
into temper, who are besides themselves. Say that true it were, that not only
the brains of mice given inwater to drink, of the ashes of a weazil, but also
the flesh of an vrchin kept in salt ordried, are very good for such as are
bereft of their right wits; who will venture to give them these medicines, be
they never so certain and assured? For as touching the ashes verily of
Scrich-owls eyes calcined (which these Magitians so highly commend for the
frenzy) I take it to be one amongst many other of their illusions, whereby
they mock and abuse the world. But above all, the course that they take in the
cure of Fevers, sauoreth nothing at all of Physic, which indeed is opposite to
all their rules and place they ordain, that when the Sun is in Gemini, the
combs, the ears, the nails, and claws of

As for quartane agues, forasmuch as it is often seen, that all the physic
that is used about them does little good or none at all, be a Physician never
so Methodical, Rational, and Diligent, yea, though he visits such patients
ordinarily, and be present with them by their bed sides: in that regard I will
not stick to relate many of their medicines and receipts for this disease;
beginning first with those that are local, and outwardly to be applied,
hanged, or worn about any part of Imprimis, they say, that the dust or sand
wherein any hawke or bird of prey has basked or bathed her self, is singular
good for the quartane ague, if the patient wear it in a linen cloth tied with
a red thread. Item, the longest tooth in the head of a cole-black dog, is very
proper for this purpose. There is a kind of bastard wesps, which the Greeks
thereupon call Pseudospheces, and ordinarily they do fly alone, and not in
troops as others do; which, if they be caught with the left hand, and hanged
about the neck under the chin, do cure quartans, as some Magitians say:
howbeit, others attribute this effect to one of these wespes, which a man saw
first the same year. Cut the head of a Viper off, or take out the heart alive,
and wrap the one or the other within a little linen rag, and carry it about
you, the quartane ague will be gone anon, by their saying. Some of them take
only the little pretty snouts end of a mouse, or the very tips of Appion gives
a subtle and curious reason of; for he does collect, that there is some
resemblance between the Happily, because all these beetles be counted of the male
sex, and none of them female: for in those little roundles of earth there breed
grubs, which turn to be in the end beetles.
operations and works of the Sun, and this fly: and this he This beetle he
called before Taurus, i. Bull.
which has little horns turning backward, but they must be gotten likewise
with the left hand, or else they will do no good. As for the third sort,
spotted with white, and called in Latin by the name of Fullo, they appoint one
of them to be slit through in two, and the 2 pieces to be tied to both arms
of the patient; whereas those of other kinds, they bind to the left arm only.
Semblably they say, that the heart of a snake taken out of her body alive with
the left hand, cures the quartan, if the patient carry it about him: as also,
that whosoever takes four of the knots or joints of a scorpions tail,
together with the sting, and carries the same about him inwrapped within a
piece of black cloth, with this charge, That for 3 days space he do not see
either the scorpion which three knots thereof, saying at the knitting of every
knot, that this they do to cure him or her of a Chrysippus the Phylosoper was
of opinion, and so he has put down in writng, That to carry one Phryganium
tied to some part of the body, is excellent for the quartan. Chrysippus was, to
stir up the diligence of others, if happily there be any so industrious as will
take pains to search farther into the thing, and learn what it might be.

In any of these long diseases which be called Chronique, it is commonly
thought, That to eat the flesh of a Crow, and to apply unto their body their
Nid^m. Some read Nitrum.
nest, is most excellent to bring them to an end.

As for Tertian agues, it were an easy matter to try the experiments of such
receipts as are given i. Wolf. Supposed to be our common spider that hunteth
flies.
Lycos, incorporat with rosin and wax, and so appliedas a frontale to the
forehead and temples on both sides of the head, will do any good to rid them
away? Certes, some use to wear about them the spider it self, enclosed within
a quil or piece of a reed: in which sort it is reported to avail much in the
cure of other fevers. Also it is thought, That a green lizard hung about the
neck alive in some box sufficient to receive it, is as effectual. And these
kind of medicines they affirm to be of great efficacy for to drive away those
agues which by way of relapse use often to return again when they were thought
to be clean gone.

Touching the dropsy, the tried grease of sweaty wool taken in wine with a
little Myrrh, so that the whole arise to the quantity of an Hazel nut, is
supposed to be a singular receipt: but some

CHAP. XII.
Medicines for S. Anthonies fire, Carbuncles, fellons, burns, crampes, or
contractions of sinews.

THe suet or grease of unwashed wool incorporat with oil of Roses and Tutie,
is a proper liniment for S. Anthonies fire: so is the blood of a tike, and
earth-wormes reduced into an unguent with vinegar: but especially these
Cricquets, crushed and wrought within ones hand to the consistence of an
unguent and so applied. And this medicine last mentioned, is passing Anthonies
fire, if the body be anointed therewith tempered in water, presently after the
baine.

As for Carbuncles, the means to rid them away, is to anoint them either with
Pigeons dung alone, or else mixed with Lineseed and honied vinegar: likewise, it
is good to make a cataplasme

All tumors and hard swellings, which had need to be mollified, are made soft
and brought down most effectually with Goose grease, or the fat of a Swan.

Moreover it is said, That a spider laid to any fellon, before it be once named
what thing it is eureth the same; but it must not be removed from the place
before the third day. The mouse Medico. i. the fourth or n^ to the little
finger.
ring-finger, and therewith apply them to the fellon. Others use for the said
purpose the filth engendered in sheeps ears: old sheeps tallow mixed with the
ashes that come of women's hair, reduced into a liniment, serves to cure the
said

As for burns and sealdings, the ashes of a dogs head burnt, are singular good
to cure the same: so be the ashes of Dormice tempered with oil; sheeps
treddles also mixed with wax: the ashes of mice and shel snails; and this
medicine will skin them so clean, that there shall no scarre remain
afterward to be seen. In like manner, the grease of Vipers: or the ashes of
Pigeons dung calcined and reduced into a liniment with oil.

Touching the nodosities of the sinews, the ashes of a Vipers head burnt and
brought into an unguent with the oil Cyprinum, is thought to be a soueraign
medicine for the resolve them.

In contractions of the sinews, it is good to eat the flesh of stock-doues,
especially if the same has bin poudered and kept in salt. The flesh likewise
of an Hedgehog is as good for crampes and spasmes: as also the ashes of a
Weazil. The old slough that snakes leave off, infolded within a piece of a Bulls
skin or leather made thereof, is good to be worn tied about one for to prevent
this disease: and more particularly for those spasmes or convulsions that draw
the sinews

When the skin turns up about the roots of the nails, or the excrescence of
the flesh puts the fingers to pain, which accidents be called in Latin
Reduviae, and in Greek Pterygia: it were

If the snailes be ragged and rugged, it is not amiss to apply unto them
Cantharides incorporat with pitch, without reemoouing this plaster before the
third day: or else to lay unto them Locusts fried in Goats suet: sheeps tallow
also is good therefore. Some mix therewith Birdlime made with Misselto and
Purcelane tempered together: others take Verdegris or rust of brass and the
foresaid birdlime, but they remove not the plaster off in three days.

CHAP. XIII.
Receipts for stanching blood: repressing or smiting back the swelling incident
to wounds: healing of ulcers and green wounds: and generally for curing of
many other maladies. Remedies all taken from dumb creatures.

THe suet that comes from the kell of a mutton, stays any flux of blood, if
it be conveyed into the place from whence it issues: so is their read,
especially if it be the rennet of a young Lamb tempered with water, either
drawn up into the nosthrils or poured into them: this is thought to be such a
sovereign remedy, that when all others have failed, it has done

As for Vulnerihus. S^e (...) V^us, i. Ulcers.
wounds, the grease of unwashed wool, incorporat with the ashes of torrified
and calcined Barley and Verdegris, of each a like quantity, and so made into a
plaistre, heals them. The same is a soueraign salve for any corrosiue ulcers,
be they never so malign and cankerous. It Nunquan sana, and will not skin up,
but scorn all healing plasters whatsoever. Much virtue also is attributed
unto Rams lights in these cases; for it eats away all the excrescences of
rank flesh in ulcers, and there is not the like again unto it, for reducing
all unto an equality. The very dung also of sheep heat under an earthen pan
and afterward wrought into a mass or paste, assuageth the tumor of any
ulcers: S^ (...) take it for T^ra Sigill^: but it sk^th not much, ^ng that
(...) S^co, T^ S^ata. and Bolus A^, yea, and Terra ^mnia, little differ in
operation, nisi^e und^m magis and minus, is the le^ned think, Vid E^lium dear
Metallia.
Bole-Arnioniacke. And these medicines abouesaid are singular for those ulcers
that be given to breed worms, and thereby are dangerous. And seeing I am light
upon the mention of worms, it would be noted, that there be diverse sorts of
worms which have wonderful properties in these cases: For first and soon do
souder green wounds: in which operation they are so effectual and speedy
withal, ^ich also is (...) ^pes: ^gles ^d
snails, bruised shells and all, be passing good: and the same incorporat with
Myrrh and Frankincense, have the name to heal sinews that be cut in two:
Moreover, the fat of a Dragon dried (...) the Sun, is very effectual: like as
the brains also of a Cock, to heal green wounds, if the patient withal eat
salt to his meat, which was calcined together with Vipers flesh: and by this
means (they say) that any ulcers will sooner yield to the cure, and be healed
with more speed. The renowned Physician Antonius Musa, having certain Patients
in cure under his hand, who had ulcers that were thought incurable, prescribed
them to eat Vipers flesh; and wonderful it is how soon he healed them clean
by that means.

The ashes of certain Locusts without wings, called by the Greeks Tryxalides,
cause the thick As oil of roses, or red wine
in some astringent liquor:] this manner of cure does souder them lightly in 14
days at the farthest. The ashes also of field-mice work the like effect as
speedily, if the same be tempered with honey, or mingled with the ashes of
earth-wormes: which also is able to draw forth spils of bones, and make them to
work out. The lights of a Mutton and of a Ram especially, reduce skars to
their lively color again, suitable unto the skin about: their tallow also
mixed with sal-nitre: so do the ashes of a green lizard: the slough that
snakes cast off in the Spring boiled in wine: and Pigeons dung tempered with
honey, and so applied. The same medicines do take away the filthy white
Morphew, called in Latin Vitiligo, if they be used with wine: for which
Morphew or infection of the skin, it is good to apply Cantharides, with twice
as much of Rue leaves, which the patient must endure and abide, lying still upon
the place in the Sun, until such time as the skin begin to rise in pimples
and little blisters. Afterward it is go not over deep. For the same morphew,
many give order to make a liniment with flies and the

CHAP. XIIII.
Proper remedies for the cure of women's maladies: and to help them for to go
out their full time, and bring forth the fruit of their wombfully ripe and
accomplished.

THe skin or secundine which an Ewe gleaneth after she has yeaned, and which
inlapped the lamb within her belly, prepared, ordered, and used (as I said
before) as touching goats, it is very good for the infirmities that properly
be incident unto women and occasioned by their natural parts. The dung
likewise of sheep, be they rams, ewes, or weathers, has the same operation.
But to come unto particulars, the infirmity which otherwhiles puts them to
pass their urine with difficulty and by dropmeale, is cured principally by
sitting over a perfume

If women in labor drink milk, it will comfort their loins or small of the
back, Mice dung delaied and dissolved in rain water, is very good to anoint
the breasts of a woman, new laid, to break their kernel, and to allay their
overmuch strutting presently after childbirth. The ashes of hedgehogs
preserves women from abortion or untimely births, if they be anointed with a
liniment made of them and oil incorporat together. The better speed and more
ease shall those women have of deliverance, which in the time of their travel
drink a draught of Goose dung in two cyaths of water: or else the water that
issues out of their own body by the natural parts a little before the child
should be borne, and that out of a weazils bladder. A liniment made of
earth-wormes, if the nouch or chine of the neck and the shoulder blades be
anointed therewith, preserves a woman from the pain of the sinews, which
commonly follows upon childbearing: Grauidis, (...) ^or puerperi^.
newly brought to bed, they drink the same in wine cuit. A cataplasme made of
them simply alone without any other thing, and applied to women's sore breasts
which are impostumat, bring the same to maturation, break them when they are
ripe, draw them after that they run, and in the end heal them up clean and
skin all again. The said earthwormes also if they be drunk in honied wine,
bring down milk i. Floure-de-lis. There be moreover, certain white snailes
that be small and long withal, and these be commonly wandering here and there
in every place. These being dried in the Sun upon tiles, and reduced into
powder, they use to blend with bean flower, of each a like quantity. And this
is thought to be an excellent mixture for to beautify their body, and make the
skin white and smooth. Also, if the itch be offensive, so as a woman be found
ever and anon to scratch and rub those parts, there is not a better thing
therefore than the little flat snails, if they be brought into a liniment with
fried Barley groats. If a woman with child chance to step over a Viper, she
shall be delivered before her time of an imperfect birth. The like accident will
befall unto her, in case she go over the serpent Amphisbaena, if the same were
dead before. And yet were barren before, to be fruitful. Certes, the grease of
a goose or swan does mollify any hard Irino, as follows in the next chapter:
not aranto, as it is in most prints.
Ireos, From swelling, hardness, or the ague, as women call it.
preserves women's breasts after they be newly brought to bed. In Phrygia and
Lycaonia it is found by experience, that the fat of the Bistard or Horn owl is
very good for green women lately delivered, if they be troubled with the
pricking or shooting pains of their breasts: but for women that are in danger
to be suffocated with the rising of the mother, they have a liniment also made
with the beetils or worms called Blattae. The ashes of Partridge eggs calcined,
mixed with brass ore called Cadmia, and wax, and so reduced into a cerot,
preserves women's breasts plumpe and round, that they shall not be riueled or
flaggie: and it is thought, that if a woman make three imaginary circles round
about them with a partridge egg, they shall continue knit up and well trussed,
and not hang downward ilfauoredly: let a woman

Bats blood has a depilatorie faculty to fetch off hair, and let the
growing thereof; howbeit sufficient it is not alone to work that feat in boys
cheeks and chins whom we would keep smooth and beardlesse, except the place be
rubbed afterward with the seed of rocket or hemlock: and in this manner if they
be dressed, either no hair at all will come up there, or else it will Item, the
ashes thereof simply, mingled with the milk of a bitch of her first litter; so
that the hairs which we would not have to come again be plucked up; or if
those places be anointed therewith where never yet grew any, none shall spring
there afterward. The same effect (by report) has the blood of a tick that was
taken

CHAP. XV.
Many Receipts handled together disorderly one with another for sundry maladies.

IT is said, that Ants eggs stamped and incorporat with flies likewise punned
together, will give a lovely black color to the hairs of the eie-browes: also
if a woman be desirous that her infant should be born with black eyes, let her
eat a rat while she goes with child. To preserve the hair from being gray and
grisle, anoint them with the ashes of earthworms and oil olive mixed together.
If sucking babes be wrung or gnawne in the belly, by reason of some cruddled
Leporis or pecoris, (i.) of a Sheep.
hare is sovereign to anoint their gumbs withal. It falls out that young
infants many times be tormented with an unnatural heat and burning of their
head, called Siriasis; for to ease and cure them thereof, they use to take the
bones that are found in dogs dung, and to hang them about their necks or arms.
Young infants are subject to ruptures and descents of the guts, in which case it
is good (some say) to apply a green lizard unto their bodies whiles they lie
asleep, and to cause it to bite the place: but then afterward the said lizard
must be tied fast to a reed and hung up in the smoke: for look kincense and the
white of an egg, does in the space of 30 days cure those that are bursten
bellied. In the little horns of shell-snails there is found a certain hard
substance resembling grit

Some things there remain as touching this argument, which hardly methinks I
should not Biberit, some read fecerit, i. who made the said water.
drank the liquour Venus sports, if they carry it about them enwrapped within a
cranes skin. In like manner the yelks of five pigeons eggs incorporat with swines
grease to the weight of one denier Roman, and so supped off, work the same
effect. Some eat sparrowes usually for this purpose; or sup their eggs. Also
there be who carry about them the right stone of a cock, enclosed fast within a
piece of leather made of a rams skin, and to good effect, if all be true that
magitians say: who affirm also, that those women who are anointed with a
liniment made of the ashes of the bird Ibis, incorporat with goose grease and
the oil Ireos, shall if they be conceived with effect, if together with the
blood of the said cock, they be but laid under ones bed. If one pluck Venus. A
wonderful thing it is (if it be true) which they report likewise of the ashes
of a star-lizard or Stellion; that if the same be enwrapped within some lint or
linen rag, and held in the left hand, it stirs up the heat of lust; but
shift the same into the right hand, it will cool one as much. Moreover, that if
one put under the pillow where a woman lays her head, a few flocks, or lock
of wool soked well in batts blood, it will set her on to desire the company of
a man; or if she do take a goose tongue either in meat Horus king of the
Assyrians, devised first this receipt against drunkenness.

Over and besides all this, there by many other singular properties behind,
worthy to be noted, which are attributed unto sundry beasts, and do properly
pertain to this present treatise handled in this book: for these magitians
tell us of a certain bird in Sardinia called Gromphaena, like unto a crane, but
I believe verily that the Sardinians at this day know not what bird it is.
Within the said Island and province, there is a beast called A Muffle, as
Munster takes it.
Ophion, which in hair only resembles a stag, but in no place else does it
breed: and the very same authors have told us of another by the name of
Sirulugus, but they set not down in writing either the description what manner
of beast it should be, nor the place where it should breed. I doubt not verily
but such sometime there were, considering that they have showed diverse medicines
that they do affourd. And M. Cicero writes of a beast named Byturos, which
gnaweth the vines in Campania.

CHAP. XVI.
Strange wonders reported of certain beasts.

THere remains yet certain wonderful things to be spoken of, depending upon
those brute creatures, of which I have treated already: namely, that whosoever
have about them the secondine of a bitch, that is to say, the skin wherein her
whelps lay within her belly; or hold in their hands either the hair or dung of
an hare, no dogs will bark at them whereuer they come. Also that there be a
kind of gnats called Muliones, which live not above a day. Moreover, as many as
have about them the bill of a woodspecke when they come to take honey out of the
out his stones, and so let him go again, he will make all other rats to run
away. Make a mash or Antipater should send the venomous water of the fountain
Styx for to poison king Alexander the great, he could meet with no matter that
would hold this poison, without piercing and running through it, but only the
houfe of a mule: and to the knowledge hereof he came, by the direction of
Aristotle the Philosopher, who devised a cup to be made thereof. A foul stain
and blot of Aristotle's name, for being privy to such vilanie, and setting it
forward as he did. Thus much of Land-creatures: it remains now to return
again to those of the Waters, and their virtues in Physic.

THE XXXI. BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF NATVRE,
WRITTEN BY C. PLINIVS SECVNDVS.
The Proem.
CHAP. I.
The medicinable virtues of creatures living in water. The admirable nature of
waters.

NOw follows the discourse of Water-beasts, and how beneficial they be unto
us in regard of Physic: wherein verily dame Nature (the mother and
workemistris of of all things) shows how little idle she is, not ceasing
even there also by her continual operations to make known her wonderful
power, among the waves and surging billows, amid the reciprocal tides of the
sea, ebbing and flowing in their alternatiue turns; yea and in the swift
course and streams of great rivers. And verily, to say a truth and speak as it
is, there is no part of the World wherein the might and majesty of Nature more
appears, than in the waters: for this one Element seems to rule and command
stopped and choked. And what might the reason else be of thunder and lightnings
flashing and

CHAP. II.
The diversity of waters: their virtues und operations medicinable: and

THere is in manner no region nor coast of the earth, but you shall see in one
quarter or other waters gently rising and springing out of the ground here and
there, yielding fountains in one place cold, in another hot; yea and otherwhils
there may be discovered one with another near adjoining: as for example, about
Some think Baion in France.
Tarbelli a town in Guienne, and the Pyrenaean hills, there do boil up hot
and cold springs, so close one unto the other, that hardly any distance can be
perceived between. Moreover, sources there be, which yield waters neither cold
nor hot but lukewarm, and the same very wholesome and proper for the cure of
many diseases; as if Nature had set them apart for the good of man only, and no
other living creature beside. To these Posidius a slave sometime, and
enfranchised by Claudius Caesar the Emperor. Moreover, there be of them so
hot, that they are able to sees an egg or any other viands or cates for the
table. As for the Licinian springs, which bear the name of Licinius Crassus, a
man may perceive them to boil and reeke again, even out of the very sea. See
how good Nature is to us, who amid the waves and billows of the sea, has
affourded healthful waters! But now to discipher their virtues in Physic
according to their several kinds: thus much in generality is observed in these
baths, That they serve for the infirmities of the sinews, for gout of the feet,
and sciatica. Some more properly Cicero and be called Ciceronian^, besoueraign
for the eyes. Now there is a memorable manor or fair house of plaisance,
situat upon the sea side in the very high way M. Cicero called Academia, in
regard of some resemblance it had unto a college of that name in Athens, from
whence he took the model and pattern: where he compiled those books of his
which carry the name of the place, and be called Like as Tusculanae
quaestiones, which he made in Tusculano, i. a ferm or house that he had in
Tusculum.
Academice quaestiones: and there he caused his monument or sepulcher to be
made, for the perpetuity of his memorial, as who would say, he had not
sufficiently immortalized his name throughout the world, by those noble works
which he wrote and commended unto posterity. Well, soon after the decease of
Cicero, this house and forest both fell into the hands and tenure of A noble
man of Rome, Consul with D. Laelius Balbus, anno ab vrbe condita 747.
Antistius Vetus; at what time, in the very forefront as it were Laurea Tullus
(an enfranchised vassal of Cicero) made certain verses, and those carrying
with them such a grace of majesty, that at the first sight a man may easily
perceive how affectionat and devout he was to the service of his lord and
master: and for that the said Epigram is worthy to be read not only there, but
also in every place, I will set it down here as it stands over those baines
to be seen, in this Decasticon.

Quo tua, Romanae vindex clarissime linguae,
Sylva loco melius surgere jussa viret,
Atque Academiae celebratam nomine villam.
Nunc reparat cultu sub potiore Vetus
Hic etiam apparent lymphae non ante repertae,
Lanquida quae infuso lumina rore levant.
Nimirum locus ipse sui Ciceronis honori
Hoc dedit, hacfontes cum patefecit open,
Vt quoniam totum legitur sine fine per orbem,
Sint plures, oculis quae medeantur, aquae.
O prince of Roman Eloquence, lo here thy Grove in place
How green it is, where planted first it was to grow apace:
And Vetus now, who holds thy house, Fair Academie hight,
Spares for no cost, but it maintains and keeps in better plight.
Of late also, fresh fountains here brake forth out of the ground,
Most wholesome for to bath sore eyes, which erst were never found.
These helpful springs, the Soil no doubt, presenting to our view,
To Cicero her ancient lord, has done this honor due;
That since his books throughout the world are read by many a wight,
More waters still may clear their eyes, and cure decaying sight.
In the same tract of Campaine, and namely toward Sinuessa, there be other
fountains called M. Varro makes mention of such another fountain in Syria at
the foot of the mountain Taurus. So does Callimachus report the foresaid
operation of the river Gallus in Phrygia: howbeit they that take of this water
must keep a measure, for otherwise it distracts their understanding, Ctesias)
who drink of the red fountain (for so it is called) in Aethiopia: as touching
the waters near Rome called Albulae, they are known to heal wounds: these
waters are neither hot nor cold: but those which go under the name of Cutiliae
in the Sabins country, are exceeding cold, and by a certain mordication that
they have, seem to suck out the humors and superfluous excrements of the body;
Otherwise called Aniger: but this name it took of Alphi, which signifies a
kind of white morphew.
Alphion is medicinable, and cures the foul Morphew. Varro mine author makes
mention of one Titius, a man of good worth and sometime lord Praetour, who was
so bewraied and painted all over his face with spots of Morphew, that he looked
like an image made of spotted marble. Cydnus, a river of Cilicia, has a virtue
to cure the gout; as appears by a letter Cassius the Parmezan unto M.
Antonius. Contrariwise, the waters about Troezen are so bad, that all the
inhabitants are thereby subject to the gout and other diseases of the feet.
There is a city in He means the Lowconutries, called sometime Belgica Gallia
Gaul named Tungri, much renowned for a noble Called now ^he bath of Sp^gh or
Spaw.
fountain, which runs at many pipes: a smacke it has resembling the rust
of iron, howbeit this taste is not perceived but at the end and loose only: This
water is purgative, drives away tertian agues, expels the stone and cures the
Symptoms attending thereupon: Set this water over the fire or near to it, you
shall see it thick and troubled, but at the last, it looks red. Between
Puteoli and Naples, there be certain wels called Leucogaei, the water whereof
cures the infirmity of the eyes, and heals wounds. Cicero in his book
entitled Admiranda, i. Wonders, among other admirable things has ranged the
moors or fens of Reate; for that the water issuing from them, has naturally a
Eudicus reports, That in the territory of Hestiaea, a city in Thessalie,
there be two springs, the one named Ceron, of which, as many sheep as drink,
prove black: the other Melas, the water whereof, makes black sheep turn white:
let them drink of both waters mingled together, they will prove flecked and of
dives colors. Theophrastus writes, That the river Crathis in the Thuriaus
country, causes both kine and sheep as many as drink thereof, to look white:
whereas the water of Sybaris gives them a black hew. And by his saying, this
difference in operation is seen also upon the people that use to drink of
them: for as many as take to the river Sybaris, become blacker, harder, and
withal of a more curled hair than others: contrariwise, the drinking of
Crathis causes them to look white to be more soft skinned, and their bush of
hair to grow at length. Semblably in Macedony they Theophrastus has left in
writing, That in some places there is no other thing bred or growing but brown
and duskish, insomuch as not only the cattle is all of that lere, but also the
corn on the ground, and other fruits of the earth; as among the Messapians.
Also, at Lusae, a city of Arcadia, there is a certain well, wherein there keep
ordinarily land-mice. As for the river Aleos, which passes through Erythrae, it
makes them to grow hairie all their bodies over as many as drink thereof. In
Boeotia likewise, near to the temple of the god Trophonius and hard by the
river Orchomenas, there be two fountains; the one helps memory, the other
causes oblivion, whereupon they For the forme^ is called (...), or (...), the
later (...).
took their names. In Cilicia, hard at the town Crescum, there runs a river
called Quasi (...), wi^ and understanding.
Nus: and by the saying of M. Varro, whosoever drink thereof, shall find their
wits more quick, and themselves of better conceit In Chio,
Chios there is a spring, which causes as many as use the water to be dull and
heavy of spirit. At Zamae in Afric, the water of a certain fountain, makes a
clear and shrill voice. Let a man drink of the lake Clitorius, he shall take a
misliking and loathing of wine, says M. Varro. And yet Eudoxus and Theopompus
report, That the water of the fountains beforesaid make them drunk that use it.
Mutianus affirms, That out of the fountain under the temple of father Bacchus,
within the Isle Andros, at certain times of the year for 7 days together,
there runs nothing but wine; insomuch as they call it the wine of god
Bacchus: howbeit, remove the said water out of the prospect and view (as it
were) of the said temple, the taste will turn to be waterish again. Polyclitus
writes of a certain fountain of Cilicia near unto the city Theophrastus
reports the same of another fountain in Aethyopia, which has the like quality.
And Lycus says, That among the Indians there is a fountain, the water whereof
is used in lamps to maintain light. And the like is reported of an ^ther
water about Ecbatan^ [the capital city of Media.] Theopompus writes, That
near to Scotusa [in Macedonie] there is a lake, the water whereof is soueraign
Iuba has left in writing, That in the Troglodites country there is a lake, for
the hurtful water that it bears, called the Mad lake, which thrice a day
becomes bitter and salt: and as many times for, it turns to be fresh and
sweet: which course it keeps also in the night season, breeding otherwise white
serpents twenty cubits long, of which it is crawling full. The same Prince
(mine author) reports, That in Arabia there is a spring boiling out of the
ground with such a force, that it scorneth and checketh any thing that is
thrown into it, and cannot be kept down with any weight whatsoever.
Theophrastus makes mention of the fountain Marsyas in Phrygia, near unto the
town Celaenae, which casts up great stones. And not far from it be two
other springs (...), i. fleta, (...), i. Risu. For the one causes weeping, the
other moves to laughter.
Claeon and Gelon, so called by the Greeks for the contrary effects which they
work. At Cizicum there is a fountain of Cupid, and Mutianus does both report
and believe. At Cranon there is a hot spring, and yet not so boiling as many
others be: the water thereof, if it be put into a bottle or flaggon of wine,
will maintain the heat thereof for three days together, that it shall drink
hot. In Germany beyond the river Rhene, there be waters so hot, that whosoever
drinks thereof, shall sensibly find the heat in his body 3 days after: The
springs that yield this water be called Mattiaci. This peculiar property
besides has this water, that about the edges and brims thereof there engender
pumish stones. Mow if any man suppose some of these strange reports to be
incredible, let him learn and know, that in no part of the world Nature has
showed more admirable works than in this element of Water. And albeit in the
beginning of this mine history I have written in ample manner of Ctesias
says, That the Indians have a lake or poole, wherein nothing will swim, but all
sinks to the bottom. And Coelius also our countryman avouches, That the
leaves which fall into the lake Avernus will settle downward and not flote
above. And Varro avouches moreover, That what birds soever fly over it, or
approach the air and breath thereof, they will die presently. Contrariwise, in
Apuscidamus a lake of Afric, nothing goes down, but all swims aloft. The like
does Appion report of Phinthia, a fountain in Sicilie: as also of a lake in
Media, and namely the pit or well of Saturn. The fountain Limyra is wont
ordinarily to change his seat, and to pass into places adjoining, but never
for naught, presaging always thereby some strange accident to ensue. And
wonderful it is, that the fishes therein should follow and do the like. Now
when this Lartius Licinius, sometime lord Pretour and afterward Lieutenant
General under the Consuls. For within a seuen-night after, a great misfortune
happened unto him. In Jury there is a river which every Sabbath day is dry.
Thus much of waters medicinable and miraculous, and yet not simply hurtful.
Contrariwise, there be others of as wonderful a nature, but dangerous

Ctesias writes, That there is a fountain in Armenia, breeding and bringing
forth black Fishes: whereupon, as many as feed, are sure to die for it
immediately. I have heard the like reported of such dangerous fishes about the
head of the river Danubius, until a man come to a fountain which presently
discharges it self into the channel of the said river; for beneath that
place such fishes go not, nor enter lower into the river. And hereupon the
fountain is by the Theophrastus says moreover, that in this water there be
certain small fishes (a thing that a man shall never see in any other venomous
fountains) and those likewise are as deadly as the water. Th^opompus writes,
That in Thrasia there be waters about the place called Chropsos, which kill
those that drink thereof. And Lycus makes report of another fountain in the
Leontines country, whereof as many as drink die within three days. Varro has
left in writing, That near to the hill Euripides the Poet, there be two rivers
run together, the one yields water most wholesome for to be drunk: the other
is as noisome and deadly. Near to Perperenae, a town in Troas, there is a
spring the water whereof gives a stony coat or crust to all the earth that it
either ouerfloteth or runs by: of which nature are the hot waters issuing
out of a fountain near

CHAP. III.
The quality that is in waters. How a man may know which be good and wholesome
from such as be naught and unwholesome.

MVch question there is and controversy among physicians, What kind of water
is best? and subtle, pure, and clear, and by that means they get their
goodness. Which considered, I (...) water.
But they ground their opinion upon this reason, because rain water is of all
others lightest, as consisting of that substance which was able to rise and
mount up aloft, and there to hang above in the air. Which is the cause also,
that they prefer Snow water before that which comes down in shoures: and
the water of ice dissolved, before the other of melted Snow; as if the water
were by ice driven together and reduced to the utmost point of finenesse. They
collect hereby, that these waters, to wit, rain, snow, and ice, be all of
them lighter than those that spring out of the earth: and ice among the rest
far lighter than any water, in proportion. But this opinion of theirs is to
be reputed as erroneous, and for the common good and profit of mankind to be
refuted: For first and foremost, that leuitie whereof they spoke, can Epigenes
avouches and affirms, That the water which has been seven times putrified
and as often purified again, is subject no more unto putrefaction. And as for
cesterne waters, the Physicians also themselves confess, That they breed
obstructions and schirrhosities in the belly, yea, and otherwise be hurtful
to the throat. As also, that there is not any kind of water whatsoever, which
gathers more mud or engenders more filthy and illfauoured vermin than it
does. Neither follows it by and by, that all great river waters indifferently
are the best: no more than those of any brook, or the most part of ponds and
pooles are to be counted and esteemed most wholesome. But of these kinds of
water we must conclude Which some take for Sows.
Tineae, engendered Troezen. As for the nitrous, brackish, and Salsa^, although
some read Salmacidas, which be holden for waters that will effeminat the^ that
drink thereof. But such waters be impertinent to this place: neither do we
read of the fountain Salmacis to be i^ this desert.
salt waters found among the deserts, such as travel through those parts
toward the red sea, have a devise to make them sweet and potable within Juno
(forsooth) sometimes bathed and washed her self therein: for otherwise, good
and wholesome water ought to have neither taste nor odor at all. Some there be
who judge of their wholsomnesse by their balance, and they keep a weighing and
poising of waters one against another: but for all their curiosity they miss
of their purpose in the end; for seldom or never can they find one water
lighter than another. Yet this devise is better and more

But if we have regard to the coldness of water, necessary it is that the Well
should stand in some cool and shadowie place not exposed to the Sun, and
nathelesse open to the broad air, that it may have the full view and sight (as
it were) of the sky. And above all this, one thing would be observed and seen
unto, that the source which feeds it spring and boil up directly from the
bottom, and not issue out of the sides: which also is a main point that
concerns the perpetuity thereof, and whereby we may collect that it will hold
still, and be never drawn dry. And this is to be understood of water cold in the
own nature. For to make it seem actually cold to the hand, is a thing that may
be done by art, if either it be forced to mount aloft, or fall from on high, by
which motion and reuerberation it gathers store of air. And verily the
experiment Nero the Emperor devised to boil water, and when it was taken from
the fire to put it into a glass bottle, and so to set it in the snow a
cooling: and verily the water became thereby exceeding cold to please and
content his taste, and yet did not participate the grossness of the snow, nor
draw any evil quality out of it. Certes, all men are of one opinion, that any
water which has been once sodden, is far better than that which is still raw.
Like as, that after it has been made hot, it will become much colder than it
was before, which I assure you came first from a most subtle and witty
invention. And therefore if we must needs occupy naughty water, the only remedy
that we have to alter the badnesse thereof, is to sees it well until the one
half be consumed. Now if a man desire to know the virtue and commodity of
cold water: first, it ordinarily that the coldest water in the mouth is not
always the coldest in the hand. And contrariwise,

Of all Waters in the world, that which we call here in Rome Martia, carries
the greatest name by the general voice of the whole City, in regard both of
coldness and wholesomnesse. And verily we may esteem this water for one of
the greatest gifts that the gods have bestowed upon our city. In times past it
was called Auffeia, and the very fountain from whence it comes, Piconia. The
head or source thereof arises at the foot of the utmost mountains of the
Pelignians: it runs through the Marsians country, and passing through the
lake Fucinus, it tends no doubt even then directly toward Rome; but anon it
is swallowed up within a hole under the ground, so as it is no more seen until
it show it self again in the territory of the Tiburtines; from which place it
is conveyed under vaults, and so carried through to Rome by Ancus No marvel
^hen if it were called Martia.
Martius one of the Roman Kings. Afterward Qu. * Martius Rex, in his
Pretorship finished the said work: and when in process of time it was fallen
to decay, M. Agrippa repaired it again: who also brought the water named Virgo
to the city, which has her head eight miles from Rome, in a certain nouke or
by-corner about two miles turning from the great port way leading to Praeneste.
Near unto it runs the river Herculaneus: but this water keeps still
behind, as though it fled from it, whereupon it took the name Virgo. Compare
these two rivers together which are conveyed to Rome, you shall see the
difference beforesaid as touching the coldness of waters; for look how cold
Virgo is to the hand, so much is Martia in the mouth. But long ago have we of
Rome lost the pleasure and commodity of these two Rills,

And here in this place I think it not impertinent to adioine to this present
treatise, the manner and skill of searching and finding out waters. And first to
speak in general terms: springs ordinarily be found in Valleys, in the pitch
or crest of some little hill where it has a fall and descent, or else at the
foot of great mountains. Many are of opinion, That in any tract whatsoever,
that side or coast which regards the North is given to have water in it. And
verily it were not amiss to show how Nature disporteth her self and works
variably in this behalf. (...). i White.
Albi: so that there is no heed to be taken by this, for the rule holds not
always. But to come now unto particulars: Look where you see growing Rushes,
Reeds, or the To wit, wild Folefoot, ca. 6. lib. 26.
Herb whereof I made relation before, be sure you shall find water underneath.
Item, Wheresoever you find Froggs lying in any place upon their breasts, make
account of good store of water there. As for the wild and wandering Sallow,
the Aller tree, and be pained withal. For avoiding which trouble and
inconvenience, some betake themselves * In Toph^.
gritty soil does yield, is commonly colder than any other: and such a kind
of ground also is allowable for the proof of good waters; for it ingendreth
sweet and wholesome water, light also Sabulum.
thick sand and gravel, it affords small and slender springs, and those not
durable; besides, the water will quickly gather mud. Ground given to bear
Glare^.
pibbles or the grosser sort of gravel, give us no security that the springs
therein will hold all the year long, howbeit the water is very good and
pleasant. The hard and compact gravel called the male grauel, and the land
which seems full of black and burnt carbuncle stones, brings forth wholesome
waters, and the sources be sure and perdurable. But red stones yield the best
simply, and those that we may be sure will never give over and fail. And
therefore when we shall perceive the foot of a mountain standing upon such
stone, or upon flint, we may boldly reckon of wholesome and everlasting
springs; and this gift there is the same reason of the haven and town it
self. At Athens, the great and famous fountain Jupiters garden, within that
city; and yet the said Well water if it be a dry season, will stand with an ice
at Midsummer.

CHAP. IV.
The reason of certain Waters that appear and be hid again suddenly.

But above all others, the waters of pits or wels be ordinarily most cold about
the i. about the (...) of ^une.
retreat or occultation of Arcturus, yea and many times they fail in the mids
of summer, and all of M. Cicero has not forgot to insert among other admirable
Cassander held the or Galatians.
Gallogreeks

CHAP. V.
Diverse historical observations touching this point.

Moreover, Earthquakes, as they discover sometimes new springs and sources of
water, so otherwhiles they swallow them up that they are no more seen: like as
it happened (as it is well known) 5 times about the river Pheneus in Arcadia.
And in manner abouesayd, there issued forth a river out of the mountain
Corycus, so soon as the peisants of the country began to break it up for
tillage. But to return again to the change and alteration of waters: wonderful
they must needs be (no doubt) when there is no evident cause thereof to be
known: as namely in Magnesia, where all the hot waters of the bains suddenly
became cold, without any other change besides of the taste: also in Caria, where
stands the temple of Neptune, the river which was known before to be fresh
and potable, all on a sudden turned into salt water. Over and besides, is not
this a strange miracle, that the fountain Arethusa in Syracuse, should have a
sent or smell of dung, during the solemn games and exercises at Olympia? But
there is some probable reason to be rendered hereof, Because the river Alpheus
passes from Olympus under the very bottom of the sea into that Island [of
Sicily] where Syracuse stands, and so comes to the foresaid fountain. The
Rhodians have a fountain within their i. their demyisland, or rather a place
environed round about with sea, save only that it has one bank or narrow
causey leading to the continent.
Chersonese, which every ninth year purges it self and sends out an infinite
deal of ordure and filthiness. And as the taste and smell of waters do alter, so
their colors also do change: as for example, there is a lake in the country of
Babylon, which every summer for the space of 11 days, looks red: and
Borysthenes also in the summer time, runs with a bluish color like (...)
Athe^.
violets, or the sky; and yet a most

CHAP. VI.
The manner of water-conduits. How and when those waters which naturally are
medicinable, ought

IF a man would convey water from any head of a spring, the best way is to use
pipes of earth made by potters art; and the same ought to be 2 fingers thick,
and one jointed within another, so as the end of the upper pipes enter into the
nether, as a tenon into a mortaise, or as a box into the lid: the same ought to
be united and laid even, with quicklime quenched and dissolved in oil. The
least level for to carry and command water up hill from the receipt, is one
hundred foot; but if it be conveyed but by one canel and no more, it may be
forced to mount the space of i. 240 foot. As touching the pipes by means
whereof the water is to rise aloft, they ought to be of lead. Furthermore, this
is to be observed, That the water ascend always of it self at the delivery,
to the height of the head from whence it gave receipt: if it be fetched a long
way, the work must rise and fall often in the carriage thereof, that the
level may be maintained still. As for the pipes, ten foot long apiece they
would be, if you do well. Now if the said pipes of lead be but (...):
five fingers in compass, ordinarily they should weigh sixty pound: Octonari^.
if they be of eight fingers size, they must carry the weight of one hundred
pound: but in case they bear a round of Denari^.
10 fingers, their poise would be at the least 120 pound; and so the rest more
or less according to this proportion. Those pipes be called properly in Latin
Denariae, the web or sheet whereof bears ten fingers in breadth, before it be
turned in and brought to the compass be of that capacity, as need requires.

And since I am fallen into the treatise and discourse of fountains, I wonder
much at Homer, that he has made no mention at all of hot springs, and yet
otherwise throughout his whole poem, he brings in oftentimes those who
bathed and washed in hot baines. But it may very well be, that the reason
thereof is, because in those times there was not that use of them in physic as
at this present: for now adays, if folk be amiss or il at ease, straightwaies
they run to the bains and bath for remedy. And in truth, those waters which
stand upon brimstone, be good for the sinews: such as come from a vein of
alume, are proper for the palsy, or such like infirmities proceeding from
resolution of the nerves. Moreover, they that hold of bitumen or nitre (such as
be the fountains Cutiliae) be potable and good to be drunk, and yet they are
purgative.

To come to the use of natural bains and hot waters: many men in a bravery sit
long in a bath, For to irritat and provoke the expulsive faculty to send all
forth again.
salt withal. Great use there is and to good purpose, of the mud which these
fountains do yield; but with this regard, that when the body is besmeared and
bedawbed outwardly therewith, the same may dry upon it in the Sun.

Well, these hot waters be commonly full of virtue; howbeit, this is not
general, That if a spring be hot, by and by we should think it is medicinable;
for the experience of the contrary is to be seen in Egesta of Sicily, in
Larissa, Troas, Magnesia, Melos, and Lipara. Neither is it a sure argument of a
medicinable water (as many are of opinion) if a piece of silver or brass which

Concerning Sea waters, the same order and mean is to be observed, especially
in such as be made hot, for to help the pains and infirmities of the sinews:
and many hold them good to souder fractures of bones, yea and to cure their
bruises and contusions: likewise they have a desiccatiue virtue, whereby they
dry rheumaticke bodies; in which regard, men bath also in sea water actually
cold. Moreover, the sea affoor death other uses in diverse and sundry respects,
but principally the air thereof is wholesome for those who are in a phthysicke
or consumption (as I have beforesaid) and cures such as do reach or void
blood upward: and verily, I remember of late Annaeus Gallio after that he was
Consul, took this course; namely, to sail upon the sea for this infirmity.
What is the cause think ye, that many make voiages into Egypt? surely it is
not for the air of Egypt it self, but because they lie long at sea, and be
sailing a great while before they come thither. Furthermore, the vomits also
which are occasioned at sea by the continual rolling and rocking of the ships
never standing still, are good for many maladies of head, eyes, and breast; and
generally they do cure all those accidents, for which the drinking of Ellebore
serves. As for sea water to be applied simply of it self unto the outward
parts, physicians are of opinion, that it is more effectual than any other, for
to discuss and resolve tumors: and more particularly, if there be a cataplasme
made of it and barley meal sodden together, it is singular for the swellings
behind the ears, called Parotides. They mingle the same likewise in plasters,
such especially as be white and emollitiues: and if the head be hurt, and the *
brain touched and (...) ^cto.
offended, it is sovereign to be infused into the wound. It is prescribed also
to be drunk: for albeit be given for the quartan fever; others advise to save
and keep it a time, for to serve the turn in Namely. adverse to the head and
sinews
same discommodities that wine, but far short it was of the good and
wholesome qualities of wine.

Moreover, forasmuch as seafaring men and sailors be many times at a fault for
fresh water, Item, let down into the sea within small nets, certain pellets of
wax that be hollow, or any other

But to proceed unto the other medicinable properties of water: let there be
any dislocation in man or beast; by the swimming in water (it matters not of
what kind it be) the bones will very quickly and with great ease be reduced into
joint again.

It falls out many times that travelers be in fear and danger of some
sickness, by change of waters, and such especially as they know not the nature
and quality of. To prevent this inconvenience, they drink the water cold which
they doubt and suspect, so soon as ever they be come out of the baine; for
then they shall find it presently.

As touching the moss which is found in the water, sovereign it is for the
gout, in case it be applied outwardly: mix oil thereto, and reduce it into the
form of a cataplasme or liniment, it eases the pain, and takes down the
swelling of the feet about the ankles. The foam and froth that floteth above
the water, causes warts to fly off, if they be well rubbed therewith.

The very sand likewise upon the sea shore, especially that which is small and
fine, and the same burnt as it were with the heat of the Sun, is a sovereign
remedy to dry up the watery humors in a dropsy, if the body be covered al over
therewith; and to that purpose it serves also for rheums and catarrhs. Thus
much may suffice concerning water it self: it remains now to treat of such
things as the water yields. In which discourse, begin I will (as my order and
manner has bin in all the rest) with those matters which be chief and
principal, and namely, salt and spunges.

CHAP. VII.
The sundry kinds of salt: the making thereof: the virtues medicinable of salt:
and diverse other considerations respective thereto.

SAlt is either artificial or natural: and both the one and the other is to
be considered in many and diverse sorts, which may be reduced all into 2 causes:
for salt comes either of an humor congealed, or else dried. In the gulf or
lake of Tarentum, the salt is made of the sea water dried by the heat of the
summer Sun, for then you shall see the whole poole converted into a mass of
salt: and verily the water there, is otherwise very low and ebb, and not above
knee high. Thus far forth have I proceeded in those kinds of salt which come of
waters naturally. There Sal Ge^ma.
Mineral, dug out of the earth: and it appears plainly, that it is a salt
humor congealed within. And verily, they use to cut it out of the ground after
the manner of Lapis specula ris, vitrum vel glacies Ma^tis or Lapis Arabicus.
glass stone in lumps: and those exceeding heavy, which the peasants commonly
call Mic^ Salis.
crumbs of salt. At Carrhae, a city of Arabia, all the walls thereof, as also
the housen of the inhabitants, be reared and built of hard stones: and the same
be laid by Masons work, and the joints closed and soudered by no other mortar
but plain water. K. Ptolomaeus, at what time as he encamped about Pelusium, a
city of Egypt, and cast up a trench to fortify the same, found such a mine or
quarrey of salt as these, which was a president to others afterward to sink
pits between Egypt and Arabia, even in the waste and dry quarters, where
under the delfe of sand they met with salt. After which manner also they
practiced to dig in the desert and dry sands of Africa, and found more as they
went, even as far as to the Temple and Oracle of Jupiter Ammon. And verily they
might perceive this salt to grow in the night season, according to the course
of the Moon. As for all the tract and country of Cyrenae, famous it is, and
much spoken of, for the salt Of (...) in Greek, which is sand.
Ammoniacum, so called, by reason that it is found under the sands. In color
and luster it resembles that Alume de Plume, which the Greeks call Schistos:
It grows in long lumps or pieces, and those not transparent: the taste is
unpleasant, howbeit, this salt is of

As touching salt artificial, made by man's hand, there be many kinds thereof.
Our common salt, and whereof we have greatest store, is wrought in this manner:
first they let into their pits a quantity of seawater, suffering fresh water
to run into it by certain gutters, for to be mingled therewith for to help it
to congeale, whereto a good shower of rain avails very much, but above all
the Sun shining thereupon for otherwise it will never dry and harden. About Vtica
in Barbary they use to pile up great heaps of salt in manner of Mounts: which
after that they be hardened This seems to be our Baysalt.
and seasoned in the Sun and Moon, scorn all rain and foul weather, neither
will they dissolve, insomuch, as folk have enough to do for to break and
enter in with pick-axes. Howbeit, in Candy the Salt is made in the like pits,
but of Seawater only, without letting in any fresh water at all. Semblably,
in Egypt, the Sea it self ouerfloweth the ground which (as I take it) is
already soked and drenched with the water of Nilus, and by that means their
Salt is made. After the same manner they make salt also out of certain wels,
which are discharged into their Salt Pits. And verily in Babylon, the first
gathering or thickening of the water in their salt pits, is a certain liquid
Bitumen or Petroleum, an oleous substance, which they use in their lamps, as we
do oil: and when the same is scummed off, they find pure salt underneath.
Likewise in Cappadocia This is the order of salt with us in our wiches here in
England.
Springs of saltish water, which the people of that country do boil, and
when it is cooled again, it turns into Salt: but it is but dull and weak in
effect, and besides, nothing white. In France and Germany the manner is when
they would make salt, to cast seawater into the fire as the wood burns. [In
some parts of Spain there be salt springs, out of Theophrastus, That the
Islanders of Imbros were wont to boil in water, the ashes of reeds and canes,
until such time as there remained little moisture unconsumed, and that which
was left they used for salt. The brine or pickle wherein flesh or fish has bin
kept salt, if it be boiled a second time until the liquor be spent and
consumed, returns to the own nature, Halos-anthos which he rendre^h
flos-salis: whereas indeed Flos-salis, i. the flower of salt, is another thing,
as himself shows elsewhere by the name of tenuissima favillasalis.
flower of salt (commonly called Sperma-Ceti) is never bred but when the
Northeast winds do blow. The salt Tragasaeus will neither spit, crackle, leap,
nor sparkle in the fire; no more will Acanthius (so called of a town of that
name:) neither does the foam of salt, nor the gobbets and fragments, ne yet the
thin leaves or flakes thereof. The salt of Agrigentum, a city in Sicily, will
abide the fire and make no sparkling: put it into water, it will keep a
spitting and crackling. Great difference there is in salt, in regard [i. Caire]
in Egypt, the salt is of a very deep red: but about the river Oxus in
Bactriana, more tawny or inclining to a russet. And the Centuripine salt within
Sicily is purple. About Gela in the same Island, the salt is so bright and
clear, that it will represent a man's face, as in a mirroir. In Cappadocia, the
Mineral salt which they dig, is of a yellow Safron color, transparent, and of
a most redolent smell. For any use in Physic, the Tarentine salt was in old
time highly commended above the best: after which they esteemed most, all the
sea salts; and of that kind the lighter, and that which especially is of the
nature of foam: for the Sa^ivere.
eyes of horses and Boeufes, they made great reckoning of the Tragasaean salt,
and that of Granado or Boetica in Spain. For dressing of viands and cates; for
to be eaten also with meat; the better is that salt, which sooner melts and
runs to water. That also which by nature is moister of the spirit as yield
most grace and contentment, we use in Latin to call Sales. All the mirth Ancus
Martius K. of Rome, was the first that erected the salt-houses, and gave unto
the people a congiary or largess of 6000 Modij of salt. And Varro writes,
That our ancestors in times past used salt ordinarily in stead of an household
gruell: for they were wont to eat salt with their bread and cheese, as may
appear by the common proverb that testifies so much.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the fishes called Commonly taken for Maquerels.
Scombri. Of fish pickle: and the fish sauce, namedin old time Alex.

NOw adays the most dainty and exquisit Garum is made of the fish called
Scomber: and Garu^ socior^
Allies sauce, as their Garum, so costly and so much in request, that every 2
gallons thereof might not be bought much under the price of a thousand
sesterces. Which some take to be our Pike.
Lupus. But in process of time Garum arose to excess, both in price and
variety of use: insomuch as there grew an infinite number, of diverse kinds: for
one sort there was of Garum that in color resembled old honied wine, and
became so clear and sweet withal, that it might well enough have bin drunk for
wine: another kind there was, which our superstitious votaries use, for to keep
themselves chaste and continent; and the Jews also in their holy sacrifices
employed the same, especially that which is made of skaly fishes. In like
manner, the other sauce, Alex, is come to be made of Oisters, sea Vrchins, sea
Nettles, Crab fishes, Lobstars, and the livers of sea Barbles. In sum, thus we
have devised a

Thus much I thought good to note cursarily, as touching those sauces which are
so greatly longed after in the world; and the rather for that in some sort they
serve in the practice of Physic: for the gross liquor or sauce Alex, heals
the scab in sheep, if the skin be scarified or skiced, and the same Alex poured
thereupon. Also it is singular against the biting of a mad dog, or the prick of
the sea dragon: the same likewise serves to soke linen wreaths to be laid in
wounds or tents made of lint to be put into sores. As for Garum, it heals
any fresh burn, if a man drop it upon the place, without naming it, or saying
that it is Garum: good it is besides for the biting of mad dogs, but especially
for the Crocodiles tooth: as also for running ulcers

CHAP. X.
The nature of Salt, and the medicinable virtues thereof.

SAlt, by nature stands much upon fire, and yet an enemy it is and contrary
unto fire, it flies from it, eating and consuming al things whatsoever:
astringent it is, desiccatiue, binding, and knitting. It keeps from
putrefaction, bodies that be dead, and causes them to endure so a world of
years. In physic it is held for mordant, burning, caustic, and
mundificatiue. It does subtiliat, extenuat, and dissolve. Contrary it is to the
stomach, and serves not but only to provoke appetite. With origan, honey, and
hyssope, it is singular against the sting of serpents: and more particularly of
the horned serpent Cerastes, if it be applied with origan, cedar-rosin, pitch
or honey. Being drunk with vinegar, it helps those that be pricked with the
Scolopendre: and applied as a liniment with oil or vinegar, and a fourth part
of line seed, it is good against the Bu principally for the eyes and therefore
it enters into collyries and eie-salues. Howbeit for these purposes above
named it is thought that the salt named Tattaeus, of the lake Tatta, is
Hyssopo. Some ^ead Oesypo.
Hyssop and hot water; with this charge, to foment or bath the place afterward
with a kind of salt brine. But above all, Spanish salt would be chosen for this
effect: and it is also good against cataracts and suffusions of the eyes: if it
be ground with milk upon some touchstone, whetstone, or hard porphyrit
marble. More particularly, it is singular for the black blood gathered in the
eyes, if it be folded within a little linen cloth, and so applied: but the
same ought to be dipped eftsoons in hot water, and so the place to be often times
patted withal. For the cankers or sores in the mouth, it is good to lay salt
upon fine lint. In case the gumbs be swelled, it were not amiss to rub them
therewith. Being beaten and reduced into small powder, it serves for the
roughness of the tongue. Moreover it is said, That whosoever hold every
morning under his tongue while he is fasting a little salt until it be
melted, he shall by that means preserve his teeth from being worm-eaten or
rotten. The same incorporat in raisins without stones, and in boeuf suet, with
a little origan, leven, or bread, is soueraign for the leprosy, fellons,
tettars, ringworms, and the wild scab. But in all th^se accidents, the salt of
Thebais in high Egypt is most commended: and of this they make choice also to
kill the itch. A gargarism or collution thereof with honey, is passing good for
the inflammation of the amygdals and the uvula. There is no kind of salt but it
helps the squinancie, and the rather if it be used inwardly with oil and
vinegar, so as at the same time it be applied without the throat also in a
liniment with tar. If a cup Sale and sole.
salt and Sun together. For thus we see, That our fishers at sea ordinarily
have bodies as hard and tough as horn. A principal thing this is therefore to
be nominated and set down for the gout in the feet. But salt moreover takes
away corns of the feer, and kibes in the heels. Being chewed in the mouth and
so applied, or else with oil, it heals any burn or skald, and keeps the skin
from rising into blisters. With vinegar and hyssop it cures S. Anthonies fire
and all ulcers that be corrosiue. It heals likewise cankerous sores, if it be
applied with wild vine grapes. Reduced into fine powder and laid to with barley
meal, it is souerain for ulcers corrosiue such as be called Wolves, and do eat
deep to the very bone; so there be laid over the same and the part affected, a
linen cloth well soked and bathed in wine. A proper remedy it is for the the
some of salt found sticking to rocks, or floting upon the sea water, is
thought to be more

CHAP. X.
Of Nitre, and the sundry kinds thereof. The manner of making Nitre. The

I May not put off the treatise concerning the nature of Salnitre, approaching
so near as it does to the nature of salt: and the rather am I to discourse of
it more exactly, because it appears evidently, that the physicians who have
written thereof were altogether ignorant of the nature and virtues of it:
neither is there any one of them who in that point wrote more advisedly, than
Theophrastus. In the first place this is to be noted, That among the Medians
there is a little Nitre engendered in certain valleys which in time of drought
became all hoary and gray therewith and this they call Halmirrhaga. There is
found also some of it in Thracia near unto the City Philippi, but in less
quantity, and the same all fouled and bewraied with the earth, and this they
name Agrion. In times past men have practiced to make Nitre of oak wood burnt;
but never

As for artificial Nitre, great abundance there is made of it in Egypt, but
far inferior in goodness to the other: for brown and duskish it is, and
besides full of grit and stones. The order of making it is all one in manner
with that of salt, saving only that in the salt houses they for the setting of
any color upon cloth, and especially the purple die. As touching the virtues
of nitre it self, and how it is employed many ways, I will write in place
convenient. But to return As dead bodies.
thing long, they use this stone-nitre. Moreover, there be in Egypt other
nitre pits also, out of which there issues a reddish kind of nitre, resembling
the color of the earth from which it sweateth and ooseth out. As for the foam
of nitre (which is commended for the best of all) the ancient writers were of
opinion, that it could not be made but when the dew fell: This is our Sal-petre.
Aphro-nitrum is gathered in Asia, and found within certain soft and gritty
caves distilling out of rocks: [These causes because they be vaulted and arched
over head, the inhabitants call Some read Colyeas.
Cochlacas] which afterward they do dry in the Sun: and the best is thought
that of Lydia. The true mark to know good sal-petre, is to be very light in
hand, exceeding brittle, and easy to crumble; inclining also much to the
color of purple: this is brought from thence to us in trochischs. As for the
Egyptian

To come now unto physic and the medicinable virtues of salnitre: hot it is of
temperature, and does extenuat; biting besides and astringent: a great drier it
is, and does exulcerat. In regard of which qualities, employed it is in those
accidents which require either drawing to the extetior parts, or to be
discussed and resolved: such also as need some gentle mordication, or would be
lightly extenuated; as meazils, small pocks, wheals, and pimples. Some for this
purpose, first make it red hot in the fire, and then quench it with some
astringent wine: which done, they beat if it be sodden in wine cuit to the
consumption of the one half: and so is it good for the spots Vritur, not
Coquitur, ex ^iosc.
Burn or calcine nitre, temper it afterward with liquid pitch or tar, and give
it to drink, it cures the squinancy. The flower of nitre incorporat with the
oil Cyprinum, makes a pleasant liniment

CHAP. XI.
The nature of Spunges.

MAny sorts there be of Spunges, according as I have showed already more amply
in my treatise of water-beasts, and those especially of the Sea, and their
several natures: howbeit some writers distinguish them after another manner;
into male and female: for some of them they have thought to be of the male sex,
to wit, those which have smaller pipes or concauities, and those growing
thicker and more compact, whereby they suck up more moisture; and these, our
delicat and dainty people, die in colors, and otherwhile give them a purple
tincture. Others they count of the femal sex, namely such as have bigger pipes,
and the same running throughout one continuity without interruption. Of the
male kind, some be harder than others, salt water: and against the sting or
prick of scorpions, with vinegre. In the cure of wounds, spunges Anthonies
evil, with vinegre only. But in this application of them, consideration must
be had that they cover the sound parts also round about as well as the other.
Spunges wet in vinegre and cold water, staunch any flux of blood. If there be
any place of the skin black and blew, upon a fresh or new stripe, lay thereto
spunges well drenched in salt water, changing them often one after another, and
it shall recover the natural color again: in which order, they bring down
the swelling of the cods, and allay their pain. Being hacked and cut small,
they serve to good purpose for to be laid to the biting of mad dogs; so that
eftsoons and ever and anon they be wet and refreshed with vinegre, cold water,
or honey good store, one with another. The spunges of Trogus writes, that about
Lycia, the softest spunges called Penicilli, do grow in the deep sea, and
namely Polybius does report, that if spunges be hung about the tester or
seeling of a bed over sick persons, they shall take the better rest and repose
all night for it. Now is it time for me to return unto Beasts of the Sea, and
other creatures living and bred in the waters.

THE XXXII. BOOK OF
WRITTEN BY C. PLINIVS SECVNDVS.
The Proem.
Medicines taken from living creatures of the Sea.

Having so far proceeded in the discourse of Natures history, that I am now
arrived at the very height of her forces, and come into a world of Examples, I
cannot choose but in the first place consider the power of her operations, and
the infiniteness of her secrets which offer themselves before our eyes in the
Sea: for in no part else of this universal Frame, is it possible to observe
the like majesty of Nature: in so much as we need not seek any further, nay
we ought not to make more search into her divinity, considering there cannot
be found any thing equal or like unto this one Element* wherein she has
surmounted and gone beyond her own self in a wonderful number of respects.
For first and foremost, Is there any thing more violent than the Sea, and
namely, when it is troubled with bloustring winds, whirlpuffs, storms, and
tempests? Or wherein has the wit of man been more employed (seek out all
parts of the whole world) than in seconding the waves and billows of the Sea,
by sail andore? Finally, Is there ought more admirable, than the inenarrable
force of the reciprocal tides of the Sea, ebbing and flowing as it does,
whereby it keeps a current also, as it were the stream of some great river?

CHAP. I.
Of the fish Echeneis, and her wonderful property. Of the Crampe-fish
Torpedo, and the Sea-hare. The wonders of the Red sea.

THe current of the Sea is great, the tide much, the winds vehement and
forcible; and more than that, ores and sails withal to help forward the rest,
are mighty and powerful: and yet there is one little silly fish, named
Echeneis that checketh, perforce, yea and hold as prisoners our goodly tall and
proud ships, so well armed in the beakehead with iron pikes and brazen tines;
so offensive and dangerous to bouge and pierce any enemy ship which they do
encounter. Certes, it is reported, that in the nauall battle before Actium,
wherein Antonius and Cleopater the queen were defeated by Augustus, one of
these fishes stayed the admiral ship wherein M. Antonius was at what time as
he made all the have and means he could devise with help of ores, to encourage
his people from ship to ship, and could not prevail, till he was forced to
abandon the said admiral and go into another galley. Meane-while the armada of
Augustus Caesar seeing this disorder, charged with great violence, and foone
invested the fleet of Antony. Of late days also, and within our remembrance,
the like happened to the roial ship of the Emperor Caius Caligula, at what
time as he rowed back and made sail from Astura to Antium; when and where,
this little fish detained his ship, and (as it fell out afterward) Caius
Caligula, he fumed and fared as an Emperor, taking great indignation that so
small a thing as it, should hold him back perforce, and check the strength of
all his mariners, notwithstanding there were no fewer than four hundred lusty
men in his galley that Periander to the cape of Gnidos: in regard whereof, the
inhabitants of Gnidos do Venus. Some of our Latin writers do call the said
fish that thus staieth a ship, by the name of Remora.

As touching the medicinable properties of the said stay-ship Echeneis or
Remora (call it whether you will) a wondrous matter it is to se^ the variety
of Greek writers: for some of them (as I have showed before) do hold, that if a
woman have it fastened either about her neck, arm, or otherwise, she shall go
out her full time if she were with child: also, that it will reduce her matrice
into the right place, if it were too loose and ready to hang out of her body.
Others again report the contrary, namely, That if it be kept in salt and bound
to any part of a woman great with child and in pain of hard travel, it will
cause her to have present deliverance; for which virtue, they call it by
another name i. Loosethrows, or ease-paine.
Odinolion. Well, howeuer it be, considering that mighty And in very truth, no
less admirable be the properties which are respected of the sea-Hare: for to
some a very poison it is, taken inwardly either in meat or drink: to others
again, the only aspect and sight thereof is as venomous. For if a woman great
with child chance but to see the female only of this kind, she shall sensibly
thereupon feel a sick wambling in her stomach, she shall presently fall to
vomiting, and anon to untimely labor, and the delivery of an abortiue fruit.
But what is the remedy? Let her wear about her arm in bracelets, any part of
the male, which ordinarily for this purpose is kept dry and hardened in salt,
she shall pass these dangerous accidents. The same fish is hurtful also in
the sea, if it be touched only. Neither is there any living creature that feeds
upon this fish, but it dies thereon, unless it be the sea Barbell only: all the
harm that this fish catches by eating of it is this, that the flesh is more
tender by that means, and nothing so fast as it was before; besides, the meat
is more unpleasant, and not so much Licinius Macer has left in writing) this
poison has no set and prefinit time wherein it kills any body. As touching
the sea-Hares among the Indians, it is constantly affirmed, that taken they
cannot be alive; and that by way of counterchange, a man is their poison: for
if he do no more but touch one of them with his finger in the sea, it will
forthwith die: And it is said withal, that far bigger he is there than in
other seas: like as all other beasts whatsoever. King Iuba in those books
which he wrote to C. Caesar, son to Augustus the Emperor, as

CHAP. II.
The natural wit, docilitie, and gentleness of some fishes. Also where they
be s^

Wonderful in my conceit is the wit and subtlety of some fishes, if all be
true which Ovid the Poet has reported of them, in that book of his which he
entitled Halieuticon: For first and foremost he says, That the Goldenie Scarus
perceiving himself to be taken in a weire, or enclosed within a wicker-net or
leap, never strives to get out again with the head forward, or to thrust his
muffle between the oisiers, for fear he should be caught by the head: but
turning his tail unto them, keeps such a flapping therewith, that he makes
himself

The Pulpe fish or Pourcuttell, makes at the very fishooks which he searches
after, and those he biteth not at, but claspeth hard and gripeth round about
with his clees and arms that he has: and never lets he his hold go,
until he has gnawne and eaten off the bait clean, unless before he have
done, he perceive that he is like to be drawn up out of the water by the
angle. The Mullet also knows that the bait has a hook within it, neither is
he ignorant that

The Lampreies devour the hooks, yea, they gobble in and swallow more than
so, until they come to the very lines, which they set their sharp teeth unto,
and never rest until they have fretted and gnawne them asunder. And Pytheas is
mine Author, who writes thus of them besides, Licinius Macer writes of
Lampries, that they be all of the female sex only, and do conceive by
serpents engendring with them, as I have heretofore observed: which is the
cause, that fishes lure them with hissing like unto serpents, and by that
means call them forth of their holes and catch them. He says moreover, That
they will feed fat with Lactatu: some read jactatu others luctatu, i. with
much striving and struggling.
milk: and if a man give them a good knock with a cudgill, they will not die
thereupon: rap them only with a Fennel stalk or some such wand, you shall
see them dead forthwith. And verily it is held for certain, that their life
lies in the tail: which if it be smitten, they are very soon gone and bereft
of vital breath: strike them upon the

There is a fish called a Rasoir: look whatsoever touches it, senteth
presently of iron.

Confessed it is and known for certain, that the Lompe, Paddle, or sea-Owle,
a fish called in Latin Orbis, of all others has tbe toughest and hardest
body. Shaped round it is without skales: a man that looks upon it, would say
it were all head.

Trebius Niger mine author affirms, That so often as the sea Kite is seen
to lance himself and fly without the water, it threateneth tempests.

The Sword-fish, called in Greek Xiphias, that is to say in Latin Gladius, i.
a sword, has a beak or bill sharp pointed, wherewith he will drive through
the sides and plankes of a ship, and bouge them so, that they shall sink
withal. The experience whereof is seen in the ocean, Trebius Niger reports,
That the sea-cats or Cuttle fishes, called Loligines, will fly out of the sea,
and settle upon ships in such multitudes, that they force them under water and
so drown them.

The Emperor Caesar had many fair houses of pleasure in the country, where he
kept fishes that would ordinarily come to hand and take meat. Our ancesters
made no such marvel thereat, namely, that they should be so gentle and
tractable in small stews and fish ponds where they be kept to feed: but they
have written the like of fishes in great lakes and standing pooles: And namely,
about Florus, a castle in Sicilie, not far from Syracusa: likewise, in a well
or fountain of Jupiter Labradius, there be yeels will take meat at ones hand,
and these wear earrings also about Apollo, called Curious, they will show
themselves of purpose to give presage and foreknowledge of things to come: and
the manner is, to call them to the top of the water with three whistles, of a
fife or such like pipe. The order is among those that come to be resolved by
them in some future events, to cast pieces of flesh to them: if they snatch the
same and swim away therewith, it is a lucky and fortunat sign, presaging a good
issue of their affairs about which they come; but in case they reject the
same, and flurt the meat from them with their tail, that is an ominous token,
and foresheweth some unhappy event to follow. About Hierapolis, a city in
Syria, the fish within Venus, obey the voice of the wardens or sextons who have
the keeping of her chapel there; and orderly they come at their call,
garnished with their ornaments of gold about them: they will abide to be
scratched and clawed, they will wag their tails like a dog in a fawning and
flattering manner; nay, they will gape with their mouths wide open, and suffer
them to thrust their hands or fingers into them. At Stabianum near to the
rock or cape of Hercules, the blacke-tailed ruffles or sea-breames, which the
Greeks name Melanuri, if a man cast crumbs Apion says,

That seafish has been used at Rome from time to time, and ever since the
very foundation of the city, it may appear by the testimony of Cassius
Hemina: which I will set down word for Numa (quoth he) ordained, That fishes
without skales should not be bought up by Caters for the furnishing of any
solemn funeral feast. By which inhibition his policy and purpose was, that
the great dinners, as well public as private; the feastiuall suppers also
which were kept at the shrines of the gods, should not be so costly and
chargeable: for fear also least the caters who made provision for such
sumptuous feasts, sparing for no cost, nor sticking at the price were it never
so high, might forestall the markets and buy the same up beforehand.

As touching Coral, we (here at Rome) set not more by the Indian orient
pearls (whereof I have written at large in place convenient) nor esteem them
at a greater price than those Indians do our Coral. And verily, if we deem
aright, it is the opinion and persuasion of people only, (...), because it is
cut and shorn (as it were) in the sea.
Curalium, as some make interpretation of the word. The reddest Coral is taken
to be the best: the same also branched most, is not rough and ragged under the
hand to feel to, or stone-hard: solid likewise it is and massy, not void and
hollow. The berries or beads which it bears, is of no less account and price
with the men of India, than the Indian pearls with our costly dames here. And
verily among them, their Wisards, Southsaiers, Priests, and Prophets, have a
religious opinion of them, and attribute great holiness to the use thereof; as
being persuaded, that whoeuer wear them, shall be secured against all perils
and dangers whatsoever; and therefore a special with any Coral, even in that
part of the world where it grows naturally. The branches of Coral

If I should speak of the repugnancie and contrariety in Nature (which the
Greeks call antipathie) found in many creatures, there is not to be seen in
the whole world any thing more venomous and adverse to plants than the Puffens
or Forke fish of the sea, called Pastinaca: for as I heretofore noted; it has
a prick in the tail, which is able to kill any trees that be pierced or
wounded withal. And yet a concurrent and enemy this has, which does
persecute and plague it, and namely the Lamprey called Galeos; so eager is it
and greedy of the venom and poison of that fish. There be other fishes also
which it pnrsueth, but those Puffins especially: and no Weazill hunteth more
after serpents. In sum, whosoever be hurt or wounded by the said

CHAP. III.
Of certain creatures which live as well upon the land as the sea. Of
Castoreum, or the genetoirs of a Bever: the medicinable virtues thereof, and
other properties observed therein.

THe power and majesty of Nature is very conspicuous and visible, even in
those creatures also which live indifferently on land and in the water: and
namely in the Beuers, which commonly the physicians call Castores, like as
their stones also Castorea. Some hold, that Sextius, who has written most
exactly in Physic, denies it flatly. He says moreover, that these cods be
small, knit short and trussed up, so as they stick close unto the chine bone,
and cannot possibly be taken from the beast but the life goes away withal. By
his saying also they are sophisticated; and the kidneys of the Beuer which are
big, be obtruded and foisted to us many times in stead of their stones, which
indeed are never found but very little and slender. Furthermore he affirms,
That they be not the right stones of a Beuer when they are seen without a
twofold burse or skin, which no living creature has besides. In these two bags
there is found (says he) a certain oleous liquor, which ordinarily is kept and
preserved with salt: And therefore among other marks to know false and
sophisticat Castoreum, is this, If you see a Vulvarumque exanimationes Vel
subdici. We practice the contrary.
or pessarie put up into the natural parts of women, is soueraign for the
rising of the mother; in which fit they lie as it were in a trance and out of
the world. Costoreum given to the weight of two drams with Peniroyall in water
to drink, moves women's monthly sickness, and forces the afterbirth to com
away. It helps those that have the dizzinesse or swimming of the brain; be
drawn backward with cramps, tremble and shake; are plucked with spasmes and
convulsions, diseased in their sinews;

CHAP. IIII.
Of the Tortoise. The medicines taken from many fishes, and diverse observations

SEmblably, Tortoises live in two places, and haunt both land and waters. Their
effectual properties besides are such as deserve like honor, as well in regard
of their manifold uses in sumptuous buildings (whereby they carry a great
price) as of their sundry virtues and operations which Nature has given them:
now of these Tortoises there be many kinds, to wit, land Tortoises, and sea
Tortoises. Tortoises found in muddy waters and marraies: Tortoises also that
keep in fresh river water; and these last named, some Greekewriters call
Emydes. The flesh of land Tortoises serves well in perfumes and suffumigations,
for so it is as good as a countercharm to put by and repel all forceries and
enchantments: a singular counterpoison also to resist any the heat of lust. And
I marvel the more hereat, because the powder of the whole shell indeed

The flesh of sea Tortoises, mixed and incorporat with the flesh of frogs, is a
soueraign remedy against the venom of Salamanders: neither is there any thing
more contrary in nature to

As touching those kind of Tortoises that live and breed in mud and moorie
waters, which I reckoned to be the third kind: broad they be and flat in the
back as well as upon the breast: neither does their shell arise arch-wise in
manner of a vault: these are il favored to see to, and yet as louelesse as they
be, they are not without some medicinable virtues and remedies: for take 3 of
them and throw them into a fire made of Vine twigs, or their cuttings; when
their shells or couers begin to divide in sunder and part one from another, pull
them hastily out of the fire, pluck the flesh out of their shells, sees them in
a gallon of water, with a little quantity of salt put thereto; thus let them
boil until a third part of the liquor be consumed: This broth or decoction if
it be drunken, is thought to be soueraign for those that be troubled either
with the palsy, gout, or pain of joints. The gall of these Tortoises purges
also phlegmatic humors and

To come now unto the fourth kind of Tortoises which keep in fresh rivers,
they afford an excellent remedy for to rid away a quartane ague, in this
manner prepared and used: first take certain tortoises, divide one piece from
another and take out the fat within, stamp the same with Anthonies fire:
likewise the running scalls of the head, and also werts. The same Authors do
promise and warrant, That with the dung of all sorts of Tortoises, the biles
called Pani may be discussed and resolved. And although it be incredible and
not to be spoken, yet some there be who have written, That any ship makes way
more slowly at Sea, that carries within it the right foot of a Tortoise. And
thus much shall suffice as touching Tortoises.

And now from henceforth as touching the fishes and other water creatures, I
mean to discourse of them and their medicinable properties, according to
every disease which they serve for. And yet I am not ignorant, that many a one
will be desirous to know all at once, the virtues

CHAP. V.
Sundry medicines and receipts taken from those living creatures which converse
in

HEretofore have I written of venomous honey, and the countties wherein such is
gathered and made: now if any be poisoned therewith, good it is to eat the fish
called Arata, i. a Guilt-head. Or say one be glutted with pure honey, or have
taken a surfeit thereof, being of all other most dangerous, whereby the appetite
is clean gone, and the stomach oppressed with crudities: for to prevent farther
danger, Pelops ordained for a special antidote or defenfatiue the meat of
tortoises boiled, after the head, feet, and tail were cut away. But Apelles in
this case attributes manner of poisons; whether it be that a man have taken it
by the mouth, or be stung and bitten

As touching fishes kept in salt, they are not without their medicinable
virtues: for to eat salt fish is very good for them who are stricken with
serpents, or otherwise bitten or stung by any venomous beast, so they drink to
it eftsoons pure wine of the grape, and withal be sure to cast up again by
vomit toward evening their foresaid meat which they did eat that day. The same
salt fish more peculiarly serves for them who have bin hurt and wounded with
the venomous Lizard or Chalcidica.
Chalcis, the horned serpent Cerastes, or the venomous horn-fretters called
Sepes: being otherwise singular to heal those who have bin smitten with the
serpent Elops, or bitten with the thirsty tooth of the worm Dipsas: but if a
man be pricked by the Scorpion, good it is for him to feed fully of saltfish,
howbeit in no wise to vomit the same up again, but rather to endure Cybium.
square piece or canton of the fish Tuny salted and condited. And since I have
named the sea-Dragon, this would be noted, That himself outwardly applied, is a
remedy for Democritus says, That if a man take out the tongue of a sea frog
alive, so that no other part thereof stick thereto, and after he has let the
frog go again into the water, apply the said tongue unto the left pap of a
woman while she sleeps, in the very place where the heart beats, she shall
answer truly and directly in her sleep, to any

Some frogs there be that live only among bushes and in hedges, which thereupon
we call in Latin by the name of Our Toads.
Rubetae, and the Greeks term them Phrynos: the biggest they are of all other,
with two knubs bearing out in their front like horns, and full of poison they
be. They that write of these toads, strive a-vie, who shall write most wonders
of them: for some say, that if one of them be brought into a place of concourse
where people are in great number assembled, they shall be all hushed and not a
word among them. They affirm also, that there is one little bone in their
right side, which if it be thrown into a pan of seething water, the vessel will
cool presently, and boil no more until it be taken forth again. Now this bone
(say they) is found by it will soon be known which is the bone, by the effect
aforesaid. There is another such like bone (by their saying) in the left side;
cast it into the water that has done seething, it will seem to

There is a certain kind of serpent or Snake haunting the water, called in
Latin Coluber; the fat and gall of which Serpent, if they have about them who
use to hunt after Crocodiles, it is wonderful (say they) how they be armed and
defenced against them; for they will not attempt to turn again upon the
hunters and give any assault: and yet of greater effect and force they shall
find it, in case there be incorporat withal, the pond-weed or water-speeke
called Potamogiton.

The river Creifishes, if they be taken fresh, stamped and given in water to
drink, are sovereign against all poisons: so is their ashes also a
counterpoison; but more particularly against Thrasillus mine Author does
report. Howbeit, he says nevertheless, that there are no such enemies to
serpents, as Crabs: and he affirms moreover, That if swine be stung or hurt
by serpents, they help and cure themselves by feeding upon sea-Crabs only,
and seek for no other

To come now to the river shell-snailes: most certain it is, that their flesh,
whether it be raw or boiled, is singular good to resist the venom of
scorpions inflicted by their prick or sting: and some there be, who for to
have them in a readiness to serve in those cases, keep them in salt: and they
ordain them to be applied unto the very sore it seife, occasioned by their
foresaid sting.

As for the [blacke] fishes named Coracini, they are peculiar and appropriate
unto the river

The Sea-swine or Porpuis, has pricky fins upon his back, and those are
counted amongst other

The Sea-calfe, otherwise named a Seal, has a certain grease, wherewith it
is good to anoint the face or visage of those, who by reason that they are
bitten with a mad dog, are afraid to drink and cannot away with water: but it
will work the better, if there be mingled therewith the marrow of an Hyaena,
the oil of the Mastich tree and wax, that all may be reduced into a liniment.

As for the biting of a Lamprey, there is not a better thing to heal it than
the ashes of a lampreys head. The Puffin likewise or Fork-fish, cures the
wound that himself inflicted; namely,

The mischievous venom of the sea-hare, [called otherwise Imbriago] is
quenched clean and mortified, by taking the flesh of the Seahorse any way in
drink.

Against the poison of deadly dwale, the meat of sea-vrchins is sovereign: and
whosoever have drunk the dangerous juice of Named after ward Opocarpasum. (...)
Carpasum, find much ease and help especially by supping their decoction. To
conclude, the broth of sea-crabs likewise taken, is thought to be effectual
against

CHAP. VI.
Of Oisters and Purple shell-fishes: of Sea-mosse, or Reits: and the remedies
which they afford.

Moreover, Oisters have a special virtue to resist the venom of the sea-hare.
And albeit I have written already of oisters, yet me thinks I cannot speak
sufficiently of them, seeing that for these many years they have bin held for
the principal dish and daintiest meat that can be served up to the table. This
fish loves to have fresh water, and joieth to be in those coasts by that means
to keep still their own native juice and humidity, and besides to gain
nouriture by the moisture of Lucrinus. Thus much as touching the substance and
body of Oisters: it remains now to speak of those parts and tracts where the
best oisters are to be had; to the end that such coasts may not be defrauded of
the honor due and appertaining unto them. But of this point speak I will by
the tongue of another, and allege his speech who is thought to have written
hereof with best judgment of any man in our time. These therefore be the
very words of Mutianus, which I will put down as follows: The oisters (quoth
he) of Cyzicum taken about the straights of Callipolis, be the fairest of all
other, and bigger than those which are fed or bred in the lake Lucrinus,
sweeter than those of Britain, more pleasant in the mouth than the Edulian,
quicker in taste than those of Leptis, fuller than the Lucensian, drier than
those of Coryphanta, more tender than the Istrian, and last of all, whiter than
the oister of Circeij: and Alexanders voiages and exploits, have left in
writing, that within the Indian sea there be oisters found a foot long every
way. Moreover, there is among us a certain Nomenclator or Controller belonging
to one of our prodigal and wastful spend thrifts here at Rome, who have given
a proper name to certain oisters, and termed them Tridacna: his desire was by
that significant name, to express thus much, That they were so big as that
they would make three good bits or mouths-full a piece.

Now proceed I will to their medicinable virtues, and before I go any further,
in this very place set down how far forth they serve in physic. First and
foremost, they be the only meat to comfort and refresh a decayed stomach: they
recover an appetite that was clean gone. But see the

Moreover, the Shell-fishes called Purples, are very good against poison.

As for the reits Kilpe, Tangle, and such like sea-weeds, Nicander says, they
are as good as treacle Nicander gives direction, to take the said treacle in
wine

CHAP. VII.
Medicines against the shedding of hair. For to color the hair of the head.
Also against the accidents of the ears, teeth, and vis age.

IF by occasion of some infirmity the hair be fallen off or grow very thin,
the ashes of the fish Also the ashes of the sea-Tortoise incorporat with oil:
of a sea-vrchin likewise burnt and Muris marini
calcined flesh and all together: as also the gall of a scorpion, be appropriat
medicines to recover hair that was lost. In like manner take the ashes of 3
frogs burnt together alive in an earthen pot, meddle them with honey, it is a
good medicine to cause hair to grow: but the operation will be the better, in
case the same be tempered with liquid pitch or tar. If one be disposed to
color the hair of the head black, let him take horse-leeches which have
putrified and been resolved together in some gross red wine for the space of
60 days, he shall find this to be an excellent medicine. Others there be who
give order, to put as many horse-leeches as a sextar will hold, in two sextars
of vinegar, and let them putrify within a vessel of lead as many days
together; and when they be reduced into the form of a liniment, to anoint the
hair in the sunshine for the same purpose. And Sornatius attributes so much
power unto this composition, that unless Menander the Poet in his comedies:
the same fish is otherwise called I. Looking up to heaven
Vranoscopus, by reason of the eyes which he has in the uppermost part of his
head. Semblably the gall of the black fish Coracinus quickneth the eie-sight.
Also the gall of the reddish seascorpions, mixed with old wine or the best honey
of Athens, serves to discuss the filmes of the eyes like to breed a cataract:
and thrice must the eyes be anointed therewith, letting a day go ever
between. The same cure serves likewise to take away the pearl in the eye. As
for Barbels, it is commonly said, that if one do feed ordinarily upon them, he
shall sensibly feel his eyes to decay and wax dim thereby. The sea-hare it
self verily is venomous; but the ashes keep the disorderly and hurtful hairs
of the eie-lids from growing any more, if they be once plucked up by the roots:
and for this purpose, the least of this kind are the best. In like manner, the
little is brought out of Pontus: the same also is white without any veins,
strings, or scales, and very

A little frog there is, delighting to live most among grass and in Calametes.
reed plots: mute the same is and never croaketh, green also of color: if kine
or oxen chance to swallow one of them down with their grass, it causes them
to swell in the belly, as if they were dew blown. And yet (they say) that if
the slime or moisture wherewith their bodies be charged outwardly, be scraped
off with the edge of some penknife, it clears the sight, if the eyes be
anointed therewith. As for the flesh it self, they lay it upon the eyes for
to mitigat their pain. Furthermore, some there are who take 15 frogs, prick
them with a rish, and draw the same through them, that they may hang Meges the
Chyrurgian devised another depilatory for to hinder the growing of hairs, made
of frogs which he killed in vinegar, and permitted them therein to putrfiie and
resolve into moisture: and for this purpose his manner was to take many fresh
frogs, even as they were engendered in any rain that fell during the Autumn. The
same depilatory

The fresh gall of a Ray or Skeat, yea, and the same preserved and kept long in
old wine, is an excellent medicine for the ears: so is the gal likewise of the
fish Banchi. Some read Bac^i.
Bancus, which some call Myxon: also of Callionymus the fish aforesaid, if it be
dropped into the ears with oil rosat: semblably Castoreum with the juice of
Poppie. There be also in the sea certain creepers engendered, called Pedunculi,
i. sea-lice, which being stamped and tempered with vinegar, they give counsel
to Recipe of the best sauce or pickle called Garum Sociorum that may be gotten,
one cyath, of honey one cyath and an half, of vinegar one cyath, sees them all
together gently over a soft fire in a new pot, eftsoon skimming it in the
boiling with a feather; and when it has left casting up a scum and is
sufficiently purified, take it from the fire: and of this decoction warm drop
into the pained ears. If the ears be swelled withal, they ordain and
prescribe to mitigat and assuage the same first, with the juice honey, or of the
Purples Conchylia, with honied wine.

If the teeth ache, the ready means to assuage them, is to scarifie the gums and
let them blood Exusta, not E^ta, according to Galen.
burnt to a cole in a new earthen pan, and afterward beaten to powder, are
thought to be good for the tooth ach. Sallustius Dionysius found the means to
hang many of them by the hinder legs over the vessel or pan of seething
vinegar, that out of their mouth there might fall the humor within their bodies
into the said vinegar. But to those who had good stomachs and were of stronger
complexions, he prescribed to eat the very frogs broth and all wherein they
were sodden. And in very truth, many are of this opinion, that if the grinders
and great jaw teeth do ache, this is a special medicine for them; but in case
they be

The fat of a sea-Calfe or Seal takes away the foul tettars called Lichenes,
and the filthy leprosy: so do the ashes of Lampreys, if the same be incorporat
with honey to the weight of 3 oboli. The liver also of the Puffin boiled in
oil. Finally, the ashes of a sea Horse and a Dolphin mixed with water, so that
the part affected be well rubbed withal until it blister. Now, when it is
thus exulcerat, it must be followed with that manner of cure which is
appropriat thereto, and namely, until it be healed and skinned again. Some
take the liver of a Dolphin, and fry or torrifie it in an earthen pan, until
there come from it a kind of grease in manner of oil, and therewith anoint the
patients in the cases abouesaid.

If women desire to be rid of the foul frectles, spots, and morphew that do
injury unto their not hollow, but fair and full. Mary upon the 8 day they must
not forget to foment and bath the place with the white of an egg well beaten.
Among the kinds of Burrets called Murices, are to be ranged those shell-fishes
which the Greeks some call Colycia, others Corythia, shaped in the shell like
to the rest in manner of a turbant, but that they be far less, howbeit more
effectual: for that besides the other properties abouenamed, this special
gift they have, to maintain a sweet breath. As for the fish or glue called
Ichthyocolla, it has virtue to lay the skin even without riuels, and to make
it rise and appear firm, but then it ought to boil in water the space of 4
hours, afterward to be stamped, Colata.
strained, and wrought to the liquid consistence of honey and no more. Thus
prepared, it must be put up into a new vessel never occupied, and there kept.
When time serves to use it, to every 4 drams weight thereof proportion two of
brimstone, of Orchanet as much, of litharge of silver 8 drams: put them all
together, and stamp them, with some sprinkling of water among. Herewith let
the face be anointed, and after four hours wash it off again. For the
spots and pimples in the face, called Lentils, as also for all other
deformities, the ashes of Curtill bones are thought singular, if the skin be
rubbed therewith: and the same consume the excrescence of proud and rank flesh,
like as they dry up any moist and rheumaticke ulcers.

CHAP. VIII.
Diverse receipts, set down disorderly one with another, for sundry maladies.

ONe Frog boiled in five hemines of seawater, is singular to cause the scurfe
of the mange

There is engendered in the sea also that which is called Halcyoneum, made as
some think of the nests of the birds Halcyones and Ceyces: but as others
suppose, of the filthy some of the sea thickened and indurat: and according to
the opinion of some, it proceeds from the muddie slime or a certain
Halos^chnes
hoary dry scum or froth of the sea. Four kinds there be of it. The first of
an ash color, thick and massy, of a quick and hot smell. The second is soft
and more mild, favoring in manner like to sea weeds. The third resembles the
whiter kind of checquer work in marquettry. The fourth is more hollow and
fuller of holes in manner of a pumish stone, and in that respect resembles a
rotten sponge, inclining much to the color of purple: and this is simply
Andreas the Physician used much the ashes of a sea-crab incorporat with oil in
curing the leprosy. Attalus occupied as usually the fat of a fresh Tuny, new
taken, for the healing of ulcers. The pickle of Lampreies, together with the
ashes of their heads calcined, and brought into a liniment with honey, heals
the kings evil. And many are of opinion, that to prick the wennes named The
Frenchmen term it Diable de meri. the devil of the sea.
Rana marina, with this gage and rule of the hand that it wound not deep, is
very good for that disease: but the same must be done every day until they be
thoroughly cured and whole. Of the same operation is the sharp prick in a
Puffen: of the sea-hare also applied to them, so as neither the one nor the
other be suffered to lie long to the place, but be soon renewed. Also the
shelly skin of the sea-Vrchin stamped to powder and brought into a liniment
with vinegar: as also the ashes of the sea Scolopendre incorporat with honey:
and the river craifish either puluerized or calcined, and the dust or ashes
thereof likewise tempered with honey, are good to be applied to the same
disease. Wonderful effectual be the bones also of the cuttill fish beaten to
powder, and with old swines grease brought into the form of a liniment: and in
called the kings evil. The stiff cricke in the neck is mollified and made
pliable again, so as it Some take it for the Sturgeon, but untruly
Silurus eaten at the table either fresh or poudered, helps the voice much.
The barbels kept until they be dried, and then puluerized, provoke vomit, if a
cup of drink be spiced with the powder. If a man or woman be short winded,
there is not a medicine again so good to help that difficulty of breath, as to
drink whiles they be fasting, Castoreum, with a little quantity of Ammoniack in
honied vinegar. The same potion taken likewise with honied vinegar hot,
allaieth the convulsion of the stomach proceeding from excessive yexing or
hicquets. Item, it is said, that Frogs boiled in some broth between two
platters after the manner of fishes, are good for a cough: and being hanged by
the

CHAP. IX.
Proper receipts for the accidents of the Liver and the sides: for the
infirmities also of

MAny use to suffocate and kill in wine a sea Scorpion, and to drink thereof
for the pain of the liver. For the same purpose many are wont to take in
honied wine and water of each a like quantity, the flesh of the long muskles or
shell fishes: or if they have a fever, in honied water. In case of pleurisy or
pain of the sides, the flesh of the sea horse roasted, eases the same: so does
the fish Tethea, which resembles an Oyster, taken as meat. The pickle of the
fish Silurus injected by way of clystre allaieth the pain of the sciatica. To
the like effect there are given for 15 days together, Cockles, or Muskles, to
the weight of 3 oboli infused in two sextars of Ol^ marin^: happily he means
Brassica ma^ina, i. (...), yet it is nothing like to our Colewort
sea-wort is like to that of the garden, hurtful to the stomach, but most
easily it purges the belly. In regard of the acrimony that it has, they use to
sees it with some fat flesh. The broth of any fish whatsoever is laxatiue: the
same prouokes urine, especially if it be madeof wine. The best fish broth comes
from the Sea Scorpions, and those which they call Iulides: of stone fishes also
that keep about rocks, and have no rank or strong taste; and such must be
sodden with dill, parsely, coriander, and leeks, putting thereto oil and salt.
The squares also or cantons of the Tunie, that have bin old kept, are
purgative, for particularly they euacuate crude and waterish humors, besides
phlegm and choler. The shel-fishes also named Myaces, have a quality purgative:
as touching whose nature I purpose to write fully in this very place. They
gather together by The broth of these fishes has the name to euacuat both the
belly and bladder, to scour and mundifie Potus, rather illitus, t^r (...)
brought in^o (...) liniment, and (...) used outwardly.
taken in drink, have a virtue to discuss the dimnesse and mistiness of the
eie-sight, to cure the accidents of the gums and teeth; and besides, to dry up
the small pocks and such like breaking out of wheals by occasion of phlegm.
Moreover, they are as good as a counterpoison against the juice of the deadly
Dwale called Dorycnium, or of Carpasum, which is commonly named Opocarpasum.
Besides, this would be noted, that they grow all to be of two kinds of them;
the one Salem. Some read Sc^la. i. sea O^ion or Squilla. (...) Mu^kles, ^Haply
Cockles.
Mituli [i. Limpins] which have a taste of salt, and carry a strong savor; the
other * Myscae, which differ from the other in roundnesse: less also they be a
good deal, and hairy: and as their shells be thinner, so their flesh is more
firm and hard. The said Limpins also, as well as Burrets, yield ashes when they
be calcined, which have a caustic quality, whereby they serve properly to
mundifie the skin from leprosy, lentils, and other pimples

Moreover, there grows in the sea a kind of Wormwood, which some call
Seriphium, and principally toward Taphosiris.
Taposiris in Egypt, the which is more small and slender than that of the land:
it loses the belly, kills the worms in the guts, and expels them. The
Cuttil fish also is laxatiue: and ordinarily given it is to be eaten, after it
has bin sodden with oil, salt, and meal. Salt Cackerels likewise provoke unto
the stool, in case they be reduced into a liniment with bulls gall, and
therewith the nauil anointed. Generally, the broth of fish stewed between two
platters with Lectuce, dispatcheth those sharp and fretting humors which are
the cause of the Tinesm. Craifishes of the river stamped and drunk in water,
stop a lask, and be diureticall. But yet in wine they move appetite to the
siege. Take away their feet and arms whereby they

To appease the painful passion called Iliaca, to allay and resolve
ventosities also and inflations, there is not a better thing than to take in 4
cyaths of mead or honied wine hot, Castoreum, with carot and parsley seed, as
much as may be comprehended with 3 fingers. The same is singular to allay the
wrings and torments of the belly, with vinegar and wine mixed together. The
fishes named Erythini eaten as meat, stay the loosnesse of the belly. For to
cure the dysenterie or bloody flix, sees frogs with the sea onion commonly
named Squilla, and thereof make certain Niceratus mine author does testify.
Eat salt fish with Pepper, so as you abstain from all flesh besides, if you
would be cured of the jaundise. Lay the fish named a Sole to the region of the
spleen, it does cure the oppilation and hardness thereof: so does the
cramp-fish Torpedo: and a Turbet in like manner, being applied alive; but
afterward Recipe of wax and flax 20 drams, of litharge of silver forty drams,
of Burrets ashes ten drams, of old oil one hemin, fiat vnguentum. The very
fishes alone by themselves, salted, sodden, and so applied, serve in this case.
Craifishes of the rivers punned into a cataplasme and applied unto the secret
parts, resolve and discuss the pushes that there arise: so do the ashes of
Cackerels heads: their flesh also boiled and laid to the place affected. In
like manner, the ashes of Perches heads salted and reduced into a salve with
honey. The ashes of young Tunies heads, whiles they are Pelamides, or the rough
skin of the fish called Some take it for a Sole, others for a Skeat.
Squatina, burnt. This is the skin which, as I said before, is proper to polish
wood and make smooth any works made thereof: whereby you may see, that even
the sea also does afford instruments to fit the Ioiners to extinguish the heat
of carbuncles and botches in the said secret parts. If one of the cods hang
down flagging unseemly lower than his fellow, some would have it anointed
with the

CHAP. X.
Remedies for fevers of all sorts: also for diverse other infirmities.

THe liver of a Dolphin eaten before the access, cures all those agues which
be not continual, but return by fits and keep their course. Oil rosat
wherein the fishes called Seahorses neck or tied to his arm, surely it will
diminish and shorten the cold fit of an ague: like as the (...) sopori^.
fall asleep, there is not a better thing than to rub the nosthrils with some
convenient ointment, or to hold thereto some perfume, Anthonies fire, the
bellies of live frogs applied to the place, do extinguish and quench the
extremity of their heat: but in any case order is given, that they be tied by
the hinder legs with their mouths bending forward; to the end, that their
often breathing also upon the place, may cool and do good. Furthermore, many
there be who use for that purpose, the ashes of the heads of the fishes called
Siluri: as also of saltfish with vinegre, and apply the same to such wildfires
and inflammations. The liver of a Puffen or Forkefish sodden in oil, being
outwardly applied, kills not only the itch and scab of men, but also in a
lethargy: so does fish-glew Ichthyocolla. Such as are given to the shaking and
trembling Sanguinem cicri.
causes bleeding, so the same may be stanched with the poulpe or pourcuttle,
if it be stamped and applied to the place: of which fish, thus much moreover is
reported, That of himself he yields a certain salt pickle, and therefore
there should be no salt put into the liquor while he is seething: Item, that it
ought to be sliced and cut with an edged reed; for with an iron knife it will
take infection, and the nature of it is such as to Retinente.
keep and retain it still. For the stanching of blood, they use also the ashes
of frogs, or else their blood dried, to be applied accordingly. But some would
have the ashes to be made of that kind of frog, which the Greeks name
Calamites, because it lives among reeds, bushes, and shrubs, and of all [i.
Bloudsuckers] are used for to draw blood. And verily it is judged that there is
the same reason of them, as of ventoses and cupping-glasses used in physic,
for to ease and discharge the body of blood, and to open the pores of the skin.
But here is all the harm and discommoditie of these horsleeches, That if they
be once set too for to draw blood, the body will look for the same physic
again every year after, about the same time, and be ill at ease for want
thereof. Many physicians have thought it good to use them for the gout of the
feet also. Well, Messalinus a noble man of Rome, and who in his time had bin a
Consul, whose forturne it was to die thereupon, having set them to his knee:
whereby we may see, that oftentimes they bring a mischief for a remedy: and
the red ones are they that in this respect ought to be feared. To prevent
therefore this dangerous inconvenience, they use with a pair of sizzers to clip
them at the very mouth as they be sucking; and then shall you see the blood
spring out, as it were at the cock of But the hollow sores commonly known by
the name of Fistuloes, are enlarged, kept open, yea Hyssopo, otherwise Oesypo,
i. the tried grease of unwashed wool.
hyssop they set them a going and purge them away. Say that the infant stick
in the birth, and by reason of painful labor be in danger of suffocation, let
the mother drink the same in like manner, there will present help ensue. Women
with child use also either to eat them fresh, or drink them dried, Hippocrates
uses the same, and prescribes unto women for the bringing down of their
sickness, and likewise to thrust out the infant dead in their wombs, to drink
them in honied wine with five dock roots, stamped together with ^e and soot:
and in very truth, sodden with sorrel or docks and parsley, they force women's
months to come down speedily, if the broth be drunk; and withal, bring
plenty of milk into nurces breasts. If women have an ague, and the same
accompanied with headache and much twinkling or inordinat palpitation of the
eyes, it is thought they shall find much good by drinking them in some hard and
austere wine. Castoreum taken inwardly in honyed wine, is singular to help
forward women's monthly purgation: the same being held to their nosthrils with
vinegre and pitch to smell unto; or put up beneath in manner of a suppositorie,
after it is take the weight of three Oboli thereof, shall avoid the danger that
may come to them Salpe had for boys, to make them beardlesse and appear
always young, and to set them out the better for sale. Of the same operation
is the fish called Pulmo Marinus, the Sea-hare likewise, I mean the blood and
gall of them both: and as for the said Sea-hare, being but stifled and killed
in oil, it is as effectual. The ashes of the Sea-crab and Scolopendre both;
the Sea-nettle [a fish so called] incorporat with vinegre squillitick; the
brains of the crampfish Torpedo tempered with alume, be all depilatories, if
the place be anointed therewith the morrow after the moon is at the full. The
bloody moisture that coms from the little frog, which I described heretofore in
the cure belonging to eyes, is the strongest depilatorie that is, and works

To come now unto the gumbs of children, and their breeding of teeth: the ashes
of dolphins teeth mixed with honey, is a soueraign medicine: yea, or if you do
but touch their gumbs with a dolphins tooth all whole as it is, the effect
thereof is admirable: the same hanged about their necks, or tied to any part of
the body, riddeth them of sudden frights, whereunto infants are much given. Of
the same effect is the tooth also of a dogfish. As for the ulcers or sores
incident to their ears, or any other part of their body, the broth of river
creifishes thickened with barley meal, heales them. For other diseases also of
breaking out, a liniment made of them and oil incorporat together in a mortar,
is singular good, if they be anointed all over therewith. Touching

A Barble drowned in wine, or the fish called a Rochet, or also two Eeles;
likewise the fish named

The stay-ship Echeneis, the skin of a Seahorse forehead, especially toward
the left side, wrapped within a little linen cloth, and so hanged about one;
or the gall of a live Crampe-fish, applied unto the genitall members in manner
of a liniment, be all means to cool the wanton lust of the flesh:
contrariwise, the flesh of river Creifishes powdered and kept in salt, given in
wine to drink, do stir and provoke the appetite unto venerie. Moreover, to
feed upon the fishes called Erythrines ordinarily at the table: to hang about
the neck the liver of the frog called Diopetes or Calamita, within a little
piece of a cranes skin; or the jaw tooth of a Crocodile fastened to any arm;
either else the Seahorse, or the sinews of a Toad, bound to the right arm,
incite

The broth of froggs boiled in water, do extenuat the scuruie thick roufe in
the farcins or mange of horses, and make way that they may be bathed and
anointed: and verily it is credibly affirmed, that if they be cured after this
manner, the scab will never return again. The expert midwife Salpe affirms
for certain, That dogs will not bark, if there be given unto them in a
morcell of bread or gobbet of flesh, a live frog.

In this discourse of Water, and the things concerning it, somewhat ought to be
said as touching Calamochnus, which otherwise in Latin is named Adarca: it
grows about small canes

As for Reeds and Canes, this is their very proper place also, wherein they
should be treated of. And to begin with that reed or cane called Phragmitis,
which is so good for mounds and hedges; the root thereof green gathered and
punned, is singular for dislocations, and the pain of the backebone, if the
place affected be anointed with it, incorporat in vinegre. But the rind of the
Cyprian cane, which also is named Donax, burnt into ashes, is singular for to
recover hair again where it was shed by occasion of sickness, and to heal
old ulcers. The leaves also serve Anthonies fire. As for the flower or down of
their catkins, if it chance to enter into the ears, it causes deafness. The
black liquor resembling ink, which is found in the cuttle-fish, is of that
force, that if it be put to the oil of a lamp burning (Anaxilaus says) it
will drown and put out the former clear light, and make all those in the room
to look like blackamores or Aethiopians. The hedge frog, otherwise called a
toad, boiled in water and given to swine among other draffe to drink, cures
all their diseases: and of the same effect are the ashes of any other frogs
besides. Rub a piece of wood with the fish called Pulmo Marinus, it will seem
as though it were on a light fire; in so much as a staff so rubbed or
besmeared with it, may serve in stead of a torch to give light before one.

CHAP. XI.
That there be of fishes and other creatures living in the Sea, one hundred
seventy and six several and distinct kinds.

Having thus treated before sufficiently of the natures and properties of
Fishes, and such creatures as the water does yield; it remains now for a
final conclusion, to present under one view, all those fishes name by name,
which are engendered and nourished not only in those mediterranean and inland
arms of the sea, which for many a mile take up a great part of the continent
and firm land, but also in that vast and wide ocean without the main, bounded
as it were limited only by the compass and circumference of the heaven: and
those, namely as come to the knowledge of, seeing we have found so many
different sorts in men, of whom we have some notice and intelligence? to say
nothing of Ta probane, and other Islands lying within

To begin then with the greatest monsters and beasts that this unruly Element
of the water does breed: we find therein the sea-Trees, Whirlepooles, greater
Whales, Priests, Tritons [i. sea Trumpetters] Nereides [i. Meremaids]
Elephants, sea Men and Women, Wheels, sea Tuns or Pipes, So called of the
form of warlick engines of battery, called in Latin Arietes.
Rams, and smaller Whales accompanying the bigger. Besides, other And yet have
some proportion of the land beast so called.
Rams that resemble Homer writes so much. Furthermore, the sea Tortoises,
which serve for Luxuriae, happily because the form of a Lute was devised first by
the shel thereof: or sumptuous buildings either tramed archwise according to
the^, o^els. dorned and seeled with their shells by Marquetage.
roiot, wantonness, and excess: the Beuers, which are so much in request
among By reason of th^r stones, which yield Castoreum.
Physicians. As for the Otters, albeit a kind of Beuers they are, yet because I
never heard that they came into the salt water, I make no great reckoning of
them; for my purpose is to rehearse those only which inhabit or haunt the sea:
moreover, the sea Dogs: the Curriors, Posts, or Lacquies of the sea: the horned
fishes: the Swordfish or Emperor of the sea, and the Sawfish. Over and
besides, those which live indifferently in the sea, the land, and the river, to
wit, the water Horses and the Crocodiles: others again that ordinarily keep in
the sea, and yet come up into the rivers, but never land, to wit, the Tunies,
as well the grown Thunnies, as the younger sort, Some take T^nat for the
Milters and Thunaides for Spawners.
Thunnides or Pelamides. The Siluri, the ^c ^ensar.
Sturgeon, the Guilthead, the cod, the Acarne, Aphya, Alopecias, the Yeels, and
A kind of C^ab, which (...) S. Bar^dth Heremite.
Araneus. The billowing fish Box, Batis, Banchus, Disble de mer.
Barrachus, and Belone, with all the kind of those which we call Needle
fishes, and also Balanus. The sea Raven Corvus, and A kind of ^bot.
Cytharus: all the sorts of the Chrombi: the Carpe, Chalcis, and A Gougeon.
Cobio: Callarius of the Cods kind, but that it is less: Colias, whether it be
Parianus [of Parium the Colony] or Sexitanus, so called of a city in Granado or
Baetica, a fish La ^torum aemulus, as Dalechampius reads.
resembling Lizards: of which and of the young Tunie Pelamis (both bred in
Moeotis) being chopped and cut into pieces and so salted, are made those
Quadrants or Squarerands, called Cybia. For this you must understand, that the
Tunie is called Pelamis, Dalechampius reads i^ contrartwise, and corrects
the place out of Aristotle.
when after 40 days he returns out of Pontus or the Euxine sea into Moeotis:
whereas the said small Pelamis i. the Nettle, all the sorts of Crabs, the gaping
small Cockles and Muskles, whether they be the rough Chamae-trachaae, the smooth
Cnamae-Ieoi, or the Chamae-pelorides: which be of diverse kinds distinct ^ne
from another, both in form of roundnesse, and variety of colors: as also the
Cockles named Chamae-glycimerides, which be bigger than the former Pelorides,
together with those that the Greeks call Colycia or Corophya. Moreover, sundry
sorts of other shell fish, and among them those that engender and bear
pearls, and thereof be called Mother-pearls. The wilkes also and Which some
take for the Pike^ell,
Garus. Also the coast Crabfish called Hippeus, or Sea-horseman Hippuros; the
sea Swallow fish, Halipleumon, Which are a kind of oysters
ears of the sea called Otia, and Orcynus. This fish of the Tunie kind named
Pelamides is the biggest, and never returns again into Moeotis, like unto a
Triton; and the meat thereof is the better for age. The Lompe, Paddle, or sea
Owl, and the grunting Molebout: moreover, the fish Phager, the Mole or Lepo
counted among stonefishes, and the Pelamis, the greatest of which kind is
called Ovid, which are not to be found in any other Author: But happily those
breed in the great sea of Pontus, in which realm he began that book De Ponto,
in his later Some read Bos-piger.
Bopgyrus, which lives among the rocks: the red Orphus, and the black
Rhacinus, the painted and streaked Mormyrae, and the golden colored Chrysos.
Moreover, the little Teragus, and Labrus with the fair and pleasant tail.
Likewise the Epodes, which are of the broad or flat kind, named Lati. All these
be notable fishes: but over and besides, he reports the special properties and
nature of some: as namely that the Chaune does conceive of it self without a
mile: that the Glaucus never is to be seen in Summer: that Pompilus always
accompanies the ships under sail: and Chronius builds a neast in the very
water. He says moreover, That Helops is a stranger to us in this part of the
world, and not known in our seas: whereby it is evident that they be deceived
who take it for the Sturgeon Acipenser; and yet many reckon this Elops to have
the daintiest taste, and to be the most delicat

Thus much of Fishes worth the naming. For besides these, I am not ignorant
that there be

THE XXXIII. BOOK OF
WRITTEN BY C. PLINIVS SECVNDVS.
Of Metals and Minerals, and their natures. The Proem.
NOw is it time to enter into the discourse of the Metals and Minerals, the
very riches and precious treasure of the World, which men so curiously and
carefully seek after, as that they stick not to search into the very bowels
of the earth by all the means they can devise: for some you shall have (to
enrich themselves) for to dig into the ground for mines of gold and silver,
base metal Electrum, Copper and gems and precious stones, for such Minerals
(I say) which may serve partly to adorn their fingers, and partly to set out
the walls of sumptuous buildings with costly colors, rich marble, and
porphyries. Lastly, there be many, who maintain rash quarrels and audacious
attempts, spare for no labor to get iron and steel, and esteeming it better
than gold, for cruel wars and bloody murders. In sum there is not a
vain in the whole earth but we pry and search into it: we follow it also so
far as it goes. Thus having undermined the poor ground, we live and go
alost upon it, as over hollow vaults and arches under our feet: and yet we
would seem to wonder, that otherwhiles she cleaves asunder into wide and
gaping chinkes, or else trembles and quaketh again: and we will not see how
these be apparent signs of the wrath of this our blessed mother, which we
bring and force from her, to express the indignation that she takes for this
wrong and misusage. We descend into her intrailes an end of these mines,
hollowing the ground as they do in all ages from time to time, and making it
void * Chrysocolla, i. Gold-soder.
unto gold, whereby it might be thought more dear and precious. For why? we
thought not the invention and finding out of gold alone to be enough for to
infect and corrupt our hearts, unless we made great account also of that vile
and base mineral, which is the very ordure of gold and no better. Men upon a
covetous mind would needs seek for silver, and not satisfied therewith, thought
good withal to find out Mineral vermilion, devising means how to use that
kind of red earth. Oh the monstrous inventions of man's wit! What a number of
ways have we found to enhaunce the price and value of every thing! for
painters of the one side with their artificial painting and enameling: the
grauers on the other side with their curious

CHAP. I.
When mines of gold grew first into request. The beginning of gold rings. The
quantity of gold in treasure among our ancestors in old time. Of the
Cavallerie and Gentry of the Romans. The privilege of wearing golden Rings.

OH that the use of gold were clean gone: Would God it could possibly be quite
abolished among men, setting them as it does into such a cursed and excess^iue
thirst after it, if I may use the words of most renowned writers Homer (a
writer of good credit) does testify. And in that manner (as I take it) began
first the commerce of negotiation among men for the maintenance of their
society and living together: for so he reports, That some bought that which
they stood in need of, for Boeufes hides, others, for iron or such commodities
as they had gotten in booty from their enemies Homer himself esteemed gold of
great price, as may appear by the aestimat that he made thereof in comparison
of brass, when he says, That Glaucus exchanged his golden armor, worth 100
It is thought that hereby are meant certain pieces of silver coin, stamped
with the portraiture of a bull or ox, called Didrachma and were worth two drams
or d^niers Roman. (...).
oxen, for the [brasen] harne is of Diomedes, which was valued but at nine
Boeufs: according to which manner practiced in those days, even at Rome also
(as may appear by the old records) there were no other penalties and fines
imposed Prometheus, I hold them all but fabulous tales: and yet in all the
ancient pictures and portraitures of him, he is to be seen by a general
consent of antiquity, with a ring of iron: howbeit, I suppose that they
represented thereby his bonds and his imprisonment, rather than any custom
that he had to wear a ring as an ornament upon his finger. And verily
concerning the ring of K. Gyge^ rather, as appears by Plato, and Cicero.
Midas, which if the collet were turned about toward the palm of the hand,
caused them to go invisible that so wore it: is there any man (think you) that
judges it Prometheus? But to come more particularly unto gold, the greatest
credit and authority that it got, was by wearing it in rings upon the fingers,
and those only and altogether upon the left hand. And yet this was no fashion
at first among the Romans, whose manner was to use no other but of iron, to
show that they were good soldiers, skillful and expert in feats of arms.
Whether the ancient kings of Rome were wont to have gold rings upon their
fingers, I am not able to say for certain. Sure it is, that the statue of king
Romulus in the Capitol has none. Neither is there any to be seen in the other
statues of the Roman kings, save only of Numa, and Servius Tullius; no nor in
that of Lucius Brutus: Whereat I marvel much, and especially at the two
Tarquines kings of Rome, considering that they were descended of the Greeks,
from whence came up the first usage of these gold rings, howsoever yet at this
day in Tarquinius Priscus, the first of all the Tarquins, honored a son of
his with a brooch or tablet of gold pendant at his neck, for that whiles he was
under 16 years of age, and as yet in his Praetexta, he had killed an enemy in
plain fight. And thereupon was taken up the manner first, (which also continued
afterward) to hang that Called Bulla, which was in form of the heart: and
after they were grown to be men, i. at 17 years of age they off^red it up to
the Lares: like as young maidens mariageable presented Venus with young babies of
clouts such as they were wont to make and play withal, as being now desirous
to have babes indeed of their own bodies. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 2 cap. 25. (...)
li. c cap. 18.
ornament about the necks of those gentlemen's sons who were men at arms and
served in the wars on horseback, in token of knighthood and cheualrie:
whereas other men's sons ware a riband only. And therefore great marvel I
have at the statue of the said prince king Tarquine, surnamed Priscus, that it
should be without a ring on his finger. And yet besides all this, I read, that
there has been some variance and difference in old time about the naming of
rings: The Greeks imposed a name derived from the C. Marius over K. Iugurtha:
and as the Cronicles do show, received not a golden ring, nor took upon him to
wear it before his third Consulship. And even those also who from the State
had golden rings given them, in regard of embassage aforesaid, never used them
but when they came abroad into open place, for within doors they might ware
none but of iron: which is the reason, that even at this day the wedding ring
which the bridegroom sends as a token It was called Pronubus Anulus.
of espousals to his bride, is of iron simply without (...)
any stone set in it. Neither, so far as I can find by reading, were there
any golden rings in use and request about the time of the Trojane Homer makes
no mention of them at all, who otherwise speaks of the bravery and rich
attire of those times. And when he talks of writing tablets, sent ordinarily
in stead of letters missiue; when he writes of cloths and apparels bestowed in
chists and coffers; when he tells us of vessels, as well gold as silver
plate; he says they were all bound and trussed fast with some sure knot, and
not sealed up with any mark of a ring as the order is in these days. Moreover,
when he reports of any challenge made by the enemy to single fight, * As of
Uulcan
to the attire of women, as eare-rings and such like of their making, which at
the beginning were commonly made, but he speaks not one word of golden rings.
And verily in my conceit whosoever began first to wear these rings, did it
covertly by little and little, putting them upon the fingers of the left hand,
the better to hide them, as if they were ashamed to have them openly seen:
whereas if they might have auowed the honoring of their fingers by that
ornament, Homer aforesaid, that men used to plait and bind up the tresses of
their hair with gold: and therefore I wot not well whether men or women first
began the manner of such braiding the locks of the hair.

As touching gold laid up for treasure, little was there of it at Rome for a
long time; for surely, when the city was taken and sacked by the Gauls, and
that the Romans were to buy and redeem their peace for a sum of money, there
could not be made in all Rome above one thousand pound Cn. Pompeius there was
embezeled and stolen 2000 pound weight of gold out of the throne or shrine of
Jupiter within the Capitol, which had bin there bestowed and laid up by By M.
Crassus
Camillus: whereupon many men have thought, that there was 2000 pound weight of
gold gathered for the ransom of the city. But surely look what overplus and
surcrease there was above the foresaid weight of one thousand pound, it was of
the very booty and pillage of the French, and taken out of the temples and
chapels in that part of the city whereof they were masters. Moreover, that the
Gauls themselves were wont to go to the wars bravely set out and enriched
with gold, it appears by this one example of Torquatus, who slew a Gaul in
combat, and took from him a massy collar of gold. Apparent it is therefore,
that all the gold, as well that of the Gauls, as that which came Jupiter
Capitolinus had rendered again the foresaid sum in duple proportions. And here
by the way there comes to my remembrance another thing, not impertinent to
this place: considering I am to treat again of rings: when the sexton or
keeper of this cell was apprehended, and the question demanded, What was become
of the treasure aforesaid of 2000 pound which Jupiter had in custody, and which
now was out of the way and gone? He took the stone that was in the collar of
his ring which he ware, cracked it between his teeth, and presently dyed
thereupon: whereby the truth was not bewraied and revealed, as touching the
thief that robbed the said treasure. Well, reckon the most that can be, surely
there was not above 2000 pound weight C. Marius the younger seized upon and
conveyed away to the city Praeneste. And all the same was recovered again and
brought back again by Sylla his enemy, who under that title carried it in
triumph, besides seven thousand pound weight of silver, which he raised out of
the spoil of Marius. And yet nevertheless, the day before he had caused to
be carried in a pomp of triumph fifteen thousand pound weight of gold, and
one hundred and

But to return again unto our discourse of gold rings: I do not read that
they were ordinarily used, before the days of Cn. Flavius the son of Annius:
This Flavius being otherwise a man of mean and base parentage, as whose
grandsire by the fathers side had bin no better than a slave infranchised:
howbeit having a pregnant wit of his own, and brought up daily under a good
Appius Claudius surnamed the Blind (whom he served as his Scribe, Clerk, or
Secretary) he grew into inward credit and favor with his master, that for his
better advancement he opened unto him the whole course of days pleadable and
not pleadable, exhorting and persuading him withal; to publish that secret and
mystery to the view and knowledge of the whole city: which the said Flavius
(after much conference and consultation had with Appius) did, and effected
accordingly; whereupon he became so gracious with the whole body of the people
(who were always before wont to hang every day upon the lips of some few of
the chief and principal Senators, for to have the information and knowledge of
the said days) that in the end a bil promulged by him, passed by general
assent of them all, for to be created Aedile Curule together Q. Annicius of
Praeneste (who not many years before had bin a professed enemy, and born arms
against the Romans) without any regard had in this election, either of C.
Petilius, or Domitius, who were nobly born, and had two Coss. to their fathers,
who notwithstanding stood for the said dignity and honorable place. Nay more,
This Flavius had a special grace besides granted, To be at the same time one
of the Tribunes also or Prouosts of the Comminaltie. At which indignity the
Senate took such disdain, and chafed so for despite and anger, that as we
read in the ancient Annals and Chronicles of our city, there was not one
Senator of them all but laid away his golden rings and gave up his place. Many
are of opinion (although they be far deceived) that the knights and men of
arms also did the semblable, and left off their rings the same time. And this
likewise goes current and is generally received, That they cast aside the
caparisons and trappings of their bard horses; for these be the two badges or
marks which cause them to P. Sempronius Longus and L. Sulpitius were Consuls.
But Flavius abouesaid, seeing what trouble and coffeehouse was risen
hereupon throughout the city, vowed to erect and build a temple in the honor of
Concord, if he could reconcile the estate of the Senate, and the order of the
gentlemen again to the common people. And seeing that he could not be furnished
with money out of the common treasure of the city, for defraying of charges
requisite to this piece of work, he made means to have certain extreme usurers
condemned to pay good round sums of money: and with these fines a little
chapel he caused to be made all of brass, and reared it in the place
appointed Annibal could never have sent to Carthage those three Modij of rings,
which were plucked from Caepio and Drusus (from which arose the sociall war of
the Marsians, and the ruin of the state) grew by occasion of a ring sold in
portsale, which both of them would have had, the one as well as the other.
Neither at that time verily did all Senators wear gold rings; for known it
has bin within the remembrance of our grandfathers, that many of them (and
such as bear the Pretorship) in their old age, and to their very dying day,
never wore any other rings but of iron. The same does Fenestella report of
Calphurnius; and of Manilius also, who was Lieutenant under Caius Marius in the
war against King Tugurtha. And many other historians affirm the like of L.
Fusidius, him I mean unto whom Scaurus dedicated Quintij, wherein (by ancient
custom and order) there was never any known, so much as the very women, to
wear any gold about them. And even at this day, the greater part of those
nations and people who live under the empire of Rome, know not what these rings
mean. All the countries of the East throughout, and Egypt generally, at this
time content themselves with simple Claudius Caesar the Emperor. Furthermore,
in these our days some slaves set iron within a collet of gold, in stead of a
stone; and others again having their rings of iron, yet they adorn and set them
out with the most pure Numa and Servius Tullius, Kings of Rome: but afterward
they began to honor the forefinger which is next unto the thumb, with a
ring, according to the manner which we see in the images of the gods: and in
process of time they took pleasure to wear them upon the least finger of all:
and it is said, that in France and Britain they used them upon the middle
finger. But this finger now adays is excepted only and spared, whereas all
the rest be sped and charged with them; yea and every joint by themselves must
have Demosthenes did, that renowned Prince of Greek Orators; so as their rings
serve for no other use or purpose but to carry their own death about them.
Finally, the greatest mischiefs that are practiced by our mighty men in these
days, are for the most part performed by the means of rings and signets. O
the innocence of the old world! what a heavenly life led men in those days,
when as there was no use at all of seal and signet? But now we are feign to
seal up our ambries and hogsheads with our signets, for fear we be robbed and
Nome^clatores.
Remembrancers to tell us the names of our Servants and people about us, they
are so many. It was otherwise ywis by our ancestors and forefathers days, who
had no more but one yeoman or groom apiece, and those of the lineage and name
of their i, the pages or grooms of Marcus o^ Lucius.
Marci-pores, and Luci-pores: and these had all their victuals and diet
ordinarily at their masters bourd. And therefore there was no great need to
keep safely any thing under lockand key from such household seruitors: whereas
now adays the cater goes to the market to provide cates and viands for to be
stolen and carried away as soon as they come home, and no remedy there is
against it: for no seal will serve to make sure either such lurchers
themselves for filching, or keep the very locks and keys safe and whole that
lead to the provision. And why? an easy matter it is to pluck the rings from
their lord and masters fingers that are oppressed with dead sleep, or when
they lie a dying. And verily we hold in these days a seal to be the best
assurance in contracts that may be: but I wot not how long it is since that
custom first came up. And yet if we consider the fashions and manners
Polycrates the Tyrant or King of the Isle Samos: who having cast into the sea a
ring which he loved and esteemed above all other jewels, met with the same
again by means of a fish which was taken, in the belly whereof the said ring
was found. Now this king was put to death, about the two hundred and thirtieth
year after the foundation of our city. Howbeit, the ordinary use of these
signets (as I suppose by all reason and likelihood) began together with usury:
for proof whereof, mark how still at this day, upon any stipulation and
bargain paroll made, off goes the ring presently to confirm and seal the
same. The which custom no doubt came from old time, when there was no earnest
nor gods-pennie more ready at hand than a signet. So as we may conclude
assuredly and affirm, That amongst

And now to return again to my discourse of rings: after they began once to
be in any request, there were none at Rome under the degree of a knight or
gentleman that carried rings on their fingers; insomuch, as a man might know a
gentleman from a commoner by his ring, like as a Senator was distinguished from
the Gentlemen, wearing rings, by his coat embroidered with broad gards and
studs of purple. Howbeit, long it was before this distinction was observed: for
I find that the public criers wore ordinarily such coats likewise
embroidered, as Senators do: as appears by the father of L. Aelius Stilo,
syrnamed upon that occasion Praeconimus, because Who thereupon we^e called
Equites.
gentlemen of Rome; the same now adays shows men of worth, and those who are
of such and such revenues. But long it is not since this disorder and confusion
begun. For when as Augustus Caesar late Emperor of happy memory, ordained
decuries of Judges in criminal matters, the greater part of them consisted of
those who wore no other rings but of iron: and those were simply called Judges,
and not Knights or Men of arms: for this name continued still appropriat to
the troops of those gentlemen, who served upon horses allowed by the Senate.
Moreover, at the first there were no more but four decuries of Judges, and
hardly might there be found in each of those decuries, a bare thousand: for as
yet those of our provinces

CHAP. II.
Of the Decuries or Chamber of Judges upon record at Rome. How often the name
and title of the Roman Cavallerie changed. The gifts and rewards represented
unto valiant soldiers for their brave service. And at what time Coronets

THe chamber of the foresaid judges consisted of diverse estates and degrees,
distinguished all by several names: for first and foremost, there were of them
called Tribuni aeris, as it were General receivers or Treasurers: secondly,
Selecti, chosen from among the Senators: and last Tiberius Caesar, the whole
estate of the gentry or cauallerie of Rome, was reduced to an uniformity; and
an order was set down whereby it was known who might wear rings, and who
might not? which fell out to be in that year when C. Asinius Pollio, and C.
Antistius Vetus were Consuls together, and in the 775 year alter the foundation
of Rome city. And C. Sulpitius Galba desirous in his youth to win some credit
with the foresaid Emperor Tiberius; and namely, by devising means how to
bring Taue^, Cooks shops, and victualing houses in danger of the law, and to
forfeit penalties; pleaded against (...), and complained before the Senate, That
those who were the undertakers and Tenants (...) ^re of the foresaid Tauerns,
etc. and made their gain thereby, had no other means to bear^ ^mselues out,
nor plea to defend their faults and disorders, but their rings. The Senate
taking knowledge hereof, ordained an act, That none from that time forward
might be allowed to wear the said rings, unless he were free borne, and that
both himself, his father, and Caius Caligula the Emperor, adjoined to the
former four, a fifth Decurie. And shortly after, men gtew to that height and
pride in this behalf of wearing rings, and the company so surcreased, that
whereas in Augustus Caesar's days there could not be found knights and
Gentlemen sufficient throughout all Rome to furnish those Decuries, by this
time they could not be contained all within the Chamber of Judges or Decuries
abouesaid: insomuch as now adays, no sooner are there any slaves manumised
(Flauius Proculus by name) indicted 400 at once before Claudius Caesar Censor
for the time being, and declared against them for this abuse and offense. See
what inconvenience insued upon the act of rings! for whiles thereby a
distinction was made between that degree and other freeborn citizens,
streight-waies base slaves leapt in, and were so bold as to take that ornament
upon them. And here by the way, it is to be noted, that the two Gracchi,
Tiberius, and Caius, brethren, upon a certain desire and inbred affection that
they had to maintain and nuzzle the people When only indeed were to judge
causes.
Senate. But after the fire of tbis sedition was quenched, and the popular
authors thereof who stirred and blew the coals were murdered, the denomination
of these criminal Judges (after diverse troubles and seditions with variable
and alternatiue fortune) fell in the end to the Publicans and Farmers of the
revenues of the State; and being thus deuolued upon them, there continued:
insomuch as for a good while the said Publicans made up the third degree
between the Senators and the Commons. Howbeit, M. Cicero when he was Consul
re-established the Knighthood and Cauallerie of Rome in their former estate and
place; and so far prevailed, that he reconciled them again that these knights
or gentlemen were last incorporated into the body of the Commonweal, this is
the only reason that even now also they are written in all public
Instruments, after the

As touching the name or title, attributed to this third estate or degree of
Horsemen or men of Arms, it has bin changed and altered oftentimes: for in the
days of Romulus and other KK. of Rome, they were called Celeres, afterward
Flexumines, and in process of time Trossuli, by occasion that these horsemen
without any aid at all of the Infanterie, had won a town in Tuscane nine
miles on this side Volsinij, called Trossuli: which name continued in the
Cauallerie of Rome, until the time of C. Gracchus and afterward. And verily
Iunius (who upon the great amity between Gracchus and him, was syrnamed
Gracchanus) has left these words in writing as touching this matter:
concerning the degree of knights (quoth he) those who now are called Equites,
[i. Horsemen] beforetime had to name Trossuli: the change of which name arose
upon this; that many of these Gentlemen, ignorant in the original and first
occasion of the foresaid name Trossuli, and what the meaning thereof was, were
ashamed so to be called. He alleges moreover the cause of the said name: and
yet notwithstanding (quoth he) they cannot away with the name at this day, but
are so called against their wills.

To come again unto our former discourse of gold. There be yet some other
points besides to be considered therein, which cause distinction in diverse
conditions of men: for our ancestors, willing at all times to honor those
soldiers who had borne themselves valiantly in wars, were wont to bestow
chains of gold upon strangers and auxiliaries, such I mean as came to aid and
succor the Romans: but unto their own natural citizens they gave none other
but of silver: L. Piso has set down in his Annals, the first giver thereof:
for A. Posthumous L. Dictator (quoth he) upon the winning of the fortified
camp of the Latins near the Lake Regillus, was the first that bestowed upon
that soldier, by whose valorous service principally the said hold was forced,
a coronet of gold; which he caused to be made of the pillage taken from the
enemy. L. Lentulus in like manner, being Consul, gave a crown of gold unto
Sergius Cornelius Merenda, at the winning of a certain town within the
Samnites country. Semblably Piso syrnamed Frugi, bestowed upon his own son
a Coronet of gold weighing five pound, which

CHAP. III.
Other uses besides of gold, as well in men as women. Of Gold, in money. When
Brass, Silver, and Gold, were first stamped and coined. Before Brass was
converted into stamped money, how they used it in old time. At what rate and
proportion of money were assessed the best houses of Rome, at the

ALl the gold employed in sacrifices to the honor of gods, was in guilding the
horns of such beasts as were to be killed, and those only of the greater sort.
But in warfare among soldiers, the use of gold grew so excessive, that the
field and camp shone again withal, insomuch as at the voyage of Macedony,
where the Marshals of the field and colonels bare Armor set out with rich
buckles and clasps of gold, M. Brutus was offended and stormed mightily at it,
as appears by his letters found in the plains about Philippi. Well done of
thee, O M. Brutus, to find fault with such wastfull superfluity: but why
said thou nothing of the gold is called Dardanium, because the invention came
from the Dardanians: like as the fine golden carkanets Viriae, we term
Celticae; and the necke-laces of gold Viriolae. Celtibericae. Oh the Called
also Sigalion.
Harpocrates, or other images of the Egyptian gods engraven upon some fine
stone? But in the days of the Emperor Claudius there was another difference
and respect had, That none might carry the pourtraiture of that prince
engraven in his signet of gold, without express license given them by those
gracious enfranchised slaves who were in place to admit unto their lord the
Emperor, whom it pleased them: which was the occasion Vespasian (to the comfort
and joy of us all) came once to the crown: for by an express edict, he
ordained, That it might be lawful for any person whatsoever to have the image
of the Emperor in ring, brooch, or otherwise without respect. Thus much may
suffice concerning rings of gold, and their usage.

To come now to the next mischief that is crept into the world; I hold that it
proceeds from him who first caused a He speaks (...). as I take it; for
Denarius was a silver piece: but he means any piece of coin.
denier of gold to be stamped: although, to say a truth, I know not certainly
who he was that devised this coin. As for the people of Rome, sure I am that
before king Pyrrhus of Epirus was by them vanquished, they had not so much as
silver money stamped and current. Well I wot also, that in old time the manner
was to weigh our brass by the Ass, [id est, Expences] as a man would say,
weighed forth, because in times past all paiments passed by weight. The Latins
likewise use the nowne Impendia, for cost bestowed, or the charges of interest
in usury above the principal; even as the verb Dependere, betokens (to
pay) because paiments ordinarily were performed by poise. Moreover, the under
treasurers of war, or paimasters in the camp, were in ancient time named
Libripendes, for weighing out unto the soldiers their wages; and their

Touching brass money, Servius Tullius a king of Rome, caused it first to be
coined with a stamp, for before his days, they used it at Rome rude in the
mass or lump, as Remeus mine author does testify. And what was the mark
imprinted thereupon? even a sheep, which in Latin they call Pecus: and from
thence proceeds the word Pecunia, that signifies money. And note here by the
way, that during the reign of that king, the best man in all Rome was valewed
to be worth in goods not above 110000 Asses in brass: and at this rate were
assessed the

Afterward, in the 485 year from the foundation of the city, when Q. Ogulnius
and C. Fabius were Consuls, five years before the first Punicke war, they
began to stamp silver money at Rome, and three several pieces were coined. At
what time ordained it was, That the Denarius or Denier should go for ten
Asses or pounds of brass money; the half Denier, Quinarius, should be current
for five; and the Sesterce reckoned worth two and a half. Now, for as much as
Ianus, on the other side with the beake-head of a ship, armed with brazen
pikes. Other smaller pieces there were, according to that proportion, to wit,
Trientes, the third part of an Ass; and Quadrantes the fourth; which And
therefore they were called Ratiti of Rates.
punts or small boats upon them. As for the piece Quadrans, it was before time
called Triuncis, because it weighed three ounces. Howbeit in process of time,
when Anniball pressed hard upon the city, and put them to an exigent for money
to maintain the wars against him, driven they were to their shifts and forced
(when Q. Fabius was Dictator) to bring down the foresaid Ass of two ounces
unto one. Yea, and enected it was, That the silver denier, which went before
time for ten Asses, should be worth Ordinarily the Roman silver Denier had the
letter X. stamped upon it, but these Deniers had XVI. Vrsin.
sixteen; the half Denier or Quinare, eight; and the Sesterce four: and by
this means the State gained the one half full. And yet I must except the money
paid to soldiers for their wages: for a Denier unto them was never reckoned
above ten Asses. As for the silver Deniers, stamped they were with the
pourtraiture of coches drawn with two horses or four horses, whereupon they
were called Bigati and Quadrigati. Within a while after there passed an act
promulged by Papyrius, by virtue whereof the Asses Livius Drusus in place, who
being one of the Prouosts or Tribunes of the commons, brought in base money,
and delaied the silver with one eight part of brass. Touching that piece of
coin, which now is called Victoriatus, stamped it was by an Act proposed by
Clodius; for before his time, those pieces of money were brought out of
Sclauonia, and reckoned as merchandise: and stamped it is with the image of
Victory, of which it took that name.

Concerning gold coined into money, it came up threescore and two years after
the stamping of silver pieces: and a scriptule of gold was taxed and valued at
twenty sesterces, which arises in every pound according to the worth of
sesterces as they were rated in those days, to nine hundred Sesterces. But
afterward it was thought good to cast and stamp pieces of gold, after Nero
brought them down to the lowest, and caused them to be coined after the rate
of five and fifty pieces to the pound. In sum, the very source and original
of all avarice proceeds from this money and coin, devised first by lone and
usury, and continued still by such idle persons that put forth their money to
work for them, whiles they sit still, and find the sweetness of the gain
coming in so easily. But this greedy desire of having more still, is grown
after an outrageous manner to be excessive, and no more to be named
covetousness, but rather insatiable hunger after gold: insomuch as
Septimuleius, an inward and familiar friend of C. Gracchus, forgot all bonds of
amity, and having cut off his friends head, upon promise to have the weight of
it in gold, brought the same unto Opimius: howbeit, he poured molten lead
Mithridates had of them, who caused Aquilius (a General of theirs, whose hap
was to fall into his hands) for to drink molten gold. See what covetousness
brings home with it in the end.

Now when I behold and consider no more but these strange names of our vessel
in plate, which are newly devised in Greek from time to time, according as the
silver is either double or parcel gilt, or the gold enclosed and bound within
work, I am ashamed of it; and the rather, Spartacus held in his camp,
expressly commanding that no man should have any plate of gold or silver. A
great reproach to us Romans, that our fugitives and banished persons should show
a more nobler spirit than we our selves. Messala the great Orator has left in
writing, That M. Antonius used to discharge all the ordure and filthy
excrements of the body into Cleopatra likewise to do the same by her monthly
superfluities, most shamefully. Noted it was among foreign Nations for
excessive licentiousness, and that in the highest degree, that K. Philip of
Macedony was never wont to go to bed and sleep without a standing cup of gold
under his pillow: also, That Agnon Teius (a great captain under Alexander the
Great) was given to such wastfull prodigality, as to fasten his shoes and
pantophles with buckles of gold. But Antony above named, to the contumely and
contempt of Which had given us gold for vessels of honor.
Nature, abused gold, and employed it to the basest service that is: an act (as
much as any other) deserving proscription and outlawing indeed.

But among diverse things besides, I wonder much at this, That the people of
Rome, upon the Annibal vanquished, the Carthaginians were injoined for 50 years
together to make payment yearly of For in all they were to pay 10000 talents:
reckon a talent at 60 pound, which is the less Atticke.
[12000] pound of silver only, and no gold at all. Neither can it be thought
that there was little gold at that time to be had abroad in the world; for
Midas and Croesus both, were possessed of infinite sums and huge masses of gold:
and Cyrus upon his conquest of Asia, met with 34000 pound weight of gold,
besides the golden plate and vessel, and other gold which he found ready
wrought: and among the rest, certain Folia, I think rather solia, i. bathing
vessels.
leaves, a Plane and a vine-tree, both of beaten gold. In the pillage also of
this victory, he gave away 500000 talents of silver, and one standing cup that
he took from Semiramis, that weighed 15 talents. And Varro mine Author says,
That the poise of the Egyptian Some say 75.
So pound. Besides, there had reigned before time over the Colchians, Salauces,
and one Esubopes: who having newly broken up a piece of ground in the Samnians
country, is reported to have gotten out thereof great store of silver and gold:
notwithstanding that the whole kingdom is renowned for the golden fleeces
there. And verily this prince had the arched and embowed roufes of his palace
made of silver and gold: the beams and pillars also sustaining the said
building, yea, the jambes, posts, principals, and standards, all of the same
metal; namely, after he had vanquished Sesostres K. of Egypt, so proud a
prince, that (as Chronicles make mention) he was wont every year to have one or
other (as the lot fell out) of those kings who were his tributaries and did
homage to him, for to draw in his chariot like horses, when he was disposed to
ride in triumph. These and such like things have bin thought Caesar afterward
Dictatour, was the first that in his Aedileship, when he exhibited a solemn
memorial in the honor of his father departed, did furnish the whole Cirque
and shew-place, with all things meet for such a solemnity, of clean silver;
insomuch as the chasing staves and bore-speares were of silver, wherewith the
wild beasts were assaulted: a spectacle never seen before. And not long after,
C. Antonius set forth his plays (when he was Aedile) upon a stage or scaffold
of silver: after whose example, diverse free cities and towns of the empire
have don the like. Semblably, L. Muraena and C. Caligula the Emperor, erected a
frame or pageant to go and rise up of it self with vices, supporting images
and jewels in the place of public pastimes, which was thought to have in it
124000 pound of silver. Claudius Caesar who Nero his successor, to show unto
Tyridates king of Armenia what abundance of treasure he had, kept the great
Theater of Pompeius for one whole day covered all over with gold. But what was
that furniture in comparison of his golden house, which took up a great part
of the city, and seemed (as it were) to compass it about. In that year when
Sex. Julius, and Lucius Aurelius were Consuls (which fell out to be 7 years
before the third Punicke war) there was found in the treasury or chamber of
Rome, According to Budaeus.
700026 pound weight of gold, in Mass or Ingots; Sex. Julius and L. Marcius
were Consuls, to wit, in the beginning of the sociall war against the
Marcians and other Roman allies, the treasure of Rome arose to 846 pounds of
gold in Bullion. C. Caesar at his first entrance into the city of Rome, when
the civil war between him and Pompey was begun, took out of the city *
According to Budaeus.
40000 Sesterces. And to say a truth, never was the city of Rome wealthier than
at this time. Moreover, Aemylius Paulus, after he had defeated and vanquished
Perseus the Macedonian King, brought into the Treasury of the City a booty
of 3000 pound of gold in weight. After which time the common people of Rome had
never any tributes or taxes levied of them by the State.

Moreover, this is to be observed, That after the overthrow and destruction of
Carthage, the beams began first to be gilded within the temple of the
Capitol, whiles Lu. Mummius was Censor. And now adays you shall not see any
good house of a private man, but it is laid thick and covered over with gold.
Nay, the bravery of men has not staid so, but they have proceeded Catulus was
diversely thought of in the age wherein he lived, because he was the first that
gilded the brazen tiles of the Capitol.

Touching the first inuentors, as well of gold, as also of all other metals to
speak of, I have already written in my seventh book. As for the estimation of
this metal, that it should be chief as it is, I suppose it proceeds not
from the color, for silver has a brighter luster, more like to the day, and
in this respect more agreeable to the ensigns of war than that of gold,
because it glittereth and shines farther off: and hereby is their error
manifestly convinced, who commend the color of gold, in this regard, that it
resembles the stars: for well it is known that their color is not reputed
richest, either in precious stones or in many things besides. Neither This
happily may be true in ore. for otherwise in fined gold it is not so: and the
finer that it is, he stronger fire it asks to be melted by.
gold: that in a fire made of light straw or chafe, it will most quickly become
red hot and melt; put the else whatsoever. But this passes all, that spun it
may be as wool and silk, wouen also in manner of yearn, choose whether you will
work it twisted with [silke] thread, or single in wire by it self. Verrius the
Historiographer reports, that K. Tarquinius, surnamed Priscus, rode in
triumph in a robe of wrought gold. I my self have seen the Empress
Agrippina, wife to Claudius Caesar, sitting by her husband the Emperor to
behold the brave show of a nauall skirmish upon the water which he exhibited,
all gorgeously arraied in a royal mantle, wouen without any other matter save
only pure gold. Cloth of gold and tissue I know there is besides, called
Vestis Attalica, wherein gold is wrought with other stuff: and long since it
is, that this invention has been devised by the rich and sumptuous kings of
Asia. Furthermore, to guilde marble or any other thing that will not abide to be
gilded by the fire, gold foil must be laid on with the white of an egg. As
for wood and timber, they use to guild it by the means of a certain compound
glue or Chrysoporo^.
Leucophoron: but what a glue this is, and how it is made, I will declare in
place convenient. As touching the manner how to guild brass, it was performed
ordinarily heretofore by quick silver natural, or else artificial named
Hydrargyron: and herein there has bin devised much fraud and deceit; according
as I will hereafter show in their proper chapters, when I purpose to set down
their nature and properties. But now after that brass has bin much knocked
and beaten, they use to put it into the fire: and so soon as it is perceived
red hot, they quench it again in salt, vinegar, and alum. Now afterward, when
it is well scoured and cleansed with sand, and known by the brightness and
luster thereof that it has bin sufficiently frobished and purified, again it
must into the fire to take a new heat by the ardent exhalation thereof; that
being thus (as it were) mortified and besmeared with a size of the pumish

CHAP. IIII.
The manner of finding gold naturally in the Mine. When were known the first
statues of gold. The medicinable virtues and properties of gold.

IN these parts of the world wherein we live, gold mines are found: so that we
need not to stand

To begin then with those who seek for this metal: first above all they hit
upon a vain of Nero, there was found in Dalmatia a vain of gold ore within
one spades griffe in the first turfe of the ground, which yielded every day the
weight of fifty pound. This manner of earth, if it be found also under a vain
of gold, they call Alutatio. Moreover, this is to be noted, That ordinarily the
dry and barren mountains in Spain which bear and bring forth The Thebaick
marble, and in many other precious stones, which are marked here and there with
specks of gold: but this ore or metal does clasp and embrace whole pieces of
marble and such Quasi ad pilas cusam.
Apilascus: but the metal which sweateth out and comes forth by the violent
heat of the furnace where the foresaid ore is melted, they name Argentum, i.
Silver. The gross substance cast up from the pot or vessel,

The third manner of searching for this metal is so painful and toilesome,
that it surpasses the wonderful works of the Who were said to rear one
mountain upon the head of another.
Geants in old time. For necessary it is in this enterprise and business, when
the work is brought to an end within the ground, and that they have undermined
and hollowed the ground as far as they think good, down they go with their
arch-work abouesaid, which or rather Corrivi.
Corrugi, a word as I take it derived a Corrivando, i. of drawing many springs
and rils together into one head and chanel. And herein consists a new piece
of work as laborious as any that belongs to mines. For the leuel of the ground
must be so taken aforehand, that the water may have the due descent and current
when it is to run: and therefore it ought to be drawn from the sources
springing out of the highest mountains; in which conueiance regard would be had
as well of the valleys as the rising of the ground between, which requires
otherwhiles, that the waters be commanded by canels and pipes to ascend, that
the carriage thereof be not interrupted, but one piece of the Manus tra^untur
ad ^men
search with the hands and pluck forth the earth before them, to see whether it
be firm or rather Araeum, Craec. (...).
Vrium: for the avoiding whereof the fountainers fear neither rocks nor stones
to make passage for their pipes or trunks aforesaid. Now when they have thus
brought the water to the edge and brow of the hills where these mines of gold
should be, and from whence as from an head there is to be a fall thereof to
serve their purpose, they dig certain square pooles to receive the water, 200
foot every way, and the same ten foot deep: in which they leave five several
sluices or passages for the delivery of water into the mines, and those
commonly three foot square. When the said pools stand full, as high as their
banks, they draw up the floud-gates: and no sooner are the stopples driven and
shaken out, but the water gusheth forth amain with such a force, and carries
so violent a stream therewith, that it rolleth Conduits, and those are to be
paued by degrees one under another. Besides, there is a kind of shrub or bush,
named Vlex, like to Rosemarie, but that it is more rough and prickely, and the

Lowhat a work it is to search out and meet with gold! and verily by this
means Spain is grown mightily in wealth, and full of treasure. In the former
work also of sinking pits for gold, an infinite deal of labor there is to lade
out the water that rises upon the workmen, for fear it choke up the pits;
for to prevent which inconvenience, they derive it by other drains. As touching
the gold gotten by cleaving and opening mountains (which kind of work I called
Artugia) it needs no trying by the bloome-smithie, for fine it is naturally
and pure of it self: and

Moreover, there is one devise to make artificial gold, to wit, of Orpiment, a
mineral dug out of the ground in Syria, where it lies very ebb, and the
painters use it much: in color it resembles gold, but brittle it is in
substance like as glass stones. And verily Caligula the Emperor

Gold untried is of a diverse touch; and generally there is not any but it has
silver in it more or less: for in some places, the gold ore has a tenth part
in weight of silver, in others a ninth, and there is again that has a mixture
of the eight part. In one gold mine within France, called Albicrarense, there
is found in gold the 36 part of silver, and no more: such metal is not
elsewhere

There is a base kind of pale and whitish gold, which has in it a fifth part
of silver: and whersoeuer this is found, they call it Electrum. Such metal
lies commonly in trenches and pits mineral, and namely with that gold which I
called before Canaliense. Moreover, there is an artificial Electrum made,
namely, by intermingling gold with silver according to the natural mixture;
but if it exceed that proportion of one part to five, it will not abide the
hammer and the anuill. This white gold also has bin of great account, time out
of mind, as may appear by the testimony of the Poet Homer, who writes, that
the palace of prince Menelaus glittered with gold, electrum, silver, and
yvorie. At Lindos (a city within the Island of the Rhodians) there is Minerua,
wherein Lady Helena did dedicate unto that goddess a cup made of Electrum: and
as the story says moreover, it was framed and wrought just to the proportion
and bigness of one of her own paps. This property has Electrum naturally, To
shine by candlelight more clear and bright than silver. This singularity and
proper virtue it has besides (if it be natural) to discover and show any
poison: for be there poison in a cup of this metal, a man shall see therein
certain semicircles resembling rainbows, and perceive besides the liquor to
keep

As touching statues of gold: it is said, that the first image that ever was
known to be solid and massy, was that of the goddess Diana syrnamed Anaitis,
which stood within a temple dedicated to her, which in my Cosmography I have
signified under that name, and this was before any brazen statue of that
making. This temple in those parts was accounted in regard of the divine power
of this goddess, most holy and sacred; and such a kind of Image they call
Holosphyraton. Howbeit, as religious as the church was, Antonie in his voyage
into Parthia, spoiled it, and carried away the said Image. And here I cannot
forget to put down a pretty speech, which (by report) an old gentleman and
soldier of Bononie delivered to Augustus Caesar, at what time as he was
entertained as a guest and supped with the said Emperor at his own table: for
being Augustus, whether it was true, that the man who first violated this
goddess, died blind, lame, and bereaved of all his lims? he answered, Yea sir,
that it is; and that me thinks you should know best, for even now a leg of his
you have at supper, and For Augustus Caesar defeited Antony, and was mightily
enriched by the spoil of him.
all your wealth besides is come to you by that saccage.

The first man that And yet other writers say, that al Greece erected that
image to honor him withal.
caused his own statue to be made of gold, and the same solid and massy, was
Gorgias Leontinus the great Orator and Rhetoritian, which (to immortalize his
own name) he set up in the temple at Delphos; and this was about the 70
Olympias: whereby we may see what wealth and gain was gotten in those days by
teaching Oratory and the Art of Rhetoric.

But to come at length unto the medicinable virtues of gold: certes, diverse
ways effectual it Nitrispama, or Apbronitru^, i. Sal-p^e.
flower of salnitre, it heals corrupt and putrified ulcers, and such as stink
again: the same being boiled in honey with Nigella Romana, does gently loose the
belly, if the naual be anointed therewith. To conclude, M. Varro says, that
gold will cause werts to fall off.

CHAP. V.
Of Borras, and the six medicinable properties that it has: the wonderful
Nature thereof in sodring one metal with another, and in bringing all metals
to their perfection.

CHrysocolla, called otherwise Borax, or green earth, is found in those pits
and mines that are dug for gold: and a humor it is at the first, running
along the vein of gold, which as it thickneth and grows muddy, congealeth at
length by the extreme cold of winter to the hardness of a pumish stone.
Howbeit, the best kind of Borax we have known by experience to be engendered in
mines of brass; and the next to it for goodness, in those of silver:
otherwhiles prove Borras; whereby a man may perceive plainly, that Borras is
nothing else but a putrified vein of metal. But this Mineral, if it be of the
own kind, differs from this other which is Sometake it to be weld or yellows.
Lutea: for of this nature it is, that it will take color and drink it in, as
well as linen or woollen. But for to dress and prepare it for the purpose;
first, they pun it, in a mortar, then they let it pass through a fine serce;
afterward it is ground or beaten again, and so it is serced a second time
through a finer serce; whatsoever passes not through, but remains behind,
must be punned once more in a mortar, and so ground into a small powder: and
ever as they have reduced any into powder, they put it into sundry pots or
cruses: then they let the same to lie enfused and soked in vinegre, till the
hardness therein be wholly resolved: which done, to the mortar it goes again,
where it must be thoroughly stamped for altogether, and so when i. the yellow,
which they keep for the powder or color Lomuntum, See the beginning of the
next book.
Lomuntum; the other liquid, namely when the said grains or pellets be resolved
into a kind of moisture, like drops of sweat. This Borax of both sorts, is made
in the Isle Cypros. The principal and best of all other comes from Armenia: in
a second degree, from Macedonia: but Nero, the floor of the grand cirque or
shewplace at Rome, was seen paued all over with green Boras, at what time as
he exhibited goodly sights and pastimes to the people; and namely, when he
meant himself to run a race with charriots, and took pleasure to drive his
horses upon a ground suitable to the color of the cloth or liuerie that he For
some were called Prassina that ran for the prise, i. Green. kins.
wore himself at that time: and in truth, a world of workmen he brought
thither to lay the said pauing. All the sorts of Boras may be reduced into three
distinct kinds: to wit, the rough, valued at seven denarij a pound; the mean,
which is worth five; and the poudred Boras, called also the grasse-green Borax,
which costeth not above three deniers the pound. As for the A kind of chalkie
earth, or clay, growing near the sea shore.
Paraetonium, and then the Borax aloft: for these things take it passing well,
and besides give a pleasant luster to the color. This Paraetonium (for that it
is most fattie and unctious by nature, and for the smoothnes besides most apt
to stick too and take hold) ought to be laid first; upon which must follow a
course of the vitrioll over it, for fear least the whitenes of the foresaid
Paraetonium do pall the greenesse of the Borax, which is to make the third
coat. As for the Borax called Lutea, some think it took that name of the
herb Lutea; which also, if it be mixed and tempered with azure or blew, makes
a green, which many do lay and paint withal in stead of Borax; which as it is
the cheapest green of all other, so is it a most deceitful color.

Borax does not only serve painters, but is much used also by Physicians; and
namely, to

Furthermore, there is a Borax or Chrysocolla, that goldsmiths occupy
especially about sodring * Whereupon it took^ the name Chryso^lla, i. gold,
gl^w, or (...).
their gold: and of this kind all the rest take the name also of Chrysocolla.
This is altogether artificial, and is made of Cyprian Verdegris or rust of
brass, the vrin of a young lad, and salnitre, tempered all together and
incorporat in a brazen mortar, stamped with a pestill of the same metal. Our
countrymen in Latin call this Borax Santerna: with it they use to sodder that
gold especially which stands much upon silver, and is therefore called
Argentosum. This kind of Some take this for Tinglasse.
white: and one piece of tin with another, with the help of oil. In like
manner, tin will hold sure with a soder of brass file-dust; and silver, with
tin. Both brass or copper, and also iron ore, melt best with an iron made of
Pinewood; as also with the Papyr reed in Egypt: but contrariwise gold soonest
melts with a fire of chafe and huls. Quickelime will catch an heat and burn,
if water be cast upon it, and so does the Which some take for pitcole, or
seacole rather, such as comes from Newcastle by sea: or rather a kind of jeat.
Thracian stone: but the same oil does quench. Fire is most of all
extinguished and put out with vinegre, with bird lime, and the white of an egg.
No kind of right earth will burn light or flame. Finally, charcole which has
been once one fire, then quenched and afterward set a burning again, is of
more force and gives a greater heat, than that which comes new from

CHAP. VI.
Of Silver, Quicksilver natural, Stibium, or Alabastrum. The dross or refuse
of silver, and litharge of silver.

IT follows by good order to write in the next place, of silver mines, from
whence proceeds the second rage that has set men a madding: where first and
foremost this is to be noted, that there is but one means to find silver, and
that is in pits sunk of purpose for it: neither is there any show at all of
silver to give light thereof, and to put us in hope of finding: no sparks
shining, like as there be in gold mines which direct us to it. The earth that
engenders the vein or, Molybdaea.
Galena, found for the most part near to the veins and mines of silver. Now by
the means of fire, when these are melted together, part of the silver ore
setleth downward and turns to be lead, the pure silver floteth aloft, like
as oil upon water. In all our provinces, yea and parts of the world to speak
of, there be mines of silver to be found: howbeit the fairest be in Spain, and
yield the finest and most beautiful silver: and the same also like as gold, is
engendered in a barraine soil otherwise and fruitless, and even with in
mountains: look also where one vein is discovered, there is another always
found not far off: which is a rule observed not in mines of silver only, but
also in all others of what metals soever; and hereupon (quasi (...), one after
another.
Metalla. And verily, strange it is and wonderful, that the mines of silver in
Spain which were so long ago begun by Anniball, should continue still as they
do, and retain the names of those Carthaginians who first found, discovered
and brought them to light: of which, one named then Bebelo, and so called at
this day, yielded unto Anniball daily 300 pound weight; which mine even at that
time had gone under the ground and hollowed the mountain a good mile and a
half: and all that way the Aquitans at this day standing iu water, lade the
same up, laboring night and day by the candle or lampe-light, every man in his
turn, and during the burning of a certain measure of oil, in such wise as
they divert the water from thence, and make a good big river thereof, to pass
and run another way. A vein of silver which lies but ebb within the ground,
and is there discovered, the miners call and cause them now to sink lower, and
never rest so far as they can dig. And yet there is a damp

Furthermore, within these veins and mines above said, there is a certain
stone found which yields from it an humor continually, and the same continues
always liquid: men call it o^ Life silue^
Quicksilver (howbeit being the bane and poison of all things whatsoever, it
might be called Death-siluer well enough) so penetrant is this liquor, that
there is no vessel in the world but it will eat and break through it, piercing
and passing on still, consuming and wasting as it goes: it supports

Over and besides, within the same mines and among the veins of silver, there
is found a mineral, which to speak properly is a stone concrete of a certain
scum or some, whire and shining, We call it Antimonium.
Stibium, Alabastrum, or Larbason: and hereof there be two kinds, the male and
the female; but the female Antimony or Stibium is the better esteemed: for the
male is more rude, rough, and rugged, and yet for all that not so weighty,
bright and radiant; besides that, it is more charged with sand: whereas the
female contrariwise shines and glittereth plentifully, being also brittle and
tender, apt to cleave easily into plates or flakes, and not to break into
lumps and gobbets.

Touching the virtues of Stibium pertinent unto physic, astringent it is and
refrigerant, but a principal and peculiar medicine to be employed about the
eyes; for thereupon it was that most men called it Platyophthalmon, for that
being put into those ointments that are to And therefore Ion called it (...),
when he reckons up the devices that Qu. Omp^ had to paint and trim her self.
beautify the eyes of women, (named thereupon Calliblephara) it seems to
extend the compass of the Which was counted a grace in old time, as may
appear by Homer, who gives unto Qu. Juno the Epithet of (...), (id est) broad
eyed, as is a Co^ or Heifer.
large withal. Antimonie puluerised and incorporat with the powder of
frankincense, by the means of gum withal, staieth the flux of humors into the
eyes, and heals the fretting and exulcerations incident thereto: being
otherwise a proper medicine to staunch the blood that gusheth or issues from
the brain. But for to stop the bleeding of any fresh wound, the powder of
Antimony alone is thought to be more effectual if the place be strewed withal:
which also is a singular thing to heal the old bitings of dogs. It cures
moreover any burn occasioned by fire, in case it be tempered in some convenient
suet and wax, with Litharge of silver, and Ceruse or White lead, and so reduced
into a salve. But for to prepare Antimonie aright, it ought to be well luted
all over with a certain kind of paste the bottom of the mortar, is held to be
the dross and dregs thereof, standing most upon lead, and is thrown away as
good for nothing: but the pot or vessel whereinto the troubled water

As touching the dross or refuse in silver, the Greeks call it Helcysma: the
nature thereof is restringent and refrigeratiue: it enters into plaistres like
as lead ore does (which is named Molybdaena, and whereof I intend to write in
my treatise of lead) especially those that are made to heal, cicatrice, and
skin. Also being injected by way of clistre with oil of myrtles, it cures
tinesms and dysenteries. It is used much also in those lenitiue and vncteous
plaistres named Lipatae, and serves likewise for the excrescence of proud
flesh in ulcers, and for those exulcerations which come of rubbing and
fretting, or the running sores and scalls in the head.

Within the metal mines aforesaid there is engendered another mineral, known
by the name of Spuma argenti [i. the some of siluer] commonly called litharge,
and three sorts there be found of it. The best litharge, of gold, which they
call Chrysitis: the second, of silver, named Argyritis: and a third of lead,
which is Molybditis: and many times all these kinds so distinct in color, are
found in one and the same lump or puffed loaf of litharge. The best litharge is
brought out of the region Attica: the next in goodness comes from Spain.
Litharge of gold, named Chrysitis, is made of the very mine and vein of silver;
Argyritis, of silver it self; and Molybditis, of the lead which is melted with
the silver: as we may see at Puteoli, where great store of it is made, and of
that place took the name Puteolana. All the sorts of them are made, after that
the metal or matter appropriat unto them, is thoroughly melted and tried; for
it runs down from or rather, P^omene
name, it is no other thing but the scum of the ore or metal boiling and
melting over the furnace: from dross it differs as much as scum or froth
above, may from dregs or lees beneath: and as the one is an excrement cast up
from a matter whiles it is purging it self, so the other is the refuse or
grounds thereof after it is purged and settled. Howbeit many there be who make
but two kinds of this foam or litharge; the one * Steresitis, as it were solid
and massiue; the other * Peumene, as one would say, puffed up and (...) argen^
or rather, (...).
full of wind. As for the third named Molybdaena, they reckon as a thing by it
self, to be treated of in the discourse or chapter of lead. Now the litharge
abouesaid ought for the use that it ^puntur.
burst: which done, for six days together they put it in mortars, washing it
thrice every day in cold water, and in the end with hot, and so at length put
to every pound of the said Litharge, the weight of one Obolus of Sal-gem. The
last day of all they put it up into a pot or vessel of lead. Some there be
forty days together in the hottest season of the Summer. There be again who
think it best to Anthonies fire. Semblably, being incorporat with oil of
myrtles and wax into a cerot, it heals kibed heels.

CHAP. VII.
Of Vermilion; and of what estimation it was among the old Romans: the first
invention thereof. Of Cinnabaris, the use thereof in Pictures and in Physic.
The sundry sorts of Minium or Vermilion: and how it is to be ordered to serve
painters.

THere is found also in silver mines a mineral called Minium, i. Vermilion,
which is a color Verrius alleges and rehearses many authors, whose credit
ought not to be disproued, who affirm, That the manner was in times past to
paint the very face of Jupiters image on high and festiual days with
Vermilion: as also, that the valiant captains who rode in triumphant manner into
Rome, had in former times their bodies To show the bloody bat tells they had
fought, and what carnage of their Enemies they had made: for with out much
effusion and drawing of their blood they might not triumph.
colored all over therewith: after which manner (they say) noble Camillus
entered the city in triumph. And even to this day, according to that ancient and
religious custom, ordinary it is, to color all the unguents that are vse^ in a
festival supper at a solemn triumph, with Vermilion. And no one thing do the
Censors give charge and order for to be done, at their entrance into office,
before the painting of Jupiters

Thcophrastus says, that 90 years before Praxibulus was established chief
ruler of the Athenians (which falls out just upon the 249 year after the
foundation of our city of Rome) Callias the Athenian was the first that devised
the use of Vermilion, and brought the li^ely color thereof into name: for,
finding a kind of red earth or sandy grit in the mines of silver, and hoping
that I wonder not that this color was so highly esteemed: for even beforetime
during the state of Homer; who being otherwise spary enough in speaking of
pictures and colors, yet commends the ships Such are called by Homer, (...).
painted therewith. The Greeks call our Minium by the name of Miltos, and yet
some term it Cinnabari: and hereof arose the error occasioned by the Indian
name Cinnabari. For so the Indians call the bloody substance of a dragon,
crushed and squeesed with the weight of the Elephants lying upon them ready to
die, to wit, when the said dragons are full with sucking out the Elephants
blood before: and now their own and it are mingled together, according as I
have showed before in the story of those beasts. And verily there is not a
color besides, which expresses the lively color of blood in pictures so
properly as Minium. As for that other Cinnabaris of India, it is most wholesome
to be put into antidots, preservatives, and countrepoisons, yea Iuba says,
that it grows plentifully also in Carmania. And Hermogenes affirms, that
Aethiopia likewise is not without good store of it. But from neither of those
two countries is it brought unto us, nor (to say a truth) out of any other
place but Spain. The best and most excellent is that which comes out of the
territory of Sisapone in the Realm of Granada or Boetica a part of Spain, even
from a Mine of Vermilion there, which pays a great custom, and yields much
revenue to the people of Rome: and there is nothing looked to more straightly
for fear of fraud and imposture; for lawful it is not there to dress and
refine it, but vncocted and crude is it brought to Rome in the mass as it lay
within the vein, sealed by the sworn masters of the mine, which yields one the
luster soon. And yet this Minium is taken to be but a kind of rust in metals,
either silver or lead, as they lie in the mines. Moreover, the mineral
Vermilion found naturally in the foresaid

Moreover, the workmen that are employed in their shops about the making of
Vermillion, do bind unto their faces in manner of Maskes, large bladders, that
they may take and deliver their wind at liberty, and yet not be in danger of
drawing in with their breath that pernicious and deadly powder, which is no
better than poison: yet so, as they may see out of the said masks nevertheless.

To conclude, Vermillion is used much in limming the titles and inscriptions of
roles and

CHAP. VIII.
Of quicksilver artificial, called Hydragyrum. Of guilding silver. Of
Touch-stones for to try the diverse kinds of silver.

SO inuentiue is the wit of man, that there has been devised in the world a
means to make an artificial Quicksiluer in stead of the true and natural, and
that out of the second kind of

I cannot thus write as I do so much of gold and silver, but me thinks I must of
necessity speak of the stone which they call in Latin i. The touchstone.
Coticula, which in times past was not usually found in any place but in the
river Tmolus, as says Theophrastus: but in these days we find it every where:
foam call it Heraclius, others Lydius. Now these stones all the sort of them
are but small, not exceeding four inches in length, and two in breadth. That
part or side which lies above toward

As touching silver, two degrees there be of it, different in goodness, which
may be known and discerned in this manner: For lay a piece of silver ore upon a
sclise, plate, or fire pan of iron red hot, if it continue white still, it is
very good, if the same become reddish, go it may for good too in a lower
degree; but in case it look black, there is no goodness at all in it. Howbeit,
there is some deceit also in this trial and experiment: which may cross a man
in his judgment: for

CHAP. IX.
Of mirroirs or looking glasses. And of the Egyptian silver.

AN opinion it was sometime generally received and believed, That no plates
might be driven Praxiteles in the days of Pompey the great. Of late, men had
this opinion of silver mirroirs, That they would represent an image more lively
and truly, in case their back part were laid over with gold.

But to return again to silver, the Aegiptians use a devise to paint it, to the
end that they would drink more devoutly, seeing their god Anubis painted
within their pots. And in truth they rest contented with painting their plate,
and never grave or chase any pieces. This devise is grown They take of silver
and sulphur vif as much of the one as the other, of Cyprian brass o^ latton

To come now unto those that counterfeit money. Antonius whiles he was one of
the three usurping Triumvirs, mixed iron with the Roman silver denier. He
tempered it also with the brazen coin, and so sent abroad false and
counterfeit money. Others there be that make money too light (namely, under the
lawful proportion) which is, to coin and stamp for every pound weight of silver
84 deniers. This enormity grew to this pass, that M. Gratidianus published a
law, by virtue whereof there was an act instituted and ordained for the proof
and allowance of silver deniers, what touch and what poise they should have: by
which act of his he so pleased the M. Gratidianus. But strange it is, and a
man would not think it, that this art and cunning devised for the detecting of
falsehood and forgerie, is the only means to teach deceit and wickedness, for
many a man will give too too much for false money: yea, and many silver deniers
for one counterfeit, well and cleanly made: to take forsooth a pattern thereby,
and learn to deceive others.

CHAP. V.
Of excessive sums of money in men's hands. Who they were in old time that

IN old time men knew no number above 100,000: and therefore at this day also
in stead of a million we multiply the said number by ten, and say thus in
Latin, Decies centina millia, i. A hundred thousand ten times told, and so
forward, To wittwentie times, or a hundred times, a hundred thousand, etc.
repeating always a hundred thousand to the numerall aduerbe, as the sums does
amount. Vsuries, interests, and coined money have been the cause of these
multiplications: and by that occasion also came debts to be called even unto
this age, by the name of Aes alienum. And thereof arose the proud name of
Diuites, i. Rich, for i. Crassus.
Dives, brought a shilling to nine pence in the end, proved Banquerout, and
defeated his creditours. As for M. Crassus, one of that same house, and who
gave the same arms, would commonly say, That no man was to be counted rich,
and worthy of that title Dives, unless he were able to dispend by the year
as much in revenues as would maintain a legion of soldiers. And verily his
own lands were esteemed worth Bis millies sestertium, that is to say, Two
hundred millions of sesterces, Roman: and setting aside Sylla, he was the
richest Roman that ever was known. And yet such was his avarice, that he
could not content himself with that wealthy estate, but upon a hungry desire
to have all the gold of the Parthians, would needs undertake a In which
expeditio^ he was taken prisoner by Surinas, lieute^ant general for the king of
Parthia: who struck off his head, and poured gold melted into his mouth to
satisfy his hunger after it.
voyage against them. And albeit by his inestimable wealth he usurped the title
and addition Optimus i. The best, in his time, yet (for me thinks it does me
good to prosecute still, and inueigh against this insatiable desire of having
more) we have known many after him, and those otherwise of base condition, and
no better than slaves newly infranchised, to have grown unto greater wealth;
and namely three at one time, to wit, during the Empire of Claudius Caesar; and
those were Pallas, Callistas, and Narcissus, late bondslaues all to the said
Emperor. But to let these men pass, as if they were lords still of worldly
wealth: in that year wherein C. Asinius Gallus and C. Marcius Censorinus were
Consuls of Rome, died C. Caecilius Claudius, who signified by his last will and
testament, bearing date the 6 day before the Calends of February, the year
above written, That albeit he had sustained exceeding great losses during the
troubles of the civil war, yet he should leave behind him at the hour of his
death, of slaves belonging to his retinue four i. threescore millions of
sesterces Roman. And besides, he set out for defraying of his funeral
charges, H S. XI. which if you read by the numerall aduerbe (vndecies)
amounts to the said sum a hundred times told.
eleven thousand sesterces, and gave order expressly, to be enterred so
sumptuously. But what of all this? Set case these and such like men gathered
together innumerable sums of money, and an infinite mass of goods, yet they
shall come nothing near to the wealth of K. Ptolomaeus, who according to the
testimony of M. Varro, Pompey the great warred abo^t Jury) maintained 8000
horsemen in pay continually with his own private purse: kept an ordinary table
within his court of a thousand persons, and those had every man his own cup of
gold to drink out of, and at each course and change of meats that came in, new
plate was served up still to the board. These guests of his sared so highly,
that a man would have said they had bin franke-fed. But how far short was this
mighty and sumptuous prince think ye (for I will say no more now of kings) in
comparison of one Pythius a Bithynian, who sent to Darius the king a Present of
a Plane-tree, all entire of beaten gold, and withal, that famous gold Vine, so
much renowned by all writers: feasted the whole army of that mighty monarch,
and those were Vide Budaeum
788000 men: promising over and above five months Pythius, might compare him
with that rich Croesus king of Lydia. But what folly and madness in the devils
name is this, to hunger and thirst so much in this life after that, which
either is common to base slaves, and may fall unto them, or else whereof kings
themselves can find no end? And thus much of gathering good and heaping riches
together.

To come now to the scattering thereof, I find in the Chronicles, That in the
year wherein Sp. Posthumous, and Qu. Martius were Consuls, they began at Rome
to make largesses, and to fling money abroad to the common people. And at that
time such plenty of coin there was Lu. Scipio, as much as bare out his charges
in exhibiting the solemn games and plays unto the people. As for that purse
which was made for the funerals of Agrippa Menenius, wherein every man put his
sextant, i. the sixth part of an As, I take it to have been no Largess, but a
benevolence to testify how the people honored Agrippa, and a supply of mere
necessity, considering how poor the man died.

CHAP. XI.
Of the superfluity and frugality both, of men in times past, touching plate
and silver vessels. Of beds and tables of silver. Also when there were devised
chargers and

THe world is given to so much inconstancy as touching silver plate, that a
wonder it is to see the nature of men how variable they be in the fashion and
making of such vessel: for no workmanship will please them long. One while we
must have our plate out of Furnius his shop; another while we will be furnished
from Clodius: and again in a new fit, none will content us but of Gratius his
making (for our cupboords of plate and tables, forsooth, must bear the name of
such and such Goldsmiths shops.) Moreover, when the toy takes us in the head,
al our delight is in chased and embossed plate; or else so carved, engraven, and
deep cut in, as it is rough again

As touching the vessel serving in the kitchen: did Calvus the noble Orator
complain in his time that it was of silver? Why, we in these days do more
than so, for we have devised that our coaches should be all silver, and these
curiously wrought and engraven. And within the remembrance of man, even in this
age, Poppaea the Empress, wife to Nero the Emperor, was known to cause her
Ferrers ordinarily to shoe her coach-horses and other palfreis for her Scipio
Africanius the second of that name when he dyed, left no more unto his Heir
in Silver Plate and Coin than two and thirty pound weight: and yet this
worthy Knight, when he rode in triumph for the conquest of the Carthaginians
showed in that solemn pomp, and brought into the chamber of Quater millies,
quad ^ingena septuagenamil liapondo: which is four millions of millions four
hundred and 70 thousand pound weight. An incredible sum, considering that which
presently follows: and therefore I suppose this place in Pliny is corrupted.
four thousand four hundred and seventy pounds weight of silver, a thousand
times old. This was all the treasure in silver that the whole state of Carthage
was able to make in those days; Carthage (I say) that great and proud city
which pretended a title to the Empire of the world, and maintained the same
against Rome: and yet see! in this age there is as much laid out in our
cupboords of plate, and furniture of our tables. The same Africanus afterward,
upon the winning and final ruin of Numantia, gave among his soldiers in a
triumph, 17000 pound weight of silver: O brave soldiers, and worthy so noble a
captain, who stood contented with such a reward. A brother of this Scipio,
syrnamed Allobrogius, was the first known to have in plate, one thousand pound
weight: but Liuius Drusus, whiles he was but Tribune or Provost of the
comminalty, had in silver vessel as much as weighed eleven Catus Aaelius in
his Consulship, was found sitting at dinner served with earthen vessel of
potters work, when the Ambassadors of the Aetolians came unto him: that he
refused also silver plate presented to him for the furniture of his board, and
to his dying day had never in silver more than two drinking cups, which Lusius
Paulus his wives father bestowed upon him after the defeiture of K. Perseus, in
regard of his valiant service; wehold it now for no less than an untruth and
incredible. And here I call to mind a merry conceited speech that I have read
in the chronicles, of certain Carthaginian Ambassadors, who said, that no men
in the world This was spoken by way of jest, and (...): for that al their
vessel being plate of potters clay and no better, seemed always the same:
whereas in silver plate, men were delighted with diversity of workmanship, and
variety of fashion.
silver plate went round about amongst them all from one to another without
change. But howsoever this frugality whereof I speak may seem strange and
fabulous to the world wherein we live, certes we all know this to be true and
no fable, that Pompeius Paulinus (the son of a Roman knight or man of arms
borne at Arles) was not only banished out of the country and nation where his
father was borne, but confined also to the marches of most savage and barbarous
people, and exposed to their cruelty, only for this, That he had in his camp
(to the evil example of the army) as much silver plate as weighed 12 pounds.
But long ago it is since the fashion came up at Rome, that our dames had their
beds covered all over with silver, yea, and some dining rooms with tables laid
with the Caruilius Pollio, a gentleman or knight of Rome, who devised to
garnish his bourds with silver, not covering them full and whole throughout
with plates thereof, nor after the manner of Deliacke workmanship, but only
by parcels, and according to the Punicke or Carthaginian fashion. The same
Pollio made beds and tables of gold: but not long after, those silver beds and
boords came to the order of those in the Isle Delos. But all this sumptuositie
was punished sufficiently and expiat by the civil war of Sylla: for a little
before those troubles, this excess and these superfluities came up: as also
about the same time, men fell to make great chargers and platters of silver,
weighing one hundred pound a piece; of which there were at Rome (as it is well
known) when the said war began, to the number of five hundred and above:
which was the cause that many a man fell into the danger of proscription and
confiscation, for that their rich plate set their enemies teeth on water; who
for Sylla and Marius, unto such superfluities and vices of those times which
reigned so rife, might be ashamed and blush to say so; for our age has been
more hardy, and has proceeded farther without any such fear of punishment
from above. No longer since than in the days of Claudius the Emperor,
Drusillanus a slave of his syrnamed Rotundus (the Seneschol or Treasurer under
him in high Spain) had a silver charger of five hundred pound weight (for the
working whereof, there was a forge framed beforehand of set purpose:) and the
same was accompanied and attended with eight more of a smaller size, weighing
50 pound a piece. Now would I gladly know (if it might please you) how many of
his fellows (such slaves I mean as himself) there must be to carry the said
vessel and serve it up to the table: or what guests they might be who were
to be seru^ ^ith such huge plate? Cornelius Nepos writes, that before the
victory of the said Sylla (...) defeated Marius, two dining tables and no more
there were throughout Rome, all of silver. Fenestella says, that in his time
(and he died the last year of the reign of Tyberius Caesar the Emperor) C.
Gracchus had in the furniture of his house, certain vessels of silver called
Dolphins, which cost him at the goldsmiths hand 5000 sesterces a pound: an
exceeding price for the fashion and workmanship, considering L. Crassus the
Orator had two pots artificially engraven by the hand of Mentor that cunning
workman, the fashion and making whereof cost Centum sestertiis: a small matter
to the former* and about 15 or 16* she o^ our money. If you read Sestertium
centum, or centum sestertiis, in the neuter gender, it is a thousand times as
much and that were as monstrous.
100 sesterces a pound: and yet he confessed and protested, that he was
abashed to use them, and durst not for shame bring them abroad. Moreover,
known it is, that he had in his cabinet pieces of plate, which to be bought
and sold were worth every pound 6000 sesterces. L. Scipio showed in triumph of
silver plate, intailed and engraven, 400 thousand and 50 pounds weight, besides
vessels of gold amounting to the weight of 100 thousand pound: and this was in
the year from the foundation of Rome, 565. But the free Donata, not D^a,
according to Bu^aeus.
donation and bestowing of the said Asia upon the city of Rome (which fell unto
the Romans by the death of K. Attalus, who in his last will and testament
ordained them his full heirs) did most hurt unto our state: and this
succession which our Ancients enjoyed by virtue of that gift, did greater
damage to the integrity of manners, and brought more corruption into our city,
than the former victory achieved by force of arms: for from that time forward
men grew to be shameless, and without regard of modesty every man's fingers
itched to be tempering Attalus, and to buy the same at any price, sold in open
port-sale to them that would give most: which happened in the 626 year after the
foundation of the city: for in 56 years (which was the mean space between the
foresaid subduing of Asia and this feoffement of K. Attalus) our city was well
nuzzled and trained not only in the admiration of such puissant foreign kings
and princes, but also in some affectionat love to their wealth and riches.
About which middle time between, and namely in the 608 year, reckoning from the
first founding of Rome, when Achaia was likewise brought under our obedience
and subjection, this victory also was a mighty means to bring us also out of al
good order, and to set us forward to embrace superfluities and to overthrow al
honesty and virtue: for now were brought in the stately statues and proud
painted tables, that we should want no enticing delights, but that all the
pride and C. Marius after he had defeited the Cimbrians, contented himself to
drink in a wooden godet and tankerd, after the example of father Bacchus: C.
Marius I say, who of a good husbandman in the country about Arpinum, and of a
common and ordinary soldier, came to be a brave captain and commander in the
field.

CHAP. XII.
Of Statues and Images of Silver: of the workmanship in grauing Silver, and of
other things pertinent thereto.

MEn commonly have thought, that the first statues of silver seen in Rome,
were made in the honor of the Emperor Augustus, by way of courting and
flattery to win his grace and favor, as those times did require: but it is
altogether untrue; for before his days, we find Pompey the Great when he rode
in triumph, caused the silver statue of K Pharnaces (the first) [of that name]
that ever reigned in the realm of Pontus) to be carried in a solemn show: like
as the image also of Mithridates his father; besides chariots as well of gold
as of silver.

Moreover, it falls out sometimes, that silver is used in stead of gold also
upon some urgent cause and just occasion: as we may see by our proud and
sumptuous dames, that are but commoners and artizans wives, who are forced to
make themselves carquans and such ornaments for their shoes, of silver,
because the rigor of the statute provided in that case, will not permit them
to wear the same of gold. And I my self, as I remember, have seen Aurelius
Fuscus (a gentleman of Rome, who being put beside his place, and having lost
the dignity of a man of arms, by reason of a notable calumniation framed
against him, when as young gentlemen's sons used to accompany him because he had
the name of a brave soldier) wear his rings of silver. But to I could see
this down more plainly: but in some respect of (...) mind^ and (...). I am
willin^ enough to leave it as obscure in English, as I found it in Latin.
kept in and restrained with silver, during the time that they be under man's
age? how our fine dames use to wash and bath in silver, disdaining and setting
light before any other bathing vessels in the bains; insomuch as the same
metal and matter which we are served with at the table, is employed also in
shameful and uncleanly uses. Oh that Fabricius were alive now again to behold
these things! if he saw our women bathing together with men in one and the
same bains, and those paued (as it were) under foot with silver so smooth and
slipperie that they Fabricius I say, who forbad expressly, that any warriors
and General captains should have in plate more than one drinking boll or
goblet, and a saltsellar: if he saw silver (which was wont to be given in
presents and rewards to brave men and valiant captains) thus to be melted and
broken to serve for these purposes, what would he say? but What a world is
this! we pass not for Fabricius, nay, we are ashamed of him and his frugality.

But to leave these abuses and complaints: one thing I wonder much at, that
among so many excellent artizans as have been, there is not one who took any
pleasure to grave in gold, nor became renowned thereby; whereas many are famous
for their workmanship in silver: howbeit, Mentor (of whom I spoke erewhile)
excelled them all in this kind: and yet I do not find, that ever he made in
all, above eight pieces that were curiously and exquisitly wrought, and those
(as Diana at Ephesus lies along: the Capitol of Rome likewise, and all within
it, has perished by fire. Howbeit, Varro has left in writing, That among his
antiquities, one brazen image he had of Mentors hand-worke. Next to him, the
world had Acragas, Boethus, and Mys, in great admiration for their excellent
skill: and at this day there be extant, pieces of all their workmanship, to be
seen in the Isle of the Rhodians: for in the temple of Minerva which is at
Lindus a city in that Island, there is one statue of the said goddess, of
Boethus his making: within the temple of god Bacchus in the very city it self
of Rhodes, there are certain cups wrought by Acragas, wherein be engraven the
religious Priestresses called Bacchae, and the Centaurs. Within the same
Church, are the pourtraicts of Silenus, and the pretty Cupids, expressed lively
in imagerie, by Mys* Moreover, Acragas pourtraied Calamis and Antipater;
together with Stratonicus, who wrought within a broad-mouthed cup, one of the
Satyrs sound asleep; but with such dexterity and so lively, that he is judged
and said to have couched and fitted him to the cup, rather than barely engraven
him. Then follows Tauriscus of Cyzicum: semblably Aristus and Eunicus, both
Mityleneans, are highly commended: as also Hecataeus and Praxiteles, who
flourished about the time of Pompey the Great. Posidonius also of Ephesus, and
Ledus the Stratiat, who was in great name for ingrauing of battles and armed
men at the point to join skirmish. Likewise Zopirus, who made two singular
cups; in the one, he represented Orestes: which were esteemed worth twelve
talents. In another age lived Pytheas, a singular Artificer, whose workmanship
was so rare and exquisite, that every two ounces of his silver plate, was sold
commonly for twenty thousand Sesterces: and verily a broad goblet or standing
piece there was of his making, with a devise appendant to it, for to be set too
and taken off Vlixes and Diomedes, stealing the Palladium out of the temple of
Minerua in Troy. The same workman devised to set into little cups, pretty
images or mannikins resembling cooks, which he termed Magiriscia, but so
finely and delicatly wrought they were, that the patterns of them could not be
taken out in any mould, without hurting and spoiling; so subject were they to
any outward injuries in the handling. Furthermore, Teucer was famous in his
time, for his dexterity and light hand in shallow imbossing. Well, in as great
request as these artificers were in times past, yet this cunning decayed all on
a sudden, and grew so far out of use, that nothing now commends such pieces
of work, but only antiquity: in which regard, how near soever they be worn
with continual handling, insomuch as the shapes and proportions of the
imagerie engraven cannot be discerned, yet great store is set by any such
antique plate wheresoever it is to be had.

Over and besides, it is to be noted, that silver will rust in medicinable
waters, such as stand upon some especial mine; yea, the salt air breathing
from them, is able to infect it: as we may see in the Mediterranean parts of
Spain far remote from the sea.

Also, in mines of gold and silver, there are engendered certain mineral colors
serving for painters; to wit, i. Ochre.
Sil and Azur. As for Sil, to speak properly, it is a kind of muddy slime: the
best of this kind is called Atticum: and every pound of it is worth 32 deniers.
The next in goodness is hard as stone or marble, and carries hardly half the
price of the other named Atticum: there is a third sort, of a fast and compact
substance, which because it is brought out of the Island Scyros, some call
Scyricum: and yet of late verily, we have it out of Achaia also, and this is
the Sil that painters use for their shadows: this is sold after two sesterces
the pound. As for the Sil

CHAP. XIII.
Of i. Ochre.
Sil, Azur.
Caeruleum, Nestorianum, and Coelum. Also that all these kinds keep not the
same price every year.

POlygnotus and Mycon were the first Painters who wrought with Sil or Ochre,
but they used only that of Athens in their pictures. The age ensuing, employed
it much in giving light unto their colors, but that of Scyros and Lydia for
shadows. As for the Lydian ochre, it was commonly bought at Sardis, the
capital city of Lydia, but now it is grown out of all remembrance.

As touching Caeruleum or Azur, it is a certain sandy grit or powder: of
which, in old time there were known 3 kinds: to wit, the Egyptian, most
commended above the rest: the Scythian taking that name of him who first
devised it: made it is of the lightest part of the Egyptian Azur, and it
costeth 40 deniers the pound. Of the same use also is the Azur of Puteoli, save

But to try the right and perfect Azur indeed, the best experiment is to see
whether it will flame upon a burning cole. As for the false and sophisticat
Azur, it is thus made: they take the flowers of violets dried, and boil them
in water: the juice they press forth through a linen cloth, and mix the same
with the chaulky earth called Eretria, until such time as it be well
incorporat

To proceed unto the medicinable virtues of Azur: It is holden to be a great
clenser, and therefore it mundifieth ulcers: in which regard, it enters into
plasters: as also into potentiall cauteries. As touching Ochre or Sil, it is
exceeding hard to be reduced into powder: and this also serves in Physic;
for it has a mild kind of mordacity: astringent it is besides and incarnatiue;
in which respect, sovereign to heal ulcers: but before that it will do any
good, it ought to be burnt and calcined upon an earthen pan.

To conclude with the prices of all those things named heretofore: howsoever
hitherto I have set them down, yet I am not ignorant, how they vary according
to the place; yea, and alter in manner every year: and well I wot, that as
shipping and navigations speeds well or ill, as the Nero late Emperor, all the
spicers, druggers, and Apothecaries, preferred a Bill of complaint unto the
Consuls, against one Demetrius a regrater. Yet notwithstanding, I thought it
necessary to put down the prices of things as they are ordinary valued at
Rome one year with another, to show in some sort (by a general aestimat) the
worth of such wares and commodities whereof I have written.

THE XXXIV. BOOK OF
WRITTEN BY C. PLINIVS
The Proem.
CHAP. I.
The Mines of Brass.

IT is now time to go in hand with Mines of Brass, a metal esteemed most of
all i. debt. Moreover, I have showed already (for the greater credit and
authority of this metal) for how many years together the people of Rome used
no other money but brazen coin. And otherwise, as may appear by ancient
records and histories, the credit of brass took root at the beginning, and
has bin in authority ever since Rome was Rome: an evident proof whereof we
have from K. Numa, who founded and erected a third society or confraternity of
brasse-founders. As touching the ore or vein of brass, dug it is out of
the mine in manner aforesaid, but it is tried, and brought to perfection by
fire. Made also it is of the Chalamine stone, named otherwise Cadmia. The best
mines of brass that yield the excellent metal, are now in Asia; howsoever in

CHAP. II.
Diverse kinds of Brass: and namely, the Brass of Corinth, of the Isles of
Delos and Aegina.

IN the Island of Cyprus, where first were found mines of brass, the same is
made of another i. Copper. (...)
Cyprian brass fell soon to bear a low price, by reason of a better kind which
other countries did yield; and principally the laton called Orichalcum, which
for a long time was counted the best and held in greatest admiration. Howbeit,
this kind of brass has not bin gotten for these many years, as if the earth
were not in heart, and had given over bearing of it. Next to this Aurichalcum,
the most reckoning Sallustius, a great friend and favorite of Augustus Caesar
the Emperor: the other of the Empress Livia his wife: and this mine also
quickly failed. And verily of this Liuian brass very little or none there is
to be had. But now adays all the name goes of the Marian brass, which also is
called Cordubense: and to say a truth setting aside the aboue-named Liuian
brass, there is not any will take the yellow tincture of the Cadmia or Calamine
stone better, or comes so near in goodness to the latton Orichalcum; * As if
he would say, this metal is so much bet ter tha^ the Cypriambrasse and copper,
as the Sest^rce and Dupon diu^, i^ of more value than As: i. duple, or duple
and half.
as if a man would say that a piece of coin stamped of it, were a sesterces, or
at leastwise a double

There be other sorts of brass metal, which stand upon an artificial
mixture and temperature, whereof I purpose to write in more ample manner in
place convenient, after I have showed above all other things the excellency of
this metal in generality, thus tempered. In old time there was a mixed
metal made of brass, gold and silver, melt and confused all together,
whereof were made singular pieces of work: and albeit the metal was rich and
precious, yet evermore the workmanship was the dearer and went beyond it. But
now, it is hard to say, whether is worse of the two, the matter or the art that
is seen in it? But certes, I cannot but marvel much how it comes to pass,
That these brazen works, having always bin from time to time so dear, and
growing so infinitely as they do still in price to be bought and sold, yet the
magnificence Verres, whom Cicero had caused to be condemned, was together with
him proscribed, outlawed, and banished by Antonie, but only this, For that he
vaunted that he had as goodly vessels and pieces of Corinth metal as
himself, and would not part with any of them to Antonie: howbeit, in my
conceit, most part of those men who delight thus in this Corinth Mascellin, in
a certain singularity by themselves, because they would seem to know more than
their fellows, make semblance rather of a special insight and skill that they
have therein, than know indeed any thing by it of such exquisit stuff. And
this will I show and and neat service. But this Corrinthian metal may be
reduced well into three principal kinds, Jupiter, erected within the chapel
of Jupiter, syrnamed Thundering, in the Capitol, is the true pattern,
testifying what kind of brass that of Delos was. And, as Myron was wont to
cast the metal of Aegina in all his works, so Polycletus used ordinarily that
of Delos for this purpose; and these two were rare Imageurs, living at one
time, and prentises at the Art together: but they indeauoured to surpass one
the other in diverse mettalls which they occupied.

CHAP. III.
Of Candle-stickes and Ornaments belonging to Temples, made of Brass.

IN old time the Island Aegina was in especial name for the workmanship only of
the branches, Which was a tale^t, or 50000 sesterces.
and base name, for called it is in Latin Candelabrum, of sticking a candle in
it. But will you know who was so foolish as to bestow so much upon a
candle-stick, and what a tale belongs thereunto, for to mend the hard bargain?
thus stood the case:, it was a jolly dame in Rome, named Gegania who made this
wise match. And when she had so done, she must needs forsooth make a feast to
Clesippus, the founder or Brasier that sold it her, was misshapen and
bunch-backt. And order was taken by the commandment of Clesippus fusor gibber,
etc. not Fullo. Who as it should seem, was one other guests, and knew how to
play his part well enough.
Theon a public crier of Rome, that he should in the midst of supper be
brought into the place stark naked as ever he was borne (and as foul and
ill-sauoured a fellow he was otherwise as a man should lightly see) under a
color to make sport and to set the company in a laughing; but indeed to mock
Gegania the Mistress of the house. But what followed thereupon? The woman cast
a fancy to him by and by, and in that heat of love, or lust rather, admitted
him anon to her bed, and after set him into her will, and made him her heir.
This crooke-backed squire seeing himself exceedingly inricht by this double
bargain, adored the said candlestick no less than a god, as the only cause of
his rising, and all the wealth he had: and thus by his occasion, Gegania, might
be eternized and continue fresh in remembrance with all posterity. But to
return again to Corinthian Mummius, as in the heat of his victory he sacked
and destroyed Corinth, so withal he dispersed the brass by parcels and
piece-meale, and sent it away into many other towns and cities of Greece.

Moreover, this is to be noted, That in old time it was an ordinary thing to
make of brass, the sides, lintels, sils, and leaves of great doors belonging
to temples. I read also in Chronicles, that Cn. Octauius, who defeated K.
Perseus in fight at sea, and rode in triumph for that naual victory, caused
the double gallerie, which stands near unto the Cirque of Flaminius, to be
erected; which was called the Corinthian gallerie, for that the chapters of the
pillars were of brass. Vesta, should be always covered over with Brass,
after the manner of Saracossian work. Likewise M. Agrippa made all the chapters
of the pillars, standing in the temple Pantheon, of Syracusian brass, which
remain at this day to be seen. And not only public places and buildings
were thus beautified and adorned, but great men's private houses also were
enriched by this metal: for it appears upon record, That Sp. Carvilius, one
of the Treasurers of Rome, amongst other criminal imputations that he objected
to Camillus, challenged him for this, That the doors of his dwelling house were
plated and garnished with brass and copper. Moreover, as L. Piso reports in
his Chronicle, Cneus Manlius after his conquest of Asia, was the first that in
the triumph wherein he rode in the year after the foundation of Rome 568, he
made a show of three-sided Valerius Antias verily does write, That L. Crassus,
heir to that great Orator L. Crassus, made sale of many such brazen tables,
which fell unto him by right of inheritance. Semblably, I find in the
histories, That in old time they were wont to make many large basins, supported
with a frame of 3 feet, known by the name of Delphick basins, for that they
were commonly dedicated to Apollo, the patron or god of Delphos, for to receive
the gifts and oblations offered to him. In those days also the lamp-branches
hanging aloft in churches, spreading out their arms abroad and carrying lights
like trees bearing fruit were usually made of brass: and such a one is to be
seen in the temple of Apollo within the Palatine hill at Rome: which being
found by Alexander the great in the saccage of Thebes, the said prince
dedicated to the god Apollo at Cyme, a town in Aeolia. To conclude

CHAP. IIII.
At what time the first brazen Image was cast at Rome. The first original and
beginning of statues, and the honor that belonged to statues. Also the diverse
kinds and fashions of them.

THe first Image of brass that ever was made at Rome, I find to be
consecrated to Ceres, and raised it was out of the goods of Sp. Cassius, who
aspiring to be a king, was therefore slain or as some say, with a kind of
Amber.
Bitumen: more marvel it is therefore, that afterward men should take such
pleasure to guild them as they, did: this invention, whether it came from Rome
or no, I know not: but if it did, surely it was no ancient devise, nor of any
long continuance there. Certes, the manner was not in old time to express the
lively similitude of men in brass, unless they were such worthy persons as by
some notable and famous acts deserved to be immortalized, as namely, for
winning the prizes at any of the four sacred and solemn games holden in
Greece, and principally at those of Olympia, where it was an ordinary thing to
see the statues of those erected and dedicated, who had achieved any the hair
of the head and beard. And such kind of complete images, the Greeks use to call
Iconicae, i. personages. The manner of the Athenians was to honor men of
singular virtue and valor, Harmodius and Aristogiton, to be made of brass at
the charges of the state, and to be erected in public place, for that they had
the courage and heart to kill Pisistratus, who tyrannized over them: and this
fell out just in that very year wherein the kings were also deposed at Rome,
and expelled the city for ever. And in process of time this manner was taken
up in all parts of the world: so plausible to the nature of man, is the
ambitious desire to perpetuate their memory by such monuments, insomuch as
there is not a good town within our provinces, but they have begun already to
beautify their market places with many such ornaments of brazen statues and
images;

CHAP. V.
Of brazen statues in long robes, and diverse other sorts of Images. Whose
statues were first erected upon pillars. When they were set up first in
public, and at the common charges. Finally, which were the first in Rome.

IN ancient time all the images and statues erected to the honor of any men,
were in their gowns and robes. Men delighted also to have them otherwhiles all
naked, resting upon their spears which they held in their hands: this pattern
came from the Greeks, resembling the manner of their young men, which in that
sort did exercise naked in their public wrestling places, thereupon called
Gymasia: and such images are named Achilleae. And verily, the Greekish fashion
Julius Caesar verily the Dictator, was well content that his image should be
set up in the Forum or common place at Rome, armed with an habargeon or coat of
male. As for such statues which represented in habit the priests of Pan, called
Luperci (i. all discovered but their priuities) it is an invention new come up,
and as lately devised as those which be pourtraied in clokes or mantles.
Mancius appointed that his image should be erected in that habit and manner,
that is to say, bound and unarmed, as he was delivered prisoner to the
Numantines his enemies. As touching the statue of L. Actius, a famous Poet, I
will report unto you what writers have recorded, namely, That being himself a
very little Augustus Caesar, late Emperor of famous memory, there had

Concerning statues erected upon columns or pillars, they be of greater
antiquity, as may appear C. Menius, who vanquished the ancient Latins that
invaded the territory of Rome: unto which nation, the people of Rome was wont
by virtue of the league, to allow the third part of the booty and pillage
gotten in the wars: during the Consulship of which C. Menius, upon the victory
achieved of the Antiats, the city of Rome ordained, that the beak-heads with
their brazen tines, which were taken from them in a conflict at sea, should be
fastened unto the pulpit of public pleas and Orations, which thereupon was
ever after called Rostra: and this fortuned in the 416 year after the
foundation of Rome. The like statue upon a column was set up for the honor of
C. Duillius, who first defeated the Carthaginians by sea, and for that nauall
victory entered Rome in triumph: the same remains at this day to be seen in
the Forum or grand place of the city. Semblably, P. Minutius obtained the same
honor, who being Purueior i. Thetwelfth part of their As.
ounce of brass coin. And I wot not whether I may boldly say that he was the
first man who received that honor at the peoples hands: for before-time I am
well assured that the Senate only granted such rewards for men's good service.
Certes, these were brave and honorable memorials, had they not begun upon
occasion of some trifling matters to speak of. For such a statue was that of
Actius Nauius the Augur or Soothsayer, which stood before the entry of the
Curia or Councell-chamber of Rome: the base or foot of which pillar was burnt,
at what time as the said Curia or Senat-house caught a light fire, at the
funerals P. Clodius. The like image was set up (by authority from the State)
in the public place of elections at Rome, called Comitium, to the honor of
Hermodorus the Ephesian; who translated out of Greek into Latin the laws of
the 12 tables, which the ten Decemvirs had gathered and set down for the
public benefit of the city. As for the statue of Horatius Cocles, which
remains to this day, there was another reason of it, and the same of greater
credit and importance: for that he alone sustaining the charge and brunt of K.
Porsenaes army, made good the wooden bridge over Tybre at Rome, and caused the
enemies perforce to abandon the place. As touching the Statues of the
Prophetesses Sibyllae, three of them there be near unto the Rostra, before
said, but of a less making, whereat I nothing marvel: the one was repaired by
Sex. Pacuvius Taurus, one of the Aediles of the Commons; the other two by M.
Messala. And I assure you Actius Nauius to have been the most antique of all
others, as being set up in the days of K. Tarquinius Priscus, but that I see
the statues of the former kings within the Capitol.

CHAP. VI.
Statues without gown or robe at all. Of other Statues. Which was the first
statue on horseback. When and whereupon all the Images, as well public as
private were demolished and put down. What women they were at Rome who were
honored with brazen statues: and which were the first statues erected
publicly at

AMong the said Statues of Roman kings, that of Romulus is without any coat or
cassocke at all; like as that also of Camillus, which stands at the pulpit
Rostra. As for the Image of Q. Martius Tremellius, which was erected before the
temple of Castor and Pollux, the same was in a gown, and sitting upon
horseback: this noble knight had vanquished the Samnites twice: and by the
winning of Anagnia, a city not far from Rome, procured thereby an easment unto
the people, from paying tribute unto the state for the maintenance of the wars.
In the rank of the most antique monuments of Rome, I may range the statues of
Tullius Cloelius, L. Roscius, Sp. Nautius, and C. Fulcinius, which stand about
the Pulpit Rostra: and these were the four Roman P. Iunius, and T. Coruncanus,
who by Teuca the queen of the Illyrians were put to death, notwithstanding
they came in embassade to her. And here I cannot ouerpasse one point noted in
C. Others say Pompilius.
Octauius, who for one word speaking lost his life: this man being sent as
Ambassador unto king Antiochus, and having delivered his message unto him
according to his charge and Commission, when he saw that the king made no
haste to give him his dispatch presently, but said he would make him an answer
another day; made no more ado, but with a wand or rod that he had in his hand,
drew a circle about the king, and compelled him by force to give him his answer
before he stirred his foot without that compass. But this cost him his life:
and for that he was killed thus in his Embassage, the Senate of Rome ordained,
That his statue should be erected in the most conspicuous place of the city,
and that was in the public Taracia Caia, or, as some say, Suffetia, a Votary
or Vestall Nun, should have her image made of brass, and this special
prerogative besides, that she might set it up in what place she would her self:
which addition or branch of the decree implies no less honor than the grant
it self of a Statue to a woman. What her desert might be, in consideration
whereof she was thus honored, I will set down word for word, as I find it
written in the Chronicles, namely, For that she had conferred frankely upon the
people of Rome, a piece of meadow ground lying under the River Tybre, which was
her own Free-land. I find moreover upon record, That the Statues of
Pythagoras and Alcibiades were set up in the cornered nouke of the Comitium at
Rome, and that Apollo Pythius; unto which the Senate sent of purpose to know
the issue of the Samnites war, which was then in hand: from whence they had
this answer, that if they looked to speed well in their affairs, they should
take order to erect two statues of brass in the most frequented place of the
city of Rome, the one in the honor of the most valiant man, and the other in
the honor of the wisest person of all the Greekish Nation: which Images
remained there until such time as Sylla the Dictatour built his stately hall
or palace in the same place: But I marvel very much, that those sage fathers
(the Senators of Rome at that time being) preferred either for wisdom
Pythagoras before Socrates (considering that the said Socrates by the very same
Oracle of Apollo, was judged the wisest man, not of Greeks only but of all
others in the world;) or in regard of valor, Alcibiades, before so many hardy
Captains Themistocles. Now if a man be desirous to know the reason of these
Columns and Pillars, which supported those Statues aforesaid, it was to
signify, That such persons were now advanced and lifted up above all other
mortal men: which also is meant by the triumphant Arches, a new invention, and
devised but of late days: yet both it, and all other such honorable
testimonies, began first with the Greeks. But amongst many and sundry statues
which they granted and allowed unto such as they affected and liked of, I
suppose, there was never man had more than Phalerius Demetrius at Athens: for
the Athenians honored him with three hundred and threescore: and yet soon
after they Strabo says that they defaced and melted them, yea, and flung them
into draughts and priuies.
brake them all to pieces, even before one full year went over their heads,
that is to say, a few days more than there were Images. Moreover, all the
tribes or wards of Rome set up a statue in every street of the city (as I
Marius Gratidianus, and those they overthrew every one, against the coming in
of Scylla.

As touching statues and Images on foot, I doubt not but they have been for a
long time greatly esteemed at Rome. Howbeit those on horseback were very
ancient: and that which more is, this honor they did communicate also unto
women as well as men; as may appear yet at this day by the statue of Claelia
sitting on horseback, as if she could not have been honored sufficiently by
making her statue in the habit of a Damsel or Lady of Rome in a side gown.
And yet neither the Chaste dame Lucretia, nor the valiant Brutus (who chased
the kings and all their race out of Rome, and for whose sake and in whose
quarrel the said Cloelia was delivered as an Hostage among others) never
attained unto that honor. And I do verily believe, Horatius Cocles, were the
first that public authority ordained: for before time King Tarquinius
Priscus caused both his own Statue and also Sibyllats to be made, like as the
other kings before him and after, as may be presumed by all likelihood and
probability. And yet Piso says, that the other damsels and young gentlewomen
her fellow hostages, after they were set free and sent home safe again by king
Porsena (for the Cloelia in consideration only of her rare and singular
virtue) caused the said statue or image of hers to be cast in brass, and
erected. But Annius Faecialis (another antiquarie or heralt at arms of Rome)
reports this story otherwise; for he writes, That the statue of a woman
sitting on horseback (which stands ouer-against the temple of Jupiter
Stator, and hard at the gate or entry of king Tarquinius the Proud his Palace)
was of lady Valeria, daughter unto Valerius the Consul, surnamed Publicola:
who says moreover, that she it was alone who escaped from her fellows, and
swam over the river Tiberis; whereas the rest of the virgins which had been
sent as pledges unto king Porsena, were murdered all, by the secret trains and
indirect means of Tarquin the Proud.

L. Piso moreover has left in writing, that in the year when M. Aemilius and
C. Popilius the (P. Cornelius Scipio and M. Popilias) caused all the images and
statues of those who had been head magistrates, that stood about the Forum of
Rome, to be taken down; permitting those only to stand which had been
erected and set up either by grant from the people, or warrant and decree of
the Senate. As for that statue which Sp. Cassius (him I mean who ambitiously
sought to be a king) caused to be erected for his own self before the church
of the goddess Tellus, the Censors not only pulled it down, but also took
order that it should be melted. And this (no doubt) did those wise and
provident fathers, to cut off all means even in such things as these, that
might feed the ambitious spirit of men. There be yet extant certain
declamations of Cato, who being Censor, cried out against the vain-glorie and
pride of certain Roman Ladies who suffered their own images to be set up
Cornelia, the daughter of the former Scipio Africanus, and mother to the two
Gracchi, whose statue was made sitting: and this singularity it had besides
from all others, That her shoes were pourtraied open and loose without any
strings or latchets at all. This image of hers was set up in the great gallery
or public walking-place of Metellus, but now it is to be seen among the
stately works and buildings of Octavia.

Moreover, (by allowance and permission of the state) there have been statues
set up in Rome in public place, by strangers: as namely, for C. Aelius a
Tribune or Provost of the commons, for that he published and enacted a law,
That Stennius Statillius a Lucan, who twice had invaded Aelius with a statue of
brass, and represented to him a coronet of gold. The same Thurines also caused
another statue to be made in the honor of Fabricius, for raising the siege
that invested and beleaguered their city. By occasion of which succor and
relief given unto strangers and aliens, it came to pass in process of time,
that foreign states and cities shrouded themselves ordinarily under the
protection of some great men at Rome; and in devotion to them, honored such as
their lords and masters, by statues and all other means, even as their bounden
vassels. At length, there grew such disorder and confusion of these statues,
that we had them pell mell at Rome without any choice or regard at all:
insomuch as it this day, they are no fewer than three statues of Anniball

CHAP. VII.
Of the Brasse-founders in old time. The inestimable prices of molten Images.
Of the most renowned Colosses and gyant-like Images in Rome.

THat the art of Founderie or casting metals for Images has been very
antique, practiced also and professen in Italy as well as in other countries
time out of mind, may be evidently Hercules, which K. Evander consecrated to
the honor of him, in that very place (by folks saying) which now is the beast
market in Rome. This image is called at this day, Hercules triumphalis, and at
every triumph is richly clad in triumphant habit. The image likewise of Ianus
with two faces, dedicated by K. Numa, testified no less, and honored he is no
less than a god, as by whom the times of war and peace be distinctly known.
Moreover, the fingers of his hand are in that sort fashioned and formed, as
they represent the number Metrodorus Scepsius who for the immortal hatred that
he bare against the Romans had his It does not appear what it was, but by all
likelihood (...).
surname given him, reproaches the Romans among other imputations, That they
had forced and sacked the town Volsinij, for the love of two thousand pretty
images in brass which were therein. Considering then, that the invention of
making such molten images has been so antique in Italy, I M. Scaurus was
Aedile, there were three thousand molten images showed upon the stage when he
exhibited his plays, notwithstanding this Mummius, after the conquest of
Achaia, brought in with him so many of these images, that he filled the city
therewith, and no corner was free: and yet when he departed this life and died,
he left not behind him a competent portion for to bestow his daughter in
marriage. And this I write not to accuse and condemn so brave a man, but
rather to excuse and commend him: for how can I otherwise do? The two Luculli
stored Rome with a number of these images. Mutianus (a man who of late days
had been twice Consul) reports, That there be yet within Rhodes three
thousand such images: and verily it is thought, that in Athens, Olympia, and
Delphi, there remain no fewer to be seen. What man living is able to
particularize them all? and say a man should come to the perfect knowledge of
them, what good can he reap thereby, or what use may he make thereof? Lysippus
(by report) made in his time six hundred and ten, so full of art, so excallent
and perfect all, as there is not one of them but sufficient it were to
immortalize his name. And how was it known that he made such a number just?
It appeared plain after his decease by a coffer that he had, wherein he
treasured up his gold, and which was then broken open by his heir: for the
manner of Lysippus was, whenever It should seem that the Greeks had a piece
in gold answerable in weight unto the Komane Denorius in silver, which was
adiam Attick: and this comes near unto our French crown.
denier of gold; and so by the number of those deniers it was known, how many
pieces of work he made. Incredible it is to what height of perfection this art
grew unto, first by the success of the art, which was so vendible and high
prised; afterward, by the audaciousnesse of the artificer, who ventured to
make so huge and monstrous works.

What good speed this art had, may appear by an example which I will set
down, of an image, devised to express the likeness neither of god nor man:
and a dog it was in brass, which many a man has seen in our time in a
chapel of Juno within the Capitol temple, before it was burnt now last by
the i. Those that sided with Vitellius.
Vitellians: This dog was made licking his own wound; but how artificially it
was wrought, and how lively it expressed the proportion and feature of a dog be
pledged and pawned for the warrantise, or to counteruaile the worth thereof:
Order therefore

As touching the bold and venturous pieces of work that have been performed
and finished by this art, we have an infinite number of such examples: for we
see what huge and gyant-like images they have devised to make in brass,
resembling high towers more like that personages, and such they called Colossi.
Of this kind is the image of Apollo within the Capitol, transported by M.
Lucullus out of Apollonia, a city within the kingdom of Pontus, which in
height was thirty cubits, and cost a hundred and fifty talents the making.
Such another is that of Jupiter within Mars field, dedicated by Claudius Caesar
the Emperor, which because it stands so near unto Pompeys theater, men
commonly call Jupiter Pompeianus, and full as big he is as Apollo Hercules] at
Tarentum, the handiwork of the said Lysippus, but he is forty cubits high: and
miraculous is the devise of this colosse, if it be true which is commonly
reported thereof, namely, that a man may move and stir it easily with his
hand, so truly balanced it stands and equally counterpoised by Geometry; and
yet no wind, no storm or tempest, is able to shake it. Certes, it is said,
that the workman himself Lysippus, provided well for this danger, in that a
pretty way off he reared a column or pillar or stone full opposite to the winds
mouth, for to break the force and rage thereof, from that side where it was
like to blow and beat most upon the colosse: and verily so huge it was to weld,
and so hard to be removed, that Fabius surnamed Verrucosus, durst not meddle
withal, but was forced to let it alone and leave it behind him;
notwithstanding be brought with Hercules, which now stands within the
Capitol. But the Colosse of the Sun which stood at Rhodes, and was wrought by
Chares of Lyndus, apprentice to the abouenamed Lysippus, was above all others
most admirable; for it carried seventy cubits in height: * Festus says 105
foot: whereby it appears that a cubit was one foot and a half. Chares the
workman engraued under it this Hypogram in Iam. bicke verse: (...).
well, as mighty an image as it was, it stood not on end above threescore
years and six; for in an earth quake that then happened, it was overthrown:
but lying as it does along, a wonderful and prodigious thing it is to view and
behold: for first and foremost, the thumbs of the hand and great toes of the
foot are so big, as few men are able to fadome one of them about: the fingers
and toes are bigger than the most part of other whole statues and images: and
look where any of the members or lims were broken with the fall, a man that
saw them would say they were broad holes and huge caves in the ground: for
within these fractures and breaches, you shall Chares was in making of it
before he could fully finish it, and the bare workmanship cost three hundred
talents: This money was raised out of K. Demetrius his provision which he had
set by for that purpose, and paid from time to time by his officers, for that
he would not himself endure to stay so long for the workmanship thereof.
Other images there are besides of the nature of colosses in the same city of
Rhodes to the number of one hundred, lesser indeed than the foresaid colosse of
the Sun; yet there is not one of them, but for the bigness were sufficient to
give a name to the place and ennoble it, wheresoever it should stand. Over and
above, there be in the said city five other gyant-like images or colosses
representing some gods, and those of an huge bigness, which were Bryaxes his
making. Thus much of workmen strangers.

And to come somewhat nearer home: we Italians also have practiced to make such
colosses, forsurely we may see (and go no further than to the library
belonging to the temple of Augustus Caesar here in Rome) a Tuscan colosse made
for Apollo, and the same is fifty foot high from the great toe upward: but the
bigness thereof is not so much as the matter and workmanship: for hard it is
to say, whether is more admirable, the beautiful feature of the body, or the
exquisit temperature of the metal. Moreover, Sp. Carvilius long ago made the
great image of Jupiter which stands in the Capitol hill, after the Samnites
were vanquished in that dangerous war, wherein they bound themselves by a
sacred lay and oath to fight it out to the last man, under Jupiter in Latium,
called therefore Latiarius. The powder and dust which the filme made in the
workmanship and polishing of this colosse, Carvilius P. Lentulus when he was
Consul thought good to dedicat to that place. The one was made by Chares the
foresaid founder; the other wrought by Decius, but this of Decius his making
compared with the other, comes so far short, that one would not take it to
be the doing of an artificer that was his crafts-master, but rather of some
bungler, prentice, or learner. But to speak indeed of a great image, and that
which surpasses in bigness all the rest of that kind, look but upon the huge
and prodigious colosse of Mercury, which Zenodorus in our age and within our
remembrance, made in France at Auvergne: ten years he was about it, and the
workmanship came to four hundred thousand sesterces. Now when he Nero the
Emperor sent for him to come to Rome, where he cast indeed and finished a
colosse a hundred and ten foot long, to the similitude and likeness of the
said Emperor, according as it was first appointed, and as he began it: but the
said prince being dead and his head laid, dedicated is was to the honor and
worship of the Sun, in detestation of that most wicked monster, whose
ungracious acts the city condemned and abhorred. Certes, I my self have been
in that workhouse of Zenodorus, where I beheld and considered not only that
great master-patterne in cley of the said colosse, but also another consisting
of very small pieces, as branches, which served as it were for moulds, and the
first induction to the work, as the assay and proof thereof. Surely the
workmanship of this one statue or colosse, showed plainly, that the true
science and skill of founderie or casting brass into forms, was clean Nero was
ready and willing to give silver and gold enough for the doing thereof
artificially and with expedition. Zenodorus also himself was not thought
inferior to any workman in old time, either for counterfeiting a similitude,
or grauing the same: for during the time that he made the statue beforesaid in
Auvergne, he counterfeited two drinking cups graven and chased by the hand of
Calamis, but belonging to Vibius Avitus (the president and governor at the same
time, of that province) which he had received of Cassius Syllinus his uncle by
the mothers side, tutor and schoolmaster sometime to Caesar Germanicus; which
prince notwithstanding that he loved them well, yet he bestowed them freely
upon his said instructor Cassius, whom he loved better: and Zenodorus did it so
well, that hardly there could be discerned any difference in the workmanship.
But to conclude, the more consummat and accomplished Zenodorus was for his
skill and cunning, the more evidently it appears, that the true Art of
founderie was in his time clean lost, and out of knowledge and practice.

CHAP. VIII.
Of 366 excellent pieces of work in Brass, and as many cunning artificers in
that kind.

THe images aad wrought pieces of Brass, commonly called Corinthian works,
many men take such pleasure and delight in, that they love to carry the same
with them whither soever they go; as Hortensius the famous orator, who would
never be without the counterfeit of Sphinx, which he had from Verres his
client, at what time as he was in trouble and called into question, for his
extortions and oppressions in Sicilie: in which trial of Verres, wherein
Cicero was his adversary and accuser, upon occasion that Hortensius who
pleaded at the bar against him in the behalf of Verrus, among other cross
words that passed petweene, happened to say, That he understood no parables and
riddles, and therefore willed him to speak more plainly; Cicero made answer
readily again, that by good reason he should be well acquainted with riddles,
seeing he had a Sphinx at home in his house. Likewise, Nero the Emperor had a
great fancy to a piece or counterfeit of an Amazon, (whereof I mean to write
more hereafter) which by his good will he would never be without. And C.
Cestius, somewhat before Nero, a man that in his time had bin Consul, was so
addicted to a little image that he had, that it went with him into Alexander
the Great had four statues or images (by report) which ordinarily were wont and
none but they, to support his tent when he lay abroad and kept the field:
whereof, twain stand now before the temple of Mars called the Revenger, and
other 2 before the Palatium.

As touching images, statues, and counterfeits of a lesser size, there are an
infinite number of artificers who are ennobled and renowned by them: yet to
begin with the image of Jupiter made Phidias the Athenian (above all other) was
of great name therefore, and wrought it was of yvorie and gold together:
howbeit many other pieces of brass there were of his making, which greatly
commended the workman; he flourished in the 83 Olympias, and about the year
(after our computation at Rome) 300. And at the same time there lived those
concurrents of his who endeavored to match him, to wit, Alcamenes, Critias,
Nestocles, and Hegias. After these, and namely in the 87 Olympias, there
succeeded and had their time, Agelades, Callon, Polycletus, Phragmon, Gorgias,
Lacon, Myron, Pythagoras, Scopas, and Perelius: of which, Polycletus brought up
diverse brave and worthy apprentices, and by name, Argius, Asapodorus, Alexis,
Aristides, Phrynon, Pynon, Athenodorus, Dameas of Clitore, and Myron the
Lycian. In the 95 Olympias there flourished Naucides, Dinomedes, Canochus, and
Patrocles. In the 102 Olympias there came in place, Polycles, Cephissodorus,
Leochares, and Hypatodorus. In the 104 lived Lysippus, at what time also K.
Alexander the Great flourished: likewise Lysistratus and his brother Sthenis,
Euphronides, Sostratus, son, and Silanion: of which Silanion this is
wonderful, that having no master at all to teach and instruct him in the art,
yet he became himself so excellent, that he brought up under him, Zeuxis and
Iades. In the 120 Olympias, Eutychides, Euthycrates, Lahippus, Sephissodorus,
Tymarchus, and Pyromachus were famous artificers for the time. Then lay the art
asleep and as it were dead for a while, until such time as about the 155
Olympias it seemed to revive and awaken again; and then there arose Antheus,
Callistratus, Polycles, Athenaeus, Callixenus, Pythocles, Pythias, and
Timocles, indifferent good workmen, but nothing comparable to the other before
named. Thus having ranged the most famous Artificers distinctly according to
their several Ages, I will run over them again,

In the first place this is to be understood, that the principal and singular
of al these founders came in question (notwithstanding they lived in sundry
ages) which of them should be esteemed chief, by reason of diverse Amasons
wrought by their hands: for when these images should be dedicated in the temple
of Diana in Ephesus, it was thought good to make choice of one that should be
deemed and approved best, by the judgment of those workmen who then lived and
were present: for plain it was, that the image whom they all judged to be next
and second to their own, the same was simply best, and so to be reputed. This
principal Amason happened to be of Polycletus Phidias: that of Ctesilas was
counted the third; of Cydon the fourth, and in a fifth place was reckned the
workmanship of Phragmon. As for Phidias, besides the Jupiter Olympius of his
making, (wherein no man seeks to come near unto him) he made likewise Minerva
of ivorie at Athens, which stands there in the temple Parthenon. But over and
above the foresaid Amason, there was of his workmanship Minerva in brass, so
fair and beautiful, that of her beauty she took the surname [Kallimorphos.]
Of his doing was the image called (...), i. Claviger, the key. bears.
Cliduchos, and another of Minerva, which Aemilius Paulus dedicated at Rome in
the temple of Fortuna hujusce diei, i. Of the days of Fortune. Also two other
statues or images portraied in clokes or mantles, were his handiwork, which
Catulus set up in the same temple: likewise another after the manner of a
colossus or giant all naked. In sum, he was Polycletus the Sicyonian, who
learned his cunning under Agclades, he it was that made in brass Diadumenus
an effoeminat young man looking want only, with a diadem or wreath about his
head; a piece of work of great account, and much spoke of, for that it cost 100
talents: and of his making was Doryphorus, a young boy with a manly countenance,
having a spear in his hand. Moreover, he made that which workmen call Canon,
that is to say, one absolute piece of work, from whence artificers do fetch
their draughts, simetries, and proportions, as from a perfect pattern or rule
which guides and directs them in their work: so as we may well and truly
judge, That Polycletus alone reduced the skill of Founderie and imagerie into
an Art and method, as may appear both by that Canon, and by other works which
passed through his hands. Of his workmanship was the brazen image, representing
one scraping and rubbing himself in the bath or hot-house: as also another all
naked, and Tale incessente^ some read, to^ incedene^.
challenging to the dice. Item, two boys both naked playing at dice, which
thereupon be called Astragalizontes. And these remain to be seen in the court
or portall belonging to the house of Titus the Emperor, which is so Mercury
which is at Lysimachia of Hercules at Rome, and namely how he heaued and held
up Anteus from the ground between heaven and earth: and the counterfeit of
Artemon, that effeminate and wanton person, who because he was ordinarily
carried in a Litter, men called Poryphoretos. This Polycletus was judged to
have brought this art of Imagery to a consummat perfection; the feat also of
ingrauing and imbossing he was thought to practice and promote, like as Phidias
before him opened the way to it and gave instructions. This proper and special
gift he had besides above all other, to devise how Images might stand upon one
leg: and yet Varro says, that all the images of his making be four square, and
all in manner after one pattern.

To come unto Myro, born he was at Eleutherae, and an apprentice likewise to
Agelades: the piece of work that brought him into name and made him famous,
was an heifer of brass; by reason that diverse Poets have in their verses
highly praised it, and spread the singularity of it abroad: for so it falls out
otherwhiles, that many men are commended by the wit of others, more than by
their own. Other pieces of work there were of his besides, to wit, a dog, a
coit. caster (or one hurting a stone or weight of lead) Perseus [killing
Medusa] sawyers called Pristae, a Satyr wondering at a pipe or flute, and the
goddess Minerva: moreover, the Delphick Pentathli, and the Pancratiastae:
furthermore, that image of Hercules which stands in the temple that Pompey
erected near the greatest cirque or shew-place, is the handiwork of Myro.
Besides (as it appears by the poesy of Brinna the Poetresse) he it was that
made the tomb or monument in brass of Apollo, which (after that Antonius the
Triumvir had wrongfully taken from the Ephesians) Augustus Caesar restored
again unto them, being warned so to do by a vision appearing unto him in his
sleep, was of Myro his making. This workman seems to have bin the first that
wrought not his images after one sort, but altered his work after many
fashions, as being fuller of invention, and given more to devise in his art,
more curious also and precise in his symentries and proportions, than
Polycletus: and yet as exquisite as he was, he went no farther than to the
outward linements of the body and members thereof; as for the inward affections
of the mind he did not express in any of his work: the hair also as well of
head, beard, as share, he left after a gross manner, and wrought them no finer
than the rude and inexpert workmen in old time had either done or taught. No
marvel therefore if Pythagoras Apollo at Delphos. He came short also of
Leontius, who expressed lively in brass, Astylos the famous runner in a race;
which image is showed for a rare piece of work in Olympia: also the boy Libys,
which is to be seen in the same place, holding in his hand a little table, and
withal carrying apples, stark naked. He made also the pourtraiture of one that
seemed lame and to halt, upon an ulcer; but the same is so lively and naturally
done, that as many as behold the same seem to have a compassion and
fellow-feeling with him of some pain and grieuance of his sore; and this piece
of work a man may see at Syracusa. Furthermore, the said Leontius cast in
brass one Apollo playing upon his harp: as also another Apollo, and the
serpent killed with his arrows; which Dicaeus, i. Just: for that when the city
of Thebes was won by Alexander the Great, the gold which he hid in the bosom
thereof when he fled, was found there safe and not diminished, when the enemy
was gone and he returned. He was the first that in his images expressed the
sinues and veins lying under the skin: he it was also that couched and laid
the hair of the forehead more handsomely, yea and wrought the same far more
finely than any before him.

Now besides Pythagoras before mentioned, there was another a or rather Parius,
of Paros.
Samian both, who by occupation was at the beginning a painter: of his
handiwork are those 7 images half naked, which are to be seen in the Temple of
Huiusce dici.
This days Fortune at Rome; and one resembling an old man: all highly
commended for singular art. This Pythagoras was so like unto the other above
named Sostratus, it is said he was apprentice to Pythagoras of Rhegium, and his
sisters son besides. As for Lysippus of Sicyone, Durus says, That he learned
the art by himself, and never was taught by other. But Tullius affirms, That
he was an Apprentice unto it, and having bin at first by occupation a poor
tinker or a plain brasier and coppersmith at the most, he began to take heart
unto him and to proceed further, by a speech or answer that Eupompus M. Agrippa
caused to be set before his own bains: and the Emperor Tiberius Caesar took so
great pleasure in it, that notwithstanding at his first coming to the crown he
knew well enough how to command and temper his own affections, yet he could not
Lysippus also won great credit and commendation by another image that he made,
representing a woman piping or playing upon the flute, and drunken withal:
also by a kennell of hounds, together with the huntsman and all belonging to
the game. But above all, he got the greatest name for making in brass a
chariot drawn with four steeds, together with the image of the Sun, so much
honored among the Rhodians. Alexander the Great he likewise expressed in
brass, and many images he made of him, beginning at the very childhood of the
said Prince: and verily the Emperor Nero was so greatly enamoured upon one
image of Alexander, that he commanded it to be gilded all over; but
afterward, seeing that the more cost was bestowed upon it by laying on gold;
the less was the art seen of the first workman, so that it lost all the beauty
and grace that it had by that means, he caused the gold to be taken off again:
and verily the said image thus vngilded as it was, seemed far more precious
than it was whilst it stood so enriched with gold, notwithstanding all the
hacks, cuts, gashes, and rases all over the body wherein the gold did stick,
remained still, which in some sort might disfigure it. Of this man's making was
the statue of Hephaestion, a great fauorit and minion of Alexander the Great;
and yet some ascribed this piece Polycletus; whereas in truth he lived almost
an hundred years before the said Hephaestion. He counterfeited also Alexander
the Great how he rode a hunting, with his hounds and all things belonging to
the chase; and this Work of his resembling hunting was thought worthy to be
consecrated in the temple of Apollo at Delphi. At Athens he made a troop of
Satyrs. As for Alexander himself, with all his principal courtiers and
friends about him, he resembled in brass most lively. All these pieces of his
workmanship before rehearsed were transported to Rome by Metellus, after the
subduing and conquest of Macedonie. Finally, Coaches drawn with four horses,
he made of many sorts and fashions, all in brass. And in a word, the art of
founderie and imagerie was brought to far greater perfection by this Artificer,
as it was thought; for he expressed the very hairs of the head as fine and
small as Nature made them. Lahippus and Bedas were passing good Workmen, and
very well regarded; but Euthycrates his third son ouerwent his brethren.
Although I must needs say, That be loved rather to follow his father in such
Works as carried some constancy and majesty with Hercules which is to be seen
at Delphos within the temple of Apollo, he expressed most excellently. The
statue also of K. Alexander the great was of his making, and is thought to be a
rare piece of work: the hunter Thespis was of his making, a work highly
esteemed: like as the nine Muses also, known by the name of Thesptades. He
represented also in brass a skirmish on horseback, representing that Turnois
which was performed at the Oracle of Jupiter Throphonius: likewise the coches
of Queen Medea drawn with four horses, of which kind he made many: as also
an horse with panniers: and hunters hounds as if there were a cry of them.

He brought up under him one Tisicrates, who also was a Sicyonian, but he
rather seemed to imitate Lysippus, than his master Euthycrates, in so much as
many pieces of his making could be hardly discerned from those in the same
kind, which came out of Lysippus his hand: as for example, the image of an old
man resembling in habit a Theban, the portrait of K. Demetrius, and of one
Peucestes who saved the life of Alexander the Great; in which regard he
deserved well to be immortalised by so good a hand.

Moreover, diverse artificers there be who have written great volumes of
singular workmen in Imagery, and they commend wonderfully one Telephanes a
Phocean, whose name otherwise had bin unknown, for that in Thessaly where he
dwelt his works lay hidden and never came to light: for in regard of his skill
and sufficiency, by all their voices equal he was to Polycletus, Myron, and
Pythagoras. And to come unto particulars, they write much in praise of his
Larissa, his Apollo, and one Spinarius a notable wrestler, and who had won
several prizes in all the five kinds of masteries and feats of actiuitie. And
yet I am not ignorant, that some allege another cause of his obscurenesse, and
why he was no more talked of, because he was a feed workman to Xerxes and
Darius, and devoted himself wholly to their service, and had the work of those
two Kings only.

As for Praxiteles, his workmanship was more seen in cutting of marble, and
making Images thereof, wherein he had a singular grace and rare felicity, and
in which regard his name was the greater. Yet he showed good proof of his skill
in foundery also, for there be most beautiful cast images of brass which he
made, to wit, the rauishing of Proserpina by Pluto, a Spinster spinning,
Catagusa: the image of Drunkenness, god Bacchus attended with one of the
Satyrs; a noble piece of work, and which for the great voice and bruit that
went of it, the Greeks surnamed Periboetos. The brazen images likewise, which
stood sometimes in the forefront of the temple at Rome dedicated unto Felicity,
were of his making: as also the goddess Venus, which when the chapel wherein
she stood erected was burnt, during the reign of Claud. Caesar the emperor, was
melted; an exquisit piece of work, and comparable to that Venus of his cutting
in marble, which all the world speaks so much of. He portraied also in brass
a woman making coronets and Chaplets of flowers, which goes under the name of
Stephusa: a foul old trot and a nasty, bearing the title of Spilumene: a
carier also of flaggons or wine pots, known by the addition of Oenophorus. He
expressed moreover in brass, and that most lively, Harmodius and Aristogiton,
Pisistratus: which images being with other pillage taken and carried away by
Xerxes K. of Persia, and recovered by King Alexander the Great when he had
conquered the kingdom of Persis, the said prince and conqueror sent them home
to the Athenians again. Furthermore, he cast in brass a Some think he means
this of Apollo.
youth lying in wait with an arrow to kill a Lizard, which was ready to creep
close unto him and to sting; which piece of work he termed Sauroctonus. Two
images there are besides of his making, which people take much pleasure to
behold, and those in countenance show diverse affections; to wit, a sober Matron
weeping, and a light Courtesan smirking: It is thought that this Courtesan was
his own Sweetheart Phryne; for men do note both (in the curious workmanship
of the Artificer) the love of him which fancied her, and also (in the pleasant
countenance of the harlot) the contentment that she took by receiving Calamis
his doing, drawn with four horses, he set a choachman of his own handiworke:
and why? because the posterity another day should not think, That Calamis
having done so well in pourtraying the horses, failed of the like cunning in
expressing the man: and to say a truth, Calamis was not altogether so perfect
and ready in personages of men Calamis was he who made many other coaches and
chariots, as well with two steeds as four; and verily, for absolute
workmanship about horses, wherein he never missed, he had not his fellow again
in the world: and yet because he would not be thought unlike himself, but be
taken for as good an imageur in expressing men and women, as in representing
horses, one statue he made in resemblance of Lady Alcmena, which is so
exquisitly wrought as no man could ever set a better piece of work by it.

To come now to Alcamenes, trained up under Phidias. A singular workman he was,
and wrought many pieces in marble, as also in brass, and namely a brazen
Pentathlus, known also by the name of Encrinomenos.

But Aristides, who learned his skill under Polycletus, is famous for the
chariots that he made as well with four as two horses. Iphicrates likewise
cast in brass a Lioness, which is much praised, Leaena, and that upon this
occasion: There was a certain strumpet named Leaena, who being familiarly
acquainted with Harmodius and Aristogiton abouenamed, (for that she could play
upon the harp, and withal sing so sweetly to it) and privy to their plots and
projects as touching the murder of the tyrant Pisistratus, would never, to die
for it, discover and reveal this intention and purpose of theirs unto the
tyrant and his fauourits, notwithstanding she was put to most exquisit and
dolorous torments about it. The Athenians therefore desirous to honor this
woman for her resolute constancy accordingly, and yet loath to be thought for
to make so much of such an harlot as she was, devised to represent the
memorial of her and her act by a beast of her name, and that was a Lioness,
yet for to express the particular motive and reason of this honor done unto
the said Lioness, they gave order unto Iphicrates For this harlot Leaena
fearing least she might for pain and torment let pass some word, and bewray
the thing, she bit out her own tongue, and spit it in the face of the tyrant
and the torme^tors.
tongue in the head of this Lioness.

Touching Bryaxis, there be two excellent pieces of his making, to wit,
Aesculapius and Seleucus. As for Bedas, he resembled in brass old Battus
adoring Apollo and Juno: And all three by him curiously wrought, are now
standing in Rome within the temple of Concord. Ctesilas expressed in brass a
man grievously wounded, fainting and ready to die thereupon; which he did so
lively, that one might perceive therein how little life and breath was left
within his body. He made likewise the image of Pericles For he never made
speech to the people, but with joint. hands litted up to heaven, he prayed
first.
Olympius, who for his divine eloquence and holiness was worthy of that
heavenly name. And here by the way, a wonderful gift this art has, that it
always has made noble and worthy persons more noble and famous.

As for Cephissodorus, the admirable image of Minerva which is to be see in the
haven or harbor of the Athenians, was his workmanship: The altar also before
the temple of Jupiter, surnamed Savior, near the said haven, was of his doing,
and few pieces of work there be comparable unto it.

Canachus made one excellent image of Apollo all naked, which by the title and
syrname of Philesius, stands in the temple called Didymaeum. And this Apollo
was cast of the brass of Aegineticke temperature. There is with the said
Apollo another most exquisit and curious piece of work by him devised and
wrought, to wit, a stag standing so lightly upon his feet, that a man may draw
a thread under them; and the same takes hold of the floor underneath, so
daintily that he seems to touch it with one foot by the clea, with another by
the heel, and the same after such a winding manner twining and turning, as
well with the one as the other, that a man would think one while he were about
to bounce and spring forward, and anotherwhile to start and cast Cheraeas
expressed in brass the lively pourtraitures of K. Alexander the Great, and
king Philip his father. Ctesalaus represented in the same metal, one of these
Doryphori, which were of K. Darius his guard, bearing a spear or pertuisane:
also one of those warlick women, Amasons, wounded. And Demetrius won great
credit by making Lysimache in brass, who had been the Priestresse of Minerva,
and exercised that ministry threescore and four years. And this artisane
made also the image of Minerua, surnamed Musica, upon this devise, For that the
dragons or serpents which serve in stead of hairs upon her Gorgon or Meduases
head, wrought in her targuet, would ring and resound again, if one struck the
strings of an Harp or Citron near to them. And the same imageur made the
lively pourtraiture of Sarmenes Daedalus moreover, who is ranged among the
excellent founders and imageurs of old time, devised in brass two boys,
rubbing, scraping, and currying the sweat from their bodies in the baine. And
Dinomenes was the workman, who cast in brass the full proportion and
similitude of Protesilaus, and of Pythodemus Alexander, otherwise called Paris,
was of Euphranor his making: The excellent art and workmanship whereof was seen
in this, that it represented unto the eye all at once, a judge between the
goddesses, the lover of Helena, and yet the murderer of Achilles. The image of
that Minerua at Rome, which is called Catuliana, came out of this man's shop:
and it it the same which was dedicated and set up beneath the Capitol by
Quintus Luctatius Catulus, whereupon it took that name. Moreover, the image
that signifies good luck or happy success, carrying in the right hand a
boule or drinking cup, in the left an ear of corn and a Poppy head, was his
handie work. Like as the princess or lady Latona, newly delivered of Apollo
and Diana, holding these her two babes in her arms: and this is that Latona
which you see in the church of Concordia in Rome. He made besides many
chariots, drawn as well with four as two horses: as also a key-bearer or
Cliduchus, of incomparable beauty. Semblably two other statues, Item King
Alexander the Great, and King Philip his father, riding both in chariots drawn
with four horses. Eutychides a renowned imageur, represented the river Eurotas
in brass: and many men that saw this work, were wont to say, That the water
ran not so clear in that river, as art and cunning did appear in this
workmanship. Hegyas the imageur made Minerva and King Pyrrhus, which be much
praised for the art of the maker: likewise boys practicing to ride on
horseback: the images also of Castor and Pollux, which stand before the temple
of thundering Jupiter in Rome. In the colonie or city Parium, there is an
excellent statue of Hercules, the handy work of Isidorus. Buthyreus the Lycian
was taught his cunning by Myron, who among

Leocras made the Aegle that ravished Ganymede, and flew away with him; but so
artificially, as if she knowing what a fine and dainty boy she had in charge,
and to whom she carried him, clasped the child so tenderly, that she forbear
with her tallons to pierce through the very cloths. The boy Autolicos also,
winning the prize in all games and feats of actiuitie, was of his making; for
whose sake Xenophon wrote his book entitled Symposion: likewise that noble
image of Jupiter in the Capitol of Rome, suramed Thundering, which is
commended above all others: as also Apollo, with a crown or diadem.

Lyciscus counterfeited Lago a boy, who in manner of a page or lacquey, seemed
to be double diligent, and after a flattering and deceitful sort performed
nothing but eie-seruice. Lycus also made another boy blowing the coals for to
maintain fire. Menechmus devised to cast in brass a calfe, turning up the neck
and head at the man that settteth his knee upon his sides, and keeps his body
down. This Menechmus was a singular imageur, and himself wrote a book as
concerning his own art. Naucides was judged to be an excellent workman, by the
making of Mercury, and of a discobole or coiter: as also for counterfeiting in
brass one that was a sacrificing or killing a ram. Naucerus won credit by
making of a wrestler, puffing and blowing for wind. Nicerates had the name for
the curious workmanship of Aesculapius and i. Good* health.
Hygia, which are to be seen at Rome within the temple of Concord. Porymachus
got great reputation by a coach drawn with four steeds, and ruled by Alcibiades
Policles was the maker of that noble piece of work that goes under the name of
Hermaphroditus. Pyrrhus counterfeited in brass another Hygia and Minerua. And
Phoenix who learned his art of Lysippus, lively counterfeited the famous
wrestler Epitherses. Stipax the Cyprian got himself a name by an image
resembling one Splanchnoptes: This was a pretty boy or page belonging to
Pericles, surnamed Olympius, whom Stipax made frying and rosting the inwards of
a beast at the fire, puffing and blowing thereat with his mouth full of breath
and wind for to make it burn. Silanion did cast the similitude of Apollodorus
in brass, who likewise was himself a founder and imageur, but of all other
most curious and precise in his art, he never thought a thing of his own
making well done, and no man censured his work so hardly as himself: many a
time when he had finished an excellent piece of work, he would in a mislike
Silanion aforesaid would express, he made not the man himself alone of
brass, but the very image of Anger and Wrath also with him, in habit of a
woman. Over and besides, the Achilles was of his making, a piece of work well
accepted and much talked of. Of his doing is Epistates; teaching men how to
wrestle and exercise other feats of actiuitie. As for Sr^ongylion, he made one
of the Amazons, which for an excellent fine and proper leg that she had, they
call Eucnemos; and in that regard Nero the Emperor set so great store by this
image, that it was carried ordinarily wheresoever he went. This artificer made
likewise another brazen image resembling a fair and sweet boy, which for the
singular beauty Brutus of Philippo so loved, that it was commonly called by
his surname Philippensis.

Theodorus who made the Maze or Labyrinth at Samos, caused his own image to be
cast in brass, which besides the wonderful near resemblance and likeness to
himself, was contrived so artificially besides, and so set out with other fine
devises, that he was much renowned for the workmanship, and in the sight of all
men it was admirable: he carries yet in his right hand a

Xenocrates was apprentice to Tisicrates, or as some say, to Euthycrates; but
whether of the twain soever was his master, he outwent ther^ both in the
number of statues and images that he wrought, and besides compiled books of
his own art and workmanship.

Many artificers there were, thatby imagerie delighted to counterfeit in brass
the battles that king Attalus and Eumenes both, fought against the Galatians
or Gallogreekes; and namely, Isigonus, Pyromachus, Stratonicus, and Antigonus,
and this artisane last named, composed books Boethius, although he was a
better workman in silver, yet one piece of work he made in brass, which had
an excellent grace, and that was a child throtling a Goose by the neck.

Of all these pieces of antique work which I have reckoned up, the most choice
and singular above the rest, Nero before time had by his violent edicts and
commandments caused to be brought from all parts to Rome, and he disposed
them in diverse rooms of his golden house for to adorn and beautify the
same; but now they be consecrated by Vespasian the Emperor, in the temple of
Peace, and in other stately buildings and edifi^s of his.

Many other excellent artificers there are be sides these above rehearsed: but
they may be all raunged in one rank, and counted for their skill and cunning
equal, for a man shall not find Ariston, who also was wont to grave and chase
in silver, Callias, Clesias, Cantharus of Sicyone, Dionysodorus who was an
apprentise trained up under Critias, Deliades, Euphorion, Eunicus, and
Hecataeus. As touching famous engrauers in silver, I read of Lesbocles,
Prodorus, Pithod^eus, and Polygnotus, who also were most excellent and renowned
painters. Likewise, of siluersmiths or grauers in silver, we have Stratonicus,
and Scymnus, who had for his master Cri^ias.

Now will I reckon up those worthy and famous Imageurs, who employed themselves
in one and the same kind of works. In the first place, Apollodorus,
Androbulus, Asclepiodorus, and Aleuas took pleasure to express the
similitudes of learned men and Philosophers. As for Apelles, he delighted
besides to represent women at their devotions, adoring the gods, and offering
sacrifices Antigonus had a grace likewise to represent one Perixu^ the same
that Apoxuo^:
currying and scraping his skin al over the body in a stoue, as also the
murderers of the Tyrants abouenamed. Antimachus and Athenodorus loved to have
in their shops the statues of great ladies and noblewomen. Aristodemus took
much pleasure to busy himself about the portraying of wrestlers, coaches with
two horses set thereto, and a coachman, Philosophers and great clearkes, old
matrons, and king Seleucus: There is also of his making a Doryphorus,
resembling one of Darius his guard, which is a proper piece of work and a
lovely. As touching the Cephissodori (for two of them there were) the elder had
a great dexterity in making Mercury fostering prince Bacchus in his infancy:
He made also one, preaching to the people, and casting forth his arms; but
what person of quality he should be, it is not certainly known: the younger
was wont to represent the Philosophers. Colothas, who joined with Phidias in
the making of Jupiter Olympius: He delighted also to be doing with the images
of Philosophers. So did Cleon and Cenchramis, Callicles, and Cephis. As for
Calcosthenes, he busied and amused himself in the counterfeits of Comaedians,
players of enterludes, and champions. Daehippus had a very good hand, in making
one scraping and rubbing his body in an hot-house. Daiphron, Democritus, and
Demon, were as cunning and perfect in the personages of Philosophers and
Sages. Epigonus would have his hand in all those works in manner which I have
rehearsed, and labored to imitate those artificers: but he surpassed them all
in a Trumpetter of his own devising; and a little infant, who seeing the
mother slain, made toward the dead corpse, and hung about it as if it would
play and be played withal, full pittiously to behold. Eubolides made one, as if
he were counting upon his fingers. Mycon his cunning was most seen in the
counterfeiting of wrestlers and such as practice feats of actiuitie: and
Menogenes, in making chariots with four horses. Niceratus likewise enterprised
all manner of works wherein others were best seen: and besides represented the
personage of Alcibiades, together with his mother Demarete, as she sacriced
with lamp light burning by her. Pisicrates showed much skill with a chariot of
two horses, Suada, i. Persuasio^, or Diana as some think. Some read Pisto, i.
the goddess of Credulity.
Pitho sitting in the habit of a woman: The images Mars and Mercury also,
which stand at Rome in the temple of Concordia, be of this man's making. As for
Perillus, there is no man commends him for his workmanship, but holds him
more cruel than Phalaris the Tyrant, who set him a work, for that he devised a
brazen Bull, to roast and fry condemned persons in; assuring the Tyrant, that
after the fire was made under it, they would when they cried seem to bellow
like a Bull, and so rather make sport than move compassion: but this Perillus
was the first himself that gave the hansell to the engine of his own
invention, and although this was cruelty in the Tyrant, yet surely such a
workman deserved no better a reward, and justly he felt the smart of it: For
why? The art and cunning foundery, which of all others is most civil and
agreeable to our nature, and which had been employed ordinarily in
representing the personages of Sthenis making are the images of Ceres, Jupiter
and Minerva, which at Rome are within the temple of Concord. The same man took
pleasure in counterfeiting ancient dames and matrons, weeping, praying, aad
offering sacrifice. Simon [of Aegina] was very good at the making of a dog and
an archer. Stratonicus that famous cutter and engrauer, was never well Scopas,
both the one and the other. As for wrestlers and champions, armed men, hunters,
and sacrificers, they were the only works that these artificers following
delighted most in, to wit, Batten, Eucher, Glaucides, Heliodorus, Hicanus,
Leophon, Lyson, Leon, Menodorus, Myagrius, Polycrates, Polydorus, Pythocritus,
and Protogenes (who also was a most excellent and renowned painter, as I will
hereafter show more at large) also Patrocles, Polis, Posidonius born at
Ephesus, who likewise chased and engraued in silver most finely, Periclimenus,
Philon, Simenus, Timotheus, Theomnestus, Timarchides, Timon, Tisias, and
Thrason. But above all other, Callimachus is the workman of greatest note, in
regard of a by name given unto him, and that was Cacizotechnos: and well he
might be so called, for he would always be finding fault with his own
workmanship, and never could see when to make an end, thinking still
Callimachus had bin in former time a painter. And since I have entered so far
into this Treatise of statues and images, I may not pass over in silence, but
note (as it were) by the way one thing of Cato, although happily it may be
thought but a mere vanity: In that expedition or voyage wherein Cyprus was
conquered and reduced under the dominion of Rome, he made port-saile of all the
pillage taken there, save only one statue of Zeno, not for the excellency of
the Hercules in his shirt and other habit thathe wore upon the mount Oete:
standing now at Rome near unto the public pulpit called Rostra: Made he is
(whosoever did it) with a grim, stern, and sower countenance, Deianira.] Upon
this statue there stand 3 titles or inscriptions: the first is this; L. Luculli
Imperatoris de Manubius, i. L. Lucullus Lord General, erected this statue out
of the spoil of the enemies: the second, Pupillus Luculli filius ex S. C.
dedicauit, i. The son of L. Lucullus, being orphan or ward, dedicated this, by
an order or act from the Senate: the third, T. Septimius Sabinus Aedilis
Curulis, ex priuato in publicum restituit, i. T. Septimius Sabinus, Aedile
Curule for the time being, has from a private house caused it to stand again
in public place. This is the image of that worthy Hercules that fought so many
battles, endured such hard conflicts and labors, and was so highly honored.

Now is it time to return to the different kinds and sundry temperatures of
brass, from which i. battable; and such is all the kind of copper or Cyprian
brass. That also which is found in the mines of other mettalls, by art
refined, differs from the foresaid pot-mettal, for out of what mine soever it
comes, after that the dross and imperfections thereof be thoroughly purged by
the fire, being thus (I say) cleansed, it becomes Regulare and will abide the
hammer. As for all other sorts besides the Cyprian brass above named, the
Campane brass is counted best: like to which, there is much in other parts
also of Italy, and in the provinces: but to every [hundred pound of brasse]
they put 8 pound of lead: then they boil it as it were and melt it again with
a soft fire, for want and scarsitie of wood and fuel. And what difference
there may be in that regard, it is most of all seen in the heart of France,
where it is commonly melted (for lack of other fuel) among stones made red hot:
for by reason that this is a swift and scorching fire,

CHAP. IX.
The difference in Brass: the diverse mixtures thereof: and how Brass should
be kept.

Moreover, it were not amiss to note thus much also, that all kind of brass
melts best in coldest weather. Now there is another temperature of brass
which serves for founders, and this is by tempering with every hundred pound
weight of brass, 3 or four pound weight of argentine lead or tin. To Cyprian
brass or copper, if you put lead, you shall have that deep red

CHAP. X.
Of Cadmia or Brass ore, and the medicines wherein it is usually employed.

THe mines and veins of brass ore do many ways furnish us with medicines: a
good proof whereof this may be, that any ulcers be soonest healed there: but
the most medicinable of all minerals that belong to brass metal, is Cadmia
[artificial.] And verily there is a kind of Cadmia made in the furnaces where
silver is fined, of a whiter color and less ponderous, but nothing comparable
to that which comes from the brass furnaces. And sundry sorts there be of
Cadmia: for the very stone of which they make brass, is called Cadmia, and as
it is necessary for founders, so it is of no use at all in Physic. Now is
there a Cadmia besides which Eluctantur, or rather, Eructantur, i. are breathed
and sent forth.
do strive to get forth; the Greeks call it Capnitis, for that it is smokie and
burnt, and for the exceeding leuity thereof resemble flying cinders. That which
is more inward and hangs down from the coping and vauted roof of the
furnace, is the best: and in that respect, because it hangs so as it were by
clusters, they give it the name Botryitis: heavier this is than the former, but
lighter than those that follow after. As for the color thereof, it is in two
sorts: that which you see of a dead

Generally, that Cadmia, of what kind soever, is best, which is found within
the furnaces of Cypros: this the Physicians do burn a second time with pure
coals; and when it is calcined and turned to ashes, they quench it with
Amminean wine, if they mean to prepare it for plasters; but with vinegar, for
scabs and scurfe. Some there be, who after it is stamped gross, burn or
calcine it in an earthen pot, then wash it well in a mortar, and afterward dry
it. Nymphodorus takes the very stone or the ore as it lies in the mine, the
heauiest and most compact that may be found, which he burns among coals; and
after it is sufficiently burnt, quenches it in wine of Chios: he beats and
punneth it then again, anon he drives or boulteth it through a linen cloth,
and grindeth it finer in a mortar: this done, soon after he steepeth and soketh
it well in rain water, and that which setleth in the bottom he stampeth: and
this he does, until such time as it Iollas, but he chooses the purest and
brightest stone that he can get.

The medicinable operations of Cadmia, be, to dry, to heal thoroughly, to
stay fluxes, to cleanse the filthiness in the eyes, and to scour the pin and
web, to extenuate any roughness; and in one word, to work all those effects
which I shall attribute hereafter to Lead.

Furthermore, brass it self may be burnt; and being so prepared, it serves
for all those purposes beforenamed: over and above, it cures the pearls,
films, and skars in the eyes: if it be incorporat with milk, it heals the
ulcers in the eyes: the same likewise they use to grind upon hard stones,
after the manner of the Egyptian collyrie; taken as a lohoch inwardly with
honey, it causes vomit. Now as touching copper, the manner is to burn it in
vnbaked earthen pans, with the like weight of brimstone; but all the breathing
holes of the furnace ought to be well closed and luted up where they must
stand, until such time as the said pans be thoroughly baked hard: some put salt
thereto: others in stead of brimstone take alumne; and there be again, who use
neither the one nor the other, but sprinckle it well with vinegar only: when
it is thus calcined, they pun it in a mortar of Thebaick marble, and then wash
it in rain water. Howbeit, this first lotion of it

CHAP. XI.
Of the dross or refuse of Brass: of the skales of Brass: of Verdegreace or
Spanish green: of Stomoma: of Verdegreace which is the rust of Brass, and of
Hieracium.

THe dross of Brass is washed after the same manner, but of less effect it
is than Brass it i. Verdegreace. Now these skales use to fall off, when as the
masses of brass be cooled with water and be red. Likewise of the same masses,
there is made that which they call Lepis; and thus the verdegreace may be
sophisticated, so as the said Lepis or skales be sold for it. Now these skales
come, by being driven and smitten off from those nails which they use to forge
of the said masses and lumps of brass, and all these most commonly are found
in the Cyprian forges: herin only is the difference; that the foresaid skales
are driven forcibly and smitten from the said pains Stomoms i. nothing (...)
but steel therefore here does like as in ^m of this chap.
Stomoma.

Howbeit, Physicians in these days (with reverence to their profession and
with their good leave be it spoken) are ignorant wholly of all these things;
yea, and the greater part of them be not so much as acquainted with the terms
and bare names (so far be they from the true composition of medicines:) and yet
in times past, it belonged properly unto Physicians, for to be acquainted with
the terms of all simples, and to be perfect in the knowledge of them. But our
phytians in this age, when they are to make any composition of simples, they
have recourse straightwaies, to their books to be directed by them, that is to
say, they try experiments by the hazard of their poor patients; and there
finding the names of this and that, they set down a receipt, and for

But to come again unto our skales, and flower of brass or verdegreace; the
manner is, first to calcine both the one and the other, either upon earthen
vessels or brass pans; then, to wash the same, as is before said, and for the
same uses. But over and above, these being prepared thus accordingly, are
singular for the carnosities and excrescences within the nosthrils, or the
fundament: a scale that comes of laton or white brass, far better than
that which the red brass or

Moreover, there is a devise that some use, namely, to let first the nails and
panes of brass to lie wet in the urine of a boy: others, so soon as the
scales be driven off, bray them, and afterward wash them in rain water; which
they use to give for the dropsy, to the weight of two drams in one hemine of
honied wine; and besides they make a liniment with it and flower, for to use
outwardly to the belly.

As touching the rust Which some take to be verdegreace.
of brass, great use there is of it in Physic: but it comes after many
sorts; for first and foremost, it is found sticking (in manner of the flower
aforesaid) unto the stone or ore out of which brass is tried, in such sort, as
it must be Aerugo r^silis
scraped from it before a man can have it. Also it is made after an artificial
manner, by hanging certain plates of laton driven full of holes, and hung in a
pipe or barrel over vinegar; but the same ought to be close covered Of the
reed Papyrus.
paper, tempered beforehand and soked in gall-nuts; for besmeare therewith the
verdegreace that is falsified, it will quickly become black. The eye also will
soon bewray the falsehood that is used therein, for if it be naught, a man shall
perceive it to look with a weak green color, nothing full nor fresh. But be
the verdegreace true or false, the best way is, before it be employed in
Physic, after it be dried, to calcine it upon a new earthen pan that never was
occupied, and in the burning to turn it often with a slice or spatule, until
such time as it be reduced into light cinders, and then after it is finely
puluerized, to lay it up for use. Others prepare it after another sort; they
put it in an earthen pot vnbaked, and set the same into an oven, where they let
it stand * Olibanum.


The manner also is to wash verdegreace before it be occupied, after the same
order as Cadmia is used. Being thus made and prepared as is abouesaid, it is
excellent to be put into eie-salues or collyries, for by a Graece (...), which
Pliny translateth delachrymationibus mor de^do proficiens: which also may be
turned thus, It helps watering eyes proceeding of some fretting humors.
mordicatiue quality it helps weeping and watering eyes: in which regard,
necessary it is that it be washed first with pencils well bathed in hot water,
so long until it have lost that corrosiue quality.

As touching Hieracium, a composition it is or collyrie so called, and made in
this manner: Take four ounces of Sal Ammoniacke, of Cyprian Verdegreace two
ounces, of shooemakers into trochiques. A singular collyrie or eyesalue this is
to withstand the beginning of pearls, cataracts,

CHAP. XII.
Of A kind of verdegris or rust of brass in manner of a worm, as Pliny takes
ir
Scolecia, and The flower of copperesse, whereof is made vitrioll, as some
think.
Chalcitis, of Brasa^olus holds it to be vitrioll Roman: others take it for
yellow coppresse.
Mysy, Duskish or ash color coppresse.
Sorry, and Vitrioll.
Chacanthum.

ANother sort there is of Brasse-rust or Verdegreace, which commonly is called
Scolecia: this is made of alume, salt or salnitre, of each a like weight,
stamped well together with the strongest white wine vinegre that can be gotten,
in a mortar of Cyprian brass or copper: and this must not be done but in the
hotest days of the year, to wit, about the rising of the Dogstarre. Now must
all the ingredients aforesaid be punned and incorporat together, until such It
seems that Pliny does here err, by reading in Diosc. (...), for (...); and
for (...): for the said mixture is to be reduced into (...) certain
trochisques or thin cakes called (...), and not into the form of worms (...).
crawling worms, whereupon it takes the name Scolecia. But if so be, that
this manner of working and making it, chance to fail and do not well, for to
amend the same, the two parts of vinegre which entered into the mixture, ought
to be tempered with as much urine of a boy under fourteen years of age. Now
if you would know the medicinable effects and virtues of this kind of
verdegreace, both it and the artificial Borax beforesaid (which I named
Santerna) be of the very same operation that the ordinary rust of brass or
verdegreace, called in Latin Aerugo. There is a kind of Scolecia natural or
mineral of it self, without addition of any thing else whatsoever; whereof I
purpose to speak in this place, and the same is scraped from the stone or ore
of which comes brass. There is a stone lying in the mine which they name
Chalcitis, out of which also (with burning) they excoct brass: differ it does
from Cadmia; for Chalcitis is hewed Item, Chalcitis (as being of a tender and
soft nature) presently will crumble into pieces, so as it seems to be a
certain fine moss concreat and gathered together. Also, there is another
difference between these two Marcassins; for that, Chalcitis contains in it
three several kinds of matter, to wit, Brass, Mysy, and Sorry; of which I
purpose to speak severally by themselves in their due place. Now this Chalcitis
lies within the brass mine in long veins: that which is of a yellowish color
like honey, full of small veins running here and there, brittle and apt to
crumble, and not of a stony hardness, is counted the best: the fresher also
and more newly gathered that it is, the more effectual and wholesome

As for i. The vein or mineral, whereof comes the duskish Vitrioll.
Sorry, that which is brought out of Egypt is counted best, and far better
than the

Touching Mysy, it is of a more hard and stony nature than Sorry; but good it is
for the tooth ache, if either it be held in the mouth, or a collution be made
therewith to wash the teeth and

To come unto the medicinable virtues thereof: being infused or powered into the
ears with oil of roses, it cures the running with matter: the same being
applied in a frontal within wool to the head, eases the ach thereof: it does
extenuat also and subtiliat the asperities of the eyes, such especially as be
inueterat and have continued long: but sovereign it is found to be for the
inflammation or swelling of the tonsils, for the squinancy, and all impostumat
sores grown to suppuration. For which purpose, prepared it would be in this
wise, and after this proportion: Take of it 16 drams, sees the same in one
hemin of vinegar with some addition of honey, until it begin to yield and
relent; and in this manner ordered, it serves in cases aforesaid: but
whenever need requires to mollify the violence thereof, and make it more
mild, it were good to wet

As concerning Vitrioll, which we call in Latin Atramentum Sutorium, ^i.
Shooe-makers black, the Greeks have fitted it with a name respective unto
brass, and by a near affinity thereunto call it Chalcanthum: and verily there
is not a mineral throughout all the mines, of so admirable Winter when it is a
frost, certain ysickles depending, as the drops destilled and grew one to
another: Viola alba.
white violet, the same they call Leucoion. There is a Vitrioll likewise made
artificially in receipts and concauities (dug of purpose in the stony mines
of Coperose) by occasion of rain water there congealed, which had been
conueighed into them, and gathered a viscous slime or mud in the passage. Also
there is a cast to make it in manner of salt by letting fresh water into such
hollow receptacles, and permitting the same to ferment in the sun when he is at
the height and full strength of his heat in the summer, until it be gathered
and hardened as salt. And therefore some there be who make two sorts of
Vitrioll, to wit, the Natural, or Mineral, and the Artificial: this that is
made by the industry and art of man is paler than the other, and look how much
the color is abated, so much inferior it is in goodness. The Violareis: he
means those that resemble Leucoion, and which he called before by that name.
wall-floures a foresaid. Moreover, if it be blown into the ears by the means
of a pipe, it does remedy the hardness of hearing. A liniment made of Vitrioll
alone, heals up wounds, but it draws the skar too near together: in regard
of which astringencie of Vitrioll, there has bin an invention devised of late,
to cast the powder of Vitrioll into the mouths of Bears and Lions when they are
to be baited: for so great a knitter and binder it is, that it will draw their
chaws together in manner of a muzzle, that they shall not be able to bite.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Pompholyx. Of Spodos, Antispodos, and of Diphryges. Of the Trient of
Seruilius.

THere be found over and besides in brass smithies or furnaces, those matters
which they call Pompholyx and Spodos: and the difference of the one from
another, consists in this, that Pompholyx requires washing for to be
prepared; Spodos never comes into water or liquor. And yet some distinguish
them otherwise, calling the whitest and lightest part, Pompholyx: holding
opinion, that it is nothing else but the very cinders of brass, or the Calamine
stone Cadmia, whereof brass comes: whereas Spodos (say they) is blacker and
more weighty

As touching Spodos, the Cyprian is most esteemed: and engendered it is, whiles
Cadmia and the brass ore or stone be melted together in the furnace. Exceeding
light it is, and apt to mount aloft with the smoke of the bloome smithie, very
speedily, yea, and ready to fly out of the furnace* and much of it sticks to
the roufe and uppermost part thereof, differing only from Spodos is called
Nil, whereof comes the pretty ambiguous speech, Nil prodest oculis.
Spodos for the eyes, is that which comes in the furnaces where gold is
fined. Neither in any thing belonging to our life, is the wit and invention of
man more admirable than in this. For, because

In the smithies where brass is made and wrought, there comes a certain
refuse or offall thereof, called Psegma: to wit, when after the brass ore is
sufficiently melted and concocted, there be new coals put thereto, and the
same set on fire and kept burning with the blast of bellows: for then of a
sudden (as it were by some extraordinary strong puff) there are rejected and
cast forth from it certain huls or chafe (if I may so say) of brass. Now the
ground or floor to receive this refuse as it falls, ought to be well paued.

There is another stuff found in the said forges or bloom-smithies, easily
discerned from this Psegma, which the Greeks (for that it is, as it were, twice
burnt or concocted) call Diphryges. But in the second trial and boiling, that
which remains behind, is called Diphryges. Well, be

But before I depart from these brass mines and furnaces, I cannot conceal
from you one miraculous thing as touching this metal. There is (you know) a
noble family in Rome of the Servilij, well renowned, as may appear by the
Roman Calendar and acts of record: and these have among them a certain piece
of brass coin ealled a Triens (i. The third part which is our farthing.
of a Roman Ass) which they do keep and feed with silver and gold. For eat and
consume it does both the one and the other: from whence it came first, and what
the reason in nature of this property is, I Messala: The house (quoth he) of
the Seruilij has a certain sacred Trient, in the honor of which piece they do
sacrifice yearly with great devotion and solemnity, omitting no magnificence
nor ceremonies thereto belonging. And this Trient the common speech is of them
all, that it seems one while to grow bigger, and another while to diminish
and be smaller: according to which increase or decrease, the said Servilij take
presage, That their family shall either rise to more honor, or decay in credit
and reputation.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Iron, and Iron mines, and the different kinds of Iron.

IT remains now in the next place to discourse of the mines of iron, a metal
which we may well say is both the best and the worst implement used now in the
world: for with the help of iron we break up and ear the ground, we plant and
plot our groves, we set our hortyards and range our fruitful trees in rewes: we
prune our vines, and by cutting off the superfluous branches and dead wood, we
make them every year to look fresh and young again: by means of iron and
steel we build houses, hew quarries, and cut in stone, yea, and in one word,
we use it to all other necessary uses of this life. Contrariwise, the same
iron serves for wars, murders, and robberies, not only to offend and strike
therewith in hand, but also to reach and kill afar off, with diverse sorts of
darts and shot; one while discharged and sent out of engines, another while
lanced and OPliny, what would thou say, if thou did dest see and hear the
Pistols, muskess, Culuerines, and Canons in these days.
Porsena, king of the Tuscans tendered to the people of Rome, I find this
express article and imposition, that they should not use iron, but only about
tillage of the ground. And as our Chronicles of greatest antiquity Pompey the
great, by occasion of a tumult and commotion raised within the city of Rome for
the murder committed upon the person of P. Clodius, there was an edict come
forth (which now is extant upon record) after the manner of an inhibition in
this form: Ne vllum telum in vrbe esset, i. That no man throughout all Rome
should be seen to wear a weapon. Nevertheless men did not forbear and give
over to do some honor unto iron also in some other occasions of this life,
tending to the entertaining of civility and humanity; for Aristonidas the
cunning artificer, minding to represent in an image the furious rage of
Athamas, beginning now to cool and be allaied, together with his repentance
for the cruel murdering of his own son Learchus, whom he flung headlong
against the hard stones, image of Hercules all of hard iron or steel, which
Alcon the famous workman made of purpose Hercules, who underwent and endured
all labors and perils whatsoever. Here also in Rome we may see certain
drinking cups of steel dedicated in the temple of Mars the Revenger.

But to come unto the nature of iron, herein appears still the same goodness
of Nature, that this metal working such mischief as it does, should be
revenged of it self, and receive condign punishment by the own rust. See also
the wonderful providence of Nature, Nihil in rebus mortalius faciente, quam quoth.
infessissimum, mortalitati, the grace of this Latin cannot be so well
expressed in English.
who makes nothing in the world more subject to death and corruption, than
that which is most hurtful and deadly to mankind.

As touching mines of iron ore, they are to be found almost in every country,
for there is not so much as the Island Ilua here within Italy, but it breeds
iron. And lightly wheresoever any Which our smiths call Col sar-yron.
brittle and short, standing much upon a vein of brass, such as will not
serve one Some read a stringe^da (oculoru^ atie) i of dazeling the eyes; which
iro^ red hot, or the bright blade of sword and other weapons, does: but nether
any copies of the author have the word (oeulorum) neither have I read
stringere, but perstringere, to signify, to dazzle: others understand it of
drawing a naked sword: and yet it is not so proper in Latin to say in that
sense, stringereaciem, as stringere ferru^, or gladium: howbeit, I incline
rather to this, for that Pliny a little after calls the best steel Acies,
which word happily is the primitive, from whence acies also is used for an edg,
etc. and yet it may be, that those stricturae i. sparkling skales, flying from
iron under the smiths hammer and from no other metal, (which do perstringere
acie^ oculoru^, if any thing else) may give occasion hereof. Sed haec viderint
Critici
a stringenda acie, i. of dazzling the eyes, or drawing a naked sword. But the
furnace it self, where the ore or iron stone is tried, makes the greatest
difference that is: for there in you shall have to arise by much burning and
fining, the purest part thereof, which in Latin is called Nucleus ferri, i.
the kernel or heart of the iron [and it is that which we call steele] and the
same also of diverse sorts: for the best is it that hardens the edge of any
weapon or tool: there is of it and turn again. But wonderful it is above
all, that man's blood should have such a virtue in it,

Concerning the lodestone, and the great concord or amity between iron and
it, I mean to write more amply in the due place. Howbeit, for the present thus
much I must needs say, that iron is the only metal which receives strength
from that stone, yea, and keeps the same a long time, insomuch, as by virtue
thereof, if it be once well touched and rubbed withal, it is able to take hold
of other pieces of iron: and thus otherwhiles we may see a number of rings
hanging together in manner of a chain, notwithstanding they be not linked and
enclosed one within another. The ignorant people seeing these rings thus rubbed
with the lodestone, and cleaving one to another, call it quick-yron. Certes,
any wound made by such a tool, are more eager and Dinocrates, who began to
make the arched roof of the temple of Arsinoe all of Magnet or this
lodestone, to the end, that within that temple the statue of the said
princess made of iron, might seem to hang in the air by nothing. But pre
uented Ptolomaee also, who ordained that temple to be built in the honor of
the said Arsinoe his sister.

But to return again to our iron: of all mines that be, the vein of this
metal is largest, and spreads it self into most lengths every way: as we
may see in that part of Biscay that coasteth along the sea, and upon which the
Ocean beats: where there is a craggy mountain very steep and high, which
stands all upon a mine or vein of iron. A wonderful thing, and in manner
incredible, howbeit, most true, according as I have showed already in my
Cosmography, as touching the circuit of the Ocean.

CHAP. XV.
The temper of iron. The medicinable virtues thereof, as also of the rust of
Brass and iron.

IRon made once hot in the fire, unless it be hardened with the Hammer, does
soon waste and corrupt. So long as it looks but red, it is not ready for the
hammer, neither would it be beaten before it begin to look white in the fire.
Besmeare it with vinegar and Alum, it will look like copper or brass. If you
be desirous to keep any yron-worke from rust, give it a vernish with cerusse,
plaster, and tar, incorporat all together. And this is that composition, which
is called by the Greeks (...).
Antipathia. And some say also, that there is a kind of hallowing iron that
will Alexander the Great sometime bound and strengthened the bridge over the
river there: the linkes whereof, as many as have been repaired and made new
since, do gather rust, whereas the rest of the first making, be all free
therfrom.

As touching the use of iron and steel, in Physic it serves otherwise than
for to lance cut and dismember withal: for take a knife or dagger and make an
imaginary circle two or three times with the point thereof, upon a young child,
or an elder body, and then go round withal about the party as often, it is a
singular preservative against all poisons, sorceries, or enchantments. Also to
take any iron nail out of the coffin or sepulcher wherein man or woman lies
is an excellent remedy against the pains of sides or breast, which come with
sudden pricks and

The very rust of iron also is counted medicinable: for so Achilles is said to
have healed Telephus: but whether the head of his spear were iron or brass,
of which he used the rust, I do not certainly know. Certes, he is painted
thus: with his sword scraping and shaking off the rust into the wound. But if
you would fetch off the rust from any old nails, scrape it with a knife wet
Antonies fire, it is singular good to apply it in an unguent with vinegar:
likewise it kills scabs, and heals whitflawes of the fingers, and the
excrescence or turning up of the flesh about the roots of the nails, if linen
rags wet there in be applied conveniently. The same conveyed up in wool after
the manner of a pessary into the natural parts of women, staieth the immoderat
flux both of whites and reds. The rust of iron tempered in wine, and wrought
together with Myrrh, is good for a green wound: put thereto vinegar, and then
it helps the piles

As touching the skales of iron that fly from the edge or point of any weapon
wrought in the smiths forge: they serve in the same cases, that the rust does,
and have the like effects, save only this, that they have greater acrimonie,
and work more eagerly: in which regard they are employed about the repressing
of the flux that falls into watering eyes. But mark this one thing: Iron
being that which wounds most and sheddeth blood, yet the skales that come
from it, stanch the same: a property they have besides to stop the flux in
women: and being applied to the region of the spleen, they do open the
obstructions thereof, and ease other infirmities incident thereto: the running
haemorrhoids they repress, and such ulcers as are given to spread farther and
corrode as they go. Reduced into a fine powder, and gently strewed upon the
eyelids,

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Mines of Lead ore: of Which some hold to be Tin-glosse.
white lead and black.

NOw insueth the discourse of lead, and the nature of it; of which there be two
principal kinds, the black, and the white. The richest of all, and that
which carries the greatest Our ordinary lead.
price, is that which we in Latin name Plumbum candidum, i. the white bright
lead, and the Greeks Cassiteron. But I hold it a mere fable and vain tale,
that all of it is fetched as far as from the Islands of the Atlanticke sea,
and that the inhabitants of those parts do conueigh it in little twiggen
boats, covered all over with feathers. For the truth is, that there is found of
it in these days within Portugal and Gallaecia, growing ebb upon the vpmost
face of the earth, and melt in the furnace. There is found likewise in the gold
mines a kind of lead ore which they

Moreover, this is is strange, that throughout all Gallecia you shall not find a
mine of common black lead, and yet in Biskay (which confineth hard upon it)
there is abundance of it and no other; neither out of the vein of this white
lead shall you try any silver, whereas out of the black it is an ordinary thing
to extract silver. Again, this is certain, that two pieces of black lead cannot
possibly Homer, who calls it Cassiteron. As for black lead, engendered it is
two manner of ways, for either it grows in a vein of the own without any
other metal with it, or else it does participat with silver in the same mine,
and being intermixed in one piece or lump of ore, it is separated from it at the
melting and fining only; for the first liquor that runs from it in the furnace
is tin, and the second silver. As for the third part of the vein which
remains behind in the furnace, it is Galaena, that is to say, the very metal
it self of lead; which being once again melted and tried in the fire, after
two parts thereof be deducted, yields that black lead whereof we now do
treat.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Tin, of Argentine Lead, and other points pertinent to these matters.

TIn has a proper use to enhuile vessels of brass, partly to take away the
evil taste they have, and to make them sweeter, and partly to preserve them from
rust, or to qualify the malicious nature of brass: and yet wonderful it is,
that such vessels thus tinned are never a jot the heavier by that means. Also
in times past there were (as I have already said) excellent Mirroirs i. Pewter,
as some take it.
silver lead or argentine. As for that mixed matter wherein be two parts of
black lead, and one of the white, they call it Tertiarium: this kind of tin is
sold after This place seems to be corrupt.
30 the pound, and it is that wherewith they used to soder conduit pipes: but
the lewder disposed pewterers have a cast to put unto this tin called
Tertiarium, an equal quantity of white lead and then they call it Argentarium:
which metal they employ in vessels for the kitchen, to that manner their
chariots, wagons, and coaches. But our vain and wastful wantons not herewith

Moreover, it is worth the observation, that the Indians have no mines among
them either of brass or lead, but are content to part with their pearls and
precious stones unto merchants, by way of counterchange for these metals.

Black lead or common lead is much used with us for sheets to make conduit
pipes; also it is driven with the hammer into thin plates and leaves. This
metal requires much labor and toil in Spain and France, before it be gotten
out of the mine, so deep it lies; whereas in Britain it runs ebb in the
uppermost coat of the ground, and that in such abundance, that by an express
act among the Islanders themselves, it is not lawful to dig and gather ore
above such a proportion, set down by stint. Furthermore, all the black lead
which now men have in request, is known by these names, to wit, Iovetanum,
Captariense, and Oleastrense. As for the dross and refuse that is purged from
it, there is no difference at all, so that it have the due clensing by the fire
as it ought. These mines alone of lead have one wonderful and admirable gift
above all others, That if they be forelet a time and suffered to rest, they
will grow again and be more fertile

CHAP. XVIII.
The medicines that we have from Lead, and the refuse and dross of Lead: of
the vein of Lead called Molybdaena or Galena: of Ceruse, white Lead, or
Spanish White, called Psimmithyum:

GReat use there is in physic of lead applied by it self alone, and namely
to repress and keep down the skars and cicatrices that rise above the other
skin: also by the refrigeratiue quality that it has to cool the heat of
fleshly lust, if there be bound unto the loins and region of the reins a thin
plate or leaf thereof. And verily Calvus the Orator, who by occasion of much
dreaming in his sleep of venereous sports, fell into mighty pollutions, and so
farther into the grievous malady of Gonorrhaea or running of the reins, with
wearing ordinarily these leaden plates, stayed (by report) all such vain and
wanton fantasies and imaginations: by which means he preserved also his
strength, and had a body able to endure the labor of Nero the Emperor (since
the gods would have it so) used ordinarily to wear a plate of Lead to his
breast, under which he would chaunt out lustily with a wide throat and strong
voice, his filthy Sonnets and beastly Ballads: but he showed thereby that Lead
was a singular means to maintain a good voice. But to serve otherwise in
Physic, lead ought to be prepared and baked after this manner: take an earthen
pan of potters

Now as touching the lead calcined in manner aforesaid, it may be washed also
after the order of Antimonie and Cadmia: and in this manner prepared, it is of
power astringent, good to stop any flux or rheum; proper also to skin and make
a small skar. Much use there is of lead thus burnt and washed, in collyries or
eie-salues, and principally if the eyes either stand out too far, or be sunk
in too deep: also it is singular to repress the excrescence of flesh in
ulcers, to heal the chaps in the seat or fundament, to cure the running
haemorrhoids, and to discuss or keep

Over and besides, the dross or refuse of lead is medicinable: and the best is
that accounted, which comes nearest to a yellow color, without any relics
at all of the lead among; or else inclining to the hew of brimstone, and
cleansed from all earthly substance: this also being braied and broken into
small parcels, may be washed in manner aforesaid, and stamped with water in a
mortar, until such time as the water look yellow; then must it be powered
forth into a pure clean vessel; and this tranvasation ought so long to be
continued out of one vessel into ordure, offall, and filthy excrements, but
have tried conclusions therein so many ways, and left

There is a kind of Spodium also made of lead in the furnace, after the same
manner as I showed before, of copper or Cyprian brass: the order of washing
whereof, is this; to put it in a course linen cloth, and to lay the same in
rain water, that the terrene substance may be separated from the rest that is
transfused or passes through the cloth with the water: and yet the same must
be cribled or serced afterward, and beaten to powder. Some think it better
to wipe and scour off the dust from the Calamine with wings, and then to beat
it in a mortar with the most odoriferous wine they can get.

There is besides, a mineral named Molybdena, which elsewhere I have called
Galaena; by which I mean in this place, the ore or vein that contains
within it, both silver and lead: the Quae non alligantur: it is thought that
Pliny mistook in Dioscor and for (...), read (...), which he has translated
without any sense at all or congruity to the place.
not mordicant: but being applied to any sore in tender and delicat bodies, and
in the softest parts, it does

There is another mineral besides, called Psimmithyum, which is al one with
Ceruse: and this

As touching Sandarache, I have already showed in manner all that concerns
the nature of it; howbeit, this would be noted over and above, that it is found
in the mines as well of silver as of gold; the redder it is, and of a more
strong and violent smell, the better men take it to be; such also is pure,
clear, and brittle withal, or easy to crumble: mundificatiue it is and astrir
gent, heating also and exceeding corrosiue: and the principal virtue that it
has, is to fret and putrify whatsoever it works upon: in a liniment with
vinegar, it causes the hair to come up thick again in places despoiled
thereof by any disease. It enters iuto collyries or eie-salues: reduced into a
lohoch with honey, it cleanses the throat, and makes a clear shrill, and loud
voice: eaten by way of a bole with turpentine, it is a gentle and pleasant
medicine for those that be shortwinded and troubled with the cough: a perfume
also made with it and Cedar together, is good in the same cases, so that the
smoke be received up at the mouth. As for Yellow orpiment.
Arsenicke, it is of the same stuff: that which is best of this kind,
resembles burnished gold in color: the paler kind inclining to the color of
Sandaracha, is thought to be the worse. A third sort there is, of a middle and
meddled color, compounded as it were of gold and Sandaracha. These two later
kinds be skaly aloft: as for the first, which is dry and pure, it is full of
small veins running here and there, whereby it is apt to cleave as the vein
goes. Of the same operation is Arsenicke as the rest,

THE XXXV. BOOK OF
WRITTEN BY C. PLINIVS SECVNDVS.
The Proem.
THe discourse of Mines and Metalls, wherein principally consists the wealth
of the

CHAP. I.
The honor of flat picture in old time.

TO begin then with that which remains as touching Picture and Painting, this
would be known, That in times past it was reputed a noble and excellent art:
in those days I mean, when Kings and whole Sates made account thereof; and
when those only were thought innobled and immortallized, whom Painters
vouchsafed to commend by their workmanship to posterity. But now, the marble
and porphyrit stones have put painting clean down: the gold also laid upon them
has won all credit from painters colors: gold I say, wherewith not only
plain and entire Claudius Caesar: but when Nero came to be Emperor, the
invention was taken up, to give those colors to stones in their superficial
outside, which they had not of their own; to make them spotted, which naturally
were of one simple color: that by the help of man's hand, the Numidicus.
Numidian red porphyrit should be set out with white spots in O^atus.
eg-fashion: the Sinadicus.
Sinadian gray marble distinguished with marks and strakes of purple: as if our
delicate wantons

CHAP. II.
The estimation and account that was made of Images in times past, represented
by lively pictures.

THe manner was in ancient time, to continue and perpetuat the memorial of men,
by drawing for they were so made that they might be taken off and set on again.
changed one for another: which has given occasion long since of many a jest
and libel spread abroad in rhyme and sung in every street. Insomuch as all men
now adays are more desirous to have the rich matter seen that goes to the
making of images, than to be known by their own personage and visage as it is:
and yet every man delights to have his cabinet and closet well furnished with
antique painted tables: the statues and images of other men they think it
enough Epicurus in every chamber of the house, yea and to carry the same about
them upon their rings wheresoever they go: in the remembrance and honor of his
nativity, they do offer sacrifice every 20 day of the Moon, and these
moneth-mindes they means are decayed and perished. But I marvel nothing hereat:
for thus it is verily and no otherwise, These images were no ^ther than
thevis^ge and head a^ a^ as to the shoul ders.
pourtraitures in wax, and those lively and expressly representing their
visages; these were set out and disposed in order, these were the images that
attended the funerals of any that was to be interred out of that stock and
lineage. Thus always as any gentleman died, a man should see a goodly train of
all those which were living of that house, accompanying the corpse, causing also
the images of their predecessors to Messala (a great Orator in his time) wherein
upon a great indignation he expressly forbad that there should be intermingled
one image that came from another house of the Leuini, among those of his own
name and lineage, for fear of confounding the race of his family and ancestors.
The like occasion moved and enforced old Messala to put forth and publish those
books which he had made of the descents and pedigrees Scipio Africanus his
house, he beheld therein his style, augmented by the addition of Salutio (for
that was one of his syrnames) which fell unto him by the last will and testament
of a certain rich man so called, who adopted him for his own son: as being
greatly discontented in his mind, that so base a name as that (to the shame
and dishonor of the Africans) should creep into the noble family of the
Scipio's. But if I may speak without offense of these two Messalae, it should
in my conceit be some token of a noble spirit and good mind that loves and
imbraceth virtue, to entitle his own name, although untruly, to the arms and
images of others, so long as they be noble and renowned: and I hold it a
greater credit so to do, than to demean our selves so unworthily, as that no
man should desire any of our arms or images. And seeing that I am so Homer.
Certes, in my opinion there can be no greater argument of the felicity and
happiness of any man, than to have Asinius Pollio, who by dedicating his
Bibliotheque, containing all the books that ever were written, was the first
that made the wits and works of learned men, a public matter and a benefit
to a Commonweal. But whether the kings of Ptolomaeus. Philadelphus.
Alexandria in Egypt, or of Attalus.
Pergamus, began this enterprise before Atticus that great friend of Cicero's
(who set forth a book entitled, A Treatise of painted images) but also of M.
Varro, who in all his volumes, whereof he wrote a great number, upon a most
thankful and bountiful mind that he carried, devised to insert not only the
names of 700 famous and notable persons, but also in some sort to set down
their physiognomy and resemblance of their visage: not willing as it might seem
that their remembrance should perish, but desirous to preserve the shapes and
portraits of so worthy personages against the injury of time, which

CHAP. III.
At what time scutchions and shields, with images engraven in them, were first
erected in public place. Where they beg an to be set up in private houses. The
original of pictures. The first pourtrait that was of one single color. Of
the first Painters. How ancient the Art of

ANd this verily which Varro did, namely, to insert the names and counterfeits
of famous men in his books, was to gratify strangers only. But of those who
were desirous in this kind, to honor Romans, I find in the Chronicles, that
Appius Claudius was the first (him I mean, who in the 259 year after the
foundation of the city of Rome, bare the Consulship with Seruilius, and namely,
by dedicating in temples and public places of the city, the shelds of his
predecessors by themselves alone. For within the chapel of Bellona, he
caused to be set up the scutchions and shields of his ancestors; taking great
contentment to have the arms of his predecessors seen on high, and the same
accompanied with the titles of their honorable dignities Appius Claudius had
given this precedent at Rome, there followed M. Aemilius, companion in the same
Consulship with Q. Luctatius, who not contented to have the Armoires and coats
of his Progenitors, to be advanced aloft in the stately hall and palace
Aemilia only, took order, that they should stand also at home in his own
house: and this also was a matter of right great consequence, being done
according to the pattern and example of the martial worthies in Homer: for
within these shields and scutchions, resembling those which were used in old
time in the battles before Troy, Quasi glyp^i, (...) Caelend^.
Clypei, i. chased and engraven, not of the old word in Latin Cluere, which
signifies to fight, or to be well reputed, as our thwarting Grammarians would
with their subtle sophistry seem to etymologize and derive it. Certes, this
original of shields and coats of armours, implied abraue mind and noble spirit
full of virtue and valor, when every man's shield showed the lively pourtrait of
him that bare it in the wars. The Carthaginians were wont to make their
targuets of beaten gold, and those likewise they caused to be engraven with
their own portraits, and carried the same with them to the wars. And verily, Q.
Martius that worthy warrior, and revenger of the 2 Scipio's in Spain, having
defeated the Carthaginians and taken many of them prisoners, found among other
spoils and pillage, the shield of Asdrubal, made in manner aforesaid: Which
shield was erected and hung up over the porch of Jupiters temple upon Capitol
behalf: which was so great, that M. Aufidius, who farmed and undertook the
custody or keeping of the Capitol, the temple, and all therein, the same year
wherein L. Manlius, and Q. Fulvius

Concerning pictures, and the first original of painters art, I am not able to
resolve and set down any thing for certain: neither is it a question pertinent
to my design and purpose. I am not ignorant that the Egyptians do vaunt
thereof, auouching that it was devised among them and practiced 6000 years,
before there was any talk or knowledge thereof in Greece: avain brag and
ostentation of theirs, as all the world may see. As for the Greek writers,
some ascribe the invention of painting to the Sicyonians, others to the
Corinthians. But they do all jointly agree i. a pourtrait of one color, for
distinction sake from other pictures of sundry colors: which notwithstanding,
yet* this plain manner of painting continues at this day, and is much used.
As for the linearie portraying or drawing shapes and proportions by lines
alone, it is said, that either Philocles the Egyptian, or else Cleanthes the
Corinthian was the inuentor thereof. But whosoever devised it, certes Ardices
the Corinthian, and Telephanes the Sicyonian, were the first that practiced it:
howbeit colors they used none, yet they proceeded thus far as to disperse
their lines within, as well Cleophantus the Corinthian, who (as they say) took
no more but a piece of a red potsherd, which he ground into powder, and this
was all the color that he used. This Cleophantus, or some other of that name,
was he who by the testimony of Cornelius Nepos, as I will anon show more at
large, accompanied Demaratus the father of Tarquinius Priscus king of Rome,
when he fled from Corinth to avoid the wrongs of Cypsellus the tyrant, who
persecuted and oppressed him. But it cannot be so: for surely before this
Tarquines time, the art of painting was grown to some perfection, even in
Italy: for proof whereof, extant there be at this day to be seen at Ardea
within the temples there, antique Atalanta, and queen Helena, close one to the
other, painted naked, by one and the same hand: both of them are for beauty
incomparable, and yet a man may discern the i. Atalanta.
one of them to be a maiden, for her modest and chaste countenance; which
pictures, notwithstanding the ruins of the temple where they stand, are not a
whit disfigured or defaced. Of late days, Pontius lieutenant under C. Caligula
the Emperor, did what he could to have removed them out of the place, and
carried them away whole and entire, upon a wanton affection and lustful fancy
that he cast unto them: but the

CHAP. IIII.
Of Romans that were excellent Painters. When the art of painting came first
into credit and estimation at Rome. What Romans they were that exhibited the
pourtraits of their own victories in pictures. And about what time painted
tables made by strangers in foreign parts, were accepted and in great request
at Rome.

AMongst the Romans also this Art grew betimes into reputation; as may appear
by the Fabij, a most noble and honorable house in Rome, who of this science
were syrnamed Pictores, i. Painters: and the first who was entitled with that
addition, painted with his own hand Salus; and this was in the 450 year after
the foundation of our city: which painting continued in our age, even unto the
time of Claudius Caesar the Emperor, in whose days the temple it self with
the painting, was consumed with fire. Next after this, the workmanship of
Pacuvius the Poet (who likewise painted the chapel of Hercules in the
beast-market at Rome) was highly esteemed and gave much credit to the art. This
Pacuvius was Ennius the Poets sisters son: and being as he was a famous
Tragaedian besides, and of great name upon the stage, the excellency of his
spirit that way, much commended at Rome his handiwork and painting aforesaid.
After him, I do not find that any person of worth and quality took pensill
in hand and practiced painting, unless happily a man would nominat Turpilius a
gentleman of Rome in our time, and a Venetian born, of whose workmanship there
be many fair parcels of paynting Turpilius was altogether left handed, and
painted therewith; a thing that I do not hear any man did before him. As for
Aterius Labeo, a noble man of Rome, late Lord Pretour, and who otherwise had
been vice-consull in Gallia, Narbonensis or Languedoc, who lived to a very
great age and died not long since, he practiced painting; and all his delight
and glory that he took, was in fine and small works of a little compass:
howbeit he was but laughed at, and scorned for that quality, and in his time
the handicraft grew to be base and contemptible. Yet I think it not amiss to
put down for the better credit of painters, a notable consultation held by
certain right honorable personages as touching the Art, and their resolution
in the end. And this was the case: Q. Paedius, the little nephew of Q. Paedius
who had bin Consul in his time and entered Rome in triumph, him I mean whom C.
Caesar Dictator, Augustus, happened to be born dumb: and Messala the great
Orator, out of whose house the grandmother of this child was descended, being
careful how the boy should be brought up; after mature advise and
deliberation, thought good that he should by signs and imitation be trained
up in the art of painting, which counsel of his was approved also by Augustus
Caesar. And in truth, this young gentleman being apt thereto, profited marvelous
much therein, and died in his youth. But the principal credit that painters
attained unto at Rome, was, as I take it, by the means of M. Valerius Maximus,
first syrnamed Messala, who being one of the grand-seigmeurs of Rome, was the
first that proposed to the view of all the world, and set up at a side of the
stately hall or court Hostilia, one picture in a table, wherein he caused to
be painted that battle in Sicily wherein himself had defeated the
Carthaginians and K. Hiero, L. Scipio, and hung up a painted table in the
Capitol temple, containing his victory and conquest of Asia, whereupon he was
syrnamed Asiaticus. But (as it is said) Africanus although he were his own
brother, was highly displeased therewith: and good cause he had to be angry and
offended, because in that battle his own son was taken prisoner by the enemy.
The like offense was taken also by Scipio Aemilianus, against Lucius Hostilius
Mancinus, who was the first that entered perforce the city of Carthage; for that
he had caused to be set up in the market place of Rome a fair painted table,
wherein was lively drawn the strong situation of Carthage; and the warlike
means used in the assaulting and winning of it, together with all the
particulars and circumstances thereof: which Mancinus himself in person
sitting by the said picture, desciphered Claudius Pulcher exhibited at Rome,
the painted clothes about the stage and Theater (which represented building)
brought this art into great admiration: for the workmanship was so artificial
and lively, that the very ravens in the air, deceived with the likeness of
houses, flew thither apace for to settle thereupon, supposing verily there had
been tiles and crests indeed. And thus much concerning Painters craft,
exercised in Rome.

To come now to foreign pictures, Lu. Mummius, syrnamed Achaicus (for his
conquest of Asia) was the first man at Rome, who made open show of painted
tables wrought by strangers, and Attalus had brought one of them, wrought by
the hand of Aristides, containing the picture only of god Bacchus, which was to
cost him VI. M. Sestertium.
six thousand Sesterces, Mummius wondering at the price, and supposing that
this table had some special and secret property in it more than himself knew
of, brake the bargain, called for the picture again, and would not suffer it to
be carried away, notwithstanding Attalus complained much at the hard Ceres. And
verily this I take to be the first painted table of a forreiners making, that
ever was set up in public place at Rome. But after he had once begun, I see it
was an ordinary thing to adorn and beautify even the common place also with
such like: for upon this occasion arose that pretty scoff which was given by
Crassus the Orator, as he pleaded upon a time under the Sub veteribus, which
some interpret Tabernis.
old Rostra: for when there was a Witness produced to depose against him,
whom he would seem to challenge and reproved, whereupon the party replied
again and urged him instantly in these terms, Speak out Crassus, and in the
face of all this Court say, what kind of person you would make me to be? Mary
(quoth he again) I take thee to be such an one (pointing directly to a table
hanging there by, wherein was painted a certain Frenchman yawning and lelling
out his Quintilianus* reports this otherwise.
Caesar dictator, who shrined the pictures of Ajax and Medea in no meaner place
than before the temple of Venus Genetrix. Next after him came MAgrippa, a man
by nature inclined rather to rusticitie than to delights, and more like a rude
peasant than a civil gentleman. But surely there is extant a worthy Oration of
his, and beseeming Venus and Ajax, 12000 sesterces, which he paid unto the
Cyzicenes for them. Also he had caused to be set in marble stone inchased,
within the hotest part of his baths, many rich pictures of a small making, and
couched in small tables, the which were taken away but a little before the said
baths were repaired. But above all that ever were, Caesar Augustus the Emperor
of famous memory, did set up in the most frequented or perspicuous place of his
Forum Castor and Pollux, besides others, whereof I will write in my catalogue
of Painters: which he hung up all within the temple of Julius Caesar his
father. The same Augustus Caesar enclosed within the wall of that Curia, which
he erected and consecrated in the common place called Comitium, two Tables
painted; the one resembling the Forest Nemea, in habit of a woman sitting upon
a lion, she carries in her hand a date tree; and there stands by her an old
man resting upon his staff, over whose head there was a pretty tablet hanging
down as a label, from a chariot drawn by two horses, with this inscription,
Nicias me inussit; i. Nicias inamelled or wrought me with fire: for that verb
[inussit] it pleased him to use. As for the other table, the admirable
workmanship therein was this, An old grey-beard accompanied Philochares was the
workman. By which one table (if there were no more but it in the whole world) a
man may make an estimate of the infinite power that is in this art, which could
cause the Senate and people of Rome to take such pleasure so many years
together to look upon Glaucion and his son Aristippus, persons otherwise most
base and contemptible, only in respect of Philochares who painted them. As for
Tiberius Caesar the Emperor, albeit he was a prince of all other least
courteous and affable, yet he delighted to hang up those painted tables Augustus
Caesar, whereof I mean to write hereafter.

CHAP: V.
The art and manner of Painting: the Colors that Painters use.

THus far forth may suffice to be spoken of the ancient dignity of that art,
which begins already to decay and die. What were the colors also that the first
painters used in old time, when they drew their portracts with one simple
color, I have written already in my treatise of Mines and Minerals, where I
discoursed likewise of painters colors. Touching those that named certain kind
of pictures Monochromatea, as also who enriched them with more colors, who
invented this or that for the bettering and perfecting of them, and at what
time each of these additions accrued thereto, I mean to reserve unto my
catalogue of painters: for the order

First and foremost therefore this is to be noted, That in process of time the
artificer who began with one bare color, found out the difference himself
between i. White and black.
light and shadow, and devised by this distinction to set up and debase the one
and the other alternatiuely, and the same more or less according to his
several intentions. After these lights and shadows there was invented a kind
of luster or gloss, different from the light aforesaid; which because it is of
a mean nature between the shade and the light, and participates of both, they
called by a Greek word Tonos. As for the apt coherence of one color with
another, the joint as it were between, and the passage from one to another,
they named it Harmoge.

CHAP. VI.
Of Painters colors, natural and artificial.

ALl colors be either sad or lively; and those be so either naturally, or by
artificial mixture. Lively or gay colors be such as the Because they be rich
and costly.
master delivers to the painter by weight and measure: as namely, Minium.
Vermilion, Armenium.
Verd d' Azur, Cinnabaris.
Sang-dragon, Chrysocolla.
Verd de terre, or Borras, I^dicum. Lacca mixta cum caeruleo.
Indico, and Purpurissum.
Roset. The rest be sad or duskish, and as well the one as the other be all
either natural or artificial. Among the natural of this sort (to wit the sad
colors) I reckon the Sincpis.
common bole Armin, Rubrica.
Ruddel or red stone, A white kind of fattie earth like plastre.
Paretonium, A white earthlike chalk.
Melinum, A whitish earth or ashcolour white.
Eretria, and Auripigmentum.
Orpin. The rest of these Or rather three denarij, for otherwise there were no
proportion between it and the other of that kind.
thirteen denarij Roman by the pound: this may serve the painters pensill, yea
or in grosser work, if a man list to color posts, beams, or wood: as for that
which comes out of Africa, it is worth eight asses every pound; and this they
call Cicirculum: that which is redder than the rest serves better for painting
of tablements: as for that which is most brown and duskish, called in Latin
Pressior, it is of the same price that the other, and employed in the bases and
feet of such tablements. And thus much for the use in painting. Touching
Physic and the medicinable properties thereof, mild it is of nature, and in
that regard of gentle operation, whether it enter into hard emplaistres of a
dry composition, or into immolitiue plasters that are more liquid, and
principally such as are devised for ulcers in any moist part, as the mouth or
fundament. This earth, if it be injected by a clistre, stops a laske: and
being given i. a dram, it stays their immoderate fluxes of the matrice. The
same burnt or calcined dries up the fretting roughness of the eyes,
principally if it be applied with vinegar. This kind of red earth some would
have to be counted in a second degree of Rubrica for goodness, for they
always reckoned that of Le^nos to be the chief and simply best, as coming
next in price to Minium, i. Vermilion. And in truth, this Terra Sigillata or
Lemnia, was highly accounted of in old time, like as the Island Lemnos from
With the image of a goat, as Diose. says: or of Diana, according to Galen.
marked or sealed, and thereupon they used to call it Sphragis. The painters
ordinarily lay a ground of this under their vermillion, and sophisticate it
many ways. In physic it is holden to be a sovereign thing: for if the eyes
be anointed round about therewith in manner of a liniment, it represseth the
flux of rheumatick humors and does mitigat the pains incident to them: the
fistulous sores likewise about the angles or corners of the eyes, it dries up
that they shall not run as they use to do. Inwardly also it is commonly given
in vinegar, to such as cast up blood at the mouth. It is taken also in drink,
for the opilations and other accidents as well of the spleen as kidneys: and
besides; to stop the excessive fluxes that be incident to women. Singular it is
against any poison or venomous sting of serpents, either upon land or sea; and
therefore is a familiar ingredient into all antidots Thus Dalechamp reads this
plac^ according to Philander, out of Dioscor. and Theophrast.
of ochre burnt and calcined in new earthen pots well luted all over: and the
greater fire that it meets withal in the furnace, the better it is. In
general, any ruddle whatsoever is exiccatiue, in which regard it agrees well
with salues and healing plasters, and is very proper for to repress shingles
and such cutanean wild-fires that will stand in drops. Take of Sinopis or
Bolearmin common that comes out of Pontus Selibr^: others read Sex lib^.
half a pound, of bright Sil or ochre 10 pound, of the Greek white earth
Melinum 2 pound; pun them al together, and mix them well, so as they may ferment
i. a kind of gum or size to lay under goldfoile for to guild timber.

Touching the white earth Paraetonium, it carries the name of a place in Egypt
from whence it comes: and many say, that it is nothing but the some of the
sea, incorporat and hardened together with the slime and mud of the shore: and
therefore there be winkles and such shell-fishes found therewith. It is engendered
also in the Isle Candy, and the country of Cyrenae. At Rome they have a devise
to sophisticat it, namely by boiling fullers earth until it be of a fast and
massy consistence: the price of the best is after 6 denier, the pound. Of al
white colors it is the fattest, and for that it runs out smooth in the working,
it is the fastest parget to ouercast walls withal.

As for the earth Melinum, white it is likewise; but the best is that which the
Isle Melos does yield, whereupon it took that name. In Samos also it is to be
found, but painters use it not, because it is over clammy and unctuous. The
Islanders are wont to creep on all four and to lie along at their work when
they dig it forth of the rocks, for search it they must among the veins that
run therein. The same i. To staunch blood.
operation it has in physic that the earth Eretria: also, if a man touch it
with the tongue, he shall find it a stringent and drying: howbeit, a depilatory
it is in some sort, and fetches away hair, or else causes it to grow thin. A
pound of it is worth a Sesterce.

There is of white colors a third kind, and that is Cerussa or white lead, the
reason and making whereof, I have showed in my discourse of minerals: and yet
there was found of it in the nature of a very earth by it self at Smyrna,
within the land belonging to one Theodotus, wherewith in old time they used to
color and paint ships. But in these days we have no other cerusse or Spanish
Nicias, of whom I have already spoken. The best that we have in these days
comes out of Asia, and for that it inclines to a purple color, they call it
Purpurea: a pound of it is fold for 16 deniers Roman. This also is made in
Rome, namely by call cining Sil or ochre mineral, which stands much upon
marble, and then quenching it with vinegar. Such use the painters make thereof
thus burnt, that no shadows will do well without it.

Concerning Eretria, another kind of white earth, it takes the name of the
place from whence it comes. Nicomachus and Parasius used this color much. In
Physic, it is found to be cooling and emolitiue. Being burnt or calcined, it
is an excellent incarnatiue: singular good for to dry any sore; proper also to
be applied to the forhead for the headache; like as, to discover any festring or
rankling matter that lies secret within: for if a place be anointed therewith,
when it is reduced

As touching Sandaracha and Ochra, K. Iuba writes, that they are to be found
in Tapazus, an Island within the red sea; but that which we have, was never
brought from thence. How Sandaracha is engendered, I have said already in the
discourse of mines. There is an artificial and sophisticat Sandaracha, made of
cerusse burnt in a furnace, The color of Sandaracha ought to be fiery like a
flame: a pound thereof is bought for 5 Asses, i. half a denier. Calcine this
and Ruddle together, and of both, being concorporat in equal quantity, you
shall have the color called Sandyx. Howbeit, I do observe in Virgil, that he
took Sandyx for an herb, as may appear by this verse: Sponte sua Sandyx
pascentes vestiet agnos.
A ruddie fleece shall Sandyx yield,
To lambs, as they do graze in field.


This Sandyx to be bought and sold, carries but half the price of Sandaracha:
neither be there any colors more weighty than these in the balance.

Among the artificial and made colors, I reckon Scyricum, which as I have
already said, serves for a good ground to take vermillon. The manner of making
it, is to mix the best ruddle Sinopis and this Sandyx together.

Painters black [called in Latin Atramentum] I count an artificial color,
although I know there is a vitrioll or coperose going under that name, which is
mineral, and is engendered two manner of ways: for either it issues and
ooseth out of the mine in manner of a salt humor or liquor; Polygnotus and Mycon
(two as renowned painters as ever were) used no other black at all, but that
which they made of the mare or refuse of grapes after they be pressed, and this
they call Tryginon. Apelles devised a way by himself, to make it of yuorie or
the elephants tooth burnt, and this they named thereupon Elephantinum: as
touching the black called Indicum, it is brought from India: but as yet I know
not the manner either of the making or the ingendring of it. A kind thereof I
see the diers do make, of that black florie which sticks to their coppers.
Also, there is a black made of torchwood burnt, and the coals that come of it
punned to powder in a mortar. And here comes to my mind the wonderful nature
of Cuttle fishes, which do yield a black humor from them like to ink: howbeit,
I do not

Of all the colors besides, which (as I said once before) for their high price
the poor painters be served with from their masters hands who set them on
work, the rich roset or purple red that is made of Tripolie or goldsmiths
earth, is simply the best: for this Tripolie is commonly died together with
purples; and no silk, wool, or cloth, will so soon take that tincture as it.
The principal is that, which having had the flower of a fatt, has drunk the
fill as it were, whiles the liquor is yet boiling, and the drugs within the
caudron be in their verdure and have not lost the heart. When this first
Tripoly thus deeply died, is cast up and taken forth, that which is put in the
Tyrian, Getulian, or Lacedemonian, notwithstanding from thence come the most
rich and precious pearls. The reason is, because the Tripoli in Puteoli is died
most with the juice of the In singula^ libras ad denarios trigi^a.
30 deniers Roman Painters or complexioners, when they would counterfeit a
luster or gloss of vermilion, lay a ground first with Sandyx, and then charge
roset upon it with the white of an egg: but if they be desirous to make a
purple color, the first course or ground is azur, and straitwaies they come
upon it with our painters in stead thereof use Lac.
roset and the white of an egg abouesaid. After this rich and lively rosat or
purple red, Indico is a color most esteemed: out of India it comes, whereupon
it took the name; and it is nothing else They say it is made of Oad: and in
those countries from whe^c^ it comes, Gal^ Nil.
but a slimy mud cleaning to the foam that gathers about canes and reeds:
while it is punned or ground it looks black, but being dissolved, it yields a
wonderful lovely mixture of purple and azur. There

The land of Armenia does furnish us with the color verd d'azur, and of that
country it is named

CHAP. VII.
What Colors refuse to be laid upon some grounds: with what colors they
painted in old time: and when the fight of Sword-fencers was first proposed to
be seen at Rome.

OF all colors, Roset, Indico, Azur, Tripoli or Melinum, Orpiment, white lead
or Cerusse, Apelles, Echion, Melanthius, and Nicomachus, most excellent
painters, and whose tables were sold for as much apiece, as a good town was
worth; and yet none of these used above four colors in all those rich and
durable works. And what might those be? Of all whites they had the white
Tripoli of Melos; for yellow ochres they took that of Athens: Nero the emperor
commanded, that the portraict of himself should be painted in linen cloth,
after the manner of a gyant-like colosse 120 foot high; a thing that never had
been heard or seen before. But see what became of it! when this monstrous
picture (which was drawn and made in the garden of Marius) was don and
finished, the lightning and fire from heaven caught it, and not only consumed
it, but also burnt withal the best part of the building about the garden. A
slave of his infranchising (as it is well known) when he was to exhibit at
Antium certain solemnities, and namely a spectacle of sword-fencers fighting at
sharp, caused all the scaffolds, public galleries, and walking places of that
city to be hung and tapissed with painted cloths, wherein were represented the
lively pictures of the sword-players themselves, with all the wifflers and
seruitors to them belonging. But to conclude, the best and most magnanimous
men, C. Terentius a Lucan: for this man to honor his grandfather, who had made
him his own son by adoption, exhibited a show for three days together of thirty
pair of such fencers fighting with vnrebated swords; and a fair painted table
which carried the lively resemblance of this spectacle, he set up and
dedicated within the sacred grove of Diana.

CHAP. VIII.
The antiquity of Painting, and the several ages wherein the famous Painters
lived. A survey of excellent Pictures, and the Artificers that made them,
together with This argument or title reaches to many chapters following.
the prices that their workmanship was valued at: and notable pictures to the
number of 305.

NOw will I after a cursorie sort run through all the famous professors and
Artizans in this kind, and that with as great breuity as possibly I can; for
the scope I have proposed to my self tends another way: and therefore let not
the Reader think much if I do but touch the names of some, as it were passing
by, and by occasion of others whose catalogue I mean to Phidias himself was a
painter in the beginning, and that the noble shield of Minerva in Athens was by
him painted: besides, this is confessed and resolved upon for a truth, that
Panus his brother Minerva, which Colores the apprentice of Phidias had made; as
also in making the statue of Jupiter Olympius, wrought with the said Colores
and helped him. But what should I dwell long in this matter? Is there any doubt
made, that Candaules King of Lydia, the last of the race and family of the
Heraclidae, who also was commonly caled Myrsilus, bought the painted table
which Bularchus (the painter or workman thereof) as much gold as it came to in
weight. See of what price and estimation pictures were even in those days! And
needs it must be that this happened about that age wherein K. Romulus lived: for
the said K. Candaules died in the 18 Olympias; or as some write, in that very
year that Romulus departed this life: at what time this skill of painting (if
I be not much deceived) was in great request every where, and grown already to
an absolute perfection. Which being granted, as of necessity it cannot be
denied, evident and apparent it is, that the original and beginning of this
art, was much more ancient: and that those painters who used one color and no
more in their plain draughts called Monocromata (to wit, Hygiaenon, Dinias, and
Charmas) lived a good while before, although it be not recorded in any writer
in what age precisely they flourished: Eumarus the Athenian painter, who
devised first to distinguish male and female in painting; and besides,
undertook to draw with his pensill the proportion and shape of any thing that
he saw; together with Cimon the Cleonaean, who followed his steps, and
practiced his inventions, could not choose but by all congruity and consequence
be of more antiquity than Bularchus aforesaid, or the reign of Romulus and
Candaules: this Cimon devised the works called Catagrapha, i. pourtraits and
images standing by as and side-long: the sundry habits also of the visage and
cast of the eye, making them to look, some backward over their shoulders,
others aloft, and some again downward: his cunning it was to show in a
picture, the knitting of the members in every joint: to make the veins appear
how they branched and spread: and besides, the first he was that counterfeited
in flat pictures, the plaits, folds, wrinckles, and hollow lappets of a
Phanaeus the brother of Phidias, he painted also the battle between the
Athenians and the Persians, upon the plains of Marathon; for now by this time
were painters furnished in some sort with colors to their purpose; and the art
was grown to such perfection, that in the picture resembling the said battle,
the full personages were pourtraied most lively, of the captains on both sides,
to wit, Milciades, Callimachus, and Cynegyrus, for the Athenians; Datis also
and Artaphanes, for the Barbarians or Persians.

CHAP. IX.
The Painters that first entered into contention for to win the prize by their
Art: and

Moreover, during the time that the aboue-named Panaeus flourished, there were
prises proposed at Corinth and Delphos, for those painters that could win them:
and the first that striued for the best game, was the said Panaeus, who
challenged Timagoras the Chalcidian upon this occasion, That the same Timagoras
had given him the foil before at the Pythian games; which also does appear by
certain verses composed by Timagoras himself as touching that argument, which
savor of great antiquity. Whereby the error of Chronicles beforesaid is
manifestly convinced, who have failed much in the calculation of the times.
Furthermore, besides these painters above rehearsed, others there were of great
name, and yet all of them before that 90 Olympiad whereof they write; as
namely, Polygnotus the Thasian, who was the first that Polygnotus workmanship,
is that picture in a table which now stands in the stately gallerie of
Pompeius, and hung sometime before the Curia or Hall that bears his name, in
which table he painted one upon a scaling ladder, with a targuet in his hand;
but so artificially it is done, and with such dexterity, that whosoever looks
upon him, cannot tell whether he is climbing up or coming down. All the
painting of Apollo his temple at Delphos, was of this man's doing; who also
beautified with pictures, the great gallery gratis, and would not take one
penny for it; whereas Mycon before him, painted one part thereof, and was well
paid for his workmanship; which liberal mind of his, wan him the greater
credit and honor besides: for by a decree from the Amphyctions (who are the
lords of the public counsel of state in Greece) it was granted, that in all
cities and towns of Greece wheresoever he came, he should Mycon before
mentioned, there was another of the name, distinguished only by this, that the
former was called Mycon the elder, and this Mycon the younger, who had a
daughter named Timarate, and she could paint likewise excellently. But to come
now to that ninetieth Olympia, there flourished in that time Aglaophon,
Cephissodorus, Phrylus, and Euenor, who was both father and master to Parasius
that most renowned painter, of whom I purpose to speak in his rank when the
time comes; all these were reputed very good artizans in their time, howbeit
not so excellent that I should need stand long upon them or their workmanship,
making haste as I do unto those glorious and glittering painters indeed, who
shine as bright stars above all their fellows; among whom, Apollodorus the
Athenian was the first that gave light, and he lived in the 93 Olympias: this
man led the way to others, and taught Ajax, all on a flaming fire with a flash
of lightning, which at this day is to be seen at Pergamus, as an excellent
piece of work. And verily before his days there cannot be showed a table of
any ones painting worth the sight, and which a man would take pleasure to
behold and look upon any long time.

When this man had opened the door once, and showed the way to this art, Zeuxis
of Heraclea entered in, and that was in the fourth year of the 95 For Olympias
was counted the space of five years.
Olympias: and now that the pensill was taken in hand (for now I speak thereof)
he seeing that it made good work, followed on therewith, Demophilus the
Himeraean and Neseas the Thracian lived; for to one of them apprentice he was:
but whether of the two was his master, there is some doubt made; and verily so
excellent he proved in his art, that the abouenamed Appollodorus made verses of
him; in which he signifies, that Zeuxes had stolen the cunning from them al,
and he alone went away with the art. He grew in process of time to such wealth
by the means only of his excellent hand, that for to make show how rich he was,
when he went to the solemnity of the games at Olympia, he caused his own name
to be imbrodered in golden letters, within the Iozenge work of his clokes,
whereof he had change, and which he brought thither to be seen. In Alcmena; and
to king Archelaus he gave another of the rustical god Pan: there was also the
pourtraict of lady Penelope, which he drew in colors; wherein he seems not
only to have depainted the outward personage and feature of the body, but also
to have expressed most lively the inward affections and qualities of her mind:
and much speech there is of a wrestler or champion of his painting; in which
picture he pleased himself so well, that he subscribed this verse under it,
Graece melius (...)* which Iambick verse some attribute to Apollodorus.
Invisurus aliquis facilius quam imitaturus, i. Sooner will a man envy me, than
set such another by me. Which thereupon grew to be a byword in every man's
mouth. One stately picture there is of his workmanship, Jupiter sitting upon a
throne in his Majesty, with all Hercules also as a babe lying in a cradle, and
strangling two fell serpents with his hand, together with his mother Alcmena,
and her husband K. Amphytrion in place, affrighted both at the sight thereof.
Howbeit, this Zeuxis as excellent a painter as he was, is noted for one fault
and imperfection; namely, that the head and joints of his pourtraicts, were in
some proportion to the rest somewhat with the biggest; for otherwise so curious
and exquisite he was, that when he should make a table with a picture for the
Agrigentines, to be set up in the temple of Juno Lacinia, at the charges of the
city, according to a vow that they had made, he would needs see all the maidens
of the city naked; and from all that company he chose 5 of the fairest to take
out as from several patterns, whatsoever he liked best in any of them; and of
all the lovely parts of those Timanthes, Androcydes, Eupompus, and Parasius,
who were his concurrents, and thought as well of themselves as he did.

CHAP. X.
Of birds deceived by pictures. What is the hardest point in the art of
painting?

OF those four before named, Parasius by report was so bold as to challenge
Zeuxis openly and to enter the lists with him for the victory; in which
contention and trial, Zeuxis for proof of his cunning, brought upon the
scaffold a table, wherein were clusters of grapes so lively painted, that the
very birds of the air flew flocking thither for to be pecking at the grapes.
Parasius again for his part to show his workmanship, came with another
picture, wherein he had painted a linen sheet, so like to a sheet indeed, that
Zeuxis in a glorious bravery and Parasius with these words by way of a scorn
and frumpe, Come on sir, away with your sheet once, that we may see your goodly
picture. But taking himself with the manner, and perceiving his own error, he
was mightily abashed, and like an honest minded man yielded the victory to his
adversary, saying withal, Zeuxis has beguiled poor birds, but Parrhasius
has deceived Zeuxis, a professed artisane. This Zeuxis, as it is reported,
painted afterward another table, wherein he had made a boy carrying certain
bunches of grapes in a flasket, and seeing again that the birds flew to the
grapes, he shook the head, and coming to his picture, with the like ingenious
mind as before, brake out into these words, and said, Ah, I see well enough
where I have failed, I have painted the grapes better than the boy, for if I
had don him as naturally, the birds would have bin afraid and never approached
the grapes. He pourtraied also diverse pieces of earthen vessels in potterie,
Fulvius syrnamed Nobilior, removed the Muses from thence of his pourtraying,
and brought them to Rome. Moreover, there remains yet at Rome within the
galleries of Philippus, the picture of Helena, wrought by the hand of Zeuxis:
and in the temple of Concord another, resembling Marsias the Musician bound to
a tree.

As for Parasius before named, borne he was at Ephesus, and invented also
diverse things of himself to the aduencement of this art: for the first he was
that gave the true symmetrie to a portraiture, and observed the just
proportions: he first exactly kept the sundry habits and gestures of the
countenance: he it was, that first stood upon the curious workmanship of
couching and laying the hairs of the head in order: the lovely grace and
beauty about the mouth and lips, he i. to make the extremities of any part, to
mark duly the divisions of parcels, and to give enery one their just compass
and measure is exceeding difficult; and few when they come to the doing of it,
have been found to attain unto that felicity. For the utmost edge of a work
must fall round upon it self, and so knit up in the end, as if it shadowed
somewhat behind, and yet showed that which it seems to hide. In this so
curious and inexplicable a point, Antigonus and Xenocrates both, (...).
Demon Atheniensinm, that is to say, the common people of the Athenians; the
devise whereof was passing full of wit, and very inuentiue: for his intention
was in one and the same pourtrait, and under one object of the eye to express
the nature of the people, variable, wrathful, unjust, and unconstant; the same
also Theseus, which stood sometimes in the capitol of Rome; a certain
Admiral likewise of a navy armed with a corselet. In one table also which is
at Rhodes, he depainted Meleager, Hercules, Perseus. This table was thrice
blasted with lightening; howbeit, the pictures were not defaced, but remained
whole and entire as at the first: a miraculous thing, and that which makes
much for the credit of the picture. Archigallus was of his painting; a picture
that Tiberius the Emperor took great pleasure in; and as Eculco mine author
does testify, he esteemeed it worth 60000 sesterces, and enclosed it within
his bedchamber. Moreover, he counterfeited one Cressa a nource, with her
infant in her arms: he pourtraied Philiscus, and god Bacchus with the goddess
Virtue standing by him: also two boys; on whom a man might see most lively
resembled, the carelessness and simplicity of that age: likewise a priest,
attended upon with a pretty boy, holding a censar in his hand, and a coronet.
Over and besides, two pictures there be of his handiework, going under the name
of Hoplitides, i. armed: the one running in his armor in battel-wise, soas he
seems all in a sweat: the other disarming himself, all wearied, so as a man
would think Aeneas, Castor, and Pollux; also of another, which contained
Telephus, Achilles, Agamemnon and Ulysses. An artisan full of work, and who
would ever be doing one thing or other; but so arrogant withal, as no man ever
showed more insolency than he, in regard that he was cunning and well thought
of: which he knew well enough, and no man needed to tell him. In this proud
spirit of his, he would take upon him diverse titles and additions to his name:
among others, he would call himself li. fine, delicat and sumptuos: for he
would be in his purple, or his golden chaplets, his staff tipped with gold, and
his shooebuckles of the same.
Abrodiatus: and other words he used, whereby he would make himself known
that he was prince of painters, and the art by him made perfect and
accomplished. But it exceeds how vainglorious he showed himself, in that
he gave out, he was in Apollo: also that the pourtrait of Hercules, which is
in a table at Lindos, he drew from the very person of Hercules himself,
answerable in all points to the proportion and lineaments of his body; who (by
his saying) had appeared to him oftentimes in his sleep of purpose, that he
might paint him lively as he was. In this vein of vanity, being upon a time
put down by Timanthes the Painter at Samos, where, by the judgment of all that
were present, his picture representing Ajax, and the awarding of the armor of
Achilles from him to Vlyxes, was not thought comparable to another of Timanthes
his making: I am ill apaied (quoth he) and sorry at the heart, for this noble
knight and brave warrior Ajax, whose evil hap it is thus to be foiled once
again by so unworthy a weight, and a far meaner person than himself. He
delighted also to paint small pictures in pretty tables, and those representing
wantonness and lechery: and this he did (as he was wont to say) for his
recreation, and as it were to breath himself when

As for Timanthes, an excellent fine wit he had of his own, and full he was of
rare inventions: he it was that made the famous picture of Iphigenia, sohighly
commended by eloquent orators: and to say a truth, his conceit therein was
admirable: for when he had devised that the poor innocent lady should stand
hard at the altar, ready to be slain for sacrifice, and had painted those that
were present about her, with heavy and sad countenance, weeping and wailing all
for the instant death of this young princess, and her uncle Menelaus above
the rest, full of sorrow and lamentation, and showing the same as much as
possibly might be: having by this time spent in them all the signs that might
testify the hearts grief, and that he was come to pourtray her own father
Agamemnon, Peace, in Rome.

In this age flourished Euxenidas, and taught Aristides his cunning, who
proved afterward a singular workman. Eupompus also trained up Pamphilus the
painter under him, whose apprentise was Apelles. There is a fine picture of
Eupompus his making, to wit, one who had obtained the victory at the public
Gymnick exercises of actiuitie, painted naked as he performed his deuoir,
Eupompus was of such authority, that whereas before his time there were but two
kinds of pictures, to wit, Helladicum, i. the Greekish; and Asiaticum, i.
Asiatick; he brought in a new division, and made 3 distinct members thereof:
for in love of him, because he was a Sicyonian born, the foresaid Helladicum
being parted in twain, there arose three several sorts, the Ionnian,
Sicyonian, and Attick.

As for Pamphilius, renowned he was for painting a confraternity or kindred;
the battle fought before Philus, and the victory of the Athenians: semblably,
of his making is the picture of Ulysses in a punt or small bottom. Himself was
a Macedonian borne, but of all painters, the first that gave his mind to other
good literature, and especially to Arithmetic and Geometry; without the
insight of which two sciences, he was of opinion, that impossible it was to be
a perfect Minoris talento annis december: yet Budaeus reads annuis talentis
december, i. ten talents by the year.
a talent of silver for 10 years together: and thus much paid Apelles and
Melanthus unto him for to learn his art. His authority brought to pass, that
ordained it was at Sicyone, and so consequently throughout all Greece, that
gentlemen's sons or freeborn should go to painting school, and there be taught
first above all other things the art Diagraphice, that is to say, the skill to
draw and paint in box tables: and for the credit of Painters he brought to
pass, that the art should be ranged in the first degree of liberal Sciences.
And verily this craft of painting has bin always of that good respect and so
honored, that none but gentlemen and freeborn at the first beginning meddled
therewith, yea, and afterward honorable personages gave themselves to the
practice thereof, with this charge from time to time, to teach no slave the
mystery of painting, who by a strict and perpetual edict were excluded

Furthermore, about the 170 Olympias there flourished Echion and Therimachus,
two renowned painters: as for Echion, ennobled he is for these pictures, god
Bacchus, a Tragedy and a Comedy, represented by painting: also Semiramis, who
of a bond-maiden came to be a queen; an ancient woman carrying a torch or lamp,
going before a young wife newly wedded, and leading her to the bride-bed, who
follows with a modest, shamefast, and bashful countenance most apparent to
the eye.

But what should I speak of these painters, when as Apelles surmounted all
that either were before, or came after. This Apelles flourished about the 112
Olympias, by which time he became Venus it should have; which Venus the Greeks
call Charis, as one would say, the grace: and in truth he would confess, that
other men's pictures had all things else that they should have, this only
excepted; wherein he was persuaded that he had not his peer or second.
Moreover, he attributed unto himself Protogenes his doing, wherein he saw
there was infinite pains taken, admiring also the exceeding curiosity of the
man in each point beyond all measure, he confessed and said, That Protogenes in
every thing else had done as well as himself could have done, yea and better
too. But in one thing he surpassed Protogenes, for that he could not skill of
laying work out of his hand when it was finished well enough. A memorable
admonition, teaching us all, That double diligence and overmuch curiosity does
hurt otherwhiles. This painter was not more renowned for his skill and
excellency in art, than he was commended for his simplicity and singleness
of heart: for Amphion in disposition, so he yielded to Asclepiodorus in
measures and proportion, that is to say, in the just knowledge how far distant
one thing ought to be from another. And to this purpose impertinent it is not,
to report a pretty occurrent that fell between Protogenes and him: for being
very desirous to be acquainted with Protogenes, a man whom he had never seen,
and of his works, whereof there went so great a name, he imbarqued and sailed
to Protogenes dwelt: and no sooner was he landed, but he enquired where his
shop was, and forthwith went directly thither. Protogenes himself was not at
home, only there was an old woman in the house who had the keeping of a mighty
large table set in a frame, and fitted ready for a picture: and when he
enquired for Protogenes, she made answer, that he was not within; and seeing
him thereupon ready to depart, demanded what his name was, and who she should
tell her master asked for him. Apelles then, seeing the foresaid table standing
before him, took a pensil in hand and drew in color a passing fine and small
line through the said table, saying to the woman, Tell thy master, that he who
made this line enquired for him; and so he went his ways. Now when Protogenes
was returned home, the old woman made relation unto him of this that happened in
his absence; and as it is reported, the artificer had no sooner seen and
beheld the draught of this small line, but he knew who had been there, and said
withal, Surely Apelles Apelles made an errand again to the shop, and seeing
the second line, was dismayed at first and blushed withal to see himself thus
overcome; but taking his pensil, cut the foresaid colors throughout the
length, with a third color distinct from the rest, and left no room at all for
a fourth to be drawn within it. Which when Protogenes saw, he confessed that
he had met with his match and his master both; and made all the have he could
Apelles to bid him welcome and give him friendly entertainment. In memorial
whereof it was thought good both by the one and the other, to leave unto
posterity this table thus naked without any more work in it, to the wonder of
all men that ever saw it, but of cunning artisans and painters especially: for
this table was kept a long time, and as it is well known, consumed to ashes in
that first fire that caught Caesar's house within the Palatine hill: and verily
we took great pleasure before that, to see it many times, containing in that
large and extraordinary capacity that it had, nothing else but certain lines,
which were so fine and small, that uneath or hardly they could be discerned by
the eye. And in truth, when it stood among the excellent painted tables of many
other workmen, it seemed a very blanke having nothing in it: howbeit as void
and naked as it was, it drew many to it even in that respect, being more looked
Apelles, this was his manner and custom besides, which he perpetually observed,
that no day went over his head, but what business soever he had otherwise to
call him away, he would make one draught or other (and never miss) for to
exercise his hand and keep it in ure, insomuch as from him grew the proverb,
Nulla dies sine Linea, i. Be always doing somewhat, though you do but draw a
line. His order was when he had finished a piece of work or painted table, and
laid it out of his hand, to set it forth in some open gallerie or thorow-fare,
to be seen of folk that passed by, and himself would lie close behind it to
hearken what faults were found therewith; preferring the judgment of the
common people before his own, and imagining they would spy more narrowly, and
censure his doings sooner than himself: and as the tale is told, Apelles
acknowledging that the man said true indeed, mended that fault by the next
morning, and set forth his table as his manner was. The same shoemaker coming
again the morrow after, and finding the want supplied which he noted the day
bfore, took some pride unto himself, that his former admonition had sped so
well, and was so bold as to cauil at somewhat about the leg. Apelles could not
endure that, but putting forth his head from behind the painted table, and
scorning thus to be checked and reproved, Sirrah (quoth he) remember you are
but a shoemaker, and therefore meddle no higher I advise you, than with shoos.
Which words also of his came afterward to be a common proverb, Ne suitor vltra
crepidam. Alexander the Great accepted the better of him, and much frequented
his shop in his own person: for, as I have said before, he gave straight
commandment, That no painter should be so hardy as to make his picture but
only Apelles. Now when the King being in his shop, would seem to talk much
and reason about his art, and many times let fall some words to little purpose,
bewraying his ignorance; Apelles after his mild manner, would desire his grace
to hold his peace, and said, sir, Alexander made of him, he showed by one
notable argument; for having among his courtesans one named Campaspe, whom he
fancied especially above the rest, in regard as well of that affection of his as
her incomparable beauty, he gave commandment to Apelles for to draw her
picture all naked: bur perceiving Apelles at the same time to be wounded with
the like dart of love as well as himself, he bestowed her on him most frankly.
By which example, he showed moreover, that how great a Commander, and high
minded a prince he was otherwise, yet in this mastering and commanding of his
affections, his magnanimity Apelles partner with him of his love, but also gave
his affection clean away from her unto him, nothing moved with the respect of
her whom before he so dearly loved, that being the concubin of a king, she
should now become the bed fellow of a painter. Some are of opinion, That by the
pattern of this Campaspe, Apelles made the picture of Venus i. Ortam mar^ i.
rising out of the sea.
Anadyomene. Moreover, Apelles was of a kind bountiful disposition even to
other painters of his time, who commonly as concurrents, do envy one another.
And the first he was that brought Protogenes into credit and estimation at
Rhodes; for at the first, his own countrymen made no account at all of him (a
thing ordinarily seen, that in our own country we are least regarded) but
Apelles, for to countenance and credit the man, demanded Protogenes asked some
small matter and trifle to speak of: howbeit, Apelles esteemed them at fifty
talents, and promised to give so much for them: raising a bruit by this means
abroad in the world, that he bought them for to sell again as his own. The
Rhodians hereat were moved and stirred up to take better knowledge of
Protogenes, what an excellent workman they had of him: neither would
Protogenes part with any of his pictures unto them, unless they would come off
roundly and rise to a better price than before time. As for Apelles, he had
such a dexterity in drawing pourtraits so lively, and so near resembling those
for whom they were made, that hardly one could be known from the other;
insomuch, as Appion the Grammarian has left in writing (a thing incredible to
Apelles had drawn, how many years they either had lived or were to live, for
whom those pictures were made. But as gracious as he was otherwise with
Alexander and his train, yet he could never win the love and favor of prince
Ptolomaeus, who at that time followed the court of K. Alexander, and was
afterward king of Egypt. It fortuned, that after the decease of Alexander, and
during the reign of K. Ptolomae aforesaid, this Apelles was by a tempest at
sea cast upon the coast of Egypt, and forced to land at Alexandria; where,
other painters that were no well willers of his, practiced with a jugler or
jeaster of the kings, and suborned him in the kings name to train Apelles to
take his supper with the king. To the court came Apelles accordingly, and
showed himself in the presence. Ptolomae having espied him, with a stern and
angry countenance demanded of Apelles, not knowing the name of the party who
had brought him thither, and being thus put to his shifts, caught up a dead
cole of fire from the hearth thereby, and began therewith to delineat and draw
upon the wall the proportion of that cousiner beforesaid. He had no sooner
pourfiled a little about the visage, but the king presently took knowledge
thereby of the party that had played this pranke by him and wrought him this
displeasure. This Apelles drew the face of K. Antiochus also, who had but one
eye to see withal: for to hide which deformity and imperfection, he devised to
paint him, turning his visage a little away, and so he showed but the one side
of his face, to the end, that whatsoever was wanting in the picture, might be
imputed rather to the painter, than to the person whomhe portraied. And in
truth, from him came this invention first to conceal the defects and blemishes
of the visage, and to make one half face only, when it might be represented
full and whole, if it pleased the painter. Among other principal pieces of
work, some pictures there be of his making, Venus, arising out of the sea
(which is commonly known by the name of Anadyomene) Augustus Caesar, late
Emperor of famous memory, dedicated it in the temple of Julius Caesar, his
father; which he enriched with an Epigram of certain Greek verses, in
commendation as well of the picture, as the painter. And albeit the artificial
contriuing of the said verses went beyond the work, which they seemed to
praise, yet they beautified and set out the table not a little. The nether part
of this picture had caught some hurt by a mischance: but there never could be
found that painter yet, who would take in hand to repair the same and make it
up again as it was at first: so as, this wrong and harm Nero being Emperor was
fain to set another in the place, wrought by the hand of Doratheus. But to come
again unto Apelles; he had begun another picture of Venus Anadyomene, for the
inhabitants of the Island Cosor Lango, which he minded should have surpassed
the former: howbeit, before he could finish it, surprised he was with death,
which seemed to envy so perfect workmanship: and never was that painter known
to this day, who would turn his hand to that piece of work, and seem to go
forward where Apelles left, or to follow on in those traicts and liniments,
which he had pourfiled and begun. One picture he drew of Of this piture Apelles
was wont to say, That there were two Alexaders: the one begotten by Philip, who
was (...): and the other painted by Apelles, and he was (...). i. inimitable.
K. Alexander the Great, holding a The manner was to express lightening, by
three shafts bond together in the midst.
thunderbolt and lightening in his hand, which cost twenty talents Diana at
Ephesus. And verily, this devise was so finely contrived, that as Alexanders
fingers seemed to bear out higher than the rest of the work, so the lightening
appeared to be clean without the ground of the table, and not once to touch it.
[But before I proceed any farther, let the readers take this with them, and
always remember, that these rich and costly pictures were wrought with four
colors and no more.] And for the workmanship of this picture, the price
thereof was paid him in good gold coin by weight and measure, and never told
and counted by tale. Of his handyworke was the picture of a Megabyzus or
guelded priest of Diana in Ephesus, sacrificing in his pontifical habits and
vestiments accordingly. Also the counterfeit of prince Clytus, armed at all
pieces save his head, mounted on horseback and hasting to a battle, calling
unto his squire or henxman for his helmet, who was Apelles made of K. Alexander
and his father Philip, were but loss of time, and a needless discourse. But I
cannot omit the painted table, containing the pourtrait of Abron that wanton
and effeminat person; which piece of work the Samians so highly extol and
magnify: ne yet another picture of Menander the K. of Caria, that he made for
the Rhodians, and which they so much admire. Neither must I forget the
counterfeit of Ancaeus: of Gorgosthenes the Tragaedian, which he made at
Alexandria: or while he was at Rome, one table containing Castor and Pollux,
with the image of Victory, and Alexander the Great: Likewise another
representing the counterfeit of War in person, bound with his hands behind at
the back, and Alexander the king mounted in a chariot triumphant: both which
tables Augustus late Emperor of immortal memory, had dedicated modestly, and
in Claudius Caesar came to wear the diadem, he thought it more for the honor
of Augustus, to scrape out the face of Alexander, as well in the one as in the
other, and to set in the place the lively image of the said Augustus to be
seen. It is thought likewise, that the full pourtrait of Hercules, painted in a
table, standing now in the temple of Antonia, was of his doing: an exquisite
piece of work no doubt, for notwithstanding that the back part stand toward
them that look upon it, yet it shows the entire visage, which is an
exceeding hard matter: a man that beholds this Hercules, would think that the
picture it self turned the face to be seen, which the painter seemed by the
rest of the work to hide from the eye. Of his painting there is a Some think
he means Hero and Leandere: and they read, He to Leandru^ pinxit, in he
painted Hero and Leander.
prince or worthy knight all naked, in which picture he seemed to challenge
Nature: and to have pourtraied every part so well, as she her self could not
have framed the same better. even living horses indeed: for perceiving that his
concurrents were in favor too mighty for him Viler Maae. reports, t^t he
painted a mare.
that of his own pourtraying, but they fell all to neigh, as taking it for one
of their fellows; which experiment served ever after for a rule, to know indeed
a good piece of workmanship in that kind. Moreover, he made a picture
representing Neoptolemus the son of Achilles, in habit of a man of arms,
sitting on horseback and riding against the Persians: likewise another,
resembling Archelaus with his wife and little daughter: also K. Antigonus armed
before with a cuirace, and marching on foot with his horse of service led by
him. Howbeit those Painters that are counted more skillful and cunning than
others, prefer before all other pieces Diana, among a consort or company of
other virgins at sacrifice; whom he depainted so artificially in this table,
that he seems to have surmounted. Homer the Poet, who eftsoons in his poems
describes the same maiden Diana with her train of young damsels. What would
you have more? he would seem to pourtray those things which indeed cannot be
pourtraied, crackes of thunder, leames or flashes of lightening, and
thunderbolts; all which pictures go under the name of Brontes, Astrape, and
Ceraunobolos; his inventions served as precedents and patterns for others in
that art to follow. One secret he had himself, which no man was ever able to
attain and reach unto, and that was a certain black verish which he used to
lay upon his painted tables when he had finished them; which was so finely
tempered, Apelles.

In his time lived Aristides the Thebane, a famous painter. This Aristides was
the first that would seem to paint the conceptions of the mind, and to
express all the inward dispositions Alexander the Great translated from Thebes
to Pella, the city where himself Aristides painted the counterfeit of a
battle between the Greeks and the Persians: in which table, he comprised an
hundred fighting men: his bargain was to have of Mnason the tyrant or K. of
Elate, for every personage that he made M^ac.
ten pounds of silver. He pourtraied the running in a race of charriots drawn
with four steeds, so lively, that a man would have thought he saw the wheels
running about. And as for an humble suter or suppliant, he depainted him so
naturally, making his petition and following it with such earnestness, that
he seemed in manner to cry with an audible voice from the very picture. He
counterfeited in a pain ted table, hunters with their venison that they had
taken. Leontion also the painter; and a woman under the name of Anapauomene,
dying for kind heart and the love of her brother: likewise prince Bacchus, and
lady Ariadne his wife, which be pictures much looked upon at Rome in these
days within the temple of Ceres; a plaier besides in a tragoedy, accompanied
with a boy (and these are to be seen in the chapel of Apollo) howbeit, this
table has lost the beauty which it first had, through the folly of an
unskillful painter, unto whom it was put forth to be scoured and refreshed, by
M. Iunius the Praetor, against the solemnity of the Apollinar games. Moreover,
there was to be seen in the chapel of Faith within the Capitol, the picture
of an old man with an harp, Aristides his making; but there is a man lying
sick in his bed, of his painting, that cannot be praised sufficiently. And
verily to conclude with his own word, so accomplished he was in this art, that
K. Attalus (by report) gave unto him for one table with the picture, one
hundred talents of silver.

About the same time, there flourished (as I have said before) Protogenes; born
he was at Caunos a city in Cilicia, and subject to the Rhodians: he was so
exceeding poor at the beginning, and withal, so studious, intentive, and
curious in his work without all end, that fawer pictures by that means came
out of his hands, and himself never rise to any great wealth. Who it was that
taught him his art, it is not known for certain: but some say that he painted
ships until he was 50 years of age: which they collect by this argument, That
when at Athens in the most Minerva; wherein he depainted that famous Names of
galleys.
Paralus and * Hemionis, which some call Nausicaa, he devised certain borders
without: wherein he painted among those byworks (which painters call Parerga)
certain small galleys and little long barks, to show thereby the small
beginnings of his art, and to what height of perfection he was come to in the
end, when his workmanship was thought worthy to be seen in the most eminent
place of that city. But of all the painted tables that ever he wrought, that
of A worthy knight, son of Ochi^us.
Ialysus is accounted the principal, which is now dedicated at Rome within the
temple of Peace: whiles he was in painting this Ialysus, it is said, that he
lived only upon steeped Lupines, which might serve him in stead of meat and
drink both, to satisfy his hunger and quench his thirst: and this he did,
for fear least too Nealces another painter did the like, and sped as well, in
making the froth falling naturally from a horses mouth; namely, by throwing his
sponge against the table before him, at what time as he painted a horse-rider
cheering and cherking up his horse, yet reining him hard as he champed upon his
bit.] Thus (I say) Fortune taught Protogenes to finish his dog. This picture of
Ialysus and his dog, was of such name and so highly esteemed, that K. Demetrius
when he might have forced the city of Rhodes, on that side only Protogenes
dwelt, forbear to set it on fire, because he would not burn it among other
painted tables: and thus for to spare a picture, he lost the opportunity of
winning a town. During this strait siege and hot assault of Rhodes, it chanced
that Protogenes himself was at work in a little garden that he had by the
towns side, even as a man would say within the compass of Demetrius his camp.
And for all the fury of war and the daily skirmishes within his sight and
hearing, yet he went on still with his works that he had in hand, and never
discontinued one Demetrius warred against the Rhodians, and had no quarrel to
good Arts and Sciences. The king then (glad in his heart that it lay now in his
hand to save those things, which he had spared before, and whereof he had so
good respect) bestowed a very strong guard about Protogenes for his better
safety and security: and as great an enemy as he was to the Rhodians, yet he
used otherwhiles to visit Protogenes of his own accord in proper person,
because he would not eftsoons call him out of his shop from work: and setting
aside the maine point and occasion of lying before Rhodes, which was the
winning thereof, the thing that he so much desired; even amid the assaults,
Protogenes, and took great pleasure to see his work. By occasion of this siege
and hostility, arose this tale moreover of one table of his making, That all
the whiles he painted it, the dagger (forsooth) was set to his heart, and a
sword ready to cut his throat: and it was the picture of a Satyr playing upon
a pair of bag-pipes, which he called One at rest, or reposing himself. Some
read, Triptolemus.
Anapauomenos: by which name, as well as by the thing it self, he would seem
to signify, that he took but little thought and care during those dangerous
troubles. Moreover, he made the picture of lady Cydippe, and of * Tlepolemus:
he painted also Philiscus a writer of Tragoedies, sitting close at his study
meditating and musing. Also, there be of his making, a wrestler or champion,
Antigonus the king, and the Phaesti^.
mother of Aristotle the Philosopher, who also was in hand with Protogenes,
persuading him to busy himself in painting all the Alexander the Great, for
everlasting memorial and perpetuity: but the vehement affection and
inclination of his mind stood another way, and a certain itching desire to
search into the secrets of the art, tickled him, and rather drew him to these
kinds of curious works whereof I have already spoken. Yet in the later end of
his days, he painted K. Alexander himself, and god Pan. Over and besides this
flat painting, he gave himself greatly to the practice of founderie, and to
cast certain images of brass, according as I have already said.

At the very same time lived Asclepiodorus, whom for his singular skill in
observing symetries and just proportions, Apelles himself was wont to admire.
This Painter pourtraied for Mnason the foresaid king of the Elateans, the 12
principal gods, and received for every one of them Mnason gave unto
Theomnastus for painting certain Princes or Worthies, one hundred pounds
apiece.

In this rank is to be ranged Nicomachus, son and apprentice both to
Aristodemus. This Nichomachus pourtraied the rauishing of Proserpine by Dis or
Pluto: which picture stands in a table within the Chapel of Minerua in the
Capitol above the little cell or shrine of Iuventus. In the same Capitol,
another table there is likewise of his making, which Plancus (Lord General of
an army for the time being) had there dedicated and set up: the same does
represent Victory catching up a triumphant chariot drawn with four horses
aloft into heaven. He was the first that pourtraied prince Vlixes in a picture,
with a In token of nobility, as Pierius notes in his Hieroglyphics, (...)*
(...)
cap upon his head. He painted also Apollo and Diana: Cybele likewise the
mother of the gods, sitting upon a Lion: of his workmanship is the table,
Bacchus in their habit, together with the wanton Satyrs creeping and making
toward them. Semblably, the monstrous meermaid Scylla, which at this day is to
be seen at Rome within the temple of Peace. A ready workman he was, and you
shall not hear of a painter that had a quicker hand than he, at his work: for
proof whereof, this voice goes of him, That having undertaken for a certain
sum of money to Aristratus the tyrant of Sicyone, to paint a monument or tomb
which he caused to be made for Telestes the Poet, and to finish it by such a
day appointed and set down in the covenants of the bargain, he made no great
have to go about it, but came some few days before the expiation of the
prescript term for to begin the same work: whereat the tyrant was wroth, and
menaced to punish him for example: howbeit, he quit himself so well, and
followed his work with such wonderful celeritie, Aristides, his own son
Aristocles, and Philoxenus the Eretrian.

This Philoxenus made one painted table for Cassander the king, containing the
battle between Alexander the Great and K. Darius, which for exquisitart comes
not behind any other whatsoever.

With these may be sorted Nicophanes also, a proper, feat, and fine workman,
whose manner was to take out all pictures and paint them new again, thereby as
it were to immortalize the memory of things: a running hand he had of his
own, and besides, was by nature hasty and furious: howbeit, for skill and
cunning there were but few comparable unto him. In all his works he aimed at
loftiness and gravity: so that a man may attribute the stately port that is in
this Art,

As touching Perseus apprentice to Apelles, and who wrote a book to him of the
very art) he came far short both of his master and also of Zeuxis. As for
Aristides the Theban, who also lived in this age, he brought up under him his
two sons, Niceros and Aristippus. This Aristippus pourtraied a Satyr crowned
with a chaplet, and carrying a goblet or drinking cup: he taught Antonides and
Euphranor his cunning; of whom I will write anon: for meet it is to annex unto
the rest, such as have bin famous with the pencill in smaller works and less
pictures; among whom I may reckon Pyreicus, who for art and skill had not many
that went before him; and verily of this man, I wot not well, whether he
debased himself and bare a low sale, of purpose, or no? for surely his mind
was wholly set upon painting of simple and base things: howbeit, in that humble
and lowly Rhyparographus. Howbeit, such rude and simple toies as these were so
artificially wrought, that they pleased and contented the beholders, no thing
so much. Many chapmen he had for these trifling pieces, and a greater price
they yielded unto him, than the fairest and largest tables of many others.
Whereas contrariwise, Serapion used to make such great and goodly pictures,
that (as M. Varro writes) they were able to take up and fill all the stals,
bulks, and shops, jutting forth into the street under the old market place
Rostra; this Serapion had an excellent grace in pourtraying tents, booths,
stages, and theaters; but to paint a Dionysius was good at nothing else, and
therefore he was commonly called Anthropographus. Moreover, Callicles also
occupied himself in small works; and Calaces set his mind especially upon
little tables and pictures which were to set out comoedies and interludes; but
Antiphilus practiced both the one and the other; for he pictured the noble
lady Hesione, K. Alexander the Great, and Philip the king his father, with the
goddess Minerva: which tables hang in the Philosophers school or walkingplace
within the stately galleries of Octauia, where the learned clerks and gentlemen
favorers of learning, were wont to meet and converse. Within the galleries also
of Philippus, there are to be seen, the picture of prince Bacchus, the
pourtrait of Alexander in his childhood, and of Hyppolitus the young gentleman,
affrighted and astonished at the sight of a monstrous bull let loose and ready
Pompey, the counterfeits of Cadmus and Europa; all pictures of Antiphilus his
making. Of his handy-worke, there is a fool with his bell, cockscomb, babble, and
in other ridiculous habit, going under the name of Gryllus, devised for the
nones to make sport and pastime; whereupon all such foolish pictures be called
Grylly. Himself was born in Egypt, howbeit he learned all his cunning of
Ctesidemus. In this bed-roll of painters, I should not do well to pass over in
silence, the workman that painted the temple of Juno, at Ardea, especially
seeing that he was infranchised free burgeois of that city, and honored besides
with an Epigram or Tetrastichon, remaining yet to be read in the mids of his
pictures in these four Hexameter verses following;

Dignis digna loca picturis condecorauit,
Reginae Iunonis supremi conjugis templum
Marcus Ludius Elotas Aetolia oriundus;
Quem nunc, and post semper eb artem hanc Ardea laudat.
This stately Church of Juno Queen, with pictures richly dight,
Whom wife to mighty Jupiter, and sister, men do call;
Commends the hand of Mark Ludie, Elotas also hight,
Aetolian born: whom Ardea does praise, and ever shall.
These verses are written in antique Latin letters. By occasion of whose name,
I must not defraud another Ludius of his due praise and commendation, who lived
in the time of Augustus Caesar Emperor of happy memory: for this Ludius was he
who first devised to beautify the walls of an house with the pleasantest
painting that is in all variety, to wit, with the resemblance of manors,
farms, and houses of pleasure in the country, havens, vinets, floure-work in
knots, groves, woods, forests, hills, fish. pooles, conduits, and drains,
rivers, riuerets, with their banks, and whatsoever a man would wish for to see:
wherein also he would represent sundry other shows of people, Ludius devised
walls without doors, and abroad in the open air to paint Cities standing by
the sea side. All which kind of painting pleases the eye very well, and is
besides of little or no cost. Howbeit, neither he nor any other in this kind
(howsoever otherwise respected) grew ever to be famous and of great name, that
felicity they only attained unto, who used to paint in tables: and therefore
in this regard, venerable antiquity we have in greater admiration; for
painters in old time loved not to garnish walls for to pleasure the master only
of the house, ne yet to bedeck houses in that manner which cannot stir out of the
place, nor shift and save themselves when fire comes, as painted tables may,
that are to be removed with ease. Protogenes, as excellent a painter as he was,
contentented himself to live within a little garden in a small cottage, and I
warrant you no part thereof Apelles himself might well have the walls of his
house rough cast or finely plaistered, but never a patch thereof had any
painting: they took no pleasure, nay they had no lust at all to paint upon the
whole walls, and to work upon them from one end to another; al their skill and
cunning attended upon the public service of states and cities: and a painter
was not for this or that place only, but employed for the benefit indifferently
of all countries and nations.

But to return again to our particular painters: there flourished at Rome a
little before Augustus Caesar's days, one Arellius a renowned painter, but that
he had one notable foul fault that marred all and discredited his art; given he
was exceedingly to wenching, and sure he would be to have one woman or other
all times in chase: which was the reason he loved alife to be painting of
goddesses, which were ever drawn by the pattern of his sweet-hearts whom he
courted. A Amulius a Painter; he carried with him in his countenance and habit
gravity and severity; howbeit he loved to make gay and gallant pictures,
neither scorned he to paint the most trifling toies and meanest things that
were. The picture of Minerva was of his making, which seems to have her eye
full directly upon you, look which way soever you will upon her. He wrought
but some few hours of the day, and then would he seem very grave and ancient,
for you should never find him out of his gown and long robe, but very formal,
though he were close set at work and even locked as it were to his frame. The
golden house or palace of Nero caught up all the works he made, where they
remained as it were in prison, and never came abroad; which is the reason that
none Cornelius Pinus, and Actius Priscus, two Painters of good reputation, who
painted the temples of Honor and Virtue for Vespasianus Augustus the Emperor,
when he caused them to be re-edified: but of the twain, Priscus in his
workmanship came nearer to the painters of ancient time.

CHAP. XI.
The manner how to make Birds silent, and to leave their chattering and
singing. Who first devised with fire and pencill to enamel and paint the arched
roufes and embowed seelings of houses. The admirable price of pictures inserted
here and there among other matters.

SInce I have proceeded so far in the discourse of Painters and their art, I
must not forget to set down a pretty jest, which has bin reported by many as
touching Lepidus: It happened during the time of his Triumvirat, that in a
certain place where he was, the magistrates attended him to his lodging
environed as it were with woods on every side: the next morrow Lepidus Lepidus
should take his repose; the sight of which serpent thus painted so terrified
the birds, that they had no mind to sing, but were altogether silent. By which
experiment at that time, it was known afterward, that birds by this means
might be stilled.

As touching the feat of setting colors with wax, and Encaustice.
enamelling with fire, who first began and devised the same, it is not known.
Some are of opinion, that the invention thereof came from Aristides; and that
Praxiteles practiced the same, and brought to an absolute perfection. But
surely Aristides days; and namely by Polygnotus, Nicanor, and Arcesilaus of
Paros. Lysippus also in his painted tables that he made at Aegina used to
entitle them with this inscription, (...), i. Lysippus painted this with fire:
which verily he would never have done, if the art of painting with fire (called
Encaustice) had not bin before devised. Moreover, Pamphilus, master to Apelles,
is reported not only to have himself practiced this painting with vernish,
and to inamel by the means of fire, but also to have taught it unto Pausias the
Sicyonian, who was the first that excelled in this kind, and carried away the
name from all others in his time. This Pausias was the son of Brietes, and
apprentice also to his father in the beginning: he used also the plain pensil,
wherewith he wrought upon the walls at Thespiae; which having been in times
past painted by Polygnotus, were now to be refreshed and Polygnotus; and the
reason was, because he dealt in that kind of work which was not indeed his
proper profession. He it was that brought up first the device of painting
vaulted roufes; for never was it the manner to adorn and garnish embowed
seeling over head with colors, before his time. His delight naturally was to
be painting little tables, and therein he loved to portray little boys. Other
painters his concurrents, and no well-willers of his, gave it out, that he made
choice of this kind of work, because such painting went but slowly away, and
required no quick and nimble hand. Whereupon Pausias, to disprove his
adversaries, and withal to get himself a name, as well for celeritie and
expedition, as for his art and skill otherwise in these small pieces, began and
finished in a table the picture of a boy, within Hemeresios. In his youthful
days he fell in fancy with a woman in the same town where he dwelt, named
Glycera: a fine wit she had of her own, and especially in making chaplets and
guirlands of flowers, she was full of invention. Pausias by his acquaintance
with her, and striving to imitate with his pensill her handiworke, and to
express that variety of flowers which she gathered and couched together full
artificially in her Coronets, enriched his own pictures also with a number of
colors, and brought the art to wonderful perfection in that point. In the end
he painted Glycera also his love, sitting, with a Chaplet of flowers her hand:
and certes this is the most excellent piece of work that ever went out of his
shop: this table with the picture was thereupon called by some, Stephanoplocos,
i. [A woman] plaiting and twisting a guarland: by others, Stephanopolis, i.
Selling guirlands: for Glycera got a poor living by making chaplets, and had no
other good means to maintain her self. The counterfeit taken from this table
and made by it (which kind of pattern the Greeks call Apographon) L. Lucullus
bought of Dionysius a painter of Athens, and it cost him 781 lib. 5 ^h.
two talents of silver. Furthermore, this Pausias made fair and great pictures
also; and namely, one of his making which does represent a solemn sacrifice of
oxen, is to be seen at this day within the stately galleries of Pompeius: and
verily, this manner of painting the solemnity of Scaurus was Aedile at Rome, all
the rich tables which were in the public places of that city, whether in the
market steads, temples, or common halls, were seized upon and brought to Rome,
for to satisfy great sums of money wherein the Sicyonians stood indebted.

After Pausias, there arose one Euphranor the Isthmian, whom flourished about
the 104 Olympias, far surpassing all other painters of his time. This Euphranor
is he whom I have named among Theseus, of whom he was wont to say, That the
Theseus of Parasius painting was fed with roses, but this Theseus of his with
good flesh. There be excellent tables of his making at Ephesus, to wit, Vlyxes
feigning himself mad, and in that fit coupling an ox and a horse in one and
the same yoke: also diverse personages in their clokes and mantles after the
Greekish fashion, musing and in a deep study; likewise a captain putting up his
sword into his scabberd.

At the same time lived Cydias, he who in a table represented the i. Diverse
valiant knights, whoaccompanied prince Jason in his voyage to Colchos for the
golden fleece.
Argonauts, for which Hortensius the Orator was content to pay 144000
Sesterces. This picture he shrined in an Oratorie or chapel built of purpose
for it, in a house of pleasure that he had at Thusculum.

As for Antidotus, apprentise he was to Euphranor: of his handiwork there is a
picture at Athens Nicias the Athenian, who of all others painted women most
excellently. For lights and shadows in perspectiue he was excellent: also a
passing great care and regard he had so to raise his work, as that it seemed
to be embossed and higher than the board of his table: the pictures of Nemea,
which out of Asia were transported to Rome by Syllanus, and hung up in the
Senate house, as I have showed heretofore; of prince Bacchus, within the temple
of Concord; of Hyacinthus, which Augustus Caesar upon a special liking to it
brought with him to Rome, after Tiberius Caesar his successor, seeing what
affection Augustus Caesar had unto it in his life time, dedicated it in the
Temple of the said Augustus) and lastly of the goddess Diana, were all proofs
of his skill and workmanship. Moreover, at Ephesus the Sepulcher of Megabyzus
one of the Priests of the Order of Diana of Ephesus was of his painting: like
as at Athens, the necromancie of the Poet Homer. Nicias held at so high a
price, that he would not let it go unto K. Attalus for 60 talents, but chose
rather to bestow it freely upon his own native country, being otherwise a man
for his own private state very wealthy. Besides these before rehearsed, he made
others of a larger size, among which are reckoned Calypso, Io, and the lady
Andromeda. The excellent picture also of K. Alexander, which is in the gallery
of Pompeius, together with Calypso painted sitting, came out of his shop. The
perfect po^traying of fourfooted beasts is ascribed unto him; and in truth, a
singular grace he had and felicity in painting dogs. This is that Nicias of
whom Praxiteles gave so good testimony: for being asked upon a time, what
pieces he esteemed best of all those that himself had cut in marble? he
answered, Even those wherein Nicias has had a hand: so much did he attribute
unto his Circumlitioni: others read circumdu ctioni, i. the the first draught
or pourfiling.
vernish and polishing. Another Nicias there was, who lived in the Atheman of
Marona was taken for as good a workman every way as Nicias, and in some
respects better: he learned the art of Glaucion the Corinthian. In choice of
his colors he stood not so much upon gallantnesse, but used those that were
with the saddest; howbeit those dark and shadowed works of his showed more
pleasant and delectable than his masters: whereby appeared his profound
knowledge and deep skill, in the very laying and couching of his colors. The
picture of Philarchus he drew, which is in the Temple of Ceres Eleusine. The
frequent assembly also of the dames of Athens, which they call Polygynaecon,
was of his pourtraying: likewise he represented Achilles in his youth, hidden
under the habit of a young damsel, and how the crafty fox Ulysses discovered
and found him

As touching Heraclides the Macedonian, he also may run in the range of famous
Painters: ar the beginning he employed himself in painting ships: after that
King Perseus was taken prisoner, he left his native country and went to
Athens, where lived at that time Metrodorus, a Painter and Philosopher both, a
man of great name and authority as well in the one profession as the other:
and therefore when L. Paulus after the defeature of the said Perseus sent unto
the Athenians, and requested them to send unto him an excellent Philosopher to
teach and instruct Metrodorus only, and commended him alone unto Lucius
Paulus, for the best approved and most consummate to serve his turn and
satisfy both his desires: which by good proof and experience Paulus found
true, and gave judgment of him accordingly.

Timomachus the Byzantine flourished in the days of Caesar Dictatour, for whom
he painted Ajax and Medea: which pictures when he bought of him for 80
talents, he caused to be hung up in the temple of Venus This Saint Julius
Caesar honored most: for that he would seem to be descended from Iulus or
Ascanius, son of Aeneas, and nephew to Venus by Anchises.
Genetrix. Now when I speak of a talent, you must understand the Attick
talent, which M. Varro does value at 6000 deniers Roman. There goes as great
praise likewise and commendation of other pieces that passed from under the
hands of Timomachus, to Orestes, of Iphigenia in Tauris, and of Lecythion, who
taught youths dancing, vaulting, and other feats of actiuitie: he pourtraied
also in a table, a goodly race, descent, and kindred of gentlemen; two persons
besides in their clokes or mantles, after the Greekish fashion, ready to make a
speech unto the people, the one set, the other standing upon his feet: but it
seemed that art favored and graced him most in painting Minerva's shield, where
he portraied Gorgon or Medusa's head most lively.

Aristelaus was the son of Pausias, and under his father he learned the
mystery of painting, who is counted one of the greatest painters that ever
was. Of his workmanship are the tables containing the pictures of Epaminondas,
Pericles, Medea, Virtue, and Theseus. He also drew with his pensil in colors,
the common people of Athens, and a solemn sacrifice of Oxen.

There was also one Mechopanes, apprentise likewise unto the same Pausias, who
is highly commended

As for Socrates the painter, his pictures were liked very well of all that saw
them, and in truth, they deserved no less: for of his doing are these and such
like, to wit, Aesculapius, with his daugh Hygia, Aegle, Panacea, and I am not
of D^echampius his opinion, who takes Iaso here for the valiant knight Jason;
For the termination of the word is mere teminine as Io, I^o, Sappho, and such
like: besides, who sees not, that Iaso is respect ue to Physic, for that Jasis
in Greek signifies curing or healing, and it so sotteth well with the names of
her other sisters, which are likewise significant.
Iaso: and an idle lazy ^ubber, known by a devised name Ocnos, whom he
pourtraied twisting a cord of Spart, and ever as he did it, an ass behind him
gnawed it asunder. Thus much may serve concerning the principal painters that
have been known to excel in both kinds, to wit, with the pensill, and with
fire: it remains now that I should discourse of those who were next unto the
principal, and so reputed.

In this second course of painters I must range Aristoclides, who beautified
with his pictures the temple of Apollo in Delphos: as for Antiphilus, he is as
much praised for painting a boy blowing hard at the coals; in which table, it
is a pretty sight to see how all the house (which was fair enough besides)
shines by the fire that he makes, as also what a mouth the boy makes: likewise
Ptolomae hunting, and this they call i. (leuelling his shot at the Dear or
wild beast) ^s Dalecoampius does interpret it: or else according to Scalieer
(hol ding his hand over his ies to spy his game, and ^ake his mark the better.
Aposcopon, for which he is much commended: but principally for a brave Satyr
of his workmanship, clad in a Panthers skin. Aristophon woone much credit by
painting Ancaeus wounded to death by a wild bore, and his wife Astypale
standing hard by, who seems to lament for his sake, and (as it were) to feel
part of his pain: he made also one fair table, enriched with a number of
personages, to wit, K. Priamus, fair Helena, dame Credulity, Vlixes,
Deiphobus, and Dolori. Androbius got himself a great name by a picture,
representing one or (...), according to (...) Herod.
Scyllis [a cunning diver] cutting in two the anchor cables of the Persian
fleet, riding at sea. Artemon likewise was renowned for the counterfeit of lady
Danae, found floting in the sea raedonibus otherwise isca^oribus, i. fishermen
rouers or men of war, who seemed to wonder at her beauty, and to behold her
with much contentment: also for picturing queen Statonice: Hercules and
Deianira his wife: but the most excellent pieces of his work manship, be those
which are to be seen in the galleries of Octauia, among other of her stately
buildings; to wit, Hercules ascending up into heaven from the mountain Oeta
within the region of Doris, where he changed this mortal life, and by the
general consent of all the gods, was received into their society: the whole
history also of Laomedon, as touching his falsehood to Hercules and Neptune.
Alcimachus the painter was renowned for the picture of hardy Dioxippus, who for
he was the challenger and none would comeforth against him.
carried away the prize in all feats of actiuity, at the solemn games of
Olympia, and never sweat nor touched for at wrestling especially, they caught
up dust in their hands, to take hold the better of one another bodies, which
were glib with oil.
dust for it; which easy victory the Greeks Caenus, he was excellent at
painting Coronets and Garlands: also at drawing coats of arms in scutchions, of
gentlemen and noble persons, with the style of their titles and dignities.
Ctesilochus, an apprentice to Apelles, became very famous for one picture above
the rest, although it were but a wanton one and offensive to chaste eyes;
wherein forsooth he depainted Jupiter, attired in a caul or coife about his
head like a woman, groaning and crying out also (as women do in travel of
child birth) among the goddesses for their helping hand, who played the
midwiues about him, until he was delivered of god Bacchus, and brought to bed.
Cleon was much spoken of, for the picture which he made of K. Admetus:
Ctesidamus for pourtraying the winning of Oechalia by Hercules. And for drawing
the picture of lady Laodamia, the wife of Protesilaus, Clesides was notorious
for one picture which he made in despite of queen Stratonice, wife to K.
Antiochus, and to be revenged of her for a disgrace that he had received at her
hands: for Craterus was a Comoedian and plaier in Enterludes, howbeit, a fine
Painter, as may appear by his handy work at Athens, within the public place
Pompeium. Eutychides pourtraied a chariot Victory to guide and drive the same.
Eudoxus had the name for his pictures which are seen at stage-plaies, to
beautify the place: who also was a good imageur and cast many fair pieces in
brass. Iphis was well thought of for Neptune and Victory of his painting: and
Abron was no less esteemed for the pictures resembling Amity and Concord; as
also for the pourtraitures of the gods. Leontiscus pictured Aratus the General
of the Achaeans, returning with victory, and triumphing with his trophy. He
painted also a minstrel wench playing Leon, he painted Sappho the Poetresse.
And Nicaearchus was much bruited abroad, for a picture, showing Venus
accompanied with the Graces and the pretty Cupids. And of his workmanship is
Hercules, sad and pensive: penitent also and repentant, for that which he had
done in his furious madness. Nealoes made one picture of Venus most curiously:
for passing witty he was, full of invention, and exquisit in his art. When he
painted the nauall battle between the Egyptians and the Persians, which was
fought upon the river Nilus, the water whereof is rough and like the sea;
because he would have it known, that the fight was upon the said river, he
devised another by-worke to express the same, which all the Art of painting
otherwise could not perform: for he painted an Ass upon the bank, drinking
at the river, and a Crocodile lying Oenias the painter made one pictiure above
the rest, which he called Syngenicus. Philiscus became renowned by a painters
shop of his painting, where he devised a prentice boy blowing the coals to
kindle a fire. Phalerion pourtraied Scylla, transformed into a monstrous
Meeremaid. Simonides got credit by the picture of Agatharrhus, who won the
best game at running: and of the goddess of Memory, named Mnemosyne. Simus
took pleasure in painting a young boy lying asleep in a waulke-mill or Fullers
worke-house: another sacrificing unto Minerva at the feast Quinquatrus: and of
the same man's doing, there is an excellent picture of Nemesis, representing
Justice and Revenge. Theodorus drew one snetting his nose: and the same painter
represented in a table, how Orestes murdered his own mother Clytemnestra, and
Aegysthus the Adulterer that Philip at Rome. Of his handy-worke is lady
Cassandra the Prophetess, which is to be seen in the Chapel of Concord.
Also, Leontium the courtisane belonging to Epicurus and his followers, was of
his painting; like as king Demetrius musing and standing in a deep study. As
for Theon the painter, he described with his pensill the madness of Orestes,
and pourtrayed Tamyras the Harper or Musician. Tauriscus made one table,
representing a man flinging a coit: and another resembling queen Clytemnestra.
He pictured also a little Pan, whom he called Panniscus, in manner of an
Anticke: Polynices also making claim to his kingdom, and marching in warlike
manner to recover the possession thereof again: and last of all, signieur
Capaneus, who lost his life in skaling the walls of Thebes. And here comes to
my mind one notable example Erigonus, which I cannot pass with silence: This
Erigonus, servant sometime to Nealces the Painter, and employed only in
grinding colors, profited so much by seeing his master work, that he became a
Painter himself, and left behind him an excellent workman of his own
teaching, Pausias brother to Aegineta the Imageur. But one thing more there is,
of rare admiration and worthy to be remembered, That the last pieces of
excellent Painters, and namely such tables as be left imperfect, are commonly
better esteemed than those that be fully finished: as we may see by the
Rainbow or Iris which Aristides was entered into, the two brethren Castor and
Pollux, begun by Nicomachus; the Picture of Medea, killing the children that
she had by Jason, which Timomachus was in hand with; and the Venus, that as I
said before, Apelles lived not to make an end of: for in these and such like
imperfect tables, Aristonides, Anaxander, Aristobulus the Syrian, Arcesilas the
son of Tisicrates, Corybas Apprentice to Nicomachus, Carmanides to Euphranor,
Dionysodorus the Colophonian, Diogenes who followed the Court of King
Demetrius, Euthymedes, Heraclides the Macedonian, Mydon of Solae brought up
under Pyromachus the Imageur, Mnasithemus Mnasithemus the son of Aristonides,
who was Apprentice likewise unto him, and Nessus the son of Abron, Polemon of
Alexandria, Theodorus of Samos, and Stodius, (all three trained up under
Nicosthenes) and Xenon of Sicyone, who learned his Craft of Neocles.

Moreover, women there were also, excellent i. that knew how to handle the
pensill.
Paintresses, to wit, Timarete, the daughter of Nicon, who made that excellent
pourtraiture of Diana at Ephesus, a most antique picture: Irene Cratinus the
painter, who learned under her father, and drew the picture of a young damsel,
which is at Eleusine: Calypso, of whose workmanship there is the picture of an
old man, and of Theodorus the juglar: Alcisthene painted a dauncer: and
Aristarete, both daughter and apprentise to Nearchus, made proof how well she
had profited, by the picture of Aesculapius. And M. Varro says, That when he
was a young man, there was at Rome one Laela, a Cyzecene borne, who passed her
whole life in virginity; and she was skilful both in painting with the pensill,
and also in enamelling with hot steel in yuorie: her delight was principally
in drawing women; and yet there is a Neapolitane of her pourtraying in a fair
long table: last of all, she took out her own counterfeit at a mirroir or
looking glass. This one thing is reported of her, Sopylos and Dionyfius (the
most famous painters in that age) notwithstanding their pictures and tables
were so fair, as that they take up whole cabinets; and well was he (before that
her pictures came abroad) who could be furnished out of their two shops. There
was yet one paintresse more, to wit, Olympias: howbeit I hear no great matter
of her, but this only, that she taught Autobulus the art of painting.

To come now to painting by the means of fire: I find this agreed upon by all,
that practiced it was in old time but two ways only, that is to say, with wax,
and in yuorie with a little steel or punching iron; until such time as they
fell to pai^ting ships also with wax and fire: and in this third sort the
manner is to use great pensils or brushes dipped in wax molten over the fire: and

Moreover, iu Egypt they have a devise to stain cloths after a strange and
wonderful manner: They take white clothes, as sails or curtains when they have
bin worn, which they besmeare not with colors but with drugs that are apt to
drink and take color: when they have so don, there is no appearance in them at
all of any dye or tincture. These clothes they cast into a lead or cauldron of
some color that is seething and scalding hot: where, after they have remained
a pretty while, they take them forth again, all stained and painted in sundry
colors. An admirable thing, that there being in the said cauldron but only one
kind of tincture, yet out of it the

CHAP. XII.
The first deuisers of the art of Potterie, and in working in cley. Of Images
made of earth. Of earthen vessels, and their value in old time.

NOw that I have discoursed of painting enough, if not too much, it were good
to annexe and join thereto the craft of Potterie, and working out of cley. And
to begin with the original and invention of making the image or likeness of
any thing in cley, it is said, that Dibutades, a Sicyonian born, and a Potter,
was the first that devised at Corinth to form an image in the same clay whereof
he made his pots, by the occasion and means of a daughter which he had: who
being in love with a certain young man, whenever he was to take a long journey
far from home, used ordinarily to mark upon the wall the shadow of her lovers
face by candle light and to pourfill the same afterward deeper, that so she
might enjoy his visage yet in his absence. This her father perceiving, followed
those tracts, and by clapping cley thereupon, perceived that it took a print,
and made a sensible form of a face: which when he saw, he put it into the
furnace to bake among other vessels, and when it was hardened, showed it abroad.
And it is said, that this very piece remained in the bains of Corinth safe,
until Mummius destroyed the city. Howbeit, Rhoecus and Theodorus, both of the
Isle Samos, were the first inuentors of this feat of forming shapes in cley,
long before the expulsion of the i. The race of Bacchis, who for a time reig
ned at Corinth
Bacchiadae out of Corinth. And by their saying, when Demaratus was feign to
fly out of that city, and to retire himself into Tuscan (where he begat
Tarquinius, afterward syrnamed Priscus, and king of Rome) there accompanied
him from Corinth Eucheir and Eugramnus, two Imageurs in cley, and they taught
in Italy the art of Potterie and Imagerie in that kind. As for Dibutades
beforesaid, the inuentor he was not of his craft; but indeed he devised to use
with other cley and earth, a ruddle, or else to color the white cley with
madder. His invention it was to set up Gargils or Antiques at the top of a
Gauill end, as a finiall to the crest tiles, which in the beginning he called i
Moulds or patterns.
Protypa. The same man afterward devised other counterfeits, and those be
termed Ectypa: Plastica to the craft, and Plastae, to to the craftsmen in this
kind. But Lysistratus of Sicyone, and brother to Lysippus, of whom I have
written before, was the first that in plaster or Alabaster represented the
shape of a man's visage in a mould from the lively face indeed; and when he had
taken the image in wax, which the foresaid mould of plastre had given, used to
form and fashion the same more exactly. This man stayed not there, but began to
make images to the likeness and resemblance of the person: for before him
every man studied only to make the fairest faces, and never regarded whether
they were like or no. Lysistratus also invented to make counterfeits in cley,
according to the images and statues in brass, already made. And in the end,
this feat of working in cley grew to such Damophilus and Gorgasus were counted
most excellent and principal of all others, and they were good painters
besides; as may appear by the temple of Ceres in Rome, that stands at the
greatest shew-place, called Circus Maximus, which these two workmen enriched
both with pictures, and also with earthen images: for in the said temple there
be certain Greek verses set up, which testify, That all the work on the right
hand was wrought by Damophilus and on the left hand by Gorgasus. Before this
temple was built, M. Varro says, that all Rome was furnished with images, of
Tuscan work, and no other: but of this church, when it was re-edified, the
pictures upon the walls were esteemed so rich, that people thought them worthy
to be Chalcosthenes made diverse pieces of work in raw cley at Athens, and the
place called Ceramicos took the name of his workhouse. And M. Varro writes,
that himself knew at Rome a certain man named Posis, who was wont to make of
cley, clusters of grapes, and fishes, soliuely, that whosoever looked upon
them, could hardly have discerned them by the eye from grapes and fishes
indeed. The same author does highly extol and magnify one Arcesilaus, a very
familiar friend of Lu. Lucullus, and whom he loved very well, whose He means
those whereby images of brass were cast.
moulds were commonly sold dearer even Venus Genetrix, which stands in the
Forum of Caesar, was of his making: but before he had fully finished the same,
for haste of dedication, it was set up imperfect. After which time (as he
affirms) Lu. Lucullus bargained with him to make the image of Felicity, for
which he was to have threescore thousand Sesterces, howbeit, the death both of
the one and the other, was the cause that the work was never finished. As for
Octauius, a knight of Rome, being minded to make a fair standing cup, he paid
to him for the mould in plastre one whole talent. The same Varro praises also
Praxiteles, who was wont to say, that the craft of Potterie and working in
cley, was the mother of Founderie, and of all works that are cut, engraven,
chased and embossed: who, albeit he were an excellent founder and imageur in
brass, and knew how to carue, grave, and chase passing well, yet would he
never go in hand to make any piece of work, Tarquinius Priscus sent for one
Turianus, to no other purpose in the world, but to agree with him for to make
the image of Jupiter in earth to set it up in the capitol: for surely, no
better he was than made of clay, and that by the hand of a porter; which
Turianus also made the image of Hercules, which at this day retains still in
the city that name, which testifies what matter he is made of. Lo, what kind
of images there were in those days made in the honor of the gods by our
ancestors, for the most excellent! neither have we cause to be ashamed of those
our noble progenitors, who worshipped such and no other. As for silver and
gold, they made no reckoning thereof, either about themselves or the very gods
whom they worshipped: and verily, even at this day there continue still in most
places, such images of earth. As for the festiers and lanterns of temples, Numa
ordained at Rome a seventh confraternitie of potters. Over and besides, many
men there have bin of good worth and reputation; who would not be burnt to
ashes in a funeral fire after M. Varro took order for to be interred. And if
we look abroad into the world, most Nations under heaven do use these earthen
vessels: and even still, those that be made of Samian earth and come from that
Isle, are much commended for to eat our meats out of, and to be served to the
bourd: and Eretum here in Italy, retains yet the name for such vessel: but
for drinking-cups, only Surrentum, Asia, and Pollentia, within Italy; Saguntum
in Spain, and Pergamus in Asia, be in credit: at Tralleis also a city in
Sclauonia, and Modenna (to go no farther than Lombardie in Italy) there is
made much fair vessel of earth, appropriat unto those places: for even in
this respect, some nations are innobled and grown into name. This earthen Q.
Ceponius was condemned and fined for an ambitious man, only for this, because
he had sent an earth Vini amphoram: I suppose that he means the vessel it
self for wine, and not full of wine.
amphor [of wine] as a present unto one who was to give him his voice when he
stood for an office. And that you may certainly know that vessels of earth have
in some sort been in request among riotous gluttons and wastfull spend thrists,
listen what Fenestella says as Aristotle's goods, which his heirs made after
his decease, there were sold 60 platters, which were wont ordinarily to go
about the house. As for that one platter of Aesop the plaier in tragoedies,
which cost six hundred thousand sesterces, I doubt not but their stomachs rise
thereat when they read thereof in my treatise as touching birds. But this is
nothing (I assure you) to that charger of Vitellius, who whiles he was Emperor
caused one to be made and finished that Decies sestertium, according to
Budaeus; but if you read according to Hotomanus, ducenties, it is twenty times
as much more
million of sesterces, for the This platter be called, the targuet of Minerva,
and he got himself thereby a name to be called Patinarius. See Sueton.
making whereof there was a furnace built of purpose in the field; the which I
rather note, because they should see the monstrous excess in these days, that
vessels of earth should be more costly than of Cassidonie. Alluding to this
monstrous platter, Mutianus in his second Consulship (when he ripped up in a
public speech, the whole life of Vitellius, now dead) vpbraided the very
memorial of him in these very terms, calling his excess that way, Patinarum
paludes, i. platters as broad as pools. And verily (says he) that platter of
Vitellius, came nothing behind another, which Cassius Seuerus reproched
Asprenas withal, whom he accused bitterly, and said, that the poison of that
one platter had killed an 130 persons who had tasted thereof.

Furthermore, there are certain towns that are in good account by reason
only of this vessel

The priests of Cybele the mother of the gods, who are called Galli, use to
gueld themselves with a sheard of Samian earth; and they be of opinion, that if
it be done with any thing else, they shall die thereof, if we may believe M.
Caelius, who whetted that tongue of his (which shortly after was in that sort
to be cut out) against Vitellius; which turned to his great reproach and
infamy, for that himself even then railed upon Vitellius in so bad terms,
and lost his tongue for his labor.

But to conclude, what is it, that Art and the wit of man has not devised? for
there is a means found to make a strong kind of mortar or cement by the broken
sheards of potters vessel, if the same be ground into powder and tempered with
lime; and the ordering of it in this manner,

CHAP. XIII.
The variety of sundry kinds of earth: of the dust or sand of Puteoli: and of
other sorts of earth which will harden as a stone.

OVer and besides the cement above named, there be other percels that the earth
it self does afford, fit to be laid in pauing work: for who can sufficiently
wonder at this, namely, that it is so strong as to break the force of the
seawater and to beat back the waves, but to subdue and crush the bodies of our
young gentlemen, and therefore serves well in the public Patrobius, a slave
lately infranchised by Nero the Emperor. I read also, that Leonatus, Cratus,
and Meleager, who were great captains under Alexander the Great, and followed
his court, were wont to have this sand carried with them, with other baggage
belonging to the camp. But I mean not to write any more of this argument, no
more verily than of the use of earth in those places where our youth anoint
their bodies against they should wrestle; wherein our youths addict themselves
so much to the exercise of the body, that they have spoiled themselves
otherwise, and lost the vigor of the mind.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of mudwalls: of Brick walls, and the order and manner of making them.

WHat shall we say? See we not in Afric and Spain both, certain walls of
earth, which they call Some read fornacei, i, arched walls.
Formacei, of the form and frame that is made of planks and boords of each
side, between which a man may say they are rather infarced and stuffed up, than
otherwise laid and reared orderly; but I assure you, the earth thus infarced,
continues a world of years and perishes not, checking the violence of rain,
wind and fire, no mortar and cement so stiff and strong. There are yet to be
seen in diverse parts of Spain, the watch-towers of Anniball, the high turrets
and sconces also reared upon the tops of hills, made all of earth: and hereof we
have i. three foot long: and the third, Pentadoron, of three foot and nine
inches in length: for the Greeks in old time, called the span or space of the
hand from the thumb to the little fingers end stretched out, Doron; which is
the reason that gifts and rewards be called in their language, Dora, for that
they were presented by the hand. You see therefore, how according to the length
that they carry, either of four or five spans, they have their denomination
of Tetradora, or Pentadora; Jupiter and Hercules, although all the columns,
pillars, and architraues round about them, were of ashler stone: thus was the
palace of K. Attalus built at Tralle is; likewise that of K. Croesus at Sardis,
which afterward was converted to their Senat-house, named Gerusia: likewise the
sumptuous and stately house of king Mausolus Muraena and Varro when they were
the high Aediles at Rome, caused the outmost coat which was ouercast of the
brick-wals of Lacedaemon, to be cut out whole and entire, and to be set and
enclosed within certain frames or cases of wood, and so to be translated from
thence to Rome, for to adorn and beautify the public hall for elections of
Magistrates, called Comitium; and all for the excellent painting upon that
parget. The workmanship therein although it were excellent and wonderful in it
self, yet being thus removed and brought so far safe, it was esteemed more
admirable. Moreover, here within Italy the walls of Aretine and Meuania be made
all of brick: mary at Rome they dare not build their houses with this kind of
brick, because a wall bearing in thickness but one foot and an half, will not
sustain above one For by reason that Romewas so populous, they made many lofts
over head, so that the building was raised to 60 and 70 foot in upright walls
(...) and these served as ^enements, and were called Coenacula, and one pair
of stairs leading into the street, served them all: whereas the lord and master
of the house kept beneath with his household, and was not troubled with these
ten ants or in-mates.
single

CHAP. XV.
Of Brimstone and Alume, with their several kinds: also their medicinable
properties.

Having spoken sufficiently of Bricks, it remains that I should proceed to
other kinds of earth: wherein the nature of sulphur or brimstone is most
wonderful, being able as it is to i. by whole pieces and in mass, which their
Physicians do use, and none but it; for all the other kinds consist of a
certain liquid substance, and being boiled in oil are made up and confected
to their consistence: whereas the sulphur vif is dug out of the mine such

As touching the nature of Brimstone, so forcible it is, that if it be cast
into the fire, the very smell and steeme thereof will drive those in the place
into a fit of the falling sickness, if they be subject thereunto. As for
Anaxilaus, he would commonly make sport withal at a seast, and set all the
guests into a merriment: for his manner was to set it a burning within a cup of
new earth over a chafing dish of coals, and to carry it about the table where
they were at supper: mix it with sal-nitre, grind the same together with
vinegre, it makes a singular good liniment for to scour the foul morphew:
let the same be tempered and prepared with vinegar of Sandaracha,

The nature of Bitumen approaches near unto brimstone: where it is to be noted
in the first place, that the Bitumen whereof I speak, is in some places in
manner of a muddy slime; in others, very earth or mineral. The slimy bitumen
arises (as I have said before) out of a lake in Jury; as for the mineral
bitumen, it is found in Syria, about a maritime town upon the seacoast called
Sidon: but both the one and the other are of a compact and massy substance,
growing together fast and unite. And yet there is a kind of Bitumen liquid, and
namely that of Zacynthus, and the Bitumen which is brought from Babylon, where
verily it is white naturally as it grows. The Bitumen also which comes from
Apollonia is liquid: and all these the Greeks do comprehend under one name
Pissasphalton, a word derived of Pitch and Bitumen. There is a fatty kind of
Bitumen likewise resembling an vncteous or oleous liquor, within the territory
Hereupon it is an ordinary medicine, to give Mumia (which is Pissasphalto^)
unto those that are fallen from on high and be inwardly bruised.
cluttered blood which is within the therewith, it hardens them against the
violence of fire. I have said already, that they were wont

As touching Alume, which we take to be a certain salt substance or liquor
issuing out of the earth, there is no less use thereof than of bitumen, and the
emploiment is not much unlike. Of alume there be many kinds: in the Island
Cypress there is found alume which they call White, and another named Black:
and albeit the distinction in the color be but small, yet it is occupied to
far different uses; for the clear alume which they name the white, is proper
for to color wool with any bright tincture; contrariwise, the black serves
for sad, dark, and brown Some take this for Alume de plume: others, for the
stone Amiantus.
Schistos, and the nature thereof is to cleave along into certain filiments or
threads like hairs, of a greenish color; which is the reason that some have
given it rather the name of Trichitis: howsoever it be named, it comes of a
certain marquesit stone, whereupon also they call it Chalcitis; so as it may be
counted a very sweat of the said stone, gathered together or congealed into a
some. This kind of alume is exiccatiue; howbeit, not so good as the other to
repress any offensive humors in the body: but surely it is singular for the
ears, either infused, which (as I have said before) is brought out of the
Island Melos, and therefore called Melinum. Certes, there is not an Alume more
astringent, nor more proper to harden: none more firm and (...).
Greek. In regard of which stypticitie, they are all very good for the
accidents of the eyes. Alume incorporat with some grease or fat, is singular to
repress the flux of blood: very proper also for the red gum incident to
children: and in some sort staieth such ulcers as tend to putrefaction, yea, it
dries up the breaking forth of Papular^
wheales and pushes. With the juice of the Pomgranat, it is good for the
infirmities

CHAP. XVI.
Of the diverse sorts of earth, to wit, of Samia, Eretria, Chia, Selinusia,
Pnigitis, and Ampelitis, together with their medicinable properties.

FRom the Isle Samos there be brought two kinds of earth: whereof the one is
called by the Greeks Syropicon, the other Aster. As for the former, the
commendation of it, is to be fresh, light, and cleaving to the tongue: The
other, is white and of a more compact constitution: but both the one and the
other, before they be used, ought to be calcined and washed. Some there be who
prefer the former: but both be very good for those that spit blood. They
enter into emplaistres, which are devised and made for to exiccat: and they are
mingled also with eie-salues.

Touching the earth Eretria distinguished it is likewise by two kinds, for
some there is of it white, other of ash color: and this for Physic is held to
be the better. It is known to be good,

Among the sorts of earth that be medicinable, there is reckoned that which
comes from Chios, and the same is white, having the same effects that the
earth of Samos: but our dames use

The earth called Some read (...).
Pignitis, is very like unto Eretria beforenamed, only it is found in greater
clots or pieces, and otherwise is glutinous. The same effects it has that
Cimolia, howbeit, somewhat

There is an earth called Ampelitis, which resembles Bitumen as near as may
be. The trial of that which is good indeed, is, if in oil it be gentle to be
wrought as wax; and if when it is torrified, it continue still of a black
color. It enters into medicines and compositions, which are made to mollify
and discuss: but principally it serves to beautify the eie-browes, and to
color the hair of the head black.

CHAP. XVII.
Sundry sorts of chaulkes for to scour clothes, and namely the Tuckers earth
Cimolia, Sarda, and Vmbrica. Of the common chaulke:

OF Chaulks there be many kinds: of which, Cimolia does afford two sorts, and
both pertinent to Physic; the one is white, the other inclines to the color
of Roset. Both the one and the other is of power to discuss tumors, and to
stay distillations, if they be used with vinegar. They do keep down biles and
emunctories and swellings behind the ears: the foul tettars also, and other
offensive pimples and pushes they repress, applied in the form of a liniment:
incorporat therewith saltpeter, salnitre, and put vinegar thereto, it is an
excellent medicine to allay the swellings of the feet; with this charge, that
this cure be done in the Sun, and that after six hours, the medicine be washed
off with salt water. Put thereto the cerot Cyprinum, C. Flaminius and Lu.
Aemylius, when they were Censors, proposed unto the people for to be enacted;
so careful were our predecessors, to take order for all things. To come then
to the mystery of Fullers craft: First they wash and scour a piece of cloth
with the earth of Sardinia, then they perfume it with the smoke of brimstone,
which done, they fall anon to burling of it with Cimolia; provided always
that it be the right and have the native color, for if it be sophisticat, it
is soon known by this, that it waxes black, and will chaune and cleave, if
it come after sulphur: and if it be the true Cimolia, it does refresh and give
a cheerful hew to precious and rich colors, yea Publius, the deviser of
riming and wanton jestures upon a stage: such another was his cousin german,
Manilius Antiochus, the Astrologer; yea, and Taberius Erotes the excellent
Grammarian: whom all three, our great grandfathers saw in that manner brought
over in one and the same ship.

CHAP. XVIII.
Who they were in Rome, and of whom enfranchised, that of slaves rise to be
mighty, and of exceeding wealth.

But what mean I to stand upon those who had learning to commend and bring
them into some state of credit and honor? Have not the same forefathers of
ours seen in the like plight standing within a cage, with a mark of chaulke
upon their feet, and a lock about their heels, Chrysogonus the slave to
Sylla, Amphion to Qu. Catulus, Hero to Lu. Lucullus, Demetrius to Pompey, Auge
the bondmaid to Demetrius (though she was thought to be the base daughter of
Pompey,) Hipparchus the slave of Antonius, Menas and Menecrates of Sex.
Pompeius, and an infinite sort of others, whom I cannot reckon up? and yet they
all being by their masters enfranchised, Agrippina the Empress, wife to
Claudius Caesar) to decree unto enfranchised slaves, the robes of Pretours,
with the badges and ornaments to that dignity belonging; yea, and such to be
sent again as it were with the axes and knitches of rods decked with Laurel,
into those countries to govern, from whence they came at first poor slaves
with their feet chalked and marked for the market.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the earth of Galata, and Clupea: of the Baleare earth, and Ebusitana.

OVer and above those before rehearsed, there be other sorts of earth, having a
property by themselves, which I have named heretofore, but in this place I am
to set down their nature and virtues also. There is a kind of earth coming
out of the Isle Galata, and about Clupea in Affricke, which kills scorpions:
like as the Balearike and Ebusitane earth, is the death of other serpents.

THE XXXVI. BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF NATVRE,
WRITTEN BY C. PLINIVS SECVNDVS.
The Proem.
CHAP. I.
The natures and properties of Stones: The excessive expense in columns and
buildings of Marble.

IT remains now to write of the nature of stones, that is to say, the
principal point of all enormious abuses, and the very height of wastful
superfluities, yea though we should keep silence, and say nothing either of
precious stones and Amber, or of Crystal and Cassidonie. For all things else
which we have handled heretofore even to this Book, may seem in some sort to
have been made for man; but as for mountains, Nature had framed them for her
own self; partly to strengthen (as it were) certain ioints within the veins
and bowels of the earth; partly to ^ame the violence of great rivers, and to
break the force of surging waves and inundations of the sea; and in one word,
by that substance and matter whereof they stand, which of all others is most
hard, to restrain and keep Annibal, and afterward the Cimbrians, surmounted
the Alps: but now, even the same mountains we pierce through with picke-axe
and mattocke, for to get out thereof a thousand sorts of marble; we cleave the
capes and promontories: we lay them open for the sea, to let it in; down we
go with their heads, as if we would lay the whole world even, and make all
level. The mighty mountains set as limits to bound the frontiers of diverse
countries, and to separate one Nation from another, those we transport and
carry from their native seat: ships we build of purpose for to fraught with
marble: Vt bibatur glacie, for hey held Crystal to be a kind of ice.
ice. Now let every man think with himself what excessive prices of these
stones he shall hear anon, and what monstrous pieces and masses he sees
drawn and carried both by land and sea; let him consider withal, how much
more fair and happy a life many a man should have without all this, and how
many cannot choose but die for it, whenever they go about to do, or if I
should speak more truly, to suffer this enterprise: also, for what use else,
or pleasure rather, but only that they might lie in beds and chambers of
stones that forsooth are spotted, as if they never forbidding expressly, That
neither the kernelly part of a Bores neck, nor dormice, and other

CHAP. II.
Who was the first that showed Marble stones in Columns, or any public
works at Rome.

But some man happily might reply again upon me, and say: what need was there of
any such ordinance, considering there was no marble in those days brought in
from strange countries? M. Scaurus was Aedile, there were not fewer than 360
pillars of marble transported to Rome, for the front and stage of a Theater,
which was to continue a small while, and scarcely to be used one month to an
end: and yet no law there was to check and control him for it. But it may be
inferred again, the Magistrates winked hereat, because he did all this for a
public pleasure to the whole city, during the plays exhibited by him in his
Aedileship: marry that is it that I would have, What reason I pray you had
they so to do? By what means more do abuses and inormities creep into a
city or state, than by a public president given? for I assure you it was
nothing else but such examples at the first that brought those other things, I
mean, yvorie, gold, jewels, and precious stones, to be used by Scaurus,
because of the pastimes he did exhibit to the whole city; What, were they
silent also and made no words, when the said Scaurus caused the biggest of all
these columns (yea those that were forty foot high within twain, and the same
of Lucullean black marble) to be erected and placed in the court before his
own house in mount Palatine? And least any man should say, that this is done
in secret and hucker mucker, know he, That when these pillars were to be
carried up into the mount Palatine where his house stood, the Bailife that had
the charge of the public sinkes vaulted under the ground, dealt with Scaurus
for good security, yea, and demanded cautions and sureties for satisfying of

CHAP. III.
The first man who had at Rome for his own vs^, pillars of Marble brought from

NEither can it be alleged for excuse of this tolleration in Scaurus, that he
took the vantage and spied his time when the city of Rome was not ware of any
such matter toward, as having not been acquainted beforetime with the like, and
therefore he stale upon them with these superfluous pompes, as doubting nothing
less than such new devises, and therefore having no time to prevent and stay
them: for long before this, L. Crassus that great Orator, who was the first
that enriched his house (within the same Palatium) with pillars of outlandish
marble, although they were but of the Quarry in Hymettus hill, and neither more
in number than six, nor carrying in length above 12 foot apiece, was reproved
and reproched for this pride and M. Brutus, who among other hot words and
biting terms that passed interchangeably between them, taunted him by the name
of Venus Palatina. Certes, considering how all good orders and customs
otherwise were trodden under foot, wear to presume thus of our predecessors,
That when they saw other injunctions and prohibitions as touching diverse abuses
crept in, take no effect, but daily broken, they thought it better policy to
make no laws at all for restraint of Scaurus? But before that I enter farther
into this discourse of marbles and other rich stones, it shall be good to speak
somewhat of the men that have excelled in the cutting thereof, and whose
workmanship has carried the greatest price. First therefore I will go through
with the artificers themselves.

CHAP. IIII.
The first Imageurs that were in name for cutting in Marble, and in what ages
they flourished.

THe first that we read renowned for grauing and caruing in marble, were
Dipoenus and Scyllis, both Candiots borne: who during the Empire and Monarchy
of the Medes, and before that Cyrus began his reign in Persia, lived in great
fame; and that was in the fiftieth Olympias or thereabout. These men went
together unto Sicyone (a city, which I may truly say was for a long time the
very native country that brought forth the excellent workmen in all kinds of
metals and minerals.) It fortuned at the same time, that the magistrates of
Sicyone, had bargained with them for certain images of the gods to be made at
the public charges Apollo Pythius, to know what remedy for this calamity; and
this answer was delivered unto them from the said god, That according to their
petition, they should find means for to be eased of this plague, in case
Dipoenus and Scyllis had once finished the images of the gods, which they
begun: and this was performed accordingly, but with much difficulty, for they
were feign to pay whatsoever they would demand: they were glad also to pray
unto them with cap in hand. And what images might these be? Even Apollo,
Diana, Hercules, and Minerva: and this last named, was afterward smitten and
blasted with fire from heaven.

CHAP. V.
Of singular pieces of work, and excellent artificers in cutting and grauing
Marble, to the number of 126. Of the white Marble of Paros, and of the stately
sepulcher called Mausoleum.

LOng time before Dipoenus and Scyllis, there had been in the Island Chios one
Melas, a cutter and grauer in marble: after whom, his son Micciades succeeded,
and he likewise left a son Anthermus, of the said Isle, a cunning workman:
whose two sons Bupalus and Anthermus, proved also most skillful Imageurs. These
flourished in the days of Hipponax the Poet, who (as it is well known) lived
in the 60 Olympias. Now, if a man will calculate the times, according to the
genealogy of these two last named, and count backward in ascent no higher
than to their great grandsire, he shall find by the ordinary course of Nature,
that the art of cutting and grauing in stone, is equal in antiquity to the
original and beginning of the Olympiades. But to prove that these two, Bupalus
and Anthermus, lived in the days of Hipponax above named, recorded it is, That
the said Poet had a passing soul and ill-fauored face of his own: and these
Imageurs could find no better sport, than to counterfeit both him and his
visage; as lively as possibly might be in stone; and in a knavery to set the
same up in open place where merry youths met in knots together, and so to
propose him as a laughing stock to the whole world. Hipponax could not endure
this indignity, but for to be revenged upon these companions, sharpened his
style or pen against them, and so coursed them with bitter rimes and biting
libels, that as some do think and verily believe, being weary of their lives,
they knit their necks in halters, and so hanged themselves. But sure this cannot
be true, for they lived many a fair day after, yea and wrought a number of
Images in the Islands adjacent to Chios, and namely in Delos; under Anthermus
his two sons, who made so many fine and curious images. The Islanders also of
Iasus have to show the image of Diana, their handiworke: within the Isle of
Chios their native country, there was likewise another Diana of their making,
whereof there goes much talk, and which stands aloft in a temple there; the
visage of which Diana is so disposed, that to as many as enter into the place
it seems sad and heavy; but to them that go forth it appears pleasant and
merry. And in very truth there be certain statue at Rome of these men's doing,
to wit, those which stand upon the lantern of Apollo's Temple (...) the mount
Agustus Caesar Emperor ^f glorious memory erected. Moreover, their father
Anthermus left behind him certain images both in Delos, and also in the Island
Lesbos. As for Dipoenus, his works were rife in Ambracia, Ar^os, and Cleone,
in which cities a man should not see a corner without them. But all the race of
these, both father, grandsire, sons, and nephews, wrought only in white marble
dug out of the ^and Paros; and this stone men began to call Lychnites, that
is to say, the candle marble, not for the lightsome white color which it
carried (for many quarries were found afterward of whiter and brighter marble,
and namely of late days in those about Luna in Tuscane) but as Varro mine
Author says, for that the pioners undermined the ground for that stone, and
labored in hewing it continually by candle light. But here comes to my
remembrance a strange thing that Phidias, about the 83 Olympias, which falls
out to be By tursit evident, Olympias was but the space of four years
complete, although it be taken for five year.
332 ye^s after Malas the first grauer in stone of name. This Phidias [though
otherwise a paint^ ^t the beginning, and a caruer in Ivorie] was himself also
a grauer in marble, and the image of Venus, which now stands among the stately
buildings of Octavia, was (as they say) o^ his cutting, a brave piece of work,
and in beauty surpassing. This is known for certain, That Alcamenes the
Athenian, a most Venus most exquisitly wrought, standing without the wall of
the city, and is known by the name of Aphrodite Some read (...), id est,
without the city.
(...), [i. Venus in the gardens;] and as it is said, Phidias with his own
hands finished this Venus: who also had another prentise under him, named
Agoracritus of Paros, whom he loved also for his sweetly youth; in regard of
which affection it is said, that many brave pieces of his own handiwork he was
content should pass under his name, which he dedicated to the immortal
memory of Agoracritus. Now these two apprentises of his strove a-vie, whether
of them could make the statue of Venus better? and so it fell out, that
Alcamenes won the victory, not in regard of finer and more cunning
workmanship, but for that the city of Athens in favor Agoracritus, a stranger
and Parian borne: who took this repulse and disgrace in such displeasure and
indignation, that (by report) when he sold the said Venus of his own making,
he would by no means pass it away, but with this condition, That it should
never stand in the city of Athens; and withal he named it Nemesis [i.
Vengeance:] and therefore set up it was at Rhamnus, a village so called within
the territory of Attica. Which image of Venus, M. Varro preferred before all
other statues whatsoever. Within the foresaid city of Athens, and in the
chapel dedicated to the honor of Cybele the great mother of the gods, there
was another mostexcellent statue or image wrought by the hands of Agoracritus.

As touching Phidias, no man doubts but he was the most excellent grauer that
ever was, as all nations will confess who ever have heard of that statue of
Jupiter Out of yvorie: which when he had finished, being demanded after what
patt^ he had made the said imag^, and how h^we^t up into heaven for to take it
for^h? answered out of Ho^er, (...), etc. Il^ad. a. whereby he signified that
he had made him according as Ho^er the poet pourtraied and described him in his
verses.
Olympius, which his own hands wrought: but that all others also may know (who
never saw his work nor the statues that he made, that he well deserved the name
which went of him. I will lay abroad some small pieces Jupiter Olympius, which
he made at Olympia; no^ the stately statue of Surnamed Lemnia, because the
Lemnians dedi^ated it.
Minerva that he wrought at Athens, which car^ied in height 26 cubits and was
all made of Iuory and gold: but I will take the shield or targuet that the said
goddess is portraied with; in the embossed and swelling compass whereof he
ingraued the battle wherein the Amasons were defeated by [Theseus;] within the
hollow part and concauitie he in^hased the conflict between the gods and the
giants: upon the shoos or pantofles that she we^reth, he portraied the fight
betwixt the Lapithae and the Centaurs; so full compact of art w^ every thing
about her, and so curiously and artificially contrived. Now in the base or pied
^all under the statue, the work that was cut he called the Genealogy of
Pandora: A Victory, o^ admirable workmanship. Moreover, artificers that are
seen and skilful in these matters do grea^ly admire the fell serpent, as also
the monster Sphinx made in brass, under the very spear that M^nerua holds in
her hand. This may serve by the way in a word or two, touching that famous and
most renowned Artist Phidias, whom no man is able to commend sufficiently, that
it may be known likewise that the sufficiency of his workmanship was the same
still, even in small matters as well as great.

To come now to Praxiteles: what time he lived I have declared already in my
catalogue of Founders and Imageurs in brass: who albeit he was singular in
that kind, yet in marble he went beyond himself: his works are to be seen at
Athens, in that conspicuous street called Ceraunicum: Praxiteles only, but by
all the workmen that were in the world) his Venus passes that he made for
them of Gnidos: and in (...) exquisit and singular it was, that many a man has
embarked, taken sea, and sailed to Gnidos (...) other business, but only to see
and behold it. He made two of them, and sold them both toget^ the one with a
veil and arraied decently in apparel, which in that regard the men of Cos
bough^ for being put to their choice, they like honest men preferred it before
the other which was naked (^otwithstanding Praxiteles tendered them both at one
and the same price) in the good mind that they carried, and having respect and
regard unto their gravity and modest carriage of themselves: that which they
refused and rejected, the Gnidians bargained for: and indeed, to speak of
workmanship, it was infinitely better, and there was no comparison Nicomedes
would afterward gladly have bought it again of the Gnidians, and offered them
enough; for he promised in consideration thereof to discharge al debts that
their city was engaged in, which were very great sums; but they would not
give ear or hearken unto him: content they were rather to live in debt and
danger still, yea and to abide and endure any forfeitures, exigents,
executions, and extents whatsoever, than to part with their Venus. And to say a
truth, good reason they had so to do, for, that one image of Praxiteles his
making was their chief credit, innobled their city, and drew resort from all
parts thither. This Venus was shrined in a little chapel by her self within
a tabernacle; but of purpose so devised, that it might be set open on all
sides, for to be seen and viewed all and whole on every part: wherewith the
goddess her self (as men Venus, and having lurked one night secretly within
the chapel, behaved himself so and came so near unto the image, that he
left behind him a mark of his leaud love and beastly lust; the spot of which
pollution appeared afterward upon the body. In the same Gnidos there be diverse
other pieces more of Marble, wrought by excellent workmen; to wit, one god
Bacchus made by Brixiades, and another by Scopas, of whose handiworke there is
Minerua also: yet there goes no speech nor voice of any but only of Venus
abouesaid; than which, there cannot be a greater argument to prove the
excellency of Praxiteles his work; they all seem but foils, to give a luster
to his Venus. Of his making there is the picture of Cupid also, that Cicero
reproched Verres with; the same for whose sake there is such resort and
pilgrimage to Thespiae, and which stands now shrined within the Scholls:
certain galleries where learned me^ were wont to meet, and (either walking or
sitting) to discourse of learning, and to dispute. And yet there were other
Scholae: withdrawing places in baines, where those that came gave attendance
until there were room void by others going forth.
Schools of Octauia. He made also another Cupid all naked, for them of Parium,
a city within Propontis, howbeit in the nature of a colony governed by the
Roman laws, and owing service to their Venus at Tenedos, as well for beauty and
excellency of workmanship, as for the like abuse and villainy done unto it; for
one Alchidas a Rhodian loved this Cupid, and (a shameful thing to speak)
defiled both himself and it, like a most filthy and profaine villain.
Moreover, at Rome there be diverse pieces of Praxiteles his making, to wit,
Flora, Triptolemus, and Ceres, within the gardens of Servilius; the images of
Good-aduenture, and Good-fortune both, which are in the Capitol; also the
religious women of the order of Bacchus, to wit, the furious Maenades which
also they name Thyades: also the holy nuns or votaries called Caryatides; and
Silenus, standing amongst the Monuments and Books within the Library of
Asinius Pollio, together with Apollo and Neptune. Thus much may suffice to have
been spoken Praxiteles.

Praxiteles left behind him a son named Cephissodorus, who was his fathers
heir every way, as well of his excellent and singular cunning as his worldly
goods: of his handy work there is to be seen at Pergamus, a Sympleg^: this
may be meant of two wrestlers being at handygripes.
couple of little boys clipping, embracing, and kissing one another: a most
dainty and exquisit piece of work, and much spoken of and highly praised: a
man that saw them would verily believe and say, they dented with their fingers
into a body of flesh, rather than a statue of marble. At Rome there be images
that came out of his hand, to wit, Latona within the temple upon mount
Palatine, Venus within the library or monuments of Asinius Pollio, Aesculapius
and Diana in the temple of Juno, standing within the pourpris or quadrant of
Octavias galleries.

Scopas follows these in order of narration, but strives to match them in
praise of worthy workmanship: he engraued and wrought the images of Venus,
Pothos, and Phaeton, which three be honored among the Samothracians in all
ceremonious devotion, as right holy saints: likewise of Apollo, which stands
within mount Palatine: of the fiery goddess Vesta, sitting in a chair,
accompanied with two Cha^*
hand-maidens set upon the ground of each hand of her, which are to be seen
within the gardens of Seruilius: like unto which, there be other such Damsels,
and Lady Vesta, remaining within the monuments or Library of Asinius before
said: where also there is one Canephoros, to wit, a virgin bearing upon her
head a flasket of holy relics: all of Scopas his making. But of all that ever
he wrought, there is most account made of those images which are in the
chapel of Cneus Domitius, within the cirque of Flaminius, to wit, Neptune
Thetis, and her son Achilles; the Sea-nymphs or Meere-maides also called
Nereides, mounted upon Dolphins, Whales, and mighty Sea-horses called
Hippocampi, and sitting upon them: moreover, the sea trumpeters Tritones, with
all the quire and train attending upon sir Phorcus a Sea-god, and the mighty
fishes called Pristes, besides many other monsters of the sea: all wrought by
one and the same hand so curiously, that if he had sitten about the making of
them al his life time and done nothing at all else, a man would have thought it
work enough, and a great deed. But moreover and besides these above rehearsed,
and many more which we are not come to the knowledge of, we have here with us
at Rome the image of Mars made giant like after the manner of a colosse, yet
sitting within the temple of Brutus Callaicus, which stands close unto the said
cirque, in the way as men go from thence to the gate Labicana. In the same
Venus naked, and wrought by the hands of Scopas, which seems to go beyond
that other Venus of Gnidos that Praxiteles made; which image alone were able
(no doubt) to give name to any other city where it should stand, and to
innoble the place: But at Rome verily there be so many pieces besides, and
those so stately and sumptuous withal, that they obscure and darken it (as it
were) in some sort. Moreover, the exceeding great affairs and the busy
negotiations (whereof there is such a multitude and a world as it were in that
City) withdraw all men from the contemplation and beholding of such things,
be they never so singular: for to say a truth, it belongs rather to idle
persons to look and gaze upon these matters, and fitter for a place where there
is little or no stirring, but all quiet and silent: which was the cause that no
man knows who was the workman that made Venus, which Vespasian the Emperor
dedicated in the rampars and building of his temple of Peace: and yet if it
stood any where else than at Rome, it might seem nothing inferior in name to
the ancient works of old time. As little certainty there is likewise of that
image wrought in marble, which represents dame Niobe ready to die, together
with all her sweet children, and stands in the temple of Apollo syrnamed
Sosianus, whether Scopas or Praxiteles made it: no more than father Ianus,
which Augustus Caesar brought out of Egypt and dedicated in his own temple, is
known ont of whose shop it came; notwithstanding now it be gilded all over:
semblably, there stands in the courtly palace of Octauia, the image of Cupid
holding a thunderbolt or lightning in his hand, ready to shoot; but it is a
question who was the maker of him? And yet this is affirmed, That the same
Cupid was made by the lively pattern of Alcibiades, who at that age was held
to be the fairest youth that the earth did bear. In the same place, and namely
in the school or gallerie of learned men, there be many more images highly
commended, and yet no man knows who wrought them: As for example, four that
resemble Satyrs; of which, one seems to carry on his shoulders prince
Bacchus arraied like a girl in a side coat or gown; another likewise bears
young Bacchus in the same order, clad in the Semelle; the third makes as though
he would still the one Bacchus crying like a child: the fourth offers the
other a cup of drink to allay his thirst: furthermore, there be two images in
habit and form foeminine, representing gales of wind, and these seem to make
sail with their own clothes. As doubtful also it is, who made the images
within the railed enclosure in Mars field named Septa, which do represent
Olympus, Pan, Chiron, and Achilles; and yet so excellent pieces they be, that
men esteem them worthy to be kept safe, and satisfaction to be made with no
less than their death, under whose hands and custody they should miscarrie.
But to return again unto Scopas; he had concurrents in his time, and those
that thought themselves as good workmen as himself, to wit, Bryaxis,
Timotheus, and Leochares, of whom I must write jointly together, because they
joined all four in the grauing and cutting of the stately monument

This Mausoleum was the renowned tomb or sepulcher of Mausolus, a petty king
of Caria, which the worthy lady Artemisia (sometime his queen, and now his
widow) caused to be erected for the said prince her husband, who died in the
second year of the hundredth Olympias: and verily so sumptuous a thing it was
and so curiously wrought, by these artificers especially, that it is reckoned
one of those matchless monuments which are called the 1. The temple of Diana
in Ephesus. 2. The sepulcher of Mausolus. 3. The colosse o^ the Sun at R^odes.
4. The statue of Jupiter Olympias. 5. The walls of Babylon. 6. The Egyptian
Pyramides. 7. The obeliske of Semiramis. See Cael. Rhod. antiquar. lect. l. 23.
c. 6.
seven Wonders of the world: from North to South it carries in length, 63
foot; the two fronts East and West, make the breadth, which is not all out so
large; so as the whole circuit about, may contain four hundred and eleven
foot: it is raised in height five and twenty cubits, and environed with six
and thirty columns: on the East side, Scopas did cut; Bryaxes chose the North
end; that front which Timotheus; and Leochares engraued at the west side: but
Queen Artemisia (who caused this rich sepulcher to be made for the honor and
in the memorial of her husband late deceased) happened her self to depart this
life before it was fully finished: howbeit these noble artificers whom she had
set aworke, would not give over when she was dead and gone, but followed on
still and brought it to a final end, as making this account, that it would be
a glorious monument to all posterity, both of themselves and also of their
cunning: and in truth at this day, it is hard to judge by their handyworke, who
did best. There was a fifth workman also came in to them; for above the side
wall or wing of the tomb, there was a Pyramid founded, which from the very
battlements of the said wall was carried to the height of the building
underneath it: the same grew smaller still as the work arose higher, and from
that height Pythis for his part. Dalechampius suspecteth this place: but me
thinks a man may conceive, even by the very words of Pliny, that upon the
first pyramid of 2. cub its there was raised another spi^e which lessened by 24
degrees, (like as we may see in many steeples with us) and that might carry so
many foot, as being added to the rest, will make up the whole 140 from the
ground.
So that reckoning this chariot with the sharp spire, the Pyramid under it
unto the battlements, and the body of the sepulcher founded upon the bare
ground, the whole work arose to an 140 foot in height. But to come to some
particular works of Timotheus beforesaid: his hand wrought that statue of Diana
in marble which stands at Rome in the chapel of Apollo, situate in mount
Palatine: and yet the head belonging thereto, which now this image carries,
Aulanius Evander set unto it in place of the former.

As touching Menestratus, men have in high admiration Hercules of his making;
as also Hecate, which stands in a chapel at Ephesus behind the great
temple of Diana: the sextons or

I cannot range in a lower degree unto these, the three Charites or Graces,
which are to be seen in the Basse court before the Citadell of Athens, the
which Some take the for the wise Philosopher so famous.
Socrates made; I mean not Socrates whom I reckoned among painters, although
some think he was the same man. As for Myro (whom I commended for a singular
imageur in brass) there is in marble of his portraying and ingrauing, an old
woman drunken, which he made for them of Smyrna; a piece of work as much
esteemed and spoken of, as any other. And here I cannot but think of Pollio
Asinius, who (as he was a man of a stirring spirit and quick conceit) delighted
to have his library and monuments to be enriched with such antiquities as
these: for among them, a man shall see the Centaurs carry behind them upon
their croup, the Nymphs, which Archesitas wrought; the Muses named Thespiades,
of Cleomenes his cutting; Oceanus and Jupiter, done by the hand of Eutochus;
the statues on horse back resembling women called Hippiades, which Stephanus
wrought; Mercury and Cupid, called Hermerotes, the workmanship of Tauriscus (I
mean not the grauer, of whom I spoke before, but another Tauriscus of
Tralleis;) Jupiter syrnamed Xenius or Hospitalis, which came out of the hands
of Pamphilus an apprentice to Praxiteles: as for the brave piece of work, to
wit, Zetus, Amphion, Dirce, the Bull, and the bond wherewith Dirce was tied,
all in one entier stone, which was brought from Rhodes to Rome; it was done by
Apollonius and Tauriscus; these men made question of themselves, who should be
their fathers? professing in plain terms, that Menocrates was taken and
supposed their father, but indeed Artemidorus begat them, and was their father
by nature; and in the same place among other monuments, the statue of father
Bacchus made by Eutychides, is much commended. Moreover, near unto the
gallerie of Octauia, there is the Image of Apollo, wrought by Phyliscus the
Rhodian; and he stands Item, Latona, Diana, the nine Mu^es, and another
Apollo naked. As for that Apollo, who in the same temple holds in his hand a
harp, Timarchides was the workman of it; but in the precinct or cloister of the
said galleries, and in the chapel of Juno, there is the goddess her self
curiously made in marble, the handy work of Dionysius and Polycles; but the
image of Venus in the same place, Philiscus wrought: al other statues there,
came out of Praxiteles his hands. Moreover, Polycles and Dionysius, the sons of
Timarchides, made that Jupiter which is in the next chapel; the images of Pan
and Olympus, wrestling together in the same place, were the workmanship of
Heliodorus; and this is one of the fairest images coupled together as
wrestlers, that are known in the world; as for Venus, bathing her self, he
also made her; but Daedalus standing by, Polycharmus. As touching one piece of
work that Lysias made, it may appear Augustus Caesar late Emperor of happy
memory, to the honor of Octauius his father, dedicated it in mount Palatin
over the triumphant arch there, and placed it within a shrine or tabernacle
adorned with columns: but what might this work be? surely nothing else but a
chariot with four horses set unto it, Apollo and Diana, all of one entire
piece. Within the gardens of Servilius, I find there is great praise of Apollo
made by Calamis, that singular grauer in metal: the religious priests and
prophetesses also of Phoebus, called Pytheae, done by Dactylis: and
Callisthenes the Historiographers statue, wrought by Amphistratus.

Moreover, many cunning workmen there were, whose fame notwithstanding is
obscured, by reason that albeit many singular pieces and those unmatchable,
have passed through their hands, Laocoon, which remains within the palace of
Emperor Titus, a piece of work to be preferred (no doubt) before all pictures
or cast images whatsoever; and yet we know not whatone artificer to praise for
it. Agesander, Polydorus, and Athenodorus, Rhodians, most excellent workmen
all, agreed by one general consent to express lively in one entire stone,
Laocoon himself, his children, and the wonderful intricat winding of the
serpents, clasping and knitting them about: semblably, the houses Palatine of
the Caesar's, a man shall see fully furnished with right excellent statues,
which Craterus and Pythidoras, Polydectes and Hermolaus, another Pythodorus
also joined with his fellow Arthemon, wrought together; as also those that
Aphrodisius Trallianus alone himself, did cut. As for the temple called
Pantheon, which Agrippa built, Diogenes of Athens enriched it with marble
images. The Virgins also going under the name of Caryatides, erected upon the
chapters of the columns in that temple are commended, as few like unto them
for workmanship: like as the other images which Hercules, in the honor of whom
the Carthaginians were won every year to sacrifice the flesh of mankind, it is
an image not regarded; for he has no place in any temple or chapel, neither
is he erected upon pillar, no nor so much as upon a base, but stands upon the
bare ground, just ouer-against the entry to those galleries in Rome, called So
named, by occasion of the statues of 14 nations there erected, as appears a
little after.
Ad Nationes: howbeit, the workmanship of this Hercules is not to be despised.
There stood also beneath, the nine Muses called Thespiades under the temple of
Felicity, and as Varro says, one Iunius Pisciculus (by place a gentleman of
Rome) was enamored upon one of them, so beautiful they were made: and yet to
this day, Pasiteles cannot look enough thereupon, but has the same in great
admiration: Pasiteles was borne in the marches and coasts of Italy called
Graecia, and together with the towns of that tract, was made a Roman free
denizen; being himself also a good cutter in stone, he made that image of
Jupiter in Yvory which stands in the chapel of Metellus, in the way which
leads into [Mars] field. It happened upon a time, that being about the
Arsenall, where certain wild beasts were, newly brought out of Affricke, he
looked in at a grate to behold a lion and to take out the counterfeit of him;
but as he was ingrauing in stone according to the pattern, behold, out of
another cage a panther brake loose, to no small danger of that most curious and
painful workman: ^t is said, that he made many works; but in particular
which were of his doing, it is not precisely set down. Moreover, M. Varro
Arcesilaus, of whose handy-worke he says that he had a lioness in marble,
and certain winged Cupids playing with her: of which, some seemed to hold her
fast bound, others forced her to drink out of a horn others again would
seem to shoe her with their sockes; and all this pretty anticke work was of
one entire stone. The same Varro writes, that Coponius made the images of the
fourteen Nations, which are about the galleries or theater of Pompeius. I
find also by my reading, that Canachus (whom I commended for a good founder or
imageur in brass in my catalogue of such artisans) wrought in marble likewise
and cut many fair statues: neither is it meet, that Sauros and Batrachus
should be forgotten, who wrought the chapels that are within the close or
cloister belonging to the galleries of Octavia, notwithstanding they were
themselves Lacedaemonians borne. Some also are of opinion, For in Greek
Batrachos is a frog, and Sauros a lizard.
frog and a lizard, to represent thereby their own names. Moreover, I cannot
conceal from you one pretty thing to be observed, and which we all know to be
true, That in one chapel of Jupiter, all the pictures therein, as also all
the ceremonial service, thereto belonging, are respective altogether to the
foeminine sex: the which happening at first by mere chance, continued
afterward: for when the temple of Juno was finished, the porters who had the
carriage of the images ordained there to stand, mistook Jupiter; and
contrariwise those for Juno, into the chapel of Jupiter; which being once
done, was not altered again, but taken for a presage, and religiously ever
after kept, as if the very gods themselves had so ordered and appointed it, and
made a counterchange: which is the reason also, that in the foresaid chapel
of Juno, there is that kind of service which was meant for Jupiter.

To conclude, there have been certain workmen that have grown to great name,
by cutting and grauing in small pieces of marble; and namely, Myrmecides
devised to inchase in marble, a chariot and four horses, and a man to drive
the same, in so small a room, that a poor fly might cover all with her little
wings. As for Callicrates, he cut in stone the similitude and proportion

CHAP. VI.
When first began Marble stones to be used in building of private houses. Who
began at Rome to

THus far forth have I discoursed of the cutters and ingrauers of marble, and
of those excellent artificers, who have bin most renowned. In which treatise I
remember well, that the diapred and spotted marble all this while was of no
regard: for all the antique pieces which I have rehearsed, were made of the
marble of Thasos, of the Islands Cyclades, as also of Menander, who in his time
was most curious of all others in discussing all such superfluity, dealt first
therein, but seldom meddled he withal. Howbeit, true it is, that at length
pillars of marble were taken up to be used in temples, not upon any pride,
bravery, or magnificence (for as yet they knew not what such things meant) but
for that it was thought, that they could not be erected nor bear upon any
thing stronger: and in that manner was begun the temple at Athens of Jupiter
Olympias, out of which, Sylla brought those columns which served for his house
and palace in the Capitol. Howbeit, even in Homers time a difference there
was made between ordinary stone and marble: for this Poet says plainly, that
Paris caught a rap M. Cicero plays merrily upon them with a pleasant conceit;
for when they made show to all that came, and among the rest to him, what walls
they had built of marble, and seemed to take great pride in their sumptuous and
magnificent building; What ado is here (quoth Cicero) I would have marvelled
much more at your wall, and

As touching the manner of slitting marble into thin plates, therewith to cover
and seel as it were the outsides of walls, I wot not well whether the invention
came from Caria, or no. The palace of Mausolus K. of Caria, built at
Halicarnassus, is the antientest building that I can find in any record,
garnished, set out and enriched with marble of Proconnesus, notwithstanding all
the walls were reared of brick. This prince changed his life in the second year
of the 100 Olympias which fell out to be the 302 year after the foundation of
the city of Rome. As for our Romans, Cornelius Nepos writes, That Mamurra,
borne at Formiae, a gentleman of Rome, and sometime a Caesar in France, was the
first who covered all the walls throughout his house which he had upon mount
Coelius, with leaves of marble. Now when I speak of Mamurra, you must not be
offended, and think that I ascribe the invention hereof to a mean person; for I
tell you, this is that Mamurra, whom the Poet Catullus my country man of
Verona, so tanted and reviled in his verses; this is the man, whose house
before said, testifies better by proof and effect, than Catullus could by his
Poesy express, That he had laid upon it and gathered into it all the riches
of Gallia Comata: which was as much to say as all France, save only Prouance,
Languedoc, Sauoy, and Dauphine. And well it might be so, for Cornelius Nepos
before named adds moreover and says, that he was the first man, who caused
the pillars of his house to be of marble, and had not one of other matter,
neither were those slight and slender, but solid and massy, even hewn out of
the quaries either of Carystus or Lun^ M. Lepidus who was joined companion in
the Consulship to Catulus, was the first man known to lay the sils, lintels,
and cheeks of his doors thorowout his house with Numidian marble; being Consul
in the 666 year, reckoning from the foundation of Rome: but well shent and
rebuked he was for his labor. And verily, this was the first Numidian marble
Mamurra employed his Carystian marble, but in (...)
middle works, and in the basest of all, namely, in door sils, lentils, and
jambes. After this, Lepidus some four years, succeeded Consul L. Lucullus,
who, as it should seem by that which fell out, gave the name to Lucullean
marble, for that he was so much delighted therien: he brought it first to Rome,
and had a special fancy thereto, notwithstanding it were black otherwise:
whereas all other men esteemed better of other colored marble, or else spotted.
This marble grows in an Island lying within the river Nilus, and no marbles
(as many kinds as there be) took name of him that loved them, but it alone. But
among these men that were given to build with marble, M. Scaurus was the first
man, as I take it, that for the stage and forefront of his Theater, made
Jupiter Tonans in the Capitol hill, is at this day built) I am not able to say
for certain: for as yet I do not read or find by any sign, that Italy knew
how to slit marble into leaves. But surely, whosoever devised that invention,
to ^aw marble stone, and to slit it into leaves for to serve the turn of
riotous and wastful persons, had a perilous head of his own, and a shrewd. But
would you know the cast of slitting marble? It is done with a kind of sand, and
yet a man would think that it were the saw alone that does the deed; for when
there is an entry once made by a very small line or trace, they strew the said
sand aloft all the length there of: then they set the saw to it, and by drawing
it to and fro, the sand under the teeth thereof, makes way downwards still,
and so the stone, as hard as it is, they cut through in a trice: now for this

CHAP. VII.
Of Whetstones and Grindstones, coming out of Naxos and Armenia. Of diverse
kinds of Marble.

FOr polishing of statues and images made of Marble; for cutting, filing, and
trimming of precious

As for the sundry sorts of Marble and their colors, to discourse of them in
general, were needless, they are so well and easily known: and to reckon
them all in particular, were endless, Augustus and Tiberius were Emperors of
Rome, of whom they took their name. And albeit these marbles be flecked Here
Pliny remembers himself, and makes a third kind of O^bites as Dioscor. did
before him.
Egypt, named thereupon Memphites, it is of the nature of these Dios. says it
is no bigger tha^ a little pebble or grau^l stone
precious stones, rather than of quarries. The use hereof is to be ground into
powder, and with vinegar to be reduced into a liniment, for to be applied to
those parts that are to be cauterized or cut: for it so astonieth and benummeth
the member, that it feels no pain, either by the searing i^on or the
Chyrurgians lancet. The Porphyrite marble, which also comes out of Egypt, is
of a red color: of which kind, look which has white spots or streaks running
among, is called thereupon Leucostictos: And quarries there be in Egypt,
standing wholly upon this marble, which yield so sufficient, cut and Triarius
Pollio, Procurator general under Claudius Caesar, in the province of Egypt,
brought for the Emperor certain statues of this Porphyry, out of Egypt: which
new devise of his was not very well liked and accepted, for no man took
example by him afterward to do the semblable. The Egyptians also found in
Aethyopia another kind of Marble, which they call Basaltes, resembling iron as
well in color as hardness: and thereupon it took the name. The greatest piece
of this marble that ever was found, Vespasian Augustus the Emperor dedicated in
his temple of Peace, and it was a statue resembling the river Nilus, with 16
little children playing about it, whereby is signified the number of cubits, to
which height the said river rises when it is at the highest. It is said also,
that within the temple of Serapis in Thebes, a city of high Egypt, there is
another statue not unlike to this marble Bazaltes, Memnon; and by report, every
day at the Sunrising, so soon as the rays or beams do beat thereupon, it
seems to crack or cleave. As for or rather Onychite^ Cassido^ie
Onyx, our ancient writers were of opinion, That it was found in those days
upon the mountains of Arabia, and no where else: yet Sudines says, that it is
gotten in Germany. Cornelius Nepos affirms, That there was at first great
wonder made at the drinking cups of this stone: and afterward, at the feet of
tables and beds, of chaires and stools likewise thereof: howbeit, afterward
(quoth he) L. Lentulus Spinter showed at Rome wine vessels, as big as good
barrels, such as came out of the Isle Chios with wine: but within five year
after by his saying, he saw pillars also, and those 32 foot long, all of Onyx
or Chalcedonie. But in process of time this stone altered and varied much: for
Cornelius Balbus brought four small pillars thereof, and showed them in his
Theater for a Callistus, one of the infranchised slaves of Claudius Caesar (a
man well known for his exceeding riches and power) built for his own self.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the stone called Alabastrites: likewise, of Lygdinus and Alabandicus.

THis Onyx stone, or Onychitis aforesaid, some name Alabastrites; whereof they
use for to make hollow boxes and pots to receive sweet perfumes and ointments,
because it is thought that they will keep and preserve them excellently well,
without corruption. The same being burnt and calcined, is very good for diverse
plasters. This Cassidony or Alabaster is found about Thebes in Egypt, and
Damascus in Syria: and this Alabaster is whiter than the rest: Howbeit, the
best and principal simply is that which comes out of Carmania: next to it in

As touching the stones Lygdinus, found in the mountain Taurus, many are of
opinion, that they be well near as good as the former, for to keep odoriferous
ointments: and those for bigness and capacity, exceed not bowls and good broad
platters: passing fair and white they be: and in times past were wont to be
brought only out of Arabia. Moreover, there be two kinds Mitres, king of
Egypt, who held his royal seat and court in Heliopolis, the city of the
Sun; where he was admonished in a dream by a vision, so to do: and thus
much may appear by the inscription Hieroglyphicae
letters that the Egyptians use themselves. After him, other princes also set
up more of these Obeliskes in the above named city: and namely king Sochis for
his part, four in number, those carrying in length eight and forty cubits
apiece. And Ramises (in whose reign Troy was won by the Greeks) erected an
Obeliske forty cubits long, in the said city: but being departed from thence
(for that he took pleasure in another city, where sometimes stood the royal
palace of king M^evis) he pitched on end another Obeliske, which carried in
length (...), by the (...) An (...) signifi^n (...) eleven: but I take it, that
here it is put for vndecentenis: otherwise there was no proportion between the
height and the breadth. Nei^ (...) like that this proud prince, being removed
from his former seat (where he had erected Obeliske* threescore and twelve foot
high) unto another city which he loved better, would set up a monument of nine
or eleven foot, for his memorial, as may appear more in the next chapter.
a hundred foot wanting one, and on every side four cubits square.

CHAP. IX.
Of three Obelisks. The first of Thebes in high Egypt: the second of great
Alexandria in Egypt: and the third which stands at Rome in the large Cirque
or Shew-place.

IT is said, that Ramises abouenamed kept 20000 men at work about this
Obeliske. The King himself in person, when it should be reared on end, fearing
lest the engines devised to raise it, and hold the head thereof betwixt heaven
and earth, in the rearing should fail and not be able to bear that monstrous
weight; because he would lay the heavier charge upon the artificers Cambyses
had won the city where it stood, by assault, and put all within to fire and
sword, and burnt all before him, as far as to the very foundation and
vnderpinning of the obelisk, commanded expressly to quench the fire: and so in a
kind of reverence yet unto a mass and pile of stone, spared it, who had no
regard at all of the city besides. Other Obeliskes there be twain, the one
erected by K. Smarres, the other by E^aphius, both without characters, and the
same are 48 cubits in height apiece. At Alexandria, K. Ptolomaeus syrnamed
Philadelphus, set up another obelisk Nectabis had caused to be hewed out of the
quarry, plain without any work: but much more difficulty there was in carrying
it from the quarry, and setting it upright, than there had bin labor in the
hewing: some write, that Satyrus a great architect and enginer, conveyed it to
Alexandria by means of flat bottoms or sleds. But ^alixenus says, that one
Phaenix did the deed, who caused a trench to be cut from the river Nilus, and
to be carried with water as far as to the place where the obelisk lay along:
then he devised two broad barges, prepared and well fraught with small squares
of the same stone, a foot every way, to the double poise or weight of the
Obelisk it self in proportion, by reason whereof the vessels having their full
load, might come under the Obelisk just, as it lay hollow overthwart the head
of the fosse, with either end resting upon the banks: which done, he began to
discharge the vessels underneath, and Arsinoe his wife and sister both. But for
that it did hurt to the ship-docke there, one Maximus a governor of Egypt under
the Romans, removed it from thence into the market place of the said city,
cutting off the top of it, intending to put a filial thereupon gilded, which
afterward was forelet and forgotten. Two Obelisks more there were in the haven
of Alexandria near to the temple of Caesar, which were hewed out of the rock
by Mesphees king of Egypt, being 42 cubits Augustus Caesar the Emperor of
famous memory, had dedicated it unto the harbor or haven of Puteoli, there to
remain for ever as a miracle to behold, but it fortuned to be consumed with
fire: the other, wherein C. Caesar had transported the second Obeliske into the
river, after it had bin kept safe for certain years together, to be seen (for
that it was the most admirable Carrick that ever had bin known to flote upon
the sea) Claudius Caesar late Emperor of Rome caused it to be brought to
Ostia, where for the safety and security of the haven he sunk it, and
thereupon, as a sure foundation, he raised certain piles or bastions like
turrets or sconces, with the sand of Puteoli: which being Augustus Caesar late
Emperor erected in the great shew-place or cirque at Rome, it was first ^ut out
of the rock by Whom some take to be Amasis.
Semneserteus King of Egypt, in the time of whose reign Pythagoras soiourned in
Egypt; and the Mars field, being 9 foot lower than it, hewed and squared it was
by commandment from Sesostris K. of Egypt. In the characters engraven in both
of them a man may see all the philosophy and religion of the Egyptians, for
they contain the interpretation of nature.

CHAP. X.
Of that Obelisk at Rome which stands in Mars field, and serves for a Gnomon.

ANd as for that Obelisk which stands in Mars field, Augustus Caesar devised
a wonderful Manlius a renowned Mathematician and Astronomer, put unto the top
of the said Obelisk a gilded ball, in such sort, that all the shadow which it
gave fell upon the Obeliske, and this cast other shadows more or less,
different from the head or top of the Obeliske aforesaid. The reason whereof
(they say) was understood

CHAP. XI.
Of the third Obelisk in the Vaticane.

THere is a third Obelisk at Rome, standing within the cirque or shew-place of
the two Emperors C. Caligula and Nero: and this is the only Obeliske known to
have bin broken in the rearing. This was hewn and erected in Egypt by Nuncoreus
the son of Sesostris: which Nuncoreus caused another to be set up of 100 cubits
high, and consecrated it unto the Sun, after he had recovered his sight upon
blindness, being so advertised by the Oracle, which remains at this day.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Egyptian Pyramides, and of Sphinx.

Having thus discoursed of the Obelisks, it were good to say somewhat of the
Pyramids also in Egypt; a thing I assure you that bewraieth the foolish
vainglory of the Kings in that country, who abounding with wealth, knew not
what to do with their money, but spent it in such idle and needless vanities.
And verily most writers do report, That the principal motives which induced
them to build these Pyramides, was partly to keep the Common may appear by
the tokens remaining thereof. One of them there is within the territory under
the jurisdiction of Arsinoe; two within the province that lies to the
government of Memphis, Herodotus says, they were 250 foot high abouethe water,
and as many deep under.
Pyramides, the mighty spires and steeples whereof (by their saying) do arise
out of the very water. As for the other three which are so famous throughout
the world (as indeed they are notable marks to be kenned a far off by sailers,
and directions for their course) these are scituat in the marches of Afric
upon a craggy and barren mountain, between the city Memphis and a certain
Island or division of Nilus (which as I have said before) was called Delta,
within four Amasis was intombed; and they would bear us in hand, that the rock
was brought thither, all and whole as it is: but surely it is a mere crag
growing naturally out of the ground* howbeit wrought also with man's hand,
polished and very smooth and slippery. The compass of this rocks head
(resembling thus a monster) taken about the front, or as it were the forehead,
contains one hundred and two foot, the length or height 143 foot; the height
from the belly Herodotus, Euhemerus, Duris the Samian, Aristagoras, Dionysius,
Artemidorus, Alexander Polyhistor, Butorides, Antisthenes, Demetrius,
Demoteles, and Apion: but (as many as have written hereof) yet a man cannot
know certainly and say, This Pyramid was built by this king: a most just
punishment, that the name and authors of so monstrous vanity, should be buried
in perpetual oblivion: but some of these Historiographers have reported, that
there were a thousand and eight hundred talents laid out only for raddish,
garlic, and onions, during the Thales Milesius devised the means; namely, by
taking just length of a shadow when it is meet and even with the body that
casts it. These were the wonderful Pyramides of Egypt, whereof the world
speaks so much. But to conclude this argument, That no man should need to
marvel any more of these huge works that kings have built, let Rhodope, a
very strumpet: this Rhodope was a bondslaue together with Aesope a Philosopher
in his kind, and writer of moral fables, with whom she served under one master
in the same house: the greater wonder it is therefore and more miraculous than
all I have said before, that ever she should be able to get such wealth by
playing the harlot. Over and above the Pyramides abouesaid, a great name there
is of a tower built by one of the kings of Egypt within the Island Pharos, and
it keeps and commands the haven of Alexandria, which tower (they say) cost
800 talents the building. And here because I would omit nothing worth the
writing, I cannot but note the singular magnanimity of K. Ptolome, who
permitted Sostratus of Gnidos (the master workman and architect) to grave

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Labyrinths in Egypt, Lemnos, and Italy.

SInce we have finished our Obelisks and Pyramides, let us enter also into the
Labyrinths; which we may truly say, are the most monstrous works that ever
were devised by the head of man: neither are they incredible and fabulous, as
peradventure it may be supposed; for one of them remains to be seen at this
day within the jurisdiction of Heracleopolis, the first that ever was made, to
wit, three thousand and six hundred years ago, by a king named Petesuccas, or
as some think Tithoes: and yet Herodotus says, it was the whole work of many
KK. one after another, and that Psammerichus was the last that put his hand to
it and made an end thereof: the reason that moved these princes to make this
Labyrinth, is not resolved by writers, but diverse causes are by them alleged:
Demoteles says, that this Labyrinth was the royal palace and seat
Motherudes: Lycias affirms it to be the sepulcher of K. Moeris: the greater
part are of opinion, that it was an aedifice dedicated expressly and
consecrated unto the Sun, which in my conceit comes nearest to the truth.
Certes, there is no doubt made that Daedalus took from hence the pattern and
platform of his Labyrinth which he made in Crete; but surely he expressed not
above the hundredth part thereof, choosing only that corner of the Labyrinth
which contains a number of ways and passages, meeting and incountring one
another, winding and turning in and out every way, after so intricat manner and
so inexplicable, that when a man is once in, he cannot possibly get out again:
neither must we think that these turnings and returnings were after the
manner of mazes which are drawn upon the pauement and plain floor of a field,
such as we commonly see serve to make sport and pastime among boys, that is to
say, they call Nomos) and within the same are contained certain vast and
stately palaces which bear the names of the said jurisdictions, and be
answerable to them: besides, within the same precinct Nemesis, to which
goddess they be all dedicated: to say nothing of many Pyramides forty else in
height apiece, and every of them having six walls at the foot, in such sort,
that before a man can come to the Labyrinth indeed which is so intricat and
inexplicable, and wherein (as I said before) he shall be sure to lose himself,
he may make account to be weary and tired out: for yet he is to pass over
certain lofts, galleries, and garrets, all of them so high that he must clime
stairs of ninety steps apiece ere he can land at them; within the which, a
number of columns and statues there be, all of porphyrit or red marble, a world
of images and statues representing as well gods as men, besides an infinite sort
of other pieces pourtraied in monstrous and ougly ^hapes, and there erected.
What should I speak of other roums and lodgings which Alexander the Great, one
Circamnos (an eunuch or groom of K. Nectabis chamber) made some small
reparations here about this Labyrinth, and never

The Labyrinth in Lemnos was much like to them, only in this respect more
admirable, for that it had a hundred and forty columns of marble more than the
other, all wrought round by turners craft, but with such dexterity, that a very
child was able to weld the wheel that turned them, the pins and poles whereby
they hung were so artificially poysed. The master deuisers and architects of
this Labyrinth, were Zmilus, Rholus, and a third unto them, one Theodorus who
was borne in the same Island. Of this, there remain some relics to be seen
at this day; whereas a Porsena K. of Tuscane caused to be made for his own
sepulcher; and the rather, because you may know that foreign KK. were not so
vain in expenses, but our princes in Italy surpassed them in vanity: but for
that there go so many tales and fables of it which are incredible, I think it
good in the description thereof to use the very words of my author M. Varro:
King Porsena (quoth he) was interred under the city Clusinum in Tuscane, in
which very place he left a sumptuous monument or tomb built all of square
stone; thirty foot it carried in breadth on every side, and fifty in height;
within the base or foot whereof (which likewise was fouresquare) he made a
Labyrinth, so intricat, that if a man were entered into it without a bottom or
clue of thread in his hand, and leaving the one end Jupiter at Dodona: and yet
are we not come to an end of this building mounted aloft in the air, for this
cover over Varro was ashamed to report it: but if we may give credit to the
tales that go current in Tuscane, it was equal to the whole Which was 250
foot: so that the whole was 500 foot.
building underneath. O the outrageous madness of a foolish prince, seeking
thus in a

CHAP. XIIII.
Of a garden made upon Terraces. Of a city standing all upon vaults and arches
from the ground. And of the temple of Diana in Ephesus.

WE read moreover of gardens made in the air; nay it is recorded, that a
whole city Homer no doubt would have written of it, considering he has spoken
so much in the praise and commendation of this city, and especially of the
(...).
hundred gates that it had. But to speak of a stately and magnificent work
indeed, the temple of Diana in Ephesus is admirable, which at the common
charges of all the princes in Asia was In the sortith chap. of the 16 bo^ke, he
says 400.
two hundred and twenty years a building. First and Scopas: Chersiphron the
famous architect was the chief deviser or master of the works, and who
undertook the After the frame was made.
rearing thereof: the greatest wonder belonging thereto was this, How those
huge chapters of pillars, together with their frizes and architraues, being
brought up and raised so high, should be fitted to the sockets of their shafts:
but as it is said, he compassed this enterprise and brought it to effect, by
the means of certain bags or sacks filled with sand; for of these he made a
soft bed as it were raised above the heads of the pillars, upon which bed
rested the chapters, and ever as he emptied the nethermost, the foresaid
chapters settled downward by little and little, and so at his pleasure he
might place them where they should stand: but the greatest difficulty in this
kind of work, was about the very frontispiece and maine lintle-tree which lay
over the jambes or cheeks of the great door of the said temple; for so huge
and mighty it was, that he could not weld it to lay and bestow the same as it
ought, for when he had done what he could, it Chersiphron was much perplexed in
his mind, and so weary of his life, that he purposed to make himself away: but
as he lay in bed in the night season, and fell asleep all weary upon these
dumpish and desperate cogitations, the goddess Diana (in whose honor this
temple was framed, and now at the point to be reared) appeared sensibly unto
him in person, willing him to be of good cheer and resolve to live still,
assuring him that she her self had laid the said stone of the frontispice, and
couched it accordingly: which appeared true indeed the morrow morning, for it
seemed that the very weight thereof had caused it to settle just into the
place, and made a joint as Chersiphron would have wished it. As touching all
the other singularities belonging to this temple, and namely the gorgeous
ornament that set it out, they would require many volumes

CHAP. XV.
Of the proud temple in Cyzicum. The fugitive stone. The echo which resoundeth
seven times to one cry. Of a great building without pin or nail of iron. The
sumptuous and admirable aedifices in Rome.

THere is at this day a temple standing at Cyzicum, wherein the mason had
bestowed threads of gold in all the joints under every stone throughout, and
those were all fair polished: within this temple, prince Cyzicus (who caused
it to be built) minded to dedicat the image of Jupiter in yvorie, and of Apollo
in marble, setting a crown upon his head. Certes, these joints thus enterlaced
with most fine and dainty threads, gave a wonderful grace and beauty to the
whole Church, by sending and breathing (as it were) from them certain rays,
which by reuerberation

Within the said town there is a stone called the Fugitive and Runnaway: The
brave knights of Greece called Argonauts, who accompanied prince Jason in his
voyage for the golden fleece, after they had used it for an anchor, left it
there: but for that this stone was ready many times to run away and be gone out
of their Prytaneum (for so they call their public hall) they soudred it fast
with lead. In the same city near unto that gate which is called Thracia, there
stand seven turrets, which do multiply a voice, and send back many again for
one: this miraculous rebounding of the voice, the Greeks have a pretty name
for, and call it Echo. True it is, that this Horatius Cocles made the place
good against the power of K. Porsena.

And now since the coherence of matters has brought me to Rome, me thinks I
should not do amiss to proceed unto the miraculous buildings of this our
city, to show the docilitie of our people, and what proof there is of their
progress in all things, during the space of nine hundred years; that it may
appear how not only in magnanimity and prowess they have conquered the
world, but in magnificence also of stately and sumptuous buildings surmounted
all nations of the earth: and as a man shall find this singularity and
excellency of theirs in the Caesar Dictator, which took up of ground three
stadia or furlongs in length, and one in breadth containing also in aedifices
and roums four acres of jugera, wherein were bestowed to sit at ease and behold
the sight with pleasure, two hundred and threescore thousand persons: what
term shall I give, but of Stately and magnificent buildings, either unto the
royal palace of Paulus Aemilius, enriched with goodly pillars of Sinadian
marble out of Phrygia, most admirable to behold; or to the sumptuous Forum of
Augustus Caesar late Emperor, Peace built by the Emperor Vespasianus
Augustus, now living, the goodliest and fairest buildings that ever were? what
should I speak of the temple The round church of N^ster dame, now at Rome.
Pantheon, made by Agrippa to the honor of Jupiter Revenger? as also how before
this time, Valerius of Ostia the architector enginer, made a roufe over the
great Theater at Rome against the time that Libo exhibited his solemnity of
games and plays to the people? Wonder we at the dispences Julius Caesar
Dictatour disbursed for the purchase of that plot of ground only and no more
wherein he built his Forum, a H S. millies.
hundred millions of sesterces? And if there be any here that take pleasure to
hoord up money, and be loath to part with a penny, and love not to be at charges
and lay forth ought, will they not make a wonder when they hear that P. Clodius
(whom Milo slew) paid for the house wherein he dwelt, fourteen millions and
eight hundred thousand sesterces? surely if they do not, I do; and take it to
be as foolish an expense and as wonderful, as that of the KK. in Egypt above
named: likewise when I consider the debts that Milo himself ought, and which
amounted to seventy millions of sesterces, I count it one of the most
prodigious enormities that a man's corrupt mind can bring forth. But old men
marvelled even in those days at the mighty thick rampires Tarquinius Priscus
caused to be made, the huge foundations also of the Capitol that he laid, the
vaulted sinks also and draughts (to speak of a piece of work the greatest of
all others) which he devised, by undermining and cutting through the seven hills
whereupon Rome is seated, and making the city hanging as it were in the air
between heaven and earth, like unto Thebes in Egypt, whereof erewhile I made
mention; so as a man might pass over the streets and houses with botes. But
how would they be astonished now, to see how M. Agrippa in his Aedileship, after
he had been Consul, caused seven rivers to meet together under the city in one
main channel, and to run with such a swift stream and current, that they take
all before them whatsoever is in the way, and carry it down into Tyber: and
being otherwhiles increased with sudden shoures and land-flouds, they shake
the pauing under them, they flank the sides of the walls about Tarquinius
Priscus, almost eight hundred Tarquinius surnamed Priscus, caused their vaults
under the ground to be made, and forced the common people to labor hard thereat
with their own hands, it happened that many a good Roman citizen being now
ouer-toiled in this kind of work (which whether it were more dangerous or
tedious, was hard to say) chose rather to kill themselves for to be rid of
their irksome and painful life; in such sort, that daily there were people
missing, and their bodies found after they were perished. This king therefore,
to preueut farther mischief, and to provide that his works begun might be
brought to an end, devised a remedy At Rome.
afterward, and that was this, That the bodies of as many as were thus found
dead, should be hung upon jebbets, exposed not only to the view of all their
fellow citizens to be despised as cursed creatures, but also to the wild and
ravenous fowls of the air to be torn and devoured. The Romans (as they are
the only nation under heaven impatient of any dishonor) seeing this object
presented before their eyes, were mightily abashed; and as this mind of theirs
had gained them victory many a time in desperate battles, so at this present
also it guided and directed them: and being (as they were) dismayed at this
disgrace, they made account no less to be ashamed of such an ignominy after
death, than they now blushed thereat in their life. But to return again unto
these sinks and waterworks of ours under the ground: K. Tarquine aboue-named,
caused them to be made so large and of such capacity, that a good wain load of
hay might pass within them. But all that ever I have said already is nothing M.
Lepidus and Q. Catulus were Consuls at Rome (according as I find all the best
writers to agree) there was not a fairer and more sumptuous house in all Rome,
than that wherein Lepidus himself dwelt: but verily Lepidus, but also exceed
the same; as also the infinite number of other houses afterward even until this
day, which have gone beyond those hundred in sumptuosities: What would he say,
and to what an unmeasurable proportion will all this arise? Certes, it cannot
be denied, but fire (which burns many a stately palace) does say well to the
plucking down of man's pride, and punishing such wastfull superfluities; and yet
these and such like examples, will not reform the abuses that reign in the
world: neither will this lesson enter into our heads, That there is ought under
heaven C. Caligula, and Nero: and as for that of Nero (because there might be
nothing wanting of superfluity in the highest degree) he caused it to be all
gilded, and called it was, The golden palace. For why? those noble Romans who
were the founders of this our Empire, dwelt (no doubt) in such glorious and
stately houses; those I mean who went from the very plough tail, or else out of
their country cabines (where they were found at repast by the fire side) to
manage the wars, to atcheeue brave feats of arms, to conquer mighty nations,
and to return with victory triumphant into the city; such, I say, as had not
so much free land in the whole Puhlius, out of Livie.
L. Valcrius Publicola, the first consul that ever was at Rome, and had
companion with him in that government L. Brutus, who had no other reward in
recompense of his good service to the Commonweal, and so many demerits; as
also by his brother who in the same Consulship defeated the Samnites twice:
where it is worth the noting That they were allowed to open the gates of their
houses outward, so as the doors might be cast to the street side: this was in
those days the most glorious and honorable show that such men's houses made,
even those who had triumphed over the enemy. Howbeit, as sumptuous in this
kind, as either C. Caligula or Nero was, yet shall they not enjoy the glory of
this fame, though you put them two and two together: for I will show, that all this pride and excess of theirs in building their palaces (princes though
they were and mighty monarchs) came behind the private works of M. Scaurus:
Whose example in his Aedileship was of so ill consequence, as I wot not whether
ever there were any thing that overthrew so much all good manners and orderly
ciuility: in such sort, as hard it is to say, whether Sylla did more damage to
the state, in having a For Sylla married the mother of Scaurus
son in law so rich and mighty, than by the proscription of so many thousand
Scaurus when he was Aedile, caused a wonderful piece of work to be made, and
exceeding all that ever had been known wrought by man's hand, not only those
that have been erected for a month or such a thing, but even those that have
bin destined for perpetuity; and a theater it was: the stage had three lofts
one above another, wherein were there hundred and threescore columns of marble;
(a strange and admirable sight in that city, which in times past could not
endure six small pillars of marble, hewed out of the quarry in mount Hymettus,
in the house of a L. Crassus.
most honorable personage, without a great reproach and rebuke given to him for
it;) the base or nethermost part of the stage, was all of marble; the middle of
glass (an excessive superfluity, never heard of before or after;) as for the
uppermost, the bourds, planks, and floores were gilded; the columns beneath,
were (as I have said before) forty Pompeies Amphitheatre (notwithstanding the
city of Rome so much enlarged, and more peopled in his time) was devised for to
contain no greater number than forty thousand seats at large. As touching
Scaurus in rich hangings, which were cloth of gold: painted tables, the most
exquisit that could be found: plaiers apparel and other stuff meet for to
adorn the stage, there was such abundance thereof, that there being carried
back to his house of pleasure at Tusculum the surplusage thereof, over and above
the daintiest part, whereof he had daily use at Rome, his servants and slaves
there, upon indignation for this wast and monstrous superfluity of their
master, set the said country house on fire, and burnt as much as came to a
hundred millions of sesterces. Certes, when I consider and behold the monstrous
humors of these prodigal spirits, my mind is drawn away still from the
progress of mine intended iourny, and forced I am to digress out of my way,
and to annex unto this vanity of Scaurus as great folly of another, not in
masonry and marble, but in carpentry and timber: and C. Curio it was, he Caesar
and Pompey, lost his life in the quarrel of Caesar. This gentleman, desirous
to show pleasure unto the people of Rome at the funeral of his father
deceased, as the manner then was, and seeing that he could not outgo Scaurus in
rich and sumptuous furniture (for where should he have had such a father in law
again as Sylla? Where could he have found the like mother to dame Metella, who
had her share in all forfeitures and confiscations of the goods of outlawed
citizens? and where was it possible for him to meet with such another father as
M. Scaurus, the principal person of the whole city so long together, who
parted stakes with Marius in pilling and polling of the provinces, and was the
very receptacle and gulf which received and swallowed all their spoils and
pillage?) and Scaurus himself verily, if he might have had all the goods in
the world, could not have done as he did before, nor make the Curio, al things
considered, was put to his shifts, and devised to surpass Scaurus in wit,
since he could not come near him in wealth. And what might his invention be?
Certes, it is worth the knowledge, if there were no more but this, that we may
have joy of our own conceits and fashions, and call our selves worthily, as our
manner is, The Romans delighted much in this word Maiores, as may appear by
their More Maiorum, etc.
Majores, that is to say, superior every way to all others. To come then to C.
Curio, and his cunning devise, he caused two Theaters to be framed of timber,
and those exceeding big, howbeit so, as they might be turned about as their
image unto all mankind: hanging in the air within a frame at the mercy of one
only hook, rejoicing and ready to clap hands at their own danger. What a
cheap market of men's lives Curio Curio had all the people of Rome to perform a
brave skirmish and combat indeed to honor and solemnize the funerals of his
father before his tomb. And yet here is not all: for he was at his Curio was
able to do! And yet was he neither king nor Kesar: he was not so much as a
general or commander of an army; nay, he was not named for any great rich man:
as whose principal state depended upon this, That when the great men of the
city, Caesar and Pompey, were skuffling together by the ears, he knew Curio
and such as he was, with their foolish and idle expenses, let us come to the
miraculous works that Q. Marcius Rex performed, and that to some good purpose:
which if we consider and esteem aright, pass all the other before rehearsed.
This gentleman when he was Praetor, having commandment and commission both from
the Senate, to repair the conduits to the waters of Appia, Anio, and Tepula,
which served Rome, did not that only, but also conueighed a new water into the
city, which of his own name he called Martia: and notwithstanding that he was
to pierce certain mountains, and make trenches quite through them under the
ground, for to bring the water thither from the Spring, yet he performed all
within the time of his Pretourship. As for Agrippa, whiles he was Aedile,
besides the conduits from all other fountains which he scoured, repaired, and
caused to keep their current: C. Caligula Caesar, and finished by Claudius
Caesar his successor, passes for sumptuousness: for they commanded the
waters from the two fountains, Curtius and Caeruleus, whose heads were 40 miles
off: and these they carried before them Sestertiumter millies. howb^it Budaeus
reads quingenties, quinquagies, quinquies, and that is not much more than the
sixth part: and yet by his computation arises to a million three hundred
eighty five thousand and five hundred French crowns.
three hundred millions of sesterces. Certes, if a man would well and truly
consider the abundance of water that is brought thereby, and how many places it
serves, as well public as private, in baines, stews, and fishpooles, for
kitchins and other houses of office, for pipes and little riuerets to water
gardens, as well about the city, as in manors and houses of pleasure in the
fields near the city; over and besides, what a mighty way these waters be
brought; the number of arches that of necessity must be built of purpose for
to conueigh them; the mountains that be pierced and mined through to give way
together; with the valleys that are raised and made even and level with other
ground: he will confess, that there was never any desseine in the whole world
enterprised and effected, more admirable than this. In the rank of these most
memorable works of man, I may well raunge the Claudius Caesar, for to void
away the water out of the lough or mere Fucinus, although this work was left
unfinished for hatred of his Nero.
successor: which I assure you cost an incredible and inenarrable sum of money,
besides the infinite toil and labor of a multitude of workmen and laborers so
many years together, as well to force the water which came upon the pioners
from under the ground with devise of engines and windles up to the top of the
hill, whereas it stood upon mere earth; as to cut and h^w through hard regs
and rocks of flint: and all this by candlelight within the earth, in such sort
that unless a man had bin there to have seen the manner of it, impossible it
is either to conceive in mind or express with tongue the difficulty of the
enterprise. As for the peer and haven at Ostia (because I would make an end
once of these matters) I will not say a word thereof, nor of the ways Papyrius
Fabianus, a great learned Naturalist, namely, That marble does grow daily in
the quarries: and in very truth, the farmers of those quarries, and such as
ordinarily do labor and dig out stone, do affirm no less; who upon their
experience do assure us, that look what holes and caves be made in those
rocks and mountains, the same will gather again and fill up in time: which
if it be true, good hope there is, that so long as marbles do live, excess in
building will never die.

CHAP. XVI.
The sundry kinds of the Lodestone, and the medicines thereto depending.

NOw that I am to pass from marbles to the singular and admirable natures of
other stones; who doubts but the Magnet or Loadstone will present it self in
the first place? for is there any thing more wonderful, and wherein Nature
has more traveled to show her power, than in it? True it is, that to rocks
and stones she had given i. The echo.
voice (as I have already showed) whereby they are able to answer a man, nay,
they are ready to gainsay and multiply words upon him. But is that all? what is
there to our seeming more dull than the stiff and hard stone? And yet behold,
Nature has bestowed upon it, sense, yea and hands also, with the use thereof.
What (...) in Greek is iron.
Sideritis, others Heracleos. As for the name Magnes that it has, it took it
(as Nicander says) of the first inuentor and deviser thereof, who found it (by
his saying) upon the mountain Ida (for now it is to be had in all other
countries, like as in Spain also;) and (by report) a neat-heard he was: who,
as he kept his beasts upon the foresaid mountain, Sotacus ascribes and
sets down five sundry kinds of the lodestone: the first which comes out
of Aethyopia; the second, from that Magnesia which confineth upon Macedonie,
and namely, on the right hand, as you go from thence toward the lake Boebeis;
the third is found in

CHAP. XVII.
Of certain stones which will quickly consume the bodies that be laid therein.
Of others again that preserve them a long time. Of the stone called Assius,
and the medicinable properties thereof.

WIthin the Isle Scyros there is a stone (by report) which so long as it is
whole and sound Mutianus mine author affirms, that look what mirroirs,
Strigiles. He means those that be used in baines to fetch off the sweat and
filthiness of our bodies.
currycombs, cloth, or shoos soever be cast into the said coffins with the
dead, they will turn all into stone. Of this nature there be stones in Lycia,
and in the East countries, which if they be hung or applied to living bodies
also, will eat and fret them away. Yet the stone called Chernites, resembling
yvorie, is more mild and gentle: for keep it will and preserve dead bodies
without consuming Darius (they say) was bestowed Touching the stone called
Porus, like it is unto the marble of Paros for white color and hardness,
howbeit nothing so weighty. Theophrastus writes, That there be found in Egypt
certain clear and transparent stones, and those he says be like unto the
Serpentine marble Ophites: happily such there were in his time, for now are there
none of them to be found; but as they are gone, so there be new come in their
place. As for the stone Assius, in taste it is saltish, but singular good to
allay the pain of the gout, if the feet only be put into a trough or hollow
vessel made of that stone. Moreover, all griefs, pains, and infirmities of
the legs, will be healed in such quarries: whereas in all metal mines, the
legs take harm. Furthermore, this stone yields in the top of the quarrie a
certain light substance, apt to be reduced into a soft powder, which they call
the phthysicke: and tempered with honey, it heals up old ulcers and skinneth
them clean: and yet

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Yvorie mineral, dug out of the ground. Of stones that are of abonie
nature, and such, as their veins represent Datetrees within: and of other
kinds of stone.

THeophrastus and Mutianus above named, are verily persuaded, That there be
some stones Theophrastus, he affirms, That there is a mineral Yvorie found
within the ground, as well black as white: also, that there be bones growing
within the earth, yea, and stones of a bony substance. About Munda, a city in
Spain, where Caesar dictator defeated Pompey, there are found stones
resembling Date-trees, break them as often as you will. There be also certain
black stones, whereof there is as great account made as of marbles: like as the
stone also of the cape Taenara. And such black stones (Varro says) be more
firm and hard which come out of Africa, than those of Italy; and contrariwise,
that there be white stones harder to be wrought by the Turner, than the marble
of Paros: the said Varro affirms, that the flint of Luna may be slit with the
saw; whereas that of Tusculum will crack and fly in

CHAP. XIX.
Of Curalium or Pyrites, i. the Marcasin: and the medicinable virtues thereof.
Of the stone Ostracites, and the Amiant: together with the properties serving
in Physic: also, of the stone Melitites, and the virtues thereof. Likewise

THe millstone Curalium, some call Pyrites, because it seems to have great
store of fire in it: howbeit, there is another fire stone going under the name
of Pyrites or Marcasin, that resembles brass ore in the mine. And they say,
that of it there is found great plenty in the Isle Cypros, and in those mines
which are about Acarnania, where a man shall meet with one in color like
silver, and another like gold. These stones be calcined many and sundry ways:
some boil them two or three times in honey, so long, until all the liquor be
consumed: others burn them first in fire of coals, then they calcine them
with honey, and afterward wash them, after fire-stones, and of all others they
be most ponderous: these be most necessary for the espials

As touching the stones Ostracitae, they have a resemblance to oister shells,
whereof they took their name: used they are much in stead of a pumish stone to
smooth and slick the skin: taken in drink they stanch any flux of blood; and in
form of a liniment applied with honey, they heal the ulcers in women's breasts,
and assuage their pain.

The It is taken for Alume de plume.
Amiant stone is like Alume, and being put into the fire, loses nothing of the
substance: a singular property it has to resist all enchantments and
sorceries, such especially as Magitians do practice. As for Gaeodes, the Greeks
have given it this significant name, because it contains

The stone Melitites has that name, because if it be bruised or braied, it
yields from it a certain sweet juice in manner of honey: the same being
incorporat in wax, is good to cure the phlegmatic wheales, and other pushes or
specks of the body; it heals likewise the exulceration of the throat: applied
with wool, it takes away the chilblanes or angry bloudifalls called
Epinyctides: also the grief of the matrice it eases in the same manner.

The Get, which otherwise we call Gagates, carries the name of a town and
river both in Lycia, called Gages: it is said also, that the sea casts it up
at a full tide or high water into the Island of Leucola, where it is gathered
within the space of twelve stadia, and no where else: black If she drink it
fasting, presently it provoke urine, if she be a pure virgin.
maid or no: being boiled in wine, it helps the toothache; and tempered with
wax it cures the swelling glandules called the Kings evil. They say that
Physicians use this ^et stone much in their sorceries, practiced by the means
of red hot axes, which they call Axinomantia;

As for Spunges, I mean by them in this place certain stones found in Spunges,
and the same also do engender naturally within them. Some there be who call them
Tecolithos, because they are good for the bladder, in this respect, that they
break the stone, being drunk in wine.

As concerning the Phrygian stone, it bears the name of the country where it
is ordinarily found, and it grows in hollow lumps in manner of a pumish
stone: the order is to steep it well in wine before it be calcined, and in the
burning to maintain the fire with blast of bellows, until it wax red; then to
quench it again in red wine, continuing this course three times: and being thus
prepared, it is good only to scour cloth, and make it ready for the Dier to
take a color.

CHAP. XX.
Of the red Bloud-stone Hoematites, and the five sorts thereof: also of the
black sanguine stone called Schistos.

THe bloud-stone Schistos and Hoematites both have great affinity one with
another. As for the bloud-stone Hoematites, a mere mineral it is, and found in
mines of metal: being burnt it comes to the color of Vermilion: the manner of
calcining it is much after that of the Phrygian stone, but wine serves not to
quench it. Many sophisticate it with Schistos, and obtrude the one for the
other: but the difference is soon known, for that the right Hoematites has red
veins in it, and besides is by nature frail and easy to crumble: of wonderful
operation and being taken in wine, it is souerain against the sting of
serpents. In all these cases the bloudstone Sotacus a very ancient writer has
delivered unto us five kinds of bloud-stones, besides that Hoematites called
Magnes, or the Lodestone: among which he gives the chief prize and principal
praise to the Ethiopian, for that it is so souerain to be put into medicines
appropriat to the eyes; as also into those which for their excellent operation
be called Panchresta. A second sort he says is called Androdamas, black of
color, and for

CHAP. XXI.
Of the four kinds of the Aegle-stone, Aetius: of the stone Callimus: of the
stones Samnus and Arabus: and of Pumish stones.

THe Aegle-stones called Aetites be much renowned in regard of the very name
they carry: found they are in Aegles nests, as I have showed already in my
tenth book, and it is said that they be two together, to wit, the male and
female: also, that without them the Aegles cannot hatch, which is the reason
that they never have but two young Aegles at one airie. Of this Aegle-stone
there be four kinds; for one sort thereof is bred in Africa, and is very small
and soft, containing within it as it were in a womb, a certain clay which is
sweet, pleasant, and white; removed they must not be but at the very time of
deliverance, for otherwise the very womb or matrice would slip out withal;
and unless they be removed then, they shall never be delivered.

Touching the stone Arabus, like it is to yvorie; a proper thing for
dentifrices, if it be calcined and reduced to powder: a peculiar property it
has besides, to cure the haemorrhoids, being applied thereto in lint, so that
there be fine linen clothes laid afterward thereupon.

I must not ouerpasse in silence, the treatise of pumish stones and their
nature: I am not ignorant that in architecture and masonrie, they use to call
by the name of Pumices or Pumishes those hollowed stones or bricks as if they
were eaten into, which hang down from those vaulted buildings which they call
Musea, to represent a cave or hollow vault artificially made. But to speak
more properly of those Pumishes which are used by women for to smooth and
slicke Catullus says, the best of them are found in Melos, Scyros, and the
Islands of Aetolia: and those ought to be very white, and according to their
proportion exceeding light: the same should be also as spungious as is
possible, and dry without; easy to be beaten to powder, and in the rubbing
between the fingers not apt to yield from them any sand. As for their
medicinable virtues, they do extenuat and dry, after 3 calcinings, so that
regard be had in the torrifying, that it be done with clean charcoles that
burn clear, and that they be every time quenched with white wine: which done,
they are to be washed like to Cadmia or the Calamine stone; and being dried
again, they would be laid up in some dry place which is in any wise dank or
given to gather mouldinesse. Theophrastus writes, that great drunkards who
drink for a wager, use to take the powder of the pumish stone beforehand; for
then they may, nay they must quaffe lustily indeed, for unless they be filled
with drink, they are endangered by the foresaid powder. To conclude, he says,
that so exceeding refrigeratiue it is, that if

CHAP. XXII.
Of stones which be good for Apothecaries to make their mortars of: of soft
stones: of the glasse-stone: of flints and the shining stone Phengites: of
whetstones and grindstones: of other stones that serve in building, which
resist the violence of fire and tempests.

Our ancient writers in old time were careful to find stones fit for mortars,
and not only to serve Apothecaries for to beat and puluerize their drugs, or
painters to grind their third degree they place a kind of Chalazius named
Chrysites; but the Physicians make most

As touching * Talc (which also goes in the name of a stone) it is by nature
much more easy Specularis lapis
to be cloven into as thin flakes as a man will. This kind of glass stone, the
hither part of Spain only in old time did afford us, and the same not all
throughout, but within the compass of a 100 miles, namely about the city
Segobrica: but in these days we have it from Cypros, Cappadocia, and Sicilie,
and of late also it has been found in Barbary: howbeit, the best glass stone
comes from Spain and Cappadocia, for it is the tendrest and carries largest
pannels, although they be not altogether the clearest, but somewhat duskish.
There be also of them in Italy about Bononia, but the same be short and small,
full of spots also and joined to pieces of flint; and yet it seems that in
nature they be much like to those that in Spain be dug out of pits which
they sink to a great depth. Moreover, there is found of this Talc between
other Nero late Emperor, there was found in Cappadocia a stone as hard as
marble, white and transparent, and shining through, yea even on that side where
it has certain reddish streakes or spots: in which regard, (for that it is so
resplendent) it has found a name to be called Phengites: Of this stone, the
said Emperor caused the temple of Fortune to be built called Seia (which king
Seruius had first dedicated) comprised within the compass of Neroes golden
house: and therefore when the Iuba writes, that in Arabia there is a certain
stone found, which likewise shines as glass, whereof the inhabitants of those
parts do make their mirroirs or looking-glasses.

It remains now, that I should proceed to those stones which are by workmen
employed to good and necessary uses: first of all, to those which serve to whet
tools and instruments of iron, of which there be many sorts: Those of Candie,
for a long time were of greatest name and most in request: in a second degree
were those accounted which came from the mountain Targetus in Laconia: but
both the one and the other serve for no use, without oil. But among the
grindstones and whetstones which are occupied with water, those of Naxos were
in greatest price and most commended; next to them, those of Armenia, whereof I
have already written. The stones of Cilicia will do well enough either with water
or oil, it skills not whether: but the whetstones, that come from Arsinoe, are
only used with water. There be found in Italy whetstones, which with water
will give a wonderful keen edge; also beyond the Alps, and such they call one
with another. Moreover, to lay a wall artificially and to bind the stones well,
they ought in alternatiue

CHAP. XXIII.
Of Cisterns, and Lime: of sundry sorts of Sand: of the tempering of Sand and
Lime together for

FOr to make good cisterns which might hold water, the mortar that goes
thereto ought to be made of five parts of fine pure sand and grauelly together,
to two parts of the most strong and binding lime that may be gotten; provided
alwais that the fragments of flint which are to be employed herein, be small,
and exceed not the weight of one pound a piece: this done, not only the bottom
or pauing, but the side-walls and the ends, ought to be rammed down hard with
iron beetles: howbeit, for to keep good and clear water, it were the better
way to have always two cisterns together, that in the former the water may
settle and cast down all the grounds Cato Censorius disalloweth that which is
made of diverse stones, or of sundry colors: and to speak a truth, white
stones are better to make lime than the hard, and such is more meet to lay
stone withal in Masonrie; howbeit the lime which comes of hollow and
fistulous stones, is thought to serve better for to cover and parget walls. The
lime which comes of flint, is rejected both for the one and the other: also
the lime made of stones dug out of the ground, is far better than of
pebbles gathered from river sides: that which comes of milstones is most
profitable, for it is more fatty and glutinous than others. A strange and
wonderful matter it is, that any thing after it has bin once burnt and
calcined, should be set on fire again with water. And thus much of Lime.

As touching Sand, there be three kinds thereof: the one is dug out of pits
in the ground, and this requires a fourth part of lime to be put unto it in
making mortar: a second comes out of river sides or the sea shore, and this
would have a third part: and if there be besides another third part of
potsherds beaten to powder and put thereto, the stuff or mortar will be the
better. Between the Apennine hill and the river Po, there is no sand dug out
of the ground, ne yet any sea sand at all. And verily, the greatest reason that
cities fall to decay and be so ruinat, is this, for that the mortar being robbed
of the due proportion of lime, has not that binding as it ought, and so the
walls built therewith are not sodred accordingly. Also, this would be observed,
that mortar the elder that it is, the better it is found for building.
Moreover, in the old laws which provide for the perpetuity of houses in
ancient time, we find it expressly set down, that the undertaker to build a
house at a certain price, shall use no mortar under three years of age: and
this was the reason that in those days a man should not see any rough-cast or
parget to rise or chawne ill fauouredly as now they do: and in truth, unless
there be laid upon walls three coats or couches (as it were) of mortar made with
sand and lime, and two courses over them of other mortar made of marble grit
and lime tempered together, the walls will not be permanent nor otherwise fair
and resplendent as they ought to be: and look where walls be dampish and given
to sweat a certain salt humor or sal-petre, it were very well to lay a ground
underneath of mortar made of the powder of potsheards and lime wrought
together. In Greece they have a cast by themselves, to temper and beat in
mortars, the mortar made of lime and sand wherewith they mean to parget and
cover their walls, with a great wooden pestill. As for the mortar made gross
mass or lump. At Elis there stands a temple consecrated to the honor of
Minerva, Panneus, the brother of Phidias, used a parget (as they say) which he
tempered with milk and saffron together; and therefore at this day, if a man
wet his thumb with spittle, and rub it against the wall, he shall perceive both
the smell and taste of saffron to remain still.

As touching pillars in any building, the thicker they stand one to another,
the bigger and grosser they seem to be. Our architects and masons make four
sorts of them: for they say, that such pillars as bear in compass or
thickness toward the foot, as much as comes to the sixth part of the height,
be called Dorique: those that carry but a ninth part, are Ionique: such as have
a seventh part, be Tuscanique. And as for the Corinthian pillars, their
proportion is answerable to the Ionique; only this is the difference, that the
Chapters of the Corinthian pillars arise in height to as much as the compass
at the base takes up: in which regard they seem more slender Diana at Ephesus,
the invention was first practiced to pitch the footstall of pillars upon a
quadrant or square below, and to set chapiters upon their heads. And as
touching the proportion, it was thought sufficient in the beginning, if a
column contained in compass or thickness the eight part of the height; also,
that the square of the quadrant under the base, should contain half the
thickness of the pillar: finally, that the pillars should be smaller by one
seventh part in the head, than at the foot. Over and besides these pillars,
there be others also of the Atticke fashion, and those be made with four
corners, and the sides are equal.

CHAP. XXIIII.
The medicinable properties of Lime. Also, as touching the Maltha used in old
time, and of Plastre.

MVch use there is of Lime also even in Physic: but then there must be chosen
that which is quick and vnqueint. Such lime is caustic, discussiue, and
extractiue: the same also is proper to repress corrosiue ulcers that begin to
spread and run far. If the said lime be tempered with vinegar and oil of
roses, it makes an excellent healing plastre, which will skin up a sore clean.
The same if it be incorporat with swines grease or liquid rosin and honey
together,

Concerning Maltha, it was wont to be made of quick and new lime: for they took
the Limestone and quenched it in wine, which done, presently they punned it
with swines grease and figs; hereof they made ordinarily two couches: and being
thus tempered and laid, it was thought to be the fastest whitening that could
be devised, and in hardness to exceed a stone. But look whatsoever is to
bepargetted with this Maltha or mortar thus prepared, ought first to be rubbed
thoroughly with a size of oil.

Of near affinity to lime is plastre, whereof be many kinds: for there is a
kind of plastre artificial, and namely in Syria and about Thurium, made of
stone calcined in manner of lime: and there is of it that is dug out of the
ground naturally, as namely, in the Isle Cyprus, and about C. Proculeius, a
great fauorit and follower of Augustus Caesar, who in an extreme fit of the
pain of the stomach, drank plastre, and so killed himself wilfully.

CHAP. XXV.
Sundry kinds of paued floores: and when at first they began to be used at
Rome. Of open terraces paued. Of Greekish pauements. And the first invention of
arched or embowed roofes.

THe devise of paued floores arose first from the Greeks, who made them with
great art, and curiously, in regard of the painting in sundry colors which
they bestowed thereupon: but these brave painted floors were put down, when
pauements made of stone and quarrels came in place: the most famous workman in
this kind, was one Sosus, who at Pergamus wrought that rich pauement in the
common hall, which they call Asaroton oecon, garnished with bricks i. to ram
down hard. As for the manner of pauing with Jupiter Capitolinum, and not
before the third Punicke war begun. But ere the Cimbrian wars began, such
pauements were much taken up in Rome, and men took great delight and pleasure
therein, as may appear sufficiently by that common verse out of Lucilius the
Poet. Ante Pavimenta aeta emblemata vermiculata, etc.
Before the Pauements checker-wrought in painted Marquettry, etc.


As touching open galleries and terraces, they were devised by the Greeks, who
were wont to cover their houses with such. And in truth, where the country is
warm, such devises do well: howbeit, they are dangerous and deceitful, where
there is store of rain and frost. But for to make works, the invention began by
Syllaes time, who used thereto small quarrels or tiles at Preneste Fortune,
which pauement remains to be seen at this day. But in process of time
pauements were driven out of ground-floores, and passed up into chambers, and
those were seeled over head with glass: which also is but a new invention of
late devised: for Agrippa verily in those baines which he caused to be made at
Rome, annealed all the potterie work that there was, and enamelled the same
with diverse colors: whereas all others be adorned only with whiting: and no
doubt he would never have forgotten to have arched them over with glass if the
invention had bin practiced before, or if from the walls and partitions of
glass which Scaurus made upon his stage, as I said before, any one had
proceeded also to roof chambers therewith. But since I am fallen upon the
mention of glass, it shall not be impertinent to discourse somewhat of the
nature thereof.

CHAP. XXVI.
The first invention of glass, and the manner of making it. Of a kind of
Glass, called Obsidianum. Also of sundry kinds of Glass, and those of many
forms.

THere is one part of Syria called Phoenice, bordering upon Jury, which at the
foot of the mount Carmell, has a mere named Cendeuia; out of which the river
Belus is thought to spring, and within five miles space, falls into the sea,
near unto the colony Ptolemais: This river runs but slowly, and seems a
dead or dormant water, unwholesome for drink, the antique manner of making
glass. But now adays there is a glass made in Italy of a Tiberius the
Emperor, there was devised a certain It is said, that when a supplia^t to this
emperor came before him, and showed to him a glass whole and sound which had
bin of purpose broken before, he caused him pre sently to be put to death.
Cael. Rhodig. l. 20, cap. 30.
artificer who devised this, was put down, and his workhouse, for fear lest
vessels made of such glass should take away the credit from the rich plate of
brass, silver, and gold, and make them of no price: and verily, this bruit
has run current a long time (but how true, it is not so certain.) But what
booted the abolishing of glasse-makers, seeing that in the days of the Emperor
Nero the art was grown to such perfection, that two drinking cups of glass
(and those not big, which they called Pterotos) were sold for 6000 sesterces.

There may be ranged among the kinds of glasses, those which they call
Obsidiana, for that they carry some resemblance of that stone, which one
Obsidius found in Aethyopia; exceeding black in color, otherwhiles also
transparent: howbeit, the sight therein is but thick and duskish. Augustus
late Emperor of famous memory, who was wont to take pleasure in the thicknes of
this stone, insomuch as he dedicated in the temple of Concord for a strange and
miraculous matter, four Elephants made of this Obsidian stone. Also Tiberius
Caesar sent back again to the citizens of Heliopolis, a certain image of prince
Menelaus, found among the moveable goods of one who had bin lord governor in
Egypt, which he had taken away out of a temple, among other cerimoniall
relics: and the said statue was all of the Iaiet, called Obsidianus. And by
this it may appear, That this matter began long time before to be in use,
which now seems to be renewed again and counterfeited by glass that
Xenocrates writes, That it is found naturally growing among the Indians;
within Samnium also in Italy, and in Spain along the coast of the Ocean.
Moreover, there is a kind of Obsidian glass, with a tincture artificial, as
black as Iaiet, which serves for dishes and platters to hold meat: like as
other glass, red throughout, and not transparent, called for that color
Haematinon. By art likewise there be vessels of glass made white and of the
color of Cassidony, resembling also the Iacinct and Sapphire, yea, and any
other colors whatsoever. In sum, there is not any matter at this day more
tractable and willing either to receive any form or take a color, than glass:
but of all glasses, those be most in request and commended above the rest,
which be white, transparent and clear throughout, coming as near as it is
possible to Crystal. And verily, such pleasure do men take now adays in
drinking

CHAP. XXVII.
The wonderful operations of fire: the medicinable properties that it has;
and the prodigious significations observed thereby.

FIre receives sundry sorts of sand and earth, out of which it does extract
and melt one while glass, another while silver, in this place vermilion, in
that diverse sorts of lead and tin; sometime Painters colors, and another while
matters medicinable. By fire, stones are resolved into brass; by fire iron is
made, and the same is tamed likewise therewith: fire burns and calcineth
stone, whereof is made that mortar which binds all work in masonry. As for
some Empedocles and Hippocrates have testified in diverse places. M. Varro
writes, that fire is good for convulsions, cramps, and contusions Lix (quoth
he) is nothing else but the ashes of the hearth; and hereupon comes Lixivus
cinis, i. Lie ashes, which being drunk is medicinable; as we may see by fencers
and sword-plaiers, who after they have done their flourishing, and be ready to
enter into fight at sharp, refresh themselves with this potion. Furthermore it
is said, That a cole of oak wood being reduced into ashes and incorporat with
honey, cures the carbuncle, which is a pestilent disease, whereof two noblemen
at Rome, both Consuls in their time, died of late, according as I have showed
already. See the wonderful power in nature, that things despised and of no
account, as ashes and coals, should afford remedies for the health of man! But
before I make an end of fire, and the hearth where it burns, I will not pass
one admirable example commended unto us by the Roman Tarquinius Priscus king of
Rome, there appeared all on the sudden upon the hearth where he kept fire, out
of the very ashes, the genital member of a man, by virtue whereof, a wench
belonging unto Tanaquil the queen, as she sat before the said fire, conceived
and arose from the fire with child; and of this conception came Servius Tullus
who succeeded Tarquin in the kingdom. And afterward, while he was a young
child, and lay asleep within the court, his head was seen on a light fire;
whereupon he was taken to be the son of the domestical spirits of the chimney.
Which was the reason, that when he was come to the crown, he first instituted
the Compitalia, and the solemn games in honor of such house-gods or familiar
spirits.

THE XXXVII. BOOK OF
WRITTEN BY C. PLINIVS SECVNDVS.
The Proem.
TO the end that nothing might be wanting to this history of mine concerning
Natures works, there remain behind nothing but precious stones, wherein
appears her Majesty, brought into a narrow and straight room: and to say a
truth, in no part of the world is she more wonderful, in many respects;
whether you regard their variety, colors, matter, or beauty; which are so
rich and precious, that many make conscience to seal with them, thinking it
unlawful to engraue any print in them, or to diminish their honor and
estimation by that means. Some of them are reckoned inestimable, or valued at
all the goods of the world besides, insomuch as many men think some one
precious stone or gem sufficient to behold therein the very perfection of
Nature, and her absolute work. Touching the first invention of wearing such
stones in jewels, and how it took first root, and grew afterward to that
height as all the world is in admiration thereof, I have already showed in
some sort in my treatise of Gold and Rings. And yet I will not conceal from
you that which poets do fable of this matter, who would bear us in hand, that
all beg an at the rock Caucasus, whereunto Prometheus was bound fast, who was
the first that set a little fragment of this rock within a piece of iron,
which being done about his finger, was the ring, and the foresaid stone the
gemme: whereof the Poets make much foolish moralization.

CHAP. I.
Of ihe rich precious stones of Polycrates the Tyrant, and King Pyrrhus. The
first Lapidaries or Cutters in precious stones. And who was the first that had
a case of rings and gems at Rome.

PRometheus having given this precedent, brought other stones into great
Polycrates of Samos, the puissant prince and mighty monarch over all the
Islands and coasts thereabout, in the height of his felicity and happy estate,
which himself confessed to be excessive, being troubled in his mind, that he
had tasted of no misfortune, and willing after a sort to play at Fortunes game,
one while to win, and another while to lose, and in some measure to satisfy
her inconstancy, was persuaded in his mind that he should content her
sufficiently in the voluntary loss of one gem that he had, and which he set
so great store by: thinking verily, that this one hearts grief for parting
from so precious a jewel, was sufficient to excuse and redeem him from the
spightful envy of that mutable goddess. Seeing king, chanced to swallow it
down as if it had bin some bait; which being afterward caught by Polycrates!
This stone (as it is well known) was a Sardonyx: and if we may believe it, the
very same it is, which at Rome is showed in the temple of Concord, where
Augusta the Empress dedicated it as an oblation, enchased within a golden
horn: and verily if it be the same, one of the least Sardonyches it is among
many other there which be preferred before it.

Next to this stone of Polycrates, there goes a royal name of the gem which
Pyrrhus K. of Albanie had, him I mean, who warred against the Romans: for (by
report) an Agath he had, wherein a man might see the nine Muses, and Apollo
with his harp, lively represented, not by art and Ismenias a famous minstrell,
who had the name to wear many of them ordinarily about him, and those very gay
and glittering: and surely his vanity that way was such, that there goes a
notable tale of him; for meeting upon a time in a merchants hand with an
Emeraud in the Island Cyprus, wherein lady Amymone was engraven, and whereof the
price was at first held at six deniers in gold, he made no more ado but caused
the money to be paid presently: but the merchant being a man of some conscience,
and thinking indeed the price to high, gave two of them back again unto
Ismenias: Ismenias (as it is thought) was the first who brought up the order
that all such musicians and minstrels as himself, should be known by their
gems, and esteemed skillful in that art according as they were set out therewith
more or less. And in very truth, Dionysodorus a great minstrell, who lived in
those days with him, used likewise to be in his change and variety of precious
stones, because he would not seem any way to come behind Ismenias. There was a
third also as vain as the best, a musician in that age named Nicomachus, who
loved to have a number of gems about him, but no judgment he had in the world
to choose them. These examples which offer themselves by fortune to me in the
beginning of this my book, may serve to pull down their plumes who stand so
much upon the vain ostentation of these Polycrates his gem, at this day it is
to be seen within the temple of Concord, whole and sound. And not only in the
time of Ismenias, but also many years after, it should seem that Emerauds were
wont to be cut and engraven. This opinion also may be confirmed by the act and
edict of K. Alexander the Great, which forbad expressly, That no man should be
so hardy as to engraue his image in precious stone, but Pyrgoteles; who (no
doubt) was simply the best in that art. After him, Apollonides and Cronius were
of great fame: and principally one Dioscorides, who counterfeited in stone the
lively form of Augustus Caesar, the which served the Emperors his successors
as a signet to seal withal. Sylla Dictator was wont alwais to sign with a
seal representing K. Iugurtha, tied and bound as he was yielded to him. We
read in Chronicles Scipio Aemilianus slew in single fight, used afterward no
other seal but that which represented this combat: whereupon grew this merry
conceit of Stilo Praeconinus, who asked, What this Spaniard would have done if
his father had killed Scipio? Augustus late Emperor of worthy memory, used at
the beginning to seal with the image Sphinx upon his signet: and verily in the
casket of his mothers jewels, two of these he found so like one to the other,
that one could not be known and discerned from the other: and as he was wont to
wear one of them about him whersoeuer he went, so in his absence (during the
civil wars which he levied against M. Antonius) his friends who managed his
affairs at Rome, signed with the other Sphinx, al those letters and edicts
which passed in his name, for the performance of some demands which those times
did require. And from hence it came, Moecenas used to seal, was always
terrible to those who received any letters signed therewith; for evermore they
were sure upon the receipt of it to make some payment of impost or taxes levied
upon them. But Augustus Caesar, to avoid the obloquie that arose by his Sphinx,
gave over sealing therewith, and signed ever after with the image of K.
Alexander the Great.

As touching a cabinet or case for many rings and such jewels, which they call
by a sorreine Greek name Dactyliotheca, the first that ever was known to have
any such at Rome, was Scaurus, whose mother Sylla the Dictator married: and for
a long time there was no other besides; until Pompeius the Great met with the
jewel-casket of K. Mithridates, which among many other rich oblations, he
presented in the Capitol; and by the relation of M. Varro and other approved
authors of that time, it was much preferred before that of Scaurus: in
imitation of whose example, Caesar Dictator consecrated in the temple of Venus
Genitrix, six such like cabinets or caskets of rings and jewels: and Marcellus
son to Octauia, dedicated one in the temple Palatine of Apollo. Pompeius
which he achieved over K. Mithridates, set men's teeth at Rome a watering after
pearls and precious stones; like as the conquests obtained by L. Scipio and Cn.
Manlius, brought them into love with silver plate curiously enchased and
imbossed: also with rich hangings of cloth of gold, silver, and tissue,
together with beds and tables of brass; even as the brazen statues and vessels
of Corinthian brass, and the curious painted tables, came in request upon the
victory that L. Mummius gained over Achaea.

CHAP. II.
Of Iems and precious stones that Pompeius showed in his triumph. The nature of
Crystal, and

TO the end that it may appear more evidently, what the triumph of Pompey
wrought in this respect, I will put down word forword what I find upon record
in the registers that bear witness of the acts which passed during those
triumphs. In the third triumph therefore which was decreed unto him (for that
he had scoured the seas of pirates and rouers, reduced Natolia and the kingdom
of Pontus under the dominion of the Romans, defeated kings and nations, M.
Piso, and M. Messala were Consuls, on which day there was carried before him in
show, a chesse-boord with all the men, and the same bourd was made of two
precious stones, and yet it was 2. foot broad and 4 foot long: and lest any man
should doubt hereof and think it incredible, considering no jems at this day
come near thereto in bigness, know he, That in this triumph he showed a
golden Moon weighing thirty pounds, three dining-tables also of gold, other
vessel likewise of massy gold and precious stones as much as would garnish
nine cup-boords; three images of beaten gold representing Minerva, Mars and
Apollo; coronets made of stones to the number of three and thirty; a mountain
made of gold four square, wherein a man might see red dear, lions,
fruit trees of all sorts, and the Cn. Pompeius, whom regal majesty and
ornaments would have better beseemed; and that good face and venerable visage
so highly honored among all nations was now all of pearls; as if that manly
countenance and severity of his had been vanquished, and riotous excess and
superfluity had triumphed over him, rather than he over it. O Pompey, o
Magnus, how could this title and syrname Le-grand, have continued among those
nations, if thou had in thy first victory triumphed after this manner! What,
Magnus, were there Pompey once to wear about him) and therewith to pourtray
and counterfeit thy manly visage! And was this the way indeed to have thy self
seem precious? does not that pourtraiture come nearer unto thee and resemble
thy person far liker, which thou did cause to be That is to say, columns
and pillars, wherein were engraven the names of cities and nations subdued by
him in those voyages into Spain.
erected upon the top of the Piraenean hills? Certes, a foul shame Pompey made
of orient pearl, even the richest of the Leuant, should be so presented
without a body. But setting this aside, how manlike was all the rest of his
triumph, and how answerable to himself? For first and foremost, given freely
by him unto the chamber of the city, there were a thousand talents, secondly,
upon his leutenants and treasures of the camp, who had performed so good
service in defending the seacoasts, he bestowed two thousand Sestertia apiece:
thirdly to every soldier who accompanied him in that voyage, he allowed
fifty Sestertia. Well, this superfluity yet of Pompeies triumph, served in
some sort to excuse Caius Caligula the Emperor, and to make his Pompeies
precedent (I say) in some measure justified Nero the Emperor, who made of rich
and fair great pearls, the scepters and maces, the visors also and maskes
which players used upon the stage, yea and the very bed-roumes which went with
him as he travailed by the way: So as we seem now to have lost that vantage
and right which we had to find fault with drinking-cups enriched with pearls,
yea and much other household stuff and implements garnished therewith, since
that wheresoever we go from one end of the house to the other, we seem to pass
through rings, or such jewels at leastwise which were wont to beautify our
fingers only: for is there any superfluity else, but in regard and comparison
hereof it may seem more tolerable Pompey: this victory of his, brought into
Rome first our cups and other vessels of Cassidoine; and Pompey himself was
the first who that very day of his triumph presented unto Jupiter Capitolinus,
six such cups: and presently from that time forward men also began to have a
mind unto them, in cupbourds, counting tables, yea and in vessel for the
kitchen, and to serve up meat in: and verily, from day to day the excess
herein has so far ouergrowne, that one great Cassidoine cup has been sold for
Octoginta sestertijs: where you must think that he uses sestertium in the
neuter gender, which is a thousand s^stertij: for otherwise 80 sesterces come
but to 20 deniers Roman, and that is about 12 sh 6 d. sterling: too much under
the price of such a jewel: and yet some read for sestertiis, [talentis] and
that is as much above the proportion, for one talent was esteemed at ^000
sesterces.
fourscore sesterces, but a fair and large one it was, and would contain
well three sextars [id est, half a wine gallon.] There are not many years
past, since that a noble man who had been Consul of Rome, used to drink out
of this cup; and notwithstanding that in pledging upon a time a lady whom he
fancied, he bit out a piece of the brim thereof (which her sweet lips touched)
Nero Domitius took away perforce from his children: and in truth, such a
number there were of them, that being set out to the show, they were sufficient
to furnish and take up a peculiar theater, which of purpose he caused to be
made beyond the Tyber in the gardens there: and enough it was for Nero to
behold the said theater replenished with people at the plays which he
exhibited there in honor of his wife the Empress Poppaea, after one childbed
of hers, where among other musicians, he sung voluntary upon the stage before
the plays Alexander the Great his corpse to be laid solemnly in his sepulcher;
and herein he pleased himself not a little. Titus Petronius, late Consul of
Rome, when he lay at the point of death, called for a fair broad-mouthed cup
of Cassidoine, which had cost him beforetime i. The value of (...) talents.
three hundred thousand sesterces, and presently brake it in pieces in hatred
and despite of Nero, for fear lest the same prince might have seized upon it
after his disease, and therewith furnished his own bourd. But Nero himself (as
it became an Emperor indeed) went beyond all others in this kind of excess,
who bought one Tre^entis sestertijs capi^: I suspect this place; for he should
have interred a greater sum than that before of T^etronius: or else Capis is a
smaller piece than Trul^a: and that should not seem, if it be derived (...)
capiend^, and so ^alled for the capac^tie, but rather ^f the ea^s, ^et by a
(...) take (...).
drinking cup that stood him in three hundred but most within the kingdom of
Parthia: howbeit, the principal come from out of Carmania. Purpura candescen^e.
purple seems to stand much upon white, and Aut lacte rub^.
their milkie white to bear as much upon the purple. Some esteemed those
Cassidoine or Murrhene stones richest, which represent as it were certain
reuerberations of sundry colors meeting all together about their edges and
extremities, such as we observe in rainbowes: others are delighted with
cerataine fattie spots appearing in them; and no account is made of them which
show either pale or transparent in any part of them, for these be reckoned
great faults and blemishes. In like manner if there be seen in the Cassidoine
any spots like corns or grains of salt: if it contain resemblances of werts,
although they bear not up but lie flat as they do many times in our bodies:
finally, the Cassidoine stones are commended in some sort also for the smell
that they do yield.

As touching Crystal, it proceeds of a contrary cause, namely of cold; for a
liquor it is i. Ice. We have this crystal likewise out of the East-parts, but
there is none better than that which India sends to us. Engendered it is also in
Asia, and namely about Alabanda, Ortosia, and the mountains adjoining, but in
request it is not no more than that which is found in Cyprus: howbeit, there is
excellent crystal within Europe, and namely upon the crests of the Alps. King
Iuba writes, that in a certain Island lying beyond the red sea ouer-against
Arabia, named Some read Ne^n.
Neron, there grows crystal: as also in another thereby, which yields the
Which some take for Chrysolite.
Topase precious stone; where, Pythagoras (lieutenant or governor under king
Ptolome) dug forth a piece which carried a cubit Cornelius or Nepos.
Bocchus affirms, that in Portugal upon certain exceeding high mountains,
where they sink pits for the level of the water, there be found great crystal
quarters or masses of a wonderful weight. But marvelous is that which
Xenocrates the Ephesian reports, namely, that in Asia and Cyprus there be
pieces of crystal turned up with the very plough, so ebb it lierh within the
ground; an incredible thing, considering that before-time no man believed that
ever it could be found in any place standing upon an earthly substance, but
only among cliffes and craggs. It sounds yet more like a truth, which the
same Xenocrates writes, namely, that oftentimes it is carried down the stream
running from the mountains. As for Sudines, he says confidently, that
crystal is not engendered but in places exposed only to the South: and verily
this is most true, for you shall never meet with it in waterish countries lying
Livia Augusta the Empress dedicated in the Capitol, which weighed about
fifty pounds. Xenocrates mine author aboue-named, affirms, by ropes that
shall get it forth. They that be skillful and well experienced therein, go by
diverse Nero the Emperor (of whom I spoke erewhile) when unhappy news was
brought unto him of a great overthrow and a field lost to the danger of his
own state and the commonwealth, in the height of his rage and a most furious
fit of anger, caught up two crystal drinking cups and

In the next degree to crystal we are to place Amber, a thing that hitherto I
hear women only set dainty store by, and adorn themselves withal: strange
it is, that l'Amber, Cassidoine, and Crystal, should thus be in equal request
with fine precious stones; marie for Cassidoin and Aeschylus, Philoxenus,
Nicander, Euripides, and Satyrus, tell us a tale of Phaeton, who weeping
piteously for the miserable death of their brother who was smitten with
lightning, were turned into Poplar trees, which in stead of tears yielded every
year a certain liquor called Electrum [id est, Amber] which issued from them
where they grew along the river Eridanus, which we call Padus, id est, the Po:
and the reason why the same was named Electrum, is this, Because the Sun in old
time was usually called (...), qui n^s (...) f^ciat, Because he rouseth and
raises us in a morning out of our beds.
Elector in Greek. But that this is one of their loud lies, it appears
evidently by the testimony of all Italy. But some of these Greek writers and
such as would seem to be more speculatiue and better seen in the works of
Nature than their fellows, have told us of certain Islands that should lie
along the coast within the Venice gulf, called Electrides, forsooth because
that amber is there gathered, by reason that the foresaid river Po falls into
the sea among them: howbeit well known Aeschylus the foresaid Poet, who says
that the river Eridanus is in Iberia, that is to say, Spain, and otherwise
that it is called Rhodanus, as also for Euripides and Apollonius, who say that
Rhosne and Po both meet in one, and discharge themselves together into the said
Venice gulf, Theophrastus contrariwise affirms, that Amber is dug out of
the ground. As for Chares, he says, that Phaeton died in Aethyopia near unto
the temple of Jupiter Ammon, which is the reason of a chapel there wherein
he is shrined, as also of an oracle much ronowmed; in which quarters (quoth
he) amber is engendered. Philemon would make us believe, that Amber is mineral,
and that within Scythia in two places it is gotten forth of the earth; in the
one it is found white and Demostratus calls Amber, Lyncurion, for that it
comes of the urine of the wild beast named Onces or Lynces: the which is
distinct in color, for that which proceeds from the male is reddish and of a
fiery color; the other which passes from the female, is more weak in color,
and enclineth rather to whitish. Some give it the name Langurium, and make
report of certain beasts in Italy named Languriae. Zenothemis terms the
same beasts Langas, and by his saying, they live about the Po. Sudines talks
of a tree in Liguria, which should bear this Amber: of whose opinion also was
Metrodorus. Sotacus was verily persuaded, that it run down from certain trees
in Britain, and those he thereupon called Electrides. Pytheas affirms, that
in Almaine there is the arm of the Ocean called Mentonomon, along Timaeus
accorded with him, save only that he would have the said Island to be called or
Banomania.
Baltia. Philemon was of this mind, that Amber would never flame if it were set
on fire. Niceas would have us conceive, that it should be a certain juice or
humor proceeding (I wot not how) from the rays of the Sun, and yet he makes
a reason thereof, imagining that the said beams should be ^ibus, some read
aesta^bus, i, in Summer.
tides into the Seashore and sands of the Germans. He writes also, that in
Egypt it is engendered after that manner, where it is called Sacal: as also
among the Indians, who make more account of it than of frankincense. Semblably
in Syria, the women (says he) make wherues of it for their spindles, where
they use to call it Harpax, because it will catch up leaves, straws, and
fringes hanging to clothes. Theophrastus reports, that the ocean casts up
amber at tides, to the capes of the Pyrenaean hills: which Xenocrates also
believed, who is the last that has written of Amber, and such like. There is
at this day living, Asarubas, who has reported, that near unto the Atlanticke
sea there is the lake Cephisis, which the Mores call or rather Electris, as
appears a little after.
Eiectrum, and the same being chased Mnesias makes report of a place in
Affrike named Cicyone, as also of the river Crathis, which floteth out of a
lough and runs into the sea; in which lake or lough, there live certain
kinds of foul which he names Meleagrides and Penelopes: herein amber is
engendered (by his saying) after the same manner as before I showed in the lake
Electris. Theomenes says, that near unto the great Syrtis where the hort-yard
and garden of the Hesperides lies, a man shall find, that amber falls out of
the said garden into a lake beneath, and then the virgins attending upon that
place, come ordinarily to gather it. Ctesias affirms, that among the Indians
there is a river called Hypobarus, (which word signifies as much, as bearing
all good vessels) it runs out of the North and falls into the East sea,
near unto a wild mountain, full of trees Mithridates writes, that toward the
coast of Germany there lies an Island, and the same named Osericta, replenished
with woods of Cedar trees yielding Amber, which runs from them into rocks.
Xenocrates is of opinion, That Amber was called in Italy not only Succinum, but
also Thieum: whereas the Scythians name it Sacrium Sophocles the Tragical Poet
(a man who wrote his Poesies, with so grave and lofty a style, and lived
besides in so good reputation; being otherwise borne at Athens, and descended
from a noble house, employed also in the managing of state affairs, as who had
the charge and conduct of an army) that he should go beyond al others in
fabulous reports, as touching Amber: for he sticks not to avouch, That beyond
India it proceeds from the tears that fall from the eyes of the birds
Meleagrides, wailing and weeping for the death of Meleager. Who would not
marvel, that either himself should be of that belief, or hope to persuade
others to his opinion? For what child is there to be found so simple and
ignorant, who will believe, that birds should keep their times to shed tears
every year so duly, and especially so great drops and Meleager when he died in
Greece? What should a man say to this? Are there not many more as goodly tales
as these, which Poets have sent abroad into the world? And their profession of
Poetry, that is to say, of faining and devising fables, may in some sort excuse
them. But that any man should seriously and by way of history deliver such
stuff, as touching a thing so rife and common, brought in every day in
abundance by merchants which were enough to convince such impudent lies, is a
mere mockery of the world in the highest degree; a contempt offered unto all
men, and argues an habit of lying, and an impunitie of that vice intolerable.

CHAP. III.
Of the true original and generation of Amber. The sundry kinds thereof. The
excess and superfluity of people, as touching Amber. The medicinable
properties that it affourdeth. Of Lincurium, and the virtues that it has in
Physic.

But to leave Poets with their tales, and to speak resolutely and with
knowledge, of Amber, known it is for certain, That engendered it is in
certain Islands of the Ocean Septentrionall, where it beats upon the coasts
of Germany: and the Almanes call it For the perspicuitie and brightness like
unto glass.
Glessum. And Germanicus Caesar made into those parts, our countrymen named one
of those Islands Glessaria, by reason of the Amber there found; which Island
the Barbarians call Austrauia. It is engendered then in certain trees,
resembling Pines in some sort, and issues forth from the marrow of them, like
as gum in Cherrie trees, and rosin in Pines. And verily, these trees are so
full of this liquor, that it swells and breaks forth in abundance: which
afterward either congealeth with the cold, or thickeneth by the heat of
Autumn. Now if at any time the sea rise by any extraordinary tide, and catch
any of it away out of the Islands, then verily it is cast a shore upon the
coast of Germany, where it is so apt to roll, that it seems (as it were) to
hang and settle lightly upon the sands, whereby it is the more easily gotten.
And for that our ancestors heretofore in old time believed that it was the
juice of a tree, they This disease is called Bronchocele or Hernia guttur^s,
ordinary in Sauoy and those parts about Geneva.
poghes under their throat, about those fleshie parts near unto it, by reason
of sundry kinds of waters which breed those infirmities. The foresaid coast of
Germany is almost six hundred miles from Carnuntum Iulianus (who had the charge
under Nero for furnishing of the solemn plays and sights of sword-fencers) to
buy up good store of amber. This gentleman I say surueied diligently al those
coasts, and saw the manner of the whole traffic for that commodity, yea and
brought into Rome such plenty thereof, that the great nets and cordage (which
for defense of the outstanding and open gallerie within the Theater were
opposed against the wild beasts, there to be baited and to fight) were buttoned
and set out with Amber; the armor likewise, the bieres, and other furniture
for burial of those fencers which should happen there to be killed, yea, and in
one word, all the apparel and provision for one day to the setting out of those
pastimes and disports, stood most of Amber. The greatest piece of Amber that he
brought over, weighed 13 pounds. Moreover, Archelaus, who sometime reigned as
king in Cappadocia, writes, That from thence it is brought rude and unclean,
with pieces of bark sticking within it: but the way to scour and pollish it,
is to sees it in the grease of a sow that suckleth pigs. That it does destil
and drop at the first very clear and liquid, it is evident by this argument,
for that a man may see diverse things within, to wit, Pismires, Gnats, and
Lizards, which no doubt were entangled and stuck within it when it was green
and fresh, and so remained enclosed within as it waxed harder. Many kinds there
be of amber. The white is most redolent and smells best: but neither that, nor
yet those pieces which are colored like wax, be of any price. The high
colored Amber, namely that which is of a deep yellow enclining to red, Nero
Domitius, among many other fooleries and gauds wherein he showed what a monster
he was in his life, proceeded so far, that he made a sonnet in praise of the
hair of the Empress Poppaea his wife, which he compared to Amber, i. Ambre:
and from that time our dainty dames and fine ladies have begun to set their
mind upon this color, and have placed it in the third rank of rich tincture:
whereby we may see there is no superfluity and disorder in the world, but it
has a pretense or cloak of some precious name or other. And yet I will not
disgrace Amber too much: for why? there is some good use thereof in Physic.
But I must tell you again, our women regard not that one whit; that is not it
wherefore they take so great a liking to Ambre. True it is that a collar of
Ambre beads worn about the neck of young infants, is a singular preservative to
them against secret poison, and a countercharme for witchcraft and sorcerie.
Callistratus says, That such collars are very good for all ages, and namely to
preserve as many as wear them against fantastical illusions and frights that
drive folk out of Callistratus brought in a new name to distinguish yellow
Ambre from the rest, calling it Chryselectrum, which is as much to say as gold
Ambre. And in very truth, this Amber is of a most lovely and beautiful color
in a morning. This property it has besides by it self, that it will catch
fire exceeding quickly, for if it be near it, you shall see it will soon be of a
light fire. He says of this yellow Amber, that if it be worn about the neck in
a collar, it cures feauers, and heals the diseases of the mouth, throat, and
jaws: reduced into powder and tempered with honey and oil of roses, it is
soueraign for the infirmities of the ears. Stamped together with the best
Attick honey, it makes a singular eie-salue for to help a dim sight: puluerized,
and the powder thereof taken simply alone, or else drunk in water with masticke,
is soueraign for Dimocles and Theophrastus. For mine own part I hold all to be
me re untruths: neither do I think, that in our age there has been a man who
ever saw any precious stone of that name. Whateuer also is written as touching
the virtues medicinable of Lyncurium, I take them to be no better than fables,
namely, that if it be given in drink, it will send out the stone of the bladder:
if it be drunk in wine, it will cure the jaundise presently, or if it be but
carried about one, it will do the deed: but enough of such fantastical dreams
and lying vanities, and time it is now to treat of those precious stones,
whereof there is no doubt made at al, and to begin with those that by all men's
confession are most rich and of highest price. In which discourse I will not
prosecute this theme only, but also (for to advance the knowledge of posterity
in those things that may

CHAP. IIII.
Of Diamants and their sundry kinds. Their virtues and properties medicinable.
Of Pearls.

THe Diamant carries the greatest price, not only among precious stones, but
also above a^ time were of opinion that it was to be had in the mines only of
Aethiopia, and namely between Mercury and the Island Meroe, affirming
moreover, that the fairest Diamant that ever was found, exceeded not in
bigness a Cucumber seed, whereunto also it was not unlike in color. But in
these days there be known six sorts of Diamants. The Indian is not engendered
in mines of gold, but has a great affinity with Crystal: and grows much
after that manner; for in transparent and clear color it differs not at all,
neither yet otherwhiles in the smooth sides and faces which it carries between
six angles, pointed sharp at one end in manner of a top, or else two contrary
ways lozengewise (a wonderful thing to consider) as if the flat ends of two
tops were set and joined together: and for bigness it has bin known of the
quantity of an Hazelnut or Filbard kernill. The Diamants of Arabia be much like
to the Indian, only they are less; they grow also after the same order: As for
the rest, they are of a more pale and yellow color, testifying vain fears
that trouble and possess the mind: which is the reason that some have called
it Anachites. Metrodorus Scepsius affirms, That the Diamant is found in
Germany and the Island Baltia, wherein Amber is engendered: but as far as ever
I could read, he is the only man that says so. This Diamant also of Almaine
he prefers before those of Arabia, howbeit no man doubts that he lies
stoutly. After the precious Diamants of India and Arabia, we in these parts of
the world esteem most of pearls: but as touching them, I have written
sufficiently in my ninth book, where I discoursed of such matters as the seas
do yield.

CHAP. V.
Of the Emeraud, and the sundry sorts thereof. Of green gems or precious
stones, and such as be lightsome and clear all through.

EMerauds for many causes deserve the To wit. after Dia^a. (...) and Pearls.
third place: for there is not a color more pleasing to the eye. True it is,
that we take great delight to behold green herbs and leaves of trees, but
this is nothing to the pleasure we have in looking upon the Emeraud, for
compare it with other things, be they never so green, it surpasses them all in
pleasant verdure. Besides, there is not a gem or precious stone that so fully
possesses the eye, and yet never contenteth it with sacietie. Nay, if the
sight has bin wearied and dimmed by intentive poring upon any thing else, the
beholding of this stone does refresh and restore it again, which lappidaries
well know, that cut and ingraue fine stones; for they have not a better means
to refresh their eyes than the Emeraud, the mild green that it has does so
comfort and revive their wearines and lassitude. Moreover, Nero the Emperor was
wont to behold the combats of fencers and sword-plaiers in a fair Emeraud. Now
this first and foremost is to be noted, that of Emerauds there be 12 kinds. The
fairest and richest of all other, be those of Tartarie and called they are
Scythick, of the nation Scythia from whence they came: and in truth, there be
none fuller and higher in color or have fewer blemishes: and look how far
Emerauds go beyond other precious stones, so far do the Scythian Emerauds
surpass all others. The Bactrian Emerauds, as they are the next neighbors, so
they come nearest in goodness to the Scythicke: found these be in chinks and
joints (as it were) of rocks in the sea, and gathered (by report) about the dog
days, Hermias a pety king there, and near unto the sea sides where were pooles
and stews of great fishes kept to be salted, there stood in old time a lion of
marble, in the head of which Lion were set certain fair Emerauds in stead of
eyes, looking opposite into the sea: but they glittered and pierced so deep into
the water, that the Iuba mine author does report, are found in Aethyopia, from
Coptos in Egypt three days journey: These be of a cheerful and lively green,
but hardly shall you find any of them clear, pure, and of one color. Among
these, Democritus raungeth the Hermionian Emerauds and the Persian: of which,
the former seem to swell out as if they were embossed and fattie withal: the
Persian are not transparent, and yet of a pleasant green and uniform,
contenting the eie-sight well enough, though it cannot pierce and enter into
them; and much like they be to the glowing eyes of cats and panthers, for we
may perceive them to glitter and shine, and yet they be not translucent. These
Emerauds in the Sun lose their luster and become dim, but in the shade they
shine gallantly, yea, and cast from them their beautiful rays farther than
any other. And yet the general fault in all these, is this, if they show the
color either Capillor^, (...).
locks Iuba has left in writing, That the Emeraud called Cholos, served the
Arabians much in their buildings: for to adorn and beautify their houses, they
were wont to enclose and set the same in the walls like as the white marble,
which the Egyptian name Alabastrites. He reports moreover, that there be
many other Emerauds near Theophrastus reports, that he has read in the
books and records of the Egyptians, That a king of Babylon sent as a present
to one of their kings, one entire Emeraud four cubits long and three broad.
Also, that there had bin within the temple of Jupiter among them, an Obeliske
made of four Emerauds, which obelisk notwithstanding was forty cubits long,
and carried in breadth four cubits in some places, and two in others. He adds
moreover, that while he wrote his history, Hercules, a pillar standing of one
Emeraud, unless happily it were some bastard Emeraud; for such (quoth he) are
found, and namely in Cyprus there was seen naturally growing, a stone, whereof
the one half was a plain Emeraud, the other a Jasper, as if the humor had not
bin fully transformed and converted into an Emeraud. Apion the Grammarian,
syrnamed i. Contentious, or Victorious.
Plistonices, wrote not long before, who has left recorded, That there remained
still within the labyrinth of Egypt, the gyant-like image of their god Serapis
nine cubits tall, and of one entire Emeraud.

Moreover, many are of opinion, that Berils are of the same nature that the
Emeraud, or at leastwise very like: from India they come as from their native
place, for seldom are they to be found elsewhere: lapidaries by their art and
cunning know how to cut them into six angles, and

CHAP. VI.
Of the precious stone Opalus, and all the sundry kinds. The faults in them,
and the means to try which be good. Also diverse sorts of other gems and
precious stones.

THe stones called Opales differ little or nothing otherwhile from Beryls, and
yet the same sometimes are nothing at all like them, neither is there a gem that
they will give place to, unless it be the Emeraud: India is the only mother of
them: lapidaries therefore and those who have written books of precious stones,
have given unto them the name and glory of greatest Marcus Antonius proscribed
and outlawed one Nonius a Senator of Rome, the son of that Struma Nonius (at
whom the stomach of Catullus the Poet did rise so much, seeing him as he did,
sit in a stately chair of Servilius Nonianus whom I my self have seen
Consul. Now the said Senator when he was driven to fly upon this proscription,
took no more of all the goods which he had, but only a ring wherein this Opall
was set, which (as it is well known) had bin valued sometime at 20000 Sesterces.
But as the cruel and inordinate appetite of Antony (who for a jewel only
outlawed and banished a Roman Senator) was wonderful on the one side, so the
peevishness and contumacie of Nonius was as strange on the other side, who was
so far in love with that gem which cost him his proscription, and rather than
to part with it suffered himself to be turned out of house and home: and yet
the very wild beasts are better advised than so, who are content to bite off
those parts of their bodies and leave them behind for the hunters, seeing
themselves in danger of death for them. In the Opall there be observed i.
Turnsole: also if it look like crystal or hail, likewise if there be a spot
coming between in manner of a grain or kernel of salt: if it be rough in
handling, or if there be certain small pricks or spots represented to the eyes:
neither is there any precious stone that the Indians can counterfeit so well by
the means of glass, as this; insomuch as hardly a man shall discern the
natural Opal from the false, when they have done withal. But the only trial
is by the Sun, for if a man hold an Opall betwixt his thumb and finger,
against the beams of the Sun, if it be a counterfeit, he shall find those
diverse colors which showed therein, to run all into one and the same
transparent color, and so to rest in the body of the stone; whereas the
brightness of the true Opal eftsoons changes, and sends forth

There is also another kind of Opalos apart by it self, according to the
opinion of some, who say it is called by the Indians Sangenon. It is said that
that there be Opals in Egypt and in Arabia, like as in the kingdom also of
Pontus; but such of all other bear the lowest price. In Galatia likewise, and
in the Isles Thrasos and Cyprus: for albeit they have the lovely beauty of the
Opalus, yet their luster is nothing so lively and lightsome, and seldom shall
you meet with any of them that is not rugged: their chief colors stand much
upon brass and purple; the fresh verdure of the green Emeraud is away, which
the true Opal does participate. This is generally

Thus far forth have I written of gemmes and precious stones which be esteemed
principal and most rich, according to the decree generally set down and
pronounced by our nice and costly dames: for we may conclude upon this point
more certainly, going by their sentence, Claudius Caesar the Emperor made no
reckoning of any but the Emeraud and the Sardonyx, and these ordinarily he wore
upon his fingers: but Scipio Africanus (as says Demostratus) took a liking to
the Sardonyx before him, and was the first Roman that used it; and ever since,
this gem has bin in great request at Rome: in regard of which credit, I will
raunge it next to the Opall. In old time the Sardonyx, as may appear by the
very name, was taken for the precious stone which seemed to be a Sarda.
Cornalline upon white, that is to say, as if the ground under a man's nail
were flesh, and both together transparent and clear: and in very truth, the
Sardonyx of India is such, according to Ismentas, Demostratus, Zenathemis, and
Sotacus. As for these two last named, they verily do name all the rest
Zenathemis writes, that these stones were not set by among the Indians;
notwithstanding otherwise they were so large and bigg, as thereof they made
ordinarily sword handles and dagger hafts: and no marvel, for certain it is,
that in those parts land floods coming down with a stream from the hills,
have discovered such and brought them to light. He says

By occasion of this stone Sardonyx, I am put in mind for the names sake, to
write of the gem Onyx also: for notwithstanding there be a stone so called in
Carmania (which is the Cassidoin) yet there goes also a gem under that name.
Sudines says, that the precious stone Onyx has a white in it resembling the
nail of a man's finger: it has likewise (quoth he) the color of a
Chrysolith, otherwise called a Topase, of a Cornalline also, and a Jasper.
Zenathemis affirms, that the Indian Onyx is of diverse and sundry colors; to
wit, of a fiery red, a black, a Whereof happily they, be called Cornallines.
horn gray; having also otherwhiles certain white strakes or veins in
fashion of eyes compassing it about; and in some of them you shall see white
streaks or veins likewise to go cross and by as between them. Sotacus makes
mention moreover of an Arabian Onyx, but it differs from others (says he)
in this respect, That the Indian Onyx has certain sparks in it, and the same
Satyrus reports furthermore, that the Indian Onyx is fleshie; that in one
part it resembles a Rubie otherwise called a Carbuncle, in another a
Chrysolith, and an Amethyst,

CHAP. VII.
Of Carbuncles or Rubies, and their sundry kinds: of their defaults and
imperfections: of the means to try them. Of other precious stones

AMong these red gems, the Rubies otherwise called Carbuncles, challenge the
principal place, and are esteemed richest: they have their name in Greek of
the For the Greeks call them (...).
likeness unto fire, and yet fire has no power of them, which is the reason
that some call them Apyroti. As touching their kinds: there be Rubies of India,
and Rubies of the Garamants, which carry the name also of Carchedonij, i.
Carthaginian, in regard of excellency, by reason of the wealth and puissance of
the city Carthage the Great. In this rank, some do place the Ethyopian Rubies
and the Alexandrian, which are found indeed among the cliffes of the hill
Orthosia, but trimmed These are called yet by Lapidaries, Alabandines, or
Alma^dines.
Alabandians. Moreover, in all sorts of Rubies, those are taken for the male
which show a quick red more fire-like than the rest; and contrariwise female,
such as shine not so bright but after a faint manner. In the male it is
observed, that some seem to flame more clear and pure, others are darker and
blacker: there be again that shine brighter than the rest, yea, and in the sun
give a more ardent and burning luster: but the best simply be those which are
called Amethystizontes, that is to say, that in the end of their fire resemble
the blew violet color of the Amethyst. The next in goodness to them, are those
which they call Syrtitae; and such do glitter and shine of their own nature: by
reason whereof, they are discovered soon wheresoever they lie, by the
reuerberation of the Sunbeams. As touching the Indian Rubies, Satyrus says,
they are not found clear, but for the most part foul; howbeit, after
Callistratus holds opinion, that if a Carbuncle or Rubie be laid upon a
thing, it ought to yield certain white clouds, in the edges and extremities of
the glittering that it makes; but if it be held up or hung in the air, it
flameth and burns out fire red: and hereupon it is, that most men have called
it the white Carbuncle; like as they have named those Indian Rubies As one
would say, more like some ordinary stone than a p^ous gem.
Lithizontes, which shine more faintly and with a brownish or duskish flame. As
for the Carchedonian Rubies, Callistratus says, they be far less than others;
whereas of the Indians some are so big, that being made hollow they will contain
the measure of one sextar. Archelaus writes, that the Carchedonian rubies be
blacker than others to see too; but if they be quickened as it Theophrastus
writes, that there be Rubies found about Orchomenus in the country of
Arcadie, as also in the Isle Chios: and as for the Orchomenian, they be of a
blacker kind, and serve to make mirroirs of. The Troezenian Rubies (by his
saying) are of diverse colors and spotted with white specks coming in among:
and the Corinthian Rubies Bocchus writes, that there be brought Rubies from
Marsils and Lisbon in Portugal; but with much ado and great difficulty they
are found, by reason of the clay wherein they be inlapped, in certain deserts
and forests burnt with the Sun. In sum, there is not a harder thing than to
discern these sundry kinds of Rubies one from another; they are so easy to be
counterfeited and falsified by the art and skill of lapidaries and goldsmiths,
who have a cast to lay some foil under, to make them for to shine and glitter
like fire. Men say, that the Aethyopians have a devise to steep their duskish
and dark Rubies in vinegar; for in 14 days they will be pure and glister, yea,
and continue so 14 months after. There is a way to counterfeit Rubies with
false glass stones, which they will make seem Rubies as like as is possible;
but the grinding upon a mill soon discovers the fraud, like as it does in
any other artificial and sophisticat

There is a stone much like to this, called Sandastros, which some name
Garamantites, growing among the Indians in a place likewise so named. It is
engendered also in that part of Arabia which regards the South Sun. The chief
grace and commendation of Sandastros, is to be clear, and to have certain
drops as it were of gold like stars shining within, that is to say, always in
the body of the stone, and never in the coat or out side: in regard of which
starre-like specks, there is attributed some religious matter to these stones,
for that they represent in some sort to them that behold them, the seven stars
called Hyades, both in number and also in order and manner of disposition: which
is the reason, that the wise men of Assyria named Chaldaei, do Ismenias, he
affirms that the Sandastres are so tender that they cannot be polished: in a
great error therefore be they who call this stone Sandaresos: but all authors
herein accord, That the more stars do make appearance in them, so much better is
the price. Furthermore, this is to be noted, that the nearenesse in name,
otherwhiles Nicander called Sandaserion, others Sandaseron: and in truth, this
Sandaser some take to be Sandaster; and the Sandaster indeed, Sandaresos;
which is found likewise amongst the Indians, bearing the name of the place
where it grows: in color it resembles an apple, or else green oil: and in
truth, no account is there made of it.

As touching Lychnites, so called for the resemblance that it has to the blaze
of a candle lighted, which gives a singular grace to it, and makes it very
rich, it may be ranged well among these fiery and ardent stones: found this is
about Orthosia and throughout all Caria and the places adjoining; but the most
excellent come from the Indians, which some have thought and said to be the
milder kind of Carbuncle or Rubie balais. In a second degree of worth and
account

Over and besides, I find other sorts of Rubies different from those above
named; for some of them hold of the fresh and glorious purple of Lac, others
stand as much upon the Scarlet or Crimsen: which being chaufed in the sun, or
otherwise set in a heat by rubbing with the fingers, Archelaus says, that
there be of them in Egypt also about the city Thebes; howbeit, such are
brittle, full of veins, and like to a cole going out and ready to die. I find,
that drinking cups have been made of this stone, as also of the former, called
Lychnites. Generally, all rubies be very hard for to be cut; and this ill
quality they have, That they never do seal clean, but ordinarily pluck some
A city, whereupon it took the name, and not of Sardinia the Isle, as some
think.
Sardis; but in truth, the principal is that which comes from about
Babylonia, out of certain quarries of stone, where it was found sticking
within another stone in manner of the heart. After this manner, it is said,
that the Persians had sometime mineral Cornallines, but the mine now does
fade: howbeit, there be of them in many other places besides, to wit, in Paros
and Assos. The Indians send unto us three several kinds, to wit, the red, the
fatty (called thereupon Demium) and the third which ordinarily have a ground of
siluer-foil laid under them to give a luster. The Indian Sardes or Cornallines
are transparent and carry a through light with them: the Arabian be more
thick: there be found of them also Menander and Philemon have named this stone
in their (...) Menander in Pedio: speaking of the Emeraud and Cornalline.
Comoedies, for a brave and proud gem: neither can we find a precious stone
that maintains the luster longer than it, against any humor wherein it is
drenched; and yet oil is more contrary to it than any other liquor. To
conclude, those that be of the color of honey, aie rejected for naught;
howbeit, if they resemble the color of earthen pots, they be worse than those.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Some take it for our Chrysolith.
Topaze, and the sundry kinds of it. Of It is thought to be our Turquois.
Callais: and of other green precious stones not transparent.

THe Topaze or Chrysolith, has a singular green color by it self, for which
it is esteemed very rich; and when it was first found, it surpassed all others
in price: they were discovered first in an Isle of Arabia called Chiris,
wherein certain rouers (Troglodytes) being newly landed, after they had bin
driven thither by tempest and urged with famine, began to feed upon herbs and
dig for roots, and by that means met with the Topaze stone: This is the
opinion of Archelaus. But K. Iuba reports, that there is an Island within the
red sea called Topazas, distant Berenice the mother of Ptolome the second, and
that by the means of Philemon (lieutenant general to her son in those
countries) who presented one of them to the said queen. Of which Chrysolit,
Ptolomaeus Philadelphus K. of Egypt, caused the statue of his wife Arsinoe to
be made, 4 cubits long; and in the honor of the said queen his wife,
dedicated it in a chapel named the Golden temple. The modern writers do
report, that there be found of these Chrysolits about Alabastrum a town in
Thebais, a province in high Egypt; and two kinds they make thereof, to wit,
Prasoides, and Chrysopteros: which later comes near to that golden Berill

This stone in regard of color may be accompanied with the Turquois called
Gallais, for a

As touching green stones, there be many more kinds: but of the baser sort we
reckon one of a Porret color, which we call Prasius, and the first kind of it
is all green; whereas the second has

The stone Chrysoprasius, i. the sea water or Horehound green, is preferred
before the other: in some sort it resembles the green juice of a Leek, but it
declineth somewhat from the Topaze, as if it were between it and gold. Some of
these are so great and big, that there be drinking cups made thereof, after the
fashion of boats: but pilastres or round staves in manner of cylindres or
rolls, are very quickly framed of such stones. These be found among the
Indians: like as another stone, which is called Thought to be the Almain
Chrysolit.
Nilios: A weak luster it has, and will not long continue, for look but a
while wistly upon it, you shall perceive it soon to fade. Sudines says, That
there be of them found in Syverus, a river that passes through the country of
Attica: in color it resembles a Iuba reports, That it is bred in Aethyopia,
and namely about the banks and sides of a river which we call Nilus, whereupon
it comes to be named Nilios.

There is a stone called Molochites, for that the green color which it has,
comes near unto a Mallow, and is more dim than the rest whereof I have
spoken. Commended it is highly in signets to seal fair: and besides it is
supposed to be by a natural virtue that it has, a countercharme to preserve
little babes and infants from all witchcrafts and sorceries.

A kind of Jasper likewise there is of a green color, and the same oftentimes
is transparent: and although there be many other stones go beyond it in
richesse, yet it retains still the ancient glory and honor that it had. A gem
it is, common to many other countries: India yields Cappadocia partly purple
and partly blew, but no kind of luster has it at all. Out of Amises, a (...).
Borea, like to the morning sky in the time of Autumn; and this may well be
called Aerizusa. There is a Jasper in color like to the Sarda, i. the
Cornalline, as also resembling much the violets: there be as many more sorts
behind, which I have not touched, but subject they be al to blemishes, as
namely being blew or like to Crystal or * waterie fleam. Last of all, we have a
Jasper (...), which Pliny inconsideratly has turned Myxus.
called Terebinthizusa by the Greeks, but as I take it very improperly, as if
it were compounded of many gems of one and the same kind; and therefore the
better sort of such are enclosed within a circle of gold, yet so as they be
open both above and beneath, neither is any thing but the edges only compassed
with gold. The faults or imperfections of the Jasper be these, If the luster
endure not long, notwithstanding it glitter a far off; also if it show a spot
like unto a grain of salt; besides all other which I have already named in the
rest. Moreover, Iaspers may be falsified by the means of glass: and this is
soon detected, namely, when they cast a reuerberation of their luster
outwardly, and hold it not within. To conclude with the stones called
Sphragides, they are not much unlike to the Iaspers. And this gift they have
above all the rest, that they make the best signets, and seal fairest.

CHAP. IX.
Sundry kinds of Iaspers.

OF diverse sorts of Iaspers, all the East part (by report) are most affected to
that which is like the Emeraud, and they carry it ordinarily about them as a
countercharme. The same if it be compassed round about with one white cross
line in the midst, is called Grammatias; if with many, Polygrammos. And here by
the way I can hold no longer, but my mind serves me very well to challenge the
Magitians, who have given it out, That this stone is very good for those to
have about them who are to make some public speech or solemn Oration to the
people. Nero the Emperor, standing ready armed with a cuirace.

As touching the precious stone Cyanos, I must speak of it apart,
notwithstanding I have of late mentioned and applied it to one of the names of
the Jasper, to wit, that with the blew color. The best Cyanos is that of
Scythia; the next comes from Cypros: and in the last place

Next after these, I am to range those stones that be of a purple color, and
such as decline but the foulest and of most base account, be those of Thasos
and Cyprus. The reason of the name Venus gems, for the great grace that they
have, and decent loveliness which they seem to show both in fashion and
color, especially without-forth. The Magitians, as vain herein as in all other
things, seem to bear us in hand that they have a special virtue to withstand
drunkenness, whereupon they should be called Amethysts: neither stay they so,

It follows now by good order to speak of the Iacinths, which, albeit they
differ much from Amethysts in some respect, yet in luster they approach very
near: and this is only the difference between them, that the brave violet
color, which in the Amethyst is full and rich, in the Iacint is delaied and
weaker. The Iacint also at the first sight is pleasant and acceptable, but the
lovely beauty thereof vanishes away before it have given a man enough. And so
far is it off from contenting the eye fully and satisfying the pleasure thereof,
that it fades sooner than the dainty flour of that name, i. Hyacinthus, so
quickly does the luster pass away, in manner before it come to the eye.
Aethyopia furnishes us with Iacinths and Chrysolithes both, which are
transparent and Bocchus mine author reports, That they be found in Spain also,
in that place where he says they sink pits for to leuel water, and out of
which the peasants do take forth crystal. He affirms also, That he has seen
a or Citrine Iacinth.
Chrysolith of twelve pound weight.

If we should speak of white stones, the principal of them all is the gem
named Paederos; And yet considering that under this name there pass other Of
which name there is Opalus and the Amethyst.
fair and beautiful stones (such a prerogative has the word to signify some
excellency of louelines) there may be question made, how it can be properly
used for one gem, or one color; yet surely there is a kind of precious stone
by it self called Paederos, and the same worth the looking on; and there seem
to meet together a sky color, and the same in his manner greenish upon a
clear and transparent Crystal: accompanied these be with a purple and a
certain yellow and bright gold color of Muskadel, and the same is always the
last color that appears outwardly and gives the luster: and yet a man that
beheld this stone, would say that the head thereof were crowned with a chaplet
of purple: and as it appears to have these colors confounded all together,
so it seems as if

In the second place of white gems, is Gira sole.
Asteria to be counted: a wonderful property it has in Nature, for which it
deserves to be chief; for that it keeps enclosed within a certain light

In like manner a white precious stone there is called Astrios, approaching
near to Crystal: this is engendered among the Indians and along the coasts of
Pallene: From the very center within, there shines a kind of star in manner
of a full Moon in the height of her brightness. Some give this reason of the
name, that being held against any stars, it receives from them a

As touching Astroites, many make great account of it: and such as have written
more diligently thereof, do report, That Zoroastres has highly commended it
and told wonders thereof in art Magic.

Sudines speaks of another gem called Astrobolos, and says it is like unto a
fish eye, and casts forth white glittering rays against the Sun.

Among white precious stones may be reckoned that which they call Ceraunia,
which is apt to receive light and luster both from Sun and Moon and other
stars. It self looks like Zenathemis confesses, That it is a white gem,
and has within a starre-like fire, which seems to run too and fro and change
place, according as a man turns it. He affirms also, that the foresaid
Cerauniae will become dull and duskish; which Sotacus has set down two kinds
more of Ceraunia, to wit, the black and the red, saying, that they resemble
halberds or ax heads. And by his saying, the black, such especially as be round
withal, are endued with this virtue, that by the means of them cities may be
forced, and whole nauies at sea discomfited; and these (forsooth) he called
Betuli, whereas the long ones be properly named Cerauniae.

It is said there is one more Ceraunia yet, but very geason it is, and hard to
be found, which the Parthian Magitions set much store by, and they only can
find it, for that it is no where to be had but in a place which has bin shot
with a thunderbolt.

Next after the Ceraunia, there is a stone named Iris: dug out of the ground
it is in a certain Isle of the red sea, distant from the city Berenice 60
miles. For the most part it resembles Crystal; which is the reason that some
have termed it the root of Crystal. But the cause why they call it Iris is,
That if the beams of the Sun strike upon it directly within house, it sends
from it against the walls that be near, the very resemblance of a rainbow both
in form and color, and eftsoons it will change the same in much variety, to
the great admiration of the beholders. For certain it is known, that six angles
it has in manner of Crystal; but they say that some of them have their sides
rugged, and the same unequally angled, which if they be laid abroad against the
Sun in the open air, do scatter the beams of the Sun that light upon them to
and fro; also that others do yield a brightness from themselves, and thereby
illuminat all that is about Horus says, that if it be calcined and pulue^ised,
it is a singular remedy against the biting of Ichneumones: also, that
naturally it is to be found in Persis.

Much like in form and shape to Iris, but not of the same effect, is there
another stone called Zeros: a man that sees it would take it to be a crystal,
with a black struck parting it overthwart. Thus having laid abroad the precious
stones and jewels which are distinguished by sundry kinds

CHAP. X.
Of certain gems digested in order according to the Alphabet.

THe Agat was in old time of great estimation, but now it is in no request.
Found it was first A
in Sicily near to a river called likewise Achates, but afterward in many
other places. It exceeds in bigness, and is full of variety in colors,
whereby it has gotten many names; for called it is Phassachates, Cerachates,
Sardachates, Haemachates, Leucachates, and Dendrachates, in the mouth, they
quench and allay thirst. The Phrygian Agats have no part of green in them. Milo
that great Wrestler of Crotone used to carry this stone about him, whereby he
was invincible in all the feats of strength or actiuitie that he tried, as
Magitions would seem to persuade us. Androdamas is a stone of a bright color
like silver, and in manner of a Diamant, square, and always growing in a table
Lozenge-wise. The Magitions suppose, that it took that name of repressing the
anger and furious violence of men. As touching Argyrodamas, Democritus says,
that it is bred in Arabia, and of a fiery color: which by his saying, ought to
be tied with camels hair, and so hung fast about them that be troubled with
the schirrosities of the spleen: also (if he say true) it is found in the neast
of certain Arabian birds. Another also of that name grows there in the cape
Leucopetra, but it is of a silver color, and glittereth withal: excellent to
be worn about one against the fantastical fears and imaginations in the
night season. The same Democritus says, That in Persis, India, and the
mountain Ida, there is a stone found named Artizoe, glistering bright as
silver, three fingers thick, formed in manner of a Lentil, and of a pleasant
and delectable savor: The Sages of Persia never go about the election and
ordering of a King, but they think it necessary to have it about them. As for
the Augites, many be of opinion, that it is no other stone than Callais, to
wit, the Turquois. Amphitane is a stone known by another name also,
Chrysocolla: found it and partly reddish. Asyctos being once heat at the fire,
will continue a seuen-night after hot: Iacchus takes it for a white stone,
with a vein partly of a Sard or Cornalline, and partly black, passing through
it overthwart: howbeit the common sort take Egyptilla to be blew, with a black
mote in the bottom.

As for the stone Balanites, there be two kinds thereof; to wit, of a greenish
color, and resembling B
Corinth brass: the former comes from Coptos, the other out of the region
Troglodytica; and they have a fiery vain cutting them just in the mids. The
same Coptos sends other stones to us besides, to wit, those which be called
Batrachitae; the one like in color to a frog, a second to Ebori: some say,
Ebeni, i. Ebene.
yvory, the third is of a blackish red. i. Amber died red with the root of
Orchanes.
Baptes, how soever otherwise it be soft and tender, yet an excellent odor it
has. The stone called Belus eye is white, and has within it a black Belus the
most sacred god of the Assyrians. There is another stone named Belus, growing
(as Democritus says) about Arbelae, to the bigness of a wall-nut in manner
and form of glass. As for Baroptenus or Baroptis, it is black, interlaced as
it were with certain knots, both white and also of a sanguine red, after a
strange and wonderful manner. Botrytes is found sometime black, otherwhiles
red, and like it is to a cluster of grapes when it begins first to knit. As
for it which is more like to the hair of women, Zoroastres calls it A kind of
Amiantum or Alume de plume.
Bostrychites. A kind of Turquo. (...).
Bucardia resembles an ox heart, and is to be found only about Babylon.
Brotia is shaped in manner of a Tortoise head: it falls with a crack of
thunder (as it is thought) from heaven: and if we will believe it, quenches the
fire of lightning. Bolae are found after a great storm

Cadmitis were the very same which they call Ostracitis, but that otherwhiles it
is compassed C.
about with certain blew bubbles. Callais comes very near to the Saphir, but
that it is whiter, and resembles rather the water of the sea about the shore.
Capnites (as some think) is a kind of stone by it self, beset with many
wreaths, and those seeming to smoke, as I have said already in due place: the
natural place of it is Cappadocia and Phrygia: in some sort it is like yvory.
As touching Callainae, it is commonly said, that they be found always many
joined together. Catochites is a stone proper to the Island Corsica: in bigness
it exceeds ordinary precious stones: a wonderful stone, if all be true that
is reported thereof, and namely, That if a man lay his hand thereupon, it will
hold it fast in manner of a glewie gum. Catopyrites grows in Cappadocia. to
tell us by way of prophecy and revelation, many things for to allay tempests
and storms:

Daphnias is a stone, whereof Zoroastres writes, and namely that it is good
against the falling D
sickness. Diadochus is like to Berill. Diphris is of two kinds; the white and
the black, the male and the female; where in may be perceived very distinctly,
those members that distinguish the sex, by reason of a certain line or vein of
the stone. Dionysias is a black stone and hard withal, having certain red
spots interming led: if it be stamped in water, it gives the taste of wine, and
is thought to withstand drunkenness. Draconites or Dracontia, is a stone
engendered in the brains Sotacus (who wrote that he saw one of these stones in a
kings hand) reports, that they who go to seek these stones use to ride in a
coach drawn with two steeds, and when they have esp ed a dragon or serpent,
cast in their way certain medicinable drugs to bring them asleep, and so have
means and leisure to cut off their heads: white they are naturally and
transparent, for impossible it is by any art to polish them, neither does the
lapidary lay his hand to them.

Encardia is a precious stone, named also Cardiscae: one sort there is of them,
wherein a man E
may perceive the shape of an heart to bear out: a second likewise there is so
called, of a green color, and the same does represent also the form of an
heart: the third shows the heart only black, for all the rest is white.
Enorchis is a fair white stone; the same being divided, the fragments thereof
do resemble a man's genetoirs, whereof it took that name. As touching Exhebenus
the stone, Zoroastres says, that it is most beautiful and white, and
therewith goldsmiths use to burnish and polish their gold. As for Eristalis,
being of it self a white stone, seems as a man holds it to wax red.
Erotylos, which some call Amphicome, others Hieromnemon, is commended much by
Democritus, for sundry experiments in prophesying and foretelling fortunes.
Eumeces grows in the Bactrians country, like to a flint; being laid under a
man's head lying asleep upon his bed, it represents by visions and dreams in
the night all that he is desirous to Belus the most sacred god among them, and
whom they honor with greatest devotion: as green it is as a leeke, and serves
very much in their superstitious inuocations, sacrifices, and exorcisms.
Eupetalos has four colors, to wit, of azur, fire, vermilion, and an apple.
Eureos is like the stone of an olive, chamfered in manner of winkle shells, but
very white it is not. Eurotias seems to have a certain mouldines that couers
the black underneath. Eusebes seems to be that kind of stone whereof (by
report) was made the feat in Hercules temple at Tyros, where the gods were wont
to appear and show themselves. Mereouer, any precious stone is called Epimelas,
when being of it self white, it is ouercast with a black color aloft.

The gem Galaxias, some call Galactites, like unto those last before-named, but
that it has G
certain veins either white or of a blood color running between. As for
Galactites indeed, it is as that if it be hung about the necks of infants, it
causes saliuation; but being held in the mouth, Happily our Bezoar.
conceived with young, and by shaking to bewray and confess a child within the
womb, and it does conceive every three months. Glossi-petra resembles a man's
tongue, and grows not upon the ground, but in the eclipse of the Moon
falls from heaven, and is thought by the magitians to be very necessary for
pandors and those that court fair women: but we have no

The precious stone Heliotropium, is found in Aethiopia, Affricke, and Cyprus:
the ground thereof is a deep green in manner of a leeke, but the same is
garnished with veins of blood: the H
reason of the name Heliotropium is this, For that if it be thrown into a pale
of water, it changes the rays of the Sun by way of reuerberation into a
bloody color, especially that which Zachalias the Babylonian, in those books
which he wrote to king Mithridates, attributes unto gems all the destinies and
and sentence on their side, yea and in wars, victory over enemies. There is
another of that kind,

The stones called Idaei Dactyli, be found in Candy: of an iron color they be,
and resemble I
in form the thumb of a man's hand. As touching Icterias, there be be four
kinds thereof, to wit one like to a pale colored bird called the Lariot; and
therefore is thought to be good against the jaundise: a second there is of the
same name, but more enclining to a Lividior.
swert color: the third resembles a green leaf, broader than the former,
weighing little or nothing, and is besides full of pale and wan veins: the
fourth is of the same color, but it has black veins running too and fro. The
stone called Jupiters gem, is white, light, and tender. The stone Indico takes
name of those nations from whence it comes; the color outwardly is somewhat
reddish, and if it be

The stone Lepidotes does represent skales of fishes in sundry colors. Lesbias
takes name of the Isle Lesbos the native place thereof: howbeit they are found
in India likewise. Leucophthalmos, L
is otherwise reddish or tawnie, howbeit in that color it carries the form
of an eye, both for white and black. Leucopetalos shows white in manner of
snow, and yet the same is garnished with a luster of gold. Libanocrus in color
resembles frank incense, but a liquor or moisture it yields answerable to
honey. Limoniates seems to be all one with the Emeraud.

A gem there is called Memnonia, but I have not read the description thereof.
As for Media, it is a black stone, and found it was first by that famous
Medea, of whom the Poets write so M
many fables, yet certain veins it has of a golden color: a kind of sweat
issues from it yellow as saffron, and in taste much resembling wine. Meconites
does represent expressly, poppy heads. The stone Mitrax we had from the
Persians, and the mountains along the red sea: many colors Xenocrates
reports, that under the Alps also they be gathered. These be the gems that
be fitted for to engraue the form of any thing from a pattern. As for
Myrrhites, it has the color of Myrrh, and the form of a fine precious
stone: it yields the smell of a sweet perfume or ointment, and being rubbed
gives a savor also of Nard. As touching Myrmecias, it is black, and has
certain risings in it like to werts. Myrsinites in color resembles honey, and
in odor the myrtle. Mesoleucos

Nasamonites is in color like to blood, howbeit certain black veins it has.
Nebrites is a stone conseciate to god Bacchus: it took that name of the
resemblance which it has to those N
skins of dear that he was wont to wear: there be others of the same kind,
but black they are. The gem Nympharena keeps the name of a city and nation
in Persia; and it resembles the teeth of a water-horse.

Orca is the barbarous name of a certain precious stone, which is very
pleasant unto the eye: O
wherein concur together black, yellow, green, and white. Ombria, which
some call Notia, is said to fall from heaven in storms, showers of rain, and
lightening, after the manner of other As the hair growing in the forhead, and
such things, whereof assay was given first to the fire.
libaments will not burn that be offered thereupon. Orites is in form round
as a globe: some call it Siderites, it will abide the fire and feel no harm
thereby. Ostracias or Ostracites is made in manner of a shell, and is exceeding
hard. A second kind there is of it resembling an Agath,

Panchrus, according to the name, seems to consist (in manner) of all
colors. Pangonius is P
no longer than a man's finger: it differs from Crystal in this only, that
it has more angles Metrodorus has not set down, howbeit he recites an
elegant verse of queen Timaris, which together with the stone she consecrated
to Venus: whereby is given to understand, That by the means thereof she became
fruitful and bare children: Some there be who call this gem Pansebaston. Now
concerning the gems of Pontus, known by the name of Ponticae, there be many
sorts of them. One is full of stars, garnished with bloody or black specks in
manner of drops; and this is counted among the sacred stones: another in stead
of stars has strakes and lines only of the same colors: and there be of
them again which represent the form of mountains and valleys. The gem
Phloginos, which is called likewise Chrysites, is found in Egypt, and is
likened unto the Ostracias of Attica. Phoenicites took the name of the
similitude that it has to a Date. And Tiresias, and that which they bring
forth, seems like unto water grown to be congealed into ice.

The Suns gem is white, and after the manner of the Sun, whose name it
bears, it casts forth shining rays round about on every side. Sagda is a
stone, which the Chaldaeans find S
sticking to ships, and they say it is green as Porrets or Leekes. Samothracia
the Island yields

Trichrus that comes out of Affricke is black, howbeit if it be rubbed it
yields three T
kinds of humors from it; to wit, from the root or bottom black, out of the
mids like blood, and in the head white. Telirrhizos is of an ash color or
reddish, and yet the bottom thereof is a lovely and sightly white. Telicardios
is much esteemed in the realm of Persia, where it is engendered: in color it
resembles tbe heart, and they call it there in their language, a Spot. The
stone Thracia is of three kinds; the first green, the second more pale, and the
third full of spots Venus hair, is exceeding black and shining; how it makes
a show of red hairs sprinkled among.

Veientana is a gem proper unto Italy, found about Veij, a city in Tuscane:
this stone is black and crossed through the midst with a white path. V


Zanthenes (as Democritus writes) is found ordinarily in Media: in color it
resembles base gold Electrum: and if a man do stamp it in Date wine and
Saffron together, it will relent in Z
manner of wax, and cast a most sweet and pleasant smell. Zmilaces is a stone
which the river Euphrates yields, like to the marble of Proconnesus, but that
in the midst it has a greenish color. Finally, Zoronisios is engendered in
the river Indus: commonly it is called the Magicians gem: more of it I find not
written.

CHAP. XI.
Of certain precious stones, taking their names from the members of man's body,
from beasts also and other things.

BEsides those gems comprehended under the Alphabet, there be more precious
stones also comprised after other sorts of distinction, according to diverse
significant varieties: for some there be which bear the names of certain
members of the body; as for example, Hepatites, of the liver; Steatites, of the
sundry sorts of fat, grease or tallow of each beast. Adad It takes the name of
the kidneys.
Nephros is a stone worshipped among the Aegiptians, so is Theudactylos also.
As for Adad, he is the chief god among the Assyrians. The stone Triophth^lmos
grows together with the Onyx stone, and represents three eyes of a man
together.

There be gems take their names likewise of beasts, to wit, Carcinias of the
color which the sea-crab has; Echites, of a Viper; Scorpites, either of the
color or form of a Scorpion; Scarites, of the fish Scaurus, i. a Gilthead;
Triglites, of the Barble; Aegopththalmos, of a Goats eye; like as another, for
the resemblance that it has to the Hyophthalmos
eye of a swine. Geranites took name of a cranes color; even as Hieracites of
the Hawks of Faulcons color. Aetites resembles the color of that Aegle which
has a white tail. Myrmerites shows the form of a Pismire creeping within
the stone; so does Cantharias, of Beetles. Lycophthalmos has the resemblance
of a Wolfes eye, and consists of 4 colors; the outward parts are tawnie,
enclining to a blood red, in the midst there is a black, enclosed within a
white circle, as like to the said eye as possibly can be. The stone Toas is
like to a Peacock, even as the gem Chelonia to the Tortoise. In Hammochrysos it
shows: Chalcites of brass; and Sycites of a fig. I see no proportion or reason
at all between

CHAP. XII.
Of new stones, and those natural. Of such as be counterfeit and artificial.
Of diverse forms and shapes of gems.

THere grow still precious stones unlooked for every day, that be new and have
no names, such as that in Lampsacus, where one was found in the gold mines so
fair and beautiful, that it was thought a present worth sending to K.
Alexander the Great, as Theophrastus writes. As touching the stones Cochlides,
which now are most common, they seem rather artificial than natural: and
verily it is said, That in Arabia there be found of them huge masses which are
sodden in honey 7 days and nights together continually; by which means, after
that all the earthy and gross refuse of this stone is taken away, the stone it
self remains pure and fine:

CHAP. XIII.
The way how to make proof of fine precious stones.

LEt other writers teach how to deceive the world by counterfeiting gems, for
mine own part I will take a contrary course, and show the means how to find out
false stones that be thus sophisticat: for surely, wanton and prodigal though
men and women be in the excessive wearing of these jewels, yet meet it is they
should be armed and instructed against such cousiners. And albeit I have
already touched somewhat respectively as I treated of the chief and principal
gems, yet I will add somewhat more to the rest: first and foremost therefore this
is observed, That all stones which be transparent, ought to have their trial
in a morning betimes, or at the Item, False stones if they be pierced or
engraven, will

As touching rivers that afford precious stones, Acesines and Ganges are the
chiese: and of all lands, India is the principal.

And now having discoursed sufficiently of all the works of Nature, it were meet
to conclude with a certain general difference between the things themselves,
and especially between country and country. For a final conclusion therefore,
go through the whole earth and all the lands lying under the cope of heaven,
Italy will be found the most beautiful and goodliest region under

FINIS.
An Index pointing to the principal matters contained in the second Tome of
Plinies natural History.
A B
ABaculi, what they be, 598. l Abaculus, an Island, 606. i Abiga, an herb,
181, e. why so called. ibid. Abort, what things do cause, 101, i. 200, i, l.
229, e. 286, k 309, b. 340, h. 396, i. 427, a. 449, a. women having suffered
Abort, how to be cured, 104. h Abort how to be prevented, 312, l. 319, f. 339,
c. 396, l, m 398, m. 403, a. 427. a. 448, l. 590, m, 591, b. Abortiue fruit how
to be fetched away when a woman trauelleth therewith, 180, g. medicines causing
Abort not to be put down in writing, 213, d. Abrodioetus, a surname that
Parasius the painter styled himself with, 536. h Abron a painter, 549. f
Abfinthites. See Wormwood wine. Abstersive medicines, 144, g. 197, d
Abstinence from wine medicinable, 303, c. from all drinks, ibid. from flesh
meats, ibid.
A C
Acacia, what it is, 194, k. from whence it comes, ibid. l how drawn, ibid.
Academia, a house of pleasure, 402, g. why so called, ibid. Academicae
questions, why so called, 402. g Acanos, or Acanon, what herb, 119, f
Acanthion, what herb, 194, i. the medicinable virtues thereof, ibid. how
employed in the East parts, 194, k Acanthios. See Groundswell. Acaros, what it
is, 237. a Acasigneta, an herb Magical, 204, g. why so called, ibid. named
also Diony sonymphas, and why, ibid. h Access easy and favorable to princes,
how to be obtained, 357. b Acedaria, what they be, 12, i. why so called, ibid.
Acenteta, when they be, 603. b Aceratae, what snailes, 380, l Acetabulum, what
measure it is, 113. c Achates, a precious stone. See Agath. Achilleae, what
Images, 490. k Achilles how he is painted, 516, h Achilleos, a singular
wound-hearbe, 216, i. found by Achilles, ibid. he cured prince Telephus with
it, ibid. the sundry names it has, ibid. the description, ibid. the virtues,
ibid. k Achaemenis, a magical herb, 203, b. the description, ibid, the
wonderful operation, ibid. 244, h. why called Hippophobas, 203. b Ach of the
hill or mountain Parsely, 24, g. the description, ibid. See Oreoselinum.
Acidula, a water medicinable, a fountain medicinable, 402, l. actually cold,
ibid. Acidulus, a fountain, 402. l Acinos what herb and the virtues, 111. b
Aconiti, what it signifies, 549, d Aconitum, a poisonous herb, 43, e. a most
speedy poison, 269, f. the description of it, 271, a. why called Cammoron,
ibid. how it first was engendered, according to the Poets fables, 270, g. why
called Thelyphonon, 271, a. how employed for the killing of Panthers or
Libards, 270, i. named by some Scorpion, and why 271, a. by others Myoctonon,
ibid. why called Aconitum, ibid. what remedies against Aconitum. 43, c. 119, a.
153, b. 262, h. 170, g. 237, f. 270, i. 323, d. 363, e 431, c. Aconitum how it
may be used for the health of man, 270. g Acopis, a precious stone, 624. h. the
description and virtues, ibid. Acopa, what medicines they be, 354, l. what go
to them. 417, d. 426, g. 450, i. 591, b. Acopos, an herb. See Anagyros.
Acornes, and their medicinable virtues, and properties. 177, c. Acoros. See
Galengale. Acragas, a singular engrauer, 483, e. sundry pieces of his
handy-worke, ibid. Acro, who was the first Empericke Physician that ever was,
344. h Acrocorios, a kind of Bulbe, 19, a Act of generation how it is helped,
130, h. 131, a 132, g. See more in Venus. how it is hindered. 58. k 59, d. 187,
a. 190, h. 221, d. 256, l. See more in Venus. L. Actius the Poet. 490. l L.
Actius being of low stature, caused his statue to be made tall. ibid. Actius
Nauius the Augur, 491 b Actius Nauius his statue erected upon a Column at
Rome, ibid.
A D
Adad, the Assyrian god, 630. h Adad-Nephros, a precious stone, ibid.
Adamantis, a magical herb, 203. c. why so called, ibid. the strange virtues
and properties thereof. ibid. A arca. See Calamochnus. Adarce, what it is, 74,
l. the virtues and properties that it has, ibid. Adders tongue. See Lingulaca.
Aditiales Epulae, or Adijciales, what feasts they be, 355. c Admiranda, the
title to a book of M. Ciceroes, 403. b Adonis garden, 91. c Adonium a flower,
ibid. in Adoration of the gods what gesture observed, 297. e Adultery how a
woman shall loath and detest, 434. k
A E
Aegilops, a kind of bulbe, 19. b Aegilops an herb, 235. a. the quality
that the seed has, 99. c. Aegilops, what ulcer, ibid. Aegina, an Island famous
for brass founders, 488. h in great name for the branchworke of brazen
candlestickes there made, ibid. k Aegipt stored with good herbs, 96. l. what
they be, ib. 97. b Egypt famous for singular herbs, and commended therefore
by Homer, 210. l Aegiptian bean, 111. c. the virtues, ibid. Aegiptilla, a
precious stone, 625. a. the description, ib. Aegles, why they hatch but two at
one airie, 590. k Aegle stone. See Aetites. Aegophthalmus, a precious stone,
630. i Aegolethron, an herb, 94, h. why so called, ibid. Aegonichon. See
Greimile. Aegypios, a kind of Vulture or Geere, 365. d Era Militum, what,
486. i Aerarium, the treasury of Rome, why so called, ibid. l Aerarij Tribuni,
what officers in Rome, ibid. Aeroides, a kind of Berill, 613. d Aerosum, what
gold, 472. g Aechines, a Physician af Athens, 301. e Aeschynomene, a magical
herb, 204. i. why so called. ib. the strange quality that it has, ibid.
Aesope the player his earthen platter, 554. g Aesope the Philosopher, 578 g. a
bondslaue together with Rhodope the harlot, ibid. Aeetites, a precious stone,
why so called, 396. l. 590. k. four kinds thereof, ibid. male and female,
ibid. their description, ibid. the virtues of them all, ibid. m Aeetites, a
precious stone, 630. i Aethiopis, a magical herb, 244 g. the incredible
effects thereof, ibid. from whence we have it, 269. d the description of it.
271. c. the roots medicinable, ibid. d
A F
Africa, the word is a spell in Afric, 297. d
A G
Agaricke, what it is, 227, d. male and female, ibid. d, e the ill quality
that the male has, ibid. Agath, a precious stone, 623, d. why called Achates,
ibid. the sundry names that it has, ibid. Indian Agaths represent the form of
many things within them, 623, f the Agath serves well to grind drougs into
fine powder, 623, f. diverse kinds of Agaths, 624. g the chief grace of an
Agath, ibid. incredible wonders reported of the Agath by Magicians, 623, h.
Agath of King Pyrrhus, with the nine Muses, and Apollo therein naturally, 601,
a, b Agathocles, a Physician and writer, 131. e Agelades, a famous Imageur in
brass, 497, e. he taught Polycletus, ibid. his works, ibid. he taught Myro,
498. h Ageraton an herb, 271. d. the description, ibid. why so called, and
the virtues. ibid. Aglaophotis, a magical herb, 203, a. why so called, ibid.
why named Marmaritis, ibid. used in coniuring and raising spirits, ibid. b
Agnels how to be cured, 38, i. See more in Corns. Agnus Castus a tree, 257. c
Agogae, what conduits they be, 468. m Agoracritus, an Imageur in Marble, 565,
d. beloved exceedingly by his master Phidias. ibid. Agrimonie, an herb, 220,
k. why called Eupatoria, ibid. the description, ibid. the virtues, ibid. l
Agrion a kind of Nitre, 420. h Agrippa Menenius enterred at the common charges
of the Roman Citizens, 480. i M. Agrippa how he cured the gout with vinegre.
156. k his admirable works during the year of his Aedileship. 585, e. how he
conueighed seven rivers under Rome. 582. h Agues, what medicines they do
require, 137. a. See more in Fevers.
A I
Air of sea water wherefore good, 412. k Air, which is good to recover
strength after long sickness, 181. d. change of Air, for what diseases good,
303. c
A L
Alabastrum, See Stimmi. Alabastrites, what kind of stone, 574. g. what uses
it served for. ibid. the degrees thereof in goodness, ibid. h Alabastrites a
precious stone, 624, i. the place where it is found, ibid. the description and
virtue, ibid. Alabastrites, a kind of Emeraud, 613. a Albicratense, a goldmine
in France, yielding the best ore, with a 36 part of silver, and no more, 469. c
Albi, hills in Candie, 408. k Albucum, what it is, 100 g Albulae, what waters
about Rome. 402. m Alcamenes, a fine Imageur and engrauer in brass and marble,
501, a. his works, ibid. 565. d Alcaea, an herb, 249. b Alcaea, an herb,
272 k. the description, ibid. l Alcaeus, a Poet and writer, 131. a Alcibiades
honored with a statue at Rome, 492. i. reputed the hardest wariour, ibid.
Alcibiades, most beautiful in his youth and childhood, 568. g Alcibion, an
herb, 275. e. the virtues, ibid. Alcimachus a feat painter, 549, c. his
workmanship, ibid. Alcisthene a woman and a paintresse, 551. a Alcmena hardly
delivered of Hercules, 304, m. the cause thereof, ibid. Alcon the Imageur, 514.
g. he made Hercules of iron and steel, ibid. Alcontes, a rich Chirurgian, 348.
g. well fleeced by Claudius Caesar, ibid. Alder tree what virtues it has in
Physic, 189. ^ Alectoriae, precious stones, 624. i. why so called, ib. the
virtues, ib. why Milo the wrestler carried it about him. ibid. Ale, an old
drink, 145, b. what nourishment it yields. 152. g Alectorolophos, an herb,
275. c. the description and virtues. ibid. Al^x, what kind of sauce, 418 g.
how made, ibid. the virtue and use thereof in Physic, ibid. i Aleos, a ri^er
of a strange nature, 403. d Alexander otherwise called Paris, excellently
wrought in brass by Euphraner, resembling a judge, a lover and a murderer,
502. g K. Alexander the great used to visit Apelles the painter his shop, 538.
m. he gave away his concubine fair Campaspe to Apelles, 539. a. a conqueror of
his own affections. ib. b Alexipharmaca, what medicines they be, 106. h
Aliacmon, a river, 403. d Alica, what it is. 139. c. compared with Ptisane.
140. k See Frument^e. Alincon described. 128. l. m. two kinds thereof, and
their virtues. 129. a Alisanders, an bearbe. 24. g. how strangely it grows.
30. g the virtues thereof. 54. i. See Hipposelinum. Alisma, what herb. 231.
a. the names that it has. ibid. the description. ibid. the two kinds and
virtues. ibid. Alkakengi, an herb. See Halicacabus. Alkanet. See Orchanet.
Almond, a disease of the throat. See Amygdales. Almond tree what medicinable
virtues it affourdeth. 171. d Almond milk, ibid. e Almonds bitter, their
virtues, ibid. e. f Almonds sweet their medicines, 172 g oil of Almonds. 161.
b. the effects thereof. ibid. Aloe, an herb. 251. b. the description. 271. d.
e. an excellent wound-hhea^be. ibid. how the juice is drawn out of it. ibid. a
gumissuing from it without in^ision. ibid. Aloe mineral about Jerusalem. 271.
f the concrete juice of Aloe how to be chosen. ibid. how it is sophisticated
272. g the manifold virtues it has. ib. the only purgative comfortable to the
stomach. ibid. the dose of Aloe. ibid. h Alopecia, a disease, when the hair
falls unkindly from the head and beard. 23^ (...). i. 364. l. the remedies.
See Hair shedding and baldness. Alsine, an herb. 272 m. the reason of the
name. ibid. the description. ibid. called by some Myos-oton. ibid. and why 273.
a. the virtues, ibid. Alpheus, a river running under the sea. 411. b Alphion, a
mere, having water medicinable. 403. a why so called, ibid. Althaea, what kind
of Mallow, 71. e Alum an herb. 275. d. the description. ib. the virtues. ib.
e Alume, what it is. 558. g Alume white or clear, the uses there^f. ibid. g h
Alume black or dim, and the uses thereof. ibid. Alume how engendered, how made.
ibid. h Alume Mineral, where, ibid. two principal kinds of Alume, ibid. i
Alume clear, the virtues, ibid. Alume Schistos, for what it is good in
Physic. ibid. k. l Alume, which is simply the best. 559. a. it takes the
name in Greek of the astringencie it has, ibid. Alume used to try and sine
gold. 466. i Alutatio, what it is. ibid. l Alvpon, an herb. 272. l. the
description. ib. the virtues. ib. Alysson, what herb. 192. k. why so called.
ibid. how it differs from Madder. ib. the wonderful operation of it. ib l.
A M
Amatorious medicines and means making thereto, 40. l 41. b. 119. c. 237. c.
278. k. 288. l. 299. e. 313. b. 314. h. to withstand Amatorious drinks, a
remedy, 316 g Amazon, an image, why called Eucnemos, 503. a Amazones, Images
of warlike women, represented by diverse artificers, 501. e Amber in request
next to Cristall, 605. c. Pliny sees no reason thereof, ibid. d Poets fables
as touching the original of Amber, ibid. e Amber, why it is called Electrum in
Greek. ibid. sundry opinions as touching Amber, and the beginning thereof.
606. g Amber called Succinum, Thyeum, and Sacrium, 607. a the true original of
Amber according to Pliny, ibid. d worn much in Lumbardie and those parts in
old time, as an ornament, and medicinable besides, ibid f. how to be cleansed,
608. h the sundry kinds of Amber. ibid. which is best, ibid. i. it is apt to
take a tincture or die, ibid. Pliny sees no cause why Amber should be so much
esteemed, 608. l. m what Amber is called Chryelectrum, 609. b. the properties
of this gold Amber, ibid. Amber is proper to counterfeit the Amethyst, ibid. c
the virtues of Amber, 608. k Ambrosia, properly what herb. 222. h. called it
is Artemisia, 273. d Ambrosia, a common name to many herbs, ibid. Ambrosia
the right described. ib. why it is called Botris. ib. Ambrosia, one of the
names of Housleeke, 237. c Ambugia, or Ambubeia, what herb, 47. d Ambushes
and secret sorelayings how to be avoided. 111. b Amerimnos, one of the names of
Housleeke, 237. c Amethyst, a precious stone, 620. m Amethysts, which are best.
ibid. where they be found, ibid. the reason of the name Amethyst, 621. a
Amethysts Indian of a deep purple color, ibid. Amethyst inclining to a
Iacinct, the Indians call Sacodion, and the color Sacon, ibid. what Amethyst
the Indians call Sapiros, 621. b the Amethyst Paranites, why so called, ibid.
the best Amethysts what properties they have, ib. best Amethysts called
Paederotes and Auterotes, ibid. why they be called Venus gems. ib. the reason
of the name Amethyst, according to the Magicians. 621. c. the vanities of the
Magicians as touching this stone. ibid. Amiant stone, 589. a. the description
and virtues, ibid. Ammi, what herb, and the uses thereof, 62. i Gum
Ammoniacke, 180. k. the virtues that it has. ibid. Ammonitrum, what it is,
598. g Amomum, 247. b Ampelites, a kind of earth medicinable, 560. g. how to
be chosen, ibid. Ampeloluce, what plant. 149. c. the description, ib. d
Ampeloprasos, what herb. 199. b. the virtues it has. ibid. Ampelos Chironia,
what herb, and why so called, 215. a Amphion a painter, excellent for
disposition of his work. 537 f Amphisbaena, a serpent or venomous worm, 70. k
the strange effects and nature thereof, 387. e. why so called. ibid. the
remedy against the venom thereof, 70. k Amphyctions, who they were, 553 f
Amphitane, a precious stone, 624. m. called also Chrysocolla ibid. the force of
it, ibid. it draws gold as the loadstone iron, ibid. Amygdales of the throat
and their inflammation how to be cured, 51. a. 59. e. 64. k 70. g. 71. c. 102.
i. 120. k. 123. c 135. d 138. g. 165. e. 169. d. 200. k. 245. b. 272. i. 301. e
328. i. 419. b. 559. a. c. Amylum. See Starchfloure. Amulius a painter given to
gravity and formalitie, 545. e his Minerua and other works, ibid.
A N
Anabasis, what herb, 246. i Anacampseros, a magical herb, 204. k. the
strange operation thereof, ibid. Anadyomene Venus, the famous picture wrought
by Apelles, 539. b. how highly it was esteemed by Augustus Caesar, 540 g. the
hurt it took was the credit of it, ib. h Anadyomene, another painted table
begun by Apelles, but never finished by him or any other, ibid. Anagyros, 273,
e. the description, ibid. Ananchitis, a precious stone, 631. a. the virtue it
has, ibid. A^apauomenos, a painted table of Protogenes his making, 543, b. the
reason of the name, ibid. Ararrhinon, an herb. See calves snout. Anaxilaus, a
writer in Physic, 236, i. 450, k Anchusa, what herb, 278. l. 124, k. 125,
b. the description and use, ibid. See Orchanet. Andrachne Agria, an herb, See
Illecebra. Andreas, a Physician and writer, 68. g Androbius, a fine painter.
549. b Androdamus, a stone, 590, h. why so called, ibid. the nature and proof,
ibid. Androdamus, a precious stone, 624, i. the form and reason of the name,
ibid. Androsaces, an herb, 273, a. the description, ibid. the virtues. ibid.
Andros^mon, an herb, ibid. b. the description, ibid. why so called, ibid. the
virtues, ibid. Anemone, 109. d Anemone Coronaria, an herb proper for
guirlands, ibid. c Anemone used in Physic, ib. three kinds of Anemone, ib.
Anguinum, what kind of egg. 353, f. the ensign or badge of the Druidae,
Magicians of France, 354, h. the virtues, ibid. i Anio a water serving Rome,
595, d Anonis, an herb, 273, e. the description, ibid. Ankles swelling how to
be allaied, 258, k Anonymos, an herb, 274, g. why so called, ibid. incredible
things reported by this herb, ibid. h Anthalium, an herb in Egypt, 97, a.
the description and use thereof, ibid. b Anthalium, 111. d Anicetum. See
Anisum. Anisum, an herb, 30, l. 65, d. how necessary it is in the kitchia,
and otherwise, ib. the degrees of Annise in goodness. ibid. f. why it is
called in greek Anicetum, ibid. how it is ^urtfull to the stomach, 67, b
Antacha^s, a pre^ious stone, 623. e (...) herb, 125. e Anthe^ (...), 255, b.
the description, ibid. (...), what (...), 188. k Anthe^con, the (...) of the
(...), 128, g. annoied much by Snailes, ibid. Anthologicaeum, books treating
of flowers, 82. (...) Anthracites, a kind of Schistos, 590. i. the description
and nature, ibid. Anthriscus, an herb, 130. h Anthyllion or Anticellis, an
herb, 111. d the description and virtues, 254. m Anthyllis, an herb
described, ibid. m Antimonium, 366. k. See Stibi or Stimmi. Anthracites, 630. l
Anthermus. See Bupalus. Antidotus, a cunning painter, 547, e. wherein he
excelled, ibid. he taught Nicias, ibid. Antheus reproved by Pliny for making
medicines of a man's skull. 294. g Anthropographus, the surname of a painter,
544. k Antidotes, what they are, 289. f Antipater, a fine grauer, 483, e K.
Antipater practiced with Aristotle to kill K. Alexander the great, 400. h
Antipathia, a kind of vern^sh for iron works, 515. e Antipathie between the
Puffin or Forke-fish, and plants, 430, h. Antipathi^ between red Dear and
Serpents, 321. d Antipathes a precious stone, 624. k. the form and trial of
it. ibid good against eie-biting of Witches, ibid. other virtues there^f, ibid.
Antiphilus, a commendable Painter, 549, a. his works, ib. (...) 544. k l.
Antirrhinon, an herb. See Calves snout or Snapdragon. Antispodium, what it
is, and the virtues thereof in Physic 159, f. 168, h. Antispodos, what, 512.
i Antistius Vetus possessed of Ciceroes Academia, maintained it, 402. h
Antonius Musa, a renowned Physician, 344. i. he changed the order of Physic
before his time, k. his cure of Augustus Caesar, contrary to the course of
other Physicians, ib. M. Antonius his Admirallship stayed by the fish Echeneis
before Actium, 426 g. he made counterfeit money, and sent it abroad, 479, a.
See more in Cleopatra. S. Antonies fire, a disease, the remedies for it 38, i.
41, d. 45 c 46, i. 47, b. 58, h. 68, h. 70, h. 71, b. 72, k. 102, l. 103, b
104, h. 105, a. 111, f. 122, k, 123, c. 140, h. 142, g 146, k. 158. g, l. 159,
c. 161, a. 174, k. 184, g. 191, d 193, d. 194, m. 197, a. 205, a. 278, l. 284,
k. 307, c 309, d. 336, m. 336, a. 351, d, f. 391, f. 392, g. 419, d 424, h.
433, b. 446, l. 450, k. 475, a. Anubis, the god of the Egyptians. 478. (...)
Anulare, a kind of white color, 531, d. why so called. ibid.
A P
Apparel how to be kept sweet, 162, i. 110. i, how to be preserved from
vermin, 264. (...) Aparine what herb, 274. (...) Aphaca, an herb, 99, d
Aphace, an herb, 275, b. the description, ibid. Apelles, a writer in
Physic, 316, i Apelles, the most excellent painter that ever was, 437, d.
when he flourished, ibid. his perfection, ibid. he wrote books of painting,
ibid. his grace or Venus in all pictures inimitable, ibid. he knew when to make
an end, 537. c. wherefore he reproved Protogenes in his work, ibid. the
history of him and Protogenes at Rhodes. 538. g. h. i. his excellent hand in
drawing a small line. ibid. his ordinary and daily exercise, and his Apoth^gme
thereupon. ibid. k. he exposed his pictures to the censure of people passing
by in the street. ibid. k. l Apelles thought not scorn to be reproved in his
workmanship. ibid. l. his apothegme to a shoemaker, finding fault with
somewhat above the shoe in his picture ibid. m. his courtesy and fair
language. ibid. beloved of King Alexander the great. ib. how mildly he reproved
king Alexander being in his shop. 539. a. in love with Campaspe, whom he dr^w
naked. ibid. by what pattern he made Venus Anadyom^ne. ibid. b. of a kind
nature to other painters of his time. ibid. how he brought Protogenes into
credit. ibid c. his dexterity in resembling favor and countenance most
lively. ibid. d. what welcome he had in king Ptolomees court in Aegipt. ibid.
c. how he was cousened there, and how he detected the cousener. ib. how he
painted king Antiochus, who had but one eye. ibid. f. his picture of king
Alexander, holding lightening in his hand 540. (...). the price thereof. ibid
other works of his. ibid k. l. m. 541. a. b. c. the horse which he painted in
contention with others. 540. m. his devise to have judgment pass justly on
his own side. 541. a. how he painted things that cannot be pourtraied. ibid.
b. the secret of his black vernish. ibid. c Aphrodisiace. 624. m Aphrodisium,
a river. 403 a Aphron, a kind of Poppie, why so called. 69. a. b Aphye, what
fish, and why so called. 418. h Aphytacores, certain trees. 606. m. what the
word signifies. ibid. Apiastrum, whaet herb according to Pliny. 54. i. the
virtues and effects. ibid. Apicius the glutton loathed the crops of Coleworts.
26. g Apilascus, what it is. 467. a Apion surnamed Plistonices. 613 b. he
raised up spirits to know what countriman Homer was. 375. c Apios-Ischas, what
herb. 253. b. the description. ibid. the root medicinable, and when to be
dug. ibid. why it is called the wild Radish. ibid. Apocynon, a bone in a
Toads side of wonderful power. 435. a. why so called. ibid. Apocynon, a shrub
described. 193. a. bane to dogs and other foure-footed beasts. ibid.
Apollodorus, a most curious workman in brass. 502. l. he never rested
content with his own workmanship. ibid. surnamed Insanus, i. Mad, and why.
ibid. m Apollodorus, a writer in Physic. 119. a. two of that name. 39. d.
Apollodorus an excellent Painter. 534. h. what were his inventions. ibid. his
works. ibid. he opened the door for other artisans. ibid. Apollonius Pytaneus,
a writer in Physic. 366. i Apollonius reproved for using the members of ma^s
body in Physic. 294. g Apollonides, a cutter in precious stones. 601. d a
great Magician. 373. c Apollophanes, an herbarist and writer in Physic. 126.
h Apostopos, a picture. 549. b Apothecaries, their deceitful dealings. 507.
(...). against them and their compositions. 176. l Apoxyomenos, a brass image
of Lysippus his making. 499. b Tiberius the Emperor was enamored on it. ibid.
Apostemes or swellings tending to suppuration, how they are cured 38. h. See
more in Impostumes and Tumors. Appetite to meat, what medicines stir up. 41. b.
59. c. 63. e. 65. e. f. 108. g. 143. e. 147. b. 148 g. 155. e. 171. d. 174. k.
194. h. 202. h. 277. a. 286. m. 359. c. 416. l. 418. k. l. 437. c. Apples
Melimela, or honey Apples, what medicinable virtues they have. 164. h Apples
round what virtues they have in Physic. 164. i Apronia, what plant. 150. i
Aproxis an herb, the wonderful virtue thereof. 202. l Apua, a fish. 418. h
Apuscidamus, a lake, wherein all things swim. 404. i Apuscorus a Magician. 372.
i
A Q
Aquifolia. 279. c Aquilius, a Roman general taken prisoner by K, Mithridates
463. e. forced to drink molten gold. ibid.
A R
Arabica, a precious stone. 624. k. like to yuorie. ibid. the virtues. ibid.
Arabicke blood stone, why so called. 590. h Arabus, a stone. 591 b. the use of
it. ibid. Arcadia a town so called in Creet. 410. l Arcebion, what herb. 125.
b Arcesilaus, an excellent workman in potterie. 552. l his moulds in cley
exceeding dear. ibid. his works. ibid. Arcesilaus, a singular imageur in
marble, his Lioness and the Cupids. 570. i Archagathus, the first professor of
Physic in Rome. 345. (...) first called the vulnerarie Physician or
Surgeon. ib. f afterward named the bloody butcher,. 346. g Archangell. See
Dead Nettle. Archers how they shall shoot and never miss. 313. d Archezostis,
an herb. 260. g Arcion. See Personata and Persolata. Arction, an herb. 274.
k. the description. ib. the virtues. ib. Arcturus, an herb. See Arction.
Archigallus, a picture wrought by Parasius. 536. g. how highly esteemed by
Tiberius the Emperor, ibid. Arellius, a painter given to looseness of life,
and to wenching. 545. d Arethusa the fountain senteth sometime of dung. 411. b
the reason thereof. ibid. Argemonia, an herb, how it differs from Anemone.
109. d Argemonia, an herb. 227. c. the virtues that it has. ibid. three
kinds and their description. ibid d Argentaria, a kind of chalk or white
earth. 560, l. why so called. ibid. Argyrodamus, a precious stone. 624. k
Arianis, a magical herb, 203. d. the strange operation thereof. ibid. Aris,
what herb. 200. d Aristida, what herb. 283. d Aristides, a famous painter
541. c. his gift in expressing the conceptions and dispositions of the mind.
ib. d. the perturbations also, ib. his admirable picture of a sucking babe, and
the mother dying upon a mortal wound. ib. b. sundry excellent pieces of his
handiworke. 541. e. f. 542. g. for one picture he received 100 talents of
silver. ibid. Aristides, a Painter, 544. h Aristius, a fine grauer, 483. e
Aristoclides, a good Painter. 549. a Aristogiton, a Physician and writer. 274.
g Aristogiton honored with an image of brass for killing Pisistratus the
Tyrant. 490. g Aristolaus, an approved Painter. 548. l Aristonidas, a cunning
imagenr. 513. e. his devise to express the fury and repentance of Athamas
both together. 513. f Aristophon, a cunning Painter. 549. b Aristolochia, an
herb. 226. g. the four kinds. g. h. i. the round, the male, Clematis or of
Candie, Pistolochia. ibid. their description. ibid. their medicinable virtues.
ibid. k Aristolochia, the round, why of some it is called the poison of the
earth. 226. k. See more in Birthwort. Aristotle a Philosopher. 303. e. noted
for devising a cup of a Mules houfe to carry poison in it. 400. h Arithmeticke
necessary for painters. 537. b Arme-holes, the rank and strong smell how to
be remedied. 101. b. 105. d. 128. k. 131. b. 207. f. 379 f. 422. l 558. k.
Armenius lapis. See Verd-de Azur. Armoracia, a kind of Radish medicinable. 39.
b Arnutius a Physician grown to great wealth. 344. l Aromatites, a precious
stone. 624. k. much used by Queens and great ladies. ibid. Arrenogonum, what
herb. 257. d Arrugiae, what they be in searching for gold. 467. c Arsen. See
Mandragoras. Arsenicke of three kinds. 521. a. their description. b. their
virtues. ibid. Arsenogonon, an herb described. 268. h. the virtue that it
has. ibid. i Artemisia, an herb. 222. g. called sometime Parthenius, and
why. ibid. wherefore it took the name Artemisia. ib. the description of it.
ibid. h. the virtues. 232. g Artemon, an effeminat person. 498. g. why surnamed
Periphoretos. ibid. Artechoux described 78. l. their virtues. ibid. they cause
desire of drink. ibid. m. they help in the act of generation. 131. a. See
more in Thistles. Artemon a Physician. 294. g. reproved for his magical
medicines made of the parts of man's body. ibid. Artemon, a singular painter.
549. c. his pieces of work. ibid. Arteriacum, a composition in Physic. 69.
b. how it is made. ibid.
A S
As, in Rome what it signified. 462. k As, of twelve ouxces, stamped with the
image of a sheep. 462. l. As, of two ounces, stamped with a two-faced Ianus of
one side, and the beakehead of a ship on the other. 463 a As, of one ounce.
ibid. b. of half an ounce. ibid. c an Ass delights in the herb Ferula, or
Fennel geant. 176. k. Ass^s house burnt to ashes, medicinable, 324. l Ass^s
green dung medicinable. 325. c Ass^s cons^crated to Bacchus, and why. 176. h
Ass^s yield ^emedies against serpents and scorpions. 322. l Ass soles urine
what it is good for. 324. h. how to be corrected. ibid. Asses yield many
medicines, but the wild Ass is most effectual. 323. b the stone that a wild
Ass voideth with his urine, being killed in chase is very medicinable. 333.
(...) Asarotos oecos, in Pergamus, the common hall, why so called. 596. h
Asarubas his opinion as touching Amber. 606. k Asarum, or Asarabacca, an
herb. 104. i. the medicinable virtues thereof. 104. i Asbestinum, a kind of
Line or Flax. 5. a. the admirable use thereof. 4. m. 5. a Asbestos, a precious
stone. 624. l Ascalabotes, what it is. 361. b Ascanius, a lake of Nure. 420. m
Ascalonia, what kind of Onion. 20 g. why so called. ibid. the properties.
ibid. Asclepias, an herb. 274. l. the description and virtues. ibid. l. m.
Asclepiades, the author of a new profession in Physic. 344. i. he revived
and cured one supposed to be dead and carried forth to his funerals. 243. d.
at first he was an Orator, and afterward became a Physician 242. m he altered
the practice of the former Physic. 243. a. he devised five principal
remedies for all diseases. ibid. which they are. ibid. he was called the cold
water Physician, because he allowed his patie^ts to drink cold water. c
Asclepiades devised bathing first, and pendant beds for the sick. 243. c. his
devises whereby he grew in credit. ib. d Asclepiodorus, a painter, excellent in
measures and proportions. 537. f. admired therefore by Apelles. 543. c his
picture of the twelve principal gods. ibid. d. what reward he had for it from
King Mnason. ibid. Ascyroeides. an herb. 275. a. the description. ibid. why
it is called Androsaemon. ibid. Ascyron and Ascyrocides, herbs resembling one
another. 275. a. Ash tree, the medicinable virtues thereof. 184. l. the seed
and cods which it bears. ibid. Ashes of a man or woman's body burnt,
medicinable. 301. (...) Asio, a kind of Owl. 366. d Asplenum, an herb. 274.
k. the description. ibid. the virtues. ibid. l Asplenas reproched for his
poisoned earthen platter. 554. k Asprenates, a family at Rome. 383. d. two
brethren of that name, how cured of the Collicke. ibid. Asperugo, an herb.
258. h. why so called. ibid. Asphodell an herb. 99. f. the description. ibid.
the use of root and seed. ibid. a sovereign herb. 127. e. the harm that
comes by Asphodell seed, 128. (...) Aspilate a precious stone. 624. l. two of
that name, and their description and virtue. ibid. Aspis, a venomous serpent
kills by a sleepie poison, and is killed likewise by a soporiferous herb.
113. a. b Aspis a most deadly serpent with a sting. 356 k. it kills by
drowsiness. ibid. inwardly taken, it is no poison. ibid. how the Aspis may be
intoxicated. 201. b. the miraculous cure of a manstung with an Aspis. 156. h.
what remedies against the venomous sting of the Aspis. 67. b. 106. i 143. d.
200. g. 228. g. 355. e. 356. g. ibid l. Assault of serpents, wild beasts, and
thieves, how to be avoided. 359. b Assius, a stone medicinable. 587. c. the
flower of this stone good in Physic. ibid. f Astaphis, what it is. 148 k
Aster an herb. 274. m. the description. ibid. why called Bubonium. ibid.
Aster a kind of Samian earth. 559. d. the use in Physic. ibid. c. how
known. ibid. Asteriae, a kind of white gem called a Girasole. 622. i. the
description and reason of the name. ibid. k Astericum, an herb. 123. d. the
description. ibid. Asterion, a kind of spider. 360. i Astragalus, what herb.
249. b. the virtues. ibid. c Astragalizontes. 497. f. an excellent piece of
work wrought by Polycletus. 498. g Astrape, a picture of Apelles his
workmanship. 541 b Astrapias, a precious stone. 630. l Astrios, a precious
stone of a white color. 622. k. the description and reason of the name. ibid.
l Astringent medicines. 48 g. 141. a. 147. a. 148. h. 158. i 161. c. 162. g.
163. e. 172. l. 175. b. 182. m. 192. h 194. g. 195. d. f. 196. i. 223. c. 237.
e. 249. c. ib. f. 250. g 255. a. 263. d. 275. b. 277. a. 278. i. 281. c. 284. h
286. k. 287. b. d. 319. b. 418. k. l. 421. e. 473. d. 474. h 485. b. 506. m.
511. c. 516. h. 519. c. 520. m. 529. d 557. d. 559. i. 556. a. Astringent
medicines and binding the belly, be diureticall. 249. c Astrobolos a precious
stone. 622. l Astroites, a precious stone. ibid. Astylis, the herb Lectuse,
why so called. 24. k Asturia the richest part of Spain for gold mines. 469. c
Asyctos, a precious stone the form and virtue of it. 625. a Asyla, what
herb. 234, l
A T
Atalanta, her picture at Lanuvium. 525. d Athamanticum, a kind of Spikenard
or Men. 77. a. why so called. ibid. the description. ibid. Athara, what it is.
138. i Athemon of Marona, an excellent Painter, wherein he excelled, and his
works. 548. h. i Atizoe, a precious stone. 624. l. the form and use thereof.
ibid. Atlantion, what it is. 312. m Atramentum, painters black, an artificial
color. 530. h Atramentum Sutorium natural. See Vitrioll. Atrophia, what
infirmity and defect of the body. 143. c the remedies thereof. ibid. 317. d.
e. 318. h Atrophi, who they be. ibid. Atractylis, an herb. 97. c. why so
called. ibid. Attalus, a writer. 297. c Attalica vestis, what kind of cloth.
466. g Attelabi, a kind of vnwinged Locusts. 361. d Attir in the breast and
chist how to be discharged 58. g. 67. d See more in Breast. Attractiue
medicines to the outward parts. 139. b. See more in drawing.
A V
Auens, an herb. 247. d. the description and virtues. ibid. Auernus, a lake
wherein nothing will flote. 404. i Aufeia, what water. 408. g Augites, a
precious stone, thought to be Callais, or the Turquois. 624. m Augustus Caesar
signed at first with the image of Sphinx. 601. e. the ^east that arose
thereupon. ibid. f. he gave it over, and used afterward the image of king
Alexander the great. 602. g Augustus Caesar his own image served as a signet
unto his successors to seal withal. 601 d Augustus Caesar crowned with an
obsidionall or grass coronet. 117. c. f Auli, the male shell-fishes. 444. h
Ancients commended for their industry. 165. e. 208. (...). for their love to
posterity. ibid. l. 209. c. for their labor and tranaile. 209. a Austrauia,
an Island, the same that Glessaria. 607. d Autolicus a boy, represented lively
in brass by Leocras the Imageur. 502. i Autopyros, a kind of bread. 141. a.
how medicinable. ibid.
A X
Axinomantia, what kind of Magic. 589. d Axungia, what grease it is. 320. i.
why so called. ibid. the virtue and use in Physic, and otherwise. ibid.
A Z
Azonaces taught Zoroastres art Magic. 372. i. Azur mineral or natural.
484. h. what it is. ibid. l. sundry sorts. ibid. Azur artificial. ibid. how
it is colored. ibid. Azur the best how it is known. 485. a false Azur how it
is made. ibid. b the virtues medicinable of Azur. ibid.
B A
BAbes how preserved from eye-biting of Witches. 300. (...) See Infants.
Bacchar, an herb. 85. e. the root only is odoriferous. ibid. what savor it
has. ibid. where he loves to grow. ibid. how medicinable it is. 104. g
Bacchus his image most cunningly wrought in marble by Scopas. 568. g Back
pain how to be eased, and the weakness strengthened. 49. e. 52. g. 53. a.
54. h. 125. a. 191. d. 199. b. 248. i 313. b. 450. i. Baianus, a vale full of
medicinable Springs.. 401. d Baines naturally hot, became of a sudden cold.
411. b Baines hot not used for Physic in Homers days. 412. h Baines of
Brimstone, for what good. ibid. Baines of Bitumen in what diseases medicinable.
ibid. Baines of Sal-nitre for what infirmities wholesome. ibid. Baines of Alume
in what cases good. ibid. hot Bains, Stoues, and Hot-houses how dangerous. 348.
m 349. a. how such are to be used. 303. f in Baines natural, how long the
patient is to sit. 412. h Baines or bathing in cold water after hot. ibid. who
devised it. 222. l Baines of cold water devised by Charmis, and approved by
Annaeus Seneca. 345. b. c forbearing Baines and Bathes, is medicinable. 303. c
heat in a Baine or Stoue how it may be better endured. 407. f. 419. c. Balance,
all contracts and sales passed by it in Rome. 462. l. Balanites, a precious
stone. 625. a. two kinds of it and their form. ibid. Balaustia, what they be.
165. e Baldness or Bald places occasioned by Alopecia. how to be replenished
with hair. 364. i. k. l. m. 365. a. b. 432. h. See more in Hair shedding.
Baleare Islands yield earth medicinable. 561. d Balis a wonderful herb. 211.
b. a young dragon and a man were by it revived. ibid. Ballote an herb. 278. g
Baltia an Island. 606. i Baluces, what they be. 469. b Banchus, a fish
medicinable. 439. e. the stones in the head likewise medicinable. 444. g
Baptes, a precious stone. 625 a Baraine women how to prove fruitful. 306. g.
312. k. 313. c. 397. a. b. 402. g. l. 403. a. See more in Conception.
Barrainesse what things do cause. 274. l. 403. a Barble fish medicinable. 433.
e. hurtful to the eyesight. 438. i. 442. h. Barble of the sea what harm he
takes by tasting of the Sea-hare. 427. a. b Barley what medicinable virtues it
does affourd. 138. i 140. i. which barley is best. ibid. Barley groats. See
Polenta. Barley meal, what effects it works in water and wine. 176. i.
Barme, what it is and the use thereof. 145. b Baroptenus, a precious stone.
625. b. the description. ibid. Baroptis. See Baroptenus. Barsaltes, a kind of
marble resembling iron. 573. d. thereupon it took the name (out of the
Hebrew.) ibid. animage of Barsaltes within the temple of Serapis in Thebes of
Egypt. 573. e. the strange quality of it. ibid. Basanites, a kind of touch
or whetstone of the best kind. 590. h. 592. g. Basill-gentle, a sweet herb,
how it floureth. 19. f. the seed how to be sown. 23. b Basil condemned by
Chrysippus, and why. 54. l. the discommodities of Basil. 54. l. why goats
refuse it. 54. m it hurts the brain, eyes, stomach and liver. ibid. it
brings folk out of their wits. ibid. it turns into a serpent, maggots, and
worms. 55. a. how it gathers scorpions unto it. ibid. it engenders lice.
ibid. Basil commended and maintained by other writers. ibid. Basil wild, the
virtues that it has. 55. e Basiliske, a serpent venomous and deadly with his
eye. 356. m. the Magicians tell wonders of his blood. ibid. they call it the
blood of Saturn. 357. a Battles represented in brass by diverse Imageurs.
503. b Battle in picture first showed by M. Valerius Max. Messala. 526. i
Batts, what vanities are reported of them by the Magicians. 359. f Batts hurt
by the Plane tree. 184. k Batis an herb, and the virtues medicinable that it
has. 111. b. Batis of the garden, is Sampier. 254. k Batrachion, what herb.
286. m. 239. c. See Crowfoot. Batrachites, a precious stone. 625. a three
kinds thereof. ibid. Batrachus and Saurus, two most excellent masons and
cutters in stone. 570. i. their devise alluding unto their names. ibid. k
Baulme or Balsam oil. 162. g the singular virtues that it has. ibid. to be
used warily. 162. h Baulme the herb. 106. k the names that it has in Greek
respective to Bees and honey. ibid. the medicinable virtues that it is endued
withal. ibid. l
B E
Beans, their medicinable virtues. 141. c Bearefoot, what herb. 224. i for
what it is sovereign. ibid. 247. e. Bears grease medicinable. 323. f Bears
gall. 324. k Beasts how to be cured of many and sundry diseases. 58. l 285. b.
342. k. Bebelo a silver mine in Spain. 472. l. of long continuance and very
rich. ibid. Bechion, an herb. See Folefoot or Coughwoort. Bedas, a fine
imaguere, and his works. 501. c Bedegnar or white Thystle, used both in
guirlands and also in meats. 92. l. 194. i Bedridden of long sickness, by what
means to be recovered. 219. e. Beech tree what medicines it does affourd. 178.
l Beer, a drink used in old time. 145. b what nourishment it yields. 152. g
Bees subject to the laske how to be remedied. 93. d how they are to be fed. 93.
e. 94. g. 95. c. Bees what flowers they delight most in. 93. c Bees straying
abroad from the hiue how to be reduced and brought home. 400. g Bees stolen
thrive worst. 23. e. Bees killed, if a menstruous woman touch the hiue. 308. m
Bee-hiues become well a garden of flowers. 93. c Bee-hiues how they are to be
made. 95. c. how they should stand. ibid. Bees sting, how to be remedied. 40.
h. 56. m. 95. a. 106. k 153. b. 174. a. 363. d. 399. f. Bees how to be driven
away that they shall not come near to sting. 53. b Beestings, what it is. 317.
b Beestings crudling in the stomach is poison. 323. b. how to be remedied.
ibid. See Colostrum. Beet of silver offered to Apollo. 17. d Beet seed comes
not all up in the first year. 23. a Beets of two sorts. 25. c Beets how to be
eaten. 25. c. d Beets are of diverse and contrary qualities. 25. d how garden
Beets and other herbs may be made to cabbage. 25. d. c Beets spread much. 25.
e Beets restore the taste to wine. ibid. Beets when to be sown and
transplanted. ibid. their medicinable virtues. 47. a Beetles, certain flies,
honored by the Aegiptians superstitiously. 390. k Appian would seem to give a
reason thereof to excuse his conntrimens vanity. 390. l Belus, a precious
stone. 625. b. consecrated to god Belus. ib. Belching sower and strong, how to
be repressed and cased. 66. h. 249. c. Belly ach how to be allaied, 383. e. f.
422. k Seemore in Wrings. Belly ach in beasts, 342. l Belly subject to many
diseases, 248. k Belly and mouth together chief means to work our death.
ibid. Belly swollen and hard how to be mollified, 40. i. 107. f 186. i. See
more in Tumors. for the Belly appropriate medicines, 154. g. 158. g Belly
costiue how to be loosened, 40. h. 43. b. 47. c. d. 48. k 51. c. 53. a. 160. l.
318. h. 331. a. See more in Soluble. herb Benet. See Anons. Beeuers in much
request among Physicians, 451. b they live on land and water, 430. i. whether
they bite off their own stones or no, ib. k. the description of their stones,
and how they be sophisticated, ibid. how Beeuers stones be known the true for
falsified, ibid. l. the degrees in goodness of their stones, ibid. See
Castoreum. Beeuers urine a counterp^ison. 431. c oil of Ben the virtues that
it has, 161. e Benumbed parts for colder otherwise how to be chafed and
restored, 58. h. 108. k. 134. g. 168 g. 173. d. 178. k 259. f. 359. c. Beryll,
a precious stone much of the nature of the Emeraud. 613. b. India the natural
place thereof, ibid. how it is to be cut, 613. c. which is the best, ibid.
Beryls of diverse kinds. 613 c. d Chryso-berillus, 613. c Chryso-praesos.
ibid. Hyacinthizon, ibid. Aeroides, 613. d Beryls, Cerini, Oleagini.
Chrystallini, ibid. the blemishes and faules of Beryls, 613. d the grace of
Beryls lies in their length, 613. d. e how they be sophisticated, 613. f
Betonie the herb, called Vettonica, whereupon, 224. g named Serratula,
C^stion, and Psycotrophon, ibid. the description and praise of this herb. ib.
the vertuees 224. g. h. Beauty and favor procured to the body by herbs in
old time, 114. k. 231. f how to be helped, 150. h. 314. k
B I
Biaeon, a kind of wine. 155. c. wherefore it is good, ibid. d Bialcon, a
writer in Physic, 342. g Bigati, what pieces of silver coin at Rome, 463.
(...) Biles or f^ll pushes how to be discussed or resolved, 56. h 128. h. 140.
h. 143. c. 158. g. 169. c. 587. f. how to be repened, 141. e See more in
Imposthumes. Bindweed, Smilax Nicephoros. an herb, 190. l. the description.
ibid. the virtues that it has in Physic. ibid. two kinds. ibid. Bindweed.
See (...). Birds, how they man b^ (...) by a (...), 546. g Birth of children,
(...) 36. i 41. d. 52. k. 66. k. l. 72. h. i. 110 g. 131. c. 173. d. 174. g.
180. h. 198. k. 202. g. 207. d. 268. h. 273 f 288. h. 290. i. 299. e. 301. c.
d. 313. c. d 315. d 339, c. d. 340. g. h. 340. k. 353. a. 396. g. k. l. m. 448.
k 449. a. how to be hastened, 205 c afterbirth how to be sent or brought away,
43. f. 50. h 54 h. 57. f. 60. k 65. d. 74. b. 78. g. 106. g. 110 g 127. c. 129.
d. 150. g. 157. c. 174. g. 182. m. 197. b 199. d. 201. a. 216. g. 266. l. 267.
a. c. d. c. f. 273. f 279. a. 288. h. 290. i. 339. d. 341. a. 395. f. 417. e
430. m. 448. i. 448. m. Bisontes. See Busles. Biting by man or woman how to be
cured, 61. b. 143. b 172. h. 301. a. 443. l. Bitumen approaches the nature
near to brimstone, 557. b Bitumen slimie in Jury, ibid. Bitumen Mineral in
Syria. ibid. Bitumen liquid where it is found, ibid. where it is white. ibid.
Bitumen unctuous in the territory of Agragantum. 557. c how the paisants
gather it, ibid. the use thereof. ibid. marks to k^ow good Bitumen, 557. c. d
the operation of Bitumen, 557. d the plaster of Bitumen for what it is good,
557. e how it serves to enhuile vessel of brass, 557. f. 558. g with cement
of Bitumen the walls of Babylon were built. 558. g. how Bitumen serves
yron-smiths and nailers, ibid.
B L
Black and blew under the eyes how to be discussed, 272. h 277. c. Black of
painters called Indicum, 530. k Black of Dyars made of florey, ibid. Black
color of painters called Tryginon, ibid. used much by Polygnotus and Mycon,
painters, ibid. an artificial color. 530. h. which is best, ibid. Black
Elephantinism, devised by Apelles, 530. k sho^emakers Black, 510. k. m Black
and blew marks upon stripes and bruses how to be taken out, 39. c. 44. k. 50.
g. 54. h. 62. h. 64. l. 109. b 126 l. 134. g. 141. b. 143. f. 149. c. 161. c.
163 a 172. i. 192. i. 200. k. 240. g. 272. h. 277. c. 289. c 318. l. 337. d.
350. i. 352. i. 394. k. 413. b. 424. h. Black stones, 588. h Bladder pained
how to be eased, 129. a. 130. g. 140. m 207. a. 238, m. 254, g. h. i. k. 255,
a. b. c. 263, d. 384, k 430, g. Bladder stopped how to be opened, 77. b See
more in urine. Bladder itching how to be helped, 130. i Bladder scabbed,
excoriate, and exulcerate, or otherwise grieved, how to be mundified and eased,
38, i. 46, i 47, d, c. 61, a. 70, h. 72, l. 102, g. 107, f. 110. g. 120, h 161,
c. 171, d. 206, l. 255, c. 267, b. 290, i. 352, h 437, c. for the Bladder,
appropriate and comfortable medicines, 148, k. 150. l. 163, b. 167, c. 171, c.
174, i. 179, b. 180, k 181. f. 216, h. 289, a. 359, c. 384, h. 444, g. 589, f.
Blains, See Biles and Pushes. Blatta, a kind of fly or Beetle medi^ (...),
(...). i k, l, m diverse kinds of them described. ibid. and their sundry
virtues. ibid. Blattaria, what herb, and why so called. 228. k. the
description. ibid. Bleach. See Itch and Scabs. Blechnon. See Fern. Bleeding
occasioned by feeding much upon fish. 447. a how the same is stayed. ibid. b
Blee^s, a foolish herb. 76. l. the danger thereof. ibid. Blemishes in the
visage how to be taken away. 52. i. 55. e 56. i. 58. k. 133. c. 144. g. 314, k.
422. m. See more in Visage, Skin, Pimples, and Freckles. Blennij certain
fishes of the Mullets kind. 444. g. the ashes thereof be medicinable, ibid. d
Blindness what remedies for it. 421. d. See more in Eyesight. Blisters red,
how to be cured and prevented, 43. f. 139. b 158. k. 338. l. red Blisters
rising like purples how to be repressed, 186. h Blisters upon burning or
scalding, how to be healed, 303. c 351. c. Blisters how to be raised, 166. m
See more in Causticke. Blood, what engender and increase, 46. g. 152. g
Bloud-suckers, 361. d. See Horsleeches. Blood of a bucke goat is strong, 321. c
the effect that it has in edge tools, ibid. Blood of goats makes a pale
look, ibid. Drusus a Tribune of Rome drank it for that purpose, ib. Blood of
red Dear, ibid. f Blood of Saturn, what it is, 357. a Blood of man or woman
is medicinable, 301. d Blood of horses and mares is corosiue and dangerous.
321. b Bulls blood venomous. ibid. unless it be at Aegira a city in Achaea.
ibid. Bloudifals how to be healed, 148. l. 173. c. 258. m. 324. k. 393. e. 589.
b. See more in Chilblanes. flux of Blood in horse how to be stayed, 342. k
Blood cluttered and congealed in the body, how to be dissolved and expelled,
39. e. 103. a. 110. i. 141. c. 156. g 157. a. 167. f. 182. g. 412. m. 557. e.
how to be kept from cluttering. 162. h Blood breaking out at times in sundry
places, how to be repressed, 263. f Blood lost how to be recovered, 156. m
Bloud-stone, See Haematites. Bleeding how to be staunched, 45. c. 52. h. 57. d.
59. d 78. k. 119. f. 120. i. 127. c. 140. l. 142. k. 146. k 158. k. 169. d.
170. i. 171. d. 174. l. 178. l. 184. k 196. h. 197. a. 199. b. 223. f. 245. a.
^63. a. 272. i 273. d. 274. i. 284. h. 307. (...). 337. f. 338. g. 350. h 365.
c. See more in Issue of blood. Blood vomiting how to be repressed, 263. f. 424.
i. 430. g 529 a. 589. f. See more in blood voiding upward. Blood spitting
reaching, and voiding upward, what remedies therefore, 39. c. f. 43. a c. 44.
i. 48. h. 49. d. 55. c 58. g. 59. d. 73. c. 75. a. f. 102, g, k, l. 138, l.
140, m 146, i. 147, a, b, f. 149, c. 159, a. 160, g. 163, a, e, g 164, l. 165,
c. 171, c. 172, g, l. 174, h. 178, l. 179. a 184, h. 186, l. 188, k. 190, g.
194, g, i. 195, c. 196, g 197, d. 245, f. 246, g. 247, b, c. f. 249, f. 263, e.
272, i 274. g. 275, c. 285, d. 289, c. 291, d. 305, d. 329, b, c 352, h. 353,
a. 380. i, k. 381, b, c. 412, k. 424, i. 442, i 559, d. Bloody s^ix how to be
cured. 37, b. 39, a, e. 40, k. 42, h. 46, i 47, b, d. 48, g. 49, d. 52, k. 55,
c. 66, i. 72, k. 73, c, d, e 102, h. 106, l. 120, l. 126, g. 129, a. 130, l.
137, b 139, f. 142, i. 146, i. 147, a, b. 148, h, i. 153, c. 161, c 163, e.
165, f. 168, g. 172, i. 174, h. l. 177, b, c, d, f 190, h, k. 195, e. 196, i.
197, f. 220, l. 248, m. 249, a, b, c, f. 250, g, h, i. 263, d. 272, l. 281, a.
285, b 287. c. 289, c. 291, d. 311, c. 314, g. 318, k. 331, b, c d, e, f. 332,
g. 352, h, l. 353, c, d. 382, i, k, l, m. 418, k 443, f. 516, g. 520, i. 557,
e. 559, c. the pains proceeding thereupon how to be assuaged, 148, l. See more
in Dysenterie. a Blouding called in Latin Sanguiculus, 332. g
B O
Bodies of those that have been stung with serpents or bitten by mad dog, make
eggs addle under a hen, and cause ews and such to cast their young untimely,
299. b the remedy, ibid. c Boethus, an excellent imageur and engrauer. 483. b
Minerua of his workmanship, ibid. a child throtling a goose wrought by him.
503. c better he was in silver than in brass, ibid. Boy children, by what
means they are thought to be gotten and bred, 215, f. 226, k. 257, b. 279, b,
d. 288, m 339, e. 340, m. Boys, how Salpe caused to look young and smooth,
without hair on their faces, 449, c Bolae, certain precious stones, 625. c
Bole-armen common, a painters color, 528. e Bolbiton, what it is. 336. l
Boleti, what Mushroms, 132. m Bolites, what it is, 110. l Bombace, See Cotton.
Bone ach how to be eased, 67. d Bones grieved how to be helped, 262. k Bones
broken how to be knit and sowdered, 40, h. See Fractures. Bones growing within
the ground, 588. h stones of a Bonie substance. ibid. a Bone found in a horse
heart for what it is good, 326. m Bonet vailing, whereupon and for what cause it
arose, 305. a Borage, See Buglosse. wild Bores, what they do yield adverse to
serpents. 322. h wild Bores grease medicinable, 324. k their urine likewise and
gall, 325. d Bores grease medicinable, 230, h Bores troubled and skalt with
their own urine, 332. l Bostrychites, a precious stone, 625. b Bots in beasts
how to be expelled, 326. l Botches, See Impostumes. Botches in the emunctories,
how to be discussed or else ripened, 121, d. 122, g. 144. g. See Impostume
called Pani. Botryon, what medicine, 301, c Botrys, what herb, 222, h. the
description, ibid. Botrys, 278, h. what names theCa ppadocians give it, ibid.
Botrytes, a precious stone, 625, b Borax natural, 454, g. a mineral and where
found, 470, l the degrees of Borax in goodness, and where to be had, 470, l,
m. Borax artificial, 470, m. called Lutea or yellow Borax, 471. a. how it is
made and prepared. ibid. b. how colored, ib. of two sorts, ibid. Borax which
is best, and how known, 471, c the prices of the several kinds of Borax,
ibid. d Nero paued the great Cirque at Rome all over with green Borax, 471. c
Borax of three kinds, ibid d Borax in powder, how to be laid in painting,
ibid. Borax that goldsmiths use, is called Chrysocolla, or Goldsoder, 571. f.
it is altogether artificial, ibid. how it is made, ibid. the virtues
medicinable, 471. c Borysthenes, a famous river, 410. k. floteth over the river
Hypanis, 411. c. once in the Summer looks of a violet color, ib. the water
of it very light, ibid. Borsycites, a precious stone, 631. a Bowels their
obstructions how cured, 259. a See Praecordiall parts.
B R
Brabyla, 278. i Bracelets given to Roman citizens for their service in wars
461, c. Bracelets of gold worn by men next to their arm bare, 461. f. why
they are called Dardania, 462. g Brains and the pellicles thereof impostumat,
how to be cured, 185. f Brain pellicles how comforted, 189. d Brains light
how to be settled, 67. a Brains intoxicated, by Halicacabus or Dwale, how to be
helped, 113. a Brain how it is purged of phlegmatic humors. 47. c 232. l.
233. e. 234. k. Brains of a wild Bore adverse to serpents, 322. h Brainsicke
or bestraught of wits, how to be cured, 44. g. 46. i 56. h. 219. d. 283. a.
591. a. Brambles, what medicinable virtues they be endued withal, 195. f. they
are exceeding astringent, 196. k Branded marks how to be taken, 240. g
Brankursine, an herb to what uses it serves, 129. b. two kinds thereof,
ibid. the medicinable virtues, ibid c Branches for lights in temples made
ordinarily of brass. 489. c. Brass pots how they may be scoured, and rid from
furring. 51 b Brass ore. See Cadmia. Brass a metal greatly esteemed, 486. i
of Brasse-founders a confraternitie at Rome, ibid. k Brass weighed out for
payment and money, 462. k Brass first coined by Ser. Tullus K. of Rome, ibid.
l what was the stamp, ibid. the value enhaunsed and raised at Rome, 463. a
Brass mines, where the best, 486. l they are medicinable, 506. g Brass tried
out of the ore, 486. k Brass made of Cadmia, 486. h Brass Cyprium or copper
made of Chalcitis, ibid. m Brass Sallustianum, 487. a. why so called, ibid.
Brass Linianum, ib. why so called, ibid. Brass Marianum, 487. a Brass
Cordubense, ibid. Brass Mascelin, a co^pound temperature of the best, 487. c
Brass Corinthian, what mixture it was, ib. d. highly esteemed, ibid. Corinth
brass metal of three kinds. 488. g Brass of Aegina highly esteemed, 448. h
Brass of Delos much accepted. ibid. Brass of Corinth employed both in public
and private buildings, 489. a Brass Coronarium, what it was, and why so
called, 505. b Brass Regulare, ib. called also Ductile and why, ibid. c Brass
Caldarium, 505. c Brass Campanum, ibid. Statuaria what temperature of Brass
it was, 505. e and why so called, ibid. Tabularis, what temperature of Brass,
and whereupon so named. ibid. Brass Collectaneum, what it is, ibid. the
temperature of Brass called Formalis, 505. f the temperature called Ollaria,
ibid. color of brass named Grecanicke, 505. f what vernish saves Brass from
rust, 506. g Brass serves for perpetuity of registers, 506. g Brass skales,
507. c Brass rust or Verdegris, 508. g diverse ways to gather it, 508. h how
it is sophisticated, 508. i. how discerned, ib. k Brass green rust or
Verdegris, how to be calcined and prepared for use in Physic, 508, k. l.
vncalcined, what medicinable virtues it has, 509. a Bread at Rome different
according to states and degrees. 11. b Bread leauened, 141. a Bread
downright, ibid. Bread biscuit, ibid. besides nourishment, what virtues
medicinable it yields, ibid. sea-Breams Melanuri, how they feed of crumbs,
429. a how they beware of a bait within an hook, ibid. Breath stinking an
unseemly disease, 239. f proceeding from corrupt lungs, how remedied, 329. b
what makes a sour and strong breath, 377, a. 441. a Breath how it may be made
sweet, 64. g. 65. e. 79. a. 105. d. 131. c. 140. i. 156. m. 162. i. 164. i.
174. h 239. f. 240. g. 304. g. 313. a. 326. k. 328. k. 350. g. 377. a 441. a.
624. i. for diseases and pain in the Breast, what medicines be appropriat. 46.
l 53. a. 56. h. 66. g. i. 74. i. 76. l. 120. h 154. g. 180. l. 182. l. 186. i.
192. l. 193. b. 246. g. 247. c. d 250. l. 290. i. k. 275. e. 284. h. 289. f.
for Breasts impostumat, remedies, 141, c. 246, g. suppurations in the breast
how cleansed, 144, h. 216, l ulcers in the breast how healed, 208. g Breasts of
women swelled how to be helped, 51. b. 54. g 58, (...). 59, f. for women's
breasts convenient medicines, 587, f. 589, b Breasts or paps of women how they
may be trussed round decently and not hang down flagging, 397. a. b Breasts of
women newly laid, if they be swollen and hard, how to be mollified and eased,
395, e. 437. d Breasts of women sore and Impostumat, remedies therefore. 395,
f. 448, h. 589. a. how to be preserved from swelling and the ague, 397. a. from
pricking and shooting pain. 397, a. if they be in pain, how to be eased, 397.
b. 589. a See more in Women. Breast full of purulent matter, how to be
discharged, 353. a Briazus, the name of a god and temple, 404. k Bricks good,
of what cley, 555. c. the best season for making brick, ibid. how old brick
ought to be before it be used in building. 555. d. Brickes of three sizes,
ibid. how according to every size they be employed in Greece, ib. e. what
buildings of perpetuity were made of brick, ibid. f Bridge Sublician or of
wood over Tiberis at Rome, framed and set together without either pin or nail,
581. d. the reason why, ibid. Brimstone of wonderful power, 556. i. k. where
the best is found, ib. i. four kinds of brimstone. ibid. Brimstone natural,
556, i. the use in Physic, ibid. Brimstone artificial, 556. k. the use of
it, ibid. how Anaxilaus was wont to make sport at a merry meeting of guests,
with brimstone. 556. l Brine to heat and comfort the sinews, how it is made,
413. d Britannica, what herb, 112. l. the description, ibid. the virtues
thereof, ib. why so called, ib. from whence it is brought, 269. d Brixiades, a
famous Imageur, 566. l Broom, whereof they make thread and not cordage, 4. g
the Broom Genista, for what uses it serves, 188. g Bees delight therein,
ibid. 93. d whether it be Sparton of the Greeks, or no, ibid. Bromos, what it
is, 145. a. the description, ib. the medicinable properties, ibid. Bronchocele,
what disease it is, and how helped. 142. h Brontia, a precious stone, 625. b
Brontes, a picture of Apolles his devising and making, 541. b Brookelime, an
herb, 255, a. the description, ibid. for inward Bruises and cluttered blood
thereupon, fit medicines, 50. k. 58. h. 64. h. 73, a. 103. b. d. 109. b. 22. k
123. d. 141. a. 146. l. 157. a. 161. c. 167. f. 192. h. i 201. f. 226. l. 262.
i. 264. g. 277. c. 289. c. 337. d. 349. f 350. i. 370. l. 412. k. 599. c.
Bryaxis, a famous founder of brazen images, statues, and colosses, 495. e. his
works. 501. c Bryon Thalassion, a sea moss, 278. i. the description. ibid.
and 445. b. good for the gout and joints, ibid. Bryonie the white, an herb,
149. f. the virtues, 150. g Bryonie the black, ibid. the virtues, ibid. h. i
B V
Bubonium an herb. See Aster. Bucardia, a precious stone, 625. b Buceros, an
herb. See F^nigreeke. running Buckewheat. See Elatine. Buffles or wild bulls
yield medicines, 323. c Buglossos, an herb, 223. d. why so called, ib.
wherefore it is named Euphrosinon, ibid. Bulls how they may be taken and made
to stand still, 169. (...) Bulls blood a poison, the remedies for it, 51. a.
131. c. 168. l 323. e. 422. k. See more in Blood. Bulls gall, medicinable, 325.
d. for what, 324. h Bulls urine medicinable, ibid. Bulapathum, what docke, 73.
e Bularchus, an excellent painter, 533. a Bulbous plants, 18. l of Bulbs,
diverse kinds. 19. b Bulbous roots, when to be dug up, 19. c Bulbous roots,
as onions, and such, how they will grow big, 21. b. their medicinable virtues.
21. b. 52. h. their discommodities, 52. l Bulbine, 19. b. the description
thereof, and the use. 52. m Bulla, the brooch of gold or pendant tablet, how it
first came up. 455. c Bullois, their virtues, 169. d Buildings at Rome in
Plinies days compared with those of ancient time, 583. b. c the Romans
exceeding in sumpteous Buildings, 583. a. b. c Buleuterion, a public hall in
Cyzicum, why so called, 581. c the wonderful frame thereof, 581. c. d
Bumastos, a kind of grape, 268. i Bunch swelled of the throat, how to be
cured, 142. h See Bronchocele. Bunias, what kind of Nauew, 39. a. the virtues,
ibid. Bunion a kind of Nauew, 39. a. the virtues, ibid. Bupalus and Anthermus,
two brethren and imageurs in marble, 564. l. how they abused the Poet Hipponax
by pourtraying him and proposing his image as a laughing stock. 564. l. their
pride and vain glory, 565. a Bupl^uron, an herb, 129. c. the description and
virtues. d Bupleuros. 278. k Buprestis, an herb, 129. d. whereupon it took
that name. ib. in this herb the Greeks are inconstant. ibid. Buprestis, a
venomous worm or fly, hurtful to kine and oxen, 362. h. 377. d. why it is so
called, ib. e. what remedies against the poison thereof, if it be swallowed
down, 150, m. 157, c. 160, k. 161, d. 307, f. 318, h. 322, k 422, i. the use of
this fly in Physic, 362, i. how to be prepared, ibid. Burre described, 99. d
little Bur, called Lappa Canaria, 206. h. the description, ib. clot-Burre, 227.
f. the names, description, and virtue, ibid. butter Burre Persolata, 229, c.
the names, description, and virtues thereof, 229. c for Burns or scalds, proper
remedies, 38, i. 42, l. 46, i. 47, c d. 70, l. 72, k. 78, i. 103, d. 110, i.
122, k. 123, c. 124, l 128, i. 129, c. 130, g. 139, b. 140, g, (...). 141, c.
142, h 146, k. 155, e. 158, h. 160, m. 161, c, f. 167, e. 170, m 174, k, m.
175, a. 178, g. 181, c. 184, k, l. 185, c, e 190, h, i, k, l. 194, g. 201, a,
e. 262, k. 273, c. 274, k 275, b. 306, i. 352, k. 392, k 446, l. 473, e. fresh
and new made, what is to be applied, 418, i. 419, d how it may be kept from
blistering, 159, b. 319, d. 337, c 350, i. 419, d. 587, b. 590, h. how to be
skinned up without a skarre, 168, g. 262, k 337, c. 392, k. 422, k. to take out
the fire of a burn or scalding, ibid. if the place be raw how to be skinned,
437, d Burnt shins how to be remedied, 52, l Burrets shell medicinable, 438. h
Buthyreus an excellent Imageur, 502, i. his works. ibid. Butyr held for a most
dainty meat, 319, a. it distinguishes the rich from the poor, ib. whereupon
Butyr took that name, 319, a. how it is made, ib. stale nd rank Butyr
medicinable, 319, b. of what quality it is, ibid. Butyr-milke. See Chernmilke,
and Oxygala. Butterflies hurtful to Bee-hiues, 95, d, e. how to be chased aw
y, ibid. Byrthwoort called Aristolochia, for what cause, 226. g it is named
Malum terrae, ib. h. four kinds thereof, ib. their descriptions, 226, h, i
Bythus of Dyrrhachium, a writer in Physic, 309, c Byturos, a strange beast,
mentioned by M. Cicero, 399. (...)
C A
CAcalia, an herb. 246. h. See Carawaies wild, Cachla, what herb, 223. e
Cachrys, what it is. 193. b. 254. k. of diverse kinds, 193. c Cacizotechnos.
See Callimachus. Cackerils salted, are medicinable, 442. g Cactos, what herb,
and how it is used, 98. k Cadmia, 486. l. of sundry sorts, 506, h. how to be
prepared, ibid. k. the medicinable virtues, ibid. l Cadmia Capnitis, what it
is, 506. i Cadmia Botryitis, the best, and why so called, ibid. Cadmia
Placitis, 106, k. the reason of the name, ibid. Cadmia Onychitis, ibid. Cadmia
Ostracitis, ibid. Cadmitis, a precious stone, 625. c Caecilius Bion, a writer,
330. i Caeciliana, what kind of Lettuce, 24. i M. Caecilius accused
Calphurnius B^stia for murdering his two wives, 207. g Caelia a kind of
drink, 145. b Caelius, a Roman writer, 404. i Caenus, a painter, 549, d. his
works, ibid. Caeria, a kind of drink, 145. b Caeruleus, a fountain serving
Rome, 586. g Cala, an herb, 278. l. of two sorts, their description and
virtues, ibid. Calamis, a fine imageur and engrauer, 483, e. his works, 501, a.
Calamitae certain frogs medicinable, 438. k. their description, 439, b. why so
called, 447. b Calamochnus, what it is, 450. i. the description and nature,
ibid. Calcifraga, an herb, 281. a. See Empetron. Calcining, how to be
performed, 362. l C. Caligula the Emperors effeminat apparel, 603. b C.
Caligula the Emperor his royal ship stayed by the fish Echeneis, 426. g. he
was killed by his own soldiers, ibid. h. he extracted pure gold out of
Orpiment, 469. d Calix^nus, a writer, 575. e Callainae, precious stones, 625. c
Callais, a precious stone, ibid. Callias the Athenian devised first the use of
Vermilion, 474. e. Calliblephara, ointments to beautify women's eyes, 473. e
Calliblephara, the best oisters, 436. m Callicrates his passing fine
workmanship in stone, 570. m Callicia, what herb, 202, k. the wonderful
operation thereof, ibid. Calligonon, what herb, 287. a Callimachus, a Poet,
131. b Callimachus, an imageur in brass, famous for his surname Cacizotechnos,
504, k. why he was so termed, ibid. Callimachus wrote a treatise of guirlands
and chaplets, 82. h Callion, what herb, 112, h Callionymus, a fish
medicinable, 438. h. he is named Vranoscopus, 438. i. and why, ibid. Callistus,
a rich enfranchised slave, 479. e Callitricha, what herbs, 232. i
Callitriche, ibid. l Callosities, how to be softened and rid away, 108. g. 139.
b 191, e. 320. g. 423. f. Calphurnius Bestia killed his two wives with the
poisonous herb Aconitum, 270. g M. Calphurnius Flamma honored with a chaplet
of grass. 117. b. Caltrap thistle Tribulus described, 98, k. the properties of
it, 98. l Calues-snout, an herb, 231, e. the description, names, and virtues,
ibid. Calves yield remedies against scorpions, mad dogs, etc. 322, l. their
sewet and marrow medicinable, 324, h, m their gall used in Physic, 324. h
Calous the Orator, why he used to wear a thin plate of lead to his back,
418, l. he complained that kitchenvessell was made of silver, 480. l Calypso, a
woman, a fine paintresse, 551. a Camels body, what medicines it does affourd,
311. b Camels brain, gall, tail, what use they yield in Physic, 311, b, c.
their dung reduced into ashes, and the hair of their tails, 311. c Cammaron.
See Aconitum. Campaspe a famous courtizan, entertained by K. Alexander the
Great, 539. a Canachus an excellent imageur, and his works, 501. d Canalitium,
or Canaliense, what gold ore, 466, m. the manner of getting it and the reason of
the name, 467. a how it is to be ordered after it is landed up to the pits
mouth, 467. a Canaria, what kind of grass, 225. b. why so called, ib. a
Candlestick of brass cost 50000 sersterces, 488, k K. Candaules otherwise
named Myrsilus, paid, the weight in gold for a painted table, 533. a
Canephorus, a virgin, wrought in marble by Scopas, 567. c Cantabrica, what
herb, 224, h. the description, ibid. Cantharias, a precious stone, 630. i
Cantharides taken inwardly, how their venom is to be repressed, 49, m. 71, b.
150, l. 157, c. 160, k. 161, d. 318, h 323, c, d. 364, g. Cantharides hurtful
to the bladder, 361, e. how they are to be taken and used in Physic, ibid.
their wings medicinable, 362, g. Physicians agree not where their venom lies,
362, g. how they be engendered, ibid. diverse kinds of them, ibid. their
description, ibid. h. how to be prepared, ibid. their nature and operation,
ibid. Cantharides, held at an high price by Cato Vticensis, 362. i Capers, how,
where, and when, to be sowed and set, 30. h Capers of Italy harmless, 62. l
Capnites, a precious stone, 625. c Capnos, what herb, 236, l. the
description, ibid. Caprar^ense, what it is, 518. h Carawaies, why so called,
30. h. how and where they grow, ib. wild Carawaie Cacalia described, 232. l.
the operation, ibid. Carbuncle, a precious stone, 616. h. it has the name in
Greek of fire, and yet fire has no power over it, ibid. Carbuncle, a disease
when it first came into Italy, 241. d the manner thereof, and the accidents
accompanying and following it, 241. d, e Carbuncles how they are brought to
maturation, broken, and cured, 56. k. 58. h. 69. a. 70. l. 134. i. 143. b. 144.
g 148. k 158. k. 160. g. h. 163. e. 167. e. 172. i. 183. d. 193. d 260. l. 392.
h. Carbuncles how to be cooled, 448. g. 599. c Carcinias, a precious stone,
630. i Carcinetron, what herb, 287. b Cardiacke passion, what it is, 153. c.
what medioines be good for it, ibid. 154, m. 196, h, i. 446, i. Caries in wine,
what it is, 152. k Carneades the Philosopher purposing to answer Zeno, purged
his brain first with Ellebore, 217. f Carnosa, what they be, 13. e Carobs,
their properties good and bad, 172. l a Carob tree always blossoming about a
certain fountain, 405. c. Carot or Dauke, 18. g Carots of four kinds, or
rather of twain, 228. m Corot of Candie described, 229. a wild Carots where
they grow, ibid. Carpasum, the juice of it is poison, 436. h. the remedy
against it, ibid. Carpathum yields a venomous juice, 323, a. the remedy for
it, ibid. Carrhae, a city built all of salt, 415. a the huge Carrick that
transported an obelisk out of Aegipt, sunk of purpose in the haven of Ostia,
for the safety of the harbor, 575. e Caruilius Pollio his wastfull excess in
garnishing and making both tables and beds of silver, 481. d Caruilius a famous
brasse-founder in Italy, 495. e Caryatides, what images, 569. f Cassidoine or
Cassedoine, a fair stone, whereof cups and other vessels were made, 454. i.
See Onyx, or Onychitis. Cassidoine stones how to be chosen, 604. h their sundry
kinds, ibid. g a Cassidoine cup of great price, 603. c Cassidoine vessel from
whence it comes, ibid. f the stone whereof they be made, described, 604. g
Cassius Haemina, an Historiographer, 345. e Sp. Cassius his statue pulled down
and melted by authority, and wherefore, 493. b Antonius Castor, a notable
Herbarist and Physician, 210. i his garden, ibid. his age and health, ibid.
Castor, a writer in Physic, 78. l Castor, a beast. See Beeuer. Castoreum,
what it is, 430. k. how prepared against sundry poisons, 431. a. b. the
ordinary dose of Castoreum, 431. b Castoreum medicinable otherwise, 438. h.
442. g Catagusa, an image of Praxiteles his making, 500. k Catanance, 278. k.
an amatorious herb, ibid. Cataract or suffusion of the eyes what remedies
proper for it. 105. b. 106. h. 198. m. 233. f. 237. b. 306. g. 312. g. 314. k.
l 316. g. 324. k. 366. i. k. l. 367. b. c. 419. a. 431. e. 432. k 438. i. 509.
a. 557. d. Catagrapha, what pictures, 533. b Catarrhs falling to the throat and
chest, with what medicines stayed, 378. h. 352. g. 380. l Catarrhs violent, by
what means they are restrained, 154. g 156, g. 173, c. 183, c. 194, i. 286, l.
287, d. Cato Vticensis endited for selling Cantharides, 362. i Cato, a writer
in Physic and natural Philosophy, 48. k Cats-haire, a sore. See Felons.
Catochites, a precious stone, 625. c Catopyrites, a precious stone, 625. d
Cattaile, how to be secured from all harms. 193. f Catus Aelius a Consul of
Rome served with earthen vessels at his own bourd, 481. b. he refused silver
plate presented unto him, ibid. had never in silver more than two drinking
cups, 481. b Cauaticae, what snailes, 380. k Caucalis, what herb. 130. i
Caucon, what herb, 247. c Caulias, a kind of Laser, 9. a Caulodes, a kind
of Colewort, 48. k Causticke medicines, or potentiall cauteries, 50, i. 56, k.
61. a 65, a. 74, i. 109. f. 134, h. 162, h. 168, i. 172, h. 191, e 207, b. 223,
c. 239. d. 252. i. 267, c. 280, l. 281. c. 286, m 362, h. 377, d. 385, e. 418,
l. 443, c. 450, i. 485, b. 521. b 595, c. Cauterie actual of iron, what
operation it has, 516. g Cauterizing of a body performed by the means of a
crystal glass, 605. b Cauteries potentiall. See Causticke.
C E
Cedrelate, what kind of Cedar, 179. c Cedria, what rosin, ibid. the strange
properties that it has, ib. the discommodities of it, ib. the danger in using
it, ib. d Cedrides, what, 179, e. the virtues, ibid. Cedrostes, what plant,
149. c Celendine the great, an herb, 224, m. why called Chelidonia, ibid. two
kinds and their description, 225. a Celendine the great, sovereign for the
eics, 234. g Celendine the less, 225. a. the juice of Celendine when to be
drawn, ibid. the virtues thereof, ibid. b Celeres at Rome, who they were, 461.
a Celeres, horse-runners in Greece, 490. l Celsus, a writer in Physic, 40. i
Celtibericae, what they were, 462 g Celticae, what they were, ibid. Cement made
very strong of earthen potshards broken. 554 i a Cement to seder broken
glasses, 353. e Cemos, a magical and amatorius herb, 278. k Cenchris, a
venomous worm, 75. d the remedies against it, ibid. Cenchrites, a precious
stone, 630. k Cenchron, a kind of diamond, 610. h Cendeuia, a river in
Phoenice famous for the matter of glass, 597. b. c Centaurie the greater, an
herb, 220. l. why so called, ibid. named also Chironeum, and wherefore, ibid.
a wonderful incarnatiue and healer, 221. a Chinon the Centaure healed by it,
220. l. the description, ib. where the best grows, 220, m. Juice drawn out
of it in manner of Lycium, 221. a Centaurie the less, an herb, ibid. a. the
sundry names it has, ib. why called Lepton, ibid. why Libadion, ibid. the
description, ibid b, why called the gall of the earth, ibid. b when to be
gathered, ibid. why the Gauls call it Exacos, ibid. the virtue, ibid. 266. l
Centauris, an herb of the kind of Centaurie, 221. b why called Triorchis,
ibid. c Centauris, another herb, 258. k Centipeda, what worm, 381. a
Centipellio, what it is, 321. c Centuncapitae, the white Eryngium or
Sea-huluer, 119. b wonders reported by it, ibid. b. c Centunculus an herb,
199. d. the description and virtues, ib. Cepaea, an herb. See Brookelime.
Cephisis, a lake, 606, l. called otherwise Electris, ibid. Cephissodorus, a
cunning imageur, and his works, 501. d 567, b. son of Praxiteles, ibid.
Cepionides, precious stones, 626. h Cepites, a precious stone, 625. d
Cepocapites, a precious stone, ibid. Cerachates, a precious stone, 623. e
Ceramicum, a famous street in Athens, 552. k. whereupon it took that name,
ibid. Ceramites, a precious stone, 625. d Cerastes, a venomous serpent, 62. k.
the remedies against it. 62, k. 158, g. 183, b. 418, l. 431, b. 434, g.
Ceratia, what herb, 250. h Ceratitis, a kind of wild Poppie, 68. m. why so
called, 69. a Ceraunia, a white precious stone, 622. m. the description of it,
ibid. the diverse kinds, 623, a. their properties, ibid. which of them be
called Betuli, ibid. Ceraunia, another precious stone which Magicians only can
find, 623. b Ceraunium, a kind of Mushrome or Toadstole, 7. f Ceraunobolos, a
picture of Apelles his making, 541. b Ceremonies and circumstances observed in
gathering and using sundry medicines, 106, h. 112, g. 122, k. 125. a 126, l.
142, m. 164, h. 165, c. 168, h. 169, a, b. 170, i. k 178, i. 188, i. 198, l.
205, b, c, d, e. 206, m. 217, d, e, f 228, h, i. 234, l. 238, k. 245, d. 252,
g. 256, i, k. 260, i 283, c. 286, g. 330, k. 368, m. 381, d. 390, k. l. m. 391.
a 392, i. 515, e. f. Cerinthe, an herb and flower, 93, c. the description,
ibid. Cerites, a precious stone, 625. d Ceron, a spring, 403, c. the water of
it makes sheep black, ibid. Cerrus, a kind of great oak, 178. k Cerusse, a
very poison being taken inwardly, 526. l the remedies against it, 136, i. 160,
k. 168, l. 318, h Cerusse how it is made. 520 k Cerusse burnt, a painters
color, 528. k the occasion how it was first burnt, 529. e Cerusse-purple, what
price it bears, 529. e. how it is made at Rome, ibid. Cerusse, how it is used
for a blaunch or white complexion, 520. l. Cestron. See Betonie.
C H
Chaereas an imageur, 502, e. his works, ibid. Chaereas, a writer of simples,
79. a Chains of gold bestowed by Romans upon auxiliaries, 461. b of silver upon
natural citizens, ibid. c Calamine. See Cadmia. Chalastraeum, or Chalastricum,
the best kind of nitre, 420. i the use thereof, 421. e Chalazias, a precious
stone, 630. k Chaelazius, what stone, 592. g Chalcanthum. See Vitrioll.
Chalcetum, what herb, 248. g Chalcidicae, venomous worms, 431. b. called also
Sepes, ibid. the remedies against their venom, 431. b. 434, g Chalcites, a
precious stone, 631. a Chalcitis, what it is, 486, m. how it differs from
Cadmia, 509, d. where it is engendered, ibid. 509. e. the description, ibid. the
medicinable properties, 509. e. f Chalcitis, a kind of alume, 558, k. why so
called. ibid. Chalco-smaragdos, what kind of Emeraud, 613. a Chalcophonos, a
precious stone, 625. e Chalcosthenes, a famous potter or imageur in cley at
Athe^s 552, k. Chalcus, what it is in weight, 113. c Chalk of Rhodes causes
wine to be sooner refined, 176. i Chalk of many kinds, 560. h Chalk used for
to mark the feet of bondslaues, to be bought and sold in markets, 560. l
Publius the rimer, Manilius Antiochus the Astrologer, and Taberius Erotes the
Grammarian, slaves marked with chalk, and came over all three to Rome in one
ship together, ibid. m. Chamaebatos, an herb, 196. l. the description, ib. why
called Neurospectos, ibid. Chamaecissos, an herb, 190. l. the description, ib.
the medicinable virtues thereof, ibid. 199. a Chamaecissos, a kind of
Cyclamine, 229. f Chamaecyparissos, an herb, 199. b. the description, ibid.
Chamaedaphne, what herb, 110, m. the virtues, ibid. Chamelaea, what herb,
198, k. the description, ibid. the virtues, 198, l. the juice of Chamelaea,
223. a Chamaeleon, an herb, 123. f. two kinds of it, ibid. why so called,
124. g Chamaeleon, a beast, 315. b. it affourdeth many medicines, ibid.
Democritus wrote a book of this beact and the anatomy thereof, ib. the
description, ibid. Chamaeleon most fearful and therefore so mutable, ibid.
adverse to hawks and all birds of prey, 315. b. c Chamaeleuce, what herb,
199. a. the virtues thereof, ibid. Chamaemelon, See Chamamile. Chamaepeuce, an
herb, 199, b. the description, ibid. Chamaepitys, what herb, 181. c. what
other names it has, ibid. the diverse kinds and their description, ibid. the
virtues, ibid. Chamaepitis, the name also of the herb Hypericon, 255. a
Chamaerops, what herb, 248, i. the description, ibid. Chamaecyse, an herb,
198. l. the description, ibid. Chamaezelon, what herb, 228, l Chamamile an
herb, 91. d. the description, ib. how it floureth, 99. c. the sundry names
that it has, 125, c. d. why it is called Chamaemelon, ib. three kinds of it,
ibid. Chaplets of gold and silver foiles representing flowers of the garden,
81. a Chaps in the fundament, feet, and elsewhere. See Fissures. Charcole once
quenched, give the greater heat afterward, 472. i. Charcole and their nature,
599. b Chares, a famous imageur and founder in brass, 495. c Chargers of
silver weighing one hundred pound weight apeece, 481. (...) a Charger of five
hundred pound weight in silver, ibid. Charis. See Apelles his graceor Venus. a
Charrio^ ^f cley, growing bigger as it was baking in the furnace, what it
betokened, 296. g Charriots with horses, what Imageurs delighted to cast in
brass, 503. e. 504. g Charms condemned by Pliny, 213. (...) Charms whether
they be effectual in witching serpents or no, 296. k. why serpents seem to
avoid them and shrink away, ibid. Charms for love, 296, k. for skarfires,
ibid. l. for staunching blood, ib. m. for the sciatica or the gout, ibid. for
dislocations or bones out of joint, ibid. for the spleen, 381. d Charms for
sundry diseases, 109. c. 206. h. 207. a 256. i 285. a. 289. e. 296. k. l. m.
301. d. 310. h. Charms of love how to withstand, 316. g against charms and
enchantme^ts, 52. h. See more in Words. Caesar Dictatour, never set forward in
any journey without pronouncing a certain charm, 279. a three Charites,
images in marble at Athens of rare workmanship, 396. a M. Charmis a Marsilian,
prosessed Physic at Rome, 3^5. b he condemned hot bains, and brought in
bathing in cold water, 345. b. he bargained to have 200000 sesterces for one
cure, 348. g Chast-tree, 257. c Chaste, how folk may be made, that were loose
and wantonly given, 314. h. 316. m Chaws swelled how to be assuaged, 158. i.
See Throat. Cheese is medicinable, 318. l Cheese of mares milk used in
Physic, 318. k l Cheese green, fresh, and soft, ibid. Cheese old and hard
for what it is good, 318. l for what it is hurtful, ibid. Cheese rotten,
putrified, and mouldie, in what case wholesome, 318. m Cheese sour
medicinable, ibid. Cheese, how it may be kept safe from the mouse, and also
vncorrupt, 399. b Chelidonia, a precious stone, 625. e. two sorts of it, ibid.
Chelonia, the Tort^ise eye, held for a precious stone, 625. e 630. k. the
magitians tell strange things of it. 625. f Chelonitides precious stones
resembling Tortoises, 625. f Cherries, 171. a. their properties, ibid. how they
do both loosen and bind the belly, 171. a Chernmilke. See Oxygala. Chernites,
a precious stone preserving dead bodies, 587. e in one of them Darius the K.
was interred, ibid. Chersiphron, a famous architect, 580. k. he reared the
frame of the temple of Diana in Ephesus, ibid. Chersidrie, perilous snakes or
adders, 119. a. remedies against their poison, ibid. Cheruile an herb, named
Paederos, 31. b Cheruile toothpicke named Gnigidium, the properties that it
has, 41. a Cheeslips, certain worms, 138. k. against their malice,
medicines, 138. k Chestnuts their medicinable virtues, 172. l Chibbols, 20. g.
k. l Chickweed an herb. See Alsine. Chilblanes, what medicines be good for
them, 37. d. 50. g 58. i. 64. m. 70. k. 76. g. 148. l. 158. l. 160. h. 168. l.
171. c 174. l. 188. l. 277. d. See Bloudifalls. against chilling cold, what
remedies, 54. i. 138. g. 169. f 173. e. 186. i. 218. l. 260. k. 305. c. 354. l.
387. e. 422. i 625. a. Children pissing bed, how to be helped, 398. h. See
Urine. Chiliodinama, an herb. See Polemonia. Chincough in children, what
remedies for it, 56. g. 105. b 315. a. 398. g. Chios earth medicinable, 559. f
Chirocineta, what book, 203. a Chironia, what plant, 150. i. what other names
it has, ibid. Choking in young birds how to be prevented, 206. g Choking by
bone how to be avoided, 302. d Choking by bread going wrong, how prevented,
302. m Choler rising up into the mouth and causing bitterness, how to be
repressed, 148. g Choler what medicines purge downward, 39, a. 49, b. 75, c
110, l. 111, f. 121, a. 140, h. 162, l. 171, c. 182. b. 186 g 198, l. 216, h.
218, i. 247, c. 250, h, k l, m. 251, a, b, c 252, h, l, m 284, i. 288, g. 442,
l. 443, a. 273, c. 275, b 277, a. 281, b, e. 291, b. Choler black and adust,
what purges downward, 412. m Choler, a disease, 46, k. what remedies for it,
46, k. 55. c 59, b f. 70, m. 141, f. 147, b. 148, g. 163, e. 195, e. 196, i
287, c. 413, c. Choaspes a river in Persia whereof the K K. drink, 406. l
Choaspites, a precious stone, 626. g Chondris is bastard Dictamne, 249. e
Chondrylle, or Condryllon, an herb, 131, e. the description, ibid. the
virtues, ibid. Chlorites, a precious stone of a grass green color, 626. g
where it is found, ibid. Ch^los, a kind of Emeraud, 612. m Chrysanthemon, an
herb, 110, h. the description, ibid. Chrysermus, a writer in Physic, 128. i
Chrysippea, what herb, 256. k Chrysippus, an excellent Physician, 242, k. he
dealt only in herbs, 242, k. he wrote a book in p^aise only of Coleworts,
48. i Chrysippus a Physician altered the whole course of Physic, 344, g.
Chrysites, a precious stone. See Chalazius. Chrysitis, an herb and flower.
See Chrysocome. Chrysitis, the best litharge of gold, 474. i Chrysoberylli,
what precious stones, 613. c Chrysocarpos, a kind of Iuie, 190, g. what
virtues it does affourd, ibid. Chrysocolla. See Borax. Chrysocome, an herb
bearing a fair flower, 89, d. the virtues thereof, 106. i Chrysolochanon, what
herb, 279, e. two kinds thereof, ibid. the virtues, ibid. Chrysolampis, a
precious stone, 626. g Cbrysolith, a precious stone, 630. l Chrysopis, a
precious stone, 626. g Chrysoprasius, a precious stone, 619, d. the
description, ibid. the use, and where it is found, ibid. Chrysoprasos, a
precious stone, 630. l Chrysoprasos, a kind of Beryl, 613. c Chrysothales,
what herb, 237. c
C I
Cicerculum, a kind of Sinopre, 528. l Ciceronian baths or hot springs
soueraign for the eyes, 401. f Cich pease, and the properties that it has, 142,
k. l Ciches Columbine, their virtues, 143. a Cichling, and the properties that
it has in Physic, 142. l Cichorie the herb, the sundry kinds, 24. l their
virtues, 48. g Cichorie wild, 47, d. the properties in Physic, ib. it is
called Chreston and Pancration, wherefore, 47. f Cichorie wild of Egypt how
employed, 97. a Cichorie of the garden, 48, g. the virtues thereof, ibid. Cici.
See Cnicus. Cimolia chalk of two sorts. 560. h. both medicinable. 560. h. a
kind of it called Sarda, and why. ibid. i. for what it is good, ibid. See
Fullers earth. Cimon, a cunning painter, 533, b. he devised the pictures
Catagrapha, and other curious points about them, ibid. c Cinaedi, the only
fishes all yellow, 451. d Cinaedia, what stones they be, 368. i Cinaedia,
precious stones, 625. d the foreshew storms and fair weather, ibid. Cinnabari
or Cinnabaris of the Indians, what it is, 476. g an excellent color for
painters, ibid. The same that Minium. ibid. Cinnabaris of another kind, good in
Physic, 476. g. h Cinquefoile the herb, described, 228. l. the diverse
names that it has. ibid. the affinity between it and the vine, ibid. the use
thereof, ibid. Circe, a famous witch, 210. k canonized a goddess therefore.
ibid. her feats, 372. k Circaeum an herb, 278. m Circeion, an herb. See
Mandragoras, 278. m Circos, a precious stone, 625. d grand-Cirqus at Rome made
by Caesar dictatour, 581. e the description of it, ibid. Cirsion an herb,
279. a. the description and virtue, ibid. Cissanthemos, a kind of Cyclamine,
229. e Cissites, a precious stone, 630. k Cissos Erithranos, what plant, 190.
k. the virtues, ibid. Cisterns, how to be made for to hold water, 594. h
Cisthos, a plant, 190. k the medicinable virtues thereof, 190, k. the sundry
kinds and their description, ibid. Citrons and their medicinable virtues. 164.
i
C L
Claudius Caesar put a gentleman to death, for having the serpents egg about
him when he pleaded at the bar. See Anguinum. Claeon, a spring of water, 404.
g. why so called, ib. Clarie the wild an herb, 256. l the first Classis at
Rome, how valued and taxed, 462 m Clauer herb, 253. c Cleanthes, a painter,
who drew first the lineaments of a body in black, 525. c Cleemporus, a
Physician. 131. d. 202. m Clema, what herb, 227. b Clematis, an herb, 191.
a. the description, ibid. the effects in Physic, ibid. Clematis, called in
Latin Centunculus, 199. d Clematis, a common name to many herbs, 199. e
Clematis of Egypt, 200. g. the sundry names that it has, ibid. and 202. m.
Cleon a painter, 549. d Cleopatra the Queen, how she made sport with Antonie
by a coronet of flowers, 82. i Cleophantes, a Physician and writer, 200. k. he
brought in first the use of wine in Physic. 243. c Cleophantus a painter, who
first pourtraied a personage in colors, 525. c Clesides a painter, famous for
the picture that he made of queen Stratonice, 549. e Clesippus, a
brasse-founder, how he played his part with dame Gegania, 488. l Cliduchus an
image, wrought by Phidias, 497. d. by Euphranor, 502. h Clinice, what kind of
Physic, 344. g Clinopodium, an herb, 199. c. the sundry names it has. ib.
Clitorius, a water which causes loathing of wine, 403. e Cliuers, what herb,
206. g. why called Philanthropos. ib; the effects that it works in Physic.
ibid. Clodian plate, 480. k P. Clodius what he paid for one house, 582. g
Cloelia, a virgin, honored with her statue on horseback in Rome, 492. l
Clupean earth medicinable, 561. d Clymenos, an herb, 221. d. why so called,
ibid the description, ibid. e. both hurtful and wholesome, 221. d. the juice
medicinable, ibid. c
C N
Cneoron, an herb, 90. h. two kinds thereof. ibid. Cnicus or Cici, ^n herb
in Aegipt, 97. c. the diverse kinds and the oil that it yields. ibid. 113. c
C O
Coaches all of silver, 480 l Coccum Gnidium the berrie described, 280. k. the
nature and virtue of it, ibid. Cochlacas what they be, 421. b Cochlides, what
precious stones, 631. b. how they be ordered in Arabia for inlaid works, ib.
c. their sundry uses. ibid. an old Cock how medicinable, 359. c. how a cock
shall not crow, ib. d. cocks, capons, and such like pullen, what medicines
they do affourd, 319. b Cock broth medicinable, how it was made, 359. d
Cocks-combe, an herb, 275. c Cockles good to expel gravel, 444. h Cods if
one hang down lower than the other what remedy, 445. a. Cods swelling by what
means helped, 52. l. 61. c 62. g. 76. k. 103. b. 106. m. 107. f. 128. g. 256.
g. See more in Genetoirs. Codiaminon, when it floureth, 92. g Cofins of cley
for a dead corpse, 523. d Coelon, what kind of Azur, 485. a Colchicon a poison,
the remedy against it, 318. h Cold poison, 180. m Colds extreme, how to be
avoided or endured, 160. k. 189. c 193. b. 260. k. 289. d. 449 a Cold fits in
agues how to be shortened or put by, 173. f. 189. e 289. d. 422. l. 424. g.
446. g. Colique how to be cured, 53. a. 55. c. 62. h. 129. f. 141. c 144. i.
383. c. d. e. 419 c. 511. e. 519. c. 521. a. 558. l. 590. g 104. l. 139. e. f.
163. c. 165. b. 167. d. 169. d. 171. f. 182. h 190. h. 253. d. 313. b. 318. g.
332. i. Colique, when it first began at Rome, 242 g Colliquation. See
Consumption. Collyria, a kind of Burrets. 441. a. their description and
medicinable virtues. ibid. Collyrie of saffron, 105. a. other collyries, 133,
c. 147, b for Collyries appropriat species, 160, g. 163, a. 197, c. 236, l 270,
m. 272, k. 285, d. 350, i. 351, d. 356, h. 419, a. 430, g 471, c. 474, h. 575,
a. 506, k. 508, l. 510, k. Colocasia of Aegipt, 96. l. See more in Cyanos.
Colostrati, what infants, 317. b Colostrum, what it is, ibid. Colotes, what
lizard it is, 361. b Colotes a famous painter, 532. m Colors in painting,
which be gay and lively, 521, i. which be dead, sad, and duskish, ibid. the
Colors four which the best painters used, what they were. 352. f Colossi,
geantlike images. 495. a Colosse of Jupiter in the Capitol, by whom erected.
495. e the Colossian images at Rome of Apollo and Jupiter Pompeianus, ibid. a
Colosse of Hercules at Tarentum wonderfully made, ib. b Colosse of the Sun at
Rhodes seventy cubits high all of brass, ibid. c Colosses made by Italian
workmen as well as by strangers. ib. e Colosse of Apollo at Rome, an excellent
piece of workmanship, ibid. Coluber, a water snake, 435, b. the efficacy
thereof in hunting crocodiles, ib. he is called in Greek Enhydris, 440. k his
teeth are good to skarifie the gumbs for toochach, ib. Comagenum a sweet
composition, 354, k. why so called, ib. how it is made, ib. l, m. the virtues.
ibid. Comagene an herb and a country, 354. l Combretum the herb and
flower, 85, f. the virtues, 104. i Comfrey the herb, 249, b. See Cumfrey.
Compitalia, festival holidaies instituted by K. Serve. Tullius upon what
occasion, 599 d a Complexion for a red. See Fuk. against compositions and
mixtures in Physic, Pliny inveigheth, 137. c. 348. i. k Conception of men
children, how to be procured, 79. a. See more in Boys. Conception by what
means it may be helped. 36. i. 40. l 43. c. 62. k. 130. k. 178. i. 279. b.
339. e. 340. l. 341. a 396. g. 399 a. what hinders Conception. 58. k. 179. d.
360. h Conchylium, a shelfish, the blood whereof is medicinable. 439. e.
Concilium, what herb. 130. h Condrylla, an herb, 99. d Conduits and their
pipes, 411. d. the manner of carrying water by them from the head of the
spring. 411. d the Conduits begun by Caligula the Emperor, and finished by
Claudius his successor, were wonderful. 585. f the charges of making those
conduits, with their manifold uses. 586. g Colewort. See Coules. Come, an
herb. See Tragopogon. Condurdum, an herb. 245. e. the description and
virtues. ib. Conserua, what it is, 280. h. a wonderful cure done by it. ib.
Coniurations, whether they be of power to raise thunder and lightening. 295. c
Coniurations of sundry sorts, 313. e. how they may be prevented and withstood.
ib. Consiligo, i. Bearefoot an herb. 224. i Consumption of the lungs, 422, m.
See Phthysicke. Consumption of the whole body, by lungs, hecticke fever, or
otherwise, how to be recovered. 134, l. 259. c. 310. m Conyza an herb, 90. m.
two kinds male and female, and their description. 91. a. 267. e Coponius, a
cutter in stone. 570. i. his workmanship. ib. Q Coponius condemned for sending
an earthen amphore to one for his voice at the election of magistrates, 553. f
Copper how to be calcined and washed, 507. a. b Coracini, fishes medicinable.
435, f. 438. i Corallis a precious stone, 625. d Coral highly esteemed among
the Indians, 429. d. where the best is to be found, ib. how it is gotten forth
of the sea, ib. whereupon it is named Curalium, ib. in great account among the
priests and wisards of India, 429. f it resists the power of fire, 430. g.
how the Frenchmen use it, ibid. how it is become scarce. ibid. the medicinable
virtues of coral. 430. g Corallo-Achates, 623. e. called the sacred agath in
Candie. ibid. the virtues. ibid. Corallo-achates a precious stone, 625. d
Corchoros. See Pimpernell. Corchorum, an herb much used by the Aegiptians.
113. b Cordial medicines, 41. b. 119. c. 130. i. 247. c. See Counterpoisons.
Cordyla the Tunie fish, when so called. 451. d Coriacesia, an herb, and the
admirable nature of it, 202. k Coriander an herb, 70. k. the virtues thereof,
the best comes out of Aegipt, ibid. Coriander rectified and corrected by
wine, 153. b the strange effects that Coriander works as touching women's
terms, 71. a Corinthas. See Menais. Corinthian works, 496. k. so much
esteemed that many carry them wheresoever they went, ibid. Corinthian gallerie
at Rome, 489. b. why so called, ibid. Corion, what herb, 255. a Coris, what
herb, ibid. b Cork tree, what virtues medicinable it has, 178. l Corns of
the feet or elsewhere, how to be cured, 38. g. 65. d 76. m. 103. a. 105. d.
134. g, h. i, k. 139. b. 141. a. 143. a 180. k. 186 l. 258. m. 302. l. 320. g.
334. l. 386. l Cornaline, a precious stone. See Sarda and Sardoin. Corn, what
virtues in Physic (...) does affourd, 137. f Corollae, and Corollaria, what
they were, 80. m Coronarium, what kind of brass, 479. a Coronae and Coronets,
80. i. the original of these terms, ib. Coronets of gold bestowed upon Roman
Citizens for good service in the wars. 461. c. by whom given first. ibid.
Coronopus, what herb, 98, m. 124. i. k Corpulencie how it may be procured,
152. m Corroboratiue medicines, 152. g. 178. k. See more in Cordials and
Caunterpoisons. Corrofiue medicines, 159. f. 160. g. 168. i. 191. f 286. f. 338.
i 441. d. 447. e. 516. k. 521. a. See Causcicke. Corynda, the wild Sperage,
what other names it has, 28. i 53. c. the virtues. ib. hurtful to the
bladder, 53. d Corrugi, what they be, 468, i Corsici, precious stones, 631. c.
their properties. ibid. Corsoeides, a precious stone, 625. d Corycia, certain
caves. 405. d Corymbi in Ferula, what they be, 32. g Corymbias, what it is.
ibid. Corythia, she fishes. See Collycia. Cossi, what worms, 339. f Cossinus
killed with a potion of Cantharides, 261. f Coticula. See Touchstone. Cotonea
what herb, 248. h. the description and virtues. ib. Cotton and the shrub that
bears it. 3. e. f Cotton found in certain fruits, as Apples and gourds. 4. g
Cotton-weed. See Cudword. Cotyledon, an herb. See Vmbilicus Veneris.
Coughwort, what herb. 246. i Cough busy in the night, how to be stayed. 329.
b for the Cough, remedies appropriat, 37, b, e. 39, b. 41, d. 41, e. 42, l. 43,
c. 44, i, l. 52, g. 56, h. 57, d. 60, l 61, a. 63, c. 64, i. 66, g. 67, d. 72,
h, m. 75, a, b. 101, c. 104, h 105, a, c. 107, d. 108, k. 110, g. 122. g. 123,
c. 128, i 134, k. l. 136, i. 138, m. 141, c. 144, h. 145. a, 148, k 151, d.
153, c, f. 154, g. 156, g. 158, h. 159, a. 167, d 171, f. 172, g, k. 173, b.
179. f. 180, g, l. 182 g, i. m 183, d, e. 184, h. 186, i. 191, c. f. 192, l.
193, c. 194, h 195, d. 197, d. 198, i. 199, b. 200, k, l, m. 208, g. 219, e
245, f. 246, g, h, i, k. 247, d. e. 249, e. 263, d. 275, c 284, h. 287, f. 290,
i. 303, e. 304, g. 305, b. 315, a. 319. d 329, a. 336, k. 352, g. 353, a. 380,
l, m. 381, c. 382, i 419, e. 422, k. 442, i. 521, a. 557, d. Coules or
Coleworts of three kinds, 26 g. 49, c. when to be sown, set, and cut, ibid.
how they will cabbage and grow fair in the head, ibid. how they will prove
sweet in taste, ibid. how to be dunged, ibid. Couleworts of sundry countries,
ibid. k the crops or Couleworts called their Cymae, how to be cut, ibid. m. the
commendable of properties Couleworts, 48, i, k Couleworts contrary to wine, 49,
c. how they bind and loosen the belly, ibid. their discommodities, 50, k
Couleworts and Vines cannot agree together, 176. g. Couleworts may not abide
either Origan, or Cyclamine, ib. Countercharmes or preservatives against
sorcerie, witchcraft, enchantment, and Magic, 149, c. 195, e. 229, d 300, k.
306, m. 310, h. 313, b. f. 320, k. 322, m. 357, a 364, g. 387, a, b. 430 g.
431, e. 433, f. 370, i. 515, e, f 589, a. 609, a. 619, e. Counterpoisons, 38,
k. 39, a, c. 45, e. 56, l. 59, b. 71, e. 107, c 144, i. 160, k. 164, i. 169, c.
172, h, k. 174, m. 186, i 190, m. 192, g. 193, c. 200, l. 202, l. 215, c. 227,
b 233, b. 246, g. 270, i. k, 288, i. 306, m. 314 g. 316, l. 321, c 323, a, b,
c, d. 356, g. 364. g. 631, a, c, e. 433, e. 434, g, i, l 435, b. 437, d. 529,
b. 610, m. poisons how they become Counterpoisons, and the manner of their
working, 270. h
C R
Crabfishes, 435, d. their virtues medicinable, ibid. enemies they be to
serpents, 435, e. 436, i Crambe the best kind of Couleworts, 48, k for Crampe
in feet or legs a remedy, 305, b for Cramps in general, convenient medicines,
40, k. 41. d. e 44, k. 46, i. 48, g. 49, e. 50, h, k. 52, k. 50, e. 60, l. 61,
a 63, a. 64, k. 67, d. 72, l. 74, i. 75, b. 77 (...). 102, g. 104, h 108, k.
119, d. 123, a. 128, i, m. 129, b, c, f. 134, l. 150 g 154, g. 191, c. 162, h.
167, f. 168, g. 179, f. 180, g. 182, l 183, e. 186, k. 191, c. 193, c. 194, k.
198, i. 199, c. 219, d 226, l. 248, h. 259, c. 262 l. 264, g. 275, e. 283, a, e
289, c, e. 290, i. 312, i. 313, c. 320, g. 354, l. 422, m. 431, a 432, i. 442,
g. 599, c. Crapula, a mixture in headie wine. 153. f. why so called, ibid. M.
Crassus the richest Roman that ever was, but only Sylla Dictatour 479, d. his
apoth^gme. ibid. his lands what they were, ibid. surnamed Optimus for his
wealth, 479, e. his covetousness, ibid. Crataegon, an herb, 279. e
Crataeogonum, what herb, 257. d Crataeogonos, an herb, 279. b. the
description and virtues, ibid. e second kind caelled Thelygonos, ibid.
Craterites, a precious stone, 625. d Craterus a cunning painter and Comaedian
both, 549. e Crateuas, a renowned Physician, 129, b. he wrote of herbs and set
them forth in colors, 210. g Crathis, a river, 403, c. the water of strange
operation. ibid. Creifishes of the river how medicinable they be, 435. c
Creifish head dries vermin out of a garden, 32. l Cresses an herb, 29. a.
why called Nasturtium, ibid. it helps the wit and understanding, ibid. 56. g.
two kinds of it, and their properties, ibid. which be best, ibid. k
Crestmarine, an herb. See Sampier. Crickets much esteemed by Magicians, 370,
h. the reason wherefore, ibid. the manner of hunting and catching them, ibid.
Cricke in the nape or pole of the neck how to be eased, 70. g See more in
Crampe. Criers public at Rome warerich coats embrodered and studded with
purple like as Senators, 459. d Crinas of Marsiles, a famous Physician, 345.
a. by what means he won credit, 345. a. b. a great Mathematician and
Astrologer, ibid. a ceremonious obseruer of days and hours. 345, b. a man of
exceeding wealth, ibid. Crista Galli, what herb, 275. c Crocallis, a precious
stone, 625. d Crocias, a precious stone, 630. m Crocinum, a sweet ointment,
105. b Crocis, a magical herb, 204. k. the strange qualities thereof, ibid.
Crocodiles skared away by the voice only of the Tentyrians, 299. a against the
Crocodiles bitt what remedies, 158, h. 315. a 418, k. 419, e. 434, h.
Crocodiles affourd medicines from sundry parts of their body, ibid. two kinds
of them, ibid. one kind living both in land and water, ibid. a second lives
only upon the land, ibid. i. his dung is sweet and medicinable, ibid. the
reason why, ibid. Crocodile good meat, all save head and feet, ibid. m
Crocodilea, what it is, ibid. k how to be chosen, ibid. how it is
sop^isticated. ibid. l. the virtues thereof, ibid. k. l Crocodilian an herb,
279, c. the description and virtue, ibid. Crocomagma, what it is, and the use
thereof, 105, b Cr^sus rich in gold, 464. h Cronius, a cutter in precious
stones, 501. d Crow-foot, what herb, 239. c. the sundry kinds, ib. their
description, ibid. d. why it is called S^rumea, ibid. e Crudana, what vein it
is of silver, 472. m Crudities in the stomach how to be digested, 64, h. 66, i.
67 e See Indigistion and Digestion. Crushes how to be cured, 350. i. See
Bruses. Crystal, 454. i. how it is engendered, 604, i. why so called, ibid.
whereupon found. ibid. how to be used, ibid. l. it grows naturally six
cornered, ibid. one piece of Crystal weighing fifty pound, 604. l Crystal
vessels of what capacity, ibid m the imperf^ctions and blemishes in Crystal,
605. a a Crystal glass once broken cannot be reunited, ibid. c Crystalls
without fault and blemish be called (...), ib. b Crystallion. See (...).
C T
Ctesias, a writer, 404. i. his opinion as touching Amber, 906. l Ctesidamus, a
painter, 549. d Ctesilas, a fine Imageur, 501. c. his curious workmanship.
ibid. Ctesilaus, a famous Imageur, 501. e. his works, ibid. Ctesilochus, a
painter, 549. d. his picture of Jupiter in travel with Bacchus, etc. ibid.
C V
Cuckowes meat, an herb. See Oxys. Cucubalum, an herb, 280. g. sundry names
that it has, ibid. the virtues, ibid. Cucumbers of the garden a commendable
meat, 13. d much affected by Tiberius the Emperor, 14. g. how preserved
growing upon the ground all Winter, ibid. Cucumbers without seed, 14. l. how to
be preserved, 15. f Cucumber seed how to be prepared and set in the ground, 14.
h. when to be sown or set, 15. a Cucumbers how they grow, and in what form,
14. h. they love water and hate oil, ibid. h. i how Cucumber plants may be
kept fresh all the year long, 14. l. Cucumbers, a delicate sallad, 37. d of
Cucumbers three kinds, 14, l. how they bloume or flower, 15. c Cucumbers wild,
35. e. f. the fruit, ibid. where they best do grow. 36. k root of wild Cucumber
for what it is good, ibid. g Cucumber Serpentine or wandering Cucumber, 36, m.
the decoction thereof, and the virtue, ibid. Cudwort an herb, 258. l. 283. b
Cuit, what medicinable properties it has, 148. k Cuit called Sapa, the nature
thereof, 157. c Cumfrie of the rooke, an herb, 275. d Cumin, an herb, 61.
c. the description and virtues. ibid. where it loves to grow, and when to be
sown, 29. f. good to procure appetite, ibid. Cumin seed how to be sown, 23. d
what Cumin is best, 30. g Cumin causes palenesse of color, 61. d Cumin
Ethiopicke, ibid. f. the properties of it. ibid. Cumin of Affricke, 62. g. the
virtues thereof, ibid. Cumin wild, and the virtues, 248. h Cunila, what herb,
30. i Cunila Bubula, 63. b. why called Panax, ibid. c used by Tortoises as a
defensitiue against serpents, ibid. Cunila Bubula, wild Origan, 226. m. the
virtues that it has, ibid. Cunila Gallinacea: the same that Origanum
Heracleoticum, 63. c. the virtues that it has, ibid. Cunila Libanotis, why so
called, ibid. c Cunila the soft, 63. d. the description and virtues. ibid.
Cunilago, what herb, 30. i. the virtues, 63. d. mothes gather to it, ibid.
Cupid, an Image at Thespiae, wrought by Praxiteles, 566. m. Cupid, at Parium,
wrought by Praxiteles, 567. a. comparable every way to Venus of Gnidos, ibid.
abused by a wretched wanton, ibid. Cupid wrought to the pattern of young
Alcibiades, 568. g Cupids fountain and the effects thereof, 404. b Curalium.
See Coral. Curalium, a stone. See Pyrites. C. Curio his devise for two wooden
Theaters at his fathers funerals. 584. i. k. l. Curtius, a fountain serving
Rome, 586. g Cutiliae, waters medicinable, 402. m. their nature and sovereign
virtues, 404. a. they stand upon salnitre, 412, g. Cuttle fishes, their nature,
428. k. their medicinable virtues, 438. k. l
C Y
Cyamea, a precious stone, 630. k Cyamos of Aegipt described, 96. l. the use of
this herb, 97. a Cyanos, a flower and a painters color, 89. b Cyanos, a
precious stone, 620. k. which is the best, l. who devised first to give it a
tincture, 620, l. male and female, ibid. Cyathus what measure or weight, 113. e
Cybia, the square pieces of the Tunie fish, 451. c Cybium, an herb, 359. e
Cyclaminos, 229. f. what herb, ibid. c. called Tuber Terrae, ibid. d. the
description, ibid. the virtues, ibid. the root how to be ordered, ib. d. the
venomous quality that it has, ibid. e. three kinds thereof, ibid. Cydias, a
famous painter, 547. d. his Argonauts, a costly picture, ibid. Cydnus, a river,
403. b Cymae, the tender crops of Coleworts, 26. g. how fruitful of them
Coleworts are. ibid. h Cynocephalia, a magical herb, 375. b. much commended
by Apian the Great Grammarian, ibid. Cynoglossos, what herb, 223. d Cynoides.
See Fleawort. Cynomorion, what weed it is, 145. a. why so called, ibid.
Cynomyia, an herb, 233. d. why so called, ibid. See Fleawort. Cynosbatos, and
Cynosbastos. See Dogbrier. Cynosorchis, an herb, 279. d. See Orchis.
Cynozolon, one of the names of the herb Chamaeleon, 124. i the reason of the
name, ibid. Cyperis, what herb it is and the properties thereof, 101. e
Cyperus, an herb, 99. e. the kinds and properties, 101. c a distinct rush
from Cypirus, 100. m Cypirus, what it is, 100. i. the description, 101. a. the
distinct kinds and properties, ibid. the discommodities of it, 101. a. b
Cypress tree Apples, their use in Physic, 179. b King Cyrus, rich in gold,
464. h Cyssites, a precious stone, 625. e Cytini in Pomegranats, what they be,
165. c. their properties, ibid. Cyzicum earth hardens to a stone in the
water, 554. l Cyzicus, a prince that built the stately temple at Cyzicum, 581.
a.
D A
DActylios, what it is, 455. d Dactyliotheca, what it was. 602. g. who first
had any such, ibid. Dactylos, what grass, 207. b. why so called, ibid.
Daedalus, an excellent Imageur in brass, 501. f. his workmanship, ibid.
Daffodils described, 85. a. how they differ from Lillies, ibid. their
operations in Physic, 103. c Daisie, a flower and herb, 89. c. the
description, ibid. the medicixable virtues, 245. e Dalion, a Physician, 66. k
Damasonium, what herb, 231. b. 256. i Damion, a writer in Physic. 52. i
Damophilus, an excellent Imageur and workman in cley, 552. i. his
workmanship, ibid. Dampe in sinking of pits it may be foreseen, and the
danger prevented, 409. d. e Dandruffe in head and beard how it may be scoured
and rid away, 44. h. 47. a. 52. g. h. 56. i. 59. c. 72. g. 103. b 127. e. 138.
m. 155. f. 157. e. 158. m. 161. b. d. 168. l 171. e. 173. c. 174. k. 179. d.
182. h. 191. c. 207 c. f 232. k. 249. c. 267. f. 306. (...). 324. g. 365. c.
432. h 559. b. Danewort, an herb. See Walwort. Danubius the river, 405. a
Daphnias, a precious stone, 626. h Dardanium, what ornament of the body, 462.
g Dardanus, a magician, master to Democritus, 373. c Darnell, what medicinable
virtues it does affourd, 139. a 144. l. Dates Myrobalane, 163. b Date tree,
Spathe, what virtues it has, ibid. Dates, what discommodities they bring, 162.
l the liquor of Dates, what use it has in Physic, ibid. m Dates Caryotae,
what properties they have medicinable, 163. a. Date stones their virtues, ibid.
Date trees resembled naturally within stones, 588. h
D E
the Dead, with what reverence and protestation they were named, 297. b
Deafness or hardness of hearing, what medicines do help, 40. g 413. c. See
more in Ears. what causes deafness, 450. k Debate what things are thought
to breed, 435. a Debts, why called in Latin Aes Alienum, 479. d P. Decius Mus
honored with two grass coronets, 116. k his praise worthy deeds, ibid. l
Decuries of Judges at Rome ordained by Augustus Caesar, 459. d. of what persons
they did consist, ibid. four in all at first, 459. e. a fifth erected by C.
Caligula the Emperor, 460. i. with what regard they were elected, 347. b a
Defensatiue against inflammation, 206. k Deformities in the skin of the face
how to be done away, 268. k. See Visage. Delphicke basins of brass, 489. c
Demetrius a Physician wrote a treatise of the number four. 305. e. K.
Demetrius, in what regard he had Protogenes the painter, 543. a Demetrius, an
excellent Imageur and engrauer, 501. (...). his curious works. ibid.
Democritus, a professor and writer in Physic, 203. a reproved for his
vanities and lies as touching the Chamaeleon, 315. b. c. addicted overmuch to
the vanities of Magicians, ibid. condemned for setting down receipts in
Physic made of man's body, 293. f. a maintainer of Magic, 373. c. in some
sort excused for his loud lies, 316. g. Demos Atheniensium, what picture it was
of Parasius his doing, 535. e Demosthenes the great Orator carried poison
ordinarily in his ring, 458. l Demostratus, a writer in Philosophy, 606. h
Denarius or Denier, a silver piece at Rome, for what it was current, 463. a.
going for ten Asses, it was stamped with the Decussis X. 463. b. going for
sixteen Asses, with this number XVI. ibid. a Denier in soldiers pay, was
never above ten Asses, ibid. Denarius, a piece of gold coin, 462. i
Dendrachates, a precious stone, 623. e. the reason of that name, ibid.
Dendritis, a precious stone, 631. a Dentifrices for to make the teeth white,
326. i. k. 327. b 352. l. 376. h. 422. g. 437. d. 440. l. 591. b. Dependere,
what it signifies, 462. g Depilatories, 50. i. 110. d. 110. k. 122. g. 146. i.
k. 166. l 171. a. 187. a. 190. h. 268. k. l. 280. l. 302. g. 312. (...). k 315.
a. 316. g. 340. h. i. 341. a. against the abuse of rosins Depilatorie, and
pitch plasters to take away hair, 349. a Desiccatiue medicines, 138. m. See
more in Exsiccatiue.
D I
Diacodium, what composition it is, 68. h Diadochus, a precious stone, 626. h
Diadumenus, an excellent Image of Polycletus his making, 497. e. Diaglaucium, a
singular collyrie or eyesalue. 282. k Diagoras, a Physician, 67. e Diagraphice,
what kind of painting or pourtraying, 537. b learned by gentlemen's children,
ibid. Dialeucon, a kind of Saffron, 86. i Diamant, the most precious thing in
the world, 609. f Diamant, the only precious stone found in metal mines,
609. f. six kinds of Diamants, 610. g the Indian Diamant described, ibid.
description of the Arabian Diamant, ibid. how the true and perfect Diamant is
tried, ibid. b. why it is called in Greek Adamas, ibid. Cyprian Diamant* ibid.
i. the description, ibid. the Diamant Siderites, why so called, ibid. the
secret Artipathie between Goats blood and the Diamant, 610. k Diamant how it
may be broken and reduced into powder, ib. l enmity between the Diamant and
Loadstone, ibid m the use of a Diamant in cutting other stones, ibid l the
medicinable virtues of the Diamant, ibid. m why the Diamant is called
Anachites, 611. a Diamoron, a composition of Mulberries, 192 h Diamoron made of
common black bramble berries, comparable to the other of Mulberries. 196. i
Dianaes Image at (...) cut in marble, 565. a the strange (...) of the eye,
ibid. Diana Anaitis, an Image of beaten gold, 470. g carried away out of the
temple by Antonie, ibid. the pleasant answer of a Bononian to Augustus Casar
as touching this act of Antonie, 470. h Diarie or day fever how it is
dispatched, 155. e Dibutades (as some think) devised first to form an Image
or likeness in clay, 551. e. f. by what occasion. ibid. his inventions besides
in building, 552. g. he devised Protypa and Ectypa, ibid. Diceus, an image of
Leonteus making, why so called, 498. l Dictamnus, an herb growing only in
Candie, 225. c three kinds thereof with their description, ibid. c. d. e the
virtues of Dictamnus, known to us by means of the Hind, ibid. of great power
to provoke women's terms, 266. m. women with child must be wary of it. ib.
Dictyotheton, a kind of work in Masonrie, 594. g Didoron, what size of
Brick, 558. d Diet of great power to correct the humors of the body, and to
reform the affections of the mind, 136. h Diet exquisite, ibid. g Diet nothing
exquisit and precise, best for health, 304. h Dieuches, a writer in Physic,
40. k. he wrote a book in praise of Coleworts, 48. i Digestion by what means
it is helped, 40. l. 41. e. 52. g 63. e. 70. g. 132. g. 134. h. 151. e. f. 154.
g. 156 l. 162. k 182. m. 247. d. 259. e. 272. k. 277. a. 290. k. 303. e.
Digestive medicines and concocting cruditie of humors, 182. m. 249. d. 359. c.
Digitellus, what herb, 237. c Dill, an herb, 30. l. the medicinable
properties, 67. c. the discommodities thereof, ibid. Dinocrates, a cunning
Architect, 515. a. his devise to cover the temple of Arsinoe, with a roufe of
Loadstone, ibid. Diocles, a writer in Physic, 41. b. 112. l. 242. k Diodorus,
a Physician and writer, 55. a Diodotus, a writer in Physic, 200. l Dionysias,
a precious stone, 626. h Dionysius, an Herbarist and writer, 71. a. he
depainted herbs in their colors, 210. g Dionysius, a painter, 551. b. he was
good at nothing but in pourtraying the personages of men and women, 544. i
hereupon he was surnamed Anthropographos, ibid. Dionysodorus, a vain Musician,
601. c. he loved to be at his change of rings and precious stones, ibid.
Diopetes small frogs medicinable, 438. k Dios-Anthos, what manner of flower,
91. a. b Dioscorides, a cunning engrauer and cutter in precious stones. 601. d
Dios-pyron, 284. l Diotimus, a Physician and writer, 309. e Dioxippus, a famous
challenger at the games Olympica, 549. c. pictured by Alcimachus, ibid.
Diphris, a precious stone, 626. h. male and female, ibid. Diphryges, what it
is, and why so called, 512. l. three kinds thereof, ibid l. m. the virtues
medicinable, 513. a. how the good is tried, ibid. Dipoenus, a renowned cutter
and engrauer in marble, 564. h his works, where they wererise, 565. b
Dipsacos, an herb, 280. k. See more in Tazill. Dipsas, a venomous worm, 434.
g Dirae, unlucky birds, 295. a Discussiue medicines, 141. a. 180. i. 233. d.
273. d. 303. a 319. c. 418. k. l. 421. e. 423. d. 556. l. 557. d. 560. g. 588.
m. 595. d. Diseases deadly of man or beast, what cures, 313. a. diverse
diseases of a strange nature, 241. c Dislocations of ioints, how to be helped,
46, i. 49, a. 52, k. 63, f. 64, h. 73, a. 103, d. 108, g. 109, b. 121, d. 124,
l 129, c. 136, k 141, a. 146, k. 154, f. 159, d. 161, d. 162. g 172, h. 187, e.
191, d. 195, e. 201, a. 205, d. 208, g. 261, d 275, e. 303, a. 320, g. 337, b.
349, e, f. 386, i. 414. g. 419. f 450, i. 595, d. swelling occasioned thereby
how to be assuaged, 261. e Distaues vndizened and so carried by women, held
ominous, 298. i Dittander, an herb, 30, k. the description, ibid. where it
grows, ibid. the properties, 65. a Diuites, i. rich, who were properly
called, 479, d Crassus, surnamed Dives, proved a bankrupt, ibid. Diureticall
medicines, 149, d. 186, g, i, l. 190, k. 191, b 254, k. 281, b. 287, b. 442, l.
443, a, e. 444, g, h. See more in Urine. Dizzinesse of the head how it is
remedied, 47, b. 60, h. 62. g 67, a, d. 111, f, 149, e. 155, d. 157, a. 177, b.
219, d. 233, c 283, f. 289, (...). 381, b. 437, a. 591, a.
D O
Docke, an herb, the roots medicinable, 19. d Dodecatheos, an herb, 214, h.
why so called, ibid. the description and virtue, ibid. Dogbrier or bramble,
196. k. called Cynosbatos and Cynospastos, ibid. the description, ibid. Dogs
grass Canaria, 225. b Dog how envious to man, may be seen in that and another
herb, ib. c Dogs are killed with the juice of the herb Chamaeleon, 124 g.
what else is deadly to Dogs, 53. d Dogs crucified and hanged alive yearly at
Rome, 355. b the reason wherefore, ib. Dogs how to be kept from barking and
doing harm, 362. m 399, e. 450, h. cursed Dogs how to be appeased, 435. a Dog
burnt to ashes, in what case medicinable, 324. i Dogs head medicinable, 362. l.
m worms engendered in a Dogs carcass, medicinable, ibid. the hair of a dogs
tail, for what it is good, ibid. Dogs blood serves in Physic, 355. c Dogs
head reduced into ashes medicinable, 362. k. l Dogs biting that is not mad, how
cured, 37, d. 42, g. 78, g 121, d. 133, c. 134, i. 146, l. 155, f. 158, h. 172,
h. 185, f 314. g. 322, m. 443, b. 473, e. mad Dogs how their tooth does poison,
231. c mad Dogs biting how remedied, 43. e. 51. a. 52. h. 54. i. 57. a 75. d.
105. c. 106. l. 166. m. 167. a. 168. k. l. 171. e, 172. k 192. k. 199. c. 212.
g. 231. c. 278. h. 301. b. 306. k. 309. d. f 313. e. 322. l. 350. h. 362. l.
363. a. b. c. 418. i. 422. h 434. h. 443. c. 516. g. a man bitten by a mad
Dog, cured by revelation from the gods, 212. g the biting of a mad Dog
incurable, if Hydrophobie ensue thereupon, 211. f how Dogs may be preserved
from running mad, 308. h 363. a. a brazen Dog in Iunoes chapel, 494. m. with
what charge it was kept, ibid. Dog-fish medicinable, 440. g Dog-berrie tree,
how it preserves herbs from any vermin, 32. m Dolphin fish yields ashes
medicinable, 440. g. the liver good in Physic, ibid. Dolphins, pieces of
silver plate, which C. Gracchus had, 482. h. Donaces be the male of
shell-fishes, 444. h Donax, a cane in Cypros medicinable, 191. c. 450. i Dora,
why gifts are so called in Greek, 555. d Doris, what herb, 124. m Doron,
what measure it is in Greek, 555. d Dorotheus, a Poet, and writer in Physic,
131. f Dorycnium, the poisonous Dwale, 112, k. why so called, ib. the
counterpoyson thereof, 150. m. 308. g. what remedies more be appropriat for
that poison, 308. g. 318. h 436 h. i. 443. b. Dorypetron, an herb. See
Leontopodium. Doryphorus, an image of Polycletus his making, 497. e Doryphori,
Images in brass, resembling the guard of King Darius, 501. e Doves foot, an
herb. See Geranium.
D R
Draconites or Dracontia, a precious stone, 626. i Dracontium, an herb, 200,
h. whether it be the same that Dracunculus, ibid. the medicinable virtues of
the herb Dragon, whether it be Dracontium or Dracunculus, 201, b, c. three
kinds of Dracontium, ibid. t differs from Aron, ibid. how it took the name,
ib. Dracunculus the herb, of two sorts, different one from the other, 212, h.
one kind shows above ground, andretireth back again, according as serpents
appear above the earth, or be hidden. ibid. Dragons, an bearbe. See Dracontium
and Dracunculus. sea-Dragon, a venomous fish, 246. k. the remedies against the
prick and poison thereof, 246. k. 277. c 418. i. 433. f. 434. h. i. sea-Dragon
medicinable for the hurt that himself has done, 434. i Dragons have no venom
within them, 357. a. their grease drives away all venomous beasts, 357. d
Dragons. See serpents. Dram Atticke, what it does peise, 113. e for to Draw
forth of the flesh, spils, shiuers, bones, thorns, arrow heads, and such like,
proper remedies, 44. k. 56. g. h 71. f. 76. k. 103. d. 105. d. 108. l. 119. d.
122. l. 135. d 144. k. l. 149. f. 150. i. 167. a. 168. l. 191. d. 195. e 206.
g. 262 i. 264. m. 365. a. d. 266. g. 283. d. 291. c 306. i. 338. m. 371. a.
394. l. 395. a. b. 447. d. e. 450. k 511. b. to Draw skalie bones out of the
skull, 233. b. d Dreams fearful and troublesome, what do cause, 251. a 315.
e. means to avoid them, 65. e. 315. c. when and how we dream most, 303. e
Drinking of cold water, more wholesome than of hot drinks 304. g. Drinking of
waters naturally hot over liberally, hurtful, 412. h. where drought makes
dirt, and rain dust, 410 i. for the Dropsy diverse remedies, 36, l. 39, d. 40,
k. 42, k. 43. b 44, g. 45, b. f. 51, f. 55, c. 57. d. 64, k. 66, k. 69, e. 74,
h 77, c. 101, d. 104, i, l. 106, g, k. 109, b. 110, m. 119, d 124, g. 127, e.
128, k. 134, k. 142, l. 148, g. 149. b 164, g. 166, h. 167, e. 174, l. 181, c.
182, g. 184, l, m 186, g. 187, c. 190, g. 191, c. 192, h. 198, i. 203, e. 218,
i, k 219, d. 252, g. 253, c. 260, l. 261, a. 273, b. 276, h. 283^ f 284, i.
287, e. 290, k. 336, l, m. 362, i. 391, e. 414, h. 419, e 422, i. 443, a. 446,
i. 508, g. Dross of brass, 507. c against Drowsinesse remedies, 74. h. 206,
g. 218, l. 260, l 336, h. 446, i, k. Drowsinesse what does engender, 101. e
Drowsinesse occasioned by the venom of the Aspis, how cured, 356, i the
druidae, together with Physicians, Prophets, and Wisards, put down by Tiberius
Caesar, 374. g the Druidae of France tell wonders of the serpents egg
Anguinum, 354. g Drunkenness, what means to withstand, 43, b. 49, c. 57, d
103, e. 105, a, d. 119, d. 153, b. 171. f. 190, g. 201, b. 259, c. 342, g. what
things cause loathing of drunkenness and wine, 399, c. 626, h. 450, g.
Drunkards, why they drink pumish stone, before they sit down to quaffe wine,
591. d Drusillanus Rotundus his vanity and wast in a silver charger. 481. e
Drusus cured of the falling sickness, by purging with Ellebore in the Isle
Anticyra, 218. g Dryites a precious stone, 630. k Dryophonon, 280. m. the
description, ibid. Dryopteris, 280. l
D V
Duckes-meat, an herb, 142, h. the medicinable virtues thereof, ibid. Duckes
and Mallards blood bred in Pontus, medicinable, 364, g. C. Duillius his statue
erected upon a Column at Rome, 491, a. Dumbness coming suddenly, how cured,
42. h Duris, a writer, 498. m Duo, the bare word, a charm for Scorpions, 297.
c
D W
Dwale, a poisonous herb. See Dorycnium.
D Y
Dyed colors, which be the richest, 88, l Dying cloth and wool with the juice
of herbs, 114. m 123, c. Dyars craft, 115. c Dysenterie or ulcer of the guts,
how cured, 66, i. 73, a. 126. g 129, a. 137, b. 140, i. 141, f. 153, f. 318, g.
382, k. 418, k 474, h. 520, i. 557, e. See Bloody flix.
E A
for Ears pained within, convenient remedies, 38, g. 42. g 44, g. 54, d. 57,
e. 60. g. 62, m. 66, g. 68, h. 70, l. 102, i 103, d. 106, m. 131, d. 135, e.
140, g. 157, b. 161, e 162, h. k 169, c, f. 172, h, i. 173, c. f. 183. f. 185,
a. 188, l 189, f. 196, h. 200. l. 237. f. 238, g. 277, c. 307, e. 325, d 326,
c. 369, b, c, e. 418, k. 439, e. 439, f. Ears exulcerat, sore within, and
running with attir, how to be cleansed and healed, 120, l. 160, h. 165, b. 174,
m 180, g. 181, a. 183, a, c. 189, f. 197, d. 216, h. 238. g 277. c. 287. b.
306. h. 325. d. 326 g. 350. i. 369. b. d. 370. g, i. 418. k. 431. c. 432. h.
422. g. 432. k. for Ears deaf or hard of hearing, good medicines, 36. h 42.
g. m. 44. g. 49. b. 54. h. 56. i. 57. e. 63. e. 75. c. 111. a 128. i. 149. a.
156. m. 157. b. 159. c. 161. b. d. 162 h 165. a. 173. c 325. e. f. 326. g. 369.
b. 507. f. 511. c. comfortable things for the Ears in all infirmities, 131. d
160. m. 161. b. 178. g. 186. m. 249. e. 259. c. 273. a. 274. i 303. e. 307. e.
356. h. 369. d. 370. k. 371. a. 439. d. e. 558. l 559. b. 609. b. for Ears
ringing and singing, or having in them any unnatural sound and noise, 43. a.
47. b. 57. e. 62. h. 135. c 161. b. 162. h. 180. m. 308. h. 510. i. Ears
smelling strong and stinking, how to be cured, 307. e. f 325. e. 370. g.
against Earewigs or such like vermin crept into the ears, 300. k. 369. e.
water gotten into the Ear, what medicines it does require, 305, b. 369. c.
Ears having worms or vermin engendered within them, how to be cleansed, 59.
b. 62. m. 77. c. 78. h. 142. k. 161. b 306. h. Ears wounded or cracked how to
be healed, 52. i. 326. g 369. f, 439. f. Ears tingling, and glowing what they
betoken, 297. c Eare-wax medicinable, 301. a Earth in or about the skull of a
man or woman enterred, held to be medicinable, 302. g Earth Ebusitane is
medicinable, 561. d. See more in Earth-wormes.
E B
Eben, the virtues thereof, 191. e
E C
Echeneis or the stayship fish, of a wonderful nature, 425. e. f how it
staieth a ship, 426, i. the form and bigness thereof, ibid. in the
medicinable virtues of this fish the Greeks write contrarieties, 246. k Echion,
what medicine or collyrie it is, 366. l Echion, an herb, 227, e. two kinds,
ibid. the description and virtue, ibid. Echion, a cunning painter, 537, c. his
pictures, ibid. Echites, a precious stone, 630. i Echites, an herb described,
199. e Echo, what it is, 581, c. how it is caused naturally, ibid. at Cizycum
there is an Echo by fortune, ibid. at Olympia, caused by art, ibid. Eclipses of
Sun and Moon thought to be wrought by enchantment and witcheraft, 210. k
Ectypa, what they be, and who devised them, 552. g Eculeo, a writer, 536. g
E G
Eggs of Hens, and their medicinable properties, 351. c yolke of Hens eggs, in
what cases it is medicinable, 352. g Eggs all yolke, and without white, be
called Schista, ibid. k skin of an Hens Egge-shell, good in Physic, ibid. l
Hens Eggeshell reduced into ashes, for what it serves, ibid. the wonderful
nature of Hens Eggeshels. ibid. m Hens Eggs, all whole as they be, what they
are good for, 353, a. the commendations of Hens Eggs, as a meat most
medicinable, ibid. b Hens Egg, a proper nourishment for sick folk, and may
go for meat and drink both, ibid. Egge-shels, how they may be made tender and
pliable. ibid. white of an Egg resists fire, 353. e of Geese Eggs a
discourse, 354. k the serpents Egg, which the Latins call Anguinum, what it
is, and how engendered, 353, f Eglantine brier, Cynorrhodon, 196. k the root
sovereign for the biting of a mad dog, 112. a Egula, what kind of brimstone,
and for what it serves, 556, k.
E I
dimnesse of Eyes, what causes, 438. i for dimnesse of Eiesight threatening
blindness, appropriat medicines, 40, g. 41, f. 46, k. 50, g. 51, d. 56, g, h.
57, b. 65. d 73, d. 74, k. l. 75, c. 76, h. 77, b, c. 78, l. 107, d. 146, m
157, a. 158, m. 160, l 161, b. 162. g. 165, a. 168, g. 179, b 180, k. 183, f.
186, l. 193, a, b. 198, m. 200, m. 218, i 222, m. 224, h. 233, e, f. 234, g, h.
236, l. 277, c. 286, k 304, l. 306, h. 311, b. 312, g. 314, m. 324, k. 325, c,
d 366, i, k. l. 367, a, b, e. 368, g, i. 369, a. 422, g. 431, c, e 432, i. 438,
h, i, l, 439, c. 443, b, c. for eyes enflamed, swelled, and pained, 37, c. 69,
d. 104, g, m 108, l. 140, g. 141, b. 155, c. 159, f. 164, g. 165, d. 173, a.
184, h. 234, m. 235, b. 236, h, k. 287, b. 307, d 308, h. 325, c, d. 351, a.
352, g. 368, g, i. 423, d. 439, e 511, b. 529. a. for Eyes bleared, 52, i. 66,
g. 120, k. 157, f. 165, c, d. 178, g 179, c. 184, l. 193, e. 194, h. 195, a.
196. g. 272, h. 301. f 307, c. 367, e. 368, k. 325, d. 174. i. 234, g. 234, m
286, g. 301, c. 304, g. 305, f. 311, f. 312, g. 313, c 318, i, 325, a. 368, h.
i. 423, d. 439, a. for Eyes bloudshotton upon a stripe, or otherwise fiery
red, 58, k. 120, l. 177, c. 234, k. 307, d. 308, h. 367, e. 419, a 431, f. 438,
k. 589, f. ulcers in the eyes how to be cured, 143, b. 168, h. 237, e 351, a.
367, f. 473, e. 507, a. 591, a, d. corners of the Eyes exulcerat how to be
healed, 197, d asperitie of the Eyes how to be helped, 307, b. 312. g. 324, k
510, i. 511, b. 528, m. 559, a. cicatrices, scars, clouds, and filmes of the
Eyes, how to be rid away, 125, e. 146, m. 180, k. 198, m. 225, b. 233, f 275,
c. 286, k. 306, g. 312, g. 314, k. 324, l. 367, b, c 421. f. 507, a. 432, i.
438, l. 441, d. 471, e. 511, b. 557, d 609, b. 438, h, l. Pin and web in the
Eyes, what medicines do scour and scatter, 106, l. 144, k. 179, b. 191, e, f.
198, l. 233, f 306, g. 315, c. 316, g. 367, c. 368, h. 438, l. 506, m 509, a.
pearls, mailes, and spots in the Eyes how to be dispatched, 144, k. 179, c.
180. k. 191, f. 306, g. 312, g. 315, c 316, g. 324, l. 325, c. 366, h. 367, c,
d, e. 422, g. 438, (...) 443, c. 507, a. 509, a. 557, d. 366, i. 367, b. 368, g
369, a. for Eyes troubled with a violent flux or rheum falling into them, 307,
d. 308, h. 423, d. 473, e. 506, m. 511, b 561. c, d. 359, c. 366, k. 368, k. l.
369, a. Eyes goggled and ready to start out of the head, how to be repressed,
69. f. 158, k. 196, h. 306, h. 519, c. 590. g. Eie-bals sunk and hollow, how
to be raised, 519. e Eyes full of filthy gum and viscous matter, how to be
cleansed, 236 k. 237, e. 506, m. Eyes of little children, if they be red and
bloud-shotten, how to be cured, 351. d tunicles of the Eyes broken, what things
do heal, 325. c 367, b, d. rough how to be smoothed, 509. a motes in the Eic
how to be rid away, 395. b Eyes how to be cleansed from the Iaundise, 307. e
excrescence of flesh in the angles of the Eyes, how to be repressed, 418. m.
438, h Eyes wearied with watching how to be comforted, 512. h Eyes black and
blew upon a stripe, how to be helped, 419, a 439, b. dents and excauations in
the Eyes how to be helped, 312. g for Eyes continually weeping and watering,
37, c. 38, h 42, g, l. 45, e. 47, b. 47, d. 52, i. 53, e. 57, c. 60, g. 61, e.
65, c 66, g. 67, c. 69, d, f. 70, l. 73, d. 76, h. 102, k. l. 103, e 104, g.
106, h, i. 108, h. 109, a, (...). 122, k. 128, g. 138, g 140, l. 141, c. 147,
b. 153, c. 155, e. 158, k. 162, i 169, c. 177, c. 186, i. 197, a. 199, e. 200,
k. 206, l 234, g, h. 235, a. 236, h, i. 237, e. 239, a. 273, a. 277, c 281, a.
282, k. 289, c. 301, c. 305, f. 307, e. 324, k 325, a, c. 351, a. 366, k. 368,
l. 473, e. 508, l. 511, b. 516, i 529, a. 587, b. 590 g. 591, a. for all
infirmities and accidents of the Eyes in general, comfortable medicines, 36,
g. 42, g. 45, d, e. 46, l. 48. l. 49, d 403, b. 416, h. 419, a. 424, i. 432, k.
511, c. 559, a. 589, b 590, i. 623. f. Eie-browes how to be embelished and
beautified, 163. a 560, g. Eie-lids, roughness, itch, and scurfe, how to be
amended, 146, m. 147, b. 166, l. 272, h. 350. k. 368, k. their asperitie and
excrescence of flesh, how to be cured, 421 f. 424. k. 438. k. 443. c. 516. h.
their hardness how to be mollified, 140. l. 351. a Eie-lids excoriat, how to
be skinned, 158. k. 272. b the untoward hairs of the Eie-lids growing into the
eyes, how to be rectified, 131. f. 183. a. 184. h. 324. l. 325. c 351. c. 366.
g. h. from the Eie-lids what cause the hair to fall, 417. d See more in
Hairs, how it is made to grow, 366. g for all the imperfections generally of
the Eie-lids, appropriat remedies, 36. g 63. c. 74. k. 106. l. 306. g. 324. m
438. l. 509. a. fistulaes about the angles of the Eyes, how to be cured, 529 a
in Eyes of Horse or Beast, how the Haw is to be healed, 69. a. 198. l. 233. f.
234. k. 366. l. 420 g. Eie-salues, 286. k. 324. l. See more in Collyries.
Eidyls and Eclogues of poets, why stored with charms, 296. k
E L
Elaphoboscon, 225. c Elaphoboscon, an herb, 129. e. the description, ibid.
preserved for meat, ibid. the medicinable virtues it has, ib f Elate, what
Date tree, 163. b Elaterium, what it is, 35. f. how it is gathered, ibid. how
reduced into trosches, 36. g. how long it will last, ibid. the proof of it,
ibid. the effects thereof, ibid. how to be chosen, ibid. the full dose of
Elaterium one Obolus, ibid. l. it is a purgative, ibid. k. it cleanses the
matrice, 37. a. it hasteneth an abortiue fruit, ibid. Elatine, an herb, 281
a. the description, ibid. Elatites, a kind of bloud-stone crude, 590, h. being
calcined, it becomes Miltites, ibid. Elatus, a river in Arcadia medicinable,
403. a Elder tree, 185. f. the virtues in Physic, ibid. ground-Elder. Sea
Walwort. Electrides, Islands, why so called, 605. e trees, according to some,
366. h Elector, the name of the Sun in Greek, 605. c Electrum, base, whitish
gold, natural, 469. e. the temper thereof with silver, ibid. of credit in old
time, ibid. Electrum artificial, 469. e a cup of Electrum dedicated by lady
Helena to Minerua at Lindos, 469. f the singular properties of Electrum, ibid.
it discovers poison, 470. g Electrum the same that Amber. See Amber.
Elecampane, an herb. 41. e. the medicinable virtues that it has, ibid. why
called Helenium, 91, b. See more in Helenium. Elelisphacos, what herb, 142.
h. k Elephants body affourdeth good medicines, 310. l. their blood
medicinable, ibid. Elephants tooth medicinable, ibid. the trunk of an Elephant
used in Physic, ibid. Elephantiasis, a foul disease. See Leprie. Elephantis,
a woman Physician and writer in Physic, 309. e Elichrysos, a flower and color
artificial, 89. b Ellebore the herb, 217, b. two principal kinds, ibid.
their description, ibid. b. c. d black Ellebore, a very poison to cattaile,
217, c. the best grows upon mount Helicon, ibid. black Ellebore, why called
Melampodion, 217, d. whereto it is used, ibid. with what ceremonious devotion
it is to be gathered, ibid. d. e. it is called likewise Eutomon and
Polyrrhizon, ibid. it purges downward, ibid. other virtues thereof, 218, i
the dose, ibid. white Ellebore, 217. d. where the best grows, ibid. with what
regard and circumstances it is gathered, 217, e. it purges upward, ibid. how
to be chosen, 218, l. the dose, 219. a circumstances to be observed in the
taking of Ellebore, ibid. c Ellebores at first were dangerous purgatiues, ^bid.
taken by students to purify their eyes, 217. f. corrected by the mixture of
Sesamoides, 218. g Ellebore the white, what properly does correct, 431. c
Ellebore called in Latin Veratrum, and why, 218. g. for use in Physic how it
is to be chosen, ibid. g. h the medicinable virtues of the Ellebores, ibid, how
they are prepared, ibid. unto whom the giving of Ellebore is prohibited, 219. e
the strange operation of the white Ellebore root, 230. l great care to be had
in taking white Ellebore, 218, l, m the time of ministering it, 219, b, c the
manner of the working of Ellebore, ibid. d Elleborine, an herb. See
Epipactis. Elm, what virtues it yields in Physic, 185. c Elops, a venomous
serpent, and the remedy, 434. g Elutia. See Leadore.
E M
Ambassadors, why they carried a rod or mace with serpents pourtraied about
it, 354. i. k Emerand, the most precious things in the world after the diamant
and p^arles, 611. b the green color of the Emer and most pleasing to the eye,
ib. why Emerauds are not ^ut and engraven, ibid. c of Emerauds twelve binds,
ibid. d Scythian Emerauds, ibid. Bactrian Emerauds, where they be found, and
how, 611. e Aegiptian Emerauds, ibid. where they be found. ibid the rest are
gotten out of brazen mines, ibid. the best therefore in Cypros, ibid. fishes
how they were scared with Emerauds, standing as eyes in the head of a marble
Lion, 612. g the defects and blemishes in Emerauds, ibid. g. h. in their
color, ibid. in their body and substance, ibid. Aethyopian Emerauds, ibid. i
Persian Emerauds, ibid. Hermionian Emerauds, ibid. the Atticke Emeraud, ibid. k
the Median Emeraud, ibid. Carchedonian Emerauds, ib. l Laconicke Emerauds, 613
g Emerauds of great bigness, ibid. a. b Empetron, otherwise called Calcifraga,
what herb, 281. a the description and virtues, ibid. b Emplecton, what work
in Masonrie, 593. f Emydes what Tortoises they be, 431. d
E N
Enamelling. See Encaustice. Encardia, a precious stone named also Cardisce.
626. k Encaustice, the feat of painting with fire, or enamelling, 546. h. i.
who devised it, ibid. who excelled therein, ibid. Enchantments. See Charms and
Words. condemned altogether by Pliny, 213. c Enchusa, what herb, 124. m
Endive, the diverse kinds and their medicinable properties, 47. d. Engrauers in
silver who were famous, 503. d Enhydris what serpent, 376. g. the properties of
it, ibid. Enhydros, a precious stone, 630. l Enneacrunos, a famous fountain at
Athens, 410. g Enneaphyllon, an herb, with nine leaves just, 281. c. the
nature and virtues, ibid. Enorchis, a precious stone, 626. k. why so called,
ibid. Entrails diseased, what medicines are proper therefore, 158. g. inflamed
how to be cured, 165. d
E P
Ephemerides, an ancient invention, 210. i Ephemeron, what herb, 261. e
Ephemeron Colchicum, a poisonous herb, with the remedy thereof, 323. c. d
Epichermus, a Greek writer in Physic, 50. h Epicurus his picture much
esteemed, 522. l. his mouthminds. ibid. Epigenes, a writer, 406. k Epigonus, an
excellent Imageur, 504 g. renowned for representing an infant by the mother
lying slain, ibid. Epimelas in precious stones, what it signifies, 626. l
Epimenidion, an herb described, 281. c. hurtful to women, ibid. Epimenidium,
a kind of squilla or sea-Onion, 18. m Epinyctides, accidents to the eyes, how
to be helped, 438. l. m Epinyctides, how Pliny takes it, 42. l. what is meant
thereby mother writers, ibid. Epithymum, what herb. 250. l. the true
description, ibid. m.
E Q
Equisetum, an herb, 263. b
E R
Eranthemon, what herb, 125. d why so called, ibid. Erasistratus, a Physician,
68. g. he condemned Opium, ibid. he altered the course of the former Physic,
344. h. how much money he received for one cure, ibid. Eretria a white earth
serving for painters color, 518. k why so called, 329. f. the use in Physic,
ibid. two kinds thereof, 559. e. how the good is known. ibid. Erigonus, a
painter, 550. k. how he came by knowledge, ibid. Erineos the name of the wild
figtree in Greek, 169. b. the name also of an herb, ib. the description of
the herb, ibid. c. the virtues, ib. Eriphia a strange herb, 204. l. the
description, ibid. how it took that name, ibid. the use thereof in Physic,
ib. Eristalis, a precious stone, 626. k Erith, an herb, 274. i. the sundry
names it has, ibid. why called Philanthropos, ib. the virtues medicinable, ib.
Erithales, one of the names of the less Housleeke, 237. c Erotylos, a precious
stone, 626. k. called likewise Amphicome and Hieromnemon, ibid. what Earth is
like by the leere to have water within, 409. b what not, ibid. c. d in what
place Earth turns in time to be a stone, 554. l. m the bounty of the Earth
inenarrable, 553. b Erthen works and vessels both in divine and civil uses
also, infinite, 553. b. c. of great price, ibid. d. e Earth pure, will not flame,
472. b Earth medicinable, how to washed and prepared, 559. e Erthquakes as they
discover springs, so they swallow them up, 411. a Erth-wormes medicinable, and
therefore preserved, 361. d Eruile the Pulse, what virtues in Physic it has,
143. b the discommodities thereof, ibid. d Erynge, a sovereign herb against
all poisons and serpents, 118. m. the description, 119. a. b Erysisceptron,
what plant, 195. b. the sundry names of (...). ib. the medicinable vertxes
wherewith it is endued, ibid. c Erythini, fishes, having a property to stay
the Laske, 443. e
E S
Esopus, what herb, 45. b Esubopes, a kind of the Colchians, rich and
sumptuous both in silver and gold, 464. i
E T
Ethe, what they be, 541. d
E V
Euax, a K. of Arabia, who wrote of herbs, 210. g Euclia what herb, 231. f.
the effects thereof, according to the Magicians, ibid. Eucnemos Amazon, an
image, 503. a. why so called, ib. why esteemed so much by Nero the Emperor,
ibid. Eudemus, a Physician, 347. e. over familiar with Liuia the princess,
wife to Drusus Caesar, ibid. Eudoxus, a painter and Imageur in brass, 549. e
Euenor, a writer in Physic, 112. l Euenor a Painter, 534. g. father and
master to noble Parasius the Painter, ibid. Eugalacton, an herb. See Glaux.
Eulaeus, a river, out of which the kings of Persia use to drink, 406. l
Eumarus, a famous Painter, 533. a. he first distinguished male from female,
ibid. Eumeces, a precious stone, 626. k Eumetres, a precious stone, 626, l.
called also Belus gem. ibid. Eunicus, an excellent grauer, 483. e Eunuchion, a
kind of Lectuce, 24. k. why so called, ibid. Eupatoria, the herb, otherwise
called Agrimonie, 220. k the reason of the name, ibid. the description and
virtues, ibid. k. l Eupetalos, a precious stone, 626. l Euphorbia, an herb,
222. k. why so called, ibid. commended by king Iuba in one entire book, ibid.
l. the description, ibid. where it grows naturally, 269. d Euphorbium, the
juice of the herb Euphorbia, 222. l. the manner of gathering it, ibid. how it
is sophisticated, 223. a. Euphorbus, a Physician, brother to Antonius Musa the
Physician, 222. k Euphranor, an excellent Imageur, 502. g. his works, ibid. he
was besides a cunning Painter, 547. c. he excelled in Symetries, whereof he
wrote books, ibid. his imperfection, ibid. his works, ibid. Euphrosynon, an
herb. See Buglossos. Eupompus, a cunning Painter, 537. a. his works, ibid.
of great authority, ibid. Eureos, a precious stone, 626. l Euripice, a kind
of rish, 101. e. the properties which it has, ibid. Eurotas the river
represented in brass, 502. h. the praise of the workman thereof, ibid.
Eurotias, a precious stone, 626. l Eusebes, a precious stone, ibid.
Euthycrates, son to Lysippus, a singular Imageur, 499. f wherein he excelled,
ibid. his works, ibid. Eutomon, what herb, 217. e Eutychides, an imageur
famous for the river Eurotus of his pourtraying, 502. h Eutichides, a painter,
549. f
E X
Exacos, an herb. See Centaurie the less. Exagon, one of the Ophiagenes,
299. a. not hurt by serpents, but licked by them, ibid. Exchange and bartering
ware for ware, the old manner of merchandise, 454. l Excrements of man's body
medicinable, 302. m Excrements of man's belly, a counterpoyson, 270. k
Excrements of a sheep baliered about their tails, 351. b the medicinable
properties thereof, ibid. Excrescence of proud and rank flesh, how to be taken
away and repressed, 146. l. 158. k. 165. a. d. 167. a. 177. f. 264 k 265. a.
273. e. 338. i. 447. e. 474. i. Execrations, bannings and cursings in a form
of words, thought to be of force, 296. i Exedum, what herb, 206. g. the
effects that it has, ibid. Exercise of the body makes much for health, 303.
d Extrebenus a precious stone, 626. k Exorcismes believed to be available,
294. l Exorcismes and prayers interrupted by unlucky birds Dicae, 295. a
Exorcisme of the Decij, ibid. Expensa, what the word signifies, 462. g
Experience, the first ground and foundation of Physic, 242, m. Exsiccatiue
medicines, 178, h, k. 249, d, f. 264, m. 286, k 320, m. 418, k. l. 421. e. 423,
e. 471, e. 475, a. 506, m 511. f. 516, h. 529, b, d. f. 558, l. 559, d. 588, m.
591. c See more in Desiccatiue. Extractiue medicines, 595. c. See more in
Drawing. Exulceration by extreme cold or burning, how cured, 432. g.
Exulceration of the belly, how to be helped, 168, h. 318. g See Dysenterie.
Exulceratiue medicines and raising blisters, 149, d. See Causticke.
F A
FAbianus a writer in Physic, 303. e Fabius (Cunctator) honored with a
grass Coronet, and why, 116. m. saluted by the name of Father, by the regiment
of Minutius, 117. a Fabricius, a patron of frugalitie, 483. c Faco rough and
blistered with Sunne-burning, how to be cured, 366. k Face broken out, by what
means healed. 422. k. how to be cleansed from freckles and pimples, 440. m.
how to look full, fair, and plumbe, 440. m. 441. a. b. how to be rid from
spots and Lentils, ibid. b Faint cold sweats, how to be remedied, 48. h. 49. f.
52. k 58. g. 313. d. See more in sweats Diaphoreticall. Faintings about the
heart how to be helped, 134. l. 155. d See Swouning. Falernum, a kind of
Amber, 608. i. why so called, ibid. Falling sickness detected by the fume of
Brimstone, 556. k by a perfume of Bitumen, 557. e. by the fume of Ieat, 589. c.
by what means else it may be disconered, 335. d. For to prevent and cure the
falling sickness, appropriat remedies, 40. l. 44. l. 49. f. 57. e. 60. k. 66.
l. 69. b 70. h. 72. k. 74. g. h. 78. k. 103. e. 107. e. 111. e. 119. d 126. i.
134. m. 140. h. 142. l. 149. e. 157. a. 167. c 171. e. 177. b. 178. i. 180 g.
181. a. 185. b. 218. g 219. d. 239. a. 260. g. h. 273. e. 283. e. 299. f. 300.
g 301. d. 305. e. 309. e. 310. m. 311. b. c. 312. m. 314. k 318. g. 335. a. b.
c. 341. c. d. 378, f. 388. g. h. i. l. m 389. a. b. c. 431. a. 431. c. 432. h.
445. c. 591. a 626. h. for the very sit of the Falling sickness, what
remedies be convenient, 432. i. k. 445. c. d. a singular clyster for this
purpose, 445. d Falling sickness thought to be cured by drinking of man's
blood, 293. c Fallen from an high place how to be ^urod, 350. i. See more in
Bruises. Families driving serpents away with their very presence, 298. m. a
Family how to be kept in concord and agreement, 312. m how it shall be
fortunat, 357. a Fantastical imaginations how to be prevented, 65. c. 313. c
Fantastical hol-^oblins called Fatui, how to be driven away, 286. h. See
Illusions. Far, a kind of wheat, for what to be used, 138. h Farfugium, an
herb. See Fole-foot. Earcins (...)* Horses, and scabs in beasts, how to be
healed, 128. l. 130. l. 161. e. 183. f. 184. g. 196. i. 218. k. 310. g 338. l.
See Scab and Mange. Farcins in horse-neckes how to be cured, 150. i. 281. f
Fascinus, what it is, and of what force, 300. l Fasting precisely from all meat
is medicinable, 303. c Fat of beasts, much esteemed, 319. b Fatness and
corpulencie, what things do procure, 134. k 172. k. 303. d. 318. l. 445. c.
what does diminish, 443 c. Fauete Linguish, what it means, 294. m
F E
Feet benumbed with cold how to be recovered, 38. k. 334. k Feet pained and
swelled about the anckles, how to be eased, 185. d. 414. h. 560. h. Feet
fretted; ga ed, and excoriat, how to be remedied, 334. k. l. 386. k. Feet
scorched with heat of Sun, how to be reduced into temper, 334. k Feet
chapped, how to be helped, 431. f. See Fissures. Feet surbatted how to be
eased, 334. k Feet galled by stubborn shoes, how to be cured, 334. l Feet of
Kine and Oxen, how to be k^pt from surbatting. 342. l Fell terrae, an herb.
See Centaurie the less. Fellons how to be healed and prevented, 56. i. 64. m.
71. b 140. i 141. c. 144. k. 161. b. e. 167. a. d. 180. g. 188. m 262. g. 300.
h. 309. d. 320. g. 337. b. 370. l. 392. i. k 419. b. 588 m. Fennel, an herb
wherein serpents delight much, 31. e. 77. b Fennel clears the sight, 77. b
Fennel juice how to be drawn, ibid. c. which is best, ibid. Fennel of diverse
kinds. ibid. d Fennel much used in the kitchen, pastrie, and bake-house,
ibid. Fernell-geant an herb. See Ferula. Fenigreeke, 87. a. 207 c. the sundry
names that it has, ib. why it is called Buceras and Aegoceras, ib. the virtues
thereof, ibid. Fern of two kinds male and female, 281. d. why it is called in
Greek Pteris, ibid. the roots when and how to be used, ibid. e women must
beware of Fern, for fear of abort and barrenness, ibid. f Oak Fern, 280. l.
the description, ibid. Ferula, what plant, 32. g. the description, 78. i the
stalks good to be eaten, ibid. how to be served up to the table, ibid. Ferula
an enemy to Lampries, ibid. k poison to Horses, 176. h Ferulacea, what they
be, 13. d Ferus Oculus, what herb, 234. l. the virtues thereof, ibid. Fevers
periodicall, what they be, 38. g. 314. h. how to be cured, ibid. i. 335. e.
445. e Feauers intermitted how to be cured, 38. g. 260. i. 310. h See more in
Tertian, Quartan, and Quotidian. day-Feauer. See Diarie. Feauers called
Stegnae, what they be, 167. b Feauers ardent, what remedies they require, 50.
h. 70. h 148. g. 160. l. Feauers cold, i. coming with cold fits, how cured,
260. h 445. e. See intermittent. for Feauers in general, proper remedies, 187.
b. 260. i. 310. i 335. e. 446. l. 435. b. 609. b. Feuerfew, an herb, 111. e.
the description, ibid. the sundry names it has, ibid.
F I
Figwort, an herb. See Celendine the less. Figtree yields a milkie juice,
medicinable, 166. k Figtree ashes medicinable, 167. f Figtree bark reduced
into powder, what remedies it affourdeth, 168. h Figs, their properties good
and bad, 167. a. b Filberds and Hazellnuts, 172. g. their medicinable virtues
ibid. their discommodities, ibid. k Filicula, what herb, 251. a Fingers which
were honored with rings first, 458. i middle finger adorned with a ring in
Britain and France, ibid. Finials in house-tops who devised, 552. g Finkle.
See Fennel. Fire what does soonest quench, 472. h Fire auerted by powerful
words, 296. l. See Fire. Fishes reduced into 176 kinds, 450. m. their names
according to the A B C. ibid. Fish glue, what virtues it has in Physic, 439.
a. 441. a Fishes cured by Persely, 53 e Fish broth is laxatiue, 442. l
ordinance of king Numa as touching Fish, 429. c Fishes small devoured by great,
for what they are medicinable, 445. a sea Fish in request at Rome from the
beginning, 429. c Fishes, where they be in steed of an Oracle, 404. k Fishes
in some water all black, ibid. m. in what water they be all deadly, 404. m.
405. a Fishes in the Arabian seas of extraordinary bigness, 427. c the wit of
some fishes wonderful, ibid. b Fishes tame, and coming to hand, 428. k Fishes
lured with a whistle, ibid. l they give presage of future events, ibid. Fishes
tame, playfull, and wanton, within the poole of Uenus, 428. m Fishes about Pele
taste all bitter, 429. a. where they be all of a sweet taste, ibid. where Fishes
of the sea be naturally salt, ibid. salted Fish which be medicinable, 434. g.
h. 440. g. h 444. m. salt Fish in Italy may be made very fresh at Beneuentum,
429. b Fissures, chaps, and clifts in the fundament, how to be cured, 104. g.
105. e. 120. i. 146. k. 169. e. 187. e. See Fundament. Fissures or chaps in the
feet how to be healed, 52. g. 128. h 169, a. 183. d. 258. l. 306, i. 334, k.
351, c. See more in Feet. Fissures or chaps in any place of the body, what
things do cure, 128, g. 141, e. 159, d. 161, d. 169, a. 197, d 320. g.
Fistulaes or hollow sores, what remedies are appropriat for them, 44, k. 49, a.
50, m. 61, c. 104, h. 130, g. 144, i 146. l. 159, a, d. 181, a. 185, d. 201, e.
218, k. 264, l 265, b. 279, c. 280, l. 285, c. 290, l. 307, c. 350, i 430, h.
448, g. 470, k. 509, b. 510, k. See more in Ulcers. Fistulaes how to be kept
open, 191. c Fistulous sores in the secret parts, how healed, 136. k. See
Priuities. Fistula between the angle of the eye and the nose, how it is to be
cured, 125. e. 146. m. 286. g. it is called Aegilops, 235. a Fistulaes how they
are bred in any part of the body, 262. h Fits cold and shaking in an ague, how
to be put by, 57. d 61. b. 143. a. 162. h. 260. ^. 313. a. 314. i. 316. l. Fits
otherwise of chill cold how to be cased, 57. f. 61. a. 67. d See more in cold.
Fiue-finger or fiue-leaued grass. See Cinquefoile.
F L
Flags what herb. See Xiphion. Flancke diseased how to be cured. 37. e. 40.
k. 54. i. 275. e Flatuositie. See Ventositie. Cn. Flauius for what demerit he
was created Aedile curule and Tribune of the Commons, 457. a. b Flax the
wonderful power thereof, 1. d. e. f the plant thriueth apace, 2. h. the seed
how it is sown, how it comes up and grows, 2. i Flax of Spain, 3. a. b
Flax of Zoela, 3. c Flax of Cumes, ibid. Flax of Italy, 3. d spinning of Flax
what manner of work. 4. k Flax how to be dressed, hetchelled, spun, beaten,
wouen, etc. 4 k. l Fleawort, the herb descriBed, 233. c. the diverse names it
has, ibid. the nature and virtues, ibid. Fleas how to be killed, 60. l. 63. c.
120. l. 124 m. 186. h against the breeding of Fleas, 387. f Fleagme viscous,
sticking in the chest and throat, how to be cut and dissolved, 46. g. h. 64. l.
73. c. 74. g 107. d. 121. e 122. h. 130. i. 167. d. 173. e. 183. c. 198. i.
200. i. 206. i 246. g. i. 257 a. 277. b. 329. b. Fleagme and fleagmaticke
humors how to be purged downward, 72. h. 75. c. 140. h. 150. h. 170. g. 172. h.
182. h 185. c. 186. g. 198 l. 218. i. 250. l. m. 251. a. b. 252. h. l 281. b.
288. g 291. b. Flemmings used Flax, and made linen in old time, 2. l Flesh
rank and proud in ulcers how to be repressed, 50. m 61. b. See more in Ulcers
and Excrescence. Flesh meat how it may be kept fresh and sweet all Summer long,
71. a how it is preserved from maggot and corruption, 342. i Flexumines at
Rome, who they were, 461. a Flint stone, where it is cut with the saw, 588. i
Flory of Painters, what it is, 531. b Flos-Salis, i. Sperma Ceti, 416. k Flos
or flower of Antimonie, what it is, 474. g Flowers that bring tidings of the
spring, 92. g Floure-de-Lis root medicinable, 87. d Floure-de-Lis where the
best grows, ibid. d. e Floure-de-Lis of Illyricum of two sorts, ibid. e
Floure-de-Lis called Rhaphantis, and why so, ibid. why it is named Rhizotomus,
ibid. the ceremonious manner of taking up the root, 87. e. f Flower gentle,
surpasses all flowers for pleasant color, 89. a. the description and nature
thereof, ibid. why it is called Amaranthus, ibid. b Spring Flowers, 92. g
Summer Flowers, ibid. k Autumn Flowers, 92. l Flowers of herbs, different,
19. f Flowers and their variety. 79. e. f Flowers differ in smell, color, and
juice (i. taste.) 86. l Flowers in Aegipt, why they sent not well, 87. b what
Flowers be employed in guirlands, 89. e Flux of the stomach or laske called
Caeliaca passio, how to be stayed, 39. e. 43. d. 49. d. 55. c 59. d 66. h. k.
68. h. 73. d 76. g. i. 106. l. 108 g. 111. a. 122. g. 124. k. 128. l. 139 f
144. i. 147. b. 148. h. i. 163. e. 164. g. l. 151. f. 153. c. f 156. g. 158. g.
i. 165. b. e. 167. f. 168. g. 172. l. 174. k 177. c. f. 178. k. 188. l. 192. h.
195. e. 196. g. m. 197. e 216. h. 249. a. 250. g. 285. d. 289. c. 219. d. 307.
c 318. l. 332. g. 331. b. c. d. e. f. 352. h. i. 353. b. c. 382. l m 422. l. if
it be inueterat, and of long continuance, 418. k. Flux called Lieuterie how
stayed, 165. e. See Laske. Flies where they are not at all, 95. b. how to be
killed, 220 g. Flies witless creatures, 364. k. they fly like clouds out of
the territory of Olympia at a certain time, ibid. upon what occasion, ibid.
their heads, blood, ashes, etc. yield medicines. ibid.
F O
Foemur Bubulum, what herb, 282. g Fole-foot the herb, why called in Greek
Asarum, 86. g Fole-foot, another herb, called in Greek Chamaeleuce, and in
Latin Farfugium, 199. a. the description, ibid. the virtues that it has,
ibid. b why called Bechion and Tussilago, 246, i. two kinds of it, ibid. wild
Fool foot, a direction to find water, 246, i. the description thereof, ibid.
the second Fole-foot called Saluia, described, ibid k Foam of a Dog and Horses
mouth, how they were lively painted by chance and fortune, 542. l Foam of water
medicinable, 414. h Food of light digestion, 141. b Forke fish. See Sea-Pussin.
Formacei, what walls they be, 555. b Fortune or Chance accounted a goddess,
270. l Fortuna huiusce diei, 497, d. a temple for her at Rome, ibid. Forum of
Rome spread with caltraps, 5. e. and why, ibid. paued with fine works in
colors, ibid. Forum of Augustus Caesar at Rome, a sumptuous building, 581. f.
what Caesar paid for the plot of ground where this Forum stood, 582. g
Founderie, i. the feat of casting images and works of metal so excellent,
that it was ascribed to some of the gods, 487. c. an ancient art in Italy, 493.
e a Fountain purging and clensing of it self every ninth year, 411. b
Fountains which be naturally hot, do engender salt, 414. m. Fountains
yielding diverse sorts of water, some hot, some cold, others both, 401. c
Fountains yielding water not potable for beasts, but medicinable only for
men. ibid. d Fountains giving names to gods, goddesses, and cities, ibid.
Fountains standing upon diverse minerals, ibid. Fountains of hot waters able
to sees meats, ibid. e. Licinian Fountains hot rising out of the sea, ibid.
red fountains in Aethyopia, 402. m. the virtues of them, ibid. a Fountain
yielding water resembling wine, 403. e a Fountain casting up an unctuous
water, serving in stead of oil to maintain lamps, ibid. f a Fountain
seething up with water of a sweet smell, 407. b the reason thereof, ibid.
number of (Four) forbidden in some cases, 305. f Fox grease, gall, and dung
effectual in Physic, 324. h Fox pizzle medicinable, ibid. k Fox tongue
medicinable, 325. d Fox tail described, 99. b Foxes, how they may be kept from
Geese, Hens, and Pullaine, 342. k
F R
Fractures or bones broken how to be knit and soudered, 58. k. 119. d. 183. a.
200. l. 233. b. 275. f. 335. e. 394. k. l 412. k. Freckles how to be scoured
out of the face, 140. m. 161. b. e 168. k. 173. c. 174. l. 175. b. 308. g. 314.
k. See more in Face and Visage. Fresh water at sea how Sailors may have at all
times, 413. f. 414 g. against sudden frights and fears, what remedy, 315.
d. sea-Frogs, fishes medicinable, 434. i. 440. h. i. k riuer-Frogs medicinable,
ibid. a Frogs tongue will cause a woman to answer directly to questions in her
sleep and to tell all, 434. i of Frogs, Magicians report wonders, ibid. k
Frogs, a good bait for Purple fishes, ibid. Liver of a Frog, 434. l.
medicinable, 439. a. b. c Frugalitie exiled out of Rome, 483. c Fruits, which
be hurtful, 163. d in Fruit gathering what ceremonious words used, 297. b
Frumentie made of Spelt, what medicinable virtues it has, 139. c Frumentie
made of the common wheat Triticum, 140. l the use thereof in Physic. ibid.
F V
Fucus Marinus. See Sea-weed. a Fuke for a red, 327. c Fugitive slaves arrested
by charms, and stayed from running away, 295. c Fugitive stone in Cizycum, why
so called, 581. b Fullers thorn, what operation it has, 195. b Fullers
herb. See Radicula. Fullers, why never goutie in their feet, 306. h how they
may wash and scour their cloth, 311. c. 560. k Fullers earth Camolia, what use
it has in Physic, ibid. i used to scour clothes, ibid. See Cimolia. the act
Metella providing for Fullers, 560. k Fullo, a kind of Beetle fly, 390. l L.
Fulvius Argentarius committed for wearing a chaplet of Roses, 81. d Fumiterrie,
the second kind of Capnos, an herb, 236. l the virtues thereof, 247. c a
Funeral cloth will never after be moth-eaten, 299. c for the Fundament, seat,
or tuill, and the infirmities thereof in general, appropriat remedies, 60. g.
72. k. 102. k. 106. ^ 107. a. 121. d. 144. i. 146. k. 155. f. 165. b. 167. d.
174. k ^^^. d. ^52. k. ^84. l. accidents of the Fundament, proceeding of cold
and moisture, how to be cured, 184. h. 196. g chaps and Fissures in the
Fundament how to be closed and healed up, 183. d. 195. c. 196. h, 280. l. 333.
d. 351. a. e 384. l. 444 i. k. 519. d. Excrescences and werts there growing,
126. l. 133. c 134. g. i. 384. l. 507. f. 519. d. Fundament or seat galled,
255. f. 384 l. 444. i Fundament fallen, hanging forth or perverted, how to be
reduced and settled, 103. e. 106. m. 156. g. 164 g. 193. b 195. a. 256. g. 384.
l. 398. g. 444. k. blind haemorrhoids in the Fundament or bigs incident thereto,
how to be eased, 384. m. 444. i. 516. i. 519. d. 521. b See more in Piles.
haemorrhoids running extremely, how to be stayed, 385. a See more in
Haemorrhoids. Fundament enflamed and appostumat how to be cured, 131. d. 141.
e. 146. k. 161 a. 333. e. exulcerat, how to be healed, 159. d. 175. a. 192. h.
196. k 197. a. 320. i. Fungi, what kind of Mushromes, 132. m. their generation
and sundry kinds, ibid. Furnian Plate, 480. k Fusses and Fusse bals. See
Mushromes.
F Y
Fylth scraped from wrestlers bodies, consisting of sweat and oil together, in
what causes medicinable, 303. a Fylth scraped from the walls of wrestlers
places, thought to be medicinable, ibid. c Fire medicinable, 596. b the
wonderful power of Fire, 598. m. the operations thereof, 599. a hard to say,
Whether Fire consume or engender more, 599. b.
G A
GAds of steel quenched, what effects they do work. 250. i. Gaeodes, a
stone, why so called, 589. b. the nature thereof, ib. Gagates, the Ieat stone,
589. b. why so called, ibid. the description and generation thereof, 589. c.
the nature, ibid. Gall of a Boeufe good for the ears, 325. d Gall of greater
beasts, what operation it has in Physic, 321. a. Gall of smaller beasts what
virtue it has, ibid. Gall of Bulls, for what good, 321. a Gall of beasts, how
to be ordered, prepared, put up, and kept, ibid. Gall of an horse rejected as a
poison, 321. b Galls between the legs how to be skinned, 146. k. 181. c 185.
b. 187. f. 189. c. 334. g. 474. i. how to be avoided, 256. g. if they be
exulcerat, 474. i Galled skin or fretted off in any place, how to be healed,
43. f 60. g. 101. b. 161. d. 178. g. 184. i. 185. b. 192. i. 197. d 265. f.
287. d. 303. c. 319. d. 350. i. Gall-nuts of diverse kinds, 177. e. their
virtues in Physic, ibid Galbanum, how to be chosen, 179. f. the virtues it
has, ibid. not good in the strangurie, 180. ^ Galactitis, a precious stone,
626. m. why so called, ibid. some name it Leucographos, Leucas, and
Synnephites. ibid. it causes oblivion, 627. a. it breeds store of milk in
nources, 626. m Galactites, a kind of Emeraud, 627. a Galaena, Lead-ore, 472.
k. 517. c it serves to try silver, 472. k Galaicos, a precious stone, 627. a
Galangall, what herb, 236. m. the description, ibid. the root, what virtues
it has in Physic, 237. b Galatian earth, medicinable, 561. d Galaxius, a
precious stone, 626. m Galedragon, an herb, 283. c. the description, ibid.
the virtues, ibid. Galeobdolon, 282. g. the description, ibid. Galeon, an
herb, ibid the description, ibid. Galeopsus, an herb, ibid the description.
ibid. Galeos the Lamprey, enemy to the Puffen, 430. h Galeotis, what it is,
361. b Galerita, a bird, good for the cholique, 383. c. d. how to be prepared
and used, ibid. Galgulus, a bird. See Icterus. Galleries open. See Terraces.
Galli, the priests of the order of Cybele, with what shard of earth they gueld
themselves, 554. i Gallius, a river in Phrygia of a strange operation. 402 m
Gandergoose, an herb. See Orchis. Gangrens, what cures, 75. c. 76. k. 139.
a. 141. f. 142. m 144 g. 148. l. 149. d. 167. a. 172. i. 173. d. 188. l. 282. h
512. h. Ganymedes, the fair boy, most artificially represented in brass by
Leocras, how he was ravished and carried away by an Aegle, 502. i Gardens of
great estimation in old time, 10. h Gardens of Alcinus and Adonis, ibid.
Gardens in a city who first devised, 10 k Gardens pendant in the air, 580. h.
who first devised, 10 h Garden compriseth Haeredium, 10. i custody of Gardens
to whom ascribed, 10. i. k Gardens commended, 10. k. l. 11. a. 12. k Gardens,
where to be seated, or how ordered, 13. a. b Gardenage a sure commodity, 12.
g. the profit that a garden yields, 12. h a Garden shows a good or bad
housewife, 12. h Gardens gave syrnames to noble houses in Rome, 12. l Gardens
to be provided of water, 13. a Garden-hearbes distinguished by their sundry
parts and uses. 13. c Syrians great Gardiners, 41. a Gargarismes, 102. k Gargle
in swine how to be helped, 216. l Garlands. See Guirlands. Garlic the
properties medicinable that it has, 43. d the discommodities thereof, 44. m
Garlic how to be set and ordered afterward. 21. f. 22. g Garlic heads
described, 21. d Garlic the countrimans treacle, ibid. Garlic the
Aegiptians do swear by, 20. g Garlic differs one sort from another by
circumstance of time, 21. e Garlic causes a strong breath, 22. g. h. how
that is to be prevented, ibid. Garlic unset and coming up of seed. 22. h how
Garlic and Onions are to be preserved for use, without spurting, 22. i
Garlic wild, or Crow-garlicke, called Alum, 22. k. the use thereof, ibid.
Garlic wild called Vrsinum, 22. k Garlic helps beasts that be ground in
the belly, and cannot stale, 45. a Garon or Garum, a kind of sauce or pickle,
12. i. why so called, 417. e. of sundry sorts, 418. h Garum served to many
uses, ibid. Garum medicinable, 418 i Garum Sociorum, 417. f. of what request in
old time, 418. g Garon a fish, and the effects of it in a perfume, 417. e
whereof the sauce or pickle Garum was made in old time, 417. f. of what it was
made in later days, ibid. the price, 418. g Gasidanes, a precious stone, 627.
a
G E
Gegania, a sumptuous dame at Rome, 488. l. enamoured upon a foul ill-fauoured
brasier, ibid. Gei-a bird. See Uulture. Gelon a spring of water, why so called,
404. g Gelotophillis, a magical herb, working a fit of laughter in them that
taste of it, 204. g Gemites, a precious stone, 631. a Gemursa, a disease in old
time, now clean gone, 242. g Genealogy of Pandora pourtraied most
artificially by Phydias, 566. h Genetoirs or Cods, swollen hard, pained, and
enflamed, how to be remedied, 141. c. 142. l. 144. i. 148. k. 157. d. f 159. d.
163. c. 174. a. 173. l. 179. a. b. 187. e. 254. i. 255. d 333. b. 344. i. 424.
h. 432, k. swelled with wind or waterish humors, how to be assuaged, 413. b.
424. h. 560. i. exulcerat, how to be healed, 141. e. 254. i. 385. b Genetoirs
galled how to be skinned, 184 i If one be relaxed, and hang down untowardly,
how to be reduced, 385. b. how to be preserved from inflammation. 422. h for
the Genetoirs in general, appropriat medicines, 385. b 589. b. See Cods.
Gentian the herb, 221. e. how it took that name, ibid. the description,
ibid. the temperature thereof, and nature medicinable, 221. f Geometry
necessary for painters, 537. g Geranites, a precious stone, 630. i Geranium an
herb, 259. b. the sundry names and description, ibid. Germander, what herb,
198. h. the sundry names that it has, ib. the description, ib. why it is
called Serrata, ibid. the medicinable virtues that it has, ibid. Gerusia, the
Senat-house at Sardeis, 556. g Gesier of a storke medicinable, 364. g
Gestation, an exercise for bodily health, 303. d. of diverse sorts. ibid.
Gethyum, what herb it is. 20. k
G I
Giddiness of head and brain. See Dizzinesse. Gidd in sheep, how to be
helped, 218. k Gilles^oure of the wall, 104. g. the medicinable virtues that it
has, ibid. Girls, how they may be gotten and conceived, 215. f. 257. b 279 d.
288. m. Gith, an herb. See Nigella.
G L
Glader grass. See Xiphion and Gladiolus. Gladiolus what herb, 99. c. the
use of the root, ibid. Gloss stone. See Specularis, and Talc. Glass sieling
over head in arched roufs, 597. a Glass the devise of making it, of sand,
ibid. d the occasion thereof, ibid. other ways to make Glass, 597. e Glass
of India the best, ibid. Sidonians excellent Glasse-makers, 597. f Glass how
it is made in Italy, 598. g. how in France and Spain, ibid. Glass made
pliable and flexible, not apt to break, 598. h Glasse-makers put down, and
wherefore, ibid. Glass, which is best, ibid. k Glass will not abide the fire,
ibid. l burning or fire glass, ibid. Glass comes near to Crystal, 605. c
broken Glasses how to be sodered, 598. l looking Glasses or mirroirs devised by
the Sidonians, 597. f Glaucias a writer of Simples, 79. a Glaucion, an herb,
282. i. the description, ibid. Glaucion, a juice, ib. from whence drawn, ibid.
Glaucium, a kind of Poppie, 69. a Glaucomata, what imperfections in the eyes,
366. h. how cured, ibid. Glaux, an herb, 282. h. why called Eugalecton, ibid.
the description, ibid. Glanders in horses, how to be cured, 218. k. 254, m.
Gleba, a kind of artificial brimstone, 556. k. for what it is good, ibid.
Glessaria, an Island, 607. d Glessum the same that Amber, ibid. Glue the best
and strongest, whereof it is made, 337. c. d Gloss in painting, 528. h. See
Tonos. Gloss^petra, 627. a against gluttony and belly-cheere, an inuected
speech, 10. l Glycera, a famous maker of flower chaplets and guirlands, 80. k.
Glycon, a writer of herbs, 129. a
G N
Gnaphalion, an herb. See Cudwort. Gnats how they may be driven out of a
garden, or killed, 32. m. 65. d. 154. h. 166. h. 277. e. Gnawing and griping in
the stomach, how to be eased, 52. g 60. i. 64. h. 76 a. 110. k 131. d. 136. g.
171. c. 307. c.
G O
Goats affourd many things contrary to serpents, 322. h Goats never without a
fever, and yet they yield a thousand good medicines, 322. i Goats and Roe-bucks
see as well by night as day, 325. a the reason thereof, ibid. their blood
medicinable, ibid. b their liver and the grauie thereof medicinable, ibid.
Goats treddles how they be employed to make garden seeds grow, 33. e Goats dung
good for eyes, 325. c a Goat enraged how he may be ordered and tamed, 330. g
Goats milk cheese, wholesome, 325. a Goats gall medicinable, 324. g. 325. b.
how it is to be prepared, ibid. Goats milk medicinable, 324. i. Considia cured
by Democritus the Physician, with drinking milk of Goats feeding upon the
leaves of the Lentiske tree, 184. i Goats dung how it serves in Physic, 324.
i Goats houfe burnt to ashes, medicinable, 322. i Goats horn good in Physic,
324. i Goats how they may be kept from straying, 330. g Gold a cursed metal,
wherefore, 454. l crowns of beaten Gold showed by Claudius Caesar, 464. l Gold
laid up for treasure, 456, h, i. how much treasured up by Camillus, ibid. Gold
served to set out soldiers gallantly to the field, 456. i not worn at all in
the house of the Quintij at Rome. 457. f. Gold how employed at sacrifices, 461,
e. excessiuely worn by soldiers in the camp, ibid. superfluity of gold used
by the dames of Rome. ibid. f. abuse of wearing gold both in men and women,
462. g. h. stamped for coin, ibid. i at what time, 463. c. a scruple of gold
in coin at what value taxed, ibid. d Golden vessel abused by M. Antonius and
Queen Cleopatra, 464. g excess of gold employed in buildings at Rome, 465. a.
b Gold why it is preferred before other metals, 465. b. c Gold wastes not in
the fire, ibid. what rivers yield gold, 466 k Gold gotten in rivers is perfect,
ibid. the painful totle in getting gold-ore by cleaving mountains, 467. c
Gold gotten by Arrugia or cleaving mountains, needs no fire, 469 b Gold
artificially extracted out of orpiment, 469. d. it would not quit the cost,
ibid. Gold in the ore, of a diverse touch. ibid. Gold ore has ever silver in it
more or less. ibid. the first statue of gold, 470. g Gorgias Leontinus, the
first man that caused his own statue to be made of beaten gold, 470. h. the
medicinable virtues of gold, ibid. i. k Gold supposed to hurt hens couving and
ewes in lamb, ib. h Gold how it may be torrified and cleansed from all the
hurtful quality that it has, 470. i Gold and silver the softer the better,
473. a no grauer famous for working or grauing in Gold, 483. c Agrippina the
empress in a mantle all of Gold, 466. g cloth of Gold, ibid. Gold first found
and gotten three manner of ways, 466. k Gold ore in some places shows ebb,
ibid. l Gold ore dug out of pits, 466. m Gold not subject to rust, canker or
offense, by vinegre and salt, 465. f Gold may be spun into thread and so wouen,
466. g K. Tarquinius Priscus rode in triumph, arrayed in a robe of wrought
Gold, ibid. Gold in Spain perfect within the earth, and needs no fining,
465. e the commendation of Gold above all other metals, ibid. f how Gold is
melted, ibid. d Gold soileth not the hands, nor colors with ruling, 465. d
of al metals it is driven out broadest, with the hamer, ib. Nero the Emperor
covered the theater of Pompeius with gold, 464. l. Neroes golden house, ibid.
Goldfoile Praenestina and Questoria, 465. e Philip K. of Macedonie noted for
having a cup of gold under his head when he slept, 464. g Agnon Teius thought
prodigal for buckling his shoes and pant^stes with gold, ibid. great masses
of Gold as well in coin as otherwise in old time, 464. h Golden-eye, the fish
Scarus, how subtle to escape when he is taken in a weere or net, 427. d. e
Gonorrhaea, a disease, what is the remedy, 518. l Goose-grasse, an herb. See
Cliuers and Erith. a Goose thought to be sick all Summer long, 353. a Geese
honored at Rome, for what causes, ibid. Gorgania, a precious stone, 627. b.
the reason of the name, ibid. Gorgasus an excellent imageur and workman in
cley, 552. i Gourds, their nature, 14. m. when their seed is to be set or
sown, 15. a Gourds of two sorts, 15. b. how they may be fashioned, ibid.
Gourds of a mighty bigness, 15. c the manifold uses of Gourds, 15. c. d Gourd
seeds how t^ be prepar^d, 15. e Gourds what kind of meat, 15. d c how to be
preserved, ib. e Gourd wild, 37. e. why called Somphos, ibid. Gourd wild named
Colocynthis, ib. how to be chosen, ib. the operations thereof. ibid. Gourds of
the garden, and their virtues, 38 g. h Gourds condemned by Chrysippus, 38. i
Gout has no Latin name, 25^ (...). no old disease in Italy, ib. Gout not
incurable, 257. (...). wearing away of it self without help of Physic,
ibid. cured also by the means of Physic, ibid. Seruius Clodius to be eased
of a painful Gout, benumbed his legs and feet, and mad t^em paraliticke, 213.
c how a fit of the Gout may be brought to the feet, 315. f Gout of the feet,
how to be eased, 334, h, i, m. 379. c. 385. f 386, g, h. 419, d. 445, a, b.
447, c 587 e. Gout hot, how to be helped, 70, h. 71. c. 129, c. 258, g. 278, i
423, f. for Gout in any joint generally, good medicines, 36, g. 37, a 38, k. h.
l. 40, i. 47, d. 48, h, m. 49, f. 50, h. 52, i. 59, b. 61. a 67, a, b. 68, h.
78, h. 104, g. 106, l. 108. g. 111, b. 122, g, k 123, c. 128, k 134, l. 137, a.
138, g. 140, h, i. 141, f 144, (...), k. 148, l. 150 k. 159, d. 160, m. 166, l.
168, i. 171, a 179, i. 180, k. 185, b. 186, h, m. 193, b. 195, d. 201, a 208,
g. 218, i. 219, d. 224, k. 257, f. 258, g, h, i. 273, b, c 279, c. 301, b. 306,
h. 307, c. 308, g. 309, d. 312, i 313, e. 317, c. 318, g. 319, d. 320, h. 334,
i, m. 359, c 386, h, i. 403, b. 413, a. 414, h. 419, d. 422, l, m. 432, l 443,
a. 445, c. 557, d. 588, g. Gout or pains in Iades, how cured, 144. m Gout
rosat how to be cured, 128. h
G R
Grace of princes and potentates how to be obtained, 354, i 357, a. Grace at
the gods hands how to be procured, ibid. Granius, a writer in Physic, 301. e
Grapes black more vehement in operation than other, 147 d Grapes how to be
saved from pullaine, 148. g Grapes white more pleasant than the black, 147, d
Grape eaten new gathered, what discommodities they bring. 147, e. Grapes codite
in wine, what effects they have, ibid. Grapes preserved in rain water, 148, g.
their medicinable virtues, ibid. Grape stones, what operation they have, 148. h
Grass Aculeatum, why so called, and the virtues thereof, 207, a. three kinds
of it, ibid. Grass guirlands at Rome in great estimation, 115 (...) few
attained to the honor ^f wearing them, 116. h to whom, by whom, and wherefore
they were given, ibid., of what grass they were made, ib. i. what general
captains were honored with grass coronets, ibid k Grass growing in the
skull of man or woman, medicinable, 302. g Gratia Dei, an herb, 225. c. why
called Elaphobosco^. b. Gratian plate, 480. k M. Gratidianus made an act at
Rome, against base and counterfeit money, 479, b. honored therefore with
silver statues throughout Rome, ibid. Gravel in kidneys and bladder what does
expel, 53. b 54 i. 126. i. 130. i. 131. c. 159. b. 171. e. 238 m 255. a. b.
273. e. 332. l. m. 351. f. 444. g. h. (...). See more in Stone, the pain
occasioned by such gravel how eased, 253. g Grauers in silver, many were
famous, 483. d. none (...) g^ld, 483. c. Grave, how folk may be made that were
vain, 314 h Grease of Swine used ceremoniously in old ^me, 319. b. c with
Grease, the bride strikes the dore-cheekes of her husbands house, 31^. c what
Grease of swine is called Axungia, ib. the sam^ (...) of great efficacy, ib.
the reason thereof, ibid. the virtues of swines grease, ibid. Grease af goose
or other foul, how to be prepared, 36^ c Graecians, a man and woman buried
quick at Rome, 295 b against Greek writers who have set down medicines made
of the parts and members of man's body, 293. d Greimile, an herb, 284. l. the
wonderful form and f^ture of this herb, and the seed, ib. the virtues,
ibid. m Grenate of Carthage, or the Carchedonian G^ate, a precious stone of the
kind of Rubies, 618. g. why it is called Charchedonius, ib. where it is found
and how, ibid. Grenates, like as all the sorts of Rubies, sign not clean^ upon
wax, 6^8. h Grindstones, 59^. a Groine-botches or risings in the share called
Pani, how to be cured, 105. e. 175. a. 250. i. 256. h. i. k. 333. a. 334 g one
unsightly cure thereof, 256 i for other accidents of the Groine fit remedies,
256. h 274. m. 275. a. 277. e. 291. b. 301. b 302. k. Gromphaena, a bird. 399 d
Gromphena, what herb, 247. f what Grounds yield good and wholesome waters,
409. b. c. d Groundswell what herb, 238. i. the sundry names of it, ibid. the
description and virtues, 238. k. l. why called in Greek Erigeron, ib. l. why
some name it A^s, others Pappos, ibid. Grylli, what insects they be, 378 h.
379. d. their me ^ble virtues, ibid. Gryllus, the picture of a fool with his
bell, babble, etc. 544. l Grylli, all such pictures to make sport withal, ibid.
of Guirlands, 80. h. i. why they were called Strophion, 80. i Guirlands and
nose-gaies, called in Latin Serta and Serviae, and wherefore, ibid. Guirlands
Aegiptian, what they were, 80. l winter guirlands what they were, ibid. Tusean
Guirlands, what they were, ibid. the use of Guirlands representing health, 82.
i ordinances concerning Guirlands won at solemn games, 81. c the honor
belonging to such Guirlands, ibid. abuse in Guirlands, 81. e Guirlands of
flowers how they were employed, 82. g Guirlands platted were the best, ibid.
superfluity and excess in Guirlands, 82. h costly Guirlands or chaplets of
silk perfumed with dainty odours, ibid. Guirlands consist properly of flowers
and herbs, 89. e Gums in general their virtues medicinable, 194. a Gums
soon dissolve in vinegre, 176. k Gum of Chamaeleon called Ixias, venomous, 39.
d. the remedies proper therefore, ib. 64. h. 153. b. 157. b. 182. m 277. c.
323. a. 323. d. 431. b. Gumbs of young infants pained, how to be eased, 449. e
Gumbs flaggie how to be knit and confirmed, 161. c Gumbs swelled and
impostumat, how to be allaied and cured, 161. e. 238. h. 249. c. 419. b. Gumbs
sore, cankred, and exulcerat, how to be healed, 159 c 160, i. 287, d. 351, b.
509, a. for Gumbs pained or otherwise diseased, general medecins, 51. e. 63.
g. 70. g. 102. i. 156. m. 158. k. 165. d. 169. c 177. f. 178. l. 184. g. 195.
f. 197. d. 238. i. 272. i. 376. k 443. b. 509. c. Gurrie in horses and other
beasts, how to be stayed, 41. c. 78. h for the pain, wrings, and corosion in
the Guts, proper remedies in general, 37. e. 53 b. 60. i. 61. a. d. 62. i. 66.
h 77. b. 187. e. 263. d. 41. d. 52. g. 72. l. 76. l. 77. e. 78. k 102. l. 105.
c. 106. k. 109. b. 111. a. e. 174. k. 238. m 318. g. See more in belly ach and
Wrings of Guts. Guts exulcerat how to be cured, 38. i. 76. c. 107. e. 200. k
207. e. 249 c. 272. k. See more in Dysenterie, and Bloody flix. grinding of
the Guts in young children, how to be assuaged, 318. i. to cleanse the Guts
proper remedies, 272. k. 283. a. 443. a Gutti the name of certain people, 606.
i
G Y
Gylding of marble, 466. g Gylding of wood, 466. h Gylding of brass, ibid.
Gylihead, the fish Aurata, what medicines it does affourd, 433. d.
H A
HAbergeon of K. Amasis wrought of imnen twist exceeding fine. 3. d Haddocke
fish has a stone in the head medicinable, 445. e Hamachates, a precious stone,
623. c Haemaetites, a red Bloudstone, 367. d Haematites the Bloudstone
described, 587. b Haematites, a mere mineral, 589. e. how calcined, ibid. how
sophisticated, ibid. wherein it differs from the stone Schistos, ib. the
medicinable virtues that it has, ibid. five kinds of Haematites or
Bloud-stone. 590. g Haematites, a precious stone, 627, e. why so called, ib.
where it is found, ibid. the wonderful properties there of according to the
vain magicians, 627. (...) Haemorrhis, a worm or serpent, 352. g. why so
called, ibid. against the hurt of the serpent Haemorrhois, what remedies 43, e.
69, e. 148, k. 150, l. 153. b. 196, g. 352, g. Haemorrhoid veins how to be
opened, 42, k. 200, k Haemorrhoid veins running immoderatly, how to be stopped
193, b. 256, g. 272, i. 511, b. 516, k. 519, d. 470, k 591. b. Haemorrhids
aching how to be eased, 199. f. 351, e Haemus a mountain, yielding springs of
water suddenly by occasion of a fall of wood, 410, k. l Haile-water hurtful,
406. i Hair shedding, how to be retained and recoucred, 39. f 42, h. 47, e.
50, h. 56, i. 74, l. 78, m. 103, a. 113, c. 122, g 127, a, c. 128, h. 130, i.
163, c. 166, m. 174, k. 177, b 178, i, l. 183, d. 185, d. 191, c. 196, l. 205,
c. 212, h 232, i, k. 239, d. 249, d. 272, h. 290, m. 291, a. 320. g 323 f. 324,
i. 364, m. 437, f. 438, g. 446, l. 450, i 516, h. 521. a. 531, c. Hair of man's
head medicinable, 301, b. of a woman's head, in what cases effectual, 307, b
means to cause the Hair to grow thick on head or beard where it was thin,
146, l. 161, d. 172, i. 185, d. 199, f 290, m. 316, l. 324, g, h, i. 364, i.
Hair of eyelids gorwing crooked into the eyes, how to be rectified, 397, f.
438, i, k. 557, d Hair of eyelids how to be kept from growing, 236, l. how to
be taken away, 312, k. how it may grew, 324. g how preserved, 320, g Hair of
eyelids how to be kept from growing, 438, k. 439. e Hair of eyebrowes how to
be trimmed, 102, k. how to have a lovely black, 397, d. how to be setched off,
302. g how it shall grow no more, 324. l Hair how to be curled, 127, a. 128,
l. 181, b. 311, c how Hair shall come up black, 365, a Hair how to be
colored black, 43, d. 71, c. 127, a. 143, d 163, c. 170 g. 174, i. 175, b.
178, g. 179, a. 184, h. 186, g 190, h. 194, m. 196, m. 268, g, k. 277. e. 324,
i. 438. g 560. g. what colors the Hair yellow, 162, g. 268, k 328, l 432,
k. what gives hair a red color, 158, h. 192, k Hair how to be washed
bright, 475. a Hair growing upon a mole or were of the face, some make scruple
to clip or shave, 300, g Hair how it shall grow upon scarred places, 364. l
Hair what hinders it in growing, 339, f. 379, e. f. 397, b, c. 449, c. Hair
how to be preserved from hoarinesse, 249, e. 324. g 397, d. Hair of a
man-child not yet vndergrowne, thought to be medicinable, 301, a, b
Halcioneum, what it is, 441, c. the sundry kinds, ibid. their description, ib.
which is best, 441, d. their properties, ibid. Halicacabus, a dangerous herb,
commended by some, 112, l. the description thereof, ib. h. the hurtful
qulities that it has, ibid. k Halicuticon, a book of the Poet Ovid, 427. d
Hallowing of houses against ill spirits and sorcerie, with brimstone, 557. a
Halmirax, or Halmiraga, what it is, 420. h. where found, ibid. Halmirida, a
kind of Colewoort, why so called, 27. a Halum, what herb, 248. h Hams of the
legs pained, how to be eased, 30^. b Hamm^tes, a precious stone, and the
description, 627. d Hammochrysos, a preti^us stone, 630. k Hammons horn, a
precious stone, 627. d. the description and properties, ibid. Hanch. See Loins.
Hand swollen or broken out how to be healed. 106. m to sit with one Hand in
another and cross fingred, what effect it works, 304. m Harefoot, an herb,
250. i seeding upon Hares flesh causes f^lke to look fair, 341. e. Hares
gall good for the eyesight, 325. d a Hare burnt to ashes medicinable, 324. i
Hares rennet medicinable, 322. k the sea-Hare venomous, 7^. f. her wonder full
nature, 427. a the seeding upon this fish dangerous to all living creatures but
the Sea barble, 427. a b those of India be killed with the touch of a man. 427.
b the symptoms incident to those that be hurt with the sea Hare, ibid. against
the venom of the sea Hare, remedies, 71. f. 165. a 179. d. f. 231. b. c. 318.
h. 307. f. 323. a. b. 363. f. 434. i 436. h. i. against the venom of the
Hardishrew, remedies, 140. i 155. f. Harmodius honored with a statue of brass
for killing the tyrant Pisistratus, 490. g Harmoge in painting, what it is,
526. i Harpacticon, an emplaister made with brimstone, 556. m why so called,
ibid. Harpax, why amber is so called, 606. k Harpocrates his image worn in
gold rings, 462. h Harstrang, 229. f. the description, 230. g. the juice how it
is drawn, ib. the virtue, ib. h. a notable healer, 265. c Hearts horn burnt to
ashes, is medicinable, 324 g
H E
Head how to be defended against the extreme heat of the Sun, 424. k
Heaviness of the head how to be eased, 180. m. 289. e 304. k. Head sealed, how
to be cured, 433. b. 437. d. 438. h. 474. i Head annoied with blisters and
pushes, what remedy, 443. c. heat of the Head in children called Siriasis, how
to be amended, 38. h. 69. e. 104. g Head how to be purged of steame, 74. g. h.
511. b. how to be preserved, 74 i. 102. l 105 c. 109. e. 148. l. 189 d. e
Headache the greatest pain that (...), except that of strangurie and stomach,
20^. c against Headache, proper remedies, 43. a. 44. i. 47. b. d. 48. l 55. b.
56. i. 57. b. 60 g. (...). 61. (...) ^5. b. 66. g. i. 68. h. 69. c 75. e. 76.
g. 102. k. 104 g. 105. d. 106. m. 109. c. 126. (...) 127. b. 139. i. b. 146. h.
147. b. 155. e. 158. k. 160. (...). l 161. b. c. d. 173. a. c. 174. i. 175.
(...). 178. m. 181. a. c 184. h. 187. d. 189. b. l. 19^. l. 194. i. 198. k.
205. b 206. h. 207. a. 232. (...), l. 233. c. d. 237. e. 272, h. 280. h 283. c.
288. g. 287. d. 302. l. 308. h. 310. l. 311. f. 315. f 324. i. k. 350. i. 359.
c. 365. c. d. e. f. 413. b. c. 423. d. 433. a 438. h. 439. a 510. i. 529. f.
573. b. Headache incident ordinarily to women, how to be helped, 300. g. Healing
medicines, 50. m. 106. i. 135. d. 303. a. 351. f more Healing medicines that
do conglutinat and skin up, 283. c. 423. d. 471. e. 474. h. 506. k. m. 509. a.
595. c. See more in Wound-hearbes. Health, how it may be ever preserved, 72. g
Heart heavy, what causes, 180. m. See Heart. Heat in fevers, stomach, or
otherwise, how to be cooled or delayed, 135. d. 136. g. 148. g. 198. k See
Refrigeratiue. Heating medicines, 180. i. 186. h. 198. i. 290. h. 319. c 320.
m. 421. e. 521. a. 556. l. 588. m. Heath, what plant, 187. f. the virtues that
it has, ibid. Heauing at the stomach or heart, how to be helped, 62, h 72. h
77. c. 102. k. Hecale, how she feasted prince Theseus 131. b. ^54. k Hecate a
rare piece of work in marble at Ephesus, 568 (...) Hedypnois, what herb, 48.
g. the properties thereof, ibid. Hegias, a famous imageur, 502. h his works,
ibid. Heleysma, the dross of silver, 474. h. the medicinable virtues thereof,
ibid. Helena, his picture at Lanuvium, 52^. d Helenium, an herb, 108. h. the
description and virtues, b. See more in Elecampane. Helianthe, a magical
herb, 204. h Heliccalis, the same herb, why so called, ibid. Helicon hill
full of good herbs, 217. i Heliochrysos, the flower, described, 92. i. 110.
h. the properties which it has, 110. h. i Heliopolus the city of the Sun in
Egypt, 574. k Helioscopium, an herb, 126. g Heliotropium, an herb, ibid.
Heliotropium, a precious stone, 627. b. the reason of the name ib. c. the
vanity of magicians as touching this stone, ib. Helxine, what herb, 123. b.
the description, 273. a. why called Perdicium, why named Helxime, 123. b
Hemeresios a picture of Pausius his making, 546. l. why so called, ibid.
Hemerocalles, the herb and flower, described, 108. g. the virtues thereof,
ibid. Hemina what measure at Rome, 113. e Hemionis the name of a galley,
painted by Protogenes, 542. h. Hemionium, what herb. 216. l. m. 248. h. the
virtue there f, ibid. Hemlocke a perilous herb what remedies for it, 121. c
153. b. 180. m. 232. g. 236. g. 28^. g. 323. d. 277. c 323. a. it rectifieth
the (...) that is in the juice of (...), (...) herb (...), 236. g. it is a
poison it self, 235. f (...) suffered d^h at A^ns by (...), ib. (...) virtues
(...) that it ^th, ibid. how it kills the (...) the (...) thereof, 236. h
H^mpe, good (...), (...). (...). the dis^ of it, 78 h the s^d (...) gat^red,
(...). (...) be plucked and pull^. (...) diverse (...), (...). which (...),
(...). Hempe-stems as big as trees, 32 g Hens eggs. See Eggs. Hens flesh put into
melting gold, what it works, 359. d Hens dung, what part of it is
medicinable, 363. e Henbane, a dangerous herb, 215. c. and the remedies
against the poisonous quality thereof, 39. d. 43. e. 69. e 121. c. 136. i.
308. g 323. a. Henbane found by Hercules, 215. a. the sundry names that it
has, ib. what virtues Henbane has, 228. g many kinds of Henbane, and their
descriptions, with their properties good and bad, 215. b. c Henui, a precious
stone, so called among the Indians, 628. g the description thereof, ibid.
Hepatites, a precious stone, 630. h Hepatizon, a kind of brass
mettallmasceline, 488. g. why so called, ibid. Hephestites, a precious stone,
627. c. the description and trial, ibid. where it is found, ibid. Heptaphonon,
a gallerie at Olympia, why so called, 581. c Heptapleuron, one of the names of
Plantaine, and why so called. 223. e Heracleon Siderion, why so called, 215, a.
the description, ibid. the virtue that it has, ibid. Heraclides a Physician,
66. m. and a writer, 41. b Heraclides, a notable painter, 548. i Heraclion, a
kind of Poppy, 69. a Heraclion, an herb, See Nenuphar. Heraclius Lapis. See
Touchstone. Herbs which come up soonest after they be sown, 22. l which be
late ere they show above ground, ibid. Herbs of the garden come up by diverse
means, 23. c they do degenerat, 32. h Herbs are subject to diseases, ibid.
Herbs loving the company of other herbs, 30. l. 31. b Herbs why they be no
more of them known, 211. d Herbs annoied with vermin, 32. i Herbs restoring
to life again, 21. b Herbs differing in taste and otherwise, 33. f Herberie in
old time yielded a revenue to the state of Rome, 12. g. how we come to the
knowledge of Herbs, 211. e Herbarists. their maliciousness, 105. e. f Herbs
written of after diverse sorts, 210. h Herbs are of mighty operation, and yet
the opinion of them is greater, 211. c Pythagoras wrote of Herbs, and
attributed their invention to the Gods, 211. a Herbs growing upon statues, 205.
b. of what effects such are, ibid. Herbs some will continue longer than others,
291. e Herbs have eternised the names of the inuentors, 208. m 213. a. M Cato
the first Roman who wrote of Herbs, 209. b C. Valgius wrote of Herbs, and
dedicated his book to Augustus Caesar. 209 c Pompeius Lenaeus wrote of Herbs,
ibid. Herbs pourtraied in colors give no great light to the readers, 210. g. h
Herculaneae, certain pismires medicinable to scour the skin, 377. d
Herculaneus, a riueret about Rome, 408. h Hercules the patron of the
Carthaginians, why his image stands at Rome upon the bare ground without a
Piedstail, 570. g Hercules Triumphalis, an image at Rome, why so called, 493.
f. Hercules Oeteus of brass, in what habit and countenance pourtiaied, 504. m.
505. a three titles thereupon, 505. a. unknown who was the workman thereof,
504. m Hercules his statue of iron and steel, wherefore, 414. g Hermerotes,
what images, 569. b Hermesias, what composition, 204. h the wonderful
operation thereof, ibid. Hermippus, a writer, 372. h. he commented upon the
Poem of Zoroastres concerning magic, 372. l Hermodorus honored with a
statue, erected upon a column at Rome, for translating the laws of the twelve
tables, 491. c. Herophilus, a singular Physician, he cured altogether with
simples, 242. k. he first searched into the causes of diseases, 243. b. his
Apothegme as touching the operation of white Ellebore, 219. b. he altered the
course of the fosmer Physic, 344. i. he observed the pulses, ibid. Herpes, a
running cancerous sore, called if some a Wolf, 394 h. Herpes, a worm,
sovereign for the sore of that name, 394. g Heart fainting how to be relieved,
37. d. 60. h. 238. m Hertlesse how to berecouered, 136. g Heart trembling and
beating, how cured, 312. i, See more in trembling. Hesperis the herb, why so
called, 87. c
H I
Hiberis an herb, and devised name, by Seruilius Danocrates, 224. k. the
description, ibid. the virtues in Physic, ib. how to be used, ibid. l
Hibiscum, or Hibiscus, what herb it is, 40. h. the medicines that it does
affourd, ibid. Hicesius a Physician and writer. 41. b. 123. a Hieracia, what
herb, 45. d. why so called, ibid. Hieracites, a precious stone, 627. d. the
description, ibid. Hieracium, a collyrie or composition, 508. m. the virtues
medicinable thereof, 509. a Hierobotane, an herb. See Veruaine. High-taper.
See Lungwort. Hicket or Hocquet. See Yex. Hickway, a bird envious to the
gathering of Paeonie, 214. i 282. l. Hills, some admit rain and are green
with woods on the North side, some one the South side only, and others all
over, 408. k Hinds not envious to mankind, but do show us medicinable herbs,
255. c they have a stone in their excrements or womb that is medicinable, 339.
c bones found in the heart and womb of an Hind medicinable, ibid. Hippace,
what it is, 318. l Hippace, another thing, 331. c Hippiades, certain images
resembling women, 569. c Hippice, what herb, 223. f Hippocrates the Physician,
71. b. when and where he flourished, 343. f. the first Clinicke Physician, 344
g he first reduced Physic into an Art, 242. i. he dealt only with simples,
242. i Hippocus, a Magician, 372. i Hippolytus raised from death by
Aesculapius, 343. e Hippomanes, a venomous thing, 326. l Hippomarathrum, what
kind of Fennel, 77. c Hipponax the Poet, how he was abused by Anthermus and
Bupalus, 564. m. how he was revenged of them, ibid. Hippope, an herb,
described, 121. a. the reason of the name, ibid. Hippophaeon. See Epithymum.
Hippophaston, 283. e. the description, ibid. Hippophyes, an herb, described,
120. m. the reason of the name, 121. a Hippuris. See Equisetum. the Greek
writers vary much about the name of this herb, 263. c. why it is called
Anabasis, ibid.
H O
Hogs grease how to be prepared and tried, 320. i See Grease. Holcus, an
herb, 283. d the description, ib. the virtues, ib. why it is called Aristida,
ibid. Holland fine linen made in old time, 2. l Holme oak, what virtues it
affourdeth in Physic, 177. d the grain of Holme oak medicinable, ibid. e
Holcchrysos, an herb, the virtues, 106. i Holosc^os, a kind of rush, 100. k
Holosphyratun, what kind of Image. 470. g Holosteon, an herb, 283. d. why so
called, ibid. the description, ibid. Homer the Poet, Prince of learning, and
father of antiquities, 210. l Honey commended and compared with Laser, 135. c
Honey, when and where it is venomous, 94. g how to be discerned from that which
is wholesome, 94. h what symptoms happen to them that eat of this honey, 94.
i. the present remedies of this kind of poisonous honey, 94. i. 362. k. 433. d.
the singular properties that honey has, 135. d. the discommodities of honey,
135. e Honey called Maenomenon, and why, 94. k Honey of Carina, medicinable,
95. b Honey-combes their virtues 137. b Honey-combs wholesome and hurtful, in
one and the same hiue, 94. l a glut or surfeit of Honey how to be helped, 433. e
Honey wherein Bees have been extinct ar stifled, medicinable, 362. k
Hoplitides, what pictures, 536. g Horatius Cocles his statue erected upon a
column at Rome, for making good the bridge against king Porsena, 491. c
Horehound, an herb, 74. m. the sundry names that it has, ibid. the juice of
Horehound, of what virtue it is, and how to be used, 75. a Horehound to be
taken warily for danger of exulceration of reins or bladder, 75. c Horehound of
two sorts, ibid. stinking Horehound, 272. g. the sundry names, description, and
virtue, 278. h Hormesion, a lovely precious stone, 627. e. the description, ib.
Horminodes, a precious stone, 627. d. the reason of the name, ibid. the
description, ibid. Horminum, a kind of grain or corn described, 144. k. the
virtues that it has, ibid. Hornets sting, what remedies therefore, 40. h. 56
m. 75. f 110. l. 153 b. 166. l. 173. a. 361. d. 418. m. Horsetaile, an herb,
263. b. the virtue that it has in wasting the swelled spleen, ibid. Horses
have agues, and how to be cured, 260. k Horse dung green, and burnt into
ashes, medicinable, 325. e Horseflesh and horse-dung adverse to serpents, 322
k Horses how they shall never tire, 341. c wild Horses are medicinable, and
more than tame, 323. b Horses laden with fruit are soon weary, 176. h. what
remedy, ibid. riuer-Horse taught us the feat of Phlebotomie or Bloudletting,
316. k. he yields many medicines, ibid. his blood Painters use, 316. l sea
Horse Hippocampe medicinable, 436. h. 437. f. 440. l haw in Horse eyes how to
be cured, 438. l. See Eyes. Horses and mares pained in staling, how to be
eased, 339. b pained in the guts, or vexed with the bots, how helped, 399. c.
Horses and asses tired, how to be recovered, and made lusty, 153. c. staling
drop by drop how to be helped, 354. m Horsleeches if they be swallowed down in
drinking, are venomous, 323. c. the remedies, ibid. 356. h. 361. d Horsleeches
medicinable, 438. g Horsleeches how they draw blood, 447. b. their use in
Physic, ibid. the discommodities that ensue in applying Horsleeches. 447. b
how they fall off from the place whereto they stuck 447. c the danger in
plucking them off, ibid. how they may be forced to fall off as they are
sucking, 356. h. how to be taken off without danger, 447. d Messalinus died by
setting a Horsleech to his knee, 467. c Horsenesse occasioned by a rheum, how
to be helped, 71. c 271. d. 275. e. 289. d. 352. g. 378. h. See more in Voice,
and Throat, Hortensius the Orator set great store by the image of Sphinx, 496.
l. how M. Cicero scoffed at him for it, ibid. Hortensij what kind of bulbs,
and their virtues, 52. l Horus K. of the Assyrians devised a medicine against
drunkenness, 399. c Hosthanes a writer in Magic, 306. m L. Hostilius
Mancinus attained to be Consul by deciphering unto the people of Rome the
picture of Carthage by him assaulted and forced, 526. l Hot waters or bathes
natural, for what diseases in general they be good, 401. e. f Hot waters
naturally be not always medicinable, 412. i See more in Bains. Howlets, by a
secret antipathie in nature, be most adverse to Horsleeches, 361 d Hounds
tongue, an herb, 223. d. why it is called Cynoglossos, ibid. two kinds
thereof, ibid. their description, ib. Housleeke, what herb, 237. c. two
kinds thereof, ibid. d their description, ibid. Housleeke chaseth away cankers
and other worms out of a garden, 32. l. the sundry names that it has, 237. c.
why it is called Stergethron, ibid. why called Hypogeson, ib. named commonly in
Latin Sempervivum, 237. d
H V
Hucklebone diseased, how to be helped, 143. f. 149. b. See more in Sciatica.
Huluer or Hollie tree, 194. e. the medicinable operation, ib. Hunger whether it
be good in diseases, 140 l Hunger, how it may be put by or satisfied, 120. b,
223. f Hungry worm in the stomach, how to be repressed and cured, 259. d.
See Phagedaena. Hurds or Hirds. See Tow. Husked barley, 139. c. d. whose
invention, ibid. the virtues that it has in Physic, ibid. See more in
Ptisana.
H Y
Hyacinth the flower, why so called, 92. i. where it loves to grow, 110. k
Frenchmen dye their cloth with it for default of grain, 110. k. other
properties and uses that it has, ibid. Hyacinthizontes, what Beryls they be,
613. c. why so called, ibid. Hyaena the wild beast, yields from sundry parts
of her body many medicines, according to the Magicians, 311. c the very body
of the Hyaena, rauisheth and allureth the senses of man and woman, 311. d
Hyaena changes the sex each other year, ibid. adverse to Luzerns or Panthers,
311. d how the Hyaena shifteth in hunting, 311, e. she does intoxicat the head
of the hunter, ibid. the urine of great efficacy, 203. d Hyaenes, how they be
hunted and taken, 311. e Hyaens hair saved as a medicinable thing, 311. f the
skin of their head counted medicinable, ibid. their gall emplied in Physic,
ibid. the grauie or dripping of their liver esteemed medicinable, 312. g what
parts besides are used in Physic, 312. g. h. i. k. l. m 313. a. b. etc.
Hyaenta, a precious stone, 627. e. the reason of the name, ibid. where it is
found, ib. the virtues thereof according to the magicians, ibid. Hydrargyrum,
is quicke-siluer artificial, 473. c whereof and how it is made, 477. d a very
poison, ibid. e used in guilding silver, and otherwise, 477. e Hydrocele, a
kind of rupture and descent of humors into the bag of cods, how to be cured,
58. i Hydrolapathum, what kind of Docke, 73. b Hydromel, what kind of mead,
136. g two kinds thereof, ibid. how made, 136. g. 413. e the virtues and
operations thereof, 136. g the discommodities that come thereby, 136. k how
used, 413. e. wherefore rejected, ibid. Hydrophobie, what it is, 363. a. the
remedies of this fearful accident, 309. f. 362. l. 435. c. d. 437. g. 516. g.
See more in mad Dogs biting. Hydrus, a kind of water-snake, 444. i. in some
cases medicinable, ibid. See more in Enhydris. Hyginus a Greekewriter in
Physic, 54. i Hygremplastron, what kind of emplaistre, 516. k the
composition thereof, ibid. in what cases used, ibid. Hyopthalmus, a precious
stone, 630. i Hyos^ris, an herb, 283. d. the description and virtues, ib.
Hypanis, a river, 411. c. sometimes it runs under, and otherwhiles above
Borysthenes, ibid. Hypecoon, an herb, 284. h. the description and virtue, ib.
Hypericon, what herb, 255. a. the names thereof and their description, 255.
b. a second kind described, ibid. Hypobarus, a river, 606. l. what the name
signifies, ibid. Hypochondriall griefs, and the remedies thereof, 39. b. 277. d
See more in Flank. Hypocisthis, an herb, 190. k. 249. e. where it grows.
ib. two kinds thereof, 249. e. how it took that name, ibid. Hypogeson, what
herb, 237. c. See Housleeke. Hypoglossa, an herb. 284. g. the description,
ibid. Hypophlomos, what herb, 235. b Hyssope an herb, contrary to Radish,
and corrected thereby, 40. g. what Hyssope is best, 233. a. the properties that
it has, ibid. Hyssope according as it is taken, purges upward or downward,
ibid.
I A
IA, what Violets they be, 85. d Iace, a kind of Coral, 429. d Iacinct, a
precious stone, 621. d how it differs from the Amethyst, ibid. sundry kinds
of Iacincts, 621. d. e which be the best, ib. how goldsmiths set them in gold,
ib. Iacincts, called Chryselectri, and why, 621. f a Citrin Iacinct or
Chrysolith wheighing 12 pound, 622. g Iacincts named Leucochrysi, ibid.
Iacincts which be called Capniae, and wherefore, ibid. Iacincts how
counterfeited, and by what means detected, ibid. Iacincts called Melichrysi,
and the reason why ibid. Ialysus and his dogs foam, a famous picture of
Protogenes his doing, 542. h K. Demetrius respecting it, forbear to burn the
city of Rhodes, 542. m Iamnes a great Magician, 373. d Ianthina Vestis, what
kind of cloth, 85. d Ianus his image of brass at Rome, 494. g. the god of
times and ages according as his pourtraiture imports, ibid. Iasione, what
herb, 99. d. the description, 130. (...). the virtues, 130. i Jasper, a gem,
or precious stone, 619. e. of a greenish color, ib. common to many countries,
619. f that of India, Cyprus, and Persia, ibid. the Persian Jasper why it is
called Aerizusa, ibid. the Jasper of the Caspian hills, ibid. Jasper about the
river Thermodoon, is blew as azur, ibid. Jasper in Phrygia purple, ibid. Jasper
in Cappadocia, Pontus, and Chalcedon, ib. 320. g sundry kinds of Jasper
different in goodness, 620. g. h Jasper Terebinthizusa, ib. what be the faults
and blemishes of the Jasper, 620. h. how it is falsified, ibid. Jasper which
resembles the Emeraud, most set by in the East parts, 620. i Jasper, when it
is called Grammatias, when Polygrammos, ib. vanity of Magicians as touching
the Jasper stone, ib. Jasper Onychopuncta, 620. k. the Jasper Capnias, ibid.
the bigness of the true Jasper, ibid. the whole visage of Nero pourtraied in
one Jasper stone, ib. Iatraleptice, what course of Physic, 344. g Iaundise in
a fever, when it is a deadly sign, 261. e. why it is called Regius Morbus, or
a kings disease, 136. m for the Iaundise, appropriat remedies, 37. a. f. 43. b.
44. g 47. b. e. 49. f. 52. g. 53. c. 54. h. 55. c. 59. b. 61. f. 64. m 71. c.
73. c. 75. c. 104. i. l. 106. g. 110. k. 124. l. 125. e 127. c. 128. k. 134. k.
136. m. 142. l. 143. a. 144. i 172. g. 175. b. c. 181. a. b. f. 189. a. 192. i.
k. l. 193. b. d 238. m. 245. a. 261. e. f. 262. g. 272. k. 277. b. 279. e 286.
l. 335. d. 370 l. 389. c. d. 419. c. 422. i. 443. a. f 628. g. Iberis, an
herb, 234. g. the virtues, ibid.
I C
Icades, what they be, 522. l Icetidas, a Physician and writer, 309. e
Ichneumon, drives away all venomous beasts with his strong and violent breath,
357. d Ichthyocolla, the name of a fish, 438. m Ichthyocolla, fish-glew, ibid.
how it is made, ibid. the best what marks it ought to have, 439. a the virtues
both of the fish and the glue, 441. a Iconicae, what images, 490 g Icterias, a
precious stone, 628. g. four kinds thereof, ibid. Icterus, a bird, 389. d.
good for the iaundise if the patient do but look upon it, ibid. Ictides, a
kind of Weazills, 355. e. supposed to be our ferrets, ibid. Ictumulum, a gold
mine, and the Act touching it, 469. c
I D
Idaea, an herb, described, 284. h Idaei-da^tyli, precious stones in Candie,
628. g. their description, ibid.
I D
I^at or Iaiet. See Gagates,
I L
Iliacke passion is most grievous, 382. m remedies against the Iliacke passion,
39. d. 44. g. 58. g 59. f. 443. e. Illecebra, what herb, 237. e. the
description, ibid. the medicinable virtues, ibid. Illusions fantastical, of
bugs and goblins in the night driving folk out of their wits, how to be driven
away, 214. i. 312. k. 609. b. 610. m. 387. d. 315. f. 624. l.
I M
Images and visages of ancestors pourtraied in wax, 523. a attending funerals,
ibid. Image of Emperor in Rome, when it was granted to be engraven and worn
in jewels,, 462. i Image of the Ox in the beast-market at Rome, of Aegineticke
brass, 488. i Image of Jupiter in the temple of Jupiter Tonans, Deliacke
brass, 488. i first brazen Image at Rome consecrated to Ceres, 489. e Images
of brass in oldtime vernished with Bitumen, 489. e who were at first honored
with statues of brass, 489. f an act of Messala, as touching the intermingling
and confusion of Images of diverse houses, 523. c Images complete, for whom at
first they were made, 489. f Images of writers set up in libraries, 523. e
Images to be erected in private houses, from whence it came first, 490. h Images
in long robes,, ibid. i Images naked, ibid. came first from the Greeks, ibid.
k Images in sundry habits, 496. k Imageurs of great name and cunning reckned
up, 497 a. b Imageurs sorted together, according to the works wherein they
excelled and delighted, 503 (...) See more in Statues. Imagerie in Cley, who
invented, 552. g. See Potterie. Impendia, what it signifies, 462. g Impia, an
herb, why so called, 205. e. the d^scription and virtue, ibid. Impostumes
behind the ears called Parotides, with what medicines to be cured, 36. h. 51.
b. 62. m. 64. l. 72. m 73. d 76. h. 119. d. 121. d. 128. i. 143. e. 144. i.
167. d 168. h. l. 179. a. 208. g. 238. g. 282. h. 301. f. 320. h. 326. h 371.
a. 312. l. 437. d. 439. f. 441. f. Impostumes breeding how to be driven back
and discussed, 49. a. 103. e. 120. k. 138. i. 141. e. 150 g. 158. g. 161. f
167. d. 179. f. 181. c. 182. h. l. 184. g. l. 185. c. 188. l. 205. d 274. g.
278. c. 286. l. 556. l. 560. h. Impostumes about the midriffe, and in the
bowels or precordiall parts, how to be cured, 39. e. 75. d. 123. d. 154. g 186.
e. 381. b. c. Impostumes between the eye corner and the nose, how to be
healed, 174. i Impostumes hard, how to be mollified, 141. a. 162. h Impostumes
painful, how to be eased, 141. d. 162. h Impostumes tending to suppuration,
how to be ripened, broken, and drawn, 47. e. 49. a. 54. l. 65. c. 70. k. 103.
f 158. l. 166. l. 171. a. 184. l. 198. i. 205. a. 318. k. 233. b 262. i. k.
264, i. 286. l. 337. b. 356. i. 108. k. 119. d 123. c. 134. i. 138. i. 167. d.
179 a. 192. k. 195. d 233. d. 262. i. k. 274. g. 283. b. 289. c. 290. i. 265. a
510. i. for all Impostumes or swellings in general, fit remedies, 194. m. 197.
b. 201. a. 245. a. 379. c. c. 423. f. See more in Tumors and Inflammations. the
Imprecation or exorcisme in a prescript form of the vestall Nun, Tuccia, 295.
a. See Exorcisme.
I N
Incarnatiue medicines, 50, m. 119, d. 121, d. 134. k. 140 i 159. f. 167. f.
183, b, c. 265, b. 272, g. 285, d. 303. a. 319. b 320. l. 475, a. 485, b. 529.
f. Incoctilia, brass vessel so artificially tinned, as that it seems silver
plate, 517. f. whose invention, ibid. Indica, a precious stone, 628. g. why so
called, ibid. the description, thereof, ibid. h Indico, a rich painters color,
528, i. why so called, 531 a Indico, a kind of azur^ or blew, 485. a. the
price thereof, ibid. Indico the Painters color, what it is, 531. b the
artificial Indico is Florey, 531. b how the good Indico may be sophisticated,
531. b how the deceit is sound, ibid. the worth of Indico, ibid. and the use in
Physic, 531. c Indish pepper. See Piperitis. Infants how to be kept from
sudden frights, 341. c. 449. (...) from starting and shriking in their
sleep, 340. c from being froward, 351. d Infants troubled with the wens or
pains in the ears, how to be eased, 398. k. 449. e bleach or breaking out of
Infants, how to be helped, 449. f Infant sticking in the birth how it may be
borne, 395. d Infants red-gumb, how to be healed, 559. a Infants sucking, how
to be eased of the grinding and wringing in the belly, 397. (...) Infant, how
it shall be borne with eyes and brows black, 397. d. the heat of the head in
babes called Siriasis, how to be allaied, 397. e. 449. f Infants forespoken or
bewitched, how to be helped, 398. i how to cause Infants puke that which is
offensive in the stomach, 398. k Infant dead in the womb, how to be expelled
or fetched away, 58. g. 76. h. 106. g. 107. f. 125. d. 135. e. 142. k 157. c.
163. c. 180. h. 193. d. 266. l. m. 267. a. c. d. 273. f 339 e. 340. i. 350. g.
448. l. Infants mouths sore with the cankers, how to be helped, 341. b. d.
their gumbes sore, how to be eased, 341. b Infants marrow and brains found by
some to be medicinable, 293. d Infection by water and air, how to be
corrected, 134. k against Inflammations, proper remedies discussiue, 39. f 77.
f. 105. a. 111. f. 120. k. 143. f. 146. h. 161. a. 168. l 185. e. 233. d. 262.
i. 289. e. 313. b. c. 320. h. 531. c. Inflammations apostumat, how to be cured,
133. f. 289. c See more in Impostumes. Inflammation of the pannicles containing
the brains, how to be cured, 76. k Inguinaria, 256. h. called by some
Argemone, ibid. Ink of the Cuttle fish, 450. k. the strange operation thereof,
ibid. writing Ink takes the perfection by gum Arabicke, 530. l Inula, an
herb, described, 18. i. the manner of dressing it, and the use thereof, ibid
how to be planted, 18. k how to go Invisible, 315. e Inundation of waters how
to be stayed, 316. h Invocation upon the gods, thought to be effectual, 294. l
I O
S. Iohns-wort. See Coris, and Hipericon. Ioints shrunk, how to be mollified
and drawn out, 78. h 126. i. Ioints bruised and hurt by crush or rap, how to
be cured, 394. k for Ioints pained or in ach, and otherwise diseased,
comfortable medicines, 48. m. 73. a. 77. b. 128. g. 146. h. 174 l 189. c. 207.
e. 258. k. l. 262. l. 423. f. 432. l. 443. a 445. a. c. 557. e. See more in
Gout. Iollas, a Physician, 67. e. 506. m Ion, a precious stone, why so called,
628. h Iotapes, a magician, 373. d Iovetanum, what, 518. h Iphicrates, an
excellent imageur and grauer, 501. b. his workmanship, ibid. Iphis a painter,
well thought for his workmanship, 549. f
I R
Irene, a woman, excellent in painting with the pencil, 551. a Ireos, Iris, or
Floure-delis, the virtues thereof in Physic, 105. b. See more in
Floure-delis. Irinum, what oil, and where it is best, 88. g Irio, an herb,
144. h. the description and medicinable properties that it has, ibid. Iris, a
precious stone, 623. b. why it is called the root of crystal, 623. b.
whereupon it took the name Iris, ibid. the properties that it has, 623. c.
which is the best, ibid. Iris, another stone, ibid. good against the bite of
the Ichneumon, ibid.
I S
Isatis, an herb, 45. c. what Pliny takes it for, ibid. Ischaemon, what
herb, 233. f. why so called, 224. g. the wonderful power thereof in
staunching blood, ibid. Ischias, what herb. 123. a Isidorus, a famous
imageur, and his works, 502. i Ismenius, a vain and gaudie minstrell, given
to wear many gems and precious stones, 601. b by his example, Musicians were
known by wearing of such jewels, ibid. Isodomon, what kind of work in
masonrie, 593. f Isoetes, what herb, 237. c Isopyron, an herb, 284. g. the
description, ibid. Issues in the skin how to be made, 168. i Issue of blood out
of the head or brain, how to be stayed, 473. e. Issue of blood gushing out of
any part, how to be staunched, 263. c. 287. e. 341. b. 352. l. 393. b. 407. f.
424. h. 473 e 509. e. 510. k. 589. a. 590. i. out of a wound, how to be
stopped, 424. i. 557. e. 559. a. See Bleeding, and Nose-bleeding.
I T
Italy, the goodliest country in the World, 632. k the commendation thereof in
all respects, 632. k. l Italy furnished with herbs of powerful operation,
210. k Italy full of gold mines and other, 469. c an act forbidding to break
any ground for mines in Italy, ibid. Itch, and itching pimples, how to be
killed, 49. c. 60. l. 64. k 73. d. e. 105. a. 143. c. f. 144. l. 148. i. 149.
a. 155. f 173. c. 174. g. 180. k. 232. m. 277. d. 306. i. 307. b 316. m. 317.
d. 320. h. 337. a. 353. a. 367. b. 395. a 413. b. 419. b. 422. l. 437. d. 446.
m. 557. d. 558. i. k 559. a. Itch occasioned by iaundise, how repressed, 419. e
422. i.
I V
Ivae Moscata, an herb. See Chamaepitys. K. Iuba wrote the hictorie of
Arabia, 427. c Iubarbe. See Sengreene and Housleeke. Judges of Rome, who
properly were called, 459. d. 460. g chamber of Judges instituted at Rome, 459
f. See Decuries. Iuell-caskets, 602. g Ivy, the virtues and discommodities
that it has, 189. d killed with a touch of a menstruous woman, 308. m Iulides,
what fishes, 441. l Julius Rufas died of a carbuncle, 241. d Juniper tree, what
virtues it yields in Physic, 186. h Ivorie Mineral, 588. h Jupiters garden
about Athens, 410. g Jupiter Ammon, 415. b Jupiter Labradius, 428. k Jupiter
Latrarius, 495. f Jupiters image at Rome was usually painted with vermillion
against high days, 475. c the first thing enjoined by the Censors, to paint
his visage with vermillion, 475. d Jupiter Tonans his image at Rome, wrought by
Leocras, 502. k. Jupiter and Ianoes temple at Rome, mismatched in the pictures
and images that beautify the places, and by what occasion, 570. k Jupiters
image of cley in the Capitol, 553. a therefore it was usually painted with
vermillion, 553. a Jupiters gem, a precious stone, 628. g
I X
Ixias, the viscous gum and venomous, how it is mortified, 56, (...) where it
is engendered, 123, f. why so called, 124. g Ixias, the herb Chamaeleon, 123.
f Ixine, what herb, 98. i
K I
KIbed heels how to be cured, 47, b. 122, g. 128, i, k. 134, k 139, b. 141, f.
143, c. 159, c. 165, b. 167, e. 194, m 258, m. 274, k. 319, c. 334, k. 386, i,
k. 413, b. 419, d 437, d. 445, b, c. 475, b. 559, b, c. for Kidneys pained and
diseased, appropriat remedies, 37. b 43, b. 47, c. 57, d. 66. k. 119, d. 120,
h. 124, l. 125, c 127, c. 130, g, k. 141. f, 150, l. 157, a. 171, e. 330, h.
422. k 556, l. Kidneys obstructed, what medicines do open and cleanse, 167, c.
444, h. 529, b. Kidneys exulcerat, how to be healed, 171. d Kilpes. See Reike
or Seaweed. Kine and Oxen how to be preserved healthful, 400. g Kings evil,
swelling and hard, by what medicines to be cured, 40, h. 44. g. 50, m. 52, g.
56, h. 58, h. 62, m. 65, a 72, g, m. 73, b, d. 75. a. 105, e. 106. l. 111, f.
119, d 120, k 122, k. l. 127. c. 128, i. 129, d. 138, k. 139, a 141, e. 142, g.
143, e. 144, g. 164, h. 166, m. 168, h, k 169, a, b. 178, h. 179, a, h. 180, g,
m. 183, d. 193. c 199, e. 206, l. 118, k. 139, b, e. 245, c. e. 250, h. 251. a
256, h. 265, b. 289, g. 282, h. 301, f. 309, d. 320, h 328, k. m. 370. l. 379,
a, b, c, d, e. 431, e. 432, g. 433, a 587. f. 588, m. 595, d. Broken and
running how healed, 378, m. 379, a, c. 437, d. 441, e. f. 442, g. 589, c.
Kernils swelling and painful behind the ears, how to be eased, 72 g. 122, g.
309, d Kissing the right hand how it came to be taken up, 297, e Knee gout or
pain, how eased, 188, h. See Gout.
K N
Knights or Gentlemen at Rome, by what badges known and distinguished from
other degrees, 457, c. 459, c Knight established a third state in Rome, by the
means of M. Cicero, 460, l. m why all Instruments pass in the name of the
Senate, People, and Knights of Rome, 461, a Knots in the ioints and other parts
of the body. See Nodosites. Hercules Knot, 305. c Knotgrasse, an herb, 287,
a. the description, ibid. the sundry names, ib. why called Calligonon,
Polygonon, and Polygonaton, ibid. the virtues. ibid. Knotgrasse of four
kinds, ibid. Knotgrasse the wild, 287, c. the description, ibid. the virtues,
ibid.
L A
LAbyrinths, most monstrous works, 578. i that of Aegipt by whom built, 578,
i the reason why it was built, 578. k Labyrinth in Greece made by Dadalus,
taken from the pattern of that in Aegipt, 578. k Labyrinth in Lemnos, 578. l
Labyrinth in Italy, ibid. b Lbyrinthe of Aegipt and Lemnos described, 578, l, m
579, c. 599, d. Labyrinth in Italy built by K. Porsena, and therein he was
entombed, 579. d Lactaria, an herb. See Tithymall. Lactoris, what herb,
204, l. why so called, ibid. Lactuca Caprina, what herb, 251. e Lactucini,
who they were, and why so called, 12. l Lacuturres, what kind of Coleworts,
26. l Lada the herb whereof comes Labdanum, 249, d Ladanum, an herb, 249,
c. of two sorts, ibid. the virtues, ibid. Ladanum, a sweet gum or juice
concrete, 249, c. whereof it is made, ibid. which is the best, ibid. d. the
virtues, ib. Ladies and great Gentlewomen, what imageurs delighted to cast and
pourtray in brass, 503. e our Ladies mantle, an herb. See Leontopodium.
Laedus, an excellent grauer, 483, e. famous for pourtraying battles, 483. f
Lagines, what herb, 199. e Lagopus, what herb, 250. i Lais, a woman
Physician, and who wrote of Physic, 309. c a Lake wherein leaves or any thing
else will sincke, 404. i Lakes engendring salt, 414. m Lala, a woman and
paintresse, 551, a. she could handle both the pencill and the enamelling iron,
ibid. her (...) of work, ibid. b. her quick hand, ibid. she excelled Sopylus
and Dionysius, painters of her time, ibid. Lamps burning how they may represent
the heads of horses and asses, 327. a Lampreys tooth venomous, 436, g. the
remedy, ibid. himself is the Physician, ibid. Lamprey ashes medicinable, 440.
l Lampreys what shifts they make to get forth of a net, 427. e they swallow
hook and bait, they bite the line in twain, 428, g. how they cut the same
with their sins, 428. h how they may be soon killed, ibid. Lampreys female
only, ibid. how they are conceived, and how they engender, ibid. how they are
taken, ibid. Lanaria, an herb, 204, l. what virtue it has, ibid. Langae,
what beast, 606. h Languishing and long diseases, how to be cured, 259. a 303,
d. 391, c. Languriae, 606. h Langurium, ibid. Laocoon with his children and
serpents, a singular piece of work in marble, 569. e Lap of the ear diseased,
how to be cured, 371. a Lapathum Cantherinum, what herb, 73. b Lappa Boaria, a
kind of Burre, 258. l Lappago what herb, 258. g Lapsana, a kind of wild
Colewort, 27, c. the description thereof and the virtues, 51. e Larbason. See
Stimmi. Larch tree the medicinable virtues thereof, 181. c Largesses and dole
of money at Rome, when they began, 480, h. Lartius Lici^us, forewarned by
certain fountains, of his destiny, 404. l Laser, a sweet liquor or drug, and
the virtues thereof, 8. h Laser the liquor of Laserpitium, 8. h the price
thereof, ib. how rare it is, 8. i. k. sophisticated, 8. i the manner of drawing
Laser out of the plant, 9. a the ordering of the said liquor, 9. a. b how the
best is known, 9. d Laserpitium, the plant that yields Laser, 8. h destroyed
by Publicans, ibid. a plant of Laserpitium sent as a great novelty, ibid. what
effects it works in cattle that feed upon it, 8. i how Laserpitium was
engendered about Cyrenae, 8. k the nature of Laserpitium, ibid. the description,
ib. what use of it, both for men and cattaile, 8. l. m the root thereof, 9. a
Laserpitium of Persia and Syria, 9. c a Laske, by what means medicinable it
may be stopped, 41 c. 43. d. 47. c. 55. b. 67. c. 70. m. 73. e. 76. i. 77. e
101. c. 102 l. 107. e. 120. k. 124. m. 127. b. 130. g 131. f 139. a. d. e 140.
l. 141. a. d. 147. b f. 151. d 156 g. 160. h 163. b. c. 164. i. k. 165. b. f.
166. g. k 169. d. 170. g. 171. b. 172. l. 174. i. k. 177. a. 179. f 181. (...).
184. g. 186 i. 187. c. 190 h. k. 195. c. d. 196. h. m 199. d. 202. h. 206. l.
248. l. 249. b. c. e. 250. h. i. 255. a 257. a. 263. d. 267. c. 272. l. 375. b.
e. 280. k. 283. b 284. h. 286. l. 290. h. 308 g. 318. l. 330. l. m. 331. a. c.
d. e. f 341. c. 353. c. 383. b. 443. e. 528. m. Lassitude how to be eased, 289.
c. 354. l See Weariness. Latace, a magical herb, 244. h. the operations
thereof. ib. Latinae, what festival holydaies, 276. k Laton brass, 486. m
Lauer what herb, 250. g Laurea Tullius his Decasticon upon Ciceroes Academia,
and the fountains there, 402. i Laurel tree, the nature thereof, and virtues
medicinable, 173. a. Laxatiue medicines, 140 h. 141. d. 161. b. 163. f. 167. c
168. i 180 l. 191 a. 192 i. k. 201. a. 218. i. 250. k. m 251. a. 252. g. 272.
g. 275. b. 287. e. 311. c. 442. l. 443. d See more in Purgative.
L E
Lea, what kind of Colewort, 48. k Lead used ^ning gold, 465. d siluer-Lead,
Argentine, 517. d two principal kinds of Lead, 516. l white lead, called
Plumbum Candidum in Latin, 516. l in Greek Cassiteron, ibid. where it is
found, ibid. how fined, ibid. m Lead ore Elutra, 517. a. why so called, ibid.
black Lead or common Lead, 517. a. two kinds thereof, ib. b white Lead or
Tinglasse Cassiteron, in request of old, 577. b how it is known to be good and
perfect, 518. g the use of black or common Lead, ibid. h Lead ore lies deep
in Spain and France, 518. h. ebb in Britain, ibid. the principal kind of
lead, ibid. Lead mines fore-let, grow again, 518. i. the reason thereof, 518.
i. how a leaden pan will not milt over the fire, ib. k Lead in what cases
medicinable, 518. l. m plate of Lead applied to back and breast, ibid. Lead,
how to be prepared and washed for use in Physic, 519. a, b. c. the operation
of Lead in Physic, thus prepared, ibid. Lead, how calcined into ashes, 519.
d. e dross of Lead medicinable, 519. e. which is best. ibid. vapor of Lead in
the furnace kills dogs, 519. a Leaena, an image of Iphicrates his making,
501. b the history thereto belonging, ibid. how a body ouer-fat may be made
Lean, 184. m. 303. d 318 l. how a man should drink to be Lean, and how to be
corpulent. 152. m Leaves of herbs different, 20. g Leaves which be employed
in coronets, 89. e. 90. g Q. Lecanius Bassus died of a carbuncle, 241. d
Lectuce an herb of sundry kinds, 24. g. i Lectuce Laconicon, 24 h why
Lectuce is called in Latin Lectuca, 24. i the nature of Lectuce, 24. k
Augustus Caesar recovered from sickness by the means of Lectuce. 24. k
Lectuce much used, ibid. Lectuce Caprina 24 l. 45, a. the properties thereof,
45. b Lectuce how to dressed for the table, 25. a how Lectuces are to be
replanted, 25 b Lectuce wild and the diverse kinds thereof, 45. a the juice of
wild Lectuce medicinable, 45. d garden Lectuces their medicinable properties,
46. g their discommodities, 46. m Leech-craft belonging to kine and oxen who
wrote of among the Romans, 209. b Leekes, 21. a Leeks headed or bolled, 43. c.
their medicinable properties, ibid. cut Leeks or unset leekes, 21. a. used much
by Nero the Emperor for to clear his voice, 21. a. of two kinds, 21. e Mela
killed by the juice of Leeks, 21. d Lees of wine the nature and properties
thereof, 157. d Legs infirmities helped by the Assian stone quarries, and hurt
by metal mines, 587. e to sit or stand cross. Legged, what effect it
works, 305. a in what cases prohibited by law, ibid. Lemonium, what herb,
228 k. the g^m and virtues thereof, ibid. Lenitiue medicines, 111. c. See in
Mollitiue. Lentiles the pulse, what medicinable properties they have, 141. d.
their discommodities, ibid 142. g Lentiles wild, 142. i. their description and
medicinable virtues, ibid. Lentiles of the marish or poole, 142. h. See
Duckes-meat. Lentiles or spots in the skin how to be scoured, 125. c. 130. l
133. c. 138. l. 377 d. 441. d. 443. b. c. 450. i. See more in Freckles, Uisage,
and Face, Lentiske or Masticke tree, the virtues medicinable that it
affourdeth, 184. g Leocras, a famous imageur, and his works, 502. i Leon, a
painter, 550. g Leontios, a precious stone, 630. l Leontine, what herb, 232.
l Leontiseus, a cunning painter, 549. f. his pictures, ibid. 550. g. Leontius,
a cunning imageur, and his works, 498. k. l Leontopetalon, an herb, 284. i.
the description, ibid. Leontopodium, what herb, 250. h the sundry names,
description and virtues, ibid. it causes strange visions and illusions, 250. i
Lepidotes, a precious stone, 628. h Lepidus his stately house at Rome, 583. a
Leptis in brass what it is, 507. c Leprie or leprosy Elephantiasis, when it
began first in Italy 241. e. the description and manner thereof, ibid. f a
malady natural and proper to the Egyptians, 242. g against the said Leprie
sundry medicines. 44. k. 50. g. h. 51. a 53. b. 58. h. 59. a. 65. a. 65. c. 67.
c. 73. d. 74. i. 103. b 122. h. 124. l. 125. c. 131. a. 139, a. 144 g. 146, i
149, e. 155, f. 157, e. 168, i. 179, d. 185, c. 191, a 192, m. 207, e. 219. d.
300, i. 318 g. 328. g. 362. i 370, k. 377, d, e. 394, k. 429. b. 422, l. 440,
l. 441, l 443, b, c. 556, l. 557. d. 559, b. Lesbias, a precious stone, why so
called, 628. h Lethargy, what remedies for it, 39, c, d. 42, k. 55, b. 57, e
74, h. 75, e. 76, h. 121, d. 160, l. 171, e. 181, a. 183, d 187, f. 206, g.
260, l. 315, e. 336 g, h. 356, i. 390, h. 430. m 446, h. i, m. 447, a. 573, c.
Lethe, a fountain, 403, d. the water whereof causes oblivion, ibid.
Leucacantha, an herb. See Phalangites. Leucanthemon. See Phalangites.
Leucacantha, what kind of Thistle, 123, a. the diverse names it has, ibid.
Leucachates, a precious stone, 623. e Leucacanthe, what herb, 111. e
Leucacanthemus what herb, 125. d Leucacanthemum, what herb, ibid. the
virtues thereof, 109. a Leuce, an herb, 285. c. the description, ibid. why so
called, ibid. why named Meseleucus, ibid. Leuceoron, an herb. See
Leontopodium. Leucochrysos, a precious stone, 628. h Leucogaei, medicinable
springs, 403. b. their virtues, ibid. Leucographis, 285. d Leucopetalos, a
precious stone, 628. h Leucophoron, what kind of size, 466, h. how it is made,
529, c. Leucophthalmus, a precious stone, 628. h Leucostictos, a kind of
Porphyrite marble, 573, c. why so called, ibid.
L I
Libadion, an herb. See Centaurie the less. Libanocrus, a precious stone,
the description, 628. h Liberd bane, a venomous herb, 43, e. why so called,
ibid. Libards how they be cured after this bane, 270, k. See Aconitum. Libralis
As, and Libella what it was in Rome, 462. k Libraries by whom devised at Rome,
523. f Libripendes, who they were, 462. l Lichen, an herb. See Liuerwort.
Lichen in Plum trees, what it is, and the virtues medicinable, 169 e Lichen in
horse legs, what, 326. l Lichenes, a kind of wild and foul tetter, 240. l.
how it began, 240. l. why it is called Mentagral ibid. the manner of this foul
disease, 240, m. who brought it first to Rome, 241, a. what persons especially
it annoied, ibid. by what means it was contagious. ibid. b the manner of
curing it, ibid. what remedies for Lichenes, 131. a. 289. d. 362, i. 440. g
441, d 470, k. See more in Tettars. Lice or vermin of the body how to be
killed, 399, b. See Lousie disease. Lice in the head, what kills, 413, b.
422. g. 559. b Licinius Macer, a writer, 428. h Life in pain and sickness,
is misery, 292. m Light in Pictures, 528. h Lightning with what ceremonies
adored, 557. a Lightning resembles the smell and flame of brimstone burning,
ibid. Lights and their infirmities how cured, 580, i. stuffed with viscous
steame and purulent matter, how to be discharged thereof and cleansed, 380, i.
443, a. 556, m. See more in Lungs. Ligusticum, an herb, 30, i. called Panax,
ibid. the description, 290, h. why called Smyrrhinum, ibid. of the garden
Lilly, 84. k juice of Lilly flowers, 103. b oil of Lillies called Lirinon,
ibid. Lillies white commended and described, 84, k. l Lilly roots how to be
set, ibid. m Lillies will come up strangely of their own liquor, ibid. Lillies
red, described, 85, a. where the best are to be found, ih. Lillies purple,
ibid. Lillies how they may be artificially colored, ibid. i Lilly roots have
ennobled their flowers, 103. a water-Lillie. See Nenuphar. May-Lillie
described, 239. b Lime for mortar, which is good, and which bad, 594. i Lime
medicinable, 595. c quicke-Lime catches fire soonest by the means of water,
472, h. Limaeum, a French herb, 285, b. the virtues, ibid. Limonia, what
herb, 130, m Limoniates, a precious stone, 628. i Limonium, a kind of Beet,
47, c. the description and virtues thereof. ibid. d Limpins, shell fishes
medicinable, 443. b Limyra, a fountain, eftsoons remoouing, and thereby
presaging somewhat, 404, i, k Linden tree, the inner bark thereof soketh up
salt, 176. h the virtues that it has otherwise, 185. d Line seed where it
loves to grow, 2. i Line much used, in what countries, 2, k. l Line how it is
known to be ripe, when it is gathered, and how dried, 4. g. h. how to be
watered, dried again, punned, and otherwise ordered, 4. h. i Line-quicke, what
it is, and the use thereof, 4, l, m. where ^t grows, ibid. Line seed serves
for meat, 4, h. it is medicinable, ibid. Line called Byssus, and the lawne or
tiffanie thereof, 5. b the price it bears, ibid. Linen Setabine, 2, m.
Allian, ib. Fauentin, 3, a. Retouine, ib Linen cloth how to be bleached, 69. b
Linen weauers where they were wont to work, 2. l Linen, where the best is
made, 2. m Linen cloth burnt to ashes how employed, 5. b Linen died, as well
as woollen, 5. c Linen curianes and veiles of diverse colors, auerspread the
Theaters and Forum of Rome, 5. c. d Linen white esteemed best, 5. f Lint of
linen cloth, for what purpose it is good, 5, b. See more in Flax. Lings. See
Heath. Lingua, an herb the virtues thereof, 205. c Lingulaca, an herb,
described, 232. i Linus, a medicinable river, 403. a Lions paw, an herb, 250,
h. the sundry names that it has, ibid. Lions body yields medicines, 310, m.
the grease, the teeth, hair, gall, and heart, 310, m. 311, a, b Lions danger
how to be avoided, 359. b Liparae among the Greek writers, lenitiue and
unctuous plasters, 174, l. 474, h how such be made, 520. i Liparis, a precious
stone, 628. i Lips chapped how to be cured, 327, f. 328, h. 352, l. 377, b See
Chaps and Fissures. Lips scabbed, exulcerat, or otherwise diseased, how to be
healed, 178, l. 377, b. 509, a Liquirice described, 120, g. the best Liquirice,
ibid. the medicinable properties thereof, ibid. Liquirice juice, 320, h. why
called Adipson, ibid. Litharge of three sorts, 474, i. how it is made, ibid. k
why called Spuma argenti, i. the froth of silver, ib. what it is, and how it
differs from dross, ibid. Litharge, how to be prepared, 474, l. m 475, a the
medicinable virtues of Litharge prepared, ibid. Lithospermon, an herb. See
Greimile. Lithostrata, what pauements, 596, m. when they were devised, 597. a
Liver obstructed or stopped how to be opened, 167, c. 189, e 329, d. 443. a.
Liver pained how to be eased, 380, m. 442, k Liver hard, and swelled, how to be
mollified, 142, l. 189, c for the Liver feeble or any way diseased, comfortable
medicines, 37, (...) 40, k. 41, d. 47, d, e. 57, d. 59, d. 61, a. 62. g 63, a,
(...). 69, a. 75, e. 76, i. 77, e. 104, i, l. 106, i. 119, c 120, h. 124, l.
125, c, e. 127, e. 130, g. 138, i. 143, c 147, a. 150, l. 163, b. 171, e, f.
173, b, d. 181, a, b, d. f 184, l. 185, a. 191, c. 193, a. 207, d. 238, m. 247,
b, c 248, g. 254. g. 277, b. 278, l. 281, c. 301, c. 359, c 590, h. in the
Livers of Swine little stones medicinable, 332. k Liuerwort the herb why it
is called Lichen, 244, m. the sundry kinds and description, 245, a. the
virtues, ibid. Living creatures be most medicinable, 292, h, i, l Liuius
Drusus, how much plate he had, 481. b Lix, what it is, 599. c Lixivus Cinis or
lie ashes, ibid. the medicinable use thereof, ibid. what use fencers and
sword-plaiers make of it, ibid. Lizards male, how they be known from the
female, 398. h
L O
Loadstone, 515, a. where it is to be found, ibid. b. it is not the right rock
Magnus, ibid. the wonderful nature of the Loadstone, 586, l. why called
Magnes, ibid. how it was first found, ibid. five kinds thereof, ibid. m
Loadstone male and female, 587, a. the different sorts thereof, ibid.
Aethyopian Loadstone best, ibid. b. where it is found, and how known, ibid. c
the medicinable properties of all Loadstones, 515, a. 587. b Loathing of meat
how helped, 147, b. 248, h. 259, c. 277, a See Appetite. Loins or small of the
back in pain, how to be eased, 37, e 39, d. 40, k. 41. f. 42, h. 43, a. 53,
b. 54, h. 59, b. 66, k. 66, a 108, k. 110, i. 119, d. 123, a. 134, m 143. f.
144, i. 149, b 182, g. 190, k. 280, g. 304 l. 309, e. 312, k. 313, b. 350, h
381 f. 382, g. 556, l. 557, e. white Lome troublesome to pioners working in
gold mines, 467. e. f. Lomentum, a kind of painters color in powder, 471. b
484, m. the price, ibid. Lonchitis, what herb, 233. a. the description, ibid.
it differs from Xiphion and Phasganton, ibid. Longaon, a gut. See Fundament.
Long-wort, an herb, 230, i. two kinds thereof, ibid. k. male and female,
ibid. Looking-glasses, See Mirroirs. Loose-strife, an herb. See Lysimachia.
Lotometra, a kind of Lotos, 125. f. the description, ibid. wholesome bread made
thereof in Aegipt, ibid. Lotos, a name given to sundry plants, 177 a Lotos, an
herb, 99. c. the quality that the seed has, ibid. Lotos, an herb, and not
a tree, 125. e. how it is proved, ibid. the virtues of this herb, ibid.
Lotus, which is called the Greek bean, 177. a. the virtues, ibid. Loueach,
why it is called Ligusticum, 30. i. it is also named Panax, ibid. to win love
and favor what medicines avail, 47. f. 108. h 311. a. See Grace. Love potions
condemned by Pliny, 213. d Lourie or Laureoll, an herb, 174. g. the
medicinable virtues it has ibid. the description, 198 k the berries or seed
what virtues they have, ibid. for the Lousie disease remedies appropriat, 36.
l. 39. b. 44. h 74. i. 149. a. 162. k. 173. c. 179. d. 189. b. c. 190. h. 232.
m 264. h. 324. g. h. i. 367. a. b. See Lice. Sylla Dictatour died of the Lousie
disease, 264. h Louvers and lanterns over temples of potters work in cley, who
devised, 552. h
L V
Lucipores, what they were, 459. a Lucius Lucullus ouerruled by the straight
hand of his Physician in diet, 304. i Lucullus took his death by a love cup,
213. c M. Ludius Elotas, a painter who beautified the temple of Juno at Ardea
with pictures, 544. l. verses testifying the same, ibid m Ludius, another
painter, who practiced to paint upon walls variety of works, 545. a. his grace
and dexterity therein, ibid. Lunaticke or out of right wits how to be cured,
107. e. 149. e 218 i. 219. d. 335. c. 381. b. 387. d. 402. l. See Phranticke.
Lungs enflamed, how to be helped, 64. i. 135. d. 275. e Lungs exulcerat and
purulent how to be mundified and healed, 37. b. 43. c. 57. d. 61. a. 179. e.
308. h. 329 b Lungs stuffed with fleame, how to be discharged and scoured, 43.
c. 59. e. 74. g. 106. i. 167. d Lungs diseased, medicines in general, 77. e.
200. l. 247. c. d Lungs or lights in beasts diseased, how cured, 247. e. 275.
e. See lights. Lungwort, an herb. See Longwort. Lupines wild, 143. d. their
properties in Physic, ibid. how Lupines may be made sweet, ibid. Lupus, a
kind of Phalangium or venomous spider, 360. h Lusae, a city, near which, a
well of a wonderful nature, 403. d. Lust how provoked or repressed. See Venus.
Lusty or gloss in painting, what it is, 518. h Lutea, a kind of Borax, 471.
a Lutea, an herb, ibid.
L Y
Lychnis, what flower, 83. e. why called Flaminea, 110. l Lychnites, the white
marble of Paros, why so called, 365. b Lychnites, a precious stone, and a kind
of Rubie Balais, why so called. 617. e the Indian Lychnites best, ibid. f. the
second sort is named Ionis, and wherefore, ibid. Lychnitis, an herb, and why
so called, 230. k Lyciscus, an excellent Imageur in brass, and his works,
502. k. Lycium, what it is, and whereof made, 197. b the best Lycium, ibid. c.
how it is known, ibid. e how Lycium is made, ibid. b Lycophthalmus, a precious
stone, 630. i Lycopsis, an herb, 284. k. the description and virtues, ib.
Lycos, a kind of spider, 381, e. See Lupus. Lycas, a Physician, 71. b Lydius
Lapis. See Touchstone. Lydius Lapis, what stone, where to be found, and how
used, 574. h Lying in bed upon the back for what it is good, 303. e upon the
belly for what, ibid. upon the sides by turns for what, ibid. Lyncurium, what
it is, according to Demostratus, 606. h whether it be engendered of the Onces
urine, 607. c. d Pliny thinks all to be fables that is written of Lyncurium,
ibid. Lyron, what herb, 231. b Lysias, a famous Imageur and grauer in stone,
569. d. his excellent workmanship, ibid. Lysimache, priestresse to Minerua 64
years, 501. e represented in brass by Demetrius the Imageur, ibid. Lysimachia
the herb, 221. f. it bears the name of king Lysimachus, ib. the
description, 222. g. the operation, ib. it may be called Lysimachia, i.
Loose-strife, in another respect, ibid. h Lysippus, an excellent Imageur, 494.
k. he made in his time 610 molten or cast images, of exquisite workmanship
all, 494. k. how it appeared that he wrought so many, ibid. l. he learned the
art of no teacher, but attained unto it by himself, ibid. m. his rare skill
and admirable workmanship, 499. a. b. c Lysistrus of Sicyone drew a man's
visage to the life in Alabaster or fine Plaster, 522. h. and so proceeded to
the personage of the whole body, ibid.
M A
MAcedonicum, a kind of Diamant, 610. h Mads or Earthwormes, great healers,
393. f. 394. g Mads. See Worms, Mad lake, why so called, 404. g. Madir, an
herb, 9. d. e. the description, ib. where it grows, ibid. the sundry names
it has, 192. i. how it is employed by diers, ibid. by curriers, ibid by
Physicians, ibid. against Madness, what remedies, 72. k. 140. h. 219. d Madon,
what plant, 149. c. See Nenuphar. C. Manius his statue erected upon a column
at Rome, 491. a. Magic, foolish, vain, deceitful, and yet professed with
credit, and long time maintained, 371. e. why it has so long continued, ibid.
Magic proceeded first from Physic, ibid. cloked by religion, 372. g.
intermeddled with Astrology and Mathematickes, ibid. Magic studied by the
greatest Philosophers, 373. b. flourished about the Peloponesiacke war, 373.
d. professed by Democritus, ibid. Magic of old time practiced in Italy,
ibid. in France, ibid. f Magic Ciprian, ibid. d Magic in Britain, 374. g
Magic of diverse kinds, and which they be, ibid. h Magic sacrifices and
ceremonious rites cannot be exercised by them that have red pimples in their
faces, 328. i Magicast herbs of sundry sorts described, with their strange
properties, 202. i. k. etc. Magicians first discredited Physic herbs, 244.
g Magicians condemned by Pliny, and their vanities derided, 213. e. 359. e. f.
244. h. i. 357. c. Monarchs in the East, much ruled by Magic, 372. h. it
first began in the East parts, ibid. Magides, what dishes they were, 482. h
Magiciscia, what cups, 484. g Magnet stone growing in one entire rock,
differs from the Loadstone, 515. b S. Magnus evil. See Leprie. Magydaris,
what it is, 9. b Maiden-haire, an herb, 126. m. why called Adiantum, ib. why
Polytricon and Callitricon, 127. a Maiden-haire of two kinds, ibid.
Maiden-haire Trichomanes described, 290. l. m Maidens-breasts by what means
they shall not grow, 236. i 281. c. 339. e. Maioran Marierom, an herb,
described, 91. e. how it comes up, ibid. it is called Sampsuchus and
Amaracas, 109. a. the oil thereof, Amaracinum or Sampsuchinum, ibid. b. the
virtues, ibid. Makarels pickle or sauce called Garum, medicinable, 442. h
Maladies incident to mankind, innumerable, 213. b Maladies going away at the
first game of Venus, 301. e which be most grievous and deadly, ibid. Maladies
of maidens ending at the sight of their first fleurs, 301. e. Maladies of the
body universal how to be remedied, 259. a Malandres in horses, how cured,
338. l Malache, what kind of Mallow, 71. e Malas, the first grauer in stone of
any name, 565. c Malicorium, the rind of a Pomgranate, 164. l. why so called,
ibid. Malobathrum, what virtues it has, 162. i Malope, what Mallow, 71. e
Mallows grow to be trees, 13. d. e Mallows highly commended, 71. d. they
enrich a good ground, 71. e. hurtful to the stomach, 72. h garden Mallows of
two kinds, 71. d Malum Erraticum, what herb, 255. d Marish Mallow, Althaea,
71. e the wonderful power of mallows to incite lust, 72. i Mallow leaf
kills scorpions, 71. e Mallows not to be used with women with child, after
the counsel of Olympias the midwife, 72. h Maltha, what it is, and how to be
tempered for pargetting, 559, d. Mamurra his sumptuous building, 571. e. f Man
medicinable to man, 293. b Man's blood to drink is abominable, ibid. c Man's
head found in digging the foundation of the Capitol temple at Rome, 295. d
Mancinus ordained his own statue to be made in that manner as he was delivered
to his enemies, 490 k Mandragoras, the herb, 235. b the sundry kinds of
Mandragoras, and their description, ib. the white Mandrage, what names it has,
ibid. with what ceremonies the root of Mandrage is dug up, 235, c. how the
liquor or juice is drawn out of Mandrage, ibid. the use of Mandrage, before
the cutting or cauterizing of a member, ibid e Mange in dogs, and other beasts,
how to be killed, 113, c 124, h. 128, l. 144, h. 149, e. 159. d. 162, l. 183,
f. 268, l 338, l. 377, d. 441. c. Manicon, why Dwale is so called, 112. k
Manlius, a renowned Methematician and Astronomer, 576, h. his devise upon the
Obeliske or Gnomon in Mars field at Rome, ibid. Maple tree the medicinable
virtues that it has, 185. a a Mares head pitched upon a garden pale, keeps
away cankerwormes, 32. l against the enormitie of hewing marble out of the
rock, 562, k l, m. no laws in Rome to repress that excess, 563, b, d.
grauers, cutters, and caruers in Marble, who were the first, 564, h. grauing in
Marble as ancient as the reckoning of years by Olympiades, ibid. l Marble of
Paros white, 565 b Marble spotted, 571. b. of sundry sorts, ibid. Marble
pillars and columns in building of temples, why at first used, ibid. men of
Chios built therewith the walls of their city, 571. c. the scoff of M. Cicero
unto them by that occasion, ibid. d Marble slit into thin plates, whose
invention, 571. d who seeled the walls of his house first with Marble at Rome,
571. e. who built his house first at Rome upon Marble pillars, ibid. f K.
Mausolus first garnished his palace with marble of Proconnesus, 571. d Marble
Lucullian, whereupon it took the name, 572. g. it is black, ibid. where it
grows, ibid. Marble stone slit and sawed after what manner, ibid. h Marble of
sundry kinds, 573. a Marble of Lacedaemon esteemed best, ibid. Marble
Augustum and Tiberium, why so called, 573. b how they differ, ibid. Marble
serpentine, ibid. the medicinable virtues thereof, ib. Marble of Memphis, with
the medicinable properties, 573, c Marble Coraliticum, where it is found and
the nature of it, 574. i. Marble Alabandicum, why so called, ibid. it will
melt, and drinking glasses be made thereof, ibid. Marble Thebaicke, 574, i. the
virtues that it has, ibid. k Marble Syenites, why so called, 574, k. it is
named also Pyrrhopoecilos, ibid. it served for long Obeliske, ibid. Marble
gray, or Sinadian Marble, 522. i Marble does live and grow in the quarrey, 586.
i Marchesin, or Marquesit stone. See Cadmia and Pyrites. Marcion of Smyrna, a
writer of herbs, 300. k Marcipores, what they were 459 a C. Marius Censorinus
how rich he died, 479, e. f Q Marcius Tremellius his statue in a gown, for
what desert, 491. e Marigolds and their flowers compared with Violets, 85. e
Mariscon, a kind of rishi 106. k C. Marius drank ordinarily out of a wooden
tankard, after the example of Bacchus, 482. l Marks remaining after the
cauterie or searing-yron, how to be taken away, 377. f Marmaridius a Magician,
372. i Marrow of what virtue it is, 320. m what Marrow is best, ib. how to be
ordered and prepared, ib. Marsians, people resisting all poison, 95. a. b
Marsians descended from Circe, 210. l. they cure the sting of serpents by
touching or sucking only, ibid. Martia, a water serving Rome, 408. g. most
cold and wholesome, ibid. from whence it comes, ibid. who conveyed it to Rome,
and maintained it, ibid. how it took that name, 585. d Q. Martius Rex his
wonderful works, performed during his Pretourship, 585. d Mascellin metal
of gold, silver, and brass, 487. q. c Maspetum, what it is, 8. l Massaris,
146, g. a wild Vine, ibid. 147. c. how employed, ibid. Massurius, a writer of
Histories, 320. k Thistle-Masticke, what it is, 98. i Masticke, the gum of the
Lentiske tree, and the medicinable virtues, 182. l. 184. h Matrice pained and
vexed with throws, what remedies for it, 39, f. 53, b, 66, k. 106. i, m. 121.
f. 186, k. 198, m 207, d. 266, l. 267, b. f. 268, g. 279, a. 283, a. 308, g.
339, c 340. g. Matrice puffed up, swelled, and hard, how to be assuaged and
mollified, 72, l. 103, c. 111, c. f. 162, k. 180, l. 183. d 186, g. 339, c. f.
340, g. 352, i. 396, h. 397, a. Matrice enflamed and impostumat how to be
cured, 55, e 59, d. 71, b. 267, d. 303, a. 350, g. 351, a. Matrice sore and
exulcerat, how to be healed, 140, i. 159. d 161, c. 175, a. 267, d. 340, g, m.
Matrice ouermoist and slipperie, how to be helped, 340, l Matrice drawn in and
contracted, how to be remedied, 303. a. Matrice perverted, fallen down, or
displaced, how to be reduced and settled again, 303, a. 339, b. 340, h. 396. h
557, f. 591, b. See more in Mother. Matrice obstructed and unclean, how to be
opened, cleansed, and mundified, 43. b. c. 55. d. 57. c. 62. k. 77. b. 101. d
168. i. 180. l. 268. g. 340. k. 104. i. 121. f. 133. e. 158. h 175. b. 182. g.
187. d. 192. l. 266. l 267. c. d. 271. d. for the infirmities of the Matrice in
general, comfortable medicines, 102. h. k. 108. k. 109. b. c. 111. d. 119. d
121. e. 154. g. 173. a. 175. a. 179. f. 181. b. 183. e. 193. b 196. g. 207. c.
267. f. 271. d. 313. c. 318. h. 339. d. 340. i. l 395. c. 448. i. 449. b. 589.
b. Maturatiue medicines, 76. k. 103. c. 139. a. 183. d. 303. a 556. l.
Mattiaci, what springs, 404. h Maur-hils corruptly called Moul-hils, what they
be, 397. d Mausoleum, the renowned tomb erected by queen Artemisia for king
Mausolus her husband, 568. i. the description thereof, and the workmen, ibid.
M E
Mead or honied water. See Hydromell. one Meal a day no good diet, 304. h
Mechopanes, a painter full of curious workmanship, 548. m Mecoenas Messius
held his peace voluntarily for three years space, 305. d Mecoenas signed with
the print of a Frog, 601. f Mecon, a kind of wild Poppie, 69. c Meconis a
Lectuce, why so called, 24. i Meconites, a precious stone, 628. i Meconium,
whaet it is, 68. i remedy against Meconium, 160 k Meconium Aphrodes, an
herb, 257 f Mecontum, what kind of medicine to make a woman fruitful, 303.
b Medea, a precious stone, 628. i. by whom found, ibid. Medea, queen of
Colchis, a famous witch, 210. k Medion, an herb, with the description, 285. e
Medius, a writer in Physic, 39. e Medlers, the fruit, and their medicinable
virtues, 171. b Megabizus, what he is, 548. i Meges, a Chirurgian, 439. c
Mel-frugum. See Panicke. Melamphyllon, what herb, 129. c Melampodium, what
herb, and of whom it took that name, 217. b Melamprasium, 278. g Melampus, a
famous Diuinor or Prophet, 217. a Melancholy the disease, what remedies are
appropriat for it, 46. i. 50. l. 72. k. 107. e. 140. h. 157. a. 219. d. 283. a
304. l. 316 g. 318. g. 336. h. Melancholy the humor, what medicines do
purge, 111. f 188. g. 235 f. 412. m. Melandrium, what herb, 248. g
Melanthemon, what herb, 125. d Melas a fountain, the water whereof makes
sheep white, 403. c. Melas, a cutter in marble, of great antiquity, 564. k
Melichloros, a precious stone, 630. m Melichrus, a precious stone, ibid.
Mililot, an herb, 90 g. why called Sertula-Campana. the description thereof,
ibid. the virtues medicinable, 106. l Melinum, a Painters white color, 528. k.
why so called 529. d. how it is gotten, ibid. the use in Physic and the
price, ibid. Melitaei, what dogs, 380. h Melites, a precious stone, 630. m
Melities, a kind of Honied wine, 136. m. the properties it has, 137. a
Melitites, a stone, why so called, 589. b. the virtues that it has, ibid.
Melons their meat and medicinable properties 37. c Melopepones, what they be,
14. k Melothron, what plant, 149. c Membranes wounded, how to be kept from
inflammation, 423. e. Memitha. See Glaucion. Memnaria, a precious stone, 628. i
Memory helped by some water, 403. d Memphites. See Marble. Men, whose bodies
are thought medicinable from top to toe, 298. m. Men who had some especial
part of the body medicinable to others, 299. f Menaechmus, a famous Imageur
and his works, 502. k Menais, what herb, and the virtues thereof, 202. k
Menander, a Poet commended for good literature, 372. m Menestratus, an
excellent Imageur in stone, 568. m Menianthes, an herb, and a kind of
Trefoile, 107. b Mentagra, a kind of foul Tettar, 240. l. how the name came
up first, ibid the remedies thereof, 44, k. See more in Lichenes. Mentonomon,
606. i Mentor, a famous grauer, 483. d he wrote of Imagerie, 502. k Mercury,
the herb, found by Mercurius, 215. e the diverse names, kinds, and virtues
described, ibid. Merigals. See Gals. Meremaids in Homer were witches, and their
songs enchauntments, 372. k Meroctes, a precious stone, 628. k Merois, what
herb, and the medicinable virtue thereof, 203 e. Mesoleucas. See Leuce.
Mesoleucos, when a gem is so called, 628. l Mesomelas when a gem is socalled,
ibid. Messalinas died by setting an Horse-leech to his knee, 467. c Metals,
what melting they require, 472. h Metal mines and furnaces, kill flies and
gnats, 519. b See Mines. Metoposcopi, who they be, 539. b Metrodorus an
excellent Philosopher and Painter, 548. i he wrote in Physic, 70. i. he
painted herbs in their colors, 210. g Meum, an herb, 77. a. two kinds
thereof, ibid. Mezils and small pocks how to be cured, 58. i. 157. d. 167. a
174. i. k. 189. c. 337. a. 338. l. 418. m. 421. c. 422. h 437. d.
M I
Mice how to be kept from gnawing books and writings, 277. e. contemptible
creatures, yet medicinable, 355. d between Mice and Planets, what sympathy,
ibid. the liver of what virtue, ibid. Miction, an Herbarist and writer, 78. g
K. Midas rich in gold, 464. h Midriffe and precordiall parts swelled and
diseased, how to be cured. 52. k. 55. c. 64. i. 66. i. 67. d. 102. l. 104. i
107. c. 113. c. 119. d. 138. l. 163. b. 202. g. 207. c 239. a. 247. c. 290. k.
how to be cleansed, 160. m Migrame, what kind of headache and how to be eased,
233. c. 418. m. Milesium Halcioneum, 441. d Miliaria, what weed, and the
virtues thereof, 144. l Militaris, an herb, why so called, 204. m Milk in
women nourses breasts, how to be increased, 39. f 49. e. 65. c. 77. e. 109. e.
130. i. 131. c. 149. e. 187. c. 193. c. 199. f. 268. i. 282. h. k. 288. i. 291.
c. 340. g. h 396. g. 397. b. 448. h. l. Milk by what means it is dried up or
diminished, 55. c 158. g. 236. i. 279. a. Milk, what will cruddle, 166. k.
168. i. how it shall not cruddle in the stomach, 137. b. being cruddled, what
dissolueth, 168. l Milk cruddled in women's breasts, how it may be dissolved,
131. d Milk cailled in the stomach, how to be dissolved, 134. l mothers Milk
best for all sucklings, 317 b Milk of nources with child, hurtful to sucking
babes, ib. Milk of women most nutritive, 317. c Milk of goats next to woman's
milk, ibid. it agrees well with the stomach, and the reason why, ibid.
Jupiter suckled with Goats milk, as Poets fable, and why, 317. c. Considia
cured by Goats milk, 184. i Goats Milk for what diseases good, 318. i Milk
of Camels sweetest next to woman's milk, 317. c Ass milk for what good, 318.
h Milk of Asses most medicinable and effectual, 317. c 323. a. excellent to
beautify and make white the skin, 327. c. it soon loses the virtue, and
therefore must be drunk new, 323 b what Milk is easiest of digest on, ibid.
Milk of Kine aromaticall and medicinable, 323 b. it keeps the body
solluble, ibid. it is a counterpoyson, 322. c. Milk of Kine Physic to the
Arcadians, 225. f best Milk how to be chosen, 317. d what Milk is thinnest
and fullest of whey, and when, ibid. a diet drink made of Cow-Milke in
Arcadia, for what infirmities, 317. d for what disease Cow Milk is appropriat,
318. h woman's Milk or breast milk medicinable, 307. c. sweetest of all other,
ibid. how to be chosen, ibid. allowed in an agne. ibid. Milk of a woman that
bare a man-child better than of another, 307. d. especially if she bare two
boy twins, ib. Milk of a woman bearing a maiden child, for what it is good,
308. g Milk of Kine feeding upon Physic herbs, is likewise medicinable, as
it appeared by two examples, 226. g Milk boiled, l^sse flatuous than raw
milk, 317. d an artificial milk called Schiston, ibid. e. for what diseases
it is medicinable, 318. g Milk of Ewes for what good, ibid. Sowes Milk, for
what sickness it is good, ibid. k Milk how to be clisterized for the bloody
flix, how for the collicke and oeher diseases, 318. g. h a clyster of Milk
much commended for the gripes of the belly occasioned by some strange
purgation, 318. g Milk in what cases hurtful, without good caution, ibid. k
the virtues medicinable of Milk in general, 317. d Millefoile, an herb. See
Yarrow, Millepeed, what worm, and the venomous nature thereof, 37. d. the hurt
coming thereby how to be cured, 37. d 42. h. i. 78. g. Millet the medicinable
virtues that it has, 139. e Miltites, a kind of bloudstone, 590. b Miltos,
See Vermilion. Mina, or Mna, what weight, 113. e Minerua, an Image in brass
wrought by Demetrius, 501. e why it was called Musica, ibid. Minerua Catuliana.
another Image of Minerua in brass wrought by Euphranor, and why so called,
502. g Minerua of Athens an Idol of gold and yuorie, 26 cubits high, wrought
by Phidias, 566. g. the curious workmanship of Phidias about the shield of
that Minerua, ibid. g. h. Minerua (...) wrought by Phidias, 597. d Mines,
minerals, and metals, the riches of the world. 453. c Mines of silver and gold
why called in Greek Metalla, 472. l. Minium. See Vermillion. Mints, the
herb, when and where to be set or sown, 29 d wild Mint will propagat and
grow any way, howsoever it be s^t, ibid. e Mints called in Greek sometime
Mintha, but now Hedyosmos, ibid. Mints, a principal herb in a country house,
ibid. garden Mints, the singular virtues thereof, 59. c. it keeps milk from
cruddling in the stomach, ibid. water-Mints, where and how it comes to grow,
31. d wild Mint named Mentastrum, described, with the virtues, 58. m Mint
masters at Rome chosen with great regard, 347. c P. Minutius his statue erected
upon a Column at Rome, 491 b. Mirroirs of tin were before any of silver,
517. d Mirroirs of silver plate, 478. i. the reason why they represent an
image, ibid. Mirroirs of sundry makings, and showing strange shapes, 478. k.
which were the best Mirroirs, ibid. l silver Mirroirs, the invention of
Praxiteles, ibid. Misliking of the body how to be cured, 259. c. 279. c. See
Consumption. Mison. See Misy. Messelto of the Oak is best, 178. h. how glue or
birdlime is made thereof, ibid. Misy or Mison, a kind of excrescence out of the
ground, 7. e Misy, a mineral, 510 h. how engendered, ibid. the medicinable
virtues, ibid. the best, ib. how known, ibid. how calcined and prepared, ibid.
i K. Mithridates his praise, 209. c. he was beneficial to mankind, ibid. his
ordinary taking of poisons and preservatives daily, ibid. d. he devised
counterpoisons, ibid. Mithridatium the famous composition, was his devise,
ibid. he spoke readily two and twenty languages, 209. e he studied Physic,
ibid. his cabinet stored with secrets in Physic, 209. f Mithridation, an
herb, found by K. Mithridates, 220. h the description, ibid. Mithridates his
opinion as touching Amber. 606. m Mitigatiues of pain, 70, i. 76, k. 106, h.
423, d. 471, e 511, c. Mirax^a precious stone, 628. k Metres, a King of, Egypt,
first caused Obeliskes to be reared and upon what occasion, 574. l
M N
Mnason, a King, who much admired painted tables, 543. d Mneme, a fountain
helping memory, 403. d Mnesias his opinion as touching Amber, 606. l Mnesicles
a Physician, 68. k Mnestheus wrote a book of Chaplets or guirlands, 82. h
M O
Moles in face or skin how to be taken away, 140, m. 143, b 328, h. Molemonium,
what herb. 248, g Mollitiue medicines, 70, i. 76, i. 103, d. 135, d. 141, a.
178. h 180, i, k. 184, g. 185, b. 186, i. 187, e. 192, m. 206, i 303, a 319, b,
c. 320, m. 423, d. 475, a. 529, f. 556, l. 560, g 591, d. Mollugo, what herb,
and why so called, 258, h Molochites, a precious stone, why so called, 619 e.
commended for scaling fair and clean, ibid. the virtues that it has, ibid.
Molon, an hear be, 247, a. the description, ibid. Moly, an herb, 112, l. 213,
f. by whom so called, ib. who fonnd it out, 214. g. described by Homer and the
Greek Herbarists diversely, ibid. Molybdaeus Metallica, what it is, 520, g, h.
the description, nature, and degrees in goodness, ibid. how the best is
known, ib. the use in Physic, ibid. Molybdaenae. 474, l. See Galaena.
Molybditis, a kind of Litharge, 474, i. it comes from the lead that is melted
with silver, ibid. Momordica, an herb. See Geranium. Money rained cause of
covetousness, 463, d Money who counterfeited and how, 479, a Money plentiful,
when it was at Rome, 480, i base silver Money brought in by Livius Drusus at
Rome, 463, c. Monochromata, what pictures, 525, b what painters were excellent
therein, 533, a Monthly terms or Fleures of women, by what medicines
procured, 39, e. 46, l. 47, e. 48, l. 54, h, k. 57, f. 60. k. 61, b 62, i. 72,
h. 74, h. 75, b. 78, g. 103, b, f. 104. g. 104, l 106, k. l. 107, f. 109, a, e.
110, h, i. 111, b. 119, d. 122, h 127, c. 128, i. 130, i, k. 131, e. 134, g.
140, k. 142, i, l 144, g. 150, g. 153, f. 163, c. 166, l. 168, i. 171, d 173,
a, b. 174, g. 177, b. 179, b. 180, l. 185, e. 187, c 189, e. 191, c. 192, k.
193, b. 198, i, k. 199, b, c. 200, k 201, a. 202. g. 206, i. 207, e. 215, g.
266, i, l, m. 267, a, b, c, d, e. 268, g. 274, g. 277, d. 278, l. 286, l. 287,
f 289. f. 290, h. 291, b. 303, a. 306, h. 308, g. 313, a 314, k. 339, b. 362,
i. 396, k. l. 430, m. 443, a. 448, k, l, m. 557, f. the immoderat flux thereof
by what means to be stayed, 101, e. 104, l. 119, d. 142. i. 158, k. l. 163, b
164, g. 165, e. 170, k. 178, g. 185, e. 188, l. 189, a. 192, l 194, i. 195, a,
d. 197, d 266, k. 267, b, c, e. 282, m. 283, b 284, h. 285, d. 339, d. 340, h.
341, a. 350, g. 352, i, l, m 353, c. 396, l. 448, k. 510, k. 516, h, 528, m.
Monthly sickness in women, cause of madness first in dogs, 310. g Monthly
flux of women in what cases wonderful, 310 k. l. m how venomous it is, 309, ab,
c. the remedies against it, 309, d. 433, a. the same also is medicinable, 309,
d Moon calves, moles, and false Conceptions, how to be dissolved and scattered,
397. d Moons, an herb. See Buphthalmos. Mordicatiue medicines, 286, l. 418,
k. l. 421, e. 485, b 508, l. Morell, an herb. See Nightshade. Morimals in the
legs, how to be healed, 128 g. 140. g 142. m. 149. d. 167. e. 174. m. 250. g.
370. l. 447. f. Morion, an Indian precious stone, 628. k. the black is
Pramnion, the red, Alexandrinum, if like the Sardoine, Cyprium, ibid. Morion,
what herb, 112, l. See Mandragoras. Morion, the precious stone where it is
found, and the use thereof, 628. k Morphew in the face and skin otherwise, how
to be scoured and rid away, 58. h. 62. l. 74. i. 103. d. 144. g. 193. b 219. d.
217. a. 290. l. 377. c. 394. l. m. 395. a. 403. a 422. h. 440. m. 557. a.
Morters for Apothecaries, Cooks, and painters, of what stone best, 591. f
Mortar for building, which is best, 594. k Mortar that will make a joint in
stoneworke to hold water, 594. h. Morticini, what they be, 134. k Mortification
in members how to be restored, 259. f Moses the Hebrew supposed by Pliny to be
a notable Magician, 373. a Moss called Spagnos, Spacos, or Bryon, what virtues
it has, 181. b Moss of the water for what it is good, 414. h Moth how to be
kept from cloths and garments, 67. b. 277. e Mother rising in women, with
danger of suffocation, by what means it is remedied, 40. k. 62. h. 67. a. d.
74. h 104. l. m. 106. k. 121. d. 157. a. 180. g. 181. a. 218. l 266, l. 267, b,
c, d. 283, a. 303, a. 307, b. 314. l. 397. a 430, m. 448, i, k, m. 557, f. 589,
c. the Mother fallen or displaced, how to be settled, 57, c. 60, k 61, b. 103,
e. 121, c. 125, c. 156, g. 161, f. 164, g. 174, k 178, g. 180, h. 181, d. 183,
d. 195, a. 267, a, d. 303, a 339, b. 340, i. k. 341, b. 350, g. See more in
Matrice. Mountains wherefore made, 562, i, k Mountains undermined and cloven
for gold, 467, c breach of Mountains washed with a current brought by man's
hand, and the manner thereof, 488, h, i Mountain dug through by Claudius
Caesar, a most chargeable and toilesome piece of work, 586, h Mouse-eare, an
herb. See Myositis. Mouth sores, ulcers, and cankers, how to be cured, 42, g.
51, a 54, h. 60, l. 63, a. 65, c. 70. g. 72, g. 101. d. 102, i. 120, h, k 141,
d, e. 149, a. 156, c. 161, f. 165, c. 173, c 175, a. 177, f. 185, e. 187. e.
189, c. 190, k 195, c. 196, g, k. 197, a, 239, e, f. 252, l. 257, a 272, i.
286, h. 287, d. 313, a. 328, k. 351, a. 418, k 419, b. 432, i. 507, f. 509, a.
510, h. 511, b. 558, i, l 609. b. Mouth sores rheumaticke, how to be helped,
512, h Mouth scalded how to be cooled, 377, b for all the infirmities of the
mouth in general, appropriate medicines, 112, l. 135, d. 157, b. 164, m. 170,
h. 195, a 196, g. 432, i.
M V
Mu, a syllable that nources used to pronounce as a countercharme to defend
their babes. 300. l Mud gathered in medicinable fountains, how to be used.
412. i. Mugwort the herb. See Artemisia. Mulberie tree, the strange
properties thereof, 170. h. the virtues of juice and fruit, ibid. g. h (...)
composition of Mulberries, called Parchrestes Stomatice 170. h. how it is made,
ibid. ^her compositions of Mulberries, 170. k. l Mullen, an herb. See
Longwort. Mules, how they shall not kick or winse. 400. h Mules houfe of a
strange nature, ibid. Muliones, Gnats living but one day, 399. e Mullet a fish,
how crafty he is to avoid the danger of the hook, 428. g Mulse, what it is,
136. m Multipedae, Manyfoot worms. See Cheeslips. their venomous qualities how
remedied, 139. e. 155. f. 323 d L Mummius, why surnamed Achaicus, 526. m P.
Munatius committed for wearing upon his head the coronet of Marsyas. 81. d
Mundificatiue medicines. 158. i. 160. g. 182. l. 193. b. 197. d 319. b. c. 418.
l. (...) 1. e. 485. b. 509. a. 511. e. 516. h k 520. m. 591. d. Murall
chaplets, 115. e Muralium, 111. e Murre occasioned by a rheum, how to be
discussed, 289. e 377. f. See Rheumes. Muria, the pickle, whereof it is made,
418. k. the nature and virtues thereof, ibid. Muscerda, Mouse dung, 364. i
Mushromes, their wonderful nature, and how they grow, 7. b. c. sundry kinds of
them, 7. c in biting a Mushrome, there was found a silver Roman Denarius, 7. d
a discourse of Mushromes, 7. f observations touching Mushromes, 7. f. 8. g
Mushromes distinguished by the trees under which they grow, 133. a Mushromes
dangerous meat, and yet medicinable, ibid. b they be engendered in rain, ibid.
c Mushromes a perilous food, 133. g Tiberius Claudius poisoned by the means
of Mushromes, ib. their venomous qualities how they may be known, ib. the
manner of Mushromes engendring, 132. h, when they may be gathered and eaten
safely. ibid. how to be dressed, that they may be eaten with security, 133. d
Annaeus Serenus, with others, poisoned by Mushromes, ib. a remedies against
venomous Mushromes, 39. d. 43. b. 49. e 51. a. 56. l. 74. g. 103. a. 113. c.
121. c. 133. d. e. 135 d 153. b. 157. e. 166. i. 174. h. l. 232. g. 277. c.
363. e 422. i. 433. e. Musica, an Image of Minerva, 501. c Muscles, 443. b Must
or new wine of sundry kinds, 150. k. l. their properties. ib. their
discommodities, ibid. Mustard seed, what virtue it has, 74. g Mutianus, a
writer, 404. h Mutianus imagined that he preserved himself from bleared eyes,
by wearing a live fly about him, 298. k
M Y
Myaces, shel-fishes medicinable, 442. l. their nature described, ib. m. the
broth of these fishes has many good operations, 443. a. the only inconueuience
that comes by them, ibid. of two sorts, Mituli, Myscae, 443. b. their
description, ibid. Myscae be medicinable, ibid. Myagros, an herb, 286. g. the
description and virtues, ib. Mycon, a famous painter, 533. f. two of the name,
the elder and younger, 534. g Myiodes, the god or Idol of flies, 364. k
Myloecos, a kind of Beele, 370. k. why so called, ibid. it is medicinable,
ibid. Myositis, Mouse-eare, an herb, why so called, 273. a Myosoton, an
herb, 272. m Myrmecias, a precious stone, 628 k Myrmecides, a famous cutter
in stone, and his fine workmanship, 570. l Myrmecion what manner of spider,
360. k Myrmecites, a precious stone, 630. i Myro, an excellent Imageur, 481. i.
he used altogether Aeginetick brass, ib. his pieces of work, wherein he
excelled, 498, h. i. he wrought also in marble, 569. a. his works, ib. Myrrha
or Myrrhus, an herb, 202. g. the sundry names it has and the description, ib.
the medicinable virtues, ib. Myrrhites, a precious stone, 628. k Myrsineum a
kind of Fennel, 77. c Myrsinites, a precious stone, 628. l Mirth, how it may
be procured. 108. h. 180. l. 223. d 259. c. 297. d. Myrtidanum, the medicinahle
virtues it has, 175. a Myrtle berries and their properties in Physic, 174. k
Myrtle oil, and what medicinable virtues it has, 161. c 174. k. Myrtle wine,
with the virtues medicinable, ibid. Myrtopetalon, what herb, 287. b Mys, a
passing fine grauer, 483. e. his workmanship. ibid Myxon, a fish, 439. d. the
same that Banchus, ibid
N A
Nails growing crooked, rough, and ragged, how to be rectified or removed
with ease, 56. k. 71. c. 73. c 76. k. 158. g. 177. f. 178. i. 183. d. 266. h.
320. g. 334. m 393. a. 422. g. 448. h. 559. b. Nails troubled with the
excrescence, turning up, and looseness of the flesh about the roots, how to be
cured, 101. d 120. h. 147. c. 165. a. 167. e. 174. l. 177. f. 194. m. 329. a
393. n. 418. m. 516. h. 521. b. 559. b. Nails loose how to be fastened, 148. l
Nails bruised how to be healed, 328. m grieved with whitflawes about their
roots, how eased, 266. h. 301. a. 350. h. troubled with fissures or chaps about
the roots, how to be remedied, 120. h Names fortunat and significant,
available in presenting a sacrifice, 297. a Napi Persicum, what herb, 291. b
Narcissinum, what oil, and the virtues thereof, 103. d Narcissues, a precious
stone, 630. k Narcissus, the Daffodill, why so called, 103. c a Narcoticke
medicine, 573. c Nard Celticke described. 88. g. the virtues thereof in
Physic, 104. k Nard rusticke is not Bacca, but rather Asara-Bacca, 85. f
Nasturtium, why Cresses be so called, 29. a Ad-Nationes, what place it is at
Rome, 570. g Natrix, an herb, 286. h. the virtues thereof, ibid. Natural
heat how increased, 290. k Natural parts of women. See Priuities. Nauall
chaplets, 115. e Naucerus, an Imageur, and his workmanship, 502. k Nauewes of
five sundry kinds, 16. h. their degrees in goodness, ibid. i of Nauewes two
kinds serve in Physic, 38. m Nauew bastard described, 200. g the medicinable
virtues thereof, 202. g against Navigations an inuectiue of Pliny, 1. f Nauils
in children bearing out how to be cured, 69. f 254. h. Nausicaa, the name of a
ship, called likewise Hemionis, 542. h. Naxian stones what they are, 572. m
N E
Nealces, a famous painter, how he painted the froth falling from an horse
mouth, 542. l. witty he was and full of invention, 550. g. his devise in
expressing the river Nilus. ibid. Nebrites, a precious stone, why so called,
628. l Necromantie of Homer painted by Nicias, 548. g he would not sell it to
K. Attalus for sixty talents, ibid. Nectabis, a sumptuous King of Aegipt, 575.
c. the Obelisk which he caused to be hewed, ibid. Neck swelled in the nape or
pole, how to be eased, 158. i 245. e. Neck sinews so pulled that the head is
plucked backward, how to be helped, 378. l. 392. m. 422. m. 431. a 442. g.
crickes in the nape of the Neck how to be eased, 300. i 305. b. 328. l. 352.
k. 378. l. 442. g. Neck impostumes how to be cured, 397. c Neck sinews cut
in twain, how to be healed. 557. e Neese-wort. See Ellebore. Nemesis, a
Greekish goddess, inuocated for diuerting of witchcraft, 297. b she has no
name in Latin, ibid. her statue in Rome, ibid. Nenuphar the herb, 222. h.
why called in Greek Nymphaea, ibid. Named also Heracleon by what occasion,
222. i. why it is called Rhopalos, ibid. the description, 222. i. two kinds of
Nenuphar, ibid. Nep, an herb, the virtues thereof, 61. b Nepenthes given to
lady Helena by Polydamna the Kings wife of Aegipt, 210. l Nepenthes, a noble
drink. 108. i. the virtue thereof, 210. l. m Nerion what herb, 191. f Nero, a
monster, and poison to the world, 132. g. he studied Magic, 374. i. he could
not attain unto it, ibid. l his devise to have exceeding cold water, 407. e
his Colosse or Image 110 foot high, 496. h why he wore a plate of lead to his
breast, 518. m his golden palace, 583. b his wastfull superfluity, 603. b.
his wastfulnesse in Cassidoine vessel, 603. e. f upon evil tidings he broke
two Crystal cups, 605. e. he made a sonnet in praise of Peppaea his wives
hair, 609. a he was wont to behold the sword-plaiers and fencers fight in a
fair Emeraud, 611. d Nerves in ach and pain how to be eased, 105. c. 135. d
149. e. 141. d. 146. l. 179. a. 183. f. 258. k. 262. l 303. a. 313. b. 337. d.
349. c. 392. l. 419. c. 422. k 624 k. Nerves wounded and cut in twain, how to
be healed, 45. b 103. b. 216. k. 262. m. 279. e. 288. k. 337. d. 394. g. h 446.
m. Nerves shrunk, plucked, and drawn together, how to be helped, 52, h. 126.
i. 146. l. 262. l. 337. d. 392. l. See more in Crampe. Nerves sprained how to
be cured, 337. d Nerves enflamed, what remedy, 138. k for Nerves and nervous
parts, comfortable medicines, 66. i 72. l. 73. a. 108. k. 109. b. 128. g. 134.
g. 154. g. 157. a 162. h. 187. a. 189, c. d. 226. l. 238. l. 262. l. 282. g
412. g. k. 431. a. Net work exceeding fine, 3. c Nettles, 95. e. f. their
stinging how to be cured, ibid. Nettles and the seed wholesome and medicinable,
97. f. 121. c oil of Nettles, 121. c dead Nettle, 78. g Nettle Fulviana,
whereupon it took that name, 255. d sea-Nettle, 255. d. medicinable, 444. g
Neurada. See Poterion. Neuras, what herb, 231. a Neuris, what herb, 112. k
New years salutations with good words, 297. a
N I
Nicaearchus, a painter famous for his works, 550 g Nicander, a writer of
herbs and simples, 78. h Niceas his opinion of Amber, 606. k Nicerates a
cunning Imageur, and his works, 502. l Niceratus, a writer, 443 f Nicias a
painter commended by Praxiteles, 548. g the table that he made, and the
inscription to it, 527. e he painted women to the life excellently, 547. e. f
Nicias his works, 548. g. he passed for making dogs especially, ibid.
Nicomachus, a famous painter, 543. d. his pieces of work, ib. d. e. f. a
ready workman, and quick of hand, 543. e in how small a time he painted the
tomb of Telestes the Poet, to perform his bargain to Artstides the tyrant,
ib. Nicomachus, a gay Minstrell, with his variety of precious stones, 601. c
Nicophanes, a painter, 544. g. his manner was to renew Old pictures, ibid. he
affected gravity in his workmanship, ibid. Nigella, an herb, how employed,
30. l. it is called Gith, Melanthium, and Melasperiu^, 65. b. the virtues of
it, ib. juice of Nigella how it is drawn, 65. c. the danger thereof, ibid. the
seed how it is used, 65. d Nightmare, a disease, how it is driven away, 283. a
Night spirits and Goblins how to be scared away, 315. d 357. a. See Illusions.
Nightshade an herb, 286. h. the description, ibid. Nigina, an herb, 286,
h. Nigidius, a writer, 357. d Nil. See Spodos. Nilios, a precious stone, 619.
d. the description and place where it is found, 619. e. why so called. ibid.
Nilus the river, how it was represented by Nealces the painter in a picture,
550 g Nilus the river pourtraied in Barselteo marble, with sixteen children
playing about it, 573. d Nits breeding in the head how to be avoided, 365. b.
413. b 422. g. 559. b. in the eyelids, 557. a Nitre, a discourse thereof. 420.
h Nitre artificial made of Oak wood burnt, ibid. i. l Nitrus water and
fountains, ibid. a lake of Nitre natural, with a spring of fresh water in the
midst, ibid. what Nitre is best, 420. m Nitre pits and boiling houses, 421. a
rocks and mountains of Nitre. ibid stone-Nitre, and the use thereof. ibid.
foam of Nitre, when, and how to be made, 421. b how the best Nitre is chosen,
ibid. c. how sophisticated, and by what means detected, 421. c where sal Nitre
is, nothing else will grow, ibid. d in sal-Nitre more acrimonie than in salt,
ibid. Nitre preserves from blindness, ibid. the virtues medicinable of
salt-Nitre, and the pits 421. e how to be prepared and ordered for Physic,
421. f sal-Nitre how it may be made stone hard, 422. m
N O
Nodia, what herb, 206. g. called also Mularis, ibid. Nodosities in nerves
how to be discussed, 392. k Nodosities of scar swhat does dissolve, 559. b
Nodosities in ioints how to be mollified, 303. a. b Nodosities in general how
to be resolved. 166. l. 180. g. m Nomae, what ulcers, 50. m. 393. f Nomi, the
divisions and several jurisdictions in Egypt, 579. a. Nonacris, a fountain,
fair to see to, and yet hurtful, 405. b. Nongenti at Rome, what they were,
460. g Nonius a Senator suffered proscription, rather than he would part with
an Opall, 614 h Nose bleeding how to be stanched, 42. l. 52. h. 57. d. 61. c. c
64. l. 121. d. e. 122. h. 207. b. 224 g. 263. a. d. 287. a 305. c. 350 g. 393.
b. c. 447. b. d. 511. b. Nose what will set a bleeding, 207. b. 279. c Nose
bleeding diminishes the swelled spleen, ibid. carnosities and excrescence of
flesh within the Nosethrils how to be taken away. 507. f. 521. b Nose ulcers
called Noli me Tangere, what medicines do cure, 50. k. 59. c. 66. g. 189. c.
195. c. 200. m. 238. g 240. g. 251. b. stinking sores and vermin within the
Nosthrils, how to be remedied, 189. c all accidents in general of the
Nosthrils how to be healed. 164. m. 165. a. callosities and werts growing in
the Nosthrils, what does take away, 197. d pimples about the Nose and lips,
what does repress, 327. f 328. g. Nose gaies, who were wont for to make most
of all other. 80. i. Notia, a precious stone. See Ombria.
N V
Nucleus Ferri, what it is, 514. i. k. of diverse sorts. ibid. See Steel. the
greatest number in old time a hundred thousand, 470. c Number odd, more
effectual than the even, 297. a critical days observed by Physicians, are of
an odd Number, ibid b Numbers ceremoniously observed by Pythagoras, 299. d
Numidian red marble or Porphyrite, 522. i Nummednesse upon cold, how to be
healed, 101. b. 105. c 108. l. Nummed members or astonished, how to be recovered,
300. l Nus, a river, so called of the effect, 403. c Nutritiues, 136. l. 139.
c. 151. c. 162. l. 167. c. 172. l. 256. l 445. c.
N Y
Nyctalopes, who they be, 325. b. how such are to be cured of their dim sight,
325. b. 368. g. 438. l Nyctigretum, what herb, and the properties thereof, 91.
c. f why it is called Chenomychos, 91. f. and why Nyctilops, 92. g the Nymphs
poole, 405. a Nymphaea, an herb. See Nenuphar. Nympharena, a precious stone,
why so called, 628. l Nymphodorus, a Physician, 506. l
O B
OBaerati, who they be, 486. k Obelisks in Aegipt, what they were, and why
consecrated to the Sun, 574. k who first erected Obeliskes, ibid. Obeliske of
K. Ramises, spared by K. Cambises, when he burnt all besides, 575. b an
Obeliske eighty cubits high, 575. c. how it was removed and conveyed from the
quarrey, ibid. c. d Obeliskes how they were transported from Aegipt to Rome,
575. e Obeliske in the grand cirque at Rome, how high, 576. d Obeliske in Mars
field, ibid. by what Kings of Aegipt those two Obeliskes were showed, 576. d.
Obelisk in Mars field serves for a Gnomon in a dial, ib. h Obeliske erected
by Nuncoreus in Aegipt, a hundred cubits high. 576. k Obeliske at Rome in the
Vaticane, ibid. Obeliskes of Emerauds, 613. a Oblivion caused by some water,
403. c Obolus, what weight, 113. e Obryzum, what gold, 465. d Obsidiana, what
kind of glasses, 598. h Obsidianus lapis, a stone, 598. h. why so called.
ibid. Obsidian stone, how employed, 598, i. where it is found, ib. k
Obsidianus, a precious stone, 629. a. where to be found, ibid. Obsidionall
coronet what it was, 116. h Obstructions in general what does open, 143. c.
443. e
O C
Ochre, 485. b. the virtues medicinable, ibid. See more in Ochre. Ochus, a
river yielding salt, 414. m Ocnos painted by Socrates, what it imports, 549.
a C. Octavus being ambassador, killed by K. Antiochus, 492. g. honored with a
statue at Rome, ibid.
O D
Odinolyon, why the fish Echeneis is so called, 426. l Odious how an enemy may
be made to all the world, 314. g 316. g. Odontitis, an herb, 286. i. the
description, ibid.
O E
Oenanthe, what flower, 146. g. why so called, 92. i. 110. g the medicinable
virtues, ^7. a. where the best is, ibid. Oentas, a painter, famous for his
picture Syngenias, 550. h Oenophorus, an image of Praxiteles his making, and
why so called, 500. l Oenothera, what herb, 259. e Oenotheris, a magical
herb of strange effects, 204. k Oesypum, what it is, 308. g Oesypum
medicinable, 350. l. which is best, ibid. l. m. how to be ordered, ibid.
O I
Oil grass green, called Herbaceum, 162. k. the virtues thereof, ibid. Oil
of Henbane, 162. i. the effects good and bad that it has, ibid. Oil of
Lupines and the virtues thereof, ibid. i Oil of Daffodils, what virtue it
has. ib. k Oil of radish, what operation, it has, ib. Oil of Sesama, what
are the effects thereof, ibid. Oil of Lillies, what other names and
medicinable properties that it has, ibid. Oil Selgiticun, the virtues of it,
ibid. Oil called Elaeomeli, the medicinable effects thereof, 162. l Oil
willingly does incorporat with lime, 176. i. See more in Oil. Oinions of
sundry sorts, 20. g Oinions differ in color, 20. i. in taste, ibid. how to be
kept, 20. l. Oinion plots how to be ordered, ib. l. m Oinions their properties,
41. f the different opinions of Physicians as touching the nature and virtues
of Oinions, 42. i Oinions highly commended by Asclepiades, and condemned by
modern writers, ib. dogs Oinion Ornithogale described, 99. c sea-Oinion. See
Squilla. Aegiptians swear by Oinions. 20. g Oisier Willow, the operation
thereof, 187. a Oisier Siler, the virtues in Physic, 189. b Oisters and their
commendations, 437. c. d. their virtues medicinable, ibid. Oisters a foot
square, 437. b Oisters Tridecna, why so called, ibid. b Oisters medicinable,
436. i. a dainty meat, ib. Oisters love fresh waters, and therefore the
coasts, ib. few Oisters found in the deep sea, 436. k a devise to cool
Oisters, 437. c Oisters which be best, ib. why the best Oisters be named
Calliblephara, 436. m Oisters desire to change their water, ibid. thereby they
feed fat, 437. a coasts renowned for their Oisters, 437. a the best Oisters of
Cizycum, and their description, ib. a. b
O K
Oak and Olive at war one with another, 176 g Oak Apples their virtues in
Physic, 168. i Oak of Jerusalem an herb. See Botrys.
O L
Olach, is a river detecting perjury, 404. k Oleander what names it is known
by, 191. f. the strange nature that it has, 192. g. death to cattle
counterpoyson to man, ib. Oleastrense, what it is, 518. h Olenus Calenus, a
great Wisard of Tuscane, 295. e. his practice with the Roman Ambassadors to
divert the destinies and fortune from Rome, ibid. Olive tree gum, 159. a Olive
leaves medicinable, 158. k Olives white, their commendable virtues in Physic
159. a. Olives black their properties, 159. b Olives in pickle, their good and
harm, ibid. Olympias a woman paintresse, 551. b Olympias of Thebes, an expert
and sage midwife, partly also a Physician, 72. h. 339. b. she forbids women
with child to use Mallows, 72. h Olympius the surname of Pericles, and why,
501. c Olyra, the virtues medicinable thereof, 138. i
O M
Ombria, a precious stone, 628. m. called likewise Notia, ib. how it comes,
ib. the virtues, ibid. Omphacium. See Wine Veriuice. Omphilocarpos, what
herb, 274. i
O N
Onces, of all foure-footed beasts, have the quickest eyesight, 316. l. their
body yields medicines for man's body, ib. l. m. they hide their own urine
upon envy to mankind, 317. a Onobrychis the herb described, 202. h
Onochelis, or Onochyles, 125. b Ononis, or Anonis, the herb Rest-harrow, 98.
l. the description, ib. 273. e. the virtues medicinable, ib. Onopordon, an
herb, 286, k. why so called, ibid. Onosma, an herb, 286 k. the description,
ibid. Onuris, an herb, 259. e. the description, ib. the virtues, ib. See
Oenothera. Onyches, female shell-fishes, 444. h Onychites or Onyx, what stone,
and where found, 573. c how it was employed, ibid. Onyx a precious stone, 615.
e. the description and the sundry kinds, ibid. Onyx of India and Arabia, 615.
e. f the true Onyx, 616. g
O P
Opall a precious stone, 614. g. naturally it is bred in India, ib. how it does
participat with other gems, 614. h sundry kinds of the Opall, ibid. Nonius
proscribed for an Opall, 614. h the imperfections in the Opall, ibid. k. how
falsisied, ib. the trial thereof, ib. why it is called Paederos, 614. l which
Opall is best, ib. l. m Ophicardelos, a precious stone, 629. a Ophidion, a fish
like a Conger, medicinable, 445. a Ophilius a writer in Physic, 300. k
Ophingenes, a race of people, adverse in nature to serpents, 298. m. Ophion, a
beast, 399. d Ophion, a wild beast found only in Sardinia, 322. g
Ophiostaphillon, what plant, 149. c Ophites, what Marble, 573. b Ophiusa, a
Magical herb, and the virtues thereof, 203. e it works illusions to as
many as eat it, ibid. the remedy to prevent such effests, ibid. Opion, a
writer in Physic, 41. a. 130. g Opisthotonos, what disease, 328. m. the cure,
ib. See Cramp. Opium, what it is, and how to be drawn, 67. e. 68. g Opium, if
it be taken inwardly, how the malice may be corrected, and the danger
prevented, 64. l. 150. m 153. b. 157. b. 160 k. 232. g, 419. f. the operations
of Opium, 68. g Opium was the death of Licintus Cecinaes father, ibid. whether
Opium may be used or no, a question argued among Physicians, 68. g Opium, in
what cases not to be used, ibid. h Opium, by what marks it is tried, whether
it be good or no, 68, i. k. how it is kept, 68. l Opocarpason, a juice
venomous, 443, b. the remedy, ibid. Opopanax, Bucolicum why so called, 274. k
Oporice a medicine, why so called, 197. f the virtues that it has, ibid.
Opuntia, an herb, and the properties thereof, 99. d
O R
Orach the herb condemned by Pithagoras, Dionysius, and Diocles. 71. a. it
breeds many diseases, ibid. Orbis, the Lomp-fish, 428. i. his description and
nature, ib. Orca, a precious stone of a pleasant color, 628. l Orchanet, an
herb, described, 98. m. the use of the root, ib. 124. k. the description and
virtues that the root has, ib. Orchis, an herb, 256. m. two kinds thereof,
ibid. the description, ibid. Oreon, an herb, 287. c. the description, ibid.
Oreoselinum, what Parsley, and the effects thereof, ibid. Origanum, an herb,
64. h. many kinds thereof. ibid. Origanum Heracleoticum, 63. c. of three
sorts, 64. i. 214. l Origanum Prasium, 64. i Origanum employed in Guirlands,
90. i Orobanche, what weed, and why so called, 145. a. the description and use
thereof, ibid. Orobathion, what herb, 249. e Orobitis, a kind of Borax
artificial, 471. b Oromenus, a mountain of salt, 415. a. yielding great
revenues, ibid. Orpheus, a writer in Physic, 40. l. he wrote exactly of
herbs, 210. m Orpiment, a mineral, whereout gold was extracted, 469. d the
description and use thereof, ibid. Orpine, an herb, 290. l. the description,
ibid. Orpin, a painters color, 518. k Orthopnoicke, how they be diseases, and
what remedies for them, 59. b. 66. m. 105. d. 106. l. 107. e. 108. i. k. 121. c
131. c. 156. h. 173. b. 181. a. 192. m. 199. a. 200. l. 247. b 263. d. 278. h.
283. f. 288. h. 289. d. 290. i. 318. i. 370. l. m 381. b. 432. i 471. e.
Orthragoriscus, or Porus, a fish, grunting like an Hog, 429. b.
O S
Osses. See Words. Ossifragus, a kind of Geir or Vulture, 383. b the gut of
this bird medicinable, ibid. e Osthanes first wrote of Magic, 373, a. be set
it first abroad in the world, ibid. Ostracias, a precious stone, 628. m. the
kinds, 629. a. how it differs from an Agath, ibid. Ostracites. a precious
stone, 629. a. how it took the name, ibid. Ostracitae, what stones, 589. a.
why so called, ib. the virtues that they have in Physic and otherwise, ibid.
Ostratium, a shellfish, thought to be the same that Onyx the fish, 449. b. the
virtues, ibid. Ostrich grease sold dear, 362. k. the use thereof, ibid.
Osyris, an heaabe, 286. l. the description, ibid. Osyrites, or Cynocephalia, a
magical herb in Egypt, 375. b the wonderful power thereof by the saying of
Apion, ib. c
O T
Otemeale, the use and virtue thereof in Physic, 140. m Othonne, a^ herb,
286. i. the description, ib. called by some Anemone, ibid. Othus a river
yielding salt, 413. m Otter, a kind of Bieuer, 451. b
O W
scritch Owl, what lies the Magicians have delivered of it, 359. e.
O X
Oxalis a kind of Docke, 73. a Oxalme, what it is, and the use thereof, 157. b
Oxus, a river yielding salt, 414. m Oxycraton, what it is, 155. e. the
medicinable virtues that it has, ibid. Oxygala, what it is, 319. b. how made,
ibid. Oxylapathum, an herb, 73. b. the description and virtues, ibid. Oxymell
how it was made in old time, 157. a. the effects thereof, ib. b Oxymyrsine or
Chamaemyrsine, an herb described, 175. b named also Ruscus by castor, ibid. c
Oxys, a kind of rish, 100. k Oxys, an herb, 286. m Oxyschoenos, a kind of
rish, 100. k
O Y
Oil of Olives, or mother of oil, what medicinable virtues it has, 159. c.
how to be used in diverse cases, 159. c. d. Oil Olive of sundry kinds, which
be medicinable, 160. h. i Oil Olive Omphacium, for what it served, ibid. i
Oil Oenanthinum, the operations thereof good and bad, ib. Oil of Tick-seed,
called Cicinum, the virtues thereof, 160. m Oil of Baies the virtues that it
has, 161. c Oil of Chamaemyrsine or Oxymyrsine, of what operation it is,
ibid. d Oil of Cypress, what virtues it has, ibid. Oil of Citrons, and the
virtues, ibid. Oil Caryinum, or of Walnut kernels, and the operations, ib.
Oil of Thymelaea seed, 161. e Oil of Lentisk or Mastick, what be the virtues
thereof, ib. Oil of Cypiros, to what uses it serves, 161. f. See Oil.
P A
PAcuvius, a poet and painter both, 526. g Paeantides, precious stones, why
they be also called Gemonides, 629. c. their virtue, ibid. Paederos, what
signifies, 622. h. a precious stone, ibid. the description, ibid. the praise
of it, 622. i. the best is the Argenon, the next the Indian Senites, ib. their
defects, ibid. See Opal and Amethyst. Paederos, an herb, 129. c Q. Paedius
borne dumb, learned painters craft. 526. i Pagasaei, hot springs breeding
salt, 414. m Pagrus, a riuer-fish, medicinable, 445. e Pains in horses how to
be cured, 144. m. 150. k Pain of the stomach how cured, 57. c. 60. g. 61. d
Pain occasioned by the stone, how eased, 332. k Pains generally of the body,
how to be eased, 74. i. 387. c 128. h. 136. k. 144. l. 182. l. 233. d. 236. i.
313. b 350. i. Pains ensuing upon sprains and dislocations, how to be eased,
129. a Pain proceeding from some secret and hidden cause, how to be assuaged,
423. f. 351. b. 354. l old Pains and griefs, how to be mittigated, 313. d
Palace stately of Paulus Aemylius, 581. e Palacrae, or Palacrenae, what they
are, 469. b Palimpissa, what it is, 183 e Paliurus, what thorn, 195. d. the
seed medicinable, ibid. Pallacana, what Oinion, 20. k Pallas, a rich slave
enfranchised, 479. e Palonis, shell-fishes, and their medicinable virtues, 443.
c Palsy the disease, by what medecins prevented and cured, 49. d. 52. k. 62.
l. 139. e. 155. d. 161. c. 183 f. 283. f 318. g 335. d 388. g. 412. g. 422, k.
431. a 432. l. Pamphilus, a notable painter, learned withal and grounded in
Arethmaticke and Geometry, 537. b. a dear teacher, ibid. Panaces, an herb,
why so called, 214. i. a common name to many herbs, ib. ascribed all to the
gods, ib. Panaces Asclepion, why so called, ibid. Panaces Heracleum what it is,
and why so named, 214. l it is cleped also Origanum Heracleoticum, and why, ib.
Panaces Chironium, why so called, 214. l. the description ib. the flower
medecinable, ibid. Panaces Centaureum or Pharnaceum, why so named, ibid. the
description, 214. m. the uses whereto it serves, ibid Panchresta, what
medecines, 590. h Pancras, a precious stone, 629. a. the reason of the name,
ib. Pancration, an herb, 287, e. the description and virtues, ib. Pancras, a
precious stone, 629. b. commended much by queen Timaris, ibid. Panaeus a
painter, when he flourished, 532, m. he painted the battle at Marathon, with
the full proportion of the captains, 533. c. challenged by Timagoras and
overcome, 523 d Pangonius, a precious stone, 629. b. the description and reason
of that name, ibid. Pani, biles in the share and other emunctories, how to be
driven back in the beginning, 444. k. 560. h how to be ripened and broken,
385. d. 560. h. 444. l a singular ointment for that purpose, ib. how to be
resolved and discussed, 385. e. 433. b. 437. d. 444. k Panicke, the medicinable
virtues thereof, 139. f by whom called Mel-frugum, ibid. Panniscus, a picture
of Tauriscus his making, why so called, 550. i Pansebastos, a precious stone:
the same that Pancros, 629. b Pantheon, a temple at Rome, wherein the chapters
of the pillars were all of brass. 589. b. built by Agrippa to the honor of
Jupiter Revenger, 581. f Panthers, whom they will not assault, 359. b Paps of
women and maids ouerbig, how to be taken down, 413. c. how they shall not
ouergrow indecently, ^48. i Paps impostumat how to be cured, 128. g Pappos. See
Groundswell. Papyr reed in Egypt. the medicinable virtues, 191. d. e Papyr
made thereof, what operation it is of, 191. (...) Papyrius Fabianus, a great
Naturalist, 586. i Paralium, a kind of Poppie, why so called, 69. a Paralus
the name of a famous ship painted by Protogenes, 542. h. Parasius an excellent
painter who challenged Zeuxis, 535 a their pieces of workmanship, ibid. b. what
Parasius invented and added to the Art, 535. c. his excellency in pourfiling,
535. e. his defect in painting, ib. his ae^e to paint the people of Athens,
ibid. c. f. his pride, arroga^cie, and vaineglorie, 536. h. i. he was put down
by Timanthes in the picture of Ajax, 536. i. his speech therup n, ib.
Paraetonium, a painters white color, 528 k why so ca^ed, 529. c. how
sophisticated. ibid. the price and use. 529. c. d Paraphoron, what kind of
Alume, 558 i Pardalios, a precious stone, 630. l Parerga, what they be in
painters work, 542. h Parget for walls, of Paraeus his making, 595. a
Parietarie of the wall, an herb, 273. a. why it was called Perdicium, 99. c.
why it was not named Parthenium. 123 e. See Helxine. Paring of nails
superstitiously observed, 298. b. for what it is good, 310. h. i in Paros a
vein of marble representing within it the image of Silenus naturally, 565. e
Parsnep wild, or Madnep, 17. f Parsnep white. See Skirwort. Parsnep wandering
called Staphylinus, the medicinable properties thereof, 40. i Parthemis, an
herb. See Artemisia. Parthenium, an herb, 111. e. 123. b Pass flower
Anemone, 92. h. when it floureth, ibid. Pasiteles, an excellent cutter in
marble and yuorie, 570. h his works, ibid. he wrote five books of all works
of fine workmanship, ib. how heardly he escaped a Panther, ib. Passernices, a
kind of whetstones, 193. b Past to glue withal, what it is good for in
Physic, 139. c Pasture making horses enraged, 226. g Pasture driving asses
into madness, ibid. Patience herb described, 73. b. the root thereof, 19. d
Pauements whose invention, 596. g the manner of Pauing a^ open flower upon a
terrace, 596. k. l Pauings called Lithostrata, 596. m. Pauing Grecanick, ib. l
Pavonacea, what works in tiling, 592. h Pausias, a cunning pa nter, 80. k.
546. k. his delight was to draw small pictures and pretty boys, ib. his
celeritie in work, 546. l Peaches, a harmless fruit, and medicinable, 169. d
Peacocks dung medicinable, 367. d. they eat their dung again so soon as they
have mewted, for envy to mankind, ibid. Pears what kind of meat, 166. k. the
medecinable use of Pears, and the ashes of Peare-tree, 166. (...). k
PectenVeneris, what herb, and why so called, 206 g. the virtues that it has,
ibid. Pecunia, why money in coin is so called, 462. l Pedes Gallinacei, what
herb, 236. l Pedigrees and descents observed among the Romans, 523. d
Pedunculi, creepers in the sea good for the infirmities of the ears. 439. e
Pedunculi terrae, what they be, 379. c Peinting in ancient time reputed a noble
art, 522. g Peinting of stones when devised 522. h Turpillius left handed, an
excellent Peinter, 526. h Q. Pedius borne dumb, learned to be a Peinter, 562.
i Peinted clothes deceive birds, 526. l when the first Peinted tables of a
forreiners work was brought to Rome, 527. a Peinting with fire of two kinds,
551. b. c Peinting of ships, 531. e a Peinted table cost the weight in gold,
533. a prises proposed for Peinters winning the best game, 533. d art of
Peinting reduced into three kinds by Eupompus to wit, Ionicke, Sicyonian, and
Atticke, 537. a Peinting school frequented by gentlemen's sons, 533. b
Peinting with wax, 546. h Peinting or pour filing with a coal, who first
devised, 525. b who first Peinted with colors, 525. c Peinting Art, raunged in
the first degree of Liberal Sciences, 537. b. it might not be taught unto
slaves, ibid. c Peinting, whose invention, 525. a Pelagia, what oysters, and
why so called, 436. k Pelamis, the Tunie fish, when he is so called, 451. d
Pelamis is medicinable, 444 l Pelecinum, an herb, 288. i. the description,
ibid. Pelops, a writer in Physic, 433. d Pelops his rib of Iuorie, 299. f
Penelope a singular picture of Zeuxis making, 534. k Penicilli the softest and
finest spunges, 423. d. where and how they grow, 424. l Peniroyall an herb,
the virtues thereof, 60. h. male and female, 60. i Peniroyall, why it is called
in Greek, (...). 61. a Pentadactylon, what herb, and why so called, 207. b
Pentadora, what brickes, 555. e Pentapetes, what herb, 228. l Pentaphyllon,
what herb, 228. l Peplium, what herb it is, 69. d. the virtues thereof,
ibid. hurtful to the eyesight, 70. k Peplos an herb, 287. f. the
description, ibid. Pepones what fruit, 14. b Pepperwort. See Dittander.
Perches, the ashes of their heads medicinable, 444. m Perdicium, what herb,
111. e Perfumes by sweet herbs commended by Orpheus and Hesiodus, 211. a
Periboetos, an Image of Praxiteles his making, why so called. 500. k
Pericarpum, an herb, 232. g. the kinds and description, ibid. the operation,
ibid. Periclimenos, an herb, 288. g Perileucos, a precious stone, why so
called, 629. c Perillus, a cunning brass founder, famous for the brazen bull
to torment folk, 504. h punished worthily for his own handy work, 504. i
Peripneumonie or inflammation of the lungs, how to be cured. 167. d. 180. k.
200. l. 287. f Perisson, what herb, 112. k Peristereon, what herb, 228. g.
why so called, 231. c See Veruaine. Pernae, a kind of fish, and the strange
nature thereof, 452. l Perpensa, what herb, 104. g Perpressa, what herb,
255. c C. Perreius Atinas, honored with a grass chaplet, 117. b Perseus a
painter, who wrote of painting. 544. h Persley of diverse kinds, 24. g. how to
be sown and ordered, 29. c. d. it served in coronets, 29. d how cooks and
vintners use Parsley, 34. h Persley much practiced, 53. e. the virtues thereof,
ibid. male and female, 53. f. their description, ibid. Persley not admitted to
the table, and why, 54. g the discommodities of persley, ibid. stone Persley,
commonly called Petroselinum, the virtues that it has, 54. l Persolata, what
herb, 229. c. the description, ibid. Persoluta, an herb used in guirlands,
113. d Personages. See Images complete. Personata, an herb See Arcion, or
Clot-burr. Perwinkle, an herb described, 92. m. named Chamaedaphne, 110. m
Perwinkles, fishes, medicinable, 442. i Pestilent infection, by what
preservatives to be prevented, 173. e. 201. b. 202. h. Pestilent air, how to
be corrected, 599. b Petesuccus, a king of Egypt, built the first Labyrinth,
578 i Petilium, what flower, 89. c. the qualities thereof, ibid. Petraea, a
kind of Colewort, 50. l. the description, ibid. the medicines that it
yields, ibid. ePtraea Colewort, the greatest enemy to wine, 50. l. it
kills dogs. 51. a Petridius, an Herbarist and writer, 78. g Petroleum, or
Petrelaeon, a kind of Bitumen, 415, e Petronius Diodotus, an Herbarist and
writer in Physic, 48. h. 228. m. T. Petronius upon his deathbed brake a rich
Cassidoine cup. 603. e Peucedanum, what herb, 229. f. See Harstrang. Peumene,
what kind of Litharge, 474. k Pezitae or Pezici, what Mushromes they be, 8. g
P H
Phacos, what it is, 142. h Phagedaenae, eating sores, 447. f. how cured. ibid.
See Ulcers. Phagedaenae, what it signifies otherwise, 259. d Phalangion, or
Phalangites, an herb, described, 288. l the blew spider Phalangium described,
and the sting thereof. 360. k Phalangium, a venomous spider, the remedies
against the prick, 45. e. 52. l. 54. k. 101. e. 105. c. 106. k. 108. l 110, k.
126. k. 127. b. 153. b. 157. d. 170, g. 173. d 174. i. 179. b. 187. d. 188 m.
190. h. 202. h. 230. i 237. f. 274. g. i. 288. l. 290. i. 360. g. h. l. 413. b
433. e. Phalangium unknown to them in Italy, 360. g. the sundry kinds, ib.
the description, manner of sting, and cure, ibid. Phalaris, an herb, 289. a
Phalaris a tyrant, who caused Perillus to be tormented by his own engine and
torture, 504. h Phalereus Demetrius honored with 360 statues at Athens, 492.
k. the same were all overthrown within one year, ibid. l Phalereon, a
painter, and his workmanship, 550. h Phanias a Physician, made a treatise in
the praise of Nettles, 122. g Phaon of Lesbos, why so beloved by Sappho. 119. c
Pharos the tower in Aegipt, what it cost in building, 478. g Sostratus the
Gnidian was the architect of this watchtower, ibid. the uses of this tower,
578. h Pharicum, a poison, what is the remedy, 323. a Phasganion, an herb.
See Xiphion. Phasiolum. See Isopyron. Phassachates, a precious stone, 623. e
Phellandrion, an herb, 289. a. the description and virtue, ibid. Pheneus, a
river in Arcadie, 411. a Phengites a shining stone, 592. l Phenion, what
herb, 109. c Phidias, the most excellent imageur in stone that ever was. 495.
f. he wrought the noble image of Jupiter Olympius, 497. a. he devised chasing
and embossing in metal, 497. c. his works. 497. d. 566. g Phidias was also a
painter, 532. l. when he flourished, ibid. he painted the shield of Mineruain
Athens, ibid. Philanthropos, an herb, See Aparine, Cliuers, and Erith.
Philemon, a writer of Natural Philosophy, 606. g Philetaeria, an herb. See
Polemonia. Philippensis, the resemblance of a boy in brass, why so called,
503. a Philiscus, a famous painter, 550. h Philistio, a writer in Physic, 40.
k Philocares, an herb, 74. m Philocares a painter, famous for the picture of
Glaucion and his son Aristippus, 527. e Philopes, an herb, 74. m
Philosophers and learned men, what imageurs delighted to represent in brass,
503. e. f. 504. g. k Philoxenus, a painter, 543. f. his works and ready hand,
544. g. Phinthia, a fountain wherein nothing will sink, 404. i Phlegmatic
humors, what does purge, 432. l. 442. l 443. a. See Fleame. Phlegontis, a
precious stone, 630. l Phleon, what herb, 120. l Phloginos, a precious stone,
called also Chrysites, 629. b Phlonides, what herbs, 230. k Phlomos, an
herb. See Lungwort. Phlox, a flower used in guirlands, 91. b Phoenicea, what
herb, and the medicines that it affourdeth, 140. k Phoenicites, a precious
stone, why so called. 629. c a Physical receipt made of the ashes of the bird
Phoenix, a mere imposure and fabulous deceit, 349. d Phoenix, a famous imageur
in brass, and his workmanship, 502. l Phoenix, a great architect and enginer,
575. c Phonos, an herb, why so called, 98. h Phormion, what kind of Alume,
558. i Phragmitis, a reed medicinable, 450. i Frenzy cured best by sleep,
260. k for the Frenzy, appropriat remedies, 37. b. 44. g. 49. f. 57. c 64. i.
66. k. 75. e. 181. a. 187. f. 219. d. 350. g. 389. c 430. m. 573. c.
Phryganium, 391. c Phrygian stone, why so called, 589. d. how calcined, and for
what it is good, 589. c Phrynion, what herb, 231. a. 288. i the effects that
it has, the names and description, 231. a Phthisicke or consumption, what
remedies be respective to it, 43. a. 44. h. 76. i. 127. e. 129. c. 173. c. 181.
d. 183. d 199. f. 200. l. 202. h. 224. k. 247. d. 259. c. d. 303. d. 317. e
318. h. k. 319. d. e. 320. g. 336. i. k. 388 g. 412. k. 446 k 588. g. Phu, or
Setwall, the virtues that it has, 104. l Phycites, a precious stone, why so
called, 629. c Phycos Thalassion. See Reike and Sea-weed. Phyllon, what herb,
123. a. 288. m Physet, a term of Lipidaries, what it signifies. 631. e
Physic flourished about the Peloponnesiacke war, and was professed by
Hippocrates, 373. d Physic nature is simple, 176. k. that is the best, ibid.
Physicians well rewarded in old time for their cures, 344. h Physic drugs far
fet and compounded, Pliny inveigheth against, 137. d. e. 176. l Physic in
old time consisted of simples, 211. d. 242. h Physic most properly handled in
the Greek tongue. 346. l against the abuse in Physic and of Physicians, an
inuectine, 347. a. c. 348. h. i. 349 a Physic noted for much incertitude and
no soliditie, 343. d againfull art, ibid. many times changed, 345. d Physic
fathered upon canonized gods, 343. d Physic, when it was regarded at Rome,
346. k. l Physic and Physicians, the occasion of many enormities and
misdemeanors, 347. e Physicians in Rome of great name, and revenues by yearly
fees, 344. k Physicians are not chosen and called as Judges. Mintmasters and
others, 347. b. c Physicians arguing about their patients, hinder the cure,
345. c. many nations live without Physicians, but not without Physic. 345. d
Physic long ere it was entertained at Rome, 345. e soon rejected, ibid. 349.
b M. Cato an enemy to the Greek Physicians, 346 g. h he condemned not
Physic, 346. i he lived according to Physic of Simples, and so maintained
himself and family in good health, 346. i. k Physiognomists, who they were,
539. d. See Metoposcopi. Phyteuma, an herb, 288. l
P I
Pibble stones not good for building unless they be bound with strong mortar,
593. c Piconia, a spring, 408. g Picris, a kind of Lectuce or Cichorie, 241.
why so called 99. d. 127. e. Pictores, a surname to the house of the Fabij,
wherefore 525. f. the answer of a Dutch Ambassador as touching a Picture, 527.
b. Pictures lively for the memorial of men, 522. k. much esteemed in old time,
524. g Pictures inserted within books by M. Varro, 524. g Atticus wrote a
treatise of Pictures. ibid. M. Agrippa his oration as touching removing of
Pictures out of private houses and setting them up in public places, 527. c
Picture of Nero, Colosse-like in cloth, 120 foot high, 531. h burnt with
lightening, ibid. Pictures of sword fencers, and their fight, who devised, 532.
i. Pictures unfinished, more admired than the perfect, 550. k. l Proud
pictures, when they were first entertained at Rome, 482. l. Pignitis, a kind of
earth, 559. f. the operation, 560. g the sea-Pike Lupus, how witty he is to
avoid nets, 427. e how he and the hook part after he is caught therewith, 428.
g. Pillars in building, of four sorts, 594. a. Dorick what they be, ib.
Ionicke, ib. Tuscanicke, ibid. Corinthian, ibid. Atticke, 595. b proportion of
Pillars, of their length to the building, of height to their thickness, 595. b
Piles and painful swelling bigs in the fundament, how to be cured, 105, c.
106. l. 120. i. 134. g. 139. c. 158. l 160. h. 161. c. d: f. 194. g. 169. e.
172. g. 174, l. 193. b 196. h. 255. f. 256. g. 272. i. 278. h. 393. a. 306. i.
333. d 351. a. e. 352. k. See more in fundament. Pilewort. See Celendine. Pills
purgative. 252. h Pills of goats dung oodg for the eyesight. 325. a Pimper
nell the herb, 234. i. the diverse kinds and their description, ibid. Pimples
rising upon sweat how to be repressed, 161. e Pimples red in the face or skin,
by what remedies cured. 37. a. 44. i. 47. c. 52. i. 55. e. 65. e. 70. k. 76. g.
173. c 184. k. 187. e. 320. h. 327, d. 328. h. 377. d. 421. e. 443. c 516. h.
Pin and web, what medicines do take away. 100. l. 119. d 144. i. See more in
Eyes. Pine-nuts or apples their virtues in Physic, 171. c Pionie or Poeonie
the herb most ancient, 214. why so called. ib. the description, ib. 282. k.
two kinds, the male and female, 282. l. the virtues in Physic, 214. i danger
in digging up the roots, 282. l. m Pip in pullaine how to be helped, 44. m.
189. c. 193. d Pipes for water conduits of clay baked, 411. d Pipes of Lead,
411. e Pipes of sundry sizes, ibid. Pipes Denariae, Quinariae, ibid. Piperitis
the herb, why so called, 34. g. it is named Siliquastrum, 64. g. the
description, ib. the virtues, ibid. Pismires in a garden how to be killed, 32.
k. they are medicinable, and their eggs likewise used in medicines for the
ears, 369. b Pismires cure bears when they be sick, ibid. Pissasphaltum,
what it is, 183. f. 557. b. Natural and Artificial, 183. f Pissaeleon, what
kind os pitch, 179. e Pissing blood, how to be cured, 111. a. 180. k. 195. c.
199. b 205. a. 254. m. Pissing with difficulty how helped, 124. g. 171. c See
Urine. Pistana, what herb, 100. h Pit-waters, when coldest, 410. g. when they
decrease and rise, 410. h Pitch of diverse kinds, 183. b. what Pitch is best,
183. h the several uses of all the kinds of Pitch, ibid. Pitch agrees well
with oil, 176. i stone Pitch, 183. b Pitch tree, what virtues it yields
medicinable, 181. c Pituitaria, what herb, 149. a Pityocampae, what worm,
362. h. the remedies against it. 157. c. 160. k. 318. h. where it breeds,
362. h. how to be prepared for use in Physic, 362. i Pityusa, what herb,
182. g. the description and medicinable virtues thereof. ibid.
P L
for the Plague, a remedy. 155. d Plaiers and Comoedians, what imageurs
delighted to pourtray in brass, 503. f Plane tree, the medicinable virtues
that it has, 184. k Plantaine the herb, 223, b. two kinds of it, ib. the
description, 223. c Plaster both Natural and Artificial, 595. d. e. how to be
made and wrought, 595. e. the use thereof in building, 395. e. f. C. Proculeins
in a fit of the stomacke-paine, drank Plastre and willingly killed himself,
595. f Plaster taken inwardly, h^w the danger may be avoided, 160. k. 318. h.
Plaste, who they be, 552. h Plastice, what Art, 494. h. 552. h. See Potterie.
Plate of diverse fashions, 480. k inconstancy of men in the variety thereof,
ibid. Plate vessel of silver and gold, and the abuse thereof in Rome, 463. f a
captain displaced for having fine pound weight in silver Plate, 481. b
Pompeius Paulinus banished for having 12 pound weight of silver plate in the
camp, 481. c superfluity in Plate, brought upon Rome the plague of civil
war between Sylla and Marius, 481. d. e Plate costly for workmanship, 482.
h C. Gracchus his costly silver Plate, in regard of the curious engrauing, 482.
h excess in Plate, when it came generally into Rome, 482. i a merry speech of
Carthaginian Ambassadors as touching the Plate of the old Romans, 481. c
Platters called Patinarum Paludes, 554. b Platyopththalmon, why Stimmi or
Antimonie is so called, 473. e. Platys, abroad Tendon, 255. c a Plethoricall
body, or rankness of blood, how to be taken down, 443 a Pliniana, what
cherries, 12. m Plistonicus, a Greek writer in Physic, 35. c Plumtree, and
the medicinable virtues thereof, 169. c Plumbago, an herb, 361. k. 359. c
Plumbago, a fault or blemish in the Emeraud, 612. k Plumbum, a disease in the
eyes, how to be cured, 236. k Pluresie or Pleuresie, with what medicines it is
cured, 40. k 57. d. 63. c. 65. a. 67. d. 75. a. 104. h. l. 105. a. 107. e. 128.
i 129. f. 134. l. 135. d. 144. i. 150. g. 167. d. 173. e. 180. g. k 184. l.
186. i. 193. a. 196. m. 198 i. 200. l. 248. h. 255. b 271. d. 287. f.
P O
small Pock^ and such like eruptions, how to be cured, 418. m 421. c. 422. h.
437. d. 443. b. ale-Pocks about the nose how to be healed, 128. h Poecile, the
gallerie, at Athens, why so called, 523. f Poenalties at Rome levied at the
first, of boeufes and muttons, and not of come, 455. a Poenicum, what stone,
592. g Poets ignorant in Cosmographie, 606, g Polea, what it is, 330. i
Polemonia, an herb, thought to be Sauge de Bois, 230. i Polemonia an herb how
it took that name, 220. k. why it is named Chiliodynama, ^bid. the
description, ibid. Polenta, what it is, 139. a. the medicinable virtues
thereof, ibid. Polia, a precious stone, 630. m Polion an herb, highly
commended by Musaeus and Hesiodus, 211. a Polium, an herb, 88. i. two kinds
thereof, and the virtues, ibid. commended much by some, and condemned again by
others, 106 g. h Pollio Asinius erected a Bibliotheque or Library at Rome 523,
f. he furnished it with statues and images of rare workmanship, 569. a Pollio
Romilius his Apothegme as touching honied wine and oil, 136. m Pollution or
shedding of seed in sleep upon weakness, by what remedies it is cured, 46.
l. 48. g. h. 58. k. 59. c. 70. i 256. l. 518. l. Polyanthemon, an herb, 286.
m. called Batrachion, ibid. Polybius, a Greek writer, 424. l Polycles, an
imageur, and his works, 502. l Polycletus, a famous imageur in brass, 488. i
he used Diliacke metal, ibid. his exquisit works, 497. e he brought the Art
of founderie into a method, 497. f diverse pieces of his making, ibid.
Polyclitus a writer, 403. f Polycnemon an herb, described, 265. f. the
virtues, 266. g Polycrates the tyrant his ring, and stone in it, 449. b. it was
a Sardonax, 601. a. he wilfully threw into the deep sea, 600. l. he found it
again in a fishes belly, 601. a Polygala, an herb, why so called, 288. i
Polygnotus, a famous painter, 484. k. his devises and inventions, 533. e. his
rare workmanship, ibid. his liberal mind, ibid, f. how he was honored by the
states of Greece, 534. g Polygnaton, what herb, 123. a. 287. a Polygonum, an
herb, 287. a. why so called, ibid. Polygynaecon, what picture, of Atheman his
drawing, 548 h Polypus, an ulcer in the nose, 251. b. See Nose ulcers.
Polypodium, what herb, 251. a. the description, ibid. why called also Filicula,
ib. the virtues, ib. the offenses that it works, 251. b Polyrrhizon, what
herb, 216. e. 289. a Polyrrhizos, what herb, 226. i. the virtues, ibid. k
Polytricha and Callitricha, two capillare herbs, their description and how
they differ, 232. i Polytrix, a precious stone, 630. l Polyzonos, a precious
stone, ibid. a Pomado for chaps in lips or face, 327. f Pomadoes of other
sorts, 320, k. l Pomegranats, their properttes in Physic, 164. k. whether to
be eaten in a fever or no, ibid. Pomegranate rind, what it serves for, 164, l.
why called Malicorium, ibid. Pomona compared with Ceres, Flora, and Tellus, by
the way of Prosopopoea, 145. c. f Pompeius Lenaeus, a Grammarian and Linguist,
209. f he translated into Latin the medicinable receipts found in K.
Mithridates his closet, 209. f. Pompeius Magnus his glorious third triumph,
602. k what gold, silver, jewels, and precious stones, he then showed, 602 k. l
Pliny enueigheth bitterly against Pompey for this triumph, 602. m his
bounteous liberality in the said triumph, 603. a his triumph set the Romans a
longing after pearls and precious stones, 602. h he brought Cassidoine cups
first into Rome, 603. c Pompholix, what it is, and how it differs from
Spodos, 511. d. e. the virtue thereof, 511. e Pompions. See Melons. Pond-weed.
See Water Speak. Ponticae, the precious stones of Pontus, 629. b. the sundry
sorts, ibid. Pontifie or high Priest letting fall a morsel of meat at the
bourd was ominous, 298. h Poplar white, a tree, what virtues it has in
Physic. 185. a Poppaea the Empress bathed ordinarily in asses milk, for to
make her skin fair, soft, and smooth, 327. c Poppaea shod her horses with
gold, 480. m she kept five hundred she asses for to bath with their milk,
327. d Poppies of three kinds, 30. l the seed of the white Poppie confected.
ib. It seasoned bread, 30. m white Poppie heads medicinable, 67. c black
Poppie. 31. a. wandering Poppie, ibid. the description of wandering Poppies, 68.
l Poppies wild, their several kinds and virtues, 67. e. f. 68. g K. Tarquinius
the Proud topt off Poppie heads, 31. a what he meant thereby, 31. b Poreblind
or short sighted, how to be helped, 367. c the Porcellane shelfish stated
Periander his ship at sea, 426 i consecrated at Gnidos, 426. i Porcius Cato a
great student, and looking pale therewith, 61. d. his scholars affected to
look pale like him by eating Cumin, ibid. Pourcuttle fish Polypus, how he
auoideth the hook like to catch him, 427. f Pourcuttles not to be sodden with
salt, and why, 447. a Porphyrite marble, 573. c Porpuis fish described, 436. g.
his sins venomous, ibid. The remedy, ibid. his fat medicinable, 440. l Porret
a kitchen herb, how to be sown and ardered, 21. a. b the medicinable virtues
thereof, 42. l. See more in Leeks, Porus, what stone, 587. b Pourfiling, what it
is, 535. d. the hardest point in painting, ibid. Pose, or a cold, what medicines
do break and resolve, 65. b 289. e. 304. k. 377. f. See Rheum. Posidianus, a
fountain, why so called, and the nature of it, 401. e. Posidonius, a renowned
grauer, 483. e Potamogeiton, what herb, 250, g. the description according to
Castor, and how he usedit, ib. the aduersatiue nature of it to Crocodils, 250.
h Peteron, what herb, 231. a. 288. i. the description, ib. k Pothos, what
flower, 92. k Potterie or working in clay more ancient than founderie of brass
and other imagerie, 494. h. 552. 1 places ennobled for Potters work, 553. d. e
Potterie or workmanship in cley, how it began, 551. e Potterie ware, of great
use and estimation, 553. d. e Potterie, mother of founderie or casting metal,
552. l much practiced in Tuscan, 552. m a confraternitie of Potters instituted
at Rome by K. Numa 553. c. manifold uses of Potterie and works in cley, ibid.
Posis, a famous Potter, and his fine works, 552. k excellent workmen in
Potterie as well for cley as plaster and alabastre, 551. e. f. 552. g. h. i.
etc. See Plasticae and Plastae. Poisons septicke or corrosiue, their remedies,
323. c. See Corrosiue and Causticke. preservatives against poisoned drinks
given by witches and sorcerers, 67. d. 231. d. e. f. and deinceps. Poisons
cold, how to be corrected, 159. b. 187. c Poison worn in the collets of rings,
456. k. 458. l Poisons, whether they may be put down in writing or no, 213. c.
d. Poisons may be made counterpoysons, 215. d for Poisons in general,
remedies, 38. k. 75. c. See Countrepoysons.
P R
Praecordiall parts, what is meant by them, 380. g pain and gripes about those
parts, how to be eased, 153. e 163. c. 380. g. 413. c. bruised or hurt how to be
cured, 274. g. See Midriffe. Prae^estina, the best goldfoile, why so called,
465. e the Praeseruatiue confection of K. Mithridates, how it is made, 172. k a
Praeseruatiue against all misfortunes, 193. e Prasion, i. Horehound, an herb,
74. m. See Horehound. Prasius, a kind of precious stone of a green color,
619. d the several kinds and their description, ibid. Praxagoras, a Physician
and writer, 44. g. he used herbs only in all his cures, 242. k Praxiteles, a
most excellent imageur and grauer, 483. e he practiced as well to cut in marble
as to cast metal, 500. i. his works, 500. k. 566. h. i. l. m. 567. 2. b his
good nature and benignity, 500. m Pressior, what kind of Sinopre, 528. l. the
price and use, ib. Prester, a venomous fly or worm, what remedies against it,
69. e. 153 b. 196. g. 431. b. 434. h Precious stones, 454. i Precious stones
taking name frrom the parts of man's body, 630. h. from beasts, 630, i. from
plants, herbs, seeds, and diuersthings, 630. k Precious stones engendered new
daily, 631. b all precious stones fairer for being boiled in honey, 631. c rules
how to know and distinguish Precious stones, 631. e how Precious stones may be
artificially falsified, 631. f how such falsified stones may be found out, 632.
g when Precious stones are to be tried, 632. h stones that will not be
engraven, 632. i all Precious stones may be cut with a Diamond, 632. i rivers
yielding precious stones, ibid. lands wherein be best Precious stones, ibid.
Precious stones have been of men diversely esteemed, 615, a Prick of vrchin,
hedghog, or such like how to be cured, 306 i Prickly herbs, 97, d. they are
medicinable, 118. k why nature has armed them with Pricks, 118. (...). l
Prick-madam, what herb, 237, c. why it is called ^rithales, ibid. Priuet or
Primprint, a small tree or shrub, what uses it affourdeth in Physic, 189. c
Priuities or members of generation, sore and grieved, by what medicines to be
cured, 385, a, b. 509, e Itching and fretting, how to be eased, 183, a. 385. a
exulcerat, how to be healed, 306, i. 385, b. 445. a carbuncle, how to be
remedied, 318, m. 392. h impostumat or vexed with botches, how to be helped,
444, l, m. werts arising there how to be taken away, 385. a Privy parts, (...)
in general, what medicines do help and comfort, 42. g. 50. h. 63, c. 70, l.
75, b. 77, f. 101. d 111, b. 120, i. 138, k. 165, a, b, e. 195, a, c. 196, g.
197. a, d 208, g. 254, i. 255, d. 257, (...). 273, a. 320, i 333, a. 351, a, b
353, a. 558, l. Priuities of men diseased, how cured, 510, k Priuities or
natural parts of women, by what medicines comforted and preserved from
maladies, 136, k. 141, f 181, b. 301, b. 509, e. having a schirre, how to be
mollifie^ 207, c if the neck be ouerstreight, how to be enlarged, ibid.
excoriat how to be healed, 397, b Prodicus, the author of the Physic
Iatraleptice, 344. g Prodigies, whether they may be auerted and altered by
words or no, 295, d K. Proetus his daughter cured of her melancholy, by what
means, 217, b Prometheus pourtraied with a ring of iron, and wherefore, 455,
a. thought to be the first deviser of wearing a stone in a ring, 600, k
Propolis, what it is, 135, c. the virtues medicinable that it has, ib from
whence Bees gather it, 185, b Prosedamum, what infirmity in horses, 257, c
Proserpinaca, an herb, 289, b Proteus, a great sercerer, and his
transformations, 372, k Protogenes, a famous Imegeur in brass, and a cunning
painter withal, 504, k. 537, e. 543. c he had this fault, that he knew not how
to make an end, 537, e. his kindness to Apelles his concurrent and chalenger,
538, i. not regarded by the Rhodians his own countrymen, 539, e. poor at the
beginning, 542 g over curious in his workmanship, ibid. his famous I^lysius
with his dog, pictured, 542. h why he lived of Lupins only, when he painted
this table, 542, i. he was helped by fortune in the finishing there^f, 542, l.
he followed his work when Rhodes his native city was beleaguered, 543, a. his
answer to K. D^metrius for so doing, ib. diverse pictures of his making, 543, a,
b, c he gave himself to curious works, 543, c Protypa, what they are, and who
devised them, 532, g Prytaneum, the town hall of Cizicum, 581, b
P S
Psaronium, what kind of marble, 591. f Psegma, what it is, 512. k Ps^ud
^chusa, what herb it is, 124. m Pseudis domon, what kind of building in
masonrie, 593, f Pseudodictamo^, what herb, 225. d Pseudosp^ces, bastardw^sps,
390, i. their description, ib. their effects in curing quartans, ibid.
Psilothrum, what plant, 149. c Psimmythium. See C^ruse. Psoricum, what
medicine, 509. f Psycotrophon, an herb. See Betonie. Psylli people
withstanding poison. 95. b Mountebanks, 231. a by touching or sucking only,
they cure the sting of serpents, 298. m Psyllion, an herb. See Fleawoort.
P T
Ptera in building, what they are, 579. b Pteris an herb. See Fern. Pterygia,
what imperfections or accidents about the nails, 101, d. how they are cured,
150, g. 245, e Pterygiae, a fault in Beryll, 613. f Ptisana, husked barley,
139, c. the medicinable virtues thereof, ibid. Hippocrates made one whole book
of it, 140. k K. Ptolomaeus his exceeding wealth, 480. g his royal and
sumptuous court that he kept, ibid. K. Ptolomaeus Philadelphus erected an
Obeliske fourscore cubits high, 575. e Ptyas, a serpent with a deadly sting,
how remedied, 413. b why so called, 306. g
P V
Publicans at Rome, Fermers to the state, became Judges, 460, l. the middle
degree between commons and Senators, ibid. Puffes, a kind of Mushroms, 133. a
Puffin of the sea, called Pastinaca Marina, a venomous fish, how the poysonfull
prick is cured, 142, i. 323, e 4^, i. 433, e. 436, h. Puffin pursued and
plagued by the Lamprey Galeos, 430, h how a meat may be made of a Puffin, 436.
h Puffin liver medicinable, 440. l Pullain, how they may be kept from the
weazill, 399, b from ravening birds, 150. k Pulmo Marinus, a seafish
medicinable, 444, g the strange virtue thereof to give light, 450, k Pumices in
architecture, what they be, 591, b Pumish stones, 591, c. their use to slicke
the skin and polish books, etc. ibid. where the best be found, ibid. how to be
calcined and prepared, 591. c Punaises, how to be killed and kept away, 449, d.
See Wall-lice. Puppies or little wh^lps laid to the bare body, draw the disease
from the patient into themselves, 380, g, h. 383, e Purgative medecins by the
seege, 44, g. 45, e. 51, c 52, g. 56, g. 68, m. 69, a, c. 104, i. 108, g. 110,
l 126, h. 127, e. 149, d. 160, m. 170, g. 171, a. 174. g 182, h. 185, c. 186,
h. 187, d. 188, g. 198, k. 216, h 250, k. l. 251, e. 252, l. 253, c. 267, e.
272, l, m. 273, c 278, l. 283, c. 288, g. 291, b. 403, b. 412, g. 413, d. 442,
l 443, a. Purgetiues in curing maladies, condemned by Asclepiades and most
Physicians in old time, 243, f Purgatiues, how they may lose their operation,
298, h. Purgation how to be stayed, 432. m Pursiuenesse, how to be helped, 154,
g Purple fishes medicinable, 437, d. their shells medicinable, 438, h how to
color a purple die, 421, a Purple embroidered coats, by whom worn in Rome,
459. d Pushes or piles called Pani, arising commonly in the emunctories, how to
be discussed or brought to maturitie, 36. h 70, l. 72, m. 158, l. 178, g, h.
180, k. 138, a. 183, d. 192, m 206, l. 208, g. 279, e. 282, h. 303, b. 307, c.
309, d. 316, k 320, g. 370, l. other Pushes, or angry biles, how to be
repressed or resolved without suppuration and breaking, 72, g. 140, l. 142, g
144, k. 166, i. 167, d 180, g. 560, h. Puteolana, a kind of Lead litharge, 474,
k Putrefaction of flesh, how to be cured, 208, g
P Y
Pycnocomon, what herb, 251, a, the description, ib, and 262, h. Pycton, a
Physician, 370, k a Pyramid erected upon Mausoleum by the hand of Pythis a
famous workman and architect, 568, l Pyramides in Egypt bewray the vain
glory of those princes, 576, l. why they made such monuments, 576. m where they
were situat, 577, a, b Pyramides of Aegipt testified by many writers, yet
known it is not what prince built which Pyramid, 577. c in building of one
Pyramid, the number of workmen, and how many years were employed, 577, c how
many talents of silver expendedin radish, garlic, and onions, for the
workmen about one Paramis, 577, d the description and measure of the largest
Pyramid, ibid. the height of these Pyramides how it should be taken, Thalis
Milesius taught, 577, f Pyreicus, a famous painter, 544, h. he practiced to
paint simple and base trifles, 544, i. surnamed thereupon Rhyparographos, ibid.
Pyren a precious stone, 630, (...) Pyrgoteles, a famous Lapidarie and cutter in
precious stone 601, d. he only was allowed to engraue the image of K.
Alexander the Great in a stone, ibid. Pyrites, the Marcasine stone, why so
called, 588. l where it is found, ibid, how calcined, ibid. for what uses in
Physic it serves, 588. m vncalcined how it is medicinable, ibid. Pyrites, a
precious stone, 630. l Pyromachus, a cunning imageur, 402, l. his works, ibid.
Pyrrhus an imageur, and his works, 502, l Pyrrhop^cilos, a kind af marble. See
marble Syenites. Pythagoras, a Physician, 66. l Pythagoras superstitious in
observing numbers and letters, 299, d. Pythagoras the Philosopher honored with
a statue at Rome, for being the wisest man, 492, (...) Pythagoras of Rhegium a
famous Imageur, and his works, 498, k. Pythagoras of Samos an Imageur, and his
works, 498, l, m he resembled the other Pythagoras so near, that hardly he
could be known from him, ib. Pytheas a writer, 428. (...) Pythe as an
admirable grauer, 483. f. his workmanship exceeding costly, ib. his works,
483, f. 484. g Pytheus the rich Bithynian, 480. g Pythiae, Priestresses and
Propheteesss, 569, d Pythios, a kind of bulbe, 19. b Pythis, an excellent
mason and architect, 568. l Pyxicanthus, a bush, the berries whereof are
medicinable, 195, d.
Q V
QVadrans, a small piece of brass coin at Rome, 463. b stamped with punts or
small boats, ibid. Quadrigati, silver pieces of coin at Rome, why so called,
463, c. Quaestoria, what goldfoile, 465. e Quaking chilling for cold, how to be
helped, 136. g Quarrels and debate, what causes, 342. i Querne-stones ready
framed, found naturally in the ground, 588, i. turning about of the own
accord, ibid. Quartane agues untoward to be cured in old time by any good
course of Physic, 390. h against the Quartan ague, appropriat remedies, 44,
l. 67, a 109, e. 120, i. 122, k. 126, k. l. 151, d. 219, e. 223, d 260, i, k.
298, c. 301, b. 302, h. 309, e. 310, i. 311, b, c 312, i. 315, a, d. 335, f.
336, g. 356, i. 390, t, k, l, m 391, a, b, c. 413, a. 432, m. 435, a. 445, f.
446, g, h, i 557, c. Quotidian ague, how cured, 310, i. 311, b. 335, f Quick
brimstone. See Brimstone and Sulphur-vif. Quicke-siluer, a poison, the remedies
thereof, 121, c. 153. b 318, h. 323, a. 364, h. Quicksilver Natural where it
is found, 473. a the power thereof, ib. it loves gold, 473. b it purifieth it,
ib. the great affinity between gold and it, 473, c. it is rare, ib. Quid pro
Quo in Physic, dangerous and condemned, 348, l. Quicke-fire stones, what they
be, 589. a good for espials in a camp, ibid. they mill strike fire, ibid.
Quinarius, a piece of silver coin at Rome, of what value, 463, a, b. Quinces,
for what good, 163, d oil of Quinces, called Melinum, what virtues it has,
64, g Quindecemvirs at Rome, and their college, 295, b Quinquesolium. See
Cinquefoile. Quinqucviri, 347, c. delegats chosen with good circumspection,
ibid. Quich-grasse described, 206, i. why called Gramen Pernassi, 206, k. the
virtues that it has, ibid.
R A
RAbirius, a writer in Physic, 308, g Radicula, what herb it is, 9, e.
where it grows, ib. what use there is of it, ib. what names it has, 219, l
the medicinable virtues that it has, ib, why it is called Aureum Poculum, ib.
Radishes described, with their properties, 16, i, k Radishes of excessive
bigness, 17. a Radishes of three sorts, 16, k. the Radish Agrion, Armon, or
Armoracia, which some call Leuce, 16. m Radish seed, where to be sown, 17. a
Radish roots how to be ordered as the grow, 17, a, b best Radishes in Aegipt,
and why, 17, c Radish medicinable, ibid. Radish highly esteemed among the
Greeks. ibid. Radishes cure the phthisicke, 17, d Radish presented in gold to
Apollo. ibid. in the praise of Radish a book compiled, 17, e Radishes mar
teeth, and polish yvorie, ib. Radishes their medicinable virtues, 39, b
Radishes wild, and their virtues, 39, a Radishes corrected by Hyssope, 40, g
Ragwort an herb. See Orchis and Satyrion. Rai-fish or Skate, medicinable, 439.
d Rain water kept in cesterns, whether it be wholesome or no 406, g. it
alters the nature of some river waters for the time, 410, k. it soonest does
corrupt, 406, k Raisins, of what operation they are in Physic, 148, k
especially, cleansed from their stones, ibid. Rams how they shall get none but
ram-lambs, 400, g Ramises a king of Egypt erected an obeliske of one entire
stone, a hundred foot high wanting one, 574. l his devise to fasten his own
son to the top end of it at the rearing, 573, a, b Ranunculus, an herb. See
Crowfoot. Rapes of two kinds, 16, g a Rape of lead offered to Apollo, 17. d a
Rape roasted by Manius Curious for his refection at the table, 38, k Rapes
medicinable, ibid. Raspir a fish, and the nature thereof. 428. i Raspts, why
called in Latin Rubus Idaeus, 197. a the medicinable virtues that it has,
197. a Rats and mice how to be killed, 124, h. 128, l. 195, f Rat of Indic. See
Ichneumon. Ravens thought to be ill at ease all Summer long, 355. a Raw places
how to be skinned, 565, f. See Galls.
R E
Reate waters medicinable, 403. c Red gum in children, how to be cured, 127, c.
306, i. 307, b Reeds and canes serving in Physic, 450, i Refrigeratiue or
cooling medecins, 46, g. 47, e. 67, c. 103, e 120, k. 131, e. 136, g. 142, h.
147, a. 155, d. 167, b 189. d. 192. h. 305. a. 221. e. 223. d. 236. g. 237. e
250, g. 259. c. 287. b. 290. g. 473 d. 474. h. 475. a. 511. f 529. f. 560. i.
591. e. the Regard of the eye in some cases of men held to the venomous. 298. i
Reins in the back pained how to be eased, 37. a. e. 40. k 42. h. 53. b. 70. h.
175. b. 283. a. 304. l. 305. c. 329. e. Reins, with what medicines they be
purged, 77, e. 104, l 126, l. 443, a. for the infirmities of the Reins,
comfortable medicines, 148k 171, c. 181, f. 182, g. 206, i. 248, h. 275, c. 290,
i. 252, b Reits or Sea-weeds medicinable, 276. g. 437. e. as good as treacle,
ib. sundry kinds going under the name of Alga, ib. they serve the dyer for a
sure color, ibid. Relapse in agues how to be prevented, 391, d a Remedy for
all diseases, 357, a Remeus, a writer, 462. l Remora, a fish. See Echeneis.
Rennet of Fawn or Hind-calfe, is most adverse to serpents, 321. f Repercussiue
medecines, 139. a. 158. g. 174. l. 278. c 284. h. 290. g. 424. g. Reseda, what
herb, 289. e. the virtues thereof, ibid. Resolutiue medicines. See Discussiue.
Restauratiues for them that be fallen away, 41. c. 127. e 130. i. 134. h. 136.
g. 139. d. 155. d. 162. m. 167. c. 171. c 181, d. 259, b. 318, g. 413, c. 446,
i. Restharrow an herb, 98. l. the description, ibid.
R H
Rhacoma, 289. b. what root, ib. the description, ibid. Rhagion, a kind of
spider, 360. i. the description, ibid. the manner of prick or sting, ib, Rham,
what kind of bramble, 197, b. their several kinds, and the description, ib.
the medicinable virtues, ib. Rhapeion, an herb. See Leontopetalon. Rhaphanos
Agria, what herb, 253 b the clarified juice thereof is medicinable, 253. c the
dose, ibid. Rhaponticke. See Centaurie the great. Rhetoric, a gainful
profession in old time, 470. h Rheumatisms, what they be, and how cured, 124.
h. 133, c 223. c. 310. l. Rheums or distillations how to be dried and stayed,
43. a. c 44, h. 53, e. 55, b, d. 66, g. 70, k. 72, h. 141, a, b. 149, a 153. f.
159. f. 161, c. 172. k. 177, d. 197. d. 224, l 236, i. 249, f. 281, e. 287, b.
303, e. 309, d. 370, m 380, m. 412, k. 414, h. 437, c. 443, a. 519, c. 531, c
360, h. Rheumes thin, how to be thickened, 194. i spitting Rheums, how to be
stayed, 183, e. 239, e Rheum into the eyes, how to be cured. See Eyes
watering. Rhexias, what herb, 25, b. the description, ibid. Rhinochisia, 278.
l Rhodites, a precious stone, 630. m Rhododaphne. See Oleandre. Rhododendron.
See Oleander. neither of them both has a name in Latin, 192. g Rhodope a
famous harlot, built one of the Pyramides, 578 g Rhodora, what herb, 205. d
Rhoeas, what Poppie, 31. a. how it differs from Anemone, 109. d Rholus, one
of the architects that built the Labyrinth in Lemnos, 579. c Rhopalos, an
herb. See Nenuphar. Rhus a shrub, haeth no Latin name, 193, g. the
description, ib. the medicinable virtues that it has, ibid. why it is called
the Curriers shrub, ibid. Rhyparographus. See Pyreicus.
R I
Ribwort. See Plantaine. Ricinus an herb, 161, a. the seed, berries, and oil
thereof, what properties it has in Physic, and otherwise, ibid. Ricini in
Mulberrie trees, what they be, 170. i Riding on horseback, in what cases good,
303. d Rings of gold worn at first upon the left hand, 455, b the reason
thereof, 456. g Rings of iron used by Romans and Lacedaemonians, 455. b Rings
upon the fingers a bad example, 455. a the Rings of Giges, 455, b. Ring
diversely named, 455, d Rings of gold, to whom allowed first at Rome, ibid. how
used, 455. e wedding Rings of iron, ibid. golden Rings not known in Homers
time, ibid. f a law for wearing of Rings, 460. h when Rings were worn
ordinarily at Rome, 456. m Rings worn at Rome by Senators only, as a badge
of their honorable place, 457. c when they were worn more ordinarily by
Senators, Gentlemen and Commons, 457. c three modij of Rings at the battle
of Cannae, ibid. a Ring caused the quarrel between Drusus and Coepio, from
whence arose the Marsians war, ibid. ancient Scnatours wearing Rings of iron
only, 457. f Rings with signets to seal, 458. g Rings set with precious
stones, ibid. Rings massy sealing without a stone, 458. h Rings first put upon
the fourth finger of the left hand, ibid. an order or regularitie set down by
Tiberius, as touching the use of Rings upon the fingers, and whereupon, 460. h
the ceremony of laying a Ring upon the table before sitting down to meat, for
what purpose, 297. d Ring with a signet or sign manuell, upon what finger
worn in Rome, 458, k. the cause and occasion of much mischief, ibid. l. used
for assurance in contracts, ibid. it began by occasion of usury, ibid.
Ringworms, by what remedies they be killed, 36, g. 49, e 124, h. 128, g. 139,
a. 146, k. 158, m. 172, i. 187, e 194, h. 252, h. 265, d. 285, a. 300, i. 307,
c. 413, b 419, b. Riparis, what Swallows, 378, i Risings in share and other
emunctories, how to be repressed or resolved, 122. g. 126. l. 137. b. See more
in Groine, Pushes, and Pani. Riuels or wrinckles in the skin of women's faces,
how to be laid even and smooth, 38. l. 103. b. 127. d. 150. h. 161. b 171. d.
184. h. 268. k. 319. e. 327. c. 416. b. 437, c, d 439, a. 441, a. River waters,
406. l what Rivers ordinarily have bad waters, 406. l what Rivers yield
wholesome waters, ibid. Rivers at all times not of like taste, 410. i the water
of the same River not at all times alike wholesome, 410. i River fresh turning
to be salt, 411. b Rivers of salt where, 414. l. m
R O
hearb-Robart. See Geranium. against robbing how to be secured, 315. d Rocket
the herb, good in a sal^d with Lectuce, 29. a the medicinable virtues thereof,
55. e why called by the Greeks Euzomos, 55. f Rocking, a good means to
procure sleep, 303, e. good also for health, ibid. Romans a second Sun-shining
to the world, 269. e Romans in an ill name for covetousness, 463. c
Romeadmirable for stately aedifices, 581. d. c Roof of sores how to be taken
off, 141. d. 448. h Roots of diverse kinds, 19. d Roots lying hidden all winter
season, 13. d Root of an herb broken within the ground, thirty foot long, 214.
g. Roots less effectual, if the herbs be suffered to seed, 291. f Ropes made
of rushes and other matter, 7. a Rose bushes, how to be set or planted, 84. h
Roses graffed, ibid. the Rose bush and the Rose described 83. a use of Roses.
83, b the medicinable virtues of Roses, ib. Roses served up with viands, ibid.
the best Rose, 83. d Roses, their several parts and names to them, 102. h
their distinct virtues, ibid. Rose of Praeneste, 83. 6. of Capua, Miletum,
Trachiniae, and Alabanda, ibid. Rose Spineola, 83. c Rose Centifolie, why so
called, 83. d Rose Campion, 83. c Greek Rose. ibid. the Rose Graecula, ib.
Rose Mosceuton, ibid. Rose Coroneola, 83. f where the best Roses grow, ib. Rose
of Campaine, 84. g Rose bushes how to be ordered, 84. h Rose leaves how to be
dried, 162. l. m. their virtues, ibid. hasty Roses flouring all winter long,
84. g Roset oil odoriferous, 83. b Roset wine, 102. h Roset oil, ibid. Rose
juice medicinable, 102. i. k Rose of Jericho. See Amomum. water Rose. See
Nenuphar. Rosemary called Libanotis, 34. g Rosemary of two kinds, 193. a in
Rosemarie, what Cachrys is, ibid. Rosat, a rich painters color, 528. i how it
is made of Tripoly or goldsmiths earth died, 530. l. m Roset of Puteoli the
best, and why, 531. a the price of Roset, ibid. Rosins of sundry kinds, 182. h
Rosins dry of Pine and Pitch trees, 182. h the medicinable virtues of all
Rosins, ibid. i. l of what trees the Rosins be best, 182. k. l of what
countries and places the Rosin is best, 182. k Rosins how to be dissolved for
plasters and outward medecins, 182. k. how for potions, ibid. Rostra, the
public place of orations at Rome, why so called, 491. a Rowing upon the water
for what diseases good, 303. d
R V
Rue killed with the touch of a menstruous woman, 308. m Rue a medicinable
herb, 56. k the juice of Rue taken in great quantity is poison, ib. what is
the remedy, ibid. Rue stolen, thriueth best, 23. e when and where to be sown,
29. a. b Rue given in a largess at Rome, 29. b Rue and the Fig Tree, sort well
together, ibid. Rue does propagat, and set it self, 29. c the weeding of Rue
is trouble some, ib. how that may be helped, 56. i Rue a counterpoyson for
Libard-baine, ibid. Rue male and female, 57. b Rue kills the infant newly
conceived, 58. k. l Rubbing of the body makes for health, 303. d hard and
sost, work diverse effects, ib. See more in Frictions. Rubie a precious stone,
616. h why Rubies be called Apyroty. ibid. Rubies of diverse sorts, ibid. Rubies
of India, ib. of the Garamants or Carchedonij, ibid. Rubies of Aethiopia and
Alexandria, 616. i Rubies Alabandines or Almandines, why so called, ibid.
Rubies male and female, with their descriptions, 616. i. k Rubies
Amethystizontes, which they be, 616. i Rubies Syrtitae, what they are, ibid.
Rubies of India called Lithizontes, 616. k Rubies Orchomenian, ibid. m Rubies
Troezenian, ib. Corinthian, 617. a Rubies of Marsils and Lisbon, 617. a Rubies
are much sophisticated, 617. a. how the fraud is discovered, 617. b Rubie
mineral, called Anthracites, ibid. b Rubies of other sorts, ibid. f Rubrica, a
red earth or ruddle in great request in Homers time, 476. g Ruddle or Rubrica,
a painters color, 528. i Rubrica of Lemnos counted the best and most
medicinable, 528. m. Ruddle for carpenters, which is best, 529. b Rumax, what
herb, 73. b Running of the reins how it may be stayed, 72. i. 130. k Ruptures
inward, spasmes, and convulsions, how to be helped, 167. f. 272. l. 385. a.
444. h Rupture when the guts be fallen down, how cured, 444. h. i Rupture
waterish called Hydrocele, how to be healed, 385. c Ruptures in young children
bursten, what remedies, 397. e. f 398. h. against all Ruptures in general,
good medecins, 39. e. 41. d 44, k. 48, g. 58. i. 64, k. 72, l. 75, b. 103, b.
108, k. 123, a, d 128, i, m. 129, c. f. 130, l. 138, h. 142, h. 150, g. 154, g
162, h. 178, m. 179, a, f. 180, g. 186, k. 198, i. 199, c. 248 h 254, g, h, i.
263, d. 264, g. 275, c. 283, e. 286, m. 289, c 290, i. 313, c, d. 320. g. 332,
h. 398, g. Ruscus an herb, 111. a. the virtues, thereof, ibid. bow it is to be
prepared for medicines, ibid. of Rushes or Rishes diverse kinds, and their uses,
100. k Rust of iron, how it is soonest scoured away, 413. c Rust of iron
medicinable, 516. g
S A
SAbine stone, how it will burn of a light fire, 588. l Sacall: the same that
Ambre, 606. k Sacopenum, a physical herb, 30. l. called Sagapenum, 67. d the
virtues which it has, ibid. Sacrificing man's flesh, when forbidden at Rome,
373. f Saffron a medicinable spice, 104. m Saffron the herb and flower, 86. g
how to be set, ib. where is the best, ibid. the manner of choosing Saffron, 86.
h. i how it is used, 86. k the manner of the growing, 99. c Sagda, a precious
stone, 629. d Sagitta, what herb, 110. h Sagmina, what they are, 115. d Salin
Crystal, what it is, 605. a Salads of herbs commended, 12. i. k Salamanders
poison, with what medecins repressed, 56. m 121. c. 150. l. 157. c. 160. k.
318. h. 358. m. 432. h. k 434. i. Salamander of all serpents most dangerous,
358. k. l he destroieth whole nations at once, ibid. by what means, ibid. his
venom is Narcoticke and extreme cold, ibid. of Salamanders, swine feed
without danger, 385. l whether his body do extinguish fire or no, 359. a
Salicastrum what plant, and why so called, 149. c. the virtues thereof, ibid.
Salij the priests, what chaplets of flowers they wore, 82. g Siliunca, an
herb, described, 82. h the use thereof, ibid. 105. f Sal^gem. 415. d Salow.
See Willow. Sal Theriacus, or Theriacalis, a kind of medicinable salt, 366. l.
m. Salpe, a learned and expert midwife, who wrote of Physic, 300. k
Sal-petre, 421. b. how the best is known, ibid. c Salsugo, or Salsilago, what
it is, 417. d Salt seasoneth viands, 176. i Salt be it natural or artificial,
proceeds of two causes, 414. i. Salt in what places made by drying in the
Sun, ibid. k Salt an household gruell, 417. b Salt Spanish, for what infirmities
it is most medicinable, 419. a. Salt compounded for to get an appetite, 416. l
Salt mountains, 415. a Salt mineral, ib. walls and houses built of Salt, ibid.
Salt for Physic, which is best, 416. k Salt growing sensibly in the night
season, 415. b Salt best for poudring or seasoning meat, 416. l Salt
Ammoniacke, 415. b. why so called, ib. the description, ibid. it is
medicinable, 415. c light within earth, heavy above ground, and the reason
why, ib. how it is sophisticat, ib. pit or poole Salt, 415. c the manifold uses
of Salt in Physic, 418. l Salt for the kitchen, which is best, 416. k. l Salt
artificial how it is made, 415. d. of sea water, ib. out of certain springs
or wels, ibid. e. f Salt Spring, 416. g Salt for the table which is best, 416,
k. l Salt made by fire, 416. g Salt black, ibid. Salt made of ashes, ib. of
fish pickle or brine, ibid. h Salt water, for what garden seed it is good, 33.
b poole-Salt, which is best, 416. h seawater Salt which is best, ibid. the
nature and temperature of Salt, 418. l in what seasons and constitutions of
weather, Salt engenders most, 416. i Salt not sparkling in fire, but in water,
416. i Salt of sundry colors, 4^ (...) stoure of Salt. 417. b, c. the
properties thereof, (...) how sophisticated, (...) the nature of Salt, 418
(...) Sales in Latin, what they signify, 416. m. 417. a Salaries, what they
be, 417. a Salaria Uia, a street, why so called, ibid. Salustius Dionysius, a
famous Physician, 440. g Salutio, a surname or addition to the family of the
Scipioes, 523. d Samian earth of two kinds, 559. d Samian stone, 591. a. good
to burnish gold, good also in Physic, ibid. Samolus, an herb; with what
ceremonious circumstances to be gathered, 193. f Samothracia, what they be,
458, i Samothracia, a precious stone, why so called, 629. d Sampier, what
herb, 236. k. the description, 254. k the manifold uses that it has, 254. l
Sampier Savage, 256. l Sand of the sea shore, for what medicinable, 414. i Sand
used to slit and saw marble with, 572. h. i. k Sand for mortar, which is good,
594 k Sand of Puteoli, of a wonderful nature, 554. l Sand of Nilus, wherefore
used at Rome, and elsewhere, 555 a Sandaracha, a painters color artificial,
528. k Sandaracha artificial, how made, 530. g the right color and the price,
ibid. Sandaracha natural, where it is found, 520. m. which is best, ibid. the
qualities thereof, ibid. Sandaresos, a kind of gem, 617. d Sandaser, and
Sandareson, 617. c Sandastros, a kind of gem or precious stone, of the baser
sort 617. c. called by some Garamantites, ib. the description thereof, and why
it is much regarded by the Chaldaeans, 617. d. male and female, ibid. Arabian
and Indian, ibid. which Sandastros is best, 617. e how Sandastros Sandaser,
Sandareson, and Sandaresos, be distinguished, ibid. Sandauer, 416. k Sandix
mineral, a painters color, 528. k Sandix artificial, how made, 530. g the
price of Sandix, 530. h Sandix, Virgil took to be an herb, 530. g Sandragon,
a color of painters, 528. i Sangenon, a kind of Opal, 614. l Sanguis Draconis,
or Sandragon, what it is, 476. g how it is sophisticated, 476 i Sanguin-Rod,
what plant, 189. b the medicinable virtues that it has. ib. Santerna. See
Borax of goldsmiths. the virtues medicinable that it has, 509. c Sapa. See
Cuit. Samphire, a precious stone, 620. l diverse sorts, and which be best, ib.
hard to be cut. ib. which be the male, ib. Sapron, what it is, 318. l Sarcion,
a fault in gems, 612. m Sarcocolla, what it is, 197. c the medicinable virtues
thereof, ibid. Sercophagus a stone, why so called, and the nature thereof, 587.
d. Sarda or Sardoine, a precious stone called the Cornalline, 615. b. it is the
one half of Sardonyx, 616. g Sardoins or Cornalines seal fairest of any
other, 618. h they be found much about Sardeis, and thereupon took their name,
ibid. from India there came Sardoins of three sorts, 618. h their several
differences, ibid. male and female, 618. i in what regard this stone is
accepted, ibid. Sardachates, a precious stone, 623. e Sardonyx of K.
Polycrates, 601. a Sardonyx, a precious stone, highly esteemed by Scipio
Africanus, 615. a. why so called, ibid. Sardonyches blind, which they be, 615.
b Sardonyches the best to seal withal, ibid. Sardonyches of sundry kinds:
Arabicke, Indian, Armenian, 615. b. c. d Sardonyches artificial, 613. e
Sarmeus wrote first of Horsemanship, and therefore pourtraied on horseback in
brass by Demetrius, 505. f Sata, what they are, 6. g Saturns well, 404. i
Satyrion, what it signifies, 257. d Satyrion, an herb, 257. a. b. 226. l. the
description, ibid. Satyrus a great architect, 575. c Satyrus, a writer in
Natural Philosophy, 615. a Sauce fleame, what cures, 128. b Savorie the
herb described, 30. k Sauge, an herb, 246. k. the description and medicinable
properties thereof, 142. k Sauge de Bois an herb. See Polemonia. Savine, a
plant, of two sorts 193. c the names that it has, ibid. used in Physic for
Cinnamon, 193. d Saurites, a preiious stone, 629. d Sauroctones, an image of
Praxiteles his making, why so called, 500. l Sauros and Batrachos, two
excellent workmen. See Batrachos. Saxifrage, one of the names of Maiden-haire,
and whereupon, 127. b Saxum, the ordinary white chanlke, 560. i Sails for
ships of purple and other colors, 5. c Sailing into Aegipt, wherefore
wholesome, 412. l Sailing upon the seas, for what diseases good, 303. d against
Sailing and navigation, an inuectiue, 1. f 2. g. h. etc.
S C
Scales. See Dandruffe. Scall of the head, how to be cured, 52. g. 56. i. 43.
f. 52. i 59. d. 60. g. 72. g. 104. g. 105. e. 127. c. 133. c. 141. b 142. l.
147. b. 155. f. 157. e. 158. m. 161. b. f. 163. b 177. f. 178. g. 180. g. 191.
c. 196. h. 201. c. 207. f 232. l. 249. e. 277. d. 287. e. 306. i. 324. h. 341.
d 353. a. Scalds with seething water, how the fire may be taken forth, and the
place kept from blistering, 351. e See Burns. Scalops medicinable, 438. k good
to cleanse the bladder, 444. h Scammonie an herb, 251. b the juice of this
herb, ibid. c how it is drawn, and to be chosen, 251. d how to be used in
purging, ibid. e how sophisticated and discerned, ibid. petie Scammonie, what
herb, 199. (...) how it is eaten and what effect it works, ibid. Scandix,
the herb, 130. g a base woort, ibid. Scarites, a precious stone, 630. i M.
Scaurus his excess in marble pillars uncontrolled, 563 b his sumptuous
building compared with Nero and Caligula, 583. d. e Sceletyre, what disease,
112. k See Stomacace. Scepsius a Philosopher and writer in Physic, 308. k
Schista, what onions, 20. h Schista, what eggs, 352. k Schiston, what kind of
milk, 317. c the making of it, ibid. the virtues thereof, ib. Schistos, a kind
of Alume, 558. h Schistos, a stone of saffron color, 367. d Schistos, a kind
of bloudstone, 590. g the virtues medicinable, ibid. i Schytanum, what it is,
471. b Sciatica, the gout in the hucklebone, what medicines it^ cured with, 50.
i. 56. k. 74. i. 105. c. 108. g. 134. m 141. d. 155. d. 161. c. 180. g. k. 185.
a. 186. k. 188. h 190. k. 192. k. 199. a. 219. e. 224. k. 238. m. 248. i 255.
e. 263. c. 271. d. 273. c. 274. k. 275. a. b. 276. i 281. c. 284. k. 287. c. f.
289. d. 290. k. 291. b. 315. a. 330 h 334. i. 382. g, h, i. 385. a. 418. k.
419, c, e. 431. a. 442. k 444. i. Scincus described, 316. i Scincus
medicinable, ib. and 433. c how he differs from the land Crocodile, 316. i
one of the ingredients of antidots, 316. k Scipio surnamed Serapio, and why,
81. f honored with a coronet of flowers by the people of Rome ib. he died
poor, ibid. interred by a general contribution of the people, 82. g Scipio
Africanus the second, how much plate and coin he had when he died, 480. m
what treasure he showed in triumph and brought into the city chamber, 481. a
what Scipio Africanus gave to his soldiers upon the winning of Numantia, 481.
a Scipio Alobrogicus how much plate he had, ib. L. Scipio allowed his charges
by the city of Rome for his solemn plays, 480. i Scipio Aemilianus received
an obsidionall or grass coronet, 117. (...) Scolecia what it is, and how made,
509. b why so called, 509. c the virtues thereof, ibid. Scolecion, what it is,
177. c Scolopendres, their venomous prick how to be cured, 59, a 60, g. 61, b.
62, g, 75, c. 127, b. 155, f. 306, k. 418, l. Scolopendres of the seaburst with
fasting spittle, 300. k Scolymus the herb, described, 98, i. 130, m the
virtues which it has, ibid. Scombri fishes, how employed, 418. g Scopa Algia,
what flower, 85. e Scopa Regia, an herb and a kind of Achillea, good for the
gargle and squinancie in swine, 216. l Scopas, a singular Imageur, 566. m. his
works, 567, c, d, e, f there were two of that name, both cunning workmen,
504, k. wherein they excelled, ibid. Scordium or Scordotis, an herb found by
K. Mithridates, 220, i the description by him set down, ib. the virtues
medicinable, ib. good for the bladder and the stone, 254. g Scordotis, 245. f
Scoria in trying of gold ore and other metals, what it is, 467. b. Scorpites a
precious stone, 630. i Scorpion, an herb, 230. l. why so called, ibid. See
Tragos. Scorpions hurt with Aconitum, how they be cured, 270, i pricked once by
a Scorpion, shall never after be stung by Hornet, Waspe, or Be, 299. c
Scorpions never sting the ball of the hand, 361. c against Scorpions and their
sting remedies, 36, k. 39, c. 40. m 42, h. 43, a, d. 45, e. 46, l. 54, i. 55,
e. 56, i, m. 59, a, b. 60. g 61, b. 62, g, k. 63, d. 64, b. 65, b, d. 69, d.
71, c. 73, b, c 74, g. 75, e. 76, m. 77, c. 101, d. 103. f. 105, c. 106, k 107,
b. 109, a. 110, k l. 113, c. 121, c. 126, h. k. 131, d 134, i. 138, l. 146, l.
153, b. 155, f. 166, l. 167, e. 168. m 170, k. 173, c, d, e. 174, i. 178, k.
179, b. 181, f. 184. k. l 194, i. 195, d. 196, g. 199, b. 206, g. 230, l, m.
237. f 246, k. 270, h. 276. g. 277, c. 288, l. 289, b. 301, a, e 322, k. l.
361, b. c, d. 413, b. 418, g, k. 424, g. 451, b. f 433, e. 434, g, i. 435, b,
d, e, f. 556, m. 561, d. 624, g. sea Scorpion medicinable, 438, g. 444. g
Scorpionrion, what herb, 126. i Scorpius, an herb, 122, l. why so called,
ibid, two kinds thereof, ibid. m Scratching of the body is healthful, 303. d
Scyllus, an Imageur and grauer in Marble, 568. h Scyricum, 476, l. an
artificial painters color, how made and used, 530, h. 528. k Scyros the
Island yields a stone of a strange nature, 587. d Scythica, what herb, and
why so called, 223. e, the virtues, ib. from whence it comes, 269. d
S E
Sea waters made hot, in what cases medicinable, 412. k, Sea waeter actually
cold, medicinable, ib. outwardly applied, for what good, ibid. l Sea water
ought to be had from the deep, far from land, 413, a. how to be given
inwardly, ib. how to be tempered for procuring vomit, ibid. Sea water
clysterized, ibid. Sea water artificial how to be made, 413. d Sea a most
wonderful element, 425. c. d Sea weed calledin Latin Fucus Marinus, 258. h
the description, ib. three kinds thereof, ibid. Seal, ae fish, his virtues
medicinable, 437. g Seal of the Roman Ambassador, was the image of Augustus
Caesar, 601. d Secundarium, what kind of Minium, 476, k. 477. d Sedum, an
herb. See Housleeke. Seeds of herbs how they differ, 23, a, b, c garden Seed,
some more strange than other, 33. a Seeds of herbs less effectual, after
incision made in the roots, 292. g Seed natural in men what does increase, 77.
f shedding unwillingly how cured, 48. g. 72. i. 130. k Segullum, what earth it
is, 466. l Selago, an herb like Sauin, 193, d. with what ceremonious
circunstances to be gathered, ibid. Selecti at Rome, who they were, 490. g
Selenites, an admirable precious stone, 629. d Selinas and Selinoides, what
kind of Coleworts, 48. k Selinus earth, for what it is good, 559. f Senators
of Rome how known from Knighs or Gentlemen, 459. c Senerio, what herb, 238,
k. See Groundswell. Sengreene. See Housleeke. Senses how preserved, 74. h. i.
how stupefied against cutting or sawing off a member, 314. l. m Senuie the
herb how it grows, 31, b. the temperature and kinds thereof, 31. b. c. how
to be dressed, 31. c threee kinds thereof, 73. f. the qualities that it has,
73. f. 74. g. Senuie juice how it is drawn, 74. k Seps, a venomous worm or a
kind of Lizard, 157. b. 263. d it cures the own bitt, 363. d. it is otherwise
called Dipsas, 173. a. remedies against the venom thereof, 157. b 434. g.
Septimuleius for covetousness of gold killed his dear friend C. Gracchus. 463.
e Scrapias, a kind of Orchis or Stundlewort, 256, m. the description, 257. a
Serapion, a painter, that loved to paint great pictures of Theaters, etc. but
man or woman he could not draw, 544, i. Seriphium Wormwood, the virtues that
it has, 443. d Serpents how they are known to be retired and gone, 132. k
Serpents when they have stung a man, never retire again into the earth, but
die as it were for remorse of conscience, 358. k Serpent hardly plucked out of
their holes but by the left hand, 299. c Serpents gather together by the
perfume of the bone about their own throat, 321. d Serpents chased away by the
fume of an Hearts horn burnt, 321. d. what other means there be to chase away
Serpents and refist their poison, 38, k. 39, b. 40, h, l. 42, g, h, m. 43, a,
d, e 45, e. 47, a, b. 50 g. 51, a, e. 52, l. 53, c. 54, l. 56, i, l. 57, a 56,
a. 60, g, l. 61, c. 62. g. 63, b, c, d, e. 64, k. 65, b. 74. g, m 77, c. 78, h,
i. 101, d. 103, a. 104, g. k. 105, c. 106, g 107, b. 108, i, l. 110, i, k. l.
118, m. 124, i. 125, a, d. 126. h 129, d. f. 131, d. f. 134, i. 135, d. 138, k.
139, b, e 142, k. l. 143, b. 148, i. 149, a. 153, b. 162, g. 165, b 168, k.
169, e. 172, l. 173, d. 177, c. 178, m. 179, a, e 180, h. 181, f. 182, h, 184,
k. 186. g, h, k. 187, c. f. 188, m 189, c. 192, k. 195, d. 198, i. 199, b, c.
200 g. 201, c, d 202, k. 206, l. 212, l. 222, m. 223, d. 226, k. l. 227, a b,
c, e, f. 228, k. l. m. 229, c, d. 230, h, i. 233, a. 235. e 237, b. 239, a.
254, m. 258, i. 274, i, l, m. 275, e 278, k. 282, g. 283, b. 284, k. 288, l.
289. a. 290. i 300. g, k. 301, a. 306, i, k. 307, b. 312, m. 316. g 318, h.
321, e. 322, h, i, k. 353, b. 355, d, e. 356. g. h 358, g. 359, a, b, c. 413,
b. 418, l. 422, h. 431, b. f 434, g, i. 435, c. 557, d. 561, d. 573, b, c. 589,
c 590, g. Serpents how to be brought asleep, and mortified, 316. h Serpyllum,
what herb it is, and the sundry kinds, 75. d Serrani, a family in Rome
wearing no linen, 2. l Serratula, an herb. See Betonie. Serta and Serviae,
what they are, 80. i Servants many retained in one house, what abuse and
inconvenience thereof, 459. a M. Servilius Nonianus what a foolish ceremony he
observed to keep himself from bleared eyes, 298. k Servius Tullius K. of
Rome, how he was supposed to be conceived, and whose son, 599. d Sesama,
the medicinable virtues that it has, 140. g. the discommodities proceeding
from it, ibid. the oil thereof, ib. Sesamoides, an herb, and the medicinable
virtues thereof, 140. g. h Seseli. See Siler. Sesostris a proud prince, K. of
Aegipt, vanquished by Esubopes, 464. i Serstertius, a silver piece of coin at
Rome, worth what, 463. a. b. Setantos, a kind of Bulbe, 19. b Setwall the
virtues thereof, 104. l Sextius Niger, a writer in Physic, 72. h. 316. k
S H
Shadow in pictures, 528. h Shaddow-like fish Sciaena medicinable, 444. k
Shaking of lims how to be helped, 141. b. See trembling. Sharewort, an herb,
256. h. the description, ibid. Share, and the infirmities thereof, how to be
avoided, 256. h See more in Groine and Pushes. Sheep hurt by tasting
Pimpernell, how they cure themselves, 234. l Sheep without gall in Pontus, and
the reason of it, 276. i Sheep rottenor otherwise diseased, how to be helped,
144. h 221, a. how to recover their stomachs, and make them fall to their
meat, 351. c Shells of fishes serving as trumpets to sound withal, 451. e in
stead of scoupes to lade oil, ibid. Shells of eggs and fishes, why crushed and
broken when the meat is eaten forth of them, 296. i Shields and scutcheons of
arms, in memorial of ancestors, who brought up first at Rome, 524. i Shields
why called Clypei, ibid. l Shields presented the lively images of those which
bare them, ib. Shield of Asdruball, 524. m Shingles bow to be cured, 44. k.
105, a. 122, k. 139, a. 143. c 146, k. 157, e. 158, m. 174, k. 265, d. 278, l.
284, k 287, b. 309, d. 337, a. See more in S. Antonies fire. Ships provided for
transporting Obeliskes out of Aegipt to Rome, 575. e Shoulder blades pained,
how to be eased, 255, e. 312, h 379. c. Shuds of Flax how employed, 4. k
hardi-Shrew biting is venomous, and the remedies against it. 43, e. 50, i. 55.
e. 56, m. 71, e. 167, a. 168, m. 277. c 322, k. 360, m. 361, a. she will not
go over a cart-tract. 361. a
S I
Sibylla, three Prophetesses, their statues at Rome of Brass, 491, d, L.
Siccius Dentalus, a brave warrior, 116, k. honored with sundry chaplets for
his good service, ibid. Sicilie air kills scorpions, 623. e Scycyone, a city
famous for workmen in metal and minerals, 564. h Sicyone in name for cunning
painters, 547. b Sides, pain or stitches how to be eased, 57, d. 123, a. 246. l
247, b, d. 248, h. 275, e. 381, e, f. 442, k. See more in Pleurisy. Sideritis
what herb, 123, b. the virtues thereof respective to the eyes, 233, f.
wonderful in staunching of blood, 263. e. Sideritis, a precious stone, 629. d.
the virtues thereof ib. Sideropoecilos, a precious stone, 629. d. why so
called, ibid. Signet or sign manuell. See Ring. Signina, what kind of works,
554. k Sil, a color mineral, what it is, 484. h Sil, which is best, 484, h.
the price, ibid. Sil Atticum, ib. the price, ibid. Sil Scyricum, 484, i. the
price, ibid. bright Sil, ib. the use of all sorts of Sil, 484. i Silanion, a
fine Imageur in brass, 502. l. he lively expressed Apollodorus the cunning
workman, ibid. Silaus, an herb, 255. c. the description, ibid. Silence at the
bourd from one end to the other, what it presageth, 298. g Siler or Seseli, an
herb, 41. c. the description thereof, ib. the several kinds and properties
that it has, ibid. Siligo, the fine wheat, what medicines it does affourd,
137, f. Silphium, 8. h. engendered by shoures of rain, 133. e. the medicinable
virtues thereof, 134 g the root of Silphium hard of digestion, and breeds
ventosities, ib. it stops the passage of urine, ib. Silurus a fish
medicinable, 442. h Silybum, an herb, 248. g. the virtues. ibid. Silybus, a
base herb, 130. m Simonides, a painter, 550, h. his works, ib. Simples and
compositions compared together, 135. b Simples or herbs of less effect, the
more they be used, 292. g. Simus a painter, 551. h. the pictures of his
drawing, ibid. Sinadian gray marble, 522. i Sinews shrunk, how to be
mollified and drawn out, 129. b 134. l. 138. g. 173. e. Sinews stiff how to
be made supple, 161. f Sinews benumbed with cold, what does recover, 74. l for
sinews and their infirmities in general, comfortable medecins, 48. m. 49. b.
137. a. 187. c. 212. l. See more in Nerves. Sinopis or Sinopum, a painters
color, why so called, 528. k of diverse kinds, ib. l. which is the best, ib.
the price, ib. the use in painting, ibid. the medicinable virtues, 528. l. m.
Sinuessa, waters medicinable, 402. l Sion, what herb, 130. k. the description,
ibid. Siphnian stone, employed in vessels to sees meat, 592. h Siriasis in
children, what disease, 126. i Sirulugus, a strange and unknown beast, 399. d
Sisapone, a territory in Spain famous for a mine of Vermillion, yielding to
Rome a great rent yearly, 476. i Sisymbrium, an herb described, and the
virtues that it has, 75. f Sisyrinchios, a kind of bulbous herb, 19. b. the
strange nature that it has, ibid.
S K
Skab and scurfe in man or beast how to be healed, 36. g 42, h. 49, c. 58, h.
64, k. 74. i. 128, k. 129, a. 146, i. 149, c 155, f. 161, a, e. 166 l. 168, i,
k. 169, a. 173, c. 197, d 319, f. 338, l. 353, a. 370, l. 377, d. 413, b. 418,
i, m. 419. b 420, g, l. 446, m. 450, h. 506, k. 516, h. 557, c. Skald heads how
to be healed, 43, f. 52, i. 59, d. 60, g. 72, g 105, c. 127, c. 133, c. 141, b.
142, l. 147, b. 155, f. 157, e 158, m. 161, b, f. 163, b. 177. f. 178, g. 180,
g. 191, c 196, h. 201, e. 207, f. 232, l. 249, e. 277, d. 287, e. 306, i 324,
h. 341. d. 357. a. Skarefire named at the table ominous, 297. e how the danger
of a Skarefire may be auerted, ibid. Skars and their strokes or marks
remaining, how to be reduced to their natural color, 36. h. 39. f. 55, f. 61.
b 65, a. 144, g. 149, e. 189, f. 266, h. 286, i. 287, a. 319. f 328, h. 339, a.
394, l. medecins skinning without Skar, 51. a Skars or marks how to be taken
out of the skin, 239. d 245. a. Skars rising up above the flesh, how to be
brought down, 430. h. 448. h. 475. a. 518. l. Skegs or wild Plums what virtues
they affourd medicinable, 169. d Skin of face or body blemished with spots and
speckles unseemly, by what means it may be cleansed, 37, a. 106, i 144, g.
157, f. 160, l. 171, e. 184, k. 185, c. 200, k 207, e. 268, i, k. 308, g. 311,
a. 314, k. 318, m. 377, b, e 475, a. Skin pilled and skaled, and full of
scurfe, how to be mundified, 103, b. 158, m. 377. c. Skin of the face rough and
riueled, how to be made smooth and even, 162, k. 368, k. 311, a. 327, c. 377,
c, f. 420, g 589, a. 591, c. Skin looking wan and dead, how to be made fresh
and lively 377, c Skin red and itching how to be delaied, 337, a Skin of the
body how to be made fair, white, and smooth, 396, i. 416, h. 559. f. Skin
scorched with cold wines how to be helped, 311. a Skirwort wild, the properties
thereof, 41. a Skirwort root accepted by Tiberius the Emperor, 18. h how to
Skoure clothes, 157, f
S L
Slaves three enfrranchised by Claudius the Emperor, surpassed M. Crassus in
riches, 479. e Slaves who having bin chalked on their feet for the market
became wealthy afterward, and in honorable estate, 561. a. b. Sleep by what
means it may be procured, 42. g. 43, d. 44. l 46, g, k. 49, a 66, i. 67, e.
68. g, h, i, m. 102, k. 104, h 105, a, d. 161, c. 162. g, i. 166, g. 171, d.
191, e. 234. c 249, d, 259, d. 260, k. 277, e. 303, e. 341, e. 398, k. 424. l
430. g. l. Sleep how to be discussed in a drousie disease, 144. h. 398. l 446.
h. See more in Lithargie and Drowsy disease. Sleeping on the right side
commended, 303. e. See Lying in bed. how to Sleep securely without fearful
dreams and visions, 357. a. See Illusions. Sloen, their virtues in Physic,
169. d
S M
Smaragdites, a mountain, why so called, 612. m Smarides, small fishes
medicinable, 444. m Smyrnium, the herb, how strangely it grows, 30. g. why
it is so called, ibid.
S N
Snap-dragon, an herb, 231. e. the description and virtues, ib. See Calves
snout. Snailes withshels excellent for the lungs, 380. i. k. how to be dressed,
ibid. which be the best, ibid. l. those of the river, and their medicinable
virtues, 435. e Snake slough of great efficacy, 376. l Snakes, whether they
cast their slough at the rising of the Dog star, or no, 376. k Snake
dedicated to the god of Physic, 358. g in the form of a Snake Aesculapius
came to Rome, 358, h. Snakes when they be venomous, 358. g for Snakes and
Adders poison, what remedies be appropriat, 226. m. 227. a. 294. l. 358. g.
435. c. in Sneesing, why we wish health to our neighbor and friend, 297. c.
Tiberius Caesar very ceremonius in that point, of being salued when he Sneesed,
297. c Sneesing by what means it is provoked, 55. d. 109. b. 193. a 218. k.
232. l. 239. e. 291. a. 430. l. Sneesing immoderat, how to be stayed. 66. i.
155. e. 183. c 218. l. Sneesing in what cases wholesome, 304. k Snow laid for
and sought in Summer, 11. e Snow water, whether it be lighter and better than
spring water, 406. g
S O
Soders of sundry kinds, 472. g. of Gold, ibid. of Iron, 472. h. of Brass in
mass, ibid. of Brass in plates, ibid. of Lead and marble, ibid. of black
Lead, ib. of Tin, ib. of Silver, ib. Sochis, a King of Aegipt that reared
Obeliskes, 574. l Socrates, a famous Imageur in marble, 569. a Socrates a
painter highly commended, 549. a. 569. a. his works, 549. a Sole fish
medicinable, 443. f Solanum, what herb, 112. h. the hurtful qualities that it
has, 112. i Soldanella, or sea Colewort, a purgative, 51. c Soldanella, 359. c
Solifugae, or Solpuga, what Insects, and the remedies against them, 145. b.
361. e Solon of Smyrna, a writer in Physic, 71. b Soluble, how the body may
be made and kept, 74. b. 121, f 122, h. 126, h. 137, a. 172, l. 164, h. 166, l.
167. a 169, c. 170. g. 172, l. 180, k. 181, a, c. 182, m. 186. g 192, l. 199,
e. 250. k. 254. l. 267, c. 276, h. 277. a 279, e. 287, b. 288, g. 311, b. 3^7,
d. 331, b. 380, l 384, k. 417, d. 419, c. 437, c. 442, l. 443, c. 470, k. a
Soot to beautify and color the eyebrowes, 324. l Soap, whose invention,, 328,
l. how it is made, ib. Soap and scouring bals consisting of salt, 417. d
Sopewort or Fullers weed. See Cadicula. Sophocles his foolish opinion as
touching Amber, 607. a Sopylos, a brave painter, 551. b Sores in face or head
how to be healed, 202, h. See Ulcers. Sorcerie condemned by Pliny, 273. e. See
Charms. Sorel or Souredocke, 33. d. e. 73. a. the description and properties
thereof, 73. b Sornatius, a writer in Physic, 438. h Soruises, a fruit, their
medicinable virtues, 171. b Sorry, a mineral, 509. e. 510. g. of diverse kinds
which is best, 509. g. hurtful to the stomach, ib. Sosimenes, a Physician and
writer, 66. l Sostratus, a famous Architect and Enginer of Gnidos, 578. h.
Sotacus, a writer, 586. m Sotira, an expert midwife and writer in Physic,
309. e Sow-bread, what herb, 229. c. d. See more in Syclaminus. Source-milke.
See Cherne-milke. Sow-thistle, an herb, described, 131. b. the kinds thereof
and the properties, 131. b. c
S P
Spain, a country studious in simples and herbs, 224. h Spain the goodliest
country next to Italy, 632. m Sparganium, what herb, 228. l Sparta, what they
are, 6. g of Spart, 6. g. h. the description, ibid. appropriat to Spain, and
may be called Spanish broom, ibid. the uses thereof, 6. i. k. l. the nature
thereof, ib. Spartipolios, a precious stone, 630. m Sparton what it signifies
in Greek, 188. g Spartacus forbad to have plate of silver or gold in his camp
463. f. Speed or success how to be obtained in law suites, 627. f inwarre,
628. g Spasme. See convulsion and Crampe. Spells. See Charms and Words. Spelt.
See Zea. Sperage of the garden excessive big, 11. d Sperage wild of the
garden, and of a middle nature, 27, c. d Catoes rule f^r their ordering, 27. e.
f. 28. g. h. their medicinable virtues, 53. a Sperme. See Seed Natural. Sphinx
in brass most curiously wrought by Phidias, 566, h Sphinx a monstrous rock in
Aegipt, 577. b. the description thereof, ib. b. c. thought to be the monument
wherein king Amasis was entombed, ib. Sphragides, certain precious stones that
scale fairest, 620. h Sphragis what earth, 529. a Sphyraena, a fish. See Sudis.
Spicknell. See Meum. Spilumene, an image of Praxiteles his making, 500. k
Spirits how revived and recovered, 59. c. 130. h Spirits made dull by some
water, 403. e Spitting observed superstitiously in auerting witchcraft, 300.
g. in preventing lamenesse, ibid. in turning away the displeasure of the gods
for some bold petition, ibid. in fortifying the operations of medicines, 300. h
in curing the party that one has hurt, and repented therefore, ibid. in
helping a beast swaied or hipped by a blow given, 300, i. in giving a shreuder
blow to an enemy. ib. Spittle conueighed backward behind the ear, what it
signifies, 297. d Spittle fasting of what virtue, 300. g. k Spittle fasting of
a woman medicinable, 308. h Spittle of certain men, medicinable against
serpents, 299. a. Splanchnoptes, an image in brass curiously wrought by
Stipax, 502, l. why so called, ibid. Splanchnoptes, 123. e for the Spleen
pained, swelled, hard, obstructed, or otherwise diseased, proper remedies, 39,
d. 40, k. 45, c. 49, f. 51, b 52, g. 56, h, i, 60, g. 61, a. 62, l. 64, l. 67,
d. 73, d. 75, c 101, b. 103, b. 104, g. 105, c. 119, d. 121, e. 122, g 124, l.
127, e. 128, l. 130, k. 143, b. 144, h. 146, k. 150. g, i 164, g. 167, c. 169,
f. 173, d. 178, g. 180, k. 187, c 188, h. 189, e, f. 190, i, l. 193, a. 196, l.
198, i. 207, d 208, g. 216, m. 253, d, e, f. 254, g. 263, c. 274, l. 275, e
277, c. 287, e. 288, h. 289, d. 290, i. 291, c. 313, b. 318, i 330, h, i, k.
341, d. 352, i. 381, d, e. 424, h. 430, g. 431, e 443, f. 444, g. 447, a. 516,
i. 529, b. Splenion, what herb, and why so called, 217. a Sploches swert in
the skin, how to be brought to a fresh color, 339. a Spodium of Lead, 520, g.
how washed, ib. for Spodium a succedan, 158. l Spodos what it is, 511, f. the
nature of it, ibid. Spodos of sundry sorts, 512. g. how to be washed, ibid, h.
the virtues, ibid, Spodos Lauriotis, ibid. the best Spodos, ib. what things
serve in stead of Spodos, 512. i Spondylium, an herb, 181, a. the virtues
thereof in Physic, ib. Spondylus, a fish medicinable, 446. i Spongiae in
Sperages, what they be, 27. d Spongites, a precious stone, why so called, 629.
d Spots and speckles black in the skin, how to be taken out, 62, i. 161, e.
266, h. 314. k. 377. d. Spots or iron moles how to be taken out, 47. d. 161. e
Spraines of sinews how helped, 334. m of Springs and fountains a discourse,
how to find them, 408. i. k. l. m. 409. a. b. Springs of waters arising upon
the stocking up and cutting down of woods, 410. k Sprots salted, medicinable
in some cases, 434. h Spuma Argenti. See Litharge. Sponge of fresh water, a
kind of herb, 280, g. why called Conferua, ibid. h Sponge of male sex, 423.
a. it was wont to be died purple, ibid. Spunges of female sex, 423. b Spunges
how they are made white, ib. Spunges have a sensible life, ibid. Sponge stones
what they be, 589. d. why they be called Tecolithi, ibid. Spunges used in
frictions, and rubbing of men's bodies, 424, k. whether Spunges have hearing or
no, 423, c which Spunges be best, ibid. the general use of all Spunges, 423,
d, e they serve in stead of Lana Succida or unwashed greasy wool in wounds,
424. g Sponge ashes medicinable, 424. i Spunges commonly divided into Africane
and Rhodiack. 424. k. where the finest and most delicat Spunges be found, ib.
Spurge, an herb, 284, i. the description, ibid. Spurges. See Tithymales.
Spiders venom, what remedies for it, 65, b. 187, d. 196, i 431, f. 433, f.
S Q
Squatina, a fish, the skin whereof is medicinable, 444. l Squilla or sea
Onion, 18, l. the description and properties, ib. more qualities that it has,
99, e. the sundry kinds, 18. m how to be ordered, 19, a Pythagoras wrote a
book of Squilla, 18, m Squilla male and female, 51, c. how to be prepared, ib.
how to be boiled or calcined, 51, e Squilla the less. See Pancration.
Squilliticke vinegar the virtues thereof, 156. l S^inancie, a disease of the
throat, with what medicines it is cured, 36, l. 39, d. 42, k. 44, g. 61, c. 66,
g. 75, e. 76, i 103, e. 134, l. 135, d. 147, e. 157, b. 158. g. 172, h. 183, c,
e 196. g. 205, e. 212, l. 245, b, d. 277, d. 287, d. 301, d, e, f 311, b. 328,
k. 378, h, k. l. 419, b. 422, k. 432, i. 442, g, b 471, c. 510, i. Squinanth
rish described, with the kinds and virtues thereof, 101, f. 102, g
S T
Stachys the herb described, 199. c. the virtue thereof, ib. Stag, Hind, Heart,
red Dear, enemies every way to serpents, 321, d. their horns, ib. skin, ib.
e. rennet of a Hind-calfe 321, f. genetoirs of a Stag, and his pizzle, ib. rim
of the paunch ib. teeth, ib. their blood draws serpents together, ibid.
Staining of clothes in Egypt, how it is practiced, 550. c the commodity of
clothes so Stained by seething, ibid. d Staphis, or Astaphis Agria, what
hearbeit is, 248. l Starre-fish medicinable, 433, f Starch-floure, the
properties of it, 140. l Staterae, what drinking cups or mazers they were, 482,
h Statice, what herb, 250. h stately Statues first when they came up at Rome,
482, l Romans honored at Rome with Statues by strangers, 493, d. Statues
erected for them at Rome who were killed in embassage or service for the state,
491. f the measure ordinarily of Statues, three foot, 492, g Statues on foot at
Rome, 492. l Statues of silver when first admitted in Rome. 482. m 483, a.
three Statues of Anniball even in Rome, 493, c Statues on horseback, a devise
coming from the Greeks, 490, l. women honored with statues on horseback,
492. l Statues riding triumphant, or otherwise in charriots, when they were
first seen at Rome, 490, m Statues erected upon columns, are of great
antiquity, 491. a what they signified, 492, k Statues without any robe, 491. e
Rome full of Statues and images, 494, i Statues Thuscanica, ibid, h Stauisacre
described, 148, l. it is not Vva Taminia, ibid. where it loves to grow, ibid.
m. the kernils dangerous inwardly taken, 149, a. the medicinable virtues, ibid.
Steatites, a precious stone, 630. h Steatomata, what kind of wens and how
cured, 265, c Steel what it is, 514, i. diverse kinds, ibid. k Stellio, a word
odious what it imports, 388. i Stellions (the Lizards) their venomous,
spightfull, and envious nature to mankind, 388, i. most adverse to scorpions,
361, b. how they cast their slough or skin, 388, k. l. the same is medicinable,
ibid. i the diverse names and description of these starre-Lizards Stellions,
361. b against the sting and poison of Stellio, remedies, 140. g Stephanomelis,
what herb, 263. f Stepanoplocos or Stephanopolis, a picture of Glycera, 80. l
made by Pausias the painter, who loved Glycera, 546. l Stephusa an image of
Praxiteles his making, 500, k. why so called, ibid. Sterelitis, what kind of
Litharge, 474. k Stergethron, an herb. See Housleeke. Q. Stertinius, a famous
Physician at Rome, and a great taker of fees, 344, k. he and his brother rich,
sumptuous, and died wealthy, 344, l Stian, or such like hardness rising in
the eielids, how to be cured, 324. m Stibi or antimonie, 366. g Stibium. See
Stimmi. Stitches in sides how to be eased, 104, h. 120, l. 121, e 126, k. 193,
a. 202, g. 516, g, See Sides and Plurisie. Stiff and stark for cold, how
restored, 263. a Stiffenesse of lims how to be made limmer and supple, 422. k
Stilo Praeconinus his merry scoff upon a Spaniards signet 601, e. Stimma, a
mineral, 473, d. of two kinds, ib. their description, ibid. their medicinable
virtues, 473, d, e. principal for the eyes, ib. how to be prepared, 473. f.
474, h Stinking smell of any part of the body, how palliated, 128. h 161, d.
Stipax, a curious imageur and his works, 502, l Stipendium and Stipend,
whereof these words are derived, 462, l. Stoebe, what herb, 120, l Stoechas,
an herb, where it grows, 289. f Stomacacum, what disease, 110, k. See
Sceletyrbe. anguish of Stomach is most painful next unto strangurie, 213, c.
Stomach weak and feeble how to be comforted, 289, c 383, h. 437, c. 558, k.
591, a. 624, l. pain of Stomach how eased, 76, l. 102, k. l. 106, m. 138, m
163, c. 172, m. 186, i. 196, h. 283, a. 312, h. for Stomach irfirmities and
diseases in general, appropriat remedies, 37, f. 38, i. 41, a. 42, k. 46, g.
47, e. 48, h. k, l. 50. l 51, d. 52, g. 55, c. 57, c. 60, i. 63, a. 70, h. 74.
g. k. 76, i 77, c. 78, m. 102, k. l. 111, c. 119, c. 122, g. 129, a. 130, g, i
141, f. 142, g. 147, a, b. 158, g. 161, f. 163, b. 164, i, k 170, h. 174, k.
197. f, 200, k. m. 246, l. m. 288, i. 380, l, m 424, g. 432, g. 609, c. (...)
^ulcerat how cured, 329, d St^ ^gnawing how to be pacified, 283, a. 329. d
Stoma^ce, what composition, and the use thereof, 164, m the reason of the name,
ibid. Stomatice, Panchrestos, and other stomaticals, how made, 170, h. 192, h
Stone Sauge, in herb. See Sederitis. Stone that scorneth fire, 593, d, e a
Stone swimming wh^le, sinking broken, 587, d Stones are not of like nature to
abide the weather, in building, 593, c, d, e air of a diverse nature and
constitution for building, 588, d Stone in bladder or kidneys how to be broken
and expelled out of the body. 39. d. 54. h. 60. k. 66. i. 72. k. 73. d. 74. l
76. h. 77. f. 78. g. 101. a. d. 104, h. 111. a. f. 120. i. k. 122, h 125. e.
127. b, 128. l. 130. l. 143. a. 173. b. 175. b. 192. m 195. d. 196. k. 206. l.
254. g. i. 255. c. d. 281. b. 283. b 284. m. 289. a. 301. c. 313. b. 332. l. m.
the pain of the stone how eased, 194. h. 384. g. h. i. 402. l 403. b. 430. g.
443. e. 444. g, h. i. 489. d. 629. f. a Stone voidedout of the body
medicinable, 301. c Stones suspected for building, how to be prepared that they
may serve, 593. e a Stone dog-bitten, causes dissension in what house soever
it is, 303. d the Vulgar Stone, what virtues it has, 285. a Stone cutting and
graven more ancient than painting or casting brass, 565. c Storax the gum how
to be chosen, 180. l. the virtues that it has, ibid. Storax, ibid. Strawberie
tree. See Arbur. Strangurie counted the most painful disease, 213. c for
strangurie or pissing dropmeale, the remedies, 40. k. 41. d 54. i. 78. g. 106.
i. 111. a. d. 119. d. 127. c. 131. d. 157. f 179. b. 185. a. 188. h. 195. c.
199. c. 202. g. h. 216. h 254. g. h. 255. b. 274. k. 283. b. 284. m. 290. m.
316. m 356. i. 384. g, h. Stra^gurie what causes, 384 h Stratiotes, what
berbe, 204. m. the description, 205. a the virtues medicinable that it has,
ibid. Strat^ the Queen, wife to K. Antiochus, pictured unseemly (...)
Clesides, 549. e Stratonicus, a ^nning grauer, 483, e. his workmanship, ibid.
Streams of rivers how to be stayed, 316. h Stricturae in iron what they be,
and why so called, 514. i Strigiles of gold, what they be in Spain, 465. e
Stroking of the head at such a day of the Moon observed for what purpose, 298.
i Strombi, certain Winkles or shel-fishes medicinable, 446. i Strongyle, what
Alume, 558, l. of two sorts, and their description, ibid. Strophia and
Strophiola, what they be, 80, i Strumea. See Crowfoot. Strumus, what herb,
280, g Struthium, what herb 10. g Strychnos, 280, g. what herb, 112, h Styx,
a fountain yielding a venomous water, 400, h. 405. a
S V
Sualternicum, what it is, 606. h Success in petitions how obtained, 314, g
Success against adversary at the bar, and enemy in field, how to be
procured, 315, d, e. 354, i. 357, b. See more in Speed. Succinum Amber, why so
called, 607. e Sudines, a writer, 573. c Sudis, a fish, 452. l. the nature of
it and the description, ibid. Suilli, what kind of Mushromes, 132, m. their
deadly poison, 133. a Sullanders in horses, 338. l Sulphur-vif is natural,
556, i. why it is called Apyron, ibid. See more in Brimstone. Sumach of
curriers, 192. g Sumach of the kitchen, ibid. b Sun-burning how to be taken
away, 161, b. 306, h. 327, e. Sun and salt singular for the gout, 419. b Suns
gem, a precious stone, why so called, 629, c Superstition of Pagans in their
divine service, 294. l. m their Superstitious ceremonies, observed at their
meat, 297, e. f. as touching Superstitious ceremonies, Servius Sulpitius wrote a
book, ibid. f. Suppuration how to be discharged out of the breast, 200. l
Surbatting of the seet how to be helped, 185. b Surfeit upon fish how to be
helped, 362. k Surfets in general what does resist, 119. d Suthernwood the
herb, described, 91. b. c. the virtues that it has, ib. the degrees in
goodness, 108, i
S W
Swallows young that be wild, are better for Physic than other, 378, i. those
called Ripariae be best, ibid. how to be calcined, ibid. Swelling occasioned by
windiness, how cured, 136, k. See Ventosities. Swellings hard how to be
allaied, 337, b. See Tumors. Sweat of certain men's bodies medicinable, 299. a
Sweats how to be procured, 67, b. 103, c. 122, h. 160, l 162, k. 167, a. 182,
g. 187, c. 193, c. 202, h. 233, c. 284. k 290. k. Sweats symptomaticall,
diaphoreticke, stinking, and immoderat, how to be repressed, 58. k. 78. k. 102.
m. 153. c 160. i. 161. e. 174. k. 341. e. 421. f. 558. k. 560. i. Swimming in
water for what it is good, 414. g Swine how they will follow one, 399. f how
cured of squinsies, 268. l Swine how to be cured of all their diseases, 206, h.
450, k Sword-fish his names. 428. i. his description and nature. ib. Swouning
or fainting of the heart how to be recovered. 55b 180. g. 381. b.
S Y
Sybaris, a river. 403. c. the water thereof is of wonderful operation. ibid.
Syce, what it is. 42. l Syce. See Peplos. Sycitis, a precious stone. 631. a
Sycomore, what tree, and the virtues in Physic. 169. e Sylla Dictatour the
richest Roman that ever was, 479. d Sylla Dictatour honored with a chaplet of
green grass, 117. c. d. he signed with the image of King Iugurtha prisoner,
601. e. Silver when it was first stamped into coin at Rome, 462. m. Romans
imposed their tribute to be paid in Silver, and not in gold, 464, h Caeser
Dictator furnished the solemnity of the cirque games all with Silver, 464. k C.
Antonius exhibited his plays upon a scaffold of Silver, ibid. C. Caligula set
for pageants oll of Silver, 464. k Silver tried out of gold ore, 467. b Silver
found only by digging pits, 472. i. cannot be tried without lead or lead ore,
472. k Syluermines found in all places, but the best in Spain, ibid dampe in
Silver mines pernicious, but to dogs especially. 473. a. Silver of two kinds,
478. g. how the best is known, ibid. Silver in plate painted by the
Aegiptians, and why, 478. l Silver images enamelled black by what means, 478.
m 479. a. Silver for shift worn in stead of gold, by whom, 483. a. b Silver
much used by soldiers, ibid. b Silver employed in base and uncleanly uses,
483. b. c Symbolum, what it signifies, 455. b Symmetrie observed by Lysippus
the Imageur, 499. (...) Symmetrie is a term that cannot be expressed by a
Latin word, ibid. Sympathies observed, 175. f Sympathy in natural things, 35.
c Symphonia, an herb, 247. f. the description and virtues, ibid. Symphitum
Petraeum, an herb, 275. d. why called Symphytum, ib. why Petraeum, ibid.
Synaristeusae, 174. h Syngenicus, a picture, 550. h Synochitis, a precious
stone and the virtue of it, 631. a Synodontes, certain fishes, 629. e
Synodontites, a precious stone, ibid. Syriation, a writer in Physic, 59. d
Syrium or Syreion, the juice extracted of Lilly flowers, 103. b. the virtues
thereof, ibid. c Syron what herb, 247. a Syropicon, a kind of Samian earth,
559. d. the use in Physic and how it is known, ibid. Syrtitae, precious
stones, 629. e Syssetieteris, a magical herb, and the effects thereof, 204, g
why so called, ibid. why named Protomedia, ibid. (...), what it signifies, 7.
a
T A
TAbles at Rome twain, all of silver, 481, e Taeda or Torch-wood, what virtues
medicinable it has, 148. g Taenia, a seafish. 439. d Talc, or glasse-stone,
where it is found, 592. i. k. the nature of it and manner of engendring, ib.
exceeding durable in all weathers, 592. l the use of Talc reduced into slakes
and smaller pieces, 592. l. Talent simply signifies the Attick Talent, 548. k.
what it amounts to, ibid. Talent Aegiptian what it weighs, 464. i Tallow or
sewet of the same nature that grease, 320. k how to be ordered and prepared,
ibid. which is the best, ibid. Tamaricus a river, the fountains whereof
foretell future events, 404. l Tamarix or Tamariske, a plant, 188. k the sundry
kinds and names thereof, ibid. Tamariske, how it is employed, 188. h. the
medicinable uses thereof, ib. the antipathie between it and the spleen, ib. i
why called the vnluckietree, 188. k Tamnacum, what herb, 111. e Tangle, a
sea-weed, 437. e. See Reits. Tanos, a bastard Emeraud, 613, a Taos, a precious
stone, 630. k Taperwort, an herb. See Mullen and Longwort. Taphiusius, a kind
of Aegle stone, 590. b. why so called, ibid. Taphosiris, a city in Aegipt,
277. e Tar, what medicinable virtues it has, 183. e. how it is made
Palmipissa, ibid. Taracia Caia, a benefactresse to Rome, honored with a
statue, 492. h Tarentum the city had the name for making the best candlestick
sbankes of brass, 488. l K, Tarquinius Priscus, by what policy he kept his
people at work under ground about his vaults and sinks, 582. k. l. K.
Tarquinius Priscus his rampires, a wonderful piece of work, 582. h. the
foundation of the Capitol, and the vaulted sinkes which he made, are
admirable, 582, h. Taste in the mouth how to be recovered and seasoned, 148. g
183. e. Taste judicial of bitter and sweet, why not in all persons alike, 136.
(...) Tattaeus salt, most medicinable in what cases, 419. a Tauri flies, a kind
of Beetles, 379, c. why so called, ib. they be named also Pedunculi Terrae,
ibid. Tauriscus of Tralleis, a grauer in marble, 569. b Tauriscus a cunning
grauer in brass, 483. c Tauriscus a painter renowned for his works, 550. i
Tazil, what herb, 239. c. the description, ibid. 280, k. the virtues, ibid. l
T E
Teats ^f milch-beasts sore, how to be healed, 148. g Tecolithi. See Sponge
stones, good to expel and break the stone in man's body, 629. f for all
accidents of the Teeth, a remedy, 443. b eye-Teeth of man or women dead,
supposed to be of great virtue, 302. g Teeth how they may be made white, and
so kept, 64, l. 129, a 140. i. 160. i. 168. g. 326. i. 352. l. Teeth corrupt,
hollow, worme-eaten, and stinking, by what means cured, 159. b. 168. k. 239.
b. c. 252. h. 440. k 624. i. Teeth how to be preserved from rottenness and the
worm, 168. g. 190. i. 419, b. Teeth rotten and hollow, how they may be broken
and had out by peecemeale, 179. c. 190. i. 239. (...) Teeth hollow and rot^en,
how they will fall out with ease, 138. h. 159. d. 179. e. 302. g. 376. i. k. l,
440, g. Teeth hollow in pain how to be eased, 276, h. 440. k ach of the
grinders or great iaw Teeth, how to be remedied, 440. h Teeth loose by what
means they may be set fast, 38. g. h 41. e. 70. g. 72. g. 73. e. 109. e. 124.
h. 156. h. m. 159. b. c 160. g. 164. l. 165. d. 184. h. 196. h. 197 a. 238. i.
239. b. c 326. i. k. l. 351. b. 377. a. 440. i. Telephanes, a famous Imageur
and his works, 500. h. i Telphium, an herb, thought to be Orpine, 290. l the
description and virtues, ibid. Telicardios, a precious stone, 629. d
Telirrhizos, a precious stone, ibid. e Telmessus, a superstitious city,
addicted to soothsaying and magic, 372. l Tempest and thunder how to be
raised, 315. c Temple of Diana in Ephesus how long a building, 580. h. i how it
was founded and scituat, ibid. the description thereof, ibid. Temple of Cyzicum
and the description thereof, 581. a. by whom built, ibid. Temple of Diana
Anaitis, religious and sacred, 470. g spoiled by Antonie the Triumvir, ibid.
Temple of Peace built by Vespasian the Emperor, a stately piece of work, 581.
f Temple of Fortuna Sera, built by Nero the Emperor, all of Phengites stone,
592. m Tephria, what kind of Marble, 573, c Tephritis, a precious stone, 629.
f. the description, ibid. Tepula, a water serving Rome, 585. d Terebinth or
Terpontine tree, what medicinable virtues it has, 181. c Terpentine rosin is
the best, 182. k. good to nourish the body and make it fat, ibid. l Terra
Sigillata or Lemnia, 529, a. it was sealed in old time, and thereupon called
Sphragis, ib. the medicinable virtues thereof, 529. a Terraces, whose
invention, 596. i for Tertian agues, what remedies are convenient, 70. l 112 g.
122. k. 125, a. 126. k. l. 205. b. 223. d. 260. h. k 287. c. d. 302. h. 309. e.
310. i. 391. c. 403. b. 424. i 446. i. Testiculus Canis, an herb, 279. d. the
description, ib. a double root it has like to dog stones, ib. the different
virtue and operation of these roots, ib. Tetheae, what fishes, 442. k. their
description and virtues medicinable, 443. c. d Tetradoron, what kind of brick,
555. d Tetragnathium, a kind of Phalangium or venomous spider 360. k. the
manner of their prick and the accidents ensuing thereupon, ibid. Tetters
called Lichenes, disfiguring the face, how cured, 156. g. 173. a. 183. c. 192.
(...). 244. l m. 245 a. b. 377. c. e 556. l. 557. d. 560 h. for other tettars,
meet remedies, 36. g. 45, c. 49. e. 52. i. 56. k 72. g. 75. b. 103. b. 124. h.
128. k. 142. l. 143. c. 144. l 146. i. 157. c. 166 l. m. 168. k. 169, a. 172,
i. 187, e 252. h. 300. i. 413. b. 419. b. Teuca queen of the Illyrians, put
Roman ambassadors to death, 491. f Teucer, a famous grauer, 484 g Teucria, an
herb, 247. b. a special herb for the liver, ib. Teucrion, an herb, why so
called, 216. l. the description and virtues, ibid. m
T H
Thalassegle, what herb, 203. e. why called Potamantis, ib. the strange
effects thereof, ibid. Thalassomeli, a syrrup, how to be made, 413. d. e. the
singular virtues thereof, ibid. Thalietrum or Thalictrum, an herb, 291. a.
the description and virtue, ibid. Thapsia, an herb, the root whereof is
medicinable, 245. b. Theamides, contrary in nature to the Loadstone, and
reieteth iron, 587. c Theangelis, a magical herb, and the virtues thereof,
203. f. Theater of M. Scaurus, a most wonderful and sumptuous piece of work,
583. e. with the description thereof, ib. Thebais salt, for what infirmities
good, 419. b Thebes a city in Aegipt built hollow upon vaults, 580. h it had
about it an hundred gates, ibid. Thelygonum, what herb, 257. d. the virtues
that it has, 268. h Thelyphonon, what herb, 230. l. the description, ib. l.
m the reason of the name, ib. Thelypteris, a kind of Fearne, 281. d Themison, a
professor in Physic, 344. i. he wrote a Treatise in praise of Plantaine,
223. b scholar to Asclepiades, ib. he rejected his masters Physic, and
brought in new, 344. i Theodorus, a writer in Physic, 52. i Theodorus, a most
curious and fine Imageur and grauer in brass, 503. a. he cast his own image
and a coach, etc. most artificially, ibid. Theodorus one of the Architects that
built the Labyrinth in Lemnos, 579. c Theodorus, a painter, for what pictures
he was famous, 550. h. i. Theombrotion, a magical herb, described, 203. c
the nature thereof, ibid. Theomenes his opinion as touching Amber, 606. l
Theon, a painter, and his works, 550. i Theophrastus his opinion of Amber,
606. k Theophrastus wrote of flowers and herbs, 82. l Theriace. a kind of
grape, 148. i. the medicinable virtues thereof, ibid. Theriaci, what trosches,
397. e. f. how they be made, ib. their use in preservative antidots, ib.
Therionarca, a magical herb, the strange effects thereof, 203. d.
Therionarca, another herb described, 229. c the reason of the name, and the
effects that it has, ib. Theseus, a picture of Euphranor his doing, compared
with another that Parasius made, 547. d Thesium, what herb. 127. e
Thesmophoria, what feasts, 187. b Thespiades the nine Muses wrought in brass
by Euthicratis, 500. g Thespiades also engraven in marble, 570. g Thessalie
practiced Magic, whereupon Magicians were called Thessalians, 377. i
Thessalica, a comedy of Menander, detecting the vanities of Magic, 372. m
Thessalus, a Physician, 344. l when he flourished, ibid. he altered the
Physic of his predecessors, 344. m he inve^ghed openly against them, ib. he
entitled himself upon his tomb Iatronices, 345. a Theudactylos, a precious
stone, 930. h Theutalis, an herb, 287. a Thiatis, what month in Aegipt, 286.
g against Thirstinesse appropriat remedies, 43. b. 51. e. 60. h. i 67. b. 70.
g. 73. a. 120. h. 129. b. 171. c. 275. e 624. g. T^laspi or Thlaspe, what
herb, 291 a of two kinds, ibid. their description, ib. why so called, ibid.
Thorn Arabian, the medicinable virtues that it has, 194. i. Thracia, a
precious stone of three kinds, 629. f Thracian stone soonest burns by the
means of water, 472. h. Thrasillus, a writer in Physic, 435. d Three-leafe
grass. See Trefoile and Clauer. a fish bone slicking in the Throat, how to be
removed, 302. l 328. k. Throat swelled, how to be assuaged, 158. i Throat sore
and exulcerat, how to be healed, 418. h. 328. i 378. g. 589. b. 609. b. for
Throat infirmities general remedies, 41. f. 59. e. 74. k 120. h. 123. c. 157.
b. 180. l. 245. b. 246, i. 317. a 328. i. Thryallis, what herb, 230. k Thumb
of of K. Pyrrhus medicinable, 295. f Thumb hending downward, a sign of
approbation, 297. d Thurtanus, a famous potter, 553, a he made the Image in the
Capitol of Jupiter in clay, ib. Thunderbolts do sent or smell of brimstone,
557. a Thuscanica, what petie images, 494. g Rome full of them, ibid. h. i
Thyme of Attica is best, and therefore the honey from thence is chief, 90. k. l
Thyme of two kinds, ibid. k when it floureth, and how, ib. 107. c. d by it is
known what a year will be of honey, ibid. the description and nature of Thyme,
90. k the virtues, 107. d running Thyme, 75. d, why it is called Serpyllum, ib.
wild Thyme, where and how it grows, 31. c. d the properties that it has, 75.
d Thymbraeum, what herb, 233. e. the virtue, ibid. Thysselium, what herb,
233. e. the virtue, ibid. Thystles, and their sundry kinds, 98. g. h Thystles
wild of two sorts, 78. l Thystles forbidden to be eaten by Roman Commoners, 11.
d
T I
Tiberius Caesar a grim sir, yet delighted in pictures, 527. f See Tyberius.
Ti^r of Flax, 4. i. k Tikes in dogs how to be killed, 124. i Tikes highly
esteemed by Magicians, 387. b. c their fooleries in the use of Tikes, ibid.
Timagoras, an ancient painter, 537. d Timaeus, a natural Philosopher, 666. i
Timanthes, an excellent painter, 536. k. famous for the picture of Iphigenia in
Aulides, ib. a man of fine conceit, ib. Timarete, a paintresse famous for her
pensill, 534. g. 551. a her picture, ibid. Timomachus, a painter of good note,
548. k his pictures, ib. Timotheus, a famous Imageur and cutter in stone, 568.
l rich Tinctures, which three be principal, 88. k Tinesmus, what disease it
is, 249, a. the remedies thereof, 44. i. 49. e. 55. c. 66. i. 70. h. 72. k. 73.
d. 126. g. 143. (...) 172. h. 249. b. 278 l. 283. b. 318. k. 332. h. 359. c.
382. k 413. a. 437. c. 443. d. e. 474. h. 520. i. Tin-glasse. See Leadwhite.
Tin of diverse kinds, 517. c. d sundry uses of Tin, ibid. how it is sophisticat.
ibid. Tin Tertiarium, what it is, 517. d. the use thereof, ib. Tin Argentarium,
what metal and how employed, 517. e Tissie, 466. g Tithymales, a kind of wild
Poppie, 69. c Tithymalus, what herb it is, 251. e. the sundry names thereof,
ib. what is practiced with the milkie juice of it, 251. e. f. Tithymall of many
kinds, ibid. 1. Tithymalos Characias, 251. f. the description, ib. the juice
extracted, 252. g. the virtue, ib. 2. Tithymalos, Myrsinites, or Caryites, 252.
i. k. the reason of both names, ib. the dose thereof, ibid. 3. Tithymalos
Paralius, or Tithymalis, 252. l. the descriptition and dose, ibid. 4.
Tithymalus Helioscopius, 252. l. the de description, ib. the reason of the
name, ib. m. the virtue that it has, ib. the dose, ibid. 5. Tithymalos
Cyparissias, why so called, 253. a, the description and operation, ibid. 6.
Tithymalos Platyphyllos, 253. a. the reason of that name, ib. why it is also
called Corymbites, ib. why named Amygdalites, ib. the virtues, ib. 7.
Dendroides, Cobion, or Leptophyllon, the description and effects, 253. a. b
Titius, a man noted for being full of the foul Morphew, 403. a. Tiwill in
young children hangiug forth, how to be reduced, 451. e. See Fundament.
Tlepolemus, a Physician, 67. a
T O
Toads or venomous frogs described, 434. l. why called in Latin Rubetae, ib.
wonders written of them, ib. a bone in one of their sides of great efficacy,
ib. and 435. a how to be found, 434. m against the venom or poison of these
Toads, remedies, 119 a 223. d. 231. a. b. 232. g. 300. k. 307. e. 431. f. 434.
i 435. b, c. Toads ^lax, an herb, 286. l. See Osyris. Toadstooles, 7. f. 132.
l. m. See Mushromes. Tongue of man medicinable, and of power to auert ill
fortune, 300. m Tongue blistered and sore, how to be cooled and healed, 328. i
377. a. Tongue furred and rough how to be mundified, 59. e. 192. i 419. b.
Tongue speechless how it may be recovered, 60. k Tongue palsy how to be
cured, 134. m against an intemperate and lying Tongue, a remedy, 316. h Tonos in
painting, what it is, 528. h Tonsils, what they are, 135. d. inflamed or sore
how cured, 183. c. 196. g. 197. d. 378. g. h. 437. d. 442. g. 507. f 509. c.
510. i. 607. f. See Amygdales. Toothing in children how to be eased, 105. b.
341, b, c, d 376. h. 397. e. 398. g. i. 449. e. Tooth or biting of man or woman
mad, is venomous, 301. a the same in some cases is medicinable, ibid. in a fit
of a Tooth one killed himself, 135. a for the Toothach proper remedies, 36, g.
38, g, h. 40, m. 42, h 44, g. 45, b. 47, b. 53, d. 56, i. 57, d. 62, l. 64, l.
65, b, c 70. g. 72, g. 73, c. 74, g, k. 102, l. 109, c. 123, a. 128, i 149, a.
161, c. 168, k. 169, a. 171, a. 178, g. 179. c 180, k. 181, c. 184, g, h, l.
187, l. 190, g. 199 f. 201. f 206, l. 238, h, k. 239, b, c. 252, h. 273, c.
274, k. 286. i 302, g. 312. g, h. 316, l. 326, i, k. l. m. 327, a. 375, e, f
367. g. h. i. k. l. m. 419, f. 422, g. 431, c. 432, i. 440, g, h 510, h. 557,
d. 589. c. Topaze thought to be the Chrysolith, a precious stone, 618 k where
it was first discovered, ibid. k l it was first graced by queen Berenice, ib.
the image of queen Arsinoe, wife to Ptolomaeus Philadelphus, made of the
Topaze, ib. d. Topaze of two kinds, to wit, Prasoides, and Chrysopteros, 618,
m. it is filed, ib. it wears with use, ibid. Topazos, an Island why so
called, 618. l Tordile, what it is, 206. h Tordilion, what it is, 74. h
Tortoises live both in land and water, 431. d their manifold uses, ibid.
Tortoises of diverse kinds, ibid. land Tortoises, their flesh, blood, etc.
medicinable, 431. e their urine also is effectual in Physic, according to
the Magi, 432. g sea-Tortoises medicinable, 432. h. 438. g their blood, 132. i
their gall, ib. ^ore Tortoises, described, with their properties, 432. l river
Tortoises, and their virtues, 432. m Tortoises how to be dressed to cure the
quartane ague, 433. a. how to be let blood artificially, 433. b a Tortoise foot
in a ship hindered her course, ibid. Tortoises are medicinable, ib. c they be
fishes serving for roiot and wantonness, 451. b Tortoise-worke when used at
Rome, 482. g Touchstone, 477. f. where it is found, ibid. how to be chosen and
used, 472. g Tow of flax, what it is, 4. i. how employed, ib. Toxica be
poisons, what remedies against them, 119. a 150. m. 177. d. 180. h. 323. d.
355. c. 364. h. Toxicon, a kind of Ladanum, 249. d
T R
Trachinia, an herb, 291. c. the incredible effects which Democritus
attributes to it, ib. Tragacantha, a great healer, 264. k Tragi, what Spunges,
423. b Tragion or Tragonis, an herb, 291. c. the description, ibid.
Tragopogon, an herb, 291. d. the description, ibid. Tragoriganum, an herb,
64. h. the description and the virtues, ib. Tragos, an herb, 291. d. the
description, ibid. Transplanting cures many diseases in herbs, 33. d
Travelers, what wine they may drink, 155. d Treacle or Theriaca, the
composition thereof, 79. b it was K. Antiochus his counterpoyson, ibid. another
Treacle or Theriaca reproved, and the composition thereof, 348. i Trebius
Niger, a writer, 428. i Trees how they prove harder to be hewed, and wax
drier, 176. g. Treasure at Rome of gold and silver, 464. l m. 465. a Trembling
of ioints, or shaking of lims, how to be cured, 49. d. 67. d. 141. b. 155. d.
162. h. 183. c. 219. d. 262. m 283. f. 312 i 359. c. 431. a. 447. a. Trembling
of the heart how to be cured, 48. h. 49. f. 174. i Tribuni aeris, what they
were at Rome, 459. f Trichites, a kind of Alum, why so called, 558. k
Trich-madame. See Prick-madame. Trichomanes, what kind of Maiden-haire, 127. a
Trichrus, a precious stone, 629. c the description, ib. Tricoccum, 126. g
Tridachna, certain Oisters, 437. b Triens, a small piece of brass coin at
Rome, 463. b the Triens or brass piece of the Servilij at Rome, and the
wonderful nature thereof, 513. a. b fed with silver or gold, ibid. Trifoile or
Trifolie of three kinds, 90. h the virtues thereof, 107. b supposed by
Sophocles and others to be a venomous herb, 107. b not to be used but as a
counterpoyson, 107. c Triglites, a precious stone, 630. i Tripatimum, what,
554. g Triophthalmos, a precious stone, 630. h Triorches, what herb, 221. b
Triorchis the Hawke defends the herb Centaurie Triorches, 221. c Tripoli or
Goldsmiths earth, 530. l how it is colored, and which is best, ibid. l. m
Tripolium, what herb, 247. e the description, ib. the virtues, ibid.
Tritianum, what kind of Colewort, 26. i Triticum, the Wheat, whereto it serves
in Physic, 138. g. Tritum, a kind of painters color, 435. a the Price, ibid.
Triumphall Coronets, 115. f Triumphant captains, why they rode painted with
Vermillion, 475. c Troschiskes of Elaterium, for what they are good, 36. g.
Trochiskes of Poppie, in what cases used, 68. g Trosches of Cyclamine, whereto
employed, 234. h Trochiskes of Scammonie, 151. c Trochiskes Theriaci, 357. e
Tr^zen, a territory, wherein the people be subject to the gout, and the reason
why, 403. b Trogus, a writer, 424. l Trossult at Rome who they were, 461. a why
the horsemen were so called, ibid. Trychnos, an herb. See Strychnos. Tryxalis,
a kind of Insect, and the virtue thereof in Physic, 381. b
T V
Tuccia, the Nun or vestall votarie, put to prove her virginity, 295. a. she
carried water in a sieue, 295. b. Tullus Hostilius K. of Rome killed with
lightening, and wherefore 295. c. d for hard Tumors and swelling bunches,
appropriat remedies, 37. a. 44, k. 45, c. 64, h. 65, c. 66, l. 73, a. 77. f.
105. d 108, g. 110, i. 111, a. 122, k. 123, c. 135, d. 136, k 138, k. 141, c.
142, g. 146, i, l. 159, a, 160, l. 160, m 166, i. 168, k. 174, i. 178, h. 181,
b. 185, d. 186. i 189, c. 193, d, 195, e. 218, k. 223, e. 236, i. 245, e 250,
c. 262, i. 337, b. 349, f. 392, h. 531, c. 448 g 475. a. how such hard Tumors
or schirrosities may be evaporated and dissolved, 139. f. 412. l. 419. f. 424.
i. 560. h 588. m. Tungri, a city famous for hot baths, natural and medicinable
waters, 403. b Tunie fish salted, called Cybium, medicinable, 434. h 440. g.
Turbot fish medicinable, 444. g Turbystum, what it is, 471. b Turnips. See
Rapes. Turning the body about, was the gesture of worshipping the gods, 297. e
Turnsoll, an herb, 126. g. two kinds thereof, Tricoccum, Helioscopium, ib. the
description, ibid. Turpilus, an excellent painter and yet left handed, 526. h
Turquois or Callais, a precious stone, 619. a the description, ib. which be the
richest, ibid. a. c where they grow and how they be gotten, ib. b how the
Indians wear them, 619. b what hurts them, and how they be falsified, ibid.
c Turrets and watch-towers raised of earth turfe, most durable, 555. c Turrets
in Cyzicam rendering echoes, 581. c Tussilago. See Folefoot or Coughwort.
Tutelar god, or the protector and patron of Rome city, not known and
divulged, 296. i. the reason thereof, ibid.
T Y
Tyberius Caesar, the first known sick of the collicke at Rome, 242. g. See
Tiberius. Tyllet. See Linden tree, Tympanie what cures, 219. d Tyridates K. of
Armenia, a famous Magitian, 374. m he traveled out of his own kingdom to
Rome by land for to do homage to Nero, 375. a. why he took not the sea, ib.
he instructed Nero in the principals of art Magic, ibid.
V A
VAlens Vectius a Rhetorician and Physician, 344. l inward and over familiar
with Messalina the empress, ib. 347. e. he erected a new sect and school of
Physic, 344. l Valerian, an herb. See Setwall. Vallare chaplets what they
were, 115. (...) Vanity of Magicians reckoned up and derided, 302. per totam
page, 310. h Varro, a writer in Physic, 42. k
V E
Veientana, a precious stone, 630. g Veins swelling called Varices, how to be
eased, 120. k 123, e. 164. g. 257. e. 279. b. 334. l. 385. e. Vein broken by
ouerstraining the voice or sides, how to be knit again. 264. g Velinus, a
lake medicinable, 402. l against the danger of venomous arrows, 316. a against
the prick and poison of venomous beasts, remedies, 41, f. 42, m. 43, e. 55, c.
57, a. 69, e. 113, c. 118, m. 127, f 134, i. 155, f. 157, c. 173, d. 187, d.
231, c. 434. g 435, c. Venison, how the Frenchmen make more tender, 220. g
Ventosities in stomach, belly, or elsewhere by what means discussed, 46, g.
50, g, l. 53, a. 55, b. 57, c. 61, b, d, 62. i 63, a. 66, h, i, m. 67, c. 77,
b. 102, g. 105, c. 106, l. 107, f 108, m. 119, c. 121, c. 125, e. 129. f. 143,
c. 153, c. 154, g. 160, l. 186, i. 187, c. 195, c. 196, l. 219, e. 237, a. 250,
l 253, c. 259, c. 277, a, b. 28^, d. 290, k. 332, g. 359, c 363, e. 383, b, c.
422, l. 431, a. 443, a, c. Venus-haire, a precious stone, black, and shining
withal 629, f. Venus of Apelles, i. the grace of his pictures, which the
Greeks call Charis, 563. f Venus Palatina, who was called, ibid. Venus, i.
love affection, how to be abated, 435, b. how to be forgotten for ever 450. h
Venus-Nauill, an herb. See Vmbilieus veneris. Venus, for lust to the act of
generation, by what means incited, 38, l. 40, g. 43, b, d. 44, l, m. 52, k.
53, b, c. 55, d 56. g. 67, b. 72, i. 105, a. 126, l. 128, k. 129, e. 130, i
131, a. 144, k. 181, c. 189. a. 191, d. 200, g. 226, l 256, l, 247, a, b, c, d.
279, d. 310, m. 312, l. 316, i 341, e. f 342, g. 359, a. 398, l. 399, a, b.
432, g. 435, a. 450, g, h by what means repressed, 53, d. 56. g. 70. i. 113. d
187. a. b. d. 189. a. 257. a. b. d. 279. d. 316. k. l. m. 341. b 342. g. 398.
l. m. 399. a f. 404. h. 432. g. 435 a. 450. g. h 518. l. condemned by
Democritus, and wherefore, 304. l it helps some infirmities, 301. e
moderately used it is wholesome, 304. l Venus, an Image in Marble known by the
name of Aphrodite (...) at Athens, whose workmanship it was, 563. d Venus, an
Image wrought by Agoracritus, 565. e. by what occasion called Nemesis, ibid.
Venus of Gnidos naked, wrought in marble by Praxiteles, an admirable piece of
work, 566, i. a wanton fellow enamoured on her, ibid. l Venus veiled, by him
also made, 566. k Venus naked wrought by Scopas, 567. e Veratrum, what herb,
218. g Verbascum, an herb. See Longwort. Verbenae, what they were, 115. d
Verbenarius, what officer at Rome he was, ibid. Verd de Azur, a painters rich
color, 528. i why called Armenius Lapis, 531. c. the price, ibid. the use in
Physic, ibid. Uer de gris, what it is, 507. c. 508. g. Achilles first used it
in a cure, 216. i Uerd de Terre, a painters color, 528, i. See Borax. Veriuice
of grapes, 146, g. the medicinable virtues, 146, m. Uermillion the best is
sophisticated with a second kind, 476. l. with Scyricum, ibid. which is the
best Uermilion, and how known, 476. m 477. a. Uermillion a mineral, 454. g
workmen about Uermillion, are masked, and why, 477. b in great account among
the Romans, 475, f. and Aethiopians, ibid. d. when it came first into use,
475. e used in limming books and sepulchers, 477. c what it is and how
prepared, 475. e the luster of Uermillion hurt by Sun and Moon, 477. a how
that may be prevented, ibid. b Uermillion, a rank poison, taken inwardly, 476,
h. 477, e where the best Uermillion is, 476. i Uermillion reckoned for a rich
and lively color, 528. i Uermillion how carefully it is looked unto, and sent
sealed from Sisapone to Rome, 476. k Uermine, as ants, Cankerwormes, and such,
how to be driven out of a garden, 32. k against all such Uermine and worms,
42. k Uerres proscribed by Antonie the Triumvir for his fair Corinthian
vessel, 487. d Uerrius Flaccus, a Roman writer of Chronicles, 296. h 466. g.
Uerrucaria, an herb, why so called, 126. h Uervaine, an herb, 228. g. the
sundry names that it has, ibid. much esteemed among the Romans, ibid. the
diverse kinds, ibid. the vanity of the Druidae and Magi about this herb, ibid.
h. i Uessell in the kitchen of silver, by Calvus the Orator his days, 580. l
Uestaes chapel at Rome covered with brass, 489. b Ueterum Delubrum, a
temple, 428. l Uettonica, an herb. See Betonie.
V I
Uibones, what they be, 112. l Uictoriatus, what piece of silver coin at Rome,
463. c. why so called, ibid. Uictorie in the field how it may be obtained, 357.
c. See Speed and success. Uindex Julius how he deceived Nero the Emperor with
his pale looks, 61. e Uine compared with other trees, 146. g. the uses thereof
in Physic, ibid. h Uinegre, the nature and properties thereof, 155. d. e the
inconvenience and discommodities, 156. h the force of Uinegre, ibid. i Uinegre
of honey, or honied, medicinable, 96. g Uinegredregs, the nature and virtues,
158. g Uinegre squilliticke how it is made, 51. d the virtues thereof, ibid.
Uiolets of sundry sorts, 85. d March Uiolets, ib. yellow Uioleta or
wall-floures, ibid. Tusculane Uiolets, ibid. sea-Uiolets, ibid. Calathian
Uiolets, ibid. the medicinable virtues of Uiolets, 103. e Uiolet flowers best
dried, 104. g Uipers venom, by what medicines it is killed, 64. h. 125. b 173.
a. 357. d. they yield remedies for their own stings. 357. d Uipers how to be
prepared for meat at the table, and to preserve eyesight, 367. a decoction of
Uipers, for what it is medicinable, ib. Uirginitie or the contrary, what does
show and bewray, 589. c. Uirgo a water serving Rome, 408. h why so called,
ibid. Uiriae, what ornaments they are, 462. g why called Celticae, ibid.
Uiriolae, what ornaments they be, 462. g why called Celtibericae, ibid. Uisage
in some countries painted with the juice of certain herbs, 114 l Uisage how
to be preserved from Sun burning, 351. e Uisage and countenance how it may be
preserved youthful, 65. e. 101. b. Uisage how to be cleansed from speckes,
scales, freckles, red pimples, and such like blemishes, 76, h. 94, k. 103, d
107, c. 108, h. 127, e. 130, l. 141, b. 145, b. 149, e. 161. b 185, c. 186, l.
187, a. 197, d. 290, l. 308, g. 310, l. 314, k 328, g. 351, e. how it may be
made to show fresh, fair, and lovely, 171. d 341, c. Uitellius the Emperor his
monstrous charger or platter of earth, 554, h. his excess and vanity that
way, noted by Mutianus, 554. h Uitex, what tree, and the virtues thereof, 187.
a. why called Agnos or Chast-tree, ibid. b Uitrioll natural, a mineral, 530.
i. the wonderful nature of it, 510, l. how engendered, 510. l. m. 511. a. of
two kinds, and how engendered, 536. i Uitrioll so astringent, that it will bind
Bears and Lions mouths like a muzzle, 511. d Uitrioll or black, a painters
color artificial, 528. k Uitrioll Stalagmias, what it is, and why so called,
511. a Uitrioll Leucoion, ibid. the best Cyprian Uitrioll, the medicinable
virtues of it, 511. b.
V L
Ulcers cancerous. corrosiue, and eating deep, as wolves and such like, by
what medicines cured, 40. g. k. 42. g. 45. b. c. 46, i. 47, c. 49, a. 50, g, m.
56, k. 62, m. 70, l. 72, m. 76, k 101, e. 103, b. 106, i, l. 107, a. 122, h.
125, e. 138, m 143, b. 144, i. 149, d. 150, i. 158, l. 160, h. 162, g, k 163,
b. 165, a, d, e. 168, l. 173, c. 174, k. 178. g. 180, g 181, a. 183, d. 184, g,
k. 188, h, l. 189, c. 190, k. 192, h, i 193, d. 194, m. 197, d. 206, g, h. 207,
b. 208, g. 263, d 264, k. l. 265, c, e. 266. g. 285. c. 287, d. 300, i. 301, b
302, h. 306, i. 320, h. 338, h, i, k. 393, d, e, f. 394, g. 418, k 419, b, d.
422, h. 443, a. 447, e. 559, b. 510, k. 516. k 519. d. 559, b. 595, c. Ulcers
of inward parts by what means healed, 105. a 154, g. 317, d. Ulcers filthy,
full of dead flesh, and tending to mortification, how to be mundified and
cured, 43. c. 44. l. 69. e. 70. h 105. c. 109. f, 121. d. 125. e. 128. g. 133
c. 147. b 159, a, b, f. 161, c. 162, g, h. 165. d. 167, f. 171, e, 179, d 183,
c. 191, d. 193. d. 198, i, l. 264, i, k. 165, a, b, d, 278, h 279, c. 282, h.
283, b. 287, c. 338, h. 447. f. 448, g. 470, k 471, e. 510, k. 512, h. 588, g.
Ulcers rheumaticke, and in moist parts how to be dried and healed, 69, c. 123,
c. 143. f. 146, m. 147, b. 155, f. 174, l 184, g. 197, d. 265, c 311, c. 422,
l. 423, c. 441, b. 528, m 531, c. Ulcers old and long festered, by what means
cured, 129, a 138. k. 139, a. 220. g. 264. k. 265. h. 279. c. 350. g. 450. i
588. g. Ulcers Cacoethe, morimals, and untoward to heal, by what means cured,
140, g. 174. h. 177. c. 190. h. 264. k 265. c. e. 281. f. 287. d. 338. k. 394.
i. 449. b. 588. g. Ulcers desperate what medicines heal, 370. l. 394. h Ulcers
breeding vermin, how to be cleansed, 265, a, d. 393, c 447 f. hollow Ulcers and
fistulaes how to be incurnat, 123. d. 124. l 140. l. 178. i. 291. a. 338. h. i.
393. d. Ulcers carbuncled, how to be cured, 45, e. 338. l Ulcers in the head
and privy parts, what means to heal, 591. d. Ulcers in gristly parts what
does cure, 40. l Ulcers occasioned by edged weapons, how healed, 338. l Ulcers
superficially healed, how to be opened again, and so kept, 189. b Ulcers in
bodies of children and old folk, what medecins do heal, 303. b Ulcers in
shins and legs, what appropriat medecines they require, 338. h Ulcers
mortified, and grown to a gangrene, how to be recovered, 143. e. 265. d. 338.
i in Ulcers the excrescence of proud flesh, how to be consumed and taken away,
393. d. e. 419. e. 441. b. 509. c. 510. k 511. c. 519. d. 588. g. tumors
incident unto Ulcers how to be assuaged, 393. c callosities in Ulcers, how to
be helped, 393. c. 394. g. i rouses and eschares about Ulcers, what does rid
away. 394. (...). for all Ulcers in general, good medicines, 393. f. 394. h
418. i. 440. d. 443. c. 559. b. Vlex, a shrub, receiving gold from the cloven
mountains, when they are scoured and washed with a current for the ore, 469.
a. how to be ordered for the trying of gold out of it, 469. b Vlophonon, one of
the kinds of the herb Chamaeleon, why so called, 124. i Vlpicum a kind of
Garlic, 21. e
V M
Vmbilicus veneris, what herb, 237. b. the description, ib. why called
Cotyledon, ibid. Vmbrian earth or chalk, for what it is good, 560. k
V N
Vncomes or dangerous felons, how brought to an head, 422. h. how broken, ib.
how cured, 188. m. 300. h Unction or anointing of the body, makes for health,
303. d Vnguis in a Rose flower, what it is, 102. h Vngulus, what it is, 455. d
V O
Voice, by what medicines it is cleared and strengthened, 43, b, d. 44, h. 59,
e. 64, l. 70, g. 120, h. 134, k 141, b, d. 204, l. 256, l. 442, h. 518. m. 521.
a. Voice helped by some waters, 403. e what hurts the Voice, 443. a straining
and exercising the Voice makes for health, 303. d. Volva, what it is, 132. h
Vomits what medicines do stat, 37. c. 41. b. 47. c. 52. g. ^5. c 59. e. 60. k.
62. h. 66. i. 70. h. 75. e. 76. a. 105. f. 140 g 146. l. 156. m. 164. i. 174.
k. 206. l. 219. b. 248. h. 274. g 275. b. Vomit by what means it may be
provoked, 37. c. 40. g. 67. a 71 c. 105. d. 121. e. 128. i. 136. i. 173. b.
173. g. 204. m 218. l. 248. g. 252. i. k. 253. c. 289. b. 291. b. 413. a. 442.
h 471. e. 507. a. 511. b. aptness to heave, cast, and vomit, how to be helped,
148 h 253. c. 155. d. 181. c. 184. h. 198. i. 219. e. 224. h. 247. a 287. c.
303. d. 305. c. 312. h. 352. l. Vomiting was taught us by dogs, 355. c Vomits
bitter how to be allaied, 148. g Vomits ordinary, in cure of diseases,
condemned worthily by Asclepiades, 243. f Vomit now and than is healthful, but
not usually, 303 e Vomiting at sea for what it is good, 412. l Vomiting of
blood out of the stomach, how to be cured, 329. d. See Blood casting and
Reaching. Vowels in the proper name of persons, significant for their fortune,
according to Pithagoras, 299. d
V R
Vranoscopus, what fish, 438. i Vrceolaris, what herb. 123. d Vrchins head of
singular operation to prevent shedding of hair, and to recover it again, 364.
l Vrchin, the strange nature both of him and his vein, 364. g. h sea Vrchin
medicinable, 436. h. 438. g. l Vri what beasts. See Buffles and Bisontes. Urine
and the speculation thereof observed in the judicial part of Physic, 306. k
of Urine authors have written, ibid. g Urine white and clear what it
betokens, ibid. deep colored and yellow, ibid. red Urine, ib. 306. l black
Urine, ib. full of Bubbles, ibid. full of froth, ibid. Urine of a thick
substance, what it imports, ibid. hypostasis of Urine heavy, what it
signifies, ibid. hypostasis or sediment white, what it does betoken, ibid.
Urine greenish, what it presageth, ib. pale, ibid. contents in Urine, brannie,
brackish, and cloudie, what they presage, ibid. Urine of children ought to be
thin and waterish, ib. in others what it shows, ib. Urine, what medecines do
procure, 37, b. 39, a, b. 40. k 41, b. 45, f. 47, b, e. 51, f. 53, b, d. 54, h.
55, c. 56, i. 60. k 62, i. 63. e. 64, k 65, d. 67, h. 72, l. 73, d. 74, h. 75,
c, e 76, h. 77, b, c. 101, d. 102, g, l. 103. f. 104, i. 105. a 108, k. 110, g,
h, k, 111, b. 122, h. 124. g. 125, c. 127, f 128, i. 129, d. 130, g, k. 131, a.
142, i, l. 150, g 162, i. 164, i, 167, a, c. 171, a, d. 172, l. 174, i 181, c.
182, m. 184, g, h. 185, e. 187, c. 189, d. 192, i. l 194, g. 195, d. 196, g.
198, i, k. 199, b. 200, k 249, c. 250, g. 254, h. 255, a, d. 263, d. 271, d.
273, b 277. a, d. 286, l. 288, h. 290, h. 362, i. stopping of Urine and
difficulty in making water, how to becured, 143, a, c. 147, a. 175, b. 181, c.
f. 201. f. 206. l 254, h. 232, l. 333, c. 384, k. 591, a. 609, a. incontinencie
of Urine in such as cannot lie dry, nor hold their water how cured, 58, h. 62.
g. 305, c. 313, d 333, b, e. a charm thereto belonging, ibid. 385. d 445. a.
Urine smelling strong how to be rectified, 175. b Urine hot and scalding how to
be delaied, 62. g Urine of mankind medicinable, 305. f in delivery of Urine,
or making water, the Magicians were very ceremonious, 306. m. it was forbidden
aagainst the Sun and Moon, ibid. upon the shadow of any person, ibid.
Vrbiumdefect or imperfection of the earth, 468. l
V S
Usurers at Rome sined, 457. d
V V
Vva Taminia, what plant, 149. b Vultures, their parts medicinable, 367, c.
381. c Uvula enflamed swollen, or fallen, how to be helped and eased, 51, b.
59, e. 64, k 67, c. 70, k. 74, g. 120, c. 122. h 134, k. 163, c. 165, e. 169,
a, c. 170, h. 173, e. f. 177. f 183, c. 196, i. 197, a. 301, e. 305, b 378, g.
419, b. 437. c 509, e. 511, c. 559, c.
W A
VVAy-bread, an herb. See Plantaine. Wake Robin, an herb, 19, b. the
description and nature, ibid. it differs from Dragons, 200. h highly
commended by the Greeks for the medicinable virtues, 200. i. k Walls of sundry
makings, 555. b. c Walls of houses in Rome of what thickness they were allowed,
556. g in Walls how stones should be laid and couched, 594. g Walking, an
exercise that makes for the health of the body 303, d. Wal-lice what kills,
282. g. 356, k. they are thought to be medicinable in many respects, 356. g. h
Walnut oil what virtue it has, 161. d Walnuts, whereupon they took their name
in Greek, 172. g their hurtful properties, ibid. their medicinable virtues,
172. h Walnuts good to be eaten after Onions, ibid. Walnut tree, an enemy to
the Oak, 176 g Walwort, an herb described, 276. g. appropriat for the inward
and secret maladies of women, ib. what medicinable virtues it has besides,
185. e. 230. i sovereign for the dropsy, 261. a Washing bals to scour the
skin, 286. l Water Persely, an herb. See Thysselium. Water-Speeke, what herb,
250. g. the description and virtues, ib. a fresh Water spring in Germany
dangerous to drink, 112, k. Waters distinguished by degrees of persons, 11. d.
e Water which is best for gardens. 33. b. c how and when gardens are to be
Watered, 33. c Waters brackish how to be made fresh and sweet, 176. i drink of
Water how it nourishes, 152. g offense by vnwhole some waters how to be
helped, 60. l Waters running how to be divided, that the same may be seen
bare, 316. h Water how to be laden out of pits, where it comes upon the
pioners, 469. a good Waters from bad, how trauailers may discern and know,
414. g Waters change their color at certain times, 411. c Waters when
heauiest, ib. Water maintained and cherished by ploughing of the ground, 410. l
Water creatures are medicinable, 400. l Waters, some coldin the Spring, others
in the Dog days, 409. e. f. Water a powerful element, 400. l. m. 401. a. b
Water suspected, how it may be altered and made good, 407. e. of well Waters
or pit waters, 407. c Waters where they be exceeding hot actually, 404. h
Waters deadly, 405. a. b Water fair to sight, yet hurtful both to man and
beast, 405. b. Waters growing to a stony substance, 405. b. c. d Water cold
what operation it has, 407. f Waters of a corrosiue and fretting quality,
405. c Water how it may be made most cold actually, 407, d, e standing Waters
condemned, 405. f a discourse, what Water is best, 406. g Waters which are
known to be cold, ibid. m Waters which are to be rejected, 406. g. 407. a
Waters salt and brackish, how they may be soon made potable, 407. a Water
ought to have no taste at all, ib. b Water best, which comes nearest to the
nature of air, 407. b. Waters not to be tried by the balance, 407. c how the
trial is to be taken, ibid. Watery humors what medecines purge downward out
of the body, 108, g. 110, m. 130, l. 149, b. 174, g. 181. c 182, g. 185, c, e.
186, g. 190, g. 252, g. 253, a. 281, b, c 284, i. 442, l. Wax how it is made,
96. g Wax Punica therbest, 96. h Wax of Pontica, ib. Wax of Candic, ibid. Wax
of Corsica, ibid. the white wax Punica how it is wrought, ib. best for
medicines, ibid. i how wax may be made black, ib, how it may be colored,
ibid. how wax may be brought to any color, ibid: the uses of wax, 96. k the
properties of Wax, 137. a b Wax contrary in nature to milk, ib. i
W E
Weary upon travel or otherwise how to be refreshed, 64. m 66. l. 121. e.
160. k. 161. e. 173. d. e. 180. k. 187. c. 289. b 319. d. 400. g. 419. e. 422.
i. 624. h. how to be be prevented, 266. i Weazils armed with rue against they
should fight with serpents, 56. m Weazils how they are brought together from
far, 316. g Weazils of two kinds, 533. e Weazils fetides, their gall is both a
poison and also a countrepoison, ibid. Weazils flesh medicinable, ibid. Weazils
wild be venomous, 363. e what remedy therefore, ibid. Wens called Ceria, by
what means cured, 37, c. 167, a 168, k. Wins named Melicerides, how to be
cured, 73, d. 107, a Wens Stratomata, how cured, 265. c Werts, what means to
take away and cause to fall off, 55. d 58, h. 105, d. 108, g. 125, h, l. 127,
e. 142, m. 146, i 166, l. 168, h. 185, b. 198, m. 218, k. 266, h. 280, l 302,
k. 307, b. 335, a. 370, k. 386, l, m. 414, h. 448, h 470, k. Werts beginning to
breed, how repressed, 418. m Wertwals what does cure, 75. c Wesand, appropriat
remedies therefore, 167. c See Throat. against the envy of the Wesps sting,
40. h. 56. m. 63. f. 71. c 106. k. 153. b. 166. l. 173. b. 361. d. 418. m.
W H
Whales and such other fishes fat, how employed by merchants, 427. c Wheales
angry, small pocks, and such like eruptions, how to be cured, 46. k. 70 g. 140.
i. l. 161. c. 173. f. 174. k 178. g. 183. b. 187. c. 219. f. 317. d. 320. h.
337. a. 421. e 443. b. 437. d. 558. i. 559 b. 589. b. Wheazing in the chest,
how helped, 134. l. 154. g Whey of cows milk for what medicinable, 318. i
Whelps or young puppies sucking, were thought fine meat at Rome, 355. b they
served there for an expiatory sacrifice, ib. they made a dish of meat at their
solemn feasts, 355. c Whet stones of sundry kinds, 593. a which be used with
water, and which with oil, 593. a. b Spanish White. See Ceruse burnt. Spanish
White, or Ceruse natural, 529. e VVhites in women, how repressed, 516. h. See
more in Women. White flaws about the nails how to be healed, 75. c. 105. d
141. a. 147. b. 158. k. 160 g. 174. l. 177. f. 272. k. 300. l 516. h. White
stones, 588. i
W I
VVild-fires and such like fretting humors, how to be extinguished, 72. g. 75.
b. 106. i. 124. h. 146. k. 157. e. 265. d 287. b. 529. b. VVildings or crab
apples and their nature, 164. i Wild-vine called Ampelos Agria, described, 149.
b. 276. h the virtues, ibid. VVild-vine Labrusca, 149. b VVild white vine
Ampeloleuce, 149. c the root has many virtues, 149. d herb Willow. See
Lisimachia. Willow or Withie, what medicinable virtues it has, 186. l Willow
yields a juice of three kinds, 186, l Wine of Bacchus, what, 403. a VVines
how they may be soon refined and made ready to draw, 176. (...) See more in
Wine. for co cleanse and discharge the VVindpipes being stuffed, appropriat
remedies, 133, e. 148, k. 194, g. 277, b. 329. e Windpipes enflamed and
exulcerat, how to be cured, 140. l. 328. i. for all infirmities of the
Windpipes, convenient remedies, 122, g. 134, k. 138, m. 170, h. 289, e. how a
horse will prove broken Winded, 342. h. i broken Wind in horses, how to helped,
246. h holding of the Wind in what cases good, 305. d shortness of Wind, by what
medicines it may be helped, 37. a 39, c. 44, g. 52, g. 56, h. 57, d. 58, h. 61,
b. 65, c. 70, g. 73. a 104, h. 105, d. 107, e. 109, a. 127. c. 144, i. 150, g.
154. g 162, g. 164, g. 167, c. 173, b. 180, g, k. 183, e. 192. l 193, a. 200,
l. 201, f. 247, a, b, d. 248, h. 263, d. 274, g 289, d. 329, c. 359, c. 381, a.
422, k. 432, i. 442. h. 521. a 556, m. 557, d. what moves to break Wind
upward, 237. a. 253, e 277, b. 290, k. Winter-cherrie, why called Versicaria,
112. h the description thereof, ibid. Wisards, prophets, and Phisicians, put
down by Tiberius Caesar, 374. g Wit helped by some water, 403. e bereft of
Wit, how to be cured, 52, l. 260, l. 306. k. l Withwind, an herb, and the
flower thereof, described, 84. l Withie. See Willow. Witchcraft condemned by
Pliny, 213. c Witchcraft and enchantments forbidden expressly by the laws, at
Rome, 296. h Witchcraft and sorcerie avail not, nor be of force, where no
regard is made thereof, 296. g against the practice of Witches, good
preservatives, 108. m 300, g.
W O
Woad, an herb, the properties medicinable that it has, 45. c bodies of men or
women painted or died therewith in old time, 114. l Wool reverently regarded
among the ancient Romans, 349. e. the side posts of the bridegrooms door
bedecked with wool by the bride on the wedding day, 349. e the use of Wool
ibid. 351. h Wool unwashed, medicinable, 351. k Wool of a sheep greasy, is
medicinable 350. g. h. i Wool unwashed and greasy, does mollify, 424. g
Wool greasy of a ram is effectual in Physic, 350. h Wool of the neck
is best, ibid. from what countries, ibid. Wool greasy, how to be ordered for
use in Physic, 350. i. k how it is calcined, 350. k the ashes thereof is
medicinable, ibid. fleece Wool washed, and the use thereof, 351. b
Woooll-beards or Caterpillars called Multipedae, described, 369. e. a Wolves
snout why it is set usually upon the gates of country ferme houses, 323. a
Wolves dung medicinable, 324. k the bones found in their dung likewise, 332. i
the strange operations of the Wolf, and parts of the body, 323. a Wolves,
how they may be kept out of a territory, 342. l Wolves grease much esteemed in
old time, 320. k the bride therewith striked the door sides of her husbands
house, ibid. Wolves, i. sores, how to be cured, 149. d. 300. m. 265. d See more
in Ulcers cancerous and eating deep. Womb. See Belly and Guts. Women with
child longing and having a depraved appetite, how to be helped of that
infirmity, 155, d. 277, a 307, c. 164, i, l. Women's breasts aching, how to be
assuaged, 340. g Women's breasts or paps enflamed, swollen, hard, sore, and
impostumat, by what means cured, 167, d. 143, b 148, i. 182. h. 183. e. 266, k.
279. c. 307. d. 320. g. issue of blood out of Women's breast heads, how to be
stanched, 263. f Women's breasts over big, how to be brought down, 340. g hair
springing about their breast nipples, how to be rid away. 268. i for all
infirmities of Women's breasts in general, convenient remedies, 70. g. 72, h,
m. 104, h. 108, h. 138, m. 142, g 157, d. 161, a. 164, g. 172, h. 169, i. 274,
g. Women's purgations upon their new deliverance, how to be procured and helped
forward, 59, b. 63, e. 65. a. d, 340. g Women's infirmities of the matrice in
general, how to be remedied, 266, i, k. 276, h. 290, k. See more in Matrice.
Women's infirmities following childbirth, how to be cured, Women's flux of
whites or reds, immoderat, how by what means stayed, 39, a. 59, d. 102, k. 110,
i, k. 130, h. 267, g 340, l. 396, g. 516, i. 529, b. Women with child, their
swawms and faintings, how to be helped, 146. k Women how they may preserve the
skin of their faces, fair, 149. b. 276. h. 286. l. Women by what means they
shall look young, fair, and full, without freckles and wrinkles, 440. m. 559.
f Women who cannot deliver their urine but dropmeale and with difficulty, how
to be cured, 395. d how a Woman shall form and bring forth a boy child, 395.
d. Women how they may keep their skin supple and soft, 319. e. Women by what
means they may cleanse the skin of their face from morphew, 149. b. 276. h.
286. l Women become soon barraine by hard travail in childbirth, 340. k how a
Woman may have speedy deliverance of childbirth, 395 d. e. what comfort a
Woman's back and loins in labor, 395. c. Women having an inordinat itch in
their secret parts, how to be eased, 396. i having ulcers and untoward sores in
their priuities, by what means to be cured, 449. b Women's bodies yield
medicines, 307. a a Woman's haire-lace or fillet,, what it is good for, 308. h
Women in time of their monthly sickness work wonders, 308, i. Women's lazy
fevers, how to be cured, 74. l Women more skillful in witchcraft, and fitter
instruments therefore, than men, 210. k Women and ancient matrons at their
devotions, what Imageurs delighted to express in brass, 503, e, f. 504, i
Women's excess and prodigal wast of gold in Plinies time, taxed, 462, g, h, i,
etc, Women excellent paintresses, 551. a Wood-evill in sheep, how to be
helped, 218. k Wood-soure or wood-sorrell, an herb. See Oxys. Woodbind, an
herb, 288, g. the description ib, the virtues, ibid. h Words pronounced in
charms or spells, whether they should be strange or familiar, 296. l whether
Words barely uttered avail not in curing diseases or no, 294. k a set form of
Words in prayer, inuocations, and exorcisms, held to be material in many
respects, 294, k Worms of diverse sorts medicinable, 393. f Worms in the belly
how to be killed and chased out, 39. e 41, e. 44, i. 45, f. 47, a. 71. e. 55.
e. 56, h. 59, c. 60, h. 70, i 105, b. 108, l. 122. g. 124, g. 126, i. 143, c.
160, k. 165, b 166. g. 170. g. 172, i. 179, e. 190, g. 192. g. 249. b 250, l.
253, c. 277, a. f. 281, c. 332. h. 419, c. 443, d 511. b. Wormwood an herb,
276, i. the sundry Linds, ibid. Santonicum, why so called, ibid. Ponticum, why
so named, ibid. Seripl ium, why so named, 277. e in Pontus, the sheep feed fat
with wormwood, 276. i Wormewo^d not so common, but it is as wholesome, 276. i
Wormwood, why it was given in drink to the winners at the chariot running,
276. k Wormwood wine, ibid. Wormwood drink, how it is made by way of
decoction, ib. the virtue thereof, 277. a the infusion of Wormwood, 276, l the
juice of wormwood by way of expression, ibid. a syrrup of wormwood made of
the juice, 276. m hurtful to stomach and head, 277. a the manifold virtues of
the ordinary drink or decoction of Wormwood, 277. a how it was given for
apurgatiue, 277. b Wormwood Seriphium, called likewise See-wormewood, 277, f.
the description, ib. an enemy to the stomach, ib. it loses the belly, ibid.
decoction of Wormwood, how to be made, 278 g Wounds in the head how to be
healed, 183. a. 192. i. 233. (...) 301, b. 307, c. 365, e. 412, m. Wounds fresh
made, how to be kept from inflammation, 423, e. how from swelling, 338. k
symptoms following upon Wounds, how cured, 72. l pain or Wounds and their
sma^t what assuageth, 302. k Wounds how to be cleansed, 471. e. 511. c Wounds
bleeding excessiuely, stanched with a charm by Vlyxes 297. m Wound-salues or
vulnerari^ medecins, 160 l. 182. l Wounds more angry by the presence of those
that have been stung by serpents, or (...) by mad dogs, 299. b Wounds-greene,
by what men's healed, 38, h. 43, b. 45, b 49, a. 50, l. 52, i. 63, b. 68, (...).
70 k. 73, a. 103, b. d. 104, i 111, d. 146, k. 159, d. 163, b. 169, f. 177,
(...) 178, h. 185, c, d 193, b. 194, h. 197, b. 253, e. 263, c. 264, l. 265. b
c. 266 g 272, i. 277. a. 283, e. 289. c. 290, k. l 305, c. 338, g 350. g, i.
370, l. 393, c. f. 394, g, h, i. 403. b. 404, g. 418, i 516, i. 557, c. Wounds
made by swordor edge weapon, what healing medecines they require, 338. k Wounds
occasioned by the whip or scourge, together with the wales of their lashes
remaining after, black, and blew, how to be healed. 394. k Wound-hearbes, and
great healers, 201, e. 202, g. 204. m 205, a 215, a. 264, l. 272, i. 273, d.
274, g. 275. f.
W R
Wrath and rigor of pimples, how to be appeased, 357. b 359. b. Wrestlers and
champions, what imageurs delighted to represent in brass, 503. e. f. 504. g
Wrings in the belly and guts, how to be appeased, 40. h 49, b. 57, d. 67, c.
75, c. 119, c. 128, m. 155, d. 160, k 165, b. 171, c. 173, f. 186, k. 188, i.
190, h. 193. c 195, d. 198, k. 202, g. 206, l. 219, e. 247, d. 249, b 250. g.
k. l. 253, c. 274, l. 275, e. 277, a. 283, a. 287. f 289, d. 313, e. 318, l.
330, h. 331, c. 353, c. 383, b, c 413, c. 419, c. 430, g 422, i. 431, a. 443,
c, e. See Bellieach.
W Y
Wine, whether more wholesome or hurtful to man's body, 151. a. Wine of Dates,
wherefore good, 155. c of Wine, Asclepiades compiled one entire treatise, 151.
b Wynes medicined with marble, plastre, and quickelime, hurtful, 153. e Wine
tunned up or delayed with seawater, 153. e touching Wines, which be best,
great variety and discension of anthours, 151. b, c what Wine is most
wholesome, 153. e Wynes dressed with rosin, how they be wholesome, and how
hurtful, ibid. Wine Falerne, the properties thereof, 151. d the discommodities
that it brings, 151. e Wine Albane, the operations of it, and the
discommodities, ibid. Wynes Helvenaca, 154. h Wine Surrentine wholesome, 151. e
Wine Coecubum out of use. ibid. Wine S^tine the virtues thereof, ibid. Wine
wherein rosin has been newly put, is unwholesome, 153. f. Wynes Statane their
properties, 151. f as touching the virtues of Wine in general, a discourse,
152. g. the convenient time to drink Wine, 155. a Asclepiades his proud
praise of Wine, 151. h Wynes artificial, needless and superfluous, 155. b
which Wine bears most water, 152. i what VVynes least inebriat, ibid. which
be easiest of concoction, ibid. what VVynes be not nutritive, ibid. which most
unwholesome, 152. k Wynes not to be mixed, 152. l Wine drunk upon an empty
stomach, hurtful both to body and mind, 152. m. 153. a Wine Merum, what it
is, and the operation thereof, 153. b when Wine is to be delayed with water,
ibid. Wine in what measure and proportion to water, we ought to drink, 155. b
Wine somewhat delaied with water, wherefore good, 153. b what persons may
drink Wine, 155. (...) the drinking of wine hinders the growth of certain
beasts, as apes, etc. 153. d Wine of Campaine, for gentlemen's tables, 153. d
mixing, bruing, and medecining wynes unwholesome, 153. e Wynes prepared with
pitch alone, 154. g Wine Picatum, what it is, 154. h whether Wine may be given
to a patient in an ague or no, 154. h. whether women in childbed may drink
Wine, 154. i who are forbidden and in what cases to drink Wine, 154. i
X A
XAnthus, an ancient Chronicler, 211. b Xanthus, a precious stone. See Henui.
X E
Xenocrates, an imageur and writer of imagerie, 503. b
X I
Xiphion, what herb, 233. b. the description, ibid.
X Y
Xyris, a wild floure-de^-lis, the virtues that it has, 105. e to be used with
great ceremony, ibid. Xystion a gem, common among the Indians, 622.
Y A
YArrow, an herb, 201, e. the description thereof, and the virtues, ibid. why
it is called Myriophyllon, Millefolium, and Millefoile, ibid. man's Yard
exulcerat how to be healed, 272. i
Y C
Ice water, what is to be thought of it, 406, g, h
Y E
Yeels wearing earings and taking meat at man's hand, 428. l Yellow color very
ancient, 89. m Yest. See Barme. Yeugh tree, the virtues that it has, 195. f
Yex or Yox, by what means it is stayed, 50. g. 59. e. 66. h 67. c. 76. a. 102,
g. 130. g. 155. e. 218. l. 248. h. 274. l 289, d. 304, k. 342, h. 431, c. 444.
h.
Y N
Ynke-blurs, how to be taken out, 306. b
Y O
Youth and youthful countenance, how it may be preserved, 65. c. 101. b. 167.
b..
Y R
Iron praised and dispraised, 513. c. d. e Iron scales, the medicinable uses
thereof, 516. i of Iron and steel the use in Physic, 515. (...) Iron how
preserved from rust, ibid. d Iron forbidden but in tillage of the ground, 513.
e quick Iron, what it is, 515. b of Iron and steel drinking cups, 514. g Iron
revenged of it self by the rust, 514. g Iron mines in all countries to be
found, 514. b Iron ore, how to be burnt, tried and fined, ibid. Iron tried by
the means of one only river in Cappadocia, 514. h. of Iron sundry sorts, 514.
h. i. k Iron, better or worse by reason of the water, 514. k for good Iron and
steel countries renowned, ibid. of Iron sundry degrees in goodness, 413. k. l
edged tools of Iron, how to be hardened, 513. m Iron blade having once shed
man's blood, given ever after to rust and canker, 515. a Iron what virtue it
receives from the loadstones, ibid. Yvorie. See Elephants tooth. Yuray. See
Darnell.
Z A
ZAchalias a Babylonian and writer in magic, 627. e Zanthenes, a precious
stone, 630. g Zaratus a magitian, 37^. i Zarmocenidas, a magitian, ibid.
Z E
Zea or Spelt, a grain, what virtue it has in Physic, 138. l. Zedoarium.
See Setwall and Phu. Zeno the Philosopher his image, Cato would not sell with
other pillage, 504. m Zenodorus, an excellent imageur and engrauer, 496. g he
made the Colosse of Merc^rie at Auvergne in France ibid. how long he was about
it, and what payment he had for it, 496. h Zenon, a writer in Physic, 131. e
Zenathemis, a writer in Natural Philosophy. 606. h Zeros, a precious stone,
623. c Zenxis, a most renowned painter, 534, h. whon he flourished, ibid. his
praise, ib. i. his wealth, ibid. his bountiful mind and high opinion of his
own pictures, ibid. his Mot under Penelope by him drawn in a picture, ib. his
other works, 534. l what was his faults, 534, l. 535. a. b. c
Z M
Zmilaces, a precious stone, 630. g Zmilus, one of the architects that made the
Labyrinth in Lemnos, 579. c
Z O
Zoophthalmos, what herb, 237. c Zopirus, a notable grauer, 483. f two cups of
his making of great price, ibid. Zopissa, what it is, 184. g. which is best,
ib. the virtues, ibid. Zoroastres first practiced art Magic, 372. h
Zoronisios, the Magicians gem. 630. g
Z V
Zura, what it is, 145. b
Z Y
Zythus, a kind of ale or drink made of corn, 145. b
An Advertisement.
WHereas in the former edition this page was stuffed full of Errata, which were
occasioned by reason of the various matter and words used in this History, not
common obvious in other Authors; such care in this second Edition has been
taken, as that they have all been amended, whereby the Readers pains to mend,
or be offended with them, is taken away. This I thought good to give notice of,
least any should think them omitted, not amended.


