A MOST EXCELLENT AND HEAVENLY SERMON: Upon the 23. Chapter of the Gospel by
Saint Luke. THE TEXT.

LVKE 23. 28. Weep not for me, but weep for your selves.

AT LONDON Printed, for Andrew Wise. 1595.

LVKE. 23. 28. Weep not for me, but weep for your selves.
RIght Honorable, right Worshipful, and well-beloved: 4. sorts of people were
about Christ, when Christ was about his passion: The first were executioners,
which tormented him: the second sort were Jews, which mocked him: the third
were lookers on, who marked him: the fourth were welwillers, who lamented him.
Now, although it is like, that amongst these his welwillers, diverse godly me^
wept for him, as Joseph of Arimathea, Gamaliel, Nicodemus, and such like, yet
it is certain that more women wept then men. More women wept then men, partly
by the permission of men, who thought that the women's weeping, came rather from
weakness in themselves, then for love toward Christ; and partly by the
providence of God, who suffered more women to weep then men, that the women
who bewailed Christ his death, might condemn the cruelty of the me^ that
procured it. Now the women wept also more then the men, either of a natural
affection, or else of a voluntary disposition, naturally subject to many either
affectionate passions, or passionate affections. But touching these women, that
which otherwise was natural in them was here voluntary: for the sin of a
woman was the ruin of a man. Therefore these women willingly wept the more,
that though a woman did most in the second death of the first Adam; so she may
do least in the first death of the second Adam: For it was Eve a woman, who
betrayed the first Adam with an apple, and caused him to sin: but it was
Judas a man, who betrayed the second Adam with a kiss, and caused him to dye.
Wherefore principally indeed, Christ speaks to the women, because both more
women wept then men, and the women also wept more then the men, more women more
weeping: yet indifferently he speaks to all his dear friends, Weep not for
me, but weep for your selves. At the first the woman began in disobedience,
and tempted Adam to eat of the forbidden fruit: yet since, women (as Mary
Magdalene, and Mary the Virgin, and the women here with diverse others) have
far exceeded men in all obedience, unto them rather then unto men he turns
his speech, and yet says generally, Weep not for me, but weep for your
selves. In which sentence we may observe as many parts as there be words,
eight words eight parts. The first is, Weep not, (that is) weep not too
much. The second, but weep, (that is) weep not too little. The third, weep
not but weep, both together. Fourthly, for me, not too much for my death.
Fifthly, for your selves, (that is) not too little for your own lives. Sixthly,
for me for your selves, both together. Seventhly, Weep not for me. Eighthly,
Weep not for me, but weep for your selves. God grant that our hearts may be
so affected with the consideration of these excellent matters, as they may be
most to the increase of our comfort in him, and his glory in us.

1. Weep not, etc. When Iairus (ruler of the Sinagogue) wept bitterly for the
death of his daughter, Luke 8. 52. Christ said unto him, Weep not. When
Rachel wept and would not be comforted for the loss of her son Benjamin,
seeing so few of her children left, Iere. 31. 16. the Lord said unto her, Weep
not. When a poor widow wept for the death of her only son, Luke 7. 3. Christ
said unto her, Weep not. And so Christ here seeing many Iairus, many Rachels,
many widows, weeping for the son of God, said unto them, Weep not.
Forbidding thereby immoderate weeping, which is condemned in nature, in reason,
Psalm. 65. 12.
and in religion: In nature, the earth when it rejoices in harvest, then it is
covered with corn: but when it has to too sorrowful a countenance, and
forelorne in the winter, then it is fruitles and barren. The water when it is
quiet and calm, brings in all manner of Merchandise: but when the sea
storms and rores too much, Esaias 23. 1.
then the very ships do howl and cry. The air looking brightly and
cheerfully, refreshes al things: but weeping too much, that is, rayning too
much, as in Noah's his flood, Genesis 7. 12.
it drowneth the whole world. The fire being sprinkled with a little water,
burns more clearly: but if we cast too much water into the fire, it will
neither give heat nor light. The eye it self has twice as many dry skins,
like sluices to stop up the course of tears, as it has moist humors like
channels to let them flow forth. If all the body were an eye, and there were
not ears in it, where were then the hearing? If all the eye were a moist
humor, and there were no dry skins in it, where were then the seeing? Seeing
then too much weeping is in the earth, barrennes; in the water, shipwreck; in
the air, an inundation; and too much water puts out the fire, and in the
eye blindness; certainly if the earth could speak, and the water speak, and
the air speak, and the fire speak, and the eye speak, they would all sing a
song of five parts, and say together, We must not weep too much. Mulsi nimium
ingratum est: 2.
which is thus translated in Prouer. 20 27. It is not good to eat too much
honey: and if it be not good to eat too much honey, it is naught to eat too
much wormwood. One says, (...), tears are like precious stones: and as the
Egyptian pearls which we commonly call unions, which grow but one by one, not
one upon another; so tears must be like these unions, shed easily one by one,
not one upon another. Seneca says, that that which we must do daily, we
must do it moderatly: so that, if we cannot quite stop the issue of our
tears, as she in the Gospel could not of her blood: yet we must weep so to
day as we may weep to morrow, and keep tears always in store, for some
other occasion. For we know that Heraclitus when he had wept, and sowsed
himself in sorrow al his life time, at length dyed of a dropsy: and so (as I
may say) drowned himself in his own tears: and Niobe by overmuch weeping,
was turned into a stone, even as Lots wife by looking back unto Sodom, was
turned into a pillar of salt. It was one of Pythagoras his poesies, (...): not
to eat the heart, but too much heaviness eats the heart of man: which is thus
expounded, Prouer. 25. 20. As a moth fretteth a garment, and the worm eats
the wood, so heaviness hurts man's heart. Now, if we must not eat up the heart
of any other thing with our teeth, much less must we eat up our own heart
with our tears. Therefore even blind reason, such as the heathen have had,
does yet clearly see this, that we must not weep too much.

But religion goes yet a step further: For when God had placed man in the
garden of Eden, which is the garden of pleasure, he did indeed provide all
things therein which might pleasure him, his wife who was equal to him, to
accompany him, all other creatures far inferior unto him, the earth to
tread on, and to yield him increase, the trees that did stand about him, the
rivers that did run besides him, gold to trample on, pearls to look on,
the beasts to name them* the herbs which he did feed on, and the flowers
which he did smell to, all these served for his delight and joy: but afterward
when sentence was proceeded against the man, that he should live in sorrow
about the fruits of the earth: and against the woman, that she should have
sorrow about the fruit of her womb: yet it pleased God to assuage and
sweeten our sorrows with diverse singular comforts. As first, we have the Holy
ghost, who is our only comforrer: next, a good conscience, which is a
continual feast: next, the holy scriptures, which are as it were another
paradise* lastly, an unfeigned faith, by which we have peace with God.
Therefore Athanagoras says well, I account that many have no spirit, no
conscience, no scripture, no faith in God, that yield too much to grief And
Jerome yet more plainly, I do in mine heart abhor all excesiue sorrow,
seeing it is a very hell upon earth, and an entrance even in this life into
that woeful place where there is nothing but weeping and gnashing of teeth. So
that immoderate weeping is condemned in nature, which teaches al things; in
reason, which teaches all men; in religion, which teaches all Christians,
that we must not weep too much. Thus much of weeping too much, which is the
first part, Weep not.

Now a little of weeping too little, which is the second part, but weep. They
to whom Christ spoke at first offended in the excess, therefore he begins
thus, weep not, but I might well shift the words and begin thus, but weep,
for we offend altogether in the want of weeping, seldom in the excess. The
reason is, because we lack charity, which being three fold, the greatest work
of true charity toward our selves, is repentance: toward our neighbors, is
preaching: toward God, is prayer, and all these require tears: so that if we
weep so little as that we weep not at all, we weep too little, which we
must not do. For the first, touching repentance, one says plainly, Lauandum
est cor interdum in lachrymis poenit entiae: The lesser our sorrows are, the
greater are our sins: but on the other side, Psalm. 74. 13.
The heads of dragons are broken in the waters: that is, very strong and vile
sins are weakened and washed away with tears. That obligation that was
against us, Coloss. 2. 14
before it was fastened to the cross of Christ, it was written in parchment,
now it is written in paper: so that, if we blur it with daily weeping upon it,
our tears will be like aqua fortis to take out the handwriting quite, that God
shall neither read, nor see our sins. Therefore says one, we must wash our
hearts in the troubled poole of Bethesda, in the troubled tears of
repentance: for as in a well (except there be some water in it) we cannot
easily see the baggish that lies in the bottom, so in the depth of our heart
we cannot see our sins without tears. Tears make our sins seen, and not
seen; not seen to God, and seen to us: God not seeing them, forgiues them;
we seeing them, amend them. Austine in the beginning of his 25. book, writes
that the tears of the vine branch do cure the leprosy: and so the tears of
these vine branches which are grafted into the true vine, do cure the leprosy
of sin. That sinful woman, because she loved much, she washed Christ his
feet with her tears: a strange sight. I have oftentimes seen the heavens
wash the earth: I understand that well enough, but I never saw the earth wash
the heaven, yet here I see it, an earthly and a sinful woman, washed the
heavenly feet of Christ. But because she washed Christ his feet with her
tears, therefore Christ crowned her head with his mercies. The prodigal son
had no sooner turned home by weeping cross, and cried peccaui, but straight
way he was received. Ambrose says, see what force there is in three
sillables. Chrysoftome says, God hearing a sinner in true contritio^ utter but
this one word peccaui, I have sinned, is in a manner so charmed and inchaunted
with it, that he has no power over himself, he cannot but grant remission.
Saint Peter likewise (says Chrysostom) did recover that place by bemoning his
offense, which he had lost by denying his master. For says Nazianzen, God is
more merciful then man can be sinful, if man will be sorrowful. Wherefore
we may see by this example of Saint Peter, that weeping is the best saltpeter
to relish our repentance, that we may get our pardon. Touching preaching, the
voice of a Preacher should be the voice of a crier, which should not pipe to
make the people dance: but mourn to make the people weep. Hence it is, that
in the old law none which were blind or had any blemish in his eye, might
serve at the Altar. And when they offered their first borne, who was ordinarily
in every family, their Priest or their Preacher, they offered with him a pair
of turtle doves, or two young pigeons: which doves did signify a pair of
mournful eyes, and these two young pigeons did signify likewise two weeping
eyes: and at their offering they prayed for their first borne, that afterward
he may have such eyes himself. For as pigeons fly to their windows, Esaias
60* 8. So the godly preacher has no other refuge to fly unto, but only to
his windows: that is, to his eyes that are glased with tears, when he weepeth
for the sins of the people. Christ is much delighted in these kind of eyes,
saying so often to his spouse, Thy eyes are like pigeons eyes. The holy Ghost
also descending himself in for me of a dove, and the Prophets usually received
their prophesies by rivers sides, as Ezechiel had his prophecy delivered him
by the river Cobar, Daniel beside the river Tigris, John the Baptist besides
the river Jordan: yea also many preached their prophesies not so much in words
as in rivers of tears: Mine eyes gushed with rivers of waters, (says David)
because men keep not thy law: Oh that my head were full of water (says
Jeremy) and mine eyes a fountain of tears: I protest says Paul, that for
these three years, I have not ceased to warn every one of you with tears day
and night: For indeed as Austine says, There is more good to be done with
sighing then with speaking, with weeping then with words, Prosper says that a
Preacher must seek non plausum sed planctum, not his own praise, but the
peoples profit in mourning for their finnes: and Hierome says, that the
Preacher is most highly commended, not when the people clap their hands, but
when they knock their bteasts: wherefore as that is an Idol and no GOD that
has eyes and sees not, so he is an idle shepherd, and no loving Pastor, who
has eyes and weepeth nor sometimes in preaching to the people.

3. Touching prayer Saint James says, That the prayer of a just man prevails
much if it be fervent, for a fervent prayer comes from a fervent spirit,
which is wholly inspired by the holy spirit, who makes requests in us and for
us, with sighs and groans which cannot be expressed: as it is Psalm. 147. 18.
He sends out his word and melts them, he breaths out his spirit, and
the waters flow: he breaths out his spirit when the holy Ghost moves us to
prayer, and the waters flow, when the waters trickle down from our eyes: for
as a seething pot runs over, so is an holy heart in prayer. The Olive tree is
most abundant in fruit when it is distilled, and a Christian is most
plentiful and powerful in prayer when he weepeth: whereupon King David
says, I am as a green Olive tree in the house of the Lord: and our Savior
himself went often to the mount of Olives, where he offered up prayers and
supplications with strong crying and tears: and therefore he wills us also
to have faith as a graint of mustered seed: now musterd seed you know makes
the eyes weep, so that he which in prayer has faith like a grain of
musterde seed, has his eyes also as the fishpooles of Heshbone: and there
Christ says as it is in Cantic. 4. 9. Cant. 7. 5.
Thou have wounded my heart with one of thine eyes: it with one, then much more
with both. For as Synesius says in his 67. epistle, weeping is more flexible,
more forcible to persuade God* and even to wound his heart, then all the
eloquence, then all the Rhetorike in the world. Cyprian says, quando spiritus
hominis aspirat, spiritus Dei suspirat: When the spirit of man sends out
sighs in prayer, then the spirit of God gives grace. And Ambrose says, God
looks that we should power out our tears, that he might pour out his
mercies: As Ezechias lying ficke prayed, and praying turned himself toward
the wall and wept: and so with weeping as with gunne shot he battered down
that partition wall which kept Gods countenance from him: therefore GOD said to
him, I have heard thy prayers and thy tears. A strange speech, I have heard
thy prayers, that I understand well enough, but I have heard thy tears: what
should be the meaning of this trow you? have tears tongues, or can they
speak? yes indeed I dare be bold to speak it, the thunder of the Almighty
cannot make such a mighty sound, such a noise in the ears of man, as the
tears of man do in the ears of God, Psalm. 39. 12. Therefore David both
before he had prayed, desired God to hear the voice of his tears: and also
after he had played, Psalm. 6. 8. He thanked God, because he had heard the
voice of his weeping: for indeed he also himself says of himself, Psalm.
109. I mingled my drink with weeping: and where was this drink of his but in
the cup of which he says in another place, I will take the cup of
salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord: and as David mingled his drink
with weeping, so he mingled his prayer with weeping. Wherefore as Elizeus cast
salt into the waters of Jericho, to make them sweet, so must we salt our
prayers with tears to make them sauorie and delightsome to God. A man can
never love himself aright, if he do not sometimes weep in repentance, nor
his neighbor, that does not sometimes weep in preaching, nor God, that does
not sometime weep in prayer: so that we must not be like the Stoickes which
were never moved, then we shall weep too little, as this second part shows:
But weep.

The third part is, Weep not but weep. Which notes, seeing both the
excess and defect are to be eschued, that therefore the true mean which we
must keep in weeping, consists in this equal intermingling of these two
extremities. Weep not but weep, both together, weep not too much says he,
for that is contrary to nature, but weep too little is contrary to
repentance, weep not too much, for that is contrary to reason, but weep too
little, is contrary to preaching; weep not too much, for that is contrary to
religion, but weep too little is contrary to prayer. Saint Paul charged
Timothy to be instant in season and out of season, first in season, then out
of season, teaching thereby, that that unseasonable opportunity is better then
seasonable importunity, yet to keep a mean in exhorting, that we must as
well use importunity sometimes, so it be in season, as to slack an
opportunity always, though it be out of season. Even so says our Savior
here. Weep not, but weep, first, weep not, then, but weep: teaching
thereby, that not to weep, is better then to weep, yet to keep a mean in
weeping, that we sometimes in not weeping, weep, as always in weeping not,
weep. For the Apostle says, that they which rejoice must be as if they
rejoiced not: and they that weep, as though they wept not. They which rejoice,
must be as if they rejoiced not, because (says Gregory, writing upon the 27.
of Job) all the joy which the godly have in this life, is as a sower grape
gathered out of time. And Ambrose says, the children of God, not only in
sorrow, but in joy, shed tears, they rejoice as though they rejoiced not. And
they that weep must be as if they wept not, because (says Macarius in his 5.
Homily) even tears are a comfort to the righteous. And Ambrose again: to the^
that are well affected, weeping is a great delight, they weep as though they
wept not. Therefore as certain heavenly apples have a sweetish sowernes, and
some old wines have a sowrish sweetness: so our sorrow must be joyful, and our
joy sorrowful: our joy must be sorrowful, as when Christ wept, there is a
sorrowful joy: but Christ wept upon Palm Sunday, there is a joyful sorrow.
For joyful sorrow: When the Israelites eat the Paschall Lamb, there is a
joyful sorrow: but they eat it with sower herbs, there is a sorrowful joy.
We must be as weeping, and yet always rejoicing: and we must be as
rejoicing, and yet always weeping, and join both together, Weep not, but
weep. Weep not: This is a fiery speech, as when S. John says, Reu. 19. 11.
That Christ's eyes were as a flame of fire, that is, subject now to no weeping:
But weep, this is a watery speech, as when David says, I water my couch with
my tears: so that if we could reconcile these two speeches together, we must
reconcile fire and water together. In Elias his sacrifice, 1. King. 18. 38.
there was both fire and water: so that the fire of the Lord consumed and licked
up the water of the Altar. And assuredly, our sorrowful spirit will be a most
acceptable sacrifice to God, as Elias his sacrifice was, if we have both the
fire of Aetna, and the water of Nylus: so that the ardent fire of faith will
well nigh consume, and almost burn up the flowing stream of love. Augustine
in his 21. book De ciuit ate Dei, cap. 5. writes, that there is a fountain
in Epirus, which not only puts forth torches that are lighten, but also
lights torches that are put out. Fulgentius likewise does report, that there
is an other fountain in France with boiling much, casts up flames of fire.
The fountain of tears which is in our eyes, must be like to these two
fountains, as we may see Psalm. 39. 2. and 3. When my sorrow was stirred, my
heart was hot within me: there is the torch lightened. And while I was musing
the fire kindled. When my sorrow was stirred, there is the first fountain, my
heart was hot within me, there is the torch lightened, and while I was musing,
there is the other fountain, the fire kindled* there is the flame burning.
Whereupon one says fitly, Nec fluant oculi, nec siccent: Our eyes must neither
be drowned, nor dry: if they want fire, they will be drowned: if they want
water, they will be dry. Therefore, weep not but weep: fire and water must
go together, that our eyes be neither drowned nor dry. And this is the right
moderation which we must keep in weeping, as appears in this third part:
Weep not, but weep, both together.

The fourth part follows, for me, not too much for my death, for the death of
Christ is the death of death, the death of the devil, the life of himself,
and the life of mankind: the reason of all this, is innocence and righteousness
which makes first, that as the life of Christ is the life of life, so the
death of Christ is the death of death. Therefore both before his death he
chalengeth and threatens death, saying, Oh death I will be thy death: and also
after his death he derideth and scorneth death, Oh death thou art a drone,
where is now thy sting? Ask death any of you I pray you, and say, death how
have thou lost thy sting? how have thou lost thy strength? what is the matter
that very children do now contemn thee, whereas Kings and even tyrants did
before fear thee? Death will answer, that the only cause of this, is the
death of Christ. When a Be stingeth a dead body he takes no hurt, nor
loses his sting: but stinging alive body, oftentimes loses both his sting
and his life too: so death stinginge us had no harm, but kept his sting still,
and took heart of grace thereby: but when Christ the life of us all had been
once stinged, the sting and strength of the devil was taken clean away. Oh
blessed king and Lord of all, who have so disarmed death that it can do us no
harm. Before, death was much like a Bugbegger which they fray children with,
who being masked, iettes it about up and down, and makes all the people afraid
of him, until such time as some one lusty fellow amongst the rest, steps to
him and takes a good staff and cudgelleth him well fauouredly, and pulls his
vizarde from his face, and makes him known to the whole world: and then
whereas before lusty and tawle men were afraid of him: now every child
mockes him and laugheth him to scorn, and stand pointing at him. Oh Blessed
Christ, who by thy death have thus dismasked death. Christ was laid in the dust
for stark dead, and the devil trampled upon him: but he upon Easter day
started up, and like a lion of the tribe of Judah, he trampled the soldiers the
devils apes under his seete: as apes at the first play with the lion and the
libard, still thinking them to be asleep, until they trample and tread him
under their feet. As the Chameleon spying a serpent sitting under a tree,
gets up into the same tree, and lets down a fine thread out of his
mouth, smaller then the spiders thread with a drop of blood at the bottom,
more clear then any pearl, which falling on the serpent kills him. So
Christ like a Chameleon climeth up into the tree of his cross, and seeing the
devil that old serpent sitting under the tree, lets down a threade with
blood at the bottom thereof, more cleerer then any pearl, the least drop
whereof straight way kills the devil. Christ standing before at the tree of
his cross, clothed himself in a blood red garment, who^ when the devil saw,
he ran swiftly against Christ with his horns, Christ perceived him steppeth
aside, and so the devil runs his horns into Christ his cross, and there
they stick fast. A dragon for a time may triumph over the Elephant, but at the
last the Elephant brings down the Dragon with him: so the devil that
ancient dragon, may for a time be doing with Christ, but at the last he
kills him. He that felleth a tree upon which the sun shines, may well cut
the tree, but he cannot hurt the sun: He that powers water upon an iron
that is red hot, may well quench the heat, but cannot hurt the iron: so the
devil could not hurt the son of righteousness Christ Jesus: and hot iron is
too hard a morfell for the devil to digest. Those barbarous people called
(...) which feed only upon raw flesh; especially of men, if they eat a
piece of roasted meat, they surfeit of it and dye: and so the right (...)* the
only deuourer of all mankind, death I mean, tasting of Christ's flesh, by
finding it not to be raw but wholesome* and heavenly meat indeed, presently
took a surfeit of it and within three days dyed. For even as when Judas had
received a sop at Christ's hands, anon after, his bowels gushed out: In like
sort, death being so saucie as to snatch a sop (as it were) of Christ's flesh,
and a little bitte of his body, was by and by like Judas choked and strangled
with it: and feign to yield it up again, when Christ on Easter day revived.
Death (I wisse) had not been brought up so daintilie before, nor used to such
manner of meats, but always had his pray either with Methridates daughters,
upon the poison of sin, or else with Noah's crow, upon the carrion of
corruption. Wherefore now (says Fulgentius) death did indeed taste of Christ*
but could not swallow him up, and digest it. Contrariwise, Christ as soon as
he had but a little taste of death, eftsoone did devour death, and so the
deat of Christ by reason of righteousness, is the death of death. It is also the
death of the devil, as the Apostle says, By his death he did not only
overcome death, but him which had the power of death, that is, the devil.

Diverse ancient Fathers note that the Virgin Mary was married, that the devil
might be deceived: for he knew well enought that Christ should be borne of a
Virgin: but he never suspected that blessed Mary was a Virgin, considering she
was bettothed to Joseph. Therefore he did not lie in wait, to destroy the
seed of the woman, so as other wise he would, if he had by a whore or wife
any such thing: so that the birth of Christ did cosen the devil, but the death
of Chrsit did conquer the devil, and that much more gloriously when the temple
of his body was upon the pinnacle of the cross, then when he himself was upon
the pinnacle of the temple: for when he was upon the temple, his words spoke
better things then Solomon: but when he was upon the cross, his blood spoke
better things the^ the blood of Abel: there his words came from his lungs out
of his mouth, but here his blood came from his heart out of his side, and there
he fought standing lustily to it, and withstanding: so then he would not
throw down himself, but here he skirmished, the devil yielding and humbling
himself to the death of Christ, and there the devil went up unto him unto the
top of an high mountain, and so (as I may say) bad him lose at his own gole:
but here Christ himself descended into hell, and so spoiled principalities and
powers, and slew the great Leuiathan in the very bottom of his own
bottomless pit. For the devil like a greedy ravenous fish, nibbing at the
bait of Christ's body, as Damascen speaks, was pierced through, and twitched
up with the hook of his deity. Hence it is that before Christ's passion, Peter
took money out of a fishes mouth to pay his tribute: and also after Christ his
passion, the Disciples boiled a fish for him to feed upon: whereby we see that
as Christ made a fish pay tribute to Caesar, so he made the devil also pay
tribute to death for him: and that the devil while he went about to catch the
good fish Jesus Christ, Gods son, the Savior (as the letters of (...)
severally signify) was himself caught, yea also killed by Christ: so that all
the while our Savior was buried in the grave, the devil was boiled in hell.
Wherefore as it was bootlesse for Goliath to brandish his spear against David:
so it little auailed the devil, to shake the spear likewise in the hand of
the soldier, against the heart of Christ: For as David having heard Goliath
prating and talk his pleasure, yet when they came to the point, at the first
stroke ouerthrewe him: so Christ with the very same spear, which gave him a
little venue in comparison, or but a fillip on the side, which was soon after
recured, gave the devil soon after a deadly wound in his forehead, which he
shall never be able to claw off again. And again, as David hackt off the
Giants head with his own sword: so Christ wrested that shaking sword out of
the Cherubines hands, and therewith chopped off the serpents head: and so, the
death of Christ by reason of righteousness, is the death of the devil. It is on
the other side the life of himself. That noble Eunuch riding in his coach,
read in Esaias that Christ was silent before his death, as the lamb before the
shearer: He says not, as a lamb before the butcher, but before the shearer:
insinuating, that death did not kill Christ, but sheare him a little. Neither
yet had death Christ's fleece when he was shorn: for Christ taking to him a
sponge full of vinegar, Ioh. 19. 29. that was full of our sharp and sower
sins, did give us for it, purple wool full of blood, Hebr. 9. 19. that is,
full of his pure and perfect justice, and indeed the only liuerie which
Christ our Lord and master gives to his servants, is a coat made of purple
wool. The just (says David) shall flourish like a palm tree: Christ is that
true (...), that true palm tree, who although he bare all the burdens of sin
in the world upon his back, yet then he does most flourish of all, even as
Camamile the more it is trod upon, the more it grows and florisheth. And as
the palm tree has many weights above, and many snakes beneath, and yet may
truly say of it self, Nec premor, nec perimor: I am neither by the weights of
the bows overmuch laden and pressed down, nor by the snakes below eaten up,
or consumed: So Christ neither by the weight of Gods wrath above, is
ouercharged, nor by the heaviness of our sins, pressed down: but like the
Swanne, sings sweetest when his death is nearest. The Prophet David says,
that God gives his snow like wool: but we may turn the sentence and say,
that Christ gives his wool like snow. For as snow covers the ground, when
it is rugged and deformed, so Christ's coat without seame, covers our sins:
and though they were as crimson, yet makes he them white as snow. And as
Gedeons fleece when it was moist, the earth was dry, but when it was dry,
the earth was moist, so when Christ's fleece was moist as a green tree, then
were all we dry like rotten sticks: but when Christ his fleece was dry,
(all the blood and water, being wringed out of his precious side) then were we
moystened with his grace; therefore, seeing Christ's fleece fell not to deaths
lotte when he was shorn, but we have it, who believe in him, it follows,
that neither death was the better, nor Christ the worse, but as a lamb is much
more nimble and lively for shearing, so this shearing of Christ was a kind of
quickening to him, and only a trimming to him, before he ascended to his
father, as Joseph was trimmed and powled before he went to Pharaoh.

When Adam slept his side was opened, when Christ died his side was opened:
Adams side being opened, flesh and bone was taken out, Christ's side being
opened, water and blood was taken out. Of Adams flesh and bone the woman was
built, of Christ's water and blood the church is built: so the death of Christ
is nothing else but the sleep of Adam, for as he himself says of the damsels
death, The damsel is not dead but sleeps: so he says of his own death, I
laid me down to sleep, and rose up again, for the Lord sustained me. And
in another place, when the father said to his son, Awake my glory, awake my
lute and harp? God the Son answers to his Father, I will awake right early.
That vessel, which Peter saw in a trance, which was let down from heaven
unto the earth, and knit to the four corners, and had all kind of beasts in
it, did betoken Christ: Christ came down from heaven unto the earth, and his
glory is knit up by the four Evangelists: and he has made Jews and
Gentiles, yea, all nations one in himself. Now says Cassianus, it is worth
the marking, which the spirit of God says, Not that the vessel was a great
sheet, but like a great sheet: a sheet may signify either sleep or death,
but neither was Peter's vessel a sleep, though it were like a sheet: neither
was Christ's body dead, though it were lapt in a sheet: For we our selves
cannot so properly be said to live in our first birth, as in our second birth:
and Christ his life when he lay in the new womb, in which never any other was
conceived, is nothing to his life, when he slept in a new tomb, in whihc
never any other was buried. Therefore as Jacob travailing toward Haran, when
he had laid stones under his head, and taken a nap by the way after his
tedious journey; so Christ travailing toward heaven, when he had slept a
little in a stony sepulcher, which was hewn out of a rock, lived yet most
princely after his painful passion. Tell me, where did Jonas live? in the
hatches of the ship, or in the belly of the whale? in the hatches of the
ship? why? that was nothing, but to live in the belly of the whale, when the
mariners were in danger upon the water, Jonas was most safe under the water:
this indeed was somewhat, who ever saw such a wonder? The waves whereof, one
while hoysted up to the highest clouds, an other while hurled down to the
neathermost depth: Jonas himself being all this while in the very gulf of
destruction, and yet not a hair the worse. Christ's case was the same: as Jonas
was in the belly of the whale three days and three nights: so, and so long
was the son of man in the bowels of the earth, yet he had no more hurt then
Jonas had. But he lived better under the earth, then we can upon the earth:
and he lived better in death, then we do in life. Tell me, where did Daniel
live? in the kings court, or in the lions den? in the Kings court? why? any
man might have lived there, but to live in the lions den, when the mouth of the
den was shut, and the mouths of the lions open: this indeed was the life of
an Angel and no man. What king could ever have made lions attend and wait
upon him? yet here you might have seen Daniel sitting in the midst of many
hungry lions, when as the lions lay down at his feet couching and crouching
before him, and adored their own pray cast unto the^, which otherwise they
would have wooried, and being beasts, became men in humanity toward this
Saint: seeing men became beasts in cruelty against him. The same reason was
in Christ, Christ's sepulcher was sealed up as well as Daniels den: and he
says also of himself in a Psalm. My soul is amongst lions: these lions were
the terrors of death, and horror of hell, yet he took no more hurt then
Daniel did, but brake the chains into fitters, and the gates of hell into
shiuers, and then most gloriously triumphed; and so the death of Christ by
reason of righteousness is the life of himself. It is lastly the life of man:
when Christ's spear had opened the way of life, which the cherubins sword
stopped up: then says he, This day shall thou be with me in paradise. Adam
and Eve both in one day were expelled out of paradise: Christ and the these
both in one day were received into paradise, yea both in one hour: for about
noone, when the wind blew, Genesis 3. 8. Adam and Eve were expelled, and so about
the sixth hour that is about twelve of the clock in the day time, Genesis 3. 44.
verse. Christ and the these were received: Christ saying unto the thief while
he did draw him up into paradise, Osea 11. 4. I draw thee with the cords of
man, even with bands of love: but the Septuagints translate the hebrew word
(...), that is, with the destruction of a man, as if he should say, I do so
dearly love thee, that I am content my self to be destroyed, that thou may
be saved; my self to die, that thou may live. I do draw thee with the
destruction of a man, even with ba^ds of love: so that the thief which saw his
own wounds, and death in Christ's body, did see also Christ's saving health, and
life in his own body, as Alcuinus notes upon the sixth of John, Assumpsit vit
a mortem, vt mors acciperet vitam: when the living Lord dyed, then the dying
thief lived. Notably says the Prophet David in one of his Psalms: The breath
of our nostrilles Christ the Lord is taken in our sins, to whom we said, We
shall live in his shadow* if Christ be the breath of our nostrilles, then he
is our life: and again, If we live in his shadow, then we live in his death,
for where there is breath in a shadow, there is life in death.

Now, as the ouershadowing of the Holy ghost was the life of Christ; so the
ouershadowing of Christ, is the life of man. And as Peter's shadow gave health
to the sick; so Christ's shadow gives life to the dead: yea a thousand times
rather Christ's the^ Peter's. Elias his spirit was doubled upon Elizeus, because
Elias being alive restored some to life: but Elizeus (as Jerome says) being
dead, raised up one from the dead. Peter's spirit was doubled upon Christ,
because Peter being alive, was a Physician unto the living: but Christ (as
Chryso stome says) being dead, was a Physician to the dead: or rather indeed
in this comparison there is no comparison: but as Peter's spirit, was a shadow
to Christ his spirit, so Peter's shadow was nothing to Christ's death. Arnobius
upon these words, Despise not the work of thine own hands, writes thus: We
are the work of thy hands, seeing we are thy workmanship. Now, because the
work of thy hands, was destroyed by the work of our hands, therefore were thy
hands nailed to the cross for our sins, that those hands of thine might
repair the works of thy hands by the tree of the cross, which was destroyed
by the tree of concupisce^ce: thus far he. Whereby we may gather, that the
fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, is evil, that is death: but
the fruit of the tree of the cross of Christ is life everlasting. And
therefore as honey being found in a dead lion, the death of the lion was the
sustenance of Sampson: so Christi fell, nostrum mel: Christ's gall is our honey:
and the bitter death of Christ by reason of righteousness, is the sweet life of
mankind. When Ezechias was sick, the Sun went backwards: but that going
backwards of the Sun, was no hurt to Ezechias: for thereby he had 15. years
added to his life: So the sun of righteousness, his going backwards was the
better for us, though he was debased for us. Thou made him lower then the
angels, as David says: there the sun of righteousness is lower ten degrees
then the angels, for our sakes. And in another place: What is man that thou art
so mindful of him, or the son of man that thou so regardest him? There he is
ten degrees inferior to man. A live dog is better then a dead lion: there he
is ten degrees lower then the worms. Pliny reports that there was a Dial
set up in Campus Martius, which was to continue 30. years, whereby they might
know the course of the Sun: yet (as he reports) it did not agree with the
Sun for the space of all those thirty years. In the death of Christ we
might have seen such a Dial, the Sun did not always agree with the Dial:
the better for us. Christ is that tender Pelican, who by wounding his own
breast, does restore his own to life again by his blood. I came (says
Christ) that men might have life, and that they might have life more
abundantly. What is that more abundantly? but only this, that we have more
life in the death of Christ, then ever we lost in the death of Adam. O falix
culpa quae talem meruit redemptorem: Happy Adam (says Gregory) that ever he
sinned, because that we by his sin, have grace superabounding. As Peter's
spirit was but a shadow to Christ's spirit, so Peter's death was but a shadow to
Christ's death: And as the death of a lion was the life of Sampson, so the death
of Christ is the life of man. Thus you see that the death of Christ is the
death of death, the death of the devil, the life of himself, and the life of
man: and therefore he says in this fourth part, Not too much for my death:
For me.

Now the fifth part follows: For your selves: Not too little for your own
life: for the life of man is the life of death, the life of the devil, the
death of himself, the death of Christ: the reason of all this is iniquity and
sin, which even in Christ's dear friends (says Bernard) is cast down, but
not cast out. Therefore though sin cannot reign in us, yet it will always
dwell in us: for it is so bred in our bones, that until our bones be with
Joseph's bones carried out of Egypt, that is, out of the world, sin cannot be
carried out of our bones. One records that the Romans got such a victory
over Chos^oes, that he made a law that never after any King of Persia should
ever war against the Romans. We cannot possibly subdue sin in such sort,
but do we what we can do, sin will always be a Iebusite, a borderer, yea
a traitor, rebelling against the spirit: which makes the life of man to be (as
Chrysostom says) a debt as it were owing, and due to death. For the devil is
the father of sin, and sin is the mother of death Hereupon S. James says:
Sin when it is finished, traveling with childbirth (as I may say) brings
forth death: For even as a man comes into a house by a gate, so death came
into the world by sin. The corruption of our flesh did not make our souls
sinful, but the sin of our soul made the flesh corruptible. Whereupon
Lactantius calls sin, Pabulu^ mortis, the relief or the food of death. As
a fire goes out when all the fuel is spent, but burns as long as that
lasts: so death dies when sin cease: but where sin abounds, there
death rages. The Prophet Abacucke sinning not, death was so far from him,
that he was able to fly without wings: but King Asa sinning, death was so
near to him, that he was not able to stand upon his feet. Nay, you may see
this in one and the self same man, Moses, who sinning not, death could not
mere with him in the bottom of the red sea: but sinning, death did seize upon
him in the top of Mount Nebo: so that the life of man, by reason of sin, is
the life of death. It is also the life of the devil. As one says: Tot crimina,
tot daemona: every man has as many devils in him, as he has evils, every
sin being sufficient to maintain a devil. The godly finding no joy on
earth, have their conversation in heaven: but Satan finding no joy in hell,
has his conversation on earth. So that the earth is a hell unto us, but a
heaven to him. Here he has his living, as it was said in the beginning, Thou
shall eat the dust of the earth, all the days of thy life. This dust (says
Macarius) is the devils diet. And therefore as a scalde curre watches for a
bone, so he goes about daily seeking whom he may devour, and waits
continually until the godly shake off the dust of their feet, that is,
shakes off some sin which they have gotten by walking in the world, that
then he may lick it up. It is meat and drink to him to see us sin: he loves
alife to see us sin, even as cursed Cham did to see Noah's nakedness. And as
flies are always flying about a sore place, and the ox will eat the best
grass he can get: so the devil is as busy as he can to have his pleasure upon
the best. So says Theophilact, It is even a sport or a pleasure to Satan,
which is a sore or a pain to man, especially if he be a godly man: for the
good Angels rejoice most when one that is a sinner repents: but evil Angels
rejoice most when one that is a penitent sins. If the devil cannot keep a
man from living long, then he will hinder him from living well. Aut impetrat
morte, aut impetit mores, says Zeo: If he cannot kill a man, he will corrupt
him. And indeed he takes more pleasure in corrupting one godly man, then in
killing an hundred wicked. He was more delighted when David slew Vrias, then
when Saul killed himself: when Peter denied Christ, then when Judas betrayed
him: so that the life of man, by reason of sin, is the life of the devil. It
is on the other side, the death of himself. Oh miserable man that I am, who
shall deliver me from this body of death? The life of the godly is a very
body of death: but there death is only a shadow of death.

Thales, being demanded what difference there is between life and death, said,
they are all one: then being asked again, if he had not rather die then live:
no says he, for they are all one: but Hierome says excelle^tly, they are not
all one, Aliud est viuere moriturus, aliud mori victurus: It is one thing to
live in continual danger of death, an other thing to dye in continual hope of
life. Therefore, Eccle. 7. 3. it is said, that the day of death is better then
the day of birth, for when we are borne, we are mortal: but when we are
dead, we are immortal: and we are alive in the womb, to dye in the world,
but are dead in the grave, to live in heaven. Hence it is, that the wicked are
merry at their birth day, as Pharaoh made a feast at his birth day, Genesis 40.
20. when his chief butler was hanged: and Herod likewise made a feast at his
birth day, Matthew. 14. 16. when John Baptist was beheaded: but they are sorry at
their dying day, as Judas was sorry when he went about to hang himself, and
Caine was afraid that every one that met him in the streets would have killed
him. Contrariwise, the godly are sorry at their birth day, as Job was, Job 3.
verse. 3. Let the day perish wherein I was borne: and I eremy says, Ierem. 20.
14. Let not the day wherein my mother bare me be blessed: but they are merry at
their dying day as Simeon was, Lord now let thou thy servant depart in
peace: and Paul says, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. For
whereas there be two ways, the one having in it first a transitory death, then
an eternal life: the wicked choose rather to live for a time, though they dye
for it eternally hereafter: but the godly choose to have their life hid with
Christ here, that they may live with Christ eternally hereafter: therefore, the
wicked never think of death, but the godly think of nothing else. As
Alexander the Monarke of the world, had all other things save only a sepulcher
to bury him in when he was dead, he never thought of it: But Abraham the
heir of the world, had no other proper possession, but only a field which
he buried his dead in, he thought of nothing else. We read that Dantel strowed
ashes in the Temple, to descry the footsteps of Baals priests which did eat up
their meat: so did

Abraham, he strowed ashes in memory of death, saying: I will speak unto my
Lord though I be but dust and ashes: that so continually seeing and marking
the footsteps of death, how it does daily eat and consume their bodies, they
may be always prepared for it. Our first father made himself clothes of
fig leaves, but God misliking that, gave him garments of skin, Gene. 3. 21.
Therefore Christ in the Gospel cursed the fig tree, which did leave only
leaves to cover our sin, but commended the Baptist, who did were skin to
discover our mortality: For not only as Augustine says, Vita morbus, our
whole life is a disease: but also as Bernard says, Vita mors, The life of man
by reason of sin is the death of himself. It is lastly the death of Christ:
when Christ was crucified, at first he was (as the Prophet says) broken for
our sins, according to that of Tertullian, Sin it was that brought the Son
of God to his death, the Jews were only instruments and accessaries to it;
sin was the principal: they cried, crucify him in Pilates court: but our
sins cried, crucify him in the court of heane^. Now as the death of Christ
is sufficient to save the wicked, so the sins of the wicked were not
sufficient to condemn Christ. But the scripture says of them which either are
not, or at most would but seem to be godly, they say they know GGD, but by
their works they deny him, and Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? And they
crucify unto themselves again the Son of God, therefore our sins did at the
first crucify Christ: and now also the wicked which are not of his body, but
we which are his members, we I say do yet oftentimes by our sins crucify
Christ with the Jews. Yea, I will say more if you will hear me, we crucify
Christ far more cruelly then the Jews did, then his body was lassible and
mortal, now it is glorified and immortal. They knew not what they did, we
know well enough: they pierced him with a spear, we pearce him with reproaches:
they buried him in the earth, we bury him in oblivion. Wherefore, let every one
as soon as he is tempted to any sin, think straightwaye that he sees
Christ coming toward him, wrapped up in white linen clothes, as he was
buried, with a kercher round about his head, crying after a ghastly and
fearful manner: Beware, take heed what you do: detest sin, adhorre sin,
fie upon it, a shame light on it, it did once most vilely and villanously
murder me: But now seeing my wounds are whole, do not I beseech you, do not
rub and revive them again with your sins, to make them bleed afresh. Now,
seeing that the scepter of the kingdom of heaven is put into my hands, do not
offer me again a reed to mock me. Now seeing my head is crowned with pure
gold of eternal glory, do not set a crown of thorns upon it again: Now
seeing that I am installed on the right hand of the throne of majesty, do
not pull me out of my throne, and throw me into the grave again, and with
your sins seal a mighty stone upon me to press me, and keep me down in
death. This I assure you will be a forcible means to afray and terrify us
from sins, if we consider that the life of man by reason of sin is the
death of Christ: and therefore he says in this fifth part, Not too little
for your own life. For your selves.

The sixth part is next, which notes, seeing both the excess and the want is
to be eschewed, therefore the true mean which we must keep between Christ and
our selves, consists in a certain qualification of these two extremities,
For me: For your selves, both together. Weep not too much (says he) for my
death, which is the death of death: weep not too little for your own life,
which is the life of death: not too much for my death, which is the death of
the devil: not too little for your own life, which is the life of the devil:
Not too much for my death, which is my life: not too little for your own life,
which is your death: not too much for my death, which is the life of man: not
too little for your own life, which is the death of Christ. Saint Paul
exhorts the Corinths to approve themselves by honor and dishonor: first by
honor, then by dishonor: teaching thereby, that dishonorable honor is better
then honorable dishonor. Yet to keep a mean in this matter, that we must as
well count it our honor sometimes to be dishonored with Christ, as a
dishonor to be always honored without Christ. Puen so says our Savior
here, For me, for your selves. First, for me, then for your selves: teaching
thereby that to rejoice for Christ, is better then to weep for our selves, yet
to keep a mean between both, that we must as well sometimes descend out of
Christ, as our selves to weep: as always ascend out of our selves, into
Christ to rejoice. For the Apostle says, Rejoice with them that rejoice, so,
weep with them that weep: If my friend be always sorrowful, and never
joyful, he has no pleasure by me: if he be always joyful, and never
sorrowful, I have no proof of him, but he is my dearest friend most
delighted in me, most approved by me, which takes such part as I do,
sometimes rejoicing, and sometimes weeping, rejoicing when I rejoice, and
weeping when I weep: the like is to be seen in this place, For me, for your
selves. If a Christian always thinks of his own misery, and never of
Christ's mercy, he will despair: if he always thinks of Christ's mercy, and
never of his own misery, he will presume: but he is the best christian, so
high that he cannot despair, and so low that he cannot presume, who inclines
as well to the one, as to the other, sometimes rejoicing, and sometimes weeping:
rejoicing for Christ, and weeping for himself. Therefore as in a balance, if
there be any odds in the scales, we take out of that which is in the heavier,
and put it to that which is in the lighter, until there be no difference
between them: so here we must weigh these matters well, that we may be just
weight, neither too heavy for our own misery, nor too light for Gods mercy.
David says, Hide me O Lord under the shadow of thy wings: not under the
shadow of thy wing, but of thy wings: of thy right wing of mercy by love, and
the left wing of thy judgment by fear. As God has two wings, the one of
mercy, the other of justice: so we must have two wings, one of joy for God,
and the other of despair for our selves. And as the Quail flying over the
sea, seeing her self not able to hold out, spreads out her wings and falls
into the sea, and lays one of her wings upon the water, and lifts up the
other wing unto heaven: so we must fly with the wings of joy, from joy in GOD,
with the wings of despair, unto despair in our selves. Lest we should
presume, we must go backwards, for fear: and yet lest we should despair, we
must go forwards toward God with love. As God does cover us with his two
wings, the one of justice, the other of love: so we must cover GOD with our
two wings, the one of fear, the other of joy. We must iumpe forwards unto God,
and backwards again unto our selves, which is Jobs cross leap. The sin of
man is the death of life. For me, (says he) I am the death of death: therefore
despair not. For your selves, you are the life of death: therefore presume
not. For me: I am the death of the devil, therefore despair not: For your
selves, you are the life of the devil, therefore presume not: For me, I am the
life of my self, therefore despair not: For your selves, you are the death of
your selves, therefore presume not: For me, I am the life of man, therefore
despair not: For your selves, you are the death of Christ, therefore presume
not: For me (says he) death is only dead, and not alive: dead in me, and not
alive in you: For your selves, death is both dead and alive; dead in me, alive
in you. For me, I am only alive, and not dead; alive in my self, and not dead
in you: For me, you are only alive, and not dead; alive in me, and not dead in
your selves: For your selves, you are both alive and dead; alive in me, and
dead in your selves. The worst foes that we have, are the devil and death: the
best friends we can have, are Christ and our selves: the death of Christ
kills those foes, and quickens those friends: the life of man quickens
those foes, and kills those friends. It is much that the death of Christ
kills death, more that it kills the devil, most of all that it kills
himself, more the^ all that it kills Christ. Wherefore we must not loose any
one of these weights: but when we weigh the reasons why we must weep for our
selves, we shall find as great cause of joy in God, great cause of sorrow in
our selves, far greater cause of joy in Christ, greater cause of sorrow in
our selves, far greatest cause of joy in Christ, greatest cause of sorrow in
our selves: for that which is more then all to make us joyful in Christ, that
is more then all to make us sorrowful in our selves. The righteousness of
Christ is the death of death, great cause of joy in Christ. Debora rejoiced
when Barake put Sisera to flight: have not we as great cause to rejoice, seeing
taht Christ has put death to flight? The sin of man is the life of death, a
great cause of sorrow in our selves. If Anna wept for her barrennes, have not
we as great cause to weep, seeing we can conceive nothing but sorrow, and
bring forth iniquity unto death? The righteousness of Christ is the death of
the devil, great cause of joy in Christ. If Judith rejoiced when she cut off
the head of Holofernes, have not we greater cause to rejoice, seeing Christ
has cut off the head of the devil? The sin of man is the life of the
devil, greater cause of sorrow in our selves. It Thamar wept being defloured
by her brother, have not we greater cause to weep, committing daily spiritual
adultery with the devil? The righteousness of Christ is the life of himself,
greatest cause of joy in Christ. If Sarah laughed when she should have a
quick child in her dead womb, is not this the greatest cause of laughter that
ca^ be to us, that Christ lived in death, and could not see corruption in the
grave? The sin of man is the death of himself; greatest cause of sorrow in
himself. If Agar wept being pulled out of Abraham's house; is not this the
greatest cause of weeping that can be unto us, that we are here pilgrims, and
strangers from our fathers house in heaven? The righteousness of Christ is the
life of man; this is more then all, to make us joyful in Christ. If Queen
Hester did rejoice, (as Queen Elizabeth does at this day, whom God long save
and preserve) because she delivered her people from thraldom, and destruction;
can any thing in the world then make us more joyful, then this, that we being
cursed in our selves, are blessed in Christ; being embased in our selves, are
exalted in Christ; being condemned in our selves, are justified in Christ;
being dead in our selves, are alive in Christ. The sin of man is the death of
Christ: this is more then all, to make us sorrowful in our selves. If the
Virgin Mary wept so sore for the death of her son Jesus, as it her soul had
been pierced through with a sword, (as Simeon speaks) can any thing in the
world then make us more sorrowful then this, that Christ being blessed in
himself, was cursed for us; being exalted in himself, was abased for us;
being justified in himself, was condemned for us; being alive in himself, was
dead for us. Oh dear brother, if thou be sorrowful at any time, remember
what Christ has done for thee, and thou will soon be glad: if thou be
joyful at any time, remember what thou have done against Christ, and thou will
soon be sorrowful: so shall we never suffer shipwreck of faith, either by too
much sorrow, as Esau did, who sought the blessing with tears, weeping for
himself, not rejoicing in Christ: or else by too much joy, as Herod did, who
heard John gladly, rejoicing for Christ, not weeping for himself. But as a
ship, being neither too heavily burdened, not too lightly ballased, fears
neither winds nor waves, but saileth safely to the haven: so we being neither
too heavy for our selves, nor too light for Christ, but rejoicing For me, for
your selves, both together, shall neither be drowned in the waves of
desperation, nor puffed up with the winds of presumption: but we shall live
safely in the Arc of Noah upon the sea of this world, until we arrive at the
haven of all happiness in heaven. And this is the right moderation which we
must keep between Christ and our selves, as appears in this sixth part, For
me, for your selves, both together.

The seventh part follows, Weep not for me, wherein we must consider three
things: that is, three virtues that were in Christ: First, his wisdom, Weep
not: secondly, his benignity, Not you: thirdly, his magnanimity, Not for me.
Wisdom in his instruction appears, in that he teaches us how we should be
affected toward the dead: for if we must not weep inordinately for the
death of Christ, then we must not trouble our selves greatly for the death of
any Christian. Indeed we may weep for the wicked, not only when they are
dead, but even when they are alive: but we must rejoice for the godly, not
only when they are alive, but when they are dead: and why? because the wicked
being alive are dead: but the godly being dead, are alive. Therefore David when
his son Absolon dyed, whom he knew to be a wicked man, wept for him, saying,
Absolon my son, O my son Absolon, would to God I had dyed for thee? but
when his young son dyed, whom he knew to be an innocent, he was well apaid,
and rose from the ground, and anointed his face, and said, I shall go to him,
he cannot return to me: whereby he warranteth that of Fulgentius, who says,
that the godly deceased are not amissi, but praemissi, not lost for ever, but
left for a time: not gone away from us, but sent to God before us. For if it be
true which Ignatius says, that life without Christ is death: then this is true
also, that death which is in Christ, is life: and what need we then wear
black mourning clothes in sign of sorrow, seeing they wear long white robes
in token of triumph? The Athenians had a law given them by Solon, which did
forbid mourning and weeping at funerals, says Chrysostme: it beseems us
rather to rejoice then to weep for the departure of the righteous: and Jerome
says, we may weep for them, because they are not with us, but we must not
weep for them, because they are with God: For Isidorus says, Charitas plorare
iubet, sed piet as lugere vetat: Though love commands us, yet faith forbids us
to weep for the dead: therefore Paulinus says, Salua fide, though we may
notwithstanding our faith, perform al duties of love, yet we must first
notwithstanding our love, enjoy the comforts of faith. So if we shed some few
tears which run softly like the waters of Silo: no force says Ambrose, they
will not bewray in us any want of faith, but only testify abundance of love:
thus and no otherwise did Abraham weep for Sarai his wife, Rebecca for Debora
her nurse, Berseba for Vrias her huskand, Christ for Lazarus his friend.
Augustine says, that Christ hanging upon the cross, taught us a many of
excellent lessons, and one amongst the rest was, how we should behave our
selves toward our brethren that are departed out of this life: and it is
amplified out of the Hebrews, and also showed by the Romans, and the
Ephesians, and declared out of Elias that the dead must not be carried to the
grave with mourning, but with singing; and herein wonderful wisdom he
shows how sparing we ought to be in weeping for the death of our godly
friends, considering their good hap, and our good hope. In that he says,
Weep not for me: 2. his benignity, not you: All his intolerable troubles
nothing troubled him so much as that his friends were troubled for his
troubles: and yet (as it should seem) they had great reason thus to be
grieved. All the people wept for Moses death, all Egypt for Joseph's death, all
Israel for Josias death, all the Church for Steuens death: but a million of
Moses, of Joseph's, of Josias, of Steuens are not comparable to Christ. The
women of Troy lamented the death of worthy H^ctor, making this the foot of
their doleful dittie, Hectora flemus: how much more then might these women of
Jerusalem lament the death of their captain Christ? All the widows lamented
the death of Dorcas because in her life time she had made the^ such fine
clothes and garments: and had not these women then far greater cause to
lament the death of Christ, who made every one of them a wedding garment,
wherein he did marry them to himself? Ye daughters of Israel (says David)
weep for Saul, who has clothed you with scarlet: how much more then ought
these daughters of Jerusalem, to weep for Christ, who clothed every one of
them with the royal robe of righteousness? yea and gave his own dear self for
them, that they might put on the Lord Jesus. When Christ was borne, the night
was turned into day as it was prophesied, Psalm. 139. 12. Then shall the night
shine as the day. But when Christ was crucified, the day was turned into night,
as it was prophesied, Amos 8. 7 Then shall the sun go down at noone day. The
sun therefore wept for Christ. As Hamons face was covered when he was
condemned to dye; so the suns face was covered, when Christ was condemned to
dye. The temple also wept for Christ. As David rent his garment, when he heard
of Ionathans death; so the temple rent his veil, when it heard of Christ's
death. The graves like wise wept for Christ: as the King of Niniue threw up
dust upon his head when the city was appointed to dye; so the graves threw up
dust upon their heads, when Christ was appointed to dye. Lastly, the stones
wept for Christ: as Job cut off his hair when he heard of his childrens
death; so the stones were cut in pieces and cloue asunder when they heard of
Christ's death. An ass carrying Christ to Jerusalem, the children cried
Hosanna: Christ carrying his cross out of Jerusalem, the women cried
Halaluiah: so if these children had held their peace, and not sung, the very
stones would have sung out the praises of Christ: If these women had held their
peace, and not cried, the very stones would have cried for the death of Christ:
or rather indeed, as soon as ever these women lest crying, because Christ bad
them, the stones straight ways fell a crying before Christ bad them. And what
heart of man could then have refrayned from weeping, though it had bin harder
then any stone, seeing the hard stones before his eyes, dissolved and distilled
into tears? Yet behold the loving kindness of Christ, Christ dyed not for the
stones, not for the temple, nor for the graves; but for us men and for our
sins he dyed: yet he suffers those dead and senceles creatures to weep,
and to have a lively feeling of his death, though they had no benefit of his
death: But being content himself to shed his own heart blood for us, yet will
not suffer us in recompense, to shed so much as one little tear for him, in
that he says, Weep not for me. Thirdly and lastly, his magnanimity, in that
he says, Not for me, appeared in that, holding now in his hand, the cup of
trembling, and being ready to drink of the very dregs of it, yet neither
his hand, nor his heart trembled.

Ennius the poet could say, Nemo me lachrymis decoret, nec funera fletu, Let no
man weep for my death: and Saint Laurence the Martyr, (as Prudentius
testifies) says, Desinite discessu meo fletus dolenter fundere, Do not weep
for my departure: but as Ennius, or any other Pagan, could never come near
Christians in true magnanimity, so Saint Laurence or any christian could never
come near Christ. Paul of any I heard of, comes nearest him going toward
Jerusalem: what do ye (says he) weeping and breaking my heart? for I am
ready not only to be bound, but to dye for the name of the Lord Jesus
Christ. Even so says Christ here, or rather indeed not so, but a thousand
times more courageously: going out of Jerusalem, what do you (says he)
weeping and breaking my heart? for I am ready not to be bound, but to dye for
the salvation of man. He knew well enough that his passion would be a new
kind of transfiguration unto him, for at his transfiguration, he was
accompanied with his Disciples, Peter, James, and John: but at his passion
Peter denied him, James and John forsook him: there he was upon mount Tabor,
which smelled sweetly of herbs and flowers: but here he was upon mount
Caluarie, which smelled lothsomely of bones and dead men's sculles: and there
his face did shine as the sun, but here his face was buffeted and spit upon:
and then his garments were white as the light; but here his garments were
parted, and he himself whipped stark naked: and there he was between two
famous Prophets, Moses and Elias: but here he was between two thieves, the
one on his right hand, the other upon his left: and there his Father spoke
joyfully to him from heaven, This is my beloved son: but here he schriched
lamentably unto his Father from the cross, My God, my GOD, why have thou
forsaken me? Yet behold the magnanimity of Christ, Christ knew well enough
before hand of this whole passion prepared for him, when as he was not
transfigured as before, bt disgraced so as never was any man, yet nothing could
move him. Oh worthy resolution, the like whereof was never heard of before!
This fearefulnes of his Disciples, this noysomenes of the place, the buffets,
the nakedness, those thieves, those schriches, could not a whit daunt his
heroycal heart: but even as a noble cha^pion, having already had a leg and an
arm slasht off, when all the stage in admiration of his valor and manhood,
cries, save the man, save the man: yet puts out himself, and standing upon one
leg, and striking with one arm, fights still as stoutly as if he had not
been hurt at all: so Christ having been scourged and scorned already, when
the whole center of heaven and earth wept for him: yea, when the powers above
the heavens came down, and the dead under the the earth, rose up to moan and
pity him: only he himself would ask no favor of others, nor show favor
to himself, but was very angry with them, that gave him such counsel.

And though all the Saints in heaven and earth, did bleed at the very heart,
in a manner, even as much as he himself did being upon the cross, to see so
good a man to be despised: yet nothing would stay him, but still he went on
forward as pleasantly and cheerfully, as to any banquet or feast, to that
most ruthful and dreadful death. Thus you see in this seventh part: the
wisdom, the benignity, and magnanimity of Christ, in that he says, Weep
not for me.

The eight part, which is the last, now only remains. But weep for your
selves: wherein we must consider likewise three virtues that ought to be in us:
First, devotion: secondly, compunction: thirdly, compassion. First, devotion in
weeping for this life: secondly, compunction in weeping at the heart: thirdly,
compassion in weeping for our own life: First, for devotion. A man may be said
to be devout in prayer, to be devout in speaking, and to be devout in
meditating, devout in thanksgiving: but we understand that devotion which
causes us to break forth into tears, and in weeping for our selves, we must
be devout: we must persuade our selves, that we are out of our own country,
and that the heavens which we possess not yet, is the country which we should
desire. If Christ wish the^ of Jerusalem here, to weep for themselves, and did
himself elsewhere weep for Jerusalem* saying: Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how
often would I, etc. but you would not: how much more the^ ought we to weep for
this life? They of Jerusalem which were carried captive into Babylon, endured
threescore and ten years: now just so long lasts our life, as the
Psalmist says. And so by this account, our whole life is nothing else but the
captivity of Babylon: therefore we may well say, By the waters of Babylon we
sat down and wept, when we remembered thee Oh Sion: and Psalm. 42. My tears
have been my meat day and night, while they said to me, where is now thy GOD?
And in another place, VVoe is me that I am constrained to dwell with Mesech,
and to have my habitation among the tents of Kedar. Jerusalem was once finally
sacked by Titus and Vespasian, whereas besides, an infinite number that were
otherwise spoiled, ten hundred thousand men, ten hundred thousand men I say,
were slain down altogether, (as Josephus a Greek writer, Egesipphus an
Hebrew writer testifies. But that which happened once to the^, happens daily
to us: we dye daily, our whole life is nothing else but such a fooyle and
sackage: and among all the miseries of this life, nothing is more miserable
then this life it self? So that the only happiness we can have in this life,
is a true and a godly bewayling of our unhappiness: which made our Savior say,
VVoe be unto you which laugh now, for you shall weep: but on the other side,
Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted: Therefore Job
desired God to spare him a little, and let him live a while longer. Wherefore?
that he might laugh, and that he might be merry? No says he, but Vt
plangam delorem meu^: that I might weep for my woe and grief: he thought, that
a man could not have time enough in this life, though it were never so long, to
lament and rue the miseries of this life, though it were never so short. For as
it is, Romans 8. 22. If every creature do sigh and groan in it self* if the
very earth which we have under out feet do mourn and pine away for sorrow,
for the heavy burden of our sins, wherewith it is almost weakened and pressed
down to hell; how much more ought we, having the first fruits of the spirit, to
have true devotion in weeping, for this life, according to this, But weep for
your selves. Secondly, compuctio^, (...), of (...), frango: as if he should
have said, Scindatur vena cordis: Break your hearts for sorrow. And this is
the cause why David says, I have rored for the very disquietnes of my heart.
And therefore follows Paul's conversion of the Christians in the Acts of the
Apostles, who cried out in the veheme^cie of their spirits, Men and brethren,
what shall we do? And this compunction in weeping at the heart, is commanded,
Psalm. 4. 5. For whereas we commonly read it, In your chambers and be still,
or be still in your chambers: the Septuagints expound it, Have compunctio^ in
your chambers: whereby they signify to be pricked to the quick, until the
blood follow again: and by chambers, in that place, our hearts is meant. As,
When thou prayest, enter into thy chamber: that is, into the silence and
secrecy of thy heart: for that having compunction in your chambers, is as much
as if he should have said, bleed inwardly at the heart. Our tears must not be
Crocodiles tears* for as there is praying from the teeth outward, so there is
weeping from the eyes outward: as Bernard says, We must be let blood, and have
a vein opened with the lance of compu^ction. And this vein (says
Fulgentius) must not be corporis, sed cordis: must not be the liver vein, or
any such like, but the heart vein only. Whereupon (says David) My heart
droppeth, Psalm. 129. 28. Not that his heart dropped indeed, but because the
tears which he shed, were not drops of water, such as may be easily forced,
coming from the eyes, but drops of blood, such as christ did sweat, issuing
from the heart. These indeed are true tears (says Austin) which are the
blood of a wounded heart: So that the heart must first be rent, and deeply
wounded, before the eye can weep. But if once our sins fall upon us like
thieves, and wound us at the heart, and leave us half dead, and make us powere
out the blood of true tears, then by and by will Christ power in the wine and
oil of gladness. For says Jerome, speaking of this compu^ction, Vngit, non
pungit: These wounds do not hurt us, but heal us. Which we may see in S.
Paul, so long as his heart was hardened, and seared with an hot iron, he played
the wild colt, (as I may say) without any grief or remorse, kicking against
the pricks: but when it pleased God to take out of his breast that stony
heart (as the Prophet speaks) and to give him an heart of flesh for it, the
only one prick of the flesh, the sting of concupiscence, was sufficient alone
to tame him, and humble him, and rule him aright. For even as a bladder, if it
be pricked, all the wind voyds out of it: so Paul his heart being pricked, and
bleeding continually for his sins, was freed of all conceitednes of all
vanity and pride. Wherefore as the men of Judea and Jerusalem were pricked at
their hearts, Act. 2. 37. so must we have true compunction, in bleeding and
weeping at the heart: alluding to this, But weep for your selves.

Lastly, we must have compassion in weeping for our own life. Indeed it is an
acceptable thing to have compassion upon others, but here we are bound to have
compassion upon our selves. Miserere animae tuae, placens Deo, as one says,
The Priest must first offer sacrifice unto God for himself, then for the
sins of the people. In the Gospel, the Pharisie took compassion upon the
Publica^, saying, I thank God I am no whoremaster, nor unclean person, nor as
this publican: But the godly publican wept for himself, and took compassion
upon his own life, and therefore God took compassion upon him. We must not
first weep for others, but first we must drink one hearty draft of
compassion for our selves, and then for our brother. If thy eye be single, al
thy body is full of light: but if thou have a beam in thine own eye, and yet
would pull out the moate that is in thy brothers eye, all thy body is full
of darkness: whereas the way is first to weep and wash out the great beam our
of their own eye, that then thy eye being more single, thou may see clearly
to pull a little moate out of thy brothers eye: otherwise, that which was most
fondly and foolishly said to Christ, may be truly and fitly said to thee,
Physician heal thy self: And, he saved others, himself he can not save. Like
to those Hagges and Pharies, which in Latin be called Lamiae, which we have
heard of in old time, who (as they say) could see well enough abroad, but when
they came home, were wont to put up their eyes in a box, and so they were
stark blind. To whom we may well say, as Christ said to one, Abi in domum tuam:
Go into thine own house: do not pry into other men's lives abroad, and shut
not up thine eyes in a box when thou art at home, but rather when thou art
abroad: look to thine own house, look to thine own heart, weep for thine
own self, for thine own life. Many can swallow a camel and strain out a
gnat: though their own backs be surcharged, and ouerladen with all ill-favored
lumpes of sin, like camels bunches; yet they never feel it, they never make
any bones of it, they can swallow it well enough without any drink of tears:
but if they see a little gnat sitting upon their brothers coat, presently they
must needs forsooth weep for it, and urge it and press it very sore, and
strain it through their tears. Such are the wicked unlearned Brownists, and
other like sectaries of this age; they say they weep daily for the ruin of
Syon, for the desolation of this Church. But our Church answers the^, as she
had heard her spouse Christ Jesus say in the like case, Weep not for me, but
weep for your selves: I (says our Church) was never more glorious heretofore*
in this Realm of England, never am like to be hereafter, then I am now at
this day, the Lord be thanked for it: and there is no one point of doctrine or
discipline, which I maintain, which has not been within these forty years
confirmed and besprinckled, and even inameled with the blood of as blessed
Saints, as holy Martyrs, our own countrymen, as ever did hold up innocent
hands to GOD. Therefore, Weep not for me, but weep for your selves: You
have departed not only from his Church, but from the primitive Church: of which
you speak so much, Act. 2. 48. In the primitive Church, they remained with one
accord in the Temple, you run out of the Temple, and refuse to pray with us.
In the primitive Church, they did break bread at home, you break peace
abroad: In the primitive Church, they had singlenes of heart, you have changed
all singlenes into singularity: I do not speak this unto any of this
worshipful audience, but to you Brownists: you are those Donatists, of whom
Saint Austine speaks in his 29. Epistle written to Ianuarius, who would take
from us the Lords prayer, with their impious arguments: so would ye Brownists.
You are those Nestorians of whom Cassianus speaks: Quia nolunt esse vt omnes
sunt, volunt omnes esse sicut illi sunt. Who, because they would not be as
other men are, would have all men to be as bad as themselves. You are of those
Luceferians, of whom Jerome speaks in the beginning of decalogue, Quibus
familiare est dicere, fact a est ecclesia lupanaria: who make it a common word
in their mouths to say, that the Church is become a Stews, so say the
Brownists. You are those Adriani of whom Epiphanius speaks in his Anchoratus,
4. and 5. page grecae: who being busy bodies themselves, and Bishops in other
men's Dioces: yet think much that godly and learned Bishops should bear rule in
their own Dioces, so think the Brownists. You are those factious
Schismatickes, of whom Irenaeus speaks of in his 4. book, 26. chapter: who
for light and trifling quarrels, rent and tear the great and glorious body of
Christ: so do ye Brownists. Yea, you are those Schismatikes, of whom Bernard
speaks, Qui eos qui de Ecclesia sunt, canes, and porcos censent: who account
of the Ministers of the church no otherwise, then of hogs, and dogs: I
speak to you Brownists. You are those murmurers against Moses, of whom
Optates speaks in his first book against Paremon, Qui sunt sepulti, ante
sunt mortui: who were buried before they were dead, because they wept for
others before they wept for themselves: so do ye Brownists. But to leave them
as they leave the Church, and return to our selves (dear brethren) who are
Christ's dear friends, and friends of his holy Church, we must not only
weep, but weep at the heart, not only weep at the heart, but weep for this
life; not only weep for this life, but weep for our own life: and so
continually practice true devotion, compunction, and compassion, according to
this, But weep for your selves.

Thus have I gone over all the eight parts of this text: Now I would desire no
greater favor of God, the^ that we might meditate of this which has been
spoken, so as our whole lives, and all our affections (especially these
affections of joy and sorrow) might thereby be ordered, and directed aright.
For weeping, and not weeping, are things indifferent: things of themselves
neither good nor bad, but thereafter, as according to circumstances and
occurrences, they are either well or ill used: Even as glorying, laboring,
fearing, or loving. For glorying, it is said, Let not the wise man glory in
his wisdom: but let him that glories, glory in this, that he knows the
Lord. Again, We must not rejoice in any thing, but in Christ Jesus, and him
crucified. For laboring, it is said, Labor not for the meat which perishes,
but for the me at which endures for ever. And again, Thou shall get thy
living with the sweat of thy brows. For fearing, it is said, Fear not him
that can kill the body only, but fear him who is able to cast both body and
soul into utter darkness. For loving, it is said, Love not the world, nor the
things of the world: if any man love the world, the love of God is not in him.
Glory not the^, but glory, not in the wisdom of the world, but in the
knowledge of God: Labor not, but labor, not for the meat which perishes, but
for the meat which abides for ever. Fear not, but fear, not him that can
kill the body only, but him that can kill both body and soul. Love not, but
love, not the world, but GOD. And so here, Weep not, but weep, not for me,
but for your selves. Weep not for me, but weep for your selves. To weep is
lawful, not to weep, without weeping, is unlawful: not to weep, is lawful,
not to weep, without weeping, is not lawful. Again, to weep for our selves,
is lawful; to weep immoderatly for Christ, is unlawful; not to weep for
Christ is lawful; not to weep at al for our selves is unlawful: whereas
without any unlawfulness in either, both weeping, and not weeping, will be
lawful, if our weeping be always joined with not weeping, and our not weeping
sometimes joined with weeping; if our weeping be for our selves, not for
Christ, and our not weeping be for Christ, and not for our selves. Therefore,
we must mark what our Savior said, he says not thus, Weep for me, and weep
for your selves; that is too much sorrow, and too little joy: neither thus,
Weep not for me, nor weep for your selves; that is too much joy, and too
little sorrow: neither thus, Weep for me, but weep not for your selves; that is
a desperate speech: neither thus, Weep not for your selves, but weep for me;
that is a presumptuous speech: only he says thus, Weep not for me, but
weep for your selves. Wherefore (holy brethren) if we have any tears, now
let us shed them: if we have any Psalms, now let us sing the^. The holy
Gospel is nothing else, but a joyful news, the sum whereof is comprised in
that Evangelical and Angelical message to the shepherds, I bring you glad
tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people. But there Christ was borne
in his mothers arms, now he holds up the Angels that they fall not, and
lifts up men that are fallen, with his arms stretched out upon the cross:
This is his kingdom which is upon his shoulder, Esaias. 9. 6. And O Ecumenius
says upon the second of Job, This was a greater glory and credit for Christ,
then the creation of the whole world. Sweet Savior, I embrace the wounds of
thy hands and feet, I esteem more of thy hysoppe, thy sponge, thy reed, thy
spear, then of any princely Diadem: I boast my self, and am more proud of
thy spittings and thorns, then of al pearls and iuels: I account thy cross
more splendent and glorious, then any royal scepter. What speak I of a
scepter? that's a goodly matter indeed, then all the sunne-beames in her greatest
brightness of beauty. This is that triumph, 2. Cor. 2. 14. whereby Christ made
us to triumph in himself, and to be more then conquerours, as Cyprian says,
whereas the goodness and sweetness of Christ, did triumph over all impiety and
malice. Therefore if the women met Saul playing and singing, Saul has slain
his thousand, and David his ten thousand: how much more ought all the sons
and daughters of Jerusalem, to meet joyfully playing upon the harp, and
singing that new song to the Lamb with the 24. Elders, Thou art worthy to
take the book, and to open the seals thereof, because thou wast killed, and
have redeemed us by thy blood. There is a time to weep, and a time to laugh, a
time to mourn, and a time to dance. Why art thou then so heavy oh my soul,
and why art thou so disquieted within me? still put thy trust in GOD, and he
will deliver thee. Wherefore, let us look up into heaven, and there shall we
see the Angels singing this song, Glory be to God on high, peace on earth,
and good will to^ards men. And if I acob, that true I acb, (I mean) Christ,
when he went to Jerusalem, having nothing with hi^ but a staff, a I acobs
staff: if then (I say) we had good cause to rejoice: how far greater cause
have we now to rejoice, seeing he is returned back again, and ascended up
into heaven to his Father, and there sits in glory: though thou were never
so much afflicted, yet even in affliction* rejoice with joy unspeakable, yet
not as Herodias did, but as David did leap up in affliction, and caper as high
as heaven it self, where thou shall see one rapt up into a third heaven,
saying to himself, God forbid that I should rejoice in any thing, but in the
cross of Christ: and to us, Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say,
Rejoice: and again and again, I say rejoice, and rejoice in Christ always.
But weep for yourselues: not because Christ dyed, but because your sin were
the cause of his death: for this I will weep day and night: yea, if I had as
many eyes in my head, as three are stars in the sky, yet I wo^ld weep them
all out for this, tha I should be such an unworthy wre^ch, as by my sins to
crucify Chris:, and to put him to so many deaths, and to kill so dear and so
loving a Lord. Oh that I could possibly devise what to say, or what to do, to
obtain thus much of you, or rather of God for you: that you would weep,
though it were never so little for your sins. But I can do no more but
commend and commit that which has been spoken, to the effectual working of
the holy Ghost in you: and to the faithful obedience of your good hearts to
God. Many excellent things are spoken of thee, renowned city, oh thou glorious
city of London: and yet there are many foul blemishes in thee, which now I
will not, and by reason of the time, I cannot rip up unto you: but must leave
them unto every one of your private consciences: only remember I pray you this
one lesson, that you sin not, for he that sins once, kills Christ once:
and he that repeateth one sin twenty times, kills Christ twenty times:
Oh that God would give force to my words, and tell me what I should say. I
would to God that I could move aany remorse, in bitinge and gnawing of your
consciences for your sins. Beloved, oh beloved, kill not the comforter of your
hearts, grieve not the holy Ghost: for when we sin, the holy Ghost is
grieved: he is grieved when we are not grieved; but if we be grieved for our
sins, then is the holy Ghost delighted: as says Saint Basil, such grief
and weeping will be the very seed, or the interest and loan of everlasting
life. For as a Father pittieth his child, and if he seeeth him cry, he
stilleth him, and takes out his hand-kercher and wipes the childs eyes
himself: so GOD our heavenly Father, will with his own holy finger wipe away
all tears from our eyes, take us by the hand, and lead us out of the house
of mourning, into the house of mirth: then having sown in tears, we shall
reap in joy: yea, having sown but a few tears, which may be put in a bottle,
we shall reap al those manifold joys which are in heaven: For (says one)
Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes the next morning: then shall
Christ turn all our misery into music: all our wormwood into wine: all our
sighing into singing: then shall Abraham that good mower, bind us up into
sheaues as good corn, and fill his bosom full of us, and carry us into the
Lords barn, to make a joyful harvest in heaven: then shall we with the wise
Virgins, having store of oil in our lamps, that is, tears in our eyes, go
out of this vale of tears which flows with weeping, and enter into that
celestial Canaan, which flows with milk and honey. Then shall we
surmounting all earthly things, so rear aloft and fly up as with the Eagles
wings, into the heavenly paradise, and there settle in the tree of eternal
life: then shall all tears of weeping and mourning be wiped from our eyes:
and then shall we see clearly the bright son of God sitting at the right
hand of his Father in heaven: saving unto us, Come unto me, all ye that are
heavy laden, and I will refresh you: not saying, VVeep not for me, but weep
for your selves: but Rejoice for me, and rejoice for your selves, through the
tender mercies of Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father, and the Son, and the
holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, power and praise, dignity and dominion,
both now and evermore. Amen.

Deus est gloria.
FINIS.

