The Education or bringinge up of children / translated out of Plutarche by
sir Thomas Eliot knight.

THE PRAISE
The table of this book.
The preface of the translatour. The procreation of children. the first chap.
Of nature, reason, and custom. ij. chap. Of nources and tutours. iii. chap. To
chose schole masters. the.iii. chap. The defau^e of learning. the.v. chap. The
difficulty to please co^munes. vi. chap. The just temperance in speaking.
vii. cha. The commodite of virtuous exercise. ca. viii. A moderate direction to
provoke childerne to learn. ca. ix. Of the exercises of memory, and of three
excellent continences. cap. x. How premeditation ought to be used with a
pleasant narration of Vlixes. ca. xi. what inconveniences do happen through
negligence of fathers. ca. xij. what company is pernicious and hurtefulle to
children. ca. xiii. The means to diswade young men from vice, and an example
to be given to parents. ca. xiiii.
Thus ends the Table.
Thomas Eliot to his only entierly beloved sister Margery Puttenbam.
AS in this te^porall life no thing is to natural man so desirous as to have
by lefull increase procreacion and fruit of his body / semblably to a man of
honestye or gentyl courage, there is no disease or grefe so intolerable as
children of their disposicion abiecte or vicious: which declynynge from all
virtue, in voluptuous and inordinate lyuinge not only consume the goods of
their parents and friends, but also deface the good opinion and fame, which
perchance their auncetours, by some virtuous act or study have acquired:
which most communly happens by the remysse educacion or bringinge up of them.
wherefore good sister, for as much as I do consider, with what fertilite
almighty god has endued you, to my great comfort, if your children do
prospere in virtue and learning, I therefore in times vacant from busynes and
other more serious study, as it were so: my solace and recreation, have
translated for you this little treatise entitled the Education of children, and
made by Plutarch the excellent philosopher and master to Tra^ane, most
virtuous and noble of all Emperors: whereby ye shall be maruaylously
instructed, or at least waye^ b^t shall admi^iculate your wisdom (which I
dare affirm is right laudable) in ordrynge and instructy^ge your children,
circumspectely and discretly. For as god shall judge me, the lack of children
should not be to me so payneful, as fear of having succession of heirs, in
whom should be lack of ve^tue and lerning. wherefore good sister e^deuour your
self to adapte and form in my lyttel neuewes incl^nacio^ to virtue and
doctrine, acording to min expectation: which ye shall with more facilite
perform if ye bear the contents of this litell book in your remembrance:
Aduertysynge you, that I have not only used therein the office of a
translatour, but also have declared at length diverse histories, only touched
by Plutarch: to thente^t that difficulty of understanding shall not cause the
matter to be to you fastidious, as it often times has hapened to other. Also
of purpose I have omitted to translate some part of this matter, contained as
well in the Greek as in the Latin^ partly for that it is strange from the
experience or usage of this present time, partly that some vices be in those
tongues reproved, which ought rather to be unknown, than in a vulgar tongue to
be expressed. Nor I would not that any man sh^ulde exact of me the exquisite
diligence of an interpretour, syns I write not to clerks, ne desire not to
have my book co^ferred with the del^ctable styles of Greeks or Latins: but as
I have ^ayde, I have this done for my pastyme without much study or travail.
And it shall only suffic^ me, if by this littel labor I may cause you mine
entierly beloved sister, to follow the intent of Plutarche in brynginge and
inducynge my litell neuewes into the train and rule of virtue, where by they
shall finally attain to honor (god so disposinge) to the inestimable comfort
of their natural parents, and other their loving frendes^ and most
specially to the high pleasure of god, commoditye and profit of their countray.

Thus heartily fare ye well, and keep with you this token of my tender love to
you, which with the virtue and toward^es of your children shall be contynually
augmented.

From London the.xxvii. day of Noue^bre.
Of the good and laufull procreacion of children, and how they be enclyned to
the good or ill disposition of their parents. First chap.
LEt us consider what may be spoken touching the education or bringing up of
the children of honest parsonages, or by what exercise they may sone attain to
virtuous manners. And percha^ce it shall be most exediente to take the
beginning at their procreation, before we tray^t^ of any other thing.
Therefore who so coueyteth to be fader of honorable or worshypfull children, I
suppose this thing ought be to purpose pryncypally, never to be joined to
womenne lewd and ^biecte, as commune harlott^s and concubynes. For in who so
ever is engendered any blemyshe or ill spotte of their moder^ part, during
their lives reproach of ignobilite always ^ccompanyeth them, which is apt and
ready for those that of malice will embraide or atwite them. For it was a wise
man that said: Unhappy is the generation /
wherein there fa^^eth a good fundation.
It is more over a fair treasure and great part of liberty, to be engendered
of good parentis, which ought to be highly esteemed of them that desire good
fruit. For children adulter at and like to counterfai^t money, be communely
blinded with arrogans, or be naturally of rude and vile dysposycyon. wherefore
that poet said truly, that spoke in this wise: The mind which i^ with any
spotte ^^taysed
Of fewde parentis, holds in captivity
The va^yant knight, whole strength ^rst neu^^ ^ay^ed
Such power has nature, bredde in iniquity
For children brought up in much fe^icitie
Of no^^e paren^e^, have for the more part
A ^o^^ynge tongue, a proud and sturdye ^art.


According there unto it is written of one named Cleophantus, son of the noble
duke Themystocles, which for his prowes was soueraynly esteemed and beloved of
the people of Athenes, the said Cleophantus auanted him self, where he was in
company, that what so ever he would, his mother would the same, and what she
desired, his fader Themistocles granted, and what pleased Themistocles, the
people was therewith contented. The noble hearts of Lacedemones (which are a
people in Greece) be worthy to be highly extolled, who compelled their king
named Archidamus / to pay to them a great sum of money, for that be married a
woman of small stature and personage embraidinge him, that he purposed not to
get them kings, but only a lineage of kings (as it were that in a king ought
to be good features and majesty.) Consequently one thing is to be remembered,
which has not ben forgoten of our elders: what suppose you that is?
Certainly, that they which do accompany with women, to ^hentent to get
children in the act veneriall, be sober, or at the least ways that they
drink a little wine only for that it is nourishing to nature / very temperatly.
For truly it happens, that the sede being sown by dronken parents / the
children thereof coming, for the more part hen drunkardes and tavern haunters.
Therefore Di^genes (the Philosopher) when he espied a young man, which being
drunk had his wits troubled, and spoke unadvisedly, said to him: young man
thy father did sow the, wha^ he was dru^ke. Thus hitherto have I spoken of
procreation of children: here after I shall treat of the gouerna^ce of them
concerning the order of their living.

Of nature / reason and custom / which should concur in the educacion of
children. Cap. ii.
GEnerally according as we have been used to trayte of concerning artis and
sciences, the same shall we now eftsoon reherce in the declaracion of virtue.
Three things there be that must co^curre and agree in the acco^plishing and
perfecting of the warke, which I now purpose, that is to say Nature, Reason,
and Custom. Reason I take for doctrine, Custom for exercise. The beginning
and enter is to be taken of doctrine, Experience is won by meditacion and
exercise. Of all those together is made a perfection: And where any of them do
lack or fail, needs must virtue halte. For Nature without doctrine is blind,
and doctrine without Nature is a thing mutilate. Needs must than exercise
(which lacks them both) be imperfecte. For like as in tyllage first it
behooves that the moulde (which is to be sown) be good. Secondarily that the
husband or ploughman be expert in sowinge. Thirdely that the sede be clean
and without fau^e. So (in bringinge up of your children) ye shall apply and
resemble to the moulde your childrens nature, to the ploughman, their
instructour or master to the sede, Instruction of learning and precepts. All
which things undoubtedly were assembled in those noble philosophers / whom all
men do commend: I mean Pythagoras, Socrates, and Plato, and every other,
which has attained to immortal fame and honor. Doutles he is in great
felicite and in the favor of god, who that is indewed with all these
qualities. But who so ever after that he has attained to doctrine and the
right experience to virtue, do suppose the wit of man not to be profitable, he
does not qualify the defaultes of Nature, but utterly erreth and is deceived.
For sloth destroys the power of nature, and she her self by doctrine is
distroyed. And light things flees from men that be negligent: and nothing is
so ^ifficile, but by cure it is optained. Also you shall lightly perceive in
many things (if ye take good head) what spedynes and efficacy is in labor
and diligence. For the small drops of water (with often falling) perce the
stones. Iron and brass is worn out with much occupatio^. And the wheles of
chariottes bowed by much violence, can never recover their pristinat
streightnes. yet labor (excedyng the course of nature) has surmou^ted her
power. But suppose you these things only declares the power of diligence ^
nay truly, but also other things innumerable. If a ground fertile of nature
be ill housbandried / for lack of good tillage it appears foul and ill
favored: and the more excellent the nature of every thing is, the more is
lost / if bit perysshe by slouthe or negligence. Is your ground barayne and
out of measure rough and vntylthy? Till it well: and good spente, comes again
of it. How many trees be there, that being little set by / abides barayne:
And when they be duly attended and cherysshed, they become fertile? what
strength of body is not dulled and consumed by sluggardye, wantonness, and
ill rule? Or what bodies be so feeble of Nature, that by exercise and doing of
maistries be not auaunced to more strength and prowes? Semblablye, what horse
well broken in youth is not after to the ryder gentle and easy? And they
that be roughe and ill broken, be not they very hard beeded and fyers of
stomach? But what need we to marvel at such other things, when we se often
times beastis most savage and cruel / to be broken and made tame with labors?
One of Thessalie (which is a country naturally inclined to war) answered
well wha^ it was demanded of him, who were most abiecte of all the people of
Thessaly, he said, they which in feats of war be not exercised. what shall
need many words? Custom is a thing ancient and of long continuance. And he
that customably haunteth his own propre and familiar virtues, shall not err in
any wise. Touching which matter, after one exaumple rehearsed, I shall cesse to
speak any more of these things. Lycurgus (which made and gave laws to the
people called Spartanes of Lacedemones) for to prove the efficacy of custom,
caused.ii. whelps to be taken and brought up in sondrye manners / the one to be
made a rauenour and re^beles, the other chaste, suer in lyam, and to hunte
truly. That done, on a time when the people were in one place assembled,
Lycurgus said unto them: O ye Lacedemones, for to get and attain unto
virtue, custom, discipline, doctrine, and good bringing up, be of great
effect and substance: Of the which I shall unto you anon, make experience.
And forthewith, bringing before them the whelps, which he kept: when he
had set between them a pot with meat and a quick hare, the one whelpe
egerly flewe to the hare, the other with as much haste or more, thraste his heed
in to the pot. And when the people in no wise could coniecte what this thing
purported, or wherefore the whelps were brought forth: Friends said Lycurgus,
both these whelps, having one sire and one damme, by custom be trained in
to sondrye disposicions: for the one is become a rauenour, the other a good
hunter. Now have we sufficiently spoken of the life and custom of men, here
after we shall treat of the Educacion and bringing up of children.

The good or ill that happens by norises and tutours. Cap. iii.
AS me seems it behooves that the moders should bring up their own children,
and do give unto them souke at their own breasts. For with more natural
affection and bu^y diligence they noriss^h them, than does other norses, as
they, which most inwardly, and (as it is communly said) from the fyngers ends
love their children. Nourses hired have but a feyned benevolence, loving the
children for their reward only.

^ore over that the moders them self ought to norishe them, which they bring
forth, nature d^clareth sufficiently. For to that intent she has given to
every creature, that is of female kind, norishement of milk. Also there was
in him a high and wise providence, which gave unto women two pappes: that if
hit happened any to bring forth twynnes, she should have double fountaynes to
noryshe them: which was done for great consideration, that thereby love and
benevolence may be noris^hed and increased between them and their children. For
familiar company in living and fedynge is an encreace of love and amitye.
Therefore it is to be observed principally that moders (as I have before
rehearsed) do bring up their own children and give them souke of their propre
breasts, or if they can not for some disease or manifest impediment that they
may happen to have: Or if they list not, for that they would have plenty of
children, than would I that they should take honest and convenient nources,
and not brothels and vagaboundes, but such as he instruct in the manners of
their propre realm or country. For in like wise as the members of infantes
newly borne, must be formed and ordered that they become not crooked: so the
manners of them at their beginning / must be aptly and properly framed. For
that very young age is teee^der and facile to be wrought: and learning is best
instylled and brought in wits, whiles they be soft and delycate. Also
things being long hard, uneath be mollified: therefore learning in childrens
wits is soonest impressed. wherefore Plato, which is called the divine
philosopher, discretely exhorts nources, that they commit not to children
tryfelynge and dishonest fables, lest at the beginning they infecte their
wits with folly, and unthrifty manners. Therefore the poet Phoci^ides in this
wise counsayleth: Infourme thy child in young and tender age.
To gentle manners the very tyght passage.
Also hit ought not to be forgotten, that you provide such parsones to
accompany or attend upon your children, as be all ready instruct in virtuous
manners, and can perfectly and truly speak and pronounce your country language
/ lest if they be intached with barbarous speech and depryued manners, your
children should enbrace of them some vicious disposicion. For not without
reason this proverb is used: He that dwells by a crepyll, shall learn to
halte. But after your children be comen to years, when they should be committed
to Tutours, than for the remenaunt of their educacion you must be
circumspecte, that you do not committee the governance of them to slaves or
villaynes, or to men unstable, false, or deceitful. For they may well be
laughed to scorn that at this day, having good and discrete servants,
appoynteth some to be their hyndes, some shypmen, some to be factours, other to
be stewardes of house hold, baylyffes of husbandrye / surueyours of lands, or
receyuours: And if they have a ribaulde or a riottous servant / unprofitable
to every purpose, communly to his governance they do commytte their children.
A good and necessary tutoure ought to be such as was Phenyx (tutoure of
Achilles the most valiant of all the Greeks, which were at the siege of
Troy) whom Peleus fader of Achilles (as Homere the noble poet writes)
ordained to have the rule of his son, to the intent that (for his wisdom
and eloquence) he should be as well in speaking as doing his instructour and
master.

what schole masters ar to be chosen and of the discom^oditees, which happen
daily by neglygent educacyon. Cap. iiii.
Now come I to the thing most chieffe and pryncipall to be remembered. ye
must dilygently provide for your chylderne, schole masters / whose lives be
not disposed to vice, ne of reprocheable manners or conditions, and which have
good experyence and form of teaching. For certainly the fountain and root
of worship and honestye, is good doctrine. For likewise as good husbands do
pyche busshes and bedges about young settes (as well to thentente they should
grow straight / as to keep them from bytynge and barkynge of catall) so good
and perfect masters plant in children conuenable and good aduertisementes and
precepts, whereby the young spryng of virtuous manners shall grow streyghte,
and be out of dangerous and beastly vice. And truly many fathers there be,
which are greatelye to be blamed, that commytte their childerne to unthrifty,
ignoraunte, and folysshe masters, not having of them before any trial or
experience / which al be it they so do in defaulte of lernyng, yet is it in
them great folly and symplenesse: For some there be, that notwithstanding by
the report of men expert, they know the ignorance and lewdnes of some schole
masters, and do perceive hit manifestely: yet unto them specially they
commend their sons: and some do bit, being vanquysshed with fair promyses,
other at the instant desire and in favor of their friends and acqueyntance:
where in they do much like, us if a man being sick or diseased, does refuse
an expert physician / which may recover him, and for to have the more favor
of his friend or acquayntaunce, takes a man unlearned, by whom perchance he
shall be brought in danger of his life: or being on the sea, forsakes a good
pilate or lodisman, and at the desire of his friend or acquayntaunce, approves
a person folysshe and ignorant. O lord god, is he to be called a fader, that
more estemeth the desire of his neighbor, than the erudition and lerning of
his children? According thereunto the old philosopher Crates was wont to say,
that when he should happen to be in the highest part of the city, he would
cry in this form (if he might be herd) whither will ye mad men, which do
set al your study in gettyng of riches / and to your children, to whom ye will
leave that riches, ye have no consideration or respect? And to that in mine
opinion may be added, that such fathers do in like wise, as they which be very
busy and nice in trimmyng their shows, when they take little regard what
happens to their feet.

There be also many parents, in whom in ordinate love of money has engendered
hate of their natural children: for to thentent that they will not give great
reward or salarye, they do provide masters for their children, ignorant
persons, which for a little stypende professes learning of small
estimation. And therefore the philosopher Aristippus sauerly and with a propre
taunte checked one being a fader, which lacked wit. For one demanded of
Aristippus, what bewolde ask for a reward to teach his son: who
demanded.xx.li. O said he, that is a sore demand, for I may bye a servant
at that price (servants at that time were bond men, and being taken in
wars were sold, as slaves he now in diverse places) ye said Aristippus,
thou shalt have for thy money two servants, that is to say thy son, and
him whom thou doste bye. As who says, the money which should purchase his
son lerninge, being enployed on a slave, makes his son for lack of lerninge,
to be of like estate or condition. Finally is it not a great folly and madness /
that where we do accustom our children to take meat with the right hand, and
if they do put forth the left hand, anon we correct them: and for to make
them to here good and commodious lernynges, we make no provision nor be
circumspecte therein?

The inconveniences / which happen for defaulte of learning, and the
comparison of lerninge to other qualitees. Cap. v.
BUt now will I assay to show what happens often to these monstrous
fathers, that when they have lewdely and vnhappylye noryshed and brought up
their children, when they be at man's stute, they despisinge all wholesome
doctrine and virtuous order of living, do fall heedlynge into inordinate
pleasures, and into servile and abhomynable voluptuosities and vices. Than the
fathers sore repent them, that they have in such wise brought them up. And
when they do perceive in them no commodity: than for their mischief and
unhappiness, the par^ntis be continually in their minds tourmented. Semblablye
some take to them flatterers, scoffers / and raylers, vile and ungracious
parsons, peryllous subuertours of youth: Other mainteyne proud and sumptuous
queynes and harlottes: some pass all the holle days in delicate feasts and
bankettes / other, as it were in a w^ccke, be drowned at dyse, and in riottous
company. There be also, which gyuynge them selfs to the folly of youth, do
embrace lecherye, aduoutrye, and other like abhomynations, and only make death
the end of pleasure. which if they had always ben in the company of any wise
man, doutles they should never have set their minds to such folly, but
rather have learned the precept o^ Diogenes the philosopher / who in his
say^nge, wisely and by an experience truly exhorted in this wise: Be bold to
enter into an harlottes house / that thou may learn there, how litell or no
co^modite is in the estimation of things vile or vicious. Now to speak in
few words / wherein I shall seem rather to dyuyne than to admoneste and
exhort, The first, myddell, and last point of this matter is, that the sure
and honest rule of living is learning. And that is the thing, which soonest
helps a man to virtue: All other things temporal be but tryfils, and not of
such value, that there in we ought to spend any study. Doubtless nobilite or
gentylnes of blood is a goodlye thing: and riches is a thing precious and
delectable: but the gifts of Fortune be such, that as we may se by
experience, she gives them, where they be not looked fore: and those which
already have them, she dispoyleth. More over great substance is a token or pray
to allure servants and other parsones ylle disposed / to wait a man with
displeasure, and to enserche his cofers and baggis. And finally they be ready
for every lewd person, that may hap to take them. Honor is pleasant, but
it is unstable and nothing constaunt. Beauty is a thing excellent, and for
the attaynynge thereof, much debate has ensurged: but yet it is transitory,
and dureth but a season. Bodilye health is a treasure, but that is also
mutable. Strength is much desired, and is taken for a part of felicity: yet
notwithstanding hit soon fades, with age or sykenesse. And he that auaunteth
him self in might of body and lymmes, is in a false opinion. For how small a
portion of strength is in man, in comparison of beastis: I mean elephauntes,
bulls, and lions? Therefore truly the thing that in us is divine and
immortal is learning. Generally two special things be in the nature of man
/ which be good, that is to say, knowledge and reasone. Knowledge commands,
reasone does obey. As for knowledge no violence of Fortune may take away /
no vexation may withdraw, nor sickness may corrupt / nor age by any mean may
endomage. Only knowledge perisshed with age eftsoon reuiueth. And where all
other things by long contynuance decay, only counnynge with the years
encreseth and multiplieth. war like a raginge floode, draws and carries
away all things with him, only learning, for that he may not stere it, he
leaves untouched. wherefore Stilpo the philosopher, as me seems, made answer
necessary to be remembered. For when king Demetrius had taken the city of
Megarie, where Stilpo dwelled, and abated hit in to the earth: he demanded of
Stilpo, if he had lost any of his goods by the assault? No said Stilpo,
wars may never take any spoil of virtue. According hit seems that
Socrates answered. For when Gorgias the Rhetorician (as I remember me)
demanded of him, if he thought the king of Perse to be happy: I know not
said he, how much he has of virtue and learning. As who says, in those
things stands happiness, and not in the treasure and gifts of Fortune.

That the pleasynge of communes is diffificile and also dangerous, and what
peril is in hastye and unadvised speech. Cap. vi.
IN like wise as there is nothing more propise and conueniente for a man, than
the virtuous bringing up of his children, so it is expediente, that he set
them in a wholesome and uncorrupted countreye, far from the fantasyes and vain
glosynges of people. For he that endeuourethe him to please the multitude, must
needs discontent the wise men, as witnesses Euripides the writer of tragedies,
Thus am I called fool and ignorant
Among rude people, my verses to auaunt
But to mean men, egall to my degree
I (...) thought wise, each as they favor me.
For of whom wise men set little price
Contenteth the people Best with their deuyse.


Verily I perceive that they, which put they^ holle prac^ise, to obtain the
grace and favor of the troublous co^munes, be for the more part prodigal,
and desirous of inordinate pleasure / and by reason bit ^uste be so. For they
that neglecte honesty to content other men's appetites, can not always pref^rre
good dilectations, or follow those that be moderate for them that be
voluptuous. More over take good head that your children do not speak sodaynely
/ and without premedytacion. For that, which is spoken or done unadvisedly and
hastily / in no wise may be co^me^dable. For it is said in a proverb: Good
things are difficile. And words not forestudied be infarced with lyghtnesse
and negligence, and uneath such perceive where at to begin, or where they
shall make their conclusion. Among other faults they that speak hastily,
fall in to babbling immoderate, but aduysed meditation suffers not langage to
wandre out of due measure. we read of Pericles (one of the noble cou^saylours
of Athenes) often times when he was required of the people to show his opinion,
would none other thing say, but that he was not provided. Semblably his
successor in the common weal Demosthenes (the most excellent orator) wha^
the people called for him to give them counsel, he came not, saying, I am
not yet fournysshed sufficiently. Perchance some will say, this tale is not
true, and that I speak it without auctorite. Al be it in his oration against
Midea, he declares the co^modite of premeditation in this form: Friends I
deny not, but I have considered, what I shall say, and that I shall speak is
with great labor provided. ye might well pytie me, If I should come before you
prepared, that I should omytte and pass over that thing, which I entende to
declare. Nor I speak not thus now to deprave spedy expedicion in gyuynge
advise or counsel, but that they which have any such grace, may frankelye
practyse hit. All be hit, I think it necessary, that ^onge men do seldom use
hit, until they come to the age of perfection, lest they speak al things
that happens, and not all that is necessary. And when the virtue of
eloquence has taken rote, than when time requires, hit shall be commendable
to depart bounteously with plentye of matter. For as they, which have been
long in gyues or stocks, by custom of long imprisonemente, when they be
loused, they do halte for the time, and may not well go: in like wise they,
which have long refrayned to speak, when they be constrained to speak
sodaynely, yet will they follow the s^ile of an interpretour (which is with
long taryenge and much study.) But yet ^e that suffers children to speak
hastily without deliberation, gives them occasyon to fall in to extreme
claterynge and i^nglynge. On a time when a simple peynter had showed unto
Appelles the most counnyng peinter that ever was, an image that he had made,
he also said to Appelles: Even now I made this image. Now in good faith
said Appelles, if thou will hold thy tongue and say never a word, I do
perceive thou dyddest sodaynlye peynte hit. But I do marvel much more^ that
in that space thou haste not peynted no m^ images.

Of the just temperance and moderacion of speaking, and of the best kind of
doctrine. Ca. vii.
Now to return to mi first matter. My counsel is that children do eschew
to much arrogaunt and pompous speech: and in like wise to avoid homely and
rude communicacion. Inflate and proud speech lacks gentyllnesse: base and
vile words nothing perswadethe or moves. For like as the body ought not only
to be hoole from sickness, but also to be of good habilite or facion: so should
the oracion or sentence not be only not sick, but also firm and
substanciall. For that thing which is sure, is only commendable: and that
which is exployted with danger we commun^ly wonder at. And like opinion have
I in disposynge the mind: For hit becomethe not a child either to be shrewde
and folehardy, or to be cowarde and temerous. The one shall cause him to be
shameless: the other to be of vile courage and dastarde. The mean way to hold
in every thing, it is a high and perfect craft. Al be it I eftsoon do
remember learning, yet what I deem therein, I will at this time differ. But to
return to speaking / To be contented with one only membre or form of
speaking, and not to poli^he it with sondrie clauses or sentenses hit is a
great token of ignorance. For to speak always one thing hit is now and
thanne tedious and intolerable. For one note of synginge, and one act in an
Interlude without variacion, is to the syngers and playours laborious, and to
the herers fulsome and tedyous. Therefore pleasant variety is in every thing
delectable: most specially in voices, and things made to behold. Therefore
in young men of good stock, nothing should lack, worthy to be hard or
seen. And to say the truth, there should be in them that, which men call
the Cercle of learning. But yet that is only as it were to be tasted (taking
of every doctrine some part) perusynge them through at the first syghte. For
it is almost impossible to be perfect in all things. All be it philosophy of
al studies ought to be soueraygne and had in most reverence: wherein I will
declare mine opinion, by a similitude.

For like as it is a pleasant and goodly thing in passing the sees to come to
diverse worlds and countries, so to inhabyte and dwell in the best of them /
hit is a thing excellently commodious and most highest to be esteemed. Verily
hit was a propre saying of Byas the philosopher, that as the wowars of
Penelope (wife of Ulysses, which in the ten years absence of her husband,
honorably sustained her self chaste ageynste the importune suit of many
valyaunte princes) could not have with her unlawful company, they meddled with
the wenches and drudges of her house. In like wise some parsones, which can
not atteygne to philosophye, as hi^ were men unapt and desperate, do
languysshe and spend their time in other lernynges of no price or estimation.
wherefore doubtless philosophy is to be preferred as princess of al other
doctrines. The wit and study of man has dyuysed a double science or
knowledge for the good governance of the body, that is to say phisike and
exercise: Of the which, the one brings health, the other good habit or
personage: only they gryues and diseases of the soul and mind, phylosophye
cures and makes hoole. By her may be known what is honest, what is
dishonest, what right, what wrong: and generally what is to be enlued, what to
be eschewed: how your parents / your friends, your soueraynes, your wives and
servants, men in authority and strangers ought to be used and enterteygned.
More over, how we should honor god, worship our parents, reverence our
betters, obey the laws, suffer and give place to men having auctorities. Also
how we ought to favor our friends, to love womenne with measure, to hold
dear our children, not to be of servile condition: and above all other, not to
rejoice to much of prosperity, nor to be oppressed with sorrow in adversity /
n^ to be enclyned to voluptuosite, neither by to much wrath make our minds
beastly. which things be the chieffe and principal commodities or treasure
of philosophy. Hit is the office or duty of a gentle man / to use well good
fortune, of a man well brought up to eschew envy, of a man wise and
assured, to vanquyshe his appitites and desires, with reason: And to refrain
or overcome anger, hit is the part of a man not abiecte nor of small
discrecion or virtue. But to my purpose, They ben assured and perfect men,
which can myxe polytike wisdom with philosophy. And I dare affirm, they do
thereby obtain double commodity. That is to wete, they do lead their life to
the common weal of their country: And also they do pass their time in
studies of wisdom and virtue, with quietness of mind, never over flowen
with the wawes of fortune. For where there be three manner of lives, one called
Actife, the other contemplatife, the third voluptuous or sensual, the last
being vicious and servant to pleasure, apperteyneth to beastis, and men of no
reputation or goodness. The actife life, lacking philosophy, is of littell
purpose, and is in sundry errors enuolued. The contemplatife life (concerning
man) if hit be natioyned with the active, hit is of none effect or profit.
Therefore let us endeavor our selfs, that the common weal may be applied, and
also philosophy obtained, as according to the time hit shall seem most
expedient. In this wise Pericles (the noble counsailour of Athenes) did his
duty to the common weal o^ his country. So did Architas in Tarcut, Dyon in
Sicile, and Epaminondas in Thebes: of whom two the last were scholars to Plato,
the prince of philosophers. what shall I need to tarry longer about doctrine /
except that besides that we have all ready spoken, one thing is convenient and
also necessary to be remembered, that is, that young men endeavor them to get
the books of old writers, and in gatheryng of them, to follow and be like to
the ploughman. For as the feate of tyllage is kept by occupyenge of the
ground, and not only by having of plowes and other store of housbandrie: in
like wise the instrument of learning is not only possession of books, but also
exercise and practice of the same.

Of the commodite of virtuous exercise. Cap. viii.
Exercise is not a little to be esteemed / and for that purpose children must
also be committed to masters, which may exercise them sufficientlye, to the
intent that thereby, good shappe of lymmes and members and strength of body
may be acquired. For the good habitie and disposition in the bodies of
chylderne, is for age a sure fundation.

And as in somer and fair wether men provide against winter: so the best
provision for age, is good manners and temperance gotten in youth. Also labor is
to be kept in, as it were in a closet or selle, and so moderatly used, that
children being tender and flexible, be not in study ouermoche fatigated. For
as Plato says, labor and sleep be enemies to learning. But what need I to
tarry here upon, seeing that I purpose to declare that which is more
necessary to speak of. It shall be most expedient to exercise children in
feats of arms, as in riding and chasyng, casting of iauelyns and darts,
shotynge in the long bow, and such other marcial acts, where in the vanquiss
hours appoint for their reward to have the goods of them that be va^quysshed.
All be hit war little estemeth the parsonage brought up in the shadow. The
pure and lean soldier, always hauntynge the affairs of war, often times
overthrows the great wrastler in bataile, and enforces the front all ready
imbatayled to recule. what is that to the purpose, says some man to me? For
where thou dyddest promise to give aduertisementes, concerning the bringing
up of honest men's children, not withstanding thou passest over pour men and
the common people, that thou go about to instruct only rich men and
nobles. whereunto it is no great difficulty to reply. Certeynly mine intent is,
that my exhortation should be common and also profitable to every man. But if
any be of such poverty, that he is not able to use this my counsel, he shall
blame fortune and not me, that do the best I can to advise him. It is to be
assayed with all that may be, that the best ways of bringing up of children
may be known also to pour men: and at the least to do that that is possible.
And these be the most sorest objections that be in this matter. Now from
hensforth I purpose to add thereto the sure and streyghte way how young men
should be instructed.

A moderate direction to provoke children to learn. And of the folly of
indiscrete fathers. Cap. ix.
I Do affirm surely in mine opinion, children ought not to be brought to
honest exercise, by beatynge and strokes, but by exhortacion and reasonyng. For
punisshement is meter for villaynes and slaves / than for them that be frank
or of gentill blood: which with travail be hardened, and some time being
aferde of the whippe / applies them to labor. But children of gentle nature
take more profit by praise or light rebuke, than by stripes. For praises
stere them to worship, and rebuke does withdraw them from folly. wherefore it
requires at sundry times to myngle sharp words with praises. After ye have
strongely rebuked, than to provoke them to shamefastnes, and eftesones to
revoke their corages with praises: and therein nources are to be followed, which
when they have made their children to weep, furthewith with they do give unto
them their pappes, thereby for to still them. But beware give them not to many
praises, le^te they take thereby to much courage and presumption: and with to
much cockenayenge be spylled and lost. I have known many faders, whom to
much love has caused, that they loved not their children. But what may I say,
to tell it more playnlyer? For where they make haste, that their children may
the sooner excel other, they do put unto them infynite labors, whereof being
werye and oppressed with intolerable pains, fynallye they find little
pleasure or swetenes in learning. A little water makes herbs to grow, and
with to much they be soon glutted. In likewise the mind with moderate labor
is quickened, and with inordinate labors is oppressed and drowned. wherefore in
studyes and labors some recreacion is to be given to children. For we must
remember / that al our lyfer divided in to study and rest. And therefore not
only watch is necessary, but also sleep: not battle only, but also peace:
not winter and storms, but also fair wether and somer: not only warke days,
but also high feasts and holy days: and generally ydelnes and rest is sauce
unto labor: and that may you perceive not only in things having life, but
also in those things that lack life. For we do vnbende our bows, and
vnwra^te our lu^es and harpes, to the intent efte^ones to bend them and wraste
them. And finally the body to preserved with lack and sustinance, the mind /
with remyssyon and labor.

Many faders be to be blamed, and that with good cause, which so committee
their children to Tutours and masters, that they them self did never se nor
here how their children have in learning profited / wherein they offend more
than need: for in a little space they may have experience, for their chyldrens
furtherance by examynynge their children: and not put their hoole trust in
the disposicion of a man hired. For masters and tutours use more diligence
about the children, when they know that they shall make answer and reckoning
for them: According to the propre saying of the wise horseman, that said,
that nothing made a horse so sone fat as the eye of his master.

Of the exercises of memory / and of the three excellent continences of the
tongue, wrath, and the hands. Cap. x.
Above all things the memory of chylderne is to be exercised and kept in
usage: for that is as hit were the store house of learning. wherefore in
aunciente fables, Memory is named the mother of Muses (which as poets write,
were fynders of all sciences liberalle) thereby declarynge, that nothing next
to nature may bring fourth so much as memory. Therefore that is to be
exercised in every part wether the child be retentife of memory or obliuious.
And if it shall hap that some be more excellent than other, we ought to
corroborate the habundaunce of nature: And where they be oppressed with dulnes,
to amend and supply the defaulte or lack. And therefore the poet Hesiodus
marueilously well says: If to a little thou addest a little more
In space of time thou shall have mykell store.
Let not this be forgoten of parents, that the part of doctrine concerning
memory, is not only a great portion of learning, but also of other
necessaries to man's life apperteignynge. And verily remembrance of a^^aires
done in time passed, is an example and myrrour the better to consider things
to come. Children more over ought to be refrayned from dyshonest and rebaulde
co^municacio^. For as Democritus says: Speech is the shadow of deeds. Also it
must be forseen, that children be made in answeringe curteise, and sweet in
salutinge. For as stourdie and sour facion in spekinge / makes a man odious
and disdayned: so children get the love of their companio^s, if when they be
demanded, they be not in their answers strange and vncurteise. It is not
commendable to vanquishe and subdue other, but also to know how to be
vanquished, specially in these things, wherein victory is cause of detrime^t or
loss. Such was the victory of Cadmus (which was in this wise as some men
suppose. Cadmus the son of Agenor king of Egypt was the first founder of
the city of Theb^s, of whom by succession came Edipus, which married Iocasta
his own mother, and had by her two sons Etheocles and Polynices, between
whom was mortal war for the kyngedome of Thebes: Polynyces the younger
brother, having in his aid the Arg^u^s. But finally the Thebanes, of the part
of Eth^ocles had the victory, which was with small profit or honor. For
Polinices has wounded Eth^ocles his brother to death: But moved with
compassion, as he stoped down to releue his said brother who offered to kiss
him, Eth^ocles incontinent slew his said brother. And so was the end of the
battle miserable and despiteous. And by reason that Cadmus was h^ed and chief
of their lynage, it was called Cadmus victory, and used for a proverb, where
damage grows by victory. Of that I have spoken is witness the wise
Euripides, which says in this manner: where (...) do ^raule, and the one is in
fury
He that refrayneth, the wy^er is truly.
Other exercises there be, which are no less to be esteemed of young men, than
they, which be rebersed: that is to lay, no^ to live to delicately / to
refrain the tongue, subdue wrath, conteyne the hands, and what apperteyneth
to every of these, It is to be seen and occlared / not withstanding they shall
^e^te appear by example, and to begin at the last. Diverse that have put their
hands to unlawful gaynes, have, lost all er they dyed. Bilippus a noble
Lacedemon, only for because he did vnknyt certain bags of money, he was
banisshed ^or ever out of his country. It is the property of a wise man, not
to be vanquisshed with anger. On a time a wanton and presumptuous young man,
with his hele struck Socrates (which was in his time the wysest man of Greece)
and when Socrates perceived, that they which were in his company took it
d^^plesantly, and were therewith soore chaufed, in so much that they would have
revenged him, he said unto them: what if an ass had bytte me with her bele /
think you it were mete I should kyke again at her: wherefore he would not
suffer them to follow the person that struck him. In conclusion the young man,
when men had long time rebuked him, and every where called him a kiker, for
pure shame at the last ^ynge him self. when Aristophanes in his interlude,
which he called the Clouds, had spoken many rebukes o^ Socrates, and one
being present redynge it, said: Socrates, art not thou herewith angry. No on
my faith said Socrates, it greueth me no more to be scoffed at in the hall,
where plays be accustomed to be, than if it were at a feast or banquet.
Semblably did Architas and Plato the philosophers. Architas returnyng from
battle (for he was much part in wars, sou^de his land out of tilth and
disfigured, he called forth his baylife of husbandry and said unto him: If I
were sure that I should not be angry, thou should repent the. Plato being
moved with his servant, that was a riot^ous person, called Speusippus his
neuewe, and said to him: Go beat this ^^low, for I am to much chaufed and
angry. Perchance some will say, that these be great and difficult matters to
follow: and I know well so they be, but yet we must with all our might
enforce us, that using these and other like ensamples, at the last we may
withdraw a great part of inordinate and vengeable anger. For where in other
things we may not compare with these wise men, in doctrine nor virtue / yet
never the less let us with all our power endeavor our ^elfes (which be the
servants of god, and expounders of his will berynge light in our hands /
follow or at the lest scrape of some fruit of their examples.

Now remains to declare the refraynyng of the tongue, according as I
purposed.

How premeditation ought to be used with a pleasant narration of Ulysses and
Polyphemus. Ca. xi.
VUho so speaks contemtuously or unadvisedly, tho it be but little, he very
much do^herre. For oportunite in silence is a great part of wisdom and much
better than speaking. Therefore our elders have showed unto us mistical and
dark ceremonies and proverbs: whereby we being one^ accustomed to silence, may
convert the ^ere and reverence that be in divine secrets / to ^ayth or
credence to be had in the mysteries and wise sentenses of men: whereof diverse
hereafter ensue. Of silence never man repented. But of spekyng many. More over,
that silence keeps, may sone be vttred, but it that ones is vttred, may never
be revoked. I remember diverse, that by their intemperate langage have sustained
much damage. And in leauyng al other, it shall suffice to remember one or two,
in setting out of this matter. King Alexander the great conqueror, commanded
the Greeks to ordeyn garments of purple, that when he returned from his
conqueste, they might in that apparaile honor his victory that he had against
them of the orient, with solemn sacrifice: The people for that intent paying
heed silver: One Theocrite a philsopher said to Alexander: I have been a great
while in doubt, but now I perceive clearly by the saying of Homer, that this
shall be thy purple death. By which words he brought him self i^ to the high
indignation of Alexander. The same Theocrite embraydinge king Antigonus who had
but one eye / with blindness: provoked him to displesure. For on a time king
Antigonus had commanded to come unto him one Eutropion his master coke, which
was also a captain in his army / to reken with him concerning his office,
which the said Theocrite often times came and showed to Eutropion, and seeing
him make no haste, said unto him: I se well thou will serve me in raw to
Cyclops. In which words be enbraided the king with blindness, and the captain
Etropyon with cokerye. Therefore said Eutropion / thou shalt lose thy heed /
and suffer penance for thy babbling and rayshenes, and furthwith showed the
words to the king, who in his fury immediately sent one to slay Theocrite. But
er I proceed any further, I will show the history of Cyclops, which is here
remembered, that the taunt or rebuke given by Theocrite may the better be
understand. After that the city of Troy was destroyed, the Greeks laded with
inestimable riches prepared their return into their countries, among whom the
wise and eloquent Ulysses, by whose policy the Greeks had exployted their
affairs, trauayled long on the sees: to whom did happen maruailous and
strange adventures. Of the which one the most wonderful was, that by tempest
he and his company were driven through two dangerous passages: whereof one was
a great and horrible rock named Scilla: the other a gulf or swalow called
Charibdis: and finally arrived in Sicile, which at that time was named
Trinacria, and was only inhabyted with monsterous people, which were of great
and huge stature like geauntes, and had but one eye, which was great and
round, in the mids of their forheed, and were called Cyclopes. The chief or
captain of them was named Polyphemus, who excelled all the other in enormitie
of stature. As Ulysses and diverse of his company were entered into the Isle to
rest and solace them after their travail, they were incontinent deprehe^ded
by the said Ciclopes, and carried into the horrible caves or de^nes made in the
rocks: where the giantes did eat the said Greeks raw, and like to raueninge
wolfes / crushed the heedis and bones of men between their tethe, that the
brains and marowe dropped down by their mouths. Such was the terrible power
and rauyne of the Ciclopes. But when Ulysses perceived the imminent peril that
he was in, he with most sweet and delectable words appesed the rage of
Polyphemus the giante / that took him, who heringe the wonderful eloquence of
Ulysses, demanded of him his name, and he answered, that he was called Noman.
The giant delited and had much pleasure at the beauty and eloquence of
Ulysses, which he perceiuinge, gave unto the giant a delectable potion, whereof
he took such abundance, that he became therewith drunk, and fell into a d^ed
and heavy sleep: that perceiving Ulysses, he withdrew him privily, and conveyed
him under the dead bodies, until the time that he was assured, that the giant
slepte fast, than he took his sword, and for the greatness of the giantis
body, being long in a doubt where to stryke him, so that he might be most
sure of him, at the last with all his might he perced the eye of the giant, and
put it clean out: but he was so drowned in sleep, that he therewith could not
awake. As Ulysses perceived that he had made blind the giant, be with all haste
returned to his ships and set up all the sails, and passed with all have
possible into the main see. After that Polyphemus was waked, and than felt
great pain of his wound, and that he had utterly lost his eye, perceiving
that he was betrayed by Ulysses, he supposing Ulysses had been yet in his den
or cave stood up spredyng his arms before the hole of the cave, thinking to
keep therein Ulysses: but when he had long time so tarried, and at the last
perceived that he was fled, he wandered in to the I Will rorynge with a terrible
voice: wherewith there repaired unto him the other Ciclopes or giauntes / and
seeing him sore hurt and bledyng demanded him who had so hurted and wounded
him: And he said^ Noman: supposing that had been the name of Ulysses. But when
they could have none other answer of knowledge of him, thinkynge^ that he had been mad, departed their ways: And Polyphemus desired to be avenged on
Ulysses, as destracte and mad, pursued him unto the sea, where he entered so
far, that notwithstanding his strength and greatness, he finally was drowned.
And Ulysses by his eloquence and excellent wit escaped from being eat by the
giantes. By this fable it appears, that Theocrite by namynge of Ciclops, noted
and inbrayded king Antigonus with cruelty and also with his blemysshe of one
eye. And by the saying of Theocrite, that Eutropion would serve by ^ in raw,
he noted him with his craft of cokery and that he was out of his kechyn /
where he should roste or sethe him. But to return to our purpose. Children
must be accustomed to speak nothing but tre^the. For lyinge is a detestable
vice, and to be hated of all men, ne to be suffered among seruantis ne other
persons / how pour estate so ever they be of.

what inco^ueniences do happen by the negligence of faders. And of the reverent
precepts of Pythagoras. Ca. xii.
Now sens I have treated of the first bringing up of children, and training
them in good manners, I will bear after in few words pass forth unto the more
ripenes of youth. Often times I have thought much occasion of ill and
corrupted manners to be in such, which having children of their own, during
their infancy and tender youth commytte them to good masters and tutours, and
as soon as they do enter into man's age, they abandon them, and suffer them
to live at their pleasure. wherein contrary wise in that enter and ieoper^ous
time more head ought to be taken of them, than when they were children. For
men know well, that the defautes of children be of light importance, and
lightly redressed: as perchance it may hap / by negligence of tutours and
lack of obedience. But the offenses of them which be common to yfect years,
be more grievous often times and full of danger, as riottous living consumynge
substance and inheritance, inordinate and chargeable gaminge, ingurgitacions
and surfettes, defloracion of mayde^s, corruptynge good women, and auoutryes.
These inconveniences ought in time and spedily to be repressed. For the
delicate flower of youth uneath may be preserved from the violence of bodily
lust, onles he be brideled. wherefore they, which withstand not youth in
their children: litell force what liberty of ymaginacion they give unto them
to commytte vice. wherefore wise fathers, having children, at that estate and
years will have to them a vigilante eye, that they may the rather induce them
in to temperance, some time exhorting, another time menasynge, other whiles
desiring, in like wise counsaylynge, eftsoon promising, or other wise
alluringe: some time declarynge to them, what dangers and troubles them self
in youth have sustained: or how by virtue and sufferance they have atteyned
both laud and honor. For the two principal occasions of virtue, be fear of
pain, and hope of reward: the one dysposeth a man to acts of honesty, the
other makes him slow to do ill. Finally we must amoue children from the
company of ryottous and ^lagicions persons. For by them they shall be with
vice and unthriftiness corrupted. To this purpose were left by Pythagoras the
noble philosopher; wonderful and good precepts in dark sentences, which I
purpose now to expound. For they be right necessary for the opteynynge of
virtue. The precepts be in this wise.

Taste nothing that has a Black tayte, That is to say, company with no
person, whose manners be spotted with vice.

Leap not over the Balaunce, Esteem Justice, and skyppe not over hit.

Sytte not in idelnes, eschew idelnes and provide diligently for thy living.

Give not to every man thy right hade, reco^cile the not to sone to thin
enemy without good auisement.

Wear not to strayte a vynge, bear the so, that thou keep the out of bonds.

Cut not the fire with weapon, do not irritate a man in his furye, but rather
when he rages, give place to his anger.

Eat no heart, what does it else signify, but acco^bre not thy mind with
thoughts, ne do not fatigate the with cares? A^steyne from ^eanes, Busy not
thy self with over mani matters. In the old time iuges were elect by lottis
made of beans.

Put not thy meat in a traye, put not good sente^ses and virtuous lernynges,
into a foul and corrupt mind. For learning and virtuous co^municacion is to
the mind norishement, but with dishonestie and vice the mind is defiled.

At the end of thy journey covet not to go back, when death comes, take it in
good part and sorrow not.

What company is pernicious to children. Ca. xiii.
BUt now to return to the purpose that I first spoke of. Let us withdraw
our children from men of ill disposition, and specially flatterers and
dyssemblers. And I doubt not to aduertyse you faders, there is not living a
thing more mischeuous than flatterers, nor any thing that sooner causes young
men to decay, than they, who confound both the fathers and children,
turmentynge the fathers age with pensiuenes, and subuertynge the young men with
pernicious counsel, surmisyng pleasure, where in is bydde a bayte of vice and
vnthryftynes. The fathers exhort their children, which have abundance to
sobrenes: the flatterers stere them to riotte and wantonness. The fathers
advise them to use mesurable sparynge: the flatterers sumptuous expenses and
revelling. The one preyseth labor and exercise: the other slouthe and desolute
idelnes / supposing that man lives but a moment: wherefore he should live
frankely and lyberally, and not skantly. Now a days what carethe the child
for the fathers menace thinking that in age his father doteth. And yet often
time such children we preyse and make much of: All be it diverse of them
haunte brothels, and some time marie dishonestly, ^o^ten times ^^^^nge and
spe^dynge away their fathers substance, wherewith they should honestely live in
their age. Dissemblers of frendshyppe is an unhappy kind of people,
absteynynge from all liberty of speech, only flattering the great men^ and
sk^minge the pour men / also prepared to disceyue young men. For when they do
se them skorne their parents or tutours, they also laugh with them, as men on
all parts impfect and alienate from their nature. For where god made them fre,
with flattery they do bring them self in bondage, also thinking them self
not regarded, when they sit at other men's tables, if they be not iested at and
rebuked. wherefore he that is a father, and desires the good bringinge yp of
his children, let him in any wise put away and abject those lothely beastis and
unthrifty companyons. For by them a gentle nature may sone be abused and
corrupted.

Of means to dissuade young men from vice, and of example to be given by their
parents. Ca. xiiii.
THe^e things also be honest and commendable, that I will now speak of. I
will not that the parents should be to sharp or hard to their children, but
some time to remytte and forgive their offenses passed, and to remember their
own fragilitie and youth, like as physicions do myxte bitter medicynes with
delectable lycours, finding the mean, to join pleasure with profit in
company: so ought the fathers to tempre rygour with mercy, and the children
some time should have their brydell slaked, to have somewhat their pleasures.
Specially fautes that be light should be casely taken: Or if the parentis be
angrye, it should be without great chaufynge or trouble of mind: it is better
that the father be sone angry than soore. For he that is so hard hearted, that
his son can not opteyne his favor, but with great difficulty, it may be
apparent, that thereby he causes his son to hate him. And sometime it is
necessary to dissemble a light and small fault, applienge the defnes and dulle
sencis of age to the actis of their children, that many things they se not
lokynge, nor here not hiringe. Syns we suffer the defautes of our friends and
servants, what wonder is it, though some time we do suffer our children. By
such means the wildnes of youth, like to a colte, wisely wayed and broken,
is made gentle and sobre. Above all things take heed, that they, which be
utterly enclyned to lechery / and be incorrigible, may have wives and be
married. For that is the most sure bridell of youth. And provide for them
wives, that neither be to rich, neither of to high blood or stock. For it is
a proverb replenyshed with wisdom: Seek the a wife p^re^^e unto the. For
they that take wives much better than them selfs, they forgete that they have
made them self not husbands, but bond men. Now adding here to a few
things, I shall make an end of this matter.

Above al things it is most expedie^t^ that the fathers be a true example to
their children / not only in doing none yuel, but doing many good actis and
faites, that beholdynge their fathers lives, as it were a myrrour, the children
may eschew al foul or unseemly act or word. For who so rebukes his child of
vice, and he him self falls into the same, it seems he knows nor, that
under the name of his child, he accuses him self. And to conclude shortly,
they which spend their lives vnthriftly, they exclude them selfs from
liberty to rebuke their own sons or servants, and in their yuell doing
they give as it were counsyll and help to other, to commit like offense.
More over where age is shameless there needs must youth be without shamefastnes.
To get your child tempera^ce and honesty, take heed, that every thing be
done with good conuenience and order. And therein let us follow Euridice a
noble woman, who all be hit that she was barbarous and fer from leruynge, yet
in her age she atteined to high study and doctrine, to the entente to bring up
her children, as it is declared in her epigram, which she did dedicate to the
Muses: Euridice the Hiropolitan after she had obtained her desire of lerninge,
she has dedicate this remembrance to the (...) For after that her children
^ame to age of discrecion, she being a mother and aged, with great pain and
study, learned letters, which be the moniment of virtue. To do all that has been ^ehersed / pauenture I may sooner wyss be it than persuade it: but to follow
it as nere as we can^ it requires the goodness of nature, and also diligence, I
am sure / that by man's wit it may be performed and brought to pass.

Thus ends this very golden book, called the Education of children.
Imprinted at London in Fletestrete, in the house o^ Thomas Berthelet, nere to
the Cundite, at the sign of Lucrece.

CVM PRIVILEGIO A REGE IN DVLTO.


