How one may take profit of his enmyes, translated out of Plutarche.

How one may take profette of his enmyes.
I Perceive my friend / that thou have chose^ a right pleasant kind of lynynge
/ void of busynesses of the common welthe, wherein nevertheless thou doste to the
common welthe much profette: being unto al them that come unto the, and eke to
them that keep the company, both compenable and pleasant.

But sins it is so, that we may find some country, that wants wild and
hurteful beastis, as it is said by Creta: But yet no common welthe has been
found, that has not norisshed within it self, envy, disdain, and strife: of
which most commonly emnities do grow, ye and if there were nothing else,
frendshyp it self turns us to enmity, which the wise man Chion
perceiving, asked one that vaunted him self to have none enmye, if he had
also no friend. Me thinks than it were mete for a man of auctorite / and that
medleth in the rule of the common wealth / that among other busin^^ he should
have also consideration of his enmyes, and to take good head, that this was not
spoken for naught of Xenophon: It is a substantial wise man's part, to take
profette of his enmyes. Therefore I have gathered to gyther those things that
came in my mind now of late, as I resoned on this matter, And I have written
the^ unto the, in as few words, taking head, as nere as I could, that I
touch nothing of those that I wrote before, in the precepts of good manner,
for I se that book often in thy hand. To men of the old world it suffised, if
they took no hurt of diverse beastis, and in that time they fought with
hurtful beastis only for that purpose. But they that are of later time,
finding the way how to use wild beastis, are not only not hurt, but also
they take profette of them, fedynge them with their flesh, clothyng them with
their flecis, making of their milk and galls, medicines for diseases, and
armyng them and defending them with their skyns: in so much yt now it is to
be doubted, that if beastis wanted unto man, man's life should be but beastly,
wild, and nedye. So like wise syns it suffiseth unto other, to take no hurt
of their enmyes: and that Xenophon says, profette may be taken of enmyes,
Belefe is not to be taken from such an auctour, but rather the manner and way
must be sought, whereby this profette may be gotten by them, that may not
live without emnities.

The husband man can not take from every tree the wild nature: nor the hunter
can not make every wild beast gentil and tame: so that the way has been
found / that for other vsis, both unfruitful trees and wild beastis have
been profitable.

The sea water is vnmets to drink, and unpleasant, but it noryssheth fysshes,
it caryeth us from place to place / and it serves in bringing in and beryng
out wares.

But Satyrus the first time that he saw fire, when he would have taken it and
kyssed it: Ho, quod Prometheus, thou roughe knave, if thou take not head, it
will make thy syppes smerte: for it burns, if it be touched, it se^uethe not
for that purpose: but hit gyuethe light and hete, and is the instrument of all
crafts, if one can use it.

It must be seen therefore, if also an enmy, that else were hurteful and
dangerous, may be touched any other way, and give some particular use of him
self, and do us very great profette. For there are many things hateful and
grievous unto them, to whom they hapen: out of the which nevertheless some use
may be taken. For thou see many use some disease of the body, for occasion of
quiet and rest. Again, labors and trauayles / that have comen by chance /
have made many man's health more perfect by exercise. Besides this, there has been many / to whom outlawrye and loss of money has been forderance to study
and lernyng / as to Diogenes, and Crates. And Zenon when he herd that his ship
was drowned: Thou doste very well Fortune, quod he, in dryuynge me to my
studyenge mantyll.

For like as some live things / that are good in digestyng, and heleful for
the body, if they ete serpents and scorpions, they degest them: yea and there
are some, that are norisshed with stones and shelles, by reason of the force
and hete of the sprites, that turn these things in to norysshement: where as
these / that been tender and sickelye, can not away with breadde and wine. So
fools mar and also lose frendshyppes, but they that are wise, can profitably
use enmities.

First therefore that that in enmytie is most hurtful / seems unto me to do
great profette / if one take heed to it. What is that? sayste thou. Truly an
enmye always watchynge / markethe what thou doste / and in seeking occasion of
sklaunder / prieth and peryth always on thy living, percyng with his sight like
a Lynx, not only the timber, the coueryng, and the walls of thy house, but
also thy friend, thy servant, and whom so ever keeps the company / that as
nere as he may, he will know what thou do, percynge and tryenge all thy
secrets. Where as our friend is by our delay and negligens, often times are
both sick / and dye without our knowledge. And of our enmyes / welnere we
mark their dremes. So that the disseasis / the dettes / the skoldynges with
their wives / shall rather be unknown of them / whose they are, than of their
enmyes. So, chiefly does he mark fautes / and above all thing, them he
feketh. Even like as these Grypes, that fly unto the savor of stynkyng
caryo^s, and them that are holle and clean they smelle not: So if there be any
thing foul / or fautie / or after apetite, in thy life, this prouokethe thy
enmye, the^ to he leapethe / who so ever hates / that he pulls and
twytcheth. Is it not therefore profitable to the, to be constrained to that
point / that always thou live hedefully and warely, and that thou another do nor
say any thing rechelesslye, or unadvisedly? But always, as they that are
aferde of some disease keep precise diete for surfetynge / so to keep fauteles
and unblameable manners. For such head bredethe in us a purpos and a study of
fautles living, in restraynyng desires of the mind / and in withdrawyng and
reuokynge the thought. For as these cities, that by their nere enmys, and
continual war, learn sobernes and diligens / and as they keep their laws
better / and govern better the common welthe: so they, whom enmyte has driven
to this point / that in their life they be sobre and heedful, to avoid folly
/ to do all thing compinablely without negligens of any thing / are brought
little and lyttel ere they beware, in to a custom of not offendynge, and of
redressynge their manners, if reason help any thing.

For who that have this always in remembrans, that Priam and his children might
be glad to have had such enmyes, whereby they took head to them selfs, and
were renowned: truly it shall withdraw, re^^rayne / and lead them fro such
things / that should be pleasure and laughter for their emnyes.

We se also these musicie^s often times slake and not very hedeful, as often as
they sing in audiens alone: But if there hapen any disdain / and strife with
other: than they do not only apply their minds better, but dress their
i^strume^tes more diligently, choose their strings / tune them more preciselye
/ in assayenge often their acorde: So who that perceyuethe / that he has a
disdayner, both of his name and of his living, takes better head to him self
/ he examinethe all his deeds, and redresseth all his life. For of truth
noughtynes has this propretie, that in offendynge, it ferethe more enmyes than
fre^des. Therefore Scipio when some thought Rome to be in a suertie, because
Carthage was distroyed, and the Greeks ouercomen: Ye but now, quod he, we are
in greattest peril, sins now we have none, whom we dread or fere.

Take with this the answer of Diogenes very excellent and mete for a
philosopher: To one that asked him / which way he might be revenged on his
enmye: If thou make, quod he, thy self an honest and a good man.

Most part of men are sorye / when they se the fair horse / or well praised
dogs of their enmyes: And again they are sorry, if they se their land well
husba^ded, or their gardeyne fair and goodly. What trowest thou than they will
do / if thou show thy self an upright man, wise / good / and thrifty,
excellent in well saying / pure and incorrupt in matters of charge: In
temperance of thy synynge, sobre and mesurable, using to plowe a deep forowe
in a wise breast, when^ out do spring goodly and fair councels? They that are
ouercomen, says Pindarus, have their tongue tayde, that they dare not ones
hysce. But that is not apliable proprely in every one, that is ouercomen of
their enmyes, But in them only, that se them self ouercomen of their enmyes /
in diligence, in wisdom / in greatness of the mind, in gentylnes, and
liberality. These things do fold up a tongue, as says Demosthenes, these do
shut and close up the mouth, these do stop the throat, these cause silence,
these cause the, that, as says Pyndarus / thou darste not ones hisce. Therefore
endeavor thou thy self / sins thou may, to seem better than they that be
naught.

Therefore if thou desire to grieve thine enmye, do it not this way, to call him
leude, or dronkerde, knave, or nygarde, or sluttysshe or slouen, but rather
endeavor thou thy self to be an honest man / endeavor thy self to be sobre,
and measurable, to be true, and to entreat them gentyllye and indifferently /
that keep company and meddle with the. But if it so hapen / that thou fall to
chydyng and reuylyng / take heed that thou be clean without those fautes, for
which thou rebukest an other. Return thy self in to thyn own breast / look
in to thine own bosom, and mark well / if there be any thing filthy or
subject to vice: Lest parauenture some ill tongue have occasion to cast this in
thy tethe: He saluethe other / and is him self full of botchis.

But if he call the vnferned, aplye thou thy self to study, and quicken thy
endeavor, if he call the cowarde, stir thy courage and the redynes of thy
mind / if he call the unchaste and vicious, chase out of thy mind the desire
of lust / if any such printe / unware to the, stycke in the. For there is
nothing fouler than such rebuke, that reboundethe to the rebuker. And there
is nothing more grievous or sharper. For like as the reflection of light does
most hurt to sore eyes, so do ill words / which truth returns thither as
they came fro.

Truly like as the northest wind drawith clouds toward it / so does ill
living draw ill speaking unto hit. Therefore Plato, as often as he saw any do
uncomely, to him self was wont to say: Am I such in any case?

Ferthermore he that has skolded with an other, if he forthwith behold his
own life, and redress it, chaungynge it in to the contrary / and correctynge
hit: truly he shall take great profette by skoldynge, and otherwise it is
both taken and also is a very folisshe thing. For so commonly men are wont to
laugh at him, that is balde or crooked, and blames an other for the same vicis.
But it is most of al to be laughte at, one to cast a rebuke to an other /
which may have some rebuke turned to him self. As Leo of Byzantia, when a
foul crooked fellow cast unto him the sorenes of his eyes: It is natural, quod
he, But thou do carry thine own rebuke upon thy back.

Therefore beware that thou cast not adultery in ones tethe, if thou use a
more filthy flesshelye lust: nor attwite not one of wast / if thou be a
nygarde.

Al^meon laid hit to Adrastus / that he was cosyn to a woman / that slew her
mother. But what said he again? He laid to him again not an others fault /
but his own, saying: Thou slewest thy mother thine own hands.

Domitius iested with Crassus on this wise: Dyddest thou not weep, when thy
Lampray was deed, which thou had kept in thy stewe? But Crassus returned
the check on this facion: Dyddest thou weep at all / when thou berydiste.iij.
wives?

He that should check an other / may not be a iester, or a skolder, or a
fool: But he must be such one / on whom no check nor fault may cleue. For
it seems that god co^mande this, Know thy self, to no man more than to him,
that should blame and check an other: Lest, if they say what they will, they
here that that they would not. For it is wont to be as Sophocles says: Wha^
thou have powered out words folisshely / and said them with thy good will,
again thou shalt here the same against thy will.

And that is the profette and commodity / that may be taken of chidyng with
enmies: and no less profette comes of the the other / that is, if one be ill
spoken of / and rebuked of his enmyes. Whereupon hit was well and truly spoken
of Antisthenes: It behooves a man for the safegarde of his welthe and
prosperity, either to have sure trustye friends / or sharp enmyes, because
they in warning, the other in rebukynge, refrain him from vicis.

But truly because that now adays frendshyp has lost her speech to speak
frelye, and flaterie has tongue enough / warning is domme: it remains
therefore, that we must here the truth of our enmyes. For like as Telephus
could not be heled of his wound by no surgen of his own fellows, and was
heled by an other wound, that Achilles his enmie gave him in the same place:
so they that have no friendly warner, must suffer the words of an ill willing
enmy, whereby they may correct and amend their fautes. In which time the
thing it self ought to be considered, and not the mind of the ill speaker.
For like as he that thought to have slain Prometheus of Thessali, by chance
struck so a wenne that he had / that he saved the man, and by breaking the
wenne rydde him of the peril: so hit is not seldom seen, that a rebuke cast
out by enmyte and hatred, heals a sore of the mind, that was parauenture
unknown or else unregarded.

But many that are touched with a rebuke, do not considre this, whether they be
gyltie of the shame that is laid to them, but they look rather, if he that
laid hit, have any thing in him, that may be cast against him. And like as
wrestlers in the wrestlynge place / do not brusshe away the duste / but one
arayethe an other: so with rebukes when they mete to gyther, one of them
shameth an other. But it were more acording, that he that has had a check of
his enmy, shall take that away that is laid against him, rather than a spotte
that one shows him in his gown.

Ye and also if one lay to thy charge a fault, that thou art not gyltie in /
yet hit is to be sought, upon what causes that ill speaking did grow: and than
it ought to be taken head of and fered / lest that unware we do any thing
like that, that is laid against us. As Lacides king of Argyne, for his trymme
busshe, and a little more pyked apparel / was sklaunderde among the common
sort / as tender and womannysshe.

The same happened to Pompey / because he skratched his heed with one finger,
although he was far inoughe from tenderness and wantonness.

So also it did hapen unto Crassus, which to dye a propre ferme, often times
resorted to a woman of religion, for to win her good will.

Truly Posthumia by reason of her liberal laughyng and talking with men, was
so sklaunderde, that she was accused of adultery, although hit was found, that
the fault was not true: Yet the bishop Spurius Minutius at her departing
warned her / that she should talk with as great dread of shame, as she did
live.

And Themistocles when he offended nothing, yet he gatte by Pausanias to be
suspecte of treason / by cause he used him so familiarly / and sent him daily
lettres and messengers. Therefore when there is any thing said against the,
that is not true, thou ought not therefore / because hit i^ false / to let
it pass. But try with thy self, if thou have said or done any thing, or
assayde any thing, or if among thy familiars there has any thing been, that
has given him prouable occasion: and if thou find it, take heed and avoid it.

Truly if hard hap, that comethe by chance, teaches some, what is best to
do, as Meropa speakethe in a play: Fortune in taking away that, that was
most dear unto me, has made me wise, to my cost. Why should we not as well
use our enmye for a teacher less costly / that may profette us, and teaches
us some thing, that we knew not before? For truly many things an enmye
perceyueth better than a friend, because that love blyndeth in the thing that
is loved, as says Plato. But unto hate is joined both besye search and
babbling.

When Hieron had his stinkyng brethe cast against him of his enmye / he came
home and chode his wife, saying: Why dyddest not thou show me this fault? But
she that was chaste and simple, answered: I had went, quod she, that all men
had sauoured on the same fasshion. So that that, which may be sensiblely
perceived, and those things that be in the body seen of every man, thou
shalt sooner know them of thyn enemies, than of thy friends or fellows.

Put to this, that where it is no small part of virtue to have a sobre tongue /
always obedient to reason: that thou can not have, without thou by much
exercise, head, and study, subdue the ill motions of thy mind, of which sort
anger is one. For as from fools words do skape out, and as Homere says: The
fleinge voice forsakethe the closure of the mouth, So is it most wont to
hapen to unexercised minds, that slip and slide, by vnmoderate anger, by
vntemperatnes of mind, and by small head of living.

More over, as says the godly Plato / the lyghtest thing that is, both god
and man punysshe with greattest pain. But a the other side / silence where as hit
is always gyltles / and not only not hurtful, hit has besides in chiding / a
savor of Socrates constance, or of Hercules force rather / for he also took
less head of grievous words, than he did of flies.

Surely where as there is nothing more grave or fayrer / than when thy enmy
chydeth, to hold thy peace, as one that sayleth by a great rock, so also
does such an exercise sprede ferder. For if thou use to suffer thyn enmyes
chiding, holdyng thy peace, thou shalt very easelye suffer thye wives
skoldynge, when she is angry, and bear without trouble the cryenge of thy
friend, and the combre of thy brother. For of thy father and thy mother thou
will suffer knockes and strokes, and be not moved with anger.

And Socrates did suffer Xantippa his wife at home to chyde and combre him,
the more easily to keep company with other / if he used to forbere her. But it
is much better in being exercised with checkes, rebukes / and hatredes of
enmyes, to use to subdue anger / and not to chafe when thou art ill spoken
to. Therefore on this wise one ought to use sobrenes and suffrance, in enmytes.
But symplenes, great mind, and gentylnes is more acordyng in frendshyppes. For
it is not so honest to deserve well of a friend, as hit is shame not to do hit,
as often as need requires. But yet it is taken for gentilnes, when chance
gives occasion / to let pass and not to be revenged on thyn enmye.

But he that receives not his good will, and prayseth not his gentylnes, that
soroweth the offense of his enmie, and helps him, if he desire it / and
takes some head to his children, or to his house / that is in peril, truly
he has an heart of a dyamant, or else of iron.

When Caesar had commanded the images of Pompei, that were cast down, to be
set up again: Thou have, quod M. Tullius, set up Pompeis images, and
stablysshed thyn own. Wherefore an enmie is not to be dispraised, nor to be
deceived of his honor, which is to be praised, and worthy, for because a
greatter praise thereon comes unto the^ that so do praise. Beside that, he yt
praises one / that deserves it, is better believed, wha^ he blames, as one
that hates not the man, but that aloweth not his deed.

And that that is most goodly of all and most profitable, he shall in no wise
envy his fortunate friends / nor his familiars, when they do any thing praise
worthy, who so ever uses to praise his enmyes / and not to gnawe nor byte at
their good fortunes. Is there any thing that bredeth such profette in us, or
yt enge^dreth in our minds a better use, than that that takethe from us
disdain and envy? For as in a common welthe there are many things necessary
and yet naught, which sins they be comen in custom, and gotten the
strengthes of a law, yet shall they, to whom they be hurtefull or grievous /
not lyghtely do them away: So enmytie brings with hit many vicis / as anger,
suspection, reioysynge of others harm, remembrance of wrongs, and leueth the
printes of these in the mind.

Besides that many things, which if thou do them to thine enmye, seem another
ill nor wrongful, so remain they in us / that skant they can be put away / as
is craftynes, deceyte, and subtylties. Whereby often times by the custom, we
shall use them to our friends, if we be not ware how we use them to our
e^mies. Therefore Pythagoras commanded very well, when he moved men from taking
of foul, and of fysshe / and forbad the killing of all gentle beastis / to
the end that in beastis we should use to te^pre our selfs from cruelte and
rauenynge. But hit is much more goodly / in being a gentle, a just / and a
simple enmye, in debates and stryfes against men, to chastise the foul and
deceytefull affections of the mind / and to subdue them / to the end that in
medlynge with friends men may utterly forbere them.

Scaurus was at debate with Domitius, and sewed him: so a servant of Domitius
before the matter was pleaded, came unto Scaurus, and advertised him, that he
had a secret thing to tell him: but he would not suffer the fellow to speak,
but took him and sent him to his master.

Cato when Murena did sewe him, and sought to gather arguments of the
accusation / there followed him (as was the custom) they that awayted, what
should be done, and they often times would ask him, if that day he would do
any thing / that might pertayne to his accusynge: and if he denied it, they
believed him and went their way. And truly that was a greatte token, that they
had a good opinion of Cato.

But this is yet fairest of al, that one wha^ we are acustomed to do uprightly
and justly with our enmyes, we shall never meddle deceytefully or falselye with
our friends and familiars. But by cause it must needs be, that every kocke
have his comb, and every mind of man of him self bredeth strife, suspecte,
and envy: it were not unprofitable, among friends that have but holowe
minds, as says Pyndarus, if a man pour out the purgynge of such fautes upon
his enmyes, and to let hit run as in to a synke / far of from his friends
or familiars. Which me thinks Onomademus an honest man perceived, which was
in Chio / when there was a mutenyng there / on that part that had the better,
and warned them of his side / not to chase them all out, that were of the
contrary side, lest, quod he, that we begin to fall out with our friends, if
we want emnyes. And if those vicis on this wise should be consumed on enmyes /
they shall the less grieve friends.

For truly the potter should not envy the potter, nor the synger the synger,
as Hesiodus says: and hit is not mete, that a man should disdain his neibour
/ or his cosyn / or his brother, if he wax rich, and have good fortune. But
if there be none other way to rid thy self from strife, envy, and disdain,
than use thy self to be sorry for thyn enmies good fortune, and sharpen the
edge of anger against them. For as these conning gardiners think to make
rosis and violettis the better, if they sow oynyo^s and garlyke nere by the^,
that what so ever sower savor be in the^, it may be purged in to the the other:
so an enmye receyuynge in to him our envy and waywardnes, shall make us better
and less grievous to our frendis, that have good fortune. Wherefore against them
must be exercised the strife of glory / of rule / and of good gaynynge, but
not so much, that we should tourme^t our self, tho they have more than we: But
to mark al things by what means they pass us, and let us endeavor us to
pass them in diligence / endeuonr / sobrenes, and warenes: As Themistocles was
wont to say / that he could not sleep for Myltiades victory at Maratho.

For he that is brought to so low mind, and fayntyng for envy, by cause he
thinks him self passed of his enmye, in gouerna^ce, or in obtaynyng of
causis, or in favor, or authority with friends / or with noble men, and not
rather endeavors and assayethe some thing in dispite of him / trewly he is
holden with a folysshe and a vain envy. But he whom hate blyndeth not so, but
that he may judge him, who^ he hates / and also may look with indifferent eyes,
both upon his life / and his manners / his words, and his deeds: of a suertie
he shall perceive many of those things, that he enuiethe / to come unto the
the other by diligence, provision / and of deeds well done. And therwithal by
exercise sharpynge the taking head of passing him, and the study of honor /
he shall shake of al ydlenes and false heart. So that if we se that they have
gotten in the court or in the common welthe, any dishonest or undeserved power,
either by flatery / or by deceit, or by false judgment, or by mede / hit shall
not be grievous unto us / but rather pleasure, in layinge to gether our vpryghte
living with their noughtynes. For truly all the gold that is either above
the earth or under the earth, is not to be compared with virtue, as says
Plato. It is mete also to have always in remembrance that word of Solon: We
woll not says he, change the riches of virtue, neither for the largess that
is cried by a great nombre / hired for mete, nor for honors, nor for the
chief place among the wives and concubines of dukes and princis. For there is
nothing to be wondered at / or notable / that grows of dishoneste. But the
lover is blind in that that he louethe, as says Plato / and better we
perceive if our enmyes do any thing uncomely. Yet may we not tho they do
noughtilye take an unprofitable gladness / or and if they do well / be moved
with an idle grief, but in each of this is to be thought / that in being ware
of the tone we may be better than they / and following the the other that we be
no worse.

Thus ends Plutarche to take profette of enmyes.
To chose The manner to chose and cherysshe a friend.
TO fylle up the padges, that else would have been void, I thought it should
another hurt nor displese, to add hereunto a few sayenges / how a man should
chose and cherysshe a friend.

Cicero says, that Scipio co^pleyned greatly / that men were more diligent in all things / than in frendshyppe: every man knows how many gotes and sheep
he has, but no man can tell how many friends he has: And in the getting of
other things men use great care and diligence / but in choosing of friends
they be very negligent, nor they have not as it were marks and tokens / by
the which they may deem those that are fete to be received in to frendshyppe.
The book says / have not frendshyppe with an yrefull man / nor with a fool:
but as Cicero says, men firm, and stable, and constant / should be taken in
to frendshyppe. Of the which sort is great scarsite and lack / and to judge
which they be, is a very hard thing, except we make a proffe, and we can not
make a proffe thereof till we be entered in to frendshyp. So, frendshyp goth
before judgment.

Some there be, that a small so^me of money shall show how sure friends they be.
Some there are / which a littel thing can not remove, and yet they be known
in a great need.

And if we hap to find a friend / that demeth it a foul and a shamfull
thing to set more by money than by fre^dshyp: yet where shall we find the^ /
that will not more esteem honors, rowmes, lordships, powers, and abundance of
riches, than friendship? But as the same Cicero says, another profittes,
honors, riches, plesures / nor none other such like things, should be more
set by than fre^dships. But yet he that is a good man, shall do nothing for his
friends sake, that is either against the common welthe, or else against his oath
or fidelite. For the offense is not excusable, to say, thou dyddest it for thy
friends sake. And yet the same Cicero, as Gellius does recite his wordis,
says, that where our friend standethe in ieopardye either of his life or of
his good renown / we may some what swerve a side out of the way. But what so
ever Gellius says, Cicero teaches plainly, that we should require nothing of
our friend / but that that is honest.

And now concerning the trust that we ought to have in our friend, Seneca
says: He that estemethe any man his friend, the which he can not trust so
much as him self, does deceive him self. And he that makes and proves his
friend festynge at the table does fail. It is virtue, say the Cicero, the
which both wynneth and entertaynethe friends. A man should reason and debate
al things with his friend, but first he should debate and reason with him,
whether he be a friend or no. No man needs to mystrust friendship / but first
let him examyne and deem, whether it be frendshyp or not.

They do against the precepts of Theophraste, the which love before they
judge, and not after they have demed. Thou shuldeste a long time consydre,
whether thou should take any in to thy frendshyppe. and when it likes the so
to do, than receive him with all thy very heart, and talk as boldly with him,
as though thou were alone. But yet live thou after such fachion, that thou
commit nothing to him / but that that thou would commit to an enmie. But
for because there be certain businesses / the which custom makes secret,
make thy friend privy to al thy cares and thoughts. Thou shalt do thus, if
thou suppose him to be sure and faithful. For many show the manner and way to
deceive, while they fere to be deceived. And some tell them that they mete by
the way, and blow in every man's ear, it that should only be opened and showed
to friends. Again some also dread so much the conscience of their most dear
friends, that if they may, they woll keep close within them all their
secretenes, because they woll not put them in trust therewith. None of these
two ways is to be taken / for each of them both is naught, to trust every
body / and to trust no man. Of which two fautes the first is the more honest
/ and the other the more sure. And though the wise man be content with him
self / yet woll he have a friend, and it be for none other cause, but to
exercise frendshyppe / lest so great a virtue should lie aside. Not for that
that Epicure says / that he may have one to tend him when he is sick, or
else that may succoure him, if he be cast in prison / or be pour and nedy, but
that he may have one / whom sick and diseased he may tend upon, and whom he
may deliver out of ward / if he hap to come in his enmyes hands. He that
regards him self / and for his own sake seeks frendshyppe, he intends
yuell: and like as he begins, so shall he end. He thinks he has got a
friend to help him out of prison, which, when he hereth the chains rattel,
goth his way. These frendshyps, as the people says, dure for a time. He that
is received into frendshyp for love of profit, as long as he is profitable,
he pleases. It is nedeful that the beginning and ending of frendshyp, should
agree. He that begins to be a friend, by cause it is expedient for him, some
price shall please him against frendshyp, if there be any price in it / that
may please him above frendshyp. Thou sayste, To what intent should I prepare a
friend? I answer, that thou may have one, whom thou may accompany, when
he is banisshed / for whom thou may put thy self in danger of death. For
the the other is rather a shapmanshyp than a frendshyppe, which has a respect
to profette, and considers, what avail he may get thereby. There is
nothing, that so much deliteth the mind, as faithful frendshyp. And he is
well happy / that fyndeth a true friend, says the book. O how great is the
goodness / when the breastis be prepared redye, in to the which all secretenes
may surely descend, whose conscience thou dredest less than thine own,
whose talking eases the grefe and heaviness of thy heart / the sentence gives
ready and quick counsel / the chere dassheth the inward sorrow, and the very
regard and beholdynge deliteth? And because the use of frendshyppe is variable
and manyfolde, and there be many causes given of suspicion and offense, the
which is a wise man's part to eschew, to help / and to suffer. Friends must
often be monisshed, and rebuked, and that must be taken friendly / when hit is
done of good will. But for so much as Terence says, Truth bredeth hate /
which is as a poison to frendshyppe / we must take heed, that our monition be
not sour, and that the rebuke be without vile words. For vile rebukes, as the
book says, for does friendship.

Thus endethe the manner to chose and cherysshe a friend, Imprinted at London in
Fletestrete by Thom Berthelet, printer to the kings most noble grace. Cum
priuilegio.

